Ackerman, Karen. When Mama Retires; illus. by Alexa Grace. Knopf, 1992.
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90289-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80289-4. 33p. Library
ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Strong outlines and uncluttered composition are
prominent features of broken-line and pastel wash pictures that illustrate a story
set during World War II. Charley is the narrator, describing a day in which he
and his brothers are taken through the procession of daily chores by their mother.
They find that doing housework is arduous, but now they know they'll be
ready-IF Mama does decide to retire from housework and take a wartime factory
job. The writing has a pleasant flow and a convincing voice, and the book is
nicely gauged in length and complexity for the read-aloud audience. ZS
Adams, Barbara Johnston. The Go-Around Dollar; illus. by Joyce Audy Zarins.
Four Winds, 1992. ISBN 0-02-700031-1. 
[26p]. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
Facts about dollar bills and paper currency accompany
a "story" about the circuitous passage of a dollar bill. Dropped by a jogger,
[ 146]
found by some boys, spent, given as change to someone else, spun through the
laundry ... the dollar changes hands several times until it is spent by a girl at a
new ice cream parlor, where it is immortalized under glass: 
"Our first
customer." Pleasant, slightly awkward, illustrations do little to compensate for
the slender excuse for a plot, but the real value, compounded with interest, is the
variety of informational paragraphs, one to each double spread, about dollar bills.
The information included seems arbitrarily chosen, but such facts as how much
dollars weigh (490 bills to a pound); whose picture can appear on money (people
"no longer living"); the formula for the printing ink (a secret), have the
fascination of essential minutiae. 
Each fact is placed within a strikingly
oversized reproduction of a bill. The first note explains the design: "For
instance, a dollar drawn as an illustration for a book must be in black and white,
not in full color. A dollar must also be shown either larger than one and one-
half times the size of a real dollar; or smaller than three-quarters the size of a real
dollar." Kids love money, and they will appreciate the detailed if scattershot
attention it is given here. RS
Alcock, Vivien. A Kind of Thief. Delacorte, 1992. ISBN 0-385-30564-8.
192p. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Elinor is thirteen, and it is she to whom her father
surreptitiously slips a railway storage receipt when he is being arrested. Elinor
knows her father couldn't possibly have embezzled money. She's wrong-not
only has he done just that, but it's the money of a great-aunt. When Elinor
retrieves the locked briefcase and keeps it, does it make her, too, a kind of thief?
That's the outline of the plot, but Alcock, with her usual combination of subtle
characterizations and bold progression of incidents, has created a story with depth
and suspense, as Elinor and her family (a young, volatile and loving stepmother,
an unhappy younger brother, the aforementioned great-aunt, and a foster cousin)
adjust to the situation and to each other, and Elinor decides what to do after
opening the briefcase. ZS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Arrick, Fran. What You Don't Know Can Kill You. Bantam, 1992. ISBN 0-
553-07471-7. [160p]. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 7-12. 
"Ellen was eighteen, about to graduate from high
school, about to start a new life in college, about to get everything she ever
wanted because she was smart and gorgeous," and she's "nice in addition to
everything else." Needless to say, Ellen is doomed. When she goes to donate
blood, her doctor discovers that she is HIV-positive-unbeknownst to her, her
boyfriend has had sex with other people at college, and has contracted and passed
on the infection. The story is the reaction of Ellen, her family (including her
younger sister Debra, whose point of view the narrative primarily takes), and the
community; but since there's virtually no characterization, the book is really an
endless series of sometimes confusing messages. 
Fact is occasionally
subordinated to drama ("Ellen and Jack both had AIDS," states a paragraph, when
they don't yet) but more often drama is subordinated to authorial infopreaching
(Ellen's boyfriend, while proposing a suicide pact, raves "You have to get your
T-4s checked every few months .. . !" to which Ellen responds "If you had a
support system you wouldn't even consider this suicide talk"). A few sensible
statements come from Debra ("She was stupid not to make him wear a
[147]
condom"), but otherwise Ellen is portrayed as a shining martyr to romantic love,
betrayed by an erring knight. We know even nice people can contract HIV and
that they need help if they do, and it's laudable to want to make this clear to
those most in need of the information, but it takes more than a mission to make
a good book. For a fictional look at teens and AIDS, skip this and try Doris
Humphreys' Until Whatever (BCCB 11/91); to bring home the reality of the
people who suffer from it, look at Susan Kuklin's Fighting Back (BCCB 3/89).
DS
C.U. 
Health
Asch, Frank. Dear Brother; written and illus. by Frank Asch and Vladimir
Vagin. Scholastic, 1992. ISBN 0-590-43107-2. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Two young mouse-brothers stay up all night reading
old letters they have rescued from their mother's attic cleaning. 
The
correspondence amounts to a loose version of "The Town Mouse and the
Country Mouse"-the tale of Great-Uncle Timothy, the city tailor, and his
brother Henry, the farmer. 
Each letter begins with the salutation, "Dear
brother," and the two young mouse boys forget their squabbles as they become
engrossed in their great-uncles' past lives. The illustrated letters are written in
lively and expressively varying scripts, and it is disappointing when the great-
uncles' stories practically come to a halt with "Joey and Marvin read many
letters that night." The life of the book is the story told in the letters-the
contemporary story merely provides a background. The appealing, brightly-
colored gouache illustrations of mice-people in their comfortable home are
warm, detailed, and cozy. A good book to inspire genealogical research. KPJ
D.V. Brothers
Bahr, Mary. The Memory Box; illus. by David Cunningham. Whitman, 1992.
ISBN 0-8075-5052-3. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Zach, the narrator, is spending his usual three weeks
with his grandparents, a summer tradition. He's a bit puzzled by some odd
behavior on the part of Gramps but agrees that it would be fun to fill a "memory
box," which, Gramps explains, is a box that stores family traditions and must be
filled by an old person and a young person together. Zach's grandmother later
tells him, gently, that Gramps has Alzheimer's disease and knows that he will
deteriorate further. The story is wistfully sad, adequately written save for an
occasional flowery phrase. 
The paintings are very handsome, with spare,
effective composition, sensitive use of color, and fine textural detail and
depiction of light. ZS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Betancourt, Jeanne. Kate's Turn. Scholastic, 1992. ISBN 0-590-43103-X.
[128p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Kate is thirteen, and she's been outstanding in her
ballet classes in Eugene, Oregon. When she begins her story she is about to
join the National Ballet School in New York, thrilled at being selected, yet
apprehensive about being good enough in this more challenging milieu. Since
Kate lives with five other girls in the home of a former dancer, there is
opportunity for the exploration of a range of miniplots and behavior patterns (the
[148 1
girl who forces herself to vomit in order to stay thin, the girl who has to give up
dancing because she was afraid to say her knee hurt, the girl from Russia who-
rather tediously-makes mistakes in understanding English words and idioms).
This is believable as the account of a young adolescent, but it sags at the crucial
point at which Kate decides-with little preparation for the reader-that she
doesn't want to be a dancer. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Bodecker, N. M. Water Pennies and Other Poems; illus. by Erik Blegvad.
McElderry, 1992. ISBN 0-689-50517-5. 54p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Bugs, insects, and other lowly creatures seem to have
claimed their fair share of poetic attention lately, including Paul Fleischman's
Newbery Award winner Joyful Noise (BCCB 2/88). Here, in Bodecker's last
book (he died in 1988), are 32 poems celebrating the earth's most prolific-and
sometimes most annoying-inhabitants. "Midsummer Night Itch" typifies the
poet's clever address of a common irritant: "Mosquito is out/ it's the end of the
day;/ she's humming and hunting/ her evening away./ Who knows why such
hunger arrives on such wings/ at sundown?" I guess/ it's the nature of things."
Many of the poems manage humor and resonance in one breath: "The silverfish/
is not a fishJ and you should be/ suspicious/ if someone says/ that silverfish/
with parsley is/ delicious." Dragonflies, moths, centipedes, daddy longlegs,
grasshoppers, butterflies, lacewings, beetles, June bugs, gnats-there's a cast of
billions right on (or, alas, inside) your doorstep. Instead of listening to kids
screech at the sight of a bug, teach them a couple of these chants, ending with
Bodeker's climactic existential question in "The Louse, the Night, and the Star."
Blegvad's delicate black and white hatch drawings give each poem fine-lined
graphic balance. BH
C.U. Nature study
Brooks, Martha. Two Moons in August. Joy Street/Little, 1992. ISBN 0-316-
10979-7. 199p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
"Nineteen fifty-nine has actually been a pretty good
year so far. Nothing terrible has happened. Yet." Fifteen-year-old Sidonie has
good reason to expect the worst after her mother's long illness and death, her
father's withdrawal, and a friend's fatal accident. These misfortunes are not
dumped precipitously as action in the first-person narrative, but are remembered
in the protagonist's healing process and tentative establishment of new--or
renewal of old- relationships. As in her collection Paradise Caft and Other
Stories (BCCB 12/90), Brooks sounds a true pitch in the voices of her adolescent
cast, including Sidonie, who often reacts to pain spitefully; her sister, who treats
both her gentle Chinese boy friend and Sidonie to bouts of self-centered caprice;
and Sidonie's new teenage neighbor Kieran, moody from the throes of his
parents' abusive relationship and divorce. There's a lot going on here,
emotionally, but Brooks exerts control through dynamics that are developed
subtly within a confined frame of time and place. Perceptive U.S. readers will
find, in this small Canadian town, a situation rendered familiar by the intensity
of what seems to be detailed recollection. BH
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Family relations
[ 149 ]
Burstein, Fred. Whispering in the Park; illus. by Helen Cogancherry. Bradbury,
1992. ISBN 0-02-715621-4. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
2-4 yrs. 
Line and wash drawings, softly colored and
realistically detailed, are the most attractive aspect of a picture book that is
appropriately simple for young children but decidedly tepid in structure and
tempo. Sophie and Miriam play together while their mothers are occupied with
caring for infant siblings. The two girls throw animal crackers to fish in the
park pond, realize it's time to go when they notice both mothers are changing
the babies' diapers, and wave a friendly farewell as they say "See you tomorrow."
ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Chang, Ina. A Separate Battle: Women and the Civil War. Lodestar, 1991.
ISBN 0-525-67365-2. 104p. illus. with photographs. (Young Readers' History
of the Civil War). $15.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Abolitionists, nurses, camp followers, soldiers and
spies: the roles, official and de facto, played by women in the Civil War were
many, and Chang uses them to illuminate the experience of the war as a whole.
Some of the women included here, such as Angelina Grimk6 and Sojourner
Truth, have long been famous; others, such as diarist Mary Chesnut, have only
recently come to light. Young readers may be most interested in the portraits of
soldiers such as Sarah Edmonds, who, disguised as one "Franklin Thompson,"
fought for the Union; or Southern spy Belle Boyd-"When she was only
seventeen, she shot a drunken Yankee soldier who had insulted her mother."
Chapters are organized by the varying roles women played in the war; boxed
inserts profile particular women and events. Photographs and contemporary
engravings are many and well-spaced in the large format; there are no notes, but
an index and bibliography are appended. RS
C. U. U.S.-History-Civil War
D.V. Sex roles
Chew, Ruth. Royal Magic. Scholastic, 1991. Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-44742-4.
127p. illus. (A Little Apple Paperback). Paper ed. $2.75.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
A young black brother and sister, Jack and Cindy, are
visiting the New York Museum of Natural History when they are suddenly
tossed back in time and across the ocean to ancient Africa. Why?-who knows,
but undemanding readers will probably appreciate this skipping of the
preliminaries in favor of the action. Unfortunately, there isn't much of that,
either, as Chew seems more intent upon showing the social structure, living
conditions, and technological achievements of her mythical realm than she is in
providing a coherent story. The sibs meet a friendly flautist, Atuke; the Oba,
king of the nation; and his chief wife (of one hundred and eighteen), the Enahan;
and the Queen Mother, who casts a spell to get the children home. All in all,
it's pretty perplexing, but junior anthropologists might enjoy the details.
Despite the story's mention of computers and such, fuzzy and anonymous
illustrations make the book seem dated. RS
[ 150]
Conrad, Pam. Pedro's Journal: A Voyage with Christopher Columbus August
3, 1492-February 14, 1493; illus. by Peter Koeppen. Caroline House, 1991.
ISBN 1-878093-17-7. 86p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Another ship's boy joins the crowd who have kept
journals of a voyage across the Ocean Sea with Christopher Columbus. This
diary has the dramatic fate of being sealed in a barrel with Columbus' own
proclamation during a terrible storm on the way back to Spain, so it ends with
convincing abruptness. Although the account is not as thorough as Miriam
Schlein's or Olga Litowinsky's (BCCB editorial, 10/91), it is manageably brief,
readable, and accompanied by lively black-and-white sketches that Pedro
purportedly makes on his trip, including one of the wrecked Santa Maria for
which he's responsible. (The last drawing seems to be something of a slip,
since it shows the barrel floating away after the journal has been enclosed in it.)
The author's note admits to a limited amount of research, but at least she makes
history smoother sailing for young readers. BH
C.U. Columbus Day
Cooney, Caroline B. Flight #116 Is Down. Scholastic, 1992. ISBN 0-590-
44465-4. [192p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
When a 747 crashes on her family's estate outside the
tiny town of Nearing River, sixteen-year-old Heidi is the only one who sees it
go down. After her emergency phone call, almost everyone in the area reports to
the accident scene, and Heidi's empty mansion is turned into a temporary
hospital. As the book begins, several young passengers are introduced, as well
as teenagers from Nearing River who later assist at the accident. The story
covers eight fast hours, documented in a minute-by-minute log-style format.
Intermittent one-sentence paragraphs, such as "Rescuing ran in the family" and
"Heidi's scream threw her to her knees," give a news-commentary flavor to the
fast-paced narrative. When a child goes into shock, a 15-year-old boy is cut from
the wreck, and a girl dies before she reconciles with her family, only the realism
and timeliness of the story keep it from crossing the line between drama and
melodrama. Readers who are fascinated by tales of tragedy will be held until the
exhausting finish. KPJ
C.U. Reading, reluctant
Cruz Martinez, Alejandro. The Woman Who Outshone the Sun: The Legend of
Lucia Zenteno; adapted by Rosalma Zubizaretta, Harriet Rohmer, and David
Schecter; illus. by Fernando Olivera. Children's Book Press, 1991. ISBN 0-
89239-101-4. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
Adapted by poet Alejandro Cruz Martinez from a
traditional story of the Zapotec Indians of Mexico and retold here again as a
story, this is the somewhat diffuse legend of a mysterious woman who, shunned
as a witch by her neighbors, finds her own quiet revenge. The river was in love
with the "amazingly beautiful" Lucia Zenteno and when she went there to bathe,
would rise from its bed and "flow through her shining black hair." After Lucia
Zenteno is driven away by the frightened villagers, the river and the fish go with
her. Faced with drought, the villagers seek out Lucia and her forgiveness,
receive it, and mind her gentle admonition: "just as the river gives water to all
who are thirsty, no matter who they are, so you must learn to treat everyone
with kindness, even those who seem different from you." The simple structure
[ 151 ]
of the tale has an appealing and folkloric plainness, but its didacticism is bald
and lacking fire. Olivera's watercolor illustrations add a welcome degree of
mystery to the tale, with emblematic images of birds and the sun and a far-off
range of purple mountains providing a ritualized background for the central figure
of Lucia, a strong-faced Madonna with a stream of bright fishes flowing through
her raven hair. English and Spanish texts are paralleled on each page. RS
D.V. Kindness
Cushman, Jean. Do You Wanna Bet?: Your Chance to Find Out about
Probability; illus. by Martha Weston. Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-395-56516-2.
102p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
A series of chatty fictional episodes explores the ways
in which chance enters the everyday experiences of two boys, Danny and Brian.
Each episode concludes with a boxed conjecture headed "Do You Wanna Bet?" in
which Cushman asks such questions as "Was Danny right? Were his chances as
good as Brian's?" but does not give answers until an analysis that follows to
explain the probabilities inherent in the situation. This doesn't do a bad job of
popularizing the concepts of probability, sampling, and statistics, but it would
be more effective if the illustrations either ramified or extended the concepts, or
if there were more attention paid to principles than to story. ZS
C.U. Mathematics
Day, David. Aska's Animals; illus. by Warab6 Aska. Doubleday, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-42126-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-25315-X. 32p. Library
ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $15.00.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
As the title might indicate, this is more a gallery of
paintings than a cohesive picture book; there's no doubt, though, that children,
their imaginations prodded by the accompanying brief poems, will enjoy staring
at the mysterious visions of animal genesis that appear herein. Horses rise from
sea foam, lions from the grasslands; crocodiles are shaped from lava flows
cooling "their stony fingers in the sea." Poem and picture appear on facing
pages; each oil painting is vividly, sometimes garishly, colored, with slick
effects that recall 1970s album-cover art. The best paintings have an eerie
rightness to them, as in the picture of camels concealed within sand dunes or
tigers emerging from the Rousseau-like fronds of the forest. Most of the poetry
is fairly flat, but there are enough surprises in perception to keep kids' attention
on both sides of the double-spreads: "When zebras come to drink at dusk,
Watch the rippling dance of shadow and light./ It's easy enough to understand/
How this water music came galloping to life." RS
Drucker, Malka. Frida Kahlo: Torment and Triumph in Her Life and Art.
Bantam, 1991. Trade ed. ISBN 0-553-07165-3; Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-35408-6.
160p. illus. with photographs. Library ed. $16.50; Paper ed. $7.00.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
The daughter of an immigrant European Jew (he had
changed his name from Kahl to Kahlo when he settled in Mexico), Frida Kahlo
was a rebel whose life was shaped by her art and by the accident which almost
killed her; in turn, her art was affected by her fierce independence, by Diego
Rivera (to whom she was twice married), and by the ferment of political and
cultural changes in her country. Informative and sympathetic, this biography is
nevertheless marred to some extent by the author's penchant for hyperbole, and
[ 152 ]
by a lack of balance between small details and matters of import. It is also
adversely affected by the reporting of thoughts or actions as though they were
observed fact. 
Illustrations include several color and black-and-white
reproductions of her work as well as photographs of the artist. ZS
C.U. Art appreciation
Dunbar, Joyce. Lollopy; illus. by Susan Varley. Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-
02-733195-4. 26p. $14.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
There's a Blegvad-like freedom to Varley's line that
makes her soft-colored watercolor illustrations vigorous despite their delicacy of
execution. The story is less impressive. Lollopy is Sophie's toy rabbit, in this
English picture book, and he's left behind when she becomes engrossed in
picking bluebells. The story shifts to a rabbit-hole, where young rabbits decide
Lollopy is "the Bogey-Rabbit" who will eat them all up. Their mother says
that's nonsense, he's Lollopy and he's lost. The rabbits take him into the wood,
get frightened again, run home; next morning Mother Rabbit patches up a torn
Lollopy. 
Shift again, abruptly, to "It was Sophie's mother who saw him
first... ." The story just doesn't hang together, being adequately told but less
effectively structured. ZS
Early, Margaret, ad. William Tell; ad. and illus. by Margaret Early. Abrams,
1991. ISBN 0-8109-3854-5. 32p. $17.95.
R 
6-9 yrs. 
Applying the same elegance of pattern and detail to
Tell as she did to Ali Baba (BCCB 12/89), Early miniaturizes the legendary
Swiss marksman with little loss to his heroism. Her retelling of the William
Tell story is straightforward and suspenseful, if sometimes pictorially belied by
her delicate medievalism. The climactic scene of the apple and the arrow, for
example, is a pastoral fantasy, its forest greens, misty mountains, and gold-
flecked Lake Lucerne, pretty but undramatic. On the other hand, the painting of
the captive Tell bound on the boat of the evil governor during a thunderstorm is
an altogether satisfactory marriage of the theatrical and the stylized, a sharp white
crack of lightning decisive against the gold-patterned rain. There's a lot of gold
paint here, always tastefully applied and sometimes eerily atmospheric, as in the
iridescence of the moonlit lake where the Swiss make their vow to resist the
Austrian conquest. The figure drawing and the tone of the paintings is a bit like
Pauline Baynes' work but less fluid and, on balance, more boldly rendered. It's a
fairly bloody tale, and if the paintings suggest less of its violence and more of
its venerableness, one feels that Tell would not refuse the handsome mantle. RS
Edwards, Michelle. A Baker's Portrait; written and illus. by Michelle Edwards.
Lothrop, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09713-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09712-
X. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Michelin the portrait painter doesn't get much
business, not because the town of Hoshel contains no customers, but because
she paints just what she sees-fat, warts, cross-eyes, and all. Now Aunt Liliane
and Uncle Ferdinand, two of the ugliest bodies and sweetest souls in the world,
have commissioned her to do their portraits. Michelin tries earnestly to lie on
paper, but the hair and full set of teeth she draws (where Ferdinand and Liliane
have none) look terrible. Finally the answer comes in affectionate metaphor, and
Michelin paints what the couple have nicknamed each other: "my chocolate
[ 153 ]
cake! . .. my challah." Next in line for a portrait stands Grandma Levy;
somehow she reminds Michelin of the first snow of winter. Edwards, whose
Chicken Man (BCCB 5/91) introduced an individualistic new talent in both story
and art, displays a kind of painterly abandon in her thick-textured oil paintings.
Although the lines seem freewheeling, there's plenty of control in these faces
and figures, not to mention in the solidly factual colors, and the shapes become
more defined as the solution comes closer. The picture book's combination of
humor and insight provides an unlabored opportunity for discussing
compromises between truth and consequence in social relationships and-as
bonus-here's a piquant introduction to symbolic representation in art. BH
D.V. 
Honesty
Ellis, Sarah. Pick-Up Sticks. McElderry, 1992. ISBN 0-689-50550-7. 124p.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Thirteen-year-old Polly is the only child of a woman
who is an artisan (in the medium of stained glass) and who had chosen
deliberately to have a child but not to marry. Polly becomes irritated by Mum's
refusal to worry or pursue house-hunting when their building is sold. She goes
to stay with her uncle's family while Mum moves into the studio. It is largely
through the experience of living with her reactionary uncle and a delinquent
cousin that Polly comes to appreciate her mother's tolerance and to realize that
she loves and is loved by a woman of rare integrity. There isn't a preachy note
in all of this; in a smoothly-written story of an emotional coming of age, Polly
reacts believably to experiences that provide perspective. ZS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Fine, Anne. The Book of the Banshee. Joy Street/Little, 1992. ISBN 0-316-
28315-0. 168p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Will Flowers has been engrossed in (the fictional)
William Scott Saffrey's memoir of life in the WWI trenches, The Longest
Summer. Being in the midst of a war himself, he decides to write his own
book. "Our house is a battleground, too, in its own way. That's what Mum
says, at least. She claims that since Estelle turned into a shrieking banshee
overnight, our house has been hell on earth." Estelle's adolescent angst and
injuries are perfect material for Fine, who, when it comes to family fights,
always has the best seat in the house. "You hate spending money on anything
for me, don't you? You'll buy things for the others. You bought Muffy a
whole bed last week-" To which Estelle's mother replies, "Estelle, Muffy
can't sleep in a crib forever." The battles are fast and furious, and the strategies,
tactics, and subterfuges developed by each member of the family (to placate,
prod, and infuriate Estelle) are both frantic and funny. Throughout, Will reads
Saffrey's memoirs; in fact, it seems as if everyone is reading something
(including Will's friend Chopper, who stays one step ahead of his parents via
Coping with the Awkward Adolescent), and the way books and lives inform each
other is a theme Fine develops with subtle humor. Her own book loses a little
steam towards the (cute) ending, brought on by a funny but pedantically extended
scene at a school Parents' Night and a subsequent family fight employing the
spice rack, but readers will be gratified by the final truce. RS
D.V. Family relations
[ 154]
Fritz, Jean. The Great Adventure of Christopher Columbus; illus. by Tomie
dePaola. Putnam, 1992. ISBN 0-399-22113-1. 12p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-4. 
An odd use of paper engineering squeezes the usual
good style and careful reporting of Jean Fritz into an unfortunate arrangement.
Like so many pop-up books, this one, lavishly illustrated, uses the device to no
discernible purpose; in fact, the pop-ups get in the way of the reader, since the
text is printed on a recto flap that begins on the closed fold, then is continued on
the back of that fold. Fritz describes, in simple and direct prose, the long wait
that Columbus had before he obtained the royal sanction and royal financial
backing so that he could sail the Ocean Sea to the Indies; she makes it clear that
Columbus never knew how erroneous his conclusions were and never wavered in
his conviction that what he wanted to believe was true. With the pop-ups
constructed in shadow-box style, DePaola's paintings are opulently but darkly
colored, and have a solemnity of tone that is unusual for this prolific illustrator.
ZS
Gay, Kathlyn. Caution! This May Be an Advertisement. Watts, 1992. ISBN
0-531-11039-7. 
[208p.] illus. with photographs. 
$13.90. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
In a mixture of history, reportage, and advice, Gay
offers consumers an intelligent and informative guide to advertising. Opting for
breadth rather than depth, the book touches on topics such as marketing research,
packaging as promotion, image creation, and public service advertising (the
memorable example: an Oregon safe-sex campaign showing an attractive
raingear-clad man, with the caption "Good boys always wear their rubbers"), as
well as the more obvious media and direct mail methods of advertising. The
overall message of the book is "Consumer, be aware," and Gay offers sound
advice, suggesting readers analyze product claims ("Is strength an important
factor in regard to paper towels?") and acknowledging the likelihood of a teenager
being at least partly responsible for the family grocery shopping as well as his
or her own purchases. An occasional example or topic is unclear (a discussion
of video news releases, for instance, fails to convey what exactly they are), but
overall the book is a readable and useful resource. Toll-free numbers and
addresses for some federal consumer agencies appear in the text; endnotes and a
remarkably extensive bibliography are included. DS
C.U. Social studies
Ghan, Linda. Muhla, the Fair One; illus. by Elise Benoit. NuAge Editions,
1991. Paper ed. ISBN 0-921833-30-X. 40p. Paper ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
"Just remember, you're not to open the big pot, no
matter what little voice whispers in your ear," warn Muhla's parents as they
leave her in charge of her little sister Lungile. This prohibition sets readers up
for the appearance of a hungry evil spirit, Izume, who pops out of the pot when
Lungile inevitably lifts the lid, who pursues 13-year-old Muhla to the village
where she's supposed to find a husband, and who forces her to change shapes
with him. This is a long, complex story for a picture book format, but the
elements are strong and the theme-that appearances are deceiving to all but the
most perceptive-is worth comparing to European tales such as "Beauty and the
Beast." If the source is folkloric, it's too bad there are no notes outside of an
acknowledgment that this was commissioned by the Black Theatre Workshop of
[ 155
Canada: our only clue is a first sentence that sets the tale "on the brown hills of
Africa overlooking the vast plain." The striking art, gray halftones with some
full-color illustrations interspersed, features a smoothly modeled cast of black
characters who are costumed in vividly patterned clothing and coifed with
elaborately braided hair. With such visual dignity and a narrative that only
occasionally falters, this well-produced Canadian paperback will hold independent
readers or serve as a read-aloud to younger listeners. BH
Gorog, Judith. On Meeting Witches at Wells. Philomel, 1991. ISBN 0-399-
21803-3. 119p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
The framing device for a series of offbeat stories told
by equally offbeat characters is this: in a school about to close because of
cracking walls, children from the eighth-grade class gather to observe a school
tradition-each student makes a pillow while three teachers participate in
storytelling sessions. That is the adequate but not strong linkage between the
stories, which are not of equal effectiveness but range from good to very good,
and yield several surprises, including the fact that some anecdotes are told by
ghostly visitors to vary the pace. One of the best is "An Old, Often Retold,
Story of Revenge," which has an unexpected ending that outdoes the drama of
the plot. Readers will also enjoy the eerie inevitability of "The Silver Skier"
and the magic of the title story. ZS
Graff, Nancy Price. The Call of the Running Tide: A Portrait of an Island
Family; illus. with photographs by Richard Howard. Little, 1992. ISBN 0-
316-32278-4. 80p. $16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
The island of the subtitle is Swans Island, off the
coast of Maine, and the family of this photodocumentary consists of Spencer
Joyce, his wife, and their three children. To the extent of their experience and
ability, each member of the Joyce family takes part in fishing for lobsters, as
their forefathers (and mothers) have done. Black-and-white photographs augment
but do not often extend the text. Graff follows family activities and interests
through the year, emphasizing the details of lobstering and the satisfactions of
the islanders' way of life. The text is informative albeit weakened by a writing
style that is at times heavy and quite often florid. ZS
D.V. Occupational orientation
Hamilton, Morse. 
Little Sister for Sale; illus. by Gioia Fiammenghi.
Cobblehill, 1992. ISBN 0-525-65078-4. 32p. $13.00.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Clean, bright drawings in line and wash illustrate a
story that is mildly amusing and might be more so were it not so determinedly
cute. Angry because her little sister Abby has taken a bite of every strawberry
(they were supposed to share) and has used Kate's toothbrush and damaged some
of her toys, Kate goes on the offensive. Changing the lettering on an old
lemonade stand, Kate puts Abby on the counter next to a sign that announces
she's for sale. An elderly woman called Nonna (a neighbor? their grandmother?)
comes out of her house, pays a quarter, and goes off (temporarily) with Abby.
There are no parents or caretakers in the story, which ends with the sisters sitting
outdoors, cuddled together in a twilight scene. Predictable denouement: regret
followed by reunion. ZS
D.V. Sisters
[ 156]
Haugaard, Erik and Masako, ad. and tr. The Story of Yuriwaka; illus. by
Birgitta Saflund. Roberts Rinehart, 1991. ISBN 1-879373-02-5. 42p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A preface advises readers that the story of Odysseus,
brought to Japan in the sixteenth century, was adapted to become a tale about
Yuriwaka, a legendary warrior of great strength and courage. Sent on a punitive
mission by the Emperor, Yuriwaka is betrayed by two scoundrels and left
marooned on an island. Eventually he finds a rescuer, returns to his wife (who
has spurned Yuriwaka's betrayer even though he has insisted that her husband is
dead), and proves his identity by his skill at archery-using his own stolen iron
bow that no other can bend. 
An interesting adaptation and a capable
retelling/translation, this is minimally flawed by what appears to be careless
editing and by some poor placement of pictures. The illustrations, whether full
color or black-and-white, are distinctive for their strong sense of design and
composition. ZS
C. U. 
Storytelling
Hayashi, Akiko. Aki and the Fox; written and illus. by Akiko Hayashi.
Doubleday, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-385-41948-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-
41947-3. 40p. $14.00.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Kon the toy fox and his young human friend Aki,
whom he has played with since her birth, decide to take a train to Grandma's
house-to get Kon's frayed seams repaired. In the course of their journey, his
tail gets squashed, as well, and he's briefly buried in a sand dune by a dog.
However, a needle, thread, and long hot bath set things right again. The real
adventure here is the art work, an open bridge between Japanese cultural details
and western children's book art of the 1940s; Elizabeth Orton Jones comes to
mind. There's even a miniature reminder of earlier times with Tenniel's Mad
Hatter and Duchess (and is that Mr. McGregor?) profiled through the train
windows. Hayashi's art, while spaciously innocent, never becomes boring or
oversweet. The compositions are slyly varied, strongly focused, and subtly
colored without becoming bland (spotlight reds and oranges make sure of that).
Most of all, these pictures are warm, especially in scenes such as Grandma's
welcoming hug and bath. The text, while it's not A. A. Milne vintage, reads
smoothly and maintains a sense of adventure at a basic level. Perhaps the
book's most immediate appeal is the independence of the two main characters
combined with the reassurance that someone will come to their rescue. BH
D.V. Love for toy
Hoberman, Mary Ann. Fathers, Mothers, Sisters, Brothers: A Collection of
Family Poems; illus. by Marylin Hafner. Joy Street/Little, 1992. ISBN 0-316-
36736-2. 32p. $14.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
"What is a family?/ Who is a family? One and
another makes two is a family!" The emphasis here is on diverse situations, and
young listeners from nuclear, extended, fractured, foster, and adoptive families
will all find a place in these poems and pictures. Rhythms and rhymes are
jingly but energetic, making for brisk read-aloud sessions. Although the general
tone is bouncy, Hoberman acknowledges the rivalries ("Big Sister"), drudgeries
("Eat It-It's Good for You!"), and practicalities ("Half-Whole-Step") that plague
families, along with the sadness of separations ("My Father"). Hafner has
bloomed here in full color. Her scenes are action-packed and skillfully varied to
[ 157]
provide a page setting for each block of text. After a sequence of jovial graphics,
there's a well-timed pause in the full-page picture of a little boy waving good-
bye to his departing dad at the end of a wintry day together. When the verses fall
to the level of a sing-song message (in "Our Family Comes From 'Round the
World," for instance), the illustrations offer engaging distraction. Both writer
and artist have a good sense of what holds families together-a sense of
humor-and they've conveyed it with catchy verses and eye-catching visuals.
BH
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Family relations
Horton, Tom. Swanfall: Journey of the Tundra Swans; illus. with photographs
by David Harp. Walker, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8107-1; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-8027-8106-3. 4 2p. Library ed. $16.85; Trade ed. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
"Only a windpipe that looped and stretched nearly four
feet within those long necks could produce such otherworldly music." With an
elegant, sometimes convoluted style, Horton recounts the migratory journeys of
the tundra swans. At both the wintering and summering grounds, a realistically
dramatic incident transpires when a cygnet is killed by a hunter near Chesapeake
Bay and when another is left behind to die because it is not ready to fly before
the arrival of the first Arctic storm. An environmental message emerges
effortlessly from information about the birds-for example, their shift to feeding
inland as the bays become too polluted to sustain aquatic grasses. Harp's color
photography is lyrical in capturing the motions of flight and the play of light
and dark on swan feathers. This is a sharply focused photodocumentary that will
stretch the awareness, as well as the vocabulary, of independent readers and the
concentration of younger listeners. BH
D.V. Ecological awareness
Joosse, Barbara M. Anna and the Cat Lady; illus. by Gretchen Will Mayo.
HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020243-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
020242-4. [176p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Best friends Anna and Bethie, first introduced in
Anna, the One and Only (BCCB 2/89), make a new friend of Mrs. Sarafiny when
she rescues the two girls-and a kitten-from a local "haunted" house. Mrs.
Sarafiny has six cats of her own and is regarded by the town as being rather
peculiar; despite the fact that she rescued the girls, Anna's father tells Anna not
to speak with Mrs. Sarafiny anymore. But Anna and Bethie are loyal to the "cat
lady," even as they become aware that her oddities (fear of Martians, for example)
indicate real trouble. While Mrs. Sarafiny's mental illness is sentimentally
rendered, there is a realistic crisis when she puts the television in the oven as a
"TV dinner," and it's up to the girls to save her. With nicely woven subplots
that include Anna's determined, and hopeless, efforts to keep the kitten she found
in the haunted house, and her (ungrounded) fear that her parents are divorcing, the
book is amiable middle-grade fare with a bit more personality than most. RS
D.V. Older-younger generations
[ 158]
Kandoian, Ellen. Molly's Seasons; written and illus. by Ellen Kandoian.
Cobblehill, 1992. ISBN 0-525-65076-8. 32p. $13.00.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
As in her previous books Under the Sun (BCCB
1/88) and Is Everybody Up (BCCB 12/89), Kandoian here extends a concept just
a bit beyond the everyday, encouraging kids to think of the world as a bigger
backyard. "The sun and the snow, the wind and the rain,/ Bring signs of the
seasons to Molly in Maine," and a series of gentle double-spread watercolor
illustrations shows Molly enjoying the fruits and fun of the four seasons, each
picture also showing the primary calendar months for that season. (Summer
may be Kandoian's favorite: while the other pictures are a bit conventional, the
summer light brings a subtle palette to some atmospheric paintings). Many
books, of course, show these changes, "but here is what Molly wants to know:
Are the seasons the same wherever you go?" No-in the far north and south,
"winter means darkness and noon looks like night/ Summer means sunshine and
midnight is bright"; at the Equator there are two seasons, rainy and dry, and in
New Zealand, the seasons are similar to Molly's, "but it's winter in June,
summer in December, Autumn in march, and spring in September!" 
This is
oversimplified: for example, the picture of the polar summer looks as warm as
the temperate equivalent; and equatorial climate is more complex than rainy
versus dry. Yet the basic concepts are sound, and the book will be a boon to all
those kids who wonder why they, unlike the characters in the books they read,
don't have snow at Christmas. RS
Kehret, Peg. Terror at the Zoo. Cobblehill, 1992. 
ISBN 0-525-65083-0.
131p. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Grandma and Grandpa have gotten Ellen and her
brother Cory an unusual birthday gift (she'll be twelve, he'll be eight) at a
charity auction: 
a one-night camp-out at Seattle's Woodland Park Zoo.
Through an unlikely series of coincidences, misunderstandings, and deceptions,
the children end up spending the night without adult supervision--and locked in
with a child-hating escaped convict who, upon discovering Ellen and Cory,
wants to hold them for ransom. The kids scramble through various animal
enclosures in the dark as they attempt to elude their pursuer until finally he
corers them in the elephant compound, where Ellen (through telepathy honed in
experiments with her dog) convinces the elephants to save them: 
"Good
elephant, help us! We need you. The man is evil. Please help us escape."
There's no characterization; the most interesting person is the hackneyed convict,
who at least has solid roots in B-movie melodrama. The nocturnal chase
through the zoo is atmospheric and suspenseful, but even the most credulous
reader may quail at the absurdity of the plot. DS
Kendall, Russ. Eskimo Boy: Life in an Inupiaq Eskimo Village; written and
illus. with photographs by Russ Kendall. Scholastic, 1992. ISBN 0-590-
43695-3. [40p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
Explaining in a prefatory note that "Eskimo" is the
ethnological term used by many Native Alaskans, the author/photographer
introduces Norman Kokeok, a seven-year-old Inupiaq Eskimo who lives on a
small island off of Alaska's northwest coast. Kendall's text is minimal, little
more than captioning for his often stunning color photographs. Alternating
dramatic perspectives of the sweeping landscape with observant portraits of
[ 159]
Norman and his family, Kendall conveys the particulars of Eskimo life without
making them seem exotic. Although Norman's mother, for example, cleans the
meat her husband hunts with her traditional ulu knife, she performs this task in
jeans and a t-shirt. 
In school, Norman learns about polar bears (which
occasionally visit the village) from a videotape. And while snow machines are
ubiquitous, "most families still ride dogsleds for fun and sometimes to race."
For kids in the lower forty-nine, Norman will seem like the kid next door-but
what a neighborhood! RS
C.U. Intercultural understanding
Lasky, Kathryn. Double Trouble Squared. Harcourt, 1991. Trade ed. ISBN 0-
15-224126-4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-224127-2. 
232p. 
(Starbuck Family
Adventures). Trade ed. $15.95; Paper ed. $5.95.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
There are two sets of Starbuck twins: eleven-year-
olds July Burton (sometimes known as J. B. or Jelly Bean) and Liberty Bell (the
two were born on the 4th of July); and five-year-olds Charlotte and Amalie (aka
Charly and Molly, born-guess-in the Virgin Islands). What's more, all four
are telepathic with each other, the younger children less proficiently than their
older brother and sister. Due to circumstances as contrived as their names, the
kids find themselves in London, where July and Liberty discover a mysterious
and invisible fifth presence added to their telepathic network. This is the sort of
madcap mystery/fantasy story that Jane Langton does very well; unfortunately,
Lasky seems entirely out of her element. The eccentricity (Mrs. Starbuck being
the largest manufacturer of ballet tutus in the country, for example) is often
forced and irrelevant; and characterization is minimal (despite a cloying appendix
in which family member introduce themselves). While the twins' telepathy has
inherent appeal, it isn't really necessary to the story, which is a belabored affair
involving the restless ghost of Sherlock Holmes' twin brother, Shadrach,
unknown to most of us because he disappeared in an early draft of a story (and,
of course, because Lasky made him up). Shadrach likes jelly beans, but he
cannot digest color, leaving little "pastel puddles" on the table. He calls this
bioluminescence (Lasky made this up, too). 
The narrative has an
improvisational aimlessness that occasionally tips into total confusion. Along
the way, Lasky offers some nuggets of literary wisdom as well as explanations
of the Gulf Stream and the genesis of thunderstorms. This is the first in a
projected series. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Levinson, Nancy Smiler. 
Snowshoe Thompson; illus. by Joan Sandin.
HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023802-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
023801-1. 64p. (I Can Read Books). Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $13.00.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
In this very easy beginning-to-read book, Danny
O'Riley is sad because he cannot send a letter to his father, who is mining for
gold on the other side of the Sierra Nevadas. "No mail until spring. The snow
is too deep." But John "Snowshoe" Thompson comes to the rescue, enlisting
Danny's help in making a pair of skis and crossing the mountains himself.
Based on a real Gold Rush hero, Levinson's story is a satisfying blend of
heartache (Danny writes to his father, "I do not care if you strike it rich. I miss
you") and action ("The wind howled. It blew so hard that John could barely
see"). Sandin's paintings amplify the contrasts between the warm browns of
[ 160 1
cozy, wood-stove interiors and the gray-white sweep of snow and mountains.
Newly independent readers will appreciate the part Danny plays in making the
skis, and they will also enjoy his reward, a return letter from Pa: "I miss you
too. I will be home for Christmas." RS
C.U. Reading, beginning; The West
Levy, Constance. I'm Going to Pet a Worm Today and Other Poems; illus. by
Ronald Himler. McElderry, 1991. ISBN 0-689-50535-3. 4 0p. $11.95.
R* 
Gr. 2-5. 
A generous collection of forty poems marks the debut
of a writer with fresh senses of sound and sight. Never beyond the reach of
children, Levy's verse will nevertheless stretch their verbal awareness with
rhyming surprises, as in "The Color-Eater": "Sunset mixed this recipe:/ Orange
and grape and raspberry/... Night came sniffing/ Like a pup;/ Licked it/ Liked
it/ Lapped it up." She's adept at both internal and end rhyme, at keeping
rhythms light without turning them into fluff, and at focusing the subject of a
poem for new perspective. "How awkward while playing with glue/ To suddenly
find out that you/ Have stuck nice and tight/ Your left hand to your right/ In a
permanent how-do-you-do!" Although the title poem is narrative, most of these
are lyrical poems with a strong stress on the immediate relationship between
kids and their natural surroundings. 
The descriptions are never boring or
condescending but will encourage the reader to close observation: "Water looks
thin/ but weighs thick." Himler's adroit pen-and-ink drawings picture bits and
pieces from key lines and leave the rest to the reader's imagination. BH
Lindenbaum, Pija. Else-Marie and Her Seven Little Daddies; ad. by Gabrielle
Charbonnet; written and illus. by Pija Lindenbaum. Holt, 1991. ISBN 0-8050-
1752-6. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-9 yrs. 
You think your family is strange? Pity poor Else-
Marie, who has seven identical knee-high fathers. "My daddies always take turns
reading my good-night story. Each daddy reads one line." And while Else-Marie
loves her daddies, she is horrified by the fact that on this day, they, instead of her
(remarkable) mother, will be picking her up at playgroup. "What if, when my
daddies come to pick me up, the kids try to play with them? My daddies might
be in a hurry to get home, but the kids will pick them up and say, 'Now, now,
let's just sing "Rock-a-bye, Baby," okay?'" But the daddies come, the teacher is
blas6 ("It's so nice when parents come and we can show them what we do every
day") and Else-Marie's classmates are properly admiring. The line-and-watercolor
sketches further the text's good-humored tone by treating the little, briefcase-
bearing, trenchcoat-wearing daddies with gentle respect: lined up on the couch
with the paper, grouchily standing in line for the bathroom ("What does she do
in there for so long?"), and trotting by for a morning goodbye kiss from Else-
Marie's mother. Else-Marie's fears of playgroup mayhem (the teacher sitting on
her daddies, for example) are catastrophically pictured; the reality (her daddies
checking the insides of the class's new birdhouses for nails) a paternal pleasure.
Daddies (and mommies!) can be different--so what? That's the friendly message
here. 
Besides, it's an intriguing look at what might have happened if Snow
White hadn't opened that door to the witch. RS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
[ 161 ]
Lipsyte, Robert. The Chemo Kid. HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-
06-020285-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020284-X. 
[192p]. Library ed. $13.89;
Trade ed. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Fred, the narrator, has always felt that he's so
nondescript as to be almost invisible. His story begins when, at a prom, his
date Mara discovers a lump on his neck; it proves to be a rare form of cancer.
Depressed and self-conscious, Fred goes back to school (after his chemotherapy
program is over) having lost his hair, and having drug-caused puffy skin that
looks greenish. It's a candid picture, augmented by descriptions of other
adolescent patients in a cancer clinic. It is also the story of a dedicated effort on
the part of Fred and his friends, spurred by environment-conscious Mara, into
cleaning up their town and their school. The third element is Fred's chemically-
induced superpower, so that he can accomplish such feats as lifting a heavy desk,
snapping police handcuffs, etc. What emerges is a very tall tale which is laced
with humor (Fred's doctor is an almost-farcical comic character) and in which the
disparate elements don't coalesce. Still, Lipsyte's writing style is resilient and
Fred's delivery is convincingly juvenile; the medical material is interesting, the
parental support cheering, and the concern for the environment admirable. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Courage; Parent-child relations
Lyons, Mary E. Raw Head, Bloody Bones: African-American Tales of the
Supernatural. Scribner's, 1991. ISBN 0-684-19333-7. 88p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
It's a real test when real folklore tries to fit into the
world of children's literature-that is to say, folklore with goblins, ghosts,
monsters, and superhumans let loose on the imagination in blunt, minimally
edited narrative form. Lyons has selected fifteen such stories, many originally
collected for various phases of the Federal Writers Project. Several are in the
Gullah dialect, which she has altered only if the spelling was unrecognizable.
Her introduction, source notes, and bibliographies (the latter organized into
sections on the stories, on information she used to describe the stories, and on
books for further reading) are invaluable, as are the brief explanations at the end
of each tale placing it in cultural context. These are not bedtime or toddler hour
selections: older elementary graders and junior high students will relish meeting
the Hag, Plat-eye, the Duppy Ghost, the Big Worm, the Night Doctor, and Dead
Aaron (familiar to readers of The Dancing Skeleton by Cynthia DeFelice, BCCB
10/89), all characters who haunt African-American lore with a vengeance.
Storytellers will recognize the more popular figures, including Big Sixteen,
which generated controversy in an illustrated picture book by Mary Calhoun and
Trina Schart Hyman (BCCB 12/83). These will make quick, unforgettable read-
alouds for kids who think they're too sophisticated to listen. You'll have them
discussing society's fears past and present; TV violence will pale by comparison.
C.U. Reading aloud
Marzollo, Jean. I Spy: A Book of Picture Riddles; illus. with photographs by
Walter Wick. Cartwheel/Scholastic, 1992. 
ISBN 0-590-45087-5. 
[3 7p].
$10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
On oversize pages, brightly colored photographs are
crammed with small objects; each double-page spread is organized by theme
(Tiny Toys, Arts & Crafts, Odds & Ends, At the Beach, etc.). The rhyming
captions at the foot of each page suggest objects to be found; this is, in fact, less
[ 162]
a riddle book than a find-the-object challenge. While the pages are very busy,
it's the sort of crowding many young children enjoy, and it certainly fosters
observation of detail. ZS
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
McGovern, Ann. Swimming with Sea Lions and Other Adventures in the
Galapagos Islands; written and illus. with photographs by Ann McGovern.
Scholastic, 1992. ISBN 0-590-45282-7. 48p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
In a follow-up (with the same attendant flaws and
strengths) to Down Under Down Under (BCCB 10/89), an anonymous girl is the
author of a diary chronicling a trip with Grandma to the Galapagos Islands. The
description of the boat tour around the islands is fascinating, as are the
accompanying color photographs of the unusual Galipagos animals. On the
other hand, the fictional elements of the story don't have enough follow-through
and leave the reader dangling-what is the narrator's name and age? (She looks
about ten.) Why doesn't she mention any of the other passengers? Why are there
no pictures of her and Grandma together? Some of the language the diarist uses
is not that of a ten-year-old ("Wonder of wonders" and "the dismal bellowing of
the sea lions"). Excerpts from Grandma's diary become an informal glossary,
providing more detailed facts about the animals. 
For the most part, the
narrator's enthusiasm and the great quantities of information slipped into the
diary entries will serve nicely as an introduction to the unique Galipagos Islands.
KPJ
C.U. Nature study
McKenna, Colleen O'Shaughnessy. Mother Murphy. Scholastic, 1992. ISBN
0-590-44820-X. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
At the ripe old age of thirty-five, Collette's mother is
expecting a baby-just as Collette, eleven, was about to finally get her own
room. Understandably, Collette is ambivalent about the situation, and-good
Catholic girl that she is-feels terribly guilty when she finds out that Mom is in
danger of miscarrying: "maybe God was trying to teach Collette a lesson about
being selfish. As soon as she thought about it, Collette knew God didn't work
that way. But she felt responsible anyway." But the fact that Mom has to stay
in bed for a while at least allows Collette a chance to demonstrate her maturity
and babysitting skills, taking care of her three younger siblings. She thinks.
This is another likable entry in a lively series (see also BCCB 4/91), and the
disaster humor of Collette's childcare mishaps is nicely balanced by the
children's concern for their mother, who, it seems, will be fine. The baby and
the next book will probably arrive around the same time. RS
D.V. Family relations
McMillan, Bruce. Play Day: A Book of Terse Verse; written and illus. with
photographs by Bruce McMillan. Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-0894-9.
32p. $14.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
As he did in this book's companion volume, One
Sun (BCCB 5/90), McMillan here photographs children (of various ethnic
origins) engaged in activities described in rhyme on the facing page. "Fat bat"
shows a small hand reaching for one of those oversize bats that toddlers wield so
enthusiastically toward a plastic ball. "Shirt dirt" needs no explanation! While
[ 163]
the last volume had a seaside theme, this one is squarely set in a grassy
backyard, which lends vivid green backdrops for the color photography.
Although one or two shots are just a touch cutesy ("goat boat" shows an
expensive-looking stuffed toy floating atop a handcrafted raft), others reflect the
children's natural enthusiasm ("fun run") or intense involvement ("feet seat).
The pictures that show body parts and objects lack the emotional punch of facial
expression but will serve admirably for identification games. The book as a
whole seems a bit younger in its target audience than the previous one, though it
generates the same creative possibilities for read-aloud chanting and word play.
BH
C.U. Language arts
D.V. Imaginative powers
Mennen, Ingrid. Somewhere in Africa; by Ingrid Mennen and Niki Daly; illus.
by Nicolaas Maritz. Dutton, 1992. ISBN 0-525-44848-9. 
[32p]. 
$13.00.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Clearing up several popular misconceptions, this
book shows a little boy who lives in Africa, but "not Africa where lions laze in
golden grass, not Africa where crocodiles glide through muddy rivers, silent and
hungry." Ashraf, who looks East Indian, lives in a city, presumably Capetown,
"a city at the very tip of the great African continent," where he enjoys city
things, such as traffic, alleys, shops both ordinary and exotic, and the library:
"slowly, Ashraf stalks the shelves for something special. Something wild and
untamed." But Ashraf always picks the same book-about lions, crocodiles, and
zebras. The portrayal of urban delights alongside an ancient heritage ("Next to
the supermarket is the place where drummers drum almost forgotten stories") is a
welcome rejoinder to jungle stereotypes, but local color takes precedence over
story, giving the book more conceptual interest than narrative appeal, unlike, for
example, Niki Daly's Not so Fast, Songololo (BCCB 4/86). The thick paint of
the illustrations, along with heavy black outlining, gives an energetic if
sometimes crude effect; color is applied liberally and vigorously. Both Ashraf's
city neighborhood and his dreams of wild Africa will seem unusual to most
American kids, who will welcome a visit to either place. RS
Mills, Claudia. 
A Visit to Amy-Claire; illus. by Sheila Hamanaka.
Macmillan, 1992. 
ISBN 0-02-766991-2. 
32p. 
$14.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Rachel, five, looks forward to visiting her cousin
Amy-Claire, two years older. Last time they had had great fun; this time Amy-
Claire seems more interested in Rachel's baby sister Jessie. Rachel feels rejected
as the day goes on and Amy-Claire's interest in baby Jessie continues. Finally,
on the if-you-can't-beat-them-join-them theory, Rachel asks if she too can play
house and is assigned the role of "big sister." The jealousy and pouting seem
more believable than Rachel's quick conversion to appreciation of the very
sibling who has caused Amy-Claire's attention to be diverted. The story has an
easy, simple style and the illustrations, large-scale and sun-bright, show two
branches of an attractive Asian-American family. ZS
D.V. Jealousy, overcoming; Sisters
[ 164]
Molnar, Dorothy E. Who Will Pick Me Up When I Fall?; by Dorothy Molnar
and Stephan Fenton; illus. by Irene Trivas. Whitman, 1991. ISBN 0-8075-
9072-X. 32p. $12.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
When she wakes up, Sarton can't remember what day
it is. Sorting through the possibilities leaves her overwhelmed: 
gym on
Monday, swimming on Tuesday, dance on Wednesday, soccer on Thursday,
library on 
. . . which day?, with different rides to and from school and
afterschool activities. So she hides under the covers until her mother fusses,
then lines up brown paper bags ("like traffic") to pack for each day, including a
no-day bag equipped for running away. This kind of juggling represents a
typical schedule for working parents' children, and if the resolution is a bit
unrealistic (Mommy promises, with a conciliatory hug, to take all day Friday off
to do anything Sarton wants), the book nevertheless presents a sympathetic
platform for discussion of harried family routines. Fenton's bouncy watercolors
keep the tone light without becoming frenetic and assert Sarton's case with
convincing energy. Parents, prepare to slow down. BH
D.V. Cooperation; Parent-child relations
Morgan, Helen. The Witch Doll. Viking, 1992. 
ISBN 0-670-84285-0.
[144p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
Courtesy of Mr. Baldock, the junkman, Linda has
acquired a mysterious, rather menacing, doll: "Linda stared at it-and as she
stared it seemed to her that the doll's expression changed... the blue eyes had a
new and glittering brilliance, the red mouth was set in a disapproving line, the
dark brows had come together in a frown." The doll's appearance is later proven
out, when, as friend Joanna begins to brush its hair, it grows larger and comes to
life. "'I have some unfinished business to attend to,' said the doll-child, with a
grim little smile." Potent stuff; unfortunately, the supernatural element is not
consistent throughout the story, with the rules for what brings the doll to life
being both confusing and contradictory. However, the central concept-that the
doll is a puppet of an evil French witch-will appeal to genre fans, who will
also enjoy all the complications of the plot (and maybe a true fan can figure out
the puzzling conclusion). Both characterization and atmosphere are sketchy, but
a spooky-eyed cover painting by Neil Waldman makes an irresistible invitation.
RS
Munro, Roxie. The Inside-Outside Book of Paris; written and illus. by Roxie
Munro. Dutton, 1992. ISBN 0-525-44863-2. 48p. $15.00.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
As she has in books about London and Washington,
Munro uses oversize pages for bright colorful paintings that pair exterior views
with interior close-ups of famous buildings such as the Mus6e d'Orsay or the
Pompidou Center. There are also illustrations of famous sites such as L'Arc de
Triomphe or ones typically Parisian, including a sidewalk caf6. The book
succeeds in evoking the effervescent atmosphere of Paris and in conveying
details, architecturally precise and true to the laws of sometimes dizzying
perspective. In a few instances, the unusual perspective may confuse children, as
in the picture of a bateau-mouche below a bridge, although the text explains the
situation. ZS
[ 165 ]
Newman, Lesl6a. Belinda's Bouquet; illus. by Michael Willhoite. Alyson
Wonderland, 1992. Paper ed. ISBN 1-55583-154-0. 24p. Paper ed. $6.95.
M 
5-8 yrs. 
After Daniel's best friend Belinda is teased by the
schoolbus driver for getting fat, she refuses an afterschool snack. "Maybe if I
stop eating so much, I won't be fat." "One of" Daniel's mothers tells Belinda a
story, a didactic allegory about a "very wise woman" who, while gardening,
makes a very big mistake when she tries to make her short, fat marigolds tall
and thin like the irises. "She put all the marigolds on a diet." The marigolds
wither and droop, and Belinda understands the analogy, that her body is just fine
the way it is. The message of self-acceptance is welcome, but it needs a story,
not a sermon. Much more casually and convincingly conveyed is the fact that
Daniel has two mothers, one "Mama" and one "Mommy," who together sit
down for snacks with the kids. The family situation and characters are inviting
possibilities that lack only a plot to show them to best advantage. Cartoon
illustrations by Willhoite (Daddy's Roommate, BCCB 3/91) are amiably and
disarmingly suburban. RS
D.V. Self-acceptance
Parks, Rosa. Rosa Parks: My Story; by Rosa Parks with Jim Haskins. Dial,
1992. ISBN 0-8037-0673-1. 192p. illus. with photographs. $17.00.
R* 
Gr. 6-9. 
A remarkable story, a record of quiet bravery and
modesty, a document of social significance, a taut drama told with candor;
whatever the role of James Haskins, he has helped achieve a fine book, and the
voice of Rosa Parks is consistently strong. One phrase she uses (in the "Stride
Toward Freedom" chapter) reflects the attitude that dominates her behavior: "I do
not like to form in my mind an idea that I don't have any proof of." More than
an account of the bus boycott or the personal history of Rosa Parks (although
this gives a detailed personal history), the book is both a record of an important
series of events in the struggle for black equality and an explanation of its
motivation and rationale. Illustrated with photographs. ZS
C.U. 
Social studies; History-U.S.
Passen, Lisa. Fat, Fat Rose Marie; written and illus. by Lisa Passen. Holt,
1991. ISBN 0-8050-1653-8. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
"Fat, fat Rose Marie! Fattest girl I ever did see!"
shouts Genevieve, but Claire persists in her friendship with the plump
newcomer until mean Genevieve persuades her to abandon Rose Marie at the
carnival ("It's fat, fat Rose Marie! She's going to get on this ride and break the
ride and we're all going to DIE!"). What rings true here is the dynamic and
dialogue of ostracism, which starts at an early enough age to make this picture
book immediate as a story and useful as a springboard to discussion. The
watercolor art is as intense as the peer group drama. Passen's purposefully
distorted, doll-eyed characters emphasize the fact that we're all homely to some
extent, even if some of us suffer special effects. By the way, Claire comes to
her senses by the time her class gets to the scary fun house, and she's not too
angelic about it, either. Genevieve gets what's coming to her ("'You're not a
nice person, Genevieve!' I shouted"): a double-scoop French-vanilla ice-cream
cone (with chocolate sprinkles) pushed into her face. BH
D.V. Age-mate relations
[ 166
Pattison, Darcy. 
The River Dragon; illus. by Jean and Mou-Sien Tseng.
Lothrop, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10427-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10426-
6. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
The illustrators of Margaret Mahy's The Seven
Chinese Brothers (BCCB 7/90) here apply their art to a folk-like tale about a
humble blacksmith who overcomes a dragon. Ying Shao, betrothed in childhood
to a goldsmith's daughter, must politely eat the cooked swallows served him at
three pre-wedding banquets even though he knows that the smell of swallows
will attract the local dragon. Ying Shao's future father-in-law is counting on the
dragon to get rid of a bridegroom whom he now considers too lowly in rank; but
luck, love, and quick wits save the hero. Although the details have been drawn
from Chinese dragon lore, the story bears structural kinship to European fairy
tales. Both art and narrative show strong linear movement, with dramatic,
intensely colored full-page or double spreads supporting a complex text. Any
child who has feared crossing a dark place will sympathize with Ying Shao's
night journey across the bridge where the river dragon lurks-and will pay close
attention to the next fortune cookie that rounds off a meal! BH
Pettit, Jayne. My Name Is San Ho. Scholastic, 1992. ISBN 0-590-44172-8.
[192p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
San Ho begins his story with a chapter that gives
historical background and creates a framework for his sad narrative about the
Vietnam War and the terrible effect it had on his family and on their small South
Vietnamese village. When San Ho is ten, his mother takes him to the safety of
a friend's home in Saigon-and it is years before they are reunited. By then,
Mother is in the United States, married to an American. The rest of the story
(less dramatic, but perhaps more appealing to readers) is interesting (if perhaps
expectable) as an account of acculturation, of slow bonding between San Ho and
his stepfather, and of the boy's growing sense of belonging and of acceptance
into his peer group. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Stepparent-child relations
Peyton, K. M. Poor Badger; illus. by Mary Lonsdale. Delacorte, 1992. ISBN
0-385-30561-3. [112p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Horse-crazy, nine-year-old Ros and her tadpole-
hunting friend Leo find a beautiful pony tethered on their local common: "He
was strong and pushy, but kind (like Ros, Leo thought. They were a good
match)." The children dub the pony Badger, but the pleasure in their discovery
grows sour when they discover that Badger's owners are neglectful and abusive.
Ros and Leo decide to stage a rescue (complete with rehearsal), taking Badger to
a bit of pasture owned by local shady character Sid the Pigman ("We want
someone dishonest," Ros says). While Badger's nasty owners are overdrawn, the
rest of the cast has great character-Sid is a terrific anti-hero-as does the
writing itself. Peyton here demonstrates that she can take her talent for
atmospheric and well-paced storytelling to younger readers, paving the way for
later requests for Fly By Night and Flambards (BCCB 5/69). DS
[167]
Philip, Neil, comp. and ad. Fairy Tales of Eastern Europe; illus. by Larry
Wilkes. Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-395-57456-0. 157p. $19.95.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
Of the twenty-two tales in this volume, many have
motifs from stories in the familiar collection of the Grimm Brothers. However,
the flavor of these Eastern European versions is slightly different from that of
their Germanic counterparts. The narrative is fluid, and the dialogue is informal.
For example, in "The Feather of Bright Finist the Falcon," a kindly Baba-Yaga
asks the adventuring young heroine a natural question, "Are you flying from
work or seeking work?" When the king in "The Useless Wagoneer" wants to
spy on Jack, he asks his daughter and his wife to do anything to distract Jack,
even if Jack "asks a piece of your flesh." The cruel stepsister in "The Twelve
Months," "lolling near the stove" and longing for strawberries, possesses mood
and motivation seldom wasted on the bad guys in folklore. On the other hand,
the versions of "The Longed-for Hedgehog" and "Cinder Jack" are both so
abridged that there is practically no dialogue and the characters seem flat. Each
tale has one full-page watercolor illustration and a few smaller pen-and-ink
drawings. The best of these are in the story "Goldenhair," in which George the
servant is a comical and common-looking hero. Notes regarding variants and an
introduction describing the linguistic organization of the tales complete the
book. With its several gems, this collection is a find for storytellers. KPJ
C.U. 
Storytelling
Pillar, Marjorie. Join the Band!; written and illus. with photographs by
Marjorie Pillar. HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021829-0; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-06-021834-7. 32p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Color photographs use most of the space in a
photoessay, and the minimal text (direct, simple, enthusiastic in tone) is
purportedly written by one of the flautists in an elementary school band. This
may not answer every question posed by its readers (Do participants have to buy
their instruments? 
Does all instruction come from the school's band
teacher/conductor?) but it certainly gives a picture of the range of instruments,
the patterns of rehearsal, the musician's obligation to practice at home and to
take care of his or her instrument, and, in closing, the excitement and
satisfaction of giving a concert. ZS
C.U. 
Music
Raymond, Patrick. The Maple Moon. Hutchinson/Trafalgar Square, 1992.
ISBN 0-09-174389-3. 107p. $17.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Cassie has come to Canada from England to meet her
father and half-brother for the first time, her parents having divorced soon after
her birth. They all like each other very much, and Cassie's father has hopes that
she will marry rich and handsome Don McFall, the son of his chief business
rival who lives on the other side of the lake. Instead, Cassie falls for Brent, a
handsome Indian (whose sister Lita, incidentally, is having an illicit affair with
Cassie's half-brother). Brent is a noble stereotype in the Harlequin romance
mold; the story as a whole owes more to that genre than it does to Raymond's
previous-and excellent-YA novel Daniel and Esther (BCCB 3/90). However,
the wilderness setting is atmospherically evoked, and while the story only
[ 168]
superficially explores the theme of cultural conflicts, the more ancient theme of
star-crossed lovers will sustain reader interest. RS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Intercultural understanding
Rosenberg, 
Liz. 
The Scrap Doll; illus. by Robin Ballard.
Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024865-3; Trade ed. ISBN
0-06-024864-5. 32p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
There's no money for the fancy doll that Lydia sees
advertised on TV, but her mother does produce her own childhood doll homemade
from scraps-"scruffy-looking . . . with staring eyes and a bald head"-not
exactly what Lydia had in mind. "Why don't you fix her up a little? Name her
anything you like," suggests Lydia's mother. A disgruntled Lydia renames the
doll Ugly Old Thing but proceeds to paint a new face, make yarn hair, and sew
some clothes (at which she's perhaps a wee bit too capable). Soon, Ugly Old
Thing finds a place in Lydia's heart, bed, and breakfast table to become Sarah
once again. The ruddy hues and rounded shapes of Ballard's spacious, open-faced
art reinforce the understated simplicity of the text; yet the message is not
oversimplified. Lydia's experience is less a sermon on being content with what
you have than a suggestion that contentment lies in creative independence. Her
relationship with her mother is full of empathy; her relationship with her doll is
full of activity. Red-blooded young listeners will still whine for a trip to Toys-
R-Us, but this book paves the way for alternative survival routes. Get busy,
kids. BH
D.V. Love for toy
Singer, A. L., ad. Disney's Beauty and the Beast. Disney, 1991. Paper ed.
ISBN 1-56282-051-6. 70p. illus. Paper ed. $2.95.
Gr. 4-6. 
See editorial
Singer, A. L., ad. Disney's Beauty and the Beast; illus. by Ron Dias. Disney,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-050-8; Trade ed. 1-56282-049-4. 96p. Library
ed. $14.98; Trade ed. $14.95.
4-9 yrs. 
See editorial
Siy, Alexandra. Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Dillon, 1991. ISBN 0-
87518-468-5. 80p. illus. with photographs. (Circle of Life Books). $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-6. 
After a somewhat confusing introduction about "A
Place Called Time," which seems to be there only-and at length-to set the
stage for the "timeless" Arctic, Siy settles down to a discussion of the Arctic
National Refuge, its geology, geography, flora and fauna. 
The text is
occasionally repetitive, sometimes unclear (". . . on the tundra there are no
reptiles, which are animals that eat bird eggs") and metaphorically overreaching
("like time, living things have seasons"). With a strong ecological message, the
book is most valuable in its clear "webbing" of life in the Arctic, explaining
how plants and animals and weather are tied in a schema of survival: "Because
lichens grow slowly, caribou must travel to new places to find plants that have
not yet been trampled or eaten. Migration of the caribou gives the lichens a
chance to grow back." The explanations of evolutionary adaptation are also
clear, without recourse to anthropomorphism. Color photos are well-placed;
[ 169]
there's an appendix of "activity pages" for each chapter; a directory of
environmental groups, a glossary, and an index are also included. RS
C.U. Nature study
D.V. 
Ecological awareness
Smith, Janice Lee. Nelson in Love: An Adam Joshua Valentine's Day Story;
illus. by Dick Gackenbach. HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
020293-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020292-0. [80p]. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed.
$12.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Adam Joshua and his best friend, Nelson, are still in
Ms. D's class (see It's Not Easy Being George, BCCB 10/89), and Valentine's
Day is approaching. 
Adam Joshua is shocked when Nelson starts admiring
Heidi's hair and dimples, but he's stunned when he learns that Heidi has a crush
on him. The love triangle shortly turns into a quin-tangle, and soon practically
everyone in the class is in love with the wrong person ("A lot of people kept
their eyes on a lot of other people, but for the most part, nobody was ever
looking at the person looking at them, so nobody's eyes ever met"). Even his
dog, George, deserts him for a girl dog named Lucy, and Adam Joshua "put a lot
of feeling betrayed into it." Although the story stands on its own, it's better if
one reads the preceding books to understand things like Adam Joshua's dislike of
Elliot, Martha's unique personality, and Nelson's fondness for fish. Smith's
understated style is at its funniest during Adam Joshua's conversations with
George, who manages to look sorry, amazed, disgusted, doubtful, very truly
honored, and deeply touched, all in five minutes. Smith has captured the
elementary school world so winningly that, with any luck, Adam Joshua will
never grow up. KPJ
Soto, Gary. A Fire in My Hands: A Book of Poems; illus. by James M.
Cardillo. Scholastic, 1991. 
ISBN 0-590-45021-2; Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-
35582-1. 64p. $11.95; Paper ed. $4.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Twenty-three poems, eight of which are reprinted
from Soto's book Black Hair and the rest from other sources, get brief, italicized
introductions that may disarm teenagers who are ill at ease with poetry and who
think they need explanations. Soto's informal free verse should do the rest,
since the narrative flow makes them accessible, and the common subjects-from
baseball to buddies--carry inherent appeal. While the language is consciously
and unmusically plain, the strong visual imagery will stay with young readers as
it has with the adults for whom the poetry was originally intended. Cardillo's
pen-and-ink drawings are competent if uninventive, and the concluding question-
and-answer segment is mildly informative. BH
Taylor, C. J. The Ghost and Lone Warrior: An Arapaho Legend; written and
illus. by C. J. Taylor. Tundra, 1991. ISBN 0-88776-263-8; French language
edition ISBN 0-88776-264-6. 24p. $12.95.
R 
6-9 yrs. 
Felled by a broken ankle, Lone Warrior is left in the
wilderness while his tribe is on the hunt for buffalo. Providing him with food
and shelter, his friends promise to rescue him on their way back, but they do not
return, leaving Lone Warrior alone to survive, find more food, and ... face a
ghost in the form of a skeleton. This retold Arapaho legend is effectively pared,
functioning both as a simple ghost story and as a more complex parable of the
[ 170]
Arapaho leadership structure. The skeleton, "the ghost of your ancestor who was
a great chief," tells Lone Warrior that his fellow hunters have been ambushed and
killed by enemies and that he must assume leadership of his tribe: "I had to see
if you could keep your courage when you felt like giving up, if you could shoot
straight in spite of your pain, if you could look at my face and not show fear."
And so, Lone Warrior becomes the new chief. Taylor, a Native Canadian, is a
naive artist whose paintings are sometimes too literal, but who just as often
shows a gift for dramatic coloring, as in a picture of a magenta-skyed blizzard, or
for equally dramatic confrontation, as when Lone Warrior offers food to the red-
robed skeleton. The final spread, of a buffalo-horn-crowned Lone Warrior
surrounded by a panorama of the land and backed by the ghost, is assured and
conclusive. RS
D.V. Courage; Leadership
Twohill, Maggie. 
Valentine Frankenstein. Bradbury, 1992. ISBN 0-02-
789692-7. 135p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
When she puts fifty valentines into the class box
with Walter's name on them, Amanda doesn't mean to create a monster; she
simply wants to give her wimpy friend a boost of self-confidence. It works.
Walter's the new king of the fifth grade, and he has no time for Amanda
anymore. And even when an exasperated Amanda tries to tell her friends that she
stuffed the Valentine box, they don't believe her. "Just admit you feel kind of
funny about not having Walter all to yourself anymore and then you'll feel
better." Although the premise is overextended and the writing made occasionally
bumpy by a shifting point of view, the story has a farcical tone that's a blessed
breeze in the sometimes over-earnest world of middle-grade fiction. The
resolution is fresh as well: Walter has changed, he's not going to follow
Amanda around anymore, and she cuts her losses. A good follow-up to Barbara
Cohen's 213 Valentines (BCCB 1/92). RS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Wallis, Diz, ad. Something Nasty in the Cabbages; ad. and illus. by Diz
Wallis. Caroline House, 1991. ISBN 1-878093-10-X. 26p. $15.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
The story is medieval-"a tale from Roman de Renard
written in the 12th century by Pierre de Saint-Cloud and retold for this edition by
the artist." The treatment is moder, with an immediacy of narrative and artistic
tone that will energize young listeners with a classic rhythm of suspense. "Now
here is someone who knew the hens well, and his name is Reynard." 
As Reynard creeps and then hurtles through these oversized pictures, with their
brilliant foxy reds and cockerel golds, children will hold their breaths until
Chantecler musters what few brains he has and tricks his foe into shouting back
at the pursuing farmer-releasing Chantecler to fly free. The large print and
larger-than-life action combine for quick pace and attractive design. A castoff
bicycle updates the scenery, which veers from photorealistic animal closeups to
surrealistic landscape. The title is enticing, the conclusion a clincher: "beware a
mouth that opens when it should stay shut"; or, if you prefer, "beware an eye
that shuts when it should stay open." Either way, this is as tempting as moral
tales come. BH