Aliki. I'm Growing!; written and illus. by Aliki. 
HarperCollins, 1992.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020245-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020244-0. [32p]. (Let's-
Read-and-Find-Out Science Books). Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $14.00.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Dark and handsome, strong Hispanic faces are the visual focus of
Aliki's bright paintings, in a book with a direct and simple text narrated by a
small (but growing) boy. The continuous text is logically arranged, moving
from clothes that don't fit any longer to the fact that growth is continuous in
youth, and on to such pertinent matters as individual growth patterns, changes
visible or internal, and a healthful regimen that contributes both to growing and
to good physical condition. 
There's also a reassuring message about
comparative size and its lack of importance. This is a worthy addition to a
pioneer series of high quality. ZS
C.U. Health
D.V. Everyday life concepts
Anderson, Madelyn Klein. Robert E. Peary and the Fight for the North Pole.
Watts, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-13004-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-15246-4.
[160p.] illus. with photographs. 
Library ed. $13.90; Trade ed. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Using quotes from Peary's letters and other writings
as well as secondary sources, Anderson has constructed a useful biography of the
discoverer of the North Pole. The book traces his life from his childhood
through his career in civil engineering, his many explorations of Greenland
including his trip to the Pole, and his struggle to maintain his claim of primacy
in the face of a rival. Although the author defends Peary from some criticisms
(about his treatment of Matthew Henson and the Eskimos, for instance), she
paints him as a prickly and difficult man, and she doesn't shy away from matters
such as his Eskimo mistress and child. She also broadens the appeal of the book
by devoting an appropriately substantial amount of space to the explorer's wife,
Josephine, who accompanied him on several expeditions and wrote extensively
about them. 
While the writing slips occasionally into romanticism or
confusion, this remains a competent chronicle of a figure who deserves to be
more than a footnote in history. Endnotes are included; an index and photos will
be in the finished book. DS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Ashabranner, Brent. Land of Yesterday, Land of Tomorrow: Discovering
Chinese Central Asia; illus. with photographs by Paul, David and Peter
Conklin. Cobblehill, 1992. ISBN 0-525-65086-5. 84p. $16.00.
R 
Gr. 5-. 
Author Ashabranner and photographer Paul Conklin
usually make their journeys together, but this time Ashabranner stayed home
while Conklin took his two sons, also photographers, on a graduation-present
trip to the Chinese "Autonomous Region" of Xinjiang, a remote, ethnically
distinct area bordering Mongolia and the former U.S.S.R. The author, however,
is no armchair amateur, as he thoughtfully weaves commentary on the Conklins'
photographs, materials from his own reading, and recollections by the
[ 229 ]
photographers: "David and Peter were more adventurous than their father when it
came to eating on the street." Xinjiang is bordered by mountains, contains a
scary desert, and is traversed by the Karakoram Highway (as well as the fabled
Silk Road), all of which offer text and photographs plenty of scope. At the
same time, neither wallow in the picturesque, and Ashabranner is frank about the
political and ethnic tensions between the Turkic and largely Muslim natives and
the Han Chinese, who are now the largest single ethnic group in the province.
Photographs, both black-and-white and color, provide a good balance of faces and
places, and, in the text, there is a lot of good information about the cultural
niceties and technical considerations involved in taking pictures in an unfamiliar
place. In all, the book is a smooth synthesis of personal experience and
sociohistorical perspective. A bibliography and index are appended. RS
C.U. Social studies; Photography
Banish, Roslyn. A Forever Family; written and illus. with photographs by
Roslyn Banish with Jennifer Jordan-Wong. HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-021674-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021673-5. 44p. Library ed. $13.89;
Trade ed. $14.00.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
"My name is Jenny. I am 8 years old. Last year I
was adopted," begins this simple and dignified photoessay about an older child's
adoption. Jenny is first depicted doing daily kid things, like running races and
reading Nancy Drew. The ensuing discussion of her adoption covers her entry at
age three into foster care, her social workers, and her meetings with and adoption
by her "forever family" (including her aunts and grandparents and cousins).
While the portrait is positive, the book is quietly realistic, with Jenny stating
"Not everybody gets adopted" and "At first it was hard to call my parents 'Mom'
and 'Dad,'" and asking about her biological mother "How come she couldn't take
care of me?" Each photograph tells a story in itself as well as illuminating the
story, and Jenny is a dark-eyed charmer, lively and thoughtful by turns. It's clear
that there have been many people (of various races-Jenny's last foster family,
pictured in the book, is black, her mother is white, and her father is Chinese-
American) who have cared for Jenny and who have a place in her life; the subtle
messages-that you don't need to throw out old loved ones to make way for the
new and that people need not be parents to be important to a child-are salutary
for all readers, adopted or not. A brief glossary of adoption terms is included, as
is a short note from Jenny. DS
D.V. Adoption, adjustment to
Bosco, Peter I. Roanoke: The Story of the Lost Colony. Millbrook, 1992.
ISBN 1-56294-111-9. 72p. illus. with photographs. (Spotlight on American
History). $13.90.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
Although the Roanoke mystery has never been
definitively solved, the story of the island's colonization in the late sixteenth
century is interesting in itself, and a timely pendant to Columbiamania. Like
Columbus, the Roanoke settlers made friends with the locals; also like
Columbus, they soon betrayed that friendship, in this case by their overreliance
on Indian generosity in order to get through a hard year. There were settlers who
had respect for the Indians and their way of life; most notable among these was
John White, governor of the colony who had served as the expedition artist on an
early exploration of the area. (His granddaughter was the famous Virginia Dare,
[230 ]
first English child born in America.) Bosco's retelling of events is fair and
fluent, although readers might want more than the scant two pages he devotes to
the eerie, apparently peaceful, disappearance of the settlers. While Bosco should
have cited the research of more than one Roanoke scholar (who theorizes that the
settlers moved north to Chesapeake Bay), the fact remains that we just don't
know what happened, and the mystery remains a tantalizing presence in
American myth. 
Period prints, especially paintings by White, are both
informative and atmospheric; there are also a note on sources, chronology,
reading list, and index. RS
C.U. History-U.S.--Colonial period
Brown, Fern G. Special Olympics. Watts, 1992. ISBN 0-531-20062-0. 64p.
illus. with photographs. $11.90.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Large print, topical arrangement within brief chapters,
and color photographs (many of which are action shots) make this appealing as
well as accessible. The subject is one that should engage all readers and should
make all those connected with the Special Olympics programs (coaches,
sponsors, volunteers, and particularly participants) proud. From a small
beginning at Soldier Field in Chicago the movement has grown into a world-
wide event in which thousands compete and in which an increasing variety of
sports are represented. The book concludes with a comment on how the program
has helped fight discrimination among the mentally retarded who participate, and
provides information on how the reader can help; a glossary and an index are
provided. ZS
C.U. Recreation
D.V. Courage; Handicaps, overcoming
Brown, Mary Barrett. Wings along the Waterway; written and illus. by Mary
Barrett Brown. Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08581-3; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-531-05981-2. 80p. Library ed. $17.99; Trade ed. $17.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Twenty-one water birds are described and illustrated,
each being given several pages that focus on appearance, mating, breeding,
nesting patterns, and the ways in which each species flies and feeds. The
illustrations are handsome watercolors, but there are some discrepancies between
textual references and visual details. One illustration of a Great Blue Heron, for
example, shows the bird with its neck gracefully extended; the text on the same
page says "they fly with their heads pulled between their shoulders." 
The
writing is not strong stylistically but it is informative and usually succinct, with
a bibliography and index adding to the book's usefulness. ZS
C.U. Nature study
Caseley, Judith. Starring Dorothy Kane. Greenwillow, 1992. ISBN 0-688-
10182-8. 154p. $14.00.
R 
5-9 yrs. 
Hurricane Harry's (BCCB 11/91) sister Dorothy is
not happy about moving to a new house and school. A room of her own? "I
don't need privacy. I need company." And imagine her first-day-of-school
humiliation when second-grader Dorothy accidently escorts kindergartner Harry to
a second-grade classroom. That fatal mistake makes manna for the class bully;
on the other hand, it also helps Dorothy find a friend. With a good balance of
[231]
school stuff and amusing family drama, this story, like Cleary's books about
Ramona, will appeal to both little brothers and big sisters, and makes a sturdy
bridge between read-aloud and read-alone. The cover portrait is inviting, but
Dorothy looks older than third-grade, and it also seems to imply a scene that is
nowhere in the story. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Brothers-sisters; School, adjustment to
Cassedy, Sylvia, tr. and comp. ed. Red Dragonfly on My Shoulder; tr. and
comp. ed. by Sylvia Cassedy and Kunihiro Suetake; illus. by Molly Bang.
HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022625-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
022624-2. 32p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
In a book designed to be read vertically, each of
thirteen haiku poems stretches across a double-spread collage of found or crafted
objects. The artifice of assembling words and assembling images gives the
collaboration a common bond, and, although the visual effects are formal, the
technique is rendered appropriate to the content. A pony on the beach, for
instance, is constructed from sea shells; a crow with a scissor beak is cut from
black paper juxtaposed on a white background (snow). The haiku are freely
adapted into one-line poems-an author's note cites the literal translation of
Hajime's "sun beam striking place shifting/ napping dog," which becomes
"High noon! A hot sun bathes the town in quiet and stirs the sleeping dog."
(The picture here, done in cloth and thread, is dominated by yellow, orange, and
hot pink.) Children will be intrigued with the idea of creating art out of such
inventively manipulated materials, which, from clothespins to chocolate
almonds, are enumerated in the illustrator's note. Guessing the contents of each
picture will be as much fun as savoring the spare verses; both activities will
serve as an invitation to children's own aesthetic compositions. BH
C.U. Art; Language arts
Collins, David R. J. R. R. Tolkien: Master of Fantasy; illus. by William
Heagy and with photographs. Lerner, 1992. ISBN 0-8225-4906-9. [112p].
$15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Tolkien's early life sounds more fictional than his
fantasy. Born in South Africa, orphaned in England by the age of 12, farmed out
first to relatives and later to boarding houses, he pushed into the upper-crust
British intelligentsia like a mushroom. His fascination with languages, along
with his friendships at King Edward's School and later at Oxford University, led
to a rich and creative academic life. Yet the don's literary sensibilities were
tempered with common sense: "Tolkien tried out his hobbit tales on his
children" and "the final decision to publish the book rested with 10-year-old
Rayner Unwin, the son of the publishing company's chairman." Despite the
tragedies that World War I wreaked on Tolkien's society, his life seemed
charmed, and the tone here projects a boyish enthusiasm accurately syncopated
with the "heroic" Colonial period of Tolkien's formative years. The awkwardly
rendered California-counter-culture-style drawing (especially in the clumsy cover
illustration) is hardly in keeping with Tolkien's classical tradition, but the
historical photographs, chronology, Middle-earth glossary, bibliography, list of
books for further reading, and index add considerably to Collins' direct text. BH
C.U. Literature, English; Writing for children
[232]
Columbus, Christopher. 
The Log of Christopher Columbus; ed. by Steve
Lowe; illus. by Robert Sabuda. Philomel, 1992. ISBN 0-399-22139-5. [32p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
If Columbus suspected he was on the trail of a new
world, he certainly never dreamed he would write a picture book about it. But
here it is, five hundred years and thirty-two pages later, illustrated with dramatic
double-spread linoleum cuts to accompany nineteen selectively edited journal
entries. Like Yolen's Encounter (below), this is a picture book for older kids
who know some of the context and can understand both the wording and the
significance of passages like this: ". . . Joy turned to dismay as the day
progressed, for by evening we had found no land and had to face the reality that it
was only an illusion." What's exciting about the book is the concept of making
primary source material, however abbreviated, accessible to both teachers and
students. Of course, selection is all, and the passages describing both the
"natives" and the "enchanted land" project a totally triumphant scenario that may
leave listeners with a somewhat unrealistic idea both of Columbus' achievement
and of its effects. (Peter and Connie Roop's adaptation of the journal, I,
Columbus (BCCB 3/91), for older readers, gives a fuller picture.) The intensely
hued illustrations themselves have a jigsaw-puzzle formality that projects
unqualified grandeur. Used alongside books with fuller information, Lowe's
selections and Sabuda's art will nevertheless augment children's study during the
quincentennial. BH
C.U. History-America; Columbus Day
Cresswell, Helen. Meet Posy Bates; illus. by Kate Aldous. Macmillan, 1992.
ISBN 0-02-725375-9. [80p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
In the eponymous protagonist, Posy, Cresswell fans
will recognize the indomitable little Daisy of the Bagthorpe stories. Posy is
eight, has unusual pets, imaginative projects, inexhaustible persistence, and the
sort of compassion that makes her spend money on a totally unappreciative bag
lady. The writing is animated and humorous, the characterizations are consistent
and sturdy, and the episodic structure makes this a good choice for reading aloud
to a group as well as for independent reading. ZS
C.U. Reading aloud
de Morgan, Mary. The Necklace of Princess Fiorimonde; and Other Stories;
illus. by Sylvie Monti. 
Hutchinson/Trafalgar Square, 1992. 
ISBN 0-09-
174077-0. 96p. $24.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
The combination of original, late 19th-century stories
with soft and graceful watercolors makes for a gentle fairy tale collection. With
the exception of the title story, all the tales focus on aspects of love: romantic
love ("The Wanderings of Arasmon," "The Story of the Opal"), parental love
("The Rain Maiden"), loyalty ("The Pool and the Tree"), and affection for
helpless creatures ("The Story of a Cat"). "The Necklace" is one of de Morgan's
best-a complex story in which the beautiful and evil Princess Fiorimonde uses
sorcery to turn all of her would-be lovers into beads on a necklace. Justice rules
in every story, as it does in all good fairy tales; not only is good eventually
rewarded the many characters who struggle for love, but also the evil Fiorimonde
gets her due punishment. The Victorian language nicely complements the
[233 ]
romance of the stories ("her white soft hands were folded amidst the scented lace
and linen of which the bed was made"). Though expensive, this is the only
collection of de Morgan's now available, and it will appeal to fairy tale fans who
think they've gotten too old for Cinderella. KJ
C.U. 
Storytelling
DeClements, Barthe. The Bite of the Gold Bug: A Story of the Alaskan Gold
Rush; illus. by Dan Andreasen. Viking, 1992. ISBN 0-670-84495-0. [6 4p].
(Once Upon America). $12.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Uncle Tanner, Ma's brother, has glib excuses for
losing all the gold he'd found in the Yukon; now (1898) he wants to go back and
wants Pa to stake him and to return to Alaska as his partner. Twelve-year-old
Bucky, the narrator, goes along and describes the hardships of placer mining and
frontier life. Both Bucky and Pa are relieved when they have panned enough gold
to go home. The often-grim details of life in the mountain camp are given
immediacy by the first-person narration, and both the hunt for gold and the
unpredictable behavior of Uncle Tanner provide suspense. Like a number of
other books in the "Once Upon America" series, this is nicely gauged in length,
reading difficulty, and subject appeal for a middle-grades audience. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Demi. In the Eyes of the Cat: Japanese Poetry for All Seasons; tr. by Tze-si
Huang; comp. ed. and illus. by Demi. Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-8050-1955-3. 80p.
$15.95.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
A rich collection of thirty-three poems, organized by
season, includes Basho, Buson, Issa, Seisensui, and other well-known Japanese
writers. Every selection is accompanied by a full-page illustration executed with
delicate linework and restrained hues. Although a few of the animal figures
border on cute, Demi varies the visual tone with sly humor, botanical precision,
and startling-but never jarring--contrasts of light and dark. Particularly
impressive are the pictures that underplay the spare form, as in the ghostly
white-on-blue image of a bird reflected upside down under the verses of a Basho
poem: "The voice of the cuckoo/ Dropped to the lake,/ Where it lay floating/
On the surface." Where Cassedy's Red Dragonfly on My Shoulder (above)
makes an unusual picture book introduction to haiku and to collage, this will
serve as an attractive resource for a broader age group of readers requesting a more
generalized anthology of Japanese poetry. BH
C.U. Language arts
Dickinson, Peter. AK. 
Delacorte, 1992. ISBN 0-385-30608-3. 
[192p].
$15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
"My mother was the war, he thought. She was a
witch, a terrible demon, an eater of people, but she looked after me." Paul,
probably twelve, has devoted his life to guerilla action in the civil war in Nagala
(an imaginary but too-real African nation), and now the war is over. Paul's
idealistic adoptive father, Michael Kagomi, gets an important position in the
new government and sends Paul off to school. Before going, Paul buries his
AK, his rifle, in a special spot, preparing for the time when he may need it
again. That time comes soon, as a different kind of war ensues, and Paul finds
[234 ]
himself fighting to free his father from prison. Best about this book is how
convincingly the author shows a young boy drawn into armed struggle, and how
quickly moral decisions are made in times of change and battle. The storytelling
can be slow going, especially in the middle third of the book when Paul, along
with a young Fulu girl, finds his way back from school to the capital where his
father is imprisoned, but the concluding heroics are well-paced. Characterization
is a bit anonymous in its idealization, and readers may know too easily whose
side to be on. Two concluding, contradictory chapters showing "Twenty Years
On Perhaps" each offer, alternatively, a vision and a nightmare; the first seems
improbable among any circumstances; the second feels more like the truth. RS
D.V. Courage; Peace
Drucker, Malka. A Jewish Holiday A B C; illus. by Rita Pocock. Harcourt,
1992. ISBN 0-15-200482-3. 34p. $13.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
After the capital letter "A," Drucker's book begins
with the sentence "Near the end of the Passover seder, Rachel finds the
afikomen hidden under the tablecloth." The paper-collage illustration shows a
girl holding up the hidden piece of matzah. Children who are not already part of
the tradition will have to look up afikomen in the small-print glossary, whereas
those who already know the tradition will not find much entertaining depth in
the stiff concepts or stylized illustrations unless an adult livens up the scene by
relating it back to the listener's own experience. After "B" ("Raffy brings a
bow and arrows and watches the bonfire at the Lag B'omer picnic"--one
searches the glossary in vain for the definition of Lag B'omer, only to find it
listed in a different section "About the Holidays," where the tradition is
described, but "omer" is never defined. Some of the key words are Hebrew (all
transliterated), others are common English words (V is for vegetables that fill the
sukkah, W is for washing hands during the seder). Although it does become
apparent that the children in the pictures are a family, there's no clue to that at
the beginning, so at first the characters seem random. Pocock's patterns and
textures are the most interesting aspect of the book, which is lavishly reproduced
in full color; while the cartooned faces and figures become clich6d, the bold
collage designs command attention. All told, this is an educational book which
will be useful for teaching Jewish traditions but which lacks the verve of
Michelle Edwards' Alef-Bet (reviewed below). BH
C.U. Holidays
Duffy, James. Uncle Shamus. Scribner's, 1992. 
ISBN 0-684-19434-1.
[144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
In an Oklahoma town, the worst neighborhood is called Shanty Town.
That's where ten-year-old Akers (black) lives with his hard-working mother and
where Marleena (also ten, white) lives with her industrially-disabled father and a
mother who supports them by taking in washing. Both children do odd jobs for
a newcomer, Uncle Shamus, a blind black man whose years in prison are the
first clue to a mystery that involves a former prison guard who shows up to
threaten the blind man and find a cache of stolen money. The children help
Shamus dig up the money, find when he goes to California that he's left them
each $8,000. Shamus unexpectedly returns, saying he gave the money back and
wants to live in Shanty Town with his two friends Akers and Marleena. In
addition to the clogged story line, issues of ethical conduct, of interracial
[ 235 ]
relationships, and of the fact that the children don't tell their parents about the
treasure or the danger are never seriously explored, an omission that contributes
to the unconvincing quality of a book that has enough drama and action to lure
readers anyway. ZS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to; Interracial understanding
Edwards, Michelle. Alef-Bet; written and illus. by Michelle Edwards. Lothrop,
1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09725-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09724-3. 32p.
Library ed. $14.93; Trade ed. $15.00.
R* 
5-9 yrs. 
Like the artist's Chicken Man (BCCB 5/91) and A
Baker's Portrait (BCCB 2/92), this has an informal warmth that will endear it to
kids who already know or want to learn the Hebrew alphabet. Each picture tells
a story that adds to a cumulative, funny family portrait of an ema (mother), an
abba (father), and three distinctly individualized children, one of whom uses a
wheelchair. A helpful introductory note gives some background on the Hebrew
language, introduces the fictional family, and features the full alphabet with a
pronunciation guide. On the first double spread, a transliteration follows the
Hebrew character for "alef" in the upper left hand corer, while the Hebrew word,
"ahm-Baht-yah," and its English translation, "bathtub" appear in the bottom
corers. In between is the panorama of a chaotic bathroom scene where the older
daughter sprays water on a floor full of toys while her mother sits on the toilet
dressing a younger child. From alef to tav, these playfully colored, thickly
layered paintings depict the non-stop activity of homely characters who look like
Harriet Pincus' children in Tell Me a Mitzi by Lore Segal. Clear, artful, and
involving, this is a model of what foreign-language alphabets should be. The
ebullience of the book as a whole stands out in sharp contrast to Drucker's
Jewish Holiday A B C, reviewed above. BH
C.U. Language arts
Eisenberg, Phyllis Rose. You're My Nikki; illus. by Jill Kastner. Dial, 1992.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1129-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1127-1. 32p. Library
ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $14.00.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
Strongly composed and focused oil paintings
illustrate a picture book that speaks of love between an African-American mother
and child. Like most children, Nikki likes to push/test her parent, and most of
the story consists of Nikki making sure her mother will recognize her even in
disguise--or what a small child thinks is disguise. All this anxiety has been
engendered because Mama is starting a new job; indeed, at the end of her first
work day, Mama does make one little slip about what Nikki's favorite sport is.
But Mama is still able to convince her daughter that she would know her
anywhere, and Nikki shows that she loves Mama in just the same way. Simple
in structure, but wholly believable as a story of separation anxiety that is
handled by Mama with understanding and patience. ZS
D.V. Mother-child relations
Faber, Harold. The Discoverers of America. Scribner's, 1992. ISBN 0-684-
19217-9. 290p. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Faber's synthesis of information on the earliest
native, Norse, Spanish, French, and English explorers of the Americas represents
[236 ]
a solid resource for students who are researching the subject. 
Concise
background information on European politics is neatly worked into accounts of
the voyages themselves, each of which comprises myriad stories of love, hate,
greed, and bravery. Vespucci, Balboa, Magellan, and company are characters of
almost tall-tale proportion, but the text is careful to balance their exploits with
eye-witness accounts of almost continual, often successful Indian resistance.
Nor are the native groups glorified: descriptions of their cannibalism and
infanticide of female babies match the conquerors' savage treachery. This is a
huge canvas, dotted with dramatic details such as young Balboa's stowing away
with his faithful dog, which is finally poisoned just before Balboa himself is
executed by a jealous rival; in another unforgettable scenario, the black slave
Estebanico-plumes in his hair, bells on his arms and legs, a feathered gourd
rattle in his hand-becomes the first non-Indian to enter the Southwest, only to
be killed by the Zuni. Supporting the text are maps, a list of important dates in
the "discoveries" of America, notes on the sources, and a bibliography with
asterisks marking entries accessible to young readers. BH
C.U. History-America
Geras, Adele. The Tower Room. Harcourt, 1992. ISBN 0-15-289627-9. 150p.
$15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Megan, the narrator, is the Rapunzel figure; she lives
in the Tower Room with Bella (Snow White) and Alice (Sleeping Beauty) at an
English girls' boarding school. At seventeen, Megan falls for Simon, the young
lab assistant and only man around, and he begins to visit her by climbing the
scaffolding to her window. When Megan's science-teacher guardian, who is also
in love with Simon, finds out, Megan and her prince flee the school for London,
from where she writes the account of her adventures interspersed with letters to
Simon. Although the message is eventually anti-romantic (Megan repudiates
the fairy tale, cuts off her Rapunzel braid and returns to school), Geras' writing
is so much better suited to the romance elements ("The whole universe was now
entirely contained in my body, and every beautiful feeling in the world was
blossoming and uncurling under my own burning skin, over my flesh, and in
my mouth made moist and tender by his kisses") that the book is likely to have
the opposite effect. The fairy-tale parallels sometimes have no point beyond
drawing attention to themselves, and the overlaid and moody writing may slow
the pace too much for some readers. The girls'-school atmosphere is spot-on and
enjoyable, however, and young romantics will savor the story of three quasi-
familiar heroines preparing to enter the world. DS
Gherman, Beverly. E. B. White: Some Writer! Atheneum, 1992. ISBN 0-
689-31672-0. 
[160p.] illus. with photographs. 
$13.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
A witty contributor to the New Yorker throughout
his long career, a devotee of Thoreau, a hypochondriac who avoided public
appearances like the plague, a loyal friend and devoted family man to his inner
circle, White achieved his greatest success with his least sophisticated medium,
children's books. Like Tolkien (see Collins review), White practised his stories
on his son before creating his first children's book, Stuart Little, and he took his
time. His remark to editor Ursula Nordstrom should become a creed of the
industry: "I would rather wait a year than publish a bad children's book ....
"
[237 ]
Written with respect for both the subject and the audience, Gherman's biography
is meticulously researched and documented, with notes for every one of the
numerous quotations and with a generous bibliography that includes primary
sources. She has struck an easy balance between discussions of work and of
personal life, as well as between descriptions of early and later years. The
readership for this will probably be graduates of White's fiction and students
with a yen to write-there's lots here about the creative process as well as the
practical problems. BH
C.U. Literature, American; Writing for children
Greenberg, Lorna. AIDS: How It Works in the Body. Watts, 1992. ISBN 0-
531-20074-4. 64p. illus. with photographs. (First Books). $11.90.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
This is one of the few books that deals with AIDS as
a physiological problem, referring only briefly to behavioral problems (ignoring
safe sex or sterile needles) that spread the causative virus (HIV) through human
carelessness. Photos of magnified tissue slides, many in color, show viral
bodies and their invasive patterns. Greenberg's writing is clear, authoritative,
and logically organized; the print is large and the glossary and relative index
make the material more accessible. The text gives, in orderly fashion, an
explanation of how viruses seek host cells, how the body's immune system
works, and what happens when the system does not function. A brief list of
books and agencies that can provide further information is included. ZS
C.U. 
Health
Gregory, Kristiana. Earthquake at Dawn. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1992. ISBN 0-15-
200446-7. [192p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
The story of the San Francisco earthquake and fire of
1906 is narrated by fifteen-year-old Daisy, the fictional servant/companion to
Edith Irvine, a real person whose photographs of disaster scenes have been
preserved in a Utah library. The plot serves adequately to account for the
presence of the two: planning to board ship for Australia, the young women are
halted by the catastrophe itself and by being separated from Edith's father, who
has their tickets. Gregory does a good job of making the suffering and confusion
dramatically vivid, and her writing style has vigor and pace. Unfortunately, the
repeated introduction of Jack London and John Barrymore seems egregiously
artificial, notwithstanding the fact that both were in San Francisco at the time.
A substantial bibliography is provided. ZS
C.U. 
History--U.S.
Guthrie, Woody. Woody's 20 Grow Big Songs; written and illus. by Woody
Guthrie with Marjorie Mazia Guthrie. HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-020283-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020282-3. [48p]. Library ed. $15.89;
Trade ed. $16.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-7 yrs. 
This song book is a semi-facsimile reproduction of a
collection put together by Woody and Marjorie Mazia Guthrie for their children.
All twenty songs are simple, folk-like, and repetitive ("Hold up your hands, your
hands, your hands") in a way that encourages easy memorization; the frequent
onomatopoeia ("Bling, blang, hammer with my hammer, zingo, zango, cutting
with my saw") will be a crowd-pleaser as well. Although there is nothing
[238 1
particularly original about the words or music, lots of possibilities for fingerplay
and pantomime make the collection a good story hour source. Naive drawings
by Woody accompany each selection; melody lines and guitar chords are
provided. RS
C.U. 
Story hour
Hall, Lynn. The Soul of the Silver Dog. Harcourt, 1992. ISBN 0-15-277196-
4. [128p]. $16.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
Sterling is a champion Bedlington terrier, suddenly
blind from glaucoma; Cory is thirteen, adjusting to the death of her little sister,
her parents' divorce, and her father's remarriage. Since Sterling is useless for
showing, his owners give him to Cory, who feels a bond with him: "He was
hers in a profound and complex way; his essence, his need were seeping into the
hollows of her heart." She decides to train him for an Agility competition, the
one canine event that allows a blind dog to compete, and finds that the training
brings her family closer together as they prepare for the day of (successful)
competition. The dependency-and-redemption theme is poignant, but the story,
especially the tearjerker ending (Sterling dies) is sentimental; nor is the family
support of Sterling's progress ever really credible. Hall tells a good dog story,
however, and although this one grabs shamelessly for readers' hearts, it will get
most of them. DS
D.V. Animals, love for
Heide, Florence Parry and Judith Heide Gilliland. Sami and the Time of the
Troubles; illus. by Ted Lewin. Clarion, 1992. ISBN 0-395-55964-2. 34p.
$14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
"My name is Sami, and I live in the time of the
troubles. It is a time of guns and bombs. It is a time that has lasted all my life,
and I am ten years old." The narrator goes on to describe his daily life in the
family's makeshift basement artillery shelter, which Sami's mother has decorated
with exquisite carpets and a brass wedding vase to remind them of their former
life (before Sami's father was killed by a car bomb in the market). While the
story is moving, it is neither focused enough on a selective incident (which
would allow fuller development) nor informative enough in context to be read
aloud without considerable adult explanation. Young listeners do not learn
where or when the action is set (the jacket copy mentions Beirut), which is
important because the implications of the action are more serious than in this
team's previous picture book about the Middle East, The Day ofAhmed's Secret
(BCCB 10/90). Lewin's watercolors are rich, even glowing, in picking up the
rugs' ruddy hues and the ashen scenes of a war-torn street. In spite of
insufficient background, the strongly anti-war message will provide
opportunities for discussion between children and informed adults. BH
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Peace
Howard, Ellen. The Cellar; illus by Patricia Rose Mulvihill. Karl/Atheneum,
1992. ISBN 0-689-31724-7. [64p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Based (as are three of the author's previous books) on
stories of her grandmother's childhood, Howard's brief account of a child's desire
[239]
for achievement and recognition constitutes a believable but static narrative. The
youngest of four children, Faith wants to prove her ability, but usually
something goes wrong; when it does, her brother Fritz teases her. The rural
setting for this turn-of-the-century period piece is reflected in adequate but not
impressive black-and white-illustrations; the writing style is simple and direct if
a bit choppy. Faith does complete a task, braving the big, scary cellar to get
apples that are stored there; even though Fritz slams the cellar door, Faith
determinedly makes her way toward the light and completes her errand. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Fear, overcoming
Hurwitz, Johanna. Roz and Ozzie; illus. by Eileen McKeating. Morrow, 1992.
ISBN 0-688-10945-4. [128p]. $13.00. 114p.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Nine-year-old Roz doesn't like it, but she and seven-
year-old Ozzie Sims are permanently linked. Not only do their families live
together in "the same two-family house," but also Ozzie is Roz's uncle (Roz's
mother is Ozzie's half-sister)-a joke that is used throughout the book. Roz and
her parents have just moved to town and Roz is trying to make new friends, but
she can't seem to shake off her biggest fan, Ozzie. Roz's reactions to her little
tag-along uncle range from irritation to occasional gratitude. The image of the
extended family sharing two homes is a gratifying one, as Grandma gives Dad
and Roz cooking lessons when Mom is busy writing her doctoral dissertation
and both fathers take turns taking the kids to the mall or the movies. The
episodic story is usually funny, occasionally repetitive, one grand scene features
everyone including the police (and four dozen extra cupcakes) arriving at school
in time for Roz's birthday treat. The kids work out their differences on their
own in a realistic and affectionate way. Any child would want to be in this
family, with four loving adults and a next-door playmate who's likable-most of
the time. KJ
D.V. Uncle-niece relations
Jacobs, Francine. The Tainos: The People Who Welcomed Columbus; illus.
by Patrick Collins. Putnam, 1992. ISBN 0-399-22116-6. 
[11 2p]. $15.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 4-8. 
Although a number of children's books have quoted
Columbus' description of the native Tainos as being a handsome people, few go
on to his other comments: that he and his 90 crew members "could overrun all
these islands without opposition ... [for the Indians] bear no arms, and are all
unprotected and so very cowardly that a thousand would not face three; so they
are fit to be ordered about and made to work....." Here is a rare account of the
generous islanders' enslavement and genocide (from 1492 to 1496, a third of the
estimated million population perished; by 1548, fewer than 500 remained alive)
by colonists bent on wresting gold from a part of the New World that had
sustained a thriving culture on the farming of yucca plants for cassava bread. It's
a grim record but one that Jacobs has balanced to maximize the force of facts,
which speak for themselves, and minimize the sensational details. Notes,
bibliography, and a list of museum exhibits attest to the background research
synthesized into a historical narrative that should be required reading for the
quincentennial. BH
C.U. Columbus Day; History-America
[240
King, Deborah. 
Custer: The True Story of a Horse; written and illus. by
Deborah King. Philomel, 1992. ISBN 0-399-22147-6. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
This is a third-person narrative from the point of view
of a palomino named Custer, who grows up happily amid cows, then has trouble
adjusting to his new home among horses until he befriends another shy
newcomer, a mare named Minto. Although the story anthropomorphizes a bit
it's all in fun, and there's a generous dollop of humor throughout, particularly in
the pictures of Custer cheerfully squashed into a row of cows and investigating a
farm kitchen. This book has a stronger sense of animal reality than Parnall's
Stuffer, reviewed below; these horses are more interested in other quadrupeds than
humans (and all ends happily, despite the British author's fortunately erroneous
statement that "Custer . . . finally lived up to his name"). The sunny-hued
illustrations project attractive watercolor landscapes, although the figures are
sometimes stiff. The factual base of the plot will add appeal to this playful
story, and kids will enjoy the pictures of equine antics. DS
Komaiko, Leah. 
Leonora 
O'Grady; illus. by Laura Cornell.
Geringer/HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021767-7; Trade ed. ISBN
0-06-021766-9. [32p]. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $15.00. Reviewed from
galleys.
M 
5-8 yrs. 
Here's a pretty picture book in which story seems
subverted by style. "Leonora's house is next to Riverview Park," so she isn't
exactly homeless. No, Leonora sleeps in the park because she likes to: "The
dew is her blanket/ The clouds are her pillow." Leonora's shopping cart is filled
with whimsical treasures ("Popcorn from Paraguay/ Snakeskins from Spain/ A
buffalo's toothbrush/ A full tube of rain!"), and even though "she doesn't have
money/ To buy much to eat," she manages each week to save up for a slice of
corn bread, take a taste, and put the rest on her head for the crows. This
featherbrained sentimentality might be mistaken for irony were it not for
Cornell's voluptuously giddy watercolors, whose raffish charms complement the
text's apparent message: it'sfun to be a bag lady. Just ask Leonora. RS
D.V. Sharing
Lehrman, Robert. The Store That Mama Built. Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-02-
754632-2. [128p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Birdie (Bertha) is the narrator of a novel set in a
Pennsylvania town in 1917; like her siblings, she is apprehensive about the
family's future as well as bereft at her father's death. Jewish immigrants from
Russia, Birdie and her brothers hope that Mama-who has little English and less
business experience-will want to go ahead with the grocery store Papa had
planned to open. This is the story of a courageous and industrious family's
project, capably told and accurately reflecting both one kind of immigrant
experience and the neighborly trust (Mama extends credit to the black
community against the advice of a kinsman) that is the turning point in the
family's fortunes. Lehrman's use of phonetic spelling (and the occasional
inconsistency in such use) is a minor weakness. ZS
D.V. Family relations; Industry; Kindness
[241 ]
Livingston, Myra Cohn. Light and Shadow; illus. with photographs by Barbara
Rogasky. Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0931-7. 32p. $14.95.
R* 
Gr. 4-7. 
Less a case of photographs illustrating poetry, this is
a symbiosis in which each double spread--one page a poem about light and the
other, a photographic study of light-reflect off each other. It is especially
remarkable that the photos, though richly reproduced color, have a stark,
restrained quality of composition that often characterizes the best black-and-white
work. In the poetry itself, light moves beyond metaphor to become almost a
character: "Light is a tolltaker, a bridgemaster flashing yellow commands ... ";
"Light swims in the ocean tipping broken half-moons over the waves ... 
"
"Light buys a ticket to the County Fair, spins in circles on a merry-go-
round..."; "Light steps into a pool, stretching its yellow legs deep down .. ";
"Light hides its face under a lampshade, throwing strange shadows." Each of
these openings and several others, fourteen in all, tells a lyrical story that blends
cohesively into an examination and celebration of light. This is a book that
could have been glitzy in appearance and faded in lyrical concept; instead, verse
and photographs form a bright illumination of an old subject. BH
Mazer, Norma Fox and Harry. Bright Days, Stupid Nights. Starfire/Bantam,
1992. ISBN 0-553-08126-8. [208p]. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Vicki, with her mother's backing, has lied about her
age (she's only fourteen) so that she'll be eligible to get one of four summer
internships on the Scottsville Courier. It's a small-town newspaper that has
won a Pulitzer prize, and it's owned by a famous correspondent and edited by his
daughter. 
Vicki, the two older girls (Faith and Elizabeth), and Chris (in
Scottsville against the wishes of his domineering father) all stay in a rooming
house; Vicki falls in love with Chris, while he falls in love with Elizabeth. All
four have emotional upheavals as they interrelate with that intensity that can be
born of proximity, zeal, and adolescence. The four make permanent impressions
on each other, but even the skill of the authors' writing can't make this much
more than a padded situation-exploration. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Milton, Joyce. Wild, Wild Wolves; illus. by Larry Schwinger. Random House,
1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91052-2; Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-81052-8. 48p.
(Step into Reading). Library ed. $7.99; Paper ed. $3.50.
R 
Gr. 1-4. 
Nonfiction at the beginning-to-read level is rare and
welcome, particularly when it blends appeal and information as smoothly as this
book does. 
In easy, short sentences Milton dispels myths about wolves,
describes their communication, hunting, and pack behavior, and explains how
wolf pups are reared. A concluding ecological plea is to the point: "Today
people are trying to live in tune with nature, as wolves do. They want to save
some of the wild places left on earth. If that happens, there will be wild, wild
wolves howling in the forests for years to come." Schwinger's pencil-and-
watercolor illustrations are elegant and accurate and don't flinch from the facts, as
in a double-spread illustration of a pack circling an old moose: "One wolf
charges. It bites the moose's nose and hangs on tight." Cover art sounds an
inviting howl; also included is a world map of wolf distribution. RS
C.U. Nature study; Reading, easy
[242 ]
Morrison, Lillian, comp. ed. At the Crack of a Bat: Baseball Poems; illus. by
Steve Cieslawski. Hyperion, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-177-6; Trade ed.
ISBN 1-56282-176-8. 64p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Line drawings and full-color paintings have a dramatic
vitality that should appeal to baseball buffs as much as will this excellent
collection of poems by an experienced anthologist. Morris is (as her appended
"Notes on Ballplayers" shows) a knowledgeable fan; herself a poet, she has
chosen both classics ("Casey at the Bat" by Ernest Thayer and "The Base Stealer"
by Robert Francis) and poems that are less well known. There is variety of
style, form, mood, and subject, but a unanimity of theme and high quality. A
bonanza for lovers of the country's favorite game. ZS
C.U. Reading aloud; Recreation
Mother Goose. The House That Jack Built; illus. by Jenny Stow. Dial, 1992.
ISBN 0-8037-1090-9. [26p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
1-4 yrs. 
A Caribbean scene on the cover and tomato-red
endpapers dotted with green lizards establish a verdant new setting for this
traditional verse. The heavily textured illustrations dramatize a sunny version of
the action that surrounds the house that Jack built, including a neatly constructed
cottage amidst rampant tropical greenery, lumpy sacks of malt, a fat rat, thin cat,
fierce dog, cow with an extremely crumpled horn, maiden all forlorn, man all
tattered and torn, priest all shaven and shorn, cock that crowed in the morn, and
farmer sowing his corn. The black characters and impressionistic, color-struck
landscapes will lend new presence to an old cumulative favorite at toddler story
hours. BH
C.U. Storytelling
Murphy, Claire Rudolph. 
To the Summit. Lodestar, 1992. ISBN 0-525-
67383-0. [160p]. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Sara, seventeen, is both excited and apprehensive
about her climb up Alaska's Mount McKinley with her father. Since her parents
divorced and her mother remarried and moved with Sara from Oregon to a small
Yup'ik village in Alaska, Sara sees this expedition as a chance to: one, prove
herself to her Dad; and two, convince him to allow her to move in with him in
San Francisco. The relationship between the two is complicated with love and
guilt and provides an emotional center for this adventure/survival story. It is a
credit to Murphy's skill that she so successfully conveys the excitement and
hardship of the ascent when, according to the jacket flap, she's never made the
attempt herself. Characterization of the other members of the expedition is
oversimplified, occasionally anonymous, and the book does get preachy, most
annoyingly in the form of inspirational quotes provided to Sara by her mother in
a trip diary. But the goal is reached, and the effort to get there has natural
suspense. RS
D.V. Father-daughter relations; Perseverance
Myers, Walter Dean. Somewhere in the Darkness. Scholastic, 1992. ISBN 0-
590-42411-4. [224p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
Jimmy has come home from another aimless day at
school to discover his father, long-imprisoned for murder, standing in the
[243
hallway of Jimmy's rundown New York apartment house. "Crab" is out on
parole, he says, has a job offer in Chicago, and wants Jimmy (who lives with
his dead mother's friend Mama Jean) to come with him. When Jimmy goes, he
discovers that the only true part of Crab's story is the part about wanting Jimmy
to come with him. Crab spends as much time fooling himself as he does trying
to fool Jimmy, and their road trip to Cleveland and Chicago, and eventually to
Crab's boyhood home in Arkansas, is a shifting pattern of old recriminations and
tentative reconciliations, all shadowed by the need to stay ahead of the police.
Crab and Jimmy are mysteries to each other, and Myers provides no quick
epiphanies or embraces. Jimmy finds his father both vulnerable and threatening,
misses Mama Jean, but knows that the trip promises something he should
know. The novel is occasionally talky but never preachy, and the secrets that
Crab reveals about/despite himself provide as much drama as the on-the-road
prison escape motif that provides the story with its impetus. RS
D.V. Father-son relations
Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds. All But Alice. Karl/Atheneum, 1992. ISBN 0-689-
31773-5. [144p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
"If all the girls in junior high suddenly raced to the
roof and plunged madly over the edge, I would be sailing off into space with
them," says Alice (of The Agony of Alice, etc.) in the winter of seventh grade,
having discovered her desire to be "in step with every female person in
Montgomery County" and "part of the great sisterhood of women." To this end,
Alice gets her ears pierced (causing her big brother Lester to faint) and joins an
earring club, participates-disastrously-in the school talent show, and starts to
move with the popular crowd, almost leaving her good friends Elizabeth and
Patrick. This is a smart and funny paean to the pleasures and trials of the herd
instinct as well as the rewards and pains of moving beyond it. Alice does
demonstrate some unlikely self-knowledge at times, but she's still touching and
frequently hilarious (when she plasters a diagram of the female reproductive
organs to her chest, thereby "proudly carrying her sex"); fans will delight in this
chapter of her continuing story. DS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Opie, lona, ed. I Saw Esau; The Schoolchild's Pocket Book; ed. by Iona &
Peter Opie; illus. by Maurice Sendak. Candlewick, 1992. ISBN 1-56402-046-
0. 160p. $19.95.
R* 
Gr 3-. 
See editorial.
Osborne, Mary Pope. Spider Kane and the Mystery under the May-Apple; illus.
by Victoria Chess. Knopf, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90855-2; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-679-80855-8. 128p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.00.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
This bug-saga begins when young butterfly Leon
espies a beautiful stranger who has dropped her scarf and flown away. He
gallantly pursues her; she introduces herself A la Puccini ("They call me Mimi");
they fall in love. Leon's mother calls Mimi a cheap tramp and tries to break
them up ("Leon, Leon, I just want something better for you") but then true high
drama begins when Mimi disappears and her burrow is left in a shambles.
"MIMI!" Leon cries. Enter Spider Kane, "brilliant detective," to the rescue.
[244]
Plentifully illustrated with funny, peevishly sinister drawings by Victoria Chess,
this is a romp whose allusions may occasionally fly over the heads of young
readers, but with a trickle-down effect that will keep them amused and slightly
breathless at the fast action and twisting plot. Spiders and slugs, dogticks and
ladybugs all have their roles to play, with Spider Kane, battle-scarred veteran of
the Mosquito Wars, occupying center stage. The ending is a letdown (it was all
a plot to see if Leon ... oh, never mind), but it does leave the door wide open
for a sequel. And, according to the jacket flap, one is due next fall. RS
Parnall, Peter. Stuffer; written and illus. by Peter Parnall. Macmillan, 1992.
ISBN 0-02-770152-2. 32p. $14.95.
M 
Gr. 1-3. 
Poor Stuffer: 
originally happy, the pet and show
pony of a girl (known as "Girl"), he is eventually outgrown and sold to a riding
stable where he is ill-treated. Unable to work any longer, he is sold again to a
happier place and taken care of by a "wee, little girl" (pictured as a twee little
girl). Heaven knows horsey girls love rescue fantasies, but this is sentimental
and sometimes anthropomorphic slush, frequently written in irritating verbless
sentences ("Away, where foals went down the lane to a disappearing place.
Down the lane and around the bend, to Somewhere"); nor does it always make
sense, with butterflies mentioned rapturously on pages where they don't appear,
and Stuffer mourning the departure of his (never seen) foal playmates but not
that of his mother. The illustrations, spare pencil with an occasional highlight
of watercolor, generally have a quiet dignity the text lacks. Black Beauty at least
had a cause; kids into that storyline should pass up Parnall's pale imitation and
either pick up a good junior version of the classic or wait to immerse themselves
in the original. DS
D.V. 
Animals, kindness to
Passen, Lisa. Uncle's New Suit (A Sort of True Story); written and illus. by
Lisa Passen. Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-8050-1652-X. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
This is a reminiscence, with the narrator recalling her
girlhood in a "run-down and crowded" house, where she lived with her parents,
brother, grandparents, uncles, aunts, cousins, and assorted pets. When her Uncle
Carmen gets a new job in an office (he has previously been a waiter) he needs a
suit, but he doesn't have enough money to buy one. The family, who have all
accompanied him to the store, secretly get together to pay for the suit while
convincing Uncle Carmen that he is the winner of a contest and the suit is free.
The houseful of relatives is nostalgic rather than lively; and the humor
throughout is more likely to be understood from an adult perspective (the time is
described as "back when there was only black-and-white television with just three
channels" and a dog is "a mix of many, many very rare pedigrees"); child readers
many also not understand the generous deception. 
The house looks
disappointingly roomy in the illustrations, but Passen's bug-eyed and misshapen
cast troops merrily across the pages, making the illustrations more appealing
than the text (the typeface of which is offputtingly dark and narrow). Overall,
this is adult retro; although more substantial than most such books, it's more
for those who were kids then, not those who are now. DS
D.V. Family relations
[245 ]
Paulsen, Gary. The Haymeadow; illus. by Ruth Wright Paulsen. Delacorte,
1992. ISBN 0-385-30621-0. [224p]. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
Fourteen-year-old John's rite of passage is a summer
alone in the mountains with six thousand sheep and four border collies to help
out. The action is nonstop, as a rattlesnake, dog injury, stampede, flash flood,
coyote pack, marauding bear, and various accidents follow in quick succession.
John rises to each occasion, earning the respect he has long coveted from his
taciturn father, who shows up a month into the summer and stays up all night
talking-for the first time-about John's birth, his beautiful mother killed by a
horse, and his grandfather, a cruel man whom John has idolized as heroic. This
is in many respects formula fiction, but it's a successful formula that will have
readers plunging over each cliffhanger into the next crisis until they finish the
book. The protagonist is clearly imagined; the style is both consciously simple
and dramatic; the dogs are appealing. There's even a touch of humor: "I don't
know why it is, but if you have fifteen horses, twenty cows, and some sheep
standing on a hill and a thunderstorm comes, lightning will hit the sheep. Every
time. Things just happen to sheep." Not to mention their herders. BH
D.V. Father-son relations; Self-reliance
Precek, Katharine Wilson. The Keepsake Chest. Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-
02-775045-0. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Meg Hamilton bitterly resents her family's move to
Ohio the summer before her entry into eighth grade. At first she resists the
charm of the old wooden farmhouse and the friendly neighbors, but she becomes
interested in the house's past when she finds a forgotten wooden chest in the
attic. With the help of a neighbor boy, Talley, and his great-grandmother, Meg
begins to uncover the history of the house and the chest's owners, including the
information that proves Talley's family to be the rightful owners of the house
from which a developer threatens to evict them. Precek's particularly good with
atmosphere, and the hot midwestern summer, the old houses, and the musty old
attic are well-evoked. The story itself is quite predictable, as Meg adjusts to
moving, finds a friend in a wonderful old lady whom she originally feared, and
beats the evil real estate developer (with the aid of a dream that may have been an
assist from the long-deceased inhabitants of the house). It's a pleasantly-told
tale, however, and many readers will enjoy Meg's pursuit of the past and coming
to terms with the present. DS
D.V. Moving, adjustment to
Random House. Let's Get Together!; ISBN 0-679-82225-9. Sharing & Caring;
ISBN 0-679-82226-7. 
Each book: 
illus. with photographs by Elizabeth
Hathon. Random House, 1992. 12p. (Cuddle Books). $2.99.
M 
1-3 yrs. 
Each of these little board books includes attractive if
sentimental color photographs of toddlers engaged in sunny, everyday activities.
Let's Get Together pairs facing pages of opposites and almost-opposites: "I
have blond hair . .
you have black" ... "I have dark skin. ..
you have light
skin"... "You wear glasses, I do not." These are concepts most toddlers can
follow, but the conclusion is on another level entirely: "Each of us is different
and very special, too, so ... 
let's get together and be friends!" Sharing &
Caring is more disjointed, but its emphasis, too, involves a degree of moral and
[246
conceptual awareness beyond the board-book audience. After six spreads of
toddlers playing together ("We jump in the hay. Ready, set . .wheeeeeee!) the
book concludes, "Sharing and caring is [sic] what it's all about." Most two-
year-olds will skip the sermons, and view both books as pleasant, if plotless,
compendia of other kids having a good time, an appeal readily covered by pretty
much everything already published for this age group. RS
D.V. Cooperation
Regan, Dian Curtis. 
The Curse of the Trouble Dolls; illus. by Michael
Chesworth. Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-8050-1944-8. 
[64p]. (Redfeather Books).
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
When Angie Wu receives a gift of six Guatemalan
Trouble Dolls from her aunt, she immediately attempts to use them, as
instructed, to take away her troubles. Her small but immediate success (a
loathed admirer doesn't sit next to her in class) causes her to sing the dolls'
praises during Sharing Time, so everybody in class begs to borrow one. When
Angie lends them out, all she gets in return are recriminations from her unlucky
classmates ("I didn't need to study. I had a Trouble Doll," snarls the boy who
flunked his spelling test) and no Trouble Dolls, since the kids have all lost or
destroyed them. Angie herself is in serious danger of failing an in-class report
(she was too busy trying to find out about Trouble Dolls to research planets, as
she intended) until she uses her research on Guatemala to write a report on the
Mayan Indians. The setup with both the dolls and the research payoff is a little
contrived, but it's well-executed. Angie and her friends are realistic, her library
research is incorporated smoothly and humorously into the peer-group plot, and
it's nice to have an easy middle-grades school story with a twist. DS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Reische, Diana. Electing a U.S. President. Watts, 1992. ISBN 0-531-11043-5.
[176p] illus. with photographs. $13.90. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-9. 
John F. Kennedy won because he looked good on
television, Benjamin Harrison campaigned solely from his front porch, and
Jimmy Carter based his campaign on a strategy he read in a book. This is filled
with interesting presidential campaign trivia scattered throughout a confusing
description of the U.S. election process. Definitions and explanations are lost
within the anecdotal history, so that terms like "primaries," "delegates," and
"exit polls" are left unclear. Reische's deductive writing style sometimes results
in premises left hanging too long-confusing the reader for several pages until
the point is made. For example, the statement that "George Bush, it was said,
would never get elected President" provides a perfect cliffhanger chapter ending,
but the reader's interest crashes before the reasons appear, nine pages later, that
explain why Bush won. Reische gets careless when, in a chapter on presidential
image, she describes Dukakis as looking like "a small-town engineer," and again
when she suggests that a Democratic rule for electing delegates is complicated
because it "insists that half of all delegates be women." Read this to get an
impression of the history of U.S. presidential campaigning, but look elsewhere
to learn how the system works. KJ
C.U. Government
[247 ]
Rodowsky, Colby. Lucy Peale. Farrar, 1992. ISBN 0-374-36381-1. [208p].
$15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 9-. 
The daughter of a fanatical Christian evangelist, 17-
year-old Lucy has been surrounded by inhibitions and prohibitions that leave her
totally unprepared for a date-rape and ensuing pregnancy. When she runs away
from home, she almost immediately encounters Jake, a sensitive boy who
protects and cares for her. This is their love story, and it is a tribute to the
writing that a plot with so little conflict-after the initial dramatic episodes are
over-can sustain such concentrated attention from the reader, whose
involvement with the two main characters deepens with each revelation of their
inherent good nature. 
The coming baby engenders enthusiasm rather than
resentment on Jake's part, and their differences of socio-economic class and
education dissolve in the face of a profoundly innocent but convincingly honest
affection. Rodowsky has experimented with a narration that shifts between first
and third person; it doesn't add to the impact, but it doesn't detract, either,
because in each case, the effect of intimacy is achieved by attentive observation
of detail. Would that all runaway teens could tell stories that ended so happily.
BH
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Roy, Jacqueline. Soul Daddy. Harcourt, 1992. ISBN 0-15-277193-X. 235p.
$16.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
"You're a bastard ... we don't want you here," says
fifteen-year-old Hannah to her father. Joe is black, a pop star, returning to
Hannah and her twin Rosie's white mother after an absence that began before the
twins' birth. He brings with him Nicola, his cool, sophisticated daughter who
is only a year younger than her half-sisters Hannah and Rosie, and who is now
in Hannah's class at their very suburban English school. Pullman's The Broken
Bridge, reviewed last month, had a similar subject, but Roy involves herself
more with family dynamics than plot strands, demonstrating a gift for phrasing
and sharp insight that makes this unusual situation broadly meaningful. The
point of view shifts gradually between the three girls, as Hannah and Rosie both
cling to and fight their mutual dependency, Rosie (neurologically impaired after a
childhood illness) begins to befriend Nicola and to blossom, and Nicola attempts
to place herself in a new household and a virtually all-white town. The style of
the novel, the author's first, is highly descriptive and the pace deliberate, but the
characterization of the three girls and treatment of their interrelationship (as well
as their connections with an increasingly extended family) are superb and
complex. This is an intelligent exploration, executed with sensitivity, of some
difficult familial and racial issues. DS
D.V. Family relations; Interracial relations
Russo, Marisabina. Alex Is My Friend; written and illus. by Marisabina Russo.
Greenwillow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10419-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
10418-5. 32p. Library ed. $13.93; Trade ed. $14.00.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Framed paintings that are cheerful and simply
composed, if anatomically naive, illustrate a story told by Ben, who looks back
over the several years of their best-friendship. Ben notices, as they grow older,
that Alex (now six, while Ben is five) doesn't seem to be growing. Mama
[248
explains: 
"Alex is always going to be small. 
It is how he was born"
(unfortunate phrasing, since everyone is born small). Alex has back surgery and
is recovering as the story ends; his physical limitations shape their joint
activities. Ben concludes, "Alex is little and I'm big, but it really doesn't matter
. .. because Alex is my friend." Young listeners may want to know what,
specifically, is wrong with Alex; however, they can still appreciate the fact that
the simple narrative stresses both the acceptance of disability and the fact that a
disabled child has the same needs and the same potential for friendship as do
other children. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Handicaps, overcoming
Schwartz, Alvin, ed. And the Green Grass Grew All Around: Folk Poetry from
Everyone; illus. by Sue Truesdell. HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-
06-022758-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022757-5. 195p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade
ed. $15.00.
R* 
4-10 yrs. 
See editorial.
Seltzer, Meyer. Here Comes the Recycling Truck; written and illus. with
photographs by Meyer Seltzer. Whitman, 1992. ISBN 0-8075-3235-5. 32p.
$13.95.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
A picture book that's politically correct in a natural,
friendly way, this follows Elisa, the driver of a recycling truck, on her cleanup
route. With an informal narrative and color photographs that are appealing if
sometimes dark, Seltzer directly summarizes the disposal problem in his first
few pages: "Our supplies of some materials we use are growing smaller and
smaller and smaller. The piles of garbage are growing higher and higher and
higher-we're running out of room!" Enter the recycling truck, nicknamed
Uncle Bud. PC aside, boys will love looking at all the equipment; girls will
love looking at a strong role model who lifts and dumps, gets a truck named
after her when she moves on to another position, and is visibly pregnant as she
sits by the computer in her new job as recycling manager for another county.
Both the regular garbage truck crew and some of the neighbors are African-
American in this socially sensitive introduction, which concludes with recycling
tips for young listeners. BH
D.V. Ecological awareness
Simon, Seymour. Mercury. Morrow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10545-9;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10544-0. 24p. illus. with photographs. Library ed.
$13.93; Trade ed. $14.00.
Venus. Morrow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10543-2; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-688-10542-4. 
32p. illus. with photographs. Library ed. $14.93;
Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
Like earlier books in this excellent astronomy series,
these two volumes are distinguished for the beauty of the color photographs
(from space probes) and the clarity of informative diagrams and continuous texts.
Simon is adept at arranging scientific material in a logical way that makes it
accessible; his writing is clear, succinct without being terse, and always
illustrative of good scientific principles: objective, distinguishing between fact
[249 ]
and conjecture, and making it clear that scientific knowledge is built on the
continuing input from many sources and is perennially subject to change as new
data accrue. ZS
C.U. Astronomy
Whitelaw, Nancy. Theodore Roosevelt Takes Charge. Whitman, 1992. ISBN
0-8075-7849-5. 192p. illus. with photographs. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Liberally illustrated with reproductions of
contemporary prints and photographs, this is a lively biography of Roosevelt
although the style is serious. The coverage is broad, and the author is candid
about Roosevelt's faults or idiosyncrasies but firmly complimentary about his
many achievements and reforms of social, industrial, and legislative ills (she also
wields the "Big Stick" metaphor a little too often). There's a good balance
between Whitelaw's coverage of the biographee's personal life and his dramatic
career. This is more detailed than Fritz' Bully for You, Teddy Roosevelt (BCCB
5/91) and deals more specifically with the pros and cons of Roosevelt's politics.
A bibliography of sources, a list of Theodore Roosevelt's books, a chronology,
and an index are appended. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
Whittier, John Greenleaf. Barbara Frietchie; illus. by Nancy Winslow Parker.
Greenwillow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09830-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
09829-0. 32p. Library ed. $13.93; Trade ed. $14.00.
Ad 
6-9 yrs. 
Line-and-wash illustrations, tidy and static, echo the
events if not the sentimentality of Whittier's Civil War poem. Notes by the
artist make it clear that the poet believed the shoot-if-you-must incident to be
true, although no verification exists. Parker also offers notes on Whittier and on
Stonewall Jackson, the Confederate General who spared one Union flag
(according to the poem) because of his respect for the courage and patriotism of
elderly Barbara Frietchie. The notes are useful; one pair of facing maps seems to
have contradictory details because of a difference in scale; one erroneous caption
for endpaper flags (one set for each of the contenders) is being corrected so that
Fort Sumter will not be said to be in Virginia. ZS
D.V. 
Patriotism
Wilson, A. N. Hazel the Guinea Pig; illus. by Jonathan Heale. Candlewick,
1992. ISBN 1-56402-013-4. 92p. $13.95.
Ad 
5-9 yrs. 
"Well," said Hazel to herself, "if that isn't a tunnel!"
Since Hazel had already decided that she wanted to try exploring, she crawled into
the rain boot ("tunnel") and got stuck. That is the beginning of a slightly
sugary story that is replete with anthropomorphism and in which the two-strand
plot concerns the interaction between people and guinea pigs and the tension
created by the addition of a guinea pig mate, a guinea pig intruder, and guinea
pig progeny. Black-and-white illustrations have a sketchy quality, and the
writing style, even for lovers of animal stories, may prove just a bit contrivedly
ingenuous. ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to
[250 ]
Wolf, Sallie. Peter's Trucks; illus. by Cat Bowman Smith. Whitman, 1992.
ISBN 0-8075-6519-9. 24p. $13.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
In this cheerfully cyclical story told in casual rhyme,
truck-mad young Peter interrogates every truck driver he meets, guessing at the
truck's contents. He starts with the milk truck ("Mister, Mister, are there cows
in your truck?" "No cows, sonny, just milk") and questions drivers of a gasoline
carrier, garbage truck, armored car, and so on, each time asking if this truck has
the same cargo as the last, until finally he finds a truck that does have cows.
The ink-and-watercolor illustrations balance dusky shades with energetic, frazzly
lines and truckloads of character in each double-page encounter: the scenes are
full of unpicky background detail, such as the antics the various cats get up to
(eyeing fish-market merchandise, chasing each other across the street), the stout
police horse shepherding pedestrians, and the jogger and biker who whip by on
their respective pages. The trucks will charm the Tonka crowd, and the "what's
inside" theme and the bouncing rhymes ("I see lots of flies. Is there garbage
inside?" "I should say not. The flies come for the ride") make this a lively
readaloud. DS
C.U. Reading aloud; Transportation
Yolen, Jane. Encounter; illus. by David Shannon. Harcourt, 1992. ISBN 0-15-
225962-7. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
A young Taino boy has a prophetic dream the night
before Columbus' landfall on San Salvador: "three great-winged birds with
voices like thunder rode wild waves in our bay," and "sharp, white teeth filled
their mouths." Despite the boy's warnings, his people welcome the Europeans,
who smile like serpents when they see gold. Escaping from the ship to which
he's been taken, the boy wanders far and wide with his portent unheeded: "So it
was we lost our lands to the strangers from the sky.... May it be a warning to
all the children and all the people in every land." The story is a 1992 hindsight
lament that depends more on symbol than development; young listeners-unless
they are to conclude with a general moral to beware of strangers-will need to
know specifically what the strangers did. Even the statistics in the author's note
do not make clear, except in a remote and generalized way, what happened as a
result of the encounter. On the other hand, there are few books at this age level
that give more than lip service to a non-white point of view. In conjunction
with books that do include more contextual details (Jacobs' excellent The
Tainos, reviewed above, is for older children but could be read aloud to younger),
this will present children with a springboard to discussion of Columbus' hotly
debated "discovery." Shannon's brooding, tensely emotional paintings attribute
mask-like visages and deathly white hands to the Spanish sailors, augmenting
the surrealistic sense of imminent, unnamed destruction. BH
C.U. Columbus Day