Arnold, Caroline. Llama; Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07541-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
688-07540-1. Penguin; Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07707-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
688-07706-4. 
Both books: 
illus. with photographs by Richard Hewett.
Morrow, 1988. 48p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Part of a series to include Giraffe, Kangaroo, Koala, and Zebra,
these two titles feature boldly composed, well-reproduced color photographs
with informal but informational texts about each animal. Llama deals with a
domesticated animal, its characteristics, and its uses. Penguin focuses on the
birds in the San Francisco Zoo, mostly Magellanics from an island off the coast
[1]
of Chile. Llama will focus readers' attention on an animal important to South
American societies, and Penguin has the value of describing scientific processes
of preserving a species in captivity. Competently organized and indexed, these
are both attractive and useful, especially for elementary students doing science
reports. BH
C.U. Zoology
Ashabranner, Brent. Always to Remember: The Story of the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial; illus. with photographs by Jennifer Ashabranner. Dodd/Putnam,
1988. ISBN 0-396-09089-3. 101p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
No current events writer for young people does a better job than
Ashabranner in providing an enlightening balance of solid information, pertinent
anecdote, and thoughtful opinion. Beginning with a concise (and fair) chapter on
the Vietnam War, the author then recounts the hard work of Jan Scruggs, the vet
who began the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, and Maya Lin, the 21-year-old
architecture student who won the contest to design the monument. While there
is plenty in this book to bring tears, Ashabranner is unobtrusive, allowing the
veterans, families, and the memorial to speak for themselves, and his own
message that war "is about sacrifice and sorrow, not about glory and reward" is
quietly woven in. Although the book lacks pictures that convey a sense of the
sculpture as a whole (an aerial view would have been helpful), Jennifer
Ashabranner's photographs capture the details of flowers and fatigues left along
the base of the monument wall but, as the architect intended, viewers will find
their attentions primarily caught by the endless rows of names. RS
D.V. Patriotism
Avi. Something Upstairs: A Tale of Ghosts. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-08382-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05782-8. [12 8p]. Library ed.
$11.99; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad Gr.5-8. Cleverly introducing his story as one he heard from the
protagonist while on a school visit, Avi here constructs a ghost/time-slip story
that takes Kenny Huldorf back to eighteenth-century Providence to change the
ghastly fate of Caleb, a young black slave murdered in the attic (now Kenny's
bedroom) of the Huldorf's house. Caleb the ghost is too self-aware of the
circumstances of his haunting ("If a person dies in an unnatural or unjust way,
that person's memory stays fixed in time and space"), especially for a self-
proclaimed "memory," but his anger at whites and suspicion of Kenny's motives
and courage add human and historical tension. In fact, the core and interest of the
story are found in the realistic scenes set in the past rather than in the
supernatural element, which is fogged by inconsistencies and a shaky structure.
This would have been better off as straight historical fiction; for that element,
the book is certainly worth reading. RS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Beisner, Monika. Topsy Turvy: the World of Upside Down; written and illus.
by Monika Beisner. Farrar, 1988. ISBN 0-374-37679-4. 27p. $12.95.
Ad Gr. 2-3. 
Framed paintings, richly detailed and vibrantly colored, have
(either on the same page or on the facing page) a rhyme that elaborates on the
[2]
humorous reversal of the picture. For example: "Come little girlJ Good little
girl/ Let the dog fasten your lead./ We're going for a walk/ A nice long walk./
Exercise is what you need." Children should enjoy the reversal concept (a girl
sitting on a doll's lap, a cat that is a meal for mice) and the pictures, but the
rhymes have a contrived, jingly quality that may be due in part to the
"adaptation" from the German original by a man named on the back page, but
not the title page; presumably "adapted" means "translated." ZS
Bernheim, Mark. Father of the Orphans: The Story of Janusz Korczak.
Lodestar, 1988. 
ISBN 0-525-67265-6. 
[139p]. 
illus. with photographs.
(Jewish Biography Series). $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
The subject, born Henryk Goldszmit, was a complex character
whose childhood unhappiness seemed to shape him for heroism in historical
circumstances of unparalleled tragedy. Korczak was tormented by loneliness as a
child when his mother forbade him to play with children below their social class
and, later, by his father's insanity. After becoming a doctor, he devoted his life
to helping orphaned children, whom he finally followed to their deaths at
Treblinka. It is a credit to the biography that Korczak's fanaticism shows
through, albeit without commentary, as well as his courage. Certainly the
second half of the book, when a troubled nonconformist sublimates every
personal concern to act on his ideals, is the more gripping; even Bernheim's
style becomes more cohesive. This has clearly been researched with great care,
though one wishes for better documentation-the bibliography consists only of
Korczak's works in English, with no secondary sources. Black-and-white
photographs are included. BH
C.U. History-World War II-1939-1945
D.V. Social responsibility
Bible. The Nativity; illus. by Julie Vivas. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-
15-200535-8. 36p. $14.95.
R* 4-6yrs. 
Accompanying a minimal text excerpted from the St. James
version of Luke are blissfully exuberant watercolor paintings of the annunciation
and birth of Christ. These are tattered angels and poor folk who keep chickens
along with their naive sense of humor. Each spread is a spacious new scenario
for visual exploration: 
Mary's expression as she watches her belly grow
enormous, her attempts to mount the donkey, the donkey's angle of reluctance in
proceeding along a rocky trail, Joseph's cuddling of the baby, the townsfolk
crowded onto perches of roof and tree, the shepherd ordering his sheep back to the
flock. The compositions are fresh enough to make many another nativity book
look like greeting card art. "And she brought forth her firstborn son" shows the
baby's head and hands peeking into a dark square of night on one page and
tumbling naked into the world the next. In the end, the mottled Angel, his
workboots still untied, holds the baby while Joseph helps Mary heave herself
back up onto the donkey. This is a book that summons the familial joy of any
birth-rainbow colors replace the traditional red and green-with no less
reverence for the one celebrated at Christmas. BH
C.U. 
Christmas-stories
D.V. Religious understanding
[3]
Branley, Franklyn M. Tornado Alert; illus. by Giulio Maestro. Crowell, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-689-04688-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04686-3. 32p. (Let's-
Read-and-Find-Out-Science Books). Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Since Dorothy Gale's tornado is a primal scene for many
television-age children, this early science book will probably find a wider than
usual audience. While both text and pictures clearly show the hows and wheres
of tornadoes, they don't skimp on the drama, with almost every double-page
spread dominated by a ferocious twister in an eerie blue/green/purple sky. The
text is brief and simple: "Tornadoes can pick up branches and boards, stones and
bricks, cars, and sometimes even people." A concluding section of safety
instructions offers a reassuring close. RS
C.U. Safety education
Carrick, Carol. Left Behind; illus. by Donald Carrick. Clarion, 1988. ISBN
0-89919-535-0. [30p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-7yrs. 
Christopher has been the subject of other common crises,
including one incident in which he confronts his fear of the water (Dark and Full
of Secrets, BCCB: 12/84) and several others about his dog. Here, he is separated
from his class on a field trip downtown when the doors of a crowded train slam
shut before he can reboard. Christopher's fear and confusion are realistic without
overdramatization, and he's helped by a uniformed official and a policeman before
trouble develops. The literal, page-and-a-half watercolor spreads lend just the
right amount of low-key tension; a good pick for preschool and primary-grade
discussion. BH
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Conrad, Pam. Taking the Ferry Home. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
02138-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021317-5. 180p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad Gr. 8-10. Conrad uses the device of two viewpoints, in alternating
chapters, effectively. Her protagonists are two sixteen-year-old girls who meet
while vacationing on a resort island. Ali is in a modest cottage with her father, a
writer who faithfully attends meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous. Simone is in
a mansion nearby, the unhappy "princess" whose mother is addicted to both
drugs and alcohol. The tenuous friendship comes to a full stop when Simone
walks off with the boy she knows Ali likes, and then reports that the two of
them have become lovers. 
Although this is grim, it is believable; the
characterization, style, and especially the dialogue are defined and controlled. The
ending, however, is melodramatic to an extent that vitiates the book's impact:
Simone sees her mother embracing a man, free-basing cocaine with him, and
being injured by an explosion. She runs off, Ali follows and jumps to reach the
departing ferry just as Simone jumps from it into the water. Ali then jumps
into the water and saves Simone's life. Too much. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Parent-child relations
[4]
Davis, Jenny. Sex Education. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08356-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05756-9. 150p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed.
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. Powerful. This is a story told by sixteen-year-old Olivia; it is
framed by a preface that explains that she is in a mental hospital, writing at her
psychiatrist's behest, and it closes with an epilogue that promises recovery.
Olivia's illness is a reaction to the death of David, the classmate she has come to
love when they act as partners in a sex education class project. They do not
become lovers, but Olivia learns from David what loving means, and both of
them have learned from their project how intricate love and sex are, and how
terrible it can be when they go wrong. The project: finding a person to care
about David and Olivia choose a pregnant, shy new neighbor whose husband is
oddly hostile. Both a touching story of an abused wife and a tender story of
young love, this is deftly structured, nicely paced, and smoothly written, with
strongly delineated characters and thematic depths that give color and substance.
ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Death, adjustment to
Day, Alexandra. Frank and Ernest; written and illus. by Alexandra Day.
Scholastic, 1988. ISBN 0-590-41557-3. 38p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad Gr. K-3. 
Hash house terminology is the whole point of a story that is
more situation than narrative, as customers give orders and the eponymous
heroes translate. Frank and Ernest fill in at a diner when the owner goes away
for three days; there's no explanation of why Frank and Ernest are the only
animals (bear and elephant) while the owner and all the customers are people.
Nor is it clear why the owner apparently had no assistant to share the work as
the animals do. Oversize pages have adequate but unimpressive paintings. The
chief appeal rests in the restaurant cant; a customer orders apple pie and a glass
of milk, relayed by Frank as "Eve with a lid and moo juice." This may entice
the audience to its own translations. ZS
DeFelice, Cynthia C. The Strange Night Writing of Jessamine Colter; illus.
with calligraphy by Leah Palmer Preiss. Macmillan, 1988. ISBN 0-02-726451-
3. [51p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Jessie Colter has always done the "fancy writing" for her small
town-the birth and death notices, diplomas, favorite sayings and quotes, and
even the menus for Jake Carpenter's restaurant, "in her fanciest style,
embellishing it with swirls and flourishes, sprinkling in French words ... Just
reading it was enough to make your mouth water." One evening, though, Jessie
finds herself making the new menu before Jake has brought over the changes.
On subsequent nights other predictions follow: a wedding notice, an obituary.
'This is going to sound strange, Rufus, but please listen to me. If I'm right--
and I think I am-you're dying. You have two weeks left." The author has
found an irresistible idea and voices it appealingly through Jessie, her young
apprentice Callie, and Jake, the restaurateur and Jessie's smitten suitor. While
Jessie is overly given to homespun homily, and the writing resorts to cliches,
this quiet story never falls into saccharinity, but instead is sentimental in the
best sense. RS
[5]
Feldbaum, Carl B. Looking hetr 
rth 
onting the Nuclear
Threat; by Carl B. Feldbauind Ronald J. Bee. Har 
, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-020415-X; Trade ed. 
[320p]. illus. with
photographs, maps, and diagrams. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
Like Judie Mills' John F. Kennedy (BCCB: 6/88), this, in
length and scope, looks like an adult book. Don't be daunted: this, also like the
Mills book, is a solid introduction to its subject, synthesizing scientific,
historical, and political material into a comprehensive and readable whole. It
differs from most new adult titles on nuclear war in that it has no particular
theory to expound, and there is a welcome absence of heated rhetoric. Less
speculative than Pringle is in Nuclear War (BCCB: 2/86), Feldbaum and Bee
take a historical approach, beginning with early nuclear research and the
Manhattan project (all of which is set out with great clarity, although there could
have been more on scientific techniques) and concluding with the signing of the
INF treaty by Reagan and Gorbachev in December of 1987. Impeccably
documented with endnotes and a complete bibliography of sources, with starred
entries for those books of special interest for the general reader. RS
Fisher, Leonard Everett. Pyramids of the Sun, Pyramids of the Moon; written
and illus. by Leonard Everett Fisher. Macmillan, 1988. ISBN 0-02-735300-1.
32p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
In a format similar to that of The Great Wall of China and The
Tower of London, Fisher continues an effective series with a history of the
Teotihuacan pyramids in the Valley of Mexico. While the text describes the
sequential cultures of the Toltecs, Chichimecs, and Aztecs, shadowy paintings in
black, white, and gray-punctuated with brick-red symbols-depict events and
ceremonies of monumental grandeur. The book has an abstract quality, which is
just as well for dealing with the cruelties that marked the Aztec sacrifice of
prisoners and the Spaniards' destruction of Montezuma's city, Tenochtitlan. A
dramatic, well-designed introduction. BH
C.U. Architecture; Mexico (unit)
Fleischman, Sid. The Scarebird; illus. by Peter Sis. Greenwillow, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07318-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07317-4. 
[30p].
Library ed. $11.95; Trade ed. $11.88. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 5-8 yrs. 
Lonesome John protects his isolated fields with a scarecrow that
has, initially, only arms and legs ("if that's not the most fearsome sight I ever
saw, it'll do"). But the creature bothers him, so he adds a head and various
articles of clothing as the weather dictates. The more human it looks, the more
he talks to it, even to the point of a one-sided game of checkers. Enter Sam, an
orphan seeking work. In folkloristically rhythmic style, the clothes come off
the scarecrow one by one as Sam has need of them until, by and by, John and
Sam are friends and the scarecrow stands alone with its shadow. The shadow,
not mentioned in the text, is a graphic addition and a strong sample of Sis' art,
which echoes the lean prose with austerely textured brush strokes. Reds
dominate the beginning and ending, while the central portion of the story is
illustrated in corn-field green and sky blue, all of which emphasizes the circular
[6]
action. In a period of thin picture books, this has much to teach about the
substance of stories and the complement of illustration. Some young listeners
will look for a last line after the suspended question that serves as ending ("Do
you play checkers?"), but the pictorial conclusion should satisfy them. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Fort, Patrick. Redbird; written and illus. by Patrick Fort. Orchard/Watts, 1988.
ISBN 0-531-05746-1. 18p. $19.95.
Ad Gr. 2-6. Redbird is a propeller plane that gets caught in a storm, meets
another plane ("Old Rascal"), and finally gets clearance to land. The book is
beautifully designed to include a simple text in braille, as well as black print,
and pictures whose shapes have a raised surface for touch identification. This
does not, unfortunately, solve the problem of depth perception. The parts of the
plane, for instance, are labelled and depicted separately on one page and, on the
next, shown as a whole in the context of the story's action. A good idea, but
the cockpit, to a person who hasn't seen one, will seem to sit directly atop the
propeller. The other drawback here is the confusion introduced by "Old Rascal."
Obviously an older model, the second plane raises questions rather than
providing a plot element. Where does it come from? Why is it playing "hide-
and-seek with the clouds" when Redbird, in the same storm, is in obvious
danger? Why don't the two communicate when Redbird is capable of radioing
the control tower? Who are the other contacts named (Romeo, Echo, Delta,
Bravo, India)? Despite these problems, kids will love handling the book, and its
spiral binding with a protective clear-plastic cover over the raised jacket seems
sturdy. BH
Geisert, Arthur, ad. The Ark; ad. and illus. by Arthur Geisert. Houghton, 1988.
ISBN 0-395-43078-X. [48p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
Geisert's adaptation of the Bible story is a mixture of brevity and
elaboration: not much text, but much of what's there is invented. "The animals
were told to go to Noah's house. They started their journey in the cool of the
evening." "The wives tended the animals." "The family found time to rest only
at dinner." However, nothing is out of keeping and in any case the text serves
primarily as captions for Geisert's intricate etchings. The ark-building has an
architectural exactness, and the pictures with animals include both lion-and-lamb
pastorals and cutaways of the Ark's three levels, each a crowded and improbable
menagerie. While not as lighthearted as Peter Spier's depiction of the shipboard
mayhem, Geisert's forty days and nights are touched by wit: a hapless son
shoveling manure, a raccoon making off with a sandal. The detail and
sophistication of the etchings are likely to attract an older audience than do many
other picture book versions; a basic familiarity with the story is also helpful, as
there are a few abrupt jumps. RS
C.U. Religious education
Geller, Mark. Raymond. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022207-7;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022206-9. 89p. Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
[7]
Ad Gr. 5-8. Like Geller's What I Heard (BCCB: 6/87), this is a pithy novel
largely dependent on dialogue to develop a dramatic situation. Twelve-year-old
Raymond has come to the attention of a teacher who notices the welts on his
back from beatings by his father. As authorities begin to investigate, Raymond
runs away from his father's violent reaction and tries to persuade his mother,
also a victim of abuse, to leave with him. The novel suffers from two problems
that its memorable predecessor did not. First, it is not as sparely structured; for
example, during Raymond's first attempt to get away, he's viciously robbed of
his bus ticket, a major incident that does underscore his helplessness but also
complicates the action. Second, the central problem of paternal abuse is drastic
and therefore needs a more fully supported development of plot and characters.
This is not to say that the story is ineffectual. It has suspense and some skillful
use of varied perspectives to illuminate the main character's dilemma, a
combination that should be of value to poor or reluctant readers who will most
appreciate the book's brevity and low reading level. BH
D.V. Family relations; Self-reliance
Gilson, Jamie. Double Dog Dare; illus. by Elise Primavera. Lothrop, 1988.
ISBN 0-688-07969-5. [126p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad Gr. 4-6. 
After a not terribly eventful summer (except for Lisa Soloman
being crowned America's Miss Pre-Teen Personality), Hobie Hanson and friends
are in fifth grade, presided over by their eccentric former substitute, Miss
Ivanovitch (see Thirteen Ways to Sink a Sub). Like others in the series, this is
destined to appeal, with a calculated blend of slapstick humor, a this-could-be-
anywhere school setting, and kids-next-door characters. Lest the breezy become
the flyaway, there is also a serious, and well-handled, theme woven throughout
about the other side of the Gifted and Talented: how does it feel to be a kid like
Hobie, who isn't? The structure is episodic, the jokes stretched far too long, and
there's a labored diligence to the fifth grade verisimilitude that flattens the setting
and characters, but Hobie's fans are legion, and will cheer his clever, if doomed,
adaptation of the wintergreen-lifesavers-in-the-dark trick. RS
Graham, Harriet. The Chinese Puzzle. Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-47689-5.
[180p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
This is the sort of book in which the chapters are all headed "in
which", as in "In which we visit the country and events take an unexpected
turn." Flora and William are greatly looking forward to their country holiday,
although they are a bit disturbed about the mysterious Chinese magician who
has come to visit their guardian, Samuel Rolandson, another magician. The
children return to London unexpectedly; Samuel has disappeared, and the two are
thrown into perilous adventure. Unlike Philip Pullman's The Ruby in the
Smoke and The Shadow in the North, which bend the conventions of the
Victorian thriller to their own purposes, The Chinese Puzzle is pure pastiche,
unrelieved by an independent imagination. The characters are all typecast,
including a cheeky street boy, a doughty housekeeper, and plucky Flora, who
appears to have seen entirely too many Shirley Temple movies. 
An evil
Chinese henchman (not the magician, who-phew-is really an old friend of
Samuel's in disguise) is another late-show stereotype: "His slant eyes didn't
[8]
waver, but the cane cut through the air again." There is action, danger, and
suspense here, but we never get worried-such is the power of the unrevitalized
cliche. RS
Greene, Constance C. Isabelle and Little Orphan Frannie. Viking, 1988. ISBN
0-670-82266-3. 131p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Isabelle, the indomitable fifth-grader who gravitates toward
trouble because she is inventive, ebullient, thoughtless, and determined, is back;
she's as lively, appealing, and amusing as in earlier books. This time she takes
eight-year-old Frannie on, having learned that Frannie can't read. A peripatetic
waif, Frannie declares she is "a norphan," and in a way she is, her mother having
come to stay with her friend because, as Frannie (calculatedly pitiful) explains,
her old daddy died and her Mom is looking for a new one. The lessons don't go
well, but after Frannie moves on, Isabelle gets a postcard: "I go to scool now. I
can read some. Your a good teach." So the story ends with Isabelle happy, her
project accomplished. There's no question of condescending charity, Frannie
being a tough little character who knows how to get what she wants. As is
usual in Greene's stories, the perceptive affection that pervades the book is
balanced by light, bright humor, especially in the dialogue. This has some
deliciously entertaining classroom scenes. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Helpfulness
Grove, Vicki. Good-bye, My Wishing Star. Putnam, 1988. ISBN 0-399-
21532-8. 128p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad Gr.5-7. A novel that focuses on the problems of today's small-farm
owners as seen through the eyes of a girl of twelve (Jens) who has written a
story to be passed on to the new owners of the farm that she has loved and must
leave. There are minor plot threads, one of which is the irritated behavior of
Jens when her best friend responds to the coltish attentions of a boy, but the
emphasis is on the emotional and financial distress of families forced out of their
accustomed way of life. Although this is a story marred by purposive direction,
it is adequate in style and characterization, a creditable first novel. ZS
D.V. Adaptability
Hahn, Mary Downing. December Stillness. Clarion, 1988. ISBN 0-89919-
758-2. [154p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad Gr. 5-8. 
Since Mr. Poland won't approve Kelly's God-is-dead proposal for
her current issues paper, she decides, on a dare, to interview the drifter who
spends his days sitting in the public library, reading about the Vietnam war.
What begins as a joke becomes genuine concern for the homeless veteran, and
Kelly cannot understand why Mr. Weems so angrily refuses her help and
friendship. Kelly is rather tiresomely self-righteous, an irritation the author
glancingly considers, but she's also right, and stands out in too-marked contrast
to her superficial friends and success-is-everything father. Dad, also a vet,
achieves catharsis when he and Kelly visit the Vietnam memorial in
Washington; while this is a moving scene, it has not really grown out of the
story. The novel is more message-driven than anything else, but Hahn's
practiced handling of suspense serves her well here, and the soft-core didacticism
[9]
may attract readers not yet ready for a more complex assessment of the war and
its aftermath. RS
D.V. Devotion to a cause; Father-daughter relations
Haldane, Suzanne. Painting Faces. Dutton, 1988. ISBN 0-525-44408-4.
[32p]. illus. with photographs by Suzanne Haldane and others. 
$13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Full-page color photographs depict face painting by various
cultures-from East Asian to African and Native American-for ritual, dance,
drama, and other purposes. With brief informational background and step-by-
step instructions, these models serve as suggestions for contemporary children's
face painting, also shown in a creative array of traditional and free-form designs.
Many young readers will be content to browse through the pictures rather than
spend time on the text. Even so, the book will open up connections to other
times and societies as well as stimulate a popular activity. Warnings about skin
allergies are included. BH
C.U. Dramatics
Hayes, Sarah. Eat Up, Gemma; illus. by Jan Ormerod. Lothrop, 1988. ISBN
0-688-08149-5. 24p. $13.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7yrs. After wreaking holiday havoc in Happy Christmas, Gemma
(BCCB: 11/86 ), baby Gemma now doesn't want to "eat up," instead joyfully
throwing any proffered food to the floor, or to the dog, or banging it to bits with
her toy hammer. Big brother finds the solution when he sees Gemma, at church,
mesmerized by the fruit decorations on the lady's hat in front of her. One
inverted bowl, a couple of bananas, some grapes ... 
A familiar situation
handled easily if superficially, this combines the appeals of infant destructiveness
and big brother know-how. While facial expressions tend toward the cute, the
full-color illustrations (and nice-sized type) are set neatly within lots of white
space, and are framed with fruit-festooned endpapers juicy enough to make the
pickiest eater salivate. The book is a British production, Gemma and her family
are black, but this is a cozy any family/anywhere kind of story. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Honeycutt, Natalie. The Best-Laid Plans of Jonah Twist. Bradbury, 1988.
ISBN 0-02-744850-9. [115p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-4. 
Picking up right where The All New Jonah Twist left off, the
sequel begins with Jonah's best friend Granville mapping strategy to convince
Jonah's mother to let Jonah have one of Granville's kittens. "Granville said that
if Jonah's mother held the kitten awhile, she would 'bond' with it. Then she
would want Jonah to keep the kitten." Jonah gets the kitten, but then his
brother Josh's hamster disappears ... 
so does friendly neighbor Mr. Rossetti
... and the two friends discover that Juliet Fisher, class pest, is to work with
them on the group science project. While there are probably one too many
subplots going on here, this, like the first book, blends Jonah's serious and not-
so-serious concerns in a natural and appealing way, with Jonah's ingenuous
perspective untainted by cuteness. RS
[ 10]
Janeczko, Paul B., comp. The Music of What Happens: Poems That Tell
Stories. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08357-8; Trade ed. ISBN
0-531-05757-7. 188p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R* Gr. 7-. 
A book that demonstrates the rich potential for originality in
anthologizing, this features 75 untraditional narrative poems deeply reflective of
the events they relate. Most are long contemporary selections in free verse
reverberating with internal rhythms and rhyme. Subjects are sustained through
intertwined imagery and language patterns that underscore taut or richly
surprising endings. "The White Rose: Sophie Scholl 1921-1943" by Erika
Mumford-as compressed a biographical comment on victims of World War II
as any-is deeply moving, as is the next selection, "Tending the Garden" by
Eric Pankey. Together they chronicle the experience of a doomed German
resistance fighter, a French prisoner of war, and a Jewish girl gassed by the
Nazis. Balancing the tragic stories are lighter moments of buoyant humor and
incidents of everyday familiarity caught unawares, as in Michael Pettit's piquant
"Driving Lesson." Janeczko has played these poems like a piano, combining
themes, tones, and even sounds for a true composition that will take young
readers beyond the usual dose of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow or Rudyard
Kipling. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Jones, Diana Wynne. Eight Days of Luke. Greenwillow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-
08006-5. [150p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* Gr. 7-12. Briefer and simpler than many of Jones' fantasies, this early
novel (now published for the first time in the U.S.) involves two family
disputes: between David and assorted relatives who don't really want him
around, and among the Norse gods, who very much want their errant son "Luke"
to come back to the family fold. David and Luke meet when David unwittingly
frees the other boy from a supernatural prison while trying out some curses on
his family. David at first thinks that Luke is some kind of friendly genie, until
others, like the one-eyed "Mr. Wedding" and the menacing gardner "Mr. Chew"
come along and reveal that Luke has hidden something of great importance that
they want returned. The mythological and contemporary worlds collide in
unexpected, usually humorous ways (Siegfried in a video game parlor), but at the
same time Jones maintains the dignity of the mythic quest: the search for
Thor's hammer. Both gods and humans are complicated characters; particularly
well drawn is Mr. Wedding (Wotan), feared and loved by his sons Siegfried and
Loki, and a figure of painful ambivalence for David as well. Loki (Luke) has
become David's friend, but fatherless David has come to respect Wotan as well,
and "it came home to David that Luke and Mr. Wedding were going to be on
opposite sides, when that final battle came." 
An afterword explains the
mythological background. RS
D.V. 
Loyalty
Kalman, Maira. Hey Willy, See the Pyramids; written and illus. by Maira
Kalman. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-82163-2. [40p]. $14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
[11 ]
NR Gr. 1-3. 
The pyramids? Well, sort of. This is a new-wave cornucopia of
narrative and visual fragments that comprise the various bedtime stories Lulu
tells her little brother Alexander. Here, for example, is the "tiny story": "Four
very tiny people walked right by me on the way to school. No one knew where
they were going, but they were walking very fast and carrying little
instruments." The accompanying illustration features, along with the very tiny
people, a flying bunny, some children with lunch boxes, a palm tree, a dog on a
unicycle, and a teepee or two, one of which may be a sailboat. Deliberately
naive in perspective and color, the pictures combine a self-consciously
childlikeness with a free-floating irony. Although YA's may enjoy the feeling of
being in on a joke, younger readers won't appreciate the hipper-than-thou tone
that permeates both pictures and text, and it is doubtful as well that they will
appreciate the absurdity for its own sake, untouched as it is by wit, narrative
sense, or genuine playfulness. RS
Knudson, R. R., 
.
American Sports Poems; comp. and ed. by R. R.
Knudson ar 
laySwenso- 
Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08353-5; Traded3ISBJLO-531-05753-4. [226p]. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* Gr. 6-12. America's gym teachers should be convinced that this collection
is a terrific read-aloud alternative to rainy day health and hygiene movies. What
is initially most impressive about the poems is their tremendous variety in
subject, form, tone and length (The shortest: "They all must fall/ In the round I
call."-Muhammad Ali). Beginning with poetic tributes to sports greats like
Babe Ruth, Vince Lombardi and Joan Benoit, this anthology moves through
baseball ("Sometimes ball gets hit/ (pow) when bat/ meets itJ and sails/ to a
place/ where mitt/ has to quit/ in disgrace."-May Swenson) football, soccer,
hockey, basketball, swimming, skating . . . and throughout there is a
concreteness to the images and a welcome lack of sports-as-metaphor-for-life that
make the poems enjoyable on a literal level as well as providing the depth that
only specificity can give. With more than 150 selections that include Updike,
Sexton and Nemerov (as well as Runyon, Nash, and Cole Porter), this is an all-
star lineup. Notes on the poems and poets, title and author index, and a valuable
subject index are included. RS
C.U. Physical education; Reading aloud
Krull, Kathleen, comp. and ad. Songs of Praise; illus. by Kathryn Hewitt.
Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-15-277108-5. [32p]. $16.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 4-8yrs. 
Fifteen popular traditional hymns, including "Faith of Our
Fathers," "Nearer My God, to Thee," "Rock of Ages," and "Amazing Grace," are
arranged in simple four-part harmonies. Since all the selections are likely to be
found in any church-pew hymnal, the reason for the collection is likely to be
Hewitt's illustrations and borders based on the Book of Hours. Medieval in
subject and spirit, the pictures progress seasonally from spring through winter.
Occasionally, the illustrations are too sweet, or seem at odds with the
superimposed song; for example, a May procession for the rather warlike "Faith
of Our Fathers." A muralistic scene of wool-making, from sheep to cloth,
works much better for "Jesus Loves Me." RS
[ 12]
Lattimore, Deborah Nourse. The Prince and the Golden Ax: A Minoan Tale;
written and illus. by Deborah Nourse Lattimore. Harper, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-023716-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023715-5. 40p. Library ed. $12.89;
Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-4. 
A young prince, Akros, offends the goddess Diktynna with his
boasts and is assigned three tests. Helped by his sister to accomplish the first
two, he fails the third and brings volcanic wrath upon his island of Thera. This
is a picture book too sophisticated for preschool children-a complex story with
elaborate, bordered illustrations based on stylized Minoan art. One yearns for
some explanatory note besides the book-jacket claim that Lattimore's work
draws "upon authentic ancient sources." What were the sources? How closely
were they followed? A human's punishment for the sin of hubris is a theme
dominating Greek mythology, and this could certainly stimulate-graphically as
well as verbally--discussion among children studying early Mediterannean
cultures. BH
Le Guin, Ursula K. Catwings; illus. by S. D. Schindler. Orchard/Watts, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08359-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05759-3. 40p. Library
ed. $10.99; Trade ed. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* Gr. 3-5. 
A more unlikely premise than four cat characters with wings
could not be found, so Le Guin's developing it into a credible and even
captivating fantasy deserves all the more credit. Thelma, Roger, James, and
Harriet have been well brought up. Their mother can only speculate on why
they were born with wings, but she takes care of them as best she can in a bad
neighborhood and bids them fly when the time comes. Their adventurous flight
eventually lands them safely with two country children who feed them and vow
to protect them with secrecy. Le Guin's adroit writing style, the well-observed
feline detail, the thematic concern for natural victims of human environment, and
the gentle humor make this a prime choice for reading aloud, although one
would not want children to miss the fine-line hatch drawings that further project
the satisfying sense of reality. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Levitin, Sonia. Incident at Loring Groves. Dial, 1988. ISBN 0-8037-0455-0.
196p. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-10. Cassidy and Ken are among the high school group that comes
across the body of one of their classmates, Mary Lou, who has been reported
missing. Since they all know they may get in trouble for being in a Park
Service summer house (supposedly locked) at night, and that an inquiry may
bring out the fact that some of them were using dope, they agree to keep silent.
After all, they can't do Mary Lou any good, right? Although purposive, the
theme is so effectively developed, and at such a good pace, that this novel about
moral responsibility makes a dramatic impact. In the course of the story, which
ends with Ken and Cass meeting at the police station where each comes to
confess despite being ashamed of having kept silent, Levitin explores a range of
attitudes. Most perceptive, and most damning, is that of Ken's father, he'd been
furious when his son announced that he was going to the police ("You tell the
[13]
cops and that's it. I'm through with you") but after television publicity that
praises Ken, his Dad, just starting what looks to be a promising political career,
states: "My sons know where I stand when it comes to telling the truth. And
I've always encouraged them to get involved. Children learn by example.
Children learn what they live." Uh huh. ZS
D.V. Ethical concepts; Responsibility
Lewis, Shari. One-Minute Stories of Brothers and Sisters; illus. by Kelly
Oechsli. Doubleday, 1988. ISBN 0-385-23425-2. 39p. $7.95.
NR 4-6 yrs. 
Considering how inspired a one-minute story can be-witness
Marshall's George and Martha, reviewed below--the reduction of an Indian Rama
tale, "Hansel and Gretel," "Snow White and Rose Red," or any other of the 20
stories illustrated with cartoon cliches here, seems all the more banal. These are
not stories but plot outlines, their rhythm, nuance of language, pacing, and
quirks of character lost to the assumption that parents see reading aloud as a
quick fix rather than a creative communication. Ironically, the adapter has even
missed the point of some selections pertinent to the central sibling theme. Her
ending for "Three Billy Goats Gruff": "Of course, why that biggest goat didn't
just cross the bridge first is a mystery to me!" An anthology of imaginatively
narrated folktales or a fresh collection of contemporary picture-book stories will
help resist most media-motivated requests for this freeze-dried literature. BH
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Loh, Morag. Tucking Mommy In; illus. by Donna Rawlins. Orchard/Watts,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08340-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05740-2. 
30p.
Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
A simply conceived episode dramatized by strong-hued double-
page spreads unfolds a situation familiar to many a parent and child; at night the
former is much more tired than the latter. Here Mommy falls asleep, leaving the
two little girls whom she was preparing for bed to tuck her in. As soon as
Daddy comes home from work, he takes over with reassuring fortitude and gets
them to bed. Read aloud, the story is a bit bland, but the art offers a hearty
balance, with humor in the compositions and strength in the warm human
figures that dominate them. BH
D.V. Mother-daughter relations; Self-reliance
Marshall, James. George and Martha Round and Round; written and illus. by
James Marshall. 
Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-46763-2. 
47p. 
$13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Forever fresh and funny, George and Martha survive five more
tests of friendship when he gives her an annoying cuckoo clock or challenges her
to use her imagination on an uncomfortable boat ride; when she criticizes his art
work, has to sleep with her own scary story, or forgives (but does not forget) a
surprise dousing by hose. Marshall's sense of the ridiculous permeates spare
watercolor compositions such as Martha's presentation of a picture with only
slightly more paint than her own substantial body has been spattered with in the
process of creation. And there are always the details: the waterlily on George's
head after his spill in the pond neatly parodies the tulip behind Martha's almost
[14]
nonexistent ear; Martha's goosebumps coordinate with the dots on the patchwork
quilt. Reliably engaging of young listeners' or early readers' humor. BH
D.V. Friendship values
McKillip, Patricia A. The Changeling Sea. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-
31436-1. [139p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad Gr. 7-10. Periwinkle works as a chorewoman at the local inn after her
father is drowned and her mother retreats into grief. In her anger, Peri hexes the
sea with magic she has learned from an old wise woman and is consequently
caught up in the drama of a king, his land-locked changeling born of a mermaid,
and a mage who frees the king's other son, born of a woman and long chained to
the sea. The two boys exchange places in a climactic meeting between the king
and his old love; Peri discovers the extent of her powers and affection for the
mage; and the fishermen get the gold that they covet. The plot is carefully
contrived but artificially developed. This is high fantasy with a formal cast,
sometimes overwritten but romantic enough to hold fans of the genre. BH
Meltzer, Milton. Starting from Home: A Writer's Beginnings. Viking, 1988.
ISBN 0-670-81604-3. [144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. By the time their second child, Milton, was born, the Meltzers
(Austrian Jewish immigrants who had met in New York) had moved to
Worcester, Massachusetts. The author conveys a strong sense of his boyhood
time and place, so that the information about local events of the past or details
about the Depression era give color to a personal narrative that is honest in self-
assessment, candid about anti-Semitism, and fascinating as a record of the
development of an organized and intelligent scholar and a compassionate human
being. ZS
Modell, Frank. Ice Cream Soup; written and illus. by Frank Modell.
Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07771-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
07770-6. 24p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
No birthday party, not this year. Best friends Milton and Marvin
hear the same verdict from their mothers, so they decide they'll give themselves
a birthday party; they blow up old balloons and make paper hats and send out
invitations (dozens, as shown in the illustrations), and try to make their own
cake and ice cream. The cake's a sad, sagging mess, the ice cream is soup.
Owners of the local bakery and ice cream stores turn away when asked for
advice-but they save the well-attended party by showing up with a three-tier
cake and a drum of ice cream. An improbable ending, but the read-aloud audience
is not likely to object; after all, adults do sometimes come to the rescue. Like
other Modell books, this is brisk, bouncy fun, and the cartoon illustrations are
impressive for their economy of line. Birthdays, minor disasters, and mission
accomplished: those are three strong appeals. ZS
D.V. Older-younger generations; Self-reliance
Parish, Peggy. Amelia Bedelia's Family Album; illus. by Lynn Sweat.
Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07677-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
07676-9. 48p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[ 15 ]
Ad 5-8 yrs. 
In a larger format than others in this series, Amelia Bedelia's
latest seems designed more for the picture book audience than for beginning
readers. Mr. and Mrs. Rogers want to give their favorite maid a party, and when
they ask whom to invite, Amelia Bedelia hauls out the family album. "Cousin
Clara is a bookkeeper," says she, to which Mr. Rogers replies, "She must be
good with numbers." No, says Amelia Bedelia, "she is good at keeping books.
She never returns one"-and the picture shows Cousin Clara, surrounded by
books, as every librarian's nightmare. The same set-up is used for all seventeen
relatives, and it does grow repetitive. Because the punch lines are (somewhat
laboriously) provided in the text, rather than in the illustrations, Sweat has less
real work to do here, but the bigger page size and less-constricted design allow
him room for some funny portraits. RS
Parnall, Peter. Feet!; written and illus. by Peter Parnall. Macmillan, 1988.
ISBN 0-02-770110-7. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-6yrs. 
With elegant drafting and witty composition, Parnall creates a
concept book that will invite young children to observe and identify the feet in
each of these 15 double spreads. While the title page shows contrasting types
(clawed, toed, hoofed), most of the pictures concentrate on one. The line "I like
BIG feet," for instance, is accompanied by a close-up drawing of the elephant's
foot with a distant miniature of the animal in its environment. Others included
are the armadillo ("LONG-TOED SCALY feet"), the bear ("HAIRY" feet), the
pelican ("WEBBED" feet), etc., ending with humans and a note identifying all
the creatures. The game-puzzle quality of the book is no less effective for
Parnall's spare illustration, in pen and ink with highlights of yellow, blue, and
green. BH
C.U. Nature Study
Pearce, Philippa. 
Emily's Own Elephant; illus. by John Lawrence.
Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07679-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
07678-5. 32p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
This might be entitled "The Perfect Plan," so idyllic a scenario
does it unfold. Emily's family is possessed of a large meadow with trees, a
shed, and a river running alongside. Her father is forever threatening to pull
down the shed and trees, but during a visit to the zoo, Emily finds the perfect use
for all of it-a miniature elephant in need of a home. Of course the elephant
will have to have its friend, the monkey, and central heating, which Dad
obligingly agrees to install in his spare time. All of this is neatly unfolded in
four brief chapters of a picture book illustrated with congenial pen-and-wash
spreads. There's a good deal of humor embroidering the realistic elements to the
more far-fetched. The description of the elephant's arrival and the celebratory
picnic with plum cake, sugar biscuits, and chocolate is delivered with straight-
faced aplomb. The amusing tone is reflected in the art--one picture, for
instance, shows the elephant in its cozy shed (no muck in this stall!) with pink
curtains, blanket, and umbrella. Wishful thinking at its best. BH
D.V. Animals, kindness to
[16]
Peck, Richard. Those Summer Girls I Never Met. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-
440-50054-0. [192p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Drew has been looking forward to summer and his sixteenth
birthday, planning to use his free time and new maturity getting a driver's
license and meeting girls. Neither he nor younger sister Stephanie (who plans to
spend the summer on the phone) is pleased when Mom tells them that their
long-absent grandmother wants to take them on a Baltic cruise. Grandma is
Connie Carlson, an I'm-still-here band singer from the 40's ("I knew Sinatra
with hair") who now makes a living singing for traveling retirees. In the course
of the cruise Drew and Steph also meet their grandfather, and Peck here turns
what could have been a fatally sentimental crowd scene into something more
subtle. The author has one of the strongest voices in YA fiction; in fact, it
overwhelms his narrator Drew, who has too much adult perspective on himself
and the world to be entirely convincing. (Stephanie's, on the other hand, is a
perfect portrait). This might have been even more effectively told in the third-
person. But Peck handles serious concerns with the kind of light touch and
casual tone that are made possible only through very careful writing.
Sometimes careful to the point of calculation, and sometimes glib, but the
economy of his characterizations and tossed-off aphorisms ("People go when
they have to, not when it suits you") have a refreshing avuncularity. Unlike too
many YA writers, this one never apologizes for being a grownup. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Grandparent-child relations
Phipson, Joan. Bianca. Margaret K. McElderry, 1988. ISBN 0-689-50448-9.
[168p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-12. A series of tragedies has conspired to send adolescent Bianca into
a state of traumatic amnesia: watching her father die under an overturned tractor
on their isolated farm; seeing a cat eat its kitten just before her mother's brusque
dismissal of her during the funeral preparations; and finally, hearing her mother
scream at her to "go away" when she appears during a home invasion by two
criminals on the run. Bianca hides on an island but is found by Emily
Hamilton and her 17-year-old brother Hubert, who proves able to help the girl
remember, recover, and trust. This is a packed plot, but Phipson has managed to
overcome the difficulties of interweavng two stories. The scenes are carefully
selected and fully detailed, the characters developed in response to the action-it's
as much a story of the rescuer as of the victim. BH
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Prelutsky, Jack. Tyrannosaurus Was a Beast; illus. by Arnold Lobel.
Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06443-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
06442-6. 32p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
The humor and vigor of Lobel's illustrations strike just the right
note for the swinging rhythm and the often-funny rhyme of Prelutsky's poetry.
Each illustration (with scientific name and phonetic pronunciation) faces a poem
about the species shown, and an example of the poet's enjoyable combination of
facts and fun is "Stegosaurus." "Stegosaurus was a creature uncontentious and
benign/ and the row of armored plates upon its back/ failed to guard its tender
[17]
belly or protect its flimsy spine/ Stegosaurus often wound up as a snack./
Stegosaurus blundered calmly through the prehistoric scene/ never causing any
other creature woe/ its brain was somewhat smaller than the average nectarine/
Stegosaurus vanished many years ago." ZS
C.U. Reading aloud; Science
Rochman, Hazel, comp. Somehow Tenderness Survives: Stories of Southern
Africa. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025023-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
025022-4. 
[160p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys
Gr.7-. 
Books written by a Bulletin staff or committee member receive a brief
descriptive announcement rather than an evaluation and rating. Ten short stories
by Nadine Gordimer, Gcina Mhlope, Mark Mathabane, Peter Abrahams, Dan
Jacobson, Zod Wicomb, Ernst Haveman, and Doris Lessing confront the tragic
reality of apartheid.
C.U. International understanding
D.V. Social studies
Rogers, Fred. Going to the Hospital; illus. with photographs by Jim Judkis.
Putnam, 1988. 
Library ed. ISBN 0-399-21503-4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-399-
21530-1. 
30p. (First Experiences). Library ed. $12.95; Paper ed. $5.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
Color photographs of children, having their first hospital
experiences add a corroborative note to the simple, direct text that is addressed to
children. The author's style is just right for this level of informational book:
reassuring yet candid, matter-of-fact about those aspects of hospitalization that
may be frightening or painful, yet not in itself alarming. Seeing, in this book,
some of the equipment or procedures (even something as simple as a face-mask)
can facilitate acceptance of the inevitable. Not the only good introduction to
hospitalization, this is surely one of the better ones. ZS
Rogers, Fred. When a Pet Dies; illus. with photographs by Jim Judkis.
Putnam, 1988. 
Library ed. ISBN 0-399-21504-2; Paper ed. ISBN 0-399-
21529-8. 
30p. (First Experiences). 
Library ed. $12.95; Paper ed. $5.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
Like the book above, this has color photographs of good quality,
although here they do not serve to augment informational aspects of the text; in
fact some are rather cute or look posed. However, they show children those
emotions of grief and anger and loneliness that are a part of bereavement.
Rogers doesn't deny the pain, but he does make it clear that time will alleviate
sadness, that there will be happy memories, and that there may be, in time,
another pet to want and love. This is both a sensitive and sensible first book
about death. ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Rogow, Zack. Oranges; illus. by Mary Szilagyi. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-08343-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05743-7. 32p. Library ed.
$13.99; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[ 18]
Ad Gr.2-4. Bold composition and quiet colors, with orange a glowing
contrast, illustrate a poetic text that describes the progression of an orange from
bare field to consumer's enjoyment. The integration of crayon pictures and text
is excellent; the text has enough narrative quality to give a sense of story but not
so much that it obscures information: readers learn details such as grafting,
irrigating, picking, etc. and also are given some feeling for the variety of peoples
who work to plant, tend, harvest, distribute, and sell the fruit. However, the
device used to accomplish this ethnic variety seems artificial: speaking of the
man who ploughed the rows for the orange grove, "Probably he spoke Spanish,"
and of a picker, "Probably she spoke Creole." ZS
Rosofsky, Iris. Miriam. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024854-8; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-06-024853-X. 
188p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. This creditable and credible first novel details a New York
orthodox Jewish childhood sharply remembered and vividly communicated. The
narrator is Miriam, who begins her story with a remembrance of her brother
Moshe's briss and ends it with her mourning his death from pneumonia shortly
after his bar mitzvah. In between comes the family drama of her parents'
determined resistance to assimilation, their preferential treatment of frail,
scholarly Moshe, Papa's humiliating exposure by his partner for stealing food
from the store, and the tension between Mama and a brother-in-law who has
always loved her. Miriam's loneliness is palpable as she is separated first from
her brother, then her cousin, and finally from the society from which she is
alienated because of her background. The survival of her self-confidence despite
rejection on many sides depends solely on an independent intelligence and
gleanings of encouragement from an English teacher. Her first job working in a
book store leads to the conclusion, which shows both her strength of resolve
and her uncertainty about the future as she contemplates Moshe's grave. The
descriptions here are vivid enough to give a full flavor of traditional Jewish life,
but also to transcend that context for a more universal understanding of the pain
of growing up. The child's perspective on those around her ("They were mostly
grown-ups who knew who they were and what they wanted and how to get it") is
in ironic contrast to evidence that will convince readers of how bewildered most
of those adults are. BH
D.V. Family relations; Sex roles
Rylant, Cynthia. A Kindness. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08367-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05767-4. 117p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed.
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad Gr. 8-10. Since his hippie father walked out years before when Chip was
an infant, Chip has lived in companionable amity with his mother. At fifteen,
he is the one who prepares income tax returns and fixes broken machines,
recognizing the element of protectivness in his love for Mom but not--until she
tells him she's pregnant-his possessiveness. This is a perceptive story about
an unusual relationship, as Chip adjusts to the idea of sharing his mother,
accepting her decision to have the child, and then adjusts to a love of the small
sister he names "Dusky" in memory of an avian species (an interest shared by
[19]
mother and son). Despite the nuance of characterizations and relationships, the
novel's impact seems vitiated by the slow pace, long introspective or descriptive
passages that contribute to that slowness, and the weak, albeit credible, ending.
The baby is the result of one night of passion between Mom and a professional
colleague (a happily married man) who is not aware of her abiding love. Nor has
Chip known of it. The two aspects of the story don't quite mesh, unfortunately.
ZS
D.V. Baby, adjustment to; Mother-son relations
Sanders, Scott Russell. The Engineer of Beasts. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-08383-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05783-6. 258p. Library ed.
$14.99; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. In this not-too-far-future fantasy, scrappy orphan Mooch
(spiritual sister to Aiken's Dido Twite) is more than a match for old Orlando,
who runs a menagerie of mechanical beasts in New Boston, a bubble-domed city
off the coast of Cape Cod. Worming her way into his heart (and into the mouth
of his mechanical lion) Mooch changes the zoo, trying as hard as she can to
restore to the ersatz animals the dignity their fabled ancestors once knew.
"There's more wildness in my left little toe than in your whole kitchy-koo zoo."
Meanwhile, Orlando's friends Humphrey and Grace have plans of their own for
New Boston; they've been secretly filling one of its hollow plastic mountains
with all the trash the citizenry believes has been safely "recycled" in the bowels
of the city. While Sanders' dystopia will be a familiar one to science fiction
fans, he manages to invest it with the inevitability that assures credibility, and
readers will share Mooch's exhilaration when she escapes the "Enclosure."
Sanders' handling of tension and suspense is variable: the scene where Grace and
Humphrey blow up the trash-filled mountain almost slips by unnoticed. But for
the most part there is strong storytelling at work here, and easily managed shifts
between the satiric and heroic, especially well personified in Mooch, whose
mechanical tinkering leads her to a vision quest and new name. RS
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Shute, Linda. Clever Tom and the Leprechaun; written and illus. by Linda
Shute. Lothrop, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07489-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
07488-X. [32p]. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-7yrs. 
Tom Fitzpatrick is a typical dupe of an archetypal leprechaun.
Having caught the little man at his work, Tom resists having his attention
diverted but falls for a later trick when the leprechaun shows him the plant under
which his treasure is buried. Tom marks it with a red garter and makes the
leprechaun promise not to remove it, runs for his spade, and returns to find a
field of plants all tied with red garters. Traditional wash drawings with bright
shades and soft textures play out this folk tale, adapted from Croker's 1825
collection. The excellent source notes that are appended will intrigue storytellers
as much as the tale will children. BH
Solotareff, Gr6goire. Never Trust an Ogre; written and illus. by Gr6goire
Solotareff. Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07741-2; Trade ed.
[ 20]
ISBN 0-688-07740-4. [32p]. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 3-5 yrs. 
Well, that ogre who "left the forest forever" in Solotareff's The
Ogre and the Frog King (BCCB: 4/88) seems to have found another forest. The
opening page of each book has the same text ("Once upon a time there was an
ogre") and almost the same picture--the outstretched hand that held a rabbit in
the first book is empty in the second. Poor rabbit. The stories are similar, and
although the newer one has grislier textual wit ("He lived in a forest filled with
animals, but he lived all by himself. He had eaten his father. He had eaten his
mother . . ."), the first has a more inventive solution. Visual details and
composition are also similar, but the first is more dramatic, with skillful use of
size and perspective. The second ogre, in the end, resigns himself to a vegetarian
existence, but who really knows where he might turn up next? RS
Spinelli, Jerry. Dump Days. Little, 1988. 
ISBN 0-316-80706-0. 
159p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
Duke and J.D. promise themselves one perfect day before the
summer ends and seventh grade begins. 
Strawberry milk, their favorite
sandwich, a movie, a bike ride-all the best things, all in one day, and so they
make plans to raise money to pay for the venture. That's about it for a plot, as
the two boys get into various schemes and scrapes, never quite managing their
goal but finding a number of golden moments. 
Despite a few glancing
references to video games and a central plot episode involving a Vietnamese
refugee, this innocent story could have taken place thirty years ago and
overindulges in nostalgic glow. The boys' slang is squeaky clean, overdone, and
dated. Krymineez? What saves this from the gee-whizzes are Spinelli's
convincing portrait of a solid friendship and the freshly comic characterizations
of the supporting cast: J.D.'s little sister Bertie, who tries to sell the boys a
dead mole on layaway; Duke's big sister Doris, who guards "her" kitchen with
evil zest. "I'll be back here in a minute. I don't wanna see a speck of dust out
of place, boy." RS
D.V. Friendship values; Generosity
Wells, Rosemary. Shy Charles; written and illus. by Rosemary Wells. Dial,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0564-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0563-8. 32p.
Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
5-7yrs. 
Charles is a happy child whose mode of communication is
minimal. He is content to accept Mrs. Belinski's chocolate surprise . . .
silently. When it's time to say good-bye, Charles simply disappears into a
flower bin. In ballet class, he pretends to be asleep. But when the babysitter
falls down the stairs, Charles gets right on the phone, summoning the
emergency service and saying everything necessary until the crisis is over. "He's
a prince, a gem, a hero!/ And everyone shouted, 'Thank you, Charles!'/ But
Charles said . . . / Zero." Like many of Wells' picture-book characters, this
mouseling is quirkily endearing, with more of the humor conveyed in the
illustrations than in the rhyming text. One full-page spread, for example, shows
the ballet students cavorting colorfully across the floor upon which Charles lies,
[21]
back to the audience, dressed in black, his tail and ears stretched stiff. Shy
listeners will empathize, others will sympathize-with a smile. BH
Willey, Margaret. If Not for You. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
026499-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026494-2. [160p]. Library ed. $11.89; Trade
ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
In her third novel, Willey is once again concerned with
examining the geometry of friendship; one can almost see the points and lines
and angles, connections made and missed. Bonnie idolizes Linda, a beautiful,
popular, older girl who has dropped out of school, pregnant, and married her
handsome beach bum boyfriend. Bonnie admiringly says,"They were such a
couple." Bonnie's best friend Jennie, Linda's younger sister, is mortified by
Linda's behavior. The younger girls' friendship ends, and Bonnie becomes
Linda's babysitter and confidante. The ever-downward spiral of Ray and Linda's
marriage is didactically predictable, but Willey is less interested in the trials of
teen marriage than she is with the breakdown of illusions: Linda's about Ray,
and Bonnie's about Linda. The author writes quietly but pointedly about her
characters, with a respectful and innocent tone not often heard in books for
younger adolescents. Readers may be far ahead of Bonnie in understanding the
disastrous marriage, but at the same time they will know how difficult it can be
to give up a dream. RS
D.V. Friendship values
Yolen, JanemedWrewT.A-y._A Collection of Original Stories; ed. by Jane
Yolen afd Martin H. Greenberg. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
026799-2;Fad 
BNJ 0-06-02 
8-4. 271p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed.
$13.95. Reviewed from g eys.
Ad Gr. 6-9. 
Thematically more circumscribed than the publisher's other
fantasy anthologies (Young Monsters, etc.) the stories in this collection, taken
individually, are moderately entertaining but as a whole suffer from shallowness
and a written-to-order air. Only a couple of the werewolves included could be
considered monsters or even at all dangerous (except to the occasional unlucky
hen); most are noble and misunderstood. When the myth is divested of its
savagery, the human dimension of the werewolf is also lost. Yolen's own story,
"The Green Messiah," is one of the best, conveying the nervous sexuality of a
girl about to change into a wolf, and also one of the few that probes the depth
and meaning of the myth. Other strong stories include Katherine Kimbriel's
"Night Calls," about a father who must kill his werewolf son, and Anne
Crompton's "Met by Moonlight," in which a werewolf explains to a human
what he's missing: "'Run over snow like rabbit, fast like deer! Snap bite pull
rip crunch. Blood, lap-lap-lap.' Drooling freely, she turned wild, happy eyes to
Len." RS