Adler, C.S. If You Need Me. Bradbury, 1988. ISBN 0-02-700420-1. $12.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
It had taken some time for thirteen-year-old Lyn and her
stepmother, Dora, to love each other; after years of Dad's girlfriends, Lyn was
ready for a mother, but Dora was introverted and shy. When it became clear that
Dad was now attracted to their pretty next-door neighbor, Mrs. Maclean, and then
even clearer that he was trying to keep the mutual attraction secret, Lyn was
worried and heartsick. That is the situation Adler explores: to whom does Lyn
feel allegiance when it is clear that the marriage is crumbling and Dad wants to
move away? Does her love and sympathy for Dora take precedence, or should she
move away with Dad? Who needs her? Dora and Dad are imperfect people, and
Adler depicts them with candor and understanding, as she does Lyn and her
ambivalence. This makes for a perceptive story, but the focus on emotions and
relationships is not balanced by plot momentum, so that the story has an uneven,
often slow, pace. ZS
D.V. Father-daughter relations; Stepparent-child relations
Anderson, Madelyn Klein. Siberia. Dodd, 1988. ISBN 0-396-08662-4. 146p. illus. with
photographs. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
Although the focus is on Siberia, Anderson provides enough
background information to make the policies and changes in that vast area a
comprehensible part of Russian history as a whole. The writing is solid, on the
dry side, but it is direct and clear, and the text is well-organized, with a good
balance of specific facts and interpretive analysis of the politics, programs, and
leaders who have played a part in Siberian history. Some of the old photographs
are hazy, but most of the illustrations are useful; one map fails to clarify textual
references. A relative index is provided but no bibliography. ZS
C.U. History--Russia
Anno, Mitsumasa. In Shadowland; written and illus. by Mitsumasa Anno. Orchard/Watts,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08341-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05741-0. 2 8p.
Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
Taking as inspiration Andersen's "The Little Match Girl," (but
supplying a happy ending) Anno evokes two worlds: ours, and Shadowland, the
place where all the shadows go in winter. The cold and lonely girl strikes a match
for warmth and makes her shadow appear, which calls the watchman of
Shadowland, who comes and lights more matches, throwing shadows everywhere.
In the meantime, the inhabitants of Shadowland, whose story is told on facing
pages, are in a panic, unable to find the watchman who tells them when it's time
[ 173 ]
to return to the world. The precise logic of Anno's mathematical books is needed
here-if all the shadows are in Shadowland, why are they appearing when the
matches are lit? The match girl's world is a wintry medieval town drawn in
Anno's familiar style; Shadowland is filled with bold black silhouettes, and
younger viewers will enjoy guessing the shapes. Here again, though, we could use
a touch of Anno's celebrated cleverness: the shadows (of animals, people, and
buildings, including a pyramid) bear no discernible relationship with the people and
buildings of the town, a lack of parallel that renders the book rather flaccid. RS
Baker, Jeannie. Where the Forest Meets the Sea; written and illus. by Jeannie Baker.
Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06364-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
06363-2. 28p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A picture book set in the Daintree Rainforest of northeastern
Australia, this features innovative art work---"relief collages ... constructed from
a multitude of materials, including modeling clay, papers, textured materials,
preserved natural materials, and paints"-without becoming gimmicky. Colors,
textures, and shapes are meticulously and tastefully superimposed for striking
effects. The simple text of several lines per page is a first-person narrative about a
young boy who boats through a reef with his father to the rainforest. There, he
imagines what he would have seen a hundred million years ago, and children will
relish finding the shadowy dinosaurs and other creatures that lurk in the tangled
trees. After the beauty of these scenes, the last page is provocative. The boy,
imagining a real estate development imposed on the area, asks, "But will the forest
still be here when we come back?" A silhouette map and brief explanatory note on
the Queensland wilderness will prove helpful in establishing the context. BH
C.U. Illustrations--collage
D.V. Environmental concepts
Brenner, Barbara. Saving the President: What If Lincoln Had Lived?; illus. by Steve
Madsen. Messner, 1988. ISBN 0-671-62023-1. 
90p. (What If Mysteries).
$9.29.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
Although many of the characters, including the protagonist
(Vinnie Ream, who sculpted a bust of Lincoln) are real, the focal events are
fictional. Adequately written, this ends with the "what if" preventive capture of
John Wilkes Booth, and a mere page and a half about what would have happened
had Lincoln lived. The subtitle is therefore misleading: very little of the book is
about what might have happened had Lincoln lived; the series title is also
misleading, since the familiar facts about Booth and the assassination present little
mystery. A closing seven pages are devoted to "What Really Happened." An
unsubstantial effort from an author who has done better. ZS
Christopher, Matt. The Hit-Away Kid; illus. by George Ulrich. Little, 1988. ISBN 0-
316-13995-5. $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Like other Springboard books by Ellen Conford and Lois Duncan
(reviewed in the April issue), this is calculated to tide kids over the quantum leap
from easy reading materials to fiction. There's lots of game play here as the main
character realizes, through two baseball games, that cheating doesn't pay and
honesty does. In the first game, he drops a ball, getting credit for catching it but
losing his sister's respect; in the second, he misses a base and acknowledges it,
forfeiting a wager but gaining stature-and getting back his little brother's prize
[ 174]
possession, taken by a rival player. This is predictable in theme if not in plot
(Barry's team loses), but kids will get the reading practice they need on a subject
that's palatable and popular. BH
D.V. Honesty
Cole, Babette. Prince Cinders; written and illus. by Babette Cole. Putnam, 1988. ISBN
0-399-21502-6. 29p. $12.95.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
Prince Cinders, victimized by three big hairy brothers who dance
at the Palace Disco, is visited by a klutzy fairy with a Star of David wand. After
several misbegotten attempts, the prince is transformed into a gorilla, which scares
a princess waiting at a bus stop. She believes that the prince who suddenly
appears at midnight actually scared away the gorilla. The frightened prince leaves
his trousers behind in his rush to get away, but of course he's found by the fit,
gets married, and enjoys watching his brothers turned into housework fairies.
More slapstick than satire, this will appeal to kids overfed with cliched Cinderellas,
though it doesn't measure up to wittier creations by Jay Williams and others. The
watercolor cartoons show the same goofy exaggeration as those in Cole's Princesss
Smartypants (reviewed in the June, 1987 issue). BH
Cooney, Caroline B. The Girl Who Invented Romance. Bantam, 1988. ISBN 0-553-
05473-2. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Unlike the paperback romances, which at least make a pretense
of the heroine having some other interests, this book is all about romance, and
love, and how you can tell the difference, and whether it makes a difference.
Single-minded narrator Kelly, a high school junior, has never had a date, but she
sees romance all around her: brother Park is dating teen queen Wendy, their father
is always bringing home sentimental gifts for Mom. To stave off the Saturday
night lonelies, Kelly begins to design a romance board game, which, in time and
through trouble, finally leads to a boyfriend. Around this bound-to-be-appealing
plot, Cooney has built a lightly toned but serious novel that questions and affirms
convention at the same time. Park is unexpectedly dumped by Wendy; father's
hearts and flowers routine masks deeper concerns on the part of both parents.
Kelly's first (blind) date-to a prom, in a limousine-is a quiet disaster. "I told
Daddy all. It was a quick sentence. 'He didn't like me, Daddy.'" One of the
squares in Wendy's game reads "Just like life! With no explanation whatsoever
your date dumps you for good. Cry all night," and Cooney excels at conveying the
not-knowingness of both one's own and other people's heartaches. But that
romance is indeed wonderful is still the book's hopeful message, and the story ends
like a Frank Capra movie, with the whole town playing Wendy's romance game.
RS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
de Lynam, Alicia Garcia. It's Mine!; written and illus. by Alicia Garcia de Lynam. Dial,
1988. ISBN 0-8037-0509-3. $8.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
2-4 yrs. 
Line and spreading wash pictures, a bit repetitive and a bit
comic, tell a very slight story of sibling rivalry that ends, predictably, in accord.
A small girl is irritated when her sibling (crawling stage) seizes and cuddles a
favorite stuffed animal. Altercation is followed by tears, tears lead to a scolding by
mother and removal of the toy, shared desolation leads to harmony. Quite
believable, but on the sweet side. ZS
[ 175]
Downer, Lesley. Japanese Food and Drink. Bookwright/Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-
18174-X 44p. illus. and with photographs. (Food and Drink). $11.90.
M 
Gr. 6-9. 
Following the usual format of this "Food and Drink" series, first
published in England, this gives two introductory chapters that hastily review
geographical, historical, cultural, agricultural, and meteorological backgrounds-in
ten pages. Most of the text is devoted to what the Japanese eat, and how it is
grown (or otherwise produced). Recipes are included. The writing is fraught with
generalizations: 
"A thousand years ago ... 
the lords and princes of Kyoto
developed a wonderful and refined culture, spending their time writing and
discussing poetry." The syntax is at times odd: "As a country of islands, the sea
has always been very important in Japanese life." The color photographs are of
good quality and some are informative. This gives a modicum of information but
neither style nor coverage seems adequate. A one-page index, a half-page
bibliography and a glossary are provided; the latter includes some surprising
entries: apprenticeship, dormant volcano, fertilizers, and meditate. ZS
Ginsburg, Mirra, ad. The Chinese Mirror; illus. by Margot Zemach. Harcourt, 1988.
ISBN 0-15-200420-3. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Watercolor illustrations, more spare of line than is most of
Zemach's work, are "inspired by the paintings of two eighteenth-century Korean
genre painters, Sin Yun-bok and Kim Hong-do," an endpaper note states. The soft
colors and sly humor of the pictures echo the quiet tone and humor of Ginsburg's
retelling of a Korean folktale. When a villager returns from China with a strange
object that mimics his actions (nobody knows what it is: a mirror) the members
of his family take turns looking at the piece of glass. The wife is jealous because
she sees a picture of a pretty young woman, her mother-in-law is confused because
the "picture" is that of an older woman, while the father-in-law is even more
baffled, because the picture isn't that of a woman at all. No moral here, unless it
is that things aren't what they seem, but the message to the reader is one children
appreciate: you are smart enough to understand although the characters in the story
are not. Nicely done. ZS
C.U. 
Storytelling
Goodall, Jane. My Life with the Chimpanzees. Pocket Books, 1988. Paper ed. ISBN 0-
671-66095-0. 124p. illus. with photographs. Paper ed. $2.75. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
"What would it be like to live with the animals?" is a perennial
childhood question-and it was Jane Goodall's, who describes in this
autobiography her early passion for Lofting's Doctor Doolittle books. In
describing her childhood and first thoughts of vocation, Goodall seems uneasy
writing for a young audience (whom she addresses as "you") and is occasionally
patronizing. In discussing Konrad Lorenz's work with geese, for example, she
writes "They fall in love, marry, and stay together until one of them dies." Her
account loses awkwardness when she tells of arriving in Kenya to work with Louis
Leakey, and beginning her own research with the chimpanzees in Gombe. David
Greybeard, Goliath, Flo and her children are all here, and may be familiar to
children from Goodall's TV specials. Always using anecdotes from her work,
Goodall cites the importance of close observation, detailed record-keeping, and
patience, concluding with a passionate chapter explaining the importance of the
humane treatment of animals. RS
[ 176]
Hailey, Kendall. The Day I Became an Autodidact, and the Advice, Adventures, and
Acrimonies that Befell Me Thereafter. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-385-29636-3.
278p. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-. 
Many high school students (and the rest of us) make "reading
plans" (usually involving Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, or both); few actually follow
through. At fifteen, Kendall Hailey, daughter of playwright Oliver Hailey and
novelist Elizabeth Forsythe Hailey, decided to graduate early ("I will have
somehow to manage to take Beginning Painting and Advanced Painting
simultaneously") and devote herself to the pleasures and rigors of "auto-
didacticism," self-teaching. Beginning with the Durants ("I'll read Will to get an
overview and then works of the age to decide if I really like these people") this
book is a memoir of three years immersed not just in books, but in painting,
acting, and old movies. "There is nothing as good for dieting as a Carole Lombard
movie." For many teens, this will have the appeal of a realized fantasy. Hailey
writes with showy cleverness, but coupled with enough self-awareness that the
overall effect is charming (there's really no better word) rather than annoying. The
tone is far from the self-glamorized alienation of most teen writers; in fact, there's
an innocent coziness to Kendall's slightly eccentric family that calls to mind books
like Cheaper by the Dozen and Our Hearts Were Young and Gay. While published
for adults, the diary-like format and authentic teenage voice guarantee a young adult
audience. RS
D.V. Education, valuing and seeking; Family relations
Haven, Susan. Maybe I'll Move to the Lost and Found. Putnam, 1988. ISBN 0-399-
21509-3. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Gilly is the narrator, and Victory (new resident in the apartment
building where Gilly's best friend Franny and Gilly's wimpy admirer Arnold live)
is the catalyst for troubled change in a teenage novel that is run-of-the-mill
structurally, adequate stylistically, and enjoyable for its rather self-conscious humor
and for the universality of many of its problems and concerns. Gilly is the
narrator, upset because conventional Franny becomes jealous of nonconformist
Victory, and more bothered than she would have expected to be by the fact that the
ever-dogged Arnold seems swept off his feet by Victory, who is quick to let him
know she finds him physically attractive. Gilly and Franny make up, and Gilly
accepts the shifts in relationships, including the end of hostilities between her and
her father's inamorata. This first young adult novel shows some potential if not
great promise. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Jealousy, overcoming
Hawks, Robert. This Stranger, My Father. Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-44089-0.
226p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
What threatens, in the first few pages, to be another teen-girl-
school-boyfriend story changes, cleverly and shockingly, to a strong novel of
suspense. Freshmen Patty Meely and her best friend Kimmers, waiting after
school one day for Patty's father to pick them up, are discussing Patty's Mark-or-
Larry boyfriend problem. Dad soon arrives-and is immediately surrounded by
three gray sedans and a team of federal agents: "They stuck their pistols in the
back of his neck." Dad is arrested, Patty taken away to be interrogated, where she
learns (although the agents believe she's known all along) that her real name is
Patricia Pelling and that her father escaped twenty years ago from prison, where he
was being held on an espionage conviction. After terrifying confrontations with
[177]
the agents and a seedy foster family, Patty runs away and joins her father, who has
escaped (again) as well. In character and theme this bears resemblance to LeCarr6's
The Little Drummer Girl, as Patty slowly recognizes the amorality of her father
and gradually becomes his accomplice, reluctantly learning elusion, deceit,
cynicism, and the many paradoxes in her father's character. Hawks handles
complex questions of morality and identity ("I was Karen Peterson. I had a driver's
license to prove it") with smooth craft, allowing them to inform but not
overwhelm a terrific thriller. RS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Heine, Helme. Seven Wild Pigs: Eleven Picture Book Fantasies; written and illus. by
Helme Heine. Margaret K. McElderry, 1988. ISBN 0-689-50439-X. 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
A hilarious conglomeration of poems, stories, fables, and diary
entries gambols with many of the animal characters and themes that have appeared
in Heine's past picture books. The first verse-tale embroiders on the folk motif of
a creature who eats everything that comes along, but here the featured crocodile
neither bursts nor gets cut open: "He burped and then was heard to say/ 'I don't
need much more food today.'"' "The Great and the Small" celebrates the triumph of
woodworms in toppling a mighty king's throne. "Seven Wild Pigs" reveals
Heine's penchant for playing with art and reality-a painter gets into trouble when
his images come to life. "Mail in a Bottle" is a wild fantasy about a shipwrecked
pirate's adventure from the point of view of the bottle which he uses to send a
message (his mother comes to the rescue in a motor boat). An ironic epigram
concludes the story of the champion ostrich that breaks its neck in a sudden descent
("Here all may see my body lie, But not my soul, for that can fly!").
Occasionally, Heine parodies himself, which is a touch self-indulgent and
sometimes obscure, especially in the amorphous "Diary of Johnny Mouse."
However, for the most part, both text and watercolors are originally and enjoyably
irreverent. BH
Heinlein, Robert A. Tunnel in the Sky. Scribner, 1988. ISBN 0-684-18916-X. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
In a future time in which interplanetary travel is common, the
students in a senior high school course in Advanced Survival are given the chance
to do a field test. Rod Walker, despite parental objections, chooses to go and is
transported to a wild, uninhabited planet; others also go, one at a time. While this
has a science fantasy matrix, it is basically a story of survival and civilization, as
other adolescents join Rod to pool their skills, build a protected settlement, and
learn to cope with the human foibles that militate against orderly government.
Like most Heinlein books, this has depth as well as action and a graceful-at
times witty-writing style; for some readers, the man/woman-against-nature will
be lure enough. Reissue of a 1955 title. ZS
D.V. Courage; Self-reliance
Hendry, Frances. Quest for a Kelpie. Holiday House, 1988. ISBN 0-8240-0680-6. 153p.
$12.95
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Beginning with an old woman's letter to her great-great-
granddaughter, this tells how the Scottish narrator, Jean, was caught up in the mid-
eighteenth century struggle between Prince Charlie's Highland rebels and the
troops of King George's brutally repressive son, William of Cumberland.
[178]
Although Jean is only eleven through most of the book, the style and content
require an older readership. The narrative is heavy with brogue and the plot entails
historical background, details of sometimes tragic hardship, and a budding romance
which eventually leads to Jean's marriage with one of the rebels she rescues.
Historical fiction afficionados who have enjoyed Mollie Hunter's books can
appreciate the subtle treatment of folk beliefs in Jean's fishing village and in the
gypsy prophecy that comes true. BH
Hermann, Helen. Jenny's Magic Wand; 
by Helen and Bill Hermann; illus. with
photographs by Don Perdue. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10292-0. 28p. (My
World). $9.90.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Black-and-white photographs illustrate a text narrated by Jenny,
blind since birth, who has recently transferred from a special school to a
mainstream school. Jenny describes some of the training for independence that has
prepared her for her new school, and she refers several times to the cane that is
"almost like a magic wand" in helping her move about on her own, indoors and
out. After some comments on the adjustment problems in the new school (being
treated as different by classmates who were "too nice"), Jenny delightedly reports
on an incident that has made everybody realize her capabilties rather than focusing
on her limitations. The writing style is a bit flat, but the text is clear, candid, and
appropriate in length and concept for the middle grades reader, although it gives
little information that is not included in other books designed to explain training
and mainstreaming of blind children. ZS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Hest, Amy. Getting Rid of Krista; illus. by Jacqueline Rogers. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-
688-07149-X. 71p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 3-4. 
Eight-year-old Gillian, who tells the story, bemoans the fact that
older sister Krista has to come home from college when their father loses his job.
Gillie and her pal Hank start a dog-walking business to earn money to send Krista
back to college, since she seems to Gillie a bossy pest. Urged to get a job, Krista
practices her singing and dancing. By fatuous coincidence, a famous Broadway
producer (user of the dog-walking service, secret resident of the same apartment
building as Gillie and Hank) loses his star, and the children introduce him to
beautiful singer/dancer Krista. She gets a role. Father gets a job. Gillie does not
get her bedroom to herself. This is, if often amusing, a trivial pursuit. Characters
are superficial, contrivance is rife, and the writing-although adequate-is flawed
by unlikely bits of dialogue and by such dubious references as Gillie's (twice)
mentioning the fact that some of the girls in her third grade classroom at a private
school wear "rhinestone dresses." ZS
D.V. Sisters
Holl, Kristi D. No Strings Attached. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31399-3. 
121p.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
A purposive sequel to Just Like a Real Family (reviewed in the
April, 1983, issue) tells what happens when June and her mother move in with
Franklin, who had been June's school "project" in a nursing home. While June
had grown accustomed to Franklin's quirks of age and bad humor during visits, her
adjustment to them in a day-to-day situation is much harder, especially when she
begins to develop a relationship with a boy. Even her mother finds it difficult to
continue giving piano lessons when Franklin's rudeness drives students away. The
[ 179 ]
characterization is competent and the situations of encounter and embarrassment
seem real, but the style is sometimes cliched ("What Suzy wanted, Suzy got") and
the message of acceptance labored. BH
D.V. Adaptability; Older-younger generations
Hooks, William H. The Legend of the White Doe. Macmillan, 1988. ISBN 0-02-744350-
7. 44p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Starting with a one-page introduction to "The True Story" of
Roanoke colony, this fictionalizes a legend of about Virginia Dare, the first
English child born in the "New World." When hostile Indians destroyed the
settlement, Virginia was supposedly taken to Croatoan Island, where friendly
Indians raised her after her grief-crazed mother walked into the sea. A medicine
man claimed her when she became marriageable, but she ran away with the brave
she loved, was killed, and ever since has haunted the Great Dismal Swamp as a
ghostly white deer. This is a minimally developed cross between history and
folkloric magic, and the combination is not always convincing. Like the text, the
full-color paintings are glamorized and somewhat stiff, but despite these drawbacks,
the drama, romance, and mystery of the situation will appeal to readers who are
beginning to study American history. BH
Humphrey, Kathryn Long. Satchel Paige. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10513-X. 100p.
illus. with photographs. (Impact Biographies). $11.90.
M 
Gr. 5-9. 
Baseball has never had a more colorful personality, and seldom a
better pitcher, than Satchel Paige, so any book about him of necessity has
impressive statistics, amusing anecdotes, or-given the length of his career-a
sizeable amount of baseball history. Unfortunately, this is so adulatory and so
repetitive as to lessen the impact of the great black star's life story. Coming from
an impoverished childhood that included five years in a reform school, he had years
of team play and barnstorming in the Negro Leagues. Because of his late
appearance in the Major Leagues, he was not eligible for the Hall of Fame until
rules were changed. Several pages of career statistics are provided, as is an index
and an odd bibliography that seems to consist of arbitrary choices of titles, five
fictional and eleven informational, that have to do with baseball and presumably
with Paige in some cases. ZS
D.V. Intercultural relations
Hunter, Mollie. The Mermaid Summer. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022628-5;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022627-7. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 4-6. 
As she did in her masterly story, The Wicked One (reviewed in the
June, 1977, issue), Hunter combines fiction and legend to the enhancement of
both. The heroine here is young Anna Anderson, who faces down a temperamental
mermaid to save her fishing village from the vain creature's fierce whims and to
bring her grandfather home from an exile forced by the same mermaid. Each
character is briefly but vividly drawn, the two principal females in living color
(sea-green eyes, hair of red). A clever plot makes folkloristic use of gifts for
rescue: a comb, a mirror, a conch shell, a knife, a length of silk---each fits into
the pattern of resolution foretold by a witch-like herb woman. There are even, in
[180]
the end, three wishes, each one granted in a most satisfying way. With alluring
cover art to send it on its way, this is briskly paced for reading aloud or alone. BH
D.V. Courage
Jukes, Mavis. Getting Even. Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99594-5; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-394-89594-0. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Fifth-grader Maggie's parents are divorced, and tension grows
when a) Mom discovers Dad has a new girlfriend; and b) the parents each give
Maggie conflicting advice on how to handle a school bully. This has more humor
and interest as a school story than as an adjustment to divorce story: while
Maggie's teachers and schoolmates are sometimes overdrawn to the point of
burlesque, they have a liveliness not extended to her parents, who are never really
defined beyond their conflicts with each other. The revenge plans for the bully are
very funny, particularly the evil suggestions of Maggie's best friend Iris, whose
attention-seeking capers land her in the principal's office almost as often as they
put her firmly at center stage of the story. RS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Friendship values
Kismaric, Carole, ad. The Rumor of Pavel and Paali: A Ukrainian Folktale; illus. by
Charles Mikolaycak. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023278-1; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-06-023277-3. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
"Which is the better way to live, by doing good or by doing
evil?" That's the pivotal question posed in this Ukrainian folktale (no source
given), both for the plot and the theme. To resolve a wager, twin brothers (one
good, one wicked) pose this question to three men, who all agree that evil seems to
get one farther in the world. Paali, the good, loses all his possessions and
eventually his eyes to Pavel, but all (and virtue) are eventually restored, with the
wicked Pavel turned into an evil spirit. Mikolaycak's handsome paintings are
vigorously colored, intensified by black outlining, and brightly patterned, including
the margins of the text, sometimes resulting in a gorgeous but overwhelming
confusion. This is controlled somewhat by placing text blocks over some of the
action, which both relieves the eye and provides visual suspense. As in some
previous books, the artist solidifies light and liquid; silly in a picture of a gushing
fountain, dramatic in the sweeps of flames and evil spirits. RS
Kresch, Paul. An American Rhapsody: The Story of George Gershwin. Lodestar, 1988.
ISBN 0-525-67233-8. 
(Jewish Biography Series). $14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
As a producer/director of films, broadcasts, and recordings, the
author of this biography shows an expectable familiarity with the milieu of the
music business. Unfortunately, he seems less qualified as a writer, indulging in
hyperbole, generalities, and peculiarities of phraseology or syntax. However, the
information is accurate (albeit interspersed with interpretation) and the coverage
adequate; the subject is well worth the reader's time, since Gershwin was a prolific
and brilliant composer. A substantial reading list follows the final chapter, which
serves as an annotated discography. ZS
[ 181]
Lampton, Christopher. Thomas Alva Edison. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-1049-5. 88p.
illus. with photographs. (First Books). $9.90.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
An adequate biography of the great inventor is illustrated by
reproductions of grainy early photographs and prints. Lampton's material, which
emphasizes Edison's work rather than his personal life or his personality, is
capably organized but stiffly written, with some repetition and some adulatory
comments. Preceding the index are footnotes indicating the use of three sources,
and an exceedingly brief list of "Recommended Reading" that gives the same three
sources plus one more. ZS
Lee, Sally. Donor Banks: Saving Lives With Organ and Tissue Transplants. Watts, 1988.
ISBN 0-531-10475-3. 87p. illus. with photographs. (First Books). $9.90.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
In a competent overview of the subject, Lee discusses the history
of donor banks, the way they function, new techniques for coping with organ
rejection, and the medical, legal, and ethical concerns involved. The text makes
clear the rapid advancement on this medical frontier, and it closes with a brief
description of the growing need for donors as transplant surgery becomes refined,
the reasons there are so few donors, and the safeguards and circumscriptions that
should encourage donors and convince them of the importance of their
contributions. This isn't written by an authority in the field, but the author is a
careful researcher and writer, and she provides a useful glossary and a list of sources
of further information, as well as an index. The weakness of the book lies in the
often-useless photographs. ZS
C.U. Health and hygiene
Leiner, Katherine. Something's Wrong in My House; illus. with photographs by Chuck
Garner. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10505-7. 54p. $10.90.
M 
Gr. 4-8. 
Eight children relate first-person anecdotes about growing up in a
family where one or both parents are alcoholics. Illustrated with photographs, this
has the look of Krementz's How It Feels ... 
books, but these are fictional
narratives and the photos are of models, distinctions that will probably be lost on
young readers. Different patterns are represented, from physical and sexual abuse
by a drunken parent, to a child who only knows about his father's problem because
father told him. An unfortunate limitation of the child's-eye perspective is that
causes of alcoholism are not discussed, and many of the parents seem to be bad
people, their alcoholism a moral failure. While the book may be comforting
("You are not alone") to children of alcoholics, it is definitely not subtle-the
ambiguities of loving an alcoholic parent, probably the hardest aspect of the
syndrome for children, are only addressed in one anecdote about a father who has
stopped drinking. There is, however, good information on AA, including what an
Alateen meeting is like, and where to find out more about the organization. The
melodramatic cover-a photo of a house torn in half-may scare off those kids
who most need the information. RS
Livingston, Myra Cohn, ad. Poems for Mothers; illus. by Deborah Kogan Ray. Holiday
House, 1988. ISBN 0-8234-0678-4. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
Twenty poems, some commissioned for this book and others
reprinted, form a kind of thematic portrait of the love and trust common to
motherhood in spite of personal and cultural differences. There is an easy flow to
the selections, many of them informal free verse, punctuated occasionally by
[182]
rhymes such as X. J. Kennedy's funny "House Noises," N. M. Bodecker's
delicious "Pippin in the Evening" and Felice Holman's jovial "One, Two, Three,
Four M-O-T-H-E-R." The way in which primary images often focus on the
sensory creates natural stylistic connections: a cool, comforting hand in the hot
dark ("when the dark opens up for her like a flower," from Liz Rosenberg's "My
Mother's Face "); a voice humming, rocking ("like a boat/ in the waves/ of her
song," from Deborah Chandra's "Mama's Song "); the gingerbread mother in
Lucille Clifton's "My Natural Mama"; licking chocolate in Jim Thomas' "Chore
Boy"; mint, rosebuds, apples, and sugarfields in other poems. Ray's line-swept
drawings with blue and peach tones capture feelings of closeness-and,
occasionally, distance-between the figures of mother and child. A May bouquet.
BH
D.V. Mother-child relations
Locker, Thomas. Family Farm; written and illus. by Thomas Locker. Dial, 1988. Library
ed. ISBN 0-8037-0490-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0489-5. 28p. Library ed.
$14.89; Trade ed. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
Mike and Sarah's family are facing losing their farm. Other
families are moving to the cities, the school is going to be closed, and Dad is
worried that they won't be able to stay much longer, given the low prices for corn
and milk. The children hit upon a solution-raising pumpkins and flowers-that
saves the farm, a resolution that may be satisfying to young readers but that seems
sentimentally improbable. This warm glow is also characteristic of much of the
illustration, which is self-consciously picturesque, refering more to the
conventions of early nineteenth century landscape painting than to the story itself.
The pictures of trees, for example, look more like pictures of pictures of trees, and
to place a tractor in their midst only intensifies the anachronism, an uneasy
juxtaposition that extends to the book as a whole. In some of the illustrations-a
gentle portrait of the children seated on a bed, the family walking through a snow-
streaked field-Locker frees himself from stylistic mannerisms and comes more
into his own. RS
D.V. Ingenuity
Majewska, Joe. A Friend for Oscar Mouse; illus. by Maria Majewska. Dial, 1988. ISBN
0-8037-0348-1. 24p. $11.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Beautifully detailed and textured paintings of fauna and flora,
some of the latter lavishly crowded, illustrate a low-keyed story about a house
mouse that meets a field mouse. Oscar is delighted by the beauty of the outdoors
and enjoys meeting other animals and seeing such wonders as pond, greenhouse and
chicken coop as his new friend Alfie gives him the grand tour. Quite pleasant, but
save for a few incidents (encounters with other animals) this is so sedate as to be
tedious. ZS
Major, Kevin. Dear Bruce Springsteen. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-385-29584-7. 
134p.
$14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
An adolescent version of Cleary's Dear Mr. Henshaw, this is a
series of letters from 14-year-old Terry Blanchard, whose parents are getting
divorced, who suffers agonies of awkwardness with girls, and who harbors
impossible musical ambitions to become a rock star. The psychological
projection onto Springsteen is pretty obvious from page one ("Hey, know what I
just figured out? That you're old enough to be my father. In fact, my old man and
you must be about the same age"). What finally stops the letters to Springsteen is
[183 ]
Terry's establishment of a correspondence with his own father after a desperate trip
to make contact with him. Readers will sympathize with Terry's failures at dating,
his protest against his long-suffering mother's having a boyfriend, and his success
at staging a rock concert benefit, which seems to solve most of his social, school,
and self-confidence problems. This is one of those books which breaks no new or
unusual ground but which is calculated, inconsistent slang and all, to appeal to an
adolescent subculture. Alas, it will lose its punch as Springsteen's songs fall from
the charts, but the book's circulation, meanwhile, may be worth it. BH
D.V. Father-son relations
Mazer, Harry. City Lights. Scholastic, 1988. ISBN 0-590-40511-X. 202p. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
George, the narrator, lives in a small New Jersey town not far
from Manhattan, and he's content with his town, happy with the prospect of
working in his father's beauty salon, and secure in his plans to marry Julie, who
had been his girl since they met at age twelve. Two terrible things happen: there
is a breach with his father, who has sold the building in which Julie's family lives,
and then there is a breach with Julie, who doesn't share George's commitment to
"forever." Through a computer dialogue, George comes to know Rosemary, who
lives in Manhattan. The story ends with a happy relationship with Rosemary and
a rapprochement with Dad. Mazer is a good storyteller: his characters have depth
and consistency, and their behavior patterns are psychologically sound. Despite
this, and a writing style that is nicely fluent, the book doesn't quite jell; it's like a
collage in which the glue is showing. ZS
D.V. Father-son relations
McCall, Edith. Better Than a Brother. Walker, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6783-4;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6782-6. 133p. Library ed. $14.85; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Set in Wisconsin at the turn of the century, this historical novel
is based on reminiscences of events in the author's family. Thirteen-year-old
Hughie (Ellen Hughes Riley) is the oldest of six children in a family that is given
a house free in return for boarding a team of ice cutters. McCall does an adequate
job of knitting together the themes of Hughie's lost locket (just received as a gift),
her budding, shy romance with a classmate, and her fear of molestation by the one
nasty member of the ice crew. What lessens the impact of the story is the sedate
writing style, which slows the pace despite the drama of a few incidents, and the
rather flat predictability of the plot development. ZS
D.V. Family relations
McGowen, Tom. The Time of the Forest. Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-44471-3. 110p.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Wolf and his tribe of hunters and gatherers are used to seeing
occasional strangers in the forest, but what to make of this dark-haired tribe who
keep animals in pens and dig holes in the ground? Upon mutual discovery, the
tribes engage in fierce battle, from which Wolf saves a pretty young girl of the
farming tribe, and the two build a friendship. The dialogue is sometimes
Hollywood-wooden ("'What are your thoughts on this, Ploughmaker?'") and details
about prehistoric customs and technology are artificially worked in, sacrificing
mood for information. At the same time, though, these details have inherent
interest for many children, and even if the friendship between Wolf and Bright
[ 184 ]
Dawn does have a twentieth-century feel to it, the pair provides a sympathetic
focus to an alien setting. RS
C.U. History-prehistoric
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Mooney, Bel. The Stove Haunting. Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-46764-0. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
The link in this time fantasy is a stove, a "ghastly old thing"
that Daniel and his parents find behind a wall in the old country rectory they
renovate after a move from London. The stove seems to call Daniel, eventually
taking him back to 1835, when the house was still a rectory, and another Daniel
(whose body and mind Daniel assumes) is a kitchen boy in charge of blacking the
stove. The time-slip is handled capably if with little ingenuity; this might have
been even stronger as straight historical fiction. In the time and place where
Daniel has arrived, agricultural unionism and Methodism have begun to shake the
privileges of the landholders, and Daniel's best friend and father figure George is
one of the secret organizers. The book has much to say about the conflict between
the needs and wishes of individuals and those of humanity, and the struggle is
intensely personalized through Daniel's own relationships: with George, who
gives up his courtship of a girl to stump for the union; with his master the rector,
caught between Christian morality and the power of the gentry; and with the other
Daniel he has become, who sees the hard lives of his friends, but is afraid to escape
the security of his kitchen fire. RS
D.V. Loyalty
Moss, Miriam. Language and Writing. Bookwright/Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-18181-2.
29p. illus. and with photographs. (Topics). $10.40.
M 
Gr. 2-5. 
On a topic that many children study in school, this offers
information and photographs but with the disadvantages of poor organization and
editing. The misconceptions that accrue almost cancel out the benefits, as in the
following passage, which implies that aborigines never speak: "Not all language
uses spoken words. Australian aborigines make a clicking sound to talk to each
other. They also use message sticks." While pictograms and demotic writing are
adequately covered, with diagrams and photos, the section on "Discoveries" leaps
wildly from a paragraph on the Rosetta stone to one on the Dead Sea scrolls to
Ventris' deciphering of ancient Greek tablets to Cretan hieroglyphics. Pictures
often appear on a different page from the text they illustrate, and the glossary
defines symbols as "things that stands [sic] for something else." Few other
treatments are available at this age level, however, so this may have to serve in
collections where the curriculum puts demands on the subject. BH
Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds. Maudie in the Middle; by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor and Lura
Schield Reynolds; illus. by Judith Gwyn Brown. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-
31395-0. 158p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Maudie, who is eight when the story begins, is the middle child
of seven, either too young or too old for everything, she feels. And, since she is a
lively child and often in trouble, she despairs of ever being appreciated, or being
special in any way. This turn-of-the-century family story is based on the childhood
of Lura Reynolds, Phyllis Naylor's mother, and it's adequately told and structured
[ 185]
but expectably episodic in the way most reminiscences are. Intermittently, this is
a bit sugary, but it's an amicable period piece. ZS
D.V. Family relations
Paulsen, Gary. The Island. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08349-7; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-531-05749-6. 202p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
NR 
Gr. 6-9. 
In contrast to Paulsen's other books about survival and perilous
journeys (of the soul and otherwise), this one takes place almost entirely on a safe,
tiny island in northern Wisconsin. Wil finds the island soon after his family has
moved away from the city; his discovery begins in routine geographical
investigation but soon becomes an intense (to him) inner journey to the sources
of creativity. This novel is heavily thematic and unrelieved by action: while we
are given to understand that Wil's meditative retreats and observations should be
action enough, the narrative is static, and the insights banal and padded. "And
after a time, after all of time, she nodded, because she had touched his temple and
read about his grandmother and the herons and the loons and seen the paintings; she
nodded and said she would help him, would help him, would help him." Paulsen
seems more interested in expounding his rather sentimentally mystical ideas about
art ("I am a painting,") than in telling a story. While Wil's essays about his
grandmother, the heron, etc., sound like the author talking, each chapter begins
with a long quote from Wil that demonstrates an entirely different voice, one with
considerably more humor, genuine perception, and vivacity. These anecdotes
reveal a Wil, and a Paulsen, that readers would like to meet. RS
Pearson, Kit. A Handful of Time. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-81532-2. 186p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Sent off to stay with relatives for the summer (while her parents
work out their divorce) 12-year-old Patricia is miserable: about her parents,
missing Toronto, her unfriendly and all-too-capable cousins. One day, though, she
finds an old watch that, when she winds it, sends Patricia back in time to when her
mother was twelve, and, like Patricia, an outcast. This owes more than a nod to
Pearce's Tom's Midnight Garden(acknowledged in the epigraph) although lacking
that book's structural complexity, and the inevitable rapprochement with Mom and
cousins is too obvious. What Pearson manages very well is the tension between
family members who are supposed to like each other and don't, and the pain of a
child who does not fit in. Simpler than most time fantasies, and written in a plain
and gentle style, this is good wish-fulfillment reading for kids in the summer
reading club who, like Patricia, would really prefer to be someplace else. RS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Family relations
Pluckrose, Henry. Crayons; ISBN 0-531-10470-2.
Paints ISBN 0-531-10471-0. Both books: illus. with photographs by Chris
Fairclough. Watts, 1988. 45p. (Fresh Start). $10.90.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Part of a series on art and craft techniques, these books on
crayons and paints feature a list of equipment and materials preceding an
introduction to the medium and preparations for using it. There follow various
projects including, for crayons, "resists" of water and wax base overlays, batik,
color cutting, chalk and crayon transfer, and rubbing. Crayons is the more
imaginative volume and shows the most attractive results. Paints involves using
[ 186]
various objects to achieve different textures, marbling, combining collage with
acrylic colors, and making bubble patterns. Both books use clear, full-color
photographs to illustrate each step of instruction, with general comments confined
to a brief text. 
There is a thematic emphasis on young artists combining
techniques for new effects, and an afterword gives further information on obtaining
supplies. Index. BH
C.U. Art-study and teaching
Rogers, Paul. From Me to You; illus. by Jane Johnson. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-531-08332-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05732-1. 30p. Library ed. $12.99;
Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
"I came headfirst into this world/ eighty years agoJ Inside, gas
lamps and firelight] outside was white with snow." This grandma-remembers
verse-story, while nostalgic, is saved from saccharinity by a lilting rhyme scheme
and softly-colored illustrations done in period style and filled with details of the
changing times. From her birth to the present day-through childhood scrapes
(throwing mudpies into Mrs. Morgan's pantaloons), marriage and the birth of her
own child-the narrator tells her story with economy and grace. The pictures add
story ("when Grandad went away" is illustrated by a young Grandma waving to a
departing soldier) and the rhythms of the verse are nicely varied by changing line
lengths and page-turns that often reveal a rolling long line to end the stanza. RS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Roth-Hano, Ren6e. Touch Wood: A Girlhood in Occupied France. Four Winds, 1988.
ISBN 0-02-777340-X. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Starting on August 22, 1940, this long novel in diary format
tells the experiences of a pre-adolescent Jewish girl in occupied France. 
Ren e
Roth's family has fled from Alsace to find safety in Paris, but the Nazi restrictions
and round-ups force her parents to send their three daughters to a convent in
Normandy, where they're lonely but cared for in relative comfort until caught in
the bombing that fronts the Allied invasion. Many of the chatty entries describe
Ren6e's interactions with her sisters, friends, and the nuns in charge. The last
entry, Friday, September 1, 1943, finds them reunited in Paris, with news that
their grandmother, aunt, uncle, and cousins in France have survived. 
The
extensively developed scenes and characterization have more flavor of fiction than
of first-person witness, but the tone is gentler than that of many autobiographical
novels of the period and may thus reach young readers unready for more historically
horrific accounts. BH
D.V. Interreligious understanding
Schwartz, Amy. Annabelle Swift, Kindergartner; written and illus. by Amy Schwartz.
Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08337-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05737. 2 8p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Annabelle figures she's got kindergarten licked. Big sister Lucy has
let her in on the trade secrets, "the fancy stuff," like globes ('This is the world,
Annabelle. This is geography "), colors, and questions: "Remember to ask lots of
questions, Annabelle. Teachers like that." But the teacher, Mr. Blum, is a little
confused at some of Annabelle's answers the next day: when, for example,
Annabelle calls out "Blue Desire!" as the color of a lollipop. Colors from Mom's
makeup table are not the same as those in the kindergarten concept corner, it
[ 187]
appears. Faithful Lucy, though, is there for a recess pep talk, and Annabelle
triumphs when she counts the class milk money, $1.08, without a mistake-
addition lessons courtesy of Lucy. 
This has a lot more verve than most
adjustment-to-kindergarten stories, and the funny, deadpan tone is tempered by the
strong loyalty between Lucy and Annabelle. As with Beezus and Ramona (whom
this cannot but recall) Schwartz's book will be enjoyed by big and little sisters
equally, and parents, especially, will appreciate Schwartz's illustrations; with both
nostalgia and wit they evoke a 1950s California suburbia-land where being
chosen milk monitor could really make a person's day. RS
D.V. Sisters
Sheldon, Dyan. I Forgot; illus. by John Rogan. Four Winds, 1988. ISBN 0-02-
782471-3. 26p. $11.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Stumpy figures and cartoon humor in line and wash drawings
give animation to an otherwise labored story about a boy who repeatedly forgets
one thing. Dressing, he forgets his shoes; giving the dog a bath, he forgets that
he's never supposed to do that indoors. His mother forgives all when he
remembers her birthday. Slight in concept, not much stronger in execution. See
also the Stevenson book below, noting that the title is identical. ZS
Shusterman, Neal. The Shadow Club. Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-77540-1. 
$12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
You won't need much booktalking here: 
seven junior high
students, all "second-besters," decide to wreak revenge on the seven other kids who
keep them out of first place; thus, the birth of The Shadow Club. "We all hate
somebody." Class beauty Vera finds pages of her diary plastered on the school
walls; first trumpet David sees green slime explode from his horn; leading actress
Rebecca is greeted by a garter snake in her thermos-all courtesy of the club.
Relatively harmless pranks, but soon more serious and life-threatening stunts
befall the stars, and The Shadow Club pleads innocent. Jared (second-best track
runner) tells the story in retrospect, a narrative technique that does not allow the
story to develop fully its potential intensity, dispelling suspense through an overly
portentous tone and had-I-but-known hindsight. However, there is complexity in
the characterizations of both the bests (some of whom, one feels, get what they
deserve) and the shadows, whose hatred of their betters is transformed into a
frightening loyalty to each other. The mystery is well-constructed, with a logical
yet unexpected finale that provides moral weight as well as plot satisfaction. RS
D.V. Jealousy, overcoming
Smoke, Richard. Think About Nuclear Arms Control: Understanding the Arms Race.
Walker, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6761-3; Paper ed. ISBN 0-8027-6762-1.
178p. illus. and with photographs. (Think Series). Library ed. $14.85; Paper ed.
$5.95.
M 
Gr. 7-10. 
One of a series designed to "enhance a high-school student's
understanding of public affairs," this is a good example of an informational book
which has well-organized facts based on research (Smoke has published several
adult books that bear on the subject) but which is presented in a format that
militates against holding the reader's interest. Smoke is a university professor, and
he tends to write down to his audience, repeatedly overexplaining, prefacing each
[ 188]
chapter with questions ("When did the American monopoly end? What is the
meaning of 'deterrence'? Why is it important to be sure an attack would succeed?
When was the hydrogen bomb created?") and ending each chapter with a summary
and review questions like "In what month and year did the White House announce
that the Soviets had tested an atomic bomb?" etc. The focus is on U.S-Soviet
relations, and the text concludes with the 1986 meeting at Reykjavik, "the capital
city of Iceland." "Personality Profiles" of some leaders of the two superpowers are
interspersed; appendices include descriptive notes on activist organizations, a
glossary, reproductions of treaties, a bibliography, and an index. Lots of facts,
weak presentation. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Snyder, Zilpha Keatley. Squeak Saves the Day and Other Tooley Tales; illus. by Leslie
Morrill. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-385-29661-4. 
$14.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Seven stories center on adventures of tiny folk called Tiddlers,
who avoid human STOMPERS except for the rare occasion when a brave Tiddler
like Trinket Tooley takes an abandoned doll for her friend Dimity, or when Nipper
Tooley and his friend Tuck save a lost baby. Several of these stories poke fun at
adults, as in the story of Nipper and Trinket's mother getting fed up with a visiting
fairy, or their father's frustrated ambition to become a cowboy. There are some
funny bits (In Grumbie language "M-M-M-M-rumph" means something like "fat
chance") and word play (one story about chickens prefixes "qu" in front of cock,
hen, and chickie to feature quocks, quens, and quickies); but there's an overall
precious note and some obvious contrivance. The principal reading appeal will be
the secret world of diminutive people. BH
Stevenson, SuGie. I Forgot; written and illus. by Susie Stevenson. Orchard/Watts, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08344-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05744-5. 28p. Library
ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
As in the Sheldon book above, this has a protagonist who has
trouble remembering, but who-at the end of the story-gains approval when he
remembers his mother's birthday; both books are entitled I Forgot. Here the
illustrations, amusingly scraggly line-and-wash pictures of platypus characters,
have more variety and vitality. The examples of what Arthur Platypus forgets also
have variety, and the story is given more substance by inclusion of the ways
Arthur tries to remember. ZS
Stolz, Mary. Zekmet the Stone Carver: A Tale of Ancient Egypt; illus. by Deborah
Nourse Lattimore. Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-15-299961-2. 28p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Double-page spreads dominated by stone-gray tints, styled after
Egyptian art, and framed with hieroglyphs elaborate this story about the origins of
the Sphinx. The Pharaoh, Kafre, commands his vizier to design an "eternal"
monument in addition to his pyramid. The vizier happens upon a stone carver,
who, during a moonlight walk with his family, sees a lion and conceives of the
design for the Sphinx. Both the Pharaoh and the stonecarver die before the work is
completed, but the stone carver's son finishes it This is long for a picture book,
but children who have been studying Egypt will be familiar enough with the
setting to keep up with Stolz' sophisticated nuances of style. The stonecarver gets
in some democratic digs at the vizier, who in turn harbors a twentieth-century
irreverence for the Pharaoh. As historical fiction, the book would have benefitted
[ 189]
from a note of background distinguishing the factual from the imagined. However,
as a graphic and fictional production, this will fit handsomely into ancient history
units and feed children's fascination for mummies and all things tomb-like. BH
C.U. History-ancient
Thiele, Colin. Farmer Schultz's Ducks; illus. by Mary Milton. Harper, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-026183-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026182-X. Library ed. $12.89; Trade
ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
5-7 yrs. 
A lively story richly told, this relates the dilemma of a farmer in
changing times. His ducks have always crossed the road to the river in the
morning and returned at night. With the city expanding, cars rush headlong in a
collision course with the birds despite warning signs. Even a bridge over the road
crashes, with ducks aboard, before the onslaught of a speeding truck. Finally, the
farmer's youngest daughter, who has suggested several sensible solutions,
conceives of a duck pipe under the road, through which the ducks waddle safely
through the year. "In winter, when the rain poured down and the water swept out
of the pipe in a torrent, they came skidding and skiing, swimming and splashing in
a wild, rollicking rush-a waterfall of ducks." The descriptions of the birds (like
jewels in a fairy tale), the stylistic rhythm and repetition invoking the seasonal
landscapes, the humorous commentary on hurried and harried humans (sentences
describing the Germanic Mr. Schultz occasionally invert verbs to the end of the
sentence) all make this a fitting companion to Make Way For Ducklings.
Meanwhile, Milton's illustrations are the essence of duck, right down to the
medium of watercolor, in which she captures the birds' staid anatomical design,
comical varieties of stance, and quizzical stares to feathery perfection (the cow isn't
bad either). An unforgettable visit to the Onkaparinga River in South Australia.
BH
D.V. Animals, kindness to; Resourcefulness
Thompson, Julian F. The Taking ofMariasburg. Scholastic, 1988. ISBN 0-590-41247-7.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
Gr. 9-12. 
This begins with a typical Thompson flourish: 
17-year-old
Maria ("Muh-rye-a") inherits untold millions from a father she's never known (or
even heard about) and decides to buy a town for teenagers. It's to be a "space to
put the time in," namely, time not spent pleasing and obeying them, namely
grownups. This, too, is a familiar Thompson never-land, and most of the adults in
the story are sterotypically silly, patronizing, or, like, evil. The teens, of course,
are cherubs, so the conflict is clear if not terribly interesting. Maria herself is
meant to be an admirably Moder Woman, but she's really a post-feminism male
fantasy: beautiful, rich, intelligent, aggressive-and she hems the tablecloths, and
she has a tattoo on her butt Thompson has a vigorous voice that can be sly and
joyful in turn, but it is too easily distracted by its own sound, wasted on coy and
pointless asides, sacrificing complexity for cuteness. Like the two sympathetic
teachers in his novel who tell the kids "We are the exceptions, please believe me,"
Thompson sets himself up as an advocate for youth and its attendant innocence,
but he is underestimating his audience, who (one hopes) knows better. RS
Tolan, Stephanie S. A Good Courage. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07446-4. 
2 4 5p.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[190]
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Ty's mother is changing her name again. Born Martha Lynn,
she's been Faith, Eowin, Jane, Lucy, Sunshadow, Jasmine and now Jordana, a
name chosen for her when she becomes a True Servant of The Kingdom, an Old
Testament cult led by mezmerizing Brother Daniel. Ty (Tie-Dye, renamed Tobias
by The Kingdom) wants no part of this, but figures his mother will tire of it as
quickly as she did her other hippie vagaries. When she doesn't, and when Ty
experiences the torture and control (he is manacled to a tree for comforting a
younger "Servant" after a nightmare) that underly the outwardly peaceful
settlement, he decides to get out. While not as complex or probing as other novels
on cults such as Peter Dickinson's Healer or Robin Klein's People Might Hear
You, this has the ready appeal and drive of a good made-for-TV movie-complete
with, in Ty, a hero so improbably plucky and ingenious and wise beyond his years
that he easily manages an unlikely salvation. RS
D.V. Mother-child relations
Walsh, JillPaton. Torch. Farrar, 1988. ISBN 0-374-37684-0. 
171p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Set, as are so many novels of the future, in a world that has lost
its technological knowledge and reverted to a simpler society, this tells of a group
of children from Greece who go on a quest. If the setting is familiar, the
development is fresh in a story with nuance and suspense. Cal and Dio have
agreed, in a deathbed promise to the old Guardian, to take on the quest of finding
the "Games" for which he had been guarding the torch. Readers will recognize, as
Dio and Cal and the other children move through a series of dangerous adventures,
references to the Olympics or variants on names and terms from the past. There is
one fantastic element, the torch that dims or lights again in response to their
behavior as they search for the place and race that feels right. An intriguing
adventure story is written with the author's usual flair, nicely knitting history,
legend, and quest ZS
Ward, Brian R. Alcohol Abuse. ISBN 0-531-10359-5. 36p
Drugs and Drug Abuse. ISBN 0-531-10358-7 43p. Both books: illus. and with
photographs. Watts, 1988 (Life Guides). $10.90.
NR 
Gr. 4-6. 
Both of these books are calculated to address the problems of
substance abuse. At first glance, they are straightforward and innocuous, but a
closer reading reveals errors in fact and style. 
Some mistakes are simply
grammatical: "After smoking cannabis, the pulse rate increases ... "; "Many will
continue to use them until their physical and mental health are affected"; "every
[sic] very small amounts of alcohol can affect judgment . . ." The book on
alcoholism does not discuss recent research on inherited tendencies. 
There are
also incidents of misleading illustration, especially in the drug book: AIDS is
listed beside a human silhouette with a pointer toward the liver; a diagram of
illegal drug profits has no basis of measurement; a photograph illustrating "stress"
shows a crowd of well-dressed people on their way to work; another, showing a
slumped body with black streaks on it, is labeled "the tell-tale marks of solvent
abuse"; most of the drawings are overdramatized. Buried under this is some factual
information that should be in the hands of young people, including a list of
organizations, with addresses and phone numbers, of places to get help. BH
Ward, Cindy. Cookie's Week; illus. by Tomie dePaola. Putnam, 1988. ISBN 0-399-
21498-4. 30p. $10.95.
R 
1-3 yrs. 
This litany of trouble focuses on a cat, but it might as well be a
toddler and will thus evoke sympathy from youngest listeners. On Monday,
[ 191 ]
Cookie falls into the toilet ("There was water everywhere!"). On Tuesday, s/he
knocks a plant off the windowsill; on Wednesday, upsets the trash can; on
Thursday, gets stuck in a kitchen drawer and on Friday, in a closet; on Saturday,
climbs the curtains. Since tomorrow is Sunday, "Maybe Cookie will rest!"
However, given the bee that's bombarding him, it's doubtful. This is the simple
stuff from which chants are made, and de Paola has loosened his style for some
lively action and low-down perspectives against broad-stroked watercolor
backgrounds. A welcome change of pace. BH
Wartski, Maureen Crane. My Name Is Nobody. Walker, 1988. ISBN 0-8027-6770-2.
$15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Rob begins his story with a dramatic description of a suicide
attempt; he is talked out of jumping from the roof of a building by elderly Kurt
Doyle, who takes the boy home to live with him. Gradually, trust and affection
replace Rob's suspicious attitude, so that by the time his abusive, rejecting father
(a thief and a liar) turns up, the boy realizes that Kurt has become a caring
surrogate father. There's a dramatic climax, as Kurt gets into trouble (suspected of
conniving with thieves) and has a heart attack; rescued by Rob, Kurt recovers
enough to make readers feel that all will pull through. Wartski has created
sympathetic characters and an adequately structured plot, but the story has a padded
quality, with too many slow-moving episodes about sailing, with a romantic
interest that never moves toward more than peripheral importance, and with several
instances of bland contrivance. ZS
D.V. Older-younger generations; Self-confidence
Weidhorn, Manfred. Robert E. Lee. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31340-3. illus. and
with photographs. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Opening with Lee's decision, in 1861, to resign from the U.S.
army rather than accept an offer to command it, Weidhorn flashes back with a brief
overview of the Virginian's life. The rest of the book is devoted to Lee's
leadership of Confederate forces throughout the Civil War, with two final chapters
on his "reconciliation" and years as a college president. Weidhorn's admiration for
Lee as a person and a general borders on adulation but is well substantiated, though
without footnotes or source documentation. His enthusiasm for tactics seems
abstract in face of casualty statistics, which are supplied steadily but without real
reference to the context of human suffering. This is a traditional military history,
in which "various actions and movements, in the intricate design or ballet that is a
battle plan" are elaborated with fervor. What's missing in an otherwise detailed
assessment are the flesh-and-blood effects when Lee "moved [his forces] around like
pieces on a chessboard." With that reservation, and in spite of a stiff, sometimes
choppy style, Weidhor's is the best young people's biography of Lee available.
BH
C.U. History-U.S.--Civil War
Westall, Robert. Urn Burial. Greenwillow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07595-9. 170p. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 8-12. 
While herding sheep up on the fells, 17-year-old Ralph discovers,
hidden in a cairn, a space-age coffin containing the remains (and weapons) of a
human-sized cat, clearly from another planet. Although Ralph decides to rebuild
[ 192]
the cairn, hiding the coffin and his "friend, dead among the stars yet here on earth
to touch," he is forced to investigate further when his village is prowled by human-
sized (and genuinely spooky) dogs. The plot sustains interest and credulity through
this point, but from there becomes too unlikely, even within the boundaries of its
premises. Ralph's girlfriend convinces him to send some artifacts found in the
coffin through the mail to be sold; the postman is zapped into space, the dogs rob
the post office, Ralph is zapped into space . . . and throughout are scattered
irrelevant diatribes about how badly man treats his planet and fellow animals. This
is based on a short story of the same name first published in Aidan Chambers'
collection Out of Time and Westall's own Rachel and the Angel and Other Stories.
The short story, and the first third of the present novel, do a marvelous job of
evoking the moody fells and Ralph's sense of awe in confronting evidence of a
stranger universe than he had previously known, but the rest of the novel is packed
with too many incidents and contrived resolutions. There are some suspenseful
moments, though, and diehard SF fans will enjoy the death ray shoot-'em-ups
between the cats and dogs. RS
Wexler, Jerome. Flowers, Fruits, Seeds; written and illus. with photographs by Jerome
Wexler. Prentice-Hall, 1988. ISBN 0-13-322397-3. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Even simpler than the botanical introductions on which Wexler
has collaborated with Millicent Selsam, this has from one to four lines per page
describing different kinds of flowers, fruits, and seeds. The book is organized by
the primary function of each: flowers produce fruits, fruits produce seeds, seeds
grow new plants. Unfortunately, the terminology is not always precise (a tomato
is called a "vegetable plant," a bean is called a fruit) and the difference between
principle and example is not as clear as in Selsam's texts. The color photography
is exemplary in composition, clarity, and variety. One memorable page contrasts a
bluet the size of a person's thumbnail with a succulent whose flower extends to the
ends of a 12-inch ruler. The last page, showing the flowers, fruits, and seeds of a
pear in circular photographic insets joined by a thin line, is a typical example of
Wexler's ability to project concepts graphically in spite of some textual confusion.
BH
C.U. Botany
Wiesner, David. Free Fall; written and illus. by David Wiesner. Lothrop, 1988. Library
ed. ISBN 0-688-05584-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-05583-4. 28p. Library ed.
$13.88; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
This really could have been entitled "Free Association," and it's
an excellent replication of a dream ... for what that's worth to the picture book
audience. Unlike many books of this kind, the artist has made a clear transition
from reality, showing the boy asleep with a subsequent double-page spread fading
from blanket to landscape. There follows a sequence of a chessboard becoming a
medieval setting, complete with castle, knights, and a dragon that the child
overcomes. Then the pages of the book reshuffle themselves as he escorts a
caravan, glimpses a familiar cityscape, and falls through the air into images of
breakfast. Spilled juice suggests water, including swans and fish, and the boy
wakes up to see his goldfish and other objects from the dream highlighted by
sunshine. These are skillfully rendered transitions; the question is one of
reception. Although there is progression, there is no plot, and the concept may be
more appealing to adults, who can analyze it, than to children, unless they can
perceive it as a game. BH
[ 193 ]
Williams, Vera B. Stringbean's Trip to the Shining Sea; written and illus by Vera B.
Williams and Jennifer Williams. Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-
07162-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07161-9. 48p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Stringbean and big brother Fred (joined en route by Potato,
Stringbean's dog) take a car trip from their home in Kansas to the Pacific Ocean,
and their pilgrimage is recorded herein in the form of a mock photo and postcard
album. Messages on the cards (written in Stringbean's and Fred's handwriting)
reveal small adventures and continuing dramas, like the search for a clown whose
giant shoe Stringbean picks up in a campsite. The postcard art is pretty campy
itself, done in a variety offaux naif styles--most of the cards are "advertisements"
for various rustic concerns ("Janis and Jeannie's Giant Vegetables") and tourist
attractions ("Come Visit Harlee Hawkins' Buffalo Ranch"). Kids will enjoy the
found-objects aspect of the book and the detailing (best and wittiest are the postage
stamps on the cards), but there's a trying-too-hard air to all the versimilitude, and a
randomness to the images and comments that renders this trip about six postcards
too long. RS
Wrightson, Patricia. Moon-Dark. Margaret K. McElderry, 1988. ISBN 0-689-50451-9.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
With her customary and sometimes uncanny sense of the
Australian wildlife and countryside, Wrightson builds a situation, sometimes too
slowly, from a seemingly minor ecological imbalance. The "flying foxes" (bats),
turned out of their traditional habitat by humans, raid the fruit trees upriver, which
causes a shortage among bush rats and bandicoots, who start a war. Gradually the
entire environment is drawn into the conflict, until one of them-a young
wallaby--calls on a mythical moon man to help resolve the problem. The key
figure in all this is Blue, a dog that witnesses the action and plays a crucial part in
it. The plot is of minor importance compared to the characterization of the cast,
which involves a good deal of humor as well as sensitive articulation of animal
behavior. Often the animals try to avoid problems by laying low ("I am not here.
I was never here. I am somewhere else"). There are certain codes of behavior that
Blue maintains in his relationship to his master, but he is not above lying and
trickery when the occasion requires it. Afterwards, he is penitent; his apologies
and contradictory excuses after becoming injured in a fight with Red Dog form an
unforgettably funny passage. This will frustrate readers who need a quick start and
fast pace, but animal lovers will revel in the patient development of creature
communication. BH
D.V. Environmental concepts
Yolen, Jane. Picnic with Piggins; illus. by Jane Dyer. Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-15-
261534-2. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
It's hard to take a detective by surprise, as the aristocratic fox
family tries to do here with a party on Piggins the butler's birthday. After a
leisurely, Edwardian picnic, Pierre Lapin and his sisters (who appeared in Piggins,
reviewed in the April, 1987, issue), get into a great flap about one of the missing
fox kits. Piggins, however, silently considers the clues and concludes it's not a
crime but a happy-birthday hoax. The "fox hunters" appear to cut the cake, and
they all return to their fancy manse, shown in the doll-house perspectives familiar
from the previous book. This is better as a continuation of Piggins than an
introduction to him; the plot is not quite as tight as the diamond robbery that
[ 194]
preceded it--one misses the villainous Ratsbys. However, birthdays are a friendly
theme, and the tidbits of humor are appealing ("If Rexy's gone missing, can I have
his piece of Cook's Surprise?"). Dyer is as proficient at idyllic landscapes as she
is at elegant interiors, so this will be a treat for Piggins fans. BH
Young, Percy M. Mozart; illus. by Tony Morris and with photographs. Bookwright/Watts,
1988. ISBN 0-531-18176-6. 29p. (Great Lives). $10.40.
M 
Gr. 4-5. 
This does give facts about Mozart's life and, to a lesser extent,
gives an impression of his personality, but it is a weak biography because of the
tedious style, the occasional gushing, and the deplorable punctuation. ("Although
Nannerl .. .was herself an accomplished, performer, it was Wolfgang who .. ." or,
"Perhaps, she was a little biased, but. .. " The two-column format is broken by
photographs and watercolor illustrations. 
A chronology, a glossary, a
bibliography of six titles (not all of which are age-appropriate) and an index are
included. ZS
Ziefert, Harriet. Egg-Drop Day; illus. by Richard Brown. Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-
98757-3. $8.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Mr. Rose tries an experiment in a class of ten children to see
who can pack an egg so securely that it will not break when he drops it from a
second-story window. Six of the children succeed, with materials including a
pillow, tennis ball, parachute, and several boxes with various packing materials.
Mr. Rose's egg and several others break messily, and the class adjourns to discuss
(and eat) eggs. The suspense here is inviting and the experimental approach
valuable. The text could have been more systematic about categorizing what
worked and what didn't (it's hard to remember all the children's names in
association with their materials) and more conclusive about the properties of eggs.
The black-and-white cartoon faces are clich6d, but that won't keep kids from
wanting to try this. It's a readable, inspiring idea for hands-on science, one of a
series by the same team (Worm Day, Trip Day, etc.). BH
C.U. Science-study and experiments
Zubrowski, Bernie. Clocks: Building and Experimenting with Model Timepieces; illus. by
Roy Doty. Morrow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06926-6; Paper ed. ISBN
0-688-06925-8. 112p. (Boston Children's Museum Activity Books). Library ed.
$10.88; Paper ed. $5.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-8. 
From simple sundials and hourglasses to more complex water
and mechanical timepieces, this guide to clock building has clear, step-by-step
instructions, includes good diagrams, and requires only easily obtainable materials
like pop bottles, sand, and string (and, for the more complicated projects, plastic
tubing and pulleys). Occasionally the focus seems to shift from how to tell time
to principles of mechanics and physics, and details of time concepts are too sketchy
and incomplete-one experiment that purports to show why shadows are longer in
the winter only in fact shows the difference between night and day. No index or
bibliography. RS
C.U. Science-study and experiments