Alcock, Vivien. The Mysterious Mr. Ross. Delacorte, 1987. ISBN 0-385-29581-2.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
"'Don't talk to strange men,' she said, 'And remember, you're
not to go anywhere near the Gray Gulls."' Feeling truly at home only along the
rough seashore rockline of the Gray Gulls, Felicity habitually defies the second of
her mother's instructions; the first is ignored when she spots a young stranger
trapped by a dangerous tide. For a few triumphant days, Felicity is a heroine ("I
particularly liked the way you waved aside their compliments with your bandaged
hand. Such a big bandage too! Most effective" says one amused observer) and the
fished-out Mr. "Albert Ross" a celebrity, but the town and Felicity's family begin
to tire of them both, leaving Felicity alone but for the albatross around her neck as
both comfort and curse. As in her previous novels, Alcock here invests a
gripping, elemental suspense story with mythic resonances and psychological
complexity. Felicity is a bright but awkward girl who fills her head with impos-
sible romantic stories; Ross, the quintessential stranger "who might be anyone.
Anything." satisfies her dreams in a way unexpected both to readers and Felicity
herself. There's a hint of the supernatural in the denouement, not enough to
classify this as a ghost story, but enough to make us question the possibility, an
ambiguity in the best gothic tradition. RS
D.V. 
Courage
Aliki. Overnight at Mary Bloom's. Greenwillow, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06765-4;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06764-6. 31p. illus. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.75.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Breezy, flyaway line drawings with watercolor and crayon echo
the ebullience cf another story about the joys of visiting an adult friend who loves
children. Mary Bloom's invitation to spend the night is accepted with alacrity (no
parental permission is mentioned) and the experience, as described by the young
visitor, is sheer delight. They cook together, feed the pets and Mary Bloom's
baby, clean up, play games, do bedtime chores and rituals: walk the dogs, brush
teeth, read a story, and snuggle happily to sleep. For children, Mary Bloom is,
indeed, the hostess with the mostest. ZS
D.V. Older-younger generations
Anderson, Madelyn Klein. Environmental Diseases. Watts, 1987. ISBN 0-531-10382-X.
67p. illus. and with photographs. (A First Book). $9.90.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
In one of a new series, books on diseases of different kinds,
Anderson states in her first chapter, "Every Disease is an Environmental Disease,"
[41]
that there are three environments for individuals: outer, inner, and "greater world."
There is some discussion of balance in adjustment (i.e. stability, or homeostasis)
but most of the text is devoted to brief descriptions of hazardous chemicals and
pollutants in the outer and greater environments. Save for some generalizations
and an occasional word or phrase that seems unscientific, this is adequately written.
It is less cohesive in coverage than some of the other books in the series (see
Metos title below). A glossary, a bibliography, and an index are included. ZS
C.U. 
Science
Baehr, Patricia. Falling Scales. Morrow, 1987. ISBN 0-688-07208-9. 
164p. $11.75.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Thea, who has just started high school, has some problems get-
ting along with members of her family, particularly her grumpy father and
demanding mother. She is anxious to play clarinet in a small ensemble led by the
school's music director, Mr. MacGraw, on whom her friend Marilyn has a violent
crush. She's interested in tracing a woman she's seen in an old picture of her fa-
ther and another man. And so on. Thea, in other words, is learning who she is
and on whom she can count. MacGraw turns out to be a lecher, Dad comes
through as dependable in a crisis, the strange woman turns out to be Dad's first
wife. And music (see title) is important as Thea gains perspective and scales (see
title) fall from her eyes. All believable, but very little that is cohesive in a story
that has some interesting aspects but never has any impact, perhaps because the
structure is weak: too much about Marilyn's pursuit of the teacher; little point to
the whole sub-plot about the first wife. ZS
D.V. Father-daughter relations; Teacher-pupil relations
Baker, Leslie. The Third-Story Cat; written and illus. by Leslie Baker. Little, 1987. ISBN
0-316-07832-8. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Alice is an apartment cat given to gazing longingly outside until
one day her mistress, Annie, leaves the window open and Alice slips out for an
adventure. Here the everyday assumes the dimension of encounter. 
Annie's
balancing act along the high ledge is breathtaking, her meeting with a friendly tiger
cat satisfying, her escape from a dog harrowing. Children can identify with these
escapades in independence and enjoy the soft, hazy watercolor paintings whose
brightest focus is the lively calico that finally finds her way home to a relieved
Annie. Baker's cityscapes of rooftops, rowhouses, and park and street scenes form
a quiet, aesthetically pleasing backdrop for the perennially appealing story of a pet
strayed and returned. BH
Bible, adaptations of. Adam and Eve: The Bible Story; retold and illus. by Warwick
Hutton. Margaret K. McElderry, 1987. ISBN 0-689-50433-0. 30p. $13.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Another of the artist's scenic depictions of Bible literature, this
begins with Creation-a small pool of light amidst darkness-and unfolds with
charged blue and green washes of increasing complexity as vegetation, beasts, and
birds multiply across the landscapes. 
Adam and Eve appear in their bare
anatomical glory, later covered by fig leaves as they experience the shame of guilt
after consuming the apple of knowledge. The serpent is persuasively sinuous;
indeed, the emphasis here is on height, the perspective vertical, with palm trees,
giraffes, waterfalls, and God's sword itself reaching skyward as if to bridge the
separation between heaven and earth. This compares handsomely with other
[42
versions illustrated by Helen Siegl (Gwendolyn Reed's adaptation) and Jim Russell
(Catherine Storr's adaptation). BH
C.U. 
Religious education
Bible, adaptations of. The Miracles ofJesus. ISBN 0-8234-0635-0.
The Parables ofJesus. ISBN 0-8234-0636-9.
Both books retold and illus. by Tomie dePaola. Holiday House, 1987. 34p.
$14.95.
SpC 
Gr. K-3. 
Because the Biblical texts seem adapted to a more sophisticated
age group than the picture book format implies, these two handsome volumes are
variously successful. Miracles is best, the stories clear and the carefully composed
illustrations appealing for an older picture book audience. There are twelve mira-
cles taken from the Gospels, beginning with the Wedding at Cana and ending with
the Raising of Lazarus. Each miracle is described in less than a page, which is
faced with framed art characterized by clean, curving lines, thick textures, clay
tones, and flat figures. Parables features brighter colors and more varied graphic
frames; it has a younger look, but the 17 parables are more complex and will re-
quire considerable clarification and interpretation on the part of adults. However,
since the text is respectfully close to the Biblical passages, which are listed at the
beginning of each book, parents and Sunday School teachers may welcome the
chance for discussion in context of such a vivid medium. BH
C.U. 
Religious education
Branscum, Robbie. Johnny May Grows Up; illus. by Bob Marstall. Harper, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020607-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020606-3. Library ed.
$11.89; Trade ed. $11.50. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Thirteen now, Johnny May is, in a third book set in rural
Arkansas, pudgy and in love with her friend of many years, Aron. She's unhappy
because Aron goes to high school in town and she is too poor to do the same-she
misses him and she yearns for more schooling. Still cheerfully doing the farm
work for the frail grandparents with whom she lives, Johnny May is resolute in her
desire to lose weight (she does) and to win a commitment from Aaron (she does)
but she never expects money to come her way so that she can go to school; it
does, in a contrived contribution from an elderly neighbor. Some readers may be
put off by the dialect, others may find it colorful. The brisk pace of the story and
the vivid depiction of farm life will appeal to many readers, as will the amusing
situation of Johnny May begging for kisses from handsome Aron, who says they
mustn't kiss because his Dad said to wait until they were older. ZS
D.V. 
Boy-girl relations
Bunting, Eve. Will You Be My POSSLQ? Harcourt, 1987. ISBN 0-15-297399-0.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Jamie, the narrator, is a first year student at UCLA, and she's
astounded when Kyle, a sophomore whose roommate is leaving, suggests moving
into Jamie's apartment-strictly business, strictly for financial reasons. Will she
be his posslq-a Census Bureau term meaning "persons of the opposite sex sha-
ring living quarters?" Kyle moves in, Jamie soon realizes she's fallen in love with
him, and -when 
it is clear he cares for her-she decides that he must leave be-
cause it would be such a temptation to become sexually involved. This facet of
the story, complete with older and younger sisters who have problems (older sister
[43]
marries the father of her child, younger sister is persuaded by this unhappy example
to refuse the importuning of her boy friend) is patterned and has a strong message.
It would be formulaic were it not for a second facet that gives it some substance:
Jamie has had cancer, is still being periodically tested, and is still visiting other
pediatric oncology patients weekly. The denoument: Kyle, unlike her previous
boyfriend, does not desert Jamie when he learns about her kidney surgery, and he
makes it clear that he still loves her despite the fact that she's asked him to move
out. Believable but not impressive. ZS
Bushey, Jerry. Farming the Land: Modern Farmers and Their Machines. Carolrhoda,
1987. ISBN 0-87614-314-1. illus. with photographs. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R* 
Gr. 3-5. 
An inviting photodocumentary draws young readers into the
countryside for a look at typical sights--"a peaceful small town ... a newborn
calf being cleaned by its mother ... or thousands of turkeys just looking socia-
ble"-before tackling the various machines that farmers use seasonally for farm
work. What's unusual here is the coherent way in which the text links the organic
work of growing things with the technical production aspect. There's also a
Ripley's believe-it-or-not appeal: on one $80,000 John Deere tractor, "the tires can
cost up to $500 each"; or again, "with an all-wheel drive tractor, today's farmer can
plow in ten minutes what would have taken a farmer with one horse all day to do!"
The color photographs are well composed and reproduced, with some inspiring ru-
ral vistas as well as informative closeups. Words in boldface print are explained in
context and defined in a glossary. BH
C.U. 
Rural life (unit)
Byars, Betsy. A Blossom Promise; illus. by Jacqueline Rogers. Delacorte, 1987. ISBN 0-
385-29578-2. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
It had been the worst flood in the history of the state, the news-
paper said, but for Vern Blossom and his friend Michael it was the chance to build
a raft and have an adventure. Maggie was participating in her first rodeo along
with Mom, and Junior, the youngest Blossom, was getting ready to visit his adult
friend Mary. Byars moves easily from one pattern to another, building suspense
for each child and for their grandfather, who has a heart attack (not fatal) when he
rescues Vern and Michael, capsized and in danger of drowning. The smoothly-knit
plot is pulled together by the crisis, and the strength of family love is made
manifest. Style, dialogue, structure, and characterization are all deft, and the story
is given depth by its percipience, and appeal by its humor. ZS
D.V. 
Family relations
Carter, Dorothy S. His Majesty, Queen Hatshepsut; illus. by Michele Chessare.
Lippincott, 1987. ISBN 0-397-32178-3. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Appended material, including historical notes and a bibliography,
attest to the research that informs and permeates this excellent historical novel.
Like Rosemary Sutcliff, Carter incorporates details of dress and architecture, evi-
dence of contemporary attitudes, and congruous speech patterns to give authentici-
ty. Here the story begins with Hatshepsut's thirteenth year, as she records the
pleasures and problems of being royal, female, and Egyptian; it continues with her
account of the years of intrigue, power, glory, and-not often, but agoniz-
ing-despair. The period and the people come alive. ZS
C.U. 
History--Egypt
[44]
Causley, Charles. Early in the Morning: A Collection of New Poems; illus. by Michael
Foreman; with music by Anthony Castro. Viking Kestrel, 1987. ISBN 0-670-
80810-5. 60p. $14.95.
R* 
4-7 yrs. 
Contemporary nursery rhymes are tricky; lacking the resonances
of history and familiarity, the poet needs to supply meaning as well as nonsense.
A few of the poems here aren't more than funny, tuneful jingling, but the best
have a depth made richer by the simple rhymes: "John, John the Baptist/ Worked
without any pay/ But he'd hold your hand/ And bring you to land/ and wash your
fears away." Causley often moves from the simple to the startling, as in the title
poem which begins "Early in the morning/ The water hits the rocks," and ends
"And over the back of the chimney stack/ Explodes the silent sun." Even some of
the funniest verses here have a melancholy edge, like "Said the Clown," about a
clown who can't make anyone laugh, or the several Bobby Shaftoe descendants
about a gone-away love, or the one about Nicholas Naylor, tailor: "He sewed up a
serpent./ He sewed up a sharkJ He sewed up a sailor/ In a bag of dark." Foreman's
drawings and paintings, employing more line than is usual for him, nicely convey
the various moods of the poems. Half the poems are set to mostly lovely music;
delicately sophisticated (occasionally pretentious), but easy to sing and play, the
songs call to mind some of Alec Wilder's compositions for Lullabies and Night
Songs. RS
C.U. 
Music
Coats, Laura Jane. Goodyear the City Cat; written and illus. by Laura Jane Coats.
Macmillan, 1987. ISBN 0-02-719051-X. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
With exactly the same subject as Baker's Third-Story Cat,
reviewed above, this is a study in stylistic contrast. Both cats long to get out of
their apartments and manage to do so, but Goodyear seems to plan his moves,
down to working at the window latch, boarding a boat, and returning to the "the
lap he loved best" (Alice's exploration is more realistically accidental). The
pictures of Goodyear show an orderly city contained in precise frames, tidy but
sometimes static and with none of the free-floating wildness that imbues Baker's
book with adventurous ambience. The perspectives on the cats' climbing down are
a good example: Baker's is looking down into a void that takes four full-page
illustrations to cross; Coats' stretches from window to balcony and down a tree in
two tiny, profiled circles. Some youngsters may prefer the cozy, mannered world
of Coats, others the open-ended immediacy of Baker; these would be ideal to
compare in booktalks. BH
Cole, Joanna. The Human Body: How We Evolved; illus. by Walter Gaffney-Kessell and
Juan Carlos Barberis. Morrow, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06720-4; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-688-06719-0. 60p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.75.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Oversize pages afford the space for fine pencil drawings, most of
which are anatomical and many of which show comparisons between humans and
other primates, without crowding. Cole describes the evolution of human beings,
showing how adaptations of form made possible such distinctive human attributes
as upright posture, the opposable thumb, and the ability to communicate through
words rather than sounds. The continuous text is lucid, sequential in development,
and complemented by appended material that includes an index and a time chart.
ZS
C.U. 
Science
[45 ]
Cummings. Little Tree; illus. by Deborah Kogan Ray. Crown, 1987. ISBN 0-517-
565986. $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
This is perhaps the most childlike and direct of Cummings'
poems, almost a narrative, and Ray's color pencil and wash illustrations have
caught the I-Thou tone with a naive immediacy that does not over-define the
images. Two children find the perfect small tree, carry it home, decorate it, and
celebrate, addressing the tree all the while ("who found you in the green forest/and
were you very sorry to come away?"). A fine-line screen effect hazes the page into
which these words are set without dimming rich blends of green and red. A gentle
holiday picture book that can serve as a bridge to other children's verse by the poet
BH
C.U. 
Holidays
Cuyler, Margery. Fat Santa; illus. by Marsha Winborn. Henry Holt, 1987. ISBN 0-8050-
0423-8. 32p. $12.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Every Christmas Eve, Molly sneaks downstairs for a glimpse of
Santa and falls asleep waiting in the overstuffed chair. This year, however, she's
wakened by a thud and a disgruntled voice saying, "I shouldn't have eaten that big
bowl of plum pudding." Santa is stuck in the chimney, and Molly's efforts to free
him by pulling on his boots with a rope, tickling his feet, and peppering him for a
giant sneeze leave the child satisfyingly in charge of a super-adult's dilemma. In
fact, Molly even delivers the last load of presents ("the Perkins's chimney is much
smaller"). When she wakes up, though, it all seems like a dream-until she opens
the note from Santa thanking her for all her help. The illustrations are filled with
traditional reds and greens, thematically integrated by Christmas motifs, but there's
nothing staid about them. Both Molly and her ludicrous calico cat display a dash-
ing amount of energy. This is a holiday picture book that will be easy for chil-
dren to listen to, look at, and like. BH
C.U. 
Christmas
D.V. 
Ingenuity
Danziger, Paula. Remember Me to Harold Square. Delacorte, 1987. ISBN 0-385-29610-
X. 145p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Fourteen-year-old Kendra Kaye and her little brother Oscar (O.K.)
suddenly find themselves hosts for Frank Lee, the fifteen-year-old son of old family
friends from Wisconsin. Their collective parents have devised a scavenger hunt
through Manhattan that will educate and entertain them for the summer. It's a cre-
ative scheme, and it more than works: not only do they learn a lot and have fun,
but Kendra and Frank fall in love, and Kendra begins to appreciate Oscar for the
first time. Danziger's irrepressible chatter is further hyped up here by the running
gags and puns characteristic of all three kids, occasionally clever but mostly the
corny product of Kendra the narrator's admittedly "smart-aleck mind." Readers will
whiz through it all, however, enjoying the predictable romance and the exploration-
game aspect (including lists of questions and answers), with glamorous glimpses
into New York on a seemingly unlimited budget (the reward for completing the
scavenger hunt is a trip to England). The one serious experience of a Holocaust
exhibit seems forced into a glib context, and in fact only a few of the excursions
are developed; the focus is on dialogue and dynamics among the young characters,
which will make this all the more popular. BH
D.V. 
Boy-girl relations
[46]
DePaola, Tomie. An Early American Christmas; written and illus. by Tomie dePaola.
Holiday House, 1987. ISBN 0-8234-0617-2. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
"Once, a long time ago," the text begins, there was no celebra-
tion of Christmas in the small New England village until a family who had come
from Germany moved into the community. DePaola describes the ways in which
this multi-generational "Christmas family" prepared for and observed the holiday.
The story ends with an observation that other people adopted the customs of the
Christmas family as the years went by, and closes, "One by one every household
in the village became a Christmas family." The color and composition of the il-
lustrations are proficiently polished, but the pictures share the sedentary quality of
the text, both being stiff and mannered. ZS
C.U. 
Christmas
Fisher, Leonard Everett. The Tower of London; written and illus. by Leonard Everett
Fisher. Macmillan, 1987. ISBN 0-02-735370-2. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Dramatic acrylic paintings in white, black and shades of gray are
effectively set in double-page spreads that include a clear space for the text and that
have, as contrast, the rich colors of the royal arms which, shown in margins, indi-
cate the period of textual references. The continuous text gives a concise history
(inherently vivid, occasionally gory) of the changes in--and uses of--the Tower of
London from its beginning in 1078 to today. ZS
C.U. 
History-England
Fosburgh, Liza. Summer Lion. Morrow, 1987. 
ISBN 0-688-06979-7. 
$11.75.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Hired as a summer helper by octogenarian Mr. Baines, teenager
Leo worries about how he will fit into the household and into the community, a
posh fishing resort in the Adirondacks. Leo is shy, insecure, worried about the fact
that he can't swim, unhappy about the fact that his mother is living with the
manager of the local hotel, ill at ease because he feels disadvantaged by not having
the acquired graces of the rich. Fosburgh focuses on two relationships: Leo's
friendship and growing affection for old Mr. Baines, and his more tentative friend-
ship with Mr. Baines' grandchild, Pookie, who is a few years older than Leo and
who is lost in a drugged state that nobody else seems to notice. Leo's a sympa-
thetic character, and his growing self-confidence is credible, as is his realization
that the rich also have problems. The one weak point of the story is Pookie's
quitting her habit after one talk with Leo, but it's a small weakness in an other-
wise substantial story. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Older-younger generations; Self-confidence
Fradin, Dennis. Heredity. Childrens Press, 1987. ISBN 0-516-01233-9. 48p. illus. with
photographs. (New True). Library ed. $8.45; Trade ed. $11.25.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Although the captions for some of the diagrams are inadequate,
the text is well-suited to the capabilities of the intended audience. The writing is
clear, simple, and sequential; the print is large and well-spaced. Fradin covers ge-
netic structure and function, multiple births, dominant and recessive genes, and ge-
netic engineering, including excision and transplant. There are some flaws in the
phoneticized glossary (why does "egg" need to be defined, and if it's pronounced
[47]
"EHG," why is the first syllable of "heredity" given as "hih'?) but it is useful, as
is the index. ZS
C.U. 
Science
Gardam, Jane. Through the Dolls' House Door. Greenwillow, 1987. ISBN 0-688-07447-
2. $10.25. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
This is a story of two worlds, human and inanimate, and a shad-
owy third, the world of story. The humans, two close friends from neighboring
families, are in focus for a tantalizing bit of time in the beginning, then dropped
except for occasional appearances till the end. The dolls are the "real world" here.
An odd but distinct assortment, Miss Bossy, Small Cry, and a Trojan toy soldier
converse with a mysterious creature called Sigger and a sugar dish named China
Cat. They're all abandoned, along with the dollhouse, as the children grow up, but
while they're in the limbo of passing years, they tell stories-versions of the boy
who saved the Great Dyke, of the Odyssey, of a kitten rejected by a Pharoah and
welcomed by the Christ-child. While the dialogue is full of witticisms and word
play, the structure underlying it is shaky. One gets first involved with, and then
nabbed from, the children, the dolls, and the characters in the dolls' stories.
Whether the plot will seem intricate or simply obscure for young readers, the more
gifted may enjoy the dolls' punny exchanges: "Timber," calls the soldier.
"Timber, fiddle-sticks," says Bossy. "Timber is fiddle-sticks," says Cry. "At least
fiddle-sticks are timber." Clever, but not as cohesive as Gardam's realistic works.
BH
Gibbons, Gail. The Pottery Place; written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. Harcourt, 1987.
ISBN 0-15-263265-4. 32p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Line-and-wash pictures extend the descriptive text of a lightly
fictionalized book about how a potter works. Gibbons shows how the artist pre-
pares clay, uses the potter's wheel and the kiln, and decorates the pieces being
worked on by glazing or incision. The writing is direct and clear; the book ends
with a rather cursory description of how the reader can make pottery that does not
need to be baked in a kiln. ZS
C.U. 
Hobbies
Gish, Lillian. An Actor's Life for Me; as told to Selma Lanes; illus. by Patricia Henderson
Lincoln. Viking Kestrel, 1987. ISBN 0-670-80416-9. illus. with photographs.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
"As told to" Selma Lanes, this account of the childhood and ado-
lescence of Lillian Gish is in first person, giving an immediacy and authenticity to
the narrative. With her sister Dorothy, Lillian Gish worked as a child star in a the-
atrical troupe, starting at age six at the turn of the century. By the time she was
sixteen, Gish had moved to California and started working for D.W. Griffith in that
new form of entertainment, the moving picture. Any theatrical biography has ap-
peal for most readers; one that has film history, child stars, and good style can
hardly fail to enthrall. To be illustrated with family photographs. ZS
Griffith, Helen V. Grandaddy's Place; illus. by James Stevenson. Greenwillow, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06254-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06253-9. 38p. Library
ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.75.
R* 
Gr. K-3. 
Janetta has never met her grandfather, and while she enjoys riding
the train with her mother, she is nervous about farm animals, noises of wild crea-
[ 48
tures, and other aspects of farm life. Grandaddy doesn't push it: his overtures are
subtle, his treatment of Janetta's fears is casual, and his storytelling irresistible.
Soon Janetta's mother is shaking her head with rueful affection and saying "One of
you is as bad as the other" as her father and daughter find themselves in rapport. No
sentimentality here, but there's sweetness and warmth and humor in a story nicely
told and just as nicely illustrated. ZS
D.V. 
Adaptability; Grandparent-child relations
Hawthorne, Nathaniel. King Midas and the Golden Touch; retold and illus. by Kathryn
Hewitt. Harcourt, 1987. ISBN 0-15-242800-3. 32p. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Hewitt, who does not hesitate to romp her way through Bible
stories and folklore, turns this Greek myth into a graphic comedy. Indeed, on the
dedication page, a horrified Nathaniel Hawthorne looks down from his portait at a
copy of her adaptation. Watercolor paintings set into stone-work frames show the
masked, caped stranger who arrives to grant Midas' wish to be more than vaguely
reminiscent of Batman's Robin. 
Midas himself sleeps with a Teddy Bear,
indicating the childishness of his greed. Only Marigold, his daughter, and on the
last page Marigold's children, appear awkwardly drafted. The rest of the characters
seem comfortable in their elaborate stage settings. These latter are complete with
send-ups of recent picture books using "Old Master" effects, as in a detail from a
Dutch Renaissance painting that appears over Midas' shoulder when he beholds
his golden breakfast with dismay. Entertaining, and not a bad moral, either, for
materialistic young listeners of the 80s. BH
Hoban, Tana, illus. Dots, Spots, Speckles, and Stripes; photographs by Tana Hoban.
Greenwillow, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06863-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
06862-6. 29p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.75.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
No text is provided or needed for this compilation of full-page
color photographs; the pictures are evidence that Hoban's technical proficiency is
matched by her artistic percipience. Thematically, this is less focused than most of
Hoban's concept books, but it's a rich source for developing powers of observation
of shapes, sizes, and patterns. ZS
Hoff, Syd. Barney's Horse; written and illus. by Syd Hoff. Harper, 1987. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-022450-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022449-5. (Early I Can Read). Library
ed. $9.89; Trade ed. $8.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 1-2. 
Useful for sharing with the ready-to-read child as well as for the
target audience, the beginning independent reader, this has well-spaced, large-type
text that is simply written and that is nicely correlated with the cartoon-style illus-
trations. It's about a peddler and his horse in the days, "long ago," when vehicles
were horse-drawn; the concept (and the horse) should appeal to children, as should
the excitement of the horse running away because the noise of the new invention,
the elevated train, frightens him. The ending is anticlimactic, unfortunately, as the
horse is caught, subsequently gets used to the trains, and never runs away again.
"Well, almost never," the story ends, with a touch of anthropomorphism, "He
knew Barney needed him." ZS
C.U. 
Reading, beginning
D.V. 
Animals, kindness to
[49
Jensen, Marilyn. Phillis Wheatley. Lion, 1987. ISBN 0-87460-326-9. 233p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Although a bibliography of sources indicates that research was
done for this biography of Phillis Wheatley, the colonial slave who became a poet,
the book is fictionalized to an irritating degree-the emotional reactions of the
subject and of others are described, occasionally in terms almost as flowery as the
verses of the poet herself. Nevertheless, the facts of Wheatley's life are adequately
marshalled, the tone is seldom adulatory, and the author is candid about the limita-
tions of a slave's life even in Massachusetts, even when she was as celebrated and
articulate as Wheatley. Material about the Revolution is smoothly incorporated
into a life story that is inherently dramatic although overextended here. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Kahn, Joan, comp. Ready or Not: 
Here Come Fourteen Frightening Stories!
Greenwillow, 1987. ISBN 0-688-07167-8. 159p. $11.75.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
A fine anthologist, Kahn has selected a varied menu in this
smorgasbord of eerie stories, some realistic and some fantastic. All are of good
quality, but the realistic fiction tends to be more potent, more chilling, than the
fanciful stories. Top honors are shared, however, by Stanley Ellin for "Robert," an
impeccably structured tale of a troubled child and his effect on a sixth-grade teacher
(all the more frightening for its realism) and by Margot Arnold for "The Girl in the
Mirror," in which a teenager's curiosity about the past leads her to step through the
time-shift mirror and to disappear forever. ZS
Lerner, Ethan A. Understanding Aids; illus. by Mark Wilken. Lerner, 1987. ISBN 0-
8225-0024-8. 64p. $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-5. 
The author is a physician, and his text is accurate and
authoritative but stiffly written. Announced by the publisher as a book for grades
2-5, this seems ill-suited to readers in the primary grades, both because of
vocabulary and concepts, and because of the calibre of the anecdotal material that
starts each chapter-itself an awkward device for an informational book.
Nevertheless, material for younger readers on the subject is needed, and this is both
dependably informative and sensible about how to treat (socially) those who have
AIDS or who carry the virus. A glossary, an index, and a brief list of sources for
help or for further information are listed. ZS
Macaulay, David. Why the Chicken Crossed the Road; written and illus. by David
Macaulay. Houghton, 1987. ISBN 0-395-44241-9. 30p. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
Macaulay romps through the answer to why the chicken crossed
the road in a spoof on cause-and-effect disasters. The chicken startles some cows,
who stampede over an ancient bridge, which collapses onto a passing train
(specifically, the dining car-"Who ordered their beef rare?"), which allows a thief
to escape. Further catastrophes lead to the capture of Desperate Dan, which leads
to a luncheon honoring the brave young hero, who orders chicken, which is why
.... 
Macaulay's illustrations are thick with paint and humor. He has an eye for
cartoon detail: the tuft of a cow's tail parted by a lady's nose, a pair of hoofs and
an udder appearing simultaneously through the train ceiling, a cow grabbing a bite
of lettuce from a man's fork on her cataclysmic descent. Blocky shapes and strong
colors build a solid case for this nonsensical string of incidents. The narrative is
sophisticated enough to appeal to the older picture book fans who will get the
most out of the derisive pokes. "Left to their own devices, the Anderson twins
turned to science and substantially enlarged the bathroom. Stunned by the
[50]
explosion, Clarella Sweet conducted a surprise inspection of Mel Tooms' garbage
truck." This is accompanied by a fireburst that sends an innocent passerby flying
into fishheads and orange peels. Whereas the artist's Baaa was satire for the special
reader or adult, here's fun for all. BH
Martin, Bill. Knots on a Counting Rope; by Bill Martin and John Archambault; illus. by
Ted Rand. Henry Holt, 1987. ISBN 0-8050-0571-4. 32p. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A dialogue between an old man and his grandson, Boy-Strength-
of-Blue-Horses, relates, in chant-like rhythms, the story of the latter's birth on a
stormy night, his weakness, his naming after the horses to which he made his first
physical response, his growth, and his success at horse racing. Subtly, in the
course of the storytelling, readers learn that the boy is blind and that Grandfather
has gently guided him to self-sufficiency in crossing "the dark mountains . . .
always around us." It is a moving narrative, and the watercolor paintings that
build from nighttime shadows to daylight colors echo the boy's development. A
last dark scene harkening back to his fear ends with the Grandfather's fire-bright
words, "You will never be alone, Boy. My love will always surround you ...
with the strength of blue horses." The southwestern landscapes are vivid, the
Native American portraits strong, and the disability perceptively dealt with. This
will speak to any child's need for family connection and confidence, and will be
especially effective dramatized by two voices reading aloud. BH
C.U. 
Child relations; Reading aloud
D.V. 
Handicaps-adjustment to; Grandfather-child relations
McMillan, Bruce. Step By Step; written and illus. with photographs by Bruce McMillan.
Lothrop, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07234-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07233-X.
26p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.75.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
The author-photographer took pictures of a baby boy over a
period of ten months, beginning with Evan, four months old, sprawled in sleep.
This is a story of motor control as Evan goes from sitting and crawling to
standing, walking, climbing, running. The color photographs are of good quality,
and it never hurts a book to have a subject so visually appealing. The text, in very
large, bold type against spacious white margins, is abbreviated: "looking out" or
"climbing up" or "wading." Not unusual, but unusually well done. ZS
Metos, Thomas H. Communicable Diseases. Watts, 1987. ISBN 0-531-10380-3. 93p.
illus. and with photographs. (First Book). $9.90. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Unlike Anderson's book above, this discusses treatment for
almost all of the diseases it describes, and is more compactly organized, with
chapters dealing with such subjects as causes, classification, defense mechanisms,
childhood diseases, and sexually transmitted diseases. It is, however, marred by
some egregious stylistic errors (calling something an "example" that is simply a
related comment) and a dry writing style. 
Useful, however, and certainly
informative. 
As with other books in the series, this has a glossary, a brief
bibliography, and an index.
C.U. 
Science
[51]
Meyer. Voices of Northern Ireland: Growing Up in a Troubled Land. Harcourt, 1987.
ISBN 0-15-200635-4. $15.95.
M 
Gr. 8-12. 
Like Meyer's Voices of South Africa, this is a collage of im-
pressions collected from many interviews during a six-week stay in a country torn
by bitter historic violence and current civil strife. Partly because Meyer's human
interest approach includes insignificant details along with important ones, and
partly because of the complexity of the subject, the organization here is patchy.
There's information to be gleaned, but it comes cumulatively in context of a me-
andering narrative with some rough transitions. One of the problems is that
Meyer's voice is the loudest. Admittedly apprehensive about her assignment, she
complains about the weather and many aspects of her visit, frustrated by the fact
that her subjects won't quickly open up to a foreign journalist and consider com-
promises that might end The Troubles. Both of those expectations are unrealistic,
and many of the young people she encounters rely on a staple of Irish humor, the
send-up, to fend her off. What does come through is the quiet heroism of the low-
key peace leaders who gave her their time, already drained by the many pressures of
their commitments. Their rewards come from a deeper understanding of kids who
wear punk plastic and disaffection like survival badges but who are also profoundly
rooted in families, communities, and traditional cultures that don't really surface
here. While six weeks may be sufficient for a fact-finding report, it's not time to
probe under the surface, to get to know and establish trust with even a few people,
let alone dozens, who are unused to outsiders and interviews and who are reserved
by nature and situation. The issues of Northern Ireland are less clearcut than those
of South Africa, and it may be harder to achieve a balanced, sympathetic perspec-
tive. A bibliography of three books, two by Leon Uris, seems inadequate as a di-
rective for further reading. BH
C.U. History-moder
D.V. Intergroup understanding
Miranda, Anne. Baby Talk; illus. by Dorothy Stott. Dutton, 1987. ISBN 0-525-44319-3.
12p. $7.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
1-3 yrs. 
Bright but never cluttered pictures are toddler-oriented in a book
with sturdy pages containing one or more flaps to lift. The game element is
strong, and the concepts are appropriate for the intended audience. For example:
Father, shaving, says "No-no" as the baby reaches for the door of the undersink
cabinet; lift the flap and the danger of the cluttered objects is clear. This goes
through the baby's day from "Up-up" to "Night-night" and it shows a sharing of
parental care (no other characters) and a procession of familiar activities. Right on.
ZS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Mitchell, Barbara. America, I Hear You: A Story about George Gershwin; illus. by Jan
Hocking Smith. ISBN 0-87614-309-5.
Raggin': A Story about Scott Joplin; illus. by Hetty Mitchell. ISBN 0-87614-
310-9.
Both books published by Carolrhoda Books, 1987. 56p. (Creative Minds). $9.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
The stories of these two musical geniuses who both died young
are full of ironic contrasts. George Gershwin, the darling prize-winner of American
society, seemed to live a charmed life in popularizing music with American themes
and sounds. Scott Joplin was buried in an unmarked grave, his opera a "failure"
and his ragtime music faded from public notice. Ultimately, the contrast is one of
[ 52]
white and black, and ideally, these two biographies will be read and discussed to-
gether for their political and well as their musical implications. They are similar
in format, with large print, black-and-white drawings (more proficient in the Joplin
book than in the Gershwin), and a simple, narrative style. Occasionally the facts
are spotty; we never find out what Joplin died of--only that "disease was taking
over his body." But overall, these are, like others in the series, informational and
accessible, filling a need for biography in the middle elementary grades. BH
C.U. 
Music, American (unit)
Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds. Beetles, Lightly Toasted. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-689-
31355-1. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Yearning for a chance to get his name in the newspaper and make
his family proud of him, fifth grader Andy enters an essay contest that's an annual
event. Like his classmates, Andy is disappointed by the topic, conservation,
which is set by the donor of the prize. 
What Andy comes up with is the fact that
insects are edible, and he makes fried worms and beetle brownies. There is a bit of
suspense and, as various people eat what Andy has made, the sort of disaster humor
dear to middle grades readers. This isn't Naylor at her best, given a one-gag situa-
tion and some character lampooning (particularly nagging Aunt Wanda), but it's
sure to amuse its intended audience. ZS
O'Shea, Pat, ad. Finn MacCool and the Small Men of Deeds; retold by Pat O'Shea; illus.
by Stephen Lavis. Holiday House, 1987. ISBN 0-8234-0651-2. 88p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
O'Shea has the great Irish gift of stretching small stories into
tall ones, and the adventures of Finn MacCool offer her a prime opportunity.
MacCool starts out the book immobilized by a headache, but his sarcastic servant
shames him into responding to a call for help: a giant-king's first two sons have
disappeared shortly after birth, and the third baby is now threatened by the un-
known kidnapper. The real heroes here are eight tiny men, each with a special
magic power that plays a role in retrieving the kidnapped children from the king's
evil sister, who is a powerful witch. Readers and listeners will enjoy the playful
inventions ("'I had a headache,' he said. 'I have it here in my hands,' the thief
said") and humorous exaggeration of fairy tale elements ("Keys turned in locks and
these keys were then locked in caskets. The caskets were locked in their turn, and
their keys were put into leather purses and brought to the King who hung them
about his neck"). The tale takes a bit too long to get started but moves well once
it's under way. Boisterous pen-and-ink hatch drawings with handsome Celtic mo-
tifs enliven a handsomely designed format. BH
Olson, Arielle North. The Lighthouse Keeper's Daughter; illus. by Elaine Wentworth.
Little, 1987. ISBN 0-316-65053-6. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Based partly on a famous incident at the Matinicus Rock
lighthouse off the coast of Maine in 1856, this tells the story of a young girl who
keeps the lights burning during her father's absence throughout several weeks of
winter storm. Like the heroine in Keep the Lights Burning, Abbie, an easy-to-read
version by Peter and Connie Roop (reviewed in the January, 1986 issue), Miranda
dashes out to save her chickens from being washed away as waves cover the island.
This is a slightly more dramatic version: Miranda is alone, with no sisters to help
her and her mother; and she is portrayed as having a yearning for a garden, which
she finally grows when grateful fishermen bring her loads of dirt for her seeds.
Full-page watercolor paintings emphasize the drama of the heavy seas crashing
[ 53 ]
against the isolated rock. The sweeping seascapes and snug indoor scenes offset
the long text and sometimes clarify it, as in the case of a confusing transition from
Miranda's memory of arriving on the island to her lamplighting during the storm.
Between the illustrations and the narrative action, this historical fiction in picture-
book format will stir a reader's imagination. BH
D.V. 
Courage
Osinski, Alice. The Chippewa. ISBN 0-516-01230-4.
The Navajo. ISBN 0-516-01236-3.
Tomchek, Ann Heinrichs. The Hopi. ISBN 0-516-01234-7.
All three books published by Children's Press, 1987. 48p. illus. and with pho-
tographs. (New True). Trade ed. $11.25; Library ed. $8.45.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
Unusual in its individualized, well-rounded look at various native
American groups, this series orients the reader to the environment, background, and
traditional and current life styles of each. All three books feature easy-to-read texts,
vivid color and black-and-white (occasionally historical) photographs, maps, glos-
saries, and indexes. The Hopi is the best title, offering real insight into the com-
plex religious and philosophical orientation of the Pueblo Indians who inhabit
three mesas in northeastern Arizona. The other volumes, however, are also
sympathetic in their factual, compressed presentation of tribal history and contem-
porary change. There are a few abrupt chapter transitions and unnecessary general-
izations ("Modem Americans will never know the beauty of a simpler way of life"
if Chippewa traditions are lost), but on the whole these are valuable additions to a
social science section for young readers. BH
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Oxenbury, Helen. All Fall Down. ISBN 0-689-769040-7.
Clap Hands. ISBN 0-689-769030-X.
Say Goodnight. ISBN 0-689-769010-5.
Tickle, Tickle. ISBN 0-689-769020-2.
All four books written and illus. by Helen Oxenbury. Aladdin, 1987. 8p. $4.95.
R* 
6-24 mos. 
One of the first-and still one of the best--creators of board
books, Oxenbury here goes to a larger size format filled to overflowing with babies
of similar plump shape but several colors of skin. The texts lend themselves to
rhythmic play with wiggly listeners: "Clap hands, dance and spin, open wide and
pop it in, blow a trumpet, bang a drum, wave to Daddy, wave to Mom." The
sportive infants are doing just what's described, with funny flourishes: while two
obediently "pop it in," the third grabs something from another's plate and the
fourth pours his juice over his neighbor's head. There's great general appeal in
this series. 
Say Goodnight shows babies being lifted and tossed ("Up, down, up
in the sky"), pushed ("swing low, swing high"), bounced ("bumpity, bumpity,
hold on tight"), and bedded down ("hush, little babies, say goodnight"). Buoyant
action and vital colors against open white space will keep these moving from hand
to mouth and back again. BH
Perl, Lila. The Secret of Katie Dinkerhoff. Scholastic, 1987. ISBN 0-590-41131-4.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
A variation on the teenage romance and friendship theme, this is
the story of a young teenager who makes invented entries in her diary, dates them
ahead, and then is thrilled when they come true. (No, nothing occult, just coinci-
dence) Katie is annoyed by clinging would-be-friend Irma, smitten by the hand-
some high school boy, Chad, she's met while doing volunteer work at a nursing
[54]
home, and anxious to win a trip to New York in a Romantic Couples Contest
(essay and photograph). Few readers are likely to be surprised by the fact that ev-
erything works out nicely: Irma turns out to be a best friend, Chad responds to
Katie's affection, the two popular class snobs are put down, etc. Plotting is trite
and pace uneven, but the writing style is adequate and the book's enlivened by hu-
mor and good characterization. ZS
D.V. 
Boy-girl relations; Friendship values
Pevear, Richard. Our King Has Horns; illus. by Robert Rayevsky. Macmillan, 1987.
ISBN 0-02-773920-1. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Although this story may have cropped up as "an old Georgian
folktale," the setting illustrated here, it is a variant of the Greek myth about
foolish King Midas, whose jackass ears are betrayed by a barber whispering the
secret into a hole from which reeds broadcast the news. This adapter/artist pair
makes a winning team, as they did in Mister Cat-and-a-Half (reviewed in the
December, 1986 issue). The writing has a smooth, unintrusive reliance on the
structure of the story to carry its own weight without elaboration. Fine lines and
richly modulated earth tones against spacious, stark white backgrounds manage
dramatic effects with meticulous drafting. Faces are sharply etched with humor;
the king's horns have the spiral curve of a mountain goat's, the jaunty young
barber has an unruly mop of curls. A natural to read aloud with the chapter "King
Midas's Ears" in Mordicai Gerstein's Tales of Pan. BH
Pizer, Abigail. Nosey Gilbert; written and illus. by Abigail Pizer. Dial, 1987. ISBN 0-
8037-0081-4. 28p. $11.95.
M 
4-6 yrs. 
An example of artistic endeavor misspent on a trumped-up story,
this opens with Gilbert the Great Dane, Tabitha the tabby cat, and Henrietta Goose
"deciding" to nap in the summer sun. Some bees arrive, Gilbert chases them, he is
stung and taken to the vet, where he behaves shamefully, and he returns home a
wiser dog with Band-Aids on his nose. The text is coyly written ("Who were those
funny, noisy flying creatures? Had they come to play?"). It is also anthropomor-
phized ("Gilbert had to admit that his nose didn't sting so much now") and unbe-
lievable (this well-cared-for, collared adult dog has "never been to the vet before.
He didn't know what to expect... "). Certainly the handsome, full-page paint-
ings are a redeeming feature, both striking and amusing, but the book as a whole
lacks the fluidity and natural focus of the author/artist's previous production,
Harry's Night Out. BH
Rohmer, Harriet. The Invisible Hunters: Los Cazadores Invisibles; by Harriet Rohmer,
Octavio Chow, and Morris Vidaure; illus. by Joe Sam; version in Spanish tr. by
Rosalma Zubizarreta. ISBN 0-89239-031-X.
Mother Scorpion Country: La Tierra de la Madre Escorpion; by Harriet Rohmer
and Dorminster Wilson; illus. by Virginia Stearns; version in Spanish tr. by
Rosalma Zubizarreta and Alma Flor Ada. ISBN 0-89239-032-8.
Both books published by Children's Book Press, 1987. 
3 2p. (Stories from
Central America: Cuentos de Centroamerica). $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-5. 
Both of these Nicaraguan legends have sophisticated themes, the
Invisible Hunters' complexity being more apparent in its graphic art, Mother
Scorpion Country in its narrative. In the former, three hunters eat a vine of invis-
ibility, the Dar, which they use initially to bag more wari to feed their tribe but
eventually to betray their hungry people and become rich off traders' money. This
[55]
is a haunting story, as the hunters are punished by wandering forever invisible,
calling "Dar Dar Dar." The expressionistic paintings play with echoes of shape
and color, hollowing out spaces for the invisible hunters in sharp contrast to their
marbled prey or the lushly lined vegetation. Mother Scorpion is an Orpheus and
Eurydice tale, with a grief-stricken husband trying to follow his bride to the land of
death and realizing he can perceive there only ugliness, while she sees illusions of
beauty. Finally, she gives him instructions that allow him to join her; he must
find a string of beads, which is in reality a poisonous snake. The illustrations are
multi-textured collage scenes that project a primitive style with modernistic
techniques. Both books have the text in English on the top half of the page and
Spanish at the bottom, with an afterword on the tales' Miskito Indian sources.
There's material for discussion here on both social and mythical levels. BH
Ruckman, Ivy. This is Your Captain Speaking. Walker, 1987. ISBN 0-8027-6434-6.
139p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Tom, the narrator, is in junior high and uncomfortable because
he isn't the athlete his older brother is; Tom's also nervous about getting to know
Carmela, a classmate he fancies. One thing he's not worried about is his volunteer
work at a retirement home; he knows he is popular and useful, and he's fond of
several of the residents, particularly his friend Roger, a former sea captain. This is
primarily about old age and death and elective euthanasia, but it's nicely balanced
by the modest love story, by Tom's relationships with his brother and his widowed
mother (both salubrious) and by his growing self-confidence. The story, capably
written, gives a positive view of intergenerational friendship and a perceptive pic-
ture of grief and the acceptance of loss (Roger dies). The weakness of the story lies
in its purposiveness, although the latter does not totally obscure the narrative. ZS
D.V. 
Death, adjustment to; Older-younger generations
Rylant, Cynthia. Birthday Presents; illus. by Sicie Stevenson. Orchard/Watts, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08305-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05705-4. 28p. Library
ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
There are many picture story books about the physical and motor
skills that take place in the first years of a child's life. Here, presented with a light
touch and an affectionate tone, is a testament to the child's developing emotional
maturity. The read-aloud audience should enjoy looking backward at the toddler
years, as Rylant describes the first six birthdays as recorded by parents. Examples:
on the day of birth, ". .. when we told you we loved you, you screamed!" and at
age one, "... when we told you we loved you, you spit up. Happy birthday,"
and so on. Each year there are presents and avowals of love. Comes the sixth
birthday and the child has made her parents cards for their birthdays in that water-
shed year, has helped make their birthday cakes, and "You laughed. You told us
you loved us." Stevenson, whose cheerful paintings are somewhat like Lillian
Hoban's, reflects the sunny quality of the text. ZS
D.V. 
Parent-child relations
Sachs, Marilyn. Fran Ellen's House. Dutton, 1987. ISBN 0-525-44345-2. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
After a 16-year gap, a sequel to The Bears' House continues the
story of Fran Ellen, who--with her brother and sisters--had tried to cope with
their father's desertion and their mother's mental illness. Now mother and chil-
dren, who have for over a year been living in separate foster homes, are reunited.
Mama has had therapy, and Fletcher is now old enough to have a part-time job.
[56]
Fran Ellen's problem is Flora, the three-year-old who had been her charge and her
dearest love; Flora weeps for her foster family and Mama is constantly irritated by
her. Fran Ellen, the narrator, is heartsick when the social worker agrees to send
Flora back to her foster family, and she's especially angry at Felice (age seven) be-
cause Flora lovc~k her instead of Fran Ellen. Woven throughout is the rehabilita-
tion of the old bears' house, a dollhouse with a family of toy bears, a theme sup-
ported by italicized dialogue that is Fran Ellen's fantasy/therapy. What Sachs does
here is show, deftly and believably, the changing attitude of Fran Ellen as she first
grudgingly permits Felice to share her play and then comes to love her and to ac-
cept the loss of Flora. Very effective, very moving. ZS
D.V. 
Family relations; Sisters
Schnieper, Claudia. An Apple Tree Through the Year; photographs by Othmar Baumli.
Carolrhoda Books, 1987. ISBN 0-87614-248-X. 44p. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Stand-out color photographs and a clear text combine for exem-
plary demonstrations of a fruit tree's seasonal growth and reproduction cycles. The
pictures here are not just informative but framable in their color and composition.
Occasional diagrams clarify textual explanations, as in "the parts of an apple flow-
er" and "cleft grafting." In factual organization, style, and illustration, this rivals
the Millicent Selsam/Jerome Wexler series on plants, though it does not involve
the reader with suggestions for observation and experimentation. 
A glossary
defining words in boldface is appended, along with an index. BH
C.U. Botany
Snyder, Zilpha Keatley. And Condors Danced. Delacorte, 1987. ISBN 0-385-29575-8.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
This begins with an entry in Carly's journal in 1907, and it is a
record of her eleventh year. Living on a ranch in southern California, Carly is bit-
terly aware of the feud with wealthy Mr. Quigley, a feud that has kept her family
poor. She's worried about her languid invalid mother and devoted to the two who
had taken her in during the worst of Mama's illness, Great-aunt Mehitabel and her
servant Woo Ying. Then there's the local bully, the young Quigley who's her
classmate, and the turn of fate that helps her save his life but brings the death of a
beloved pet dog. Last, Carly adjusts to her mother's death. This has believable
characters and good style, and it gives a convincing picture of place and period, but
it is an overcrowded picture, so that while it is an enjoyable read, it lacks impact.
The title refers to Carly's interest in observing the reputed ceremonial dancing of
the California condor. ZS
D.V. 
Age-mate relations; Death, adjustment to
Stein, R. Conrad. Prisoners of War. Childrens Press, 1987. ISBN 0-516-04799-X. 48p.
illus. with photographs. (World at War). $10.60.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
This is history little told in children's literature, and the
photodocumentary makes a strong anti-war statement without actually articulating
it. Opening with a description of the Bataan Death March, Stein goes on to relate
the uneven treatment of POWs during World War II, including Germans taken by
Russians and Americans, Russians taken by Germans, Polish taken by both sides,
and Americans taken by Germans and Japanese. One notable omission: although
the lot of American civilians taken by the Japanese is mentioned, that of Japanese
[57]
civilians interned by the U.S. is not. There are a few abrupt transitions here, but
generally the text is well written, with a balance between general information ("Of
the 5.7 million Russian prisoners captured by the Germans, more than half died")
and individual accounts (the British escape tunnels from the Germans' Sagan camp,
for instance). The well-chosen black-and-white photographs (primarily news shots
and Air Force archive photos) on every page communicate the prisoners' suffering
in realistic terms. An index gives access to the undemanding text, which is
preceded by a page outlining "Some Major Events in World War II." BH
C.U. 
History-World War II, 1939-1945
Taylor, William. Paradise Lane. Scholastic, 1987. ISBN 0-590-41013-X. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
From a New Zealand author, the story of two adolescents who
move from bitter enmity to tender love is developed at an uneven pace but with
sympathetic insight. Rosie is the loner, the odd one who is teased by her peers,
including Michael; Rosie's mother is an alcoholic, her father given to too many
hugs and caresses (no indication that his attentions go beyond this) that make her
uncomfortable. Her home is often silent, her lot a solitary one. Michael is from a
loud, noisy, happy family, and it is after he begins to love Rosie that his mother
intervenes to help the girl. Occasionally overwritten, the plot has a basic structure
that is sturdy: a believable situation, believable changes. ZS
D.V. 
Animals, kindness to; Boy-girl relations
Terris, Susan. Nell's Quilt. Farrar, 1987. 
ISBN 0-374-35504-5. 
162p. 
$12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
In a story set at the turn of the century, narrator Nell begins
with, "No, no, never... No matter what they say. No matter what they do, I
will not marry Anson Turner." Nell has always been a dutiful, conforming older
child who resented the languid airs of her sister Eliza. This is the story, unfortu-
nately overextended, of Nell's protest; pressured into agreeing to the marriage, she
takes refuge in two escape routes: the quilt she doggedly sews, and the anorexic
behavior that makes her thin, ill, disoriented, obviously unfit for marriage.
There's a youth she's fond of who, rejected, has gone away; that he may return is
to be anticipated by the reader, since by the end of the book Eliza happily has be-
come engaged to Anson, and since the disrupted personality of Nell seems to have
received impetus for change. The story seems too long for its plot, and the
changes of tense as an indication of Nell's illness-the change from first person to
third, reversed on the final page-are awkwardly handled. The characterization is
adequate, as is the writing style. ZS
Tiger, Steven. Diabetes; illus. by Michael Reingold. Messner, 1987. ISBN 0-671-63273-
6. 57p. (Understanding Disease). $10.79.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Formerly in clinical practice as a physician assistant, Tiger is
explicit, detailed, and authoritative in his descriptions of the causes, symptoms,
and treatment of various types of diabetes. Adequately illustrated, the text is print-
ed in double columns, and in good-sized type. There is some repetition in the
writing and some clutter in diagrams, but for the most part the book is a useful
source, with material that is well organized. The text gives good background about
organ function, diet, chemical and biological changes in the diabetic body, and how
the body uses different kinds of foods. A glossary is provided, and a relative index
gives access to contents. ZS
C.U. 
Health and hygiene
[58]
Vigna, Judith. Mommy and Me By Ourselves Again; written and illus. by Judith Vigna.
Whitman, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-8075-5232-1. 32p. $11.25.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
On her sixth birthday, Amy muses (and Vigna keeps it at a
child's level) about missing Mommy's boyfriend Gary, who had separated from
them (and who had not lived with them) just the way Daddy did. Mommy under-
stands Amy's feelings of loss and her separation anxiety, and tells her child that it
just didn't work out, that it isn't Amy's fault, and that some day she hopes to find
a person who will be a good husband and father. The disappointment of having
Gary forget her birthday is alleviated for Amy when a grandparent and five other
family members turn up to say "Happy birthday" and show their love. Direct,
simple, and candid, this is a nicely told story with which many children can identi-
fy. ZS
D.V. Family relations; Father-child relations
Watson, N. Cameron. The Little Pig's First Cookbook; written and illus. by N. Cameron
Watson. Little, 1987. ISBN 0-316-92467-9. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Precisely styled watercolor paintings of three pig brothers make
this picture book as appealing as it is useful. After the characters are introduced,
with distinctive traits and hobbies, each produces a different menu, one for
breakfast, one for lunch, one for dinner. The pictures of the food and the
instructions for making it are aesthetically satisfying, and almost all the dishes are
variants of children's favorites, often reshaped or decorated, as in "grilled geometric
sandwiches" or "guinea pig salad" (half a pear with almond ears and raisin eyes).
These are easy and fun to make, but the best part of the recipes is their emphasis
on fresh ingredients--even the "tomato alphabet soup" is made from scratch.
Illustrated directions are especially formated for clarity, and extra comments
(including safety tips) and comic drawings appear in the spacious margins framing
each recipe. BH
C.U. 
Nutrition (unit)
Whitehead, Victoria. The Chimney Witches; illus. by Linda North. Orchard/Watts, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08307-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05707-0. 117p. Library
ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
The funny noises in Ellen's room at night don't scare her, and
she's more than slightly delighted when she discovers the witch family-Weird
Hannah and her son Rufus-living in the chimney. These witches aren't frighten-
ing, although they'd like to be, and unless they can retrieve Uncle Whizoon's
Medallion of Middle Magic, that night's Halloween Revelries won't be any fun at
all. Only Ellen can help them. She has the Medallion. There isn't anything new
here, and plots that rely on magic spells to move things along are difficult to pull
off. But stories of benignly bumbling witches are great favorites (Estes' The
Witch Family, Coombs' Dorrie books) and this one has enough humor and
expected pleasures--magic powders, a broomstick ride-to ensure appeal. ZS
Wilkinson, Brenda. Not Separate, Not Equal. Harper, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
026482-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026479-9. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Set in 1965, this historical novel describes a fictional episode in
the struggle for school integration. Malene, 17, is one of six black students who
had been selected to attend a white high school. There are problems at school, but
[59]
most of the action focuses on the surly white bigot who, at the start of the story,
sets his dogs on Malene as she passes by, and-near the end of the book-locks
the six black students in a garage at gunpoint. The book is a mixture of strengths
and weaknesses: it convincingly recreates the tension of the period, it has adequate
characterization and good plot structure, but it is inconsistent in the use of accent
(One of the boys says "thing" and "thang" on consecutive pages), and it has fre-
quent lapses into such awkward phrasing as "There have been threats on the
school" and "Not that Charley had been any great shaker on the team." ZS
D.V. 
Intercultural understanding
Wisler, G. Clifton. This New Land. Walker, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6727-3;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6726-5. (American History for Young People). Library ed.
$14.85; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Richard, the narrator, begins his story with a description of the
difficulties the English Separatists had in Leyden in 1620, and continues with an
account of the long journey to America (first in the Speedwell, then in the
Mayflower) and the hardships of the Pilgrims' first year in the new land. Wisler
gives a convincing account of the often-described venture, with vivid impressions
of the cold, the death toll, and the relief of the settlers when, helped by their Indian
friends, they brought in the first bountiful harvest. The weakness of the story lies
in the uneven pace and the occasional but obtrusive awkward phrasing-for exam-
ple, "She kept Edward in dry shirts and myself out of mischief" or "'Hold it steady
lest I command otherwise.'" A selected bibliography is provided. ZS
Yep, Laurence. The Curse of the Squirrel; illus. by Dirk Zimmer. Random House, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-98200-2; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-88200-8. (Stepping
Stone). Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $1.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Howie and Willie are brothers, one a fearless hunting dog and the
other a coward who, in the opening scene of the book, cowers in the chicken coop
warning the other hounds away from a giant vampire squirrel named Shag. Shag is
not only vicious, it turns out, but his bite transforms his victims into squirrels.
The fantasy has some wildly inventive elements, but they're tumbled together too
fast and furiously; Yep doesn't seem entirely comfortable with the abbreviated style
and structure of easy-to-read books. Still, this beats most classroom practice ma-
terials, with just enough spoofy humor and slapstick action to hold it together.
BH
Ziefert, Harriet. I Won't Go to Bed! illus. by Andrea Baruffi. Little, 1987. ISBN 0-316-
98768-9. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
3-6 yrs. 
It's nine o'clock, but little Harry won't go to bed. " 'Then
don't,' said Harry's father. And up the stairs he went." Harry, of course, learns
that staying up all night can be boring (you can only play with the TV remote
control for so long), lonely (not even the mouse comes to Harry's impromptu
party), a little scary (shadows, noises), and ultimately exhausting, as Harry drops
off around 2:30. Lighted with a night time glow, Baruffi's pen and watercolor
paintings place Harry in a large, almost empty living room, the quiet of the night
emphasized by the expanses of wall and carpet Harry himself seems to get smaller
as the night wears on, falling asleep next to a suddenly appearing, and one
assumes, fake, snake that's bigger than he is. A disconcerting moment here, but
Daddy's appearing at five to carry Harry back to bed returns to the focus, bringing
the story (and the night) to a gentle close. RS