Adler, C. S. One Sister Too Many. Macmillan, 1989. ISBN 0-02-700271-3.
[176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
A colicky baby sister, an adolescently temperamental
older sister, tired parents, a rigid teacher, and an unbalanced babysitter prove
almost too much for even doughty Case, the protagonist of an earlier novel,
Split Sisters (BCCB 4/86). Case's penchant for trouble is perhaps overstressed
[163
here, but the family relationships are smoothly developed, as is the friendship
between Case and best friend Willie, which begins to smack lightly of romance.
What's not so credible is the melodramatic kidnapping episode that makes Case a
hero when she solves the crime. The babysitter Charlene is a fascinating
character, and her dislike of outgoing Case, along with Case's reaction, makes a
vivid enough dynamic without revving the plot. BH
D.V. Baby, adjustment to; Family relations
Arnold, Caroline. The Terrible Hodag; illus. by Lambert Davis. Harcourt,
1989. ISBN 0-15-284750-2. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
An original tall tale about a traditional monster, this
pits a heroic lumberjack named Ole Swenson against a greedy boss who won't
pay the men unless they fill an impossible quota. It is the feared Hodag who
comes to their aid, cutting the trees and helping deliver them at night, then
scaring the boss out of his moneybags. This is well written and smoothly
illustrated. 
The 
paintings make skillful use of perspective to show the
monumental scale of the red-eyed Hodag and his rich forest landscapes. One
could quibble with the reduction of a mythically dimensioned monster by
moralizing: lumberjacks shouldn't cut more than they need, greed will never
succeed. The art, however, is uncompromising, and the revisionist folklore
comfortable for today's children. BH
Beck, Jennifer. The Choosing Day; illus. by Robyn Belton. Hutchinson/David
& Charles, 1989. 24p. $13.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
"In Briar's family, when it is someone's birthday that
person can choose what they want to do all day long." Wow, what a premise!
Briar chooses bananas and ice cream for breakfast-in her mother and father's
great big bed. It's all uphill from there. The bubble bath, the silver high-heeled
shoes, the request that her mother wear a wedding dress to do the shopping (by
bus), an impromptu picnic in the park with rainbow sponge birthday cake and
Briar's soon-to-be-classmates, a ride home in the back of her father's truck. How
could you miss? You can't. From the endpapers filled with sparkling candles to
the free-floating watercolor illustrations, rose-tinted of course, this is a sure bet
with preschool birthday girls. Any parent who reads it aloud will have some big
wishes on their hands from dawn to dark during the next celebration. BH
D.V. Adaptability
Bible, adaptations of. Easter; illus. by Jan Pienkowski. Knopf, 1989. ISBN 0-
394-82455-5. 32p. $18.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
This companion volume to Christmas (BCCB 4/85)
is similarly designed and illustrated with dramatic silhouettes framed and
ornamented with gilt-edged flowers, leaves and branches. With the King James
language neither simplified nor paraphrased, Easter has more text than
Christmas, and because verses are mingled from all four gospels, the story is
sometimes difficult to follow, implying, for example, that Judas betrayed Jesus
because of His reprimand when Judas suggested that Mary's ointment be sold.
[ 164]
The silhouettes have a strong simplicity that helps to balance the occasionally
gaudy decoration: the Last Supper is a humble, homely scene, and Jesus a
beardless, ordinary man. RS
C.U. Easter
Brisson, Pat. Your Best Friend, Kate; illus. by Rick Brown. Bradbury, 1989.
ISBN 0-02-714350-3. [40p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
While on a month-long vacation through eleven
states, Kate writes letters to her best friend Lucy. The letters include travel
tidbits ("The temperature hit 1030 today while we were visiting old Fort Jackson
in Savannah, and the cannon I touched was so hot I nearly burned my hand") that
come from an authentically kid-like perspective but convey more about the
manic quality of family trips than they do about the places visited. "When he
[Kate's brother Brian] began to sing Monogahela, Monogahela, to the tune of
'Three Blind Mice,' my father made a deal with him." Kate's sibling superiority
to her younger brother is the truest and funniest running battle here, providing a
narrative thread and a touching conclusion. The cartooned illustrations are bright
but busy, a montage of frantic family scenes, ersatz postcards of famous places
and, oddly, the various state trees, flowers, and birds. Perhaps this tries to do a
bit too much, but family vacations are like that. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Bunting, Eve. The Wednesday Surprise; illus. by Donald Carrick. Clarion,
1989. ISBN 0-89919-721-3. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Every Wednesday night her Mom works late, and big
brother Sam waits with Anna until Grandma arrives before he goes to the Y to
play basketball. Every Wednesday night Anna and Grandma work on the
surprise they are planning for Dad's birthday. It is probable that most readers
will be surprised, too: what Grandma has been doing is learning to read, with
seven-year-old Anna as her teacher. Bunting's writing is simple and warm and
direct, showing rather than telling the book's audience that reading is both a skill
and a joy. Carrick's pictures echo the warmth, especially in the faces of the
family, painted in realistically detailed watercolors with a careful attention to
familial resemblance. A gentle charmer. ZS
D.V. Family relations; Grandparent-child relations
Busselle, Rebecca. Bathing Ugly. Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08401-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05801-8. [192p]. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
There have been a good many books about campers
who suffered because of obesity, and the story Betsy tells has elements that are
similar to the experiences in others: 
the self-conciousness, the shame, the
determination to diet. Busselle gives this camp story focus and impact by the
fact that the camp has a "Bathing Ugly" contest as well as a bathing beauty
contest, with every cabin choosing a nominee for each Queen. Betsy is stunned
with dismay when she's chosen as cabin five's bathing ugly candidate, but she
[165]
grimly does her best to look both gruesome and ludicrous, and she wins.
Although the story has a few standard characters (the mean girl, the loyal friend,
the eccentric founder of Camp Sunny Days), the characterization for the most
part has both depth and consistency, and the first person voice is credibly
convincing. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Self-confidence
Caraker, Mary. The Snows of Jaspre. Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-48292-5.
[24 0p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
The planet Jaspre has become habitable due to the
installation in orbit of an artificial sun-Argus-that has made fertile the area
called Friisland, around the equator, and, as a byproduct, has brought strange and
beautiful colors to the polar region of Lumisland. And-perhaps-Argus has
also given some native Lumislanders extraordinary powers, dismissed as myths
by the Friislanders. Setting is the most prominent element in this novel, and
Caraker has done a superb job of evoking a frozen "wasteland" powered with
mystical light. The suspenseful plot has strong appeal as well. Interplanetary
school supervisor Morgan Farraday has come to investigate conditions on the
colonial world and she is soon caught up, professionally and personally, in a
controversial plan to build a second Argus which may destroy the snows and
light and Lumisland. Morgan respects and feels the power of the north, but she
is also alarmed when her teenaged daughter Laura runs off to join a Lumisland
cult led by the enigmatic Anders Ahlwen. Friend or foe? The ending comes too
quickly (it all gets wrapped up with a vision) but the appeals are many and, for
the most part, well-satisfied. RS
Chaikin, Miriam. Feathers in the Wind; illus. by Denise Saldutti. Harper,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021163-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021162-8. [64p].
Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
SpC 
Gr. 3-5. 
"He who guards his mouth and tongue, guards
himself from trouble." The text is from King Solomon, and Yossi uses it in a
theme his teacher assigns on "speaking with an evil tongue." Yet Yossi himself
is guilty of misusing his mouth-not only for the ordinary little sin of sweets
between meals but also for spreading rumors about his archenemy. Yossi's
epithet "Avraham Lev still wets his bed" sends Avram into hiding and Yossi
into paroxysms of penitence until he manages to right his wrongdoing. The
dialectic exchanges between Yossi, his classmates, and the rebbe evoke a lively
contemporary orthodox Jewish classroom setting. 
Like the last book in the
series, Yossi Tries To Help God (BCCB 3/87), the story's prime audience may
be limited to children with the background to appreciate that context. BH
D.V. Ethical concepts
Chetwin, Grace. Mr. Meredith and the Truly Remarkable Stone; illus. by
Catherine Stock. Bradbury, 1989. ISBN 0-02-718313-0. 
[32p]. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
[ 166 ]
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
In this "Fisherman and His Wife" story with a
redemptive final twist, Mr. Meredith trips over a remarkable stone, "big as a fist;
smooth, and round, and gray, with a cracked top." He takes the stone home and
gives it the place of honor in his greenhouse and invites eight friends to admire
it. But pride goeth and groweth as it usually does, and the greenhouse gets more
elaborate (a pavilion, a hall, a palace), the parties get bigger, and the remarkable
stone is forgotten altogether. Until the fall: Mr. Meredith's, over the stone,
which gets a new place of honor in the frame of his bedroom window. Stock's
elegant paintings follow the story's pattern. All is simple watercolored bucolia
at first, becoming fancier and fancier (even to the ever-increasing decoration of
the Victorian garb on the party-goers) until the last enormous party, an almost
abstract riot of collage. Peace and soft colors return in the final pages when a
now-old Mr. Meredith regains his sense of perspective. The moral is lightly
worn (for all their excess, the parties look like fun) and rather than ironic, the
tone of both text and pictures is ruefully amused. RS
D.V. 
Contentment
Cohen, Miriam. 
See You in Second Grade!; illus. by Lillian Hoban.
Greenwillow, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07139-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
07138-4. [32p]. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
The first-grade class made popular by Cohen's insight
and humor and by Hoban's everyday-model interracial group here goes on an end-
of-year beach picnic. There are none of the problems that are so deftly dealt with
in earlier books in this series, just a few skirmishes-Anna Maria's discovery
that she's brought her brother's school bag and has neither lunch nor swimsuit,
for example-but the low-keyed text gives a clear picture of a day of fun and
food and fellowship. 
There's a dash of poignant nostalgia, but no
sentimentality, as they remember events of the year and say goodbye to their
beloved teacher and to each other. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Conrad, Pam. My Daniel. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021314-0;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021313-2. [176p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Ellie is twelve; she and her younger brother Stevie
have looked forward to a promised visit with their grandmother to see the
dinosaur exhibit at the Natural History Museum. The contemporary scenes are
told in the third person; interspersed are first person accounts by Grandma as a
child whose older brother Daniel had a passionate interest in finding dinosaur
bones. The museum exhibit does, in fact, contain a brontosaurus skeleton
discovered by Daniel before he was killed by a bolt of lightning. Some of the
story is like the material in Kathryn Lasky's The Bone Wars (BCCB 11/88)
which also describes the race to find fossil remains in the 19th century. It is this
historical material that gives Conrad's book substance and pace; while the
competence of the writing style is maintained, the contemporary episodes seem
more matrix than narrative. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Death, adjustment to; Grandparent-child relations
[167]
Daneman, Meredith. Francie and the Boys. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-440-
50137-7. [192p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Too bad the title may give the impression that this is
a formulaic teenage story, since it's notches above the usual example of that
genre in style, story, humor, depth, and characterization. It's also one of the
best books in years that has to do with amateur theater. The setting is English,
and the meeting between Francie (shy, 13, and one of six girls chosen from her
school to take part in an original musical being mounted by a London school for
boys) and a male world is perceptive and funny. The theatrical details are vivid
and authoritative, and Francie's adjustment to the limelight-and to a first timid
love affair-are gently humorous, sweetly moving, and remarkably insightful.
ZS
C.U. Drama-study and teaching
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Self-confidence
Day, Edward C. John Tabor's Ride; illus. by Dirk Zimmer. Knopf, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-98577-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-88577-5. 
[32p].
Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
"He complained about the wind. He complained
about the hot sun. He complained about the smell from boiling down the
blubber." Young John Tabor is not a happy sailor, and his whining brings
comeuppance from an odd little ancient mariner, who appears on the whaler one
moonlight evening ("I've come for ye, John Tabor") to take John where he
wants to go: back home to Cape Cod and Taborstown. Via whale. It's a
bumpy,fast trip, and, once there, the whale, roaring "like a hurricane through a
fleet of fishing boats" takes a chastened John right back to his ship. Tall tale
and mythic drama sail together here in a "true" story (adapted from J. Ross
Browne's Etchings of a Whaling Cruise) that's a great read-aloud. While
Zimmer's paintings have a primarily comic tone, his behemoth is fierce and
dark, a monumental crosshatched presence that overwhelms the landscape and
gives depth to what is actually a very unsettling tale. RS
dePaola, Tomie. The Art Lesson; written and illus. by Tomie dePaola.
Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21688-X. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Budding artist Tommy knows from his grown-up
cousins that art's two main credos are "don't copy" and "practice, practice,
practice." It's a real blow, then, when Tommy finally gets to first grade and a
real art teacher, that she tells the children to copy the Pilgrim she's drawn on the
board, and allows them only one piece of paper. Tommy goes on strike, but an
agreeable compromise is struck, and Tommy goes on drawing, "and he still
does," with the last illustration showing a gray-haired Tommy (Tomie?)
surrounded by familiar dePaola motifs. While the illustrations hold few
surprises, the story has the kind of specificity that characterizes the best dePaola
texts, such as Nana Upstairs and Nana Downstairs. Here, for example, is
kindergarten art time: "It wasn't much fun. The paint was awful and the paper
got all wrinkly ... If it was windy when Tommy carried his picture home, the
[ 168]
paint blew right off the paper." And Miss Landers' announcement that everyone
must use SCHOOL CRAYONS will strike a chord of remembered dismay in
anyone who has ever treasured the Crayola box of sixty-four. RS
D.V. Perseverance
Dijs, Carla. Big and Small: A Pop-Up Pal Book of Opposites; ISBN 0-448-
09075-9; How Many?: A Pop-Up Pal Counting Book; ISBN 0-448-09076-7.
Each book: written and illus. by Carla Dijs. Grosset, 1989. 10p. (Pop-Up
Pals). $7.95.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
Watch the hands, they tell the story. In this pair of
early concept books, pop-up child-sized hands are used, effectively, to reinforce
principles of counting and opposites. For "up" (in Big and Small), a little girl
points to a bird: "The bird is up." For "down," her hands reach towards a bright
green turtle. Two "noisy" hands bang pot lids; a girl puts forefinger to lip for
"quiet." How Many? counts animals, from "one friendly guinea pig" to "ten
little goldfish," and for each, the appropriate number of fingers pop up. The
illustrations are mass-market simple, with easily identified shapes and an ethnic
mix of children. The pop-up parts seem sturdy, but, if broken, can be easily
fixed with glue. Two thumbs up. RS
Dinner, Sherry H. Nothing to be Ashamed of: Growing Up with Mental Illness
in Your Family. Lothrop, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08482-6; Paper ed.
ISBN 0-688-08493-1. [160p]. Library ed. $13.00; Paper ed. $8.00. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr.7-9. 
A child psychologist, Dinner gives adequate analyses
of different kinds of mental illness and adequate advice on how to cope, if you are
young, in a positive fashion. Certainly she writes with both knowledge and
experience; unfortunately, her writing is tedious, repetitive, and occasionally has
a note of kindly patronage. The anecdotal material, which the writer carefully
explains is fictional, is seldom illuminating. Perhaps the most useful part of
the book is the appended material, which includes a glossary, an annotated list
of references, and a list of organizations that provide family support groups. ZS
Dutton, Sandra. Tales of Belva Jean Copenhagen; written and illus. by Sandra
Dutton. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31463-9. [80p]. $11.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Irrepressible Belva Jean has just come from the south
to a new school in Ohio. Talking pure country, she describes her friends and
family in seven episodes that have a sprightly humor despite their meandering
air. 
In the first vignette, Belva Jean entertains the playground with
exaggerations of her wardrobe, which is really from the secondhand shops ("Had
me a coat of genuine rabbits' feet-the whole thing, all rabbits' feet"). The
other stories include a mother-daughter banquet at school ("I went over the rules
with Mama once again before we walked in. Don't chew ice, don't line up your
[cherry] pits, don't tuck in your napkin, don't talk too loud, walk normal, and be
friendly at all times"), a visit with Granny from Arkansas, a Fourth of July party
[1691
next door ("the biggest party we ever had was Granny"), an adventure with Belva
Jean's little brother Buster, a visit to Uncle Abraham's cabin in Kentucky ("he
don't have no TV, so he sort of faces the radio"), and an effort at Standard
English in the free Modeling and Self-Improvement course at the local
department store. The dialect may stall a few readers, but Belva Jean is a likable
sort, her surroundings ordinary, lower-middle-class-and benevolent. The black-
and-white drawings are gawky-ineptly drafted, perhaps, by Belva Jean? BH
D.V. Self-expression
Eco, Umberto. The Bomb and the General; tr. by William Weaver; illus. by
Eugenio Carmi. Harcourt, 1989. ISBN 0-15-209700-7. 35p. $12.95.
NR 
5-7 yrs. 
"Once upon a time there was an atom." It can be
unfortunate when an esteemed author of books for adults decides to try his hand
at children's literature; too often, the result is cute allegory. In this one, some
atoms are sad because a wicked general has put them inside an atomic bomb.
"Thanks to them there was going to be a huge catastrophe: Many children
would die, many Moms, many kittens, many calves, many birds--everybody."
But these atoms decide to rebel, and escape the bombs and hide in the cellar. The
war fizzles, the wicked general is humiliated, and the happy people use the
empty bombs for-what else?-flowerpots. "So they discovered that life was
more beautiful without bombs." There have been some courageous books about
nuclear war written for children-Maruki's Hiroshima No Pika, Vigna's Nobody
Wants a Nuclear War-but Eco's is the kind of book that attempts to disguise
soft thinking as wee wisdom. Carmi's collages are occasionally dramatic in
their own right; some are abstract, others employ a heavyhanded symbolism.
RS
Gregory, Kristiana. Jenny of the Tetons. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1989. ISBN 0-15-
200480-7. [144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
The heroine of this historical novel is Jenny, Native
American wife of an English trapper, Richard "Beaver Dick" Leigh, and each
chapter is prefaced by an entry from Beaver Dick's journal. The fictional
chronicler and protagonist is fifteen-year-old Carrie, most of whose family was
killed in an Indian raid, who is befriended by Dick, and who is resistant to the
welcome extended by Jenny, a Shoshone, and the spontaneous friendliness of
Jenny's many children. There are a few action episodes and a love interest
(unfortunately described in paperback romance terms by Carrie) but the primary
thrust of the book, and a worthy one, is to show the admirable qualities of Jenny
as (in jacket copy that quotes the author) a woman "who symbolizes other
women and other American Indians who have been lost to history." 
A
bibliography cites source materials used for a well-written first novel. ZS
D.V. Intercultural relations
Guy, Rosa. The Ups and Downs of Carl Davis III. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-
440-50138-5. [112p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[ 170]
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
As Carl quickly makes clear in the letters that
comprise this novel, he's out of place in the South Carolina town where his
parents have sent him to visit Grandma (and to get himself straightened out).
Rosa Guy uses the correspondence capably in developing conflicts and characters,
especially the protagonist's transition from irrefutably obnoxious to refutably
obnoxious. It's only the tone that sometimes seems forced too far--Carl's self-
conscious intellectualism, for instance, or Grandma's lecturing Carl's prejudiced
teacher and classmates on Afro-American history. The relationship between Carl
and a neighboring boy who's using drugs is realistic, as is Carl's sadness over
his New York friend who has died of an overdose. On balance, this is a bitter-
sweet book that's refreshingly frank about being black, being proud, and saying
it out loud. BH
D.V. Adaptability; Intercultural understanding
Hahn, Mary Downing. The Doll in the Garden: A Ghost Story. Clarion,
1989. ISBN 0-89919-848-1. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Just as she did in Wait Till Helen Comes (BCCB
10/86) Hahn has her gothic elements down pat: an old house, a malevolent old
woman, a rose garden gone wild. And, once again, very real ghosts. 10-year-old
Ashley Cummings' father has died, and she and Mom have moved to a small
town where Mrs. Cummings can finish her dissertation. Avoiding the hateful
stares and scoldings of the landlady Miss Cooper, Ashley and her new friend
Kristi make a secret hideout in the old garden where they find a doll (another
appealing motif) buried along with a cryptic note. With the help of a ghost cat,
Ashley and Kristi explore the mystery of the doll, discovering a guilty secret that
goes back to Miss Cooper's childhood. The girls' friendship is realistically
knotty, and Ashley's pain at her father's death is emotionally convincing as well
as neatly meshed in the mystery. Not as straight-ahead-scary as Helen, this still
has the virtues of a direct style and smooth storytelling. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Friendship values
Henderson, Kathy. The Baby's Book of Babies; illus. with photographs by
Anthea Sieveking. 
Dial, 1989. 
ISBN 0-8037-0634-0. 
[24p]. 
$9.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
1-2 yrs. 
Color photographs of a bevy of babies always has
appeal, in varying degrees, to other babies or to those who read aloud to them.
Here the rhyming text catalogs a lot of familiar activities and varieties (" ...
squeaking, peeping, crawling, creeping," or ".. . round ones, long ones, small
ones, strong ones, babies, babies everywhere") but that's about it: no pattern, no
developments, no grouping of activities, just a lot of pictures of a multiethnic
cast of infants. ZS
Hoban, Tana. Of Colors and Things; illus. with photographs by Tana Hoban.
Greenwillow, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07535-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
07534-7. 24p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
2-4 yrs. 
As usual, Tana Hoban's latest wordless concept book
is characterized by exemplary design and photography, filled with intensely
[171]
colored pictures of kid-appealing items. However, this book simply does not do
enough. Each page displays four items, three of one color and a fourth that has
that color along with others. A toy mouse, a plastic mammoth and a teapot are
all gray; the fourth photograph is of two towels, one gray, the other yellow. A
radish, tomato and rockinghorse are all red; a white and blue cup holds a red
toothbrush with yellow bristles. The possibilities are not exactly endless and
there is a problem with scale: each object is photographed at the same depth
against a white background, so a crib, cake, pitcher, and comb appear to be the
same size. RS
Holl, Kristi D. Hidden in the Fog. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31494-9.
[14 4p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Nikki lives with her parents on a Mississippi
steamboat, which they and two other families have worked hard to turn into a
successful floating hotel and restaurant. Now that tourist trade has fallen off,
Nikki sees the threat of her father's old depression in his eyes. She worries
about the workers they've had to lay off, about their own future, and about her
capacity to keep up with all the maid service after her mother is injured in an
automobile accident. The protagonist's setting and her problem of compulsive
responsibility are unusual in juvenile fiction, and both are depicted naturally.
Holl's writing style is smooth; in spite of some plot contrivance and
sermonizing at the conclusion, this shows a side of children that's often
submerged under carefree behavior. BH
D.V. Family relations; Responsibility
Hughes, Dean. Family Pose. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31396-9. [192p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-10. 
As fully realized as an adult novel but with appeal for
junior high and high school readers, this portrays a night-shift hotel crew's
becoming family for an orphaned runaway. David's foster homes have so
damaged him that Paul, the middle-aged bellboy who sneaks him into a room
and feeds him, has to work hard to win his trust. The desk clerk, the telephone
operator, and the cocktail waitress unite to offer him the affection and respect he
craves, but each of them is a loner for different-and complex-reasons.
Whether anyone will undertake responsibility for him, or whether they will
shuffle him back into an impassive system, remains in question until the last
satisfying but never sentimental page. 
The detailed setting, the subtle
observation of each character, and the realistic development of a life crisis make
this a high point in young adult fiction. BH
D.V. Friendship values; Older-younger generations
Johnson, Jean. Librarians A to Z; written and illus. with photographs by Jean
Johnson. Walker, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6842-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
8027-6841-5. 
48p. (Community Helpers). Library ed. $12.85; Trade ed.
$11.95.
[ 172]
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
In a series that has previously featured firefighters and
postal workers, among others, librarians now get their romp through the
alphabet, from Art (craft programs) through Zigzag (antique folding books in the
rare book room). While the last seems a touch tangential, the other entries are
appropriate, clearly illustrated with black-and-white photos, and usually
sufficiently explained. Exhibits: "These librarians are setting up an exhibit of
dinosaur books so that people will want to read about dinosaurs. Librarians set
up many kinds of exhibits." Programs: "These children are watching a library
program about African dances and songs. Librarians plan programs that make us
want to learn about our world and read books." Some of the entries (like "Glue")
perpetuate the myth that anyone who works in a library is a librarian, but let's
not be too stuffy: the librarians pictured are a disparate, cheery (except one who
is formidably Weeding), busy crew, and the many activities pictured provide an
effective antidote for those well-meaning patrons who would just love to have a
job like yours so they could sit around and read all day. RS
Keller, Beverly. Fowl Play, Desdemona. Lothrop, 1989. ISBN 0-688-06920-
7. [176p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
The narrator has progressed here from Desdemona-
Twelve Going on Desperate (BCCB 12/86) to Desdemona twelve-and-a-half
going on desperate. She's depressed about Thanksgiving without her mother
(who left the family to find herself), in trouble when her friend Sherman
involves her in a save-the-turkeys scheme, and perennially worried about the
landlords, Sherman's mercenary parents, who take a dim view of Desdemona's
riotous five-year-old twin siblings and their big, boisterous dogs. While the
previous books in the series have been a mix of high humor and low blows, this
one leans heavily on a series of problems that seem slightly forced. 
For
instance, the unlikely woman whom Desdemona's father is dating and who
comes to dinner with her mother is overdrawn as a coldhearted snob. On the
other hand, the kids' sudden vegetarianism based on a newfound knowledge about
mistreated animals is spontaneously developed, as is Desdemona's friendship
with Laurelle, a girl she had assumed to be an insensitive member of the junior
high in-group. In spite of an anticlimatic conclusion, readers who have followed
Desdemona Blank's fortunes will enjoy the hint of romance between her father
and Laurelle's mother-and with it, the possibility of a new home after the
Blanks' imminent eviction. BH
D.V. Animals, kindness to; Friendship values
Keller, Holly. 
The Best Present; written and illus. by Holly Keller.
Greenwillow, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07320-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
07319-0. [32p]. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
Wash and line pictures that are effectively composed
but awkwardly drawn illustrate a story that is simply told. Rosie is eight, two
years too young to be allowed to visit her hospitalized grandmother. Hoping she
will pass for ten, Rosie dons hat and gloves and invests her savings ($2.80) in
flowers (3 carnations) and goes off secretly to the hospital. The ruse doesn't
work, and Rosie sadly turns the flowers over to the elevator man, saying they
[173 ]
were for her Grandma Alice on the 7th floor. This instruction seems to be
adequate, because after Grandma is home, she shows Rosie the pressed flowers
and tells her they were the best present she received during her convalescence.
The story has a gentle quality, but it may be too static to appeal to some
children. ZS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Kline, Suzy. ORP. Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21639-1. 
[96p]. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
To fight the effects of his name, Orville Rudemeyer
Pygenski Junior-Orp for short-starts an "I Hate My Name Club" that
succeeds beyond his wildest dreams. It seems everyone he knows hates his/her
name. Actually, the episodes unfold with a predictable repetition of that fact.
We're all but tired of it by the time Orp's sister, Chloe Urath Rudemeyer
Pygenski (Curp?), gives up being secretary of the club and turns to writing
historical fiction. The first-person narrative has flip appeal and a touch of
elementary school romance to ease the central gimmick, which will be popular
where Kline's Herbie Jones series has paved the way. BH
D.V. Initiative
Kuklin, Susan. Fighting Back: What Some People Are Doing about AIDS;
written and illus. with photographs by Susan Kuklin. Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-
399-21621-9. 110p. $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 7-. 
While there have been many commendable books for
teens about AIDS, its causes, symptoms and prevention, this is the first one to
tell-with candor and detail-what it is like to live with the disease. Susan
Kuklin spent nine months working with a team of volunteers from the Gay
Men's Health Crisis organization in New York. These volunteers (straight, gay,
young and old) are "buddies," helping people with AIDS with shopping,
cooking, cleaning, talking and listening. More than anything, one sees from
Kuklin's account that there is no strict division between the helpers and the
helped (called "clients"); instead, there is reciprocal attention and friendship
among people sharing a common concern. Some of the buddies have AIDS
themselves; one straight buddy, Kachin, is thinking about having the AIDS test
because she wants to have children someday. "Take someone with you when
you are tested," says her client Michael. 
"Don't go alone." 
Perhaps
surprisingly, there is plenty of humor in this book. Manuel wants a wild
haircut before he dies, so while his mother wails in dismay, friend Stephen gives
him a bright orange Mohawk. Sister Kathleen, a Franciscan nun, gives safe-sex
lectures and demonstrations. "Oh, I use a banana. It's the second best model."
Stories weave in and out: brave, funny, irritated and angry, sad but never
mawkish, and the book closes with Kachin and Michael's inspiring visit to the
AIDS quilt on display during the march on Washington for gay and lesbian
rights. Kuklin's organization of material is fluid and fluent, her black-and-white
photographs give faces to the voices, and, wisely, she lets her subjects speak for
themselves. Says one buddy, relieved and surprised that his AIDS test was
negative: "My interest in AIDS hasn't changed. I used to think, that's me.
[ 1741
Now I look at these young kids and think, why should it be them?" (Note: this
book should not be confused with Sabra Holbrook's ill-conceived Fighting Back:
The Struggle for Gay Rights, reviewed in the 2/87 issue). RS
D.V. Friendship values; Handicaps, adjustment to
Lacey, Elizabeth. The Complete Frog: A Guide for the Very Young Naturalist;
illus. by Christopher Santoro. Lothrop, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08018-
9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08017-0. [72p]. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 4-6. 
The title hints at the gentle humor and stylistic flair
that distinguish this top-flight science writing. The text conveys an astonishing
amount of information with easy but never off-hand informality: "the list of
things a frog will eat is very long. Longer still is the list of things that will eat
frogs." She encourages observation: "one of the things you notice first about a
frog is that pair of big eyes on top of its head, one at each side. This may look
odd to you, but it is very useful to the frog." She addresses readers with an
awareness of their limitations ("for those of us who do not have an x-ray
machine handy . . .") but never diminishes the information with tonal
condescension on the subjects of anatomy, adaptations to habitat, or
characteristics: "sometimes it may 'play dead,' which is not playing at all, for
when severely frightened a frog can 'faint' into a state where it looks quite dead."
The respect for creature comfort is obvious, including warnings not to handle a
frog with insect repellent-covered hands because of chemical damage to its skin;
the list of rules "gives the animal its best chance to survive the adventure of
having met you." There are also practical tips: "Never pursue a frog into the
water. It will head for the deepest place, and you have no way of knowing just
how deep that may be or what else is out there. If you are dealing with a frog in
a big puddle, it may try to hide by burrowing into the soft bottom. If you go
after it you are going to get terribly muddy. You may not mind, but whoever
does your laundry may be annoyed." From far-out Guinness-type facts such as
the size contrast of African Goliath frogs (over 30", more than 7 pounds) and
Cuban arrow frogs (less than 1/8" long at hatching from its parent's single egg)
to a feel for the marvels of "frogness" and its place in myth and history, Lacey
relates environmental phenomena to the lives of children: "the future of both
[frogs and the natural world] depends on your continuing curiosity as well as
your continuing care." The book has been quietly but lovingly designed, mostly
with abundant, careful black-and-white drawings but with one section including
color to convey the unusual markings of "odd fellows." In a period of nonfiction
marked by photographic displays that sometimes dwarf textual content, this is an
intelligently balanced book. BH
C.U. Zoology
Lauber, Patricia. The News About Dinosaurs. Bradbury, 1989. ISBN 0-02-
754520-2. [48p]. illus. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
A new angle on presenting information about
dinosaurs is getting harder to conceive as more books feed into the maw of
children's bottomless appetites for the subject. Here Lauber's emphasis is on
[ 175
discoveries that have dispelled traditional misconceptions such as the idea that
dinosaurs resembled reptiles in living alone (many banded together in herds,
packs, or pairs) or in not caring for their young (at least some dinosaurs guarded
nests of eggs and babies). The text explains ("the news is ... ") the study of
footprints and bones as showing that dinosaurs walked upright easily, that some
traveled with their young encircled by adults, that birds developed from
dinosaurs, and that a collision with meteorites, as much as a cooling earth, may
have accounted for the creatures' extinction. Abundant full-color illustrations,
many by paleontologically trained artists, suggest models of various species'
appearance and behavior. A pronunciation guide begins the book, and an index
ends it. More informal in tone than Sattler's Tyrannosaurus Rex and Its Kin,
reviewed last month, this focuses on science as a historical and ongoing
investigation. BH
C.U. Paleontology (unit)
Lowry, Lois. Number the Stars. Houghton, 1989. 
ISBN 0-395-51060-0.
[160p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
Best friends Annemarie Johansen and Ellen Rosen
must suddenly pretend to be sisters one night when Ellen's parents go into
hiding to escape a Nazi roundup in wartime Copenhagen. With the help of a
young resistance fighter, the Johansens smuggle the Rosens aboard Annemarie's
uncle's fishing boat bound for freedom in Sweden. But it is Annemarie who
actually saves all their lives by transporting a handkerchief coated with blood and
cocaine to deaden the search dogs' sense of smell. Based on historical research
and stories Lowry heard from a friend, this has the quality of an adventure story
sometimes distanced by explanation. Readers are told, for instance that "the
German occupation forces had burned part of [Tivoli Gardens], perhaps as a way
of punishing the fun-loving Danes for their lighthearted pleasures." And later on
the same page, "It had made Annemarie feel sad and proud, too, to picture the
tall, aging king, perhaps with tears in his blue eyes, as he looked at the remains
of his small navy, which now lay submerged and broken in the harbor." Lowry
is capable of writing great tragedy as well as comedy, witness Autumn Street.
This lacks the immediacy of her best fictional development, but it's still a fast-
moving tale with clearly delineated characters. BH
C.U. History-World War II, 1939-1945
Marshak, Samuel. The Pup Grew Up!; tr. by Richard Pevear; illus. by Vladimir
Radunsky. Holt, 1989. ISBN 0-8050-0952-3. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
First published in the Soviet Union in 1926, this
narrative poem has been capably translated and has been newly illustrated by
Radunsky in a style that was popular at the time of original publication. It's
silly and funny, it takes a pike at officialdom, and it uses repetition in a way that
the read-aloud audience enjoys, usually to the point of participation. Boarding a
train with a list of luggage that begins with a pan and a divan and concludes with
"a tiny Pekingese," a woman complains at the end of the journey that what she
has is a huge Great Dane. (The officials having noticed that the tiny dog was
[ 176 1
left behind, have brought in a stray as substitute.) The owner is aghast; the
officials blandly suggest that the pup grew up. That doesn't make a convincing
end to the story, but it does make an amusing one, and plausibility is not meant
to be the strong point of this picture book, nonsensical exaggeration is. The
pictures are deftly comic, reminiscent of the work of Miroslav Sasek in the use
of line and color, although Radunsky's paintings are more subtle. ZS
McMillan, Bruce. Super Super Superwords; written and illus. with photographs
by Bruce McMillan. Lothrop, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08099-5; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-688-08098-7. 
[32p]. 
Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
This first lesson in comparatives and superlatives is
disarmingly inculcated through photographs of a busy kindergarten. A stack of
books in the library becomes heavy, heavier, and heaviest as a girl piles more
and more into the arms of a friend. One girl's blouse is yellow, a boy's
turtleneck is yellower, another girl's sweatshirt is yellowest. (Yellower?
Yellowest? ?) Each trio of words is accompanied by a double-page spread of three
cheerful photographs of kids at play. Probably most envied will be the child
who was allowed to sharpen her pencil down to a stub to illustrate short, shorter,
shortest. Page layout is consistent (small, bigger, biggest, photographs running
from left to right) which may reinforce the concept but gives the book a static
design. Because the words are confined to -er and-est comparatives (a limitation
the afterword acknowledges) be prepared for a rash of good, gooder, goodest, but
for what it does, this is one of the bestest language concept books around. RS
C.U. Language arts
Murphy, Jill. Worlds Apart. Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21566-2. [127p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Susan, who tells the story, is an English eleven-year-
old whose mother has never talked about the husband from whom she had long
been separated, but who agrees to tell her story when Susan pleads for
information. Susan then uses guile (in dealing with a family friend) to get the
one fact Mother has omitted: the name. Turns out he's a famous actor, turns out
he's thrilled when Susan presents herself in his dressing-room, turns out that the
flame of love has never died and so Mother and Father are reunited, and
everybody is happy, including the puppy that Father gives Susan. Palatable
because of the adequate style and appealing because of the romantic plot, but not
Murphy at her best. ZS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Naughton, Jim. My Brother Stealing Second. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-024375-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024374-0. [224p]. Library ed. $13.89;
Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
This is a story that shows the corrupting influence of
power in a small town, it's a story about different kinds of love and friendship,
and to a lesser extent it's a story about courage--on the baseball diamond and
[ 177 ]
off. Bobby is the narrator, a teenager who mourns the older brother, Billy, killed
in a car crash when he had been drinking and driving. Also killed were the
occupants of the other car, the parents of Bobby's classmate Annie. Annie has
every reason to hate Billy's family, but a slowly developing friendship between
her and Bobby grows into love. It is in part that love, in part the support of an
adult friend, and in part Bobby's desire to clear Billy's name that makes Bobby
press for justice and disclosure when he discovers that both Bobby's parents and
the kin who have taken Annie in have always known it was not Billy at the
wheel, but the owner of the car, the rather nasty son of the family that dominates
the town's business and politics and police. Why have Annie and Bobby's
families remained silent? For the good of the children, to whose welfare a
financial contribution has been made by The Family. Taut, convincing,
provocative. An excellent first novel. ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Ethical concepts
Owen, Annie. Annie's One to Ten; written and illus. by Annie Owen. Knopf,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-92791-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-82791-0. 
32p.
Library ed. $9.99; Trade ed. $8.95.
NR 
4-6 yrs. 
Were the illustrations outstanding, the format
conducive to learning, or the text amusing, this might be an effective
mathematics book. As it is, the pictures are often confusing: "Now count up to
ten" on a page that has more than ten objects, or "Ten airplanes, ten hot-air
balloons" on a page that has both but also has a helicopter. Most of the pages
are devoted to the concepts of varying components that total ten, and this
introduction of the process of addition seems a stretch for the child young
enough to count little pictures of trucks, ducks, buckets, and spades (six buckets,
four spades or five hats and five streamers). This is adequate for object
identification, but not for a counting book. ZS
Precek, Katharine Wilson. Penny in the Road; illus. by Patricia Cullen-Clark.
Macmillan, 1989. ISBN 0-02-774970-3. 
[32p]. $14.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
An elderly man looks back to his boyhood and to a
day in 1913 when he found a penny dated 1793. Precek uses the boy's musings
(in first person) to dip repeatedly into the earlier date on a what-might-have-
happened basis, which gives the narrative a static quality and a segmented
structure. Since all of the action (and there is very little of it in toto) resides in
the 1913 framework, the repeated musings about what the dropper of the penny,
assumed to be a boy, did or ate, how he may have worked or played, never move
past conjecture. The soft crayon drawings are nicely detailed and economically
composed, frequently using a fainter delineation of the imagined 1793 scene in
the background of a picture that has, at the side foreground, the musing narrator.
ZS
D.V. Imaginative powers
[ 178 ]
Rayner, Mary. Marathon and Steve; written and illus. by Mary Rayner.
Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-525-44456-4. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Steve's dog Marathon dreads the exertion, hard
pavements, and cold winds ("his heart sank, and he whined") of his master's
maniacal jogging. It's a relief when Steve strains a tendon and has to turn to
swimming, leaving the television on so Marathon will not feel lonely guarding
the apartment. 
Although it appears to be realism, this is shamelessly
anthropomorphic ("I am a real dog after all, he thought, smiling from ear to ear")
and not as clever as Rayner's animal fantasies about Mrs. Pig and family.
However, the watercolor and colored pencil illustrations perk things up
considerably. Adult readers will empathize with a creature who likes eating,
lying by the fire, and watching television, while children will empathize with
any small being whose master shouts "No lagging behind." BH
D.V. Individuality, expressing
Roberts, Willo Davis. What Could Go Wrong? Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-
689-31438-8. [176p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Three cousins who renew their friendship at a family
reunion in Seattle shortly thereafter find themselves aboard a plane to visit their
aunt in San Francisco. Thirteen-year-old Charlie is the ringleader, perennially in
trouble but nevertheless an all-time favorite of the eleven-year-old narrator,
Gracie. 
Younger Eddie plays sidekick to them both. The plane makes an
unexpected landing in Portland because of a bomb scare; there an old woman
whom the children have befriended disappears; they find her knocked on the head
and rescue her; when the flight continues, they figure out that the villains are on
the plane; their aunt doesn't meet them because her friend has been hospitalized
with an asthma attack; the children identify and retrieve what the villains are
after; the villains trap and threaten them; the children take action to save
themselves; the FBI arrives almost too late; the old woman recovers; Aunt
Molly marries the FBI agent. Well, Roberts writes a good mystery, and her
style and characterization are up to par here, but the plot is farfetched and
attenuated with lots of obvious cliffhanger chapters. Young readers won't mind
abit. BH
Sanders, Pete. At Home. ISBN 0-531-17148-5; On the Road. ISBN 0-531-
17149-3. 
Each book: 
Gloucester/Watts, 1989. 
32p. 
illus. and with
photographs. (Safety Guides). $11.90.
Ad 
Gr. 3-6. 
Spicing up what could have been an unrelieved
harangue with projects, quizzes, and games, these have enough information to
merit attention and enough variation to hold it. At Home is the more
comprehensive of the two, including advice about preventing fires and falls,
kitchen safety, childproofing for toddlers, and elementary first aid. On the Road
is also useful but overextended, consisting almost entirely of advice to look both
ways when crossing the street. Safety has become a popular project assignment,
and this series provides plenty of ideas to get kids busy. RS
C.U. Safety education
[ 179 1
Sanfield, Steve. The Adventures of High John the Conqueror; illus. by John
Ward. Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08407-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05807-7. 
[128p]. 
Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
High John the Conqueror has captured storytellers'
imaginations as a trickster equal to Brer Rabbit in his exploits but much more
threatening, in the form of a superhuman, to white masters or bosses. The 16
stories show many aspects of black slaves' talents in fooling their owners, and
several will be familiar from other cultures. "John Wins a Bet," for instance, is
a neat variant of the Jack tale "How Bobtail Beat the Devil." These are capably
styled ("when it came to his stomach, the important thing was to keep it full"),
with a note about the folklore and an excellent five-page bibliography of story
sources and books about slavery, including both adult and children's books. The
use of words like "Massa" is clearly ironic in context, and the brief, simply
styled tales make good reading for elementary school students as well as a
reference for storytellers. To be illustrated in black and white. BH
D.V. Ingenuity
Sargent, Sarah. Jonas McFee, A. T. P. Bradbury, 1989. ISBN 0-02-778041-4.
[112p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
Clearly frightened, the girl who had just jumped off a
bus handed Jonas, through the school fence, a small blue ball that she said she'd
be retrieving. She was older than Jonas, a fifth grader, and she told him nothing
about the ball. This is the fairly calm start of a fantasy adventure that is marred
by trite incidents in a lurid plot and by stereotypical characterization. Jonas, his
classmate and fifth grade bully Sean, and the stock white-haired professor join
forces with the girl to prevent her power-mad father from retrieving the ball that
will give him power to control the world. Jonas knows how the ball works
because he has used it to magical effect and has come to know how ruthless one
can feel when powerful. For fantasy buffs, this will doubtless have some appeal
because it has plenty of action (some of it violent) and danger, but it's not
written with the polish or the freshness that made the author's Weird Henry Berg
(BCCB 9/80) so successful a fantasy. ZS
Saville, Lynn. Horses In the Circus Ring; written and illus. with photographs
by Lynn Saville. 
Dutton, 1989. 
ISBN 0-525-44417-3. 
32p. 
$13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
The combination of horse and circus is an almost
guaranteed hook for elementary school browsers, and the action-packed, full-color
photographs here will not disappoint them. While most photodocumentaries run
the risk of posed subjects, these horses are not camera shy, and the performers
are concentrating too hard on staying atop a galloping team to notice flash
bulbs. After a brief introduction, the text describes various acts by Katja
Schumann of the Big Apple Circus in the U.S., a young boy's work in the
Gruss family's circus in France, some stunt riding by Moscow Circus
[ 180 1
performers, and a comedy act with trainer Patrick Gruss and his equine clown.
Choice footage. BH
Schwartz, Lynne Sharon. The Four Questions; illus. by Ori Sherman. Dial,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0601-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0600-6. [40p].
Library ed. $15.89; Trade ed. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Framed by the rituals of a Seder, an excellent text
gives brief background on the celebration of Passover, answering the traditional
questions about why this night is different from all other nights, with its
matzoh, bitter herbs, and salt water, and why one reclines to eat. The stunningly
stylized illustrations facing each page of text are a sophisticated carnival of
animals that reflect a kind of Chagallian surrealism grounded by strongly
outlined shapes, deep colors, and dense compositions. This would be the perfect
picture book for sharing the holiday with children were it not for the over-
ambitious ploy of dividing the book horizontally so that part of the pictures and
the Hebrew text are upside down, ie. can be read from back to front. Youngsters
may find this puzzling since the Hebrew is not a continuous text but appears on
only five pages and as graphic decoration. Those familiar with the Hebrew,
however, will recognize the convention and revel in the art. A concluding spread
gives the order of the seder, with a different animal demonstrating each part of
the service. BH
C.U. Passover
Selsam, Millicent. Keep Looking!; by Millicent Selsam and Joyce Hunt; illus.
by Normand Chartier. 
Macmillan, 1989. 
ISBN 0-02-781840-3. 
[32p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
Nicely detailed watercolors of wintry scenes are
carefully coordinated with a text that describes many of the forms of animal life
near what appears to be a deserted house. This may encourage the read-aloud
audience to be observant or may identify some species for them, but it's not one
of this dependable team's best nature books. For example, there is an illustration
showing a bat, which usually hibernates in winter. The book gives information,
but it seems more a catalogue of creatures than a cohesive picture of winter wild
life. ZS
C.U. Nature study
D.V. Environmental concepts
Shorto, Russell. J. R. R. Tolkien: Man of Fantasy. Kipling/Contemporary
Books, 1988. ISBN 0-943718-07-4. 48p. illus. and with photographs. $8.95.
NR 
Gr. 6-9. 
While a biography of Tolkien written at a level
appropriate for junior-high readers flush with fresh discovery of The Hobbit is a
good idea, this book actually tells very little about the creator and creation of
Middle-Earth. The basic facts of Tolkien's life and career are here but are
obscured by excesses of sentiment: "All in all, Ronald Tolkien, and his younger
brother Hilary, had a pleasant, cozy, childhood, taught and cared for by their
loving mother in the charming cottage in the village of Sarehole. Then, quite
[ 181 ]
suddenly, it all came to an end." There is also far too much information about
the two World Wars-Tolkien himself protested loud and long that his epic was
not a metaphor for WWII, but Shorto seems intent on pushing a pet theory to
the contrary without even acknowledging the author's argument. Some of the
photographs are relevant, others seem beside the point (F. Scott Fitzgerald and
Hitler, for example); the book has many maps (including one of San Francisco?)
that function more as design elements than as information; the same is true of
the drawings. There are no source notes or index; a reading list includes
Tolkien's major fiction and two popular guides to Middle Earth. RS
Simon, Seymour. Storms. Morrow, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07414-6;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07413-8. [32p]. illus. with photographs. Library ed.
$12.88; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 4-6. 
Following the format of his stellar series on the sun,
stars, and planets, Simon here taps a topic of private terror to many children who
have not outgrown early fears of thunder and lightning. There's inherent drama
in the information itself, and the book heightens this with bold color photos of
cumulonimbus clouds (including a diagram to show air movements), storm
cells, squall lines, hailstorms, gust fronts, lightning play, tornados, and
hurricanes. The display is awesome, and the text respects it. Explanations are
clear but never condescending; the science of radar, satellite, and computer
tracking is as astounding as the ancient theory of Thor's chariot striking clouds.
Children seeking material for reports will find the real power of facts. BH
C.U. Weather
Smith, Alison. Billy Boone. Scribner, 1989. ISBN 0-684-18974-7. [128p].
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Trumpet, Billy's mother felt, was not an appropriate
instrument for a young Southern lady. The bandleader told Billy, "the trumpet is
a very masculine instrument." Billy, the narrator, is determined, even agreeing
to take piano lessons (a fiasco) and act as office charlady for her father if she's
allowed to keep up her trumpet lessons. Billy's musical achievements are kept
at a credible level, and her interest is balanced by familial relationships
(particularly in getting along with a mother and grandmother who do not get
along with each other) and in tenaciously proving that she had not been so
negligent as to leave Dad's office unlocked, facilitating a break-in. This is a
good example of a story about a goal-oriented protagonist whose victory comes
through quiet persistence. ZS
D.V. Sex roles
Springer, Nancy. They're All Named Wildfire. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-
31450-7. [112p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
Gr. 5-7. 
Jenny Wetzel and her new neighbor Shanterey Lucas
are both in the horse-crazy stage, which helps Jenny over her initial prejudice ("I
watched 'The Cosby Show' on TV, but it wasn't the same as being right in the
house with black people.... I just wanted to get away from her, before I caught
[ 182 ]
something. Like blackness cooties"). 
The rural Pennsylvania community
honors no such common bond as the two girls form, and eventually the Lucases
are driven out of town by an unmitigated battering of taunts, school fights,
phone harassment, and finally, a palomino with its throat cut on their sidewalk
and its hide spray-painted ("Here's your horse, nigger girl") by an owner
infuriated that Shanterey rode it. Jenny does change. From deriding Shanterey's
"black-slat legs" she grows to appreciate "all the dark, rich colors in her skin" as
well as her riding ability. 
But the heavy-handed plotting squashes subtler
developments, such as the girls' nighttime whispers on a phone they've made
with string through a hole in the wall common to both apartments. With the
best of intentions, this turns a story of interracial friendship between two girls
into a counterproductive tirade against racism. BH
D.V. Friendship values; Intercultural understanding
Tamar, Erika. It Happened at Cecilia's. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31478-
7. [144p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Andy, the narrator, is in ninth grade, has been
motherless most of his life, and lives contentedly with his father Lazlo, who
runs the Hungarian-Cajun restaurant that is called Cecilia's in memory of Andy's
mother. Into the happy atmosphere come disruptions: one is a series of small
fires, set as warning by the mobsters who want part of the profits. That stems
from the fact that a favorable article by a restaurant critic has brought a much-
publicized spate of diners. Another kind of disruption is, for Andy, the fact that
his father falls in love with Lorraine, a dancer, marries her, and crowds the tiny
apartment above Cecilia's. It is through sharing the danger and worry about the
mob that Andy and Lorraine become friends. There are other plot threads
(Andy's relationship with his wealthy maternal grandmother who remains
implacably bitter towards Lazlo; Andy's love for his cat, which finally turns up
after he's spent hours looking for it in Greenwich Village), and they are all
smoothly knit. 
The characters are distinctive, occasionally odd but not
exaggeratedly so, and the fairly happy ending is not made pat and incredible by
having everything sugar-iced: 
Grandma won't come for a Christmas
reconciliation, and Lazlo and his partner Cajun Jack go right on making minor
concessions to the mob enforcers. ZS
D.V. Stepparents, adjustment to
Waddell, Martin. The Park in the Dark; illus. by Barbara Firth. Lothrop, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08517-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08516-4. 
[32p].
Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
A stuffed monkey, a knitted elephant and a toy dog
sneak away from their sleeping child for an adventure on the playground. "When
the sun goes down/ and the moon comes up/ and the old swing creaks/ in the
darkJ that's when we go/ to the parkJ me and Loopy/ and Little Gee, we three."
The streets and trees are full of terrors, all graphically reflected in gray-blue
watercolor illustrations with faces in surprising places. Yet there's a safe
balance between the scary and the secure. Youngsters will love the glorious
swoosh of the friends as they swing up into the night sky and the wild run home
[ 183 ]
as they flee from the THING (a passing train). Rhythmic in verse and art, this
has a dream quality with plenty of clearcut action that addresses the fears and
fantasies of the very young. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers
Weiss, Nicki. Where Does the Brown Bear Go?; written and illus. by Nicki
Weiss. Greenwillow, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07863-X; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-07862-1. [24p]. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
1-3 yrs. 
Offering reassurance through rhythm, story, and
soothingly textured colored-pencil drawings, this bedtime chant has some of the
same hypnotic comfort as Goodnight, Moon. "When the lights go down/ On
the city street/ Where does the white cat go, honey?/ Where does the white cat
go?/ When evening settles on the jungle heat,/ Where does the monkey go,
honey?/ Where does the monkey go?" Cat, monkey, brown bear, and all the rest
are headed to the same place: "They are on their way. They are on their way
home." Toddlers will have this one memorized in two nights flat and will love
the last picture, which shows all the animals as stuffed toys surrounding a
sleeping child. "And everyone is home." Clear white type on black pages with
colored borders face pictures of the off-to-bed animals, which are simple,
shadowless shapes in felt-like landscapes lit by a crescent moon. Warm as a
blanket. RS
Wells, Rosemary. Max's Chocolate Chicken; written and illus. by Rosemary
Wells. Dial, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0586-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-
0585-9. 24p. Library ed. $8.89; Trade ed. $8.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
It's superego vs. id all the way this Easter, with
Ruby telling Max what to do and Max eating the chocolate chicken anyway.
What cares he about finding the stupid eggs? A mudpuddle he finds, acorns, a
spoon, ants, even. ("Pull yourself together," says Ruby. "Otherwise you'll
never get the chocolate chicken.") While Ruby counts her gold egg with purple
stripes and her turquoise egg with silver swirls and her lavender egg with orange
polka dots, Max makes ant-and-acorn pancakes in the mud. While Ruby declares
herself the winner of the egg hunt, Max claims the prize and hides with it in a
convenient hole under the tree. While Ruby offers to share it if he will come
out, he consumes it all, tail first, head next, wings last. Thoughtfully, a benign
Easter Rabbit (not unlike Max in appearance) provides a chocolate duck as well,
but Max is closing in on that by the concluding picture. Bright in color and
concept, this is as fresh as the spring-green grass that dominates every spread.
BH
C.U. Easter
Yarbrough, Camille. The Shimmershine Queens. Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-399-
21465-8. [144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Angie and her friend Michelle are in fifth grade, where
Angie is taunted because her skin is so dark. It's an elderly visiting relative (the
[ 1841
book has her coming from both Alabama and Atlanta) who makes Angie feel her
own worth and who explains "shimmershine" as the glow you get when you feel
good about yourself. Encouraged by a new teacher at school, Angie takes part in
a play, "The Dancing Children of Ghana," and she's imbued with shimmershine.
While it's a pleasure to have a theme of black pride, this is not a story
distinguished for either characterizationor style, especially as it is weakened by
the author's use (sometimes in the same paragraph) of inconsistent speech
patterns, as when Cousin Seatta, the wise old visitor, says both "that" and "dat."
ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Self-confidence
Yoshida, Toshi. Young Lions; written and illus. by Toshi Yoshida. Philomel,
1989. ISBN 0-399-21546-8. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
Unlike Ryder's White Bear, Ice Bear reviewed last
month, this handsome volume confronts head-on the most pressing reason
animals run: eat or be eaten. Three lion cubs, bored with napping, set out for
their first solo hunt. Passing by the intimidating rhinoceroses and water
buffaloes, the cubs make their first attempt at a group of zebras, "but the alert
zebras see the hiding lions, and the entire herd runs off through the trees." The
gnus escape as well, and there's a final misbegotten attempt at a porcupine.
"Even for strong, grown-up lions more animals escape than are caught." A
brave if futile quest, then, but the cubs have sharpened their stalking and hiding
skills and, almost incidentally, provided readers with a realistic view of animal
life on the African plains. The text is minimal, never anthropomorphic, and is
choice in the details it provides: "Rhinoceroses cannot see well, but their noses
and ears are keen." "Cheetahs are good hunters and good runners, but they
cannot run for very long." The subtly and naturally colored pencil drawings use
wide double-page spreads to tremendous advantage, showing predators chasing
herds across the plain and giving a striking evocation of movement through
texturally graded horizontal lines that increase in intensity to illustrate relative
speeds. After the sun sets (gorgeous shot of Kilimanjaro here) there's a surprise
vertical spread, where the cubs are confronted by a leopard high in a tree, eyes
glowing as he stands above a dead antelope draped across a limb. Honest but
never brutal, this informs natural selection with natural suspense. RS