Anderson, Madelyn Klein. Arthritis. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10801-5. 93p.
$11.90.
Ad 
Gr. 6-10. 
Although arthritis is commonly thought of as
attacking the aged, Anderson makes it clear that young people are affected as
well. By outlining widely varied types of the disease-including degenerative,
inflammatory, infective, and metabolic-Anderson presents a serviceable
overview of symptoms and treatments. Occasionally the style is awkward
("Many concerned hands are out there to keep that loss to a minimum") or
overgeneralized ("Yesterday many cases of lupus were fatal. Today, there are
drugs that can keep the wolf at bay"). In general, however, the medical facts and
photographs will prove helpful for student reseach; an extensive glossary, index,
and list of relevant organizations are included. BH
C.U. 
Health
Arnosky, Jim. In the Forest: A Portfolio of Paintings; written and illus. by
Jim Arnosky. Lothrop, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09138-5; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-08162-2. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
The subtitle is the clue to the lack of cohesion here:
this is "a portfolio of paintings" rather than a text about kinds of forest
environments. Each painting is attractive, with soft brush strokes or filtered
light or hazy colors; each is faced by a page with a centered block of type. Some
of the titles are "Beaver Pond," "Clearing," "Hillside-Mixed Woods," and
"Logging Road." The text for "Clearing," as an example, describes two days of
painting a doe in a forest clearing. This is attractive, but less focused and less
informative than most of Arnosky's books, seeming more like an album than a
book. ZS
C.U. Nature study
Bannan, Jan Gumprecht. Sand Dunes. Carolrhoda, 1989. ISBN 0-87614-321-
4. 48p. illus. with photographs. (Carolrhoda Earth Watch Books). $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
With diagrams and well-reproduced color photographs
on every page, this introduction to the topography of sand dunes covers various
formations shaped by the wind, together with cycles of sand movement and plant
succession. Although other locations are mentioned, including East Coast shore
dunes and Mexican desert dunes, the focus here is on the Oregon dunes that have
been made into a national recreation area on the Pacific Coast. The text contains
clear explanations of how seashells and mountain rock sediments from the
Cascades are eventually ground and pounded into sand by streams and ocean,
washed back, piled ashore, and blown into dunes. The sand of one desert dune
area in New Mexico is described as coming from a dried-up lake bed, but there is
no explanation of how sand was formed in areas such as the Sahara--one
assumes they were once under water. While the discussion of protecting the
dune environment is laudatory, there is not enough explanation of how its
destruction would affect the larger ecological chain. Aside from minor quibbles,
however, Bannon's is the best of very few books on the subject. Glossary and
index are included. BH
[77]
Berger, Gilda. Violence and the Media. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10808-2.
176p. $13.40.
M 
Gr. 8-12. 
While containing some timely source material for a
popular term paper topic, this is an ungainly synthesis of documented and
undocumented, reputable and questionable research. With chapters on violence in
magazines, books, TV, video (including music videos) and "dial-a-porn," Berger
presents all sides without apparent prejudice, but also without an organizing
hand to give some order to the controversy. "Most everyone agrees that
antisocial, aggressive people tend to watch television programs with violent
content. Yet, the evidence has not yet made it clear whether watching causes
aggression or whether normally aggressive people just tend to watch violent
programs." There are several ideas in those two sentences that need to be sorted
out. "In the fall of 1987, when pro football was off the airwaves because of a
players' strike, some families actually experienced more squabbling and
antagonism." That needs a footnote. "Americans of all ages spend an average of
seven hours a day in front of the television set... Children spend even more
time than adults watching television, about three to five hours daily." Despite
the presence of footnotes, both sentences cannot be true. The author has
amassed a great deal of research, but has failed to present it in coherent form.
RS
C.U. Social studies
Berry, James. Spiderman Anancy. Holt, ISBN 0-8050-1207-9. 119p. $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-. 
With the same lyrical nuance of dialogue that
characterized A Thief in the Village (BCCB 7/88), Berry has retold twenty
Caribbean folktales of West African origin. Like all tricksters, Anancy ranges
from hero to villain to fool in his relationships with the other animal characters,
but whatever his role, he becomes so integral to readers by the end of the book
that we feel as he does about saying good-bye to his arch enemy: "Bro Anancy
is surprised how much he misses Bro Tiger. Anancy decides, to keep the
memory of Tiger, he'll tell stories about himself and Bro Tiger. Spider Anancy
hides in bedrooms and whispers stories like dreams." The word choices here are
irresistibly poetic ("They listen how the Anancy goes on wrapping up his words
in tricky traps"), and the prose so rhythmic that sometimes it becomes pure
chant. Even the titles have a tongue-rolling sound, as in "Ratbat and Tacooma's
Tree." The narrative, which is cast in the present tense, addresses the reader
directly, with immediate impact ("Listen to the Anancy calling loud-loud"). The
stories themselves are often gripping, either in plot-the kidnapping in "Mrs
Dog First-Child and Monkey-Mother," for instance, and the final fight scene
between Lion and Tiger--or simply in imagery. The dialect becomes accessible
through its musical appeal and is easy to incorporate for either independent
readers or storytellers. Like Berry's oral style, the pen-and-ink drawings have an
energy that contrasts sharply with many current adaptations that seem tidied to
death. There's no question that this is a living tradition. BH
D.V. Ingenuity
C.U. Storytelling
[78]
Billings, Charlene W. Grace Hopper: Navy Admiral and Computer Pioneer.
Enslow, 1989. ISBN 0-89490-194-X. 128p. illus. with photographs. $15.95.
M 
Gr. 6-12. 
Grace Hopper, Commodore in the U.S. Navy,
developer of the COBOL programming language, and guest of David Letterman,
deserves better. While this biography provides many facts about Dr. Hopper's
life and career, it does so in an extremely plodding fashion, alternating resume-
like cataloging of Hopper's achievements with pages of undigested information
on computers. And the two never quite come together: while we are told that
Hopper contributed immensely to the development of COBOL, and while we are
told a lot about COBOL, we aren't told exactly what one had to do with the
other. Hopper's dedication to the Navy and her peppery sense of humor come
through in some of the quotes, but one senses that Billings missed many
opportunities in her interviews with the subject. Useful for reports, but it won't
be easy getting kids past the corny cover and the chapter headings that are less
than enthralling: "Taking Risks at the Forefront of a New Industry," "Grace
Hopper, Tireless Teacher to Us All." RS
C.U. Mathematics
Brett, Jan, ad. Beauty and the Beast; ad. and illus. by Jan Brett. Clarion, 1989.
ISBN 0-89919-497-4. 32p. $14.95.
M 
5-8 yrs. 
Though neither of the eighteenth-century authors,
Villeneuve and Leprince de Beaumont, is mentioned, the artist acknowledges
Walter Crane's illustrations (1875) and Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch's version
(illustrated by Edmund Dulac in 1910) as influences. Considering the power of
both those editions and of other recent versions with art by Mercer Mayer, Diane
Goode, Warwick Hutton, Winslow Pinney Pels, Binette Schroeder, Michael
Foreman, Michael Hague, or Etienne Delessert, this is a forbidding fairy tale to
take on. Brett shows real finesse in drafting various animals as a central motif
of the story, but her human faces are awkward except in profile. Perhaps because
of this, the characters are frequently profiled, resulting in stiffly arranged
compositions that are packed with formal decorative detail. The peacock, which
symbolizes vanity in most versions, seems to pop up everywhere here, including
the transformation scene, where its feathers, interlaced with willow branches,
surround the happy couple and where its appearance is something of a
contradiction. Overall, the tone is glamorous to the neglect of the emotional
power that has sustained the story for centuries. There are exceptions: a
strongly focused opening picture, a Rackham-like silhouette, and a moving
double spread dominated by the heads of Beauty and the Beast. In the climactic
last page, however, both horse and roses look as if they're made of plastic, and
the peacock feathers, gold brocade, and stilted humans add to the artificial sheen.
Pretty but problematic. BH
D.V. Courtship
Brett, Jan, ad. The Mitten; ad. and illus. by Jan Brett. Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-
399-21920-X. 32p. $14.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
An ornately illustrated Ukrainian folktale relies, as
several of the artist's books have done, on border pictures for graphic extension
of the action. Nicki's grandmother has resisted his pleas for white mittens
[79 ]
because they will get lost in the snow. When she finally knits them, he does
drop one without noticing it. That sets the stage for a progession of animals-
mole, rabbit, hedgehog, owl, badger, fox, and bear-to stuff themselves into the
mitten, until mouse causes bear to sneeze and the mitten shoots into the sky,
landing right in Nicki's hand. Although each of the artistic effects is well
handled, the overall design is crowded: intricately realistic paintings (some of
the faces have the appearance of retouched photographs) are framed in elaborately
mottled birch bark upon which is superimposed stylized flowers and the mitten-
shaped windows that show action on the side. However, Brett's clever patterning
and dominant white tones do work to blend these varied elements at the point
when they threaten to become mutually distracting, and young viewers will
undeniably enjoy the game aspect of watching the boy and the animals play out
their separate dramas. BH
C.U. Seasons (unit)
Carwardine, Mark. Animals in the Cold; illus. by Jim Channell. ISBN 0-
944483-26-7. Animals on the Move; illus. by John Francis. ISBN 0-944483-
27-5. Each book: Ilex/Garrett Educational, 1989. 45p. (Looking at How
Animals Live). $13.95.
M 
Gr. 2-4. 
Two of the books in a publisher's new series
illustrate the weaknesses of the set, all-thus far-by the same author. Some of
the deficiencies may be format-imposed: double-page spreads that do not give
the same kind of information about each creature; for example, sometimes facts
about breeding or about raising young are provided, sometimes not. In Animals
in the Cold, which describes some of the life-forms of the polar region, there is
also haphazard arrangement of material, the entries being assembled without
alphabetical or zoological relationships. This and Animals on the Move, which
has an arrangement even more random (and includes an Arctic tern which could
have been in the first book) have the same kind of awkward writing: " . .they
have very strong feet for grasping onto brick walls," or redundancy, as in "They
pair for life, the same females and males always breeding together ... 
."
Illustrators vary from book to book, the best giving accurate enough details for
identification but having little distinction, the poorest tending to be rather gaudy
commercial art. Each book has a table of contents but no index. Other books in
the series, to date, are Monkeys and Apes, Night Animals, Nibblers and
Gnawers, and Water Animals. ZS
C.U. Nature study
Cobb, Vicki. Writing It Down; illus. by Marylin Hafner. Lippincott, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32327-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32326-3. 32p. Library
ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Perky, humorous ink-and-wash drawings and diagrams
illustrate a simply written and spaciously printed text that explains how paper is
made, how a ballpoint pen works (and why it's an improvement on quill pens)
and how pencils and crayons were invented-again, with an explanation of their
less-satisfactory predecessors. Nothing new here, but a good job of explaining
the origins of familiar objects for just the age that may be asking questions
about them, and the text is so clearly and simply written that it can also inform
the read-to-me audience. ZS
[80 1
Cole, Brock. Celine. Farrar, 1989. ISBN 0-374-31234-6. [224p]. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 7-12. 
See editorial, this issue, p.75.
D.V. Stepparent-child relations
Condon, Judith. Smoking. Watts/Gloucester, 1989. ISBN 0-531-17174-4.
32p. illus. and with photographs. $11.90.
NR 
Gr. 5-9. 
"These are opinion books," says the introduction to
the series, and "written by acknowledged experts." The author of this one "is a
freelance writer and has worked in adult education for many years." Some of the
other books in this series have effectively presented their "opinions" with logic
and evidence, but Smoking never gets beyond diatribe. Few people doubt that
smoking is unhealthy, but a book on the subject needs to do more than provide
unsubstantiated rhetoric. That tobacco smoking can cause early menopause,
aneurysms, crib death, stillbirth and miscarriage may well be true, but the author
cites no evidence to back the assertion. A list of the "lethal cocktail of at least
4,000 substances" in tobacco includes "ammonia (used to make explosives)."
Photographs (in an often melodramatic layout) are more polemical than
informative: a picture of a forest fire, for example, elides the question of how
the fire was started. For a better book (for a younger audience) see Pete Sanders
Why Do People Smoke? reviewed below. RS
C.U. Health and hygiene
Dereske, Jo. The Lone Sentinel. Karl/Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31552-X.
169p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Erik and his father are responsible for overseeing the
fields of biosote essential to the lives of the Helgatites, an alien race that
protects the humans who live on the planet Azure. Accustomed to their lonely
life in the wilderness, Erik does not tell the authorities when his father is killed
in an accident, nor does he inform them of the mysterious runaway twins who
appear at his door, and, when a third emergency threatens, Erik can't inform "the
Trust" because his radio is mysteriously broken. This is well-paced science-
fiction suspense, constructed with a minimum of world-explanation. While the
theme seems oddly paternalistic (Erik helps save the Helgatites from evil rebels)
the action is clear and quick, climaxed by a great rocket-and-car chase scene. RS
Dillon, Eilis. The Island of Ghosts. Scribner's, 1989. ISBN 0-684-19107-5.
151p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
None of the residents of a remote Irish island know
why Mr. Webb, an American engineer, has come to live amongst them, but they
are aware that his coaching has helped two local boys, Dara and Brendan, win
scholarships to a mainland school. When all three disappear, the sisters of the
boys ask the schoolteacher to lend them his boat-unheard of on the island, girls
sailing a boat. Dara is the narrator for most of the book, his sister Barbara
telling the rest of the story, which is a compelling account of Webb's luring the
boys to the Island of Ghosts and keeping them prisoners there until they are
rescued by Barbara and by Brendan's sister Cait, who have never believed-as
both sets of parents do-that the boys are dead. ZS
[81]
Dygard, Thomas J. Forward Pass. Morrow, 1989. ISBN 0-688-07961-X.
186p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
A high-school football coach, after his first mediocre
year, knows that what he needs is a really good pass receiver; having watched
Jill, star of the school's girls' basketball team, and having concluded that she'd
be safe if she didn't tackle or try any broken field running, he invites her to try
out. Jill is interested, and her parents agree-cautiously-to let her join the
team. Most readers will anticipate what follows: protest from the oppostion,
media attention, game sequences in which Jill performs well. She does decide to
quit before the end of the season so that she can go back to the basketball team.
This is a variation of the formula sports story, lacking depth but adequately
written and having the action sequences sports buffs enjoy. ZS
D.V. Sex roles
Ehrlich, Amy. The Story of Hanukkah; illus. by Ori Sherman. Dial, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0616-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0615-4. 26p. Library
ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A notable Hanukkah picture book combines cohesive
storytelling with distinguished art. Ori Sherman's work is characterized by a
collage effect of strongly colored shapes and patterns, often stylized with Jewish
and Middle Eastern motifs. The effect is monumental enough to support but not
overwhelm the account of the Maccabee revolt and the miracle of light for the
rededicated temple. Neither didactic nor condescending, this companion to The
Four Questions by Lynne Schwartz and Ori Sherman (BCCB 3/89) maintains
aesthetic respect for a traditional celebration. BH.
C.U. Hanukkah
Emerson, Kathy Lynn. Making Headlines: A Biography of Nellie Bly. Dillon,
1989. 
ISBN 0-87518-406-5. 
[lllp.] illus. with photographs. 
$11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Nellie Bly's life is the stuff of drama: an attractive,
young, nineteenth-century woman (Elizabeth Cochrane) defies tradition to
become a newspaper reporter who specializes in social causes, focuses world
attention on her breathless trip around the world, marries a multi-millionaire,
declines into bankruptcy, and dies of pneumonia while covering a story back on
the job as an investigative reporter. Although there are occasional stylistic
problems with the text ("Several hundred workers shared one toilet, along with a
family of rats"), this makes fascinating reading, and Emerson is forthright about
Bly's limitations (on her travels "she tended to make generalizations about the
conditions she saw without understanding the culture that produced them") as
well as her triumphs ("this is all my own [column] ... 
I may say all I please
and what I please"). With telling black-and-white photographs, a selective
bibliography, and an index, there's plenty of information here for student
research on women's history as well as on the specific subject and her times.
BH
C.U. Journalism
[82]
Faville, Barry. The Return. Oxford, 1989. 
ISBN 0-19-558166-0. 
163p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
There's a new, odd, boy in Jonathan's class. Can
Karl really send messages to Jonathan's mind? Do Karl and his equally odd
mother have anything to do with the pillar of light Aaron Clark spots from his
fishing boat one night? Faville's spinning of this aliens-among-us tale is a bit
slow but persuasive. The setting is a small coastal village in New Zealand, just
after World War II, and all the inhabitants play a part in the story, which has a
gentle tone closer to Ray Bradbury than to Invasion of the Bodysnatchers. The
aliens have come to Wilkes Beach to rectify a wrong committed by one of their
kind on a visit seventy years before; their success leads both aliens and humans
to new understanding of each other and themselves. RS
Finkelstein, Norman H. The Other 1492: Jewish Settlement in the New World.
Scribner's, 1989. 
ISBN 0-684-18913-5. 
100p. illus. with photographs.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
This history of Sephardic Jews and Marranos offers a
counterview to the lionization of Ferdinand and Isabella's support for Columbus.
The year 1492 marked not only the "new world" exploration that was financed
heavily by Jewish backers, but also the expulsion of Jews from Spain after five
centuries of cultural absorption. Finkelstein's accounts of mob persecution,
forced conversion, and Inquisition tragedies are carefully researched and never
overdramatic, though the stories of chief figures such as Torquemada and
Abravanel are more involving than fiction. The writing is clear, smooth, and
well-organized. 
After a thorough background occupying half the book, the
author concentrates on Spanish Jews' determined efforts to settle Brazil as well
as North America. With so many books currently emphasizing the fate of
Ashkenazis around World War II, this offers more unusual perspective on the
Jewish role in a major movement of world history. Accompanied by a solid
bibliography of books and articles, the text is illustrated with historical
engravings and paintings. BH
C.U. History-World
Gallo, Donald R., ed. Connections: Short Stories by Outstanding Writers for
Young Adults. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-29815-3. 228p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Gallo's third collection of short stories by YA writers
wears thin very quickly. None of the seventeen authors included are at their best
in the short story form; few achieve the distillation and focus necessary to make
a short story effective. While the stories aren't memorable, they are readable,
and most are humorous. M.E. Kerr's is a snappy sketch about a girl who loves
the "wrong" guy; Chris Crutcher's "A Brief Moment in the Life of Angus
Bethune" is a robustly funny story about "a big kid" with big parents-both of
them gay. Robin Brancato's "White Chocolate" is a concentrated study of an
angry-and very smart-teenager's non-encounter with an equally smart English
teacher. Those are the plums. RS
[83 1
Gates, Susan. The Burnhope Wheel. Holiday House, 1989. ISBN 0-8234-
0767-5. 114p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Ellen, fifteen, feels incredibly disagreeable these days,
lashing out at the world in general and her family in particular. An (unfamiliar)
impulse of curiosity makes her get on the bus marked "Burnhope," empty save
for a silent driver. Burnhope is an abandoned mine, but when Ellen arrives there
she has a frightening vision of an enormous water wheel churning while flood
waters rise. 
Dave, a boy from a neighboring town is also drawn to the
mysterious mine, where the two of them find themselves involved in a dark and
ugly mystery from a long time ago. While sullen (and overexplained) Ellen is
unlikely to gain much empathy from readers, the menacing atmosphere is
economically evoked and the book as a whole is a diverting blend of time-shift
tale and ghost story. RS
Gibbons, Gail. Monarch Butterfly; written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. Holiday
House, 1989. ISBN 0-8234-0773-X. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Large-scale paintings, clearly detailed, and a simply
written, sequential text describe the life cycle of the monarch butterfly and its
migratory patterns. This is Gibbons at her best, providing information in a text
that is cohesive and comprehensible. A final double-page spread, emphasizing
respect for the butterfly, closes with "How to release your butterfly outside," and
Gibbons adds a page of additional facts, such as the height of a monarch's flight
or the fact that some butterflies are tagged to track how fast and how far they fly.
ZS
C.U. Nature study
Gifaldi, David. Yours Till Forever. Lippincott, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-
32356-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32355-7. 90p. (Page-Turners). Library ed.
$11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-10. 
Rick has never thought too much about the tragic
death of his parents and his subsequent adoption. It all happened the day he was
born, when his parents suffered fatal injuries in a car accident while on their way
to the delivery room. But there is something about his new friends Pete and
Samantha that sends Rick back to the mementos of his parents that his adoptive
parents have saved for him. "I think Pete and Samantha are my parents-
reborn." The reincarnation motif is belabored, its resolution hinging upon a
chance encounter with an Indian scholar, and the suspense is contrived.
However, Rick's narration is immediately involving, the subject has inherent
appeal, and the book is quick and short. RS
Goble, Paul, ad. Iktomi and the Berries: A Plains Indian Story; ad. and illus.
by Paul Goble. Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08419-1; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-531-05819-0. 32p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R* 
Gr. K-3. 
It is hardly necessary to cite again the dramatic
composition, judicious use of space and bright colors, and the incorporation of
tribal motifs in costume details. They are as effective here as in Iktomi and the
[84]
Boulder (BCCB 7/88). A traditional trickster tale is retold in this second book
which-like the first-uses small print to quote Iktomi's comments, setting
them apart from the larger print of the narration. Goble suggests, in fact, that
the audience be given a chance to insert remarks at those points in the story
when the narrator is making direct comments (gray typeface instead of the black
of exposition). The plot: with many caustic asides, Goble describes the foolish
behavior of Iktomi, who narrowly escapes drowning when he tries to pick the
reflection of berry bushes in the river. It's lively, it's funny, it's handsome, and
it has a fillip at the ending that the audience will surely enjoy. ZS
Harrar, George. Signs of the Apes, Songs of the Whales. Simon and Schuster,
1989. Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-67748-9; Paper ed. ISBN 0-671-67745-4. 48p.
(Novabooks). Trade ed. $14.95; Paper ed. $5.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-9. 
Based on the Nova program of the same name, this
attractively-if not efficiently--designed and illustrated book introduces several
ongoing experiments in animal language-learning. Chapters on Washoe the
chimp and Koko the gorilla are more extensive than a third section on dolphins;
all three chapters are broken up with sidebars that are usually informative but
often irrelevant. A discussion of social behavior among chimps, for example, is
interrupted by a page on Siri the elephant, who draws. Similarly, a section on
dolphin memory is accompanied by a sidebar explaining how honeybees dance.
While the presentation is disorganized, the subject has an inherent fascination
that will smooth over the rough spots. A spotty index is appended. RS
C.U. Communication; Language arts
Helprin, Mark. Swan Lake; illus. by Chris Van Allsburg. Ariel/Houghton,
1989. ISBN 0-395-49858-9. 80p. $19.95.
M 
Gr. 9- 
Unlike Dame Margot Fonteyn's straightforward
retelling of the ballet plot (BCCB 5/89), this is an extended, discursive, and
digressive elaboration on some of the tale's basic elements. The story is told by
the (unnamed) prince's tutor (also unnamed) to his young ward, a device that not
only distances the action, but allows for an unconscionable degree of rambling
that will be incomprehensible to the child reader and irritating to most adults.
"On a very superficial level, let us assume that man lives in two worlds: one of
God and nature, and the other of his own making. To live entirely in the first and
to be satisfied therein is perfectly adequate. Indeed, it is a kind of paradise, which
the animals know better than anyone, and without resort to it in some fashion
man is nothing more than a machine of his own design. But whereas . . . ."
The drama of the Prince and Odette is swamped beneath self-indulgent prose. On
the other hand, Van Allsburg's thirteen illustrations may justify purchase. With
the same otherworldly glow that illuminated The Wreck of the Zephyr, these
paintings contain intense hues of color within formal black outlining. The
arrangements of the subjects---Odile and Rothbart on a staircase, for example-
are deliberate but not static, conveying instead a held-back, often menacing,
dynamism. Both Helprin and Van Allsburg have here attempted to impose a
personal vision onto traditional material, but only the illustrator has regenerated
the story. RS
[85 ]
Isberg, Emily. Peak Performance: Sports, Science, and the Body in Action.
Simon and Schuster, 1989. Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-67750-0; Paper ed. 0-671-
67747-0. 48p. illus. with photographs. (Novabooks). Trade ed. $14.95; Paper
ed. $5.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-9. 
Although the format is cluttered (a broad inner
column of type is often broken by, or framed by, color photographs, labelled
diagrams, and boxes of quick/additional information) this is a text that gives a
great many facts about current knowledge and practices in sports medicine,
practices that contribute to both the health and the performances of athletes.
Isberg uses some specific cases to illustrate the techniques by which individual
men and women have been diagnosed or treated or trained. The arrangement of
material is not impressive, and the writing is intermittently choppy, but the text
gives good coverage to a subject that is of interest to many young readers. An
index gives access to the contents, based on a "Nova" television program. ZS
C.U. Health and hygiene
Kamerman, Sylvia, ed. The Big Book of Comedies. Plays, Inc., 1989. ISBN
0-8238-0289-2. 327p. $16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
A compilation of twenty-five one-act plays is divided
into a set of plays for junior and senior high school, a second set intended for the
middle grades, a group of seven "skits and curtain raisers," and five adaptations of
classics, some of which are designated as being for "round-the-table reading."
(Given the age-range stipulated by the publisher, it is hard to see the rationale for
compressing Pride and Prejudice or The Importance of Being Earnest into one act
rather than reading the originals). Production notes are appended. Like the
material in most of the collections that have been published by Plays, Inc. the
plays here are short, sunny, only occasionally funny or perceptive. There isn't
time for much characterization in a one-act play, but there is time for wit or
insight, neither of which abounds. At best, useful. ZS
C.U. Assemblies
Kandoian, Ellen. Is Anybody Up?; written and illus. by Ellen Kandoian.
Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21749-5. 32p. $14.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
In Under the Sun (BCCB 1/88), Molly wanted to
know where the sun went when it set; here she wonders who else is up at seven-
thirty in the morning. As in the first book, the question provokes a global
response, longitudinally speaking. "Far to the north and far to the south, it is
seven-thirty in the morning and other people are getting up and having breakfast
too." The others include an Inuit woman on Baffin Bay, a boy in Quebec (eating
French toast), Molly's grandfather in Miami, a Peruvian boy in the Andes, etc.,
all the way south to an Antarctican seal hunting for fish. This is a clear and
clever presentation of a time concept not usually occurring to toddlers, who
nevertheless will adore the idea of far-away folk all eating breakfast at exactly the
same time. The pen-and-wash illustrations are spare and simple, radiant with
morning light. This, as well as the first book, would make a great companion
for a child's first globe. RS
D.V. World--concepts
[86
Krementz, Jill. How It Feels to Fight for Your Life. Joy Street/Little, 1989.
ISBN 0-316-50364-9. 132p illus. with photographs. $15.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-9. 
Photographs illustrate the accounts by fourteen
children (ages 7 to 16) of their struggles with the fear and pain and, at times,
despair in battling illness or crippling accident that is usually permanent and
often life-threatening. 
The illnesses covered are aplastic anemia, asthma,
coronary malfunction, cystic fibrosis, diabetes, epilepsy, juvenile rheumatoid
arthritis, kidney disease, leukemia, lupus, osteogenic sarcoma, and spina bifida;
one of the children is a bur victim and one is unable to walk because he was
shot in the spine by someone aiming at his stepfather. While the young
people's stories give a great deal of information about their illnesses, the
impressive aspect of the accounts lies in the courage and adaptability the boys
and girls reveal as individuals and as a group. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Courage
Lawlor, Laurie. Addie's Dakota Winter; illus. by Toby Gowing. Whitman,
1989. ISBN 0-8075-0171-9. 160p. $10.50.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Set in 1883, this is the story of a pioneer family's
winter in a Dakota sod house. Since ten-year-old Addie has an unfriendly brother
(George is nine) she looks forward eagerly to a chance to go to school and make
a friend. The story focuses on Addie's feelings about her own behavior when,
threatened by some bullies, she lies and says her new friend Tilla was the one
who had told the teacher about the boys. There is a blizzard, of course, and
Addie is caught in it; there is a conversion of George from reprobate to
participant, due to the teacher's sensitive handling of his rudeness. In all, a
believable slice-of-life story of the frontier, not distinctive in plot or
characterization, but adequately written and giving a very good view of the
prejudicial attitudes (held by some) toward newer immigrant groups. ZS
L'Engle, Madeleine. An Acceptable Time. Farrar, 1989. ISBN 0-374-30027-5.
343p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
L'Engle's particular brand of Christianity is skeptical
and undogmatic; her challenge has always been to keep her ideas from
overwhelming her story. In this sequel to A House Like a Lotus (BCCB 12/84),
Polly has come to live for a while with her grandparents (Dr. and Dr. Murry
from A Wrinkle in Time) in a rather remote part of Connecticut. After two
mysterious encounters with otherwordly young people, Polly finds herself in
another time-a prehistoric time, when the area was populated by Druids. While
this is a promising premise, too much of the first half of the book is taken up
with provocative-L'Engle is certainly a spirited thinker-but rather abstract
conversation having too little to do with the events of the story. 
When,
however, Polly is mistaken for a goddess by two warring tribes-now there's a
story, somewhat melodramatic ("'Blood!' the people screamed") but very
exciting. RS
D.V. Religious understanding
C.U. Religious education
[87]
LeSieg, Theo. The Pop-Up Mice of Mr. Brice; illus. by Roy McKie. Random
House, 1989. ISBN 0-679-80132-4. 20p. $9.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
This busy-box version of a book first published in
1973 as The Many Mice of Mr. Brice probably won't stand up to library
circulation, but its dizzying array of things-to-do (besides reading) is impressive.
Mr. Brice's mice all live on different floors and "have their names upon the
doors": twenty-six doors, labelled from Ann to Zeke, each one opening to reveal
a different mouse. Hard-to-find-Harriet wheels around behind several lift-the-
flaps; Mary Rose ties pretty bows (yarn included); Donna loves to dance (shake-
shake); a six-inch ruler slides out for a quick lesson in measurement. Perhaps
the most educational effect is Waldo's clock, an easy and movable introduction
to time-telling. The text is a bouncy rhyming catalog of what mice do; the pop-
up parts are considerably lower-tech than what we're used to, but a great deal
more fun. RS
Martin, Katherine. Night Riding. Knopf, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-
90064-0; Trade ed. 0-679-80064-6. 197p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
An ably written, sometimes gripping first novel is
vividly set in rural Tennessee, where eleven-year-old Prin must cope with her
father's hospitalization for tuberculosis, her mother's unexpected pregnancy, and
the resulting family stress and financial strain, not to mention concern about
new "white trash" neighbors named Hammond. 
Mr. Hammond's violence
toward his illegitimately pregnant 15-year-old and his sexual threats toward Prin
escalate to a climactic scene one night when Prin rides the horses she and her
father have cared for together. Except for the archvillain, each character is three-
dimensional, with scenes evolving naturally from dynamics of interaction and
internal development. The dialogue is subtly tuned and the treatment of incest
honestly but delicately handled, always from a young protagonist's viewpoint
without didactic intrusion. The fictional details and plot as a whole authentically
reflect the customs and values of the 1950s in the conservative south, to which
Martin is especially true in depicting the secrecy surrounding unsanctioned or
even marital sex. BH
D.V. Friendship values
McCaughrean, Geraldine. Saint George and the Dragon; illus. by Nicki Palin.
Doubleday, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-385-26529-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-
26528-X. 32p. $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 2-. 
This no-nonsense version of the St. George legend
could serve elementary, junior high, and high school students as an introduction
to England's patron saint. The dragon here is a rank villain whose father is Evil,
whose mother is Darkness, and whose name is Wickedness. It eats dogs, sheep,
and finally children until St. George arrives in time to save the princess of the
medieval town under attack. The paintings do not flinch from projecting the
terror of all who are threatened, from St. George's wild-eyed horse to the
Princess Sabra, tied to a stake as dragon's meat after her name is chosen in the
lottery to appease the creature's appetite. The red-gold cast of the art suggests
blood as well as fire. 
The anatomical detail and facial expressions are
masterfully drafted with robust action and Renaissance stylistic flourishes.
[88 1
Youngsters can sharpen their acumen by comparing this to Trina Schart
Hyman's Caldecott-award-winning St. George and the Dragon (BCCB 10/84). A
note on the story is appended. BH
D.V. Courage
McKissack, Patricia. Jesse Jackson: A Biography. Scholastic, 1989. ISBN 0-
590-43181-1. 108p. illus. with photographs. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Charismatic, energetic, and articulate, Jesse Jackson
has also been accused of unscrupulous ambition, as in the case of his using
Martin Luther King Jr.'s assassination to further his own career by appearing
almost immediately afterwards on the Today Show. To her credit, McKissack
mentions the controversies that have dogged Jackson's activities, including the
financial scandal attached to Operation Breadbasket, but she champions him
candidly: "while SLCL's high council refused to make a comment, Jesse was
trying to stop the senseless death and destruction" after King's death.
Occasionally the tone is adulatory, as in the implication that Jackson's advocacy
is responsible for the drop in sickle cell anemia rates. However, the information
is factually solid without becoming too detailed, and, in spite of a few stylistic
flaws, the text is accessible and easy to read. Although it would have been
helpful for students doing research to have source notes included, especially for
quotes, there is a bibliography and index. Illustrated with black-and-white
photographs, this a guaranteed choice for reports on U.S. political leaders. BH
D.V. Pride in background and heritage
C.U. Social studies
McMullan, Kate. Dinosaur Hunters; illus. by John R. Jones. Random House,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-91150-4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-8150-X. 48p.
(Step Into Reading Books). Library ed. $6.99; Paper ed. $2.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Although there are myriad books on dinosaurs for
beginning and older readers, this is tailored, somewhat self-consciously, for those
in between. Five chapters in large print cover the fossilizing process, early
notions about dinosaur bones, a few scientists who made landmark
paleontological digs, and current findings. The tone is sometimes patronizing,
and the watercolor art is much more lightweight than the competitive standard of
photographs, models, and fine drawings set in works by Helen Sattler and others.
However, as supplementary material for reports and for gung-ho young dinosaur
fans, this is a logical choice for both school and public libraries. BH
C.U. 
Paleontology
McVitty, Walter, ad. Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves; illus. by Margaret Early.
Abrams, 1989. ISBN 0-8109-1888-9. 32p. $14.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
With smooth storytelling and exquisitely rendered art
in the style of Persian miniatures, this represents the best aspects of the
contemporary publishing trend of illustrated classics. Margaret Early's borders
around every page of text are technically elaborate but aesthetically restrained in
service of spacious double spreads. Similarly, each full-page picture develops
multiple design and color motifs with such delicately patterned line work that the
most complex compositions effect a unified tone. Those familiar with the
[89]
Arabian Nights story of the poor man who discovers a cave concealing a robber
band's wealth will remember the ferocious elements of the tale as well as the
noteworthy intelligence of its real hero, Morgiana. 
This rendition neither
compromises nor overdramatizes these elements, but incorporates them into an
absorbing complement of narrative and graphic image. Honorable mention
should also go to the fine reproduction and bookmaking. The answer to that
nagging question of "do we really need another edition" is, in this case, a
resounding yes. BH
D.V. Ingenuity
Munro, Roxie. The Inside-Outside Book of London; written and illus. by Roxie
Munro. Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-525-44522-6. 48p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Although the format of this oversize book makes it
look appropriate for a picture-book audience (and, indeed, some young children
will enjoy the pictures because of their scale, bright color, and intriguing details)
the subject is probably of more interest to the middle-grades audience that can
identify famous buildings, appreciate architectural details, and understand
perspective. 
As she has done in earlier books, Munro follows an outdoor
picture with a view of the interior (Houses of Parliament/Commons Chamber;
the dome of St. Paul's/the Whispering Gallery) although in some instances she
abandons this outside/inside pattern, as when a view of Buckingham Palace is
followed by another outdoor scene with the Royal Coach passing. Nice for
browsing, especially with a visit in prospect or in retrospect. A page of notes
giving information about the pictured sights of London ends the book. ZS
Mwalimu. Awful Aardvark; illus. by Adrienne Kennaway. Little, 1989. ISBN
0-316-59218-8. 32p. $14.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
With the rounded shapes and strongly focused
compositions that characterized Kennaway's Greenaway-award-winning art for
Crafty Chameleon by Mwenye Hadithi (BCCB 2/88), Kennaway illustrates
another African story by Mwalimu. In folktale style, Mongoose conspires with
other jungle animals to stop Aardvark's loud snoring, but the monkeys, lion,
and rhinoceros only manage to rouse him briefly. It is the lowly termites that
topple his tree, "and from that time to this, Aardvark has slept during the day and
eaten termites at night. And Mongoose and the other animals sleep peacefully
because they are no longer disturbed by Aardvark's awful snoring." In addition
to its verbal and graphic humor, both deceptively simple, this has a special
appeal to very young listeners who may be disturbed at night by a parent who
snores as loud as Aardvark. Read this with full-throated sound effects, and watch
out for toddlers bearing termites towards Mom and Dad's bed! BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Nickell, Joe. 
The Magic Detectives; written and illus. by Joe Nickell.
Prometheus, 1989. ISBN 0-87975-547-4. 115p. Paper ed. $7.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Using an Encyclopedia Brown-like format, the author
seeks to debunk thirty "paranormal" mysteries such as Bigfoot, the Amityville
Horror, Tut's curse, and the Loch Ness Monster. Each mystery gets a page-and-
a-half treatment; readers are then asked to turn the book upside-down for the
[90
"real" explanation. If the explanations seem guarded, their caution is a refreshing
contrast to the wild claims made by Uri Geller, or those for Lady the Wonder
Horse. Unlikely to staunch the appeal of fanciful feats, but good ammunition
for playground skeptics. Notes and suggestions for teachers are appended. RS
Ostrow, William. All about Asthma; by William and Vivian Ostrow; illus. by
Blanche Sims. Whitman, 1989. ISBN 0-8075-0276-6. 40p. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
More comprehensive and easier to follow than
Michael Charlton's Wheezy (BCCB 2/89), this cartoon-illustrated guide was
written by a young asthma sufferer and his mother. The Ostrows detail what
asthma is and how it is diagnosed, how to handle an attack, and generally, how
to live with the affliction. While the kid's-eye view of the disease is effectively
delivered from someone who has Been There ("My chest would tighten like a
gorilla was sitting on it, daring me to take a breath"), sometimes the tone is a
bit much: "During a family get-together, my cousin Dan told me that Teddy
Roosevelt had asthma as a kid. This was exciting news, and I needed to
investigate it further. I went to the library and took out every book I saw about
Teddy Roosevelt." But, on the whole, the blend of information and informed
empathy works quite well. RS
C.U. Health
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. Wild Turkey, Tame Turkey; illus. with photographs
by William Mufioz. Clarion, 1989. ISBN 0-89919-704. 57p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Color photographs of good quality illustrate a text
that is-like most of Patent's work-accurate, informative, clear but not overly
simplified, and written with a communicated enthusiasm for the subject.
Almost wiped out as a species in the United States, the wild turkeys of an earlier
day were wily, graceful (almost elegant) birds. Careful breeding and conservation
programs have increased the numbers of wild turkeys, which are quite unlike the
domesticated variety in appearance and behavior. Patent, although clearly partial
to the slim, bronze wild turkey for its intelligence, makes it clear that the tame
turkeys bred and grown in close and controlled quarters are needed to meet the
demands of the market. Information about similarities and differences, about
courting and breeding habits, and about the origins of subspecies is provided; an
index is appended. ZS
Peck, Sylvia. Seal Child. Morrow, 1989. ISBN 0-688--8682-9. 
200p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
A variation of the selkie motif that has been featured
in several picture books (Susan Cooper, Mordicai Gerstein, Jane Yolen) and
fictionalized by Carolyn Sloane in The Sea Child (BCCB 11/88) and Mollie
Hunter in A Stranger Came Ashore (BCCB 1/76), this holds its own as the only
version set in the U.S., a vividly recreated stretch of Maine coast. It is also the
only one that involves friendship rather than the more traditional romance.
Molly is a lonely sixth-grader who finds, during summer vacation, the skinned
body of a seal, with its pup crying nearby. Soon afterwards, an old neighboring
woman takes in a strange girl, Meara, who seems ignorant of many things, who
never gets cold, and who refuses to swim in the sea. Molly and Meara become
[91]
close, in spite of Molly's jealousy of her own little brother Douglas, who
claims Meara's devoted attention. Then, in a climactic scene, Meara must make
a choice to save Molly at the cost of their human friendship. This is subtly
developed, building mystery by focusing on the main characters rather than the
obvious ploy of exploiting the seal hunters as a threat. At the same time, the
story is easy to read, and Molly's devotion to her Labrador retriever makes it an
appealing dog story. A theme song has the music notation, and Parker's black
ink and gray wash pictures, together with a gray reflection shadowing each
chapter heading, contribute to handsome bookmaking that underscores the story's
exploration of the doppelginger. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Perl, Lila. The Great Ancestor Hunt: The Fun of Finding Out Who You Are;
illus. by Erika Weihs and with photographs. Clarion, 1989. ISBN 0-89919-
745-0. 104p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Relatively little how-to information about genealogy
is scattered throughout a text more interested in family history as an idea than as
an activity. Perl discusses the origins of names; censuses in history; migratory
patterns across the U.S.; and events that led to immigration, such as the Irish
potato famine. Included in the main text are instructions for charting a family
tree and some general advice about talking to relatives, but most of the hard
how-to information is found in an appendix. While not really a genealogy
guide, Perl's informal and anecdotal approach to family history will add a
personalizing aspect to history curriculums. RS
C.U. History; Social studies
Philip, Marlene Nourbese. 
Harriet's Daughter. 
The Women's
Press/Bookpeople, 1988. ISBN 0-88961-134-3. 150p. Paper ed. $6.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Margaret and Zulma, both fourteen, are best friends
and facing some problems. Margaret's father is always going on about how
Coloured People are supposed to behave, and about how rebellious Margaret
needs some Good West Indian Discipline, meaning exile to her grandmother's
home back on the island. Zulma, on the other hand, wants to go back to her
home and grandmother in Tobago and be safe away from her abusive stepfather.
Characterfully narrated by Margaret, this story of a strong friendship between
two black Caribbean girls in Toronto confidently carries a feminist theme as the
girls, with the assistance of a grandmotherly neighbor, Mrs. B, scheme to get
Zulma back to her grandmother. Margaret, who calls herself Harriet after her
heroine Harriet Tubman, is in the Holden Caulfield mode of adolescent run-on
narrators, but the author skillfully allows enough space between Margaret and
readers for them to appreciate her foibles as well as her strengths. The portrayal
of a community of brave black women is both funny and intense, admiring and
admirable. While the men in the story are drawn with less subtlety (one's a
brute, the other pig-headed) and the book deserves better copy-editing, this is an
engaging effort from a small press. RS
D.V. Friendship values; Mother-daughter relations
[92]
Pringle, Laurence. The Animal Rights Controversy. Harcourt, 1989. ISBN 0-
15-203559-1. 103p. illus. and with photographs. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Pringle has done an even better job than usual at
explaining and assessing the arguments on all sides of a controversial issue.
While animal rights concerns may seem to many to be very much an issue of
the 1980's, Pringle traces their history back to the 18th century and the writings
of Humphrey Primatt and philosopher Jeremy Bentham: "The question is not,
Can they reason? nor Can they talk? but, Can they suffer?" Much of the
discussion about contemporary problems is based on the writings of Peter Singer
and Tom Regan, whose work Pringle cogently and fairly introduces. Whether
describing the procedures of "factory farming" or Draize testing, Pringle is never
sensational, making this book both a sensible witness and an effective
counterpoint to overheated propaganda. The lack of footnotes is unfortunate,
particularly in the face of controversial and/or ludicrous quotes ("a spokesperson
for the veal industry said that the calves are chained in these small enclosures so
they can have 'privacy"'); a reading list and index are appended. Black-and-white
photographs illustrate the points without sensationalizing them. RS
Prochdzkovi, Iva. The Season of Secret Wishes; tr. by Elizabeth D. Crawford.
Lothrop, 1989. ISBN 0-688-08735-3. 213p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
In a story that has vitality and immediacy (qualities
that are preserved by the translator) eleven-year-old Kapka describes the events
and people of a springtime when her family has just moved to a new
neighborhood in Prague. Her father is an artist whose work has been rejected by
the authorities, and it is Kapka and her new friends (all ages) who help mount a
street show of Papa's sculpture. This is not a bitter indictment, but a soft
impeachment, of an authoritarian regime. Structure, style, and characterization
are sturdy, there is humor in incidents and dialogue, and the story gives a vivid
picture of the interesting differences between life in Czechoslovakia and in the
United States while reaffirming the universality of young people's needs,
interests, and concerns. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Courage; Friendship values
Rau, Margaret. Young Women in China; written and illus. with photographs
by Margaret Rau. Enslow, 1989. ISBN 0-89490-170-2. 160p. $16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Focusing on themes of work, marriage, and
education, Rau exemplifies contemporary social conditions in China through the
stories of several young Chinese women. Chingfeng has endured a rural
childhood caught between the excesses of the Cultural Revolution and those of
patriarchal tradition; Meihua wants to marry a boy of whom her family
disapproves; I Miao and Jintao are apprehensive yet excited about leaving their
homes for further education; two chapters tell of girls who have left their homes
to work in the cities. Little Western-style feminist consciousness is exhibited
by the subjects, but the author does point out how "liberated" life is for this
generation of women in comparison with the lives of their mothers. Detail is
sometimes not selective enough-a chapter on five hotel attendants, for
example, includes inordinate discussion of hairstyles-and the author's attempt
[93]
to force a narrative form onto events sometimes results in hokey soap-opera
suspense. While there is some inarticulate gushing ("It was a sense of growing
pains between her shoulder blades that made her feel as if she were sprouting
wings") the writing is generally calm and involving, making the book a useful
cross-cultural discussion-starter. It is illustrated with fuzzy photographs and has
a map, pronunciation guide, and index. RS
C.U. Social studies
Rawlins, Donna. Digging to China; written and illus. by Donna Rawlins.
Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08414-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05814-
X. 32p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
In her conversations with aging gardener Marj, young
Alexis finds out that "if you dug a hole deep enough, you could go straight" to
China, a place Marj has always longed to visit because it seems "exotic." So,
for Marj's birthday, Alexis digs a hole to China ("it took many weeks"), buys a
postcard, and presents it to Marj ... while two Chinese children emerge from
the hole beside Marj's cacti and succulents. Rectangular framed illustrations
center every recto, and small insets decorate the verso on which the text appears.
The art features solid shapes and warm hues, with endpapers showing an
American town across the top and a Chinese city upside down. It's a toss-up as
to whether this is a juvenile fantasy or an adult joke, but the pictures are
inviting in either case. BH
D.V. Older-younger generations
Rohmer, Harriet, ad. Uncle Nacho's Hat; illus. by Veg Reisberg. Children's
Book Press, 1989. ISBN 0-89239-043-3. 32p. $12.95.
M 
5-8 yrs. 
The story of Uncle Nacho, who canot let go of an old
hat full of holes even after his niece gives him a new one, is told with a natural
lilt in both English and Spanish, but the repetition of his trying to throw or
give away the hat is overextended. The paintings, too, are a mixture of fresh
naivet6 and exaggerated clashes of color and pattern. Adapted from a Nicaraguan
folktale performed by a puppet workshop, this could supplement subtler
bilingual picture books in libraries where the demand is heavy. BH
D.V. Adaptability
C.U. Spanish-study and teaching
San Souci, Robert D. The Boy and the Ghost; illus. by J. Brian Pinkney.
Simon, 1989. ISBN 0-671-67176-6. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Many librarians will recognize in this southern black
tale a variant of "The Tinker and the Ghost," included among Ruth Sawyer's
favorite Spanish stories in The Way of the Storyteller. San Souci has a full
note on his own sources and has adapted turn-of-the-century story fragments from
the Journal of American Folk-Lore with a natural ease that sits well in a picture-
book medium, including the low-key dialect. J. Brian Pinkney's watercolors
have a style of wash over sketch-work not unlike that of his father, the notable
Jerry Pinkney, to whom he will inevitably be compared. However, Brian's
human figures and faces have a distinctive grace and versatility. His subtly hued
[94]
scenes maintain a spacious simplicity of composition that makes his first book
a choice one for group read-alouds. BH
D.V. Bravery
C.U. 
Storytelling
Sanders, Pete. Why Do People Smoke? Watts/Gloucester, 1989. ISBN 0-531-
17192-2. 
32p. illus. and with photographs. 
(Let's Talk About Books).
$10.40.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Covering the same ground, with some of the same
photographs, as Condon's Smoking, reviewed above, this is for a younger
audience. The tone, approach and design here are more temperate than in
Condon's book. In comparison with the fuzzy talk about forest fires in Condon,
for example, Sanders simply says "Lots of forest fires are caused by someone
carelessly dropping a cigarette that has not been put out completely." Simple
and direct, with the don't-smoke message all the stronger for its calm delivery.
RS
C.U. Health and hygiene
Sanders, Scott Russell. Aurora Means Dawn; illus. by Jill Kastner. Bradbury,
1989. ISBN 0-02-778270-0. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Mr. and Mrs. Sheldon, traveling from Connecticut by
covered wagon, arrive in Aurora, Ohio in 1800; they have been told that Aurora
is a village with homes, a mill, and a store. What they find, using the land-
company's map, is a surveyor's post. Trapped by debris from a storm, the
family is able to reach their site when settlers from a nearby village help clear
the road. This rather unsubstantial plot ends quite abruptly: the settlers leave,
next morning the parents and children gaze at "this forest that would become
their farm," and the book ends with "Aurora meant dawn; they knew that. And
their family was the dawn of dawn, the first glimmering in this new place. The
next settlers did not come for three years." Watercolor paintings, at times blurry
in detail, have a good sense of space and depth in quietly colored outdoor scenes.
There is no establishment of character; slight structure and static style of writing
provide little to ameliorate what is basically a one-event story. ZS
Seixas, Judith S. Living with a Parent Who Takes Drugs. Greenwillow, 1989.
ISBN 0-688-08627-6. 102p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
A reviewer can't help but feel hopeful in picking up a
book that discusses, at a low reading level, what to do about parental drug abuse.
If this book helps any children with such a problem, it's worth buying, but it
could have been a lot better. To begin with, it implies that drug problems,
including alcoholism, began in the sixties and seventies. To continue, it tries to
incorporate information into dialogue, an awkward device at best. One boy
remarks to another in front of his locker, "he knows that since I belong to
SADD, that's Students Against Driving Drunk [sic], and started the BAD Club,
that's Boys Against Drugs, no one's gonna go through my stuff." And finally,
there are some unfortunate superficialities--a description of group homes as way
stations for children fleeing from troubled situations concludes, "Eventually,
[95 ]
things work out" Balancing these drawbacks are supportive, repeated assurances
that no child is responsible for a parent's habit; open and valid advice about
seeking help; and some facts interwoven with fictionalized case studies. No
index, bibliography, or list of agencies is included. BH
D.V. Parent-child relations
C.U. Health
Seligson, Marcia. Dolphins at Grassy Key; illus. with photographs by George
Ancona. Macmillan, 1989. ISBN 0-02-781800-4. 48p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
The Dolphin Research Center is unusual in
providing, instead of tanks, a natural environment of penned-in areas of the Gulf
of Mexico for research and healing work with dolphins. An educational visitors'
laboratory program includes swimming with dolphins and working with their
trainer/caretakers. This photodocumentary chronicles the activities of the Center
in a way that will involve and inform readers, though it will not enlighten them
about ongoing controversies such as those generated by the fact that "the
military trains [dolphins] to search for hidden explosives in the ocean." The
black-and-white photos are informal and inviting, the continuous text accessible.
Without drying out the information, this will give readers a low-key look at the
characteristics of a favorite sea mammal that often surfaces in ecology units. BH
D.V. Animals, respect for
C.U. Zoology
Shemie, Bonnie. Houses of Snow, Skin and Bones; written and illus. by
Bonnie Shemie. 
Tundra, 1989. 
ISBN 0-88776-240-9. 
[24p]. 
$12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
An informative text accompanied by diagrammatic
black-and-white drawings appears on every other double spread here, alternating
with textured, full-color illustrations of the igloo, quarmang, and tent homes of
Arctic dwellers. Emphasis on the ingenuity and environmental adaptability of
these structures lends weight to the background facts on Inuit tradition. Though
the picture-book format belies a more advanced reading level, this will be useful
for U.S. and Canadian Indian study units among children for whom Charlotte and
David Yue's The Igloo (BCCB 1/89) is too difficult or specialized. BH
C.U. Eskimos (unit)
Smith, Lucinda Irwin. Women Who Write: From the Past and the Present to
the Future. Messner, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-671-65668-6; Paper ed. ISBN
0-671-65669-4. 166p. illus. with photographs. Library ed. $14.98; Paper ed.
$9.98.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
The subject is organized, after an introduction placing
women's writing in historical context, into three sections comprising brief
biographies of seven famous writers of the past (Jane Austen to Lorraine
Hansberry), interviews with twelve contemporary writers (reporter Dawn Garcia
to novelist Anne Tyler), and suggestions to young people who are interested in
becoming writers. 
The strength of the book is its emphasis on variety,
including journalism, poetry, and fiction; the weakness is superficiality-more
depth on fewer representatives might have added substance. The scope is also
[96]
limited to British and American authors. Except for a sentence including several
Nobel Prize winners and a few pages on Anne Frank, there's no treatment of
European, South American, or classical figures (surely Sappho deserves a nod in
an historical overview). The interviews include some real insights into the
personalities and approaches of a range of writers who will be of special interest
to the young adult audience, including a bitter indictment of conservative
librarians by Norma Klein. In spite of a few fatuous lapses ("Once you declare
yourself a writer, part of your soul is committed forever. ... If you decide to
take your writing out of the classroom and into the world of publishing, your
work will produce many different responses during your career and perhaps for
centuries to come!"), the book is honestly written and will prove useful for
browsing and reports. BH
D.V. Occupational orientation
C.U. Vocational guidance
Smucker, Anna Egan. No Star Nights; illus. by Steve Johnson. Knopf, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99925-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-89925-3. 40p. Library
ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
A steel-mill mood piece summons, through verbal
and graphic imagery, the fiery colors and clanking noises that once dominated
life for factory workers and their families in West Virginia. There's a moment
of suspense when the narrator recalls stopping a trucker from dumping slag down
a slope her sisters are climbing, but the real characters here are the smoke and
grit filling the air or the fire engines and floats of a parade, with the fearsomely
powerful machines suggesting background action. The book is handsomely
designed, from gray endpapers to full-page paintings alternating a dusky glow
with scenes hazed by air pollution. There's some nostalgia filming these
landscapes, but the total evocation is as powerful as Judith Hendershot and
Thomas B. Allen's In Coal Country (BCCB 6/87) or Cynthia Rylant and Diane
Goode's When I Was Young in the Mountains (BCCB 4/82). BH
C.U. History-U.S.-Pictorial presentation
Stevenson, James. Grandpa's Too-Good Garden; written and illus. by James
Stevenson. Greenwillow, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08486-9; Trade ed. 0-
688-08485-0. 32p. $12.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
As he does in earlier books, Grandpa has a tall-tale
answer for everything. Here Mary Ann and Louie are discouraged because their
garden is barren. Could be worse, says Grandpa, and tells them about the garden
he had when he was a boy. Grandpa (tiny, but even then, mustachioed), with the
disastrous assistance of a baby brother and the accident of their father's miracle
hair-grower that he tossed out the window, develops an Instant Giant Garden,
taller than the house, with caterpillars of matching size. Ink and wash drawings
are sunny and funny; this may be a repeat pattern, but established Grandpa fans
seem to want exactly what Stevenson gives them: silliness, exaggeration,
improbable developments but no real trauma or danger, and cheerful pictures.
ZS
[97
Sullivan, George. Here Come the Monster Trucks. Cobblehill/Dutton, 1989.
ISBN 0-525-65005-9. [64p.] illus. with photographs. $14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Tires that are 66 inches in diameter? That's the craze
Bob Chandler started when, in 1982, he began using them for a pickup truck he
called "Bigfoot." Now there are contests and shows in which such Monster
Trucks are used to crush cars or pull a multi-ton sled through a mud bog.
Elaborately decorated or chrome-plated, trucks named "Nightmare II" or
"Godzilla" or "Bear Foot Trax" are described in detail, with boxed "Monster
Facts" given for some of the best-known competitors. Color photographs show
action shots; the material is clearly presented; an index and a glossary of
"Monster Words and Terms" are included. Not every reader's book, this, but for
the vehicle-mad boy or girl, appealing. ZS
Sussman, Susan. Big Friend, Little Friend: A Book About Symbiosis; by
Susan Sussman and Robert James. Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-49701-9.
32p. illus. with photographs. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Defining symbiosis in a brief introduction as "the
word scientists use to describe the way two organisms help each other live," the
authors proceed to show fourteen examples. Across from each page of textual
explanation is a full-page color photograph of the creatures represented: an
African buffalo and a red-billed oxpecker, for instance. Included are mammals,
reptiles, birds, fish, insects, and plants. The last spread on humans and peregrine
falcons-mutually beneficial in an urban setting-seems to stretch the concept a
bit (and the bird shown is not clearly identifiable), but it's not a bad idea to
encourage young readers to think of all creatures as part of a mutually dependent
ecosystem. Except for one case in which novices are not told whether the
pictured species is a pygmy falcon or a social weaver, this is clear and cohesive.
BH
C.U. Zoology
Taylor, Theodore. Sniper. Harcourt, 1989. ISBN 0-15-276420-8. 227p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
A taut suspense story has an unusual setting: a
private zoological reserve for lions, tigers, and other big felines. While his
parents are away (and can't be reached in Africa) fifteen-year-old Ben is in charge,
on his own because the chief animal handler is in the hospital. Somebody
begins a campaign of sabotage, letting the animals out of their enclosures, and
shooting some of them, including a few that have become beloved pets. The
mystery is solved logically, the setting is interesting, the characterization is not
deep but is convincing and consistent, and the action is nicely paced. ZS
D.V. Courage; Pets, care of
Townsend, John Rowe. The Fortunate Isles. Lippincott, 1989. Library ed.
ISBN 0-397-32366-2; Trade ed. 0-397-32365-4. 248p. Library ed. $13.89;
Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Townsend has created a remarkably doughty and
engaging protagonist, Eleni, and has supported her with a cast of characters who
[98]
are equally strongly drawn. This is set in the unspecified past and in an
unspecified land, but it is completely conceived and just as completely
convincing. Eleni, with rather timid Andreas and cocky Nikos, runs away (each
for a different reason) from their home island hoping to reach the royal city of
their island country. (The Fortunate Isles seem to be located in the Aegean.)
Their adventures are varied and exciting, and Townsend brings in issues and
relationships that give the story depth and color. Fine style, fine story. ZS
Twain, Mark. The Adventures of Tom Sawyer; illus. by Barry Moser. Morrow,
1989. ISBN 0-688-07510-X. 261p. (Books of Wonder). $21.95.
R 
Gr. 6-. 
It isn't necessary to review a book that has been a
classic for over a century, but it is a pleasure to see a new edition as handsome
as this one. The print is clean, the margins are broad, and the illustrations by
Barry Moser are handsome watercolors (seventeen of them) that are equally
distinctive whether they are landscapes or portraits, with the bonus of humor in
the latter. 
Moser never fills his background with clutter; the color and
composition of his paintings are a testament to the credo that less is more when
technical ability and sensitive interpretation are equally high. ZS
Walter, Mildred Pitts. Have a Happy...; illus. by Carole Byard. Lothrop, 1989.
ISBN 0-688-06923-1. 106p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
In a pleasant story about a black family, Chris hopes
to get a bicycle for his eleventh Christmas/birthday, but there seems little hope,
since his father has been out of work for over a year. Because of a large and
supportive extended family, the help of friends, and his own industry, Chris has
a happy birthday, a merry Christmas, and a wonderful Kwanzaa. This is a book
that has warmth, strong ethical concepts, and a satisfying ending, but it is
weakened by stilted writing (due in part to a variance in depicting speech
patterns) and in part to the obtrusively informative dialogue and exposition about
Kwanzaa, which is like a lesson inserted in the narrative. ZS
York, Carol Beach. Once Upon a Dark November. Holiday House, 1989.
ISBN 0-8234-0780-2. 98p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
November is a great month for atmospheric effects,
and the chill is everywhere in York's latest succinctly constructed mystery. Who
is "Cousin Martin," and why has he returned to town after so many years? What
is Martin's connection to Miss Gorley, the strange recluse who lives across the
street? Fourteen-year-old Katie ponders these mysteries, which escalate in
importance when Miss Gorley is found dead and stuffed into a closet. Clues are
cunningly and fairly placed, suspense is natural, and the outcome will probably
elude most junior detectives until it is revealed. York is a mistress of the
menacing mood, which is all the more effective here for its economy and
understatement. RS