Aesop. Aesop & Company; With Scenes from His Legendary Life; ad. by
Barbara Bader, illus. by Arthur Geisert. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-50597-6.
64p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 3-. 
Bader's provocative introduction and concluding brief
biography of Aesop frame her equally brief retellings of nineteen fables. Both
adaptation and scholarship are crisp, and the introduction provides several
reference points for consideration-for example, that the fables "do not advocate
moral behavior or show the ethical thing to do. Rather, they offer counsels of
prudence and practical wisdom." One to a tale on each double-spread, Geisert's
etchings, according to the introduction, set the fables in and around Galena,
Illinois, the illustrator's home. Somewhat crabbed, they vary from full-page
portraits of the lesson learned (the dog losing the meat to his reflection in the
water) to two-frame narratives (the fox and stork, at odds and at dinner), to a
vine-entwined sequence of four frames for "The Fox and the Grapes." As in
McClintock's version reviewed below, Geisert infuses an old-fashioned look
with a contemporary sensibility, but the book has a dark, dry tone that will
probably appeal more to older students and adults than to the usual picture-book
audience. RS
C.U. Literature
Aesop. Animal Fables from Aesop; ad. and illus. by Barbara McClintock.
Godine, 1991. ISBN 0-87923-913-1. 48p. $17.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
5-9 yrs. 
McClintock presents the fables, nine in all, as a
masquerade by a dapper troupe of a fox, crane, cat, crows, lamb, wolf, mice, and
"assorted dogs and peacocks." 
Her adaptations are lengthier and more
conversational than Bader's, reviewed above; her line and watercolor illustrations
are as elegant as Geisert's but funnier, with a nimble wit that evokes Mozart as
much as Aesop. "The Crow and the Peacocks" presents a startling contrast
between the feather-bedecked crow entering the drop-dead, double-spread glamor
of the peacock ball, and his pouting, plucked exit across an otherwise white
page; "The Fox and the Grapes" alternates pratfalls and telling gestures to a new
end: the top-hatted, frock-coated fox grudgingly buying his grapes from the
grocer. In the end, the curtain falls, and the animals remove their masks to
reveal a cast of children and grownups. (Wearing tights like the other actors, the
fox, by the way, has great legs.) RS
C.U. Literature
[115]
Andersen, Hans Christian. The Little Mermaid; retold by Deborah Hautzig;
illus. by Darcy May. Random House, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-92241-5;
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-82241-0. 48p. (Step into Reading). Library ed. $6.99;
Paper ed. $2.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-3. 
Probably the most significant achievement of
Hautzig's adaptation is that it restores to the mass market Andersen's original
ending so recently bowdlerized by the Disney movie and its spinoffs. There's no
"Ariel" here, no talking finned or feathered friends; just Andersen's story, pared-
down for easy reading. Hautzig maintains the romantic tone of the tale, helped
along by a surfeit of exclamation points: "Many nights the Little Mermaid
swam near the palace. She swam so close! She could see the Prince looking
out his window at the sea. How she longed to be near him once again!"
Watercolor illustrations are technicolored, conventionally imagined, and
sinuously drafted (those fins, that hair). Video-saturated readers might be
surprised at the Little Mermaid's death and ascent into heaven, and they may feel
betrayed-it's your job to tell them by whom. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Anderson, Mary. The Unsinkable Molly Malone. Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-
213801-3. 202p. $16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Molly Malone is a hip young New York artist of
sixteen, spending her summer selling her art-made-from-garbage on the sidewalk
near the Metropolitan Museum-and falling in love with extremely simpatico
Ron Cavendish ("It had been my dream to someday meet a guy I could talk with
in shorthand"). Molly eventually discovers that Ron is not the impoverished
scholarship boy she had mistaken him for, but the scion of a wealthy family.
Although this disappoints her fiery principles, it provides her with a useful
connection: Molly has been teaching art to kids at a welfare hotel, and Ron's
charity-active mother seems financially prepared to support an official program
along those lines. Molly's life is not always credible and her self-righteous
narration gets irritating, but she's a lively character; her disciplined studio work
and intelligent discussion of art may inspire her real-life counterparts. DS
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Auch, Mary Jane. Seven Long Years until College. Holiday House, 1991.
ISBN 0-8234-0901-5. 169p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
So much is happening at once: Natalie is starting
sixth grade, her mother is getting remarried, her sister is leaving for college.
And it certainly doesn't help matters when Natalie finds out that her best friend
Carla is moving to Cleveland. All of this satisfactorily bubbles together in a
fast and funny novel which begins with Mom's pratfall-filled wedding (Natalie
didn't mean to throw her bridesmaid's bouquet); features Natalie visiting her
sister at college (Natalie didn't mean to ruin Christa's roommate's art project);
and closes with a rapprochement between Natalie and her new stepfather (who,
much to everyone's delight, finally snips the apron strings tying him to his
overbearing mother). Since many intermediate realistic novels singlemindedly
focus on the ins and outs of school cliques (yes, that's here too), it's nice to see
a story with almost too much going on. RS
D.V. Sisters; Stepparent-child relations
[ 116]
Baker, Barbara. Oh, Emma; illus. by Catherine Stock. Dutton, 1991. ISBN 0-
525-44771-7. 135p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Emma, age nine, is the oldest of three children and
she has been looking forward to moving from their crowded, hot apartment to a
house where she could have a room of her own, and a dog. Mommy's
announcement that a baby is on the way means there is not enough money for
the house, but perhaps they can afford bunk beds? Hoping at least to gain floor
space, Emma tries to be patient and helpful so Daddy will say yes. The
solution: second-hand bunk beds. This is an amicable but rather plodding
family story, adequately written and consistently characterized but weak in plot.
However, it is realistic, and many of the incidents will probably evoke a
recognition reflex in primary grades readers. Occasional pencil sketches are
cozily familial. ZS
D.V. 
Adaptability; Family relations
Barton, Byron. 
The Three Bears; written and illus. by Byron Barton.
HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020424-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
020423-0. 32p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
Byron Barton never mistakes the child-like for the
amateurish. His three bears are cookie-cutter simple, but their patterning on the
page is always effective and dramatic, witness the verbal and visual rhythm of
his "someone has been sitting in my chair" double-spread. 
And while
Goldilocks' facial equipment is limited to a few dots and lines, kids will enjoy
watching the progression of her expressions in encountering the porridge, the
chairs, and the beds. With the current surfeit of dreamily lavish editions of
familiar folk and fairy tales, it's refreshing to see a bright, bold, and basic
treatment of a bright, bold, and basic tale, just right for toddler story hours. RS
C.U. 
Storytelling
Bennett, Jill, comp. Machine Poems; illus. by Nick Sharratt. Oxford, 1991.
ISBN 0-19-276094-7. 26p. $9.95.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
Lots of onomatopoeia, naturally, figures in these
poems about washing machines ("Splish, splash, splosh"), vacuum cleaners
("the Hoover moos and drones"), motorcycles ("A chuck a chuck"), and robots
("Zoing Zoing Boink!"). 
The overall tone is humorous and felicitously
complemented by Sharratt's crayon drawings, which pop with color, clicks, and
whirrs. Twelve poems, one to each double-page spread, are included, and
although most have been previously published in the U.K., they will be new to
American children. Vroom! RS
C.U. Reading aloud
Bernstein, Joanne E. Special Parents, Special Children; by Joanne E. Bernstein
and Bryna J. Fireside; illus. with photographs by Michael J. Bernstein.
Whitman, 1991. ISBN 0-8075-7559-3. 64p. $11.50.
R* 
Gr. 3-5. 
Liberally 
illustrated 
with black-and-white
photographs, these accounts of families in which one or both parents are
handicapped are matter-of-fact, evincing sympathetic understanding rather than
maudlin sympathy. In each case, both children and parents candidly discuss
problems of adjusting to a disability, or overcoming it, and of coping with
[117]
people who stare or make comments. Lisa has a blind father; Bobby and Adam
have a father who is confined to a wheelchair; both Rigert children are bigger
than their parents, who are achondroplastic dwarfs; and all three Stewart children
have learned sign language, since both their parents are deaf. The authors have
wisely let the members of the four families speak for themselves, and the result
is an eloquent testimonial to the resilience of the human spirit. ZS
D.V. Handicaps, overcoming; Parent-child relations
Bial, Raymond. Corn Belt Harvest; written and illus. with photographs by
Raymond Bial. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-56234-1. 48p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Crisp color photographs illustrate this book about
field corn production. Readers unfamiliar with farm equipment will have trouble
following the sometimes unclear descriptions of planting, tending, and
harvesting a corn field: "Farmers use a cultivator, a chisel-toothed implement
that is pulled behind a tractor, to scrape under the weeds along the rows." The
book would have been much improved by a glossary, to explain words left
undefined in the text, such as "herbicides," "hybrid," and "shuck." Occasionally,
explanations of confusing words turn up later in the narration-the action of
making a pass through a field, mentioned first on page 5, is defined on page 22.
The plentiful photos supplement the text nicely, and often the captions do a
good job of explaining what the text does not, such as the way a combine's
auger works or how to load a corn planter with seed corn. This will interest kids
who love machines, but be prepared for questions. KPJ
C.U. Farm life
B6hlke, Dorothee. Mr. Chang and the Yellow Robe; ad by Elizabeth Bradford;
written and illus. by Dorothee B6hlke. Garrett, 1991. ISBN 1-56074-029-9.
32p. (Magic Mountain Fables). $10.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Mr. Chang is tired of dressing in "plain colored
clothes and a plain black hat and plain black slippers." He longs for a yellow
robe, forbidden because the wearing of yellow is limited to "only the most
important people." But Mr. Chang does get a yellow robe, wearing it under his
plain clothes until he is found out and then realizes-somewhat obliquely--that
fancy clothes do not make the man. Gazing at the night sky he says, "I am like
one of those stars. They do not gleam as brightly as the sun or shine like the
moon. But each star is special. Each star is important. A star is bright enough
for me." While no more a folktale than The Emperor's New Clothes, Mr.
Chang might make for an interesting comparison with that story. Line-and-
watercolor illustrations are nicely drawn, with the tubby little Mr. Chang a feast
for the eyes (his own, anyway) as he preens in his yellow finery. RS
D.V. Self-acceptance
Bond, Michael. Paddington's ABC; ISBN 0-670-84104-8. Paddington's 123;
ISBN 0-670-84103-X. 
Paddington's Colors; ISBN 0-670-84102-1.
Paddington's Opposites; ISBN 0-670-84105-6. Each book: illus. by John
Lobban. Viking, 1991. 32p. $10.95.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
Four oversize books, each in the standard 32-page
picture book format, are appropriate for teaching basic concepts to young
children, using bright blocks of solid color, surrounding them with plenty of
white space, and supplying boldface captions on each page. All of the books
[ 118 ]
have some reinforcing game element at the end: in the alphabet book, for
example, supplying the missing first letter of a familiar word, or in the counting
book, finding the partially-hidden marmalade sandwiches. While Lobban's
Paddington lacks the raffish charm of the Peggy Fortnum original, the design
and execution are ineluctably appealing, just right for the intended audience. ZS
Brooks, Bruce. Nature by Design; ISBN 0-374-30334-7 Predator!; ISBN 0-374-
36111-8. Each book: Farrar, 1991. 74p. illus. with photographs. (Knowing
Nature). $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-. 
Flora-and-fauna books are rarely witty, but these two
are, written in a breezy, sometimes irreverent style that does not disguise the
author's sharp powers of observation. In captioning a photo of a poisonous
tropical frog, for example, Brooks writes "Take a good look, these colors say,
you know I'm bad." And, despite the jokes, Brooks never falls into an
anthropomorphic trap. In both books he continually cautions readers not to
assume that animals think like humans: "attributing human-like intentions to
an animal can keep us from looking at the animal's sense of itself in its
surroundings." The books are thematically, rather than taxonomically, arranged,
allowing the author and reader to make conceptual connections among species.
The chapters for Nature by Design are "Animal Craftsmen," "Building from
Within," "Holes," "Building from the Environment," and "Are Animals Smart?"
Those for Predator! are even more succinct, including "Food," "Hunting,"
"Killing," "Staying Alive," and "The Killer Outside." That last refers to
humankind, and Brooks' ecological stance throughout both books is insistent
without harangue. 
Color photos are plentiful and well-placed; the print is
unfortunately small and cramped. Each book has a glossary and index. RS
C.U. 
Nature study
Buller, Jon. 20,000 Baseball Cards under the Sea; written and illus. by Jon
Buller and Susan Schade. Random House, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-
91569-9; Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-81569-4. 48p. (Step into Reading). Library
ed. $6.99; Paper ed. $2.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Roger collects baseball cards; his friend, an old man
named Kenneth, collects junk to build all manner of unlikely contraptions.
Their interests dovetail when Kenneth build a submarine, and the two friends go
to the bottom of the sea to Kenneth's storeroom, filled with shipwreck debris
(including a treasure chest filled with valuable baseball cards) by his pals, the
merpeople. "And I make things for them," says Kenneth, "We have a nice
arrangement." Full-color cartoons add to the loony-tunes atmosphere, as do
Roger's attempts to entertain the merkids: 
"I did my Pee Wee Herman
imitation. They loved it." Humor overtaken by events, perhaps, but Roger's
wish-fulfilling adventure remains a brash break from much easy-reading fare. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Bunting, Eve. Jumping the Nail. Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-241357-X.
[17 6p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
"Jumping the nail" is the expression used by a group
of California teenagers for jumping from a high cliff into the ocean, risking the
chance that they will hit rocks rather than water. There have been fatalities, and
it is a decade since anyone tried the jump; this story of braggadocio daredevil
I 119 ]
friends, some of whom have succumbed to peer pressure, is told by one of the
adolescents who tries to prevent a friend's participation. Bunting makes Dru's
account believable, sustains suspense, and concludes with expectable, almost
inevitable tragedy, but-despite the fact that this captures the phenomenon of
don't-be-a-chicken conformity-the story is too narrow in scope, too
melodramatic in development to be fully effective. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Buss, Fran Leeper. Journey of the Sparrows; by Fran Leeper Buss with the
assistance of Daisy Cubias. Lodestar, 1991. ISBN 0-525-67362-8. 
156p.
$14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Maria tells the story of her arrival in Chicago after
traveling, huddled in a dark crate, from Mexico, where Mama and the baby have
stayed because of illness. The family had all been in flight from El Salvador
where the army had killed Papa and the husband of older sister Julia. Julia
(pregnant) and Maria had been cooped up with five-year-old Oscar and a strange
boy, Tomas. This story of illegal immigrants and their problems of survival
and adjustment presents a touching situation, but as a narrative it is weakened by
a slow pace and a plethora of small details that neither advance the story nor
expand characterization. 
It is strong, however, in the descriptions of the
escapees' way of life and, at the end, in depicting Maria's trip to Mexico to try,
unsuccessfully, to find Mama. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Carter, David A., ad. In a Dark, Dark Wood; ad. and illus. by David A. Carter.
Simon, 1991. ISBN 0-671-74134-9. 25p. $10.95.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
There's no real need, of course, for another (or any)
picture book rendition of this classic jump tale; on the other hand, what story
better deserves a pop-up conclusion? Carter's double-spread paintings have
looming, eerie perspectives, with large simple shapes (the trees, the house, the
room, the cupboard...) that will travel well for medium-distance story hour
viewing, as well as peculiar details (such as a portrait of a three-eyed dog)
apparent to the close observer. And how apt, how restrained, that the paper
engineering is reserved for the last spread, in which "A GHOST!" pops up in a
blue-gray swath of operatic surprise. The cover and coated paper are sturdy, but
the GHOST, while simply constructed, might keep this in the noncirculating,
story hour special collection. RS
C.U. Storytelling
Case, Dianne. Love, David; illus. by Dan Andreasen. Lodestar, 1991. ISBN 0-
525-67350-4. 128p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Anna Jantjies adores her older half-brother, David, and
in telling his story, fraught with both compassion and tension, she gives a
bittersweet, candid picture of the obstacles and pressures in the lives of those
growing up in that mixed-race segment of the South African population called
"Cape Colored." Anna also is unhappy because of the increasing hostility
between her father and fourteen-year-old David. Caught by the police for selling
marijuana, David is sent to a reformatory; a concluding letter from him shows
Anna that there is a realistic promise for his future. 
Case lets Anna, a
convincing voice, speak of life in the Cape Flats, so that the problems inherent
[ 120 ]
in--or engendered by-apartheid have immediacy and impact; the author does not
tell us, but shows us. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Interracial understanding
Cohen, Barbara. 213 Valentines; illus. by Wil Clay. Holt, 1991. ISBN 0-
8050-1536-1. 55p. (Redfeather Books). $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Wade, one of just four black kids in a new Gifted and
Talented fourth grade program, misses his old school and friends. The only other
student from his neighborhood is-yuck-a girl, Dink. Convinced of his own
unpopularity, Wade hatches a plan to send himself 213 cards (signed by such
luminaries as Michael Jordan, Nelson Mandela, and the Bushes) via the class
valentine box. But will he send one to Dink? "I don't think so," says class-brat
Allison, "I think you like him a lot better than he likes you. Isn't that true,
Dinka-dinka-dink?" Finer feelings eventually take precedence, and Wade sends a
whole bunch of valentines to Dink, and to the other kids, as well as to the
patients in the pediatrics ward where his Aunt Mae works. And as ye sow....
Realistic classroom action and arguments balance the moralizing, and racial
tensions are believably entwined among other conflicts: "Are you sure you're in
the right room?" asks Allison. A good school story, easier to read than most, is
illustrated with line drawings that are too literal, but not insulting to the dignity
of the newly independent reader. RS
D.V. Interracial understanding; School, adjustment to
Compton, Patricia A., ad. The Terrible EEK; illus. by Sheila Hamanaka.
Simon, 1991. ISBN 0-671-73737-6. 34p. $14.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Based on a Japanese folktale (although there is no
source note), this comedy of misunderstanding spells defeat for a thief and a
wolf. It's raining. The thief is on the roof, the wolf is at the door, and both are
puzzled-and frightened-when they hear the man inside tell his family that "the
most frightening thing of all. . . is a terrible leak." The wolf has never heard
of a leak ("It must be an awful creature if they are most afraid of it"); the thief,
caught in the downpour, only hears "eek" and falls off the roof... onto the
wolf. "Now the poor thief thought he had landed on the back of the terrible eek.
And the wolf thought that the terrible leak had landed on him." And they're off.
The tale is fast and well (re)told, and Hamanaka's oils, thinly spread on textured
canvas, evoke the drama of the chase and the humor of the situation. Posing
traditionally styled Japanese animal figures against a rounded landscape, she uses
bold perspectives, with one double spread showing the thief's dizzying drop onto
the wolf, while another shows, from ground level, a look up at the wolf and the
thief, now joined by a tiger and a monkey, all screaming and scaring themselves
into the woods, "and they never found out about the terrible leak." Kids will
love being one up on these characters. RS
C.U. 
Storytelling
Cox, Clinton. Undying Glory: The Story of the Massachusetts 54th Regiment.
Scholastic, 1991. 
ISBN 0-590-44170-1. 
167p. illus. with photographs.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
An extensive bibliography attests to the painstaking
research that serves as a basis for Cox's vivid account of the struggles of black
and white antislavery forces to form a military unit of black soldiers and of their
[ 121 ]
many contributions to the Union cause in the years of the Civil War. The
author lets the record speak for the regiment's courage and loyalty; he does not,
himself, hesitate to speak of the prejudice that made so distinguished a record all
the more remarkable for the fact that it was achieved despite many obstacles. An
insert of photos adds immediacy; an index furthers the book's reference value.
ZS
C.U. History-U.S.--Civil War
Curry, Jane Louise. What the Dickens! McElderry, 1991. ISBN 0-689-50524-
8. 153p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Although much of their time is spent at home, the
three oldest Dobbs children (protagonist Cherry and her twin brother Sam,
eleven, and six-year-old Darsie) also work on their father's freight boat on the
Juniata Canal in central Pennsylvania. The story is set in 1842, and it gives
many historical details about life on the canal. The plot is built around a
fictional theft of a Charles Dickens manuscript-the material he was gathering at
the time for his American Notes. Dickens traveled on the canal, the jacket copy
states, but there are no notes or sources provided. The plot has more momentum
than believability, as Cherry involves others in the pursuit of two thieves she
has overheard scheming, with detestable Mr. Goodge, to get the manuscript so
that it can be published by Goodge, a bookseller. The characters use idiom and
dialect heavily, a device that is not wholly effective and the plot is too dependent
on coincidence; however, the premise is interesting and the writing capable. ZS
Day, David, ad. The Swan Children; illus. by Richard Evans. Ideals, 1991.
ISBN 0-8249-8461-7. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
The Children of Lir is an Irish story of magic gone
awry, when four children of a sea god are bewitched by their stepmother to
become swans. The wicked queen is punished, but the children must serve out
their enchantment-300 years on peaceful Lake Darvra, 300 years on the bitter
cold Sea of Moyle, and 300 years on the Western Sea-until a priest rings out
the ancient magic of the land. Then the children sing one last time, for they
have kept their human voices, and rejoin their father under the sea. Although
Day has softened the ending (originally, the swans die after their final human
transformation and baptism) a lingering sadness over their passage into the sea
attests to the tonal integrity of this version. The tale is a long one for picture
book audiences, but haunting enough to command attention. It is well written
here, with a sensitive balance of narrative and detail. The book is skillfully
designed and formatted, its feathery-pale art work often varied in wing shapes
across the pages. The colored pencil lines are fine and the hues delicate, yet the
effect is strong. Independent readers could enjoy this as much as a listening
audience because of its sophisticated look and tone. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Delisle, Jim. Kidstories: Biographies of 20 Young People You'd Like to
Know. Free Spirit, 1991. Paper ed. ISBN 0-915793-34-2. 168p. illus. with
photographs. Paper ed. $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Twenty children and teenagers who have "made a
difference" are briefly profiled in this upbeat collection. Ranging from a student
who convinced her gym teacher to have the class pick up litter, to another who
[ 122 1
successfully protested frog dissection, the accomplishments shown in this book
are life-sized, and therefore perhaps more convincing than accounts of
"superkids." Unfortunately, each profile is undermined by an adulatory tone
("Sharing and caring are very important to Natalie") and, due to the lead of the
author's questions, the kids come off as a fairly platitudinous bunch: "Commit
yourself to excellence in your physical self, your attitude toward people and life,
and your spirituality. Write your goals down... ." Each profile is divided
into four sections that further the didactic tenor ("Family and background";
"Making a difference"; "Lessons Learned"; "Personal goals, global concerns"),
and each is concluded with "Questions to Consider" (some of which are
pertinent, some thought-provoking, and some busywork) and a decent reading
list and directory of relevant organizations. RS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Conduct of life
Demi. Chingis Khan; written and illus. by Demi. Holt, 1991. ISBN 0-8050-
1708-9. 56p. $19.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
In this story of the great khan who united the Mongol
clans into a military empire (1160-1227 A.D.), Demi has contributed to a
growing number of distinguished picture book biographies by Diane Stanley
(Good Queen Bess, etc.), Aliki (The King's Day), and others. From history and
legend, Demi has selected a few of the most dramatic scenes in Chingis' life and
portrayed them with a fine sense of sweeping landscape, in which her
characteristically tiny figures appear dwarfed by the vast steppes where they ride,
fight, and die. The cast is kept from appearing cute by dignified backdrops and
rhythmic lines of composition. The use of gold, although undoubtedly adding to
the book's expense, is well considered and never pretentious; it contrasts richly
with the whites, blues, and grays of a frozen world and, later, with the rich
purples of captured Persia and the brilliant reds of fallen China. The sometimes
violent facts (and fictions: the Mongol invasion of Poland and Hungary did not
happen until after Chingis' death) are verbalized with folkloric distance and
illustrated with stylized perspective; yet the urgency of a grand-scale life-and-
death saga will hold young listeners spellbound. 
The conclusion, which is
illustrated simply by layers of fused watercolor washes, implies time's erosion
of physical conquest; the fact that it is supported by an experience of art and text
ratifies the power of the picture book-so much revealed in so small a space.
BH
C.U. History-World
Dorros, Arthur. Abuela; illus. by Elisa Kleven. Dutton, 1991. ISBN 0-525-
44750-4. 40p. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Like Faith Ringgold's Tar Beach (BCCB 3/91),
Dorros' Abuela celebrates urban ethnicity-Hispanic in the latter book, African-
American in the former-through a fantasy of flying over New York City. In
the park with her grandmother, Rosalba dreams (partly in Spanish) that the two
of them soar over streets, trains, factories, ships, the Statue of Liberty, and
finally back down for further adventures on a paddle boat. Description outweighs
story, but not enough to sink the flyers. The book centers on art work gaily
patterned with myriad bits of paper and paintbrush strokes in a multimedia
collage. The city has never looked so good; it's a gingerbread world sweetened
[ 123 ]
with color instead of sugar. Perspectives are mostly flat, while angles vary.
Although the mosaic occasionally gets too dense, the general effect is one of
buoyancy. If listeners don't know the Spanish phrases, they can guess most of
them from the English context and learn them along the way, or check the
glossary, which gives pronunciations and definitions. 
A lift for bilingual
preschools and primary graders. BH
D.V. Grandmother-child relations
Dowd, Ned. That's a Wrap: How Movies Are Made; illus. with photographs by
Henry Horenstein. Simon, 1991. ISBN 0-671-70972-0. 64p. $15.00.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
In a picture book format, Dowd describes the process
of making a feature film, from the creation of the screenplay to the final release.
Color photographs document all the backstage work on a recent crime/adventure
production, The Taking of Beverly Hills. There are many interesting details,
such as how bullet wounds are faked, how camera shots are taken inside a
moving car, and where actors eat and go to the bathroom during outdoor filming.
There's also a lot of movie-lingo in the text, more technical talk than is
explained; if the book had a glossary and/or picture captions most of this
problem could have been avoided. As it is, many terms are explained in the text
(grazing, tripod, gaffer, best boy), some are poorly defined ("sync"--"lined up
exactly in synchronization"), and some are not defined at all (gels, scrims, cherry
picker, in the can). Dowd's writing is sometimes confusing ("No matter in what
order they appear in the film, all the scenes that take place on one set are shot
one after another"). On the other hand, the book is nicely designed and even the
candid photographs are well-composed. Keep an eye on the movie reviews-if
The Taking of Beverly Hills is a hit, buy this book. KPJ
Forman, James D. Prince Charlie's Year. Scribner's, 1991. ISBN 0-684-
19242-X. 136p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
1745: Prince Charlie's Year. It is described in great
detail by Colin Macdonald, looking back as he marches in another war in 1780,
again fighting the British, this time in the colonial American rebellion. This is
a spirited, harrowing, dense account of the Jacobite Rebellion, perhaps best
suited to readers interested in Scottish history or military history. The 1780
framing device seems a bit artificial, and the predominant note is somber, but
Forman can always write a war story that is an indictment of war, and he
succeeds in showing how the clan system led to disastrous support of the Bonnie
Prince, even amongst the men who saw him as he was. A postscript includes
historical notes and a glossary. ZS
C.U. History-Scotland
French, Fiona. The Magic Vase; written and illus. by Fiona French. Oxford,
1991. ISBN 0-19-279875-8. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
6-8 yrs. 
Vibrantly patterned, desert-tone pastels illustrate a
rather preachy, occasionally confusing tale of a greedy art dealer who is taught
"the value of all things" by an Indian potter. When the art dealer comes to her
village demanding a valuable vase, Maria the potter enlists the help of the
animals to create the fabled vase and teach the dealer a lesson. A snake becomes
the coils, and a bear, rabbit, birds, and fishes (in the desert?) become the design.
While the man is gloating over the vase, the animals whisper to him and the
[124]
snake uncoils and delivers the sermon: "Your collection of vases only belongs
to you during your lifetime. And when you are dead they will be auctioned away
and belong to someone else, and after that to someone else, and someone else."
Stricken by the futility of it all ("'I've been tricked,' cried the art dealer") the
man repents, and Maria gives him a small pot. Some events are puzzling, as
when the snake seems to uncoil a page before it's supposed to; and a reference to
the dealer going "back to Maria," is odd, because we haven't been told he's left.
It's not a great story, but the gorgeously rendered landscapes and the dramatic
transformation of the vase, growing larger and coming to life, steal the show.
RS
D.V. Unselfishness
Giblin, James Cross. The Truth about Unicorns; illus. by Michael McDermott
and with photographs. HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022479-7;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022478-9. 113p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-12. 
In a clear, well-organized narrative, Giblin covers the
history of the legendary unicorn. He begins with a description of the fantastic
beast that originates from 500 B.C. Persia and continues with unicorn
mythology from Greece, Rome, China, and India. More than half the book is
about medieval Europeans' use of the unicorn as a symbol for Christ and their
belief that a unicorn horn had magical medicinal properties. Although Giblin
does a good job of linking the diverse legends of several cultures, his scholarship
is casual, lacking any notes and sometimes heavy with speculation ("This may
also explain why the rulers of ancient countries such as Assyria and Persia wore
tall headdresses that came to a point like a horn. These headdresses were
probably mean to demonstrate that the rulers, like unicorns, possessed
extraordinary strength"). On the other hand, there is an in-depth index provided,
and a good bibliography. 
Along with some fancifully speculative drawings by
McDermott and representations of "unicorns" from throughout history, there are
seven color plates of the Unicorn Tapestries from the Cloisters Collection at the
Metropolitan Museum of Art, accompanied by an interpretation of each scene.
The author covers his topic thoroughly although it seems strange to read a book
about unicorns in which the word "virgin" never appears-the young girls who
capture the beasts are "innocent maidens." That's a minor point, however; this
is a good survey of a popular subject. KPJ
Giff, Patricia Reilly. Diana: Twentieth-Century Princess; illus. by Michele
Laporte. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83806-3. 57p. (Women of Our Time).
$10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-5. 
Through strains in the royal marriage and a recent
upsurge in popularity as our heroine settles into her work, the Princess of Wales
continues to fascinate. 
This book addresses these highly publicized
developments, but it's really a puff piece for young princess dreamers, with
clearer information about clothes ("Queen Elizabeth wore aqua, Princess Anne
wore yellow, and the Queen Mother wore blue") than other matters (Diana's
father's earldom is never mentioned, Great Britain is inaccurately described as
being "three-quarters farmland," and Henry VIII is described as having eight
wives instead of the actual six). Giff does discuss some down-to-earth details,
such as the rigors of life as a royal and the importance of the Mountbatten-
Windsor family as a tourist draw, but Mary Fox's Princess Diana (BCCB 12/86)
[ 125
is a more vivid and better-written portrait, if not so up-to-date. Still, Giff's
book is an easy read for young admirers, who will enjoy the behind-the-scenes
look at a glamorous subject. DS
Goodchild, Peter. The Spark in the Stone: Skills and Projects from the Native
American Tradition. Chicago Review Press, 1991. Paper ed. ISBN 1-55652-
102-2. [129p.] illus. Paper ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-9. 
Intended as a manual of "wilderness technology" for
enterprising young readers, this book describes Native American methods of
making tools, trapping, finding food, building shelter, weaving baskets, and so
forth. 
The candid specifics ("The best bone for making an awl is the
ulna... Grasshoppers aren't bad tasting; they're a bit like unsalted peanuts")
will appeal to young survivalists, who can practice making their own rope in the
safety of their living rooms. As a field guide, however, the book has problems:
much of it takes some unlikely previous knowledge for granted-a particular
problem with the wild foods section, where the line drawings that illustrate the
text will not be sufficient to keep kids clear of poisonous plants. The section
describing rope-making from tree roots suggests "if you don't have any spruce in
your neighborhood, look for jack pine, or lodgepole pine, or western red cedar, or
tamarack," sidestepping completely questions of identification and ownership
(particularly in light of the earlier directive to "use the whole tree if you are
going to use it at all"). And even in areas where "you can buy deerhide and
moosehide in most large stores that sell leather" the expense of three yards of
deerhide-the amount necessary for the project-is likely to be beyond most
readers. The anthropology and respect for the various tribes' practices, however,
is impressive, and the author is attentive to regional and chronological
variations. 
It's good fodder for imaginary camping trips (perhaps as an
accompaniment to My Side of the Mountain) or for adult-assisted real projects.
DS
C.U. Social studies
Grimm, Jakob Ludwig Karl. Snow White; ad. by Josephine Poole; illus. by
Angela Barrett. Knopf, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-92656-9; Trade ed. ISBN
0-679-82656-4. 32p. Library ed. $16.99; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Looking at Angela Barrett's art for Snow White is
like journeying along a road with Nancy Burkert's landscape on one side and
Trina Schart Hyman's on the other, plus glimpses of some Binette Schroeder
byways-and still the countryside has an air of its own. Striking endpapers
show snow-covered ground stained with blood. The paintings are dominated by a
looming elegance of shapes and by ominously dark hues. There's even a
suggestion of the surreal in some of the flat perspectives and in angular figures
that seem vertically suspended. Although it's too bad the Grimm Brothers aren't
mentioned somewhere as a source, Poole's adaptation is effective. Of the king's
marriage to the evil queen, she writes: "Nobody told him that she had a proud
heart and a greedy, jealous temper. Nobody mentioned that." The mirror rhyme
remains, but the seven dwarves' repetitious chant ("The first said, 'who has been
sitting in my little chair,'" etc.) is omitted and the ending altered for a justice
more poetic than the Grimms' lethal red-hot shoes; the evil queen brings a
poisonous rose to lay on the wedding pillow but instead dies from clutching the
[ 126 ]
thorns in anger. A sophisticated version that could inspire discussion in an older
audience as well as among primary graders. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Haldane, Suzanne. Helping Hands: How Monkeys Assist People Who Are
Disabled; written and illus. with photographs by Suzanne Haldane. Dutton,
1991. ISBN 0-525-44723-7. 48p. $14.95.
R* 
Gr. 4-6. 
Psychologist Mary Joan Willard began the Helping
Hands program in 1977, training four monkeys in various tasks useful to
quadriplegics. In this engagingly formatted photoessay, Haldane achieves a nice
balance between description of how the monkeys are trained to help the disabled
and description of how a particular monkey (Willie, a female capuchin) helps
Greg, an adolescent quadriplegic. Haldane's black-and-white photos show how
monkeys in the Helping Hands program are fostered and taught, and the array of
tasks that Willie performs for Greg: 
getting juice from the refrigerator,
inserting cassettes in a player, helping operate a computer, and retrieving and
opening books. Greg finds less tangible benefits as well: "Willie gives me
something to think about besides myself. When she's out of her cage, I'm
always looking around to find out where she is and what she's doing." This is
everything a nonfiction book should be; it is logically organized, lucid in its
explanations, careful in placement of photographs in relation to the text, and
written in a matter-of-fact tone. ZS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Hamilton, Virginia. 
The All Jahdu Storybook; illus. by Barry Moser.
Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-239498-2. 108p. $19.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Along with Ted Hughes' Tales of the Early World
(BCCB 6/91), this will provide young readers with a cycle of literary myths to
fire the imagination. Both the 1969 and 1973 collections on which her current
volume is based are out of print, and Hamilton has added four new tales to
sweeten the stew. These four include fairy tale and tall tale elements with
generous dashes of invention. In "Jahdu Meets the Big Chicken" ("Just call me
Cackle G. The G stands for Giant") we get a peek at several characters who have
appeared in Hamilton's folktale adaptations, among them Bruh Rabbit, Hairy
Man, and Little Red Riding Hood, who is also featured in "Jahdu in the Far
Woods." Removing the storytelling framework of Mama Luka's relating the
tales to Lee Edward ameliorates their episodic effect (although a few still
meander), while Moser's eerie full-page watercolors will lure more sophisticated
readers than those targeted by the earlier collections. Read aloud, this will appeal
across a broad age range and instill that irresistible word into the private
mythologies of those who run through the wide world with Jahdu: "Woogily!"
BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Haywood, Carolyn. Eddie's Friend Boodles; illus. by Catherine Stock.
Morrow, 1991. ISBN 0-688-09028-1. 74p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Texturally busy, Stock's black and white drawings
have a scratchy, casual quality for this posthumously-published book by a writer
who has been popular with young readers for decades. Too sedate for some
children, the Eddie stories appeal to those who prefer simplicity, brevity, and
[ 127 ]
everyday life incidents in a style that is less than taxing. Here Eddie's friend
Boodles decides to teach his dog Poochie some tricks after the boys see a circus.
That's the thin thread that connects episodic chapters that present the usual
Haywood mix of family affection, peer friendships, observance of safety rules,
and mild adventure. ZS
D.V. Friendship values
Heller, Ruth. Up, Up and Away: A Book about Adverbs; written and illus. by
Ruth Heller. Grosset, 1991. ISBN 0-448-40249-1. 44p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Heller, author of such effective grammar-with-a-beat
books as Merry Go Round: A Book about Nouns (BCCB 1/91) and Many
Luscious Lollipops: A Book about Adjectives (BCCB 1/89) here turns her
attention to the more complicated question of the adverb. The format for this
book is the same: bouncy rhymed text describes the part of speech ("Adverbs
work terrifically/ when answering specifically.../ 'How?'/ 'How often?'/
'When?'/ and 'Where?"') and provides a multitude of examples with adverbs in
ALL CAPITAL LETTERS. 
The book doesn't limit itself to those old
standards, -ly adverbs, but also addresses interrogatives, modifiers, and negatives
(cameo appearance by Gelett Burgess' purple cow). Difficult concepts are
generally well-handled, although the statements that "when adverbs compare, all
of them use LESS and LEAST" and "MORE and MOST must be used with
adverbs ending in LY" are slightly confusing in context and may seem mutually
contradictory to an uninitiated reader. The artwork is skillfully varied, with
some spreads intense (an up-close view of myriad coral-pink toe shoes stands out
against the all-black background) and some airy (prismatically colored hot-air
balloons rise through white space). Overall, this eye-catching book explains its
perplexing subject well and clearly, and more memorably than could any
grammar textbook. DS
C.U. Language arts
Heyer, Carol, ad. Excalibur; ad. and illus. by Carol Heyer. Ideals, 1991. ISBN
0-8249-8487-0. 32p. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Lush, fantasy calendar-art, illustrations in acrylics and
pencils illustrate the story of how King Arthur got his sword, Excalibur. The
fact that Heyer used models for her paintings is most evident in the realistic and
individual faces of Arthur and his opponent, the Black Knight. In contrast, the
picture of the Lady of the Lake is disappointing-she is a stiff, doll-like figure
overshadowed by the exotic (tropical!) fish swimming below her. On the whole,
the prose is a good blend of contemporary and legendary language ("Excalibur
glowed and sparkled, shimmering in a spellbinding brilliance that flowed from
the sword and into Arthur"). The passage that sticks out is Merlin-as-therapist:
"Neither the win nor the loss makes you triumphant, Arthur. It is only your
feelings about yourself which give you triumph or defeat." 
Only in the
psychoanalytic twentieth century is it possible for legendary King Arthur to have
an identity crisis ("Merlin... I still feel as though I am nothing"). Arthur
regains his composure by the story's end, however, and this book serves as an
acceptable addition to the multiplying group of new picture books about Arthur.
KPJ
[ 128 ]
Hirsch, E. D., Jr., ed. What Your First Grader Needs To Know: Fundamentals
of a Good First-Grade Education; ISBN 0-385-41115-4; 2 46p. What Your
Second Grader Needs To Know: Fundamentals of a Good First-Grade Education
[sic]; ISBN 0-385-41116-2; 318p. 
Each book: Doubleday, 1991. illus. and
with photographs. (The Core Knowledge Series). $15.00.
M 
Gr. 1-3. 
E. D. Hirsch, Jr., is on a roll, and if you want to roll
with him, just fork out fifteen dollars for what you already have in your library:
a handful of popular nursery rhymes, folktales, fairy tales, and fables, all widely
available in better illustrated and better adapted anthologies; some basic math,
science, geography, and history concepts set forth in textbook fashion; and a
smattering of facts about the "fine arts" (mostly the the words for traditional
songs such as "Row, Row, Row Your Boat" and "I've Been Working on the
Railroad"). What you will not find out is that Beatrix Potter wrote Peter Rabbit,
although she would turn in her grave to see this dumbed-down version of it, or
that Hans Christian Andersen authored "The Emperor's New Clothes" (likewise a
grave-turner) or that Dickens originated "The Christmas Carol" (reduced to three
pages, as is Peter Pan). What may not surprise you is that token diversity has
been introduced with the inclusion of one African-American, one Hispanic, one
Native American (Iktomi is spelled Inktomi here), and one Asian-American tale
in each book. What you would never guess is that many of the 73,000
children's books in print already present this material better (Robert
Quackenbush is one of the few authors mentioned, for his biography of Annie
Oakley). What you will discover is that the most frequently cited information in
Hirsch's cultural literacy juvenilia is the address for Dover Publications, each of
whose coloring books is highlighted in a boxed announcement: first graders get
the full address each time ("31 East Second Street, Mineola, New York 11501");
second graders are simply referred each time to the address in the introduction.
The illustrations look dated, the introductions are simply repeated in each
volume, and the subtitle for the second-grade book says, in blazing large-block
letters on the title page, "Fundamentals of a First-Grade Education." What may
most alarm you intellectually is the condescension implied in commonality,
from the reduction of imaginative literature to the patronizing address of children.
A choppy paragraph about "Two Freed Women" ends with these questions: "Do
you know a poem? Have you ever tried to write a poem as Phillis Wheatley did?
You probably could!" Is this cultural literacy or commercialized idiocy? BH
Hooper, Maureen Brett. The Violin Man; illus. by Gary Undercuffler. Caroline
House, 1991. ISBN 1-878093-79-7. 70p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Ten-year-old Antonio is constantly reprimanded for
dreaming about the travelers that come through his 19th-century Italian town,
but "it was only when traveling men came to town that Antonio got ideas about
a life that could be anything but ordinary." Traveler Luigi (based on a real
historical figure) comes to town on an exciting quest: a search for a beautiful
violin, a Stradivarius that an old diary entry places in the area. Antonio assists
Luigi in finding the forgotten instrument, and when Luigi leaves he travels with
him, finally getting his wish to see the world. Unfortunately, both writing and
characterization are flat, and there's not much flavor of time or place. The gentle
detective story is interesting, however, and the love of music genuine enough to
appeal to readers of a similar inclination. Black-and-white line drawings,
somewhat stiff, appear throughout the text. DS
[129]
Johnston, Norma. Louisa May: The World and Works of Louisa May Alcott.
Four Winds, 1991. ISBN 0-02-747705-3. 
[224p.] illus. with photographs.
$15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
This well-crafted biography is a worthy companion
and a serious contrast to Meigs' Newbery winner, Invincible Louisa: Johnston
makes it clearer why Louisa needed to be invincible. Where Meigs' Alcott, for
instance, has sadness and delicate health, Johnston's has bitter awareness of the
cruelty of 19th century medical realities that robbed her of loved ones and
wracked her own days with pain. The book is neither ill-natured nor depressing,
however, just vividly honest in its description of Alcott's constant physical and
literary labor. Johnston evokes a fascinating milieu of both everyday toil and
daily contact with the makers of American intellectual history (everyone from
Hawthorne to Emerson to Margaret Fuller is here), creating an absorbing portrait
of interest even to readers who aren't Little Women fans. The style is crisp and
telling ("All his life, Bronson had a gift for inspiring women to make sacrifices
for his work") and bespeaks good research, although one regrets the absence of
notes. Not many books convey the grinding reality of writing to make money;
this one does that and provides a look at a talented and determined woman as
well. DS
C.U. Literature, American
Joosse, Barbara M. The Pitiful Life of Simon Schultz. HarperCollins, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022487-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022486-X. 
137p.
Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
It's Simon's last year at middle school and he's
having a hard time coping with "smother love," especially because his mother is
a widow and cries every time he protests her behavior. She embarrasses him,
manipulates him, makes decisions on his behalf-all for his good, of course.
When Mother finds and reads Simon's secret journal, the situation becomes
tense, and there is a confrontation. Mother finally agrees to let him make more
of his own decisions and his own mistakes. This need for independence is so
much a part of growing up for all adolescents that the story would find
sympathetic readers on that basis alone; fortunately, it also has sturdy
characterization, realistic dialogue, and a pervasive, yeasty humor. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Mother-son relations
Kidd, Ronald. Sammy Carducci's Guide to Women. Lodestar, 1991. ISBN 0-
525-67363-6. [112p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Pint-sized sixth-grader Sammy and sweet voluptuous
Becky take turns narrating the story of their would-be romance (although for
some reason, Sammy's narration is in present tense and Becky's in past). The
plot is a little forced (after going to a dance with Sammy, Becky has an unlikely
date with a guy in high school and there's a slapstick showdown). Also,
Sammy's cocky schtick sometimes becomes obnoxious, but the broad humor
has its appeal: "Women are always going on diets. But they have this
uncontrollable urge to bake chocolate chip cookies. It's one of the mysteries of
modern science" pontificates self-appointed expert Sammy. Some quieter bits
are particularly well done, such as the characterization of Becky's parents, "Mr.
and Mrs. Suburbia," and their obsession with home appliances, and Sammy's
[ 130 ]
credulous and worshipful friend Gus. It lacks the authenticity and panache of
Byars' Bingo Brown books, but readers, particularly young Sammies hoping to
find their true loves, may enjoy the tale of youthful amour. DS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Latimer, Jim. The Irish Piper; illus. by John O'Brien. Scribner's, 1991. ISBN
0-684-19130-X. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-9 yrs. 
For reasons that are pure-and perfect--blarney,
Latimer has the savior of Hamelin coming from County Clare. In Hamelin, it
seems, his legend precedes him. As the rat-beleaguered mayor says, "we must
have a piper. We must have the Pied Piper." The mayor promises the Piper
everything, "a cornucopia of treasures and rewards," as well as an introduction to
the head alderman's pretty daughter Gretchen. The rats aren't easy. "The head rat
spat out his gum, took a fresh stick from his pocket, and folded it with his paw.
'We have heard of you,' he said in a rasping voice. 'We have heard this story
before. And we are not going to follow you."' But they do, and the mayor
reneges on her promises, and the children of the town-along with pretty
Gretchen-follow his beckoning music, which "sounded like butterflies and
carousels, like ribbons and strange balloons." The text is long, occasionally
twee, but sly allusions and funny anachronisms keep the tone fresh. O'Brien's
ink-and-watercolor illustrations are crisply crosshatched and warmly colored,
playing the story straighter than does the text and providing a gentling balance.
RS
C.U. Reading aloud
Levitin, Sonia. The Man Who Kept His Heart in a Bucket; illus. by Jerry
Pinkney. Dial, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1030-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-
1029-1. 32p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
M 
6-8 yrs. 
"Jack's heart had once been broken," so now Jack
keeps it safe in a bucket that he carries along while plying his trade as a
metalsmith. Safe, but useless-Jack can't work up any enthusiasm for the
baker's bread, the piper's music, or the holding of a baby that "squirms and
cries," all three of which are offered to him in exchange for his work. But when
Jack stops at the lake to get water for his heart, the story shifts from a
reasonable parable to a confusing hash of the fictive and the folklike, the literal
and the symbolic. A carp jumps into the pail, turns into a beautiful maiden, and
steals Jack's heart, literally, and, as it turns out, figuratively, as we discover
when Jack goes back into town in search of the answer to the maiden's riddle, an
answer demanded for return of the heart. For some reason, Jack then melts down
the bucket he had held his heart in; for some other reason the melted bucket turns
into a golden heart. And, in gathering the answers to the maiden's three-part
riddle, Jack discovers that he has a heart and that it is, as the townspeople point
out, "in the right place after all." The riddling is irrelevant, the two hearts are
confusing, the story's conclusion is filled with contradictions that have none of
the mystery of paradox--they're just bewildering. Pinkney's watercolors feature
his familiar rural landscapes; the facial distortions of the characters further
confound the mixed messages of the story. RS
[ 131 ]
Lewis, J. Patrick. Earth Verses and Water Rhymes; illus. by Robert Sabuda.
Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-689-31693-3. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Kids who rollicked to Lewis' previous picture book
poetry, A Hippopotamusn't (BCCB 7/90), will find his rhyme still strong here
but his tone more sober. Landscape descriptions dominate, as in "Lighthouse":
"This giant white/ Land candle burns/ The edges of/ The fog by turns." "A
Charm for the Trees," like several other of the seventeen poems here, depends on
a chanting element for its main appeal: "Juniper, hickory, walnut, fig/ Make a
wish on a twisted twig." Occasionally the forms seem forced, but at his best-
in the counting rhyme "Blue Herons," for instance-Lewis exerts control with a
light and inventive touch. The verses are set into richly textured linoleum cut
prints of pastoral scenery. The few human figures are less deftly delineated than
the flora and fauna that fill each double spread with dramatic contrasts of hue and
shape. Primary graders who can't manage to read this independently will relish
the chance to hear it read aloud and to absorb Sabuda's striking visual images
along with Lewis' verbal ones. BH
Ludwig, Warren, ad. Old Noah's Elephants; ad. and illus. by Warren Ludwig.
Whitebird/Putnam, 1991. ISBN 0-399-22256-1. 32p. $14.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Combining the grand Biblical tradition of Noah's ark
with a humble legendary motif, an appealing Israeli folktale (no sources cited)
gives the artist a chance to draw all kinds of animals in action. This he does
with aplomb, after Noah prays for help moving two elephants so fat from
raiding the storeroom that they threaten to tip over the ark. "What should I do,
God?" begs Noah. "Tickle the hyena," comes God's unexpected reply---"Trust
me." Of course, Noah sets off a chain reaction that eventually confronts the
elephants with a mouse, scaring them to opposite ends of the ark for a perfect
balance. Ludwig is a sure-handed cartoonist, never drifting into lazy clich6s of
expression or sloppy line work. The pictures are bulging with generously scaled
shapes, as a crowded ark should be, without becoming cluttered, while the colors
are kept to low-key earth tones to give more room for the figures. A funny read-
aloud that will save young listeners from floodwaters of daytime or bedtime
boredom. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
MacLachlan, Patricia. 
Three Names; illus. by Alexander Pertzoff.
Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024036-9; Trade ed. ISBN
0-06-024035-0. 32p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Who wouldn't love a school where you stabled your
horse out back and took your dog, Three Names, inside to lie on the coats or on
your feet while you did your lessons? That's the nineteenth-century, one-room
school described with such affection by the narrator's great-grandfather, who
recalls seasonal highlights from fall to summer, when school's closing left both
dog and boy at loose ends in the barn hay. "And Three Names would turn around
three times and sigh, settling like a sack of grain beside my great-grandfather, the
two of them dreaming away the summer. The two of them waiting for school."
This is more recollection than story, and there's not much about boring lessons
or strict discipline, but neither does the account wallow in sentimental nostalgia.
The writing is crisply specific to a prairie freedom salubrious for humans and
animals alike. The setting is sharply evoked in Pertzoff's watercolor paintings,
[ 132 ]
which range from amiable canine portraits to storm-struck landscapes that add
dramatic scope to the quiet narration. BH
D.V. Older-younger generations
Martin, James. Chameleons: Dragons in the Trees; illus. with photographs by
Art Wolfe. Crown, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-58389-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
517-58388-7. 36p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.00.
R* 
Gr. 3-5. 
A clear, well-organized continuous text sets the stage
for stunning color photographs of chameleons, which use changing colors (and
patterns) not to hide, as is popularly believed, but to communicate with others
of their kind. Many of the photos are action-packed tongue shots of chameleons
catching insects, or detailed closeups of chameleons climbing over fingers or
plants or simply confronting each other. A map shows African and Asian areas
where the reptiles live in the wild, and, in an endnote, Martin distinguishes
between real chameleons and anoles, which are popularly called chameleons in
the U.S. He is bluntly honest about keeping real chameleons as pets-most die
within weeks, even in a carefully simulated terrarium environment, and some are
threatened with extinction. Such a vivid presentation of these creatures in their
habitat is therefore doubly serviceable: for information and for observation once
removed. BH
C.U. Zoology
McAllister, Angela. The Enchanted Flute; illus. by Margaret Chamberlain.
Delacorte, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-385-30327-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-
30326-2. 26p. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
When persnickety Queen Pernickety orders a special
flute for her daughter Olivia's birthday, nothing is good enough until an old
magician goldsmith designs an enchanted flute. To anyone who hears it, its
song is the sound dearest to his heart. This blissful state lasts until Queen
Pernickety bans the goldsmith from producing any more magic flutes. In anger,
the goldsmith alters the magic on the princess's instrument so that it plays the
sound each hearer fears most. Surprisingly, what the queen is afraid of is the
truth from her subjects: "you have the fanciest frocks but the hardest heart, your
selfish Sovereignness." Pernickety's heart softens in an amazingly short span of
time, considering what a fussy tyrant she has been, but once her attitude
changes, she hears sweet flute music. Unfortunately-and abruptly--"that was
all that anybody ever heard from the enchanted flute." Some of the coined words
are clever ("Queendom") and some are cutesy ("they all found it grumblingly
difficult"). The brightly humorous illustrations are filled with whimsical
patterns, especially around the castle and in the royal clothing, and each two-page
spread has a unique border. Although the queen's sudden transformation makes
for a rushed ending, the crowded and colorful pictures are fun to pore over. KPJ
Mills, Lauren. The Rag Coat; written and illus. by Lauren Mills. Little, 1991.
ISBN 0-316-57407-4. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Minna, whose father dies of black lung disease and
who doesn't go to school because she has no coat to keep warm, walks a fine
line between the Little Match Girl and Pollyanna. The plot itself is sturdy (if
well-worn, with Mills acknowledging Dolly Parton in a note) as the Quilting
Mothers make the heroine a patchwork coat for which she's mercilessly teased---
[ 133 ]
until she tells the story of each patch contributed from her classmates' homes.
Unfortunately, the children's change of heart happens too quickly and completely
to be quite believable, and Minna seems noble to the point of martyrdom. The
full-page illustrations have a pastel prettiness that belies the hardships of
Appalachian poverty described in the facing text, but the idyllic scenes and
triumph of virtue will nevertheless have broad appeal. BH
Moore, Ruth Nulton. Distant Thunder; illus. by Allan Eitzen. Herald, 1991.
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8361-3557-1. 160p. Paper ed. $5.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, was a Moravian town at
the time of the American Revolution, and Moore has used many of the people
who lived there as minor characters in this novel set in 1777-1778. As is
usually true of historical fiction for young people, the major characters are
fictional; the author uses cousins Kate Rau and Andrew Werner as protagonists
to show what life was like for young people in the community. The story is
adequately written, with characterization that is consistent if not deep; no sources
are cited, but the author's note offers corroboration of many historical facts in
the story. The book may show a facet of the War for Independence that is new to
some readers, but as a narrative it has an air of purposive inclusion of incidents
of peripheral importance to the story. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.-Revolutionary War
Myers, Walter Dean. Now Is Your Time: The African-American Struggle for
Freedom. HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024371-6; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-06-024370-8. 292p. illus. with photographs. Library ed. $17.89; Trade
ed. $17.95.
R* 
Gr. 6-12. 
Most history surveys lull you to sleep rather than
opening your eyes to new perceptions; this one is different. Although it's
comprehensively focused on nearly three centuries of African-American
experience, it's also full of individual stories that will wake kids up to a
personalized sense of the past. A dramatic example is the account of Ibrahima,
born a Fula prince, educated as an Islamic scholar and warrior, abducted into
slavery, and finally freed from a Mississippi plantation in his old age to return to
Liberia. The book is written with a fresh sense of style and a firm point of
view. About the prejudice faced by black artist Meta Vaux Warrick, for instance,
Myers writes that "the problem was in the eyes and hearts of those who were
willing to reduce the human adventure to something as superficial as skin color."
Plenty of detailed evidence supports Myers' indictment of white supremacy, from
the records listing slaves bought and sold on a Georgia plantation to the number
of lynchings recorded between 1882 and 1968 (4,743). None of this is new, and
omissions are almost inevitable in such a broad work--the intertwined struggle
of women and African Americans for the right to vote isn't mentioned.
Although the role of Myers' own ancestors does not always seem smoothly
worked into the general history, especially in a chapter that opens with J. E. B.
Stuart's military operations and jumps to the estate where Stuart rested in close
proximity to Myers' great-grandmother Dolly Dennis, the inclusion of the
author's relatives lends immediacy to what might otherwise seem to young
readers a distant authorial voice. All told, this is a thoughtful digest of events
that are difficult to contain in a single volume accessible to young readers.
We're lucky somebody had the audacity and energy to do it, aided and abetted by
[ 134 ]
a generous number of historical photographs and documents. While there are no
notes, the select bibliography, arranged by topic, will lead researchers to further
reading. BH
C.U. 
History--U.S.
Nabb, Magdalen. Josie Smith at School; illus. by Pirkko Vainio. McElderry,
1991. ISBN 0-689-50533-7. 106p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
In this third volume of small adventures (see also
Josie Smith, BCCB 11/89), Josie Smith gets off on the wrong foot with a new
teacher, makes friends with a shy new East Indian girl, and-after some
humiliation-gets the part she wanted in the school concert. Hearing her chest
go "bar, barn, bam" every time she gets anxious, and "shutting her eyes tight"
whenever she tells a lie, Josie Smith is certainly a creature of habit. While the
repetitive language of this early chapter book is occasionally stilted, more often
it is patterned with a comfortable, engaging rhythm good for both reading aloud
and alone. Low-key, sometimes diffuse, the three stories here combine the
appeals of everyday action, a familiar setting, and a dauntless protagonist who
makes plenty of mistakes, but who always comes back for more. Illustrated
with cozy ink drawings. RS
Osborne, Mary Pope. American Tall Tales; illus. by Michael McCurdy.
Knopf, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90089-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80089-1.
116p. Library ed. $18.99; Trade ed. $18.00.
R* 
Gr. 4-7. 
Tall tales have provided the impetus for some
landmark collections, and Osborne's continues the tradition. Her introduction,
background notes on each tale, and bibliography provide historical context for
the stories, which bustle with witty colloquial expressions reflecting their
nineteenth-century sources and burst at the seams to be read aloud to today's crop
of kids. Osborne's heroes-some funny, some sad- 
include Davy Crockett,
Sally Ann Thunder Ann Whirlwind, Johnny Appleseed, Stormalong, Mose,
Febold Feboldson, Pecos Bill, John Henry, and Paul Bunyan. These folk loom
big as life and twice as natural in McCurdy's colored wood engravings, which
achieve monumental scale with stylized line work. For a slightly higher price
than San Souci's collection (reviewed below), American Tall Tales offers a lot
more to parents, teachers, and storytellers. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. African Elephants: Giants of the Land; illus. with
photographs by Oria Douglas-Hamilton. Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-
0911-2. 40p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
A top-notch introduction to elephants, this is plain-
spoken, logically organized, and illustrated with color photographs that are
always well-placed and to the (sometimes brutal) point. Devoting her first
chapter to the anatomy and useful physical traits of the African elephant, Patent
goes on to cover family structure, mating and birth, environmental adaptation,
and ecological concerns about ivory hunting and elephant survival. Patent
knows how to present the kind of details that kids love, such as the fact that
elephants can use their trunks both to break a small tree and to grasp a single
leaf, without the sort of AMAZING!!! hyperbole many other animal writers
indulge in; she shows respect for both her subject and her audience. She's also
[ 135
appropriately blunt-"each pair of tusks [in a market stall] means a dead
elephant"-when facing hard facts. An index (rare and welcome in an almost-
picture book) is appended. RS
C.U. 
Zoology
Paterson, Katherine. 
The Smallest Cow in the World; illus. by Jane Clark
Brown. HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024691-X; Trade ed. ISBN
0-06-024690-1. 
64p. (I Can Read Books). Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed.
$11.95.
R* 
Gr. 1-3. 
In her first easy-to-read book, Paterson has proved
once again that a good writer can filter simplified vocabulary through a rich
imaginative process. This is the story of Marvin, who loves the meanest cow in
the world, loses her when the farm his Dad works on is sold, and deals with the
loss and the move in the most ingenious way possible. After discovering
meanness doesn't work, Marvin fantasizes a miniature version of the cow to
keep him company. What makes the story more than just adjustment-to-change
bibliotherapy are the authentic conversations between Marvin and his sister
("'You are the dumbest boy in the world,' May said") and the quirky details
enlivening the classic dynamics that Marvin's family use to support him
through a crisis. Kids will get so involved they'll forget all about decoding-
and read the book. Brown's literal crayon-and-watercolor illustrations have a
homely humor that brightens the scenes without overwhelming them. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers; Moving, adjustment to
C.U. Reading, beginning
Patrick, Diane. Coretta Scott King. Watts, 1991. 
ISBN 0-531-13005-3.
128p. illus. with photographs. (Impact Biographies). $13.90.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
The author of a biography of Martin Luther King Jr.
has judiciously used some of the research for that book to produce this
companion volume, although most of the citations in Coretta Scott King are
based on Mrs. King's My Life with Martin Luther King. The material is
interesting, often inspiring or dramatic, and the author does not indulge in either
adulation or hyperbole. 
The text is weakened, however, by repetition (in
reference to Mrs. King's mother, "... she had only been able to go to school
until the fourth grade" on page 15, and on page 19, "Coretta's mother had only
been able to go to school until the fourth grade ... ") and by stylistic errors
("When Coretta was fifteen, their church asked her to be pianist and choir
director"). Source notes, a bibliography, and an index are provided. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Reeves, James. 
Mr. Horrox and the Gratch; illus. by Quentin Blake.
Wellington, 1991. ISBN 0-922984-08-5. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Mr. Horrox's realistic paintings of farmyards and
cottage doors with roses around them are getting a little pass6, says the art
dealer, so Mr. Horrox rents a cottage in Scotland where the scenery is more
rugged. "Only be careful of the Gratch," says the cottage caretaker. "He'll be all
right if you give him plenty of string." Mr. Horrox, of course, forgets about the
invisible wee spirit, and soon finds his pictures of Highland cattle and sheepdogs
covered with stringy lines of paint. The Gratch's abstracts are an immediate
success, and Mr. Horrox learns to paint tangled string patterns himself, insuring
[ 136]
his own future-and even the happiness of the Gratch (by leaving behind a ball
of string). Quentin Blake is the ideal illustrator for this jovial spoof, since his
flyaway lines tend to be squiggly anyway, and his tone satirical. The alternation
of black-and-white with color spreads is not entirely successful, since the color
scenes are so vivid in contrast to the gray washes, but the story and art are so
funny that kids won't mind; they can identify with jumble in any form. First
published in England in 1969. BH
Reuter, Bjarne. Buster, "the Sheikh of Hope Street"; tr. from the Danish by
AntheaBell. Dutton, 1991. ISBN 0-525-44772-5. [136p]. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Poor Buster. Dressed as Wild Victor of Arabia,
galloping about Br0nsh0j on his faithful broomstick steed Charlie Mane, the
only part he can get in the school production of The Scimitar of the Sheikh (and
the Three Naked Ladies, Buster adds to the audition posters) is that of scenery-
shifter. 
Buster doesn't mind: it's just another entry in the long list of
misunderstandings between Buster and the world. Jumpier than the first book
about Buster (Buster's World, BCCB 9/89), the present volume nevertheless
displays a funny and touching array of Buster's naivets--or was he joking when
he drew sad faces on the sour cream cartons and happy faces on the sweet cream
ones? We're never sure, and either way, it's sad when Buster gets fired from his
afterschool job at the dairy. It's even more distressing when Buster, after being
called "nothing, you zero, you nil" by his math teacher, runs to Charlie Mane
for comfort, only to discover that his horse has been put down ... for lice.
"'I'm Buster,' he shouted into the rain, 'I'm Buster.... I'm not nothing. And
I'm not crying either-it's only the rain.'" As always, Buster bounces back, and
in the end, steals the show in a remarkable display of upstagemanship. What
else? Who better? RS
D.V. Self-expression
Rosenberg, Maxine B. Brothers and Sisters; illus. with photographs by George
Ancona. Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-395-51121-6. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
In three photoessays, a child is the speaker: one is
the oldest in her family, one the younger of two boys, and one is a middle
sibling. 
This is very simply written so that, read aloud, it will be
comprehensible to young children; appropriately, the children are also young.
There is authorial description that sets a scene or is used as linkage, but the
comments on relationships and attitudes are always made by the speakers. This
should be a useful book to clarify advantages and disadvantages of each position
in a family constellation, but it seems just a little sugary, with everybody liking
his or her family slot and-despite sibling flaws-their brothers and sisters.
Ancona's photographs are, as usual, very good in quality, only occasionally
seeming posed. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Salter, Charles A. The Vegetarian Teen. Millbrook, 1991. ISBN 1-56294-048-
1. 112p. $13.90.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
While not as comprehensive as Sada Fretz' Going
Vegetarian (BCCB 4/83), Salter's guide is a solid introduction to the reasons for
and benefits of vegetarianism, varieties of diets, and ways to convert to a
[ 137]
meatless (or mostly meatless) regime. The book pays special attention to the
nutritional needs of adolescents, and while the author seems convinced of the
healthy advantages of vegetarianism, he is persuasive rather than polemical. The
claim that "the vegetarian diet is ideal for helping you lose flab and maintain
normal body weight" is not necessarily true, particularly if that diet includes
dairy products, which are used in several of the tasty, though sometimes high-
fat, recipes included at the back of the book. The format is stodgy but clean, and
notes, a reading list, and an index are appended. RS
C.U. Nutrition
San Souci, Robert D. Larger Than Life: 
The Adventures of American
Legendary Heroes; illus. by Andrew Glass. Doubleday, 1991. ISBN 0-385-
24907-1. 60p. $16.00.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
San Souci's tall tale collection, with half the number
of stories as Osborne's (reviewed above) and no notes or bibliography,
unfortunately suffers by comparison. Of the five subjects included here-John
Henry, Old Stormalong, Slue-Foot Sue and Pecos Bill, Strap Buckner, and Paul
Bunyan--only one is different from Osborne's: Strap Buckner is a pugilistic
Texan who fights the devil and loses. Both the language and book design in
Larger Than Life are colder than those in the Osborne book, while Glass' full-
color illustrations, although fired with energetic crosshatch, lose some dignity
by burlesquing the action. For collections that can afford both books, San
Souci's could serve as a competent contrast. BH
Sherlock, Patti. Four of a Kind. Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-0913-9.
196p. $13.95.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
"Hadn'ta been for you," says his grandfather to Andy,
"that Tom colt wouldn'ta lived a week." The colt and its twin, Maggie, are now
full-grown Percherons, big draft horses still used for farm work in the rural Idaho
area where Andy lives with his grandfather (neither of his divorced parents can fit
him into their schedule). Twelve-year-old Andy has loved the horses ever since
their birth and hopes to enter them in the Draft Horse Pulling Contest (teams
compete to pull the heaviest load) at the Eastern Idaho State Fair. Surviving
adventures en route (a disastrous runaway by the team, and a heroic pull to lift a
tree off an injured ranger when Andy is logging in the Idaho forests), Andy,
Maggie, and Tom make it to the fair, face opposition fair and foul (a wealthy and
heartless opponent), and eventually triumph. Andy's unlikely freedoms (very
few twelve-year-olds are allowed to fell and skid government timber with barely
any supervision) may arouse readers' yearning, and the unusual choice of
equestrian event may pique their curiosity; but the clich6s, ranging from Grandpa
(a crusty and dialect-using caricature) to the language itself ("I don't know what
his heart said to those two big horses in those silent moments, but I did know I
had no right to watch") to the final contest (where the real victory is not the
pulling of ten thousand pounds but the appearance of Andy's distant father), are
too thick and tired to permit much real interest. DS
D.V. Grandfather-child relations
Sieveking, Anthea. What Color?; written and illus. by Anthea Sieveking.
Dial, 1991. ISBN 0-8037-0909-9. 18p. $9.95.
[ 138 ]
R* 
1-3 yrs. 
What more could you ask of a concept book? It's
clean in design, clear in presentation, enticing to look at, and multi-cultural-the
babies are as varied in hue as the objects. What color is Chiau Pheng's raincoat?
Bright red, as are the rainhat, umbrella, and boots the toddler's wearing, all
labelled and neatly laid out on the facing page. Louise is surrounded by orange
toys, similarly captioned and formatted; Sabrina's shampoo and bath equipment
are all yellow. And here's a clever twist: viewers may guess which of two
babies in the tub is Sabrina-the white or the black baby-or simply identify
with either. Green, blue, and other colors get similar treatment, the items
clustered thematically by basic activities such as eating or diaper changing. This
is a book that will fit more than one use and stage of development. Grow with
it. BH
D.V. Everyday life concepts
Skutina, Vladimir. Nobody Has Time for Me: A Modern Fairy Tale; illus. by
Marie-Jos6 Sacr6. Wellington, 1991. ISBN 0-922984-07-7. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
"'I don't have time, can't you see?' grumbled Karin's
father, his eyes glued to the television set. He was watching the football game
and reading the paper at the same time." Thick-textured, earthtoned paintings
illustrate this Czech fable about a little girl who looks for time in a clock tower.
There she meets a grandfatherly clockmaker whom she believes to be Father
Time and who tells her that even busy people can make time for things, a
message she relays to her preoccupied parents. Like all fables, this is a touch
didactic, but there's natural drama in the child's adventure and in the rich graphic
depiction of it. While the characters' faces are flatly cartooned, the snowy scenes
and the dark old tower stairs-not to mention giant cog wheels, chains, ropes,
and pendulum-will help involve readers in a longish picture book text that
addresses one of the most common problems of contemporary children. BH
Taylor, Theodore. The Weirdo. Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-294952-6. 289p.
$15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Samantha ("Sam") stands to make some good money
this summer by taking care of Uncle Jack and Aunt Peaches' prize Weimaraner,
Buck, but readers who think they're going to get a dog story may be confused
when Buck drops out of the picture after the first chapter. Buck is the catalyst,
however, for Sam's meeting Chip, a disfigured boy who lives in the Powhatan
swamp where Sam goes chasing after the runaway dog. This first section is
broken up by excerpts from a college essay Chip has written about the swamp;
readers will be further confused by the next section, an extended flashback. The
friendship-and romance-between Sam and Chip makes a good foreground for
what seems to be Taylor's main interest, the swamp and its creatures. "Many
people say 'ugh' at the mere mention of swamp, the reputation being more of
beast than beauty. It is probably the most misunderstood landscape of all."
There is also a mystery, involving the disappearance of Tom, a graduate student
whom Chip has been assisting in bear tagging and tracking, but it isn't much,
and readers will spot the "burly" perpetrator fairly early on. The natural history,
survival lore, and information about bear research have the appeal of fleshed-out
facts, but the story is strictly secondary. RS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
[139]
Tesar, Jenny. Scientific Crime Investigation. Watts, 1991. ISBN 0-531-
12500-9. 96p. illus. with photographs. (Venture Books). $12.40.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Fingerprints, ballistics, lie detector tests, DNA
profiles-forensic medicine exerts a fascination (which Tesar ascribes to the
influence of Sherlock Holmes) combining the thrill of the chase and the
compulsion of puzzle-solving. While this book doesn't really convey that
fascination, it does adequately cover, using a mixture of anecdotes, statistics, and
explanation, the tools and responsibilities of the scientific side of evidence-
gathering. Explanations are not always clear or clearly phrased ("Some physical
evidence is real"), and they sometimes come too long after the problem has been
introduced ("The medical examiner ruled out suicide, for there were no powder
bums on the body" is on page 18, but it's not until page 71 that gunshot
residues are explained); the absence of any summary makes the book's end oddly
abrupt. Overall, however, the breadth and up-to-dateness of the book make it a
useful survey of a complicated subject. DS
C.U. Science
Turner, Robyn Montana. Rosa Bonheur. Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-85648-7.
32p. illus. with photographs. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Known primarily for her paintings of animals, Rosa
Bonheur had a successful career that was remarkable for a woman in the
nineteenth century, and Turner's simple (but not simplistic) style creates a clear
and informative narrative. In a scenario rare for that period, the young Bonheur
was encouraged in her career by her father, also a painter. Liberally illustrated
with reproductions of Bonheur's painting and sculpture (chiefly in color, and
with a few paintings of the artist by others), this is an excellent combination of
biography and art history. ZS
C.U. Art appreciation
VA, Leong. A Letter to the King; written and illus. by Leong VA; tr. from the
Norwegian by James Anderson. HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
020070-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020079-0. 32p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed.
$14.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
"Once upon a time in China, more than two thousand
years ago, there was a small village right next to the famous Great
Wall.... In the village there lived a doctor. Like everyone else he wanted a
son, but had only daughters. Five of them." It is the youngest, Ti Ying, who
frees her father from unjust imprisonment by petitioning the emperor to let her
go to prison in her father's place. Ti Ying's initiative in accompanying her
pilloried father to the Forbidden City with her horse Red Tail, her perseverance
in the face of scornful authorities, and her courage in using Red Tail to stop the
royal carriage comprise satisfying aspects of a traditional hero's journey. And Ti
Ying's triumph has far-reaching impact as the entire village rejoices in the return
of their doctor, who has learned to be "glad he had five daughters." Leong Vi's
work, which won first prize in a Norwegian picture book competition, assumes
a deceptive simplicity of tone in both story and illustration. His art has a
childlike naivet6 structured by sophisticated stylization of lines, organic earth
tones, and strong design. Each double spread features a picture with text in
English and Chinese on the recto and, facing it on the verso, a blown-up
informational detail, such as a rice mill, pillory, or bonsai, with captions.
[140]
Created by a Chinese living in Scandinavia, translated by an Englishman, and
published in the U.S., this is a distinct and distinctive international effort. BH
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Weiss, Harvey. Maps: Getting from Here to There; written and illus. by
Harvey Weiss. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-56264-3. 64p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Illustrated with his own crisp halftone cartoons, as
well as several clear reproductions of printed maps, Weiss' affable introduction to
map-reading and -making begins at home-his home, starting with a map of
Weiss' desk, his office, his house, his town, his state, and so on through the
whole shebang. 
Subsequent chapters cover scale and measurement, map
symbols, latitude and longitude, marine charts and other specialized maps, a brief
history of mapmaking, and "making your own map," complete with instructions
for using a compass and protractor. Information is concisely organized, with a
good balance of technical detail (calculating degrees of latitude, for example) and
general context. Although there is no index or reading list, this is a needed step
up from Jack Knowlton's book for primary-graders, Maps and Globes (BCCB
3/86). RS
C.U. Geography; Map drawing
Weitzman, David. Thrashin' Time: Harvest Days in the Dakotas; written and
illus. by David Weitzman. 
Godine, 1991. 
ISBN 0-87923-910-7. 
[80p].
$24.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-. 
Set in 1912, this is the putative account by a North
Dakota farm boy of his first encounter with the steam traction engine. The book
is handsome and informative, and the just-enough-fictionalized text adds
historical interest. Oversize pages are used judiciously to accommodate large-
scale illustrations and set them off effectively by pristine backgrounds, just as
the centering of type on textual pages is set off by very broad margins. The
black-and-white illustrations have the meticulous details of Edwin Tunis' work
and the visual, textural appeal of the art of Leonard Everett Fisher, with the
incorporation of stippling, parallel lines, and some cross-hatching. Good style,
good flow, good book. ZS
C.U. 
Farm life
Whittaker, Dorothy. Angels of the Swamp. Walker, 1991. ISBN 0-8027-
8129-2. 
[224p]. 
(American History Series for Young People). 
$15.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
In a story set during the Depression, three young
people come together on an isolated island off the Florida coast. Taffy, fifteen,
is -running away from a social worker who wants to place her with a foster
family. Jody, several years younger, is escaping an alcoholic uncle who seems
oblivious to the fact that the boy has a severe and dangerous leg infection. Both
are orphans, and both are experienced at fishing. They have already become
friends, pooled resources, and set up a hideaway when they meet Jeff, who is
older than they and has left home for economic reasons. Their hideaway is on
island property owned by Jodie's family; there are many vivid details about
fishing (based on the author's experiences) but few historical details. The
writing style is adequate, the plot outcome both predictable and pat: everybody's
lot or health improves, everybody's future is decided, and it is clear that bonds
[ 141 ]
established during the island experience will be permanent. This is more a
survival story than a book about the 1929 Depression, and it has a deliberate
pace that at times slows the narrative. ZS
D.V. Self-reliance
Willis, Val. The Mystery in the Bottle; illus. by John Shelley. Farrar, 1991.
ISBN 0-374-35194-5. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
More sweet-spirited than Bobby Bell's previous finds
The Secret in the Matchbox (a dragon, BCCB 7/88) and The Surprise in the
Wardrobe (a witch, BCCB 1/91), the catch here is a mermaid, whom Bobby
brings home from a visit to the beach, and whose talents he employs to win a
school swimming contest. Like Wardrobe, the story is slight, the mermaid's
magic (she conjures up both a dolphin and King Neptune) too freewheeling to
have much impact. Children, however, will applaud Bobby's triumph, and
Shelley's precise but splashy paintings are a glorious mess of fish and kids and
goofy-looking grownups, each double-spread bordered with a frieze of seafaring
motifs. "Suddenly the mermaid" may not be everybody's idea of convincing
narrative, but mermaid-mayhem has an appeal all its own. Catch a wave. RS
Woodruff, Elvira. Back in Action; illus. by Will Hillenbrand. Holiday House,
1991. ISBN 0-8234-0897-3. 
150p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
In a sequel to Awfully Short for the Fourth Grade,
Noah Murphy once again uses wishing powder from a magic kit to shrink
himself and bring his little plastic "guys" to life. This time, Noah lets his best
friend Nate in on the adventure. When Nate sneezes into the magic powder just
as Noah makes the wish, more toys come to life than the boys had originally
planned. The boys and their toy pals have an exciting, action-packed adventure
trying to dodge the horrible toy monster that comes to life and chases them. The
author knows boys' fantasies--endless candy, a working space station and plane
to fly in, and a real army. There are places in the story, however, where the plot
is contrived, especially when Noah conquers his fears and leads his army in an
attack against the monster even though it's clear that before they get eaten alive,
everything will return to normal. The sentimental goodbyes at the book's end
are dragged out long enough to make the promises "We'll be back... I
promise, we'll be back...." KPJ
Wyman, Andrea. Red Sky at Morning. Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-
0903-1. 230p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
The time is 1909, the place is an Indiana farm, and
the narrator is twelve-year-old Callie, whose father has gone to Oregon to find a
better farm, leaving Callie, her older sister Katherine, her pregnant mother, and
her grandfather, Opa, whose speech is used to stress the family's German
heritage. Both Mama and her baby die in childbirth. Katherine goes to work for
a slave-driving aunt and returns home ill; the farm is doing badly; and many
friends die in a diphtheria epidemic. When Papa (who had taken Opa's money)
turns up and the others learn that he has married a widowed farm owner; they
decide to pack up and go with him. The saga of disasters is told in a style that is
uneven in pace and tone; the use of Opa's reversal malapropisms ("No more
dropping the eaves," "the bee spelling") becomes tedious. However, the physical
hardships-especially of women and children--are vividly realistic. ZS
[ 142
Yancey, Diane. Desperadoes and Dynamite: Train Robbery in the United
States. Watts, 1991. ISBN 0-531-20038-8. 64p. illus. with photographs.
(First Books). $11.90.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Jesse James and Butch Cassidy might not hold the
same allure for the Star Wars generation as they did for earlier thrill-seekers, but
low-tech methods not withstanding (pulling a rail from ahead of a train, often),
these bad guys can still seize the imagination. Yancey points out that train
robbery was a natural development from stagecoach robbery, gaining popularity
after the Civil War and the railroad expansion into the West. Train robbers used
many methods for stopping and looting the trains, but the primary objective was
usually the "express car," which was (supposedly) secure and held hard cash and
valuable papers. Anecdotes about the outlaws and their adversaries, notably the
Pinkerton Detective Agency, are well-integrated into the general discussion;
particularly diverting is a story about Bill Carlisle, who wrote to the Denver
Post after two other men were imprisoned for one of his hold-ups: "To convince
the officers that they have the wrong men in jail, I will hold up a train
somewhere west of Laramie, Wyoming. (signed) The White Masked Bandit."
Photos (including Rube Burrows in his casket), old prints, and "Wanted" posters
add authenticity and interest; glossary, notes, reading list, and index are all
appended. RS
C.U. The West
Yolen, Jane, comp. ed. Vampires: A Collection of Original Stories; comp. ed.
by Jane Yolen and Martin H. Greenberg. HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-026801-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026800-X. 
228p. Library ed.
$14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
There is a great variety of plots in these thirteen short
stories about vampires. The climax of most of the stories, of course, hinges on
the shock that ensues when the innocent characters discover that one among
them is a vampire. 
Fourteen-year-old Ashley describes it best when, in
Lawrence Watt-Evans' "Richie," she learns her boyfriend is a vampire:
"This... certainly explains a heck of a lot." 
In Delia Sherman's "Blood
Kin," set in turn-of-the-century New Orleans, young Clarisse fights off her
creepy cousin's attempts to make her part of his nocturnal company. Esther M.
Friesner's "The Blood-Ghoul of Scarsdale" is "akshally" a "rilly" cool first-
person narrative by Janine, who is nearly seduced by a dracula's shopping skills.
One of the best stories is Josepha Sherman's "The Magic-Stealer," a fantasy in
which a young girl trained in magic to be a "Power-Speaker" battles with a
vengeful vampire who tries to destroy her village. The longest story, "Blood
Libel" by Leigh Ann Hussey, is the tale of a young Jewish scholar whose blood-
drinking habits are supported by a sympathetic community. Unfortunately, the
futuristic political premise behind Phyllis Ann Karr's "A Cold Stake" is not
explained clearly enough and the tale doesn't support its potential. Overall, this
is a strong anthology of good creepy stories to add to Yolen and Greenberg's
growing series. KPJ