Aesop. Aesop's Fables; illus. by Fulvio Testa. Barron's, 1989. ISBN 0-8120-
5958-1. 43p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Using as setting a Middle Eastern oasis much like the
landscape in Wolfs Favor (BCCB 10/86) Testa illustrates twenty of Aesop's
more familiar fables. His paintings of Wolf, Fox, Lion and the rest have a
surreally formal quality, posing stylized animals and foliage in front of rounded,
naturalistic backgrounds. Framed with abstract borders, each illustration has the
quality of an iconographic portrait. A handsome presentation and a good
selection of fables, but none of them conclude with the traditional moral
appendages, despite the book jacket's claim to the contrary. RS
Alexander, Ellen. Llama and the Great Flood: A Folktale from Peru; written
and illus. by Ellen Alexander. Crowell, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04729-
0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04727-4. [40p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A welcome addition to the picture-book folklore
collection, this will be a logical companion to present with the many available
[ 214 ]
versions of Noah and the Ark. After an introduction to the Andean people of
Peru, the narration picks up the Quechuan story of a great flood, about which a
llama dreams and warns his owner. The two of them, with the owner's wife and
child, take food to the top of the highest mountain, Willka Qutu, where they
find animals of every kind already gathered. "Almost at once the sea began to
overflow and they all remained stranded there.... Only the top of Willka Qutu
remained above water. It is said that the water even reached the fox's tail and
turned it black. It is still that color today." When the people and animals
descend, they find an empty world that they must repopulate. A note explains
the background of the story and some of the artist's graphic motifs, which she
attributes to "several pre-Inca cultures such as the Wari and the Moche." The
full-color wash drawings are vivid even if the human figures are somewhat stiffly
drafted, and the rocky landscapes are expressive-literally, when parts of the
terrain take on the aspect of faces. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Anno, Mitsumasa. Anno's Aesop: A Book of Fables by Aesop and Mr. Fox;
adapted, written and illus. by Mitsumasa Anno. Orchard, 1989. Library ed.
ISBN 0-531-08374-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05774-7. 64p. Library ed. $16.99;
Trade ed. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
If Fulvio Testa's version, reviewed above, seems to
ignore a basic ingredient of Aesop's fables, Anno might be accused of not
leaving well enough alone. Aesop's fables here are a book within a book; they
are accompanied by Mr. Fox's running commentary as he reads the fables to son
Freddy. Actually, Mr. Fox doesn't seem to be doing much reading, preferring
instead to make it up as he goes along, using the pictures in Freddy's book to
spark a few lessons of his own, inverting, extending, or ignoring the traditional
precepts of the tales (which are printed in full). "The Dog and His Reflection"
becomes a mathematical puzzle; "The North Wind and the Sun," coupled with
"The Shipwrecked Man and the Sea" is, Mr. Fox says, an insurance ad that
illustrates the point that "every cloud has a silver lining"; "The Grasshopper and
the Ants," unlike people, "look after one another, you see." While Mr. Fox's
recastings of the forty fables included often have an ironic twinge entirely in
keeping with the spirit of the originals, the device becomes self-indulgent,
relying on extraneous details in the pictures or dragging on in a shaggy-dog style
that leads nowhere in particular: 
Mr. Fox sounds (entertainingly) like an
armchair eccentric trying to keep himself as amused as his young listener.
While the illustrations are gerrymandered to fit both Aesop's and Mr. Fox's
fables, we can see why Mr. Fox finds so much inspiration therein-both
schematic and dramatic, the ink-and-watercolor paintings are filled with details
and devices, recurring motifs and characters (including, of course, one
exceptionally wily fox) that bring an inventive progression to the fables. While
Anno's edition, like Testa's, is no substitute for a solid picture book Aesop, its
clever extensions will provide some provocative entertainment for older children
already familiar with the fables. RS
[215 ]
Appiah, Sonia. Amoko and Efua Bear; illus. by Carol Easmon. Macmillan,
1989. ISBN 0-02-705591-4. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
A child's love for her toy bear is not an unusual
theme, but the West African setting is, and the warm paintings individualize a
universal situation. Amoko plays devotedly with Efua Bear, tying Efua on her
back to visit the market with her father, making Efua a pillow-bed while she and
her father cook mutton and yam stew, and holding Efua in her lap while the
family eats. When Auntie brings a new drum, however, Amoko forgets the
stuffed animal, which is almost torn apart by dogs in the night but-after a
tearful reunion-is washed and sewn together by Amoko's mother next morning.
With never a trace of contrived travelogue effect, story and art impart many
details of Amoko's life style, including her parent's loving involvement in her
everyday activities. The two-dimensional, vividly colored art concentrates on
clean, simple compositions to capture nuance of landscape and household
interiors. The very lack of barriers between outdoors and indoors is noticeably
different from what young U.S. listeners will have experienced. Figures are
stylized in posture but expressive in facial depiction. A satisfying visit abroad.
BH
D.V. Family relations; Love for toy
Ashabranner, Brent. Born to the Land: An American Portrait; illus. with
photographs by Paul Conklin. Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21716-9. 134p.
$14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-10. 
Focusing on the Nunn family, whom the author
previously interviewed in The Vanishing Border (BCCB 3/88), Ashabranner
examines the contemporary situation of ranchers, and, to a lesser extent, farmers,
in southwestern New Mexico. While the empathy that the author and illustrator
consistently demonstrate with their subjects is usually a strong aspect of their
books, here the fellow-feeling falls into an idyllic, adulatory tone-Ashabranner
usually asks tougher questions than the ones posed here. Scant attention is paid
to the Mexican-American inhabitants of Luna County-it is not until the end of
the book that we are told Hispanics constitute half the county population. The
ranchers never mention their Hispanic neighbors or employees, and the book
glides over problems of ethnic relations. Although Ashabranner is usually better
at providing social and political context (as in The Vanishing Border or Dark
Harvest), his (and Conklin's) gift for detail serves them well when describing the
actual work of a ranch: branding, corralling, selling cattle, and always praying
for rain. RS
Attmore, Stephen. Read About Horses and Ponies. Warwick/Watts, 1989.
ISBN 0-531-19054-4. 32p. illus. (Read About). $10.90.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
A winner for young horse lovers who aren't ready to
read more technical riding and training books. With various breeds described and
pictured, Attmore adds tidbits on how to measure a horse's height in hands, how
to tell a horse's age from looking at its teeth, how to identify the parts of a
horse, how to groom and tack up (including the complicated bridle), how to
[216]
mount and position properly for different gaits, and, for armchair admirers, how
to draw horses and start scrapbooks. The nonstop, full-color illustrations and
businesslike tone will keep this galloping off the shelves. With glossary and
index. BH
Auch, Mary Jane. Glass Slippers Give You Blisters. Holiday House, 1989.
ISBN 0-8234-0752-7. 169p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Sixth-grader Kelly wants to get involved in the
school production of Cinderella, but she knows her mother will disapprove.
Mom doesn't like Kelly to do anything that smacks of her own mother's rather
bohemian behavior, and theater is the biggest taboo: when Mom was little,
Gram once ran away to act in New York. This is a once-over-lightly blend of
intergenerational conflict and school-play story with lots of appeal, both in the
scenes of school jealousy and feuding and in the vivid arguments of two mothers
and their daughters. While not as immediately funny as Auch's last novel, Mom
Is Dating Weird Wayne (BCCB 1/89), this one has the advantages of a fresher
idea, more convincing plotting, and recognizable growth on the part of the
protagonist RS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Bellairs, John. The Trolley to Yesterday. Dial, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-
8037-0582-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0581-6. [192p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade
ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Johnny (nice boy) and his pal Fergie (not-at-all-nice
boy) go along with elderly Professor Childermass on a trip to Constantinople.
Since their mode of travel is a trolley that functions as a time machine, their
visit takes place in 1453. The story, febrile in pace, is fraught with danger and
consists of a series of crises-and-escapes. For readers who like action, the
concept of time travel, a bit of history larded in, and some suspense, this should
appeal. It is not strong in characterization, however, and has a plethora of plot;
the writing style is adequate save for overwrought dialogue. ZS
Berger, Gilda. The Human Body; illus. by Darcy May. Doubleday, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-24279-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-24278-6. 43p. Library
ed. $9.95; Trade ed. $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Drawings and diagrams are combined on oversize
pages on which 1/4 to 1/2 the space is devoted to text printed in columns set
legibly against a colored background. The clean-lined paintings are generally
illustrative; the diagrams are not always clearly labelled: on facing pages,
diagrams of the male and female reproductive systems might lead readers to
assume that males have something called a pelvis, but females don't. The
writing is direct, accurate, and comprehensive without being wordy or diffuse.
Berger uses a traditional approach: digestive system, respiratory system,
reproductive system, the skin, the senses, etc. An index is included. ZS
C.U. Science
[217 1
Blanchard, Arlene. Sounds My Feet Make; illus. by Vanessa Julian-Ottie.
Random House, 1989. ISBN 0-394-89648-3. 18p. (Just Right Books). $4.95.
M 
2-3 yrs. 
In a publisher's series designed for a specific age
range, this focuses on sounds, a phenomenon of which young children are
happily aware. The pages are uncrowded, a minimal text and pedestrian pictures
printed on heavy, slick paper for comparative durability. What weakens the
book is the use, at times, of spelled-out "noises" that are not really like what
one hears: even on a metal grid, a child shod in rubber boots is unlikely to
produce "Clang! clang! clang!" Useful, perhaps, as a catalyst for talking about-
or imitating-noises with a preschool child, but slight as a book, lacking story
or humor as it moves from one sound to another. ZS
Bode, Janet. Different Worlds: Interracial and Cross-Cultural Dating. Watts,
1989. ISBN 0-531-10663-2. 120p. $12.90.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
A substantial divided bibliography and an intermittent
infusion of interview-based citations attest to the amount of research and
preparatory work that Bode has done as background for a text that is direct,
dignified, candid, and non-judgmental. Racial and cultural differences are seen as
insuperable barriers by some of the members of our diverse society; when those
who hold the "stick-to-your-own-kind" viewpoint are parents or guardians of
teenagers who have different views, a range of problems can arise. Bode gives
background material on scientific attitudes toward race and racism, and discusses
attitudes and conflicts in general as well as in a series of case histories (also
accessible by cases in a relative index) that illustrate a range of multi-ethnic
situations. ZS
C.U. Guidance
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Intercultural understanding; Interracial understanding
Calmenson, Stephanie. 
What Am I?: Very First Riddles; illus. by Karen
Gundersheimer. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020998-4; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-06-020997-6. [32p]. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
Just one short step up from point-and-name, these
rhyming riddles couldn't be simpler: "To guess what I am/ Is easy as can be./
Your sock goes on your foot/ And your foot goes into me." Turn the page for
one unmistakable shoe. Never tricky and always toddler-tested (keys, flowers, a
swing), the riddles provide the appeal of rhyming as well as pride in the
accomplishment of figuring out the answer. And, of course, the fun of shouting
it out. Tidy drawings on the riddle page provide visual nudges; illustrations of
the mystery objects are generic enough to be readily identified while maintaining
interest through color (a yellow telephone) and detail (a terrific toy train). RS
Castle, Kate. Read About Ballet. Warwick/Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-19055-2.
32p. illus. (Read About). $10.90.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Although this follows the same format as Attmore's
book about horses, reviewed above, and includes quite a bit of information, it is
disconcertingly disorganized. The introduction, for instance, prepares the reader
[218 ]
to find out about ballet's "special language" of movement, which does not
appear until several pages later after a look behind the scenes at prop workers and
at a professional dancer's typical day. Similarly, going to a special boarding
school to train for a career comes before the section on "starting to dance." On
the plus side, there are some simple, straightforward descriptions and clear
diagrams, though in general the art work is not as fluid as in Attmore's book.
Like all the titles in the series, this one has a glossary and index, but the section
suggesting activities is a bit patronizing ("Spring might mean walking in the
rain to the music of 'Singing in the Rain'"). BH
Charnas, Suzy McKee. The Golden Thread. Bantam, 1989. ISBN 0-553-
05821-5. [224p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 7-9. 
Valentine, a teenager who has magical powers, is the
narrator of a fantasy in which the realistic matrix seems overshadowed by the
famtastic. The plot concerns a pushy, hostile alien, Bosanka, who also has
magical powers-but they are not enough to get her back to her home in space,
so she demands that Val and her friends join their psychic potential to help her
achieve her goal. In the end, Bosanka is horrified by the discovery that her
people have all become sea-creatures, but she becomes a dolphin in order to join
them. Gran, whose occult powers have been Val's model, dies after a long,
comatose illness, but not until Val has had a chat with Gran's spirit. The
writing style is adequate, but the plot and the characters are so contrived that the
book seems to appeal to only the most ardent science fiction buffs. This is a
sequel to The Silver Glove (BCCB 6/88). ZS
Cole, Babette. Three Cheers for Errol!; written and illus. by Babette Cole.
Philomel, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21671-5. 26p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
First published in England, a story carried by the
comic brio of the line and wash illustrations has the kind of exaggeration young
children enjoy, a device that acts as counterpoint to the matter-of-fact text. A
lost cause academically, Errol (a city rat who attends a "scruffy school in a
drain") is very good at sports and is all set to compete in the Inter-school
Ratathlon when his rivals wound him by trickery. Undaunted, Errol (despite
assorted bandaged parts) goes into a new training program and wins five events,
partly by using his tail for the javelin throw and for boxing. The story is funny
if slight; it is weakened by an abrupt ending: "'What a smart rat!' they said.
Three cheers for Errol!" ZS
Collins, Alan. Jacob's Ladder. Lodestar, 1989. ISBN 0-525-67272-9. [160p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
Angry and afraid, thirteen-year-old Jacob pushes away
help after his father is killed in an "accident"-more likely, Mr. Kaiser was
pushed from a cliff by anti-Semitic laborers. Jacob and his younger brother
Solly, after a brief attempt at running away, are taken by sturdy Mrs. Pearlman
to a Jewish orphanage in the suburbs of Sydney. It is 1939 in Australia, and the
other children in the Abraham Samuelson Memorial Home are refugees from
Europe, many of them waiting for their parents to escape. For Solomon, Hitler
[219 ]
and the Holocaust are far away, and he is resentful of the European Jews, yet at
the same time intrigued with their devoutness and rituals, so different from his
own seedy, secular background. "The word [kosher] had a different connotation
when mouthed frequently by Uncle Siddy. Deals were kosher, the man who
bought the scrap gold was kosher, the woman he was currently living with was
not kosher." 
While occasionally distanced by the author's reminiscent
perspective ("My first few months in the Home were a mixture of pain and
pleasure, of resentment and acquiescence, of loneliness and jealousy .. .")
Jacob's alienation at the home and later, when apprenticed to a printer and living
in a boarding house, is hard and honest, mitigated by complicated and tentative
bonds with his brother, foxy Uncle Siddy, and others. The progression of
Jacob's sexual and religious awareness is carefully traced as well, from
frightening yet erotic dreams and a half-comprehended bar mitzvah to exciting
discoveries--romantic and political-in Sydney's communist and Zionist youth
groups of the time. The ending is a bit neat, and occasioned by some unnecesary
melodrama, but the journey to it is genuine. RS
D.V. Brothers; Religious understanding
Crouch, Marcus, ad. Ivan: Stories of Old Russia; illus. by Bob Dewar. Oxford,
1989. ISBN 0-19-274135-7. 80p. (Oxford Myths and Legends). $15.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Ivan may be a noodlehead or a trickster or a bold hero;
in Russian folklore there are myriad Ivan stories and, in this appealing new
compilation, they are retold with wit and a strong sense of the oral tradition.
The illustrations, both those in color and those in black and white, echo the
comic quality of the retellings, more suave than stark, yet starkly dramatic in
visual effectiveness. Lovers of the genre, young or old, will recognize familiar
tales (Baba Yaga intercedes in "Three Brides for Three Brothers") and enjoy
Slavic variants of others, as in "Ivan Gets It Wrong," an entertaining companion
to "Epaminondas." ZS
C.U. 
Storytelling
Dickinson, Peter. Eva. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-50129-6. [256p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 7-12. 
Daughter of a prominent primatologist, 13-year-old
Eva has grown up around chimps, "and now she was one herself. Okay." Her
body destroyed in a car accident, Eva's "neuron memory" has been transplanted
into the body of a chimpanzee named Kelly. Where is Kelly now, Eva wonders,
and Dickinson uses this question to frame both narrative and thematic impetus in
a dramatic science fiction story about an experiment that may or may not have
gone wrong. Able to talk with humans via an electronic gizmo, grooming and
chattering with the chimps, Eva becomes a controlled, contract-bound celebrity
in an overpopulated world obsessed with 3-D television and chimps, who, living
in zoos and research enclosures, are almost the only wild animals left. Both
theme and plot will be familiar to SF movie fans, but Dickinson's story of
Eva's transformation is never melodramatic, and his theme of the rights of
animals is understated, allowing the chimps' behavior to speak for itself. His
literal anthropomorphism of Eva/Kelly, in fact, serves not to show us how alike
[220 ]
the animals are to ourselves, but how different. "Looked at with human eyes,
thought about with a human mind, felt with human emotions, [a picture of the
chimps] almost cried aloud ... 
Uh-uh, thought Eva. People. They'll never
understand." But perhaps it is because we are people that the last scene is so
moving: a dying Eva, who has been living wild with the escaped chimps for
years, gives her voice box back to the humans. RS
Duncan, Lois. Don't Look Behind You. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-29739-
4. [176p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
April's peaceful, perfect world is shattered when she
and her family are forced to assume new identities after her father, working
undercover for the FBI, has testified in court against some dangerous drug
smugglers. While Duncan seems to be incapable of writing something that is
not a page-turner, the suspense here is vitiated by naggings of implausibility
that undermine her premise and plot development. The family hides for two
weeks in a hotel, never leaving their room. When taken under the wing of the
Witness Protection Program, they simply disappear, change their names, move
to Florida, get contact lenses for little brother Bram (whose eyes are two different
colors), and April's mother gives up her career as a noted author of children's
books, all without much of a peep on the part of neighbors, media, or Mrs.
Corrigan's editor. While April keeps learning the lesson that "real life isn't
Cinemax," the novel is framed in terms of the world of the paperback romance:
for April, the worst thing about the Witness Protection Program is losing her
boyfriend; in the end she finds another. Duncan is usually more complex and
careful than she is here, but her talent for suspenseful pacing and melodrama
remains unparalleled. Author recognition, the fright-night title, and the cover
photo of a gloved hand gripping another hand gripping a phone guarantee
absolutely no need for booktalks. RS
Facklam, Margery. The Trouble with Mothers. Clarion, 1989. ISBN 0-89919-
773-6. 135p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Buzz Troy's big eighth-grade ambitions are to be
anonymous in class and conspicuous in the swimming pool, where he yearns to
win the butterfly and freestyle relay. Both goals look hopeless after a crusading
censor picks his mother's book to target in a "Clean Up America Campaign."
Mrs. Troy's book is historical fiction with some explicit sexual scenes, and
Buzz's friends harass him in the locker room while the town divides into pro-
and anti-censorship groups whose antagonism erupts into violence at a rally.
The situation and repercussions of book banning make a dramatic plot. The
characters, while not deeply probed, are smoothly presented, and the style is
consistent. At a few points, the case study aspects show, as in an English
teacher's raising questions about censorship, but this is an accessible book to
have on hand for classroom discussions of controversial titles. BH
[221]
Fine, Anne. My War with Goggle-Eyes. Joy Street/Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-
28314-2. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Anne Fine writes some of the funniest-and truest-
family fight scenes to be found. Kitty's room is a bit, well, disorganized. Or,
as mother's boyfriend Gerald (nicknamed Goggle-eyes by Kitty for the way he
looks at mother's legs) prefers, the room is disgusting. "He put his foot in it
right there. It was quite clear from the expression on Mum's face that, for the
moment, she had heard enough from Gerald Faulkner about his views on natty
housekeeping." But Gerald is tenacious, pointing out to Mum that her defence
of Kitty is "utter baloney," and soon Mum is completely taken in. "'Take care,
Gerald,' she giggled. 'Mind what you say! You'll end up in terrible trouble
with Kitty.'" That's just one skirmish in an on-going war; perhaps even more
pointed is the scene where staunch conservative Gerald accompanies Kitty, little
sister Judith, and Mum to an anti-nuclear demonstration witnessed only by the
police ("It's not as easy as you might think to get arrested") and some sheep.
Contemptuous of their politics as he is, Gerald nevertheless takes Kitty and Jude
home when Mum is arrested, and Kitty finds herself beginning to love him. In a
benignly barbed family comedy peppered with Hepburn-and-Tracy repartee,
readers will empathize with Kitty's step-by-step acceptance of Gerald while at the
same time finding this self-described "boring" man magnetically charming from
the start. RS
D.V. Devotion to a cause; Family relations
Fleischman, Sid. 
The Ghost in the Noonday Sun; illus. by Peter Sis.
Greenwillow, 1989. ISBN 0-688-08410-9. [144p]. $11.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
"At cockcrow I got out of bed and stepped on the tail
of Aunt Katy's one-eyed cat, Jibboom." Readers will feel themselves in the
hands of a master storyteller from this first sentence of a tale crackling with
pirates, ghostly appearances, and treasure hunts. On Oliver Finch's twelfth
birthday, he expects to welcome his father, for whom he's waited through three
years of a whaling voyage. Instead, Oliver is kidnapped aboard Captain Scratch's
mysterious ship, taken on a long hard voyage, and ordered to find the ghost who
guards a hoard of gold. The plot and characters are inventively cut from the best
stuff of tradition, the pace never lags, and the style is quickened with resounding
adjectives such as wrathy, twistical, grandacious, and dubersome, or verbs like
gulch, scarify, and difficulted. The whole crew, from first mate Jack O'Lantern
to a Fiji islander named Cannibal, are caricatured but never hyperbolic. First
published in 1965 and now re-issued in a new format, this book laughs at itself
without missing a beat of the action. A treat to read aloud. BH
Fonteyn, Margot, ad. 
Swan Lake; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman.
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1989. ISBN 0-15-200600-1. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Swan Lake is a romantic tragedy, a "Beauty and the
Beast" in which both hero and heroine die untransformed. Here the author and
artist have attempted to capture the tale without benefit of the major reason for
its sustained popularity-the ballet itself. Between Hyman's choreographic
[ 222 ]
drawing and Fonteyn's feeling for the drama, they've done an admirable job. In
the story, Prince Siegfried has fallen in love with Odette, a queen turned swan by
an evil owl-magician. When the owl-magician's daughter appears at a ball
disguised as Odette, Siegfried pledges his troth, only to discover the deception
too late. He and his true love cast themselves into the lake, breaking the
magician's hold over the other swan maidens "by the strength of a love that
feared nothing but separation." Fonteyn's note on the history of Tchaikovsky's
music and the dance productions through the century that followed are technically
detailed, and the illustrations are effectively theatrical, if conventional-there are
no visual surprises here. Grace, however, is Hyman's hallmark in overall
composition, drafting, portraiture, and page design, with magical blues and
moonlight whites dominating full-page paintings. A prerequisite for preparing
children to see the ballet. BH
C.U. Dancing
Girard, Linda Walvoord. We Adopted You, Benjamin Koo.; illus. by Linda
Shute. Whitman, 1989. ISBN 0-8075-8694-3. 32p. $10.50.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Age nine, Benjamin Koo Andrews talks about his
life, both what he's been told (abandoned ten days after his birth, left on the
steps of a Korean orphanage, adopted by an American couple and taken to the
United States) and what he has experienced: a loving extended family, the advent
of a baby sister, also adopted (this time from Brazil) and the realization that his
appearance is accepted casually by many but received with varying degrees of
hostility by a few. It might seem ambitious to tackle in one short book such
major themes as adjustment to adoption, cultural adaptability, sibling
relationships, and prejudice. Girard handles this with aplomb, and makes Ben's
voice both childlike and convincing. Perhaps because it eschews both cuteness
and sentimentality, the story is touching without being maudlin, and its tone is
direct and candid rather than being overburdened with Message. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Intercultural understanding
Gleeson, Libby. I Am Susannah. Holiday House, 1989. ISBN 0-8234-0742-
X. 124p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Susie is miserable when her best friend Kim moves
from Sydney to Melbourne. The two had spent all their time together, sharing
clothes ("I'll wear it Monday to Wednesday and you wear it till Sunday"),
leaving secret messages in a forgotten cubbyhole, spying on the strange "Blue
Lady" who mutters around the cemetery, picking up odd bits of twigs and moss.
The Blue Lady also draws, and after Kim has gone, leaves a picture of the two
friends for Susie in the hiding place. The ache and anger of losing a friend-
"Who will I sit with?"-is rendered with intensity, as is Susie's sickly dread of
her first boy-girl party. 
While Susie's pain is authentic, its unvarying
expression becomes a bit static until the Blue Lady rescues Susie the night bf
the horrible party, revealing herself to be much more than the neighborhood
eccentric. This is a great scene, but readers will wish the two could have spoken
sooner. RS
D.V. Friendship values
[223]
Godfrey, Martyn. The Last War; illus. by Greg Ruhl. Collier, 1989. ISBN 0-
02-041791-8. 91p. (Fast Fiction). $2.95.
M 
Gr. 6-10. 
See editorial, this issue.
Graham, Bob. Has Anyone Here Seen William?; written and illus. by Bob
Graham. Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-32313-6. 30p. $11.95.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
Mixed media illustrations that have action, humor,
and a raffish use of flyaway line provide most of the impact in a picture book
with a direct text that serves as foil to the pictured excesses of a child's second
year. His parents and three siblings repeatedly sound the alarm with the title
question; William, increasingly mobile, staggers about getting into minor-
usually messy-difficulties. The book ends with William, at the end of a hard
day of birthday celebration, hunted yet again and found by his patient parents,
curled up asleep in the dog's basket in the kitchen. The catalogue of antics
should please the read-aloud audience, who will no doubt sympathize with
William's ability to get into trouble with no deliberate intent and no real harm
to anyone. ZS
D.V. Everyday life concepts
Havill, Juanita. Jamaica Tag-Along; illus. by Anne Sibley O'Brien. Houghton,
1989. ISBN 0-395-49602-0. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
In a situation to which every younger sibling can
relate, Jamaica follows her brother Ossie to the park and tries to join his game of
basketball but is told not to tag along. Stung by the rejection, Jamaica spurns
little Berto's attempt to help her build a sand castle, then stops herself and
teaches him how to help her. Together, they create such an exciting project that
eventually Ossie wants to join them after his game. It's a pleasant conclusion,
and the importance of kindness to lesser mortals is clearly stressed.
Unfortunately, there's another message, as well, that boys play ball and girls
take care of little children. However, that's the way life is in the park. The
scenario is realistic and the black and Hispanic cast, portrayed in friendly,
effective watercolors, will win the attention of young listeners, who may
remember the appealing main character from Jamaica's Find (BCCB 5/86). BH
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Friendship values
Horenstein, Henry. Sam Goes Trucking; written and illus. with photographs by
Henry Horenstein. Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-44313-X. 40p. $14.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Sam is going trucking with his dad in their Mack
model R-600. They enjoy an early breakfast, head for the terminal, check the
truck and hitch the trailer to the cab, fill the tank with diesel fuel, pick up a load
of fish, and deliver it, with the requisite lunch break for burgers and fries at
Cindy's Truck Stop. Kids will find out there's more than one meaning for the
words reefer (a refrigerator trailor), smokey (a state trooper), log (a record of how
far and where the truck goes), and white-line fever (road fatigue). Best of all is
the affectionate relationship between a boy and his father, who's known as "Big
[ 224]
Stuff" on the CB. 
Although the well reproduced and formatted color
photographs base this solidly in the real world, the idealized experience will
seem a dream/fantasy for most boys. A photodocumentary with sure appeal for
young browsers. BH
D.V. Father-son relations
Horvath, Polly. An Occasional Cow; illus. by Gioia Fiammenghi. Farrar,
1989. ISBN 0-374-35559-2. [112p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
When precocious young Imogene's parents learn that
her summer camp has burned down, they pack her off from their New York
apartment to her aunt's farm. It's like turning Eloise loose in Iowa. Imogene is
a cool number, and she quickly takes measure of mischievous possibilities for a
pig talent show and other local events. Cousin Josephine (along with three
other fat siblings) is Imogene's equal, as it turns out, and the two not only make
peace but also make friends after some very realistic rows. Although the action
is occasionally exaggerated to the point of slapstick, there's lots of clean (well,
sometimes muddy) country fun in late-night lake expeditions, spying on
neighboring rivals, agate collecting, laundry chute sliding, and always, on rainy
days, adding to the longest gum-wrapper-chain in the world. The narrative voice
is steadily clever, self-consciously so on occasion. With jovial pen-and-ink
drawings and manageably sized episodic chapters, this is a good read-aloud to
launch the summer. BH
D.V. Individuality, expressing
Horvatic, Anne. Simple Machines; illus. with photographs by Stephen Bruner.
Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-525-44492-0. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Very simple machines: 
wheels, inclined planes,
wedges, levers, and screws. "All of these are simple machines. They don't need
electricity to work. You make them work." Using familiar examples, narrative
and photographs work well together to explain the principles of these machines.
The principles of a lever and fulcrum, for example, are illustrated with a bike
brake, hammer, seesaw, and flip-top lid. For inclined planes, photographs
clearly show why sometimes we want steps and other times we want ramps.
And for when we want a drink-a lever and a screw join forces to open the wine.
An exemplary introduction that combines simple explanation with challenging
extension: scissors as a lever? Think about it. RS
Hyde, Margaret O. The Homeless: Profiling the Problem. Enslow, 1989.
ISBN 0-89490-159-1. 96p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Hyde begins her examination by discussing in general
terms who the homeless are, how they live, what their medical problems are, and
so on. Separate chapters then examine different groups: those who have lost
their homes, young people who are runaways, street people, the mentally ill,
young children. A final chapter, "Taking Action," discusses ways to help the
homeless; while Hyde describes, throughout the text, some of the municipal,
charitable, or individual efforts to alleviate the plight of the homeless, she gives
little attention to the role of legislative and financial support from government
[225]
agencies, especially at the federal level. A list of suggestions for seeking help
(including organizations and their addresses) is provided, as are a bibliography
and an index. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Ibbitson, John. The Wimp and the Jock; illus. by Heather Collins. Collier,
1989. ISBN 0-02-041792-6. 85p. (Fast Fiction). $2.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
See editorial, this issue.
Jenkin-Pearce, Susie. The Enchanted Garden; written and illus. by Susie Jenkin-
Pearce. Oxford, 1989. ISBN 0-19-279845-6. 24p. $12.95.
NR 
Gr. K-2. 
A wordless picture book is framed by ten lines of
text* at the start, "November grey/ End of day/ Mist time/ Smoke has run/ The
chase is done/ Out of the garden and/ Back into time." In between is a fantasy
adventure in which a girl, a dog, and a rabbit move from an urban street to an
elaborate garden. Topiary animals come to life, a statue joins the original trio,
guests in period attire dance at a castle ball, as do the animals, etc. The
paintings are crowded and often fussy, the story line is both contrived and hard to
follow, in part because double-page spreads may show a character two or three
times. The girl eventually leaves a ferociously florid garden to return to a city
street with her dog and with the rabbit that is now a stuffed toy. Details of the
illustrations may interest some children, but the lack of cohesion, plot, or
humor will limit the book's appeal. ZS
Johnston, Norma. The Delphic Choice. Four Winds, 1989. ISBN 0-02-
747711-8. [208p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
Meredith, the seventeen-year-old narrator, is at Delphi
when she meets Brandon (also American, also bound for Istanbul) and he
explains the conflict between public and private duty that influenced oracular
pronouncements in ancient Greece. Meredith's aunt Felicity is with her, and
they are called back to Istanbul when Felicity's husband Mark (Quaker, peace
negotiator) disappears. What follows is a taut story of increasing fear and
tension as Mark becomes hostage to terrorists who also threaten Felicity and her
children. There's plenty of action here, and a setting that has topical interest and
some suspense; characterization is adequate if not deep, and the writing has a
controlled structure despite the fact that the author has overcrowded her story
with so many incidents and characters and-to a lesser extent-descriptive
passages that have the aura of a travel brochure. ZS
Juster, Norman. As: A Surfeit of Similes; illus by David Small. Morrow,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08140-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08139-8. 80p.
Library ed. $9.88; Trade ed. $9.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Clever drawings that are scratchy, often cross-hatched,
animated and amusing, illustrate a series of similes-in-verse that are interrupted a
few times by dialogue. Although there is an occasional note of aspersion or
contrivance ("As drunk as a sailor," or "As queer as a duck") most of the figures
of speech are familiar ("As blind as a bat," "As fresh as a daisy") or, less often,
[226
are poetic: "Elusive as tunes," for example. The repetitive form produces deja vu
reading, but the book should indelibly imprint the simile in readers' minds; it is
more often funny than forced, and the appeals of rhyme and metric lilt make it
easy to remember verses and likely that they will be quoted. ZS
C.U. Language arts
Kaplow, Robert. Alessandra in Love. Lippincott, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-
397-32282-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32281-X. 
[160p]. Library ed. $11.89;
Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
"This guy is a serious candidate for Mr. Adequate,"
says fifteen-year-old Alessandra, immediately smitten by Wyn Reed, who is a
senior, a dedicated cellist, a new member of the orchestra. She knows that
although Wyn seems fond of her, he's also seeing another girl. On a Manhattan
weekend (friend Melissa is covering for Alessandra) that is tensely platonic,
Alessandra learns that Wyn and the Other Girl in his life have been intimate.
There is a quarrel, Alessandra is despondent; time passes; she recovers to the
point of gaining interest in "this junior guy I've got my eye on." The story has
little depth of characterization, a slow-moving structure, and a pleasantly
conversational style that includes natural-sounding dialogue. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Keller, Charles, comp. Tongue Twisters; illus. by Ron Fritz. Simon, 1989.
Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-67123-5; Paper ed. ISBN 0-671-67975-9. 25p. Trade ed.
$13.95; Paper ed. $7.95.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
They wanna talk? Let 'em sink their teeth into these
little morsels. Yes, tutors toot and pipers pick and she still sells sea shells by
the shore, but this clever collection includes many unfamiliar twisters as well:
"Sheila uttered a sharp shrill shriek and shrunk from the shriveled form that
slumbered in the shadows" (Funny, but whatever happened to "shrank"?). With
forty-odd selections, each illustrated with literal aplomb, there's enough for a
whole classroom full of marching munching monkeys to each have a turn. RS
C.U. Language arts
Kline, Suzy. Horrible Harry and the Green Slime; illus. by Frank Remkiewicz.
Viking, 1989. ISBN 0-670-82468-2. [64p]. $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Consciously capitalizing on lower-grade, low-grade
humor, Kline continues the story of Horrible Harry in Room 2B with four
episodes that demonstrate Harry's inventive rascality. Best friend and narrator
Doug describes Miss Mackle's "secret pals" project, an antismoking skit about
death by tobacco poisoning, the draping of Charlotte's webs all over South
School, and the demonstration of how to make green slime. Although the
stories never really go anywhere (except the resonant Charlotte's Web chapter),
they fit comfortably into the genre of light classroom realism at an anecdotal
level. BH
[227 ]
Kropp, Paul. Death Ride; illus. by Greg Ruhl. Collier, 1989. ISBN 0-02-
041793-4. 91p. (Fast Fiction). $2.95.
M 
Gr. 6-10. 
See editorial, this issue.
Kropp, Paul. Jo's Search; illus. by Heather Collins. Collier, 1989. ISBN 0-
02-041794-2. 93p. (Fast Fiction). $2.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-9. 
See editorial, this issue.
Lasenby, Jack. The Lake. Oxford, 1989. ISBN 0-19-55862-8. 167p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Frightened and angered by her stepfather's sexual
advances, 13-year-old Ruth runs away to the New Zealand wilderness where she
had spent many happy summers as a child. While Ruth is equipped with
survival and sailing lore learned from her beloved dead father and from an
inventive, sympathetic schoolteacher, her journey isn't easy, and the author
smoothly works in the details of food-finding (and stealing), shelter building, and
river-crossing that survival buffs find fascinating. 
A stalking stranger adds
suspense; while this subplot may have melodramatic appeal, it's not nearly as
gripping as Ruth's own conflicts. A good suggestion for readers who enjoyed
Harry Mazer's The Island Keeper. RS
Leverich, Kathleen. 
Best Enemies; illus. by Susan Condie Lamb.
Greenwillow, 1989. ISBN 0-688-08316-1. 79p. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-3. 
And how would you feel about a new "friend" named
Felicity Doll, especially if she had curly hair and always dressed in ruffles?
Especially if her idea of friendship ("Friends share") is to take your desk, your
pencil box, your lunch? It turns out that first-grader Priscilla's big sister was
right. "Felicity Doll is a snake." Every first grade has a snake and Leverich has
coiled this one to perfection; even funnier is second grade, when Felicity decides
to mend her ways and christens Priscilla (much to her disgust) "Pixi": "friends
give each other pet names." The humor is on target, but the delivery leaves
something to be desired. Perhaps in an effort to keep this easy to read, Leverich
often eschews the use of contractions, which, combined with the short sentences,
results in peculiarly stilted dialogue: "'I did not do my homework,' said
Felicity. 
'Lend me your paper. 
I will copy the answers.'" 
Punctuating
comments by Priscilla's dog ("'Wrrouu,' yipped Pow-wow" . . . "'Wruff!'
barked Pow-wow") do little to further the action. RS
Livingston, Myra Cohn. Up in the Air; illus. by Leonard Everett Fisher.
Holiday House, 1989. ISBN 0-8234-0736-5. 32p. $14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
This sonorous celebration of airplane travel will
enhance any child's excitement over flying and make the adult reader rethink
what may have become routine. In quick-paced tetrameter of three rhyming lines
per page, the passenger prepares ("Good-bye to the airport! Good-bye to the
ground!/ My seatbelt is buckled tightly around./ The airplane is full of a roaring
sound") and soars ("Off to the blue of the highest sky, A thin curl of clouds
passes us by./ Ruffled clouds chasing us, up we fly"). An exuberant, lilting
[228 ]
narrative poem simply structured within the framework of a journey, this
describes changing "pictures" out the window and the final thump-down ("Faster
and faster and faster we race./ Good-bye to sky and good-bye to space./ Hello to
Earth in another place"). In suggesting rather than defining patterns of landscape,
Fisher's characteristically expressionistic paintings extend the poetic imagery
without intruding on it. Younger than the author and artist's Sky Songs series,
this is a poetic prerequisite for a child's first flight. BH
Luhrmann, Winifred Bruce. Only Brave Tomorrows. Houghton, 1989. ISBN
0-395-47983-5. 190p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
An English girl of fifteen, Faith is left orphaned
shortly after coming to the Massachusetts Colony in 1675. The growing
tension between Indians and the white settlers who moved into the lands the
Indians felt were theirs had culminated in the brief but bloody conflict called
King Philip's War. For reasons of convenience, Faith marries the man who had
been her family's guide, and she copes with housekeeping while her new
husband is away. By the time he returns to stay, it is quite clear that this
unconsummated marriage is destined to blaze into burning, passionate love.
This bit of paperback-romance denouement strikes a trite note to end what is an
adequate historical novel that gives a believable if not vivid picture of the
colonial frontier and of some aspects of the conflict between native Americans
and immigrants. Characterization tends to be stereotypical (brave young girl,
stalwart sergeant, all-wise Goody Collins). The pace is uneven, the writing
style competent but also uneven. ZS
Lydon, Kerry Raines. A Birthdayfor Blue; illus. by Michael Hays. Whitman,
1989. ISBN 0-8075-0774-1. 32p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-3. 
An appended historical note, with map, gives some
information about the Cumberland Road (later called the National Road along
which Blue and his family were traveling on Blue's seventh birthday. The text
is set (legibly) against the colored background of misty paintings in tones of
blue, green, and brown. The story, a bit plodding in style, but simple enough to
be comprehended (both in the sense of concepts and of vocabulary difficulty) by
primary grades readers, describes the details of one day. This doesn't make a very
exciting tale, but it does give a picture of one segment of the pioneer experience
in westward expansion. ZS
MacDonald, Caroline. The Lake at the End of the World. Dial, 1989. ISBN 0-
8037-0650-2. [192p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
Neither Hector, who lives in an underground
community much like the one described in Maguire's I Feel Like the Morning
Star (reviewed below) nor Diana, who lives with her family at the edge of a
mysterious lake, are prepared for their first sight of each other. Both had thought
no one else was left in the world since "it all happened." Not nuclear war, but
an inexorable breakdown of the earth's resources-a whimper, not a bang.
Gradually learning to trust each other, Hector and Diana become friends when he
escapes the caves and comes to live with her family. Survival within the family
[229 ]
and as a family is the theme, the "war of love" that is fought among Diana and
her parents, and the exacerbating relief and tension that Hector's presence brings
to them. Their Robinson Crusoe-like existence is involvingly particularized;
less successful, although suspenseful, is a subplot about the evil machinations
of the charismatic leader of the cave community, which is resolved through an
insufficiently prepared fantasy element. On the whole, however, this is a fresh
conception, with more subtly crafted characterization than most post-doomsday
fiction. RS
Maguire, Gregory. I Feel Like the Morning Star. Harper, 1989. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-024022-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024022-9. [288p]. Library ed.
$14.89; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
This close portrait of a post-atomic blast colony is
focused on three rebellious teens: Sorb ("Normal as dishwater. Kind. Lazy"),
Mart ("eyes with a purpose, and a heart like an ancient army tank"), and Ella, the
steady base of the triangle, held between the two boys. Their community lives
in a great underground sphere, safe from nuclear contamination but altogether cut
off from the civilization that may or may not still lie above. While Ella longs
to find freedom within the supposedly benevolent totalitarian society of the
Colony, the two boys-for very different reasons-want to get out. Along with
the three well-realized protagonists, many of the other colonists are perceptively
drawn; especially good are the offhand characterizations of the young children in
Ella's charge. The story, however, is not all it could be, and what could have
been (and is intermittently so) a suspenseful escape narrative is mired in an
overabundance of adjectives, philosophical flights, and figurative language.
While the imagery is occasionally telling, most of it is self-conscious, making
readers pay attention to the phrase while distancing them from larger narrative
and thematic concerns of the novel. Some judicious pruning could have done
wonders for an intriguing set of characters and a can't-miss plot. RS
Marino, Jan. Eighty-Eight Steps to September. Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-
54620-8. 154p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Amy has the usual sibling tensions with her brother
Robbie, and in the book's opening these center on their love for a puppy that
Amy acquires to replace a dog too big for their new home. The focus soon
shifts, however, to Robbie's illness-he is diagnosed as having leukemia and
taken to the hospital. Amy feels increasingly abandoned as her parents leave her
in the charge of an unsympathetic babysitter in order to stay with him. What
keeps this from being just another tearjerker is the singular voice of the narrator,
the authentic details of a family in stress, and the smooth development and
natural incorporation of secondary situations. Amy has a deep friendship with an
Italian girl. She fights with classmates, is affectionate with a babysitter who
"rescues" her, takes loving responsibility for the puppy, and, ultimately, for her
brother. A fine balance of the ordinary and the heroic. BH
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Death, adjustment to
[230]
Martin, Laurence W. Nuclear Warfare; illus. by Tony Gibbons, Peter Sarson,
and Tony Bryan. Lemer, 1989. ISBN 0-8225-1384-6. 4 8p. (Modem Military
Techniques). $9.95.
M 
Gr. 7-12. 
While the series title makes it sound disconcertingly
like a make-and-do book, this is actually an introduction to the strategic and
technological, as opposed to political, considerations of nuclear deterrence and
warfare. The text gives the particulars of strategic and tactical weapons, land-
and sea-based missiles, radar detection devices and star wars technology.
Throughout, there is much speculation on how a nuclear war might begin and be
conducted, a rare slant in books for young readers. The middle-grade format and
expected sophistication of the audience are somewhat at odds, and there is really
more information than either format or limitations of audience can support.
There is no bibliography; terms sometimes go undefined, either in the text or the
glossary; and the index is skimpy, with a chunk of it out of alphabetical order.
Diagrams and paintings are striking but not always clearly labelled or keyed to
the text. RS
Matthews, Downs. Polar Bear Cubs; illus. with photographs by Dan Guravich.
Simon, 1989. ISBN 0-671-6675-2. 25p. $12.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
A stunning match of color photography and clean
writing, this follows a polar bear from her winter hibernation through the birth,
care, and training of her cubs over a period of two years. The irresistible
subjects will absorb young listeners and lure independent readers as well, and the
text is simple enough, without any condescension, to be read aloud or alone.
Information about the North Pole emanates naturally from the central focus, and
the tone is one of respect for both the animals and the environment. Guravich's
close-ups speak of long, cold vigils and an uncanny command of technology to
capture creature habit and characteristics, including some unusually humorous
poses. From one frozen Arctic endpaper to the other, this is picture book
nonfiction at its best. Children who enjoyed Cutchins and Johnston's fine
photodocumentary Andy Bear: A Polar Cub Grows Up At the Zoo (BCCB 1/86)
should have a chance to see cubs in their natural habitat. Let's hope the weak
binding holds up to the hard use. BH
McBratney, Sam. The Ghosts of Hungryhouse Lane; illus. by Lisa Thiesing.
Holt, 1989. ISBN 0-8050-0985-X. 118p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
"When Mercia Porterhouse died at the age of eight-
six, she left her house and its ghosts to her best friend, Miss Amy Steadings."
Unfortunately, no one can find the will, so an estranged nephew rents the house
to the newly rich (thanks to a winning lottery ticket) Sweet family, including
three terrible children-Zoe, Charlie, and Bonnie. It's a pitched battle between
the kids, who blast all possibilities of Unwakeful Serenity, and the genteel
ghosts, who enlist the aid of a truly terrifying specter, Oggi Agga Gooth, a
Stone Age woman killed by a saber-toothed tiger that apparently joined her after
death. Oggi does manage to scare some respect into the kids, but the real
turning point comes when they discover a secret room in the chimney. There,
Miss Porterhouse's diary, will, and manuscript convince them of the ghosts'
[231]
right to rest. Although it's a bit contrived at points, and stocked with
caricatures, this is capably written, and the slapstick elements will prove
appealing to haunted house enthusiasts. Spoofy. BH
McCaughrean, Geraldine. A Pack of Lies. Oxford, 1989. ISBN 0-19-271612-
3. 168p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Not to be confused with the play Pack of Lies, this is
a conservative fantasy in which are imbedded (to the detriment of the matrix) a
series of deft and varied stories. The stories are told by the mysterious M.C.C.
Berkshire, a young man who wanders into the antique store out of which
adolescent Ailsa and her mother eke a bare living. Mr. Berkshire's background is
not divulged until the very end, but the author makes clear to her readers if not to
his employers that he is from Reading, just as he claims; but for that English
town, substitute the word "reading" and you know that he is a tale-spinner. Each
tale, within the larger story, is used as a device to make a sale to an unconvinced
customer. The writing style is witty, the plot ingenious, the characters vividly
etched; for some readers, the interpolated stories may halt the flow of the
Berkshire story, while for others they may seem entertaining embellishments.
ZS
Newlands, Anne. Meet Edgar Degas. Lippincott, 1989. ISBN 0-397-32369-7.
[32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
It's a rather audacious scheme, to cast a first-person
narrative in the voice of the artist, but outside of the question of authenticity
(which may not occur to young readers), it works well here. We learn
something of the artist, his subjects, and his ideas. The conversational tone is
immediate and informative without becoming dry, as much art history
commentary can be. The fifteen paintings, mostly one to a page on the recto,
are center stage, with vivid color reproduction and spacious white frames. Even
second hand, their power is undeniable. The humor in "The Song of the Dog,"
the strength of "Henri Rouart in Front of His Factory," and the clarity of
"Racehorses before the Stands" are startling in variety of tone and technique. A
well-focused introduction. BH
C.U. Art appreciation
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. Looking at Dolphins and Porpoises. Holiday House,
1989. ISBN 0-8234-0748-9. 48p. illus. with photographs. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
A good introduction to a topic most children find
interesting, this has a combination of spacious format, good black and white
photographs, clear writing, accuracy, and capable organization of material
(logical, sequential) that should appeal to readers in the middle grades or to
younger children to whom the text may be read aloud. An experienced science
writer, Patent avoids extraneous material and gives enough information to
answer questions generally asked and to stimulate further reading. A one-page
index (adequate, given the length of the text) is appended. Dolphins and
Porpoises, also by Patent and published by Holiday House in 1987, covers the
same information but goes into more detail and is for slightly older readers. ZS
[232
Patrick, Denice, ad. Look inside a Ship; based on the Italian text by Mario
Gomboli; illus. by Carlo A. Michelini. ISBN 0-448-19352-3. Look Inside a
House; original Italian text and illus. by Mario Gomboli. ISBN 0-448-19351-5.
Each book: Grosset, 1989. 16p. (Poke & Look Learning Books). $9.95.
M 
4-7 yrs. 
This sturdy, spiral-bound pair of oversized board
books will certainly attract readers to "poke and look," but as for learning, there
are many problems. Both books have die-cut windows, doors, and cutaway
views that seem to promise some kind of cumulative learning as the pages turn,
but the holes are actually little more than decorative and are usually confusing,
mixing perspectives and dimensions. The colorful, schematic illustrations,
although cluttered with extraneous cute animals (and, in Ships, Friendly Natives)
do point out some of the physical features of houses and ships, and could be
useful for object identification. The text, too, has its informative moments but
is written at a level far beyond the toddler audience implied by the format. Kids
will love to pore over these eye-catching volumes, but any attempt to figure out
exactly what the books are trying to show will have adults reaching for the
aspirin. RS
Pomerantz, Charlotte. The Chalk Doll; illus. by Fran6 Lessac. Lippincott,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32319-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32318-2. [32p].
Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
A perfect companion to Appiah's book Amoko and
Efua Bear, reviewed above, this is a fresh story in the form of dialogue between
Rose and her mother, who storytells her childhood in Jamaica while Rose is in
bed with a cold. Describing how she made rag dolls from scraps of material,
Mommy admits that she preferred the "chalk dolls" she saw in the shop
windows, even the castoff with a missing arm and broken nose. One memory
leads to another, and Rose's mother recalls the condensed milk they used in their
tea, the birthday when she received three pennies to buy sweets, the pink taffeta
dress her mother could not finish till a month after her birthday, the high heels
that school children made from mango pits and tar. The vignettes flow together
partly because they are honestly connected and smoothly written, partly because
of enticing art and book design. 
Facing each page of text is a full-page
primitive painting ebullient with color and delicately patterned animal and
vegetable life. The print is spaciously set, sometimes headed with a title and
always decorated with motifs from the stories, which move easily between
continent and island settings. The link between past and present is as secure as
the bond between mother and daughter. BH
D.V. Mother-daughter relations; Love for toy
Pryor, Bonnie. Mr. Munday and the Space Creatures; illus. by Lee Lorenz.
Simon, 1989. ISBN 0-671-67114-6. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
An interstellar farce will probably have great appeal
for the read-aloud audience, although the monotone level at which the silliness is
pegged lessens the comic impact. Bright watercolor pictures have a dashing line
that, combined with the depiction of various kinds of alien creatures (all more or
less amicable) provides an ebullient mood. A mailman trades places with a
[233]
creature from outer space whose ship has stopped for repairs; each has adventures
that makes him feel there's no place like good old safe, comfortable home.
Exaggerated to the satiation point, but amusing for the age that enjoys--or
prefers-this kind of humor. ZS
Rabe, Berniece. Tall Enough to Own the World. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-
10681-0. 160p. $12.90.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Joey is in fifth grade and insists that he can read-but
he can't, and everybody knows it. Ashamed, discouraged, and angry, Joey turns
to hostile behavior to mask his feelings of inadequacy and despair. This is the
story of how, through the patient efforts of a reading specialist, Joey does
learn-to his disbelieving joy-to read. This is the core of the story, and it is
both convincing and touching. Some of the exterior relationships and sub-plots
are less substantial and have varying degrees of pertinence: problems with peers,
Joey's worries about how his mother or his stepfather (more relaxed and
affectionate than Mama) will respond to him, and the relationship with the
elderly black neighbors who are patient surrogate grandparents. These facets of
the story are adequately knit into the main theme but do not always expedite its
motion or buttress its importance. ZS
D.V. Stepfather-child relations; Teacher-pupil relations
Rabinowitz, Ann. Bethie. Macmillan, 1989. ISBN 0-02-775661-0. [208p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
In this sensitively written coming-of-age novel,
fifteen-year-old Beth faces universal adolescent concerns-parents, friends,
tentative sexual exploration-as well as those particular to her place and time,
New York City in 1943. Beth loves and admires her father, active in trying to
rescue the European Jews, but he remains seemingly detached from her. Her
relationships with her stepmother and depressive mother are rocky. Beth's best
friend Grace is growing angry and withdrawn since the divorce of her own
parents. The novel is stronger in characterization than in plot, and the story
seems to stop (with Grace's suicide) rather than to end. However, the family and
friendship dynamics are both realistic and dramatic-especially well drawn is the
difficult yet hopeful relationship between Beth and her stepmother-and period
scene-setting is consistently relevant yet unobtrusive. RS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Parent-child relations
Raphael, Elaine. Drawing History: Ancient Egypt; written and illus. by Elaine
Raphael and Don Bolognese. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10698-5. 
32p.
$12.40.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Launching another useful series from the team that
served up drawing lessons in various media with Pen and Ink and Pencil (BCCB
7/86), this focuses on a subject that is popular for curriculum units and art
projects. Each of twelve double spreads treats a different aspect of ancient
Egyptian life, with a brief historical commentary, an illustration in full color,
and diagrammed instructions for drawing a detail from it Pharaohs, farms along
the Nile, tombs, mummies, and monuments all get a brief introduction while
[234]
children practise their drawing techniques. 
There's a conscientious
acknowledgment of the differences between ancient Egyptian art and the
techniques suggested here, which encourage use of frontal and three-quarter views
along with perspective to show space and shading to show three-dimensional
forms. A glossary defines words such as Ankh and Ka, and an index will help
children doing specific reports, though browsing is easy in such a neatly
organized set-up. A practical purchase for the learn-by-doing department. BH
C.U. Egypt (unit)
Rogers, Fred. Going on an Airplane; Trade ed. ISBN 0-399-21635-9; Paper ed.
ISBN 0-399-21633-2. Going to the Dentist; Trade ed. ISBN 0-399-21636-7;
Paper ed. ISBN 0-399-21634-0. Each book: illus. with photographs by Jim
Judkis. Putnam, 1989. 
[32p]. (First Experiences). Trade ed. $12.95; Paper
ed. $5.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
Would that all the world were as safe and gentle as
Fred Rogers' Neighborhood, but in these books he demonstrates what comfort
can be had in two potentially scary places: in the air and in the chair. Both
books, illustrated with clear and friendly photographs, infuse facts about flying
and dental visits with radiant benevolence; both assure toddlers that not only are
grownups there to help, but that they often share similar experiences: "Everyone
who goes to the dentist wears a bib-even grownups!" Mister Rogers knows
what we're all afraid of-"dials and instruments tell .. how much fuel the
airplane has and which way to go even when the airplane's in the clouds"-and
capably calms us down. RS
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Savage, Deborah. Flight of the Albatross. Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-
45711-4. [288p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 8-12. 
Sarah's been looking forward to visiting her mother,
a famous and dedicated ornithologist now working in New Zealand, but after a
few days, she has to wonder if her always-busy mother returns the affection.
Left on her own, Sarah plays her flute and tentatively explores exotic Great
Kauri Island, coming to appreciate its eerie beauty and its inhabitants: Mako, an
angry, attractive boy; a mysterious old Maori woman; an injured albatross that
Sarah nurses back to freedom and flight. That the albatross is a "sign" and
metaphor is a point made too often and loudly here, and the book as a whole
suffers from overlush romanticism and overheated prose: "The sound of the flute
became part of her, soaring through her high into the morning sky. She was
music! She was the albatross, spiraling into the brightness!" 
Where the
exclamatory style does work is in the scenes between Sarah and angry Mako.
Their sexual tension is palpable; their dialogue ("'I hate you right now,' she
said. 'I know,' he said simply") the stuff sweet dreams are really made of.
Savage sets the love story against a real background of Maori tradition and racial
conflict; unfortunately, the solutions she proposes (Mako is predestined to
become a great, healing leader) are sentimental, based on a questionable
adaptation of Maori history and legend. RS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Intercultural understanding
[235 ]
Schneiderman, Ron. The Picture Life of George Bush. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-
531-10696-9. 64p. illus. with photographs. (Picture Life). $10.90.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
With a steady, factual style, Schneiderman recounts
the main events of Bush's life, beginning with his childhood in an affluent
family ("George never really thought of his family as being wealthy, but he was
driven to Greenwich Country Day School by a chauffeur, and there were other
servants in the house"). His action as a young pilot in World War II, marriage
to Barbara Pierce, success in the oil business, and political career are all subject
to a kind of game-play reportage, with photographs in color and black and white
and with an index for children doing school reports. This is a book that, to be
honest, would not be of much interest if Bush had not been elected president.
However, he was, and it is. BH
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Service, Pamela F. Vision Quest. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31498-1.
[160p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Bored in the small Nevada town to which she and her
mother had come after her father's death, Kate develops an interest in the Indians
who had once lived in the area, and in the artifacts that have been found.
Learning that her interest is shared by a peer, Jimmy Fong, Kate explores with
him to learn more about those people of long ago; interpolated segments tell the
story of a young shaman of that time, Wadat; eventually the time circles
overlap. Service uses a side plot, the unmasking of a villain engaged in illegal
selling of relics, to give movement to the story. Unfortunately, the two plots
seem more competitive than complementary; however, there's plenty of action, a
bit of suspense, a fairly vivid creation of setting, the story of an interracial
friendship, an element of fantasy, a respectful treatment of a Native American
culture, and the always-appealing achievement of a goal without the intervention
of adults. ZS
D.V. Friendship values
Skurzynski, Gloria. Dangerous Ground. Bradbury, 1989. ISBN 0-02-782731-
3. [128p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Since her parents had always worked in oil fields,
they had left Angela to stay with her great-aunt, Hilda. Now that they were
going to settle down, Angela (eleven) was to join them at the end of the school
year, and both she and they hoped that "Ant Hil" would come to live with them.
Distrait, Aunt Hilda takes Angela on a long farewell trip, driving about
Wyoming and acting so erratic that Angela fears Aunt Hilda has Alzheimer's
disease. Chased by a bear, the elderly woman almost walks into a dangerous
thermal field at Yellowstone; subsequent examination shows that her odd
behavior was due to medication. 
She'd been-knowingly-taking pills
prescribed for somebody else. Aunt Hilda decides she will, after all, join the
family. Adequately written, the story loses impact because of repetitive
patterning and a resultant slowed pace. ZS
D.V. Aunt-niece relations
[236]
Sneve, Virginia Driving Hawk, comp. Dancing Teepees: Poems of American
Indian Youth; illus. by Stephen Gammell. Holiday House, 1989. ISBN 0-
8234-0724-1. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
"Grandmother, I watched an eagle soar/ high in the
sky/ until a cloud covered him up./ Grandmother, I still saw the eagle/ behind
my eyes." Virginia Driving Hawk Sneve's own verse mingles with the other 18
selections here, all brief, orationally rhythmic, and representative of far-flung
peoples. Sioux, Omaha, Hopi, Paiute, Zuni, Makah, Crow, Navajo, Apache,
Osage, Dakota, and Wintu come together in context of Gammell's expertly
designed picture-book framework. Watercolors with pictogrammatic characters,
scenes, and motifs vary the pages into which each poem is set. Although some
of the art is toylike compared to original artifacts, the total effect offers a visual
and oral enrichment of children's background on native American cultures. The
list of sources in the acknowledgements will be useful for adults. BH
Sullivan, George. How the White House Really Works. Lodestar, 1989. ISBN
0-525-67266-4. 118p. illus. with photographs. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Describing the building and the way it is staffed,
Sullivan goes into considerable detail about social and culinary practices, and
describes the ways in which presidents and their families have used the White
House, including social, recreational, and practical facilities. While the book
sometimes has the tone of a list on which items are being checked off, children
will enjoy the "insider's" perspective and plethora of interesting details: the
private bowling alley, the Autopen device for reproducing the President's
autograph, the decorative planters that double as security barricades. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Tannenbaum, Beulah. Making and Using Your Own Weather Station by Beulah
and Harold E. Tannenbaum; illus. by Anne Canevari Green and with
photographs. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10675-6. 112p. (Venture Books).
$11.90.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Here are clear instructions for constructing
barometers, thermometers, sling psychrometers, rain gauges, wind vanes, and
anemometers; each project is accompanied with a discussion of how and why it
works and suggested experiments. While this is a good guide to making and
using weather instruments (although a wind vane made of plastic straws and a
coat hanger won't stand up well), it is more than a project book, with some of
the least foggy explanations of weather-related phenomena to be found in books
for this age group, including a cogent description of that favorite magic-markered
poster project, the Water Cycle. RS
C.U. Science experiments; Weather
Totten, Samuel. Human Rights; by Samuel Totten and Milton Kleg. Enslow,
1989. 
ISBN 0-89490-156-7. 
[256p]. 
illus. with photographs. 
$16.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Beginning with a definition of human rights and
various attempts throughout history to codify these rights into law, this is a
[237 ]
comprehensive introduction to past and present limitations of freedom, dignity,
and survival. 
Devoting individual chapters to discrimination and racism,
genocide, political prisoners, torture, and hunger, the book closes with an
overview of the activities of human rights organizations. The authors' evidence
of human rights abuses is overwhelming, often inevitably brutal, but the impact
of the book is undermined by repetitive writing and too casual documentation.
There are reference notes, but no way to link them to the often controversial
assertions of the text. This lack of necessary source information also applies to
the photographs, many of which are inadequately labeled. To caption a grim
photo with the sentence "A man is being whipped in the Middle East," is to beg
the question "Where?"; to label another, even more grim, with "A man is being
tortured," is exploitivb. However, the historical perspective is valuable, as are
the links the authors make between obvious abuses such as murder and
imprisonment and those more subtle, such as sex discrimination and hunger.
Appended material includes a reading list, directory of organizations, index, and a
copy of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. RS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Democratic understanding
Ure, Jean. One Green Leaf. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-440-50144-X. [192p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Robyn, the narrator, is one of a foursome that began
in childhood; now they are adolescents and she and Zoot accept the fact that the
other two, David and Abbey, are serious about their love for each other. Of the
many novels that have been published with a focus on a fatal illness, this is one
of the most sensitive and most cohesive. Robyn's viewpoint predominates, but
through her Ure shows how tragically and poignantly David's illness (cancer,
with unsuccessful surgery) affects Abbey, how David's parents react, how
classmates and teachers handle seeing David during a period of remission, and
how David himself copes physically and emotionally with illness, loss of a
limb, and the knowledge that death is inevitable and imminent. The writing
style and characterization have polish and depth, and the gravity of the theme is
alleviated by a humor that is appropriate because it comes from the resilient
young adults drawn by the author with affection and perceptive respect ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Friendship values
Van Leeuwen, Jean. Dear Mom, You're Ruining My Life. Dial, 1989. Library
ed. ISBN 0-8037-0573-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0572-7. [160p]. Library ed.
$12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
This is a chatty sixth-grade novel framed between two
letters to Samantha from the Tooth Fairy (her father) as she loses her twelve-year
molars. There are lots of letters interpersed among incidents at school and at
home. The title theme promises to concern the strain between Samantha and her
mother, a writer who often communicates through notes slipped under the door
("You want me to act like a regular mother, and I am trying. But it is not
always easy being invisible"). However, many other elements get equal-and
equally light--attention, including Samantha's move to a gifted program, her
[238]
unrequited crush on Brian Finnegan ("Sam's stomach did an odd flip-flop.
Liking someone made you feel as if you were getting sick all the time, she'd
noticed"), and her friendship with her scientific friend Katy. The characters are
clearly delineated and the writing smooth, but the plot is diffuse. Although this
never reaches beyond surface feelings, the protagonist's family is a happy one
and her concerns common enough to attract readers. BH
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Ward, Brian R. Overcoming Disability. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10645-4.
48p. illus. and with photographs. (Life Guides). $12.90.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
First published in Australia, this is a useful survey of
some of the most common disabilities of childhood, from the minor handicap of
imperfect eyesight to such life-threatening diseases as cancer or hemophilia.
Some of the disabling conditions are inherited, some are congenital, some
develop after birth. Given the fact that each disability is discussed (with
drawings, photographs, or diagrams taking-at times-as much as half the
space) in two pages, Ward has done a good job of covering salient points. The
illustrations are of variable usefulness, some being far more clear than others. A
good catalyst for a discussion of disability, this stresses such aspects of
adjustment as the emotional needs of children with special problems, their desire
for as much independence and achievement as is possible within their physical
limitations, and the fact that their interests are no different from those of children
who do not share their problems. A list of "useful addresses" is appended, as are
an index and a glossary that includes, oddly, most of the illnesses discussed in
the text, but not all of them. ZS
C.U. Health and hygiene
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Waxman, Stephanie. What Is a Girl? What Is a Boy?; written and illus. with
photographs by Stephanie Waxman. Crowell, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-
04711-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04709-6. [40p]. Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed.
$10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
4-6 yrs. 
This new edition of a 1976 title published by Peace
Press probably says more about changing times than it does about differences
between the sexes. Through simple text and pictures, Waxman means to deflate
basic, kid-sized stereotypes: "Some people say a boy is someone wearing pants.
But Keko is wearing pants. And she's a girl." This may have caused a few
revelatory "clicks" in the 70's, but now seems a trifle quaint. The consistent
sentence structure is rhetorically twisted; few people, even in the 70's, would
have defined "boy" as "someone who plays basketball." The author's point,
illustrated with polite but frontal nude photographs, is that the only real
difference between boys and girls (and men and women) is that "a boy is
someone with a penis and testicles," and a girl "is someone with a vulva and a
vagina." This difference was true in 1976 and it remains true today, but the
book is more cultural artifact than contemporary consciousness-raiser. RS
[239]
Wells, Christie. Rival Roomates. Troll, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8167-1496-
7; Paper ed. ISBN 0-8167-1497-5. 124p. Library ed. $9.49; Paper ed. $2.95.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Kathy and Deena, fifteen-year-old cousins, are forced
to room together when their mothers decide to go into business running the old
inn they have inherited from New England grandparents. Deena is conforming,
tidy, conservative, and industrious; Kathy is flamboyant, rebellious, hostile, and
uncooperative. The expectable ending-achievement of a modus vivendi-is
arrived at after a series of incidents that extend and thin a slight plot. The first of
a series called "Cranberry Cousins," this has superficially drawn characters, the
you-get-what-you-expect appeal of most lightweight series books, and a writing
style that is flawed by structural weakness and by florid phraseology, both
exemplified by such a sentence as, "It bound them together like the roots of an
oak tree are bound to the soil, Deena thought..." ZS
Wexler, Jerome. Pet Mice; written and illus. with photographs by Jerome
Wexler. Whitman, 1989. ISBN 0-8075-6524-5. 48p. $12.95.
R* 
Gr. 3-6. 
Even for those whose idea of a good time is not
something that will "run up your arm and poke in your pocket for a treat,"
Wexler makes pet mice seem like a lot of fun. With a friendly, personal tone,
the author explains the details of buying healthy mice, housing and feeding
them, training and playing with them, and mating them. "Let's do a little
math." Using examples from his own mousekeeping experience, Wexler is
frank about problems ("After taking care of my wound, I put my hand back-
this time moving more slowly") and contagiously enthusiastic about the
pleasures, especially in a remarkable sequence of photographs showing the birth
and development of mouse babies. (Unfortunately, a diagram showing how to
tell a male from a female mouse is confusing.) The many color photographs
throughout are informative, well-keyed to the text, and adorable. RS
C.U. Pets, care of
White, Sandra Verrill. Sterling: The Rescue of a Baby Harbor Seal; by Sandra
Verrill White and Michael Filisky. Crown, 1989. ISBN 0-517-571129. 32p.
illus. with photographs. (New England Aquarium Books). $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Irresistible color photographs introduce various kinds
of seals in their ocean habitat and then follow the rescue of an orphaned baby
seal-the mother swims away to feed after its birth and does not reappear for
reasons unknown. After several days, the pup is picked up by a marine specialist
and taken to an animal care facility. Procedures at the New England Aquarium
include medical checks, tube feeding of infant seal formula, weaning to a diet of
fish, and pool preparation for several pups' return to the sea. In spite of a few
abrupt transitions in the text, there's a lot to learn here, and the information is
presented in a palatable, environmentally responsible context. BH
D.V. Kindness to animals