Anno, Mitsumasa. Anno's Math Games; written and illus. by Mitsumasa Anno.
Philomel, 1987. ISBN 0-399-21151-9. 100p. $18.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Anno's sprightly illustrations and direct, simple text present a
series of mathematical concepts for younger children, with questions posed but not
answered, so that the book has a game element. It is designed to inculcate
concepts of sets, location, capacity, sequence, proportion, etc. in a way that is
effective. Most of the questions posed are fairly easy to answer, although a few
minor obstacles (a deck of cards that has 11, 12 and 13 rather than the jack, queen,
and king familiar to children in this country, for example) may require adult
interpretation. Notes for older readers are appended, explaining Anno's purpose and
suggesting ways to use the book. ZS
C.U. Mathematics
Asher, Sandy. Where Do You Get Your Ideas? illus. by Susan Hellard. Walker, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6691-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6690-0. 88p. Library
ed. $13.95; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Asher tackles the question most popularly posed to writers by
asking some of her own: "What would happen if?" is one that helps bring new
ideas to her mind. Some chapters suggest keeping a journal, completing the
beginning and ending for a play fragment, and exploring "how many ways can this
done?" Alternating chapters include brief statements from popular authors such as
Lois Lowry and William Sleator about the inspirations for their books. The major
examples are from Asher's own work-a light story, play, and verses about
various ways to wake up. Although some of the collective approaches include
good advice, the book seems fragmented and the cartoon drawings trivialize what,
to children, is a serious query. "Where do you get your ideas" really translates into
"who are you?" Behind that lurks the more pressing problem, "who am I and how
do I find out?" To the extent that Asher's suggestions can spur a young reader's
explorations, it's successful, but the actual prescriptions are incidental. This could
serve, by the by, to stimulate discussion and clarify questions previous to a
writer's visit. BH
C.U. Language arts-Study and teaching
D.V. Creativity
Aylesworth, Jim. Two Terrible Frights; illus. by Eileen Christelow. Atheneum, 1987.
ISBN 0-689-31327-6. 32p. $13.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
"Downstairs, in the basement, in a cozy corner, a little mouse
was thinking about a bedtime snack. And upstairs, in a cozy room, a little girlwas
also thinking about a bedtime snack." This satisfying complement of text and
[61 ]
pictures develops the dual story of the mouse child and the little girl, who meet in
the kitchen and scare each other ("Squeak!" and "EEEK!" respectively). Reassured
by their mothers and tucked into their soft beds, "they both dreamed ... about each
other." The repetition and variations in the text (the mouse goes "through a dark
hole, . .. under the stove, . . . and out across the kitchen floor." The little girl
goes "through the dark parlor, . . . through the dining room, . . . and into the
kitchen") will create a kind of suspense for very young listeners, who can see the
collision coming. The color pencil and wash illustrations play on this echo, with
scenes reflecting each other in a nicely varied page design and coming together in
the dream spread at the end. An entertaining-and reassuring-bedtime story. BH
D.V. Fear-overcoming
Berger, Gilda. Crack: The New Drug Epidemic! Watts, 1987. ISBN 0-531-10410-9.
120p. (Impact). $11.90.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
In a discussion of a growing problem in our society, Berger
describes the sources of crack (and other forms of cocaine) and the ways in which it
is processed, distributed, and sold. Most of the text emphasizes the dangers to
users and the costs (and dangers) to society, pointing out how criminals operate,
how governments-for the most part, ineffectively-try to stem production,
distribution, and use. Berger concludes with an examination of palliative measures
that have been proposed or tried, citing conflicting opinions about such programs
as legalization of crack, detoxification, testing, treatment (both voluntary and
compulsory) and problems of a legal or ethical nature. This is a well-organized
book and a useful one despite occasional generalizations and more-than-occasional
repetitions. A glossary, a list of sources for help or further information, an index,
and a bibliography are included. ZS
C.U. Health and hygiene
Calvert, Patricia. Stranger, You and I. Scribner, 1987. ISBN 0-684-18896-1. 
162p.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Hughie has a crush on Melissa, who's firmly attached to the
school Adonis, Jordie, and is upset and confused when his best friend, Zee, tells
him she's pregnant and that Jordie is the father (one-night stand). Hugh, portrayed
as a nice guy but not a wimp, offers to marry Zee, who refuses; he also talks
Jordie into acknowledging legally that he's the father of the baby boy who is given
up for adoption. Hugh is also responsible for helping his parents try to work out
their marital problems and for being kind and loving to a doting eight-year-old
brother. In sum, although there is some action, most of the emphasis in the book
is on the ways a human being can be unselfish in loving other people. The
narrative moves at a good pace, and the characterization is strong and consistent, so
that the problems and solutions of the plot develop and mesh with conviction. ZS
D.V. Brothers; Friendship values
Cameron, Ann. Julian's Glorious Summer; illus. by Dora Leder. Random House, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99117-6; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-89117-1. 62p. (Stepping
Stones). Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $1.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
With spontaneous humor and a natural, easy-to-read style,
Cameron shows how a small lie comes to determine young Julian's whole
summer. On seeing his best friend, Gloria, tooling along on her new bike, Julian
hides his fear of trying it out with a fib about having to work all summer for his
dad. Then, of course, he's stuck working-and all for naught; his father rewards
[ 62]
him with a new bike. Much to his surprise, however, Julian learns to ride it. The
story does several things: it addresses a common fear that rarely surfaces, it
portrays a happy, healthy family that just happens to be Black, and it entertains.
At one point Julian's mother observes to her exhausted son: "if you nod one more
time, your chin is going to make a crash-landing in your creamed corn." Later,
Julian confesses to his mother. "Once I began to tell the truth, it seemed like I
almost had a taste, like some really delicious food to chew on, that I wanted to
have more and more of in my mouth." And he proceeds to detail, with zest, what
he hates about bicycles, from tubes and tires to falling off. Modest and honest.
BH
D.V. Fear, Overcoming
Crawford, Charles P. Split Time. Harper, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021380-9; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-06-021324-8. 183p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
After his wife left, Evan's father decided to sell their home, and
when the two of them moved into an apartment in a converted house,' they met
Lamia, a young woman with whom Evan-age 15-has a passionate affair. Her
moods, her capriciousness, her clinging possessiveness come to a tragic climax.
Eventually one of the old women (who have themselves behaved oddly) explains
that Lamia has been institutionalized many times, that her suicidal despair when
Evan spends time with some old friends could have been triggered in many other
ways. The first-person narration is convincing in a novel that is perceptive,
sophisticated, poignant, and believable. ZS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to
Dekkers, Midas. Arctic Adventure. Orchard/Watts, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08304-
7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05704-6. 165p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Although this adventure story carries a strong Greenpeace
message, it is the narrative that dominates the book. First published in Holland,
then translated by Jan Michael for the English edition that carried the title Whale
Lake, this is the story of two Dutch brothers who go on an exploratory expedition
in the Arctic; Adrian is an archeologist and a member of Greenpeace, Menno is his
adolescent sibling who becomes committed to the cause and who learns to love the
whale they find in a salt lake when they are cast away on an island. There is a
dramatic confrontation between a whaler and a Greenpeace rescue boat, so that there
is plenty of action and excitement as well as some cogent arguments against
animal destruction and for other Greenpeace causes. ZS
D.V. Courage; Devotion to a cause
Dunlop, Eileen. The House on the Hill. Holiday House, 1987. ISBN 0-8234-0658-X.
147p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
While his mother was taking a nursing course in London, Philip
* 
was sent (sulking) to stay with elderly great aunt Jane in Glascow. He didn't
expect to like Jane or his cousin Susan, also staying with their great aunt. Dunlop
is without peer as a writer whose blending of realism and fantasy is seamlessly
smooth. The mysterious light in an empty room is the first clue the children have
of a strange secret in the old house, and the development of that mystery emerges
against a background of fine characterization, strong but subtle changes in
relationships, and a logical ending for both the fantasy theme and the real-life
matrix. ZS
[63]
Emmens, Carol A. The Abortion Controversy. Messner, 1987. Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-
62274-6; Paper ed. ISBN 0-671-64209-X. 
13 7p. Trade ed. $9.79; Paper ed.
$4.95.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
With even-handed attention to both prochoice and prolife
positions, Emmens explores the moral, medical, emotional, religious, and judicial
issues involved in abortion. There is also some historical background and a quick
survey of current global practices. Although the book is packed with facts, the
writing is smooth and clear enough to keep readers from being overwhelmed. The
conclusion, far from resolving any of the issues, raises new questions consequent
to recent research in fetology that may allow embryo transplants into artificial
wombs. A four-page bibliography includes books and articles through 1986.
Careful reporting on a complicated issue, this provides a sound resource for
debates, discussion, and private deliberation among teenagers. BH
C.U. Sex education
Gauch, Patricia Lee. Christina Katerina and the Time She Quit the Family; illus. by Elise
Primavera. Putnam, 1987. ISBN 0-399-21408-9. 32p. $12.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
The third and best of several picture books about a feisty young
character, this features a text true to the vicissitudes of child behavior along with
watercolor scenes of authentic family chaos. Feeling nagged and put upon,
Christina changes her name and defines her own autonomous areas of the house.
Her mother wisely supports this separation, helps label the dividing lines, and
waves goodbye. Needless to say, Christina, alias Agnes, eats junk, wreaks messy
havoc, wears mismatched clothes, and stays up late. And needless to say, she
begins to suffer the consequences-it's a real feat to tuck yourself in at night.
Fortunately, her mother invites her back into the family for some chocolate cake
and storytelling, and Christina rejoins them ".... because Christina liked doing
what she pleased, and that's exactly what pleased her just then." The issue of
control is of inexhaustible interest to young children, and this girl's carefree
abandon in rebelling will be as entertaining as her return to the fold is satisfying.
The art kicks up its heels as well, reveling in spirited depictions of anarchic clutter
with ironically controlled line and color. BH
D.V. Family relations
Giblin, James Cross. From Hand to Mouth: Or, How We Invented Knives, Forks, Spoons,
and Chopsticks & the Table Manners To Go With Them. Crowell, 1987. Library
ed. ISBN 0-690-04662-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04660-X. 86p. illus. and with
photographs. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
An informed and informative historical survey of eating untensils
suggests the social context for changes such as the introduction of the fork, the
rounding of knife tips, and the decline of Asian children's dexterity in wielding
chopsticks. 
This is one of those books that stimulates observations about
everyday patterns and gives a long view on their development. The style is
clearcut and the book design lively, with arresting photographic reproductions and
spacious format. 
A 3-page bibliography includes both adult and juvenile
(asterisked) books, and the index is thorough. 
The return of contemporary
Americans to eating fast food with fingers casts a thought-provoking perspective
on historical cycles. BH
C.U. History
[ 64
Hall, Lynn. Ride a Dark Horse. Morrow, 1987. ISBN 0-688-07471-5. 164p. (A "Gusty"
McCaw Mystery). $11.75.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Hall uses her knowledge about horses and horse breeding to good
advantage in a mystery story that has solid structure, a brisk pace, believable first-
person narration and characterization, and all the suspense and danger a mystery
buff could want. Gusty (Augusta) is seventeen, an excellent student, an exercise
rider at the Ohio horse farm where she also lives. Her father has recently died, her
mother had left long ago, and when Gusty is accused of selling information about
the horses, she is dismissed. She knows then that someone has become aware of
her investigation into a fraudulent breeding scheme-and the rest of the story
describes, with gathering momentum, her eventually successful efforts to learn the
truth, expose the culprits, and regain her good name. A good choice for reading
aloud to a middle-grade audience. ZS
Hamm, Diane Johnston. Grandma Drives a Motor Bed; illus. by Charles Robinson.
Whitman, 1987. ISBN 0-8075-3025-5. 28p. $10.25. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
A young boy describes his visit with bedridden Grandma, both
the high points ("The only thing my motor bed won't do is wash the dishes") and
the low (Grandma "wears throw-away diapers. . . . Sometimes it smells like a
bathroom in there"). With a child's frank curiosity, the narrator watches as
Grandma is exercised by a therapist, visited by friends, massaged by her affectionate
husband. The text is more description than story and the ending abrupt, but a
family readaloud will help children discuss their own experience of gerontological
problems. With functional drawings in tan and white. BH
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Hearn, Michael Patrick. The Porcelain Cat; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. Little, 1987.
ISBN 0-316-35330-2. 30p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
In the tradition of sorcerer's apprentice tales, young Nickon is
sent on an errand by his master. But Nickon does not bungle his task-to procure
a vial of basilisk's blood for a spell that will bring a china cat to life to rid the
Wizard's house of rats. The first magic creature he asks requires something that
sends him to the next, and so on, until he succeeds, only to watch the animated cat
shatter into a thousand pieces when it pounces on its first rat. The Dillons' art,
parlaying the magic theme into objects with faces throughout the book, has the
last say as a porcelain bird flies out of the china rubble at the apprentice's feet. So
much for magicians and their charms. This ending will confuse some young
listeners, who may also miss the irony of the magician going to so much trouble
when there are cats depicted everywhere in the illustrations. The book is gracefully
designed with art deco frames and still, rounded shapes that keep the humor
mischievously low key, a tone set by the subtle text. A smooth, sophisticated
blend, from wry wording to softly shaded endpapers sporting a tell-tale illusion,
this is almost too sophisticated for its format. BH
Holman, Felice. Terrible Jane; illus. by Irene Trivias. Scribner, 1987. ISBN 0-684-
18841-4. 34p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Line and wash drawings that have vigor and humor are
imaginatively composed and well placed in relation to the verses that catalogue the
behavioral lapses of an enfant terrible. Children will enjoy the disaster humor that
recurs in the poems, but the extravagance of Jane's conduct makes some of the text
less believable and therefore less effective-for example, "The dentist's in terrible
[65]
pain/ Jane don't bite his finger again/ You're here for the good of your teeth, dear/
Your humor you must, please, restrain," or "Oh, what is that up in the steeple/
Ringing loud the bell?/ It's Jane who's telling all the people/ It's three A.M. and
all is well." ZS
D.V. Social behavior
Honeycutt, Natalie. Josie's Beau. Orchard, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08318-7; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-531-05718-6. 153p. Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Age twelve, Josie Pucinski and Beau Finch had been close
friends since their families had met as neighbors in a San Francisco two-flat eleven
years earlier. They are just on the verge of a shy first love but friendship is
paramount-and Honeycutt does a fine job in making clear the nuances and
changes in the relationship. The subtle handling of personal relations and the
control of narrative pace and style make the plot development more meaningful, as
Josie lies to help her friend Beau. His mother is adamantly against fighting and
refuses to listen when Beau explains that he's being persecuted by a local bully, so
Josie (to the baffled distress of both sets of parents) announces that she's beaten
him up-thus explaining the bruises. This would be a good read even if it weren't
lightened by humor, which it is. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Friendship values; Honesty
Howard, Elizabeth. A Scent of Murder; Library ed. ISBN 0-394-97548-0; Trade ed. ISBN
0-394-87548. 155p.
Mystery of the Magician. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-97547-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-
87547. 
138p.
Mystery of the Metro. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-97546-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-
87546. 171p.
All three books: illus. by Michael Wm. Kaluta. Random House, 1987. (My
Name is Paris). Library ed. $5.99; Trade ed. $3.99.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Paris idolizes Sherlock Holmes, and a good thing, too, for she
arrives in her namesake city to visit her Uncle Claude only to discover him dead.
Mysteriously dead, Paris suspects, and sets out to find the killer. This new series
has a fresh setting (Paris, 1900) and exotic casting that mixes fictional characters
such as the arch-villainess Madame M6duse with historical figures like Harry
Houdini (Mystery of the Magician) and Claude Monet (A Scent of Murder).
Sixteen-year-old Paris herself is a dauntless and daring American girl, not far
removed from Nancy Drew, but far enough-Paris, to her credit, possesses a sense
of humor, particularly regarding her detection abilities. The mysteries themselves
are rather dull, though, and historical details are effortfully woven in. However,
it's a new slant on an old formula, and readers may thereby be lured to Aiken and
Garfield and Philip Pullman's wonderful new Ruby in the Smoke. RS
Ingpen, Robert. The Idle Bear; written and illus. by Robert Ingpen. Bedrick/Blakie, 1987.
ISBN 0-87226-159-X. 24p. $11.95.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
Winner of the 1986 Hans Christian Andersen Medal for
illustration, Robert Ingpen is a popular Australian artist. Here, in a book first
published in the United Kingdom, the full-page pictures of two toy bears are
remarkable for their textural quality and their deftness in depiction of light and
shade. The narrative is unfortunately slight, consisting of a dialogue between the
two Teddy Bears, and the writing seems more appropriate for a somewhat older
[ 66]
audience than the format indicates, since it contains some fairly sophisticated
concepts and vocabulary ("challenged," "worldly," "desperation..."). ZS
Jukes, Mavis. Lights Around the Palm; illus. by Stacey Schuett. Knopf, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-98399-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-88399-3. 28p. Library
ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
Her family is becoming exasperated with 7-year-old Emma's
"Teach the Animals" game, where, for example, she asks Highpockets the horse
what letter begins the word "apple": 
"N-eigh!" Emma seems convinced; not
perhaps, that the animals can talk, but, at least, that she can have a splendid time
behaving as if they do. And maybe it's true-this is, after all, a Christmas story
where miracles can happen; Emma says that "Highpockets said Winnie (a hen) said
Santa (Claus) said it's the palm tree's year for lights." Another miracle occurs
when Emma's contemptuous 10-year-old brother is converted-he, too, says he
hears the animals talk. Again, it is left unsaid whether he truly believes, is
joining in the fun, or is simply being kind to his little sister. All commendable
motives, and maybe it just doesn't make any difference. This is a change for
Jukes, author of the poetic and utterly realistic Like Jake and Me and Nobody's
Going to Nashvillle; unfortunately its ideas are more intriguing than its
execution-the themes and ambiguities crowd out the small and quiet story. Palm
trees and all, Schutt's paintings convey a glowing Christmas mood, the somewhat
stiff figures and gorgeous color reminiscent of Mary Szilagyi's work. RS
D.V. Imaginative powers
Kaye, Marilyn. Cassie. ISBN 0-15-200421-1. 119p.
Lydia. ISBN 0-15-200510-2. 1llp.
Both books: Harcourt, 1987. 
(Sisters). Trade ed. $13.95; Paper ed. $4.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
The author's Phoebe and Daphne (reviewed in the May 1987
issue) launched a series about four sisters ranging from 11 to 14 years of age.
These two sequels focus on Cassie, who's pretty and conventional, and Lydia, an
independent leader who espouses radical causes. Cassie abandons her former friends
for the company of a rich, spoiled newcomer, Dana, until Dana shoplifts a blouse
and blames Cassie for it. At that point, Cassie realizes how manipulative, lonely,
and ultimately needy Dana is. While the message that beauty is skindeep seems
labored (especially in the stereotype of Dana), there's a surprise touch of resistance
at the end, with Cassie still trying to maneuver her parents into a new outfit. The
writing itself is more spontaneous than in the previous books (" . .. the second
her hair realized what was going on outside-boom! Major frizz"). In Lydia, too,
the style has some funny twists. In her last year of junior high school, Lydia is
planning to shake up the establishment with an alternative student newspaper. Her
first campaign against cafeteria food is a big hit, but trying to get girls on the
football team turns out to be more complicated. At one point, her 60s-oriented
father says encouragingly, "Keep on truckin," to which a chum replies "Keep on
what?" And when Cassie gushes over Lydia's courtship by a football player, Lydia
retorts," I always get a tingle when I win." Though sometimes simplistic, these
offer young readers a stepping stone between formula series and more complex
fiction. BH
D.V. 
Sisters
[67]
Kellogg, Steven. Aster Aardvark's Alphabet Adventures; written and illus. by Steven
Kellogg. Morrow, 1987. Library ISBN 0-688-07257-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
07256-9. 40p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $13.00.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Not quite consistent in its pattern, not quite useful as an alphabet
book, not quite so funny as it is frenetic, this episodic account of animal activities,
alphabetically arranged, tells a brief story that is more or less alliterative.
Kellogg's busy pictures have the action and humor that appeal to young children,
but the stories seem bent to fit the letters as often as not: "Vincent and Valerie
Vulture, Vincent's valet and the vacationing voles from Virginia were vaguely
vexed when their voyage to Vesuvius to view the volcano and the various villas in
the vicinity was vetoed by visitors from Venus who vanished with their vessel."
ZS
Klass, David. A Different Season. Lodestar, 1987. ISBN 0-525-67237. 201p. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
According to the jacket-flap quote, the author is here addressing
the question "Which traditional barriers between men and women are valuable, just,
and worth preserving?" The story is told by the ace pitcher of his high school
baseball team, Jim. Much as he likes Jennifer, the school's best female athlete, he
is articulately opposed to having her play on the team. Jennifer demands her
rights, and she has many supporters, but neither Jim nor the coach is among them.
Baseball game sequences will appeal to buffs, and the focal issue should be of
interest to adolescent readers. The characterization is adequate if not deep or subtle,
the plot is kept moving and has a reasonable outcome: Jennifer is accepted, the
team loses the final game, and there is an understanding between Jim and Jenny
that they will agree to disagree about whether baseball is a woman's sport. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Sex roles
Klein, Robin. Hating Alison Ashley. Viking Kestrel, 1987. ISBN 0-670-80864-4. 182p.
$11.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A world class liar to rival Cleaver's Ellen Grae, Erica is used to
being an academic star (as well as the class braggart and hypochondriac) and she's
put out when the new girl in sixth grade, Alison, turns out to be an A student as
well as being a very pretty clotheshorse. To add insult to injury, Alison's clothes
are in impeccable taste. Erica, the narrator, lives with her family in a noisy,
slapdash environment. This very funny, very astute story brings the two girls
together with such compassion and wit that it doesn't matter a whit that the
rapprochement has been inevitable from the start. First published in Australia,
this is a gem of a school-and-camp story. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Jealousy, overcoming; Truthfulness
Kuskin, Karla. Jerusalem, Shining Still; illus. by David Frampton. 
Harper, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023549-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023548-9. Library ed.
$12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
In rhythmic prose that occasionally breaks into verse, Kuskin
impresses readers with the age and vicissitudes of a city holy to many religions.
Her thematic emphasis of the stones-their construction, destruction, and
reconstruction-becomes a symbolic reflection of the comings and goings of
conquerers, which she reinforces with a kind of litany. "You have not forgotten
that after the Babylonians came from Babylonia, the Greeks came and then the
Romans, those worshippers of Gods and omens. Then the Persians came in
[ 68 ]
troops, Moslems followed, groups and groups, the Fatimid Egyptian forces, Seljuk
Turks on foot and horses. After that the Crusaders, Saladin and more Molsems,
the Mamelukes and the Ottoman Turks all came to stay, for a while, and went
away." Frampton's full-color woodcuts have their own rhythmic patterns of linear
development-Jerusalem particularly seems to lend itself to this medium. There is
one confusing transition from an introductory note on time that seems to direct the
reader back to the city's beginning but in fact leads to a description of
contemporary Jerusalem. 
Overall, however, this is a strongly evocative,
handsomely illustrated presentation. BH
C.U. 
History
Langstaff, John, comp. What a Morning!: The Christmas Story in Black Spirituals by
John Langstaff and John Andrew Ross; illus. by Ashley Bryan. Margaret K.
McElderry, 1987. ISBN 0-689-50422-5. 24p. $12.95.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
A series of five Black spirituals, alternating with illustrated Bible
verses, unfolds the story of Jesus' birth: "My Lord, What a Morning"; "Mary Had
a Baby"; "Go, Tell It On the Mountain"; "Sister Mary Had-a But One Child"; and
"Behold That Star." 
The music for each song includes piano and guitar
accompaniments, and Langstaff has added a note about spirituals, with suggestions
for singing or playing the songs. Bryan's paintings of a Black nativity feature
bold, almost glaring color contrasts and geometric designs with African motifs in
clothing and setting. The art sometimes seems crowded, but this is a striking
production that will prove a standby for adults working with children during
Christmas celebrations. BH
C.U. Music, American (unit)
Leroe, Ellen. The Peanut Butter Poltergeist; illus. by Jacqueline Rogers. Lodestar, 1987.
ISBN 0-525-67241-9. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
In a flip, first-person narrative, 11-year-old M.J. tells how he
tried to humble his new stepsister, Ashley, by playing poltergeist tricks in the old
house that his father and stepmother rented for their first family vacation.
Although he's successful with the exploding lightbulb, crashing pictures, and
dancing flowers, MJ.'s schemes are doomed, partly because they're so obvious and
partly because Ashley devises better ways to pay him back in kind, notably a
seance and a midnight exorcism that terrify him. 
Although the step-siblings
finally make amends, the main character isn't very likable; he seems to lie easily,
manipulate his friends, and have a ready mental put-down for not just the
newcomers in his family but anyone that strays across his path. On the other
hand, readers will identify with the relentless jealousy M.J. feels and will enjoy the
prankish devices that comprise the plot. BH
D.V. Jealousy-overcoming; Brother-sister relations
Levy, Elizabeth. 
Something Queer in Rock 'n' Roll; illus. by Mordicai Gerstein.
Delacorte, 1987. ISBN 0-385-29547-2. 43p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
There's usually a modicum of exaggeration in Levy's popular
mystery stories for the primary grade reader, but here credulity is strained. Other
facets of this book have the appeal of its predecessors: light style, active girl.
detectives, humor, and a gratifying solution to the mystery. Gwen and Jill join a
four-person combo that enters an under-twelve rock contest in which participants
mtust perform a song they've written. The group's song is about wanting pizza
[69]
and about a dog's life, inspired by the hopeful howling of Jill's dog Fletcher when
pizza is held over his head. The final howl (dog and combo) is a huge success, but
when Fletcher disappears the success of the act is threatened. Levy's fans know
that Jill and Gwen will solve the mystery and they'll be pleased when the group
wins the contest. ZS
Lindbergh, Reeve. The Midnight Farm; illus. by Susan Jeffers. Dial, 1987. Library ed.
ISBN 0-8037-0333-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0331-7. 28p. LIbrary ed. $13.89;
Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
A soothing lullaby chant for youngest listeners is accompanied
by idyllic pictures of a mother and son making the nighttime rounds of their farm.
In each room or outbuilding, they check on the animals that have settled down to
sleep: "Here is the dark of the stable door/ Where five horses stamp their feet on
the floor/ And blow through their noses and stamp some more/ In the dark of the
stable door." The book is a showcase for Jeffers' fine-line pen drawings, deeply
colored against mottled violet paper. The text has sufficient music and movement
to support the elaborate art, which is well drafted and composed if occasionally
stiff. Use this with Eve Rice's City Night, reviewed below, for a striking
contrast. BH
D.V. Security
MacLean, John. Mac. Houghton, 1987. ISBN 0-395-43080-1. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
Fifteen-year-old Mac thinks he's not too smart, not too good-
looking, "and not too swift. Especially with girls." Gorgeous Jenny disagrees and
forthrightly, too, asking Mac to call her, inviting him to the school dance. There
have been a bevy of aggressive girl friends in recent YA fiction, and they usually
go after boys like Mac, ordinary guys who think they don't think too much, but
both the sex role turnabout and the male ingenuousness in this book are surely and
quietly handled, avoiding the self-conscious sensitivity that has affected some
others. All progresses nicely until Mac is molested by a doctor during a sports
physical, an event that is not spelled out but is made clear in the second section of
the book when Mac seems transformed into a terrifying double of himself. With
Mac's face, speaking in Mac's voice, a stranger-foulmouthed, bitter and
detached-appears in his place. Mac had blocked the molestation from his mind,
his pain manifested in anger and delinquency. A wise counselor helps Mac admit
to what has happened, and he begins struggling back to his girl friend and family.
The last section of the novel is weakened by too much information about sexual
abuse conveyed in the guise of conversation, but Mac's voice remains true
throughout, making his transformation believable (and all the more frightening)
and his eventual catharsis a welcome return. RS
D.V. Parent-child relations; Boy-girl relations
Mahy, Margaret. 17 Kings and 42 Elephants; illus. by Patricia MacCarthy. Dial, 1987.
ISBN 0-8037-0458-5. 24p. $10.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
"Seventeen kings on forty-two elephants/ Going on a journey
through a wild wet night] Baggy ears like big umbrellaphants,/ Little eyes a-
gleaming in the jungle light." Thus begins a musical nonsense rhyme with the
combined appeal of rhythmic word play and large-scale watercolor illustrations of a
wild animal parade. It's a perfect read-aloud for toddler picture-book sessions, with
[70]
only two lines of text to each page and with dramatically visible art that features
white-outlined shapes against vividly contrasted colors. The effects are patchy
close up but striking at a distance. The compositions reflect the fun of the text: in
the spread illustrating hippopotami, three are facing viewers and one is--dare we
call it-mooning them with its perfectly huge bottom centered by a smallish,
dangling tail. A rump ... I mean, romp. BH
Marshall, James. The Cut-ups Cut Loose; written and illus. by James Marshall. Viking
Kestrel, 1987. ISBN 0-670-80740-0. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
While he's probably best known for the bland, "what, me
worry?" effrontery of his illustrations, Marshall's ear for the quirks and cliches of
the American language has always been an important contribution to his peculiar
sense for what is funny. Those two, Spud and Joe, "a couple of real cut-ups," are
back, and eager for the first day of school, "the biggest challenge of all." But also
returning is the boys' chief nemesis, school principal Lamar J. Spurgle, and even
though Spud and Joe promise to be on their best behavior "for the rest of their
lives," the cut-ups just can't help themselves. "Unfortunately, some habits are
hard to break." Marshall's esay handling of simultaneous deadpan drollery and
outrageousness is unique, demonstrated especially well here by the boys' friend,
"that nice Mary Frances Hooley," and her benefactress, Sister Aloysius, who takes
on Spurgle with practiced ease: "Shame on you." 
As Mary Frances says,
"Nobody messes with Big Al." RS
McCully, Emily Arnold, illus. School. Harper, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024133-0;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024132-2. 30p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
This might be subtitled,"Small Mouse Makes Good," and most
of the read-aloud audience should enjoy the accomplishment, the adventure that
leads to it, and the cheerful pictures that show cozy interiors and glowing autumn
colors outdoors. When older siblings go off on the first day of school, the
youngest mouse sneaks off in their wake, slips into the classroom, wins
distinction by prowess at the blackboard, and enjoys snack time and story hour.
The wordless plot ends with the appearance of a worried mother, who reclaims her
perfectly happy child. There are some pages in which the action is not as clear as
this genre demands, but it's a book children can "read" with amused empathy. ZS
Melling, O.R. The Singing Stone. Viking Kestrel, 1986. ISBN 0-670-80817-2. 
206p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
An ambitious fantasy in which a contemporary young woman,
Kay, goes back in time to help the Rising Queen of Inisfail in 1500 B.C. The
plot is clever and complicated, involving a quest and an invasion, two heroines,
and two romances. However, the conventions of Sword, Spear, Cauldron, and
Stone of Destiny are stock devices and the language is often cliched or overdramatic
("She could feel her mind heaving darkly. Something terrible was looming ahead.
Dread rose within her and another emotion she couldn't name"). There are lots of
symbols and sumptuous descriptions, but there's never any doubt about the
outcome. When the Rising Queen begins her final race, "the tests were nothing
compared to the mountains she had scaled, the plains she had crossed, the great
rivers she had forded." Young fantasy buffs who enjoy the non-stop action and
love interest probably won't quibble about the fact that no river or plain has
presented any problem, or has even appeared, in the course of the quest. BH
[ 71 1
Merriam, Eve. Halloween A B C; illus. by Lane Smith. MacMillan, 1987. ISBN 0-02-
766870-3. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
The title and format are deceptive here, because this is more
sophisticated in poetry and art than the picture book appearance suggests. The
verse is well structured and skillful, ranging in tone from satanically sinister to
impishly funny. Some lines are thought provoking ("Conceal, conceal] peel off
and reveal/ the mask that no one detects:/ your face that the mirror reflects"), others
entertaining ("a pet that's not the least bit vicious/ yet finds the neighbors quite
nutritious"); most are surprising. The poems are arranged by title alphabetically:
"Apple," "Bat," "Crawler," "Demon," "Elf," "Fiend," etc. Each is accompanied by
a darkly delicate, surrealistic painting that intensifies the creepy mood considerably.
This will disquiet adults and galvanize kids. BH
C.U. Halloween
Murrow, Liza Ketchum. West Against the Wind. Holiday House, 1987. ISBN 0-8234-
0668-7. 232p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
In a story about a family that travels by wagon train in 1850,
Murrow shows how the problems of weather and terrain were matched by the
erosive recurrence of fear, monotony, and the hostility engendered by all these
pressures. This is a good first novel, only occasionally florid in phrasing but
written with controlled pace and narrative flow and having characters that are
consistent even as they develop and mature. 
The protagonist is Abby, an
adolescent girl whose courage helps save the family, whose qualities attract a
suitor, and whose dearest wish, to find in California the father who had sent for
them, is granted. ZS
D.V. Courage
Newton, Laura P. William the Vehicle King; illus. by Jacqueline Rogers. Bradbury, 1987.
ISBN 0-02-768230-7. 32p. $12.95.
M 
3-5 yrs. 
Bright paintings of a child and his toys will have the appeal of
familiarity for the preschool audience. The text, unfortunately, is so thin that it
fails to tell a story; William takes a toy car from his toychest and then adds other
vehicles and highways of blocks. End of narrative. The pictures show a happy
boy and a cluttered bedroom floor. This is not unpleasant at all, but it's a book
that fails to provide humor or plot or information or concepts. ZS
Nixon, Joan Lowry. The Dark and Deadly Pool. Delacorte, 1987. ISBN 0-385-29585-2.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
When her parents urge gawky Mary Elizabeth to take a summer
job to improve her self-confidence, little could any of them have known exactly
what was going on at the fancy Ridley Hotel. Guests are being pickpocketed, food
and furniture stolen, and all the trouble seems eventually to get around to the
hotel's spa where Mary Elizabeth works. This has neither the terror nor suspense
of Nixon's best mysteries, but it's a neatly worked out procedure as Mary
Elizabeth, Francis, her budding beau, and Tina, a young security guard cum Dr.
Freud, piece together a pattern out of what appear to be disparate crimes. There's
humor here in the characters of two garrulous and competitive (but sharp eyed) old
dowagers, and Mary Elizabeth's slightly caustic narration adds a bit of texture. RS
[72]
Paulsen, Gary. Hatchet. Bradbury, 1987. ISBN 0-02-770130-1. 195p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
En route to visit his father for the first time after his parents'
divorce, thirteen-year-old Brian is alone in the Canadian wilderness after the pilot of
the small plane dies of a heart attack and the plane crashes into a lake. This is a
story of survival, and it has good pace, suspense, and convincing details of Brian's
ingenuity and growing self-confidence. It is weakened by stylistic flaws (speaking
of a coil of wire, "it sprung into a three foot long antenna") and by the
melodramatic treatment of "The Secret," the fact that Brian had seen his mother,
prior to the divorce, kiss a man whom she later "continued to see," as explained in
an epilogue after Brian's rescue; but as a story of boy-against-nature, it's deftly
conceived and developed. ZS
D.V. Courage; Self-reliance
Philip, Neil. The Tale of Sir Gawain; illus. by Charles Keeping. Philomel, 1987. ISBN
0-399-21488-7. 100p. $11.95.
R* 
Gr. 6-9. 
Old and ill, Sir Gawain lies wounded outside the French castle to
which Sir Lancelot had fled, and he tells his young squire old tales of courage and
treachery, of the Holy Grail, of courtship and magic and betrayal. The pen-and-ink
drawings are starkly dramatic and handsome, echoing the boldness and drama of the
story. Gawain's narration is, appropriately, that of an elderly person-he is
garrulous, colloquial, articulate, heartsick at the breach with his best friend and the
disintegration of the Round Table company. Philip has linked episodes and
characters in the Arthurian cycle in a way that clarifies loyalties and relationships.
ZS
Plummer, Louise. 
The Romantic Obsessions and Humiliations of Annie Sehlmeier.
Delacorte, 1987. ISBN 0-385-29574-X. 181p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
The Sehlmeier family migrates from Holland to Salt Lake City
in a contemporary story that is given depth by the inclusion of family problems,
but that is basically a boy-girl story which is only superficially concerned with
immigration and adaptability. The writing style is adequate, save for the fact that
Annie, the narrator, is at times fluent in English and at times seems to have lost
her grasp of the idiom. Annie is 17, and one of the family problems is that she
and her younger sister fall in love with the same boy, a handsome charmer who
proves unworthy of either. There is more substance in the depiction of a senile
grandmother who has come to America with the family. Not a bad first novel, but
sprinkled with unconvincing details (Annie's father, head electrician at the opera
house in Utrecht, believes that Dutch is taught in American schools just as
English is taught in Dutch schools) that weaken it, this shows more potential than
performance. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Boy-girl relations
Rabinowitz, Ann. Knight on Horseback. Macmillan, 1987. ISBN 0-02-775660-2. 197p.
$12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Sick from frequent bouts of asthma and even more sick of his
family's exhausting vacation tour of English cultural sites, 13-year-old American
tourist Eddy Newby meets two unlikely candidates for saving his sanity. One is an
old antique dealer who finds him straying in a London market and invites him to
her home in Yorkshire. The other is the ghost of Richard III, who somehow
[73]
mistakes Eddy for his son Edward and engineers Eddy's returning of a toy knight to
its rightful place in a crumbled Middleham castle. There are some loose ends to
the logic of this fantasy (why Eddy and not the myriad other boys named Edward
who throng London?) and there is some overdramatizing in the writing, especially
in the form of exclamations and rhetorical questions. On the other hand,
Rabinowitz has her history so well in hand that the past becomes vividly real,
assuming a haunting quality by the climactic conclusion. The Newbys' family
dynamics, if too obviously linked to the fantasy dimension, are convicingly
negative in scenes of tense bickering. Tying together so many elements of plot
and character is an ambitious undertaking, and this first novel is not entirely
successful. It does, however, have some involving sequences and an intriquing
glimpse into a Richard diametrically different from Shakespeare's villain. BH
C.U. 
History
D.V. Father-son relations
Rice, Eve. City Night; illus. by Peter Sis. Greenwillow, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-
06857-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06856-1. 24p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed.
$11.75.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
A lively rhyme celebrates a little girl's night out on the town
with her parents: "The city lights/ up at night./ Going./ Glowing./ Yellow./
Bright!" There are lots of light and sound effects here, each one picked up in
double-page spreads that echo the shrill contrasts of a street fair against a dark sky.
Heavy, horizontal brush strokes texture most of the scenes, while many of the
shapes are vertical, creating a tension that charges the art with an urban tone
opposite from (and without quite the depth of) the effects in the Lindbergh/Jeffers
nighttime book reviewed above. BH
Rickard, Graham. Prisons and Punishment. Bookwright/Watts, 1987. ISBN 0-531-18147-
2. 32p. illus. and with photographs. (Topics). $10.40.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
A brief global survey of the social concepts and manifestations
of crime and punishment begins with an analysis of the need for regulation among
members of any group and the consequences of disobedience. The historical
summary includes descriptions of corporal and capital punishment, the relatively
recent development of prisons, and contemporary changes in attitude toward
offenders. Illustrated with an assortment of photographs and reproductions of art
work, this will have some automatically lurid appeal but will also serve as an
introduction, albeit a superficial one, to students seeking information that is not
readily available elsewhere at this level. With a glossary of words that appear in
awkward boldface throughout the text, a brief list of children's books for further
reading, and an index. BH
C.U. History-world
Rockwell, Thomas. How to Fight a Girl; illus. by Giolo Fiammenghi. Watts, 1987.
ISBN 0-531-15082-8. 112p. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Billy Forrester from How to Eat Fried Worms is the victim here
of a pact between several peers to take him down a peg or two in revenge for his
winning the worm bet. The conspirators involve a girl, Amy Miller, to fake a
romance that will humiliate Billy, but the two develop a real affection for each
other. The best part of the book is the realistically bumbling moves these two
characters make in their change from a classic, middle-grade, male-female
[74 ]
adversarial position to enjoyment of each other's company, including a first
groping kiss. What doesn't work so well is the stylistic reflection of speech
patterns that do not translate smoothly into print: "Alan thought of like waking
up in the middle of Yankee Stadium with no clothes on. But Joe probably didn't
mean like that either"; or again, "It was so hot and the horrible smell of garbage."
Some of the switches in point of view are discombobulating, too, but Rockwell
does have a knack for capturing the feelings of kids this age and conveying them
with the verve of everyday action. BH
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Russell, Jean, ed. Supernatural Stories: 13 Tales of the Unexpected. Orchard/Watts, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08323-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05723-2. 156p. Library
ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
An anthology of eerie tales, all first published in Great Britain,
includes a few tedious stories, but for the most part the selections range from good
to stunningly good. Ghosts abound, but other manifestations of the occult are also
evident, and some of the best of the tales are by such eminent writers as Vivien
Alcock, Adele Geras, Joan Aiken, Dick King-Smith, and Jan Mark. ZS
Rylant, Cynthia. Henry and Mudge in the Green Time. ISBN 0-02-778004-2
Henry and Mudge Under the Yellow Moon. ISBN 0-02-778004-X.
Both books: illus. by Sucie Stevenson. Bradbury, 1987. 48p. $10.95.
R* 
Gr. K-2. 
As warm and funny as the first two books in the series, these
stories are, if anything, stronger on structure, spontaneity, and style. In Green
Time, Mudge comforts Henry by licking his tears when he's stung by a bee, soaks
him by shaking off his bath water, and serves as a ludicrous dragon to Henry's
imaginary king-of-the-hill game. 
In Yellow Moon, they play in the autumn
leaves, comfort each other through scary Hallowe'en ghost stories, and befriend
obnoxious Aunt Sally, who visits every Thanksgiving. It's hard to tell which is
more entertaining, the details of text ("when the fall wind blew, Henry's ears turned
red and Mudge's ears turned inside out") or illustration (Mudge's glazed stare as he
wolfs down crackers). Either way, Rylant and Stevenson are a winning team for
beginning readers. BH
C.U. Reading, beginning; Seasons (unit)
Salassi, Otto R. Jimmy D., Sidewinder, and Me. Greenwillow, 1987. ISBN 0-688-
05237-1. 150p. $11.75.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
In a series of letters dominated by a colloquial, down-home
drawl, 15-year-old Dumas Monk tells a judge how he ended up in jail and why he
qualifies for a pardon. The orphaned son of a gambler, Dumas has a gift for
shooting pool. He's quickly spotted by a hustler named Jimmy D., who springs
him from the tyrannical "foster family" he works for, uses him to make money in
a seedy hypnotist's con game, and then dumps him. An old card shark named
Sidewinder picks him up almost immediately as a protege who will perpetuate his
fame and glory, but Dumas' training leads to a shootout in which most of the
players are killed. This isn't quite as tall a tale as the author's On the Ropes
(reviewed in the May 1981 issue), but it's very much in the tradition of a Western
yarn. The story is entertaining and cleverly paced, with a stray protagonist whose
exposure to the seamier sides of life leaves him no less vulnerable and whose
endearing honesty raises the stakes for a reader with every turn of the page. BH
175 ]
Schwartz, Alvin. Telling Fortunes: Love Magic, Dream Signs, and Other Ways to Learn
the Future; illus. by Tiacey Cameron. Lippincott, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-
32133-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32132-5. 123p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed.
$11.50.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
'A potpourri of omens that have been historically and even
currently accepted as predictors of the future. The writing is informal, the material
well organized, and the subject of interest to kids. On the other hand, there is
some inconsistency of approach to the validity of the predictions. "In this chapter
you might learn who is in love with you, who you are going to marry, how many
chldren you are going to have, what your life will be like, and when all this will
happen. There are many ways to find the answers." Well, not really-the only
way would be accidentally. Typical superstitions feed too readily into children's
own imagined fears: "Jump until you miss. It is said that the number you are
reciting at the time will be the number of years you have remaining before you
die." In other cases, Schwartz is careful to make responsible disclaimers. In the
chapter on dreams, for instance, he talks about the logic of Lincoln's dream of
being assassinated. Yet he does not stress, before listing meanings for common
dream images, that their interpretation depends entirely on a personal context; and
at least one of the listed meanings, for a coffin (=happiness), contradicts the
meaning for that image in the Lincoln anecdote. Schwartz' extensive notes and
bibliography attest to his usual care in examining and documenting sources.
Taken with a folkloristic grain of salt, the book will make an enjoyable browsing
item. Illustrated with black-and-white pen sketches. BH
Silverstein, Herma. Mad, Mad Monday. Lodestar, 1987. ISBN 0-525-67239-7. 116p.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Fourteen-year-old Miranda, the narrator, is totally smitten by a
sixteen-year-old hunk, Stormy Kincaid. 
So smitten that she goes out to a
cemetery at midnight to cast a spell found in Madame Lulu's Book of Magic
Spells and Incantations. What she gets is not Stormy's love, but an adolescent
ghost from the 1950s, nicknamed Monday, visible and audible only to her.
Monday is seeking revenge because his high school sweetheart had married
someone else. A series of implausible confrontations and skirmishes leads to
Miranda's falling for the ghost but accepting his departure, and discovering that
handsome Stormy is a type-cast heel. This has some humor, but it is an
unconvincing fantasy that has slapdash plotting, shallow characters, and such
stylistic peculiarities as "...Stormy was tossing in his bed, unable to sleep, his
arms aching to hold his heart bursting with desire to kiss my lips." ZS
Sloan, Frank. Titanic. Watts, 1987. 
ISBN 0-531-10396-X. 
88p. illus. and with
photographs. (A First Book). $9.90.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
An efficiently reported account of the disaster that continues to
fascinate readers of all ages, this is strong on factual detail, though less so on first-
hand quotes that lend personal immediacy. Descriptions of the ship enumerate its
luxurious appointments as well as the engineering principles that were supposed to
guarantee it as the safest in the world. Sloan also discusses the crew and
passengers, including the fate of the immigrants ("while all the children in first and
second class were saved, two-thirds of those in steerage went down with the ship").
A section of "Titanic Trivia," a glossary, and a bibliography divided into books,
monographs, and magazine articles are appended, along with an index. Easy to read
and bolstered with black-and-white photographs, this will answer many questions
[76]
generated by the recent location and photographing of the broken hull, which is
discussed in concluding chapters. BH
Stadler, John. Three Cheers For Hippo! 
written and illus. by John Stadler.
Crowell, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04670-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04668-5.
30p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
M 
1-2 yrs. 
Cartoon-style ink and wash drawings have action and humor that
should appeal to beginning independent readers. The story is flawed enough in
style and execution to weaken its impact despite the lure of animal characters, the
danger in the situation, and the accomodation (large print, short sentences, simple
vocabulary) to the audience. For one thing, the text is not always sequential; for
another, the dialogue is not always consistent. Examples: a cat, dog, and pig are
parachuting downward and see "gators" below; the text reads "The gators wait.
They are nervous," but it is clearly the parachuters who are nervous-and why after
such comments as "Not bad" or "What is that?" should the animals switch to
"Meow," woof," and "oink"? ZS
Steig, William. The Zabajaba Jungle; written and illus. by William Steig. Farrar, 1987.
ISBN 0-374-38790-7. 30p. $13.95.
M 
Gr. K-2. 
Neither sequence nor consequence are much in evidence in a
picture book that has a delightful riot of jungle flora and fauna and a sadly weak
structure. "A spunky little boy," the jacket copy calls Leonard, who is introduced
as he slashes his way through the jungle. "Why is he there? He doesn't know.
He just has to push on." Voracious flowers and hissing snakes loom in his path.
At one point he is rescued by a giant butterfly. Captured by mandrills, and taken
for trial, Leonard escapes by dazzling the court with the fireworks he just happens
to have in his backpack. Then he, in turn, effects a rescue, since his parents are
sitting inside a huge bottle, mother placidly knitting, father placidly reading. The
story ends abruptly, as his parents ask "How do we get out?" (of the jungle).
Leonard says, "Follow me." Whether writing for younger children or middle grade
readers, Steig is usually witty. Not here. ZS
Stein, R. Conrad. The Story of Mississippi Steamboats; illus. by Tom Dunnington.
Childrens Press, 1987. ISBN 0-516-04726-4. 32p. (Cornerstones of Freedom).
Library ed. $7.45; Trade ed. $9.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
An efficiently brief history of Mississippi steamboats during
their heyday in the mid 1800s describes the development of the vessels and
capitalizes on some of the intriguing detail surrounding them. 
Stein's account
emphasizes both the romantic allure so eloquently described by Mark Twain and
the constant danger of fire and explosion ("The dead and missing in the Sultana
wreck totaled 1,547-more than were lost in the Titanic disaster of 1912"). The
format and gray-and-brown wash drawings are somewhat younger than the tone of
the text here, but the book will be useful in American history studies. BH
C.U. History-U.S.; Frontier and pioneer life
Stolz, Mary. The Scarecrows and their Child; illus. by Amy Schwartz. Harper and Row,
1987. ISBN 0-06-026007-6. 65p. Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
In a homespun fairy tale that is as American in tone as her
Cuckoo Clock (reviewed in the May 1987 issue) was European, Stolz introduces
Handy and Blossom, two scarecrows who marry after their owners leave the farm.
Although they love each other and the black cat child born to them, named Bohel,
[77]
they soon set out in search of work. Their efforts are fruitless, but a couple does
take them from the barn to decorate a Hallowe'en display. Bohel is first frantic,
then lonely, until a visiting broom whisks him off to the Hallowe'en riot-and-
revel. There, amongst the other coven creatures, he finally finds his parents and
lives with them happily until his time comes to go out into the world. Readers
must be willing to suspend their disbelief for the unconventional fantasy elements
here, which are stated rather than developed, and the plot seems to go off on a
tangent with the parents' job hunt. Their kidnapping lends suspense, however, and
Stolz' fine writing has allure. BH
C.U. Hallowe'en-stories
Sullivan, George. All About Football. Dodd, 1987. ISBN 0-396-09095-8. 128p. illus.
and with photographs. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
A dependably good sports writer, Sullivan has pulled together
facts about football history, about game play, and about rules and penalties into a
text with good organization and sequential flow. His explanations of plays and
positions are clear and concise, and since he does not "write down" to his readers,
the book can be profitably enjoyed by those older than the target audience.
Photographs add interest; diagrams are useful and are carefully placed in relation to
the text to which they pertain, and end matter includes a glossary, an index, and a
section headed "All-Time Records." ZS
Talbert, Marc. Toby. Dial, 1987. ISBN 0-8037-0441-0. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Toby is ten, the only child of a brain-damaged mother and a
father who is "slow" but capable of supporting his family financially. Both
parents are kind and loving to their child as they are to each other. Beset by the
good intentions of a minister, Toby fears that he will be remanded to a social
agency; his fear is justified because both the minister and Toby's surly next-door
neighbor think he is a liar and a thief. In fact it is the minister's son, a vicious
bully, who has committed all the transgressions of which Toby is accused. The
book poses an unusual family situation, and a touching one. Unfortunately, all
the characters are drawn as very good or very bad or very credulous-there's little
shading or nuance to make them believable. The author's sympathy for Toby is
effectively conveyed in a story that might be more convincing if the
characterization and dialogue had more depth. ZS
D.V. Family relations
Talbott, Hudson. We're Back! A Dinosaur's Story; written and illus. by Hudson Talbott.
Crown, 1987. ISBN 0-517-565994. 32p. $11.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
This is a first-person narrative stretched into tall-tale proportions
as a Tyrannosaurus Rex recounts being lured into a space ship by a tasty-looking
alien that showers him with Mega-Mind pills. The Brain Grain he swallows
enables him, along with other prehistoric creatures, to master language and
advanced studies. Their bonus is a trip to twentieth-century New York, where they
are first mistaken for floats in a parade, then hunted down, and finally rescued by
Dr. Miriam Bleeb at the Museum of Natural History. Although not in comic-strip
format, the pictures have lots of cartoon appeal, with kooky humor in every
action-packed page, some wild chase scenes, and out-size characters that figure large
in popularity with the student set. These are very expressive dinosaurs-they'll
spice up any primary-grade unit on the Paleozoic era! BH
[78]
Taylor, Mildred D. The Friendship; illus. by Max Ginsburg. Dial, 1987. Library ed.
ISBN 0-8037-0418-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0417-8. Library ed. $11.89; Trade
ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
A bitter short story about race relations in rural Mississippi
during the Depression focuses on an incident between an old Black man, Mr. Tom
Bee, and a white storekeeper, Mr. John Wallace. Indebted to Tom for saving his
life as a young man, John had promised they would always be friends. But now,
years later, John insists that Tom call him "Mister" and shoots the old man for
defiantly-and publicly--calling him by his first name. Narrator Cassie Logan
and her brothers, characters from Taylor's previous books, are verbally abused by
Wallace's villainous sons before witnessing the encounter, along with a token non-
hostile white child, Jeremy. The social drama elicits a naturally powerful response
in depicting cruel injustice, and the writing is concentrated to heighten that effect.
BH
C.U. Minority groups (unit)
Teague, Sam. The King of Hearts' Heart. Little, 1987. ISBN 0-316-83427-0. 184p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Harold and Billy were born the same month and played
inseparably as next-door neighbors until a fall from their tire swing left Billy brain
damaged. Here is the story of their transition into maturity, which often involves
embarassment and anger on Harold's part but eventually leads to pride and
unequivocal love. Harold is a rising track star whose races are abruptly terminated
when Billy, a devoted and constant fan, accidentally causes him to fall and break
his arm. After a rush of fury, Harold forgives Billy and devotes himself, along
with girl friend Kate, to preparing his friend for running in the special Olympics.
This is one of those books where the word "heartwarming" is almost unavoidable.
To some extent, the emotion is calculated, as in the death of Kate's brother, who
just happens to be retarded too. But the main characters are authentically drawn,
Harold with his common adolescent concerns and Billy with a peculiarly consistent
logic all his own. Both families' commitment to the boys' friendship is realized
in action rather than exposition, and the ending, though slightly sentimental, is
effective. 
Teague's style is occasionally overdramatized ("It was one of those
nights a boy is destined to recall on some warm summer evening in his manhood;
and his reminiscence will make him happy, and his reminiscence will make him
sad"), but there's a lot of humorous dialogue and carefully paced movement in this
first novel that will make it a natural hit with readers. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Tennyson, Noel. The Lady's Chair and the Ottoman; written and illus. by Noel Tennyson.
Lothrop, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-04098-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-04097-7.
32p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $13.00.
Ad 
Gr. 3-4. 
Cross-hatching is used effectively in full-page spreads that are
distinctive for their definition of light and shadow and their textural quality in
compositions that are animated and angular. The story line is a variant on boy-
meets girl; here it is an ottoman that loves, loses, and is eventually reunited with
an upholstered chair. Anthropomorphism reigns supreme as household objects
have longings, give advice, and occasionally move as though they were animate
(one armchair "nudges" another although they are not side by side) and speak.
There are several conceptual weaknesses, but the chief flaw of the story is that its
[79]
level is not congruous with the picture book format, being long and long-winded.
ZS
Williams, Barbara. Beheaded, Survived. Watts, 1987. ISBN 0-531-10403-6. 150p. illus.
with maps. $12.90.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
The title alludes to a mnemonic phrase referring to the wives of
Henry VIII, and it's offered by Lowell to the other teenagers who are touring
historic sites in England and Wales. Lowell is moody and seldom talks to the
others; Jane is nevertheless attracted to him. The story is told effectively through
the separate comments of the two. It is clear that Lowell has a serious emotional
problem, so that the title has a second meaning; only gradually do readers (like
other characters in the story) learn what Lowell's problem is. He does, indeed,
survive, and a genuine affection develops between the silent boy and Jane, who has
been afraid that the others would discover she is diabetic. Natural dialogue,
excellent characterization of major and minor characters, and a smooth development
of plot make this an eminently readable story that is embellished but not overcome
by details of cathedrals, palaces, and cultural events. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Death, adjustment to; Handicaps, adjustment to
Wood, Audrey. Heckedy Peg; illus. by Don Wood. Harcourt, 1987. ISBN 0-15-233678-8.
32p. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
With heady artistic and textual momentum, the Woods have
collaborated on an exuberant new picture book production. Seven children named
after the days of the week each request something special from the market as their
mother sets out, warning them against admitting strangers or touching fire. Along
comes witch Heckedy Peg, who convinces them to light her pipe and then turns
them into food, which she plans to eat back at her hovel. In the end, the mother
finds them but must guess which child is which to break the spell, and she does so
by matching up the food on the table with the children's requests ("Bread wants
butter. That's Monday"). There's nothing more gripping than a kidnapping-rescue
tale, and these large-scale illustrations play up the drama with throbbing color
contrasts and swirling lines of action. Dark tones dominate the danger, while the
opening and closing idylls glow with golden green. 
The page design is
compellingly varied. The realistic portraits are well drafted; though individualized,
each child is radiant with trust, their mother unfailing in strength, the witch eerily
grotesque. Occasionally, the effects are slick, but this has a rhythmic vitality
characteristic of the Woods' best work. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
