Adoff, Arnold. In for Winter, Out for Spring; illus. by Jerry Pinkney.
Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-238637-8. [48p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
"Rebecca at Breakfast Time/ Becky By Lunch" is the
exuberant young black narrator of this seasonal cycle of poems. Some are her
simple outbursts of joy: "/ Send/ This/ Spring/ Song/ Out/ For/ All/ To
Shout/ And Sing/ Out For Spring/ Out For Spring/ Out For Spring." Others
poems are observations about the natural world, some of them suggesting an
older point of view than Rebecca's: "I Hear The Usual Thump/ And Know That
One More/ Robin/ Has Hit The Glass Door/ In Love With Its Own/ Reflection."
Understatement is sometimes used to comic effect: "Daddy Screamed A Perfect/
Cartoon Scream And Dropped The Heavy Cream/ And Dropped His Cake Pan/
And Ran/ Out Of Our/ Warm/ Kitchen/ Faster Than The Mouse Was/ Running
The Other Way." The idyllic life of this rural family is disturbed only by the
threat of storms, or of polluted air when the wind blows the wrong way ("We
Stay In For the Rest of the Day"). With his variegated watercolor and pencil
illustrations, Pinkney captures the mood or essence of each poem. Purple
crocuses burst through snow, and dead leaves come "Out For Spring," while a
wary, chased-from-the-kitchen mouse looks on. A master of color, Pinkney uses
a full palette of spring greens. His flora and fauna are meticulously rendered, but
the human figures, though lovingly portrayed, present occasional difficulties
with their awkwardly drawn heads or faces. Because the uninhibited layout of the
free verse poetry may be confusing to younger readers, this book would benefit
from one-on-one sharing. It certainly invites repeated readings. RAS
D.V. Family relations
Allen, Pamela. My Cat Maisie; written and illus. by Pamela Allen. Viking,
1991. ISBN 0-670-83251-0. 32p. $12.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
The best way to learn respect for animals is by
animals' response to mistreatment, and Andrew is a prime candidate for a lesson.
He's lonely, but the cat that strays into his arms runs quickly away after being
squeezed, twirled ("Let's be helicopters and whizz round and round"), and
submitted to games of fire engine and acrobat As Andrew chases the fleeing cat,
a neighboring dog plays rough with him, leading Andrew to gentler behavior
when the cat reappears through the window to sleep on his bed. Allen's full-
color compositions are simple but spiced with expressive action; this Australian
award-winner has a warm and knowing way of projecting the world of small
children-for their own enjoyment. BH
[209 ]
Anderson, Lena. 
Stina's Visit; written and illus. by Lena Anderson.
Greenwillow, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09666-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
09665-4. 34p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
First published in Sweden, this read-aloud story is
just right in length, complexity, gentle humor, and integration of text and
pictures for its intended audience. Clean watercolors show a tow-headed moppet
and her fairly sedate grandfather (whom she's visiting at his island home),
contrasting them with a lively extrovert, Grandfather's old friend Axel. Axel's
nickname is Stretchit, and even the youngest listener can appreciate Stretchit's
creative reminiscences (very tall tales) which leave Stina amazed and Grandfather
repeatedly murmuring, dubiously, "Indeed." ZS
D.V. Older-younger generations
Avi. Windcatcher. Bradbury, 1991. ISBN 0-02-707761-6. 124p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Tony is not looking forward to staying three weeks
with his grandmother in Connecticut, until his parents allow him to spend his
paper route money on a small sailboat. Grandmother makes arrangements for
him to take sailing lessons from a local teenage girl. After Tony becomes adept
enough to go sailing alone, he does what any good fictional eleven-year-old
would do-gets into trouble. Amusing himself by looking for a treasure buried
nearby, according to local lore, Tony finds he is competing with a menacing
couple. A good detective, Tony not only finds his own clues, but also spies on
his competitors for more. Avi keeps the action moving by placing Tony in
exciting and sometimes dangerous situations, but relies on too many
coincidences to pin the plot together. 
The biggest groaner is when Tony,
shipwrecked on one of a chain of islands, finds his boat miraculously washed up
on the beach of an island that he's been lucky enough to swim to in the dark.
However, the reader doesn't have much time to ponder the coincidences as the
story's fast pace pushes Tony's luck to an agreeable conclusion. KPJ
Berger, Melvin. Ouch! A Book about Cuts, Scratches, and Scrapes; illus. by
Pat Stewart. Lodestar, 1991. ISBN 0-525-67323-7. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-3. 
Berger describes the healing process, pointing out the
roles played by red or white blood cells, and by the platelets. Clear and
sequential, if minimally marred by a tendency to include exclamatory remarks
("Sometimes it is even hard to remember where you cut yourself!"), the
continuous text ends with advice: wash the wound, cover it, and see a nurse or
doctor if the bleeding won't stop. Illustrations include diagrams that show the
stages in healing; these are both more attractive and more informative than the
pedestrian, harshly colored pictures of children. Simply written for primary
grades readers, this may be useful to read aloud to even younger children. ZS
C.U. Health
Bjbrk, Christina. Elliot's Extraordinary Cookbook; tr. by Joan Sandin; illus. by
Lena Anderson. R&S/Farrar, 1991. ISBN 91-29-59658-0. 60p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
When Elliot forgets his key one day, he waits
upstairs with his neighbor Stella Delight, who introduces him to the world of
cooking in this pleasantly idiosyncratic (as the best are) cookbook. A Swedish
[210]
import, this book is a good example of how many things a book with a well-
executed single focus can embrace. It's chock-full of recipes of varying degrees
of difficulty, handy hints, and presentation tips, but it also gives appropriate
mentions of food history, human anatomy, animal welfare, and world hunger.
Information comes in sections, starting with potatoes and their uses, moving
through dairy products, salads, afternoon snacks, hamburgers, and more. The
fictional frame works well, permitting the book to mention variants due to
vagaries of taste ("Arthur thinks runny yolks are disgusting, so he usually turns
his eggs over and cooks them on the other side, too") and converting recipes
from the abstract into the personal. Although the print is small, the many line-
and-wash illustrations, photographs, and sidebars break up the dual-column
format, making it appealing and accessible. A bibliography and index are
included. DS
Blake, Quentin. All Join In; written and illus. by Quentin Blake. Little, 1991.
ISBN 0-316-09934-1. $14.95. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
These verses may be as unsubstantial as meringue,
but they're just as tasty. Frenzied action and cheerful noise are the focus of each
of six poems that share the ebullient quality of Blake's dashing line and
humorous approach in illustration. One poem begins, for example, with "When
William's in his study/ and his thoughts are very deep/ We come and help him
concentrate-/ We go BEEP-BEEP BEEP-BEEP." The audience will relish the
noise, the rhyme, the rhythm, the "join in" refrain--and the delightful idea of
disrupting the pursuits of adults. ZS
Blizzard, Gladys S. Come Look with Me: Enjoying Art with Children.
Thomasson-Grant, 1991. ISBN 0-934738-76-9. [32p.] illus. with photographs.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
6-9 yrs. 
With a more conservative selection of paintings than
Yenawine's Colors, etc., reviewed last month, Blizzard's book is also more
generously designed. It asks the same kinds of (frequently inane) questions,
ostensibly designed to "spark lively discussion and get children more involved in
what they see." What discussion might follow in response to the question "Do
you think the dog likes the child?" (asked about Joseph Whiting Stock's Portrait
of a Baby and a Dog)? The answer will probably be "yes," but where do you go
from there? Some of the questions are better: "If you could touch this child's
dress, how would it feel?" (asked about the same painting), is a question that
will involve children in the picture and will make them think about the painting
process. Excepting Picasso's Maya with a Doll, all the twelve examples are
representational and prominently feature children; some of the other artists
included are Renoir, Manet, and Goya, and the reproductions are large and clear.
RS
C.U. Art appreciation
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
Bragg, Ruth Gembicki. 
The Birthday Bears; written and illus. by Ruth
Gembicki Bragg. Picture Book Studio, 1991. ISBN 0-88708-139-8. [28p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Two children are remembering a year-ago birthday:
they had been enjoying spaghetti and cake and ice cream (three different flavors)
[211]
when, all of a sudden, "the bears came striding in!" "Big bears, little bears,
kodiaks and grizzlies, mamas and papas and babies and toddler bears, great gray
grumpy grandparent bears," all come to eat the spaghetti and ... the children,
who jump onto the table and call the cops. The story isn't much, but the havoc
is satisfying, as are Bragg's energetic black-crayon and watercolor cartoons,
crisply sprawled across double-page spreads. After rounding up the bears, the
children receive medals from the police and rewards from the Zoo, and get their
pictures in the paper-not a bad birthday, and now, one year later, it's about to
happen again! RS
Bunting, Eve. Fly Away Home; illus. by Ronald Himler. Clarion, 1991.
ISBN 0-395-55962-6. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Andrew and his father (a widower who has a job as a
weekend janitor) live at an airport; Andrew, who tells the brief and wistful story,
is not yet of school age but is wise enough to understand that if you are
homeless, you take care that nothing that makes you stand out. Dad and Andrew
dress inconspicuously, keep moving, and do nothing to attract the attention of
the security guards. Himler's quiet paintings echo the economy and the touching
quality of the story, which is all the more effective in depicting the plight of the
homeless because it is so low-keyed. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Cadnum, Michael. 
Calling Home. Viking, 1991. 
ISBN 0-670-83566-8.
[192p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 9-12. 
The enticing cover art and jacket blurb promise a Lois
Duncan-like thriller, but this novel has more serious (and more convoluted)
aspirations. After accidently killing his best friend Mead in a drunken argument,
Peter keeps the body hidden and periodically calls Mead's parents, impersonating
their son and assuring them that he's all right. Peter has several shaky
motivations for his behavior ("I tried to keep Mead alive by pretending to be
him"), but there isn't enough sufficiently sustained tension for readers to care
much about his guilty secret and its eventual revelation, brought on by Peter's
(perfect) black friend and her father. While the characterization of Peter's mother
and his girlfriend is one-dimensionally unpleasant, Peter himself is powerfully,
bitterly drawn-probably the truest portrait of a teenaged alcoholic we've had in
YA fiction. But even here we are distanced from the boy's pain and anger by a
pretentious writing style that occasionally dips into the incoherent ("The dead
guts grumble and the foot goes forward to the place on the sidewalk where the
light just begins") or ridiculous ("I hung the padlock on the latch; it dangled
there like a sex organ on a robot and the sight of it aroused me in a way that
made me feel dirty") and only gets in the way. RS
Christopher, Matt. Skateboard Tough; illus. by Paul Casale. Little, 1991.
ISBN 0-316-14247-6. [168p]. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
When a builder digs up a skateboard with the name
"Lizard" on it, Brett is thrilled, since he's an avid skateboarder and Lizard is so
much better than his old board. This is a three-ply plot: there's a competitive
enmity between Brett and another skater; there's the question (not very
convincingly presented) of whether Lizard has magical powers that make Brett
[ 212]
skate better; there's the range of adult acceptance, from Brett's mother's apparent
disapproval to the elderly neighbor next door who spends her own money to
build a rink on her property. Ardent skateboarders will probably enjoy reading
about their sport, but the book is crammed with descriptions or definitions of
stunts to an extent that slows the story, which is not up to Christopher's usual
standard structurally or stylistically. ZS
D.V. Older-younger generations
Cole, Sheila. The Dragon in the Cliff: A Novel Based on the Life of Mary
Anning; illus. by T. C. Farrow. Lothrop, 1991. ISBN 0-688-10196-8. [176p].
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Mary Anning started a career, unusual in the early
19th century, of collecting fossils and helping her father, who sold the "curios"
in Lye, England. Poor and uneducated, Anning was also intelligent and curious;
at the age of twelve, she unearthed a dinosaur backbone and in 1911 dug out of
the cliff at the shore a fossil ichthyosaurus. Anning tells her own story, and she
depicts very clearly the prejudices of the time (shocking behavior for a young
girl to be out on the beach alone) and the state of paleontological knowledge.
The imbedded information about fossils is interesting and the period details are
vivid, but the story is weakened by an uneven pace and a style that is at times
florid. ZS
Crompton, Anne Eliot. The Snow Pony. Holt, 1991. ISBN 0-8050-1573-6.
[128p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
"I've been in this new school here in Winterfield
since Christmas," says thirteen-year-old Janet, "and I still haven't found one
friend." What she has found is an eccentric old neighbor, Mr. Flower, who hires
Janet to help him with a project: to turn ugly and neglected pony Pearl into a
suitable present for Mr. Flower's little grandson Arthur. Despite her ignorance
of horses, Janet finds her confidence and ability increasing at the stable, which is
more than can be said for school, where glamor queen (and Mr. Flower's
neighbor) Marigold Stass and her court "form a circle with me outside it." Janet
gradually grows more comfortable in Winterfield, discovering Marigold's
pretense (a mere acquaintance depicted as a boyfriend) and becoming friends with
her, and finding a solution when Mr. Flower's adored Arthur refuses to have
anything to do with Pearl. Janet's relationship with lonely Mr. Flower is
touching and well-depicted with its tinge of sadness, but both the stable and
school scenes have their funny sides. The first-person, present-tense narration is
understated, making the book an easy but unpatronizing read. DS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Older-younger generations
Cross, Gillian. Wolf. Holiday House, 1991. 
ISBN 0-8234-0870-1. 
140p.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
"You'll be better off at your mother's, until I'm over
this." Cassy's Nan sometimes sends her away like this, and Cassy once again
goes in search of her peripatetic hippy-ish mother, Goldie, who this time has
taken up residence in a derelict squat with a new boyfriend, Lyall, and his
teenaged son Robert. Cassy, at first unwillingly, joins in their project-a
multimedia educational extravaganza about wolves-but worries and wonders
about why Nan sent her away, who the mysterious stranger was who came the
[213]
night before she left, and what the yellow lump of plasticine Nan tucked into
Cassy's sack is for. This isn't as well-constructed as some of Cross' other
thrillers, with the central image of the wolf belabored artificially into the story.
And while the characterizations of Goldie, Lyall, and Robert are complex and
convincing, Cassy's time with them-most of the story-seems flat, lacking
the incredible tension of the briefer scenes at Nan's that open and close the book.
The ending is a fierce and scary shocker, and well worth waiting for. RS
D.V. Family relations
Dahl, Tessa. Babies, Babies, Babies; illus. by Siobhan Dodds. Viking, 1991.
ISBN 0-670-83921-3. 26p. $12.95.
M 
Gr. K-3. 
Watercolor pictures, too busy on some pages but
clear on others, illustrate a book that is designed to help young children
understand that there are different ways in which baby animals (including
humans) are born and nurtured, with varied developmental motor skills, etc.
This doesn't quite work, because at several points comments are made that may
confuse listeners. For example, the question "Will our baby be born with its
clothes on, Mommy?" elicits the answer "Oh no, Sophie, our baby will be born
with nothing on at all. But, pregnant (in her "tummy") Mommy goes on,
"Zebra foals are born with their stripes, puppies are born with all their fur..."
etc. A strange comparison, and a strange question from Sophie, who has a
younger sibling she must have noticed in his natural state. Later, Sophie asks
"Can animals change too?" but Mommy's answer confuses metamorphosis and
development. In sum, better intended than executed. ZS
Dewey, Jennifer Owings. Animal Architecture; written and illus. by Jennifer
Owings Dewey. Orchard, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08530-9; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-531-05930-8. 72p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
While other books have documented the many
different dwellings that animals construct for themselves, this one does an
exceptional job of showing just how various bugs, birds, and mammals go
about their building: "... Working from the top down, bees construct cells in
vertical rows. Each cell is built on a slant so the honey will not run out.
Gravity-sensitive hairs on a bee's body tell it which was is up and which way is
down." Along with bees, Dewey includes chapters on radiolarians, spiders,
termites, five kinds of birds, bats, mice, prairie dogs, and beavers. Soft pencil
illustrations are large and clear, their compositions focused by the organic lines
of straw and silk-and spit: the swiflet's saliva-constructed nests are just one
kind of animal shelter that kids will find fascinating. An index is included. RS
C.U. Nature study
DiSalvo-Ryan, DyAnne. Uncle Willie and the Soup Kitchen; written and illus.
by DyAnne DiSalvo-Ryan. Morrow, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09166-0;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-9165-2. [32p]. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Uncle Willie spends his days volunteering for a soup
kitchen, and one day he inittes the young narrator, whom Uncle Willie cares for
after school while Mom works, to help him feed the homeless. Although this is
a book motivated by good intentions, it's also personable enough in detailing
[214]
the characters and their world-both verbally and visually-to avoid becoming
didactic. The boy who has shown a natural nervousness in reaction to an old
man collecting cans from the garbage, or to an old woman sleeping on a bench,
responds differently when these persons acquire names and a social context in the
kitchen. The kitchen crew itself, Shanta, Brother Mike, and George, demonstrate
a friendly practicality that never becomes cloying. The color-pencil and wash
illustrations observe the same balance between attracting the viewer with softly
blended colors and avoiding the sentimentality of glamorizing an essentially sad
situation. Without sacrifice of story, the total effect leaves young listeners with
new considerations of society and social service, a theme too often neglected in
picture books. BH
D.V. Older-younger generations; Social responsibility
Dooley, Norah. 
Everybody Cooks Rice; illus. by Peter J. Thornton.
Carolrhoda, 1991. ISBN 0-87614-412-1. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
In a cheerfully pan-ethnic if slightly contrived story,
Carrie hunts through her neighborhood for her little brother Anthony ("He's such
a moocher!") to tell him to come in for dinner. En route, she breezes through
the homes Anthony has visited, doing her own share of mooching as she tastes
the rice dishes (Indian, Vietnamese, Barbadian, Haitian, etc.) that each family is
cooking, with a nicely authentic variation of response ranging from "Boy, was it
delicious!" to "It tasted... interesting." The illustrations are awkwardly drafted
and inconsistent, with Carrie's hair barrette migrating from page to page; and the
overall yellowing of the pictures, intended presumably to convey early evening
light, instead has a jaundiced effect which emphasizes their stodginess. The food
doesn't really appear in the full-page illustrations but in decorative little
balloons, and its sensual allure remains uncaptured. The cuisine/culture idea is
useful and likely to appeal particularly to Carrie- and Anthony-type moochers.
Recipes for the dishes are appended. DS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Edwards, Dorothy. My Naughty Little Sister Storybook; illus. by Shirley
Hughes. Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-89919-857-0. 96p. $16.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Previously published in England in the 1950s and
1960s, this is a compilation of twelve books in the "Naughty Little Sister"
series. The engaging illustrations are Hughes at her dependable best. The
stories, while they have the appeal of bad boy/bad girl behavior, are written with
a tone that dips into coyness: "... and do you know what that naughty bad girl
did?" or, after giving an example of the N.L.S. being rude to an adult, the older
sister who is the narrator says, "There-I knew you would be shocked at that."
In sum, a wee bit precious, but since it deals with everyday life events, the book
will probably garner listeners. ZS
D.V. Everyday life concepts
Edwards, Michelle. Chicken Man; written and illus. by Michelle Edwards.
Lothrop, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09709-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09708-
1. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Rody is an Israeli kibbutznik known as Chicken Man
because his work in the coop keeps him happy and the hens productive.
However, the jobs rotate to keep work assignments fair and square, and the
[ 215]
chicken man gets reassigned to the laundry room, the dairy, the garden, and the
children's house. Rody does his chores so cheerfully that others always want his
job, but his heart is with the chickens-and theirs with him. When they stop
laying, the work committee agrees on a permanent assignment for Chicken Man.
This is one of those books that brings a faraway situation close to home with
specific development and witty crafting. Edwards' story has the appeal of a
cumulative folktale, and her humorous, thick-textured paintings are so matter-of-
fact in their homely detail that kids can't help but identify with the humble hero,
gifted with good nature as well as fowl instincts--oy va voy, what a gift. With
his red, spiky hair and beak of a nose, Chicken Man even seems to resemble the
birds to whom he sings. We should all know our gifts so well! BH
D.V. Adaptability
Eisenberg, Lisa. Mystery at Camp Windingo. Dial, 1991. ISBN 0-8037-0950-
1. [144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Kate has barely had time to unpack her luggage when
trouble starts at Camp Windingo, where she has a job as a junior counselor.
The bridge has been washed out in a storm, so there's no way to get medical
help when all (well, almost all) the newly arrived campers get sick from tainted
hot chocolate. And who stole Farmer Frank's rare birds? And who's the
skulking stranger? This follow-up to Mystery at Bluff Point Dunes (BCCB
10/88) is another readable summertime mystery, but too much of the suspense is
meant to be derived from Kate's forgetting ("I couldn't quite put my finger on
it") previous and obviously planted clues. Still, it's nice to have a girl-detective
(and camp counselor) with a sense of humor that comes in particularly handy in
dealing with two obnoxious red herrings, campers Tracy and Heather: "'Quiet,
you little twits!' I hissed under my breath." RS
Emberley, Michael. The Present; written and illus. by Michael Emberley.
Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-23411-7. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Various domesticated animals ramble around the
Brundby market where Ame is seeking a birthday present for his nephew Tove's
twelfth birthday. Owner of a fix-it shop, Arne works hard to shine and polish
the second-hand pocketknife he finds; he likes the knife so much he decides to
keep it and refurbish an old bicycle for Tove. To get the present to his nephew,
Arne rides the bicycle, but when he reaches his destination, he sees that Tove
already has a bicycle. So, with good grace, he gives the boy the wonderful knife
he'd expected to keep for himself. Well-drawn, bouncy paintings show Arne in
what appears to be an old-fashioned costume; little details in the pictures indicate
that the setting is Danish. The text is adequately written, and it's appropriate in
length and subject for a young audience, but it is stretched thin. ZS
D.V. Uncle-nephew relations
Fritz, Jean. Bully for You, Teddy Roosevelt!; illus. by Mike Wimmer.
Putnam, 1991. 
ISBN 0-399-21769-X. 
[128p]. 
$15.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Ebullient, opinionated, and energetic, Theodore
Roosevelt had succeeded to the Presidency when William McKinley died, and his
popularity brought him a sweeping victory at the next election. Teddy (a
[216]
nickname he disliked) was vigorous and colorful, and Jean Fritz has portrayed
him clearly, so that readers can judge for themselves the contribution he made to
political history, to social reform, and to international relations. His career was
so full and so diverse that it would be impossible to cover all aspects of events
in which he was involved; the author has, therefore, focused on Roosevelt
himself, giving-for example-details of his involvement in the Spanish-
American War (pro-war before war was declared, enthusiastic participant after it
began) without diverging to discuss, for example, the influential war-mongering
of William Randolph Hearst. As in other biographies she has written, Jean Fritz
gives a rounded picture of her subject and deftly blends the story of a person and
a picture of an era. A section of author's notes and a bibliography are appended.
ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Giff, Patricia Reilly. The War Began at Supper: Letters to Miss Loria; illus.
by Betsy Lewin. Delacorte, 1991. Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-30530-3; Paper ed.
ISBN 0-44040572-6. 70p. Trade ed. $11.00; Paper ed. $2.95.
M 
Gr. 3-4. 
Taking the form of a classroom of children's letters to
a former substitute teacher, this book begins on January 2, 1991 and ends on
February 18. The letters are filled with news and questions about the Gulf War
in a way that's a little calculated: Michael M. writes, "Here is my word list.
Jessica said you were dying to see it. SORTIE-means 1 of our planes goes to
a target like a germ factory and bombs it." Alice tells Miss Loria about a
discussion at home: "My mother and father are fighting about the war, yelling.
My mother said we shouldn't go to war, we should mind our own business, and
not send soldiers to fight over oil in a place nobody even cares about?" With
such determined all-sides issue-jamming, the effect becomes artificial. It's too
late for this book to treat the Gulf War in a timely fashion; in its discussion of
kids' fears of war in general, however, it may be useful in eliciting empathetic
response. Occasional sketches imply a second or third grade class, but the hand
of an adult behind these letters is too apparent. RS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Goldstein, Peggy. Ldng Is a Dragon: Chinese Writingfor Children; written and
illus. by Peggy Goldstein. China Books and Periodicals, 1991. ISBN 0-8351-
2375-8. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Black and red are used in both text and diagrams for an
effective depiction of the characters for Chinese, a language that has no alphabet.
Goldstein explains the evolution of modem characters from their ancient
originals, although she does not use such words as ideogram or pictogram.
Directions for writing individual characters (with amplifying illustrations) are
quite good in this "how to" book, but the general descriptions are less clear; for
example, a character that stands for "horse" is accompanied by a diagram of the
directions in which brush-strokes are made and the order in which they are
made-but there is no explanation of the order in which characters in a scroll or
page are read. Still, the reader who has done calligraphy or hieroglyphic writing
should enjoy trying these, and all readers can appreciate the beauty and
complexity of Chinese writing. ZS
[ 217
Gorog, Judith. Winning Scheherazade. Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-689-31648-
8. 101p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Princess Scheherazade has told her thousand and one
tales and left the Sultan to take up residence in her own palace as Storyteller of
the Kingdom. But now appears a stranger who disturbs her household and sense
of freedom. In trying to run from him into the desert, she instead keeps him
company through several dangerous exploits, for he is a suitor of many
disguises. Unfortunately, although the tales within tales are involving, the plot
episodes are sometimes contrived or too convoluted, while Scheherazade's
romantic destiny is obvious from the beginning. However, she's a feisty
heroine who can outwit Djiins and greedy old men, and Gorog's style is as fresh
and clean as the writing in her earlier short story collections (BCCB 7/87, 11/88,
6/90). Fans of McKinley's Beauty (BCCB 12/78) may very well take on this
fictional extension of a fairy tale despite its problematic development. BH
Greer, Gery. Let Me Off This Spaceship!; by Gery Greer and Bob Ruddick;
illus. by Blanche L. Sims. Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021606-9;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021605-0. 54p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
The plot of this slapstick science fantasy is basically
that two boys are captured by space-ship aliens, and deliberately act so abrasive
that they are (not as planned originally) taken back to earth. Large print, short
sentences, plenty of dialogue, and bug-eyed monsters will attract primary grades
readers, but the plot development is silly and the writing style shallow. Few
young readers will care. ZS
Hahn, Mary Downing. The Spanish Kidnapping Disaster. Clarion, 1991.
ISBN 0-395-55696-1. 132p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Twelve-year-old Felicia's mother and new step-father
hadn't planned to take the children on their honeymoon in Spain, but "due to
circumstances beyond everybody's control," Felix (Felicia) and her new same-age
stepsister Amy and ten-year-old stepbrother Phillip are tagging along, all
unhappy. Because of some boastful lying by Felix, they are thought to be rich
and are kidnapped. This creates action, danger, and suspense, but all three
elements are achieved by an undue amount of structural contrivance, so that the
whole plot seems implausible. However, the tension of the kidnapping and the
predictably happy ending will probably appeal to many readers. This is far less
convincing than Zilpha Snyder's The Famous Stanley Kidnapping (BCCB
12/79), which is set in Italy, and which is also a merged-family story in which
the step-siblings are kidnapped because one of them has been overheard boasting
about how rich her father is. ZS
D.V. Resourcefulness; Stepfamilies, adjustment to
Hopper, Nancy J. The Interrupted Education ofHuey B. Lodestar, 1991. ISBN
0-525-67336-9. [192p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
This first-person narrative by Huey, a high school
senior, focuses on his problem with his English teacher but has a nice balance of
interests: male and female friends, relationship with his father, volunteer work
that has led to an interest in birds, and a problem of poor grades because of the
[218
amount of time spent on other things. Nothing melodramatic here, but the
weaving of parts of Huey's life is convincing and told with vigor, and the
solution to his academic and romantic problems is convincing. The jacket
illustration is silly and does not match the appeal of the story. ZS
D.V. Education, valuing and seeking
Hovey, Tamara. Paris Underground. Orchard, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08531-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05931-6. 90p. illus. with photographs. Library
ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-. 
In a handsomely designed book filled with intriguing
historical photographs, the author does a clear and thorough job of tracing the
construction and history of the Paris subway. Beginning with an overview of
the city's earlier transportation systems of riverboats and horse-drawn
omnibuses, Hovey describes how the long-awaited subway system finally was
begun at the impetus of the 1900 Paris World Fair. The details of designing and
digging, the mishaps and disasters and fires, may have had drama, but Hovey
hasn't captured it. 
Her style is dry, and she fails to give a context for
understanding and appreciating what is a rather specialized topic. "The 1960s
saw realized on three Metro lines a revolutionary notion for increasing the
efficiency of subway trains-rubber tires." How is this revolutionary? More to
the point, are we interested? Although a map of the city and system would have
helped readers better "see" the locations she discusses, the collection of
photographs goes a long way toward supplying appeal: the upheaval of building
a tunnel amidst the Grand Hotel and Paris Opera; a station converted into an
ominous-looking factory by the occupying Nazis. 
A bibliography of the
author's French sources and an index are appended. RS
C.U. Transportation
Howard, Ellen. The Chickenhouse House. Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-689-
31695-X. [64p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
In her first book for younger children, Howard uses a
protagonist, Alena, who appeared as an older child in an earlier book (Edith,
Herself, BCCB 5/87). Alena looks to be (in pedestrian line drawings) about six
years old here, and the story of her adjustment to a new home is based on the
author's family journal. The family moves an hour's wagon-ride away from
Grandfather's big house, but it takes some time for Alena to accept living in a
chickenhouse until the new house can be built. Details of prairie life at the turn
of the century are convincing, but the story is weakened by a plodding quality
that makes it seem more the making of a narrative out of a reminiscence than
imaginatively developed fiction with flow or vitality. ZS
D.V. Adaptability
Inglehart, Donna Walsh. Breaking the Ring. Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-41867-
6. 160p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
When the two James girls and their friend, Maggie,
spend a summer day exploring a "haunted" island on the St. Lawrence River,
they run into danger. Drug runners have been using the small island as a drop-
off between Canada and the U.S. The girls find the stash, but don't replace it in
exactly the same spot, and, as they leave the island, Maggie's distinctive red hair
is spotted by the criminals. What follows is a suspenseful waiting game around
[219]
the resort town, in which the girls and the drug runners search for and eventually
find each other. The other elements of the plot-Maggie's parents' divorce,
Jesse's new romance, the arrival of grandparents-fill out the story without
distracting from it while the suspense builds. The impact of the frightening
adventure lies in its realism, from the nature of the crime to the two creeps who
track down Jesse and Maggie. When the scare is over and the drug runners have
been captured, the thought of a peaceful family vacation is a welcome relief. A
good adventure story for girls. KPJ
Isadora, Rachel. At the Crossroads; written and illus. by Rachel Isadora.
Greenwillow, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-05271-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
05270-3. [32p]. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
"Today our fathers are coming home! For ten months
they have been away working in the mines." Thus begins an account, all the
more moving for its lack of overt political statements, of several South African
children who prepare to celebrate with singing and homemade instruments.
Alas, "it's a long way from the mines," and day passes into night and then into
dawn before the truck finally arrives. The characters' anticipation, patience, and
joy speak loudest here, both in text and in brilliantly lit watercolor paintings.
The rural, corrugated shacks are not glamorized, but neither are they squalid, for
the focus is on faces and bodies in constant, expectant motion. In fact, the art
features the same strength of imagination shown by the children. Deep hues,
bold brushstrokes, and patient portraiture (though some expressions seem
distorted) create sweeping contrasts of natural-and emotional-landscapes.
Good company for Niki Daly's city-set Not So Fast Songololo (BCCB 4/86).
BH
C.U. South Africa
D.V. Father-child relations
Katz, Bobbi. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Don't Do Drugs!: A Rap Song;
illus. by Isidre Mones. Random House, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91485-
4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-81485-X. 32p. (Random House Pictureback). Library
ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $2.25.
NR 
5-8 yrs. 
"They might act nice/ and offer you stuff./ Don't stop
to think twice/ before you think tough!" Despite the with-it tempo of the text,
the anti-drug messages of this TV spin-off are patronizing and tonally dated,
warning readers about sunglassed drug dealers who hang around schoolyards
offering innocent children free samples, and "once they've trapped you in their
net, they'll squeeze for all that they can get." The grooviness is labored, and
confused in its use of the vernacular: "Kids stuck on drugs/ get stuck taking
more./ Kids who pass drugs by/ are the kids who score!" The Ninja Turtles are
appealingly cartooned, but the pictures of druggies and Good Kids are straight
out of a 1950s health-handout. Too bad-the Turtles did a nice job with ecology
in Rosser's ABC'sfor a Better Planet, reviewed last month. RS
C.U. Drug education
Kennedy, Pamela. An Easter Celebration: Traditions and Customs from around
the World. Ideals, 1991. ISBN 0-8249-8506-0. 32p. illus. with photographs.
$10.95.
[ 220]
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
A description of the ways in which pre-Christian
celebrations have been incorporated into current observances of the major
Christian holiday is illustrated by reproductions of church windows and famous
paintings, and by color photographs. There is useful information here about
Easter traditions, and the tone of the text is reverent, but the book is weakened
by poor organization of material, a plethora of exclamatory sentences, and a lack
of notes or bibliography. Were there an index, the contents might be more
accessible. ZS
C.U. Holidays; Religious education
Kittredge, Mary. Barbara McClintock: Biologist. Chelsea House, 1991. ISBN
1-55546-666-4. 
104p. illus. with photographs. 
(American Women of
Achievement). $17.95.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
A quiet woman whose genetic research was the focus
of her life, Barbara McClintock left Cornell, where some of her early and
significant work was done, when her promotion was denied. Her discoveries
about the cross-over of genetic material on chromosomes were not acknowledged
for over thirty years; in 1983, when McClintock was over eighty, her
contribution was recognized when she was awarded the Nobel Prize. Despite the
unattractive appearance of the pages, with their double columns of solid-looking
type, this is an appealing biography. The writing style is smooth, the tone is
moderate rather than adulatory, and the descriptions of McClintock's work and
comments on her personal life are nicely balanced. 
A chronology, a
bibliography, and an index are included. ZS
C.U. Biology
D.V. Perseverance
Klein, Robin. Tearaways. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83212-X. 
134p.
$12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Ten stories from the popular Australian author are
amusing, energetically styled, but a bit obvious, too often relying on predictable
plot-twists for their effects. Several plots center on role-reversals between
schoolyard bullies and their victims; the best of these is "The Stone Angel," in
which timid Audrey gets divine assistance in handling two mean girls with
Hitchcockian aspirations: "Gracious, Audrey, you need your specs checked as
well as your hearing! We always get off at this stop. Always have done, for
two whole years." 
In "A Perfectly Lovely Time," little Laura's morbid
imagination makes her more than a match for two older boys who won't let her
in their treehouse: "In fact, your whole garden is rather dangerous, isn't it?
Witches and animal sacrifices and tree spirits and murdered skulls ... Perhaps
we should all go and sit safely in .... " While rarely subtle, all the stories have
a rough-and-ready pace and humor, propelled with lots of dialogue, that make
them good brief encounters for reluctant and relaxing readers. RS
Krull, Kathleen. Alex Fitzgerald, TV Star; illus. by Irene Trivas. Little, 1991.
ISBN 0-316-50479-3. [64p]. (Springboard Books). $10.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Alex had never heard of Rox Rox, the teen rock star,
before being invited to audition for her rock video. But that doesn't stop Alex
[221 ]
from becoming obsessed with the idea, especially since she will be cast as a
junior version of the star. Alex soon becomes tiresome to everyone. Friends
begin to avoid her, and who can blame them? Invited to a classmate's beach
party, Alex tries to convince her that everyone would rather listen to Alex play
the piano than play volleyball because "playing volleyball would only mess up
her hair." It takes her awhile to realize how her behavior is affecting others, but
Alex eventually reforms: "Becoming a TV star was making her life in California
worse, not better. She was getting in trouble at school. Hurting her dad's
feelings by forgetting to buy him a present. Making him spend money he
didn't have. And losing friends, not gaining them." Didactic? Yes, but readers
can sympathize with Alex's dreams of stardom, especially since they don't
materialize. Brief chapters and short sentences make this a good choice for rookie
readers, who may enjoy finding out about Hollywood's star-making machinery.
RAS
LaBonte, Gail. The Tarantula. Dillon, 1991. ISBN 0-87518-452-9. 60p.
illus. with photographs. (Remarkable Animals Books). $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Huge and hairy, different species of tarantulas live on
five continents, and their brown or black bodies are sometimes brilliantly marked
with red, pink, or orange. Photographs show off these multi-colored spiders in
their various habitats; other photos are close-up shots of tarantulas eating (one
picture shows the Goliath bird-eater consuming a rat), molting, mating, and
spinning. In a creepy, predatory sort of way, tarantulas are fascinating, but
many of the interesting facts turn up in unlikely places throughout the text. For
example, following a list of various habitats is a misplaced paragraph about
what the largest spiders eat. The chapter called "The Tarantula's Year" actually
describes the whole life of a spider-which has been known to last 28 years.
Finally, LaBonte's conclusion (we should protect tarantulas from becoming
endangered because they eat insects for us) seems forced after her earlier claim
that each tarantula eats, at the most, an insect a week. They've already survived
for 300 million years; most likely they'll outlast us all. KPJ
C.U. Nature study
Mahy, Margaret. Dangerous Spaces. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83734-2.
[160p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Eleven-year-old Anthea, who has just lost her parents
in a yachting accident, comes from an opulent home to live with her uncle's
family in their chaotic rural household. To create her own space away from the
clutter of renovation and blustering jealousy of a cousin her own age, Anthea
enters a dream world inhabited by a young ghost who threatens to take her with
him into final rest. Only human love, with all its messy temperament, can save
her. Mahy has always realized her ventures into fantasy with a consistency of
detail that made them credible. This time, the detail is present without the
consistency. Statues loom, battles erupt, crayon arrows point the way through a
nebulous limbo that is more confusing than ominous. 
The concepts are
fascinating; their development needs sharpening. However, the writing has
flashes of brilliance. The family relationships--except for an explanatory tone
toward the end of the book-are shown rather than told, conveying a realistic
[222]
immediacy focused on the two girls. Their unfolding friendship, along with the
suspenseful theme of an orphan in danger, will appeal to readers. BH
C.U. Cousins; Death, adjustment to; Family relations
Mazer, Norma Fox. D, My Name Is Danita. Scholastic, 1991. ISBN 0-590-
43655-4. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
Thirteen years ago, Dani Merritt was a premature
baby, and she's tired of hearing about it. She wishes her parents had something
else to fuss about, but she regrets that wish when she meets an illegitimate
nineteen-year-old half-brother whom no one else in her family knows about.
Dani's personality-insecure, stubborn, and restless-comes across through the
book's ample dialogue and first-person narrative ("I stood there, balancing for a
moment between feeling sorry for myself and getting mad. Mad won, and I went
charging out of the store after Laredo"). Her relationship with her best friend,
Laredo, alternates realistically between superficial silliness ("Wooo! Cute!") and
intensity. Their mishaps with boys and school keep the story light so that the
family drama does not overwhelm the story. Hitting on major areas of interest
to teenage girls-boys, best friends, and family-this book won't miss. KPJ
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Miller, Edna. Scamper: A Gray Tree Squirrel; written and illus. by Edna
Miller. Pippin, 1991. ISBN 0-945912-12-9. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Pale wash drawings illustrate the story of a young
gray squirrel's first several days of independence after he leaves his summer nest.
Narrow escapes from a fox and hawk teach him caution in selecting a nest, and
he's forced to collect nuts and seeds when his raids on a bird-feeding station are
curtailed by protective shields. The activities of the squirrel are competently
depicted, though the text slips into an unfortunate anthropomorphism ("he
played hide and seek with the hawk"). The dramatic encounters are further
diminished by demure pastel shades and repetitive compositions. However, very
young listeners who enjoyed this artist's Mousekin series will appreciate the
antics of a familiar city/suburban creature and the reassurance that he'll survive.
BH
C.U. Nature study
Murrow, Liza Ketchum. The Ghost of Lost Island. Holiday House, 1991.
ISBN 0-8234-0874-4. 165p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Twelve-year-old Gabriel resents his bossy older sister
("ever since she turned thirteen and started wearing a bra and braces, she's ordered
me around like a drill sergeant"), so he's happy that Grandfather is only taking
him-not Ginny-along for the annual sheep-shearing on Ghost Island off the
Maine coast. Although Grandfather dismisses Gabe's suspicions as the result of
an over-worked imagination, Gabe is sure that someone else-a ghost?-is on
the island. Characters' motivations and actions are occasionally overexplained,
resulting in some diminishing of suspense; yet the mystery is logically
developed and solved, and a grudging alliance between Gabe and Ginny (who has
come on to the island) credibly changes to one of mutual esteem. The island,
with its hills and coves and secrets, makes an atmospheric setting crucial to a
story that effectively blends contemporary family drama with a mystery from the
past. RS
[223 ]
Nunes, Lygia Bojunga. My Friend the Painter; tr. by Giovanni Pontiero.
Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-256340-7. [80p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
In what appears to be the first of Andersen Medalist
Nunes' books to be translated into English, young Claudio is missing his friend,
"the painter," who has suddenly died. The adults whisper of suicide, even though
the painter's friend Dona Clarice says he died "'just as... just as everybody dies
one day.' And she said good-bye and rushed off." This is an intense portrait of a
child painfully puzzling through the death of a friend and the secrets of adults,
but the treatment is introverted and abstract, a medley of thoughts and whispers
and colors and dreams, all true to a child's emotional world but elliptically
conveyed. "The page came away. I hid it at the back of the notebook. Then I
attached it again to the other one. I separated it. I attached it I separated it. I
played. I attached it. And suddenly I wanted to try doing the same thing with
the memory of my friend: to separate Friend here and why there." The
conclusion of the story is a lyrical celebration of a remembered friendship,
"everything joined together and mixed up," but its power will most likely be
lost on a young audience. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Perl, Lila. Fat Glenda Turns Fourteen. Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-395-53341-4.
[176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
"I hated to think of the fat, lonely winter that
probably lay ahead of me-and just when I'd turned fourteen, the truly grown-up
age I'd always dreamed of being." Glenda's summer romance is over, and she's
putting on weight again. A new friend, Giselle, who's fatter than Glenda ever
was, offers an intriguing possibility: modeling. "Plus-size" teen models are in
demand, and it might be just the thing to get Glenda to stop mooning over her
callous summer beau Justin and her weight gain. In this judiciously blended
mix of school and friends and boys and clothes, Glenda once again is a steady
heroine, neither as fat nor as lonely as she sometimes believes herself to be. Her
modeling career is successful, but brief: self-conscious about parading dcvwn the
runway, and nervous about looking her best, Glenda loses weight without even
trying. No more plus-size for her, and waiting after the (slapstick-disastrous)
show is friend Roddy, with an invitation for a date. Fat--or just plump-kids
sometimes won't be seen with a book with "fat" in the title; too bad, because
Glenda makes an appealing role model and a good friend. RS
D.V. Determination
Pringle, Laurence. 
Batman: Exploring the World of Bats; illus. with
photographs by Merlin D. Tuttle. Scribner's, 1991. ISBN 0-684-19232-2.
42p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Given the particular appropriateness of the sobriquet
to the topic, it's a definite shame that Pringle had to go through the
complexities of getting DC Comics' permission to call his book Batman.
Merlin Tuttle, both subject and photographer for the book, specializes in
researching bat behavior, and Pringle fluently blends information about the
scientist, the methods of research, and the bats themselves. Refuting many
myths about bats ("less than half of one percent of bats contract rabies'), and
making a cogent case for their protection, the book discusses bats and their
[ 224 ]
environments worldwide, and Tuttle's color photographs are up close and
personal, and in a few instances, even cute. An excellent companion to the
author's Wolfman (BCCB 4/83) and Bearman (BCCB 11/89), this has a reading
list and an index. RS
D.V. Occupational orientation
Regan, Dian Curtis. The Class with the Summer Birthdays; illus. by Susan
Guevara. Holt, 1991. 
ISBN 0-8050-1657-0. 
74p. (Redfeather Books).
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Brittany is unfortunately stuck in the youngest of the
three third-grade classes; worse, all the kids in her class were born in the summer
months, so there are no birthday parties. This is a likable school situation
comedy with all the dramas (including that staple, a best-friend fight) requisite to
the genre. Give it to Babysitters-in-training-shorter and easier than most of the
many other books of its kind, Regan's quick tale is accompanied by occasional
pencil sketches that are quirky enough to flatter readers' maturity. RS
Rinaldi, Ann. 
A Ride into Morning: 
The Story of Tempe Wick.
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-200573-0. [30 4p]. (Great Episodes).
$15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
The narrator is Mary Cooper, who has been sent by
her Tory family to stay with her older cousin Tempe Wick. Since both young
women are ardent Patriots, Mary had expected to be welcomed. 
Tempe,
however, is hostile and critical, especially when Mary befriends Tempe's
estranged brother Henry. Believed to be mentally ill, Henry is actually helping
the cause of independence, his pretended affliction making him free to wander
anywhere. That is important because a Pennsylvania regiment is camped on the
Wick property, a New Jersey farm. Rinaldi has done a good job of meshing
fictional and historical elements, and her writing style is competent. The pace of
the story is uneven, however, and the plot is laded with cumbersome intricacies.
An author's note and a bibliography of sources are provided. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.-Revolutionary War
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Scieszka, Jon. The Frog Prince Continued; illus. by Steve Johnson. Viking,
1991. ISBN 0-670-83421-1. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
"Well, let's just say they lived sort of happily for a
long time. Okay, so they weren't so happy. In fact, they were miserable."
Although the Frog Prince has been transformed by the princess' kiss, he still
sticks his tongue out, hops around on the furniture, and whines for his pond.
However, a trek through the forest in search of witches who will restore him to
amphibious form leaves him glad to go back home, where kissing the princess
effects an unexpected happy ending. Admirers of Scieszka's The True Story of
the Three Little Pigs (BCCB 9/89) will find this fun to use if a bit more
contrived; the text depends on a series of fairy tale conventions strung together
rather than on the solid subversion of one story. But kids won't care. They'll
relish meeting these sleazy witches from Sleeping Beauty, Snow White, and
Hansel and Gretel, not to mention the bumbling fairy godmother from
Cinderella. And while the illustrations here don't have quite the surrealistic zing
[225 ]
that distinguished Pigs, Johnson's dark art does have a satirical twist and bug-
eyed irreverence that will engender plenty of snickers from the audience. BH
C.U. Language arts
Segal, Jerry. 
The Place Where Nobody Stopped; illus. by Day Pilkey.
Jackson/Orchard, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08497-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05897-2. [160p]. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-. 
With rhythmic Yiddish storytelling patterns that are
never exaggerated or clich6d, but with a stylistic resonance all his own, Segal
spins a tale of Yosip the baker, who lives near a road between two Russian cities
in "the place where nobody stops." Of course, someone finally does stop there.
After years of loneliness Yosip finds himself hosting a huge family, along with
a less welcome annual visitation of the Czar's army recruitment forces. Meet
Yosip's very first guest, Mordecai ben Yahbahbai, whom the czar's officer would
capture if Yosip did not hide him (in the flour bin) and whose wife describes him
thus: "Whenever he talks, he always agrees with himself. That makes two of
him against just one of me, so what chance have I against such logic and faith?"
The fictional humor, folkloric plot, and vivid setting support a handful of richly
cast characters, especially gentle Yosip, who loses each year's encounter with the
cossacks only to win in the long run. Fortunately, his love, pride, and
rebellion-along with that of his adopted brood-is detailed in scenes that never
give a moment's hint of didactic intent. It's a pleasure all the way, to read aloud
or alone. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Family relations; Loyalty
Shannon, George. More Stories to Solve: Fifteen Folktales from Around the
World; illus. by Peter Sis. Greenwillow, 1991. ISBN 0-688-09161-X. 64p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Like its predecessor, Stories to Solve, this collection
combines the appeal of short, easy-to-read folktales with a riddling quality that
turns the stories into solve-it-yourself mysteries. Shannon has been careful not
only to select from widely varied cultural traditions, but also to cite his sources
more carefully than most children's book authors. From peoples of Southeast
Asia, South and North America, Africa, and Europe, these include unusual
motifs as well as familiar ones with a new twist. Not surprisingly, most are
trickster tales. The governing characteristic is enigma, and there's enough of it
to keep kids guessing, either independently or in interactive story-hour sessions.
Answers are given after each selection to keep young readers' frustration levels to
a minimum, while capacious pen-and-ink hatch drawings-well designed to
frame and vary the text-serve the same end. BH
C.U. Reading, reluctant
D.V. Imaginative powers
Sheldon, Dyan. The Whales' Song; illus. by Gary Blythe. Dial, 1991. ISBN
0-8037-0972-2. [26p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
Although great-uncle Frederick testily objects
("Whales were important for their meat . . . don't fill her head with
[226]
nonsense... ") when he hears Grandmother tell Lilly about how the beautiful
whales sang to her when she was a child, it is Grandmother's romantic view that
prevails. In dramatic but sentimental moonlit paintings, the illustrator reflects
the poetic text, as Lilly has her own thrilling experience of seeing the whales
leaping and singing in the moonlight. Jacket copy states that the book was
inspired by the author's concern for an endangered species; while the text does
not state this, it does-a bit theatrically--affirm the fact that whales are graceful,
free, and wonderful to behold. ZS
D.V. Ecological awareness
Showell, Ellen Harvey. Our Mountain; [as told by by Jimmy and Corey Allder
to the author]; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. Bradbury, 1991. ISBN 0-02-782551-
5. 73p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Seventeen chapters averaging a few pages each
describe a boy's mountain home, built by his parents and shared with a younger
brother who roams the woods with him and several cousins. Some of the
episodes have action, as in a bear's raid on the family's honey supplies; others
are limited to description-a half page about a hard rain, for instance. One
section, "Spiders," is only one sentence: "What I want to know is, why do
spiders make their webs so neat?" The simple style, short sections, and literal
pencil drawings put this idyllic picture of rural life in easy reach of readers who
have just graduated to chapter books. The lack of plot makes the first-person
narrative seem rambling and sometimes anti-climactic, but the total effect is
amiable. BH
D.V. Pride in background and heritage
Shusterman, Neil. What Daddy Did. Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-78906-2.
[240p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
The "Daddy" in the title of this based-on-a-true-story
is a sensationalizing diminutive; narrator Preston always refers to his father as
"Dad". What Dad did was kill Mom, an event reasonably apparent from the
preface, which also tells us exactly how to feel about the story to follow:
"Preston Scott's story is a story of overwhelming love-the kind of love that
can change the world-and if you never before believed in the power of love,
Preston's story will make you a believer." Well, the story is convincing
enough, realistically detailing Preston's anger and sadness, and his gradual
forgiveness of his father. The present-tense narration sometimes hyperventilates
with cheap irony, particularly in the chapters before the murder, where readers are
made too aware that the author knows something they-and Preston-don't. It's
a peek-a-boo kind of suspense that seems at odds with the interestingly
complicated theme of forgiving the unforgivable. As is often true in first-person
YA novels, this narrator-even when he gets it wrong-explains too much of
himself, with the distance afforded the other characters rendering them more
visible and individual. Like all of Shusterman's books, this one has a
propelling pace that will take readers right through the therapeutic patches, and
the topic has a prurient appeal that guarantees popularity. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Father-son relations
[ 227 1
Slote, Alfred. Finding Buck McHenry. Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
021653-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021652-2. 250p. Library ed. $13.85; Trade ed.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Jason, the narrator, is in fifth grade; an avid collector
of baseball cards and an enthusiastic Little League player, he's stunned when his
team's coach announces that it's Jason who will be cut and sent to a not-yet-
formed expansion team. Slote has been a deservedly popular writer: his style is
smoothly casual, his plots and dialogue usually convincing. Here the narrative
has an aura of being concocted to make it possible to give information about the
now-defunct Negro Leagues of baseball. Jason becomes convinced that a school
custodian, Mack Henry, is really Buck McHenry, who in his youth was a major
player in the Negro League. Mack Henry's newly-orphaned grandson (Aaron
Henry!) also believes it. So does another newcomer to the town, the daughter of
a famous baseball broadcaster. The three are the nucleus of the new Little
League team. The answer to the mystery about McHenry is logical, and the
ending of the story pleases all the characters and will probably please all the
readers, but any book that uses dialogue to give information as much as does
this story tends to suffer as narrative. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Smucker, Barbara. Incredible Jumbo. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-82970-6.
177p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
The facts about the famed elephant who was brought
by P. T. Barnum from the London Zoo are historical, and around them Smucker
has woven a fictional story about a boy named Tod. Tod is ten when he goes to
work as assistant to the elephant keeper of the Regent's Park Zoo in 1865. The
combined attractions of boy-loves-elephant and the circus background (after Tod
stows away to follow Jumbo to the United States) will appeal to many readers.
The writing is marred by anthropomorphism: an older elephant "looked skyward
and shook his head. The new baby seemed to him downright foolish," and by
occasionally awkward phrasing. ZS
Spohn, David. Nate's Treasure; written and illus. by David Spohn. Lothrop,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10091-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10092-9. 32p.
Library ed. $9.88; Trade ed. $9.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Tidy and gentle little pointillist paintings illustrate
this hushed tale of a dead skunk, "a feast for all the creatures who could crawl or
wing their way to it. The celebration lasted the rest of the summer." Summer
gives way to fall and winter, and spring brings a miraculous "treasure" as the
skunk is revealed stripped of its fur and flesh, leaving behind its skeleton.
"There were little teeth, set neatly into rows. There were ribs and vertebrae and
tiny pieces that made up fingers and feet. Every piece was in place." A little
boy finds the treasure and carries it around all summer in a pouch attached to his
bike, opening it "only for certain people to see." Children who are fascinated by
bones and such will appreciate the opportunity; others may find the tender
treatment somewhat affected. RS
C.U. Nature study
[ 228 ]
Stolz, Mary. Go Fish; illus. by Pat Cummings. Harper, 1991. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-025822-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025820-9. 80p. Library ed. $12.89;
Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
In six chapters, eight-year-old Thomas manages to:
distract his grandfather from reading, assemble a fishing trip, catch a big speckled
trout, enjoy it for dinner, wangle a bedtime story, and fall asleep determined to
pass it on to his own grandchild. A sequel to Stolz' Storm in the Night, which
was also illustrated by Pat Cummings but in picture book format (BCCB 2/88),
this features the same two black characters in natural dialogue with each other
and in natural harmony with their Gulf Coast surroundings. The text is easy to
read, laced with gentle humor, and designed with rounded, black-and-white
pictures in a pop-art style that gives the human close-ups a Campbell Kid look.
A book that's all the more effective for its low-key, companionable tone. BH
D.V. Grandfather-child relations
Sundall, Viveca. Mimi Gets a Grandpa; tr. by Richard Fisher; illus. by Eva
Eriksson. R&S/Farrar, 1991. ISBN 91-29-59864-8. 28p. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Mixed-media pictures have an ingenuous, rather
rumpled quality as they follow the lively (and often silly) adventures of Roberta
and her friend Mimi, the narrator, in a light-hearted story from Sweden. Peering
through a shoe store window, they have decided that the owner, Enoch, is
probably a bandit. They are so curious about what is really in the stored
shoeboxes that Mimi (seven) is convinced by Roberta (nine) to hide in the store
when Enoch leaves to go fishing. All of this leads, in an unconvincing but
entertaining story, to both girls adopting Enoch as a surrogate grandfather. ZS
D.V. Older-younger generations
Tomlinson, Theresa. Summer Witches. Macmillan, 1991. ISBN 0-02-789206-
9. [96p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Sarah, the narrator, describes the way she and Susanna
had become good friends when the latter moved into the house next door. First
published in England, the story is set in the present, but the events hinge on
what happened fifty years before. The two girls have decided to make a
playhouse out of an old air-raid shelter. Through their increasing knowledge of
the two little girls who had played there in wartime, Sarah and Susanna begin to
understand that an elderly woman may be silent and odd, but that she is not a
witch. The witch theme is familiarly handled but appealing, the story is
adequately written with well-defined characters, and is strongest in its believable
development of intergenerational friendship and understanding. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Older-younger generations
Tompert, Ann. Savina the Gypsy Dancer; illus. by Dennis Nolan. Macmillan,
1991. ISBN 0-02-789205-0. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
In a highly romanticized, legend-like tale (no notes
connect this to actual Gypsy lore), Tompert recounts the heroics of a Gypsy
tribe roaming the country of cruel King Walid. When the chief's young
daughter, Savina, dances before the king, he fears her power ("Anyone with such
control over my people is a danger to my throne"). This doesn't make much
sense plotwise, since his people dislike Gypsies and don't seem given to revolt,
[229 ]
but it's the trigger for his violent harassment of the tribe, which finally escapes
when Savina dances some pursuing soldiers to exhaustion. Nolan's dramatic oil
paintings will claim their share of attention, with firelit scenes focusing on a
sensual, tambourine-wielding wild child in flowing white sleeves, a red skirt, and
dark tresses. The king looks like a fat, ferocious opera singer exaggerating his
poses, but the other characters are well portrayed against suspenseful
backgrounds. 
Feature this with Noyes' The Highwayman, illustrated by
Mikolaycak (BCCB 12/83), and other picture books appealing to listeners older
than the usual preschool audience. BH
D.V. Loyalty
Turner, Ann. Rosemary's Witch. Zolotow/Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-
06-026128-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026127-7. 164p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade
ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Like many of the best spooky stories, this is a cozy
one, suffused by the atmosphere of a small town summer. Mathilda, a witch
who began life over a century ago as a lonely, unloved little girl, has come back
to her childhood town to make trouble-particularly for Rosemary's family, who
has moved into her house. The witch's tricks are childish: 
she steals
Rosemary's bike, sends a cat to spy on her, upends the playground equipment,
causes a parade of toads to crawl through the town. But a little research in the
town's archives, and an imaginative leap of empathy, bring Rosemary to an
understanding of Mathilda, "a child who was so lonely her body ached. A house
full of cold and silence." The alternation of Rosemary's and Mathilda's point of
view is intensely effective; interpolations about other townspeople seem
mannered. Rosemary is a cozy children's-book heroine, all wronged and
misunderstood and right, and readers will cheer on her classic battle for a home.
RS
D.V. Courage; Individuality, expressing
Twohill, Maggie. Superbowl Upset. Bradbury, 1991. ISBN 0-02-789691-9.
154p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Fifth-graders Ginger Bidwell and Lucas Ridley had
established a caustic enmity before her father and his mother married. Sharing a
home did not improve matters, even though both children liked their stepparents.
When Lucas' mother wins a contest, she's the only one (having no interest in
sports) who isn't thrilled at the prospect of going to a Superbowl game. This is
competently written but plotted in almost-slapstick pattern, with a series of
mishaps culminating in the family's watching the game on television, crowded
into a motel room with obnoxious relatives on a surprise visit and with an even
more obnoxious family who have pushed their way in. This is the sort of
disaster humor that many children find hilarious; they'll tend to overlook the
implausibility of the story. ZS
D.V. Stepfamilies, adjustment to
White, Ryan. Ryan White: My Own Story; by Ryan White and Ann Marie
Cunningham. 
Dial, 1991. 
ISBN 0-8037-0977-3. 
277p. illus. with
photographs. $16.95.
[230
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Ryan White died in 1990, several years after a long
and very public battle with AIDS and the concurrent prejudice it brought.
There's no indication in the prefatory material as to how this book was put
together, or what Ann Marie Cunningham's contributions were, but the first-
person narrative is determinedly perky: "At first I had to have pentamidine shots
in my thighs-yech!--but later I could get it intravenously." Ryan's account of
his life is candid about the discrimination he encountered because of his disease,
unabashedly starstruck about the celebrities with whom he became friends, and
generally upbeat about living with AIDS. And about dying: "[Mom] knew I
wanted the Reverend Ray Probasco to conduct my funeral... But Mom and I
had never discussed the really important stuff: What I should wear." The picture
here (and the photos, all sunny publicity shots) is of a likable, uncomplicated
kid struggling gamely with a fatal disease. How he narrated the account of his
last conscious moments before a final coma and death ("As the drugs took hold, I
drifted back to a question some kid asked me once"), is not explained. There is
an important and moving story at the core of this book, but it doesn't always
come through the model poster-child tone and cheery celebrity anecdotes.
Appended are Ryan White's testimony before the President's AIDS
Commission, factual information on AIDS and its transmission, a directory of
organizations and resources, and two tributes: a dignified paragraph from Elton
John and a horrible little poem from Michael Jackson. RS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Wiesner, David. Tuesday; written and illus. by David Wiesner. Clarion, 1991.
ISBN 0-395-55113-7. [32p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Only briefly surprised that their lilypads can suddenly
float and fly, the frogs by the thousands are soon carooming through the night
sky. That's it, for premise and wordless story, as the frogs surprise a man
(Wiesner himself) at his late night snack, sail into a clothesline of sheets, watch
T.V. while an old lady sleeps unaware, and pester a dog who should have known
better. 
Come the dawn, the frogs, Cinderella-like, are on their own, leaving
behind lots of now-stilled lilypads while they march back to the marsh.
Watercolor paintings are lavishly and deeply colored, but what saves this book
from simply being a gorgeous gallery of paintings is its warmth and humor:
these frogs are having a lot of fun. One gives a dapper wave to the midnight-
snacker; another operates the TV remote control with its long pink tongue. In
the same spread, one different drummer gazes longingly at a landscape painting
on the wall while all its fellows are mesmerized by the video glow. And words
aren't needed to convey the feeling of whoops when the midair frogs are grounded
by the sunrise. Compositions are naturalistic but strongly patterned, with the
occasionally Escher-ish design made all the more effective by realistic details.
Realistic? Of course. And pigs might fly-they do here, on a gotcha final
picture. RS