Abolafia, Yossi. Fox Tale; written and illus. by Yossi Abolafia. Greenwillow,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09542-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09541-0. 32p.
Library ed. $13.95; Trade ed. $13.88.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Using the motif of the trickster who is tricked,
Abolafia incorporates references to some of the Aesopian fox-fables (sour grapes,
stone-filled bag) to prepare the audience for the decision of Crow, Donkey,
Rabbit, and Bear that they must catch Fox by their cleverness this time. Fox
has invited this group revenge by tricking Bear into trading his jar of honey for
Fox's beautiful tail ("I'll keep it for you," says Fox). The others prevail and
trap Fox in a way that makes him look so silly that he never comes to that part
of the forest again. The jovial watercolor pictures are a bit repetitive but are
nicely placed in relation to pertinent text; the style is simple and direct, even
clipped. ZS
Adler, David A. A Picture Book of Eleanor Roosevelt; illus. by Robert Casilla.
Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-0856-6. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-3. 
Sedate watercolor illustrations incorporate the settings
and clothing of the almost eighty-year span of Eleanor Roosevelt's life with a
faithfulness made possible by photographs. They are not, however, always
reflective of the text, as in the case of Eleanor's portrait with her horse
illustrating a page describing her nanny's cruelty, or in the picture of a plain
woman described as Eleanor's beautiful mother. This is a biography in which
some of the much-publicized aspects of the Roosevelts' lives have been omitted.
The continuous text is quietly admiring, focusing on major events in the
biographee's life and on the philosophy and social involvement that led to Harry
Truman's description of Eleanor Roosevelt as "First Lady of the World." A list
of important dates is provided. ZS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Consideration for others
Alcorn, Johnny. Rembrandt's Beret; or the Painter's Crown; illus. by Stephen
Alcor. 
Tambourine, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10207-7; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-10206-9. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
6-9 yrs. 
Tiberius, a Florentine painter reminiscing about his
childhood, tells his granddaughter of an adventure when the portraits of old
masters came to life in an art gallery, and Rembrandt painted Tiberius' portrait.
[1831
The illustrations (paintings, of course) are vivid and richly textured; the story is
sometimes a bit stretched, as when the masters jest together in a dialogue that
strains credulity. The theme is imaginatively played, however, in this picture-
within-a-picture-book fantasy. ZS
Alphin, Elaine Marie. The Ghost Cadet. Holt, 1991. ISBN 0-8050-1614-7.
[160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Twelve-year-old Benjy Stark and his older sister have
been shipped off to visit their paternal grandmother while their mother takes a
vacation with her new boyfriend. Resentful of the father who deserted them,
fearful of further rejection after what he's already suffered at school, and
defenseless against his sister's hostility, Benjy makes friends with Hugh, the
ghost of a young southern cadet who was shot during a Civil War battle that
took place near his grandmother's house. To help Hugh rest in peace, Benjy
must find a gold watch, the valued family heirloom that Hugh hid from Yankee
scavengers just before he died. The plot is solid-if a bit contrived-and the
characters are consistent, but the themes of friendship and honor are belabored.
With plenty of action and dialogue attesting to Benjy's newly developing
determination, the reader does not need to have it explained repeatedly as well.
However, there is little children's historical fiction from such a fiercely southern,
proudly military point of view, and Virginians especially may find this of
regional interest. BH
C.U. History-U.S.-Civil War
D.V. Friendship values; Loyalty
Ashabranner, Brent. An Ancient Heritage: The Arab-American Minority; illus.
with photographs by Paul S. Conklin. Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
020049-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020048-0. [160p]. Library ed. $14.89; Trade
ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-10. 
Ashabranner here sets himself what should be an
unnecessary task: to demonstrate that Arab-Americans are basically like the rest
of us. Only one of the interviewees could be categorized as famous (deejay
Casey Kasem); most lead ordinary lives grounded, in varying degrees, in an
awareness of Arabic heritage and history. Some are descendents of 19th-century
immigrants from the Lebanon who often worked as peddlers to farms and small
towns; others came in recent decades to go to school or to escape upheaval or
both. Their accounts of discrimination in this country are quiet but firm: "I've
had people say to me, 'You don't seem like an Arab.' I'm sure they thought
they were saying something nice to me." Ashabranner includes a brief historical
overview of Arabic history and early immigration, as well as his own
reminiscences of the Syrian-American community in his childhood Oklahoma
town. The text is a fluent blend of information, anecdote, and interview; the
photos of the many interviewees give the book the atmosphere of an extended-
family album. A bibliography and index are included. RS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Bang, Molly. Yellow Ball; written and illus. by Molly Bang. Morrow, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06315-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06314-4. 24p. Library
ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
[ 184 ]
Ad 
2-4 yrs. 
A ball gets away from children playing at the water's
edge, it floats away, and it moves through wind and storm to be picked up-after
it has been carried back to shore-by a happy child. While this is adequate in
structure for very young children, the visual interpretation may be confusing; the
paintings are handsome, but the succession of pictures that show the ball in
different sizes and locations may require more visual sophistication than most
preschool children possess, and occasionally the text (never more than a few
words per picture) is elliptical, shifting from description ("Coming ashore") to
commentary ("Watch out!" or "Too late now"). Primary graders, on the other
hand, may enjoy the game of finding that yellow ball. ZS
D.V. Environmental concepts; Spatial concepts
Branscum, Robbie. Old Blue Tilley. Macmillan, 1991. ISBN 0-02-711931-9.
[112p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Fourteen-year-old Hambone is an orphan who shares
the home of a circuit-riding preacher, Old Blue, who is forty-five, a devout and
compassionate man. Together they ride Old Blue's rounds in the Ozarks, a
journey that ends with a revival meeting at which several marriages take place, a
long enmity is dissolved, and Hambone decides he will leave Old Blue and claim
his inheritance, usurped by greedy kin. Branscum uses the circuit as a way to
introduce sets of characters, with the revival as a stage for the last, all-ends-
neatly-tied act. 
Some of the characters have substance, but most seem
stereotyped, using (not always consistently) quaint speech patterns heavily in
what seems to be an attempt to provide local color. ZS
Bunting, Eve. The Hideout. Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-233990-6. [144p].
$15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Stories of running away from problems at home
coincide with many children's fantasies, and twelve-year-old Andy Dubin's
hideout-a penthouse hotel suite to which he's found the key-will add to the
appeal of this suspense novel. Andy is successful at avoiding the maid who
cleans the seldom-used suite, but there's a more ominous employee on his trail,
one who makes sinister use of Andy's own idea for a ransom note that would
extort money from his mother in order to visit his father in England. Andy's
first-person narrative reveals not only his own moral ambiguities, but also acute
glimpses into the personalities of his mother, of the stepfather he resents so
bitterly, and of the father who has essentially abandoned him and a new family in
England as well. Bunting's plot development is practised and her style polished;
this will be a natural choice to booktalk as a thriller companion to Dean
Hughes' realistic Family Pose (BCCB 3/89). BH
D.V. Mother-son relations; Stepparents, adjustment to
Byars, Betsy. The Seven Treasure Hunts; illus. by Jennifer Barrett. Harper,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020886-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020885-6. [80p].
Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Jackson and his friend Goat spend seven chapters
looking for secret treasures that they hide from each other-in fact, making maps
and clues is most of the fun. Their game involves escapades that kids will
enjoy; in one, Jackson sneaks out of piano practice, runs to Goat's house for a
[ 185 ]
chocolate popsicle, and slips back in time for a successful piano lesson. In
another episode, both boys sort through a huge pile of garbage for something
Goat's sister has actually hidden in the freezer. The plot seems more repetitive
than spontaneous, but this may prove an advantage for struggling readers, who
appreciate light fare with a familiar flavor. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Callen, Larry. Contrary Imaginations. Greenwillow, 1991. ISBN 0-688-
09961-0. [128p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
"Your father died a week ago, Alex. I learned about it
this morning. ... what's left of him is in the den." Alex's dad left the family a
long time ago. Mom had all but replaced him with Big Al; marriage appeared to
be in the offing. Now Dad has returned home-as ashes in a cardboard box. The
reality of his death takes a while to sink in, but keeping the box on the living
room table forces everyone to deal with it. Far from being a tearjerker, this
offbeat family story combines occasional pathos with a puckish sense of humor,
verging at times on the bizarre. The twins, Joel and Lily, unabashedly charge
their friends admission to see the cremated remains: 
Mom is not amused.
Irrepressible Lily lightens things up with her weird theological questions: "If
God did pick his nose, how large do you think the booger would be?" Alex finds
solace by reading a book, Contrary Imaginations, a philosophical novel whose
main character comes to life, at least to Alex. These interpolations are poorly
integrated and weaken an otherwise solid and entertaining family story, whose
surprise ending will leave readers guessing. RAS
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Caseley, Judith. Harry and Willy and Carrothead; written and illus. by Judith
Caseley. Greenwillow, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09493-7; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-09492-9. 24p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Line and wash pictures, a bit awkward but cheerful,
are pleasantly set off by plenty of space and show Harry, born without a left
hand, with and without his prosthesis. Caseley does a nice job of being matter-
of-fact about Harry: he's been a happy baby, and when he gets to school he's
not disconcerted by the curiosity of the other children. Harry's parents' positive
attitude has helped him feel that he's like everybody else. Well, maybe a better
ballplayer than most. It is Harry who senses how much his friend Oscar dislikes
being called "Carrothead," and who gets Willy to use the redhead's real name.
Told with direct simplicity, this story of a three-way friendship includes a
disability but doesn't treat it as a problem. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Handicaps, adjustment to; Kindness
Christian, Peggy. The Old Coot; illus. by Eileen Christelow. Atheneum,
1991. ISBN 0-689-31627-5. [64p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A homespun rendition of four tales that combine
original and traditional motifs, this is framed by two encounters between a
maverick goldminer and a coyote that saves him from going around the bend.
The treasure to which Old Man Coyote leads the hungry Old Coot, after several
weeks of wandering, is storytelling. Old Coot learns to make his living off it
and here shares stories about a rustler, a gambler, and a tall tale contest.
Illustrated with aptly offhand, black-and-white drawings, Christian's yarns will
[ 186]
enliven read-aloud sessions during a frontier unit or offer independent readers an
American West alternative to the European fairy tale mode. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Imaginative concepts
Conrad, Pam. Prairie Visions: The Life and Times of Solomon Butcher; illus.
with photographs by Solomon Butcher. Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
021375-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021373-6. 85p. Library ed. $16.89; Trade ed.
$16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Solomon Butcher, 1856-1927, was a Nebraska
pioneer in more ways than one. Restless under the constraints of any steady job,
he neglected his homesteading work to travel around Custer County
photographing families from whom he collected frontier stories. Conrad's
informal narrative recounts the vicissitudes of Butcher's progress toward the
photographic history that was finally published despite an 1899 fire that
destroyed everything except his glass-plate negatives. While the subject and
historical photographs are inherently intriguing, the organization, captions, and
style here are somewhat problematic. The frontier stories are neither gathered
into one section nor interwoven with historical context, but are clumped into
two sections divided by a section of history. The captions are more conjectural
than informational ("I can tell how spunky prairie kids were by looking at these
two") and sometimes suffer from the same inexplicable grammar ("Dunlap must
have dreamed of waves and wind and luffing sails as he carved pieces of this boat
upon his horse") as the text. Misplaced modifiers seem to be the main offense,
but there are other points of confusion as well: "Early homesteaders loved a tale
that would put a common man up against an outlaw and show him winning."
The common man or the outlaw? Although the book is handsomely designed,
sometimes it is hard to tell what photo the text is referring to; there is no drum,
for instance, in the photograph facing the sentence "Where did that boy get his
drum?" The drum appears in a photo on the next page. Another caption--"I
imagine this father down that abandoned well, and his family wondering where
he's gone"-leaves a reader wondering if this is the family featured in the story
accompanying the photo (there's no well in sight). 
Whether these are
editorial/layout problems or not, they distract from but don't quench the
irrepressible energy of the eccentric individual to whom Conrad introduces young
readers. What saves the book is the excitement of taking one of those byways
that makes primary-source history tempting to read. BH
C.U. History-U.S.---Frontier and pioneer life
Cooney, Caroline. The Party's Over. Scholastic, 1991. ISBN 0-590-42552-8.
[19 2p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Popular and pretty, happy to be half (with Jaz) of the
senior class's perfect couple, Hallie wants high school to last forever. She has
no desire to go to college, and she's not happy when the end of summer brings
the departure of Jaz and all her circle of friends. Using a first-person narrative,
Cooney makes Hallie's voice believable and touching, as she gropes her
unhappy way toward finding work she enjoys and accepts the fact that she and
her former friends have less and less in common; most of all, she misses Jaz.
There's no all-ends-tied conclusion here: this is a believable story about an
[ 1871
adolescent who feels she's a misfit and learns that there are still pursuits and
people she can enjoy. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Occupational orientation; Self-confidence
Cooper, Ilene. Mean Streak. Morrow, 1991. ISBN 0-688-08431-1. [160p].
(The Kids from Kennedy Middle School). $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
"Veronica pretty much ran the sixth-grade girls," but
that's small comfort when it comes to her feud with former best friend Robin.
And while picking on fat girl Gretchen has long been an activity that made
Veronica feel good about herself (Queen of the Sixth Grade, reviewed in the
11/88 issue) it's no longer helping. Veronica is terrified about her father's
impending re-marriage, and, worse luck, Gretchen is the only one who knows
how upset she is. The girl-you-love-to-hate is a standard appeal in school series,
but making her the main character is a real challenge, one that this author meets
with great success. A traditional ploy is to make the mean girl "misunderstood,"
but Cooper has chosen a more difficult path: Veronica really is, as Robin calls
her, "a creep." Even Veronica's mother, when told of this insult, responds with
something less than empathy: "we both know Robin's not the kind of girl who
just goes around calling names." Creep that she may be, however, Veronica
captures our interest and sympathy, and in the end of the book (after a juicy
comeuppance) leaves us with some hope that she is capable of change. We'll
see. RS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Friendship values
Cossi, Olga. Harp Seals. Carolrhoda, 1991. ISBN 0-87614-437-7. [48p.]
illus. with photographs. 
(Naturewatch Books). 
$12.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
A high standard of information, organization, and
color photography has distinguished this series, and the subject here has extra
allure because of the appealing harp seal pups. Cossi explains the animals'
reproduction and migration cycles while vivid closeups depict seals at every stage
of development, including yellowcoats, whitecoats, ragged-jackets, beaters,
bedlamers, and saddlebacks. The continuous text includes abundant facts that are
accessible through the index, and a glossary defines terms. The species' complex
adaptation to extremes of an arctic habitat emerge clearly; by contrast, the fact
that commercial hunting could endanger the animal's survival makes this book a
logical springboard for discussion of environmental checks and balances. BH
C.U. 
Zoology
D.V. Ecological awareness
Covington, Dennis. Lizard. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-30307-6. [208p].
$15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 9-. 
This southern picaresque first novel benefits from an
unforgettable narrator/hero who escapes from a state school for retarded boys.
His rescuer is an alcoholic actor who wants Lizard (nicknamed by his fellow
inmates) to play Caliban because Lizard's deformities-and abilities-make him
a natural for the part. The actor and his girlfriend take Lizard to Birmingham, a
journey that includes, in an Eden-like pine forest, an encounter with a black girl
who is abused by her guardian. Lizard forms a deep attachment to both the girl
and her younger brother, determining to free them and find out about his own
S188 1
parents. This is ambitious fiction that has been credibly tempered for a young
adult audience; it has classic rite-of-passage narrative patterns, stylistically
controlled realism, and a structure that shapes negative forces into a positive
ending. Covington has looked at society through one of its outcasts, whose
observations are surprisingly self-assured and reassuring. BH
Dana, Barbara. Young Joan. Zolotow/Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
021423-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021422-8. [384p]. Library ed. $17.89; Trade
ed. $17.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-9. 
"Joan." The miracle began simply, with Joan hearing
her name spoken aloud in the garden with no person in evidence. The earliest
instructions were easy--"Be good. Go to church"-but Joan had earlier had a
dream in which she was told to "help the Dauphin." Only gradually did Joan
allow herself to believe that she was the Maid prophesied long ago by Merlin:
"France will be ruined by a woman and saved by a maiden from the oak forest of
Lorraine." Barbara Dana's recreation of Joan of Arc's early life, before she
commanded an army, is entirely involving and convincing. 
Making no
concession to the twentieth century, Dana portrays a Joan true to her own time,
neither a feminist nor an hysteric, but a mystic, a child for whom God always
came first. While appreciating the company of her pets and her friends, and the
companionship of working alongside her mother, Joan's most joyful occupation
was prayer. "To me this was all there was. But there was more to know. The
voice was a call. It was my call to come awake, to open my mind to all the
knowing in my heart." In prose that often recalls the quiet cadences of prayer,
Joan relates (from beyond death, it appears) her childhood and early adolescence,
giving the same close attention to the memories of sheep-shearing and gossiping
as to her voices and visions. The visitations, particularly, are ecstatically
rendered: "The voice, the fragrance of a thousand flowers, the blazing light, and
then Saint Michael was before me. All flooded purple before my eyes, great
blazes of purple light, deep purple, blazing first here, then there, by the sheep,
near the bush, by my feet, and brighter than all, amidst all the purple, in
blinding white, Saint Michael, the Captain of the Armies of Light." There
hasn't really yet been a Song of Bernadette for the present generation; Dana's
portrait of Joan will have more than a few young readers hopefully searching the
sky, or their souls. RS
D.V. Religious understanding
Dewey, Jennifer Owings. A Night and Day in the Desert; written and illus. by
Jennifer Owings Dewey. Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-18210-9. 32p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Soft color-pencil drawings don't disguise the drama of
plant and animal survival in the desert. As presented here, the cycle begins at
sunset, when a pair of coyotes, "lean, powerful, and tireless," begin their hunt
for food. So do bats, birds, snakes, and rats, each feeding (often on each other)
under the cool and protective cover of darkness. 
Dewey is clear and
straightforward about the harshness of desert life ("the mouse is caught in needle-
sharp teeth, its skull pierced"), but the continuous text is not always well-
organized. One paragraph, for example, is confusing in its discussion of rodents
and seeds: "Pocket mice, pocket gophers, and kangaroo rats use fur-lined cheek
pouches for carrying seeds to caches underground. Desert rodents disperse seeds
by stashing, storing, and spreading them. Mice harvest seeds in summer. Their
[ 189]
caches are insurance against lean times." Storing, harvesting, dispersing-the
distinctions are vague. Elsewhere, there are abrupt shifts in topics whose
connections don't become apparent for a few paragraphs. But the observation is
sharp and the details are fascinating: "The beetle larvae, like parent beetles, feed
on bats that have toppled from above and cannot launch themselves into flight
again." Page design is generous, with the life-and-death struggles of the animals
dramatically poised on double-page spreads. RS
C.U. Nature study
Downing, Julie. Mozart Tonight; written and illus. by Julie Downing.
Bradbury, 1991. ISBN 0-02-732881-3. [40p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
While Mozart and his wife Constanze are on their
way to the premier of Don Giovanni, the composer reminisces about his
childhood as a musical prodigy, his unhappy time in the service of the
Archbishop of Salzburg, and his years as a popular-but almost penniless-
composer. Although there are some confusing shifts in point of view, and it's
unlikely that Mozart would tell his wife that "I'm Joannes Chrysostumus
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart," the tone is light and bright, capturing the
composer's anticipation of the evening-and the last-minute preparations:
"You, dear wife, stayed up long after the last guest had gone home. You kept
me awake with your best fairy stories. By five o'clock this morning the
overture was finished." Downing's watercolors are picturesque and richly
detailed, but with an attention to homely reality that keeps them fresh: a baby-
laden Constanze dropping coins into creditors' hands, for example. And, while
this Mozart is no Amadeus, the occasional smug look on his face is entirely in
keeping with the man's oblivious egocentricity. An appended author's note is
exemplary, documenting sources, explaining what is fictionalized and what is
not, and describing the research for the illustrations. The best-so far-of the
recent Mozart books published for the composer's bicentenary (see also
Catherine Brighton's Mozart, reviewed in the 12/90 issue and Lisl Weil's
Wolferl, reviewed below). RS
C.U. 
Music
Ehrlich, Amy. The Dark Card. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83733-4. 
180p.
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 9-12. 
"What do cards and love have in common?" Her
mother recently dead from cancer, Laura, seventeen, is spending the summer
alone in the family's vacation house near Atlantic City. Her friends there seem
always busy with summer jobs, while Laura's own preoccupation is
overwhelming: 
"death was always in her thoughts now, undermining
everything." Laura finds ritualistic escape in the casinos, getting herself in with
the I.D. she steals from her older sister. She goes in secret every day, calling
herself Heather, wearing lots of makeup, and compulsively playing hand after
hand of blackjack. The third-person narration is deliberate and objective, its
distance echoing Laura's desperate isolation and fear that her mother's death has
made the whole world a dangerous long shot: "... the dark card, it was called.
In that card was the outcome of the game." Laura gets involved with a slick
gambler named Ari; the sexual danger he presents seems less threatening than the
real love offered by Billy, the older brother of her best friend. Most young adult
novels that thematically center on the death of a parent offer some sentimental
[ 190]
pleasure in their grieving; this one is instead almost unbearably bleak, with
Laura's eventual escape from Atlantic City a relief rather than a victory. Laura's
story is sad, but, more significant, it's scary. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Ernst, Lisa Campbell. Miss Penny and Mr. Grubbs; written and illus. by Lisa
Campbell Ernst. Bradbury, 1991. ISBN 0-02-733563-1. 38p. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
After forty-eight years of envying his neighbor's lush
garden, Mr. Grubbs decides to besiege it with a couple of rabbits. The plan
works so well that Miss Penny, despite all her protective efforts, loses every
single vegetable ... and wins yet another blue ribbon-for rabbits. The warm-
hued, earth-toned illustrations are satisfyingly organic, both humans and animals
having a rounded, faintly vegetable-like quality. Compositions are clean and
freshened by several surprising perspectives. Although the main characters are
adult, the behavior patterns of jealous obsession will feel familiar to children,
while the theme of a trickster tricked will appeal to their sense of fair play. A
fertile plot for story hours. BH
D.V. Neighborliness
Geras, Adele. Happy Endings. Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-233375-4. [180p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
In a story first published in England in 1986, sixteen-
year-old Mel is the narrator. At her mother's instigation, she has successfully
tried out for a part in a theatrical project: an all-adolescent production of Three
Sisters. The background of a local theater company and the details of production
and rehearsal will appeal to many readers, and the characterization is both
differentiated and, for each person, consistent. The plot is weaker than setting,
style, or characterization, however; it is basically a triangular love affair, with a
nice female (rejected) and a not-nice female (chosen and triumphant) and a male
director. Mel, a biased and involved narrator, learns that the show must go on.
ZS
D.V. Friendship values
Gerstein, Mordicai. The New Creatures; written and illus. by Mordicai Gerstein.
Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022167-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022164-X.
32p. Library ed. $14.89; trade ed. $14.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
The old sheepdog Herman insists on a walk despite
sleet and icy puddles, and Ishtar the cat must be fed tuna and poached eggs.
"Sometimes I wish they'd take care of themselves," says a girl to her brother,
"like when they lived in the wild." This launches Grandpa into a tale of the time
when dogs and cats ruled the world, becoming so greedy and lazy that one
explorer (Herman's ancestor) during the Age of the Terrible Mess found and
brought back some new creatures (Herman's beings, now called humans) which
the animals trained to stand upright and do chores. This clever spoof on myths
will entertain children and at the same time introduce them gently to satire. The
illustrations are warmed by burnt-orange tones of the firelight by which the tale
is told; both sheepdogs are heroically furred, and the lolling animal masters are
as funny as the humans learning to dress themselves. A fantastique that's lighter
in tone but just as freshly envisioned as Gerstein's Mountains of Tibet (BCCB
1/88). BH
[ 191]
Gibbons, Gail. Surrounded by Sea: Life on a New England Fishing Island;
written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-30961-3. 32p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Tidy and bright, Gibbons' line and wash pictures
show a range of views of an off-shore island on the North Atlantic coast, and
focus on the major industry of the island. The pictures echo the two emphases
of the text, the patterns of daily life in the circle of the year, and the variety of
boats and their uses. The writing is static, but has the direct simplicity that
makes it easy for young listeners or primary grades readers to assimilate
information, and the book gives a sense of the special quality of an island
community. ZS
D.V. Community life
Gilson, Jamie. Sticks and Stones and Skeleton Bones; illus. by Dee deRosa.
Lothrop, 1991. 
ISBN 0-688-10098-8. 
[160p]. 
$12.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Sometimes a joke can backfire. 
Hobie's pop-up
snake was meant to surprise Nick. The hole the wire snake drilled into his
friend's nose was certainly a surprise, but Nick isn't laughing. His methods of
retaliation, wrecking Hobie's art project and pushing him down an escalator, are
underhanded; all-out war looms. Gilson combines elements of a standard school
story with an unusual setting (the school is in a shopping mall) and throws in
some unusual characters (a skeleton and a disgruntled Santa Claus) to good
effect. Her descriptions are often funny ("Nick's little brother, Tony, who is
going through the terrible fours .. . also went through the terrible ones, twos,
and threes"), and bang-on. Take lunchtime in the school cafeteria: "everybody
else'finished eating in two seconds, practically inhaling whole bologna
sandwiches and sword-swallowing their carrot sticks." The book starts to go
downhill after class mediators are called in to help settle the boys' dispute, and
the injured parties draw up a contract. All disputes are shown to be solvable by
mediation and listening to the other's point-of-view, not just the boys' but that
of a Santa aggrieved with the younger generation ("children just aren't what they
used to be") as well as two arguing preschoolers. Most readers won't object to
the purposive didacticism, as the humorous tone never flags, but potential
conflict mediators may find the message overly simplistic. RAS
Gleitzman, Morris. Two Weeks with the Queen. Putnam, 1991. ISBN 0-399-
22249-9. [144p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Packed off to English relatives while his younger
brother Luke lies dying of cancer in Australia, twelve-year-old Colin determines
to get the Queen's intervention. "I'm going to need some help on this one,
thought Colin, someone important who knows the phone number of the world's
best doctor." His aunt and uncle's idea of help is to ignore the situation and
refuse to talk about Luke, taking Colin on a sightseeing trip to London's
biggest hardware store. He is undaunted, and un-put-offable: "Do you mind if
we go now? I'm actually finding it a bit hard to concentrate on hardware while
Luke's got cancer." While his naive actions often make him seem young for
twelve, Colin's rescue attempts-climbing the fence at Buckingham Palace,
trying to phone the Queen-are funny and courageous, with Colin's matter-of-
fact effrontery disallowing any sentimentality. "Look. I know you're probably
[ 192 ]
not meant to open the gate and you probably get people lying through their teeth
all the time, but I promise you I'm telling the truth and if you open the gate I'll
explain everything to the Queen and you won't lose your job pr get sent to
Northern Ireland." Colin doesn't manage to talk to the Queen, but he does make
a friend, Ted, whose lover Griff is dying of AIDS in the hospital where Colin
has gone to seek advice on cancer. Here again, the author's style is too brisk for
wallowing, and while Griff's death is hard, the experience gives Colin the
courage to go back home and be with his brother. Not before, however, one last
classic bit of backtalk at the airport. After hearing a stranger derisively call Ted
a "queen," Colin turns and looks the man straight in the eye. "He's not, but he
should be." Brave words from a brave boy. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Gross, Virginia T. The Day It Rained Forever: A Story of the Johnstown
Flood; illus. by Ronald Himler. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83552-8. [64p].
(Once Upon America). $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Incorporating the suspense of a natural disaster into
the pace of this brief historical novel, Gross recounts a fictional family's
experience of the 1889 Johnstown flood, said to have killed between 2,500 and
7,000 residents of a western Pennsylvania valley. Although Tina's mother
manages to save both herself and a newborn baby that she snatches from the
roaring waters, Tina's uncle and his fianc6e are both drowned. This fact, along
with the bitterness Tina's brother feels against the rich men who built a flimsy
dam to enhance their sports club, lends credible realism to the event. In a few
places, the dialogue and narrative seem calculated to project the historical setting,
but several scenes transcend their purpose to become truly moving, especially
the naming of the baby Hope. And offsetting occasional stylistic awkwardness
is a neat turn of language, as when Mama, her strength almost spent, clings to a
tree: "something within her braided her thoughts into a small rope of strength."
Although the author's note doesn't tell whether this incident is based on a true
one or not, it does give background information on other aspects of the event.
An involving and appropriately unsettling look at U. S. history. BH
C.U. 
History-U.S.
D.V. Courage; Death, adjustment to
Hartling, Peter. Ben Loves Anna; tr. from the German by J.H. Auerbach; illus.
by Ellen Weinstein. Overlook, 1991. ISBN 0-87951-401-9. 96p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Although this is translated from the German, the
action appears to take place in the U.S., a fact less evident from details of setting
than from several low-key references in the book. It is exactly such missing
details that render the situation more generic than individualized. The dynamics
between the two main characters and among their classmates seem unrooted in
any social milieu, which may be an attempt to broaden the book's appeal. Love
between a ten-year-old boy and girl is not often enough developed in children's
fiction, and Ben and Anna do show authentic reactions to each other and to the
inevitable teasing that ensues from their affection. Anna's outsider status as a
Polish immigrant adds a sub-theme with which some readers will also
empathize. However, both the new-wave black-and-white illustrations and the
translation suffer from occasional awkwardness ("He liked when she was
[ 193 ]
confident"), and Hartling does not seem as comfortable fictionally as he was in
Old John (BCCB 7/90). BH
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Hathorn, Libby. Thunderwith. Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-35034-6. [224p].
$15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
After her mother dies, fifteen-year-old Lara goes to
live with her father, his new wife, and their children on a homestead in the rain
forest of northern New South Wales. Although her parents divorced when Lara
was a toddler, she easily feels loved by her father. Her stepmother, Gladwyn, is
another story: '"Just go away!' she yelled full into Lara's face. 'Go on. Go
away! '" And while Lara gradually wins the hearts of the three younger children,
twelve-year-old Pearl mimics her mother's resentment. The hostility, at school
as well as home, is as thick as the humidity, and with Lara's father gone so
much, her only solace is a mysterious dog she meets and names Thunderwith
after a favorite poem. This picture of a lonely, grieving girl in a stormy
environment is thoroughly realized, with an especially expert weaving of story
and setting. Lara's eventual alliance with Pearl, in face of a bullying older boy,
is credibly developed, as is her winning over of her angry and defensive
stepmother. This family that seemed so strange and cold in the beginning
satisfyingly shows itself to be a comforting place in the end. RS
D.V. Stepparents, adjustment to
Haugaard, Erik Christian. The Boy and the Samurai. Houghton, 1991. ISBN
0-395-56398-4. [256p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Homeless and friendless, the small boy had no real
name but was called Saru, or "monkey." He is the narrator, and his story is both
a remarkably vivid picture of power and corruption in feudal Japan, and a moving
story of a child's adaptability and, as he grows, his resourcefulness and courage.
It is Saru who thinks of and executes a plan to save himself, his priest-mentor,
the Samurai who has become his friend, and the Samurai's wife, the hostage of a
warlord. Historical details are smoothly incorporated, characters are well-defined,
and the book's pace and style have vitality and polish. With Katherine Paterson
and Lensey Namioka, Erik Haugaard has made a significant contribution to the
body of fiction about an era and its way of life in Japan. ZS
D.V. Friendship values
Heisel, Sharon E. A Little Magic. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-55722-2.
[144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Ghosts and family problems are suspensefully
entwined in a first novel reminiscent of Mary Downing Hahn. Jessica's younger
cousin Corky has been fiercely overprotected by his mother ever since his father
died in an accident; when he says he sees a ghost out the window, everyone
thinks it's just his grieving imagination. 
But Jessica and her best friend
Tiffaney have to admit that something strange is going on up in the hills behind
Jessica's house in rural Oregon. 
The menace is convincing, as are the
relationships among the characters; especially well-drawn is a sad girl at Jessica's
school who becomes involved in the mystery. Cover art is a little young-
Heisel does a much more atmospheric job of evoking both the ghostly and
autumnal chills so important to this kind of story. RS
[ 1941
Helldorfer, M. C. The Mapmaker's Daughter; illus. by Jonathan Hunt.
Bradbury, 1991. ISBN 0-02-743515-6. 40p. $14.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
In a fairy tale-like story, Suchen, who helps her father
make maps, finally goes off on an adventure by following the paths she had once
painted. In this version of a tale in which ordinary objects thrown to the ground
become magical aids to the hero, too much time elapses between Suchen's
unwitting tossing away of the magic objects and the moment when the objects,
now animated, help in her escape. She overcomes an evil witch with apparently
no effort and escapes in the space of one paragraph. The richly-colored
illustrations are framed with medieval borders in the style of Trina Schart
Hyman, although the figures and landscapes are not so seductively drawn.
Characters are hard to identify except by their elaborate clothing, and on one
early page the combination of text and painting makes it easy to confuse the
witch and Suchen. The feminist twist at the end is refreshing, but for a similar
story with more action and suspense, try good old Baba Yaga. KPJ
Herzig, Alison Cragin. The Boonsville Bombers; illus. by Dan Andreasen.
Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83595-1. 91p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Her older brother, Michael, and some of his sixth
grade classmates had a baseball team, but they certainly didn't want Emma to
play with them. Emma knew she was a good player, and she was pleased when
Mikey said she could play if she had a Bombers T-shirt. When their father tells
them he's taking his children to a pro game, both are thrilled. Emma is less
thrilled when she discovers that Joe (the most belligerent member of Mikey's
team) is tagging along; in fact, Dad gives up his ticket and lets Joe go into the
stadium with Mikey and Emma. It will probably surprise few readers that the
story ends with Emma getting a solid hit sometime later in a Bombers' game,
but it may surprise them that she gets it because of Joe's whispered coaching.
Sports-minded girls should particularly enjoy Emma's triumph, but this
pleasantly written baseball story has enough play sequences and enough depth in
interpersonal relationships to appeal to any middle-grades reader. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Sex roles
Hoban, Tana. All About Where; written and illus. with photographs by Tana
Hoban. Greenwillow, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09698-0; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-09698-0. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R* 
2-5 yrs. 
An outstanding photographer, Hoban uses no text
with this new series of color photographs, but borders each picture with the
same list of words that pinpoint location. "Above, on, behind, under, out,
against.. ." the list begins, and leaves it up to the viewer to decide where these
terms are applicable. Unlike most concept books (including Hoban's) that pair
words and pictures, this can encourage children to interpret visually the alternates
to the obvious. For example a bateau-mouche is moving under a Seine bridge:
it's "under" or "below"; the bridge is "above" or "over"; people crossing the
bridge are going "across," the boat is "between" the sides of an arch, etc. Solid
concepts with a light touch. ZS
D.V. Perceptual acuteness; Spatial concepts
[ 195 ]
Hobbie, W. D. Bloodroot; illus. by Holly Hobbie. Crown, 1991. Library ed.
ISBN 0-517-58153-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-58152-3. 
150p. Library ed.
$14.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Nine-year-old Lizzie narrates the story of her summer
with her Grama Ax, a painter, in the New England countryside. The plot is
slight; the book is really Lizzie's account of the passage of time, the wonders of
the country, and the shallowness of people who seek to suburbanize the land
("Old world is the way people used to be when their land was the most important
thing there was," says Grama Ax wistfully). The short chapters make the format
inviting, and strong-willed Lizzie is an interesting (and occasionally
authentically unpleasant) child. Despite its slow pace the book maintains a
readable style, and the story may appeal not only to nostalgic adults but to
young readers who enjoy tales of independent country life and feisty
grandmothers. DS
D.V. Grandmother-child relations
Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane. 
Pueblo Storyteller; illus. with photographs by
Lawrence Migdale. Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-0864-7. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6.
Keegan, Marcia. Pueblo Boy: Growing Up in Two Worlds; written and illus.
with photographs by Marcia Keegan. Cobblehill, 1991. ISBN 0-525-65060-1.
48p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
The subject and scope of these two books are so
similar that their different nuances of design, narrative, and focus make an
intriguing study in contrast. 
Both books could easily be absorbed into a
collection, and probably should be, given the dearth of photodocumentaries about
contemporary Native American children. Hoyt-Goldsmith's book is about a girl
named April (Kutsiyat'si in the Keres language), and Keegan's is about a boy
named Timmy (Agoyo-Paa in the Tewa language). Both children are ten years
old and come from artisan families living in pueblos outside of Santa Fe, New
Mexico. Both books give background information on the culture as well as on
the everyday activities of the community. The voices, however, are different.
Hoyt-Goldsmith's text is in the first person, which makes it less distant than the
Keegan's narrative but also slightly more artificial, since ten-year-olds don't,
realistically, rattle off cohesive information about their lifestyles. Although the
writing in Keegan's book is better, students working on reports will appreciate
the appended legend and index in Hoyt-Goldsmith's. The book design in Pueblo
Boy is cleaner, with larger, more dramatic photographs coordinated with the text
to eliminate captions. There are, of course, a few gender differences, and this
may well be the deciding factor, for this age group, in determining which book
children will choose. BH
C.U. Indians of North America
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Hughes, Shirley. Wheels; written and illus. by Shirley Hughes. Lothrop,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09881-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09880-0. [32p].
(A Tale of Trotter Street). Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
A dab hand at drawing, proficient as a colorist, and
dependable for her high standards of composition and controlled humor, Hughes
[ 196 ]
has made the multiethnic world of Trotter Street everybody's neighborhood.
Here two young boys, envying the more sophisticated bicycles of older children,
both hope for new bicycles for their birthdays. One's wish is gratified; the other
is disappointed to the extent that the friendship cools-but when he gets a go-
cart together the two ride it to win Trotter Street's Non-Bicycle Race, beating
roller skates, scooters, a box-on-wheels, and other vehicles. The competition is
cheerful, the winners are happy, and the twin appeals of group play and the
wonders-of-wheels should appeal to the read-aloud audience. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Jealousy, overcoming; Social behavior
Hurwitz, Johanna. School's Out; illus. by Sheila Hamanaka. Morrow, 1991.
ISBN 0-688-09938-6. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
In a new addition to the Class Clown books, Lucas
Cott celebrates the summer between his third and fourth grade years. The
biggest event is the arrival of a French au pair girl Genevieve. At first,
mischievous Lucas plays harmless tricks on her, but he soon learns to appreciate
all the free time she gives him by taking care of his three-year-old twin brothers.
On the whole, Lucas' summer experiences have an innocence that will appeal
most to a young read-aloud audience ("What fun to get paint on you and not have
anyone scold, Lucas thought"). Lucas' most rollicking adventure occurs when
one of the twins disappears during a movie, and as Lucas crawls under seats on
the floor of the theater, he gets mistaken for a mouse. Some unnecessary
didacticism is forced in when Lucas makes a leap in maturity to learn from his
mistakes ("He'd have to keep trying not to scare his mother again. He also
would have to do a better job of setting a good example for the twins"), but the
story carries much of the mood of a quiet summer with a loving family, and
Lucas has the promise of camp for the next summer (book). KPJ
Jacobs, Paul Samuels. Sleepers, Wake. Scholastic, 1991. ISBN 0-590-42397-
5. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A spaceship travels toward the planet Errat; its
passengers are in hibernetic capsules save for Dody, awake due to a computer
error. When his parents and his siblings Bobby and Elaine wake, they are
stunned to see that while they have not aged, Dody has been awake for fifty years
and become an elderly man. Jacobs uses elements that will be familiar to
science fantasy buffs: the cloning of children, the hostility of the planet, danger
and escape, a return to Earth. This is not as effective as Jacobs' first book, Born
into Light (BCCB 4/88) in characterization and plot development, but it is
equally well-written. ZS
Johnson, Neil. Fire & Silk: Flying in a Hot Air Balloon; written and illus.
with photographs by Neil Johnson. Joy Street/Little, 1991. 
ISBN 0-316-
46959-9. [32p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Author-photographer Johnson takes full advantage of
the inherent color and drama of his topic, since today's hot air balloons are
dazzling in their splendid variety and create made-to-order compositions against
the sky. The text is informative, giving facts about why and how the balloons
fly, how they are put into the air and taken down, how the ground crew follows
the flight path so that they can be there when pilot and passengers alight. The
[ 197
text also informs readers of some of the problems and the joys of ballooning.
ZS
C.U. Hobbies
Keegan, Marcia. Pueblo Boy: Growing Up in Two Worlds. See Hoyt-
Goldsmith, Diane, for review.
Keehn, Sally. I Am Regina. Philomel, 1991. ISBN 0-399-21797-5. [224p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Regina's story begins in 1755, just as the French and
Indian Wars are beginning; when their home in western Pennsylvania is attacked
by Indians, Regina is kidnapped. She knows her father has been scalped, but her
mother had been away at the miller's and may have escaped. Afraid and angry,
Regina learns to respond to her new name of Tskinnak, to trust some of her
captors and-in time-to love some of them and to feel so much a part of the
Indian community that she joins in their hatred of the enemy, the English. She
is, as she was in the historical case on which Keehn bases this novel, reunited
with the mother she's longed to see. Characterization is adequate, and details of
period and place are convincing; the writing has good pace, with a present-tense,
first-person narrative that is at times compelling. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.--Colonial era
D.V. Interracial understanding
Kehret, Peg. Cages. Cobblehill, 1991. 
ISBN 0-525-65062-8. 
[160p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Hoping to get the lead in a school play, Kit is
unhappy at not even getting a minor role; she comes home and has an argument
with her alcoholic stepfather. That leads to Kit's flouncing off to a shopping
mall and being caught when she shoplifts. Assigned to do twenty hours of
volunteer work for the Humane Society, Kit becomes involved and dedicated.
The themes of animal protection and of ethical behavior are adequately handled,
but they don't quite merge into a story that also includes improving a peer
relationship, making Kit's mother and stepfather face his drinking problem, and
confessing her thievery to her classmates. ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to; Family relations
Koertge, Ron. Mariposa Blues. Joy Street/Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-50103-4.
[176p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Graham is thirteen and starting to feel his oats. He
sees his old friend Leslie in a sexy new light, and he's beginning to argue with
his dad about everything. These are classic boyhood rites of passage, and
Koertge personifies them in a likable, believable protagonist. Leslie has her
own problems: "Do you think I'm flat?" Both Graham's and Leslie's fathers are
racehorse trainers, and the competition between father and son becomes
professional as well as personal when Graham goes to work for Leslie's father,
grooming a horse whose owner has transferred from one trainer to the other.
Though the conflict is presented realistically enough, the tone is so breezy that
we know there isn't a chance things won't work themselves out, which they do,
quite nicely. Mom helps: "Your father's not Godzilla. He's not going to come
through the wall and eat your bed. He's just mad." Koertge has a gift for
[ 198]
writing boys' books short on macho posturing and long on offhand amiability-
maybe a little too amiable in the present instance, which glows with good
feeling but lacks the substance of some of his previous winners. RS
D.V. Father-son relations
Lindgren, Astrid. Lotta's Easter Surprise; tr. by Barbara Lucas; illus. by Ilon
Wikland. R&S/Farrar, 1991. ISBN 91-29-59862-1. 32p. $13.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
In an import that travels well, Andersen medalist
Lindgren has created an Easter story that has humor, sweetness, and an
understanding treatment of a child's belief in legendary figures. Capably
translated from the Swedish, the story is written with a light, sure touch and
illustrated with watercolor paintings that have charm without whimsy. The
local candy store has closed, and since the Easter bunny has always bought his
eggs there (so Mom and Dad say), there can't be an egg hunt. But Lotta knows,
as do the readers, that Lotta has arranged a very special candy hunt. At one
point, Lotta's older siblings explain that "Dad is the Easter bunny. He is also
Santa, if you want to know." Lotta definitely does not want to know this, and
she accepts it on one level but keeps right on thinking "What a terrible Easter it
would be without the real Easter bunny," thus admitting reality but keeping her
faith in the symbol. This is longer than most read-aloud books, but the
combination of a light style, the appeals of the holiday, and the protagonist's
ingenuity should hold the audience. ZS
D.V. Family relations; Self-reliance
Lobel, Anita. The Dwarf Giant; written and illus. by Anita Lobel. Holiday
House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-0852-3. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Lobel's strong sense of design is evident in the
intricacy of swirling costumes pictured in the Japanese-style paintings for a tale
in the folk-like tradition. Pleasant at first, the dwarf who came to the palace of
prince Mainichi and Princess Ichinichi soon showed his evil nature, enticing the
Prince with magic and turmoil, so that he forsook his Princess. Eventually the
Prince realized that he was in danger, since the dwarf giant was more and more
violent and domineering. It was the beautiful princess who rescued the prince by
killing the dwarf. The clear message is that happiness lies (here unrecognized)
"back in your own back yard." The illustrations are attractive, and the story is
competently structured and told, but it will probably be the magic, the danger,
and triumph of good over evil that will appeal most to young children. ZS
Maestro, Betsy and Giulio. The Discovery of the Americas; written and illus.
by Betsy and Giulio Maestro. Lothrop, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06838-3;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06837-5. [48p]. Library ed. $14.88; Trade ed. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Beginning quite properly with the Stone Age
migration across the land bridge from Asia, the Maestros remind us of possible
Japanese, Chinese, and Phoenician expeditions, along with St. Brendan and Leif
Ericsson before getting around to the voyages of Columbus. It's a welcome
context, as are the parallel descriptions of highly advanced cultures that were
flourishing in America all the while Europeans were busy "discovering" it. "The
Europeans brought diseases that killed many of the natives, and a strange new
way of life they did not understand or accept. Many lost their lives, and most
[ 199 ]
lost their freedom, their customs, and their pride." The continuous text is
forthright and well organized. Pencil-and-watercolor illustrations in this large-
format book are more variously successful: the land- and sea-scapes are dramatic,
the maps are clear and well-placed, the portraits and human figures are crude and
sometimes garishly colored. Appended "additional information" includes a
chronology, an annotated list of early American inhabitants, more information
on the "age of discovery" and "other interesting voyages." A useful review for
Columbus Day. RS
C.U. Columbus Day; History
McKenna, Colleen O'Shaughnessy. The Truth about Sixth Grade. Scholastic,
1991. ISBN 0-590-44388-7. [192p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
After her sojourn on Murphy's Island (BCCB 10/90),
Collette is back at Sacred Heart Elementary for the second half of sixth grade.
When the other girls discover that the handsome new teacher Mr. Kurtlander is
an old friend of Collette's father, she finds herself unexpectedly popular-with
some eighth-graders, no less. The situations and conflicts are many and
entertaining, but a heavier hand is at work here than in most of the previous
Collette stories. Some of the plot turns are forced, and a subplot about an
overly mature eighth-grader is didactic. 
Nevertheless, this has just about
everything readers expect from a school-and-family series, including pleasantly
vague stirrings of romance. RS
D.V. Age-mate relations
McMillan, Bruce. The Weather Sky; written and illus. and with photographs by
Bruce McMillan. 
Farrar, 1991. 
ISBN 0-374-38261-1. 
[40p]. 
$16.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
After a general discussion of air masses and fronts,
McMillan devotes most of his book to clouds: the different kinds, the difference
that altitude makes, different clouds in different seasons. The material is well-
organized, both chronologically (proceeding from winter through spring) and
visually, with each page devoted to a color photo of a cloud; a drawing of what
the cloud looks like from the side, top to bottom; a diagram of the kind of front
that would create such a cloud; and a clear, brief paragraph explaining and
amplifying on the illustrations. This is a good guide to weather prediction
through skywatching, although kids will wonder about the lack of information
on thunderstorms, tornadoes, and hurricanes. On the other hand, what McMillan
does include encourages readers to find the exciting in the everyday. A glossary
and an index are appended. RS
C.U. Weather
Mills, Claudia. Hannah on Her Way. Macmillan, 1991. ISBN 0-02-767011-2.
[144p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Fifth-grader Hannah Keddie is firmly anti-precocity:
she cherishes and plays with her dolls, eschews trendy hairstyles in favor of a
long braid, and is alarmed by the advancing adolescence of her peers: "I'm not
ready for Seventeen magazine. I want Ten magazine, Nine even. I'm not ready
for makeup or party dresses with no straps on them or kissing boys." She's lost
and unhappy in her new school, humiliated in gym and lonely at lunch, finding
solace only in the library and in art class. When the regular art teacher is
[ 200 ]
replaced with a substitute who has a fascination for projects involving Clorox
bottles, glitzy Caitie Crystal somehow manages to implicate truly artistic
Hannah in brief rebellion and thereby sows the seeds of friendship. Hannah must
then reconcile her pleasure in her new friend with her frequent alarm at Caitie's
behavior, while deciding just how much growing up she wants to do. This is a
warm story from the point of the view of the quiet one whom people wrongly
take to be just the sidekick, and it believably portrays Hannah's intelligence,
stubbornness, and appeal for Caitie. While Caitie's family is too stereotypically
self-absorbed as the cause for her occasional amorality, her character as the girl
who has both the glamor to be popular and the independence to choose her own
friends has depth and credibility. This book will be enjoyed not only by readers
who themselves feel outshone by their classmates but also by Caities who are
Hannahs at heart. DS
D.V. Friendship values; Growing up
Mollel, Tololwa M. The Orphan Boy: A Maasai Story; illus. by Paul Morin.
Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-89919-985-2. 32p. $14.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
To the old man who "loved the stars as if they were
his children" there appears, one evening, an orphan child named Kileken. In
return for friendship and shelter, the boy does all the old man's chores, keeping
the cattle fat throughout a terrible drought. Although Kileken warns the old man
not to probe the secret of his powers, curiosity proves stronger than trust. This
is a moving story that resonates with the poignancy of punishment for a
prohibition broken. Morin's paintings intensify the sense of mystery with
nighttime blues and the contrasting arid golds of a parched daytime landscape.
His use of vertical shapes, diagonal shadows, and pebbly textures creates rich,
muted contrasts. Soft or blinding, the light from which Kileken draws his
strength is like a third character in the story. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
D.V. Older-younger generations
Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds. Reluctantly Alice. Karl/Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-
689-31681-X. 182p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Determined that her first year in junior high will
establish her popularity with everybody, Alice is discouraged by the hostility of
one girl. She can't understand why Denise picks on her, and she is depressed
when she realizes that Denise is going to force her to sing on "Seventh Grade
Sing Day," when any upper class student can demand a public performance, even
of people who (like Alice) can't carry a tune. The anguish over this prospect
seems a bit out of proportion, but so does the volatility of adolescent emotions.
The events at school are balanced by sub-plots about Alice's brother's problems
with women, by Alice's father's problems with women, and by Alice's
injudicious intervention in both situations. Fans of the previous books about
Alice will find this one just as entertainingly styled. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Park, Ruth. My Sister Sif. Viking, 1991. 
ISBN 0-670-83924-8. 
180p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Erika begins her story with "These things happened
when I was fourteen years old," and goes on to describe the reasons she and Sif,
[201 ]
who is seventeen, were unhappy living with a married sister in Sydney since
their father, a Scandinavian seaman, died. Their mother was still on the home
island, Rongo. Separately, each of the sisters makes her way back to their
beloved Rongo; then Erika is fearful that the American scientist who has come
to Rongo and fallen in love with Sif will learn their secret. Are they really
descendants of a sea people? Does their mother really live in a submarine city
and talk to sea creatures? Themes of pollution and conservation are smoothly
incorporated into a story that very deftly blends realism and fantasy so that each
reflects the other and neither dominates. As she did in Playing Beatie Bow
(BCCB 4/82), which was voted the Australian Children's Book of the Year, Park
has put together a strong plot, solid characterization, and a colorful setting to
create a narrative with depth and lucid style. ZS
D.V. Sisters
Porte, Barbara Ann. Fat Fanny, Beanpole Bertha, and the Boys; illus. by Maxie
Chambliss. Jackson/Orchard, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08528-7; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-531-05928-6. [11 2p]. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 4-6. 
With the same present-tense immediacy that
distinguished her narrative in Ruthann and Her Pig (BCCB 1/90), Porte
storytells the fate of Fanny and Bertha during the year Bertha's father returns
from a two-year disappearance and Fanny starts coping with her parents' two-
year-old divorce. 
Now in fifth grade, the girls have been friends since
kindergarten, and their relationship shows a comfortable familiarity that young
readers will either identify with or yearn for. Bertha's triplet brothers provide
humorous antics, especially when Fanny tries to teach them the tap-dancing
routines through which she's developed such grace-and confidence enough to
shed the weight she gained trying to keep her parents' divorce a secret. Fanny's
parents act childlike themselves, while her nanny Hildegarde has to be the most
original caregiver since Ole Golly tended Harriet the Spy. In fact, Hildegarde
spins several of the traditional tales woven into the main story. These likably
eccentric characters both shape and deserve their happy endings. BH
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Friendship values; Self-confidence
Rappaport, Doreen. Escape from Slavery: Five Journeys to Freedom; illus. by
Charles Lilly. Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021632-8; Trade ed. ISBN
0-06-021631-X. [128p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Based on sources cited at the end of the book, the
author tells, in five brief episodes, dramatic stories of escapes from slavery,
some as familiar as Eliza crossing the ice or Ellen Craft (passing as white and
dressed as a man) posing as the owner of the man who was actually her husband.
The writing style is a bit flat, but the inherent drama of events makes the
accounts interesting. Rappaport discusses, in an afterword, some of the leaders
and conductors of the underground railroad, and she follows the notes on sources
with a bibliography of adult and juvenile titles. ZS
C.U. Black History Month; Social studies
D.V. Courage
[ 202 ]
Rodenas, Paula. The Random House Book of Horses and Horsemanship; illus.
by Jean Cassels and with photographs. Random House, 1991. Library ed.
ISBN 0-394-98705-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-887-5-0. 
180p. 
Library ed.
$18.99; Trade ed. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 4-12. 
This oversize book offers a panoply of delights
designed to please various breeds of horse lover: there are pictures enough to
make the uninitiated happy just gazing, descriptions of horse care and training to
allow the more advanced to focus their dreaming, and charts of show jumping
courses to enable horseless readers to gallop to gold medals in their living
rooms. Rodenas arranges this book in well-defined sections which combine to
make an overview of virtually everything connected with Equus caballus,
ranging from the evolution of the horse to riding for the handicapped. The
book's breadth is particularly impressive in its description of many, many
horsey activities, including the familiar, such as horse racing and show jumping;
the lesser-known, such as driving competitions and vaulting (although it really
should have a section on competitive trail riding); and youth-oriented
organizations, such as Pony Club and 4H. And even the most knowledgeable
equestrians will appreciate the brief narratives by professionals (some quite
famous) about their work: a groom, a veterinarian, a trick rider, several Olympic
champions, and many others get their personal say. Complete neophytes may
have some problems with the text: certain basic terms ("gelding," "crossrail,"
"equitation," etc.) are undefined, the writing is not always clear (the "Colors"
section has several misleading statements), and some outright errors slip through
(a reference is made to an animal's being 14.4 hands high-an impossible
measurement, and a cantering horse is described as leading with his inside hind
leg). Overall, however, the book is an equiphile's delight; bibliography, several
lists of organizations, and an index are included. DS
Roper, Robert. In Caverns of Blue Ice. Sierra Club/Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-
75606-7. [200p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
With its plethora of dates and newspaper quotes,
mountain-climbing lore and history, this book about Louise DeMaistre, "one of
the three or four best climbers in France these days [1957]," reads like a
biography. It's fiction, though, somewhat formulaically structured, but with
plenty of interest generated by the mountain-climbing details and by the strong
central figure of Louise. The book begins with Louise's childhood and early
love of the French Alps; her progress from intrepid amateur to noted guide and
Himalayan climber is carefully etched, with lots of attention given over to
technical information about climbing. This documentary aspect is well-balanced
by suspenseful accounting of Louise's adventures, both triumphant and scary:
"Louise had only a second to tighten her grip on the rope. She managed to
shout a single word-'Avalanche!'-before the whole mountain seemed to come
loose under her feet." RS
D.V. Courage
Rosofsky, Iris. My Aunt Ruth. Zolotow/Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-
06-025088-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025087-9. [192p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade
ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Sixteen-year-old Patty aspires to be an actress just
like her beautiful Aunt Ruth, who is visiting New York from the west coast for
[203 ]
treatment of a severe diabetic circulatory problem. The tension between Patty's
staid parents, a surgeon and a stockbroker who both disapprove of Ruth's
lifestyle, transfers to Patty as she centers her school life around roles in several
school plays. Patty's first-person narrative is embarrassingly self-absorbed
("Should I quit the play and devote myself to writing? Should I ignore Helen
from now on? What should I do about acting as a career?"), but authentically so.
Many teenagers will identify with her complaint that "I could scarcely
concentrate on the drama onstage; my own personal one seemed so much more
important and more real." Readers will be drawn to exactly the soap-opera
quality of Patty's tone and Ruth's life as both women deal with Ruth's illness-
after several unsuccessful surgeries, both of her legs are amputated below the
knees. What's more, the substructure of family dynamics, which are as realistic
and consistent as they were in the author's first novel Miriam (BCCB 9/88),
lends credence to the situation. Except for occasional repetition, Rosofsky's
style is competent and involving. BH
D.V. Aunt-niece relations; Handicaps, overcoming
Rosser, J.K. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles ABC's for a Better Planet; illus. by
The GEE Studio. Random House, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91383-1;
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-81383-7. 32p. (Random House Pictureback). Library ed.
$5.99; Paper ed. $2.25.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
"Hazardous waste is awful and dangerous. In fact, we
four guys are the only good things that ever came out of it!" Leonardo and his
fellow Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (made so by "toxic mutagen slime") here
take kids through an A to Z of environmental awareness. While many similarly
themed books don't get much further than advice to recycle and pick up trash,
this one is more "radical" in its suggestions. Fast Food: "Don't give your
business to fast-food places that serve their stuff in Styrofoam." Meat: "How
about not eating so much meat in the first place? And ask your folks to buy
meat from organically raised cattle." With each letter accompanied by a bright
cartoon of the Turtles in ecological action, topics include Cruelty-free products,
Ivory, Ozone layer, and Tropical rainforests. Q is a get-involved standout:
"Always ask questions! How was this product made? Do I really need it? Was
it tested on animals? When I'm done with it, how do I get rid of it without
hurting the earth? Can it be recycled or used again?" Cowabunga, dudes. RS
D.V. Ecological awareness
Rounds, Glen. Cowboys; written and illus. by Glen Rounds. Holiday House,
1991. ISBN 0-8234-0867-1. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
This litany of a cowboy's sunup to sundown chores
doesn't amount to much, textwise, but the artist's tall-tale humor of line and
expression will go a long way toward roping young listener's attention. The
red-eyed bronco, the startled cattle, and the deadpan cowpokes make fun of the
western myth as surely as they project it. Rounds has exaggerated his usual
heavy outlines, angling vertical shapes against long horizontals and adding
splatterbrush texture. The very minimalism of words and images leaves a lot of
space for imaginative play. Rustlers are conspicuously absent; the only villain
in the piece is a rattlesnake, whose "skin will make the cowboy a fancy belt and
hatband." BH
C.U. The West
[ 204]
Schoenherr, John. Bear; written and illus. by John Schoenherr. Philomel,
1991. ISBN 0-399-22177-8. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A bear cub wakes to find his mother gone. Searching
for her launches a maturation journey that he survives by successfully eluding
his enemies and by learning how to fish for salmon in a stream he tumbles into
by chance. Lending urgency to this simple nature narrative are the life-and-death
tone and the artist's sweeping watercolor paintings of an animal in constant
motion. The Alaskan wilderness makes a naturally dramatic landscape subject,
and Schoenherr amplifies his double spreads with open space, large-scale shapes
from varied perspectives, strong earth tones, and organic textures. BH
C.U. Nature study
Shura, Mary Francis. Gentle Annie; The True Story of a Civil War Nurse.
Scholastic, 1991. ISBN 0-590-44367-4. 184p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
"They called her, 'Gentle Annie,' 'Michigan Annie,'
and 'that brave little sergeant in petticoats"' says the explanatory afterword to
this biographical novel about Anna Blair Etheridge, Civil War nurse. Here she
accompanies her regiment to Blackburn's Ford, First Bull Run, and other battles,
tends them on the retreat to Washington, and works in hospitals and on a
hospital ship (occasionally brushing shoulders with other historical figures en
route). The hard slog and grime of war and nursing are well-conveyed here, but
the style never lifts the story above the formulaic despite its factual background.
Anachronisms in speech are jarringly common (doctors are described as being
"really into beef tea," and another character is going "gaga"), and one character
changes her name from Clara to Claire and back again for no apparent reason.
Still, Annie is a courageous heroine who lived through some important history,
and Shura has shaped her life into an easily readable story. DS
C.U. History-U.S.-Civil War
D.V. Courage; Devotion to a cause
Simon, Seymour. Neptune. Morrow, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09632-8;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09631-X. 32p. illus. with photographs. 
Library ed.
$13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
In the same format as earlier volumes Simon has
done for his series of astronomy books, the color photographs are startling in
their beauty and their vivid details. The square pages are spacious, the print
large, the integration of pictures and text judicious. 
The text itself is an
admirable example of good informational writing: clear, direct, and logical, with
good organization of material. 
Background information about the planet
Neptune serves as a basis for noting the new facts disclosed by the 1989 flyby of
Voyager 2 as it passed Neptune on the way to the edge of the solar system. ZS
C.U. Science
Simon, Sheridan. Stephen Hawking: Unlocking the Universe. Dillon, 1991.
ISBN 0-87518-455-3. 
112p. illus. with photographs. 
(People in Focus).
$12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Stephen Hawking, the British physicist, is clearly a
remarkable man, and this biography of him (based on interviews with the
subject's friends as well as printed sources) traces his life from his reassuringly
[205]
unbrilliant childhood through his major discoveries about black holes to his
current work in cosmology. It also describes his long battle with amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, which has severely limited him physically. Dr. Hawking's
personal life is treated respectfully, with the occasional anecdote hinting at the
sharp and funny character conveyed by quotes from Hawking himself, making
one wish for more of them. The author's writing tends to be clich6d ("the
mighty mind inside the weakened body"), and some of his observations are
dubious ("His disability has allowed him to push his mental abilities to their
natural limits"). While the science involved is explained in a simplified form, it
may still be too complicated for lay readers. Nonetheless, the book is valuable
as a diligent chronicle of the life-to-date of an important scientist and interesting
man. A bibliography and index are included. DS
C.U. Science
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Talbert, Marc. Pillow of Clouds. Dial, 1991. ISBN 0-8037-0901-3. 204p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
Chester, who is the narrator and who has turned
thirteen while visiting his father in Santa Fe, resents the fact that a court
decision made years before when his parents were divorced means he must choose
(at thirteen) where he will live. Quiet and sensitive, Chester is torn. Will it
hurt his mother, a manipulative alcoholic, if he chooses to live with his father?
The latter and his wife, Florence, are people of warmth and integrity; Chester
knows he will be happier with them and makes his choice. His mother's
subsequent suicide attempt is an emotional burden Chester has to learn to live
with and understand. Talbert achieves, in this compassionate story, a non-
judgmental attitude that makes it clear that his mother loves Chester, but that
the quality of her love is selfish, limited by her own emotional needs; as he
learns more, his guilt is assuaged and his love for her becomes easier to express.
Chester's friendship with two neighboring brothers, Jos6 and Arturo, provides a
needed light touch in a story that is serious but not depressing. ZS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Mother-son relations
Weil, Lisl. Wolferl: The First Six Years in the Life of Wolfgang Amadeus
Mozart 1756-1762; written and illus. by Lisl Weil. Holiday House, 1991.
ISBN 0-8234-0876-0. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Like Catherine Brighton's Mozart (BCCB 12/90),
Weil's picture book concentrates on the early life of the composer, a focus that
does not allow full scope for the composer's achievements but that young
children will enjoy, particularly in the Guinness-like accomplishments of the
prodigy. And the miracle was already apparent with the young Mozart's
compositions sounding like "the voices of angels," according to the Archbishop
of Salzburg. While Weil's drawing is sometimes crude, her ink-and-watercolor
pictures have an effervescence missing from Brighton's book, if they are a little
giddy in their exuberance (Mama Mozart waving a sign that says "baby boy" on
the occasion of Mozart's birth, for example). 
The text is generally more
restrained, save for the occasional outburst: "And then something quite
unexpected happened! Very, very unexpected!" A glossary of musical terms is
appended. RS
C.U. 
Music
[206 ]
Westall, Robert. The Promise. Scholastic, 1991. 
ISBN 0-590-43760-7.
[176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
"Promise that if I ever get lost, you'll come and find
me?" Bob, fourteen, has a terrible crush on Valerie, so of course he promises,
little knowing where his word will take him. Valerie is beautiful but frail,
spending as much time sick at home as she does at school-a bit of a relief for
Bob, afraid of taunts from the other boys. It's the early days of World War II,
and all the boys become caught up in the exhilaration of air raids and plane-
spotting: "I won't say I never thought about Valerie; but the War Effort had to
come first." This story of first love and war has an almost autobiographical
feeling, so it's all the more unsettling when Valerie dies and begins to haunt
Bob, insisting that he keep his promise. Thematic comparison with Keats' La
Belle Dame would not come amiss here, and Valerie's transformation from nice
girl to demanding ghost is quite credibly done, proceeding seamlessly from the
realistic story. 
Bob's narration is reminiscential but not nostalgic, his
recollections confiding and direct. The pink-and-purple jacket art depicting a
1990s Bob and a bodice-ripper Valerie is romantically effective if somewhat
misleading. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Wood, Audrey. Piggies; by Audrey and Don Wood; illus. by Don Wood.
Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-256341-5. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
1-4 yrs. 
With a winning narrative pattern and graphic aplomb
equal to that of the Woods' Napping House, this capitalizes on toddlers'
fascination with their fingers. Young listeners will hasten to hold up their
thumbs in response to the first double spread picturing larger-than-life child
hands with gleeful pigs perched on each thumb-"I've got two fat little
piggies,"-followed by "two smart little piggies" (index fingers), etc.
Meanwhile, the pigs are cavorting, and the pages are changing from hot yellow
to cold blue to sudsy pink to mud brown, depending on the condition of both
fingers and pigs. The games end with bedtime kisses as the fingertips touch and
the light fades. This is what the Woods do best-boldly designed images
stylized to heighten the rhythms of a cumulative read-aloud. It's a jackpot for
both story hours and family sharing. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
D.V. Imaginative powers
Yenawine, Philip. Colors; Library ed. ISBN 0-385-30314-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
385-30254-1. Lines; Library ed. ISBN 0-385-30313-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-
30253-3. Shapes; Library ed. ISBN 0-385-30315-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-30255-
X.Stories; Library ed. ISBN 0-385-30316-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-30256-8.
Each book: 
Museum of Modern Art/Delacorte, 1991. 
[30p.] illus. with
photographs. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
4-7 yrs. 
Using art work from New York's Museum of Modem
Art as examples, Yenawine (director of education at the Museum) attempts to
demonstrate concepts of line, shape, and color, as well as to develop children's
visual sophistication and appreciation of moder art. The books work best when
they stay simple: "Sometimes the shapes are exact (Composition by Mondrian).
Sometimes they aren't" (Arrangement According to the Laws of chance by Arp).
"Creative thinking" questions are sometimes provocative-"What can you tell
[207 ]
about this family?"-for a Henry Moore sculpture, and sometimes vapid: facing
prints of a Roy Lichtenstein beach bunny and Wyeth's Christina's World
accompany the suggestion to "Make up a story about what they are doing. How
do you think they feel?". Characterizing the colors of Monet's Water Lilies as
"pretty and cheerful" seems not only clich6d but inaccurate, and the contrast
between a picture in which colors "Make things look very real" and one in which
they make "things seem strange" is subverted when the "very real" colors are in a
photograph, as opposed to the "strange" example of an expressionistic painting.
The reproductions are good, as is the selection of subjects. Parents and teachers,
and kids themselves, may come up with better-suited questions and captions than
the ones presented here. Each book includes notes on each piece of art featured.
RS
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
Yolen, Jane. All Those Secrets of the World; illus. by Leslie Baker. Little,
1991. ISBN 0-316-96891-9. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Gentle yet direct, this small story of a girl's
experience of a father gone to war has the sense of children's reality that was
missing from George Ella Lyon's similarly themed Cecil's Story, reviewed last
month. Four-year-old Janie (the dedication seems to indicate an autobiographical
source for the story) is excited when her father ships out: he gives her a hundred
kisses, she gets to wave a flag, she and her cousin are treated by Grandma to ice
cream. But the next day, when Janie and Michael are playing at the beach, she
becomes frightened when he runs off into the distance to show her how things
look smaller when they're far away. "'Come back, come back,' I cried, suddenly
afraid he'd disappear forever like the ships gone from the horizon, dropped over
the edge of the world where no policeman could ever find him." The metaphor is
unforced and apt, especially so when a two-years-older Janie recalls it upon her
father's return: "When you are far away, everything is smaller. But now you are
here, so I am big." Yolen's text is comfortably poetic, if occasionally self-
conscious, and finds a quiet match in Baker's watercolors, which capture the
World War Two setting in cool blue-green tones. While both words and pictures
have the perspective of memory, they are not nostalgic, and may well evoke an
empathic response from children scanning an uncertain horizon today. RS
D.V. Parent-child relations