Aamundsen, Nina Ring. Two Short and One Long; written and tr. from the
Norwegian by Nina Ring Aamundsen. Houghton, 1990. ISBN 0-395-52434-2.
103p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
The narrator, Jonas, is twelve and his friend Einar a
year older, although their dialogue often sounds as though they are younger.
Nevertheless, in this story of two Norwegian boys who admit an Afghan
newcomer into their close relationship, there are nuances that are far from
simplistic. Hewad, the Afghani boy, is quickly befriended by Jonas, but Einar
(who seems to have a sad secret) is more reluctant to accept the newcomer.
Aamundsen is reminiscent of Beverly Cleary in the way she conveys serious
issues through light handling, and in the merging of familial relationships with
the other aspects of the protagonist's life. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Intercultural understanding
Alexander, Sally Hobart. Sarah's Surprise; illus. by Jill Kastner. Macmillan,
1990. ISBN 0-02-700391-4. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
Mom and Sarah, who is seven, climb rocks to reach a
beach where they can gather mussels as a surprise for Dad. Sarah tends to balk
along the way, complaining about the potential for danger: what if she falls?
what if she slips? what if it rains? Mom, with a patience that is exemplary if
unconvincing, encourages Sarah to forge ahead. When Mom slips and hurts her
foot, Sarah turns brave and goes off in the rain to get Dad. 
Mission
accomplished, Sarah is proud and cheerful, even saying she might eat some
mussels, which she disdained the year before. The plot is a time-worn variant of
the rising-to-occasion (of child or pet) and is adequately but rather stiltedly told.
The paintings are more impressive in evoking the rocky beach and driving rain
than they are in portraying the human figures. ZS
D.V. Fear, overcoming; Mother-daughter relations
Baird, Thomas. Smart Rats. Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020365-X;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020364-1. 199p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Much science-fiction written for teens simply sets an
old-fashioned grand adventure in the future; here's one whose story and theme are
as bleak as its setting. Ecological disaster has amost ruined the world; those
areas still habitable are governed by faceless authoritarian command. In an
attempt to relieve overcrowding, each family is being forced to surrender one
[77]
child (of the allowed two) to re-colonize areas below the Equator. Because
Laddie's mother makes such a scene over the new law, the magistrate sadistically
commands her and Laddie's father to make the choice themselves: between
Laddie, seventeen and something of a rebel, and his strange little sister Greta,
who is given to tantrums and troublemaking. The novel is crowded, with so
much attention devoted to world-building that the plot sometimes seems like an
afterthought. However, the atmosphere and what does emerge of the story are
effectively grim, witness the fact that the children supposedly relocated to South
America are actually being drowned at sea. Laddie himself is more symbol than
character, but the scene where he kills Greta rather than allow her to betray their
family is nevertheless dramatic. Sprawling but involving, this is a tensely
atmospheric beginning that deserves a sequel. RS
Barron, T. A. Heartlight. Philomel, 1990. ISBN 0-399-22180-8. 
272 p.
$15.95.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
Kaitlyn's beloved grandfather, an absentminded
astrophysicist, has discovered that the sun's ration of Pure Condensed Light
(PCL) has become dangerously diminished, and so he must go, via cosmic
butterfly, to the star Trethoniel to bring back some more. Kate bravely follows
him, encountering not only Morpheus the butterfly (twin to Orpheus, who
carries Grandfather), but the Darkness, the People of the Snow, the Great
Trouble, and the Voice. In its combination of pseudo-science, fantasy, and
religion (the Pattern), this first novel is obviously indebted to Madeline L'Engle
but lacks her sure sense of storytelling. There is simply too much going on
here, in a plot riddled with abrupt shifts and cliched fantasy motifs. While much
of the action is potentially exciting, the overuse of exclamation points and just-
in-time escapes creates an atmosphere of freneticism rather than suspense. The
scene where Kate confronts the Voice is much like the scene in A Wrinkle in
Time where Meg confronts It, but here the debate is interminably prolonged, and
the deliverance of Wisdom throughout the story gets a little pompous: "If you
trust in the Pattern, you trust in yourself." The ending, in which Grandfather
dies, demonstrates an integrity to which the book has aspired all along. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Faith; Grandfather-child relations
Bender, Lionel. Eurotunnel. Watts, 1990. ISBN 0-531-17178-7. 32p. illus.
and with photographs. (Engineers at Work). $8.90.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
Come 1993, if all goes well, it should be possible to
take the train from London to Paris, courtesy of the three parallel 31-mile
tunnels currently being built beneath the English Channel (or, as the French
have it, La Manche). As the series title implies, this is a book about the
technology of the tunnels and their construction, and students needing
information on the controversy that has attended the project will have to look
elsewhere. Facts are conveyed through text, captions, and illustrations, resulting
in a visually attractive but conceptually haphazard arrangement of material.
Most instructive, and bound to appeal to diagramaniacs, are the schematic
drawings of the route, the tunnel-boring machines (TBMs), the construction set-
ups, and the designs for how it all-eventually-will work. A few simple
projects, a list of important tunnels, a glossary, and an index follow the abruptly
concluded text. RS
C.U. Social studies
[78]
Borden, Louise. 
The Neighborhood Trucker; illus. by Sandra Speidel.
Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-590-42584-6. 32p. $12.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
With bright pastel illustrations that capture both the
quality of little-boy romance and its object-trucks-this is a poetic,
occasionally self-conscious, portrait of vocational obsession. Elliot watches the
trucks rumble by on their way from the concrete yard down the street, and his
favorite is number 44. Elliot loves all kinds of trucks: dump trucks, flatbeds,
garbage trucks, the big rigs on the interstate, fire trucks ... but the heart of his
dream comes true the day he gets a ride in number 44. The essence of a dream is
in its details, and both author and illustrator are careful to provide plenty.
There's a litany of eighteen-wheeler models; the driver of 44 is named Slim;
Elliot's truck play is specified, including plowing the driveway, grading the
field, and going with his father to the truck yard to count trucks. The pictures
are sharply drawn, carefully differentiating, through shape and colors, the various
trucks pictured and praised. Both text and pictures have an almost soft quality
that should make the book a good bedtime choice for revved-up trucksters. RS
D.V. Occupational orientation
Brighton, Catherine. 
Mozart: Scenes from the Childhood of the Great
Composer; written and illus. by Catherine Brighton. Doubleday, 1990. Library
ed. ISBN 0-385-41538-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-41537-0. 26p. Library ed.
$15.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
Even children unaware of Mozart's precocious
minuets and marches may be impressed by the story of the six-year-old's
appearance before Empress Maria Theresa, or his blindfolded performance for the
King of France. The story of Mozart's early years is here told by his sister
Nannerl, also talented but "too old to be a miracle child." The style is bland and
deliberate, with a lack of fussiness that would have been welcome in the
illustrations. At once cute and cool, the pictures combine elaborate formalized
patterns, posed figures, and stage lighting for a sometimes striking but more
often affected air. The is a facile introduction, not as lively as Monjo's Letters
to Horseface (BCCB 4/76) for older readers, but still an easy exercise for small
hands. RS
C.U. Music
Brooks, Martha. Paradise Caft and Other Stories. Joy Street/Little, 1990.
ISBN 0-316-10978-9. 124p. $14.95.
R* 
Gr. 7-12. 
First published in Canada in 1988, these fourteen
impressively fresh short stories portray adolescents in aching throes of emotion.
The first four suggest the range of subjects: "Running with Marty" is about a
girl who hurts her boyfriend almost beyond recall before she learns to value him;
"A Boy and his Dog" details the death of an aged pet; "King of the Roller Rink"
describes a girl jilted because she's from the wrong social class; and "The Way
Things Are" depicts a retarded boy who becomes part of a farm family. Once or
twice, the tone seems self-conscious, as in "Dying for Love" ("My mother's
going through early menopause and I'm going through late puberty"), but the
writing is consistently adroit. Two friends with a crush on the same boy keep
identical five-year diaries, which one of them describes: "And each night under
hissing street lamps we sighed, rolling our eyes, before we separated to be alone
with Karl on the crisply lined pink paper." 
The cast is diverse, including
[79]
French, Indian, and black characters. 
All share the pain and triumph of
maturation with which young adult readers can identify. BH
D.V. Growing up
Carpenter, Angelica Shirley. Frances Hodgson Burnett: Beyond the Secret
Garden; by Angelica Shirley Carpenter and Jean Shirley. Lemer, 1990. ISBN 0-
8225-4905-0. [128p]. (Lerner Biography). $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
This biography of the author of Little Lord
Fauntleroy and The Secret Garden relies on a light, semi-fictionalized approach
to tell the story of Burnett's domestic and writing life. It focuses particularly on
her popularity with readers (if not with critics) and her relationship with her
sons, although it tends to skim rather than probe. The style, both choppy
("Frances had always liked stories. She learned to read at the age of three. Soon
she could read the Bible, and history books and romances") and inclined to emote
("They called Vivian a sissy! They called Lionel a sissy!"), obscures the solid
research that the authors have done. The attempt to dramatize Burnett's life by
keeping to her point of view frequently confuses things: the end of one chapter
states "She would not marry Stephen!" and in the next we are told that she did.
Still, readers who enjoy Burnett's books may find her romantic and self-
romanticized life absorbing. The book is lavishly illustrated with photographs
and maps; there is an index, bibliography and selected list of Burnett's works.
DS
C.U. Literature
Catterwell, Thelma. 
Sebastian Lives in a Hat; illus. by Kerry Argent.
Kane/Miller, 1990. ISBN 0-916291-30-8. 32p. (Cranky Nell Books). $12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
First published in Australia, this has a simple, direct,
but rather static text about a baby wombat whose mother was killed by a car
while he was still small enough to be carried in her pouch. A soft knit hat is a
comfortable substitute provided by the people who feed Sebastian and attend to
such needs as warmth and cleanliness. The story points out that Sebastian will
some day be big and strong, able to hunt and to dig a burrow. The pictures,
spaciously composed and almost photorealistic in depicting the vulnerable pink
baby, are a bit repetitious. Bland, but pleasant enough to appeal to young
children. ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Cecil, Laura, comp. Boo! Stories to Make You Jump; illus. by Emma
Chichester Clark. Greenwillow, 1990. ISBN 0-688-09842-8. 93p. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Line and wash pictures on almost every page
contribute to the nervous pleasure relished by most readers of ghost stories. The
contents show variety in subject, style, and age range, including some selections
that can be read aloud to younger children and some that may appeal to readers in
the upper grades. Tales as familiar as "The Hairy Toe" and "The Three Billy-
Goats-Gruff" are here; so are less well-known selections from Margaret Mahy,
Diana Wynne Jones, and William PMne du Bois. The print is large and the
illustrations judiciously placed in this mini-anthology, first published in Great
Britain. It includes prose and poetry, and many of the selections are appropriate
for telling. ZS
C.U. Storytelling
[80]
Clements, Bruce. Tom Loves Anna Loves Tom. Farrar, 1990. ISBN 0-374-
37673-5. 167p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
The title says it all, but the characters are so
involving that you want to read their whole story anyway. The question is not
whether Tom and Anna will fall in love; they do that as soon as Anna comes to
Tom's town for a few weeks' visit with her Aunt Barbara. The question is how
they will sustain each other through self-disclosures and mutual experiences.
Anna's brother has recently drowned during a storm on Lake Michigan, her
brother's best friend tried to rape her afterward, and her beloved aunt dies at the
end of the book. Since the first two events happen off stage and in the past, the
book can focus on Anna's vulnerability and relationship with Tom instead of on
melodramatic action. Even Aunt Barbara's illness, which does add tension to the
plot, is low-keyed to suit the subtle nuances of dialogue and dynamics between
the two main characters. Tom's quirky best friend, Hank, is something of a
distraction, even an anomaly, but he does serve a function as foil for Tom's
steadfast good nature. Both families are well realized, too. All in all, it's a
reliably handled cast, even down to the villain, who gets most reliably handled of
all by trusty Tom. BH
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Death, adjustment to
Conlon-McKenna, Marita. Under the Hawthorn Tree; illus. by Donald Teskey.
Holiday House, 1990. ISBN 0-8234-0838-8. 153p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
After baby Bridget's death from an illness that has
decimated their Irish village during the famine of the late 1840s, Mother leaves
home to search for Father, long gone to look for a job on the roadworks.
Twelve-year-old Eily, in charge of her younger brother and sister, must deal with
the English landlord's overseer, who insists the children go to a workhouse
along with other tenants lacking any means of support. This is the story of the
three children's trek to a distant town, where they hope to find help from two old
grand-aunts about whom they've often heard from their mother. The death,
destruction, and disease threatening their progress at every step are grim, and
their valid suspicion of a desperate, homeless population leads them through
several narrow escapes. The historical situation is projected through credible
characterizations and brisk action that will sustain readers' interest to a fortuitous
ending. The unusual setting will be especially valuable as background for
students exploring the impact of Irish immigration or researching family roots.
BH
C.U. Ireland
D.V. Self-reliance
Cooney, Barbara. Hattie and the Wild Waves: A Story from Brooklyn; written
and illus. by Barbara Cooney. Viking, 1990. ISBN 0-670-83056-9. 40p.
$14.95.
R* 
Gr. K-3. 
Cooney at her best here, with text and illustration
serving to record social history, with art that is handsome and authentically
period-detailed, and with a story that has pace and color. The book is based on
the life of Barbara Cooney's mother, the daughter of an immigrant family that
was industrious, affectionate, and successful. The setting of an idyllic childhood
split between a New York mansion, a summer house on Rockaway Beach, a
Long Island estate, and a Brooklyn hotel serves as a glamorous backdrop for
[ 81
Hattie's emerging determination to become an artist. Architectural details, as
well as those of furnishings and clothing, are deftly drawn, and the judiciously
used colors are rich but subdued. ZS
Cushman, Kathleen. 
Circus Dreams: The Making of a Circus Artist; by
Kathleen Cushman and Montana Miller; illus. with photographs by Michael
Carroll. Joy Street/Little, 1990. ISBN 0-316-16561-1. 90p. $15.95.
R* 
Gr. 6-10. 
This account of eighteen-year-old Montana Miller's
training as a trapeze artist at the National Center for Circus Arts at ChAlons-sur-
Marne, France, stands out as unusually honest in a literature that tends to
glamorize career immersion. Montana's pain as she trains for her specialty is
due to physical strain, lack of confidence, and a sense of isolation (she's the only
American in an intensive program). At one point, she decides to leave after the
year is over, but a final performance convinces her to continue, and an afterword
reports her first job with a troupe touring Europe. Diary-like, the year's work is
segmented by date-between one and four entries per month-but is related in
third person rather than first, so that Montana's activities benefit from an
observer's perspective. 
The black-and-white action shots are beautifully
incorporated into the text, a complex task with so much interplay between
graphics and description of routines. The strength, exhaustion, and vulnerability
reflected in Montana's stocky body and expressive face, her struggle with timing,
and her successful trapeze flights are all vividly portrayed here. This is a real
find for kids who have longed to join the circus, or who just love to go, or who
harbor other "crazy" dreams of their own. And for adults who remember those
states of mind. BH
D.V. Occupational orientation
Dahl, Roald. Esio Trot; illus. by Quentin Blake. Viking, 1990. ISBN 0-670-
83451-3. 64p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
This is Dahl in a mellow mood, just as funny as he
usually is but not as tart. Blake's illustrations, with few but telling flyaway
lines, reflect the breezy, amicable mood of the text in a preposterous (but not
impossible) love story. Mr. Hoppy is too shy to disclose his love to the
charming widow, Mrs. Silver, whose balcony is just below his. Knowing that
she dotes on her pet tortoise, Alfie, but worries because Alfie doesn't grow, Mr.
Hoppy gives Mrs. Silver a secret formula (the words are written backward and
should delight readers) for growth. Meanwhile he fills his apartment with
tortoises of all sizes and runs in substitutes for Alfie. Mrs. Silver, harmlessly
duped and delighted, invites her mentor down for a closer look, and the besotted
Mr. Hoppy proposes and is accepted. It isn't often that a love story offers appeal
to primary grades readers, but this one should prove diverting. ZS
Dragonwagon, Crescent. Home Place; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. Macmillan,
1990. ISBN 0-02-733190-3. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Walking through the woods, a red-haired narrator
discovers the ruins of a house and imagines a black family who might have lived
there. "A chimney, made of stone,... a round blue glass marble, a nail. A
horseshoe and a piece of plate. A small yellow bottle. A china doll's arm."
From these she projects the lives of a boy and girl, husband and wife, uncle and
grandparents, a clan eventually disbanded when its members die or move away:
[82]
"still, whether anyone sees, or not, whether anyone listens, or not, the daffodils
come up, to trumpet their good news forever and forever." Dragonwagon's text
is evocative, and Pinkney's graphics are intensely atmospheric here. Even the
endpapers simulate peeling wallpaper. In one picture that recalls images from
Toni Morrison's Beloved, a woman seems to step through time as she passes
from sunlight to shadow through a doorway. Always at home with nature
spreads, the artist has quickened his portraiture with more graceful lines and
planes; the family dinner makes a powerful scene. In spite of its picture-book
format, this richly illustrated prose poem is better suited to independent readers
beginning to develop a sophisticated sense of time. The words and art together
will have an impact on children realizing their own ancestral past as part of
history. BH
C.U. History
D.V. Everyday life concepts
Eriksson, Ake. Joel, Jesper, and Julia; written and illus. by Ake Eriksson.
Carolrhoda, 1990. ISBN 0-87614-419-9. 
[32p]. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Joel and his pet cat Jesper befriend a runt-of-the-litter
piglet, Julia, and make sure the baby gets enough to eat (readers may be
surprised to see a pig being milked). When Julia is fully grown, Joel's father
wants to send her to the slaughterhouse, but Joel hides her. Eventually, Julia
produces a litter, having mated with a boar. Joel and Jesper emerge from the
woods with the new runt-of-the-litter. "This is Jonathan, and I'm going to take
care of him," Joel announces. "And," the book ends, "that was the end of that."
The illustrations display a narrative momentum lacking in the text, which is a
bit labored. The line-and-wash drawings have an informal ease that is a nice fit
for a not-quite-believable story first published in Sweden. ZS
D.V. Pets, care of
Fleischman, Sid. The Midnight Horse; illus. by Peter Sis. Greenwillow, 1990.
ISBN 0-688-09441-4. 84p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Every ingredient appropriate to a fantasy adventure
with Gothic overtones and a romantic base has been included by the author. An
orphan boy, a charming heroine (about to be bilked out of her heritage by a
curmudgeon who also is prepared to cheat the orphan), 
a rascal, and a ghost
who is also a magician. How this remains credible is a mystery, the solution of
which can be attributed only to Fleischman's gift for keeping derring-do in
proportion and leavening melodrama with humor. Touch, the orphan, is
instrumental in spotting a thief, saving his inheritance and Miss Sally's,
outwitting nasty Judge Wigglesworth, and avoiding the orphanage. Fast-paced
fun. ZS
Freedman, Russell. Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Clarion, 1990. ISBN 0-
89919-379-X. 
[200p] illus. with photographs. 
$16.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R* 
Gr. 7-. 
Profusely illustrated with photographs, this is a
biography that is outstanding for its candor and objectivity as well as for the
smooth integration of personal and political details into a coherent portrait of the
man and of the major events that affected his political life. An impressive list of
[83]
sources attests to Freedman's research; the index has been carefully compiled; a
list of places to visit is included. The book should be of interest to adult as well
as young adult students of history, and it gives with remarkable clarity
assessments of such major events as World War II, the Great Depression, the
New Deal, and the changes in social services established during Roosevelt's long
tenure in the White House. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
French, Michael. Split Image. Bantam, 1990. ISBN 0-553-07021-5. [192p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
After his mother dies, sixteen-year-old Garrett leaves
his small-town Arkansas home to live with his father, whom Garrett hasn't seen
in ten years. Clarence, Garrett's father, has some kind of hush-hush job in the
aerospace industry; it will be apparent to the reader, just ahead of Garrett, that
Clarence is a spy. We are told rather than convinced of Clarence's magnetism,
but it is believable that he recruits Garrett into his work, which involves,
Clarence says, spying on the South Koreans to keep the U.S. safe from the
North Koreans. This doesn't offer the suspense a good spy novel needs, but the
story is sturdily enough constructed to keep readers interested in the conflicts and
nuances of Clarence's and Garrett's relationship. Psychologizing is overt ("For
my father, I can do anything in the world") but spot-on; high-tech details of spy
cameras are equally labored but in themselves interesting. RS
D.V. Father-son relations; Patriotism
Geras, Adele. My Grandmother's Stories: A Collection of Jewish Folk Tales;
illus. by Jael Jordan. Knopf, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90910-9; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-679-80910-4. 96p. Library ed. $18.99; Trade ed. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Traditional Jewish tales are framed in ten segments of
a first-person narrative in which a young girl recounts the situation inspiring
each story her grandmother tells. In the first, "Bavsi's Feast," for instance, the
child is helping to make a strudel when her grandmother launches the story of
the rich miser to whom King Solomon denies food in order to teach him a
lesson about greed. Storytellers will recognize the fools of Chelm in some
tales, along with a tale popularized in several picture books (Margot Zemach's It
Could Always Be Worse, etc.) and here called "An Overcrowded House." The
writing flows well and the selections are varied, including a robust trickster tale
("The Faces of the Czar") and a delicate ghost story ("A Phantom at the
Wedding"). Some readers may resist the tale-within-a-tale format, but in most
cases it provides the stories with some context rather than burying them. The
pen-and-ink drawings show linear integrity, whether in color or black-and-white,
with stipple and hatch providing textural variation. Read aloud, this could thrive
with audiences younger than the reading level implies. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Goble, Paul, ad. Iktomi and the Ducks: A Plains Indian Story; ad. and illus. by
Paul Goble. Jackson/Orchard, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08483-3; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-531-05883-2. 32p. Library Ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
[84 ]
R 
5-8 yrs. 
"There goes that white guy, Paul Goble, telling
another story about me. . .. My attorney will Sioux," says Iktomi. This
picture book, even more than the first two in the series, reveals the artist as
trickster. Here Iktomi starts out looking for his horse to ride in a dress parade.
On the trail ("who could possibly ride such a wild horse?"), Iktomi spies some
ducks and coaxes them to dance with their eyes closed, bopping them on the head
and cooking them on a fire, his every move watched by Coyote. As usual,
Iktomi proves his own undoing and loses out on the ducks. Never mind: "I
never liked roast duck-too greasy-bad for my cholesterol level." The special
effects-a runaway horse, a shadowy coyote, some ridiculous ducks, two sinister
trees that trap Iktomi between creaking branches--are based on a witty use of
silhouettes. Other visual jokes include leaf patterns that echo the ducks' tracks,
associating the catcher with the caught. Rhythmic shapes keep every page
action-packed, and the varied typefaces allow several levels of narration to
proceed simultaneously, ending with that time-honored cliffhanger, "what do you
think he will get up to next?" BH
C.U. Indians of North America
Hall, Lynn. Fair Maiden. Scribner's, 1990. ISBN 0-684-10213-6. 
120p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
At the beginning of her senior year (although the
cover portrays her as much younger), Jennifer volunteers to play the role of a
"fair maiden" at a local Renaissance fair. For five weekends she lives in a
fifteenth-century world where she meets a lute player named John. Outside the
fantasy world of the fair, Jennifer's life is jarring-she and her mother are
pretending not to dread the return of Jenny's violent brother from a psychiatric
hospital. During her time at the fair Jennifer tries to escape her harsh life and
eventually comes to accept that she cannot. The scene where Jennifer loses her
virginity to John is done tactfully but the one in which her brother attacks
Jennifer and their mother is realistically violent. Although there's enough
dreamy romance here for fans of love stories-there's also drama for those who
want something more. KP
Hamilton, Virginia, ad. The Dark Way: Stories from the Spirit World; illus.
by Lambert Davis. Harcourt, 1990. ISBN 0-15-222340-1. 154p. $19.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Twenty-five "tales out of darkness" range from an
opening anecdotal description of the Irish banshee to an original story about the
exorcizing of a cat witch, based on African-American folklore. The collection
includes Baba Yaga, Medusa, Fenris the Wolf, Manabozo, Childe Rowland,
Joseph Golem, and a number of less familiar figures of the uncanny from diverse
cultures. This is a twilight zone where gods and tricksters mingle, the human
and the supernatural overlap, and reality mixes freely with superstition. Some of
the legends are full, some are fragmentary; but Hamilton never dilutes the power
of the haunting central images. 
A note following each story gives brief
background on it; however, the concluding general bibliography does not indicate
which titles serve as sources for specific tales. The full-color art projects
forceful impressions of an eerie cast of characters, minimizing detail to effect
concentrated, slightly surreal compositions. BH
C.U. Storytelling
[85
Hayes, Sarah. Nine Ducks Nine; written and illus. by Sarah Hayes. Lothrop,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09535-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09534-8. 26p.
Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Rollicking double-spread watercolors depict the
fortunes of "nine ducks nine" (walking in a line), with a comical fox stalking
them as, one by one, they fly to a rickety bridge. Part of the fun is comic-book
balloon comments: "Stupid fox," thinks one of the ducks; "Stupid ducks,"
thinks the fox. As in the case of Rosie's Walk by Pat Hutchins (BCCB 6/68),
with which this would make a fine companion, the fox's pounce is his downfall.
Children learning to count, either forwards or backwards, will get a quick shiver
of suspense from the picture where he finally makes his move, even though the
happy outcome is clear. Hayes' fox has something in common with John
Burningham's, but the total effect is all hers. BH
C.U. 
Counting
Hessell, Jenny. Staying at Sam's; illus. by Jenny Williams. Lippincott, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32433-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32432-4. 26p. Library
ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
A small boy is the narrator, whose experience as an
overnight guest will probably evoke a recognition reflex in the read-aloud
audience who have made similar discoveries about lifestyles that are different
from their own families'. The modest text begins, "Staying at Sam's house is
like visiting another planet. You wouldn't believe the things they do." Sam's
family cheerfully kiss and cuddle and share the bathroom: "You wouldn't see that
happening at our place in a million years!" When Sam is invited to return the
visit, he says "It's always fun at your house. Kind of like being on another
planet" Realistic crayon pictures, notable for their vernal colors and expressive
composition, are smoothly integrated with the text to emphasize both the
informality and affection of Sam's home and the pleased participation of the
speaker in its coziness. ZS
D.V. Everyday life concepts; Family relations
Holland, Isabelle. The Journey Home. Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-590-43110-2.
212p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Set in the late 1800s, this is a story based on the
work of the Children's Aid Society of New York and the "orphan train" they
organized, sending homeless children to families in the West. The children here
are Maggie (twelve) and her sister Annie (seven) whose only parent has just died.
This is a story of adjustment (New York/Kansas) and acceptance (Catholic
orphans/Protestant adoptive parents) and it is adequate in structure and style but
slow-paced and rather purposive, reading more like an information-bearing case
history that is fictionalized than a narrative with its own momentum. ZS
C.U. Courage
D.V. 
Responsibility
Hooker, Ruth. Matthew the Cowboy; illus. by Cat Bowman Smith. Whitman,
1990. ISBN 0-8075-4999-1. 32p. $12.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
"A cowboy suit! Just what I've always wanted."
Six-year-old Matthew is pleased with his birthday present, immediately going
[ 86 ]
outside-and out West-to be a cowboy. He gets some "jingle, jangle, jingle"
spurs at the general store; finds a beautiful white horse, Silver, on the plain; and
meets cowboy Rocky, who enlists Matthew's help in roundin' up some cattle
rustlers. This pokerfaced fantasy is a deft presentation of wish-fulfillment at its
most sublime, and the watercolor cartoon illustrations have lots of appealing
energy, especially in the sequence where Matthew-"Ya-a-a-ah!"-confronts Bad
Bart. Little boys, of course, will love this, but liberated parents will be pleased
that Matthew's cowboy friends are a multiethnic mix, and include a ponytailed
woman, Tex. At the end, Matthew hangs up his spurs, bids a tearful goodbye to
Silver, and goes in for dinner. "'How about some grub?' his mother asked."
Home on the range. RS
D.V. Imaginative powers
Hooks, William H. The Ballad of Belle Dorcas; illus. by Brian Pinkney.
Knopf, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-94645-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-84645-1.
40p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
"Belle Dorcas was free issue, her daddy being a white
master, her mama being his house slave." But though Belle has papers, she falls
in love with a slave named Joshua, whom a new master plans to sell. Granny
Lizard's conjure bag turns Joshua into a cedar tree by day, a man by night; even
when the tree is chopped down to make a smokehouse, Joshua is resurrected
from the cedar shingles nightly until Belle Dorcas ages and dies, leaving "two
young cedar trees ... growing side by side." An episodic legend depending on
magic to resolve each threat, this combines the haunting motif of a lover
transformed with a tragic historical drama. The author's note cites an oral tale
from his Carolina coast childhood as the only source and gives information on
Gullah conjure tales as well as on the "free" offspring of slave masters and slave
women. Pinkney's full-color scratchboard illustrations swirl white lines against
black backgrounds in a contrast that naturally highlights the secrecy and danger
of the action. The visual effect is one of muted suspense, a tone especially
appropriate for the misty past recreated here. Although this is a picture book in
appearance, it's actually better suited for reading aloud to elementary students
who have some historical sense in which to fit the complex elements of fantasy
and reality. BH
D.V. Loyalty
Howard, Ellen. Sister. Karl/Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-31653-4. 148p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
While Sister follows Edith, Herself (BCCB 5/87) it is
set earlier (1886) and is also based on events in the lives of the author's
ancestors. Edith has not yet been born in this story of Alena, her oldest sister.
Alena yearns to stay in school and is encouraged by her teacher to think that she
might get a scholarship to go to Normal School. Her hopes are dashed by the
fact that her mother, brooding over the death of a newborn daughter, needs
Alena's help at home. Alena is also stunned by grief, having felt close to the
baby she had delivered because Father was away. Characterization is strong and
consistent; Howard gives a convincing picture of the busy life of an Illinois farm
family as well as a touching picture of the relationships among its members.
The writing style is strong and flowing, and Howard manages to instill
excitement and momentum into the drama of everyday life. ZS
[87]
Ingpen, Robert. The Age of Acorns; written and illus. by Robert Ingpen.
Bedrick/Blackie, 1990. ISBN 0-87226-436-X. 30p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Hans Christian Andersen Medalist Ingpen, in this
story of a toy bear that has been left outdoors by the "Others" (children), has
created a series of soft, almost grainy, and highly textural pictures. The colors
are quiet, reflecting the poignant wistfulness of the story, as Bear ponders his
isolation and apparent abandonment and faces imaginary terrors, creatures
marvelously depicted but possibly frightening for some children. Like The Idle
Bear (BCCB 12/87) this is static, and it is also too somber a story to have great
popular appeal. The messages of comfort (the dark can't really harm you, and
those who love you will rescue you) are nevertheless strong. ZS
James, J. Alison. Sing for a Gentle Rain. Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-
31561-9. 211p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Contemporary teenager James has been troubled by
dreams of heat and thirst; Spring Rain, an Anasazi girl who lived centuries
before, worries about the endless drought that has come upon the desert where
her people live. She also wonders what man will give her a child, since there is
no one eligible for marriage in her cliff-dwelling community. This time-shift
fantasy has a suspenseful, romantic, and very appealing plot that is easier to
follow than many in the genre. The Southwestern setting is unusual and well-
realized, and the scenes in Spring Rain's time-most of the book-smoothly
incorporate interesting details about Anasazi culture (according to an author's
note, facts were vetted by historians). Both teens are convincingly of their
respective times, and their crosscultural romance is realistically awkward-
witness James' distress when he is asked by the community of elders to engage
in a hunting competition to demonstrate his manly mettle. 
Despite its
occasionally sexy moments this isn't a sophisticated story and would be a
reassuring introduction for teens who "don't like" fantasy or historical fiction.
RS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
King-Smith, Dick. Ace, the Very Important Pig; illus. by Lynette Hemmant.
Crown, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-57833-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-57832-8.
134p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Creating a fictitious pig as distinctive as Babe in
King-Smith's Babe, the Gallant Pig, which won England's 1984 Guardian
award, is a challenge, but Ace manages to garner a place of his own. He's saved
from the market by an extraordinary intelligence that allows him to understand
human speech from birth. Gaining access to Farmer Tubbs' television set, Ace
eventually educates himself and ends up on the BBC, after a memorable visit to
the village pub. Ace's companions-a goat, a cat, and a Corgi-are also well-
realized characters, and fans of the author's other animal fantasies will find this
one just as realistically detailed and casually humorous. A comic British
companion to Charlotte's Web. BH
King, Elizabeth. The Pumpkin Patch; written and illus. with photographs by
Elizabeth King. 
Dutton, 1990. 
ISBN 0-525-44640-0. 
[40p]. 
$13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
[ 88]
R 
3-7 yrs. 
This brief photo-essay on every child's favorite
squash describes in simple terms how pumpkins are grown from seed to jack-o'-
lantern on a California vegetable farm. 
Crisp color photographs are
supplemented by short descriptions of two to three sentences: "more new leaves
grow. Stems grow too. The stems twist and crawl along the ground as they
become vines." Large print and lots of white space make this accessible to
beginning readers. The text is occasionally poetic: "These leaves look like big
hands covering the earth." A wide variety of pumpkins are shown ("Some have
smooth skins. Others have big bumps. Some are big, and some are little"); all
are photogenic. The book's Halloween focus (a witch, a scarecrow, and a giant
papier-mach6 pumpkin decorate the farmer's pumpkin stand) ensures its
browsing appeal for younger readers. "With a candle inside, the pumpkin glows
on Hallowe'en night Ghosts and goblins, BEWARE." RAS
C.U. Halloween
Klein, Robin. Penny Pollard's Passport; illus. by Ann James. Oxford, 1990.
ISBN 0-19-554868-X. 72p. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Letters, postcards, and diary entries give a lively and
amusing record of Penny's travels in the United Kingdom. Her friend Alistair
wins a Hypermart contest, and Penny is lucky enough to go with him and his
mother. There's a lot of travelogue-ish information in the book, but it's nicely
balanced by Penny's quips and ploys and small adventures. There are notes to
Penny from others (Alistair, particularly) to give contrast, but they are hardly
needed, since the tone is brisk and chatty, and the pages are decked with
photographs of people and places. Readers of Penny Pollard's Diary (BCCB
9/84), etc., will welcome this latest peek. ZS
Korschunow, Irina. Small Fur Is Getting Bigger; tr. from the German by James
Skofield; illus. by Reinhard Michl. Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
023290-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023289-7. 67p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed.
$14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Small Fur (BCCB 6/88) may be getting bigger, but
he's scared of Uncle Ned, who has come for his annual visit Uncle Ned bullies
and berates Small Fur ("You're a sissy"), and when his (equally intimidated)
mother won't take his side, Small Fur runs away. In a hair-raising scene, Small
Fur is almost lured into the swamp by a gurgle-girl, but is saved by rumored-
witch Trulla, who enchants Small Fur with his own self-confidence. Fiercer
than the first book, this one builds on a strong realization of the fear and
resentment children feel in the presence of a bullying grown-up. While the
atmosphere is sometimes scary, young listeners will probably enjoy the shivers,
and they will certainly appreciate Small Fur's rebellious backtalk ("No!") and
recognize its justice. Children who heard the first story a couple of years ago
might be able to read this one on their own; both readers and lookers-on will
empathize with Michl's Sendakian drawings that show a very bossy Uncle Ned
and an even more threatening gurgle-girl. In both text and pictures, Small Fur is
a very sturdy hero. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Self-confidence; Uncle-nephew relations
[89 1
Kronenwetter, Michael. Northern Ireland. Watts, 1990. ISBN 0-531-10942-9.
160p. illus. with photographs. $13.90.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
A fair-minded, carefully documented overview of the
Troubles that have made Northern Ireland a battleground, this recounts historical
and contemporary conflicts between Irish and English, Catholic and Protestant.
Unlike some other titles about politically disrupted countries from this
publisher, Kronenwetter's book runs little risk of becoming dated, sadly enough,
for the situation seems entrenched: "To compromise now, for these people,
would be like saying that all the pain, devotion, and suffering were unnecessary.
... too many people on both sides of the peace lines are not yet ready to face
that one simple-and terrible-fact." 
Detailing general information with
selected dramatic incidents, Kronenwetter is honest about the terrorism on both
sides and well organized in dealing with social complexities as both cause and
effect. The writing style is occasionally dry, and the captions are not as careful
as the text; one picture in the middle of a discussion on Belfast shows homeless
children huddling together "in a main shopping area of Dublin," but the
footnoted facts more than make up for this lapse. Overall, Kronenwetter has
provided a solid background for the further reading he recommends in his
bibliography. BH
C.U. History-Moder
Larrick, Nancy, comp. Mice Are Nice; illus. by Ed Young. Philomel, 1990.
ISBN 0-399-21495-X. 48p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Moving down the food chain from Cats Are Cats
(BCCB 1/89), Larrick and Young here showcase twenty-six poems featuring the
lowly mouse. Poets represented are generally familiar names with proven child
appeal-John Ciardi, Valerie Worth, A. A. Milne, and so forth-and the well-
chosen poems range from those contemplating mice ("Mice/ Find places/ In
places"), to those through which mice merely scurry ("Calico Ban/ The Little
Mice ran/ To be ready in time for tea"), to nursery rhymes ("Six little mice sat
down to spin"). Young's illustrations, soft pastel and charcoal in a range of
warm browns (on white paper this time), extend as well as illustrate the poems,
conveying the mouse's delicate charm (although cats appear with enlivening
frequency) in a way that may soften sternly practical readers as well as delight
those enamored of small creatures. DS
C.U. Reading aloud
Lauber, Patricia. How We Learned the Earth Is Round; illus. by Megan Lloyd.
Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04862-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04860-2. An Octopus
Is Amazing; illus. by Holly Keller. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04803-3; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-690-04801-7. Each book: Crowell, 1990. 32p. (Let's-Read-and-Find-
Out Science Books). Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
These two entries in a science series for primary-
grades lend themselves equally well to classroom use and one-on-one sharing.
Octopus is a simple and clearly sequenced introduction to a creature whose eight
arms alone endear it to the imaginations of young children. Add to that the
octopus' powers of camouflage, tentacle regeneration, and ink-production, and
you have a subject fit for Saturday morning TV. The book is plentifully
illustrated with ink-and-watercolors, but there is a confusing apparent
contradiction in both text and pictures. One page shows an octopus turning
[90]
black after emitting ink, while the next page shows one turning white after
emitting ink to confuse a moray eel. Which is it? How We Learned the Earth Is
Round has no such contradictions, but a use of dates to separate the discoveries
of the Greeks and those of Columbus would have been useful. Otherwise, this
is an exemplary case of how to introduce abstract science concepts to an audience
firmly grounded in-and near-the concrete. Through a simple text, a couple of
demonstration experiments, and a series of maps that show how humankind's
picture of the world has changed, Lauber and Lloyd will encourage even the most
stubborn flat-earther to prove the earth's shape to his or her own satisfaction.
The last page is a wonderful surprise, showing a full-color photo of the earth as
seen from space, a witty and graceful cap to Lloyd's pen-and-watercolor
illustrations of earthbound conceptions. RS
C.U. Science
Lavies, Bianca. The Secretive Timber Rattlesnake; written and illus. with
photographs by Bianca Lavies. Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44572-2. 32p.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
A former staff photographer for National Geographic,
Lavies does not depend solely on a telephoto lens to capture her subject, the shy,
retiring, but venomous timber rattlesnake. She enters the snakes' cave not only
in the fall when they are sluggish, but also in the spring, when "after storing up
venom all winter long, their bite would be especially dangerous." The results of
her dedicated pursuit are apparent. The dramatic color photographs include a
sequence showing a snake killing and swallowing a mouse, a photo of a snake
shedding its skin, and one of a mother snake with her children. Pictures are
matched with a highly readable, descriptive text: "The rattle develops piece by
piece. The next time the snake sheds, the skin covering the very tip of its body
will loosen. It will become dry and brittle, but will not be shed. Hollow and
hard like a shell, this section of skin stays attached to the snake, forming the
next segment of its rattle." Lavies brings an ecological bent to the subject,
emphasizing that most rattlers "are killed by people encroaching upon the
snakes' environment." Thus, she asks us, the next time we see a rattlesnake,
"quickly step out of its way, and let it go in peace." An excellent companion
volume to Russell Freedman's Killer Snakes (BCCB 4/83). RAS
C.U. Zoology
Lehrman, Robert. Separations. Viking, 1990. ISBN 0-670-81646-9. 212p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Kim's parents' separation is anything but friendly.
Mom would prefer that Kim have nothing to do with her father, who has fallen
in love with a younger woman, but Kim finds it hard to hate him. She's a
promising young tennis player, and Dad is her biggest fan, so moving to New
York City with Mom means not only tennis lessons on a roof, but secret
meetings with Dad in Central Park. The twin themes of Kim's adjustment to
divorce and her growth as a tennis player are reasonably well entwined, both
offering much in the way of emotional rollercoasting. The divorce story is
predictably patterned, but the tennis story is subtle in its handling of Kim's
frustration at not being a spectacular net-charger like Martina Navratilova, and
having to "settle" for being a pretty good baseliner-a far more realistic sports
[91]
drama then the tears-and-triumph sagas often proffered. Game sequences will be
enjoyed by players and fans; others may find them difficult to follow. RS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Moving, adjustment to
Liptak, Karen. North American Indian Medicine People. ISBN 0-531-10868-6.
North American Indian Sign Language; illus. by Don Berry. ISBN 0-531-
10869-4. North American Indian Survival Skills; ISBN 0-531-10870-8. Each
book: Watts, 1990. 64p. illus. with photographs. (First Books). $11.90.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
In these three books, the author undertakes a
respectful survey of American Indian customs and traditions. Medicine People is
the best of the three, explaining the different traditions of many tribes as well as
the overall similarities and importance of the role of medicine men and women.
Sign Language, however, is apt to be more popular, with its large dictionary of
Plains Indians sign language likely to have readers loudly practicing silent
communication all over the library. Survival Skills is more a description of
basic Indian living practices than the lost-in-the-wilderness guide the title
implies, and the few how-to sections seem out of place. The books are generally
well-organized and soundly researched, but explanations are not always clear (a
particular handicap for the Sign Language book), and the style occasionally
becomes patronizing ("As you start using Plains Indian Sign Language, you
may begin to sense the special relationship North American Indians feel with
Mother Earth"). Appropriate warnings are inserted about not trying medicinal
herbs, wild food, or dangerous procedures on your own. Illustrated with
diagrams, contemporary photographs and reproductions of old paintings
(occasionally awkwardly or mistakenly captioned--one Survival Skills picture
depicting coyote- or wolf-skin draped Indians says they are "disguised as
buffalo"), each book has a "For Further Reading" list and an index; Medicine
People and Survival Skills have glossaries. DS
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth. Paul Revere's Ride; illus. by Ted Rand.
Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44610-9. 40p. $14.95.
R 
5-9 yrs. 
With its dark colors lit by moon and lantern, this
edition of Longfellow's famous poem captures the mood and time of the story in
a way that Nancy Winslow Parker's toy-like illustrations (BCCB 5/85) cannot.
The title-page double spread shows Paul and his horse cantering through a grove
of glowing birch trees; similarly atmospheric are the blacks and blues and great
full moon in the watercolor of the Somerset in the Bay. The ride itself is a
sequence of spreads that picture the Boston countryside in enough variety to keep
the listening audience looking as well. There's just one missed note: to
illustrate "the spark struck out by that steed, in his flight.. ." with a picture of
Paul's horse at a water trough seems distinctly anticlimactic. But by land, by
sea, by far, this is a handsome edition of an old favorite that deserves its dusting
off. RS
C.U. History-U.S.-Revolutionary War
Manes, Stephen. Chocolate-Covered Ants. Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-590-
40960-3. 103p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Dirty tricks and tasteless gastronomic jokes should
endear this tale of sibling rivalry to How to Eat Fried Worms fans. "Of course,
if it weren't for my little brother, I wouldn't be doing this at all. I mean, ants
[92]
are not part of the four basic food groups." Adam, the little brother in question,
is so taken with his birthday present, an ant colony, that he claims to know each
of its occupants by name. Big brother Max soon tires of hearing Adam's non-
stop talk about ants. Determined to shut him up, he makes a bet with Adam
that people really do eat chocolate-covered ants. Unable to find any for sale,
Max creates his own confection in the microwave, with disastrous results: "The
bag had burst open. The chocolate had exploded... It looked truly disgusting."
Since Adam is not satisfied when Max eats the ants himself ("I knew you'd be
stupid enough to eat them"), Max tries but fails to find a willing classmate. In a
final act of desperation, he fools Adam into eating chocolate-covered ants
himself, slipping them into his chocolate-almond ice cream. Truly disgusting,
and sure to please those with a taste for stomach-churning humor. RAS
D.V. Brothers
Marshak, Samuel. 
Hail to Mail; tr. and ad. by Richard Pevear; illus. by
Vladimir Radunsky. Holt, 1990. ISBN 0-8050-1132-3. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Even more fun to read aloud than The Pup Grew Up!
(BCCB 3/89), this is a shaggy dog poem of another kind, as a letter winds
around the world in search of its peripatetic addressee. With a text wittily
translated and transplanted from Russian, kids will enjoy the pJace-name litanies
("Reno, Roundup, Harpers Ferry, Pittsburgh, Plattsburgh, Pondicherry") as
much as the basic concept: from here to there to there to there .. ., the letter
finally reaches John Peck, back from his travels, safe at home in New York.
The sophisticated paintings are dark and mysteriously colored, enveloped in a
Jazz Age atmosphere but set in a landscape all their own. In a world as eccentric
as the one portrayed here, it's no wonder John Peck keeps on the move. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
McKenzie, Ellen Kindt. Stargone John; illus. by William Low. Holt, 1990.
ISBN 0-8050-1451-9. 67p. (Redfeather Books). $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 4-6. 
"Star gone" is a family nickname for quiet, abstracted
John, youngest of seven children in a small-town Wisconsin family. The name,
though, becomes a taunt when John starts attending the one-room schoolhouse,
silently enduring the abuse of an ignorant teacher who insists, to no avail, that
John speak and write. "He sat and didn't talk. He sat and didn't read. When
Miss Vordig spoke to him he sat. I don't think he heard her. He was star gone,
and now and again he got whacked." John is hit and humiliated by the teacher,
once even wetting his seat because she refuses to let him get up to go to the
outhouse. The story is told by John's older sister and confidante Liza, who
herself gets bumped back to the third-grade row for trying to help John survive
his first day. Set in an era (probably late nineteenth century) when special
children could not be comfortably labelled, this is a gently perceptive story of a
gifted boy's triumph, as John, with the help of friends both real and imaginary,
learns that language is good. "I knew what that meant. John meant it had to be
worth the while." The one-room schoolhouse setting is in itself an interesting
portrait, and the classroom dynamics will be familiar-sometimes ruefully so-
to contemporary readers. They will especially relish John's response to Miss
Vordig's mocking challenge that he "at least write a word" on the blackboard:
"JANE IS BAD" neatly writes John, naming a fellow first-grader who has been
tormenting him. And could John have known that Jane is also Miss Vordig's
[93]
first name? The story is both funny and moving, empathetically narrated by
John's most staunch defender. The several pencil illustrations have a simple
dignity, with an expressive use of light and texture that contributes to the
novel's plainspoken appeal. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Teacher-student relations
Mellecker, Judith. The Fox and the Kingfisher; illus. by Robert Andrew Parker.
Knopf, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90539-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80539-7.
40p. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
In an English country manor at the turn of the
century, two children rebel when their widowed father announces he will remarry.
They appeal to a mysterious new stableboy, who uses a golden key to transform
them into a fox and a kingfisher from Christmastime to spring, when they're
finally ready to return and accept their new mother. The idea of escaping from a
family situation so neatly is, of course, enormously appealing, as is the fidelity
of parents who wait as lovingly as Sylvester's do in William Steig's superlative
tale of a lost child, Sylvester and the Magic Pebble (BCCB 4/69). The upper-
crust tone and historical setting here add to a pseudo-legendary quality-pseudo
because the magic is fey rather than driven by internal logic (who is the
stableboy and whence comes his golden key?). 
However, Parker's vivid
watercolor scenes project a world credibly recreated. His Constabulary, foxhunt,
and snowfallen landscape are textured to deliver an almost tangible situation from
yesterday to today's listeners. BH
D.V. Stepparents, adjustment to
Meltzer, Milton. Crime in America. Morrow, 1990. ISBN 0-688-08513-X.
170p. illus. with photographs. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
An indefatigable researcher, Meltzer supplies facts
and, sketchily, their sources, as well as a brief "Notes on Sources" that precedes
the index. The coverage is broad, with separate chapters on different kinds of
crime (physical abuse of women and children, white collar crime, crime in
government, organized crime, etc.) and with discussions of our system of justice,
of the increase in vigilante response, and of the intricacy of such crime-related
problems as drugs, gun laws, and violence within the social fabric. A final
chapter, "What Can Be Done About It?" examines some of the causes (such
conditions as poverty, ignorance, and injustice) and suggests some of the
changes (the educational system or the legal system, for example) that might
alleviate or reduce crime and violence in the United States. While the writing
style is solemn, the material is inherently dramatic-at times inherently lurid,
and depressing. An important topic is given thoughtful consideration despite the
fact that the magnitude of the problem prohibits extended treatment of its various
aspects. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Miller, Mary Jane. Me and My Name. Viking, 1990. ISBN 0-670-83196-4.
121p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
"Does a new name make a new you?" Erin Mitchell
must decide whether or not she wants to be adopted by her stepfather, and thus
become Erin Zanin. Doing so would please her pregnant mother, whose
expected twins Erin finds vaguely threatening. Apparently made on the spur of
[94]
the moment, Erin's decision ("Just like that, I knew my name was part of me")
is foreshadowed by two incidents which teach her that self-respect is more
important than acceptance. Invited to a sleep-over party by the most popular girl
in sixth grade, Erin passively watches her classmates smoke and drink beer. She
submits to the horrors of Truth or Dare ("that's like asking someone if they
want to be a meal for a gorilla or a shark. Some choice") but refuses to betray
her best friend. Also shaping her self-respect is her realization that pursuing the
most popular boy in the school, who speaks to her only through his sidekick,
isn't worth the effort. This first novel suffers from the occasional psychological
clich6 ("kids shouldn't have to choose between parents"), but honestly portrays
Erin's ambivalent feelings towards her father ("He's too far away to be even a
sometimes dad"), whose apparent indifference to her possible name change
bothers her considerably. Short sentences and chapters combine with the first
person narrative to make this an undemanding read that should prove popular
with fans of Judy Blume. RAS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Milnes, Gerald. Granny Will Your Dog Bite and Other Mountain Rhymes;
illus. by Kimberly Bulcken Root. Knopf, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-
94749-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-84749-0; Book and cassette ISBN 0-394-85363-
6. 48p. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $14.95; Book and cassette $18.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
This picture-book compendium of traditional West
Virginia rhymes, some nonsense and some narrative, can be read on its own or
with an accompanying cassette that features the rhymes sung with banjo and
fiddle accompaniments (no musical notation appears in the book). Many of the
verses echo familiar English nursery rhymes; for instance, "My old hen's a good
old hen/ She lays eggs for the railroad men" resembles "Hickety pickety my
black henJ She lays eggs for gentlemen." Others spoof famous rhymes; "I went
to the river and I couldn't get across" sets the scene for "Turkey in the Straw."
There are some riddles, as well, and abundant pen-and-wash drawings with a rural
flavor synchronize blocks of text or occupy full pages. Animals, people, and
even landscapes take on individuality with Root's quirky lines and active
compositions. Milnes' lighthearted collection will offer Mother Goose fans a
chance to chant some quirky, down-home, regional fare. BH
C.U. Language arts
Noyes, Alfred. The Highwayman; illus. by Neil Waldman. Harcourt, 1990.
ISBN 0-15-234340-7. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Like Charles Mikolaycak, (BCCB 12/83) Waldman
faces the inherent difficulty of casting Noyes' passionate melodrama in picture
book format. 
Unlike Mikolaycak's primarily black-and-white approach,
Waldman uses plenty of sinuously airbrushed watercolor; eerily effective in the
"riding, riding" double-page spreads, but a bit lurid in the bright composition of
Bess with the gun at her breast. The colors are often unlikely-plenty of aqua
and magenta-but surprisingly effective, as in a moody painting of the
highwayman upon his horse, a study in blue and black and gray. Too often, the
effect is slick, as in the scenic-design-like bending trees that frame some of the
compositions, and the total impact seems more like a collection of graphic
design elements than a visual depiction of human emotions. Mikolaycak's
version does a better job of capturing the mood-but who needs pictures when
[95]
Noyes' words have such a marvelous effect on their own? "Then look for me by
moonlightJ Watch for me by moonlightJ I'll come to thee by moonlight,
though hell should bar the way." RS
C.U. English literature
Olsen, Victoria. Emily Dickinson. Chelsea House, 1990. ISBN 1-55546-649-
4. 
110p. illus. with photographs. 
(American Women of Achievement).
$17.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-. 
Given the reclusive pattern of most of Dickinson's
life and the fact that, by her instructions, her letters and known manuscripts were
burnt when she died, biographers have come up with a considerable amount of
information about the poet. Olsen's book is adequately written, though it is
weakened by a slow pace and is not improved by stylistic oddities ("Both parents
were not prone to emotional outbursts"). In addition, the photographs are not
always provided with careful context. A good example is a picture of Walt
Whitman, with the caption "The American poet Walt Whitman, who is one of
the founders of moder American poetry along with Dickinson." On the same
page, the text reads "One author whom she refused to read, however, was the
American poet Walt Whitman." A chronology is appended, as is a half-page
bibliography and an index that is less than judiciously compiled. A few separate
pages of poems are inserted, while other poems are distributed within the text.
ZS
C.U. American literature
Passen, Lisa. Grammy & Sammy; written and illus. by Lisa Passen. Holt,
1990. ISBN 0-8050-1415-2. 32p. $13.95.
M 
4-6 yrs. 
The narrator is a small girl (no name given) who
delivers a monologue on how unhappy she was when her widowed grandmother
came to live with her progeny and took an instant dislike to Sammy the cat.
The end is predictable, since it seems to be a canon of the genre that pets and
grandparents are innately lovable: Grammy brings Sammy in out of the rain.
The slight plot is not compensated for by the pictures: Mom's nose is the size
of her hand; sag-breasted Granny has a wee pursed mouth and Harlequin glasses
with no eyes visible. The read-aloud audience may enjoy the scenes in which
Sammy has opened Grammy's purse, chewed up her pension check, donned her
glasses, and-when chased-pulled off Grammy's wig, but this bit of disaster
humor is the only comic bit in a tedious tale. ZS
D.V. Grandmother-child relations
Pearson, Susan. The Bogeyman Caper; Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-70565-2, Paper
ed. ISBN 0-671-70569-5. 73p.
The Campfire Ghosts; Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-70567-9, Paper ed. ISBN
0-671-70571-7. 73p.
Eagle-Eye Ernie Comes to Town; Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-70561-4, Paper
ed. ISBN 0-671-70568-7. 70p.
The Tap Dance Mystery; Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-70566-0, Paper ed.
ISBN 0-671-70570-9. 87p. Each book: illus. by Gioia Fiammenghi. Simon,
1990. (Eagle Eye Ernie). Trade ed. $11.95; Paper ed. $2.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Like many easy "mystery" series, this quartet is
actually more concerned with the pleasures and dramas of everyday school and
[96]
afterschool life, with the mystery acting as a plot-providing hook. Pearson
clearly knows this, and while "Eagle-Eye Ernie's" detection powers don't get
much of a workout, she is an appealing heroine, with a good mix of ordinary-kid
attributes and personalizing idiosyncrasies. . .. Comes to Town is about
Ernie's initial ostracism and eventual popularity when she moves to a new town
and school; The Bogeyman Caper is a rather predictable story of a house that
Ernie determines to prove not haunted. Although its mystery is weak, The Tap
Dance Mystery is the most engaging story, with a well-drawn best enemy,
Marcie, who's put in charge of the tap dance for Parents' Night: "You can do
the steps. I will make all the taps. That way it will sound as if we are all
together. Even when you make mistakes." The Campfire Ghosts takes Ernie
and her friends to the woods for an entertaining respite and mini-adventure. All
the books are attractively packaged, and have likable cartooning from
Fiammenghi. RS
Perrault, Charles. Puss in Boots; tr. by Malcolm Arthur; illus. by Fred
Marcellino. Di Capua/Farrar, 1990. ISBN 0-374-36160-6. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Dramatic perspectives characterize Marcellino's full-
color illustrations for Perrault's fairy tale, beginning with cover art dedicated to a
full-page close-up of a ruddy cat's face--title, author, and illustrator appear on
the back cover. Bronze endpapers, large taupe typeface, varied picture formats,
and sudden changes of view all contribute to the look-at-me tone of the book
design. While the drafting in the human faces is sometimes bland-purposely,
no doubt-the creatures and the scenes in which they appear are wittily lined,
with postures and patterns emphasized by contrasting hues. Best of all are the
unexpected visual details: the snake's tail trailing from a covered dish being
carried to the Ogre, for instance, or two mice pointing to the portrait of Puss,
who "became a great lord and gave up chasing mice, except just once in a while,
for the fun of it." BH
Prelutsky, Jack. Something BIG Has Been Here; illus. by James Stevenson.
Greenwillow, 1990. ISBN 0-688-06434-5. 160p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
Fans of The New Kid on the Block (BCCB 10/84)
will recognize and welcome more of the same here. A hundred new poems,
energetically illustrated with Stevenson's scratchy black-and-white sketches, run
the gamut from the familiar to the absurd. All are easily digestible in length
(ranging from four to forty lines) but the subject matter is not always for the
squeamish: "GRASSHOPPER GUMBO/ IGUANA TAIL TARTS/ TOAD A
LA MODE/ PICKLED PELICAN PARTS/ . . . MEADOW MOUSE
MORSELS/ CRACKED CROCODILE CRUNCH/ The school cafeteria serves
them for lunch." 
Prelutsky conjures up an impressive array of creatures
(Wumpaloons, ticklish Twickles, and smoking Yokadokas, to name a few), but
his best poems are about familiar situations, comically exaggerated. "I wish my
father wouldn't try to fix things anymore," complains the child of a tinkering
dad; "there's a faucet in the basement that has dripped one drop a year, since he
fixed it, we can't find it without wearing scuba gear." Prelutsky is the master of
the surprise ending: the early worm scares the early bird out of his wits. After
cleaning up an exploded turkey a young cook concludes: "I'd never again stuff a
turkey with popcorn that hadn't been popped." Most of the poems are humorous
stories, but a few deal simply and honestly with emotions. Prelutsky is never
[97
condescending in his use of diction, occasionally stretching his readers'
vocabulary through context: "the rat in the attic's determined to stay/ I'm facing
a fairly pestiferous day." Discerning readers may find this sequel lacks some of
the wit and sparkle of its predecessor, but even the most die-hard young poetry
hater will be won over by the accessible manner in which Prelutsky combines
comic exaggeration and absurdity. RAS
C.U. Reading aloud
Pryor, Bonnie. Merry Christmas Amanda & April; illus. by Diane de Groat.
Morrow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-0745-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07544-4.
32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Mischievous Amanda and virtuous April are pig
sisters sent to the store for ingredients to make a surprise for Santa. Distracted
by sledders on the hill ("I am sure Mama won't mind if I take one tiny ride") and
goodies in the store ("I know we are out of ice cream. That was probably one of
the things on Mama's list"), the two don't arrive home till almost dark.
However, Santa-along with Mama-forgives even Amanda's misdemeanors
and honors the sisters' heartfelt wish for "two Snuggly Baby Pigs that said
'Mama' when you pulled a string." The plot rings true to common childhood
experiences, and the dialogue reflects typical sibling tensions. So does the
watercolor art, which injects a good deal of argumentative expression and action
into the character dynamics against a background of deceptively mild pastel
coloration. One of this year's livelier seasonal read-alouds. BH
D.V. Sisters
Reit, Seymour. Guns for General Washington: A Story of the American
Revolution. Harcourt, 1990. 
ISBN 0-15-200466-1. 
[144p]. 
$15.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
It is rare to learn, reading a preface to a book of
historical fiction, that "All the dates, times, and places are real. The people who
took part in it are also real." Reit is referring to the great cannon trek of 1775, a
transfer of large arms from Fort Ticonderoga to Massachusetts over rough terrain
and in bitter cold. The man who conceived and executed the mission was
Colonel Henry Knox, and the cannons he so laboriously transported were able,
in the spring of 1776, to free the city of Boston from British grasp. Save for the
contrived introduction of a series of lyrics of contemporary songs into the
narrative, the story has a smooth flow; pace is sustained, and the sequence of
events have all the drama that might be in an imaginary adventure, plus the
solidity of historical fact. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
D.V. Resourcefulness
Rocklin, Joanne. Jace the Ace; illus. by Diane deGroat. Macmillan, 1990.
ISBN 0-02-777445-7. 107p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Starting fifth grade in a new school in a new state, is
tough, so Jason, in order to impress the other kids, embroiders considerably on
his one-time encounter with a news reporter. And while "Jace the Ace's"
fictions eventually collapse in face of the truth, he makes some friends, adjusts
[98]
to life in L.A., and even gets a dog of his own in the process. This is a likable
slice-of-life story in a genre that usually prefers girls as protagonists. Jace is an
ordinary, perhaps slightly naive kid whose imaginative attempts to find friends (a
various, warmhearted bunch) in a new home will generate an empathetic
response among readers. Occasional, atmospherically shaded pencil drawings are
sophisticated enough for middle-graders. RS
D.V. Moving, adjustment to
Rockwell, Thomas. How to Get Fabulously Rich; illus. by Anne Canevari
Green. Watts, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-10877-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05180-8. 134p. Library ed. $12.90; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Billy Forrester, of How to Eat Fried Worms and How
to Fight a Girl (12/87) wants to win the lottery, and his schemes for coming up
with numbers and buying tickets require the (witting and otherwise) cooperation
of family and friends. So it turns out that an awful lot of people lay claim to a
part of the $410,000 that Billy eventually wins, his numbers courtesy of baby
sister Janie's babbling. The premise is widely appealing, and the resulting
complications are developed with a great deal of energy. In fact, both the writing
style and the pacing are hyperactive, and it's sometimes hard to tell which
character is speaking, or, for that matter, what they're saying. But readers will
persevere for their old friend Billy, and, as always, will appreciate the accuracy of
Rockwell's unsentimental, uncondescending vision of contemporary boy-life.
RS
D.V. Friendship values
Rubinstein, Gillian. Beyond the Labyrinth. Jackson/Orchard, 1990. Library ed.
ISBN 0-531-08499-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05899-9. 
24 5p. Library ed.
$14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
No one in the Trethewan family is particularly happy
about the fact that cousin Vicky will be spending the summer with them;
Brenton, fourteen and sullen, only decides to like Vicky after a toss of his
fantasy gameplaying dice tells him to. Like Brenton, Vicky feels as if she's an
outsider in this family, and the arrival of another misfit-from the far future-
forges a complicated bond. Cal is a time-traveling anthropologist who jokes
that she's on a "back-to-nature trip," and while she tries to be superior about the
advances her race has made, it gradually becomes apparent that the future can be a
lonely place. The science fantasy and contemporary family story mesh well, and
the three protagonists are credibly drawn with rough edges as well as unexpected
moments of nobility. Unfortunately, all the characters are overpsychologized, as
if the author were afraid to let their actions and words speak for themselves.
These expository passages seem textbookish, and they combine with the present-
tense narration to create a self-conscious tone. Like the games Brenton plays
with his books and dice, the novel closes with two possible endings, a device
that is more irritating than provocative. However, there is great material here,
and three characters who, unidealized and often annoying, get and keep our
attention the hard way. RS
D.V. Cousins; Family relations
[99]
Russo, Marisabina. Where Is Ben?; written and illus. by Marisabina Russo.
Greenwillow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08013-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
08011-1. 32p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
2-4 yrs. 
While his mother makes an apple pie, Ben plays hide-
and-seek. "Ben's mother patted and rolled the dough. Then she heard a faraway
voice calling, 'Mama, come find me."' Patient Mom lovingly obliges again and
again. Neither she nor the young reader has any trouble finding Ben's hiding
places: he always leaves a clue to his whereabouts (laundry dumped beside its
basket, "a jumble of boots on the floor next to the coat closet"). "Where is
Ben?" Mom always asks (as if she didn't know). "You found me," Ben joyfully
squeals, each time his hiding place is discovered. Although the flat gouache
paintings have little drama or tension, they combine pattern and color in
unlikely but pleasing combinations. Russo provides an abundance of eye-
catching, realistic details, especially in the kitchen: a painting that is clearly
Ben's, taped to the refrigerator; rubber bands on the cupboard handles; and a
collage of family photographs. The story's repetitive action is static but
reassuring: no matter where we hide, Mom can always find us. RAS
D.V. Mother-child relations
Seabrooke, Brenda. Jerry on the Line. Bradbury, 1990. ISBN 0-02-781432-7.
124p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Responsible and sensible, Jerry is a "latchkey kid"
who rather enjoys his after-school solitude, although he goes out to play soccer
whenever he can, once Mom has made her after-school telephone call. A new
element enters when random dialing brings Sarita into his life. She calls again
and again, disrupting his plans, but Jerry feels sorry for her because she is also
home alone, and is only a lonely second-grader. This isn't a book that's strong
on plot, but it is strong on self-reliance, safety, and kindness. 
The
characterization and writing style are capable, and most readers will enjoy the fact
that Jerry brings Sarita a kitten he's rescued from some bullies, giving him
some after-school freedom and her some after-school companionship. ZS
D.V. Kindness; Self-reliance
Shott, Stephen, illus. Baby's World: A First Picture Catalog; illus. with
photographs by Stephen Shott. Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44617-6. 40p.
$13.95.
R 
1-3 yrs. 
The sturdy pages of an oversize book are filled with
color photographs of excellent quality and include a racially diverse cast of
babies. Each double-page spread has a theme: an activity like "Getting Dressed"
or a concept like "Colors" or a group of like objects such as "Toys That Go."
The range is broad; almost all the objects and activities are recognizable by the
very young children; and the book is both handsome and useful. One minor
weakness is, on some pages, a deviation from scale, with bowls appearing much
larger than accompanying bibs, for example. On the other hand, the visual
inclusion of several kinds of bibs (rattles, shoes) clearly demonstrates the
concepts of just-like-mine as well as just-like-mine-but-different. ZS
D.V. Environmental concepts
[ 100]
Siebert, Diane. Train Song; illus. by Mike Wimmer. Crowell, 1990. Library
ed. ISBN 0-690-04728-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04726-6. 32p. Library ed.
$14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Train poems often rely on too many clickety-clacks
for their effect; this one has a few, but they're grace notes to a steady, subtly
shifting rhythm-"long trains/ strong trains/ singing-clickety-song trains/ cars
with lumber/ cars with cattle/ clickety-clacking/ to Seattle." The poem is filled
with words and sounds that are fun to say, but one misses a narrative pattern or
direction that would discipline the often clever imagery: "cars piled high with
automobiles/ wheels/ on/ wheels/ on/ wheels/ on/ wheels." Wimmer's paintings
are large-scale and romantic double-spreads that often view the trains from low
perspectives that emphasize the size and drama of the cars. Portraits of
passengers and trainmen have a Norman Rockwell glow, but the overall tone is
lyrical rather than sentimental, with some of the paintings of the trains in
motion achieving a photorealistic effect. RS
Silsbee, Peter. The Temptation of Kate. Bradbury, 1990. ISBN 0-02-782761-
5. 155p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
If it seems amiss to use words like "witty" and
"elegant" to describe a teen novel about divorce and suicide (and demonic
temptation), let's lay the blame on a genre in which over-earnestness has gotten
out of hand. Kate is twelve, and unhappy about her parents' divorce and about
her and her mother's move from New York City to a small college town. A
debonair new neighbor, Nat Worthy, is all too eager to help Kate out of her
misery, tempting her with suicidal revenge: "The only leverage you have is
yourself. I mean, you are worth something to your parents. Only if you were
gone would they see how much you are worth to them." Nat is actually Demon
Jaster, and he is intent upon Kate's immortal soul, his plan revealed in some
Screwtape-ish inserts in the story. It's a classic theme, and Silsbee's variant has
a dead seriousness that is fully supported by the light tone and black humor.
Occasionally, the religious debate obscures the action and thereby its own effect;
best are the vividly conveyed scenes of Kate's pain and her sturdy defense in a
battle she doesn't even know she's fighting. Kate-and the cover art-is a little
young for such a sophisticated story, but theological diversion is too rare in
books for young people of any age. RS
C.U. Religious education
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to
Silverstein, Herma. Alcoholism. Watts, 1990. ISBN 0-531-10879-1. 
126p.
illus. with photographs. (Venture Books). $12.40.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
In a broad look at the "number-one drug threat" in the
United States, the author discusses causes, effects, and some programs that can
help alcoholics recover and others that help members of an alcoholic's family.
There are also descriptions of the four stages of the disease, of the ways in which
a pattern of alcoholism can be identified, and of the behavior of adult children of
alcoholics. The writing is sometimes confusing; for example, in discussing
studies of a genetic factor in alcoholism, Silverstein discusses a study on "the
sons of an alcoholic parent" but then refers to conclusions about "daughters of
alcoholic mothers." The author mentions MADD (Mothers Against Drunk
[ 101
Driving) but not its student equivalent, SADD. A bibliography, an index, and a
list of helpful organizations and hotlines are provided. ZS
C.U. Health
Simon, Carly. The Boy of the Bells; illus. by Margot Datz. Doubleday, 1990.
ISBN 0-385-41587-7. 32p. $14.95.
NR 
4-7yrs. 
Ben's sister Miranda doesn't/won't/can't talk
anymore, so when Grandfather sends Ben up to the tower to ring the bells on
Christmas Eve, Ben takes the opportunity to flag down Santa for his advice.
Santa doesn't know why Miranda is speechless ("There are many mysteries in
the universe") but advises Ben to do his best when he rings the bell in the
morning. Ben does, and Miranda talks. This Christmas fable depends on
twinkly-sprinkly whimsy to make its readers forget the fact that the story makes
no sense whatsoever. It's all button-pushing: Bells, snow, Santa, sister, and
Christmas. The same things crop up in the illustrations, which are naively
drawn, sentimentally colored, and compulsively decorated. Carly Simon is a
sophisticated crafter of good songs for grownups; someone should clue her in to
the fact that children's books demand no less hardheadedness. RS
Smith, Robert Kimmel. The Squeaky Wheel. Delacorte, 1990. ISBN 0-385-
30155-3. 182p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Sixth-grader Mark Baker is the son of recently-
divorced parents and he resents it. He can't get used to seeing his dad only once
a week, living in an apartment with his newly-employed mom, or being the new
kid at school. Mark learns that in order to let his parents know how he's
feeling, he has to speak up, become a "squeaky wheel." The story is a realistic
portrayal of an adolescent's reaction to divorce. For example, Mark's big
accomplishment-getting both his parents to spend Thanksgiving with him-
unfortunately encourages his fantasy that his parents might get back together.
The dialogue consists of informal and clean-cut language, but the first-person
narrative sometimes has an unnatural stiffness ("It saddened me some when I
thought about it..."). Mark's adjustments to his new school-complete with
girls and a bully-are entertaining. Although the divorce scenario is formulaic,
Mark is a character who will engage readers. KP
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; School, adjustment to
Sobol, Donald J. Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Disgusting Sneakers;
illus. by Gail Owens. Morrow, 1990. ISBN 0-688-09012-5. 92p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
"On the day of the Disgusting Sneaker Contest,
Phoebe Eastwood, the previous year's champion, walked into the Brown
Detective Agency. 
She had no shoes. 
Encyclopedia immediately knew
something was afoot." Bad puns, a breezy style, and thumbnail character
sketches-the hallmarks of this series-invite readers, reluctant and otherwise, to
match wits with "America's crime-buster in sneakers" (Leroy to his parents,
Encyclopedia Brown to you and me). Hard-boiled detective humor surfaces
occasionally: "Bugs might get mad and use me as a door knocker. That's too
much exercise for a small person like me." The title case is perhaps the
funniest: "Suddenly there was a big fuss by the table. Mrs. Carstairs, one of
the judges, had swooned and couldn't continue. 'You've got to smell this
contest to believe it,' she muttered as she was helped away." The cases run the
[ 102]
gamut from hard (trying to crack an obscure code) to easy (remembering that
Chinese teacups have no handles). All will challenge readers to pay attention to
clues. No cheating! RAS
C.U. Reading, reluctant
Steig, William. Shrek!; written and illus. by William Steig. Di Capua/Farrar,
1990. ISBN 0-374-36877-5. 32p. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Kids who believe themselves too old for the
straightforward rewards of the traditional fairy tale are in for a treat here. Kicked
goodbye by his ugly parents, even uglier Shrek goes out into the world on a
quest, er, "to do his share of damage." 
A witch sends him on his way to a
princess. After an amusing encounter with a dragon, and a dreadful dream of
meeting some friendly children, Shrek finally fights his way into the princess'
castle, where, Quixote-like, Shrek confronts himself in a Hall of Mirrors:
"They're all me!" he yodeled. 'All ME!' He faced himself, full of rabid self-
esteem, happier than ever to be exactly what he was." The princess, of course,
is "stunningly ugly," and they live "horribly ever after." An easy joke, perhaps,
but Steig's skillful wordplay adds high gloss to the low humor, as when Shrek
and the princess profess their love: "Your horny warts, your rosy wens,/ Like
slimy bogs and fusty fens, Thrill me." The illustrations are cheerfully mean-
spirited, with colors that never hurt anyone crabbed in by little black lines.
Perfect for those bad-mood storyhours. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
Stiles, Martha Bennett. Kate of Still Waters. Macmillan, 1990. ISBN 0-02-
788395-7. 232p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Kate, the daughter of Kentucky sheep and cattle
farmers, wonders if she'll be brave enough to run the farm when she's grown up.
At thirteen, she gets sick when watching her dad puncture a bloated cow, even
though she is trying to live up to his command to "think like a farmer." If Kate
needs to be strong, the author gives her ample opportunity-there's an
agricultural crisis per chapter in this book. The farm life depicted is realistic,
albeit a bit accelerated. Stiles' intention is to show small farmers struggling to
keep their farms, but the disaster scale runs a little high when in the course of a
year, a neighborhood suffers from a runaway stallion, wild dogs in the sheep, a
tornado, a man and truck struck by a train, a lamb that nearly dies three times, a
field full of bloated sheep, and more. Apart from the melodrama of the story, the
characterization is strong and believable-Kate and her friends are aware of their
hard-working parents' struggles and successes. It is refreshing for fictional
teenagers to be goal-oriented and sometimes serious, instead of superficially
suburban. KP
D.V. Family relations
Suzanne, Jamie. Jessica's Secret; created by Francine Pascal. Bantam, 1990.
Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-15824-4. 133p. (Sweet Valley Twins #42). Paper ed.
$2.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Elizabeth assumes that Jessica shares her happiness
and excitement about their "blossoming into womanhood," as the gym teacher
once called it; Jessica is not about to reveal that Elizabeth is alone in getting her
[103
period. The situation has more dramatic possibility than the book really knows,
but the ensuing conflict between Jessica and a bewildered Elizabeth is rendered
with more realistic intensity than is usual for this series. References to
menstruation are coy, with Elizabeth referring to "supplies" and going to the
drugstore to get "what she needed." 
A subplot about a visit to a newly
sophisticated cousin is fun and relevant; the fact that Jessica begins menstruating
right before the book ends is just what kids will want, and just what you'd
expect. RS
Talbert, Marc. Double or Nothing; illus. by Toby Gowing. Dial, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0928-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0832-7. 
[160p].
Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Nine-year-old Sam has inherited all of the clothing
and the equipment of his Uncle Frank. Sam loved Uncle Frank and had always
wanted to be a professional magician too. With some flashbacks, this is the
story of one day in which Sam goes off by himself, by bus, to a park where he
puts on his first public performance. This is an intriguing story; it is cohesive,
yet it has movement; it is compressed within the parameters of one day, yet it is
not crowded; it has tender memories of a loving uncle-nephew relationship but is
not sentimentalized. Sam is nervous but achieves a degree of success with a first
performance that is modestly believable and very satisfying. There is a closing
section that takes place a few days later, in which Sam's mother makes it clear
that she understands why Sam went off on his own (it was Uncle Frank's
birthday and the performance was Sam's tribute). There is one scene that can be
interpreted as dream or fantasy, in which Frank steps out of a mirror, tells Sam
never to lose the magic, and then disappears; it doesn't strengthen the story, but
it also is so susceptible to varied interpretations that it doesn't weaken it. ZS
D.V. Self-confidence; Uncle-nephew relations
Wadsworth, Ginger. Julia Morgan: Architect ofDreams. Lerner, 1990. ISBN
0-8225-4903-4. 128p. illus. with photographs. (Lerner Biographies). $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Although this biography, like Shirley and Carpenter's
biography of Frances Hodgson Burnett, reviewed above, employs fictionalized
sequences and a light tone, the character of Julia Morgan herself resists cutesying
where that of Burnett invites it. (Lerner's condescending policy of referring to
female-but not male-biographees by their first names also needs to go-
"Julia" and "Frances" can hardly be taken as seriously as "Eisenhower" and
"MacArthur".) Wadsworth has a clear respect for the achievements of her
subject, from her unprecedented entrance into the Acole des Beaux-Arts to her
work with W. R. Hearst on San Simeon; aspects of her architectural career are
explained well, including Morgan's philosophy of designing completely to the
client's desires and the consequent effects on her reputation. The author also
addresses Morgan's status as trail-blazer for other women in architecture and the
importance of female support of professional women, mentioning the many
commissions she received from women and women's clubs. Morgan is an
unusual and interesting figure, and the book is a lively read, full of color and
black-and-white photographs, that should attract readers beyond "famous females"
aficionados. Despite the italicization of some words in the text, there is no
glossary; a list of selected buildings, a bibliography and index are provided. DS
C.U. Architecture
[ 104]
Willard, Nancy. The High Rise Glorious Skittle Skat Roarious Sky Pie Angel
Food Cake; illus. by Richard Jesse Watson. Harcourt, 1990. ISBN 0-15-
234332-6. 60p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
With her mother's birthday coming up, the narrator is
trying to figure out how to make the only thing Mom wants-a High Rise
Glorious Skittle Skat Roarious Sky Pie Angel Food Cake, as baked by Great
Grandmother. There's a clue in one of thirty-two ledger books the narrator has
inherited, but the secret ingredient (love written backwards in the sugar) is
discovered by accident, in spidery handwriting under the piano when Uncle Harry
drops his jello into the piano strings. The cake is baked at midnight; three
angels (white, black, and Asian) come and eat it up and then bake a heavenly
replacement, including the golden thimble Great Grandmother had baked into
Mom's seventh birthday cake. If the plot seems a little coincidental, it's
actually more mystical (what does happen to the jello that falls into the piano?).
The full-color art work blends super-realism with surrealism. 
Texture,
patterning, and design work are binding in spite of some slick graphics.
Original effects include the golden cake reflected in a gritty toaster and unusual
angel-eye perspectives from behind bushes and above clouds. On the other hand,
all the characters look like advertising models, while flowers, feathers, and
butterflies pervade the atmosphere. Both story and art teeter between inventive
and precious. Some of the images are freshly baked, some self-consciously
molded. In either case, the story and art support each other aptly, and the total
effect is unusual enough to evoke some playful, even thoughtful, responses. BH
D.V. Faith
William, Kate. Friend against Friend; created by Francine Pascal. Bantam,
1990. Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-28636-6. 138p. (Sweet Valley High #69). Paper
ed. $2.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-9. 
Sweet Valley High gets tough. Andy Jenkins, a
black friend and fellow student of Jessica and Elizabeth, is being harassed. "Go
back to Africa" reads the note in his (trashed) locker; girlfriend Tracy's car has
the air let out of its tires; a boy bumps him in the hall: "'Oh, I'm so sorry,
Andy,' Charlie said with mock sincerity. 'I didn't mean to trip you." Most
painful is the rift that develops between Andy and his white friend Neil, who,
feeling betrayed by Andy's anger at white people, find himself involved in a
group assault on his former best friend. The treatment is baldly didactic, with
Andy over-idealized and the twins true to form: Jessica, "waving a sheet of
notebook paper" wants to start a petition, while Elizabeth gets serious: "We
should also have some kind of racism awareness program." Although the story
generally fulfills the homogenized expectations of the formula-fiction audience,
it is thematically uncompromised, with the rift between Andy and Neil
apparently left breached. Of course, they could shake hands and make up in SVH
#70, but to find that out you'll have to buy it, now won't you? RS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Interracial understanding
Williams, Sue. I Went Walking; illus. by Julie Vivas. Gulliver/Harcourt,
1990. ISBN 0-15-200471-8. 32p. $13.95.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
As effective with a large group as it will be with a
lap-seated audience of one, this has a simple text that invites chanting along or
[ 105]
call-and-response; either way, toddlers will have it memorized after just one
hearing. "I went walking. What did you see? I saw a black cat (brown horse,
red cow, green duck, pink pig, yellow dog) looking at me." Reminiscent of Bill
Martin's Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What Do You See (BCCB 2/84), this is as
easy as could be, with a diversity of appeals that belies the simplicity. Too
often, such toddler-sized texts are inundated by brassy graphics, but Vivas'
watercolors, cleanly set and balanced among lots of white space, are elemental.
The "I" is an inquisitive toddler (a boy, according to the jacket; an Everychild,
according to the pictures) whose play with the animals is gentle and affectionate.
The animals, while true to their colors, are elegantly shaped and shaded, with the
green duck, for example, sporting orange feet and purple feathers along with its
dominant hue. The final double spread ("I saw a lot of animals following me!")
is a down-to-earth rumpus. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
Yolen, Jane. Bird Watch: A Book of Poetry; illus. by Ted Lewin. Philomel,
1990. ISBN 0-399-21612-X. 40p. $15.95.
R* 
Gr. 3-5. 
Like Marilyn Singer's fine Turtle in July (BCCB
9/88), this nature poetry is paired with evocative watercolor art that gives young
readers plenty of space to consider the graphic verbal images. Some of the lines
are solemn: "From the lake/ laughs the last joke/ of a solitary loon./ Winter
silences us all." 
Others are satirical, as in the poem about choosing a
supermarket tom over a wild turkey ("In matters of eatingJ our minds do what
they can"). "Swan" offers rhymed humor with a contrast of the bird's stately
appearance above the water, versus its functional feet underneath. Lewin's
pictures strike just the right tonal balance, neither glamorizing the birds nor
distracting from the poetry. The swan picture, for example, is a deep blue wash
with the white bird framing the poem in white print. A last page gives the
names and a bit of information about each bird. BH
C.U. Reading aloud