Apfel, Necia H. Voyager to the Planets. Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-395-55209-5.
48p. illus. with photographs. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Handsome color photographs of Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus, and Neptune and their rings and satellites illustrate a text that is
continuous, clear, and carefully organized. 
Apfel lectures to children at
Chicago's Adler Planetarium, and her experience is evident in her choice of
material and vocabulary: no writing down, but also no heavy use of technical
details or extraneous facts. The book describes the computer-controlled missions
of spacecrafts Voyager I and Voyager II, which employ each planet's
gravitational effect to redirect the path so that the vehicle can planet-hop. A very
brief index and an equally abbreviated list of books for further reading are
supplied, as is a pronunciation guide. ZS
C.U. Astronomy
Berg, Cami. D Is for Dolphin; illus. by Janet Biondi. Windom Books, 1991.
ISBN 1-879244-01-2. 60p. $18.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
As in many contemporary alphabet books, the
concepts presented here are too sophisticated for an audience at work on their A-
B-C's; that said, D Is for Dolphin is a handsome collection of paintings yoked to
a credible sequence of definitions: A is for Air, B is for Blowhole, C is for
Calf.. etc. While the twenty-six paintings of dolphins in the water are at first
glance repetitive (and occasionally tangential to the definitions), illustrator
Biondi varies seashades and tones through a blue-gray-green spectrum. The
dolphins themselves are a lively bunch, and here again the illustrator uses an
assortment of longshots and close-ups to keep us interested all the way to Zzzzz
(a pair peacefully sleeping at the surface). A brief glossary explains each entry.
RS
D.V. Animals, respect for
Castafieda, Omar S. Among the Volcanoes. Lodestar, 1991. ISBN 0-525-
67332-6. 184p. $14.95.
M 
Gr. 7-10. 
In this earnest and well-meaning novel about
contemporary rural Guatemala, Isabel feels torn between her desire to be a teacher
and her respect for the Mayan traditions that mandate a very different life for
women. Although her boyfriend loves her-"He stared so deeply into her when
he kissed that she felt him loosen the capstone inside her and let free a tbrrent of
[233 ]
crystalline waters"-Lucas wants her to be a traditional wife and is jealous of her
curiosity about a young American medical student who is visiting their village,
and who, perhaps, can help Isabel's desperately sick mother. The author's
treatment of the Mayan culture and people is so reverent and noble that the
characters seem like studies from National Geographic: "Though these were the
most ordinary of things in Chuuf Chopal6, ascending as she was to the house of
the mystical Eziquel, Isabel felt a ripple traverse her body because of nature's
activity." Such purple prose makes the culture and landscape seem exotic even
to the characters themselves, and that can't be right. The overwriting is
relentless, witness Isabel on her way to confront Lucas after an argument:
"Isabel could not relax enough to keep her right shoulder from spasming just
under the skin. Her flesh leaped into frenzied gyrations every few seconds. Her
throat felt dry and her stomach gurgled. On uncertain legs she went. On some
level she knew that courage is often nothing more than a knot of muscle at the
gears of the jaw." Although the characters (and readers) are overwhelmed by the
excesses of the prose, the author does gives us a rare picture of a culture totally
unknown to most American teens. RS
D.V. Pride in background and heritage; Sex roles
Chetwin, Grace. Child of the Air. Bradbury, 1991. 
ISBN 0-02-718317-3.
[256p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Mylanfyndra and her brother, Brevan, thought the old
man was their grandfather until he died. The townspeople, who claim the
siblings as geth (common-property slaves) tell them otherwise. Without the
protection of the kind old man, Myl and Brev find they have no rights in an
awful world. While they are still geth, they sneak out of their dormitory/prison
at night and discover that they can rise above the ground and fly. Using this
skill, they escape and are captured three times, each time by equally evil people.
Chetwin uses a generic Good-versus-Evil theme as well as over-familiar fantasy
elements to create a story tinged with dd6j vu. There are devastating fire storms
reminiscent of Anne McCaffrey's Pern, and the narrative is burdened with too
many other-worldly words ("I went out of town once, right after the glair, up
into the Greater Podlithra to clean for the 'lith crews"). Chetwin stays true to
her form with a stretched but very happy ending. KPJ
Cobb, Vicki. This Place Is Lonely; illus. by Barbara Lavallee. Walker, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6960-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6959-4. 
32p.
(Imagine Living Here). $13.95.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
Although kids will be intrigued with Cobb's picture
of the Australian outback here, they should also know that it's a limited and
romantic view. "If you lived on the outback of Australia, the only people you
would see every day would be your own family." Well, not necessarily-along
with the immense sheep stations described in this book, the outback also has
towns, mining developments, military installations, and aboriginal
communities. 
Although cover art features a mumbo-jumbo design of
loinclothed, war-painted aborigines, the book could lead one to believe that the
aborigines are extinct, referring only to cultural contributions without indicating
that Australia's first inhabitants are still very much around: "the art and legend
of the aborigines have made a strong impression on modern Australia." Along
with the kid-appealing aspects of sheep-station life (school via radio), the book
[234 ]
also includes scattershot coverage of Australia animals, geological history,
European settlement and the Great Barrier Reef. Paintings depicting Australia's
animals are better than the sometimes cutesy pictures of people, but the coloring
is whimsical: blue sheep? RS
C.U. Geography
Cooney, Caroline B. Twenty Pageants Later. Bantam, 1991. ISBN 0-553-
07254-4. 186p. $15.00.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
McKane family life, it seems to Scottie-Anne,
revolves around her beautiful older sister Dane, a veteran of the beauty pageant
circuit. Scottie feels smart but ordinary-looking ("you have very nice features,"
says her mother), and her motives for entering the Marshfield Middle School
Princess Pageant are so mixed that she doesn't-until her best friend Lillie, in
collusion with Dane, forges Scottie's application and signs her up. Cooney's
treatment of her subject is nervy and smart: she takes a hard-eyed look at the
beauty contest scene while at the same time making us root for Scottie to win
the school pageant. And while Scottie only places as third runner-up (coming
closer than is probably realistic), there are no easy and sanctimonious lessons
about beauty being skin deep. Dane is a complicated, formidable beauty queen,
with far more magnetism than her sometimes whiny younger sister. "I love
winning," Dane says, and you can see why she usually does. There are a few
purple patches, but the writing is generally sharp, and would-be Danes and
Scotties will both find themselves a sister. RS
D.V. 
Sisters
Crossley-Holland, Kevin. The Dead Moon and Other Tales from East Anglia
and the Fen Country; illus. by Shirley Felts. 
Andr6 Deutsch/Trafalgar
Square/David & Charles, 1991. Paper ed. ISBN 0-233-98572-7. 104p. Paper
ed. $8.95.
R* 
Gr.5-. 
Eleven chilling folktales have been elegantly-and
carefully, from cited sources-adapted for the benefit of sophisticated young
readers and adult storytellers. The pen-and-ink drawings will insult neither, for
they maintain the atmospheric integrity of these marsh tales involving boggarts,
will-o'-the-wykes, witches, dead hands, green children, and a marvelous character
called Tiddy Mun, who mourns the passing of the swamp to modem drainage
systems ... and demands retribution. Feminists will delight in "The Dauntless
Girl," who agrees to rid a farm of unnatural visitors with these words: "I'm not
afraid of ghosts. But you ought to take account of that in my wages." Later she
says to the haunt, "I've no cause to be afraid of you, for you are dead and I'm
alive." Bravo Mary, and bravo, once again, Kevin Crossley-Holland, whose
British Folk Tales (BCCB 1/88) was a landmark collection. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
DeWitt, Lynda. What Will the Weather Be?; illus. by Carolyn Croll. Harper,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021597-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021596-8. [32p].
(Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science Books). Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-3. 
For slightly younger readers than is Bruce
McMillan's The Weather Sky, reviewed last month, this is another good guide
to elementary weather forecasting. Beginning with a clear discussion of cold and
[235 1
warm fronts, the book also describes various weather instruments (including
thermometers, wind vanes, anemometers, hygrometers, and barometers), and
shows how forecasters use these to find fronts and predict the weather. Croll's
illustrations are crisply designed and colored, with an appealing balance between
informational graphics and mood-setting spreads of snow and storms. RS
C.U. Science
Freedman, Russell. The Wright Brothers: How They Invented the Airplane.
Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-0875-2. 129p. illus. with photographs.
$16.95.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
Profusely illustrated with well-placed photographs of
the craft and flights of the first airplanes (those of the Wright brothers primarily,
but also those of other early aviation pioneers), this is an account that, for all its
attention to technical details, remains lively and forceful. The photographs,
many by the Wrights themselves, will interest camera buffs as well as flight
fans. Freedman's research is, as usual, impressive, and his organization of
material excellent; the focus is on the experiments and improvements made by
the inventors, as indicated in the subtitle. An appended note describes the
photographic work of the Wright brothers and is followed by a list of places to
visit, a bibliography, and an index. ZS
D.V. Courage; Industry
Garden, Nancy. Lark in the Morning. Farrar, 1991. ISBN 0-374-34338-1.
[24 0p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
It's her last summer before college, and Gillian is
spending it with her family at their summer cottage. Someone has broken into
the cottage, taking food and bedding-and Gillian's diary, which contains details
of her growing awareness of her lesbianism and her love affair with best friend
Suzanne. Garden's Annie on my Mind (BCCB 12/82) was a groundbreaker in its
romantic treatment of a gay theme; the present book is notable in that it presents
a gay relationship as just one (and a subordinate one, at that) story element. The
central plot concerns Gillian's befriending of Lark, a younger girl who with her
little brother has run away from an abusive home. Lark is a tough but
ultimately vulnerable stereotype of the Gilly Hopkins mold; the dialogue
between Gillian and Lark is windy and therapeutic, as Gillian convinces the
bitter girl that the world is not necessarily a terrible place. Despite Suzanne's
dire (and sensible) warnings not to get too involved, Gillian takes the two
children to their kindly aunt in New Hampshire, leaving the younger girl feeling
much better about herself: "Some of what you said began making sense, and I
began feeling maybe I was okay after all, and maybe there were some good
things around after all . .. I-I think I do want to be alive." The love story
between Gillian and Suzanne is also talky, but authentically so, and gay and
straight kids both will find them an easy pair to like. RS
Gogol, Nikolai. Sorotchintzy Fair; ad. by Countess Sybil SchOnfeldt; tr. from
the German by Daniel Reynolds; illus. by Gennadij Spirin. Godine, 1991.
ISBN 0-87923-879-8. 26p. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Taken from a German adaptation of the original
Russian, this tale of peasant wit, credulity, and romance does occasionally show
signs of awkward translation, but the combination of traditional tale-elements,
[236]
action and humor, and-above all-striking illustrations, has a strong appeal. A
beautiful girl, coming to the annual fair with her father and stepmother, responds
instantly to the love (equally precipitate) of a handsome young man. The path
of true love runs no more smoothly here than it's supposed to, as trickery and
superstition cause delays in, but do not prevent, the wedding. Spirin's paintings
are rich and colorful, and they combine meticulous details with a Breughel-like
gusto. ZS
Gordon, Ruth, comp. Time Is the Longest Distance: An Anthology of Poems.
Zolotow/Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022424-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
022297-2. 74p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 9-. 
Subtle and sophisticated, the sixty-one poems in this
thoughtful collection recall the "pulsing of the loud and fallen dusk," (Delmore
Schwartz) and other signs of day and night and time. A majority of the poems
are translations, ranging from 10th century Japanese ("The way I must enter/
leads through darkness to darkness" -Izumi Shikibu), to modem Hebrew ("this
night/ and these three stars/ lost among trees/ this wind"-Leah Goldberg).
While the theme probably does not have the immediate young adult appeal of
Gordon's anthology of love poems, Under All Silences (BCCB ), the collection
is loosely and sensitively ordered, offering lyrical meditations from a range of
quiet, introspective voices. Indexed by title, author, and first lines. RS
Hayes, Daniel. The Trouble with Lemons. Godine, 1991. ISBN 0-87923-825-
9. [128p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Tyler and his best friend Lymie sneak out one night
to swim in the forbidden quarry, where they stumble upon a corpse in the water
and a car making a quick getaway. Twelve-year-old Tyler is a lonely rich kid;
Lymie a gold-hearted lout; and this is a junior-high mystery that seems fairly
oblivious to the last quarter-century in young adult literature. The two kids are
likable enough and the writing and plot development are professional, but the
didacticism is overbearing, as Tyler learns Lessons in Life from the wise and
kindly family retainers Mrs. Saunders the housekeeper and Chuckie the
groundskeeper: "It seemed funny hearing a tough guy like Chuckie using the
word 'love'." This is just one echo from the 50's; another is the stereotyped
school librarian: "It was a small library and she probably knew where every
book in the place was by heart, but all she could do was point at the card
catalog." Unenlightened but undemanding, this is a quick pick for kids who
want another book about friends who solve a mystery. RS
D.V. Friendship values
Hayes, Sarah. The Grumpalump; illus. by Barbara Firth. Clarion, 1991. ISBN
0-89919-871-6. 26p. $14.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Even listeners too young to know the difference
between a gnu and a yak will love the sounds of this cumulative tale, as a parade
of animals confronts the mysterious grumpalump, which just lies there-a big
multicolored pile of stuff-resisting the animals' attempts to get it to do
something but grump. "The bear stared, the cat sat, the mole rolled, the dove
shoved, the bull pulled, the yak whacked and the armadillo used it for a pillow.
But the lump still grumped." The lump and its suitors sprawl across big crayon-
and-watercolor double spreads; the animals' expressions range from meditative
[ 237]
(the bear) to smug (the cat) to determined (the gnu, who blew and blew until "to
everyone's surprise, the grumpalump began to rise"). The grumpalump's an air
balloon, the gnu its intrepid pilot-"And how the bear stared." Large print and
lots of defining white space make this a terrific just-one-more for storytime. RS
Hearne, Betsy. Polaroid and Other Poems of View; illus. with photographs by
Peter Kiar. McElderry, 1991. ISBN 0-689-50530-2. 68p. $12.95.
Note: Books written by The Bulletin's editors or advisory committee are given a
descriptive annotation rather than a review.
Gr. 7-12. 
"Poetry is a way of seeing," says Betsy Hearne in the
foreword to her new collection of forty-seven poems for young adults.
Henricksson, John. 
Rachel Carson: The Environmental Movement.
Millbrook, 1991. ISBN 1-878841-16-5. 96p. illus. with photographs. (New
Directions). $14.90.
R* 
Gr. 7-. 
This biography of Rachel Carson is impressive: it
has a balanced treatment, it reflects economic and scientific changes during the
subject's lifetime, it focuses on Carson's interest in ecological balance without
abandoning other facets of her life, it has a tone of admiration but no hyperbole,
and it is written in a style that has vigor and grace. Henricksson writes with
sympathy of the scientist who found writing difficult but who wrote so well that
she was able to afford giving up a salaried job to devote her time to writing,
especially about the sea she loved and the pollution she feared. Chapter notes, a
bibliography, a list of dates, and an index are appended. ZS
C.U. Ecology
Herman, Charlotte. Max Malone Makes a Million; illus. by Cat Bowman
Smith. Holt, 1991. ISBN 0-8750-1374-1. 76p. (Redfeather Books). $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Max and his friend, Gordy, try and fail at several get-
rich-quick schemes. They wouldn't take their failures so hard if six-year-old
Austin Healy wasn't such a success at the very same things-a lemonade stand,
a backyard carnival, door-to-door solicitation. Finally, thanks to a tip from
Austin, Max and Gordy manage to make a nice profit on their final scheme of
the summer. The writing is simple without being patronizing, the sentences are
short without being choppy ("Max felt like throwing a wet sponge in Austin's
face too"). The desire to make money lies in every eight-year-old's heart, and
this realistic story will ring up a sale. Animated pen-and-ink illustrations add to
the light-hearted humor of the story. KPJ
Hewett, Joan. Public Defender: Lawyer for the People; illus. with photographs
by Richard Hewett Lodestar, 1991. ISBN 0-525-67340-7. 48p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Giving background information on how the public
defender system evolved in the United States, Hewett focuses on the work of one
such lawyer, Janice Fukai, who works as a public defender in the Los Angeles
County system. Black-and-white photographs are too dark (and not always
informative), but they show Fukai's activities from arraignment through
hearings and consultations to the trial. While this is an account of one lawyer,
it offers information about all public defenders who participate in our system of
justice. The book concludes with a glossary, a bibliography, and an index. ZS
[238]
Hickman, Pamela M. Bugwise: Thirty Incredible Insect Investigations and
Arachnid Activities; illus. by Judie Shore. Addison-Wesley, 1991. Paper ed.
ISBN 0-201-57074-2. 96p. Paper ed. $8.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
The author has served as education coordinator for the
Federation of Ontario Naturalists, so this activity book, first published in
Canada, is nicely gauged for a middle-grades audience both because of its
appropriate vocabulary level and because of the range of complexity of its
suggested investigations. Under such rubrics as "Insects in Winter," or "Insect
Impostors" are a series of two-page projects ("Waterscope down," "How to tell a
butterfly from a moth," "Biters and stingers") printed in double columns on each
page and profusely illustrated. Instructions are clear, and safety warnings
("Carefully tape the sharp edges so you don't cut yourself") are included. An
index is appended. ZS
C.U. Nature study
Holland, Isabelle. The House in the Woods. Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-37178-
5. 194p. $15.95.
M 
Gr. 6-9. 
Five years after her adoptive mother's death, fourteen-
year-old Bridget feels that her father is interested only in his biological children.
The one member of the family to whom she relates is her younger brother,
Morgan, who has never spoken. Bridget's resentment increases when their father
indulges his passion for sailing and takes the family to a sparsely populated lake
for the summer. As the plot grows denser, it becomes confusing, and the
numerous characters are more inconsistent than complex. Is the nanny
intentionally, or just stupidly, cruel to Bridget and Morgan? Does Bridget's
weight problem stem from her anger at her father? Has Daddy completely
forgotten that the lake where they are vacationing is close to the little town
where Bridget's birth father once killed a man? And what is the House in the
Woods, anyway? 
Compared to the painful twists and turns of Bridget's
adolescence, the neat ending is a disappointment. Holland's competent style
holds up the weight of the plot, however, and the pace and natural dialogue keep
the story moving. KPJ
Hort, Lenny. How Many Stars in the Sky?; illus. by James E. Ransome.
Tambourine, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10104-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
10103-8. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A gentle family story about the relationship between
a black father and his son. How many stars are in the sky? Mom would know,
but she's out of town. Her son, who can't sleep, decides to count them but
keeps running into obstacles: ". . . there were lots of stars hiding behind the
trees. The houses blocked out even more. The street lamp was so bright I
couldn't see the stars anywhere near it" Since Dad can't sleep either, the two go
on an all-night star-counting drive. More sophisticated readers may question
Dad's logic in driving first to town ("'This isn't a good place to see stars,' I
said"), then to the city ("I couldn't see any stars at all"), before finally going to
the country, where stars are abundant, but the long trip cures both insomniacs.
Oil paintings capture the changing hues of the evening sky, suggesting the
mystery of the world at night. The artist is less successful at depicting human
figures and facial expressions, which are occasionally stiff and awkward. The
[239 ]
book's premise will appeal to night owls, who will enjoy the thought of going
on a trip at three in the morning. RAS
D.V. Father-son relations
Hotze, Sollace. Summer Endings. Clarion, 1991. 
ISBN 0-395-56197-3.
[176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
Beginning with the German surrender on May 7,
1945, Hotze has vividly recreated, from the perspective of a young Polish
immigrant, the neighborhood bordering Chicago's Wrigley Field. Christine's
mother has a job, Christine's sister has a soldier who sweeps her away to the
Aragon Ballroom, and Christine has the Cubs, whom she watches from an
overhanging screened porch where she sleeps in summer. Christine's father has
not been heard from since he stayed in Krak6w to settle their financial affairs and
was caught in Hitler's invasion. This is a story of tight times and strong ties,
but each character is individualized to avoid period clich6s. The protagonist's
effort to raise money by selling season tickets to watch the game from her
apartment, her evening as a soda jerk with a boy to whom she's attracted, and her
race through a graveyard with best friend (and loudmouth) Arlene make
unforgettable scenes in a historical novel that is developed with skill,
consistency, and imagination. BH
C.U. 
History-U.S.
D.V. Growing up
Hughes, Ted. Tales of the Early World; illus. by Andrew Davidson. Farrar,
1991. ISBN 0-374-37377-9. 122p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-. 
Both poets and mythologists work with compressed
image; England's poet laureate Ted Hughes combines the forces of lyrical style
and concentrated plot in these ten original creation myths. Add a generous
dollop of humor, and you get a God tired of working all the time and not
incapable of making mistakes. Take the case of Leftovers the Lion, who,
created right before dinner, absorbed a little too much of God's hunger for
sausages in the process. "The Making of Parrot" features one of the most
entertaining scenes, a singing contest in which a cormorant performs first
("Aaaaaaaaaaark!"), followed by a loon and then a giraffe ("What looked like a
bubble travelled slowly up her neck. Giraffe opened her mouth, and after about
six seconds burped"). 
However, there are bitter moments along with the
confusing ones, as when Eel wins his point about being the sweetest of fish,
only to doom his heirs to lives of eluding hunters. Hughes satirizes suspense
itself in the hilarious denouement of "The Invaders" (fleas from outer space).
"The Playmate," on the other hand, is a tale of gentle beauty about God's
creating a horse to be woman's playmate. There's a sophisticated tension
between male and female here that depends on adult experience, and a few of the
tales have a tone of self-conscious contrivance. The total impact, though, is one
of anarchic genesis, at once funny and fierce. The black-and-white engravings
add a biblical dignity with occasional sly flecks of levity. BH
C.U. Literature
Janeczko, Paul. Preposterous: Poems of Youth. Jackson/Orchard, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08501-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05901-4. 
134p.
Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
[240]
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
This anthology of mostly male poets and mostly
male voices may be seeking to woo poetry-resistant teenage boys. Among the
poets are the nationally known (Robert Penn Warren's stunning "Orphanage
Boy" and Gwendolyn Brooks' famous "Gang Girls" are included) as well as
people more familiar from other contexts, such as Jim Wayne Miller and Ron
Koertge. Some formal variation (nearly all the poems are free verse) would have
enhanced the collection, but it is nonetheless full of varied and vivid insights.
Janeczko has a particularly strong selection of dead-on "boy's-eye-view"
vignettes with added perspective, such as David Allan Evans' "Bus Depot
Reunion" and Herbert Scott's "That Summer," which seem likely to lure any
audience into reading further. An index and source notes are included. DS
Kelleher, Victor. Brother Night; illus. by Peter Clarke. Walker, 1991. ISBN
0-8027-8100-4. 179p. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Although he was raised by the gatekeeper Dorf,
Rabon's mother is Jenna, a mysterious witch, and his father is rumored to be
Solmak, the great Lord and guardian of the Sun Gate, which keeps away the
dreaded, King Kong-like, Luan. "The Sun Lord also has to see that the monthly
tribute is paid. Without that, Luan becomes restive. Uncontrollable. Then,
too, there's the question of. . . of sacrifice ... 
." This quest-fantasy is
complicated, involving two sets of twins trapped in dualistic, Beauty-and-the-
Beast roles. Rabon's brother is Lal, an ugly monster who lives in the swamp
and whose hideousness conceals a brave and loving heart. After the death of their
mother, the two boys set out for the Sun Gate, Rabon to confront his father and
Lal to bury his mother. Their journey is dangerous (and well-paced by Kelleher),
their arrival the occasion for even greater terror and unexpected reward. Darker-
toned than much juvenile fantasy, this is an adept and satisfying blend of action
and atmosphere. RS
Kirwan-Vogel, Anna. The Jewel of Life. Yolen/Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-
200750-4. 118p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Duffy, undersized and underfed, isn't at all sure he'll
like apprenticing to the old apothecary Master Crowe, but he knows it will be
better than the almshouse where he had been living, the only home he'd ever
known. Much to Duffy's apprehension-and delight-it turns out that Crowe is
an accomplished alchemist as well as herbalist, and he enlists Duffy in his quest
for the Philosopher's Stone, the Jewel of Life. 
Kirwan-Vogel creates an
atmospherically detailed setting for this fantasy story, and both Duffy and Crowe
are engaging and believable, if familiar, characters. What this first novel lacks is
a strong narrative pulse: the quest for the Stone is intermittent, and Duffy's
three adventures in a mysterious other-world are too convenient and
unconvincing in their impetus. Aside from some occasional prattle ("We are our
own stars. The dance and the dancer are the same") the writing is fresh and
graceful. RS
Kitchen, Bert. Pig in a Barrow; written and illus. by Bert Kitchen. Dial, 1991.
ISBN 0-8037-0943-9. 26p. $13.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Kitchen's paintings are, as always, scrupulously
realistic and beautifully detailed, with a strong textural quality. Here the pictures
[241 ]
of a series of animals accompany four-line verses that are unfortunately limp and
contrived. An example: "The bluetit in the birdhouse/ Pokes out her little head/
She chirrups to her parents/ It's time that she was fed." Save for the fact that
each creature is in or on something (bird in nest, bird in birdhouse, ferret in
watering can, field mice in a parsley pot, etc.) this seems a random assemblage.
ZS
Landau, Elaine. Weight: A Teenage Concern. Lodestar, 1991. ISBN 0-525-
67335-0. 115p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
While her references to "teenagers of size," may cause
a cringe among fat and slim alike, Landau's summary of social issues
surrounding fatness is crisp and persuasive, with an organized synthesis of
research findings. This book is less scientific and more political than the
Silversteins' book reviewed below, with Landau placing less emphasis on how
to lose weight and rather more on the prejudice overweight people, particularly
teenagers, face. She cites some of the same research as do the Silversteins, but
her explanations are clearer and better documented, usually with footnotes. On
the other hand, Landau tends to gloss over research that indicates that being fat is
less healthy than being slender. Still, it's a book with an argument-not a bad
thing-and the author includes interviews of both the fat-kid horror story variety
and the success story type. As one contented fat girl says: "When I die, I want
people to be able to say something more than 'There lies Barbara-she sure
managed to keep her weight down.'" A directory, notes, index, and reading list
are all included. RS
C.U. Health
Langenus, Ron. Mission West; tr. by Niesje C. Horsman-Delmonte; illus. by
Willem van Velzen. Wolfhound/Dufour, 1991. Paper ed. ISBN 0-86327-239-8.
144p. Paper ed. $8.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
This winner of the 1989 Belgian Book Prize is a first-
person, present-tense novel set in Ireland during Cromwell's invasion. Just
before English troops drag him to his death, Father O'Faolain charges his foster
son, Rory, to deliver a secret parchment to a friary on the west coast. Rory
relates his narrow escapes along the way and, in so doing, reveals a panoply of
characters and situations typical of the times. Although the excitement is just a
bit too non-stop, this is an aspect that some readers will appreciate rather than
consider to be calculating. The large cast offers a mix of individualized and stock
characters who, though not always memorable, neatly forward the plot, which
includes the protagonist's friendship with an Irish wolfhound, establishment
with a new family, and rescue of a girl. Given the appeals of adventure,
romance, and an unusual style that is evenly translated, it's too bad the cover is
more young-looking than the tone of the book. BH
C.U. History-Ireland
D.V. Perseverance
Lattimore, Deborah Nourse. The Sailor Who Captured the Sea: A Story of the
Book of Kells; written and illus. by Deborah Nourse Lattimore. Harper, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023711-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023710-4. 32p. Library
ed. $15.89; Trade ed. $15.95.
[242 ]
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Three brothers-a stonecutter, a metalsmith, and a
sailor-leave the port of Dublin because of Viking raids during the year 804.
Taking refuge at the monastery of St. Columba, the older two men work on the
book of Kells until each is claimed for his skills by a warring king. It is the
youngest who, because he saves a Viking boy from drowning, is able to protect
the monastery and finish the Great Book. 
Although the art is ornate,
Lattimore's characteristically elaborate borders here seem more appropriate than
usual because of the book's subject. The miniature scenes and designs are also
balanced by a more carefully controlled simplicity of central compositions,
whose hues are often softened blends of the brighter tones in the illuminated
frames. The story itself has a legendary quality that keeps it from seeming too
farfetched; in total effect, this an unintimidating introduction to the Book of
Kells, which admittedly makes any imitation look garish. BH
C.U. History-Medieval
Livingston, Myra Cohn. Poem-Making: Ways to Begin Writing Poetry.
Zolotow/Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024020-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
024019-9. 
[16 0p]. Library ed. $15.89; Trade ed. $15.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. S-8. 
Beginning with John Ciardi's reminder to ask how
rather than what "a poem means," Livingston takes a formal approach
throughout her guide to the sounds, shapes, and structures of poetry. In clear-
occasionally severe-prose she elucidates practice and principles of voice, rhyme,
metrics, imagery, and form, including quatrains, ballads, haiku, cinquain,
limerick, and free verse. There are plenty of examples from first-class poetry, and
Livingston is not afraid to quote from some of her students' lesser efforts in
order to show us what not to do. She seems particularly annoyed at teachers
who regard poetry-writing as a language arts exercise, and just as tough on
students who rhyme mindlessly ("When you're alone/ it keeps you capone") or
natter ("I realized his idea of poetry was simply to write prose and arrange it in
lines"). Her arguments for the benefits of formal structure are cogent and
convincing: "Repetition can serve you best as a meaningful way of providing
sound and thought patterns where there is no end rhyme. It also lends emphasis
to what you wish to say. It can hold a poem together when used well. Used
poorly it will make your readers yawn!" Aside from a few general suggestions,
would-be poets are left on their own as far as inspiration goes, but Livingston's
hows are in themselves good prompts for whats-and whys as well: this is just
as much a book for readers as it is for writers. RS
C.U. Creative writing
Llywelyn, Morgan. Brian Boru: Emperor of the Irish. O'Brien/Dufour, 1991.
Paper ed. ISBN 0-86278-230-9. 160p. Paper ed. $8.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
This fictionalized life of the warrior who united
Ireland and either overcame or pacified its Viking raiders cuts a neat swath
through relationships among clans, families, and personalities that dominated a
complicated political landscape. 
Without idolizing Brian Boru, Llywelyn
projects his charisma, along with the ambition that made him determined to
free-and rule-a land he loved. Between panoramic battles and household
conflicts (Brian married four times, with children by each wife), the scenes here
achieve an epic quality without sacrifice of detail or dialogue. Through an
[243 ]
understated style and fluency of information, the author has shown respect for the
inherent drama of her subject. Junior high and high school students will find
themselves involved and moved by a historical figure equal to the Homeric
heroes. BH
C.U. History-Ireland
D.V. Leadership
Loeper, John J. Crusade for Kindness: Henry Bergh and the ASPCA.
Atheneum, 1991. 
ISBN 0-689-31560-0. 
103p. illus. with photographs.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Henry Bergh's one-man crusade is an example of how
an individual can change the laws and behavior of a nation, and this book is a
competent chronicle of his commitment to animal rights and his founding of the
ASPCA. The author begins by making clear the economic and transportational
importance of animals and the wide employment of certain cruelties, then goes
on to describe Bergh's wide concerns, touching on sanitation, cab horses, circus
animals, livestock, and, in the famous "Mary Ellen" case, child abuse. While
occasionally marred by sweeping or perplexing statements, the book is
unusually fair-minded in its discussion of Henry Bergh's inconsistencies
(preaching vegetarianism while eating meat, for instance), nor does it glory in or
shrink from his occasionally flowery Victorianism (". .. the same starlit night
that brings you rest shines down also upon the bloodstained stones of your
slaughterhouses... "). The final chapter describes the contemporary work of
the SPCAs and ASPCA; a bibliography and index are included. Illuminating
period illustrations and cartoons liberally adorn the text. DS
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Mallory, Kenneth. The Red Sea. Watts, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-10993-
3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-15213-8. 
40p. illus. with photographs. 
(A New
England Aquarium Book). Library ed. $13.90; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
One of a series of books published by the New
England Aquarium, this is written by the head of that organization's publishing
division. The color photographs are beautiful as well as informative; the text is
written authoritatively but is not always well-organized within subdivisions.
Mallory describes the forms of marine life that inhabit the Red Sea, focusing on
rare species that inhabit the varicolored coral reefs. The final page is devoted to a
discussion of the efforts of many countries that border the Red Sea to protect its
wildlife. A glossary, a brief bibliography, and an index are appended. ZS
C.U. Oceanography
Marshall, James. Rats on the Roof and Other Stories; written and illus. by
James Marshall. Dial, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0835-1; Trade ed. ISBN
0-8037-0834-3. [80p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
Miss Jones is a careful goose "who never opened the
door without knowing who was on the other side." Unfortunately, she doesn't
see quite as well as she used to, so when the new neighbor announces that "My
husband and I are canaries," Miss Jones does not notice the long furry nose or
[244]
sharp white teeth of "Mrs. Caruso." Marshall's up to his old tricks in a new
format; this book features seven stories that are longer and more complex than
his easy-to-read books but are just as funny, with sophisticated overtones fit for
practised readers. Lots of the humor depends on reading: "A Sheepish Tale"
skewers a character who claims to be able to read and so leads his friend past a
sign saying "Danger Lurks! Beware of Wolves" ("For your information, it
says, 'Welcome to the pretty forest"'). Kids can predict the ensuing disaster-if
they read the sign. As always, Marshall's art tells half or more of the story, as
when the savior of the mouse wedding party turns out to be a bride who's as big
as the attacking cat ("Even if she is on the tall side, we'll make a fine couple,"
hints Cedric Mousejoy in an earlier understatement). Furred or feathered fables
of this size are always welcome. BH
C.U. Reading, reluctant
Mayne, William. The Farm that Ran Out of Names. Jonathan Cape/Trafalgar
Square/David & Charles, 1991. ISBN 0-224-02757-3. 90p. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
When the City of Birmingham, needing a water
reservoir, plans to flood the Welsh valley where Owen Tudor and his family live,
Owen responds in a startling if not unprecedented way: he builds an ark. After
moving his family and farm animals onto it, he anchors himself on the pond-
soon-to-be-reservoir and defies the Birmingham Water Authority ("It was never
like this for Noah," Owen says, "people going to law on him"), with animals
multiplying and floods finally moving the Ark to safe, legal, and purchaseable
ground. The Welsh water politics that underlie the story won't be known to
most American readers, but this is still an attractively gentle and quirky fable,
with the flavor of a local folktale. The local atmosphere is pervasive, with
Welsh words and names thick throughout, but the story is simply told and easy
to read. Readers will enjoy this variant on that favorite story, a little guy
triumphing over the odds. DS
McKissack, Patricia. Marian Anderson: A Great Singer; by Patricia and
Fredrick McKissack; illus. by Ned 0. and with photographs. Enslow, 1991.
ISBN 0-89490-303-9. 32p. (Great African Americans). $12.95.
NR 
Gr. 1-3. 
While there is a great need for biographies at the
primary grades level, this entry in a new series is adulatory, oversimplified, not
always accurate, and stodgily designed. Anderson had a temper as well as
temperament, but in this book she is only "sad" and "not for herself" (twice)
when confronting racial prejudice. There is no clue that Anderson was a
contralto, nor, in fact, is there any indication that she sang classical music:
aside from spirituals, all the book says is that she "sang the high notes, the low
notes, and all the notes in between." The year of Anderson's disastrous Town
Hall recital was 1924, not 1922; the year of her famous triumph over the DAR
and subsequent concert at the Lincoln Memorial was 1939, not 1943. Although
the print is large and readable, the format is 50's-primer, and the pen-and-ink
drawings look like advertising art from the same era (the several photographs are
better). The cover painting gives the singer a halo. A glossary and an index are
appended. RS
C.U. 
Music
[245 ]
McVey, Vicki. The Sierra Club Book of Weatherwisdom; illus. by Martha
Weston. Sierra Club/Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-56341-2. 104p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
Taking a whole-earth approach to understanding
weather, this goes beyond weather maps and cloud formations to show how the
earth's "system" is governed by natural forces such as gravity and solar energy,
and how these forces shape weather and climate. The approach is clear,
comprehensive, and enlivened by various projects and experiments, as well as by
several extended fictionalized sections that show kids in other cultures using or
predicting or braving various weather phenomena. Everything is in good order
except for the projects, which are in themselves instructive but aren't always
logically placed within the text. The project that kids will probably enjoy the
most, a homemade weather station, is broken up throughout the book and is
given only the most desultory of mentions in the main narrative. Pencil
illustrations are instructive but somewhat amateurish, and "Molly the Molecule"
has no place in a contemporary science book. With a good balance of
information and anecdote (and an index but, unfortunately, no bibliography), this
is a smorgasbord that will provide an enlivening supplement to both weather
units at school and rainy days at home. RS
C.U. Nature study; Weather
Moore, Yvette. Freedom Songs. Orchard, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08412-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05812-3. 168p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Sheryl is a black fourteen-year-old who launches her
narrative with an account of her family's trip to North Carolina on Easter of
1963. There she sees Jim Crow laws in action when a store owner yells at her
for drinking from a water fountain and a clerk keeps an old black woman waiting
through a series of white customers. Back in Brooklyn, she organizes a concert
to raise money for the freedom riders, one of whom, her Uncle Pete, is killed by
a bomb at the school where he teaches black southerners registering to vote.
There are some vivid aspects to this first novel, especially the dynamics of an
extended family and of adolescents uniting for friendship, flirtation, and a good
cause. The style is sometimes awkwardly expository, as in the narrator's
reaction to TV news coverage of "the freedom workers, young and old-hard-
pressed but not crushed, perplexed but not despairing, persecuted but not
abandoned, struck down but not destroyed"; or in the conclusion, in which
Sheryl welcomes "the idea of growing up, knowing art would be part of that
future." Some of the motifs, however, are as powerful as the hum that shudders
through Sheryl's body when she touches a hot wire fence installed by a hostile
white neighbor of her grandmother's-and hears herself called "nigra" for the first
time. Scenes such as the one in which Sheryl's mother breaks down over her
brother's murder overshadow the book's problems, and its integrity as historical
fiction about a charged era is manifest. BH
C.U. 
History-U.S.
D.V. Courage; Intercultural understanding
Orlev, Uri. The Man from the Other Side; tr. from the Hebrew by Hillel
Halkin. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-53808-4. 186p. $13.95.
[ 246]
R* 
Gr. 7-. 
Readers who were caught up in Orlev's World War II
ghetto adventure, The Island on Bird Street (BCCB 6/84), will not be surprised
by the vivid characterization and tight plotting here, but they may not expect the
stark realism, which gives this the authenticity of a memoir. The fourteen-year-
old narrator, Marek, observes and even participates in the anti-Semitism of Nazi-
occupied Poland before discovering that his own father was Jewish. Stunned by
this fact, Marek defies his anti-Semitic stepfather, a sewer worker who smuggles
food underground into the ghetto for money, and helps a Jew, Jozek, hide in the
city. When the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising starts, Jozek insists on going back, and
Marek guides him through the sewers only to be caught in the fighting himself.
Marek's mother, stepfather, grandparents, and friend Jozek are as memorably
developed as the boy himself, whose gradual understanding of his stepfather
tempers an emergent sense of justice. The sewers through which Marek travels
are a naturally apt metaphor for his journey through the underworld of self-
knowledge, which involves danger from within as well as without. Neither
sensationalized nor sanctified, this young adult Holocaust novel has rather been
profoundly considered and patiently crafted. Halkin's translation is so well
blended with the author's style that the text reads as if it were originally written
in English rather than Hebrew. BH
C.U. History-World War II
D.V. Courage; Father-son relations; Intercultural understanding
Paulsen, Gary. The River. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-30388-2. 
[$$$].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
In this sequel to Hatchet (BCCB 12/87), Brian returns
to the wilderness at the request of the government: "If he could share that with
us, show us, take us through it with him-he could save others who are in the
same place." 
Brian and Derek, a survival psychologist, are flown into the
Canadian wilderness with nothing but a knife and a radio transmitter-the latter
of which does no good when both it and Derek are knocked out by a lightning
bolt. Derek lapses into a coma, and it's up to Brian to get him out of the
woods. Although there is a certain amount of melodramatic paragraphing and
emphatic repetition ("Brian would make him comfortable and then wait next to
him. Wait for him to come to. He would wait"), the writing is clean and the
survival action straightforward. 
Easier to read than Hatchet-and with a
corresponding lack of detail-this sequel has a minimal amount of
characterization, a clear theme, and a strong wilderness focus, all of which should
appeal to reluctant readers as well as confirmed Paulsen fans. RS
C.U. Reading, reluctant
D.V. Self-reliance
Rinaldi, Ann. Wolf by the Ears. Scholastic, 1991. ISBN 0-590-43413-6.
252p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
The title phrase is taken from a remark by Thomas
Jefferson, speaking of slavery: "... we have the wolf by the ears, and we can
neither hold him, nor safely let him go." Harriet, the narrator, understands very
well: she's a favored slave who is approaching the age (of twenty-one) when she
will be freed by Jefferson, whom she adores and calls "Master." She believes
that she and her brothers are his children. Her mother convinces Harriet that she
should agree to make use of her impending freedom and her education by passing
[ 247 ]
as a white woman and marrying a white man, a Northerner who has been smitten
by Harriet's charm. Rinaldi presents an issue seldom faced with candor in books
for young people, and she deals capably with the facets of the problem through
discussions among both black and white characters. 
There is a trace of
contrivance occasionally, but for the most part the novel deals convincingly (if
occasionally slowly) with changes in Harriet's attitudes about leaving
Monticello and about passing as white. A provocative story. ZS
D.V. Interracial understanding
Robbins, Ken. Bridges; written and illus. by Ken Robbins. Dial, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0930-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0929-3. 32p. Library
ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Along with their more practical uses, Robbins tells
us that bridges are "monuments to our need to reach beyond the boundaries of
nature," a sentiment at one with this collection of elegantly handtinted
photographs of many kinds of bridges, from a fallen log to the Brooklyn Bridge.
Each picture is accompanied by a brief paragraph about how the bridge works
("Made of metal and glass, this bridge crosses not a river but a busy street. It
lets people walk from one office building to another, saving time and effort
while protecting them from weather and the dangers of city traffic"); each double
spread of text and picture is simple and fastidiously designed. The low-tech
nature of the handtinting process gives most of the photos a nostalgic tone, but
since many of the color juxtapositions and intensities are just the other side of
likely, the book has a postmodern look as well. Overall, the tinting has the
visual effect of blending the bridges into the surrounding land- and seascapes,
making both look as if they've been around for a long time. RS
Rylant, Cynthia. Appalachia: The Voices of Sleeping Birds; illus. by Barry
Moser. Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-201605-8. 32p. $14.95.
R 
6-8 yrs. 
Echoing the tone of a James Agee quote that launches
the book, this is a running narrative description of the dogs, people, houses,
seasons, and lifestyles of Appalachia. The long, loosely rhythmed sentences are
linked with carefully chosen words that project a stream-of-consciousness flow.
The text is punctuated by Moser's sharp portraits or understated outdoor scenes
in which the characters' backs are often turned to the viewer as they walk into
landscapes. Unlike Rylant's other picture books set in Appalachia-including
When I Was Young in the Mountains (BCCB 4/82) and The Relatives Came
(BCCB 12/85)-this is more nostalgic mood piece than story or reminiscence,
but it is beautiful to read and look at and can feed children's understanding of
regional roots. Given a book so spare and simple, the self-congratulatory back
cover blurb seems superfluous. BH
D.V. Pride in background and heritage
Sailer, Carol. The Bridge Dancers; illus. by Gerald Talifero. Carolrhoda, 1991.
ISBN 0-87614-653-1. [32p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Eleven-year-old Maisie describes the stormy night in
which she saved her older sister's life-and also came to accept the differences
she has always recognized between them. Mama is an herb woman who has
gone to nurse a neighbor, and Maisie's sister is a wild child with daring ideas,
such as taking down the ax to split a log for a fire. When the ax falls and cuts
[248 ]
her leg, she begs Maisie to cross the dangerous swinging bridge to get help, but
Maisie is afraid and instead applies the remedies she's seen her mother use to
stop bleeding and ease pain. There's real excitement and drama here, as well as a
subtle unfolding of opposing characters. This is the kind of story kids beg you
to tell, and they'll sit still for it; though the text is longish for a picture book,
the lean writing never dallies. Except for the opening portrait of Maisie's sister,
which gives her a surrealistically Asian look, the watercolor and oil paintings
manage to place this black family on their isolated mountain some time in the
past without becoming too literal. Talifero's impressionistic graphic imagery
suggests delicate landscapes veiled with pouring rain. A strong first book from
both writer and artist. BH
D.V. Individuality, expressing; Pride in background and heritage; Sisters
Samton, Sheila White. Jenny's Journey; written and illus. by Sheila White
Samton. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83490-4. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Jenny's best friend has moved away, so Jenny writes
her a letter that quickly turns into a brave and creative quest in a crayoned
sailboat to Maria's new home. Jenny imagines herself sailing out of New York
harbor, into the ocean, and off to adventure: "Remember how lonely I felt when
you moved away? I feel lonely now, too, but then a dolphin shoots out of the
water. Then another one!" Past an ocean liner, around a mysterious group of
islands, through a storm at sea, Jenny finally spots land, palm trees, and Maria.
"Hooray!" 
This is an exuberant rejoinder to missing a friend, with an
impetuosity matched by bold and simple paintings that stretch across double-
page spreads. Jenny's sailboat has a friendly, furry figurehead and a pink sail
that's a bright flag against the ocean blues and greens. An imaginative voyage
far from the shallows of conventional bibliotherapeutic approaches. RS
D.V. Imaginative powers; Moving, adjustment to
Schroeder, Alan. Josephine Baker: Entertainer. Chelsea House, 1991. ISBN 0-
7910-1116-X. 
128p. illus. with photographs. 
(Black Americans of
Achievement). $17.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Written by the author of Ragtime Tumpie (BCCB
10/89), which was a brief, illustrated account of a scene from Baker's childhood,
this newer book is for older readers. 
Despite an occasional use of florid
phrasing, it is a good addition to the publisher's "Black Americans of
Achievement" series, being balanced, sophisticated, and not flagrantly adulatory.
Twice married by the time she was fifteen, the flamboyant entertainer became a
leading star in Paris before she was recognized in America. A political activist,
a member of the French Resistance, mother of twelve adopted children, Baker
was controversial, extravagant, naive, and glamorous. Schroeder does her full
justice. A chronology, a bibliography, and an index are appended. ZS
Seixas, Judith S. Allergies: What They Are, What They Do; illus. by Tom
Huffman. Greenwillow, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08877-5; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-688-09638-7. [56p]. (Read-alone Books). Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
In an easy-to-read series that has included other
medical subjects such as vitamins and junk food (BCCB 6/86 and 6/84), Seixas
[ 249 ]
describes the history, causes, and treatment of allergic reactions. The text is
clear and simple, with a scope carefully, if selectively, defined. It's too bad that
the format, which is spaciously designed, can't take advantage of more
informative graphics than the two-color cartoons that illustrate the book; they
are adequate decoration but don't add much dimension in terms of either fact or
fascination. However, kids who need to know what's here-and there are an
increasing number of children who suffer pollution- related allergies or are
coping with affected friends and family members-will find the material basic
and accessible. BH
C.U. 
Health
Selznick, Brian. The Houdini Box, written and illus. by Brian Selznick. Knopf,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91429-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-81429-9. 56p.
Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Enraptured by the feats of Harry Houdini, young
Victor locks himself in Grandmother's trunk (and can't get out), tries to hold his
breath for five thousand seconds in the tub ("his mother kept making him get
out of the tub and breathe"), and attempts to walk through walls (finally, "he
used the door"). But a chance meeting with Houdini, and an invitation to his
house, make Victor think he is finally onto the magician's secrets. While the
story is resolved through several unlikely contrivances, the writing has a funny,
fabular quality that matches the offhanded and slightly skewed crosshatch pencil
drawings that go far to evoke a sense of tender mystery. This is very much a
grownup's gloss on childhood magic, appealing more to adult nostalgia for
secrets past than to children themselves. The ending, in which a now-grown
Victor learns Houdini's secret, is a big-boy's delight. RS
Silverstein, Alvin. So You Think You're Fat?: All about Obesity, Anorexia
Nervosa, Bulimia Nervosa, and Other Eating Disorders; by Alvin and Virginia B.
Silverstein with Robert Silverstein. Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
021642-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021641-7. 215p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Offering no "tips" or miracles, the Silversteins
instead provide a comprehensive survey of the social and scientific issues
surrounding weight control and body image. Although the authors seem to have
accumulated a lot of research, it is for the most part undocumented, with too
many references to unnamed "studies" and "experts." Some of the researchers are
named, if unscrutinized: "nutritionist Dick Gregory," for example. Some of the
research discussed is contradictory, a fact of which the Silversteins don't always
seem to be aware. On page 175, for example, it is stated that "Millions of
Americans, especially teenagers and young adults, are risking their lives to be
thin." Page 177: "Although no one is certain just how many people suffer
from anorexia nervosa, most doctors agree the number is well over one hundred
thousand." 
Page 189 tells us that "millions of American girls and young
women" suffer from bulimia. These numbers don't add up in any sensible way,
and the overuse of "millions" makes the tone vague. Scientific findings are
often contradictory, as the authors themselves state, but the summaries here have
not been synthesized into an intelligible whole. 
The book is better on
straightforward biological and nutritional information, explaining why two
people who eat the same will gain different amounts of weight, for example; and
[ 250 ]
there is much sensible advice to both encourage dieters and reassure those who
are content with their body image. An index and reading list are appended. RS
C.U. Health
Simon, Seymour. Big Cats. Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021647-6;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021646-8. 40p. illus. with photographs. Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Stunning color photographs face every page of
Simon's continuous text, which includes an introduction to the big cats and a
look at each species: the lion, the tiger, the leopard, the jaguar, the puma, the
cheetah and the snow leopard. Basic facts such as the Felidae family's keen
night vision are consistently and smoothly presented, with only an occasional
lapse in organization, as when a description of the lion's range interrupts the
discussion of the characteristics and advantages of living in a pride. The
combination of action shots-one tiger is caught mid-spring out of the water-
and the author's practised, informal style will win the attention of young readers,
with whom Simon charges the future of the big cats. The picture of a lion
leaning into the sunset, right next to the discussion of the animals'
endangerment, and an endearing photo of a leopard cub on the last page make it
hard not to consider the message. BH
Spinka, Penina Keen. White Hare's Horses. Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-689-
31654-2. 154p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Set in a Chumash village in 1522, in what later
became Southern California, this is a story of a peaceful people whose lives are
disrupted and their safety threatened by the coming of a band of Aztecs. The
adolescent protagonist, White Hare, knowing that the Aztec men are preparing
for war (and human sacrifices in the rites of war) courageously frees the Aztec's
horses by imitating the call of a frightened colt. With their horses gone, the
Aztec warriors lose their advantage and are driven from the village. The setting is
real, if idealized, the events fictional; the story's strengths are in the convincing
pictures of cultural assimilation of the former Aztec slaves and of the
sympathetic, (albeit belabored) picture of the Chumash. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Sutton, Elizabeth Henning. A Pony for Keeps; illus. with photographs by
Mary Brant Gamma. Thomasson-Grant, 1991. ISBN 0-934738-77-7. [32p].
$9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Girl meets pony; girl loses pony; girl gets pony. It's
an old story, but simply and pleasingly told here, as young Meg gets to take
riding lessons but then must bid farewell to her beloved mount when he retires,
only to find that her parents have given her a pony of her own. The illustrative
photographs are frequently sunk in shadow, which is a shame considering how
immensely photogenic the subjects are: Meg's pony for keeps, Lady Jane, is an
irresistible fuzzy snowball that resembles a harp seal pup on hooves. The
book's accurate depiction of Meg's obsession ("She loved looking ahead through
the pony's fuzzy ears, and the smell of his warm, woolly coat") will strike a
chord in like-minded readers, who will empathize with her perusing horse books
by flashlight and envy her sitting proudly on her tiny steed. The end ("She had a
pony to love and care for, a pony to ride any time she wanted, a pony all her
own-a pony for keeps!") is all that Meg and her readers could dream. DS
[251 ]
Wallace, Bill. Totally Disgusting!; illus. by Leslie Morrill. Holiday House,
1991. ISBN 0-8234-0873-6. hllp. $13.95.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
Mewkiss is a kitten who hates his name. With a
sophistication beyond his weeks, he associates his name with mucus-"the
yucky, slimy crud people cough up when they have a cold." From a wise old
cat, Mewkiss learns in a didactic way that his potential is not limited by his
name. Thus inspired, little Mewkiss bravely attacks an evil rat. Many scenes
between Mewkiss and his best puppy-friend, Barkus; his "special person,"
Jessica; and the wise old cat, Allergies, are cloying. They contrast oddly with
the fight-to-the-death scenes between cats and rats. Girl readers might flinch
from the injustice of Jessica's receiving a new doll and a kitten while her twin
brother gets three Nintendo games and a puppy for their birthday. On the other
hand, the quick pace of the story will please insatiable lovers of animal stories.
KPJ
Weller, Frances Ward. I Wonder If I'll See a Whale; illus. by Ted Lewin.
Philomel, 1991. ISBN 0-399-21474-7. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
The young narrator has seen "spouts far off and
shadows in the mist," but has never seen a whale. Out on the boat again,
watching "hard and far," she sees spouts and bubbles, the backs and tails of a
mother whale and her baby, and even some huge whale mouths, open to the
terns and gulls who feed on the fish therein (an unlikely scenario). 
And
then.... Lewin's splashy watercolors have anticipated the whale's triumphant
leap from the start, showing us the whales underwater (which may confuse
young listeners who may wonder why the girl can't see what they do). The
paintings are sea- and sun-filled, the whales' ponderous presences a dramatic
focus for composition. While the text isn't so much story as frame, the girl's
longing and satisfaction have some of the force of epiphany. RS
Whelan, Gloria. Hannah; illus. by Leslie Bowman. Knopf, 1991. Library ed.
ISBN 0-679-91397-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-81397-7. 64p. Library ed. $11.89;
Trade ed. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Hannah remembers the fall of 1887, when she was
nine. The middle child of a farm family, Hannah was blind and knew that her
mother felt it would be a waste of time for her to attend school. It was the
combination of support from Hannah's father and the pleas of the new teacher,
Miss Robbin, that prevailed; Mama was won over, and Hannah was delighted to
learn whatever she could and to make new friends at school. This has no serious
flaws, but it is weakened by predictability and an overly fortuitous happy ending.
ZS
Wijngaard, Juan. Cat; ISBN 0-517-58202-3. Dog; ISBN 0-517-58204-X.
Duck; ISBN 0-517-58204-X. Bear; ISBN 0-517-58201-5. Each book: written
and illus. by Juan Wijngaard. Crown, 1991. 
10p. $3.95.
R* 
1-3 yrs. 
It may not be necessary to buy all four board books
in this series, but no one who does will be sorry. Each one features the title
animal in five double spreads that tell a story in facing images. In one spread,
for example, the verso depicts the bear climbing up a chair toward two canisters;
the recto shows him standing on top of the chair with a cookie in his mouth and
[ 252 1
a cannister of spilled tea on the floor. In the next book, the cat rears up to sniff
a boot and then falls into the boot. The dog leaps to catch a ball and then
deflates it with one bite. The duck discovers a loaf of bread and then eats a
tunnel into it. All the books end with the animal finding a cozy sleeping spot.
Some of the stories depend on slapstick, as in the repeated pulling down or
knocking over of things beyond reach. Just as often, however, the humor
incorporates another level of wit, as when the dog digs to the bottom of a sand
pile and finds . . . a shovel. The drawings are appealing without being cute;
compositions are clean, objects realistically but imaginatively rendered, and
colors true enough for identification, an activity to which these books will lend
themselves along with storytelling. A great introduction to cause and effect.
BH
C.U. Perceptual acuteness
D.V. Language arts
Wilkes, Angela. My First Party Book. Knopf, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-
90909-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80909-0. 48p. illus. with photographs. Library
ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
M 
Gr. 2-4. 
This oversized guide for young would-be hosts and
hostesses, first published in Britain, attempts to instruct readers in making party
invitations, decorations, masks, hats, and all kinds of edible goodies in the
shapes of faces or animals. 
Despite its bright and alluring photographs,
however, the book has many problems. Repeated claims that materials are
shown "life size" are 1) selectively interpreted-equipment is shown in
arbitrarily sized drawings with no consistent ratio, making a needle appear as
long a a ruler, 2) irrelevant-a bowl merely labeled "cream cheese" or a pitcher
labeled "milk," for which measurements do not appear, are not enlightening, and
3) occasionally false (some mighty tiny fruits and vegetables turn up, as do
some humongous glasses). Nor do the directions themselves help, failing to
explain the pictured steps clearly and sometimes requiring materials difficult to
obtain in your average American neighborhood. The book gives repeated
reminders to get adult help every time a craft involves sharp instruments or a hot
oven, but a child who can't cut out colored paper strips unaided is unlikely to be
able to "copy the crocodile and dinosaur on pages 8 and 9." The reader old
enough to puzzle out the directions won't need parental help and probably won't
want peanut dip shaped like a pig, while those young enough to long for a Tuna
Clown may find only frustration. DS
Williams-Garcia, Rita. Fast Talk on a Slow Track. Lodestar, 1991. ISBN 0-
525-67334-2. 182p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Denzel (christened "Dinizulu" by his sixties-era
father) Watson figured he had Princeton licked, even when he was required to
undergo a special pre-freshman summer program for minority students.
"Remedial? How could you even open your mouth to say Denzel Watson, class
valedictorian, Kid Whiz, and remedial all in the same sentence?" But Denzel's
slick talk, nonexistent study habits, and general arrogance get him nowhere but
humiliated, and he convinces himself that college is not the answer. Convincing
his parents, however, is going to be another matter, and Denzel spends the rest
of the summer selling candy and not telling his folks that he's decided not to go
back to Princeton in the fall. Given the didactic tenor of the story, the fact that
[ 253 ]
Denzel does go back is a foregone conclusion; it is a credit to the author's gift
that the character survives her well-intentioned role-modeling of his fate. Denzel
is smart but smug, not allowing anything as petty as self-doubt to get in his
way. Competing with smooth-talking Mello, (whom Denzel privately calls a
"big, illiterate dummy") to con the most customers into the most candy, Denzel
can't see how pitiful his sales triumphs are; and, while he puts down his fellow
workers as "social misfits unable to get work elsewhere," he's afraid to do
anything else. If readers can get past the despite-himself finger-wagging of
Denzel's narration, they'll find a good story of a difficult summer, and a picture
of urban middle-class black life that's rarely shown in YA literature. RS
D.V. Integrity
Willis, Patricia. A Place to Claim as Home. Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-395-
55395-4. [176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
A first novel is based on childhood experiences of the
author's father; like him, Willis' protagonist, thirteen-year-old Henry, also is
sent to live on a farm. It is 1943, and orphaned Henry finds it hard to understand
why Sarah Morrison wants to keep him with her when she seems so clearly to
dislike him. Expectably, a bond forms between the two, and Henry begins to
wonder if Sarah could be his birth mother, since he has learned that she had once
had an illegitimate child and given him up for adoption. The primary plot is
served well by sub-plots, which feed into it rather than competing with it.
Unlike many first novels, this is not overcrowded with characters; here, too, as
in the structure, the minor roles set off those of the major characters. ZS
Winthrop, Elizabeth, ad. Vasilissa the Beautiful: A Russian Folktale; illus. by
Alexander Koshkin. Harper, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021663-8; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-06-021662-X. 40p. Library ed. $15.89; Trade ed. $15.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
The heroine of this famous Russian fairy tale
collected by Afanasev is closely related to Cinderella, but the villain is unique in
the pantheon of witches. Who can forget Baba Yaga's flying mortar, house with
chicken legs, and apocalyptic horsemen of the sun, day, and night? 
It is
Vasilissa's doll-a gift from her dying mother and a comfort after her father's
marriage to a cruel stepmother-that guides her out of the clutches of Baba
Yaga, but it is Vasilissa's own fine sewing that makes her a Tsar's wife. The
stages of a child's passage into adulthood through grief, tests, and tempering are
deeply imbedded in a story accompanied by dramatic paintings rich in fiery hues
and elaborately costumed characters. Koshkin maintains the life-or-death tone of
the tale with sweeping shapes and stately figures, the latter arranged in
traditional, somewhat stiff iconographic poses. This is a long story, alternating
double spreads of text and of art in the manner of Nancy Burkert's Snow White,
but the older picture book audience will hold still for it nonetheless. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
D.V. Courage
Wolfe, Rinna Evelyn. Charles Richard Drew, M.D. Watts, 1991. ISBN 0-531-
20021-3. 64p. illus. with photographs. (First Books). $11.90.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Although this biography is written in a style that has
little vitality, it is written clearly and does an adequate job of describing Drew's
life and the importance of his contribution to medical history and to the training
[254 ]
of black doctors. 
Refused admittance to the medical school at Howard
University, Drew entered McGill, where his record of academic prowess was
followed by the achievement of distinction as an educator, a medical researcher,
and (as a specialist in research on blood) one of the organizers of the American
blood bank system. The book closes with a glossary, a bibliography, and an
index. ZS
Woodruff. Elvira. The Wing Shop; illus. by Stephen Gammell. 
Holiday
House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-0825-6. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
The idea of a shop where magical wings of all kinds
are sold gives the illustrator ample opportunity for a pastel kaleidoscope of
feathery wings, color-filled skies, and rosy buildings. They are the background
for Matthew's abortive attempts to fly ("Rental wings by the hour") back to the
old neighborhood he misses. The theme of nostalgia-followed-by-adjustment
after a move is a familiar one, and it is introduced here in an adequate blend of
realism and fantasy; it is, however, overstretched from a situation to a story, and
is dependent on the illustrations for the movement it lacks. ZS
D.V. Moving, adjustment to
Yoshida, Toshi. Rhinoceros Mother; written and illus. by Toshi Yoshida.
Philomel, 1991. ISBN 0-399-22270-7. 33p. $14.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
In his plainest portrait yet of life on the African
plains (see Young Lions, reviewed in the 3/89 issue and Elephant Crossing,
1/90), Yoshida tells a story of a mother and baby rhinoceros: "The mother
rhinoceros has been wounded; her side is bleeding." Black-and-white double
spreads illustrate what could have happened; in each case, the author explains
why it didn't: "Perhaps they met a male rhinoceros. His horn would wound her.
But it isn't likely a male rhinoceros would charge a female rhinoceros."
Returning to color once again, the narrative goes back to show what did happen,
when the pair met a baby elephant who had wandered away from his herd in the
nearby forest. The two babies are only curious about each other, but their
mothers engage in defensive combat, a confrontation graphically depicted in a
wordless-none needed-spread centered on the spurt of blood from the
rhinoceros' hide. This is a fierce tale that will engage readers' sympathies more
deeply than tamer offerings, an effect all the more remarkable for its resistance
to anthropomorphism. There is natural suspense in the long night following the
fight, and the author is matter-of-fact: "If the wound gets infected, she will
probably die. Baby rhinoce;os can do nothing for her." She does live, with the
help of the tickbirds that clean the wound. Strong composition sets the solid
animal figures against the long green and yellow horizontals of the plains; while
entirely naturalistic, the pictures have a cleanly formalized dignity that gives the
events some alleviative distance. RS
C.U. Zoology