Aaseng, Nathan. Jose Canseco: Baseball's 40-40 Man. Lerner, 1989. ISBN 0-
8225-0493-6. 56p. illus. with photographs. (The Achievers). $8.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
It is inevitable that there should be similarities
among baseball biographies, but Aaseng gets through the saga of rookie
problems, batting slumps, and moments of triumph on the diamond without
either adulatory descriptions or choppy game sequences. Canseco emerges as a
pleasant young man and a capable outfielder who set a new mark in baseball
history by winning 42 games and stealing 40 bases in the same (1988) season.
Photographs of Canseco and other players may interest fans but add little to the
information provided by the text. Tables of Canseco's game statistics are
appended. ZS
Adams, Laurie. Alice Whipple in Wonderland; by Laurie Adams and Allison
Coudert. Bantam, 1989. ISBN 0-553-15704-3. 99p. Paper ed. $2.75.
NR 
Gr. 3-5. 
Fifth-grader Alice is anxious for an important role in
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, but her auditions for each part are disastrous;
she is finally cast as one of a dozen oysters. Alice attends a private school for
girls, and she's less thrilled than most of her classmates by the fact that the play
is being staged jointly by a school for boys. This is a remarkably tedious story,
with forced humor, shallow characterization and relationships, a plot that
consists primarily of patched-together incidents, and a modicum of contrived
suspense in the exploration of who is playing pranks that sabotage rehearsals.
ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Banks, Lynne Reid. Melusine: A Mystery. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-
06-020395-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020394-3. [224p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade
ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Roger, his twin sisters, and their parents have rented
quarters in a French chateau for several weeks' holiday. What had looked
promising in a guidebook, however, is in fact depressingly rundown, with an
owner, Monsieur Serpe, so fierce that Roger is afraid of him. The only
[1]
redeeming feature is the old man's daughter, Melusine, whom Roger befriends by
helping her milk the goats. Curious about Melusine's sadness and terrified
several times by a mysterious intruder in his bedroom, Roger finally uncovers
the dark secret that transforms a beautiful young girl into a snake by night. In
terms of style, setting, and characterization, this is a haunting novel, but it does
not always succeed in the ambitious attempt to blend a realistic story of sexual
abuse with a fantasy based in legend. One scene in which Melusine transforms
herself in order to save Roger's sister from drowning, for instance, seems
contrived, as does Roger's father's determination to tunnel under the chateau at
night in order to get into the forbidden tower for a look around. The original
versions of the Melusine story do not involve incest, either, but a relationship
between a woman and her husband. On the other hand, the Gothic mood is well
sustained, the imagery powerful, and the family dynamics convincing. Readers
won't put the book down or forget it quickly. BH
Bare, Colleen Stanley. Never Kiss an Alligator!; written and illus. with
photographs by Colleen Stanley Bare. Cobblehill/Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-525-
65003-2. 32p. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
"Never kiss an alligator, hug an alligator, pat, poke,
push, hit, kick, or even touch an alligator, because alligators bite!" A rhythmic
but informative text makes firm grounding for vivid color photographs of
alligators, including a labelled skull, eggs and babies, comparisons with
crocodiles, and numerous shots of alligators in their habitat. The layout is
varied without sacrifice of clarity and the selection of detail is discriminating.
This is young nonfiction with a thematic respect for wildlife and a relaxed style
of conveying biological and environmental facts. BH
C.U. 
Zoology
D.V. Ecological awareness
Barrett, Joyce Durham. 
Willie's Not the Hugging Kind; illus. by Pat
Cummings. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020417-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
06-020416-8. [32p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
The younger of two children in an affectionate black
family, Willie had become self-conscious about being hugged after his best
friend has teased him about it. Willie's sister says he's not the hugging kind,
but Willie knows he really is. He misses hugging and one morning can't resist
hugging both of his parents; he then tells his friend he's the one who's silly.
While strong outlines give definition to the clear, bold colors that Cummings
uses, her portraiture seems stiff and overly deliberate. The story is adequately
told but is a bit flat; the plot (boy misses hugs, boy gets hugs) seems attenuated
and slight. Elizabeth Winthrop's Sloppy Kisses (BCCB 1/81) is a more lively
treatment of the same theme. ZS
[2]
Barton, Byron. Dinosaurs, Dinosaurs; written and illus. by Byron Barton.
Crowell, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04768-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-694-00269-
0. 32p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Bold masses, bold colors, and naive treatment can
make even the most ferocious species look like toys; this isn't the best choice
for identification or information, but it can serve well as a first book on a
subject that most young children find appealing. Endpapers identify species, but
the double-page spreads carry a single line of large type: "There were big
dinosaurs and small dinosaurs," or "There were dinosaurs with sails on their
backs." ZS
Bawden, Nina. The Outside Child. Lothrop, 1989. ISBN 0-688-08965-8.
[160p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-9. 
Suddenly and accidentally, thirteen-year-old Jane
Tucker learns that her widowed father-a ship's engineer whom she rarely sees-
is remarried and has two younger children. Inevitably, she defies her adoptive
aunts to locate her half-sister and brother. What she doesn't expect to find is a
dark secret that seems to spark violent hostility from her stepmother. The
realistically piecemeal revelation of Jane's suppressed memory, together with a
careful delineation of her friendship with a boy whose family is separated, makes
a taut story with faultless characterization as well as sustained pace. Bawden's
style in this first-person narrative is deceptively simple. Because of that, young
readers will find themselves absorbed in complex relationships where the
strengths and shortcomings of each individual charge the plot without making it
melodramatic. 
The circumstances of Jane's discovery are unusual, but her
situation, and the consequent emotions, are not. BH
D.V. Stepparent-child relations
Berger, Melvin. The Science of Music; illus. by Yvonne Buchanan. Crowell,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04647-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04645-5.
[160p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-12. 
Beginning with a general discussion of sound
production and hearing, Berger proceeds through the orchestra, explaining how
each instrument (and the human voice) creates its unique sound. 
His
explanations are lucid and include several simple projects with water glasses,
rubber bands, etc., that will allow readers to design their own rudimentary
instruments. Small pen and ink illustrations are attractive but imprecise, and the
last section on recording and playback is technically more demanding and
probably needs its own book-length treatment. Young musicians will appreciate
the how of all those lovely sounds they make; young scientists may find a new
challenge. RS
C.U. Music; Science-experiments
[3]
Blake, Quentin. Quentin Blake's A B C; written and illus. by Quentin Blake.
Knopf, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-94149-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-84149-2.
32p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Big pages, big print. Upper and lower case letters.
Plenty of white space to set off the letters and the rhyming text at the foot of
each page. Funny, lively, inventive pictures that also have the small-child
appeals of exaggeration and incongruity. Line-and-wash drawings accompanying
the text for "Q is for Queen with a cloak and a crown" and "R is for roller
skates-watch us fall down!" show, for example, scruffy looking parents
(Blake's line does wonders) participating amicably with duster/fans and
towel/trains in the cortege of their wee daughter, who is proud and beaming and
wearing her mother's shoes. Roller skaters, all falling down, come in all sizes
on the facing page. ZS
Brownstone, David M. Historic Places of Early America; ISBN 0-689-31439-6.
Natural Wonders of America; ISBN 0-689-31430-2. Each book: by David M.
Brownstone and Irene M. Franck. 
Atheneum, 1989. 
56p. 
illus. with
photographs. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Color photographs of good quality are used liberally
to illustrate short (one or two pages), alphabetically arranged entries. In both
books the focus is on sites in the continental United States, but some entries are
for island possessions or in Canada. Adequately written, the books are useful for
browsing but less useful for reference or school assignment purposes because of
the alphabetical arrangement: middle grade readers may not know Christiansted
or Point Loma in the first book or Auquittuq Virginia Falls in the second; type-
of-site index entries would have been useful. The smallish print is in double
columns; each book has an index of places and subjects. ZS
Bums, Peggy. Nothing Ever Stays the Same. Lion, 1989. ISBN 0-7459-1249-
4. 128p. Paper ed. 3.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Jacket copy, title, and the attractive cover photo of a
pensive teen make this book look like a light problem novel-which it is, but
with the more unusual feature of the heroine accepting Jesus Christ as part of the
solution to her problems. Sandie has lived with her grandparents since her
parents' divorce, but when Gran has a stroke, Sandie has to go and live with her
mother. Sandie would have preferred to stay with her more easygoing, music-
loving Dad, "but it's not convenient for him to have you there just now." The
relationship between Sandie and Mother is difficult, complicated by anger and
distrust on both sides. While conversations can be obtrusively edifying (not
unlike most problem novels), what distinguishes this book from many other
Christian titles is the subtlety with which Sandie's conversion is handled: rather
than solving her problems, her new faith gives Sandie the courage to face them.
Also refreshing is the fact that the Christians in this book have no monopoly on
goodness; Sandie's mother, for example, is strict, sometimes caustic, but works
[4]
very hard to love and understand her daughter. A good story, and an interesting
complement for the mainstream paperback collection. RS
C.U. Religious education
D.V. Faith; Mother-daughter relations
Cassedy, Sylvia. Lucie Babbidge's House. Crowell, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-
690-04798-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04796-7. [256p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade
ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Lucie Babbidge, class scapegoat, has little more to
say at school than "I don't know, Miss Pimm," but at home she is the center of
a loving, eccentric family. Readers will be well into this book before they
discover that Lucie is an orphan, living in "a place for girls who are neither this
nor that," and her "family" exists in a forgotten dollhouse in the cellar of the
orphanage. As in the late author's previous books, Behind the Attic Wall and
M. E. and Morton, the setting here is realistic, but its most intensely detailed
landscape is drawn within the mind of a silent outsider. Lucie's games with her
dolls are refuge and triumph (she can tell Mumma and Dada all about how she
won the game that in reality the other girls wouldn't even let her play) and, she
eventually realizes, powerful, as the events in the dollhouse begin to happen in
the life of Lucie's English pen pal Delia. While the first part of the novel is
somewhat static, readers will be caught by the gothic mood, and Lucie's brave
rescue of Delia's family (one of the other girls steals the dolls) has an eccentric
suspense. Without ever resorting to superficial psychologizing, Cassedy always
showed a deep understanding of the imaginative obsessions behind children's
most ordinary games, where a paintbox could become a boarding school (in M.
E. and Morton), or here, where a dollhouse can become a home that brings the
world to a girl left too long alone. RS
D.V. Imaginative powers; Self-expression
cummings, e. e. hist whist; illus. by Deborah Kogan Ray. Crown/Random
House, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-57258-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-57360-1.
24p. Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $10.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
Like the best Halloweens, this picture book treatment
of e.e. cummings' poem is both spooky and secure. "hist 
whist/ little
ghostthings/ tip-toe/ twinkle-toe" through a misty autumn evening lit by a full
moon and eerie earthly lanterns. A toad, "little itchy mousies," and a witch who
"knows the devil" prowl the landscape all red and yellow with leaves and light.
In what is at once a sly reassurance and hommage to Sendak's Max, a "green
dancing devil devil" dances triumphantly to the moon. And on the last page-
"wheeEEE"-the masks come off and the children revel, their cheerful grins
dispelling the drama, just. A treat RS
C.U. Halloween
[5]
Curtis, Patricia. Dogs on the Case: Search Dogs who Help Save Lives and
Enforce the Law; illus. with photographs by David Cupp. Lodestar, 1989.
ISBN 0-525-67274-5. [128p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Filled with anecdotes of amazing feats, this introduces
the several ways dogs are used in rescue work and law enforcement. Beginning
with an explanation of canine olfactory prowess, Curtis devotes chapters to the
training and work of police dogs, search-and-rescue dogs, narcotics-detecting
dogs, U.S. Customs dogs, and dogs used to detect arson and explosives. True
crime buffs as well as dog fanciers will relish the stories of sniffed-out felons,
cocaine, and, in the case of customs dogs, sausage and chestnuts; the accounts of
wilderness rescue give due credit to heroism without resorting to Noble Beast
mawkishness. Photographs of the dogs in action and in training are well-placed
and specific; a reading list and a directory of search-and-rescue dog organizations
are appended. RS
Ehlert, Lois. Color Zoo; written and illus. by Lois Ehlert. Lippincott, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32260-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32259-3. 32p. Library
ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
M 
3-5 yrs. 
Sturdy paper, bright colors, and the device of cut-out
windows in various shapes should appeal to the very young audience for whom
this triple-concept book is designed. Unfortunately, there are serious flaws that
militate against the book achieving the purposes for which it is designed. This
is the pattern: a purple page with a cut-out circle (caption: tiger) shows the
lines and colors of other pages (the square of the next recto page: mouse) then a
triangle (fox). Finally comes a page with two green dots that have served as the
eyes for all three animals. First, the geometric abstractions do not look like
animals; second, the book tries to do too much at once; third, the ending (3
pages that show shapes, colors, and a reprise of the 9 animals) reveals that some
of the colors used in the book (purple) are missing or are misrepresented, as in a
green labelled "yellow green." ZS
Fisher, Leonard Everett. 
The Wailing Wall; written and illus. by Leonard
Everett Fisher. Macmillan, 1989. ISBN 0-02-735310-9. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
In a format similar to The Great Wall of China
(BCCB 4/86) and others in this series, Fisher gives a trenchant account of the
4,000-year history of the site sacred to Jews because of Abraham's covenant, the
Tabernacle, the First Temple, and the Second Temple, of which the Wailing
Wall is a western section. A chronology (1900 B.C.-1967 A.D.) and map at the
beginning of the book outline time and place, while the black-and-white, rough-
stroked paintings project massive shifts of history-usually violent, in battles
for possession of the area. The war between Moslems and Jews is compacted
into a kind of afterword ("More About the Wailing Wall"), an understandable
way to avoid controversy and to maintain perspective on the ancient reaches of
the story. With characteristic ingenuity of design, Fisher has displayed symbols
[6]
on each page to represent Jewish, Babylonian, Persian, Greek, Roman,
Christian, and Islamic dominance. A solid addition to a landmark series. BH
C.U. History; Religious education
D.V. Interreligious understanding
Garfield, Leon. Young Nick and Jubilee; illus. by Ted Lewin. Delacorte, 1989.
ISBN 0-385-29777-7. [144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Orphaned siblings (Nick is ten, Jubilee nine) live
precariously in 18th century London, and, through the offices of Mr. Owen (a
thief) are accepted as scholars at a charity school. The arrangement benefits the
children and Owen, whom they mendaciously claim as their father. In the
Dickensian picture of a segment of Westminster life, it is almost inevitable that
a tenderness enters the relationship and fosters affection between Owen and the
children. Garfield is a colorful writer, skilled at creating atmosphere and
introducing period details. The style is robust and humorous, the weakness
being in the use of poor grammar in exposition: "His face, his hair, and his fine
blue coat was a ruin of dirt and stinking fish slime," or "There weren't no
boozing nor cursing .. ." or "Next night there was mutton chops on the table.
And that weren't all!" What this does is to make the use of such language less
effective in dialogue (where it is appropriate) because it serves to surfeit rather
than set off by contrast. ZS
D.V. Education, valuing and seeking
Hearn, Lafcadio. The Voice of the Great Bell; ad. by Margaret Hodges; illus. by
Ed Young. Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-36791-5. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
A smooth retelling of a traditional tale from Hearn's
collection Some Chinese Ghosts, this is the story of an emperor who, 500 years
ago, commissioned a mighty bell and of the daughter of the bell-maker who gave
her life to ensure her father's successful completion of the task. Some of the
print is hard to read because of the background color on which it is printed, but
the strengths of the book outweigh this weakness; it is strong in style and in the
reflection of filial piety, an attribute long valued in Chinese culture, and in the
illustrations, in which rich colors blend and blur in abstract patterns within
which are discernible shapes and figures. ZS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Howard, Elizabeth Fitzgerald. Chita's Christmas Tree; illus. by Floyd Cooper.
Bradbury, 1989. ISBN 0-02-744621-2. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
A turn-of-the-century story begins on the Saturday
before Christmas, when Chita and her father go out of the city (Baltimore) to
choose a tree. Papa marks it with Chita's name and assures her that Santa Claus
will get it to their house. The story continues, quietly, with preparations for the
holiday, a dinner for the black family and relatives on Christmas Eve, and
Chita's happy discovery the next morning that the big, decorated tree does indeed
have her name carved on it. While the tone is static, a feeling of familial
[7]
affection permeates the story and the illustrations, which are realistic paintings
with lines so soft they are almost fuzzy. Dress and other period details add to the
color and warmth of the pictures. ZS
C.U. 
Christmas
D.V. Family relations
Jones, Rebecca C. The Believers. Arcade, 1989. ISBN 1-55970-035-1.
[184p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Tibby rarely sees her adoptive mother Veronica, a
glamorous TV reporter, and has become adept at sneaking around Aunt Evelyn,
who cares for Tibby when Veronica is out of town. 
Tibby knows she's
supposed to stay away from "the Believers," a fundamentalist sect that meets in a
nearby barn, but she is drawn because of a budding friendship with Verl, a boy in
the group, and because she hopes for a miracle that will bring her mother home
to stay. Tibby is an orphan in the Gilly Hopkins mold, and her incorrigible
rebellions and rudeness believably shift to an acceptance of Veronica's flaws and
a trust in Aunt Evelyn's love. While the characterization of Veronica, an
ambitious professional who gives Tibby fifty-dollar bills instead of love, is
stereotyped, the Believers are drawn with unusual restraint, their fervor balanced
by earthly contradictions, and their appeal for Tibby is made convincing. RS
D.V. Aunt-niece relations; Mother-daughter relations
Jones, Robin D. No Shakespeare Allowed. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-
31488-4. [176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Portia's mother is an actress, participating in the
town's annual Shakespeare Festival of which her husband is the director. Portia,
the narrator, is fourteen when she begins her story, which is balanced by other
aspects (first date, first serious rift with best friend, first participation in the
school's track program) but which focuses on the battle of wills between Portia
and her father. He has always cast her in his plays and considers her an actress of
great potential; she is tired of the stage, tired of Shakespeare, and eager to try
something new. The writing style is adequate, the situation applicable to the
desire for independence most adolescents feel, so the story should appeal to and
hold readers despite the slow pace; the sub-plots and the development of the main
plot have an air of concoction rather than a feeling of natural flow. ZS
D.V. Father-daughter relations; Occupational orientation
Katz, William Loren. The Lincoln Brigade: A Picture History; by William
Loren Katz and Marc Crawford. Atheneum, 1989. 
ISBN 0-689-31408-X.
[84p]. illus. with photographs. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Liberally illustrated with photographs, many of
which are faded or grainy, this covers the same material as the Lawson book
reviewed below. This, too, provides background information about Spain (the
monarchy, the republic that members of the Lincoln Brigade were defending, the
fascist regime that defeated that government) and discusses the political and
[8]
idealistic motivation that brought volunteers from the United States and other
countries. A bibliography and an index are useful additions to a book that has
good coverage, an emphasis (as in the Lawson book) on details of individual
battles, and a moderate tone. It is not as well-written as the Lawson book, in
part choppier because there are so many accumulations of facts about individual
volunteers; the two-column format and small type-size make the pages
unattractive. ZS
C.U. History-Spain
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Kerr, M. E. Fell Back. Zolotow/Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023293-
5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023292-7. 
[192p]. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
In a sequel to Fell (BCCB 7/87) Kerr's student-hero
is still an active member of the exclusive "Sevens" club at a posh school for
boys, Gardner School. When a classmate is killed by a fall from a tower, Fell is
sure that it was not suicide or accident, but murder. As the mysteries mesh and
move toward solution, they are permeated by the rituals and obligations imposed
by the Sevens. Although the solution seems less cunningly plotted than it was
in the first book, this is still a palatable blend of prep school setting, love
interest, and suspense, and the usual Kerr attributes of humor, insight,
distinctive characters, and smooth style are compelling appeals. ZS
Klein, Norma. Learning How to Fall. Bantam, 1989. ISBN 0-553-05809-6.
182p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 8-10. 
Dusty, the narrator, is seventeen; his father is
fighting alcoholism, his mother lives in another city with her female lover; he's
been put in a psychiatric hospital by his father, and that's led to a cavalier
dismissal by his volatile girlfriend, Star. Into this heavily dramatic situation
comes Star's best friend, Amelia, sweet and wholesome. When Dusty is released
from the hospital, where Amelia has visited him (Star has not) he becomes
friendly with the members of Amelia's family. Dusty, half in love with
Amelia, has a final fling with Star; Amelia learns about it, and tells Dusty they
are through. The characterization and the writing style are strong in this
exploration of risks in personal relationships, but the plot and structure are less
effective: the situation is almost turgid with familial and personal problems, the
pace is uneven, and the ending brings a slow-dissolve image. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Lawson, Don. The Abraham Lincoln Brigade: Americans Fighting Fascism in
the Spanish Civil War. Crowell, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04699-5; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-690-04697-9. [176p]. illus. with photographs. Library ed. $11.89;
Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Lawson gives good background material about
Spain's role in the European community, its decline as a sea power, the loss of
[9]
colonial lands that contributed to the establishment of a republican government,
and the subsequent seizure of military and political power by General Franco.
Comparatively few young people today know the details of the military
involvement in behalf of the Loyalists (against Franco's Rebels and the Fascist
countries that gave him massive support) by volunteers from the United States.
Called the Abraham Lincoln Brigade, many of these young men-and some
women-saw the war as a rehearsal for a second world war; they were aware that
there was no support at home because the U.S. government was suspicious of
the help the Loyalists got from the U.S.S.R. For some readers, there may be
too-detailed accounts of individual battles, but Lawson does convey the idealism,
the courage, the desperation of brigade members. He describes some of their
leaders, particularly Captain Bob Merriman; he makes it clear that there were
other international brigades who served in the war that was won by Franco and
that led to the establishment of a fascist government in Spain. Lots of action,
lots of drama, lots of history. Lawson is a careful researcher, a capable writer,
and an observer who strives for impartiality. A closing note suggests other
sources of information, including several adult books about the Spanish Civil
War. ZS
C.U. History-Spain
D.V. Courage; Devotion to a cause
Leonard, Laura. Saving Damaris. Karl/Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31553-8.
[192p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Abby begins her story on her twelfth birthday, July
4, 1904. Papa is working away from home, Mama earns money sewing, and it
seems a boon when sixteen-year-old Damaris gets a job in Mr. Buttenbacher's
emporium. That is, it seems a boon until it becomes clear that Mr. B. (an
unattractive person) wants to marry Damaris. When Mama dies and her children
are taken in by an aunt and uncle, it appears that there is no financial alternative,
so Damaris becomes engaged-and Abby desperately wants to save her sister
from what seems certain to be an unhappy fate. It is Mr. B. who ends the
engagement when he realizes that Damaris expects him to take in Abby and
brother Joel. The story is told, convincingly, in diary form, and the characters
are adequately drawn; as is true of many first novels, this seems a minimal plot
that is stretched to story length. It shows promise, however, since period
details, characterization, and style are capably handled, the weaknesses being in
pace and structure. ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Sisters
Lester, Julius, ad. How Many Spots Does a Leopard Have?: and Other Tales;
illus. by David Shannon. Scholastic, 1989. 
ISBN 0-590-41973-0. 
[80p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
"I have fitted the story to my mouth and tongue,"
says Lester in an author's note, but he takes care to disclose what changes he has
made and what sources he has used in selecting these twelve uncommon stories.
Most are African-from the Efik-Ibibio, Xosa, Basuto, Fan, Mende, Hausa,
[ 10]
Masai, and Ngoni peoples-and a number are pourquoi tales or myths. Two are
Jewish, and one combines variants from African and Jewish lore. Lester is
practised at adaptation, respecting core elements while rejuvenating details with
his own unobtrusive but distinctive style. Storytellers will consider this a
valuable resource, and independent young readers will find the text accessible as
well. Shannon's deep-toned paintings are powerfully imaginative, poignant to
match the tone of "The Woman and the Tree Children," humorous for "Tug-of-
War," scary for "The Monster Who Swallowed Everything," mythic for "Why
the Sun and Moon Live in the Sky," full of motion for "Why Dogs Chase Cats"
and "Why Monkeys Live in Trees," surrealistic for "What Is The Most Important
Part of the Body?" Overall, the book is a strong foil for the classic European
fairy tale collections that are flooding the market. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Levine, Ellen. I Hate English!; illus. by Steve Bjorkman. Scholastic, 1989.
ISBN 0-590-42305-3. [32p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-3. 
The author, who has served on the board of directors
of Manhattan's Chinatown Planning Council, shows quite clearly how a
newcomer from Hong Kong resents and resists using the English language. As
do most children, Mei Mei picks up a second language quickly and can
understand English. 
She just doesn't want to use it-until a friendly,
understanding teacher leads her, through laughter, to acceptance. A bit pat,
perhaps, but the tone is light, the telling pleasantly styled, the line-and-wash
pictures animated (although the faces are not well drawn), the solution
believable, and the ending nicely nonpartisan: "And to this day Mei Mei talks in
Chinese and English whenever she wants." ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Teacher-student relations
Levite, Christine. Princesses; by Christine Levite and Julie Moline. Watts,
1989. ISBN 0-531-10772-8. 208p. illus. with photographs. $12.90.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
Princess Di? "A regal young woman-elegant and
charming, warm-hearted and enchanting." Stephanie? "Fame hasn't made her
helpless." The Infantas Elena and Cristina? "Like most Spaniards, they enjoy
the richness of life in a land that's known for its sunny skies, balmy seashore,
and extremely friendly people." It may well be that such society-page prose is
the best vehicle for these brief portraits of eleven contemporary princesses, but
one does long for a sense of proportion. The real accomplishments of princesses
like Yasmin Khan (fund-raiser for Alzheimer's research) and Elizabeth of Toro
(Ugandan diplomat) are reported here, but seem dimmed by the surrounding glitz:
"The Thurn and Taxis royals may not have careers in the usual sense, but their
globe-trotting schedule is demanding." Coverage is uneven, with most space
devoted to Di and Fergie and the Grimaldi girls; other princesses, like Martha
Louise of Norway and the Infantas, receive cursory attention. The text is
footnoted, which, given all the chatty adulation of the text, seems a little
excessive: "She [Diana] claims she's got 'a brain the size of a pea,' 1 even
though she's learned the fine-and difficult-art of making conversation."
[11]
Metric equivalents are also given: "Held at an estate on the French Riviera, the
wedding reception was set around a swimming pool that was filled with 200
gallons (760 1) of perfume and festooned with floating flowers in the shape of
the couple's monogram." RS
Lyon, George Ella. Red Rover, Red Rover. Jackson/Watts, 1989. Library ed.
ISBN 0-531-08432-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05832-8. 
131p. Library ed.
$12.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
"How do you act when at age eleven you've become
an only child? When there's a death in the family? Not a death you visit, but
one you have to live with?" Sumi has suffered two losses: her grandfather has
died, and her beloved only brother has gone away to music school. And when
her best friend moves away, Sumi finds herself solving the puzzles of early
adolescence alone. Her mother gives Sumi pads for her first menstrual period,
but doesn't explain what's happening, or even that it will happen again and
again. "I think that's part of my trouble: I don't get used to things." Sumi
decides to lose weight, gets a crush on a teacher, discovers a love of music
through a Peter, Paul and Mary album--events all acccompanied by both pain
and self-discovery. Like Cynthia Rylant's A Blue-Eyed Daisy (BCCB 9/85),
this is a poetic, reminiscent (but never nostalgic) perspective of a young girl's
growth during the early 60's, stronger in sensibility than story. Told by twelve-
year-old Sumi recollecting her previous year, the book is occasionally too
introverted and the hard-gained wisdom sometimes overly precocious, although
perceptive, precise, and true. RS
D.V. Growing up
Malmgren, Dallin. The Ninth Issue. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-29691-6.
182p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Blue Hocker, newly transferred to a Texas small town
high school, is put on the staff of the school newspaper; he quickly makes
friends with other staff members but particularly likes Rachelle (although she
seems firmly committed to a football hero) and the journalism teacher, Mr.
Choate. While this has nicely merged sub-plots that focus on relationships
among the staff members, the thrust of the story is on the importance of
integrity in investigative journalism and on freedom of expression. Malmgren
doesn't wax didactic about these issues, but they are inherent in the story and
they come to a head when the teacher, defended by his students, is attacked by the
administration when controversial issues are aired in the paper. ZS
D.V. Ethical concepts; Teacher-student relations
Matas, Carol. Lisa's War. Scribner, 1989. ISBN 0-684-19010-9. [128p].
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Lisa, who tells the story, is a young adolescent
whose older brother Stefan becomes a member of the Danish resistance to the
[12 ]
occupying Nazi forces. The time is 1940, the setting is Copenhagen, and Lisa's
family is endangered as are all Danish Jews. Lisa insists on doing her share in
the resistance and frets because her cousin Erik and his parents refuse to see, or
admit, that the Germans are a threat to all Jews and those who sympathize with
them or help them. The story, told smoothly, with good pace, structure, and
suspense, ends with the mass evacuation of Danish Jews to Sweden, an effort in
which hundreds of non-Jewish Danes participated. ZS
D.V. Courage; Kindness
Milton, Joyce. Greg Louganis: Diving for Gold; illus. by Stephen Marchesi
and with photographs. Random House, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-94586-7;
Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-84586-2. 
87p. (Step-Up Books). Library ed. $6.99;
Paper ed. $2.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
This biography of the Olympic gold medalist in 1984
and 1988 is admiring but candid and very easy to read. Information about diving
as a competitive event is well integrated with anecdotes from Louganis' life and
his own personal successes, failures, and near-misses. Milton writes frankly
about the diver's problems with alcohol and dyslexia and his difficulty with
fitting in among his peers; her style is concise and only occasionally falls into a
high-low choppiness. The many photographs are clear and informative (and
hunky); the few stiff drawings are unnecessary. While intended for primary-
grades readers, this has an appeal and format that will extend the audience to poor
and reluctant readers through junior high. RS
D.V. Perseverance
Murphy, Jim. 
The Call of the Wolves; illus. by Mark Alan Weatherby.
Scholastic, 1989. 
ISBN 0-590-41941-2. 
[32p]. 
$13.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
With an involving text and arresting art, this is a
nature narrative that commands attention without ever becoming sentimental or
anthropomorphic. A young wolf is separated from his pack during a caribou
hunt that is interrupted by illegal hunters shooting from a plane. Trapped, the
wolf plunges over a cliff, injures a leg, and labors through a snowstorm in
another pack's territory to return home. The story yields plenty of unobtrusive
information, and an afterword explains how much modern research contradicts
myths of the past. A brief list of important sources for futher information is
appended. Because the style is straightforward and the dramatically textured
paintings-each a handsome composition unto itself-are so dynamic, this can
be read by independent readers older than the picture book listeners for whom it's
intended. BH
C.U. Nature study
[13]
O'Connor, Jim. Jackie Robinson and the Story of All-Black Baseball; illus. by
Jim Butcher and with photographs. Random House, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-
394-92456-8; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-82456-3. 
48p. (Step into Reading).
Library ed. $6.99; Paper ed. $2.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Adequately illustrated with photographs (some posed,
some action shots) and crayon drawings, this is a simply written book that,
despite some awkward phrasing, is nicely geared (by vocabulary, sentence length,
and print size) to the primary grades audience. O'Connor provides a nice
condensation of some parts of baseball history by covering not only the story of
Jackie Robinson's prowess and his problems as the first black man to play in
the major leagues, but also the story of the rise and fall of black baseball and
some of the star players and managers who contributed to the Negro National
League and the Negro American League. ZS
C.U. Black history
Pevsner, Stella. How Could You Do It, Diane? Clarion, 1989. ISBN 0-395-
51041-4. [192p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
Bethany, fourteen, is the narrator, and she begins her
story five days after her beloved stepsister Diane, one year older, has committed
suicide. There was no note, and the focus of this novel is on Beth's efforts to
find a reason for Diane's decision as well as on the disruptive despair of the
whole family. Pevsner moves easily from the unhappy present to the past, as
Beth remembers Diane and their relationship and as she searches for ways to
accept the bitter truth and adjust to it. Given the fact that the drama is over
when the curtain goes up, the author has done an impressive job of sustaining
interest, displaying insight and sympathy, and creating a group of characters who
are well-defined and who bear the burden of not understanding the act that has
brought their shared grief. ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Stepsisters
Reuter, Bjarne. Buster's World; tr. by Anthea Bell. Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-
525-44475-0. [112p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Buster Oregon Mortensen, son of a charming but
useless street magician, is the delightfully amoral anti-hero of this Danish
import. Buster's lame sister Ingeborg is having trouble with a big bully, so
Buster, busy, hands her a stone. "Throw it at him." The bully then goes for
Buster, and their unending circle of revenge becomes the thread that leads Buster
from triumph to mishap to trouble to romance. 
While there's plenty of
entertaining slapstick mayhem here, Buster's loyalty to Ingeborg and their
muddled family, and his affection for a street that smells of lilac and for a girl
who lives there occasion an inviting synthesis of pathos and humor. Getting
ready for his first date, Buster says, "I put Dad's deodorant under my left arm and
Mom's under my right arm." Buster has inherited his Dad's silver tongue as
well as his way with a magic trick, and the combination should prove irresistible
for fans of Roald Dahl and Betsy Byars. RS
[14]
Roberts, Willo Davis. Nightmare. Karl/Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31551-
1. [192p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
His widowed mother had remarried, his brother
Mickey (unable to get along with their stepfather) had left home; Nick hardly
needed the triple blows of having his girl announce they were through, having a
man fall from an overpass onto the hood of Nick's car, and having a
housebreaker kill his dog. He decides to drive the family motorhome to Texas to
see Mickey, and is irritated to find that a younger neighbor who dotes on him
(Daisy is fifteen) has stowed away in the vehicle. Both of them are baffled and
frightened when they discover that they are being followed by two cars driven by
men who had been seen on the overpass just before the fatal fall. Nick's sure it
was not an accident, but murder, and just as surely, he and Daisy are in great
danger. Courageously, they contribute to the capture of the criminals, and all's
well that ends well. Roberts is a skillful writer, providing believable dialogue
and characters, adequate motivation, and firm basic structure. She is less
convincing in the evolution of logical development of the plot, and this may
contribute to the fact that the pace of the story occasionally lags. ZS
Robinson, Mary. Give It Up, Mom. Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-49700-0.
[176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Rayne has to come up with an Impact on the World
project for her seventh-grade social living class, and decides to help her mom quit
smoking. The trouble is, Mom doesn't really want to quit, and instead of the
closeness Rayne thought the project would bring between them, Mom just gets
irritated, exasperated, and angry. These are convincing portraits of a crusading
kid and a hell-bent smoker, but there is too much else going on in the story.
Rayne's first-person narration is occasionally and confusingly interrupted by
omniscient excursions into the stories of her best friends; the plot of Rayne's
favorite soap opera is described in painstakingly day-by-day detail; and there are
too many characters. However, the central story is funny and convincing, and
Mom does quit-though both Rayne and readers will want to keep their fingers
crossed. RS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Rodowsky, Colby. Sydney, Herself. Farrar, 1989. 
ISBN 0-374-30649-4.
[19 2p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Sydney Downie believes, in spite of her mother's
assurances to the contrary, that her father was a member of the famous rock
group Boomerangs from Australia, where her mother was a graduate student, and
that she was named after their hit "Sydney Downie Down Down." 
Her
emergence from obsession to reality is narrated in context of a journal assigned
by a creative writing teacher who is dating her mother, a history teacher at the
same small private school. This is carefully developed, with well-realized
portrayals of a cast that includes a young neighbor for whom Sydney babysits,
[15 ]
his brother who becomes Sydney's boyfriend, a landlady who bullies Sydney's
mother, the creative writing teacher who's really a sculptor, and several
classmates. Most of all, it is Sydney's voice that lends credibility, her creative
writing efforts authentically amateurish and her maturation convincingly
balanced. BH
D.V. Self-evaluation
Roe, Eliane Corbeil. Circle of Light. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
025079-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025072-0. [2 56p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade
ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
"I know what I can do and what I can't. I can't do
this. And I don't want to." In this novel set in post-WWII Ontario, thirteen-
year-old Lucy is dead set against entering the scholarship competition. Who
wants to spend high school being taught by nuns? But when Lucy sees her
secret crush Gabriel skating with Saint Margaret's second-best scholar
Madeleine, she impetuously tells Sister Andrew that she will try for the
scholarship. While the ever-approaching competition gives a suspenseful pull
through the novel, this is really a somewhat static portrait of Lucy's isolation as
she spends more and more time working alone in the nuns' study. She feels like
an outsider-"the brain"- among her friends, and worries that Gabriel doesn't
like her. While all of Lucy's lonely emotions are carefully limned, this first
novel is diffuse and tentative. Its drama and story are subtle, and have a quality
of adult reminiscence from which most young readers will feel removed. RS
D.V. Education, valuing and seeking
Rosen, Michael, ad. We're Going on a Bear Hunt; illus. by Helen Oxenbury.
McElderry, 1989. ISBN 0-689-50476-4. 33p. $14.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
"Bear Hunt" is a time-honored story hour stretch, but
whoever thought you needed pictures? However, this oversized picture book is a
natural step from Oxenbury's board book series of baby rhymes (All Fall
Down, etc.). Double-page spreads in pencil of a family outing ("We're not
scared") alternate with full-color surprises for the sound effects ("Stumble trip!
Stumble trip! Stumble trip!") with both pictures and text big and emphatic
enough for the noisiest crowd. After the close encounter ("IT'S A BEAR!!!!"),
Dad and the kids make a breathless return through the elements to the security of
a big pink comforter, and while they're "not going on a bear hunt again" your
audience won't be able to wait. RS
Rosenberg, Liz. Adelaide and the Night Train; illus. by Lisa Desimini.
Zolotow/Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025103-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
025102-6. 
[32p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
Dream-journeys rarely make, or need, sense; and just
as rarely can they be evoked upon waking or for the awake. Wide awake on a
warm spring night, Adelaide hears the train pass by and believes she has "lost
[16]
her way to sleep," until the conductor invites her into the train. What follows is
a loose assortment of images: four firemen playing cards, frogs practicing their
singing, "a late night-disc jockey played a love song dedicated to Laura. And
Laura heard it." None of these has anything to do with Adelaide or her train,
which finally takes her to a peaceful nighttime garden. As in David Wiesner's
Free Fall (BCCB 5/88), the lack of narrative is somewhat compensated for by
handsome illustration. Desimini's paintings glow with night light, their rich
colors deepened by warm black shading. The stiff stylization of the figures and
train, along with some quietly surreal perspectives, have a '30s feel that lends
strange but satisfying comfort. The haze of dreams and their streams of pictures
are successfully re-created, but the tenuous text needs a sharper focus. RS
Rostkowski, Margaret I. The Best of Friends. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-025105-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025104-2. [192p]. Library ed. $12.89;
Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
It's 1969, and best friends Will and Dan face high
school graduation, college, and the possibility of the draft. Dan's sister Sarah, a
year younger than the boys, is mildly active in anti-war protest, much to the
disdain of her father, a veteran of the Korean War and head of the local draft
board. This is a novel of characters rather than action as the three teens, facing
change, sort through what they mean to each other and themselves, with the
threat of the war serving as catalyst. 
While there is too much overt
psychologizing and over-explanation delivered via conversation, this is a
complicated, difficult trio, continually re-evaluating themselves in face of the
others. The characterization of Dan and Sarah's father lacks the complexity of
the young adults', and his constant reiterations of my-way-or-nothing seem too
easy. There is nothing easy, however, about the brave-perhaps foolishly so-
decisions each of the teens makes by the end of the book. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Devotion to a cause; Friendship values
Rowland, Della. The Story of Sacajawea, Guide to Lewis and Clark; illus. by
Richard Leonard. Yearling/Dell, 1989. Paper ed. ISBN 0-440-40215-8. [96p].
Paper ed. $2.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
The life of the woman who led Lewis and Clark on
their expedition to the Pacific is a dramatic tale; witness Scott O'Dell's
historical novel Streams to the River, River to the Sea (BCCB 4/86).
Rowland's biography is competent enough, clearly retelling what is known of
Sacajawea's early life, the stages of the expedition, and the very little that is
known of the guide and translator's life after she returned to her home near the
Missouri River. Throughout, the author avoids fictionalization or invented
dialogue. The style is plodding and unimaginative, with vivid description
limited to repeated references to the "shining" or "glistening" Rocky Mountains,
and exclamation points are substituted for excitement: "They would all live or
die together!" 
However, the subject (and the paperback format) have great
[17]
inherent appeal, and there are no other biographies of Sacajawea in print for this
age group, making this useful for Native American projects. RS
C.U. History-U.S.-Discovery and Exploration
Ryder, Joanne. Catching the Wind; illus. by Michael Rothman. Morrow,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07171-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07170-8. 32p.
(Just for a Day Books). Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
While the anthropomorphic premise of the series is
labored and confusing, this second entry is more successful than the first, White
Bear, Ice Bear (BCCB 2/89). In Catching the Wind, "you" are a little girl who,
upon feeling the wind "calling you softly," changes into a Canada goose. You
join a flock, "flying and honking across the sky," land and eat at a pond, and
resume your flight. While most children will probably understand that the wind
doesn't really sing "Be warm. Come be warm" to the geese, they will probably
not understand that this is a whimsical allusion to migration, and will be
confused after a previous reference to the "cold windy sky." However, this book
does contain more facts, gracefully presented, than did White Bear, and
Rothman's paintings have even more drama than the ones he did for that book.
Full-color close-ups of the birds in flight and splashing across the pond seem to
leap from the page, and the bird's-eyed perspectives of the sky and earth are
inviting-but not for "you," who "slide through the open window, where your
own warm bed waits to change you again." RS
C.U. 
Zoology
Sampson, Fay. A Free Man on Sunday. Gollancz/David & Charles, 1989.
ISBN 0-575-04114-5. 138p. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Restricted to public paths in the Derbyshire hills,
walking clubs ("ramblers") of townspeople rebelled, in 1932, against the
restrictions imposed by local landowners. There was a massive protest (the
"Mass Trepass") that resulted in some arrests but that led, eventually, to the
establishment, in 1949, of the National Parks and Access to the Countryside
Act. The protagonist here is Edith Ramsden, whose father looked forward to his
Sunday rambles and who was part of the resistance movement. Sampson has
done a fine job of integrating fiction and history, giving the story color and pace
and structure, defining an issue but never letting it become more important than
the narrative. ZS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Schlein, Miriam. Pigeons; illus. with photographs by Margaret Miller.
Crowell, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04810-6Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04808-4.
[48p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Considering how ubiquitous pigeons are in the city,
it's amazing how little most people know about them. Hatchlings, for instance,
[ 18]
are hard to observe since "most pigeons lay their eggs in hidden-away places."
That's because they're "descendants of wild rock doves, birds that nest high on
cliffs and rock ledges." This photodocumentary gives lots of facts about the
birds (though nothing on special breeds such as the fantail or pouter), including a
five-week diary of two chicks from egg to first flight. Miller's black-and-white
photography is of top quality, as are the historical photos and other illustrations
that accompany accounts of homing pigeon's heroic flights, passenger pigeons'
extinction, and other information. A must for urban nature study. BH
C.U. Nature study
Scieszka, Jon. The True Story of the 3 Little Pigs: by A. Wolf; illus. by Lane
Smith. Viking, 1989. ISBN 0-670-82759-2. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R* 
Gr. K-3. 
It turns out that Alexander T. Wolf ("You can call me
Al") only wanted to borrow a cup of sugar for a birthday cake for his granny
(who looks a bit all-the-better-to-eat-you-with herself, and is that a pair of bunny
ears poking out of the cake batter?). After knocking politely on the first pig's
door, Al's nose started to itch. "I felt a sneeze coming on. Well I huffed. And I
snuffed. And I sneezed a great sneeze. And do you know what? That whole darn
straw house fell down." And lying in the middle of the straw was the First
Little Pig, "dead as a doornail." "Think of it as a big cheeseburger just lying
there." And so on. The gruesome humor of the text is kept in the line by the
breezy style of Al's narration, a natural (if you dare) read-aloud studded with
offbeat rhyme: "I called, 'Mr. Pig, Mr. Pig, are you in?' He yelled back, 'Go
away wolf. You can't come in. I'm shaving the hairs on my chinny chin
chin.'" With a sensibility akin to Henrik Drescher's but informed with more
sophisticated draftsmanship, Smith's creepy and witty illustrations get right to
the meat of the matter. The Second Little Pig's snuffing leaves his porky
bottom posed neatly between a set of fine stick-style tableware; and from our
brief glance of the Third (very pink and very mean: "What a pig") we can easily
see how A.T. Wolf, "big and bad," soon found himself in Pig Penn. While
hardly everyone's cup of tea (or sugar), both read-aloud and read-alone audiences
will find a tasty treat. RS
Seide, Diane. Physician Power: New Vistasfor Women in Medicine. Lodestar,
1989. ISBN 0-525-67276-1. [128p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Seide examines the role of women in medicine, citing
statistics about the difference between the income of men and women doctors
despite the growing numbers of women who are accepted into medical school and
who now include most specialties in their practices. Seide gives useful facts
about medical education, and includes material based on interviews with three
women physicians. Adequately written, the text is flawed by inadequate
definitions: for example, "opthalmology" and "pediatrics" are defined, in a list of
specialties, as "diseases of the eye" and "children's diseases." Later the text
states "Pediatricians-doctors primarily concerned with the medical and
[ 19 ]
psychological problems of adolescence ... ." 
Still, the lists of sources of
information and of educational programs are most useful. They include a listing
of medical schools (by state in the U.S. and, for those in Canada, the most
recent figures available to the author on the numbers of non-Canadians admitted);
institutions that offer combined B.A./M.D. programs; sources of loans, sources
of information about scholarships and/or financial advice; two lists of sources
(one general, one dealing with medical specialities) for further information. ZS
C.U. Vocational guidance
D.V. Occupational orientation
Shannon, George. Unlived Affections. Zolotow/Harper, 1989. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-025305-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025304-5. 
[14 4p]. Library ed.
$12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
Bitter and alone at age eighteen, Willie Ramsey can
hardly wait to sell everything belonging to the stiffnecked grandmother who
raised him and who has just died. He has long dreamed of leaving their
emotionally stifling Kansas home for college in Nebraska. What he finds in
cleaning out the house, however, is a stack of letters written to his mother,
killed in an automobile accident when Willie was two, from a father he has never
known. 
Willie discovers startling truths not only about his father's
homosexuality but also about his own fear of loving relationships. The letters
are the heart of the story, and the characters who emerge from them are much
more vivid than the boy whose emotions are too often and awkwardly explained
as he reads them: "Like the blue pool water that seemed to suddenly turn clear
when put in a glass when he compared the woman he'd known to what the
letters revealed, Willie now saw Grom anew." Shannon has a story to tell, and
it is an unusual and moving one, full of secrets, lies, and dreams. When the
details-sometimes sad, sometimes refreshingly humorous-reveal that story
unforced by exposition, the effects are telling. Unfortunately, the complex
structure of tale-within-a-tale is one of the most difficult to handle in terms of
creating, balancing, and blending two fictional worlds. This is an ambitious
first novel, not entirely successful, but intriguing enough to hold attention to
the end. BH
D.V. Family relations
Singer, Marilyn. Turtle in July; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. Macmillan, 1989.
ISBN 0-02-782881-6. 32p. $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 3-5. 
The great joy of these fifteen nature poems is the
pattern of verbal rhythms that reflect the character of each subject creature. The
befuddled bear emerging from hibernation in March asks "Who I?/ Where I?/
When I now?/ No matter/ Need water/ Few berries/ Fresh ants/ Not so hungry/
Or am I?" The timber rattlesnake sibilantly describes summer and winter with
long coiling sounds. The beavers in November hurry here and there with the
refrain, "This stick here/ That stick there/ Mud, more mud, add mud, good mud.
... " The joy of the art is Pinkney's venture into new effects without sacrificing
his characteristic style. While his human figures are sometimes studied, these
[20
animal drawings are anatomically spontaneous. The settings are lusciously
simple, with spacious color and sharply focused compositions. Both writer and
artist have captured the essence of the fish, fowl, and mammals featured here.
Perfect to share in classrooms or story hours emphasizing themes of nature study
and seasonal change. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Sonnenschien, Harriet. Harold's Runaway Nose; illus. by Jiirg Obrist. Simon,
1989. ISBN 0-671-66912-5. 32p. $12.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
An illustration of how adult turns-of-phrase can strike
terror into the hearts of literal-thinking children, this is silly fun with a realistic
base. Harold the bunny has a cold, and his mother gives him nose drops to "get
rid of that big, red, stuffy nose." "Harold wondered what was going to happen.
He didn't want his nose to go away, just the cold." So he gets really worried
when his mother admonishes him that "his nose is running!"-and off he goes,
running after his runaway nose. Obrist's pictures of Harold's chase are warmly
colored with solidly reassuring outlining, and hide Harold's nose for the benefit
(or confusion) of those not yet in on the joke. An engaging combination of
reader-identification and reader-superiority. RS
Stickland, Paul. Machines as Tall as Giants; written and illus. by Paul
Stickland. Random House, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-95375-4; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-394-85375-X. 26p. Library ed. $10.99; Trade ed. $9.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
This can hardly miss; machines are alluring to most
children, and the idea of huge machines even more so. Twelve such machines
are pictured in double-page spreads that are printed sideways, so that the full
length is impressively evident. The paintings are uncluttered, carefully detailed,
brightly colored, and shown with some object or person included so that scale is
indicated. At the top or bottom of each spread there are a few lines of text that
name the machine and that describe its purpose and the way it functions.
Children too young to read this independently will also enjoy it. ZS
Taylor, L. B., Jr. Hostage!: Kidnapping and Terrorism in Our Time. Watts,
1989. ISBN 0-531-10661-6. 
144p. (Impact Books). $12.90.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Focusing on one of the most made-for-TV aspects of
terrorism, Taylor considers the infamous abductions of, among others, Patty
Hearst, Aldo Moro, and the staff of the U.S. embassy in Iran; as well as the
policies and ideologies of terrorist groups that make kidnapping such an
attractive and lucrative pursuit. 
Anecdotal material and personal narratives are
balanced with discussion of governmental strategies for dealing with terrorists;
the political, psychological, and economical forces at play are all well-covered,
including a lucid account of the Iran-contra affair. While not as comprehensive
treatment of terrorism as Meltzer's (now somewhat dated) The Terrorists (BCCB
10/83) this is a fair and intelligent introduction. Black-and-white photographs
provide dramatic evidence. RS
[21]
Thesman, Jean. Appointment with a Stranger. Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-
49215-7. [180p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Embarrassed by the fact that she's asthmatic, afraid
she will have an attack in the presence of others, Keller describes her shyness at
coming to a new school and her happy sense of ease with just one boy she's
met, Tom. She does wonder why Tom is not in her high school; they meet at
the pond near her grandfather's house, and Keller soon realizes she's deeply in
love-it takes longer for her to realize that she's in love with a ghost and to
accept the affection of a classmate, Drew. The story, not entirely convincing, is
given added interest by an element of mystery to do with Tom's death, but it
isn't quite enough to sustain the attenuated plot; characterization is adequate, the
writing style is competent, the blending of real and fanciful elements not wholly
successful. ZS
Travers, P. L. Mary Poppins and the House Next Door; illus. by Mary Shepard.
Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-29749-1. 96p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
After several years, a new Mary Poppins book
revolves, as do the earlier books, around the omniscient nurse in a British
household. At times the Banks children wish they could disobey their domestic
tyrant, but they do appreciate her magical powers. One is either a Travers fan or
not, depending on the amount of whimsy one enjoys. Mary Poppins is a
distinctive character, part of her effectiveness lying in the fact that all the other
adults of the story are either unpleasant, or credulous, or just plain foolish. Here
the ex-governess of Mr. Banks moves into the neighborhood with a small boy
who has all the freedom of an indentured servant; when Luti confesses that he
longs for home, Mary Poppins cloud-walks him (and the Banks children) to his
South Sea island home, stopping to visit the man in the moon. ZS
Wallace-Brodeur, Ruth. Stories from the Big Chair; illus. by Diane de Groat.
McElderry, 1989. ISBN 0-689-50481-0. 
[4 8p]. $11.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
"'I am tired of having a sister,' said Molly. 'Why?'
asked Mama. 'Because she is always here,' Molly said.... 'I wish I was an
only child. . .. Are you tired of Susan too?' 
'No,' Mama said. 'Not right
now.'" After this exchange, Mama suggests Molly tell stories about herself,
which she does each night after supper--discovering, much to her suprise, that
her little sister figures importantly in them. In one, Susan is jealous of Molly's
missing teeth; in another, Susan brings Molly some forbidden jam; in a third,
Susan gets lost looking for Molly. These are brief, realistic scenarios that will
offer transitional readers a seven-year-old character with whom they can identify
and, perhaps, a suggestion for coping with their own vexations through
storytelling. The literal, black-and-white drawings offer informal portraits of the
family. BH
D.V. Sisters
[22]
Wiseman, David. A Tie to the Past. Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-51135-6.
[160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
As in several previous novels, Wiseman here uses a
time-shift link to portray a historical event through a contemporary filter.
Unwillingly roped into a prank by her best friend Julia, Mary finds herself in
possession of a stolen jewelry box filled with mysterious mementos and a prison
diary by Gladys Mayhew, a militant suffragette in 1909 London. Plagued by her
guilt over having the box, Mary befriends the owner, an elderly woman who is
Gladys Mayhew's niece, but increasingly fascinated by the story the diary tells,
Mary keeps the box, and soon starts having frightening dreams of throwing
rocks through windows and being imprisoned in a dark cell. While the parallels
between Mary's and Gladys' lives are occasionally labored, both stories have
drama and a convincing misery. "Suffragette" seems a quaint term nowadays; it
is to Wiseman's credit that he strips away the nostalgia to reveal a brave and
terrible story. RS
C.U. History-England
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Wood, Marcia. The Search for Jim McGwynn. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-
31479-5. [160p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
"Jim McGwynn" is the intrepid hero of a series of
spy novels, and when friends Jamie and Shelby find out that "P.J. Ross," the
pseudonymous author of the McGwynn books, lives in their town, they become
determined to find him. McGwynn seems to have everything Jamie finds
lacking in his own father, an erratic, quick-tempered alcoholic, and so Jamie
weaves elaborate fantasies about the hero and his author: "Maybe I could be his
apprentice, and carry on where he leaves off." Ross' identity will probably
become apparent to readers sometime before it is to Jamie, but his search is
suspenseful and moving. The story is told through Jamie's diary entries, a
device that is not always convincing or effective, given that Jadrie recollects too
much and perceives too little. The characterizations of Jamie's father and ever-
placating mother are true-to-syndrome but underdeveloped, the pain of their
relationships not given its due. While Brooks' No Kidding (BCCB 4/89) and
Carter's Up Country (BCCB 7/89) contain more searching portrayals of a child
of an alcoholic, this book still has a poignant edge and a simplicity that will
appeal to those not ready for a more complex portrayal. RS
D.V. Family relations
Yolen, Jane, ed. Things that Go Bump in the Night: A Collection of Original
Stories; ed. by Jane Yolen and Martin H. Greenberg. Harper, 1989. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-026803-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026802-6. 
[288p]. Library ed.
$13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Yolen's own contribution to this anthology has a
can't-miss title---"The Baby-sitter"--and is the most effectively frightening tale
in the book: Hilary learns a ghost-warding trick from the twins that comes in
[23 ]
real handy when a Halloween-masked intruder comes to call. "All she could see
was a crumpled gorilla mask, a piece out of a green shirt, and a dark stain on the
floor that was rapidly disappearing, as if someone-or something-were licking
it up." William Sleator's story about a claustrophobia-causing elevator is
creepy, and Diana Wynne Jones spins a crankily humorous story about a chair
that comes to obnoxious life. Most of the other fifteen writers will be unknown
to YA readers; some are practiced, others promising. Medori Snyder's "Jack
Straw" is a quiet, moody standout about a girl's two encounters with Death,
once deferred and once accepted. As in the best ghost stories, this one leaves the
reader with both exhilaration and horror. Like many written-to-order collections,
this one has some stories that suffer a lack of imaginative spark or are over-
ambitious, but most demonstrate verbal nerve and a fair degree of ghostly chill.
RS
Ziter, Cary B. When Turtles Come to Town; illus. with photographs by Chuck
Bigger. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10691-8. 64p. (First Books). $10.90.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Several species of sea turtles are on the endangered
list, but their nighttime egg-laying along Florida beaches is still a fascinating
sight. The color photographs here do justice to the subject, and there's quite a
bit of ecological information included. Unfortunately, the author has tried to
spice the inherently dramatic material with the story of two children; they
observe environmental officers working to find nests and save eggs from beach
tractors or from bright lights that confuse hatchlings into heading away from the
sea. The writing has some stylistic problems ("The June heat surrounded the
three people, thick and heavy as if a wool blanket covered them") that
occasionally border on condescension ("Mother Nature showing she knows how
to make beautiful things if just left alone to do the job"). However, young
readers who browse through the brief text for pictures and information will find
the book accessible and helpful for reports on nature study and threatened
wildlife. There's a bibliography and index. BH
C.U. Nature study