Alexander, Lloyd. The Drackenberg Adventure. Dutton, 1988. ISBN 0-525-44389-4.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Ruritania lives again, as Alexander's atypical, picaresque heroine
Vesper Holly (The Illyrian Adventure, The El Dorado Adventure) meets new
challenges and once more outwits the nefarious Dr. Helvitius. Again the story is
told by seventeen-year-old Vesper's guardian, an incorrigibly pompous Philadel-
phian (whose complacent parochialism, while still amusing, does get a bit repeti-
tious). He blunders along as Vesper deals with villains, Gypsies, heads of state,
etc. with successful impunity when attending the diamond jubilee celebration of
Her Most Serene Highness, Maria-Sophia of Drackenberg. Adventures galore,
humor as usual, colorful (if not wholly convincing) characters, and the appeal of a
series book are combined in a story written with typical Alexandrian gusto and
aplomb. ZS
Anno, Mitsumasa. Anno's Peekaboo; written and illus. by Mitsumasa Anno. Philomel,
1988. ISBN 0-399-21520-4. 16p. $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
2-4 yrs. 
This wordless book has much less substance than most of
Anno's previous output, its one value being, perhaps, for children still young
enough to be reminded that an object has not disappeared because it's out of sight.
Part-pages alternate with full pages, each part-page consisting of two hands that
almost obscure the picture beneath: a tiger, a person, a cat, etc. This is Anno's
first book for toddlers, and it may be so bland as to disappoint his fans. ZS
D.V. Visual perception
Arnold, Caroline. Coping with Natural Disasters. Walker, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-
8027-6717-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6716-8. 127p. illus. with photographs.
Library ed. $14.85; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Beginning with an informative, if dry, chapter on various disaster
relief organizations (Red Cross, UN and governmental agencies, OXFAM, etc.),
Arnold goes on to devote a chapter apiece to each of the major natural disasters,
from hurricanes to forest fires. Using headline events like hurricane Agnes and the
Guatemalan earthquake of 1976, she describes how the phenomena develop (the
snow conditions that precede an avalanche, for example), what kind of help sur-
vivors need, and how that help is provided. She concludes with practical advice to
readers on how to cope in disasters, and what kind of supplies to keep on hand.
While this has a textbook tone and could use more eyewitness documentation by
[197]
survivors, the appeal is a ready one, and the book could provide an antidote to the
sensationalism too often found in disaster accounts. Illustrated with black-and-
white photographs (most too dark), the book also includes a glossary, bibliogra-
phy, and an index. RS
C.U. 
Safety education
Bierhorst, John. The Mythology of South America. Morrow, 1988. 
ISBN 0-688-
06722-0. 269p. illus. with photographs. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-. 
Like its companion, The Mythology of North America, this is a
sprawling compendium of myths from many diverse groups. After an introduction
characterizing certain traits of the lore, Bierhorst organizes the material geo-
graphically: Greater Brazil, Guiana, the Brazilian Highlands, Gran Chaco, the
Northwest, and the Central Andes. Within these sections, he proceeds thematically
according to elements of the material, grouping tales that treat hostility between
men and women, for instance, or variants of ubiquitous tale types such as The Tree
and Flood or The Twin Myth. While the imagery is powerful, this is more de-
scription than storytelling, and thus more dry than dramatic. Although readers may
get bogged down in some of the fragmentary explanations of origin, however,
anyone using the work for research will find it invaluable, especially where the au-
thor provides interpretation, as in the lucid conclusion on Inca lore and commen-
tary on cultural contrasts. With exemplary documentation in the form of source
notes and an extensive bibliography of references, this is illustrated with black-and-
white photos of art objects and drawings by the people represented, along with
maps for each region. BH
C.U. 
South America (unit)-folklore
Birkhead, Mike. The Falcon over the Town; written and illus. with photographs by Mike
Birkhead. Gareth Stevens, 1988. ISBN 1-55532-304-9. 30p. (Animal Habitats).
$9.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Books from Oxford Scientific Films can be counted on to have
excellent color photographs, and this is no exception; many of the same pictures
are used (but without the captions) in the text adapted by Harrison for younger
readers (see review below). The text describes the varieties of kestrels, discussing
their habits and habitats and pointing out the reasons that they thrive in urban (as
well as rural) settings on several continents. The coverage is good, the writing
style direct, the organization of material adequate; a combined index and glossary is
appended. ZS
C.U. 
Nature study
Buffett, Jimmy. The Jolly Mon; by Jimmy Buffett and Savannah Jane Buffett; illus. by
Lambert Davis. Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-15-240530-5. 30p. $14.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
5-7 yrs 
A fantastical story in an unusual setting, this tells of the Jolly
Mon's adventures with a magic guitar as he sings people to happiness in the
Caribbean Islands. When pirates seize his boat, the Orion, and toss the Jolly Mon
overboard, a dolphin swims him safely home to Snapper Bay, where eventually his
guitar turns up as well--minus the picture of a dolphin that had been painted on it.
There's a touch of lyricism in the text and a song at the end, with music and
words. The illustrations, which rely heavily on the brilliant blue of sky and sea,
[ 198 ]
have a glittering clarity against which the graceful black figure of the Jolly Mon
forms a warm contrast. BH
Bunting, Eve. A Sudden Silence. Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-15-282058-2. 107p. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
Back from his first year at UCLA, Jesse Harmon and his deaf
younger brother Bry are walking home from a party one night when a drunk driver
swings to the side of the road and kills Bry. Jesse and his close family are devas-
tated, and Jesse's guilt over not saving his brother is heightened by his attraction
to Bry's girl friend, Chloe. In fact the death begins to seem to the reader a cheap
device for a standard romance, but Bunting redeems this aspect of the plot with the
more powerful theme of Jesse's anger. He is determined to find the killer, and after
several false leads, he does-Chloe's mother-a discovery which complicates his
feelings rather than relieving them. Bunting is a smooth, practised writer, adept at
style, structure, and type-casting. If sometimes her work seems over-calculated,
even in treating emotional situations, as it does here, it is nevertheless both
competent and readable. BH
D.V. Brothers; Death, adjustment to
Burton, Jane. Chester the Chick; Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99640-2; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-
89640-8. 
Freckles the Rabbit. Library ed ISBN. 0-394-99639-9; Paper ed.
ISBN 0-394-89639-4. 
Ginger the Kitten. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99638-0;
Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-89638-6. 
Jack the Puppy. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-
99641-0; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-89641-6. All four books: written and illus. with
photographs by Jane Burton. Random House, 1988. 
22p. (How Your Pet
Grows!). Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $1.95.
Ad 
3-6 yrs. 
Despite the exclamatory series title, this quartet is more about
the engaging antics of cute baby animals than it is concerned with developmental
processes. The first few pages of each title are devoted to birth, nursing, and first
steps, but the real fun begins when the babies learn to "play." While there is some
padding here which, again, seems an excuse for cute (albeit clear and copious)
photographs, Burton is careful to emphasize that animal play has a serious side:
"Kitten games prepare them for real fights if they are attacked by other animals."
Reproductive behavior is glossed over; at five months, Freckles the rabbit meets a
wild rabbit--"then they are off, having a great time chasing each other through the
trees." Next page: "Now Freckles is making her own nest... Her babies are
nearly ready to be born." 
While library bound editions are available, librarians
might want to consider purchasing multiple copies of the paperbacks instead: high
circulation is guaranteed, and these are more desirable as browsing items than as
serious competition for similar books by Joanna Cole and the Fischer-Nagels. RS
Cameron, Eleanor. The Private Worlds of Julia Redfern. Dutton, 1988. ISBN 0-525-
44394-0. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Although several books about a younger Julia have been
published in the interim years, this is the direct sequel to the 1971 title A Room
Made of Windows (reviewed in the June, 1971 issue), the first book about the girl
who was a budding writer and passionately loyal friend to her neighbor. This
sequel is one of the best books Cameron has produced, both tightly knit and
expanding with Julia's growing maturity and her involvement in the lives of
[ 199]
others. There are depth and empathy as Julia, now fifteen, finds love and accepts
temporary separation from her love, and adjusts to the fact that imperfection of a
loved one (her uncle Hugh, primarily) does not mean the end of loving. A far cry
from the formula romance, this is a book for thoughtful readers. ZS
D.V. Older-younger generations; Uncle-niece relations
Campbell, Duncan. Secret Service. Gloucester/Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-17079-9. 27p.
illus. and with photographs. (Issues). $10.90.
M 
Gr. 7-10. 
While packaged in the same attractive format as Evans' South
Africa, reviewed below, also in the Issues series, Secret Service suffers from poor
organization and a lack of logical development. Opening (logically) with a discus-
sion of "Why have spies?" this then moves through brief sections on the
Iran/contra affair, western secret services, "Eastern spies," a definition of
intelligence service, wiretapping, satellites, human agents, etc., with no discernible
effort made to link the topics. The text is too dry, and occasionally given to
sentiments that should be documented or explained: "In Britain, the government
does not want to have freedom of information laws. It believes that people should
accept that what the government does is always right, without wanting to check
the information on which government decisions are based." A photograph of
Nicholas Daniloff is captioned '"The Americans claimed he had been framed and
swiftly arranged his release. Journalists are often used as agents by secret
services." On the whole, the many pictures and captioned information contain far
more interesting information: there's a photo of a Soviet nuclear sub, taken by a
satellite 90 miles away; another of a German advertisement warning secretaries
against attractive, inquisitive strangers; and a few spy-in-action shots, including the
dramatic cover photograph. RS
Carkeet, David. The Silent Treatment. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020979-8;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020978-X. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Ricky, the narrator, has just started high school in his small
town in the foothills of the Sierra Nevada mountains, and although he's known as
"that nice Appleton boy," he feels he can never live up to the performance of older
brother Rodney, a world class egomaniac. There are several plot threads: rivalry
with a girl classmate, friendship with an oddball boy of whom Ricky's parents
don't approve, a contest, a minor mystery about a ne'er-do-well old prospector, a
running feud with Rodney, and a persistent dismay at how Rodney has duped their
parents into giving him undeserved kudos. Ah, but it all comes right in the end in
a very impressive story that has polished style, a structure deftly meshing all the
threads, a cast that is distinctly differentiated, and a core of perceptive exploration
of the silent treatment that can be a way of communicating ease or hostility, con-
tempt or shyness, resentment or resolve. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Brothers; Friendship values
Carle, Eric, ad. Eric Carle's Treasury of Classic Stories for Children by Aesop, Hans
Christian Andersen and the Brothers Grimm; ad., comp. and illus. by Eric Carle.
Orchard/Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-05742-9. $18.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Partially taken from previous collections illustrated by Carle,
these twenty-two tales range from commonly anthologized selections such as the
Grimms' '"Tom Thumb" to less well-known stories such as Andersen's "The Tray-
[200
eling Companion." The retellings are smooth, though they lack the rhythmic
power of other versions; the invocation of "Flounder, flounder, in the sea .. ." is
missing, for instance, from "The Fisherman and his Wife." The drama of Carle's
paintings, however, is undeniable, and they are generously distributed, sometimes
full-page and sometimes partial, on every spacious double spread. The picture of
tiny Tom Thumb curled up in a snail shell that covers two pages thickly textured
with greens, blues, and tans is unforgettable. BH
Chambers, Aidan. NIK: Now I Know. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021209-8;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021208-X. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
As in his Breaktime and Dance on My Grave, Chambers here
uses a variety of 
devices--diary entries, letters, lists, "intercuts" and
illustrations-along with (almost) straightforward narration that readers may have
trouble keeping track of. Glanrorously aloof and agnostic, seventeen-year-old Nik
agrees, grudgingly, to help a youth group make a what-if movie about the second
coming of Christ. Chronologically, this is the beginning, but the fragmented
narrative actually begins with reports of a crucifixion in a junkyard. That the
victim is Nik is not the real mystery; instead readers are asked to think about
how-spiritually as well as physically-Nik got there. The bildungsroman of
faith is a rare thing in YA fiction, and Nik's journey, attended by devils and saints,
is thought-provoking, articulating questions considered but not asked by many
teens. However, the form and style are hampered by a self-conscious cleverness
that impedes the subject, and while we hear plenty-too much--of Nik's religious
quandaries and epiphanies, there is barely enough story or characterization to
support the theme. RS
C.U. Religious education
D.V. Religious understanding
Charles, Oz. How Is a Crayon Made?; written and illus. with photographs by Oz Charles.
Simon, 1988. ISBN 0-671-63756-8. 30p. $9.95.
R* 
3-6 yrs. 
From the cover photograph of an orderly field of Crayolas
through the clean design of the pages, this book seems to know exactly what it is
that kids love about a box of crayons. Order. Rows. Precise and unpeeled points.
And within all this exactness, sensuous spots of pure color. You want to eat
them. Even the factory itself (Binney & Smith-in many ways the book resem-
bles a glossy, pint-sized, annual report) is Crayon Heaven, where the machines are
brightly covered with crayon dust, performing Willie Wonka-like feats of melting
and molding, sorting and sharpening; the device that sorts the different colored
crayons together looks like a high-tech gumball machine. The text is clear and
minimal, wisely subordinating itself to the close-up, monumentalizing
photographs, which, as far as the preschool audience will be concerned, tell the
whole titillating story. RS
Charnas, Suzy McKee. The Silver Glove. Bantam, 1988. ISBN 0-553-05470-8. 162p.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Valentine Marsh is fourteen and possessed of magical powers
inherited maternally. In this book, a sequel to The Bronze King (reviewed in the
January, 1986, issue), she and her grandmother, a beneficent witch, foil the
[201 ]
machinations of a vile necromancer who is stealing souls from the homeless and
outcast to resurrect dead warriors battling in a galactic encounter between good and
evil. The villainous Mr. Brightner and his wife Ushah are a fearsome couple,
providing some climactic encounters in a story with vigorous action, a vivid New
York city setting, and a well-blended sub-plot resolving the tensions between Val
and her mother, who prefers a "normal" life to acknowledging her supernatural gift.
Fans will look forward to the next episode. BH
D.V. Grandparent-child relations; Mother-daughter relations
Cole, Joanna. Asking About Sex and Growing Up; illus. by Alan Tiegreen. Morrow,
1988. Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06927-4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-688-06928-2. Trade ed.
$11.95; Paper ed. $4.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Considering that a question-and-answer format is inherently
rougher in terms of organization and transition than scientifically structured
approaches to information on sex and reproduction, this is more effective than one
might expect. After an introduction and list of helpful books for parents and kids,
Cole has grouped the questions by subject: growing up, finding out about sex, the
different development of girls and boys, masturbation, crushes, intercourse, child-
birth, preventing pregnancy, pregnancy, homosexuality, and protection from sexual
abuse and disease. The tone of the text is straightforward but reassuring, with an
emphasis on the emotional as well as the physical. Cole seems well aware that
extensive information may seem too much for kids of this age, and she keeps her
answers brief and to the point, a few sentences to a few paragraphs each. Whether
the questions actually came from middle-grade readers, the text does not say; if not,
their tenor nevertheless rings true. BH
C.U. 
Sex education
Denton, Kady MacDonald. The Picnic; written and illus. by Kady MacDonald Denton.
Dutton, 1988. ISBN 0-525-44376-2. 26p. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Line and wash drawings (clean composition, colors that are both
soft and bright, some humor but little grace) illustrate a brief story about two
children who, having been told by their respective parents that they can't go on a
picnic, solve their problem in a novel way. With a quick shift to fantasy, the
parents are washed until they shrink to doll size; a pleasant picnic is enjoyed by
all, and after it "Jeremy's father grew tall right away. But Alison's mother decided
to stay small a little while longer." This quirky ending provides the one bit of
humor in a simply written but not very substantial story with a concept that may
appeal to children. ZS
Evans, Michael. South Africa. Gloucester/Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-17056-X. 
28p.
illus. and with photographs. $10.90.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Unlike John Griffiths' Cuba (reviewed in the March issue),
which accepted a country's controversial claims for itself without reservation, this
book about South Africa is forthrightly critical, as evidenced from the start in its
placement in an "Issues" series rather than a "Countries" series. Beginning with
the European colonialization of southern Africa (and refuting South African claims
that white and black arrived in the region at the same time) and the Boer War, this
moves quickly to the victory of the National Party, the institutionalization of
apartheid in 1948, and subsequent events through 1986. While unequivocally
[ 202 ]
denouncing apartheid, the book also concisely discusses the pros and cons of
divestment and sanctions, dissent among black political groups, and the uneasy ties
between South Africa and its neighboring black states. The layout is rather busy
and sensational (a photo of a black and white couple, torn in half, for example),
but it is eye-catching, and all the photos are both dramatic and germane. In
addition, there are plenty of clear charts and maps that vividly support the author's
argument. RS
C.U. 
Social studies
Field, Rachel. General Store; illus. by Nancy Winslow Parker. Greenwillow, 1988. Li-
brary ed. ISBN 0-688-07354-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07353-0. 22p. Library ed.
$11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Wherever children enjoy playing store or fantasizing about own-
ing one, there'll be a ready audience for this simple rhyme illustrated with large-
size, colored pencil drawings. Parker has filled the pages with "jars of peppermint,
tins of tea, pots, and kettles, and crockery. Seeds in packets, scissors bright, kegs
of sugar, brown and white." A bolt of brightly sprigged calico unrolls across one
counter, a brass cash register dwarfs the young girl "taking the money in all my-
self." With endpapers that will serve, like the old-fashioned objects in all the full-
page pictures, as a good point-and-identify game, this moves at an appropriately
active pace for the listeners to whom it will appeal. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers
Fields, Julia. The Green Lion of Zion Street; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. Margaret K.
McElderry, 1988. ISBN 0-689-50414-4. 27p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
In her first book for children, poet Julia Fields uses the voice of
a child to reflect the feelings of a group of children towards the majesty and mys-
tery of a sculptured lion. The lines, which use some of the idioms of Black speech,
are impressionistic, vividly expressing the children's pleasure in using their
imaginations as well as in working up a pleasurable fright in a safe situation.
Occasionally, the power and impact of the writing flag to admit a flat word or
phrase, but for the most part this is a bright poetic narrative. Pinkney's paintings
are deft children huddled against the cold penetration of a foggy morning, the lion
looming blank-eyed and massive in the gray day. ZS
Fisher, Leonard Everett. Monticello; written and illus. by Leonard Everett Fisher and with
photographs. Holiday House, 1988. ISBN 0-8234-0688-1. $12.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Thomas Jefferson's life and times are framed in his passion for
building a house on the "little mountain" crowning his property of Shadwell in
Virginia. The text opens with summary background on the development of
English and American architecture, the specific buildings that influenced Jefferson,
and his early planning. 
Various stages of construction and modification
demonstrate Jefferson's ingenuity and wide-ranging intelligence as he adapted
classical structures to local landscape. The decay of the property after Jefferson's
death and its eventual renovation give as much sense of history as the building's
conception. The photographs, reproductions, diagrams, and drawings are a
masterly mix of graphic information, including Jefferson's sketches and drawing
[ 203 ]
tools, interior and exterior pictures of the building in states of disrepair and
restoration, a photo of one of Jefferson's slaves who managed his nailery, and an
1828 land-sale notice. A prerequisite for any young reader's visit to Monticello,
and an armchair tour for students who can't make the trip. BH
C.U. 
Architecture; History-U.S.-pictorial presentation
Friedhoffer, the Madman of Magic. How to Haunt a Housefor Halloween; by Friedhoffer
and Harriet Brown; illus. by Richard Kaufman and with photographs by Timothy
White. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10501-6. 89p. $11.90.
Ad 
Gr. 4-8. 
While including such old favorites as "The Dead Live Again"
("Cut down the box to the appropriate shape of a coffin") and "Jungle Worms"
(spaghetti), this also features such new-wave effects as "Radioactive Fallout"
(luminous paint and popcorn) and "Acid Rain" (luminous paint and rice). "Total
darkness" and "setting the mood" are the most frequently mentioned ingredients for
these spooky tricks, which should relieve parents and teachers who balk at
luminous paint and stage blood (mix clear corn syrup with red food coloring).
Readers are frequently counseled on safety and neatness. Many of the tricks can be
found in other magic books, here recast for Halloween: the old bead-on-a-shoelace
trick, for example, becomes "Dracula's eye." While the authors are perhaps a
touch, um, sanguine (and repetitive) about the effects' effectiveness ("If you do it
well, they'll scream"), there's enough here to keep the kids occupied in your
neighbor's rumpus room for the entire month of October. RS
C.U. 
Halloween---programs
Gleiter, Jan. Jane Addams; by Jan Gleiter and Kathleen Thompson; illus. by Diane Barton.
Raintree, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-8172-2662-1; Paper ed. ISBN 0-8172-2666-4.
29p. (Raintree Stories). Library ed. $11.50; Paper ed. $6.95.
NR 
Gr. 2-4. 
Told through the eyes of Johanna Krause (whom one must
assume is fictional, as this biography has neither notes nor sources), this is a
child's perspective on Jane Addams and Hull House. Johanna meets Addams in a
Chicago street, is invited to Hull House for cake, and learns about the reformer's
great plans: "We want to do things here that will make life a little nicer for
everyone." 
As is true of too many biographies for younger children, this is
inaccurately child-centered ("Especially, though, they helped the children") and
tends to trivialize, in the name of simplicity, a complex personality and life.
While readers are told four times that the streets were filled with garbage, that's
about it for the social ills of 1890s Halsted Street. To say that Johanna "was hot
in the summer and cold in the winter. She was hungry most of the time," does
little to distinguish her or her times for contemporary readers. Following suit, the
illustrations, except one spread which includes the aforementioned garbage, are tidy
and cheerful, Johanna in a neat pink pinafore. RS
Hamilton, Virginia. Anthony Burns: The Defeat and Triumph of a Fugitive Slave.
Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-98185-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-88185-0.
Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Hamilton has done a masterly job of melding historical fact with
fictional characterization to the enhancement of both. This is the gripping story of
[204]
a slave who, after escaping to Boston, is recaptured by his southern master and
returned to Virginia by the power of the Fugitive Slave Act. It is also the story of
abolitionists' attempts to resist the law, a judge's fateful decision, and a black
minister's determined and finally successful efforts to buy Burs' freedom. One of
Hamilton's most remarkable capabilities is her revelation of the present through
glimpses of the past. Here she alternates between the tense courtroom or crowd
scenes and Burns' recollections of his youth. Without too much psychological
speculation, this device shows the reader what slavery was like, for Burs, for his
family, for his friends. It is ironic but understandable that he escapes the cruelties
of current reality through remembrance of suffering survived. The past is familiar
and finished; the future, unknown and all the more terrifying. Although Burs'
worst fears come true when he is punished in a prison camp for runaways, he is
bought back and freed, realizing his dream to be an educated minister before his
death at age 28. 
Hamilton's afterword makes careful distinctions between
documented facts and educated guesswork; she also includes selections from the
Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 and a valuable bibliography of primary and secondary
sources. BH
C.U. 
History-U.S.
D.V. Pride in background and heritage
Harrison, Virginia, ad. The World of a Falcon; adapted from Mike Birkhead's The Falcon
over the Town; illus. with photographs by Mike Birkhead. Gareth Stevens, 1988.
ISBN 1-55532-308-1. 30p. (Where Animals Live). $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
One of the many titles in the Where Animals Live series that has
been adapted from the Animal Habitats books for middle grades readers produced by
Oxford Scientific Films, this has been rewritten to be read by a primary grades
reader, with simplified language, shorter sentences, and larger print. Arrows point
to illustrative color photographs that, in the original book (see Birkhead review
above) have descriptive captions. The tables of contents and the glossaries of the
two books are the same, an indication of the fact that the coverage in the adaptation
is adequate. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said of the writing style, which is
flat and has some changes that weaken the text. ZS
C.U. 
Nature study
Haskins, Jim. Winnie Mandela: Life of Struggle. Putnam, 1988. ISBN 0-399-21515-8.
179p. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 7-. 
For a slightly older audience than Meltzer's biography (reviewed
in the October, 1986 issue) although there is an overlap, this is one of Haskin's
best. It is forthright but calm in tone, admiring rather than adulatory, and
smoothly written. It gives excellent background (despite one misuse of the
derogatory term "kafir") about South African history and politics without
overbalancing the text to the detriment of Winnie Mandela's life story. Haskins
wisely has let her character and her achievements speak effectively for themselves.
A divided bibliography of sources is provided. ZS
C.U. 
Social studies
D.V. Leadership; Social responsibility
[205 ]
Henry, Maeve. The Witch King. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08338-1;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05738-0. 126p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
In Robert's small village, there's a rumor that a magnificent
City lies to the south. With the prodding of an old Witch Woman, Robert
determines to find it and discover what part he is to play in its destiny. In this
recasting of the Fisher King story, Robert is the prince who must redeem the dying
land, and while he performs courageous deeds and faces terrifying specters, the
perspective is less mythic than realistic, the most sinister horrors perpetuated by
the king's corrupted son. This is one of the few fantasy novels that needs to be
longer-the magical elements are intriguing, but not fully worked out. Yet the
vaguely archaic diction and tone are consistent, the horrific details (a mad queen) are
intense, and, without betraying her characters or story, the author maintains respect
for her mythic sources. RS
Heuck, Sigrid. The Hideout; tr. by Rika Lesser. Dutton, 1988. ISBN 0-525-44343-6.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
A trenchant novel about two Jewish children who are separated
from their parents in the last days of World War II Germany. Rebecca's memory,
even of her last name, has been blasted away in a bombing raid, after which she is
found crying near the ruins of a house. Although Nazi authorities are suspicious,
they assign her to an orphanage, where she suffers cruel taunts from other children
who call her "Gypsy Child." Nearby, she discovers Samuel hiding out in a corn
field, and his imaginative stories create a fantasy world that allows them brief
respites from hunger and the artillery terrors of the advancing front. He also makes
her a cornhusk doll, and her attachment to it is the most poignant and well-
developed aspect of the book. The fantasy seems almost to intrude on the
immediately suspenseful realism, but it plays out the children's capability to cope
through powers of imagination. The telescoped ending is half fairytale, half fable:
Rebecca's parents "were found in a camp. They adopted Sami and emigrated. They
searched for a country where there would be no war, a country with everlasting
peace." 
The most powerful element here is the depiction of fateful quirks in a
war-stricken dictatorship: with a stupid prank, one of the orphans betrays the very
woman who has protected her. Indeed, the author's portrayal of children's confused
responses to war are the heartbeat of the book. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Hines, Anna Grossnickle. Grandma Gets Grumpy; written and illus. by Anna Grossnickle
Hines. Clarion, 1988. ISBN 0-89919-529-6. 28p. $13.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Pencil drawings in quiet colors illustrate a story that should
appeal to children because of its familiar activities: eating, playing, fussing about,
cleaning the resultant disorder, adjusting to the fact that even a patient, loving
grandmother draws the line somewhere. Lassen, the narrator, is one of five small
cousins who are staying with Grandma overnight. When Grandma does get
grumpy (but not very), she freely admits that the reason she sounds like the
children's parents is because she's the one who taught them "everything they know
about being grumpy. And I'm older, so I've had more practice." Then she shows
how sensible and loving she is all over again. A modest but not unsubstantial
[ 206 ]
story in which the read-aloud audience should recognize their own behavior, and be
amused. ZS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations; Social behavior
Hogrogian, Nonny. The Cat Who Loved To Sing; written and illus. by Nonny Hogrogian.
Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99004-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-89004-3.
26p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Hogrogian's wash drawings provide a traditional setting for this
Armenian cumulative song-tale about a cat which, in return for a loaf of bread,
gives the thorn in its foot to a woman to use as a needle. The cat then swaps the
bread for a chicken, the chicken for yar, the yam for a coat, the coat for a dog, the
dog for a sheep, and the sheep for a shepherd's mandolin, which will accompany
the cat's singing forevermore. The words and music of the cat's song conclude the
book, which is designed with woodsy endpapers that extend the verdant scenery of
the cat's capers. The fused effects of the backgrounds contrast nicely with the
pencilled lines texturing the cat's fur for a gentle effect to which young listeners
will respond by quickly picking up the chant. BH
Hoover, H.M. The Dawn Palace: The Story of Medea. Dutton, 1988. ISBN 0-525-
44388-6. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 8-12. 
Greek tragedy without a true hero or heroine, this portrays a
villainous Jason tricking a young Medea, who has already been deserted by her
mother and betrayed by her father and who seems intent on self-destruction. There
is a great deal of historical color here and a lot of butchery-the bodies pile up in
heaps. What seems odd is that Medea goes through all this for passion, but there's
not even a hint of sex, even on her wedding night, so her horrendous fate (murdered
step-brother, children, etc.) seems gratuitous. The theme of a matriarchal Baltic
society, worshippers of the Great Goddess, doomed by the war-mongering,
patriarchal Mediterranean cultures makes an interesting backdrop, and the
characterization is consistent. The writing is smooth, with the exception of some
labored passages ("Oh, Hercules, look what we've done with the serpent's red egg
of potential"). Jason is so unappetizingly cruel, however, and Medea so ruthlessly
and blindly faithful that their exploits occasionally pall. BH
C.U. 
History-ancient
Hughes, Shirley. Out and About; written and illus. by Shirley Hughes. Lothrop, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07691-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07690-4. 46p. Library
ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $13.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
3-5 yrs. 
Eighteen simple, cheery rhymes are surrounded with illustrations
that will sweep youngsters through the four seasons. Starting in spring, there are
several paeans to rainy days and mud play. Summer celebrates picnics in the park
and at the beach; autumn, the wind and harvest fruits. The best verses come with
winter, one about being sick, another about a bonfire: "Fire is a dragon/ (Better
beware)/ Dangerous and beautiful/ (Better take care)./ Puffing out smoke/ As soon
as it's lit/ Licking up leaves/ Crackle and spit!" The children who romp through
these non-stop family scenes are rosy, cared-for, active, and enthusiastically messy.
( 207 ]
Hughes' drawing is always good, but the composition and coloration here mark
some of her most cohesive book design and art work. BH
C.U. 
Reading aloud
Hughes, Ted. The Iron Giant: A Story in Five Nights; illus. by Dirk Zimmer. Harper,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022639-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-0022638-2. 58p.
Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Resonant in style and robust in essence, these five stories have
stood the test of twenty years since their first publication for a fresh reappearance
with Dirk Zimmer's powerful pen-and-ink drawings. Each story presents a
monumentally scaled threat, first by the Iron Giant to the human world, and then,
after they're reconciled, to the Iron Giant and the human world by a space-bat-
angel-dragon from a star in the constellation of Orion. The fullness and mythical
overtones of these stories make many a contemporary picture book pale by
contrast. The Iron Giant has a pathos like that of the Golem and other monsters,
and the boy Hogarth, who first traps and then befriends him, has the folktale appeal
of a typical unlikely small-guy hero. For great sound effects, from rhythmic
repetition to onomatopoeia, read this one aloud-you'll have the Gobot and
Transformer crowd entranced. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Hutchins, Hazel J. The Three and Many Wishes of Jason Reid; illus. by Julie Tennent.
Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-82155-1. 81p. $9.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
With a bright tone and winning characters, this plays the old tale
of three wishes for an irresistible new angle. Eleven-year-old outfielder Jason Reid
has read all those stories about the downfall of greedy wishers, so he's not entirely
unprepared when Quicksilver, an Elster of the Third Order, appears on top of a
garbage can and offers him three wishes. Jason asks for a baseball glove that will
catch anything, a grant of immunity from surprise or questioning about the glove
and three more wishes. The rest of the book details Jason and his friend Penny's
juggling of wishes to include something more generous than small, personal-type
acquisitions, and in the end .... 
Well, it wouldn't be fair to tell the end, but it's
ecological, suspenseful, and convincing. The pen-and-ink drawings are competent
but lack the natural grace of the writing. A first novel carefully crafted for
transitional readers: home run! BH
D.V. Social responsibility
Kavanaugh, Michelle. The Emerald Explosion. Pineapple Press, 1988. ISBN 0-910923-
46-9. 191p. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 9-12. 
While everyone is sad that Patrick's mother was killed in a bus
accident while on a trip to Russia, Patrick himself seems to have gone over the
edge--he believes the accident was faked, and his mother still lives, taken prisoner.
When incontrovertible evidence of this shows up in the form of a photograph,
Patrick maneuvers himself into Russia to take a look for himself. The setting up
of the plot is overwritten and overlong (little brother's adjustment to Mom's death,
father hospitalized, father's romance with a nurse), but once Patrick begins his
search, the story sheds most of its problem-novel trappings and works up some
[208 ]
genuine cold-war intrigue. As it turns out, Patrick's mother has defected, an
unusual twist on the author's part but presented without convincing motivation:
unhappy in her marriage and job, Mrs. Kendall goes to Russia, gets involved with
Deputy Minister Yuri Davidov, fakes her death and defects? As every good spy
knows, never make a plot more complicated than it needs to be. RS
D.V. Mother-son relations
Koertge, Ron. The Arizona Kid. Joy Street/Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-50101-8. 228p.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Sounds like a great summer. Midwesterner Billy is going to
spend it with his uncle in Tucson, working with a horse trainer, and hopefully
pursuing his First Time. But Uncle Wes is gay, the work harder and dirtier than
Billy expects, and Cara Mae not exactly friendly. "'Get bent,' she said." Of
course, it does turn out to be a great summer, though not without complications,
including a coupla mean ol' varmints who want Billy and Cara out of the way.
Wes is not one of those stereotyped gay uncles who crop up far too often in YA
books, the regular-guy type who "just happens" to be gay. Tall and gorgeous and
kind, Wes is also fanatically neat (he has his underwear pressed) and, more
seriously, occasionally despairing, watching his friends die of AIDS and worrying
about his own chances. He also, another first for the genre, actually has (safe) sex,
and instructs Billy about the importance of condoms. The other characters are
drawn with an equal specificity that includes both humor and depth: Cara Mae is
neither nervous filly nor racetrack floozie, but rather a combination of real and
pretended arrogance ("Man, I'd love to sit on a million dollars and tell it to go
fast,") and understated vulnerability. More relaxed and even funnier than Koertge's
previous novel, Where the Kissing Never Stops (reviewed in the February, 1987
issue), this is perfect for growing-up fans of Betsy Byars. RS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Uncle-nephew relations
Korschunow, Irina. Small Fur; tr. by James Skofield; illus. by Reinhard Michl. Harper,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023248-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023247-1. Library
ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
With the same gentle tone as the team's The Foundling Fox
(reviewed in the November, 1984 issue), this effectively handles the concerns of
young children through a blend of realism and folktale elements. Small Fur, who
resembles a toddler-aged Wild Thing, is mad at everything and everyone because his
best friend Brown Fur has moved away. After his exasperated mother tells him "I
don't want to hug you anymore," Small Fur goes off into the woods, where, after
passing through a mysterious gate, he meets an elf who promises to teach him to
fly if Small Fur can retrieve her lost wing-taken by the dreaded Nock who lives
underwater. Never truly menacing (the Nock just wants someone to talk to), the
story has equal measures of adventure and reassurance (Mother forgives, with lots
of hugs) that give an imaginative dimension to a familiar dilemma. Michl's warm
red and black drawings are reminiscent of Sendak at his coziest; in fact, the whole
is a treat for Little Bear fans who are ready for greater length and complexity.
Perfect, as well, for a week's worth of short bedtime read-alouds. RS
C.U. 
Reading aloud
[209]
Kroll, Steven. Happy Father's Day; illus. by Marylin Hafner. Holiday House, 1988.
ISBN 0-8234-0671-7. 28p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
A sleep-befogged father wakes up to find a series of notes
directing him to breakfast and a Green Sox pennant from Lenny, a cleaned-up kitty
litter box and a pair of green socks from Linda, emptied garbage cans and a Green
Sox hat from Laurie, a freshly painted cellar door and a Green Sox sweatshirt from
Louise, a newly mown lawn and Green Sox key chain from Larry, a weeded terrace
from baby Lester, and a washed car and Green Sox tickets from Mom. There's
even a surprise pizza for the whole gang to eat during the game. And that's it,
folks, a happy time had by all, with full-color cartoons projecting a synchronized,
sunny family celebration. Tailored for (and limited to) the occasion. BH
C.U. 
Holidays
D.V. Father-child relations
Lampton, Christopher. Endangered Species. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10510-5. 120p.
illus. with photographs. (Impact Books). $10.90.
Ad 
Gr. 8-10. 
Conservation of species threatened by extinction is a topic in
which many people have an interest, and which for some people is a cause they
defend with passion. Lampton, whose plea for the right-to-life of all species is
eloquent (if often stylistically flawed), has done a capable job of describing how
species evolve and how-now and in the past-they have become extinct or
threatened by extinction. His book has two weaknesses: one is the repeated use of
terminology that implies anthropomorphic purposiveness, and the other is that
after discussing the extinction of various animal species and speaking of the moral
issues implicit in protecting endangered species of fauna, he presents his most
cogent arguments for plants, not animals, citing medical and other uses of plants
in addition to their consumption as food-then moves on to a final plea, again, for
saving animal species. The index and a bibliography frame government-issued
charts on "Endangered and Threatened Wildlife" and "Endangered and Threatened
Plants." ZS
C.U. 
Science
Little, Lessie Jones. Children of Long Ago; illus. by Jan Spivey Gilchrist. Philomel,
1988. ISBN 0-399-21473-9. 32p. $13.95.
M 
Gr. K-3. 
Written by Eloise Greenfield's mother, these nostalgic verses tell
of a long-ago time in a small black farming community where children "Tromped
to school on hard-frozen roads,/ Warmed themselves by wood-burning stoves] Ate
supper by light from oil-filled lamps ... " Sweet and over-idealized, the poems
convey a time that never really was, but they may have a naive appeal to children
who want to know about "old-fashioned" living. Gilchrist's pastels have more
vigor and specificity than the poems: dramatic and dark, the colors reflect the
changing colors of sky and earth, and the figure drawing (particularly for "All
Dressed Up" and "Papa's Cutting Wood") has some of the stylized strength of
1930's WPA murals. RS
Lobel, Arnold. The Turnaround Wind; written and illus. by Arnold Lobel. Harper, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023988-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023987-5. Library ed.
$12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[210 ]
R 
Gr. K-3. 
In a posthumous publication, an ingenious picture book can be
read (and is illustrated) right-side up and upside-down. First, in several pages of
small paintings, Lobel introduces his cast of people who are enjoying a summer
day. The rest of the story, after the advent of a fierce windstorm, is told through
large-scale portraits and descriptive captions. The device that will intrigue children
is that the book, when turned upside-down, shows that each portrait functions as
well in the new position, showing another face. On some pages the features are
somewhat contrived to achieve double interpretation, and the captions are more
descriptive than narrative, but if the goal is amusement, it is cleverly achieved. ZS
Martin, C.L.G. The Dragon Nanny; illus. by Robert Rayevsky. Macmillan, 1988. ISBN
0-02-762440-4. 29p. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Visually dominated by Rayevsky's drawings of dragon scales and
the soft, cool colors given contrast by touches of a rich red, this is an engaging
first effort by Martin. Her heroine is a durable, spunky, heart-of-gold Nanny,
deemed by the king to be too old to stay on in the royal nursery. Nanny takes on
the job of caring for two juvenile dragons. Unable to teach them to breathe fire,
she invents a way to simulate that achievement in order to satisfy their mother, the
monstrous Dragonia. A surprise ending (but not an illogical one) brings peace and
amity to both the dragon family and the royal family. Crisply told and nicely
structured. ZS
Matthews, Billie Pipkin. Secret of the Cibolo; by Billie Pipkin Matthews and A. Lee
Chicester. Eakin, 1988. ISBN 0-89015-638-7. $8.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-6. 
Some readers will undoubtedly be familiar with the story of a
Texan who has become a folk hero, Gregorio Cortez, through the medium of the
television film about his unjustified capture and arrest. This story may disappoint
such readers more than those unfamiliar with the facts, since it has a thick overlay
of fictional heroics that rob the facts of their impact. The story is set in 1913,
when Cortez has been pardoned but is using an alias because there are still some
vengeful whites. Two boys (one Anglo, one Hispanic) are best friends and
neighbors, and they soon discover that the mysterious newcomer "Pablo" is
Cortez, doing one dramatic deed after another (shooting a snake about to strike, for
example). The characters are flatly drawn, the writing style is mediocre, and the
one strength of the book is the inclusion of such factual information as is provided
through dialogue about Cortez. ZS
McDonald, Joyce. The Mail-Order Kid. Putnam, 1988. ISBN 0-399-21513-1. 
117p.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Flip, the narrator, is in fifth grade and has two problems: one is
that he resents the six-year-old Korean orphan (Todd) his parents have adopted, and
the other is that his parents, particularly Mom, are irritated because Flip has
received a fox he'd ordered by mail. (Well, the adoption of Todd had been arranged
by mail, hadn't it?) By the time Todd has accepted as inevitable the fact that his
fox is a wild creature and should be released in a wildlife reserve, he has also come
to realize how much Todd has helped him in caring for the fox and to see the
similarities in the adjustment problems of transplanted child and pet. There is
little in the story that doesn't develop in predictable fashion, but the writing style
[211]
is adequate and both characterizations and relationships are drawn with warmth if
not depth. ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to; Brothers
Meltzer, Milton. Rescue: The Story of How Gentiles Saved Jews in the Holocaust.
Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024210-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024209-4.
illus. with photographs. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
One of the first chroniclers of the Holocaust for young readers
(Never to Forget: The Jews of the Holocaust, reviewed in the September, 1976
issue) here takes up the more hopeful side of history-those who helped save Jews
from the Nazi's final solution. 
Relative to those Gentiles who accepted or
participated in the persecution of the Jews, the numbers who resisted were small,
but their stories are heroic and hair-raising, from isolated individuals like Oskar
Schindler to entire villages such as Le Chambon and countries such as Sweden and
Belgium. Some rescuers are well known and saved thousands-Raoul Wallenberg,
for example; others, unheralded, risked their own families to save one child. Each
case, however, implies a question of what the reader would have done in the same
circumstances. 
There is introductory background on anti-Semitism and a
concluding discussion of characteristics or beliefs common to the "Righteous
Gentiles" honored in archives such as Yad Vashem, but the emphasis is on the
accounts themselves, which are often related by witnesses; unfortunately, these
lack source citations. 
An important complement to current books on the
Holocaust by Miriam Chaikin (reviewed in the January 1988 issue) and Barbara
Rogasky (reviewed below). BH
C.U. History-World War II-1939-1945
D.V. Courage
Mills, Judie. John F. Kennedy. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10520-2. 370p. illus. with
photographs. $14.90.
R* 
Gr. 7-. 
A meticulous consolidation of biographical information about
John Kennedy is focused thematically on his relationship with his father and older
brother, against whom Jack measured himself even after Joe Jr.'s death on a
bombing mission during World War II. Jack's lack of academic concentration,
chronic ill health, use of the family's wealth and influence, and womanizing are all
addressed but shown to have come under control with his maturation as a politician
and father. Although some of the detail in the early campaigns seems given equal
weight with later, more important developments, the book shouldn't be faulted for
its thoroughness. In fact, one would like to learn even more about sisters Jean,
Pat, and Eunice (the rebellious Kick died young and Rosemary was mentally
disabled), who seem consigned here to unindividualized campaigning in service of
the men's ambitions. Ted doesn't get much attention either, but those who most
affected Jack's career-Joe Sr. and Jr., Rose, Bobby, and Jackie, along with select
aides who were privy to the Hyannis compound early on--are clearly delineated.
This is by far the most definitive portrait of Kennedy written for young people and
certainly the first biography to have such thorough documentation, including
footnotes for factual background as well as quotations. A solid bibliography of
books and videos will further assist students researching the complex life and times
reflected here. BH
C.U. History-U.S.
[212]
Mosley, Francis. The Dinosaur Eggs; written and illus. by Francis Mosley. Barron's,
1988. ISBN 0-8120-5910-7. 30p. $9.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Funny, full-color, pen-and-wash drawings illustrate the tale of a
childless couple who acquire three large eggs that hatch into dinosaurs. With
parental TLC, the three grow so large that the family is forced to heighten the
house and then leave the neighborhood for a remote abode by the sea, where they
live happily ever after. What particularizes a rather common plot is the odd
pictorial detail-a dinosaur trying to skate on two cars or the transport of the three
on flatbed rail cars-as a logical extension of earlier mundane bottle, bath, and
bedtime routines. Both the macro and micro aspects of the story will delight
young listeners in various monster/dinosaur stages. BH
Murphy, Jim. The Last Dinosaur; illus. by Mark Alan Weatherby. Scholastic, 1988.
ISBN 0-590-41097-0. 30p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Full-color illustrations characterized by a filmy photo-realism
evoke the setting for this story of the last dinosaur, a female Triceratops whose
remaining herd of two males is killed in a fight with a Tyrannosaurus Rex and
whose eggs are eaten by small mammals when she abandons the nest to escape a
forest fire. The scenario certainly renders the end of the Age of Dinosaurs more
immediate than many non-fiction accounts, though the author seems to apologize
for this in an afterword ("It's sad to think about the death of the Dinosaurs. But we
shouldn't be too sad about their end"). A preface mentions the factors of disease,
temperature change, and a comet explosion that may have contributed the the
dinosaurs' disappearance. None of these appears as a factor in the story; in fact, the
opening, in which a Triceratops charges an enormous tree to free its head of
grapevines, may make readers wonder how creatures so dense survived as long as
they did. Nonetheless, this will be appreciated by a picture-book audience as well
as by students reading independently. BH
C.U. History-prehistoric
Norman, Charles. The Hornbeam Tree and Other Poems; illus. by Ted Rand. Holt, 1988.
ISBN 0-8050-041703. 30p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Nineteen poems about birds and animals are set against
watercolor spreads with splatter-brush effects. The verse is uneven, occasionally
patronizing and often strained to rhyme ("And now look: squatting on a stumpJ
A phoebe looking like a frump"). When the poetry leaves the surface, it echoes
more resonantly: "A Parlement of Swallows" flies away ". .. to winter in Brazil,
And to myself at summer's end/ To winter in my thoughts until/ The long New
England winter ends." Rand's illustrations vary from several dramatically
composed pages of birds in flight to slightly sentimentalized animal pictures. Not
the most original celebration of creatures, this will nevertheless appeal to some
nature enthusiasts. BH
O'Dell, Scott. Black Star, Bright Dawn. Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-47778-6. 134p.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
The Iditarod is the annual Alaskan dog sled race (1,197 miles
from Anchorage to Nome) across two mountain ranges and the Yukon River. It is
[213 ]
clear that O'Dell has done careful research to achieve such verisimilar details, and
just as clear that those details are given dramatic immediacy by being presented in
the voice of Bright Dawn, who enters the race to replace her injured father.
Through the grueling course of the Iditarod, the Eskimo girl shows tenacity and
courage that will involve and engage readers. No, she doesn't win-but she's
excitingly close. ZS
D.V. Courage; Perseverance; Self-reliance
Pendergraft, Patricia. Hear the Wind Blow. Philomel, 1988. ISBN 0-399-21528-X.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
In Sweetwater Valley, "where boys can be as all-out mean and
ornery as they are big," 12-year-old Isadora is having particular trouble with hell-
raiser Haskell Moore, who likes nothing better than to twit her about the time he
saw her dressed in a curtain, dancing like a "gauzy whirlwind," just like the famous
Isadora whose picture is pasted in Mama's album. Isadora's hatred for Haskell is
passionate, and she is puzzled by the gentle and forgiving responses of her best
friend Maybelle, another of Haskell's victims, who joyfully awaits the day she is
to be "saved." Set in an indeterminate time and place (although the film favorites
are Bette Davis and Lash La Rue), this features down-home dialect (that may make
difficulties for some readers: "winder," "askeered") and some stock characters in
Maybelle, who meets a harsh end without complaint, and in Haskell, who
experiences an unconvincing transformation into an upright citizen. But Isadora's
own appealing voice and resilience in the face of a tired and disappointed mother
raise this above simple stereotyping, as do the grim details of Maybelle's stern
fundamentalist family. RS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations; Religious values
Pluckrose, Henry. Counting; illus. with photographs by Chris Fairclough. Watts, 1988.
ISBN 0-531-10524-5. 28p. (Knowabouts). $9.90.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
This and Webb's Sound, reviewed below, are the best in two
new concept series for young children. Using familiar objects (fingers, stairs,
shoes) and involving no number larger than twenty, each page asks a very simple
question: "How many chairs are there here?" "How many shoes can you see
here?" with the answers found in the accompanying photographs. The photos are
the real reason to buy the book: they are clear, colorful, and filled with details that
attract observation and extend the concepts. Some are elegantly simple, like one of
twenty green and gold and blue marbles reflecting against a textured white
background; others delight with their acuity-ten lollipops, each one a different
color. "If you ate three of them, how many would be left?" The anticipated debate
over which three should be eaten first is all part of the fun. RS
C.U. 
Counting (unit)
Polacco, Patricia. Rechenka's Eggs; written and illus. by Patricia Polacco. Philomel,
1988. ISBN 0-399-21501-8. 30p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
A fanciful story is set in Old Russia, where Babushka, who
paints Easter eggs in intricate patterns in the Ukrainian tradition, has planned to
enter the annual contest in Moscow. Rechenka, a wounded goose that Babushka
has been nursing, accidentally breaks the eggs, but she then lays eggs that are
[214 ]
already decorated and are even more beautiful than the first batch. Babushka wins
the prize and returns home to find Rechenka gone, a most beautiful egg left behind,
and the joy of having the egg hatch. This not very convincing story is a vehicle
for strong, effective paintings. Polacco achieves optimal dramatic contrast by
using bold shapes against uncluttered white space and by contrasting rich colors
and design details with faces in black and white. ZS
Prince, Alison. The Type One Super Robot; written and illus. by Alison Prince. Four
Winds, 1988. ISBN 0-02-775201-2. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
A tongue-in-cheek robot story in which a Type One Super
Housemaster robot nicknamed "Manders" spices up the summer for young
Humbert, who has been parked with his uncle while his mother is out of town.
It's a sit-com setup, but the characters are so idiosyncratic that their mishaps raise
the level just above formula. Episodes include making and flying a kite so big
that it soars away with Manders, who eventually crash-lands through the glass
ceiling of a greenhouse. Later on, Manders confuses the baking staples and uses
salt instead of sugar for cakes and gravy powder for coffee, foiling the fund-raising
effort of an obnoxious neighbor trying to tidy up a lovely wild park. This has
some British phrases (the park, for instance, is called a common) but nothing to
stop a reader from enjoying the slapstick. BH
Rogasky, Barbara. Smoke and Ashes: The Story of the Holocaust. Holiday House, 1988.
ISBN 0-8234-0697-0. illus. with photographs. $16.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 7-12. 
A carefully researched history of the Holocaust details the Nazi
operations calculated to solve "the Jewish problem" with slave labor and death
camps. With Meltzer's Never to Forget: The Jews of the Holocaust and
Chaikin's A Nightmare in History: The Holocaust 1933-1945, this makes a kind
of trilogy. Meltzer's book is strongest on quoting primary sources, Chaikin's for
chronological clarity, and Rogasky's for intensely focused factual information.
Smoke and Ashes gives, for instance, the average caloric content for Jewish food
rations in the ghetto. It lists the major figures tried for war crimes and their
sentences, which were often light or reduced. It systematically catalogues those
individuals and governments who resisted the Nazis with help for the Jews. It
includes a section (which seems misplaced between chapters on rescuers and
survivors) on other "holocausts," including the destruction of various Native
American peoples by whites in this country, Armenians by Turks, and
Cambodians by the Khmer Rouge. Its descriptions of the Nazi camps are probably
the most specific, realistic, and thus horrifying of any in children's literature. In
these, Rogasky's reporting is most effective. In the political analyses, her moral
outrage is occasionally redundant; in the case of U.S. and British reactions, for
instance, the facts speak loudest and clearest when unaccompanied by editorial
commentary or rhetorical questions. On balance, however, this is a wrenching and
thoroughly supported picture of the Holocaust, with historical photographs that
document the horror more graphically than words. A partial list of sources is
divided into eyewitness accounts and references. BH
C.U. History-World War II, 1939-1945
[215 ]
Rosenberg, Maxine B. Artists of Handcrafted Furniture at Work; illus. with photographs
by George Ancona. Lothrop, 1988. ISBN 0-688-06875-8. 57p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Handsomely formatted color photographs and a continuous text
present the work of four furniture crafters, three men and a woman with
distinctively different styles. Although their designs, approaches, and backgrounds
are different, all are devoted to form as well as function, and their commitment to
durable aesthetics is the dominant theme here. There are one or two rough
transitions, as when a full-page spread of wood grains appears unexpectedly after a
discussion of general properties and problems of wood's reaction to temperature
changes. Overall, however, this articulates the ideals and personalizes the practical
aspects of woodworking artistry, a book as well-formed as it is functional. BH
C.U. 
Industrial Arts
Ross, Rhea Beth. The Bet's On, Lizzie Bingman! Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-44472-1.
186p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-6. 
The time is 1914, the place a small mining town in Missouri,
and the narrator is fourteen-year-old Lizzie, whose three brothers seem to share all
the parental views about woman's role in life that Lizzie feels are sexist. After a
great deal of repetitive incidental narration, a lurid bit of plot emerges when Lizzie
(in a forbidden spot) witnesses a murder, later is taken by and escapes from the
murderer (he pushes her into a "churning" river), and eventually testifies at the trial
at which the murderer is convicted. Alas, this is a cloyingly cute collage, in which
the author relies on stretched figures of speech to achieve color, exaggeration to
achieve character, and Lizzie's perverse or tomboyish behavior to achieve comic
effects. The story does have action, it has some good period details, and it has
some carefully sustained references to the issue of feminine equality. ZS
D.V. Sex roles
Scott, Jack Denton. Swans; illus. with photographs by Ozzie Sweet. Putnam, 1988.
ISBN 0-399-21406-2. 59p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
As usual, Scott and Sweet have produced a book in which the
text and photographs have equal strength, even to the unusual care with which the
pictures are placed to make captions unnecessary in almost every instance. The
subject lends itself to action pictures of grace and beauty, and to still shots, also
beautiful, that extend the text. The continuous text is smooth, seldom formal,
never cute or repetitive. Scott gives facts about anatomical structure and flight,
about characteristics of species, about habitats and migrations, and about all the
patterns of courting, mating, nesting, and rearing cygnets in a book that is pleasant
to read and dependably accurate in the information it provides. The index includes
italicized entries for illustrations. ZS
C.U. Nature study
Smith, Beth. Castles; illus. by Anne Canevari Green and with photographs. Watts, 1988.
ISBN 0-531-10511-3. 86p. (First Books). $9.90.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
A solidly instructive text introduces various kinds of castles as
they developed historically, with chapters on castle life and warfare. Terms are
defined in the text as well as the glossary, while black-and-white photographs and
labelled drawings clarify descriptions. Although this is not as inspiring as David
[ 216]
Macaulay's Castle ,its text is broader in coverage and also more detailed. The
word "wardrobe," for instance, is traced to the "garderobe" or castle toilet, where
clothes were hung because the smell kept the moths away. The geographical
emphasis is on England and Wales, but other examples are incorporated as well. A
concluding section on legends and ghost stories will whet the reader's appetite for
more. Indexed. BH
C.U. 
Middle Ages (unit)
Sorenson, Jody. The Secret Letters of Mama Cat. Walker, 1988. Library ed. ISBN
0-8027-6791-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6779-6. 122p. Library ed. $13.85; Trade
ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Meredith does not want to move to San Antonio. She was not
consulted in this decision, she does not want to start seventh grade in a new city,
and, most of all, she believes that leaving Chicago will take her even farther from
her recently dead grandmother. As part of adjusting to the death and to her own
new situation, Meredith writes Grandma letters: about her new friends, including a
special boy; about missing her older sister, who's gone away to a school for the
deaf (Tina has not been comfortable with mainstreaming-neither, it seems, is the
author); and the general ups and downs of life. There's a lot packed into this short
novel, but Meredith's dilemmas will be familiar to readers, and her voice is
appealing. A rather quirky moral is drawn in the end: Mom has discovered and
read Meredith's letters (the issue of privacy is not really addressed) which, although
they've been lovely, brief, and occasional, are now shown to be evidence of some
kind of unhealthy obsession on Meredith's part-the happy ending is that she
stops writing them. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Handicaps, adjustment to; Moving, adjustment to
Swan, Robert. Destination: Antarctica; illus. with photographs by Roger Mear, Robert
Swan and Rebecca Ward. Scholastic, 1988. ISBN 0-590-41285-X. 38p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-6. 
Emulating the early twentieth-century explorer 
Robert Scott,
Robert Swan and company recently walked-without radio, dogs, or rescue
beacons-from McMurdo on the Antarctic coast to the South Pole. While the
subject and many photographs hold inherent interest, this record of the journey is
less than compelling, interspersing an "and-I-alone-survived" tone with facts about
the Antarctic, but containing little verbal or observational acuity. Part of the
problem may be that too much of the book is devoted to preparations for the
journey, and relatively less to the trek itself. Swan does say, however, that along
with hunger, cold, and wind, the biggest problem was boredom. RS
D.V. Perseverance
Tangborn, Wendell V. Glaciers; revised edition; illus. by Marc Simont. Harper, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04684-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04682-0; Paper ed. ISBN
0-06-445076-7. 30p. (Let's Read-and-Find-Out Science Books). Library ed.
$12.89; Trade ed. $12.95; Paper ed. $3.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Useful maps, evocative paintings of vast, snowy distances and
the slow majesty of glacial flow extend and enhance a text written by a scientist
who worked for many years for the U.S. Geological Survey. He has simplified his
[217]
material appropriately and-as is usually true in this excellent series--excluded
nothing of importance; his descriptions of how glaciers form, where they start,
how they move, and how they leave evidence of their passing are clear and
comprehensible. A revision of a 1965 tite. ZS
C.U. 
Physical geography
Versfield, Ruth. Why Are People Hungry? Gloucester/Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-17082-9.
29p. illus. and with photographs. (Let's Talk About). $9.90.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Without hectoring or eat-what's-put-in-front-of-you admonitions,
this simply and clearly explains what hunger is ("real hunger is about being very
poor") who is hungry and why, and (briefly--this is not a hopeful book) what can
be done. With large print, not always relevant photographs (one shows a
Greenlander, with neither text nor caption referring to a hunger problem in that
country), and diagrams, this is organized by questions that progress logically.
"Aren't there more hungry people in some areas?" "Why don't people grow their
own food?" "Why can't the food get around to everyone?" While discussing
drought and other natural impediments to food production, Versfield maintains that
money is the root of the problem. "The main reason why all the world's food
can't get around to everyone is always the same. Food is only sold to those who
can pay for it." A glossary, index, and addresses of hunger organizations are
appended. RS
D.V. International understanding
Wallace, lan. Morgan the Magnificent; written and illus. by Ian Wallace. Margaret K.
McElderry, 1988. ISBN 0-689-50441-1. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
After one hundred and sixty-six perilous walks along the barn
peak, Morgan is strictly told to keep off, so she resorts to the high beams within
the barn and cartwheels across the field. More than anything, Morgan wants to be
a high-wire artist in the circus like her idol, the Amazing Anastasia. Morgan gets
her wish when the circus comes to town, sneaking into Anastasia's tent for a
costume, and then into the Big Top. While some of his figure drawing is
awkward, Wallace skillfully uses a variety of perspectives to convey Morgan's
intrepid stunts: from her walk across a barn beam viewed, dizzyingly, from below
to a scary moment when Morgan, at the circus, starts to slip from the wire skewed
diagonally across a double-spread. Amazing Anastasia comes to the rescue, and
dubs Morgan with the honorific Magnificent. Both the pastoral scenes and the
glitter of the circus are filled with flamboyant--even surreal--color, giving a not-
quite-real, wish-fulfillment tenor to the book. RS
Ward, Hiley H. My Friends' Beliefs: A Young Person's Guide to World Religions.
Walker, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6793-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6792-3.
illus. with photographs. Library ed. $19.85; Trade ed. $18.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 8-12. 
With twelve chapters on major religious groups, and one more
touching on another two dozen, this has the handiness of a fact-packed reference
book but also suffers from over-compression, under-explanation, and an uneasy
balance between informational and anecdotal material. Two-thirds of the book is
devoted to Christianity, but Judaism, Hinduism, Buddhism and Islam are also
included. Each chapter has been vetted by clergy and/or scholars of the appropriate
faith, and, overall, there is more of an emphasis on ritual, sacraments (far too
[ 218 ]
much about baptism techniques), and what happens in a service than on dogma,
beliefs, or contemporary controversy. Statistics of church membership are not
included. Each chapter follows essentially the same format: origin, a brief
biography of founder or otherwise important leader, baptism, "things to know"
(holidays, symbols), and an anecdote about a young person of the faith, which also
includes details of service procedures. RS
C.U. Religious education
D.V. Interpersonal understanding
Webb, Angela. Sound; illus. with photographs by Chris Fairclough. Watts, 1988. ISBN
0-531-10456-7. 28p. (Talkabouts). $9.90.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
As imaginatively photographed as Pluckrose's Counting,
reviewed above, this contains simple experiments with appropriately simple
explanations. The concept of sound waves is conveyed analogically through
experimentation: "Throw a stone in a pool of water;" "How well can you hear on
a windy day?;" (accompanied by a photograph of an excitingly stormy beach);
"Wind can blow sound waves away." The photos are always pertinent, containing
information or ideas not explicit in the text. "How can you use a tube to help you
hear from further away?" is illustrated by a photo of two boys, a cardboard tube,
and a wristwatch. Graphically a match for Tana Hoban, both Sound and Counting
are perfect for children ready to move from observation to participation. RS
C.U. 
Scientific recreations
Wilson, Bob. Stanley Bagshaw and the Rather Dangerous Miracle Cure; written and illus.
by Bob Wilson. Hamish Hamilton, 1988. ISBN 0-241-12419-0. 32p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
An English import has pages crowded with cartoon-style frames,
colors that are subdued (fortunately, given the crowding), and a story (more or less
in rhyme) that is told partly in captions and partly in balloons within the frames.
This may be confusing to readers until they figure out that balloons in black and
white fit, metrically, into the captions while conversational balloons with colored
background do not. The story, slow-starting, tells of a small boy who visits an
adult friend in the hospital. (No explanation of why the patient's big toes are both
bandaged when only one was bitten by a water-rat.) Lost, little Stanley lies down
on a bed in an empty room and just, but JUST, escapes eye surgery (double eyeball
transplant) as the operating room team assumes he is the blind patient they expect.
Rather funny in style, and with the action readers enjoy, this nonsensical tale may
not be intended to malign hospital procedures, but it could sow seeds of
unwarranted doubt. ZS
Wright, David. Illustrated World Atlas; by David and Jill Wright; illus. by Tony Streek
and with maps and photographs. Warwick/Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-19033-1.
63p. $13.90.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
In addition to accurate geographical information, an atlas for
children should provide map-reading instruction and, ideally, a sense of the
pleasures of fingertip travel. This atlas tries to do all that; its special feature is the
use of colorfully detailed drawings to illustrate various industries, agricultural
projects and tourist attractions on the maps, each of which is devoted to a single
country or region. A key is provided for some of the symbols, and children should
[219]
enjoy guessing the others. There is, however, little consistency in their use. The
symbol for tobacco growing in Kentucky is different from the one pictured in the
key; rice is grown in North Korea but not in China or Japan. Some of these
omissions are rectified in the accompanying text, others, including most of the
tourist attractions (a football player in Minnesota) and local color (happy drummers
in Jamaica) are unexplained. The writing can be odd ("In some places farmers grow
vines and use the grapes to make wines"; "Some Austrians work in hotels but
most people work in factories"), and British publication is occasionally evident:
"You can often find Irish butter and cheese in the supermarket" The book includes
flags of the nations and many color photographs. RS
Wurmfeld, Hope Herman. Boatbuilder; written and illus. with photographs by Hope
Herman Wurmfeld. Macmillan, 1988. ISBN 0-02-793580-9. 62p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Black-and-white photographs illustrate this account of a Maine
craftsman, Ralph Stanley, who follows the old trade of building wooden sailboats.
After some descriptive scene-setting, the story focuses on the building of a
nineteen-foot sloop, from commission through design and construction to launch-
ing. There are a few abrupt transitions, as when the reader is suddenly shifted from
the scene of a race to a boatyard. The photographs are clear and well composed,
though not always coordinated with the text. For instance, the sentence "When the
molds are complete, they are placed on the keel in their proper location and so
define the shape of the hull" appears over a picture showing the molds stacked
against the wall, with the keel as yet undefined in text or photo. However, there is
a glossary in the back of the book for landlubbers, and anyone can appreciate the
clean lines of the vessel that takes shape in Stanley's seasoned hands. BH
Zirpoli, Jane. Roots in the Outfield. Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-45184-1. 
149p.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Part baseball story, part mystery, part family story, and
convincingly knit together. Sixth grader Josh, who tells the story, is a dedicated
baseball fan but so inept a player that his classmates call him "Roots" because he
seems to freeze in his outfield position. Teased, Josh decides to accept his father's
invitation to spend a year with him, his new wife, and her daughter Barbara. The
mysterious next-door neighbor, Josh realizes when he gets to the lake house, is his
hero Slug Smith of the Giants. The story has elements of coincidence and
contrivance, but readers will probably savor the happy ending (Slug, who's been in
hiding, rejoins the team when his confidence-building program for Josh gives him
confidence also; Josh makes friends with the stepsister with whom he's had a
hostile relationship) and will relish the improvement Josh shows when he is back
home and plays with his school team. 
Style is adequate, characterization
believable but shallow. ZS
D.V. Family relations; Fears, overcoming