Ahlberg, Allan. Ten in a Bed; illus. by Andr6 Amstutz. Viking, 1989. ISBN
0-670-82042-3. 95p. $11.95.
R* 
Gr. 4-6. 
The ten in this witty and literary bed include three
bears; a wicked, er, wonderful witch; a puss-in-boots; an oh-so-sleeping beauty;
a big bad wolf ("Tra la la la la-that's a weak line"); Simple Simon ("though it
would have been Brainy Simon or Captain Dynamite Simon, if I had written
it"); a frog in search of a kiss; and a hungry giant "Fish gotta swim, birds gotta
fly--and I have to eat people." It's easy to be clever with this sort of material,
but Ahlberg's satiric twigs brush gently, always remaining true to the fairytale
source and spirit. The bed belongs to Dinah, a commonsensical Scheherazade
who encounters each of the creatures sleeping in it on successive nights, and gets
them to leave by telling stories--their stories, as they would like to hear them.
Most of the visitors turn out to know each other, and the stories turn into stories
within stories within stories ("'I have heard it already already!' said the baby
bear") as Dinah and her guests ponder the mysteries of tales and tradition: "'Yes,
well there's other versions,' said the wolf over his shoulder. 'Lots of 'em.'" The
fresh tone and humor will recommend this to young sophisticates who believe
themselves too old for fairy tales. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
Aiello, Barbara. On With the Show!; by Barbara Aiello and Jeffrey Shulman;
illus. by Loel Barr. Twenty-First Century, 1989. ISBN 0-941477-06-1. [56p].
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
This is one of a series of books dedicated to "... the
chidren who teach us about differences-and similarities," by Aiello (whose
work in special education is cited at the back of each book), and Shulman, about
whom no information is given. All of the stories are in first person, all are
designed for the middle grades, and each book incorporates into the narrative
some (at times quite a bit of) information about a physical or emotional
problem. In On With the Show! fifth grader Brenda tells her counselor about a
problem in getting along with classmates while planning a fifth-grade musical;
it becomes clear (to Brenda and to readers) that there is a connection between her
feelings about other relationships and activities and her feelings about her
parents' divorce (the reason she is getting counseling). 
There are some
awkwardly handled situations, some poor use of punctuation, and an element of
[25]
purposiveness, but on the whole this book and others in the series have (as
narrative and as therapy) more impact and are more readable than some of the
other series designed to alleviate or explain children's difficulties in adjusting to
problems of disabilities. Other books in the series have to do with asthma
(Hometown Hero), epilepsy (Trick or Treat or Trouble), and diabetes (A Portrait
of Me). Each book concludes with a section of questions and answers: "How
can you give yourself shots? Isn't it disgusting?" or "Did you ever feel the
divorce was your fault?" The illustrations, line drawings, are of poor quality
aesthetically and technically. ZS
Aliki. The King's Day: Louis XIV of France; written and illus. by Aliki.
Crowell, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04590-5; Trade ed. 0-690-04588-3.
[32p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 2-5. 
Louis XIV was the archetypal king: 
powerful,
brilliant, wealthy, and totally committed to personal luxury. He was also a man
of routine, so the one day depicted here resembled many others in the seventy-
two years of his reign. Aliki has done a masterful job of balancing selective
details of daily ritual-the king's Lever, Mass, Council, Petit Couvert, hunt,
Appartement, Grand Couvert, and Coucher-with historical complexities of
setting. One double spread shows Louis, Queen Marie Th6rbse, and the Dauphin
on the verso, with two of Louis' mistresses, their eight children, and the
governess Louis later married on the recto. We learn that an autopsy showed
Louis' stomach to be twice the size of an ordinary one, that five hundred servants
were kept busy preparing his meals, that he did not eat between meals and did
not talk during them. His courtiers fought to attend him from the moment he
arose at 8 A.M. to his bedtime at 1:30 A.M. What we don't learn, even in the
concluding pr6cis, is the cost of his rule to the peasantry or anything about the
common people whom "he controlled ... with absolute power." Although it's
true that "he knew just what he wanted for his kingdom, and brought spectacular
glory to it and to the seventeenth century in which he lived," it would have been
more accurate to hint that there was another side to the story. This is a quibble,
however, and one that's partly attributable to Aliki's sharply defined scope. The
book design combines the appeal of a comic format with carefully researched
illustration, including elaborate indoor and outdoor scenes of Versailles. A
chronology and list of definitions (without pronunciation) for French words are
appended. On balance, this is lively and informative biography. BH
C.U. History-France
Allard, Harry. The Stupids Take Off; 
by Harry Allard and James Marshall;
illus. by James Marshall. 
Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-50068-0. 
[32p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
After hanging their breakfast out to dry, the Stupids
decide to vacation early to avoid a visit from Uncle Carbuncle. A series of
picaresque adventures follows: their plane ("Air Stupid") passes that of Cousin
Fifi, who's "off to Grandfather Stupid's graduation from kindergarten"; they
attend the sixth birthday party of Patty Stupid, who has eight candles on her cake
because she can't find six; they crowd onto Uncle Artichoke's new diving board,
extending high over a lush green lawn with no pool in sight; and after other
escapades, they return home and put on their diving equipment to get ready for
[26
bed. This is less a story than a series of gags, but they work. After all, "the
Stupids are everywhere," and what Allard and Marshall have done in creating
these characters is to extend the folklore of noodleheads and fools' tales into
picture book form, complete with cleverly deadpan, uncluttered watercolors that
uphold a tradition of ridiculous human beings. Each of us either knows some or
is one. BH
Ashabranner, Brent. People Who Make a Difference; illus. with photographs by
Paul Conklin. 
Cobblehill/Dutton, 1989. 
ISBN 0-525-65009-1. 
[144p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Ashabranner and Conklin's latest has a simple and
worthy theme: "This is a book about heroes." The fourteen people interviewed
here demonstrate a wide variety of concerns, but all share an unwavering
commitment to their chosen causes. While the adulatory tone throughout the
book is, perhaps, inevitable, the accounts rise above the encomium to become
interesting as well as inspiring. Mary Joan Willard trains capuchin monkeys to
assist quadraplegics; Frank Trejo teaches karate to handicapped children; Beverly
Thomas is the principal of an inner-city high school in Detroit that sends its
graduates on to Ivy League colleges. 
Like these heroes, the rest of the
subjects-some young people themselves-seem to have been chosen not only
as worthy role models, but as people whose accomplishments will have a special
meaning for young adults. A welcome balance to the teen-magazine most-
admired polls that always seem to put Michael J. Fox at the top of the list. RS
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Avi. The Man Who Was Poe. Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08433-
7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05833-6. 
[224p]. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed.
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Eleven-year-old Edmund has lost his sister, and Edgar
Allan Poe has lost his inspiration. Can they help each other? Informing an
intricate detective story with the lurking menace of the real Poe's short stories,
Avi has crafted a complex, atmospheric thriller. First mother, then aunt, then
Sis having disappeared, a despairing Edmund turns for help to a stranger in the
street. "Auguste Dupin" senses a story, as well as some disturbing parallels to
his own life, and agrees to investigate. Callous, alcoholic, pursued by private
demons, Dupin (Poe) is only intermittently helpful, and just as often hindering,
forcing Edmund to do his own searching among shadows he only half
comprehends. Avi recreates the gloom of 1840's Baltimore with a storyteller's
ease, blending drama, history, and mystery without a hint of pastiche or
calculation. And, as in the best mystery stories, readers will be left in the end
with both the comfort of puzzles solved and the unease of mysteries remaining.
RS
Aylesworth, Jim. 
Mother Halverson's New Cat; illus. by Toni Goffe.
Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31465-5. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Farmer Halverson is charged by his wife to bring in a
barn cat that can rid their pantry of mice. The gray cat turns out to be crabby,
the black to be flabby, and the yellow to be gabby. It is only the shy tabby that
[27]
makes the grade and is named, true to the rhyme scheme, Abby. The sweet and
the shy shall inherit the hearth in this book; indeed, "The nice shall inherit the
mice" is embroidered on a wall plaque in the last double-page spread. It's a fine-
tuned, low-key story for younger listeners, who can predict-and thus enjoy-
the narrative patterns. Goffe's pen-and-wash illustrations harbor fillips of humor
in the expression and posture of both human and animal characters. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Berenzy, Alix. A Frog Prince; written and illus. by Alix Berenzy. Holt, 1989.
ISBN 0-8050-1123-4. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
It's audacious to change motifs of a traditional tale,
but Berenzy has replaced the ending of Grimm #1, The Frog Prince, with proven
elements of other tales, including Sleeping Beauty, and she has kept the style
simple, reserving elaborations for her romantic art. After the capricious princess
rebuffs him, this frog travels to the end of the world, tricking a troll and a witch
to free their victims, a bird and turtle that help him on his way. Eventually he
finds another princess, this one a sleeping frog who responds to his kiss.
Berenzy's superlative drafting actually does make these frogs quite heroic without
giving up their true native charm. Biologically, they're perfect, whether riding
a pony, sleeping under a royal cloak, dancing, or undertaking amphibian
activities in the water. The nuances of line, the rich color, and the intensely
concentrated compositions add up to some special effects. There are some good
lines here, too. It doesn't hurt to find a hero unafraid to acknowledge common
nature: "I am only a frog wearing fancy clothes." (Alas, both princesses remain
blissfully unaware of inner possibilities.) The Frog Prince is a tale type with
many variants. Children familiar with the standard European version will have
an interesting time talking about this revision. BH
D.V. Courage
Bible, adaptations of. Adam and Eve; ISBN 0-689-71305-3. Jonah and the
Whale; ISBN 0-689-71307-X. Noah's Ark; ISBN 0-689-71306-1. The Walls
of Jericho; ISBN 0-689-71308-8. Each book: illus. by Jenny Thome. Aladdin,
1989. 12p. (Baby's Bible Stories). $3.50.
M 
2-4 yrs. 
Can Bible stories really be recast successfully in
board book format? The renditions here are simplified ("Then God made a friend
for Adam. She was called Eve. Adam and Eve lived happily in the Garden") in a
way that makes the stories accessible to young (but not that young) children, but
often at the expense of the tale. No reason is given for the Flood, Jonah is
unwillingly tossed overboard, Joshua fells the walls of Jericho with no
bloodshed. The line-and-watercolor illustrations are pretty, bland, and literal, and
too small-scaled to appeal to young eyes. Print size is also small, making these
read-to-me rather than look-alone, so why the board book format? Miracles of
marketing. RS
D.V. Religious understanding
Brennan, John. Zoo Day; by John Brennan and Leonie Keaney. Carolrhoda,
1989. ISBN 0-87614-358-3. [32p] illus. with photographs. $9.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
[28 1
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
In a book first published in Australia, a series of
photographs show various creatures at the Melbourne Zoo, the day's pattern
shown by drawings of a clock next to the explanatory captions for each page.
Intervals (from page to page) range from about twenty minutes to one hour, and
the appeal of the book, inherent in any collection of high-quality zoo
photographs, is weakened only slightly by the fact that the captions do not
always fully explain the pictures. Why use the phrase "single file," for example,
but not show it? ZS
Brenner, Barbara. Annie's Pet; illus. by Jack Ziegler; ISBN 0-553-34693-8.
The Color Wizard; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon; ISBN 0-553-34690-3. Lion
and Lamb; by Barbara Brenner and William H. Hooks; illus. by Bruce Degen;
ISBN 0-553-34692-X. Each book: Bantam, 1989. 32p. (Bank Street Ready-
to-Read). Paper ed. $3.50.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
Brenner's three books illustrate the three levels of
difficulty in a paperback series designed for children ages 4-8. The Level 1 book,
The Color Wizard, is a color concept book with a narrative framework, with
some rhyme and repetition; the sentences are usually short, there are some words
(presto, unicorn, castles) that may challenge ready-to-read children; the clean
lines of the Dillons' illustrations are effective. Cartoon-style drawings fit the
humor of the Level 2 book, Annie's Pet, in which a small girl spends all her
birthday money, then gets a free pet from an animal shelter to fit the collar and
leash already purchased. 
Here the vocabulary is simple, but dialogue is
introduced. In the Level 3 book, Lion and Lamb, there are three brief stories
about animal friends (in the Lobel Frog and Toad tradition, with a dash of Frank
Baum's cowardly lion) that are illustrated by line and wash drawings that
vacillate between being comic and being saccharine. 
There are a few
polysyllabic words, but the concepts demand more comprehension in this book,
and there is some establishment of character. Some of the distinctions between
levels are not followed in other books in the series. Nothing here that is
markedly innovative, but the series should be useful. ZS
Brown, Kay. Willy's Summer Dream. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1989. ISBN 0-15-
200645-1. [144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Willy is fourteen, he's black, he lives with his
mother, and he attributes the fact that his father doesn't visit him and that he has
no friends to being retarded. His mother, whom he often thinks of as "ole
Bertha," is trying to find another school for him. Willy develops a deep
affection for a neighbor's visiting niece, Kathleen, who's several years older than
he and who gives him some tutoring. He goes to Sag Harbor with his mother
and helps a new, younger friend who's being abused by his caretaker. Back in
Brooklyn, Willy gains some social confidence despite the fact that he cannot read
or write. He's a sympathetic character, but there's little to the book except a
nice youngster in an unhappy situation. The author has put together a pastiche
of episodes that do not make a substantive narrative or have any focus.
Unfortunately, the book also has a writing style weakened by syntactical errors,
inappropriate use of adjectives, and florid phraseology. ZS
[29]
Bunting, Eve. No Nap; illus. by Susan Meddaugh. Clarion, 1989. ISBN 0-
89919-813-9. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
"'It's Susie's nap time,' Dad said. Susie shook her
head. 'No nap. Susie isn't tired.'" But by the time they take a walk, boogie
and bongo and dance the creepy camel, do push-ups and windmills and
headstands, read stories and sing songs, and lie down with the big yellow dump
truck and the teddy bear and the balloon and the tumble monkey, Daddy is tired.
In fact, he's sound asleep by the time Mom walks into a toy-strewn house to
find Susie bright-eyed and blowing bubbles. This is one of those slices of life
that acquires creative buoyancy by virtue of humorous illustrations. Susie's not
cute; she's one of those diminutive but determined kids who rules her parents
with a firm hand and exhausts everyone in the process. Meddaugh has used
scraggly lines and contrasting colors to convey her main character's energy. The
clutter is offset by a kind of charged space that also centers the girl as a dynamo
of activity. Parents who push naps will appreciate this as much as listeners who
resist them. BH
Carter, David. What's In My Pocket?; written and illus. by David Carter.
Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21685-5. 10p. $8.85.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
There aren't many pages in this board-bound paper-
engineered book, but they are sturdy, they have a theme, they give information,
they have nice composition and bright color in pictures with no clutter, and
there's a mild, accessible humor for small children who, after a read-aloud or
two, should be able to "read" the text for themselves. Carter uses two devices:
one is that the heads of a series of animals pop up and unfold as the pages are
turned; two, the flap that forms a "pocket" shows each animal's favorite food for
the possibly hungry viewer, save for the very last pocket, which belongs to a
kangaroo .... 
ZS
Climo, Shirley, ad. The Egyptian Cinderella; illus. by Ruth Heller. Crowell,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04824-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04822-X. [32p].
Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Rhodopis is a Greek girl stolen by pirates and sold in
Egypt. Her fellow servants ridicule her appearance and treat her cruelly, but her
kind old master wakes to see her dancing one day and gives her a pair of red-gold
sandals. These, of course, excite further jealousy, and Rhodopis is left behind
when the servants go to see the Pharaoh hold court for his subjects. While she's
washing clothes, a falcon steals one of her slippers, flies away, and drops it in
the Pharaoh's lap, whereupon he searches the land until he finds Rhodopis by
fitting the slipper on her tiny foot. The drafting in the full-page spreads is
dutifully reminiscent of the two-dimensional style of Egyptian art, and the
compositions are well-designed to incorporate the print, but the pinks, purples,
and greens seem artificially bright, oddly out of keeping with their setting. For
the many children who study Egypt in grade school, this will be valuable if for
nothing else but to let them know that the tale stretches back at least 2,500
years. Although the afterword gives some historical background, there is no
note on the source Climo used or how much she adapted the text. BH
[30]
DeFelice, Cynthia D., ad. The Dancing Skeleton; illus. by Robert Andrew
Parker. Macmillan, 1989. ISBN 0-02-726452-1. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
Unloved in life and unmourned in death, Aaron Kelly
got up out of his coffin and walked home ("I don't feel dead. I feel fine!"),
refusing to go back until he feels dead. Even when he begins to dry up, with
nothing left but his skeleton, Aaron just keeps rocking in his chair, old bones
clicking and clacking. "His widow did her best to ignore him, but it wasn't easy
with all the racket he made." But one night the widow's suitor, a fiddler, comes
to call, and Aaron decides to dance .... 
This macabre, but mostly funny, story
(adapted from John Bennett's "Daid Aaron II") is a great read-aloud, with bone-
popping sound effects, including a showstopping opportunity for some knuckle-
cracking. 
Parker's pen-and-watercolor illustrations, minimally lined for
maximum effect, provide the perfect sober-sided companion, portraying the
stubborn-jawed Aaron, his long-suffering widow, and the daunted suitor as an
unlikely love triangle. One feels that Aaron Kelly, eventually buried but hardly
rested, did his widow a favor. RS
C.U. Halloween; Reading aloud
Derby, Pat. Goodbye Emily, Hello. Farrar, 1989. ISBN 0-374-32744-0.
[176p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
While the plot of this middle-grades story is
unoriginal, it is one that reflects a common problem, and as such it should
appeal to readers. It deals with a friendship that fractures because the two girls
mature at different rates and, as they move from elementary to high school,
develop divergent interests. Robin, the narrator, is quiet and shy; Emily,
moving toward sophistication, grows impatient with her friend. Expectably,
there is a rupture that is followed by Robin's discovery that she can make new
friends and do without Emily. A final episode brings the girls back together.
This is not a dramatic book, but it has a well-sustained pace, believable
characters, good dialogue, and a plot that moves smoothly and credibly toward an
ending that is modest and realistic. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Friendship values.
Fischetto, Laura. Inside Noah's Ark; illus. by Letizia Galli. Viking, 1989.
ISBN 0-670-83028-3. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
They just won't leave this one alone. Noah's Ark is
a great story all on its own, but most new editions can't resist elaboration. In
this version the forty-day-and-nighted two-by-twos begin to forget. "'We were
king and queen of the forest,' boasted the rabbits. 'And I knew how to fly,' said
the lion." So Noah asks the goats, "the wisest of all creatures and the very best
storytellers" (huh?) to remind the animals of their places in the scheme of
things. It's all a bit forced and arbitrary, and the disembarking turtles end the
story with a heavy query: "Will man always be a friend to the animals?" "But
the others had gone, and so the question has never been answered. Do you know
the answer?" Galli's illustrations deserve a better text; the cartooned animals
crowding the ark are drawn and colored with distinctive finesse, their boasting,
posing, and forgetting given both dignity and humor. RS
[31]
Fritz, Jean. The Great Little Madison. Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21768-1.
[160p.] illus. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 6-9. 
Reproductions of portraits and prints are included in a
biography that is invested with Jean Fritz's ability to bring a character to life
without depending on the excesses of either adulation or pejorative criticism.
Small, soft-spoken, and by nature diffident, James Madison found it difficult to
speak in the midst of controversy, but his zeal and his convictions in the
struggle between Republicans and Federalists gave him confidence, and his
successes brought him to the presidency. Fritz has given a vivid picture of the
man and an equally vivid picture of the problems--especially the internal
dissension--that faced the leaders of the new nation in the formative years after
the appearance of the Declaration of Independence and the turmoil of the several
decades that followed the ratification of the Constitution. Notes by the author
and a bibliography are appended. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
Goffstein, Brooke. A House, A Home; written and illus. with photographs by
Brooke Goffstein. Zolotow/Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022437-1;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022436-3. 32p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
M 
5-7 yrs. 
"A house has skin/ and eyes/ and bone/ a headj a
breast/ a heart." Goffstein's gentle poem about a house is ill-served by vague
photographs of an old wood and cardboard dollhouse. "Our jokes and songs," for
example, is the line beneath a photo of a dark and empty room. Small wooden
figures appear--dimly-in some of the pictures, but add little life. While it
would be nice to have a subtle alternative to all the hopped-up picture books
currently crowding the shelves, here the low-key verges upon the somnolent.
RS
Goodall, Jane. Chimps. Atheneum, 1989. Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-31467-1;
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-71320-7. 32p. illus. with photographs. (Jane Goodall's
Animal World). Trade ed. $11.95; Aladdin paper ed. $3.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
While all four volumes in this series share a similar
outline and feature color photographs, only one of them was written by Goodall.
Unlike the books by MacGuire and Schlein, Goodall's includes lots of personal
anecdotes from the author that go a long way to enlivening the text. The
contents pages of the four books are the same, listing twelve short chapters
devoted to biological and behavioral characterizations of the species in question.
Photographs are plentiful but not captioned, and not always well placed in
relation to the text. A map, in Chimps, of where chimpanzees live mistakenly
places them in Spain and Turkey as well as in Central Africa, and none of the
other maps have legends. While the lack of bibliographies or indexes will limit
the curricular value of the series, the facts are sound and the packaging is
attractive. See further imprint information under MacGuire and Schlein, this
issue. RS
Gramatky, Hardie. Little Toot and the Loch Ness Monster; illus. by Hardie
Gramatky, with additional art by Dorothea Cooke Gramatky. Putnam, 1989.
ISBN 0-399-21684-7. [48p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[32]
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
A dedicated effort to publish the last manuscript of a
favorite picture book artist, this will probably please fans even if story and art
lack the offhand flair of Gramatsky's best. Little Toot is inspired by a dream to
find the Loch Ness monster. After defying the scornful river boats and crossing
the ocean, he befriends Nessie-huge, shy, playful-and of course has to save
her from discovery by bullying search boats. Little Toot's trick of pulling a
cliff boulder into the water to divert attention from the trapped Nessie isn't very
convincing, but it is childlike. The illustrations are a somewhat motley mix of
sentimental watercolor paintings, charcoal sketches, and crisply-lined, spacious
wash drawings. BH
D.V. Courage
Griffith, Helen V. Emily and the Enchanted Frog; illus. by Susan Condie
Lamb. Greenwillow, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08484-2; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-08483-4. [32p]. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
In a comical role-reversal spoof of The Frog Prince
(compare with Berenzy's more serious treatment, above), a girl transforms a frog
into an unwilling prince. Emily does manage, after arguments and extensive
kissing, to undo a complex spell, find an equally perverse frog princess, and get
them both back into their true amphibian forms. The second of the three stories
included here involves an elf's granting Emily three wishes (invisibility? a
pony? a million dollars?) and the third is a dialogue between Emily and a hermit
crab that thinks it's a mermaid. 
These are lightweight stories, somewhat
overextended but not without whimsical appeal. 
The pen-and-watercolor
cartoons decorating every page have an offhand dash that treats magical forces
with slapstick familiarity. BH
Harris, Joel Chandler. Jump On Over!: The Adventures of Brer Rabbit and His
Family; ad by Van Dyke Parks; illus. by Barry Moser. Harcourt, 1989. ISBN
0-15-241354-5. [48p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 4-6. 
How can you lose? Brer Rabbit has perennial appeal
and Barry Moser just gets better and better. Here are five more stories: "How
Brer Rabbit Frightened His Neighbors," "Brer Rabbit and Brer Bear," "Why Brer
Wolf Didn't Eat the Little Rabs," "Another Story about the Little Rabs," and
"Brer Fox Gets Out-Foxed." Just for the record, Brer Rabbit frightens his
neighbors by wearing the tin coffee pot, cups, and plates he has bought for his
family. He fools Brer Fox by enticing Brer Bear into a goober-patch trap for a
dollar a minute. He tricks Brer Wolf into chasing Brer Fox by persuading the
former that the latter's blood tastes like molasses. He comes home to find that
even his children have, with the helpful advice of a friendly bird, outfoxed Brer
Fox. And he persuades Brer Fox that a team of horses has sunk into quicksand
by judiciously planting a few tails. No child can resist such a trickster, and no
adult can resist Moser's sly portraits, with their varied perspectives, uncanny
draftsmanship, and sparely detailed southern settings. Parks' adaptations are
looser and more comfortably idiomatic this time around; music to his song
"Home" is appended. BH
C.U. Storytelling
[33]
Hernandez, Irene Beltran. Across the Great River. Arte Publico, 1989. ISBN 0-
934770-96-4. 136p. $8.50.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Kata discovers a complicated world when she and her
family illegally cross the Rio Grande to a hoped-for new life in the United
States. Her father disappears in the river, and Mama is wounded by gunshot, so
she, Kata, and her baby brother Pablito are taken to the home of Dofia Anita, a
mercurial but generous folk-doctor. Kata's present-tense narration is immediate
and authentically childlike, her perceptions of the adults around her sharp and
shifting. There is both love and violence in Kata's new country, a place where
Anita's magic spells and the more conventional therapies of doctors and social
workers work together to help the girl. While the fairytale ending (the family
finds Papa and a secret gold mine) is at odds with the rest of the book, readers
will find comfort in Kata's safe repatriation to her homeland. RS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Hill, Elizabeth Starr. When Christmas Comes. Viking, 1989. ISBN 0-670-
82201-9. [192p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Callie had always liked Fran, but as a new mother?
Mom--Callie's real mom--would never come back if Dad remarried. And while
the prospect of moving to a trailer park is a far sight better than staying in their
managers' apartment at the Y, how will Mom find them? This adjustment-to-
divorce and new-stepmother story is set in Betsy Byars country; unfortunately,
Hill does not demonstrate Byars' humor or economy of language. While the
dialogue here is often crisp and realistic, the book is slowed by stilted and
repetitive descriptions. One one page, for example, a character is described as
having "dents like dimples [that] appeared in the tops of her cheeks"; on the next
page, "the creases in the tops of her cheeks dented with mirth." 
But
characterization is solid, the relationships-particularly between Callie and
Fran-believable, and the trailer park background adds color. RS
D.V. Stepparents, adjustment to
Homes, A.M. Jack. Macmillan, 1989. 
ISBN 0-02-744831-2. 
[208p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
Holden Caulfield would feel at home with all the
"totallys," "goddamns," and "I means" in this first novel, a first-person narrative
with a contemporary voice but an old-fashioned pattern. Jack's parents have
been divorced since he was eleven; now, at fifteen, he learns that his father is
gay. Unlike the subtle portrait of Jack's mother, the characterization of Jack's
dad is skimpy, so this revelation has less impact on the reader than does that of
the gay father in George Shannon's Unlived Affections, reviewed last month.
Jack's narration is an inviting, if over-familiar, blend of boy-angst and humor,
but there's too much of it, with unfettered exposition taking the place of action.
While the voice and the story could use some judicious pruning, both have an
engaging ease that goes some way towards making a long story short. RS
D.V. Parent-child relations
[34]
Huck, Charlotte, ad. Princess Furball; illus. by Anita Lobel. Greenwillow,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07838-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07837-0. [40p].
Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Like Climo's The Egyptian Cinderella (reviewed
above), this is yet another variant of the common tale type, 510 A-Huck's
introductory note relates it to the English "Catskin" and the Grimms' "Many
Furs." A young princess whose mother dies is raised by a nurse and promised to
an Ogre in marriage for fifty wagons of silver. She forestalls the wedding by
requesting dresses of gold, silver, and starlight, along with a cloak of a thousand
furs, but runs away when she gets them. Found hiding in the forest by a king's
hunting party, she becomes his cook's assistant, slipping out of her ragged
disguise to dance in her beautiful dresses and bedazzle the prince-he discovers
her by the golden objects she drops in the royal soup. Anita Lobel has wisely
abandoned her characteristic heavily ornamental patterning for sturdy shapes and
deeply textured colors that support the weight of the story. Tastefully adapted
and designed, this will make a natural accompaniment to Hooks' Moss Gown
(BCCB 3/87) and other parallel tales. BH
Hunt, Jonathan. Illuminations; written and illus. by Jonathan Hunt. Bradbury,
1989. ISBN 0-02-745770-2. 40p. $16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
An alphabet book for children old enough to
understand social and cultural aspects of the Middle Ages is not for learning
letters. Hunt's book is a showcase for illuminated designs and scenes that
portray an alchemist for A, black death for B, coat of arms for C, dragon for D,
Excalibur for E, and finally, villeins for V, wattle and daub construction for W,
xylography (woodcut) for X, yoke for Y, and zither for Z. There is some
awkwardness in the drafting, and even an occasional confusion, as when two
knights are shown beholding a grail that only one, Sir Galahad, is described as
being pure enough to see. However, the brief paragraphs accompanying each
dramatic spread will please students hooked on knights, dragons, and unicorns.
And it won't hurt kids constructing a portcullis to find out what the oriflamme
is. BH
C.U. History-Medieval
Hutton, Warwick, ad. Theseus and the Minotaur; ad. and illus. by Warwick
Hutton. McElderry, 1989. ISBN 0-689-50473-X. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Although the story of Theseus may seem too epically
proportioned for a picture-book format, it has been accorded dignified, if
simplified, treatment in company of Leonard Everett Fisher's brooding art
(BCCB 10/88) and now Hutton's light-and-shadowed watercolors. In scenes that
seem frozen from a mythical stage drama, Theseus volunteers to replace one of
the young people sent as forced tribute to the Cretan Labyrinth, wins Ariadne's
admiration, fights the Minotaur, escapes with his fellow victims, abandons
Ariadne on Naxos, and causes the death of his father Aegeus by forgetting to
swap the black sail for the white. 
Although the human figures here are
sometimes stiffly posed, especially in the dance of Dionysus, Hutton's pen-and-
wash seascapes set a grand scale for heroic deeds and haunting human frailties.
The dark interior of Minos' palace and the blazing white of the Mediterannean
[35]
coast make brilliant contrasts naturally suited to Hutton's chiaroscuro effects,
which have characterized a distinguished series of classical stories. BH
Kimmel, Eric. Hershel and the Hanukkah Goblins; illus. by Trina Schart
Hyman. Holiday House, 1989. ISBN 0-8234-0769-1. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Billed as an original story, this is built with familiar
folk motifs in Jewish traditional garb. Hershel agrees to spend eight nights of
Hanukkah in a haunted old synagogue to rid the village of goblins. He fools the
first, tiny goblin by crushing a hardboiled egg that looks like a rock; the second,
larger goblin by tempting him with a bottle of pickles into which the greedy
goblin stuffs his hand and gets stuck; and the third, by a clever gambling ruse
with the dreidel. We don't find out exactly how Hershel survives the other four
devilish visitors, but the eighth night brings the frightful King of Goblins,
whom Hershel tricks into lighting the candles himself by pretending it's too dark
to see. Thus the spell is broken and the spirit of Hanukkah triumphs. Well,
after all, the Maccabees must have used a few tricks of their own-there are only
so many ways to outmaneuver an opponent. This will provide relief from the
boring, candy-coated read-alouds that so often comprise holiday fare and will fit
companionably with haunted castle variants. 
Hyman is at her best with
windswept landscapes, dark interiors, close portraiture, and imaginatively wicked
creatures. Both art and history are charged with energy. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Kuklin, Susan. Going to My Ballet Class; written and illus. with photographs
by Susan Kuklin. Bradbury, 1989. ISBN 0-02-751235-5. 32p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Color photographs show young boys and girls in a
ballet class for beginners; the pictures are technically good and visually
appealing as well as informative. The text is simply written in first person, so
that facts about lessons and positions and steps are always from a child's
viewpoint. The book concludes with a section (in smaller print) addressed to
adults, giving some useful advice on choosing a ballet class and on researching
what's available and has a good professional reputation. ZS
Laird, Elizabeth. Loving Ben. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-29810-2. [192p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
"Hydrocephalus," the doctor had said just after Ben
was born, but Anna (twelve at the time) loved him dearly, spent as much time as
she could with him, and was happy that some of her friends understood how
sweet a child her baby brother was. Anna is the narrator, so that her feelings
about Ben and, two years later, about his death, have an immediacy and
poignancy that are moving. It is in part because of her love for Ben that she
later becomes devoted to a child she's helping to care for, and toward whom she
is protective. 
The book deals with a sensitive subject and a touching
relationship but it never become saccharine, and it unfolds with pace and
purpose. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Death, adjustment to
[36]
Lisle, Janet. Afternoon of the Elves. Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08437-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05837-92. [128p]. Library ed. $12.99; Trade
ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Nine-year-old Hillary has a happy home, all the
material possessions she wants, and plenty of friends at school. Eleven-year-old
Sara-Kate is an outcast, thin, poorly dressed, with failing grades, a decrepit
house, and a weedy yard adjoining Hillary's neat garden. But Sara-Kate has an
elf village, and with it she hooks Hillary into a friendship that thrives on elf
stories but suffers from Sara-Kate's stormy moods and prickly pride. It is for
Hillary to discover that Sara-Kate alone is caring for a mother who is mentally
ill, penniless, and unable to provide the most basic physical or emotional
necessities. It is Sara-Kate who teaches Hillary to "go slowly and quietly, and
look deep." This is a carefully developed story focused on two childen who
influence each other in realistic, subtle stages. 
The ending is ambiguous:
whether Sara-Kate will be crushed or cared for by the authorities who separate her
from her mother, whether Hillary was being trusted or used by the older girl, are
both unanswered questions. What's certain is that a petted child has seen a
wilder side, that a potentially smug individual-and perhaps the young reader as
well-has been sensitized to life beneath surface appearances. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Livingston, Myra Cohn, comp. Halloween Poems; illus. by Stephen Gammell.
Holiday House, 1989. ISBN 0-8234-0762-4. 32p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Like earlier books in Livingston's series of holiday
poetry anthologies, this is a wise selection and has considerable variety of mood,
style, and form. The selections are interpreted with relish in Gammell's black
and white illustrations, which are deftly drawn, gory-gruesome, and distinctive
for their repeated (but not repetitive) use of thin black line as hair, twigs, cracks
in a wall, a skeleton, etc. The line ties the pictures as the subject ties the
poems. There are selections by many well-known writers of children's poetry
(Harry Behn, X.J. Kennedy, Lilian Moore, Valerie Worth) as well as one by the
compiler and one that also appears in the Yolen title reviewed below. ZS
MacGuire, Leslie. Lions; illus. with photographs by Leonard Lee Rue III and
Len Rue, Jr. Atheneum, 1989. Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-31470-1; Paper ed. ISBN
0-689-71322-3. 
32p. (Jane Goodall's Animal World). Trade ed. $11.95;
Aladdin paper ed. $3.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
See review under Goodall, above.
Maestro, Betsy. Snow Day; illus. by Giulio Maestro. Scholastic, 1989. ISBN
0-590-41283-X. [32p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
"For the children, it's a holiday," but for the adults
there remains the task of clearing all that snow away. The Maestros clearly
describe and illustrate the different ways snow is removed after a blizzard: from
driveways, roads, airports, harbors, and city streets. The tone is rather catalog-
ish and the pictures only serviceable, but snowbound kids (okay, parents) may
appreciate the sense of proportion this provides on a no-school day. Kids in the
sunnier states may want to move north. RS
[37]
Mahy, Margaret. The Blood-and-Thunder Adventure on Hurricane Peak; illus. by
Wendy Smith. McElderry, 1989. ISBN 0-689-50488-8. 
[144p]. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
"'I shall love this school,' said Zaza, stroking the
head prefect, who purred and rolled over, showing her stomach, which was
covered with crimpish, curdly, curly cream-colored fur-much more attractive
than the stomachs of most head prefects." Readers will also love the Unexpected
School, set in the Pigweed Mountains where a modest enrollment of six students
must wear stone boots to avoid blowing away during the hurricanes that sweep
around their peak every three hours. The school hall is "very like a large cave,
filled with stalactites and stalagmites and glowworms." The classroom has
"colored streamers, balloons of all colors, a few white rabbits, and many bowls
of goldfish." Each desk is equipped with a pack of cards, a wand, and a top hat.
Homework assignments in advanced magic involve one student sawing another
in half (thus doubling the enrollment, a requirement for school inspectors) and
rejoining him again. Down in the city of Hookywalker, where the police have
been issued flashlights and roller skates to replace their cars during an economy
drive, trouble is brewing as wicked industrialist Sir Quincey Judd-Sprocket tries
to kidnap beautiful scientist Belladonna Doppler, who is really in love with
Heathcliff Warlock, resident magician and deputy principal of the Unexpected
School, which Sir Quincey is trying to close down for purposes of mining
precious ore. Numerous secondary characters, including Sir Quincey's adopted
aunt and two buffoonishly villainous sidekicks, contribute (unwittingly, of
course) to this diverting spoof, which walks a fine line between wacky slapstick
and fresh invention. It's gratifying to find one of juvenile literature's most
imaginative writers as fluent with accessible humor as she is with realistic
fiction and taut fantasy. Energetic pen drawings distributed liberally through the
book elaborate the best bits with a keen sense of absurdity. BH
McGovern, Ann. Down Under Down Under: Diving Adventures on the Great
Barrier Reef; illus. with photographs by Jim Scheiner, Martin Scheiner, and Ann
McGovern. Macmillan, 1989. ISBN 0-02-765770-1. 48p. $14.95.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
Although the information and photography in this
nonfiction are involving, the voice is a puzzle. The first-person narrator is not
the author but a 12-year-old girl recounting her experiences diving around the
Great Barrier Reef off the Australian coast, and the effect doesn't always forward
the facts: "I could watch the darling clown fish for hours." The implied-journal
style leads to some abrupt transitions ("Would they [potato cods] slurp in my
arm like a vacuum cleaner? I can't figure out Captain Chris") and false build-up
of suspense ("Is one shipwreck worth the risks? ... One bite and you're dead in
five minutes. ... 
Its spines are full of venom, too .. ."). The final chapter,
"Getting Ready for a Dive," would have set the stage much more clearly at the
beginning of the book. Diving enthusiasts will enjoy browsing through the
clearly reproduced, vivid underwater photographs, but a straightforward
informational tone would have improved the text. BH
[38]
McKenna, Colleen O'Shaughnessy. 
Fifth Grade: Here Comes Trouble.
Scholastic, 1989. ISBN 0-590-41733-9. 
[128p]. $10.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Collette is not enthusiastic about snobby Marsha's
plans for a boy-girl party to celebrate her eleventh birthday, and she is even less
pleased that Marsha's cousin Carole, "a legal teenager," is masterminding the
event. Thirteen-year-old Carole makes Marsha throw out her stuffed animals and
get her ears pierced and involves both younger girls in a shoplifting episode.
The story is more didactically drawn than the previous books about Collette
(BCCB 10/88, 2/89), and while accurately limning the preteen party scene, does
so with little humor or nuance-two qualities that made the other books stand
out from the series stampede. But it's likely that flawed but feisty Collette has
gathered herself a following among readers, who will pleasantly mark time with
this book while crossing their fingers for the next. RS
D.V. Friendship values
McLaughlin, Molly. Dragonflies. Walker, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-
6847-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6846-6. 32p. Library ed. $15.85; Trade ed.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Excellent color photographs (with varying degrees of
magnification) are well-placed in relation to the text and are adequately provided
with full captions, adding to the visual appeal and the accessibility of a fine
science book by a staff member of The Franklin Institute Science Museum.
McLaughlin writes authoritatively about her subject, using vocabulary and
concepts appropriate for the level of her intended audience. A single column of
large, clear print leaves wide margins for photographic captions. The continuous
text is clear and sequential as it follows the life cycle of dragonflies and
damselflies. ZS
C.U. Nature study; Science
Miklowitz, Gloria D. Anything to Win. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-29750-
5. [160p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Cam Potter, the narrator, is a high school senior;
captain of the football team, Cam is told by his coach that an athletic
scholarship is available at State if Cam can put on thirty pounds. And that's
why Cam succumbs to a program of anabolic steroids, stopping only when he
sees the damage it has done to another user. The topic is of considerable current
interest, and the fact that this is a book in which a minatory message is more
important than the story is indicated by the list of steroid abuse risks that forms
the introduction. There is a story, and it's adequately written, but the book has
an air of documentary message that obtrudes on the fiction. ZS
Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds. 
Keeping a Christmas Secret; illus. by Lena
Shiffman. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31447-7. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Realistic pictures that are colorful, uncluttered,
repetitive, and adequate but not impressive in line and composition, illustrate a
story that is nicely written although static in tone and slight in conception. The
[39]
youngest of three children, Michael is unhappy because he's let slip the fact that
Dad's present from his family is a sled. Fortunately, the last-minute mystery
present Michael has wrapped proves, at just the right moment, to be the rope
that nobody else has thought of that is needed to pull the sled back up the hill
after they've had the first family sled-ride. ZS
C.U. 
Christmas
Neitzel, Shirley. The Jacket I Wear in the Snow; illus. by Nancy Winslow
Parker. Greenwillow, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08030-8; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-08028-6. [32p]. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
Any parent who's ever sandbagged a child for winter
should have this cumulative rhyme down pat. Beginning simply enough ("This
is the jacket I wear in the snow"), things rapidly hit a snag: "This is the zipper
that's stuck on the jacket I wear in the snow." The snag is the "scarf, woolly
and red, that's caught in the zipper that's stuck on the jacket ... ." The rhyme
captures the misery of all those layers-itchy sweater, stiff blue jeans, bunchy
long-johns, floppy socks-and ends with Mom's release of the zipper, et al, and
a treat of hot chocolate and cupcakes. Parker's illustrations are pleasantly
schematic, and along with full-page pictures of each piece of clothing, smaller
versions are dotted rebus-like throughout the rhyme. The order of dress is
confusing-the jeans "go over the sweater" and the boots appear to go on after
the underwear and before the jeans-but to both dressed and dresser it often must
seem like that anyway. RS
C.U. Clothing and dress
Nixon, Joan Lowery. Whispers from the Dead. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-
29809-9. [19 2p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Sixteen-year-old Sarah has felt shadowed by a
comforting presence ever since her out-of-body experience while drowning. The
presence that she feels in her family's new house isn't comforting, however-
it's frightened. Does the voice that cries "Ayudame" have anything to do with
the grisly murder that occurred in the house two years before? It's a credit to
Nixon's skillful suspense-building that readers will race through the book despite
its many contrivances. No one (except Sarah, who's dating him) will fail to
spot the identity of the murderer early on, but this kind of one-step-ahead reading
has its own appeal: our eye rolling at the heroine's gullibility is combined with
a protective instinct that shudders at knowing just who is hiding behind the door.
RS
O'Dell, Scott. My Name Is Not Angelica. Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-
51061-9. [144p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Raisha is renamed Angelica by the slaveowners who
purchase her for their plantation on St. John, an island in the Danish West Indies
(now the U.S. Virgin Islands). Both Raisha and her betrothed, Konje, have been
captured and sold into slavery by a rival African king, and soon after landing in
St. John, Konje escapes to a hidden colony of runaways intent upon revolt.
Based upon historical records, Raisha's narration of the conditions and events
[40]
leading to the tragic rebellion is vivid, intensely conveying the humiliation and
torture inflicted upon the slaves (and occasionally by the slaves) and the
brutalization of the whites. While events are occasionally telegraphed and
characterization emblematic, this is a fierce story, fairly and urgently told. RS
C.U. History-Caribbean Islands
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Oakes, Bill. Puzzlers; written and illus. by Bill Oakes and Suse MacDonald.
Dial, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0690-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0689-8.
32p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
NR 
4-6 yrs. 
Puzzling indeed, this book is dedicated by its author
to "thinking in new ways," but most young viewers will only come away with
conceptual confusion. Each double-page spread features, on the right, a spatial
concept (widest, upside-down, facing) and on the left, an illustration of an animal
made up of numbers that are variously colored, tipped, elongated, and distorted.
For "facing," for example, readers are asked to "find the facing numbers" in a
picture of a monkey that includes, among others, two sevens (the arms) and two
nines (sixes?-the ears). The answer key indicates that both the sevens and
nines "face each other." However, numbers do not have faces, and the fact that
one of each of the sevens and nines is flipped backwards to accomplish the
supposed "facing" effect seems perverse. Concepts like "the widest number" are
arithmetically corrupt and concepts like "sequence" and "pattern" are incorrectly
defined. The number collages themselves have day-glo appeal, however, and
children might enjoy the more straightforward pleasure of simply finding what
numbers are used to form the animal shapes. RS
Peck, Richard. Voices After Midnight. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-29779-3.
181p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Californian Chad MacPherson, along with his older
sister Heidi, younger brother Luke, dog Al, and parents, is spending two weeks
in New York City while Mr. MacPherson does business. In the old house
they've rented, the children are haunted by dreams of the past and by desperate
ghostly voices. Through trips back in time, which are brief but occur with
dizzying frequency, they redirect a romance and save two young people-their
ancestors, as it turns out-from freezing to death when they're trapped in an
elevator during the 1888 blizzard. The plot is neatly rendered, and the characters
are capably presented if not deeply developed. Peck's lancet humor is ever active
("We'd never seen anybody who could talk without moving her jaw"). However,
the time-travel mechanism seems as mystifying to the reader as it is to the
children. They conjecture variously that it's doors, dresses, determination ("I
usually get what I want," says Heidi, smitten by a boy from the past), or special
powers which trigger their sudden but frequent commutes into nineteenth-century
New York, but there's no real consistency. 
At one point when they're
researching old newspapers in a library, they slip back with no trigger at all.
There's also a question of what accounts for the urgency of their mission: if
they are capable of going back to any point of time at any time, they could
correct the problem any time. Kids probably won't formulate any of these
objections, but there is a looseness of inner logic that has not characterized
Peck's earlier time travel fantasies about Blossom Culp. What might date the
[41
book, ironically, are references to the New Wave fashions of Sean Penn and
other popular teenage idols who will get lost in the time-warp of their fans'
memories. BH
Salerno-Sonnenberg, Nadja. Nadja: On My Way. Crown/Random House,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-57391-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-57392-X. [9 6p].
illus. with photographs. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
"As told to" editor David Allender, this is the
autobiography of the twenty-eight-year-old violinist who is as well known for
her punk outfits and dramatic grimaces as she is for her musical virtuosity.
Unlike many biographies of classical musicians (or other supposedly serious
subjects) this one does not downplay artistic accomplishment in favor of
patronizing, "ordinary kid" anecdotes. While Salerno-Sonnenberg reveals herself
as a fervent Yankees fan, the emphasis here is on music, practice, and work.
"To measure up to all those wonderfully talented players at Julliard, I would have
to commit myself as never before. And if I disciplined myself to really work,
and give the violin my all, and failed... I would have to deal with it forever."
Although there are some abrupt breaks (after telling us "there was never enough
money to go around" she says "Starting when I was thirteen, I studied in France
every summer"), the style is forthright and aptly epigrammatic: "Friends can run
away, but Brahms never will. And he's listening." Her passion is clear, her
self-evaluation candid, her story not so much "inspiring" as it is honest. RS
C.U. Music
D.V. Determination
San Souci, Robert D., ad. The Talking Eggs: A Folktale from the American
South; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. Dial, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0620-0;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0619-7. 32p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R* 
5-7 yrs. 
A Creole folktale about a widow and her two
daughters, who "lived on a farm so poor, it looked like the tail end of bad luck,"
combines elements of Cinderella with distinctively southern black lore. The
youngest child, abused by her mother and sister, helps an old woman who
rewards her with magic eggs that produce gold and jewels. When the evil sister
seeks the same old woman and disobeys her, the eggs give forth snakes, toads,
and vermin. It's a strong story well told, and Pinkney's elaborate watercolor
scenes play it to the hilt. The two-headed cow with corkscrew horns and a
mulish bray, the multi-colored, many-legged chickens that whistle like
mockingbirds, and the old woman who removes her head to comb her hair are
haunting images of magic, both verbally and visually. In spite of occasional
stiffness in drafting of human faces and figures, there is an eerie quality to these
scenes that will electrify storytelling or picture-book sharing sessions. BH
D.V. Integrity
Sargent, Sarah. Seeds of Change. Bradbury, 1989. ISBN 0-02-778031-7.
103p. $12.95.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Rachel's father has bought an option on a Georgia
swamp to develop it into an entertainment/resort center, and Rachel is determined
to explore it and make recommendations that will prove she's entrepreneurial
[42]
rather than artistic like her mother. Two half-day trips to the swamp-one
including a visit to an old denizen named the Flower Woman and the other, a
rescue by the Flower Woman when Rachel gets lost and injured-convince
Rachel that her father's plans will doom a delicate habitat. He agrees, partly
because of financial uncertainties, to cut his losses and leave the place
undisturbed. Although the protagonist is a potentially sympathetic character, her
motives and behavior are overexplained, as are the thematic conflicts and the
symbols (especially a carnivorous flower). 
The secondary characters are
functionary, and the plot is predictable. This will stimulate ecological awareness
and discussion of environmental issues, but it could have used a subtler
development. BH
Sattler, Helen Roney. 
The Book of Eagles; illus. by Jean Day Zallinger.
Lothrop, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07022-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07021-
3. [64p]. Library ed. $14.88; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-up. 
Profusely and meticulously illustrated by detailed
paintings that can be used for identification, this is impressive both as a
reference book and as a text that communicates the author's enthusiasm, concern,
and knowledge. Sattler discusses differences and similarities among the major
types of eagles, describes their habitats, and examines the ways in which eagles
hunt, court, nest, and grow from nestlings to magnificent fliers and hunters.
One chapter ("Humans: Friends or Foes?") considers both the ways in which
humans have decimated or threatened some species, and the ways in which other
humans have established protective or breeding programs to maintain genera and
species. Appended material increases the book's reference use: a list of all
known eagles, by groups and genera, a superb glossary that shows each bird and
adds a small picture of the underside (in flight) and provides both a map and a
descriptive text, a list of books for further reading, and a relative index. As is
true of most good reference books, this may be useful to readers younger than
the target audience. ZS
C.U. Nature study; Science
Schlein, Miriam. Hippos; illus. with photographs by Leonard Lee Rue III and
Len Rue, Jr. Atheneum, 1989. Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-31469-8; Paper ed. ISBN
0-689-71321-5. 
32p. (Jane Goodall's Animal World). Trade ed. $11.95;
Aladdin paper ed. $3.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
See review under Goodall, above.
Schlein, Miriam. Pandas. Atheneum, 1989. Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-31471-X;
paper ed. ISBN 0-689-71319-3. 32p. illus. with photographs. (Jane Goodall's
Animal World). Trade ed. $11.95; Aladdin paper ed. $3.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
See review under Goodall, above.
Schroeder, Alan. Ragtime Tumpie; illus. by Bernie Fuchs. Joy Street/Little,
1989. ISBN 0-316-77497-9. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A story about the childhood of Josephine Baker, the
St. Louis girl who became the toast of Paris and, for many, epitomized the Jazz
Age. 
Her family was poor, they-with other black people in their
[431
neighborhood-had a warm and happy community life, and Tumpie's father
played the drums in a ragtime band. Tumpie loved music, loved dancing, and
decided, when she won a local dancing contest, that she would be a dancer. An
author's note (accompanied by a publicity shot) is appended. Despite the
unintended implication that all God's children have rhythm, this is a happy if
uncorroborated story. The illustrations are paintings that have vitality, warmth,
good use of color and light, and a nice mix of representational and impressionist
techniques. ZS
Sevela, Ephraim. We Were Not Like Other People; tr by Antonina Bouis.
Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025508-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025507-2.
[224p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
In a tough novel about a Soviet Jewish teenager
separated from his parents at the beginning of World War II, the boy wanders
from Siberia to Germany, eating when he can, finding temporary caretakers he
can trust, and finally joining the last fighting outside Berlin. Whatever the
suffering and death in his path, however kind are his occasional helpers, he is
aware of a persistent hostility toward Jews: a colonel who grows genuinely fond
of him replaces his Jewish name with a nickname; bullies beat another Jewish
child with taunts of "Kike, Kike" in a work factory; a friendly soldier betrays the
boy with anti-Semitic comments after the fighting is all over. The narrative is
not consecutive; an opening battle scene actually happens toward the end of the
story, and we don't find out till late in the book how the boy first became
separated from his mother (his father was rounded up in one of Stalin's purges of
the military). However, the segments are completely developed and totally
absorbing, the segmentation serving to give a sense of the way victims of war
are dislocated, dumped here or there, and jerked along in trains or other transport.
The writing is stark and the translation intense, with a total effect of readers
having experienced the situation. Perhaps the concluding reunion seems a bit
unrealistic after the rest of the story; the author's dedication suggests that he has
tempered the parents' fate for children's reading. BH
Simon, Seymour. Whales. Crowell, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04758-4;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04756-8. [40p]. illus. with photographs. Library ed.
$14.89; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Simon introduces toothed and baleen whales in a
smoothly written text that can be read aloud as a picture book or alone by
independent readers. The mammals' habits and habitat are capably covered,
several species get detailed treatment, and kids will love the occasional Ripley's
believe-it-or-not tone of information ("In one day a blue whale eats more than
four tons of krill, about forty million of these animals"). However, the vivid
comparisons sometimes lead to quirks of description as well: "Just the tongue
of a blue whale weighs as much as an elephant" begs the question of how big
and what kind of elephant; the callosities of a right whale should hardly be called
"strange bumps"; and "carries" is a misleading term for gestation period,
especially under a photograph where a sperm whale cow seems to be actually
carrying her calf. In fact, the dramatically attractive photographs that characterize
Simon's books are here sometimes obscure; features are hard to distinguish in
pictures opposite a description of a whale's skull and body, for instance, or in
[44]
the shots of a fin whale, minke whale, and blue whale. Other photographs and
facts are beautifully clear, and the concluding appeal for saving this endangered
animal is a moving one. BH
C.U. Nature study
D.V. Environmental awareness
Smith, Janice Lee. It's Not Easy Being George: Stories about Adam Joshua
(and His Dog); illus. by Dick Gackenbach. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-
06-025853-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025852-7. [128p]. Library ed. $10.89; Trade
ed. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
In the school pet show, at the library sleep-in, and at
the talent show, Adam Joshua and his dog George share tribulation and triumph.
So what if Elliot's dog Champion rolls over on command? George sleeps on
Adam Joshua's stomach, listens to his problems, and laughs at his jokes.
"'Tricks?' asked Mrs. Jackson. 'Doesn't have time,' said Adam Joshua." While
the three stories here are couched in the low-key cozy humor that characterizes
the series (BCCB 2/88, 6/84, 3/82), they are a little short on plot, and the
running jokes are replayed too often. However, the stories and reading level are
both comfortable, and Adam Joshua-trusting, ingenuous, but a tad world-
weary-will retain his fans. RS
D.V. Pets, love for
Staples, Suzanne Fisher. Shabanu: Daughter of the Wind. Knopf, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-94815-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-84815-2. 
[200p].
Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 7-12. 
This first novel is, on several counts, one of the most
exciting YA books to appear recently. Staples is so steeped in her story and its
Pakistani setting that the problematic use of a first-person voice for a desert child
rings authentic-the voice is clear, consistent, and convincing, the narrative all
the more immediate. An enormous amount of information on nomadic life
surfaces in earthy details that move the story along, build a world, and develop a
protagonist who is spirited but bound by the ways of her people. Shabanu and
her sister Phulan are to marry brothers as soon as they all come of age. It is an
ideal match for family and economic reasons, but accumulating the dowries
involves selling Shabanu's beloved camel to cruel Afghans. This is Shabanu's
first loss of many: she will eventually lose her betrothed and be promised to a
wealthy landowner to settle a blood feud. In the end, it is only her innermost
strength that she can protect, and we feel this sense of self as if it had crossed a
world of distance and traditions to become our own. The richness and tragedy of
a whole culture are reflected in the fate of this girl's family, each member of
whom is rendered with natural clarity. Scenes of dust storms, camels mating and
birthing, the onset of menstruation that initiates wedding plans, the burial of an
honored grandfather, wedding rituals, the carnival atmosphere of an Asian fair,
the binding rites of the Muslim faith are all vividly related. Through an
involving plot Staples has given young readers insight into lives totally different
from their own, but into emotions resoundingly familiar. BH
[45]
Stewart, Molly Mia. Surprise! Surprise!; created by by Francine Pascal.
Bantam, 1989. Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-15758-2. [80p]. illus. (Francine Pacal's
Sweet Valley Kids). Paper ed. $2.50. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-3. 
When, in reviewing the first Sweet Valley Twins, we
pondered as to whether Sweet Valley Day Care would be next, we were just
kidding. But here they are, the twins at six, and the now pint-sized stereotypes
remain intact. "Jessica passed notes to her friends during class and was always
ready to whisper with them. Elizabeth was an attentive student who read a lot.
She also liked to write short poems." Actually, this level of characterization and
the patterned plot (J and A buy each other seventh birthday presents they want
for themselves) are effective with beginning readers-and just think what they
have to look forward to. RS
D.V. Reading, beginning
Tadjo, V6ronique, ad. Lord of the Dance: An African Retelling; ad. and illus.
by V6ronique Tadjo. Lippincott, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32352-2; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-397-32351-4. 
[32p]. 
Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
This picture book almost begs to be chanted and
danced, a physical aspect often neglected in the moder representation of folklore
in print. The narrative is poetically rhythmic without becoming singsong or
forced, the art leaps with color and strikingly balanced shapes. The concept itself
is lyrical: the Mask leaves the spirit world and comes among men and women
to lead their songs of joy and sadness. Even when traditions are buried in
concrete and steel, the voice survives. Folk art motifs border many of the
pictures, and a note on the cultural life of the Senufu people, as well as on
Tadjo's collection and adaptation of the song, provide valuable context. A map
with the C6te d'Ivoire together with photos of a Senufu artist and of Tadjo
herself, are also included. An original re-creation in the best storytelling
tradition. BH
Tessendorf, K.C. Along the Road To Soweto. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-
31401-9. [160p.] illus. and with photographs. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-up. 
Most young people today have some knowledge of
apartheid and what its policies have produced in South African life; probably
fewer numbers have an understanding (also true of many adults) of the several
centuries of conquest, usurpation, competition, and bitter hostility among native
tribes, Portuguese, British, and Boers, that led to the tragedy of Soweto and the
oppressive policies of the present regime. Tessendorf records this history in
careful, minute detail, his prose saved from tedium by the resilience of the
writing style. The tone is as objective as a record of prejudice and power
struggle can be. Well-researched and well-organized, the book has an annotated
bibliography; the bound copy will include an index. ZS
C.U. History-South Africa
Thomas, Jane Resh. The Princess in the Pigpen. Clarion, 1989. ISBN 0-395-
51587-4. [128p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[46 1
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
Sick with "the fever," nine-year-old Elizabeth finds
herself transported through time from her 17th century London home to a 1980's
farm in Iowa. The story gives no reason for the time-shift, a device that requires
careful and clever plotting. While this novel substitutes contrivance for
cleverness, the clash of cultures is fun and enlightening, and the fact that the
farmer's wife is an Elizabethan historian (really) with a handy library of books
on the period (including one with a picture of Elizabeth) is helpful. The
narrative suspense provided by Elizabeth's desperate need to take the magic
penicillin back to her dying mother is silly, and her return to her own time is as
unconvincing as her original departure. However, many readers are daunted by
the conceptual sophistication demanded by good time-travel books, and this one
might prove a comfortable first trip. RS
Van Leeuwen, Jean. 
Oliver and Amanda's Christmas; illus. by Ann
Schweninger. Dial, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0647-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
8037-0636-7. 
[56p]. (Easy-to-Read). Library ed. $9.89; Trade ed. $9.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Five easy-to-read Christmas stories show the same
natural ease of structure and writing as others in this series. As usual, the focus
is on family, this time preparations of baking, shopping, picking out a tree,
making presents, and enjoying them. And, as usual, the idyllic atmosphere is
gently mitigated by lifelike details of sibling rivalry, childish greed, and
humorous actions that overcome them. Amanda is miffed by all the secrets until
she manages to make a few of her own. Oliver cannot find a stocking big
enough for the twenty-two toys he's requested from Santa. No cookie, the
children find, is ever perfect. The small, smoothly rounded watercolor pictures
are warm without becoming sentimental; they, too, project a naivet6 supported
by amusing detail. As comfortable as tradition. BH
C.U. Christmas-stories; Reading, beginning
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Whipple, Laura, comp. Eric Carle's Animals Animals; illus. by Eric Carle.
Philomel, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21744-4. 93p. $18.95.
R* 
Gr. 2-4. 
This poetry anthology is a splendid showcase for
Carle's dramatic double image. Two haiku by Demaru and Issa, for instance,
make perfect companions in describing "butterflies dancing through falling
snow" on one page, and facing it, the observation of "how sadly the bird in his
cage/ Watches the butterflies." The front part of a whale stretches across two
pages that illustrate two lines from Genesis: the tail, surrounded by fish,
extends onto the next two pages, which contain an African Pygmy chant and a
haiku by Koson, both about fish. Prelutsky's poem, "Long Gone," is perched
beside a painted Tyrannosaurus Rex that looms over John Gardner's "The
Lizard," under which hides a childlike miniature of a dinosaur in the same
brilliant green. Carle's textures are unfailingly intriguing, his colors eye-
catching, his designs bold, his patterns innovative. Whipple's selection should
be credited for its variety, quality, and appeal. It's a winning combination. BH
[47 ]
Wirths, Claudine. Where's My Other Sock?; by Claudine Wirths and Mary
Bowman Kruhm; illus. by Molly Coxe. Crowell, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-
690-04667-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04665-0. [128p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade
ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
For a slightly younger audience than the authors' I
Hate School (BCCB 10/86), this guide to getting organized has the same
exclamatory style ("solicitous bonhomie," ZS called it) and let's-chat format.
Unfortunately and ironically, a conversational format is not the most organized
method of getting specific, systematic, information across. The authors have
"three secrets" to organization; they include breaking big problems into little
ones, "being in charge of what you do," and "finding a way of organization that
is right for you." Like the more specific tips offered, these secrets are sensible if
not profound, and may make school and home life less hectic, although the
school hints are better and more thoroughly discussed in I Hate School. RS
Yolen, Jane. Best Witches: Poems for Halloween; illus. by Elise Primavera.
Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21639-5. [48p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
There's nice control of form, meter, rhyme, and
scansion in this collection; there are moments of spine-chill that middle-grades
readers will enjoy; there is, as prime appeal, a humor that has verve and
sophistication but is never inaccessible. The ebullience of Yolen's poetry is
matched by that of Primavera's paintings, which are colorful but pleasantly
gruesome, with a great deal of vitality and antic humor. ZS
Zimmerman, H. Werner, ad. Henny Penny; ad. and illus. by H. Werner
Zimmerman. 
Scholastic, 1989. 
ISBN 0-590-42390-8. 
[32p]. 
$8.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Fools' tales can be tricky to present, since the
storyteller has to project the characters without too much sympathy. The
gullible, after all, get eaten. Although Henny Penny is not the cheeriest of
folktales, it seems to inspire light-hearted treatments, including Steven
Kellogg's Chicken Little (BCCB 11/85). Here the ridiculous parade of barnyard
fowl, mostly crowned with pots and pans for protection from the falling sky,
plays the classic role of dolts too dumb to cry over. Zimmerman, whose
drafting, color, and composition are equally impressive, has lent further
perspective to the tale by showing both the first and last scenes from far above-
a clever, tree-top perspective of the squirrels who drop the nuts that panic Henny
Penny. The end-papers are (what else?) sky blue, another example of the skill
and comic grace that will make this a favorite for pre-school story hour sessions.
BH
C.U. Storytelling