Ancona, George. Riverkeeper; written and illus. with photographs by George
Ancona. Macmillan, 1990. ISBN 0-02-700911-4. 48p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
The subject of this photodocumentary is John
Cronin, a representative of the Hudson River Fishermen's Association who
guards the waters against pollution from nuclear power plants ("It is estimated
that the plants at Indian Point ... kill 6,000,000 fish a year"), industrial waste
dumping, tanker spills, sewage disposal, and other environmental threats.
Cronin's case against Exxon-for dumping dirty sea water from oil tankers into
the Hudson and loading clean river water for transport to an arid Caribbean
island-builds like a mystery, and young readers will be heartened by his energy,
optimism, and experience with positive response from concerned citizens,
proving "that everybody should be a riverkeeper." Spacious, black-and-white
photographs give sharp direction to a straightforward text. Of more than
regional interest, this will energize kids to consider other rivers as well as other
kinds of environments in the light of ecological responsibility. BH
D.V. Ecological awareness
Beck, Martine. The Wedding of Brown Bear and White Bear; illus. by Marie H.
Henry. Little, 1990. ISBN 0-316-08652-5. 30p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
First published in France, this is a romantic story
featuring anthropomorphic animal characters and a boy-meets-girl plot that may
be of limited appeal to young children. Brown Bear sees graceful White Bear
skating and is smitten by her beauty; he woos and wins her, they wed and
"Brown Bear and White Bear danced away until the last of the stars slipped out of
the sky." 
The read-aloud audience may appreciate some of the courtship
incidents, such as Brown Bear falling on the ice when he tries skating, but a
theme of love-and-marriage may not be of great interest to most children in the
preschool and primary years. The delicately tinted pictures have the same
combination of restraint (in color and composition) and lively line that
characterize the decorously sprightly illustrations of another French illustrator,
Gabrielle Vincent. ZS
Bowkett, Stephen. Dualists. Gollancz/Trafalgar Square, 1990. ISBN 0-575-
04106-4. 152p. $17.95.
M 
Gr. 7-10. 
Simon Hallam regrets moving to a boring town on
the English coast despite the proximity of eagerly attentive Kathy and alluring
[259 ]
but standoffish Louise. Life gets interesting, however, when the three kids and
Louise's little brother find a jelly-like slime that has the power to replicate
anything with which it comes into contact. Individual experiments with the
slime, which they call "slubber," lead to various fantastic results, including the
duplication of a cat and a guinea pig and the revelation that slubber induces
euphoria and possesses miraculous healing powers. Kathy, now Simon's
girlfriend, alerts him to the dangers of their discovery ("Don't you understand
that if slubber gives us everything, we won't need to try!"), and, despite siren
Louise's blandishments and prophecy of riches, Simon refuses to go public with
slubber and permit the certain doom of humanity ("No, no-that's not the
way!"), although the ending suggests that Simon's noble renunciation may have
been insufficient for the preservation of species homo sapiens. The pacing is
uneven, and the slubber story is frequently overshadowed by bland domestic
matters (romantic problems, school bullies, weird parents) which detract from
the darker impact of the central plot. Simon is irritating rather than clever, and
preternaturally mature-at the age of thirteen he is probably too young for his
own Dr. Faustus myth complete with Louise as Helen of Troy. Readers with
the patience to endure the digressions may find the evil-substance tale worth
pursuing. DS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
BrOger, Achim. The Day Chubby Became Charles; tr. from the German by
Ren6e Vera Cafiero; illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. Lippincott, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32145-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32144-9. 90p. Library
ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Smoothly translated from the German original, this is
a story about alliances and friendship values among younger children that is, for
all of its directness and simplicity, subtle and perceptive. Always the odd man
out, Chubby trails meekly after Julia and Jacob; one day Julia encounters
Chubby after school and hopes that Jacob won't see them walking together.
She's rather embarrassed, but as the afternoon goes on, she finds that Chubby
(real name Charles) is sympathetic about Julia's concern for her grandmother,
apparently ill. The two children exchange confidences, share hiding places, and
Julia realizes that Charles is a friend. This is a gentle story, tender but not
saccharine. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Grandparent-child relations
Brooks, Polly Schoyer. 
Beyond the Myth: 
The Story of Joan of Arc.
Lippincott, 1990. ISBN 0. 176p. illus. with photographs. $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 7-10. 
Brooks, author of Queen Eleanor (BCCB 1/84), here
focuses on a later medieval heroine, one who "has been called upon by such
diverse extremes as communists and monarchists, each claiming her as their
champion." Carefully distinguishing between fact, speculation, and legend, the
author traces Joan's destiny from her first visitation, at age thirteen, by the spirit
of St. Michael. While theologians may argue with the assertion that "whether
Joan really heard voices or only thought she did doesn't matter," few will fail to
be impressed with Brooks' rendering of Joan's fierce dedication and persistence.
The battle scenes are vivid, as are the portraits of Joan's followers, bedevilers,
and beneficiaries-the author's impatience with the wishy-washy King Charles
has a witty and authoritative tartness. A detailed index, concisely annotated
[260 ]
bibliography, and historical illustrations (including various depictions of Joan)
are included. An afterword offers some considerations of how perceptions of Joan
have changed over time, and some suggestions for "rational" explanations of her
miracles. "Joan herself is not so easy to explain. She is more of a miracle than
the many miracles attributed to her." RS
C.U. History-France; Religious education
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Bunting, Eve. The Wall; illus. by Ronald Himler. Clarion, 1990. ISBN 0-
395-51588-2. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A narrator who appears to be about four years old
gives a present-tense account of the visit he makes with his young father to find
Grandpa's name on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. The father's emotions and
the boy's perspective are well-realized, and the action is low-key: "He slides out
a picture of me, one of the yucky ones they took in school .... 
Dad puts the
picture on the grass below Grandpa's name." The watercolor paintings also carry
a quiet weight of expression. This is a book that will need some preamble and
discussion to be meaningful to a picture book audience, but it does offer
possibilities for children to talk about similar experiences of visiting the wall or
to acquire an introduction to the Vietnamese conflict that has affected so many of
their families. BH
C.U. History-U.S.-Pictorial presentation
D.V. Peace
Clarke, Judith. The Heroic Life of Al Capsella. Holt, 1990. ISBN 0-8050-
1310-5. 152p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Al Capsella wants to be more than a normal teenager
more than anything. Unfortunately, he has two major liabilities-Mr. and Mrs.
Capsella. They are a "bookish couple" who just don't seem to understand that
parents should be "perfectly ordinary and unobtrusive, quiet and orderly, well
dressed and polite, hardworking and as wealthy as possible." Instead, Mrs.
Capsella writes romance novels, wears thrift-shop clothes, and barges into Al's
school whenever she's bored. Quiet Mr. Capsella teaches at the University and
is overwhelmed by the overgrown state of his suburban lawn. The funny,
cynical, but believable Australian story shows Al's growing tolerance for his
parent's foibles. Al's misadventures will make a good middle school readaloud,
but be forewarned-from Al's perspective, the adults appear ridiculous, and the
most ridiculous of all is the school librarian. KP
D.V. Parent-child relations
Clifford, Eth. Harvey's Wacky Parrot Adventure. Houghton, 1990. ISBN 0-
395-53352-X. 112p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-4. 
Wisely shifting the theme of her Harvey series from
cousin rivalry to what she writes best, adventure/mystery, Clifford will satisfy
her action-thirsty readers once again. This third Harvey book follows a familiar
formula plot, with eleven-year-old Harvey and his animal-crazy cousin Nora
getting themselves in and out of danger. This time, Harvey and Nora use clues
from a talking parrot named Sinbad to search for a hidden treasure. The simple
prose is punctuated by exclamations, italics, and cliff-hanging chapter endings
("Nora gasped, and grabbed my arm. 'Harvey!' she cried. 'He's trying to
[261 ]
hypnotize Sinbad!"'). Exotic characters-a pirate, and an Irishman disguised as
an Indian Sikh-add to the story's glamor. The characteristics of Clifford's
writing style match the personalities of her young fans--enthusiastic, fast-paced,
and sometimes melodramatic. KP
D.V. 
Cousins
Doherty, Berlie. White Peak Farm. Orchard, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08467-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05867-0. 102p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed.
$12.95.
R* 
Gr. 6-9. 
First published in England in 1984 and written for the
BBC, this is an account by adolescent Jeannie of the strong bonds and major
events in the life of her family, living in comparative isolation on their
Derbyshire farm. Although the chapters are episodic (perhaps because of the
radio broadcasting format) they are solidly linked, so that there is an overall
pattern that accommodates the changes in this family's life. Older sister
Kathleen marries the son of a family enemy; brother Martin wants to leave and
study art, prompting his father to brutally ruin one of Martin's pictures: "If this
is what you think of my farm, then this is what I think of your painting." Both
children eventually return. What is strong in these cunningly crafted stories is
the sense of place, the love of their land that binds the members of the family
almost as much as does their love for each other. ZS
D.V. Family relations
Dowden, Anne Ophelia. The Clover and the Bee: A Book of Pollination;
written and illus. by Anne Ophelia Dowden. Crowell, 1990. Library ed. ISBN
0-690-04679-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04677-4. 90p. Library ed. $17.89; Trade
ed. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 4-. 
"All flowers, large or small, dull or spectacular, exist
for one purpose only-to make new plants." Dowden conveys a sense of wonder
and delight in this well-organized, generously illustrated volume. In the first
section, she lays the necessary groundwork, describing the parts of the flower and
the role of pollen. Her clear explanations are enhanced by abundant visual
examples that emphasize the variety of plant life. A second section, devoted to
pollinators, includes such lesser known ones as beetles and bats. Finally,
Dowden explores the process of pollination itself, going from the simple (saucer
and bell flowers) to the complex (closed and trap flowers). Also covered are wind
and water pollination and such exclusive partnerships as the yucca cactus and the
Spanish bayonet moth. Dowden's descriptions are entertaining and dramatic:
"Closed flowers do not always gently guide visitors to nectar. Some of them are
almost sinister, with traps that lure victims and then hold them captive until
pollination is assured." She shows that the flower can be an active participant in
the process: "Sometimes orchid flowers subject their pollinators to very rough
treatment, firing pollinia at them like bullets, or tumbling them about in the
blossoms." Typical of the book's precision and detail are the two indexes (one
general and the other for specific plants and pollinators). Dowden concludes her
book with a warning: "The lost habitat of one small butterfly may be the signal
that a whole network of plants and animals has been destroyed." The meticulous
drawings and paintings, double-spaced text and wide margins make this a very
accessible resource. RAS
C.U. Nature study
[262]
Dyjak, Elisabeth. I Should Have Listened to Moon. Houghton, 1990. ISBN 0-
395-52279-X. 136p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Nadine, the narrator, is twelve. 
She has two
problems: one is that her best friend, Moon, has become interested in boys, and
the other is that her grandmother (forgetful and disoriented) has been moved in as
a roommate. It's supposed to be just for the summer, but Nadine gets in touch
with a local retirement home. The resolution is predictable, following a
formulaic period of resentment with an equally formulaic realization that
Grandma is lovable. In fact, loved. This is saved from being tedious by the
breezy dialogue and the reflection of the diurnal rapture/anguish pattern of many
young adolescents. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Grandparent-child relations
Ernst, Lisa Campbell. Ginger Jumps; written and illus. by Lisa Campbell
Ernst. Bradbury, 1990. ISBN 0-02-733565-8. 34p. $14.95.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
While Ginger the circus dog enjoys performing, what
she really wants is a family "with a little girl who had time to play with
someone who loves her." Ginger hopes that being in the spotlight for a scary
new stunt will find her a family, but her fear of heights keeps her grounded. Top
dog Prunella takes her place: "'I'm the only star of this show,' she said,
smirking. 'No mutt will ever take my place.'" But Ginger finally manages her
leap of faith-right into the arms of the perfect little girl. From the first double-
page spread of a lonely, underfoot Ginger to the last of girl and dog united, this
is a classic orphan tale, its sentimentality checked by the festive setting and
Ginger's own forthrightness, as she selflessly replaces a nonplussed Prunella in
the (sabotaged) stunt: "Dashing for the steps, Ginger knocked her aside."
Accented with glowing yellow highlights, the large-scale painting are drawn
from perspectives both dog's-eye and dizzying. Ginger herself is small, round,
and dauntless. RS
Feldman, Eve B. Seymour, the Formerly Fearful. Four Winds, 1990. ISBN 0-
02-734371-5. 151p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Seymour Goldfarb makes excuses and hides from his
friends rather than reveal his fears. He's afraid to swim, so he won't go to the
beach; he's afraid of failing, so he won't learn to ride a bike; he's afraid of the
city, so he won't go to New York without his parents. Seymour thinks his
friends and family accept his lame excuses for not participating, but he's not
fooling anyone. It takes Pessach, Seymour's older cousin from Israel, to
confront Seymour and make him face his fears. 
Although Pessach is an
appealing character, his conversations with Seymour sometimes get preachy:
"We are same genes, so you can be just like me. No pachdan. No chicken. I
can make you strong." 
Despite the weighty lessons Seymour learns and
Pessach's infallible wisdom, the story is funny and sure to provoke empathy.
Readers will cheer for Seymour as he teaches himself to ride a bike in his
basement. KP
D.V. Fear, overcoming; Cousins
[263 ]
Green, John F. Alice and the Birthday Giant; illus. by Maryann Kovalski.
Scholastic, 1990. 
ISBN 0-590-43428-4. 
[40p]. 
$12.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
The elements of this tale-a birthday party, a one-
eyed giant, and a magical librarian-should add up to chaotic fun. Despite its
potential, though, the story is mostly silly rather than funny, with no real logic
to the fantasy. Alice wishes for "something big" to happen on her birthday and
finds a giant sleeping on her bed the next morning. The gentle giant doesn't
know why he's there or where he came from, and Alice's first reaction is to hide
him in the basement. After the giant bumbles into the birthday party, Alice
takes him to an omnipotent librarian who makes him disappear before he is
captured by the police. While the giant is textually underdrawn, the humorous
illustrations add vitality to the text-in one amusing scene, the giant strides to
the library with Alice on his back, frightening the other pedestrians. Pen and
watercolors of peach, pink, green, and lavender combine with bright yellow and
red for a pleasant flair. The giant leaves a note promising to come back for
Alice's next birthday. Maybe next time he'll have something to say for himself.
KP
Gretchen, Sylvia, ad. Hero of the Land of Snow; illus. by Julia Witwer.
Dharma, 1990. Trade ed. ISBN 0-89800-201-X; Paper ed. ISBN 0-89800-202-8.
40p. Trade ed. $14.95; Paper ed. $8.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Too long for a picture-book text, this nevertheless
has the inherent appeal of an epic hero tale, with active heroines as well, and the
added allure of an unusual setting, Tibet. Mighty Gesar is born to be a savior of
his oppressed people; his courageous helpmate, Brougmo, is a beautiful woman
who, with the help of Gesar's mother, procures his swift horse and golden armor
for him. The story is smoothly written, though without reference to sources or
elements of adaptation. Full-page color pencil drawings are intense in hue but
not always skillfully drafted, varying from striking portraits and patterns to stiff
anatomical detail in human and animal figures. Still, this is an adventure that
will bridge from folktale to fantasy, especially read aloud to middle graders. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
D.V. Courage
Griffin, Peni. Otto from Otherwhere. McElderry, 1990. ISBN 0-689-50500-0.
182p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
When Paula's little brother Peter ploughs his bicycle
into an odd boy (with no nose, ears, pinkies, or English speech), Paula realizes
that the stranger must be a lost alien. Paula and Peter's family take in Otto, as
they call him, and are amazed by the speed with which he learns English.
Neither this skill nor his extraordinary singing ability are sufficient to ease his
social way as he attends Paula's school ("I'll say he's our cousin from Brazil")
and deals with the domestic drama in the household as the kids' music teacher
woos Paula's divorced mother, much to the displeasure of her ex-husband. There
are some refreshing touches in this otherwise familiar transplanted-alien story-
Otto's home planet is neither embattled and lethal nor beatifically utopian, and
Otto is a highly colloquial English speaker, his carefree "Y'all"s shattering the
myth that aliens cannot master contractions. Much of the diligent mysticism,
however (Otto's origins in a Native American-like tribal society devoted to birds
[264 ]
and music, his communication with animals, his ability to heal through song),
seems at odds with the more ordinary earthbound school-and-family plot.
Despite the imbalances, it's a cozy and wish-fulfilling venture into science
fantasy. DS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Differences, respect for
Grove, Vicki. The Fastest Friend in the West. Putnam, 1990. ISBN 0-399-
22184-0. 174p. $14.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-7. 
Lori Lee Sumner is overweight, unathletic and, after
her best friend Louise drops her in favor of the in-crowd, alone. She finds her
only consolation in underwater dreams of being a mermaid named Lorelei,
hiding in her navy-blue-painted room ("I had to do the ceiling and floor and
windows too ... I would definitely have said it passed for black") and watching
her slenderized reflection in her aquarium. Then a bold, skinny, and unkempt
new girl named Vern latches on to Lori ("My system is to make one friend,
fast"), and while Lori is repelled by the new girl's social naivete and
unappetizing appearance, Vern's fascination with the sky draws Lori, echoing her
own oceanic obsession. Vern then narrates her own story, telling her tale of
living in a station wagon with her parents and little brother, constantly moving
on in search of work and never having time to make friends. Despite Vern's
eventual departure, the ending offers hope rather than bitterness, with Lori telling
of some small gains, such as repainting her room, finding some new friends, and
getting a postcard (with no return address) from Vern indicating that her family
has happened on better times. Vern is not a case study or a martyred prodigy,
and her story rings true in its mixture of longing, acceptance, bewilderment and
insight ("Everything that's found isn't necessarily to be kept"). While Grove
focuses on the same weighty concerns as The Grapes of Wrath, she also treats
Lori's more ordinary seventh-grade pain with tenderness and respect DS
Hall, Barbara. Dixie Storms. Harcourt, 1990. ISBN 0-15-223825-5. 
197p.
$15.95.
R* 
Gr. 7-10. 
This seamless novel of family encounter is set on a
Virginia tobacco farm threatened by drought. Fourteen-year-old Dutch Peyton is
the narrator, and she's faced with a sudden visit from a beautiful city cousin
whose parents are getting divorced. At the same time, Dutch's father seems
overwhelmed by financial difficulties; her older brother nurses permanent anger
toward the wife who left him; the nephew she's trying to help raise is becoming
imprinted by his father's anger; and her love for a local boy isn't prospering.
Dutch's nervous aunt is no substitute for the loving mother who died when
Dutch was born, nor for the gentle sister-in-law who left. These complexities
emerge through richly developed scenes in which Dutch learns her own strength
and weakness along with an acceptance of others' unresolvable differences. The
setting is vividly detailed and the dialogue naturally tuned to each character ("I'm
sorry I called you ugly, ugly," says nine-year-old Bodean). The tension of
human conflict and empty rainclouds offers a suspense roundly capped by a Dixie
storm. 
This is a promising pick for readers who have enjoyed Sue Ellen
Bridgers' fiction. BH
D.V. Family relations
[265 ]
Hall, Lynn. Halsey's Pride. Scribner's, 1990. ISBN 0-684-19155-5. 
119p.
$12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
In a flashbacked story, thirteen-year-old March Halsey
is sent to live with her father in rural 1955 Illinois. Halsey has just sunk
everything he owns into a dog kennel that is riding on the reputation of his Best-
in-Show dog, Pride. March is happy while working with the dogs; at first, her
only worry is when the kids in her new school will find out about her epilepsy.
The book's themes then start to multiply-from dying puppies, to financial
troubles, to Halsey's delusions, to a past suicide. Hall is skillful enough to hold
the plot together, but permeating the story is a cumbersome lesson ("I could tell
that by the time the bell rang everyone knew as much as they wanted to about
epilepsy . . ."). The section where a neighbor stays with March because the
neighbor thinks she might commit suicide is not terribly convincing ("You had
a look on your face last night, girl. I've seen that look before, and I'm not
likely to forget it in my lifetime"). Serious and complicated, this will be read
by hardcore Hall fans. KP
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Hamilton, Morse. Effie's House. Greenwillow, 1990. ISBN 0-688-09307-8.
208p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
The "I" of this challenging YA novel does not reveal
her identity until the end of a strange journey whose facts and fictions are, for the
most part, left for the reader to sort out. After being told that her father was
killed in Vietnam, the narrator has found him, faceless and voiceless, in a
hospital, and the two have run away to the father's boyhood home in Michigan.
That the father is illusory is only gradually-grudgingly-revealed as we
discover the true sad story that led the girl to run away: an affair with her
stepfather has left her pregnant, and she has refused her mother's pathetic
demands that she have an abortion. Eschewing the therapeutic cliches of the
problem novel, this never becomes an adjustment-to-death or having-a-baby
book; instead, Hamilton uses the story to draw a complex portrait of a
desperately lonely girl. The narrative subterfuges recall Cormier (particularly I
Am the Cheese), but while Hamilton does not quite have that author's control of
his material, he is more subtly affecting, using his narrator's fallibility (and
outright deceit) to bring her, despite her best intentions, closer to the world. RS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Hurtling, Peter. Old John; tr. from the German by Elizabeth D. Crawford.
Lothrop, 1990. ISBN 0-688-08734-3. 120p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
As honest as the author's Batchelder Award-winning
book, Crutches (BCCB 11/88) but more cohesive in narration, this recounts the
moving in, adjustment, and eventual decline of Laura and Jacob Schirmer's
grandfather, Old John. The central focus on an individualistic family renders
each member distinctive and yet reserves central place for the group as a whole:
"Everything new or out of the ordinary had to be discussed in detail from every
angle and usually at top volume as well." This dynamic is especially touching
at the point when a decision must be made about whether to bring Old John
home from the hospital after a stroke, even if it means living day by day with
his dying. Most impressive, however, is the helter-skelter humor that dominates
the book, from Old John's idiosyncrasies (including a pair of triangular
[ 266 ]
swimming trunks) to his December romance with a village teacher. The tone is
outspoken, the portrayal affectionate, and the viewpoint true to a child's
perceptions. BH
D.V. Family relations; Older-younger generations
Hayward, Linda. All Stuck Up; illus. by Normand Chartier. Random House,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90216-3; Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-80216-9. 32p.
(Step into Reading Books). Library ed. $6.99; Paper ed. $2.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Brer Rabbit's been stuck in this situation by a
thousand storytellers and hasn't died yet. Not even as brief a treatment as this
can kill the tale of the trickster tricked-Brer Fox conned into letting go the
victim he's trapped with a tarbaby (here homogenized to "some mighty sticky
stuff"). About fifty sentences all told, with one or two per gracefully color-
cartooned page, this is reduced to the most basic motifs, but it does respect the
ones it keeps. It will be a book to hand to kids who clamor for a version they
can read for themselves after story hour. Tell them to fill in their own details,
and be sure to point their parents or significant other read-alouders toward wittier
versions by Julius Lester (The Tales of Uncle Remus, BCCB 7/87), Van Dyke
Parks (Jump Again!, BCCB 10/87), and Virginia Hamilton (The People Could
Fly, BCCB 7/85). BH
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Ingenuity
Houghton, Eric. Walter's Magic Wand; illus. by Denise Teasdale. Orchard,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08451-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05851-4. 26p.
Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
In this Jumanji, jr., Walter's magic wand creates
satisfying upheaval at the library. Tapping a book called Tigers turns the place
into a jungle, Pirates run amok, Oceans .. well, get the mop. It's just another
day for the fearless librarian: "When the pirates waved their swords and shouted
bloodcurdling threats, the librarian shot pencils at them with a rubber band and
drove them away." The twin themes of books-as-adventure and librarian-as-friend
are disarmingly presented, and the bright, catastrophe-laden paintings are large
and clear enough for a first-visit storyhour. RS
D.V. Imaginative powers
Hudson, Edward. Poetry of the First World War. Lerner, 1990. ISBN 1-85210-
667-0. 128p. illus. with photographs. $16.95.
R* 
Gr. 7-. 
In a collection with the narrative power of a novel and
the impact of concentrated verse, Hudson organizes poems by World War I
writers on a month by month, year by year basis that reveals a profound shift in
both attitudes and techniques. While early work celebrates-often with
traditional poetic devices-a youth dedicated to national glory, later free verse
selections agonize over useless loss of life, horrors on the front, and ironies of
wartime fate. Black-and-white photographs project images that are as poignant
as the verbal metaphors, and biographical notes affirm that of the thirty-seven
contributors, fifteen died in the fighting, almost half a generation of British
poets. From a satirical jab at officers ("Prayer for Those on the Staff" by Julian
Grenfell, d. 1915); to the solidarity among those suffering the agonies of trench
warfare enumerated in poems by Siegfried Sassoon, Wilfred Owen, and others;
[267 ]
to the guilt and anger of survivors; this looks honestly at the bitter faces of war.
Boys who find poetry "sissy stuff" may undergo a change of mind-about heroes
as well as poems. BH
C.U. Literature-Poetry
D.V. Peace
Janeczko, Paul B. The Place My Words Are Looking For: What Poets Say
about and through Their Work. Bradbury, 1990. ISBN 0-02-747671-5. 150p.
illus. with photographs. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Like the compiler's Poetspeak (BCCB 6/83), this is a
diverse assortment of contemporary poems accompanied by comments from the
poets on the particular poem, or on poetry in general. Intended for younger
readers than was Poetspeak, this collection of sixty-odd poems includes some
lightweight verse ("Yuk! How I hate Nancy Feder!/ I can't think why the world
would need her") that may be seen as patronizing by readers capable of the more
sophisticated selections: "If you were exchanged in the cradle and/ your real
mother died/ without ever telling the story/ then no one knows your name ... "
(William Stafford). In general, the humorous verse included here is both less
successful and for younger readers than are the darker or more meditative
selections. The poets' comments are sometimes self-important ("I notice things
other people don't"--Cynthia Rylant), generally genial ("It's not too hard, and
it's fun"-John Updike), and probably not of great interest to most young
readers ("If I could have the work of just one poet on a desert island I think it
might be Rilke"-Russell Hoban). 
The poems themselves speak most
distinctly, as in Hoban's own verses: "The thing about a sea gull is its eye-/
Eye of the wind, the ocean's eye, not pretty." Junior high readers are too often
marooned between children's poetry and YA collections; here's a anthology that,
at its best, takes itself and its audience seriously. RS
C.U. Literature-Poetry
Kamal, Aleph. 
The Bird Who Was an Elephant; illus. by Franc Lessac.
Lippincott, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32446-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-
32445-6. 32p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
In a handsomely designed picture book of primitive
paintings bordered by rows of miniatures that reflect the subject of each page, we
see the life of an Indian village unfold from a bird's-eye view. The Bird watches
women bathing in the river at dawn, smells spices and snacks as he flies past the
shops, gets his fortune told by a Palmist ("Two thousand years ago, you were an
Elephant"), hears beggars and bullock carts, speaks to a Sacred Cow that doesn't
answer ("It is said that the Wise use words sparingly"), observes a Sadhu and
Snake Charmer, pecks at fruit in the market, passes a train station and a temple
dedicated to the Monkey God, and finally settles down to sleep in a tree above
peacocks, monkeys, and rats. In its own meandering way, this is a pleasant visit
to India, but the title leads one to expect a story that never materializes. The
bird's getting its fortune told by one line of a claw is humorous, and Lessac's art
is certainly eye-catching; yet the matrix seems stilted, especially when the Bird
asks the Sadhu what a Sadhu is. Adults willing to storytell the pictures can take
advantage of the atmospheric locale; others will have to rely on empathy with
the Bird to keep children involved in what is basically an extensive description.
BH
[268 ]
Kelleher, Victor. The Red King. Dial, 1990. ISBN 0-8037-0758-4. 
185p.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
In this fast-paced medieval fantasy, Timkin is a
young acrobat and slave who lives for her kind master's promise that he will free
her before he dies. But when the evil Red King's fatal mist strikes down the
master, an injured Timkin is left under the dubious protection of Petie, a wily
thief. Secreting the key that locks her slave-collar, Petie "convinces" Timkin to
join him in his plan to plunder the stronghold of the Red King. While the
plotting isn't subtle, it is exciting, pitching Petie and Timkin (and their two
faithful animal-allies) into plenty of trouble. Much more complex are Timkin's
feelings about old Petie, a sad fraud who never willingly reveals a better nature.
Her decision to stick with him after numerous betrayals, tricks, and only
grudging rewards, is as surprising as it is believable: "Cursing him beneath her
breath, she set out along the track." RS
Keller, Holly. What Alvin Wanted; written and illus. by Holly Keller.
Greenwillow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08934-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
08933-X. 32p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
The youngest of a mouse family, Alvin is
disconsolate when Mama goes off on an errand, leaving him in the care of
siblings Libby and Sam. They try to solace Alvin, they try to amuse Alvin,
they take Alvin to the playground. Finally Mama comes home and guesses
what the trouble is: she had neglected to kiss Alvin good-bye. The kiss is
delivered, and Alvin (a real whiner) cheers up. Flat simple paintings on the recto
pages face a few lines of text on each florally-bordered verso page. Pleasant and
direct, but this is a picture of a situation rather than a story. ZS
Kendall, Sarita. The Bell Reef; illus. by Mark Hudson. Houghton, 1990.
ISBN 0-395-53354-6. 135p. $13.95.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
Daniel and Vicky only grudgingly tolerate each other;
he's a local island boy who works for Vicky's mother, a dolphin trainer. When
they spot a shiny gold disc lying just out of reach on the ocean floor, though,
the two kids unite in a search for shipwrecked treasure on mysterious Bell Reef
off the Colombian coast. There's plenty of appealing material here: pirate gold,
whispers of ghosts, a menacing man (who, it turns out, is peripheral to the main
plot). Most engaging, if awkwardly introduced, is the dolphin lore, and the part
that trained dolphin Kika plays in retrieving the treasure. Information overload
about dolphins and the Caribbean slows the story, however, and the mystery of
Bell Reef is weakly and unconvincingly solved via a story told by Daniel's
grandfather and in a library book: "Then she saw something which made her
wriggle with excitement-a story called 'The Bell Reef'." Occasional pen-and-
ink illustrations have Hardy Boys drama. RS
Khalsa, Dayal Kaur. Cowboy Dreams; written and illus. by Dayal Kaur Khalsa.
Potter, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-57491-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-57490-X.
26p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
"When I was a girl I wanted to be a cowboy," and
Khalsa's last book evokes in vivid detail the obsession with which children enact
their favorite fantasy games. "I galloped everywhere, slapping my thigh and
[269 ]
yelling, 'Giddyap!' to make myself go faster. As I grew older I developed a
bowlegged walk and tied my blankets into a bedroll at the foot of my bed.... I
called my bike Old Paint, my brother Pardner, my supper chuck and my bedroom
the bunkhouse." From cowboy movies to art museums, from raffle tickets for a
horse to outfitting the basement banister for riding, Khalsa keeps up a lively
pace until the last few pages of the book, which lapse into phrases from favorite
old wild west songs illustrated with double-spread art. Khalsa's paintings are
faux-naive in style, flat in perspective, and sharply defined by patterns of
contrasting color. Despite the fade-out ending, it's a book to which even
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtle fans can relate, along with any other youngster
who's been consumed by playtime perspectives on everyday reality. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers
Knutson, Barbara, ad. How the Guinea Fowl Got Her Spots: A Swahili Tale of
Friendship; ad. and illus. by Barbara Knutson. Carolrhoda, 1990. ISBN 0-
87614-416-4. 32p. $12.95.
R* 
3-6 yrs. 
An East African pourquoi tale holds great appeal for
very young listeners because it is unabashedly brief, literally illustrated, and
reassuring as to the rewards of friendship. "Guinea Fowl was a little bird, but
she had a big friend. And that was Cow. They liked to go to the great green
hills where Cow could eat grass and Nganga could scratch for seeds and crunch
grasshoppers. And they would both keep an eye out for Lion." Twice Nganga
risks her small life for Cow, who thanks her by spattering spots of white milk
across her feathers to confuse Lion and camouflage the future guinea fowls of the
world. With ink and watercolor on scratchboard, Knutson treats line, pattern,
and composition sparingly. Her understated, angular figures emerge powerfully
from spacious white backgrounds. Technically ingenious in design, strikingly
simple in effect BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
D.V. Friendship values
Kuhn, Dwight. More Than Just a Flower Garden, Library ed. ISBN 0-671-
69642-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-69644-0.
More Than Just a Vegetable Garden, Library ed. ISBN 0-671-69643-2;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-69645-9.
Each book: written and illus. with photographs by Dwight Kuhn.
Silver, 1990. 40p. Library ed. $15.98; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Dwight Kuhn is an experienced and capable nature
photographer; his close-up color pictures of flora and fauna are of excellent
quality and are both informative and handsome. Unfortunately, the calibre of the
text is not equally high. In the book on flowers, for example, the author states,
"Plants that come up year after year, without their seeds sprouting, are called
perennials." He then cites some examples of perennial plants, among them
lupines. A dozen pages on, the process of seed formation in lupines is described,
which may confuse readers. In both books, Kuhn achieves his purpose (indicated
in the titles) of showing that there are many forms of animal life living in, and
sometimes living on, gardens. In the book about vegetable gardens, the text
sometimes moves awkwardly from flora to fauna and back again. Both books
have clear step-by-step instructions for starting plants indoors and later
[270 ]
transplanting them outdoors, and both books have a combined glossary and
index, providing phonetic pronunciation for all words italicized in the text. ZS
C.U. Nature study
Levinson, Nancy Smiler. Annie's World. Kendall Green, 1990. Paper ed.
ISBN 0-930323-65-3. 97p. Paper ed. $2.95.
R 
Gr. 6-12. 
Deaf since the age of four, sixteen-year-old Annie
feels plunged into a frightening new world when family circumstances force her
to transfer from a special school for the deaf to a regular public high school.
While the story's pattern is predictable (Annie's fear and anger gradually subside
as she adjusts, solves a mystery, and finds a boyfriend), it is satisfyingly played
out and is very easy to read. Avoiding movie-of-the-week melodrama, the
treatment of the new-kid theme is direct and recognizable, with Annie's disability
providing an unusual perspective that readers will recognize as not really so
different. Annie's speechreading lapses are represented by ellipses, evoking the
overwhelmed feeling of any newcomer: ". .. you looked lost .... 
thought you
... sit.. .friends over ... 
." Information about mainstreaming, deafness, sign
language, and speechreading is clearly and smoothly incorporated into the story.
RS
C.U. Reading, reluctant
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Lewis, J. Patrick. A Hippopotamusn't; illus. by Victoria Chess. Dial, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0519-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0518-2. 40p. Trade
ed. $12.95; Library ed. $12.89.
R* 
4-8 yrs. 
Playful, clever, and, above all, freshly worded, Lewis'
thirty-five rhymes would be a read-aloud bonanza even without the artistic wit of
Chess' picture-book setting. The subjects are animals' and birds' distinctive
features, including "that redheaded woodpecker/ redwooded headpecker,/
rockheaded woodpoker's head." The flamingo poem is shaped into a figure like
the bird's, and the camel poem offers an unforgettable way to distinguish the
one-humped Dromedary from the two-humped Bactrian (just turn over the initial
letters). There's a wolf that howls the moon home, robins that play tug-of-
worm, a culture-defying vulture that eats with his toes, and the title
hippopotamusn't flossing his hippopotamolars. 
This is all grist for the
illustrator's signature mischief; Chess has a knack for depicting silly, beady-eyed
creatures, humans included, as in the picture of an old woman watched by her
chop-licking cat as she consumes her oyster stew: "There's a squishy/ Fishy
critter/ Swishing in my/ Oyster stew./ Tell me, OysterJ Mister? Sister?/ Girl or
Boyster?/Which are you?" Bon appetit. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Mahy, Margaret. The Seven Chinese Brothers; illus. by Jean and Mou-sien
Tseng. Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-590-42055-0. 40p. $12.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
In a variant of the tale popularized by Claire Bishop's
1938 Five Chinese Brothers, which has been criticized for stereotyped depiction
of Asians, Mahy draws on other sources for an expanded version. Here, the
Seventh Brother's capacity to cry an ocean of tears (in response to the suffering
of workers repairing the Great Wall of China) triggers the super-strong Third
Brother to an overnight renovation of the wall. Instead of being grateful, the
[271 ]
Celestial Emperor feels threatened enough to imprison the Third Brother, whose
death sentence leads to a chain reaction of each identical-looking brother
substituting his body for the next: an iron-boned body for decapitation, elastic
legs to keep from drowning, and a heat resistant body to keep from burning, till
the last brother washes away both of the Emperor's armies in a sea of tears. The
folkloric patterns of repetition are underscored by Mahy's reiteration of key
phrases and descriptions, but this is for an older audience than Bishop's simple
telling. The watercolors are elaborately literal, as well, with historical costume
detail and echoes of traditional Chinese landscape painting in the linework. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Manes, Stephen. Some of the Adventures of Rhode Island Red; illus. by
William Joyce. Lippincott, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32348-4; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-397-32347-6. 117p. Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95.
R* 
Gr. 3-6. 
Move over Pecos Bill! Though he's no bigger than a
grade-A jumbo egg, Rhode Island Red is a featherweight human to be reckoned
with. Adopted by chickens at an early age, Red speaks English "with a slight
poultry accent," "chicken with a smidgen of a human accent," and a little fox to
boot. Resourceful Red handily rescues a flock of neglected chickens ("they gave
him four clucks-the fowl version of three cheers") and outsmarts a pack of
foxes: "they were so fed up with chickens that they and all their relatives left the
state entirely. Whenever anybody runs across a red fox in Rhode Island these
days, it's bound to be a foolish stray from Connecticut or Massachusetts." The
chapters are broken up with conversations between the narrator (the once
neglectful chicken farmer) and the writer, who becomes increasingly convinced
that this is "no cock and bull story." Chicken tracks lead from one chapter to
the next. The illustrations, black-and-white pencil drawings, are in keeping with
the exaggerated humor of the text. The story bounces along, effortlessly
sustained by an abundance of chicken jokes and size puns. Manes has hatched a
tall tale that squawks to be read aloud. RAS
McFadden, Fred. Wayne Gretzky. Fitzhenry and Whiteside, 1990. Paper ed.
ISBN 0-88902-368-9. 48p. illus. with photographs. (Canadian Lives). Paper
ed. $7.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Written in the eulogistic style of so many sports
biographies, this gives adequate coverage to Wayne Gretzky's career, but only a
modicum of insight into his personality. As is true for other books in this
"Canadian Lives" series, the pages are broken by photographs in color and in
black and white, by jagged pieces of newspaper headlines (also in color), and by
boxed additions to the text. The writing style, like the coverage, is adequate
despite the author's proclivity for poor organization of material; for example,
after stating, "Two months later, in one of the most stunning moves in the
history of sport, Wayne Gretzky was no longer an Edmonton Oiler," the text
discusses other aspects of the great hockey player's life and career before
explaining the "stunning move" twelve pages on. ZS
Paladino, Catherine. Spring Fleece: A Day of Sheepshearing; written and illus.
with photographs by Catherine Paladino. Joy Street/Little, 1990. ISBN 0-316-
68890-8. 48p. $14.95.
[272
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Romantically exploiting the play of light upon fleece
and wool, silvery black-and-white photographs document the process of wool
"harvesting," from round-up through shearing, skirting and picking, washing,
carding, and spinning. Like most of the many recent farm photodocumentaries,
this focuses on the small unmechanized family farm, and the tone is nostalgic:
"In their cottage far away the shearers prepare for shearing day .... 
Inside the
farmhouse the shepherd has a good meal of soup and breads and cheeses ready for
the shearers." Along with the time-ago atmosphere, however, is plenty of solid,
interesting, and well-organized information. This is an engaging addition for the
where-does-it-come-from collection, and the clear and clearly sequenced photos
also make it an unusual pendant for a farm-animal story hour. RS
C.U. Farm life
Pinkwater, Daniel. Borgel. Macmillan, 1990. ISBN 0-02-774671-2. 
17 0p.
$12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-9. 
Not long after Uncle Borgel arrives to stay at
Melvin's house he takes Melvin (and the now-talking family dog, Fafner) on a
journey through "time-space-and-the-other." 
"This is no more dangerous than
eating ice cream," says Borgel, adding "in a hot air balloon in a high wind."
Their adventure, fraught with strange encounters ("It was a formless pink mass
with occasional tufts of coarse black hair, slimy patches, no eyes that I could
see, and lots of red bumps and pimples") and pitfalls ("Some kids just came
along and zapped Borgel with some kind of... gleep"), culminates in a search
for the Great Popsicle which "has powers of which we knew nothing," according
to their hitchhiker Pak "Freddie" Nfbnm*. The story is in the casual and loopy
tradition of Douglas Adams (who receives a tip of the literary hat early on) but
lacks his crispness; bits that should be throwaway humor are often belabored.
The book possesses enough bizarre effervescence, however, to satisfy those
enamored of the offbeat-for-offbeat's-sake. DS
Pringle, Laurence. Global Warming. Arcade, 1990. ISBN 1-55970-012-2.
46p. illus. with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Mention of "the greenhouse effect" seems to have
become obligatory in any children's book of even tangential relation; here's one
that explores the phenomenon logically and thoroughly. Calmly keeping from
dire prophecy, Pringle explains why most scientists believe that the earth's
temperature is rising, why that increase is occurring, and what effects it could
have in the coming century. His explanations of the self-feeding nature of
warming are only too lucid: "Most of the sunlight falling on snow and ice is
reflected back toward space. As the climate warms, there will be less snow and
ice. The sunlight will fall instead on darker soils and plants, which readily
absorb sunlight. This will warm the earth further, causing even more snow and
ice to melt." Discussion of political considerations is fair-minded and aware of
ecological ironies: "Most [trees] are cut by landless people desperate for a place
to grow food." The format is as open and clear as the text, with plenty of white
space and color photos both informative and atmospheric. 
No notes or
bibliography, but a glossary and index are included. RS
D.V. Ecological awareness
[273 ]
Rice, Judith. Those Mean Nasty Dirty Downright Disgusting but .
Invisible Germs; illus. by Reed Merrill and with photographs. 
Toys 'n
Things/Acropolis, 1990. Paper ed. ISBN 0-934140-46-4. 
32p. Paper ed.
$6.95.
NR 
3-5 yrs. 
Good intentions do not necessarily make a good
book. This one is minatory, coy, and inaccurate. Illustrated with photographs
of a five-year-old girl at school, the text repeats the adjectives of the title each
time little Beth encounters a germ. There are five such encounters; one germ
causes earache, another a headache, the others produce a sore throat or nausea or
fever. Each germ is fancifully pictured in full color; each is out-of-scale;
"Maybe it would look like ... THIS!" is the repeated punch line for the turn of
the page. The germs "speak" as they are swept down the drain ("Foiled again!")
when Beth washes her hands, the focal health habit of a book that is boring and
repetitive, and that may more confuse than inform. ZS
C.U. Health
Sharpe, Susan. Waterman's Boy. Bradbury, 1990. ISBN 0-02-782351-2.
170p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-6. 
Ben wants to be a waterman like his dad, but the
fishing is mysteriously deteriorating on their section of Chesapeake Bay. His
mom runs a bed-and-breakfast to make ends meet, and Ben, who would rather be
out on the water with his dad, is expected to help out. Ben finds a sympathetic
listener in David Watchman, a marine biologist who is testing the bay's water
quality. Ben's parents, suspicious of "government interference," disapprove of
their friendship. Not much happens here: Ben enters a crab in the Fourth of
July race, goes out on the boat with David Watchman, then with his dad.
Finally, he and his friend Matt uncover an ecological crime: oil is being dumped
in the bay. The boys eventually discover the perpetrators, but Sharpe misses the
opportunity to exploit the drama of the situation: Ben never confronts the
criminals and a speech-filled, didactic ending is anticlimactic. Throughout, the
author's environmental concerns sometimes overshadow the plot, as explanation
verges on didacticism: "It's because of fertilizer running off farms and lawns.
See, Dad, the fertilizer runs into the water, and it feeds the algae. So you get
millions more algae than normal. Then the algae crowd each other and that uses
up oxygen. So now, with all this algae dying right here, there's no oxygen left
for the fish." Sharpe's characters discuss complex environmental problems with
admirable lucidity, and the reader learns a great deal about crab fishing.
Unfortunately, there is not always enough plot to sustain the weight of
information in this well-meaning story. RAS
D.V. Ecological awareness
Siberell, Anne. A Journey to Paradise; written and illus. by Anne Siberell.
Holt, 1990. ISBN 0-8050-1212-5. 32p. $14.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
An Indian gardener and his pet monkey persuade their
heavenly visitor, a white elephant, to fly them to Paradise as soon as the raking
and planting are over. Meanwhile, the potter, the spice seller, and the weaver all
beg to come along, each envisioning a place tailored to his or her own idea of
perfection. Not until they fall back to earth, mistaking the dark garden for
Paradise, do they discover the pleasures of their own place. Although it's too
bad the information on the back flap, or some other source note, 
isn't
[274 ]
incorporated at the end of the text, the story combines several common motifs
and will make a good bridge into other Asian lore. The full-color illustrations
have a flat-figured collage effect, with handsome patterns and no pretentious
imitations of Indian art. This will be fun to read aloud and easy to show in
group sessions. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Sinykin, Sheri Cooper. Shrimpboat and Gym Bags. Atheneum, 1990. ISBN
0-689-31567-8. 152p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Bo, eleven, is small, but that's no disadvantage for a
gymnast, and he expects to do so well at his new school that he may get his first
gold medal when they compete. He has stiff competition from unfriendly Jim
Harmon. This formula beginning does end in the expectable friendship between
the two; they vie at the meet, and win first (Jim) and second (Bo) place. The
standard treatment has, as a counterpoint, the too-cute antics of a little brother, a
device that tends to distract rather than divert the reader. In this first novel, the
author has used, it seems, knowledge based on her son's participation in
gymnastic meets, so the practice and performance sequences are realistic. 
The
writing style is competent, the characterization shallow. 
A glossary of
gymnastics terms is appended, as are two pages on "Information on Competitive
Boys' Gymnastics." ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
St. Germain, Sharon. The Terrible Fight; illus. by Deborah Zemke. Houghton,
1990. ISBN 0-395-50069-9. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Molly and Becky were best friends, perfectly
balancing on the park seesaw, waving good night from their respective bedroom
windows. But . .. "that was before the terrible fight." Like most childhood
feuds, this one begins with a seemingly inconsequential disagreement (Molly
wants to trade dolls) that gathers its own velocity, resulting in a sequence of
meannesses far out of proportion to the original offense. "Guess what, Becky?
I'm having a birthday party and you're not invited." Although the theme is not
new, the appeal of this story lies in its elemental familiarity, and young children
appreciate seeing their daily dramas enacted by somebody else. Pen-and-
watercolor paintings are big and inviting, with expressively cartooned faces and a
sunny tone that implies the happy ending. Like most fights, this one ends when
its antagonists decide friendship offers the finer rewards. 
Becky waves
goodnight, "and then, my best friend Molly waved back at me." RS
D.V. Friendship values
Sutcliff, Rosemary. The Shining Company. Farrar, 1990. ISBN 0-374-36807-
4. [304p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 7-10. 
Set in A.D. 600 and based on "the earliest surviving
North British poem" (actually Welsh), The Gododdin, this powerful story is told
by Prosper, who is twelve when he first meets Prince Gorthyn and dreams of
becoming his shield-bearer. Two years later, Prosper and his bondservant Conn
join Gorthyn to attend him in the training of the "shining company," the three
hundred young warriors who are responding to the call of the "Golden King,"
Mynyddog, in preparation for battle against the Saxons. As always, Sutcliff is
so immersed in the period that no details of speech or behavior or costume or
[275 ]
custom seem obtrusive. Prosper's comments lend immediacy and verisimilitude,
as Sutcliff provides pace, drama, color, and historical background. ZS
D.V. Courage; Loyalty
Troughton, Joanna, ad. How Stories Came Into the World: A Folktale from
West Africa; ad. and illus. by Joanna Troughton. Bedrick/Blackie, 1990. ISBN
0-87226-411-4. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
These five abbreviated tales from the Ekoi, Efik
Ibibio, and Yoruba peoples are neatly framed in another story about a mouse
weaving stories that eventually escape her dwelling to run "up and down all over
the earth" forever. "Why the Sun and Moon Live in the Sky" is a well-known
Nigerian myth; "Rubber Girl" is a variant of "The Tar Baby"; "How All
Animals Came On Earth," "The Story of Lightning and Thunder," and "Why the
Hippo Lives in Water" are less familiar pourquoi tales. The illustrations are
bold in both color and design, with thickly textured figures and folk motifs
shaped by heavy black outline. Each small white block of text is set against
simple but varied compositions for satisfying balance in a book easily shared
aloud with very young listeners, either alone or in groups. BH
C.U. Africa; Storytelling
Voigt, Cynthia. On Fortune's Wheel. Atheneum, ISBN 0-689-31636-4. 276p.
$15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Set in the same medieval Kingdom as Jackaroo,
(BCCB 9/85) this companion story takes place some fifty years later. While 14-
year-old Birle has no desire to marry Muir, it seems at first to be the only way
out of her oppressive life at home. When an alternate escape presents itself in
the form of a runaway Lord, she joins him, publicly declaring fealty and
privately, instantly, falling in love: "All she knew was that his smile lit up the
morning as the rising sun does." Readers may be hard put to understand the
attraction, as Orien's sole positive personality trait seems to be the oft-noted
"bellflower" color of his eyes. Leisurely and digressively told, this story may be
appreciated for its elegant (and occasionally eloquent) writing, but the narrative is
directionless and too long. Birle and Orien journey down the river to the sea,
where-by virtue of Orien's stupidity-they are taken into slavery. While Birle
is lucky enough to get a good master, Orien is taken to the fatal mines. She
helps him escape, nurses him back to health, and takes him home to his rightful
position as Earl. Dicey would have drowned him. RS
Wade, Barrie. Little Monster; illus. by Katinka Kew. Lothrop, 1990. Library
ed. ISBN 0-688-09597-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09596-8. 32p. Library ed.
$12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
In a picture book first published in Great Britain, airy
ink-and-wash drawings illustrate a story about a quiet, conforming child who
overhears her mother say "My Mandy is as good as gold" and then say "but my
Jimmy is a little monster." Mandy then deliberately tries being naughty and is
pleased to find that even when her mother calls her a "little monster," she still
loves her. Testing, testing. All parents will recognize the ploy, and the read-
aloud audience may show a recognition reflex. This is psychologically sound,
but neither smoothly written nor very substantial. 
The illustrations show an
attractive black family but are, like the writing, lightweight in effect. ZS
[276]
Wheatley, Nadia. My Place; illus. by Donna Rawlins. Australia in Print,
1990. ISBN 0-7328-0010-2. 48p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Beginning in 1988 and reaching back at ten-year
intervals to 1788, this is a capsule history of Australia as reflected by a
succession of children living in the same Sydney house. Laura's house (in
1988) was previously lived in (in 1978) by Mike, named for his father Michaelis
(1958), who came with his family from Greece "because there wasn't enough
work on our island." Before the house was built in 1888, the Miillers had their
store there; the same German family changed their name to Miller sometime
between 1908 and 1918. The first inhabitant, Barangaroo, loved to play in the
same big tree enjoyed by all those who came later. The tree stands behind a
McDonalds now, but Laura's family hangs an Aboriginal flag in their window to
remind them of their roots. Each double-page spread represents a decade and is
eye-fillingly detailed with a portrait of the child-narrator, a picture of the house
and its happenings, and a personalized map illustrating a child's-eye view of the
changing neighborhood: 1938-"Boot Factory (Almost no one works here)";
1918-"Boot factory where Ev makes soldiers' boots") as well as those things
that remain the same. 
The pattern is more than a clever scheme, with family
stories as well as history unfolding when each child recalls stories he or she has
heard about the past. Some stories, such as one that discreetly touches upon
illegitimacy, will be more apparent to adult readers than to children. A natural
accompaniment to oral history projects, this book also has the admirable virtue
of being just as much fun to read backwards as forwards. RS
C.U. History-Australia; Social studies
White, Alana. Come Next Spring. Clarion, 1990. 
ISBN 0-395-52593-4.
170p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
A first novel about a twelve-year-old's year of
maturation in the Smoky Mountains of East Tennessee chronicles her changing
relationships and attitudes in 1949. The best friend whom Salina has always
counted on becomes citified, a newcomer of whom she's suspicious proves to
have compatible reading and family interests, her older brother stops being a
playmate but stays a friend, and she begins to come to terms with the
encroachment of outsiders on her beloved mountains. Salina's friends, Mayella
and Scooter, are typecast, but the dynamics of friendship are well realized.
Sometimes the writing style is natural ("That's my name, don't wear it out"); at
other times it seems forced ("'Nashville is Tennessee's capital,' Mrs. Prince
reminded the girls. 'The state government buildings are very interesting'").
This is a post-war, regional period piece that's well detailed in setting but slow-
paced in plot development. Readers who don't mind taking their time will find
plenty to sympathize with in the daily interactions of a pre-TV generation. BH
D.V. Adaptability; Friendship values
White, Diana. No Bath for Boris; written and illus. by Diana White. Dutton,
1990. ISBN 0-525-44562-5. 26p. $12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
It's bathtime at the North Pole and Boris the polar
bear is doing everything he can to avoid getting in the tub. "'My friends like me
with dirty fur,' said Boris, and he crawled under the tub." It's the familiar
routine of whining ("Mothers are always telling you to get in the tub") and
bribery ("When you're all clean, you can have a fish lollipop") with a polar
[277 ]
twist: "The bathtub had two faucets. One said COLD and the other said
COLDER." The chilly allusions are cute but potentially confusing for younger
listeners. Boris drinks "a cup of cocoa with three spoonfuls of crushed ice" and
goes to bed with a cold-water bottle. Geographic purists may also wonder how a
polar bear (Arctic) can have a penguin (Antarctic) for a playmate. The pictures,
frosty, impressionistic pastels, outshine the text, creating an icy world that is
paradoxically warm and inviting. A shivery bathtime romp. RAS
Widman, Christine. Housekeeper of the Wind; illus. by Lisa Desimini. Harper,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026468-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026467-5. 32p.
Library ed. $15.89; Trade ed. $15.95.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
Dark, dramatic oil paintings provide a glowing but
static background for this tale about Yula, housekeeper to the Wind. Yula has
her hands full, sweeping out the clutter that the Wind blows in: "soot from old
campfires and sand from far shores ... fluff from the dandelion and petals from
pansies." When the Wind blows hot gusts instead of the cooling breezes she had
asked for, Yula gets angry and locks him out of the house. At times self-
consciously poetic ("she gathered the fragrance of meadows the Wind left in the
cottage and put it in bottles to sell at the market"), the text is sometimes
choppy: "No Wind breezed in. It was quiet outside. The Wind had stopped
storming. The air was cool. The Wind had blown away the hot day." The
somber pictures have a monumental quality that fails to capture the playful
potential of the story. The story's premise and the paintings' colors are rich, but
both need some fresh air. RAS