Aaseng, Nathan. Better Mousetraps: Product Improvements That Led to
Success. Lerner, 1990. ISBN 0-8225-0680-7. 80p. illus. with photographs.
$10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
A collective biography examines the careers of eight
people whose ideas and/or inventions improved on less than successful products
already in existence. Photographs, most of which are promotion shots, illustrate
the pieces on Elisha Otis, King Gillette, George Eastman, Margaret Rudkin (the
only woman and the developer of Pepperidge Farm bread) and others. The
writing style is flat, and the repetition of pattern in each biography does not
alleviate the static quality. This could be useful as supplementary curricular
reading for a unit on economics, especially because marginal notes give
definitions and examples of such terms as "wholesale," "market share," and "test
market." A brief reading list and an index are provided. ZS
C.U. Industries
Andersen, Hans Christian. The Ugly Duckling; ad. and illus. by Troy Howell.
Putnam, 1990. ISBN 0-399-22158-1. 38p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Romanticized paintings, Victorian in mood and in
details of costume, alternate, in single or double-page spreads, with pages of
text. Howell handles light deftly, and his work has textural variation that
strengthens portrayals of both humans and animals. His adaptation adheres to
the original fairly well, combining sentences at times, at other time breaking a
long sentence in two. Setting aside the question of whether Andersen's work
needs to be adapted, this is a lush edition of an enduring favorite. ZS
D.V. Self-confidence
Baynes, Pauline, comp. Thanks Be to God: Prayers from around the World;
comp. and illus. by Pauline Baynes. Macmillan, 1990. ISBN 0-02-708541-4.
[32p]. $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-7 yrs. 
While most of the thirty-five prayers contained herein
are of Christian origin, none get any more specific than "Father," "Lord," "God,"
or "Chief': "Oh thou great Chief/ light a candle in my heart/ that I may see
what is therein/ and sweep the rubbish from thy dwelling place." That is a
"prayer of an African schoolgirl"; the others will be similarly new to most
children. This is a thoughtful collection of prayers, most brief and many
rhyming, that appeal without dogmatic distractions to a child's sense of the
[ 179]
Infinite. Delicate ornamentations are scattered throughout the spaciously set
text, with the bottom third of each page given over to precise, small-scaled
illustrations that unify the prayers/poems on each spread. An Edenic spread
nestles an amicable collection of beasts to illustrate two prayers for animals.
Children and pets take a crisp sunrise walk to school: "Thank you, God, for this
new day/ In my school to work and play." "From ghoulies and ghosties and
long-leggety beasties .. ." shares a double-page spread with other bedtime pleas,
all gaining credence from the ghostly-green collection of nighttime frights
giving way to a sunrise so bright that flowers fly off the bedspread. A reflective
resource. RS
D.V. Religious understanding
Bos, Burny. Prince Valentino; illus. by Hans de Beer. North-South/Picture
Book Studio, 1990. ISBN 1-55858-089-1. 26p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Valentino is an only frog spoiled by his doting
mother, who calls him her little prince, and his father, who gives him a sports
car. Eventually his superior attitude alienates his friends and family, so he sets
out in search of a princess to prove he's a prince. On his journey of self-
discovery, Valentino rescues a baby bird, who turns out to be a true friend
despite the fact that, as she grows taller, Valentino recognizes her to be the
frog's worst enemy, a stork. The idea that your identity rests on your deeds and
ultimately awaits in your heart is neatly couched in traditional terms of a child
seeking his fortune and finding help from the one he helps. It's longish for a
picturebook story, but the fairy tale motifs will settle young listeners, who can
enjoy the generously scaled, innocently comical watercolors along the way. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Brett, Catherine. S.P. Likes AD. Women's Press, 1990. ISBN 0-88961-142-
4. 119p. $6.95
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Lacking the excesses of melodrama that often plague
the teenage coming-out novel, this is a simply told, straightforward story about
a girl's first realization that she may be a lesbian. Ninth-grader Stephanie finds
herself attracted to classmate Anne Delaney, even if she isn't sure exactly why.
"In her thoughts Anne Delaney was just-well-there. She wasn't doing
anything or saying anything. She was just standing around." A group sculpture
project not only allows Stephanie to spend more time with Anne, it brings her
friendship with an older lesbian couple enlisted to help with the project. Kate
and Mary are a refreshingly relaxed pair of role models whose conversations with
Stephanie are enlightening but never didactic. "If you are gay, then sooner or
later you'll know for sure. You'll be attracted to someone who's attracted to
you. You'll know." And, while her passion for Anne remains unrequited,
Stephanie becomes comfortable enough to confide in her best friend, whose
response is matter-of-fact: 
"Why Anne Delaney? 
She's sort of a jerk."
Unassuming and non-threatening, this is a friendly fictional introduction for gay
and straight kids alike. RS
Burningham, John. 
Hey! Get Off Our Train; written and illus. by John
Burningham. Crown, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-57643-0; Trade ed. ISBN
0-517-57638-4. 48p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
[ 180
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Only Burningham could make an ecological fable so
much fun. The child is hero here from the start, as the mother's unsympathetic
words establish immediately: "You aren't still playing with that train are you?
Get into bed immediately. You know you have to be up early for school
tomorrow." The boy does, and dreams that he and his stuffed dog, now an
efficient railroad engineer, are speeding through the countryside playing games
and, by the by, picking up endangered animals ("They are cutting down the
forests where I live, and soon there will be none of us left," says the tiger).
Each time they stop to play (ghosts, swimming, kite flying, umbrella, snowball
throwing), another animal comes on board until it's time to go home. When the
boy's mother wakes him up for school, there seem to animals all over the house
("Does this have anything to do with you?"). Spacious drawings contrasted with
deeply textured landscape paintings create a striking effect as the artist juggles
antic humor with a serious message-and never misses a beat. BH
D.V. Ecological awareness
Byers, Rinda M. Mycca's Baby; illus. by David Tamura. Orchard, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08428-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05828-X. 32p. Library
ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
In a close-knit extended family, young Mycca
anticipates her Aunt Rose's first baby with longing. 
She visits her
grandparents' house, where Grandma has prepared a crib and diapers ("The baby
can sleep in our spare room while you're working, Rose") and begs her own
parents to have another baby. This is a hard-working cast of characters: Aunt
Rose and her husband Robert live in a trailer, and Rose keeps house for senile,
elderly Maudie next door while Robert works in a feed store. Mycca's father
admits that he cannot earn enough to support more children than Mycca and her
brother, but when the baby arrives, Rose makes sure that Mycca and newborn
Serenity share a loving cousinly cuddle. Strokes of cheerful realism raise this
common story above the ordinary: "I wish the baby was born. My feet hurt.
And I look like a pig," complains Rose; later, Mycca bluntly describes Maudie
as forgetting everything, including Rose, who takes care of her every day.
Rounded shapes and comfortable figures give the warm-hued illustrations a
reassuring tone just right for the text as well as for young listeners who are
experiencing the anxiety of a new baby coming along. BH
D.V. Baby, adjustment to
Chang, Margaret. In the Eye of War; by Margaret and Raymond Chang.
McElderry, 1990. ISBN 0-689-50503-5. [224p]. 
$14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
The family had moved to Hong Kong, then to
Shanghai, to escape the Japanese. In the last year of World War II, Shanghai
was (to explain the title reference) a quiet center of the storm, since those
Chinese who didn't attract attention were reasonably safe in spite of the presence
of the Japanese. This account of what it was like to live there and to welcome
the end of the war is based on the experiences of co-author Raymond Chang,
who contributes authentic details, the intimacy of memory, and a perspective
that may be new to many readers. Added attractions include a smooth writing
style, and the candor and depth of characterization of the protagonist, ten-year-old
Shao-Shao, Little Brother in a large family. ZS
[ 181]
Colman, Hila. Forgotten Girl. Crown, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-57592-
2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-57591-4. 153p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Fourteen-year-old Kelly is the narrator, and her story
is a believable but slow-moving development of a family as they are affected by
the past, by emotional inertia, by selfish need on the parts of Kelly and her
mother and brother, and by the catalyst of criminal behavior. Kelly, bitterly
aware than her mother dotes on Eliot, who is as sugary to his mother as he is
acerbic to his sister, is stunned when she discovers that responsible, conforming
Eliot is a thief. Mom's reaction, when Kelly tells her, is anger at Kelly and
disbelief in what Kelly says. The book ends with a clearing of the air that is
achieved by the intervention of a family counselor, an ending that promises
improved relationships but indicates that it will take time to achieve them.
Unevenly paced but adequately written, the story has characters that are
psychologically convincing but seem more projections of examples in case
histories than they are individuals. ZS
D.V. Brother-sister relations; Ethical concepts; Mother-daughter relations
Duffy, James. The Man in the River. Scribner's, 1990. ISBN 0-684-19161-X.
165p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
In a sequel to Missing (BCCB 3/88) and set six
months after it, retired police officer Agatha Bates again solves a crime; this
time it is the death of the father of Sandy and Kate (the kidnapping victim of the
earlier book). Their mother asks Agatha to look into the death of her estranged
husband: was his drowning an accident or a suicide or murder? Did the fact that
he had taken out a large life insurance policy of which Kate and Sandy were the
beneficiaries indicate some change in his life style? This is, although slow-
moving, an adequate account of investigative detection. It has believable
characters, but the girls (ten and twelve) really play minor roles and this may
disappoint readers who look for more than passive participation on the part of
characters with whom they can identify. ZS
Fleischman, Paul. Saturnalia. Zolotow/Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
021913-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021912-2. [128p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade
ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
A wicked humor informs this stern tale set in the
"tombstone-cracking cold" of colonial Boston. William, the printer Charles
Currie's brilliant fourteen-year-old apprentice, is an Indian, and thus a thorn in
the side of Mr. Baggot, local tithing-man, zealot, and sneak. In fact, Mr. Baggot
regards the entire Currie family with suspicion: although assured that the family
does not celebrate the "reeking" holiday of Christmas, Baggot has heard they
indulge in the far more pagan festivity of Saturnalia, the day on which masters
and servants trade places. Several sets of masters and servants people the story,
with pratfalls provided by the wigmaker Mr. Hogwood and his conceited
manservant Malcolm, both courting ladies and disaster. While William has a
good situation, he still searches for his Narraganset family, finally finding his
great-uncle and a cousin living in abusive slavery. The writing here is dense and
complex, but the antique styling has a read-aloud rhythm that complements the
steady storytelling. RS
C.U. History--U.S .- Colonial
D.V. Pride in background and heritage
[ 182
Friedman, Ina R. The Other Victims: First-Person Stories of Non-Jews
Persecuted by the Nazis. Houghton, 1990. ISBN 0-395-50212-8. 
[176p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Thirteen narrators relate their experiences during the
Holocaust, when they were imprisoned in labor or concentration camps as being
degenerates, enemies of the Nazi state, pollutants of the Aryan race, or simply
occupants of territories conquered for German "living space." Friedman, author
of Escape or Die: True Stories of Young People Who Survived the Holocaust,
has researched the history of these 5 million doomed offenders and interviewed a
few who survived. Her brief chapter introductions provide background for
accounts by a Gypsy, a Catholic priest, a Jehovah's Witness, a deaf girl
sterilized because of her disability, a Jew married to a Christian doctor, two
dissident students, Czech and Polish resistance fighters, and two Dutchmen
captured for slave labor. Although some historical context is provided for
persecution of blacks and homosexuals, a lack of living witnesses is cited for
including no personal accounts. The preface acknowledges sources, some
personal, some archival, while a concluding list suggests other children's and
young adult books on the subject. Well organized and edited, the tales are
harrowing, though they all end happily, often with escape or immigration to
America and highly successful careers. Friedman points out that these were the
lucky ones, and her book serves as a much-needed reminder that the Nazi
nightmare extended far beyond Europe's Jewish population. BH
C.U. History-World War II, 1939-1945
D.V. Courage
Gherman, Beverly. Agnes de Mille: Dancing Off the Earth. Atheneum, 1990.
ISBN 0-689-31441-8. 138p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
Chapter notes and a bibliography indicate the research
done by the author on the life of one of this country's outstanding dancers and
choreographers. With no parental support, with a late start in beginning the
study of ballet, and with the knowledge that she did not have "the ideal ballet
body," Agnes de Mille persisted, practiced, and worked until a stroke ended her
ability to dance. Anecdotes drawn from de Mille's own books and articles
provide lively color and intimate details, so that this biography presents a
perceptive picture of an artist struggling to gain self-confidence as well as
acclaim. The text is cohesive, coherent, and flowing despite some awkward
phrases. ZS
C.U. Dancing, study and teaching
Gibbons, Gail. Weather Words and What They Mean. Holiday House, 1990.
ISBN 0-8234-0805-1. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Although this has a picture-book look and format, the
degree of detail provided seems to indicate an older audience. Gibbons bases her
introduction to weather on four terms: temperature, air pressure, moisture, and
wind. Discussion of these terms necessarily brings up other, more complicated
words such as humidity, cumulonimbus, and hurricane. 
Definitions and
sequencing are clear (although in common with most forecasters, Gibbons names
but fails to elucidate the difference between partly sunny and partly cloudy), and
illustrations are typically schematic if somewhat more relaxed than is usual for
this artist The words under discussion are placed in speech-balloons within each
[183
picture; clear enough when a little boy says "rainbow," but more often leaving
to the reader's imagination whether the implied speaker is the author, the
margin, God, or Willard Scott. RS
C.U. Weather
Gifford, Griselda. Revenge of the Wildcat. Canongate/David & Charles, 1990.
ISBN 0-86241-216-1. 104p. $17.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
First published in Scotland, this is a first-person
account by Tim (English, on a vacation with his parents and older sister) of his
adventures at a Scottish farm. Mrs. MacPherson is a widow who, for financial
reasons, is on the verge of selling the farm to an American; her son Alan (Tim's
age) is sure that if he can find the reputedly buried family treasure, he and his
mother can keep the farm. Unlike the other visitors, Tim sees MacPherson
ghosts from the past, and it is in part through these glimpses of earlier
MacPhersons that he helps find the treasure, save the farm, and make a friend of
dour Alan. There's plenty of action and a happy ending to satisfy some readers,
but the book is weakened by the awkward combining of fantastic episodes with
the realistic matrix, and to a lesser extent by the fact that the characters-while
believable-lack depth. On the other hand, the writing style is adequate and the
setting colorful. ZS
Golenbock, Peter. Teammates; illus. by Paul Bacon. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1990.
ISBN 0-15-200603-6. [32p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Line-and-wash drawings and some photographs
illustrate a book that is in picture book format but is textually best suited to
primary-grade independent readers. Plenty of white space and not too much print
on each page make a famous baseball story easy to read; most fans know the
story of Jackie Robinson, the first black man brought into the major leagues,
and of the abuse he withstood with pained stoicism. "I want a man with the
courage not to fight back," manager Branch Rickey had said. He and Robinson
knew that acceptance might lead to more black players and to the end of separate
black and white leagues. The denouement of the book is Pee Wee Reese's
gesture before a hostile public, when he crossed the field to put an arm around
the shoulder of his black teammate. There, rather abruptly, the book ends.
Accessible, useful, and still touching, the book may mislead readers who expect,
because of the title, a more substantial exploration of friendship. ZS
C.U. Physical education
D.V. Interracial understanding
Goor, Ron. Insect Metamorphosis: From Egg to Adult; written and illus. with
photographs by Ron and Nancy Goor. Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-31445-0.
32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
Brilliant color close-ups document the development of
several species representative of complete and incomplete metamorphosis. The
four stages of the first (egg, larva, pupa, adult) and three stages of the second
(egg, nymph, adult) get well-defined explanations through examples of monarch
butterflies, hickory hored devil caterpillars, mourning cloak butterflies, cecropia
moths, mosquitoes, paper wasps, braconid wasps, praying mantids, dragonflies,
and cicadas. Although each insect has characteristic variations, the repetition of
molting and other patterns of change will help readers (this could also be read
[184]
aloud to a young audience) absorb the rhythmic cycles. Clear and concisely
thorough. BH
C.U. 
Zoology
Graff, Nancy Price. The Strength of the Hills: A Portrait of a Family Farm;
illus. with photographs by Richard Howard. Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-32277-
6. 80p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
"This is the story of life on the Nelson Farm ... and
of the kinds of work it takes to tend and hold on to one small corner of the
Earth, generation after generation." An enjoyable photo-essay follows the daily
routines of Bill and Jenny Nelson and their four children on a Vermont dairy
farm. Clear black-and-white photographs are matched with an informative and
occasionally sentimental text ("Haying has the grand and graceful movement of
ballet"). 
Graff's obvious enthusiasm for her subject never clouds her
presentation as she discusses the difficulties as well as the joys of farm life:
Jenny must work at a part-time job to make ends meet, and the family can take a
vacation only once every three years. During the course of a seventeen-hour
work day, we follow Bill as he milks his cows, talks to the vet, mows a
hayfield, and advises his children. We accompany Jenny on her mail route, and
watch the children as they do their chores, work on their 4H projects, and go
swimming. Along the way, Graff effortlessly works in many of the technical
details involved in running a dairy farm, with an especially clear description of
the milking process. The candid photographs convey the family's pride in their
work. Graff stresses the sense of continuity underlying the daily routine, as Bill
passes on to his sons the knowledge received from his father, who, though
retired, still helps out on the farm. Sometimes the photographs speak louder
than words, as Bill mows behind the cemetery where many generations of his
farming ancestors lie buried. Graff helps us not only understand but also care
about the Nelsons and their way of life. RAS
Hahn, Mary Downing. The Dead Man in Indian Creek. Clarion, 1990. ISBN
0-395-52397-4. 130p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Even though Matt's getting tired of the too-cool
mannerisms Parker has developed since they started junior high, he still defers to
Parker's decisions: "he was, as my parents often pointed out, a natural-born
leader, and I was a natural-bon follower." Parker is the quintessential best friend
your parents don't trust, and the resulting character dynamics create as much
narrative tension as does the boys' discovery of a dead body in the creek. Hahn
is a sure storyteller, with an exceptional command of suspenseful pacing and a
plain understanding of what middle-graders find exciting. Matt's narration is
believably that of an unprepossessing twelve-year-old boy who will attract
plenty of empathy from readers. They will know what it's like to have a best
friend who often seems less than that and who only grudgingly shows his need
for you. With lots of appeal and vicarious excitement, this story is firmly
grounded in the familiar-sometimes the scariest place of all. RS
D.V. Friendship values; Parent-child relations
[185]
Hallowell, Tommy. Duel on the Diamond. Viking, 1990. Paper ed. ISBN 0-
14-032910-2. 122p. Paper ed. $3.95.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
Baseball buffs seem able to enjoy any story that has
plenty of game sequences, and this does. Unfortunately, it has little else, the
plot consisting of an overextended account of the change in the relationship (foes
to friends, a time-worn pattern) between two members of a team.
Characterization is slight, and the writing style is pedestrian. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Harley, Rex. Black November. Gollancz/David & Charles, 1990. ISBN 0-575-
04150-1. 139p. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
A chain of murders begins when a young black
saxophone player is unlucky enough to see a vicious criminal in an accidental
encounter; the saxophonist's instrument, sold to the owner of an antique store, is
the primary catalyst for two other murders. The saxophone is bought by Simon,
an adolescent whose life is in danger because of this acquisition, which poses a
threat (unmasking him) to the criminal. No happy ending here, no justice or
retribution-instead, a logical conclusion to a book which is taut with suspense.
The dialogue between Simon and his friend Matthew gives a note of contrast that
lightens the mood of the story. This is Harley's first novel, and it should appeal
to adults as well as to teenage readers: the characterization and dialogue are
effective, the style and structure smooth and substantial. ZS
Holman, Felice. Secret City, U.S.A. Scribner's, 1990. ISBN 0-684-19168-7.
[208p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
In the burned-out wasteland north of their slum
neighborhood, best friends Benno and Moon colonize an old building, eventually
turning it into a shelter for other homeless kids. As Holman has demonstrated
in Slake's Limbo and The Wild Children, the city can be as treacherous and
rewarding as the thickest wilderness, and the tools for survival are much the
same: work, tenacity, ingenuity, amity. Here, however, the characters, plot,
and ultimate thematic concerns--all potentially involving-are distanced by
authorial commentary and an earnest didacticism. Each chapter, for example,
begins with an italicized thesis: "Today, yesterday, tomorrow: In a dead City
they do not mean anything. There is no time: It is suspended. Something new
is created thatfills the space that time once did. Is it promise?" Speaking in an
unnecessary patois ("I'm gonna be president of the meetin' an' what I wanna
know is if ya know other kids, like personal, or even maybe some bigger
people, who stay inna streets"), the characters are subjected to much explanation
and interpretation that leaves the reader with little to imagine. The ending, in
which all the homeless boys find families (via the intervention of a sympathetic
nurse), may be a crowd-pleaser, but it tends to sentimentalize all that has gone
on before. Any survival story satisfies an elemental appeal, but as a whole this
book is undermined by its own good intentions. RS
D.V. Cooperation; Friendship values
Howe, James. Pinky and Rex; ISBN 0-689-31454-X. Pinky and Rex Get
Married; ISBN 0-689-31453-X. 
Each book: 
illus. by Melissa Sweet.
Atheneum, 1990. 48p. $11.95.
[186 1
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
Pinky (so nicknamed because of his affection for the
color) and Rex (a girl) are best friends in this new beginning-to-read series that
features some mild sex-role-reversals and even milder adventures of the two
friends, along with Pinky's pesty little sister Amanda. In Pinky and Rex, they
go to the museum to see the dinosaurs; the friends are inspired to Get Married
after Rex catches a bouquet at a wedding. While the vocabulary and sentence
structure are appropriately simple and the situations familiar, there's not enough
development or conflict in either of these stories to keep most new readers
interested in discovering what happens next. 
Watercolor illustrations are
plentiful, tidy, and bright. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Friendship values
Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane. Totem Pole; illus. with photographs by Lawrence
Migdale. Holiday House, 1990. ISBN 0-8234-0809-4. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Color photographs liberally illustrate a first-person
text narrated by David, whose father is a skilled carver. They are members of the
Eagle Clan of the Tsimshian tribe; David's mother has been adopted into the
Eagle Clan although she is of European descent. David describes the way his
father carves a new totem pole, pointing out the traditions associated both with
the making of the pole and with the intricate ceremony of raising it and
celebrating its installation. The writing is simple and direct, the tone of pride is
strong, the information is not often found in books for children, and the book is
imbued with cultural dignity and a sense of the value of the extended family and
community. A glossary and an index make the contents accessible. ZS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Jacques, Brian. Mattimeo. Philomel, 1990. ISBN 0-399-21741-X. [448p].
$15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
This sequel to Redwall (BCCB 7/87) features similar
doses of villainy, violence, and revenge, as friendly woodland creatures face
Deadly Peril at the hands of other, evil, animals. Three parallel stories are
advanced at once: Mattimeo (son of Redwall mouse-hero Matthias), along with
other Redwall young, is kidnapped by Slagar the Cruel (a fox) to be sold into
slavery; Matthias and company go after them; the remaining inhabitants of
Redwall are attacked by General Ironbeak and his flock of menacing birds.
There's lots going on, although some readers might have trouble with the quick,
cliffhanging shifts from subplot to subplot. 
While the action is fierce,
characterization is often coy, with both villains and heroes talking like misplaced
denizens of Disneyland. But those who stuck it out through the 350 pages of
the first book will probably enjoy these 450 more. RS
Johnston, Ginny. 
Windows on Wildlife; by Ginny Johnston and Judy
Cutchins. Morrow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07873-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
688-07873-7. 
48p. illus. with photographs. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
"In the end, we will conserve only what we love. We
will love only what we understand. We will understand only what we are
taught." This prefatory quote from Baba Dioum sets the tone for an eye-opening
[ 187]
account of six synthetic wildlife environments for gorillas, penguins, rain forest
creatures, hippos, tropical birds, and kelp-bed sea life. The writing clips along
with a balanced look at the animals themselves, the human efforts to create and
maintain habitats, and the research that constantly updates our knowledge of
endangered fauna and flora. The authors are careful to note that breeding provides
more specimens than collecting, a sign of environmental consciousness-raising
among zookeepers, and to acknowledge that no exhibit can ever duplicate natural
life in the wild. The index is inconsistent: gorillas are listed under "lowland
gorilla," for instance, and birds are listed only under "R. J. Reynolds Forest
Aviary," whereas both "hippopotamus" and "penguin" get main entries.
However, children doing reports can access the information through the table of
contents. Well-reproduced color photographs are both revealing and alluring in
projecting a well-rounded text BH
C.U. Nature study; Zoology
Johnston, Tony, ad. The Badger and the Magic Fan: A Japanese Folktale; illus.
by Tomie dePaola. Whitebird/Putnam, 1990. ISBN 0-399-21945-5. 
32p.
$13.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Bright oranges, purples, peaches, pinks, and reds
flamboyantly illustrate a funny Japanese folk tale about a mischievous badger
who lengthens and shortens noses with the aid of a magic fan. DePaola explains
in the introduction that he has based his drawings on the "feeling" of Gilbert and
Sullivan's Mikado, although some may find the cartooning more reminiscent of
Kurt Wiese's illustrations of The Five Chinese Brothers. The text is replete
with sound effects for the read-aloud crowd ("tiptoe, tiptoe, tiptoe,"
"bzzzzzzzzzt!" "SNNNZZZZZZ") and also makes a few condescending comments
to the young listener ("And, my, didn't that wake him up?"). The combined
humor of the illustrations and fast-paced narrative guarantee a wide appeal for
kids. For a more sophisticated but equally funny version, see Gengoroh and the
Thunder God, adapted by Miyoko Matsutani. KP
LaBonte, Gail. The Miniature Horse. Dillon, 1990. ISBN 0-87518-424-3.
60p. illus. with photographs. (Remarkable Animals). $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
The title and color photographs will sell this book
without further ado, but the text is clean and straightforward in describing the
history and characteristics of the miniature horse. Child-size and affectionate,
many of the animals are no bigger than dogs; in fact, they are sometimes treated
as house pets, seeming as comfortable in a living room or car as they are in a
stable. Their popularity is guaranteed to the point of supporting a number of
ranches devoted just to the breed. An opening list of "Facts about Miniature
Horses" and four chapters of generously illustrated information are concluded by
a directory of "Sources of Information about Miniature Horses" (with current
addresses), a glossary, and an index. This one will never stop circulating. BH
Landau, Elaine. We Have AIDS. Watts, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-10898-
8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-15152-2. 12 6p. Library ed. $12.90; Trade ed. $11.95.
NR 
Gr. 7-12. 
As is true of the author's Teenagers Talk about
School (BCCB 12/88), this is an undocumented collection of monologues, in
this case, allegedly by teens who have AIDS. As is also true of School, these
voices all sound the same, and incorporate extensive information ("My mother
[ 188 ]
has a friend who's a nurse. She told me ... ") in a way that strikes a false,
manipulative note. All nine narratives are fact-packed, grim (are there no helpful
ministers, no helpful doctors?), and often sensationalized in a way that seems
closer to the YA problem novel than it does to real life: "I felt like a dog on a
short leash. I couldn't leave Larry. Like a baby who needs a bottle, I needed the
needle. I hated myself. I hated Larry. But most of all, I hated the drugs that I
wanted so badly." Seven of the teens describe how they contracted the disease
(drug abuse, transfusion, etc.); the only two who don't are gay-leaving readers
to infer that AIDS just automatically comes with homosexuality. 
The
monologues are interspersed with factual information about AIDS which is
correct save for two instances where Landau draws a parallel between marijuana
and alcohol and "damage to the immune system." Her statement that "those
involved in AIDS research now believe that up to 99 percent of these individuals
[infected with the virus] will come down with the disease" is alarmist, over-
generalized, and not true. Scientific data (mostly drawn from the Surgeon
General's report and from McCall's) are footnoted; there are a directory of AIDS
organizations and a reading list. Landau's sensational treatment of a serious
disease almost seems inadvertently to justify the AIDS hysteria she so loudly
deplores; lead students instead to Susan Kuklin's angry, funny, and genuine
Fighting Back: What Some People Are Doing about AIDS (BCCB 3/89). RS
C.U. Health; Social studies
Lander, Patricia S. The Land and People of Finland; by Patricia S. Lander and
Claudette Charbonneau. Lippincott, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32358-1;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32357-3. 
212p. illus. with photographs. Library ed.
$14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 9-. 
This potentially valuable resource sets out to cover
Finland (a particularly interesting country in the light of recent Soviet
developments) geographically, culturally, historically and politically.
Unfortunately, stylistic and organizational lapses consistently frustrate the
enterprise. Sophisticated words such as "unicameral" are left undefined, but the
language occasionally becomes patronizing of its subject or reader, as in the last
sentence of the book: "... Finland can be described as a spunky little nation
that still has wilderness, courage, and dreams." Some subjects that should merit
their own chapter or section, such as the Finnish language, are irritatingly
marginalized in "boxes" of text that interrupt the main body of the chapter (to
which the subject of the box may not be related). Despite the fact that the
historical overview doesn't begin until chapter eight, historical events are alluded
to but not explained throughout the first seven chapters. 
Although heavy-
occasionally too heavy--on the technical when it comes to charts, the book has
map problems: it inexplicably lacks a detailed map (only ten towns are listed on
the primary map, and many locales referred to in the text are on no map at all),
and a set of nine maps of "Borders of Finland from 1323 to 1944" fails to state
that the shape used for comparison in each is the Finland of 1920 rather than that
of 1990. The book is admirably even-handed and comprehensive, with a
thorough history and an impressively up-to-date survey of economic, political,
and artistic trends. Social and historical problems are discussed openly, with
particular attention to the contribution and cultural status of women and the
native minorities. A promising and ambitious book marred by self-sabotage,
which a revision might repair. Index, bibliography and discography are included.
DS
[ 189 ]
Le Guin, Ursula K. Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea. Karl/Atheneum,
1990. ISBN 0-689-31595-3. [226p]. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
In spite of references to The Tombs ofAtuan (BCCB
4/72) and other episodes in Le Guin's high fantasy series, the last book stands
on its own with the development of a new heroine. The hope of the future lies
in Tehanu, a child traumatized by abuse, deformed by fire, and saved by an aging
Tenar's loving care. This is Tenar's story, too, and she is reunited with Ged in
spite of his lost power and of threats from sorcerers hostile to women. Male
misuse of power is an overt theme, and the villains here are vicious and
unremitting in their misogynous violence. Since wizardry is on the way out-
there's no archmage to replace Ged-it's not clear how Tehanu will develop her
defensive powers unless she can count on timely appearances by the dragon
Kalessin, a magnificent character but a deus ex machina nonetheless. Readers
who have thrived on the Earthsea chronicles will no doubt extend this happy
ending with explanations of their own shaping. A life-or-death plot and strong
realization of the main cast sustain the book, despite representational secondary
figures and occasional theorizing, for the ultimate effect of a solidly imagined
world. BH
D.V. Fear, overcoming; Sex roles
Long, Kim. The Astronaut Training Book for Kids. Lodestar, 1990. ISBN 0-
525-67296-6. 116p. illus. with photographs. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Although the "kids" of the title seems too juvenile
for this book's audience-readers old enough to assimilate the often-sophisticated
vocabulary and to want detailed information on preparing for a career as an
astronaut-it should be useful and is both logically organized and
comprehensive. The rather patronizing tone of the title is echoed occasionally in
the text ("Your parents probably wish they could be astronauts, too, but they
may already be too old") but information is given quite crisply, with chapters on
space flight history and on future explorations and equipment preceding separate
chapters on aspects of career preparation: physical fitness, computer technology,
science studies, courses, organizations, etc. Names of institutions or programs
are listed in each chapter, with addresses and telephone numbers. Information on
astronaut training is provided, as are a glossary and a metric conversion table.
ZS
C.U. Vocational guidance
Lottridge, Celia Barker, ad. The Name of the Tree: A Bantu Folktale; illus. by
Ian Wallace. McElderry, 1990. ISBN 0-689-50490-X. 36p. $14.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Drought has driven all the animals across the plain
toward a fruit tree that will not bend down its branches until they learn its name,
which only the lion knows. Both the swift gazelle and the proud elephant forget
the name, Ungalli, but the steady young tortoise remembers, a resolution
children will anticipate because of the popularity of the tortoise and hare tale in
European and Afro-American cultures. The retelling has some joyful rhythms
("Ungalli, Ungalli, the name of the tree is Ungalli," chants the tortoise on his
long journey) and appetizing refrains (the fruit is "as red as pomegranates, as
yellow as bananas, as green as melons, as purple as plums, and as orange as
mangos, and smelled like all the fruits of the world"). Wallace's earthtoned,
stippled illustrations are well focused and drafted; several are so pale as to require
[ 190 ]
a close look-this is not for group showing-but the subtle compositions are
well worth detailed attention. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Loxton, Howard. Theater. Steck-Vaughn, 1990. ISBN 0-8114-2359-X. 4 8p.
illus. with photographs. (The Arts). $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
First published in England as one of the publisher's
series on the arts, this is an oversize book profusely illustrated with color
photography, along with some black-and-white pictures and diagrams. Although
far from comprehensive, the text serves well as an introduction to the topic,
including some theater history, some actors and playwrights, half a page for
those who are interested in theater work, half a page for "Further Reading."
Single and double columns are used in different ways on the pages, with
italicized captions in the single columns. In sum: adequate information and
organization, cluttered format, uneven coverage, and a rather dry writing style.
ZS
C.U. Dramatics, study and teaching
Lyon, George Ella. 
Come a Tide; illus. by Stephen Gammell.
Jackson/Orchard, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08454-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
531-05854-9. 32p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
In a picture book that will naturally be paired with
Cynthia Rylant and Stephen Gammell's The Relatives Came (BCCB 12/85)
because of similar rhythms, setting, and art, a young narrator describes the time
her grandma's prediction of a flood came true. After four days and nights of rain,
the backwoods mountain families seem cheerful about getting washed out, and
many refuse to leave their homes ("I've got me a boat and I'm aiming to find the
oars"). Even shoveling mud is a joyous occasion in these color-pencil and
spatter-wash drawings, where homespun figures strike exaggerated poses of
catastrophic disarray. Appalachian residents may find the verbal and visual
imagery a bit quaint ("If it was me," says Grandma trailing biscuits and coffee in
her shabby housedress and railroad cap, "I'd make friends with a shovel"), but the
child's-eye view of disaster-as-exciting-adventure offers a tonal balance of
enthusiastic bounce and reassuring warmth. BH
C.U. Weather
Mace, Elizabeth. Under Siege. Orchard, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08471-
X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05871-9. [224p]. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed.
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Morris' mother has insisted they spend their
Christmas holidays with relatives he hardly knows. But Morris doesn't need to
know his eccentric young uncle in order to appreciate the huge model of a
medieval castle and village in which a computer program controls lifelike battles
fought by plastic lords and peasants. Taking on the role of a god to the little
model figurines who come to life only in his presence, Morris retreats into the
fantastic qualities of the game as he deals with his anger and confusion about his
parents' separation. There are some holes in this potentially good plot (based on
"War Game," a short story by Philip K. Dick), and Morris' feelings about his
parents' failing marriage are never adequately described except when he has a rare
sentimental thought ("All the people I love are taken away from me"). The
[ 191 ]
fantasy element is disappointing and flat because Morris is basically an observer,
not an actor, in the game. Mace's detached development of both characters and
plot is incongruous with the easy ending-"LOVE CONQUERS ALL." KP
D.V. Family relations
Maestro, Betsy. Temperature and You; illus. by Giulio Maestro. Lodestar,
1990. ISBN 0-525-67271-0. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
A basic introduction to temperature begins with the
weather (and an illustration of melting icicles) and makes a logical progression
to heating and air-conditioning, cooking and refrigeration, and, finally, body
temperature. While not making a clear distinction between temperature (a
measured degree of heat) and heat itself, the book is generally characterized by an
age-appropriate use of examples (snowman, oven), concepts (skin is "a little like
a blanket"), and advice ("You cannot control the temperature outside. Inside your
house, you can change the temperature to make it more comfortable"). Color
illustrations are stiff but large, clear, and sensible. An end note expands on
some of the concepts mentioned in the text, useful for parents who wonder why
shivering makes you warmer. RS
C.U. Weather
D.V. Environmental concepts
Marzollo, Jean. Pretend You're a Cat; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. Dial, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0774-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0773-8. 32p. Library
ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
On oversize pages, each double spread consists of a
large painting of an animal, a smaller painting-boxed--of children imitating
the animal, and of a series of questions. Sample "Can you climb? Can you
leap? Can you stretch? Can you sleep? Can you hiss? Can you scat? Can
you purr like a cat? What else can you do like a cat?" The pictures of children,
black and white, are pleasant, but it is in the painting of animals that Pinkney
excels. This may be useful as a stimulus for very young children in imitative
play or physical training, but it's not very substantial poetry and seems an
overextended concept as a book. ZS
Mills, Claudia. Dynamite Dinah. Macmillan, 1990. ISBN 0-02-767101-1.
[128p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Ten-year-old Dinah Seabrooke is an irrepressible
crowd-pleaser who loves the limelight: she performs a class recitation of
Millay's "Renascence" (the longest poem she could find), a dance with the
school janitor's mop, and a frolic on the rooftop in the rain. Unfortunately, her
new baby brother, whom she had expected to be an audience for her exuberant
antics, turns out to be "the world's most useless individual." And when the
coveted part of Becky in the class production of Tom Sawyer goes not to Dinah
but to her best friend Suzanne, Dinah's jealousy causes a rift in their friendship.
Dazzling Dinah's relationship with the modest Suzanne is unerringly depicted, as
is Dinah's ambivalence about her only occasionally charming new sibling.
Mills' heroine is an older Ramona, whose delight in herself is not only
understandable but contagious. Even when (temporarily) reformed and abject,
she cannot resist self-dramatizing: "And yet Dinah felt somehow sorry for the
[ 192 ]
world, deprived of humorous routines with her hose, denied the opportunity to
hear another version of 'Renascence.' ... 
She was nicer than she had been
before, yes, but undeniably less interesting." The writing is both savvy and
sparkling, making Dinah a distinctive and memorable individual with broad
appeal. DS
D.V. Baby, adjustment to; Friendship values
Morpurgo, Michael. Mr. Nobody's Eyes. Viking, 1990. ISBN 0-670-83022-4.
[144p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Ten-year-old Harry doesn't like his stepfather or the
new baby and recalls with longing the time when he and his mother were alone
together, united in their mourning for Harry's father, who was shot down over
the English channel during World War Two. Harry has a secret refuge in the
basement of the bombed-out house next door; a perfect place to hide and house
the runaway circus chimpanzee Ocky, who seems to have attached herself to
him. The two eventually light out for several adventures and near-escapes that
provide a series of repetitive cliffhangers-the book seems about to end several
times. Characterization is slender and stereotyped; there's lots of improbable but
exciting action; the ending is a cozy reconciliation. A boys' book like they used
to make them. RS
D.V. Stepparent-child relations
Moss, Elaine. Polar; illus. by Jeannie Baker. Greenwillow, 1990. Library ed.
ISBN 0-688-09177-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09176-8. 
[32p]. Library ed.
$13.88; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
3-5 yrs. 
Photographs of stuffed toys are used in colorful but
static collage pictures, illustrating the thin story of a white teddy bear (named
"Polar") who has a tobogganing accident, receives attention and gifts from his
friends, and recovers. Elaine Moss has had a distinguished career as a critic in
the children's book world; Jeannie Baker has done some stunning work (in the
same medium, collage) as an illustrator. This book, however, suffers from a
self-conscious use of language ("Numb, dumb bear") and a whimsical plot overly
dependent upon contrivance. ZS
Norsgaard, E. Jaediker. Nature's Great Balancing Act in Our Own Backyard;
illus. with photographs by Campbell Norsgaard. Cobblehill, 1990. ISBN 0-
525-65028-8. 64p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
A writer and a photographer take the young reader on
a tour of their backyard, which, although presumably typical of many U.S.
areas, is not identified as to location. The focus is ecological, with early
sections lightly covering food chains, population balance, and "feathered
helpers," while the major portion of the book describes specific insects-
lacewings, ladybird beetles, praying mantises, wasps, stink bugs, dragonflies,
spiders, and parasites. A few symbiotic species and mammals are also featured,
along with a plug for natural waste recycling. This is a chatty text: "We
planted dahlias around the bird bath because butterflies are attracted to them.
See--a tiger swallowtail has landed on one. Come closer and watch it sip nectar
through its long sucking tube." The organization is somewhat random and the
[ 193]
information occasionally repetitive in cataloguing the activities of representative
insects. However, the format is accessible, with color photographs enlivening
almost every page and an index and table of contents helpful for student reports.
BH
C.U. Ecology; Nature study
D.V. Ecological awareness
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. Flowers for Everyone; illus. with photographs by
William Muftoz. Cobblehill, 1990. ISBN 0-525-65025-3. 64p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-. 
Profusely illustrated with large, often dazzling, color
photographs, this is a description of the flower-growing industry. It explains
methods of propagation, concentrating on pollination and including cloning,
planting seeds, and using cuttings. Patent discusses the patient gamble of
individual gardeners and large nurseries in developing new varieties and gives
some interesting facts about plants of special interest to many hobbyists-
orchids, for example. The writing is crisp and direct; a glossary and an index are
included. ZS
Paulsen, Gary. The Boy Who Owned the School: A Comedy of Love.
Jackson/Orchard, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08465-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05865-4. 85p. Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Jacob Freisten spends his days at high school trying
to remain invisible, because whenever he has been "seen, or noticed, or watched,
things ... happened. Ridiculous things." Like getting stuffed into the trash
can in the locker room by obstreperous jocks. Like being smiled at by beautiful
Maria Tresser, which causes him to trip over his shoelaces and skid face-first
along the gym floor. Like being picked out by his English teacher as needing
extra credit, to be earned by working the fog machine in the play starring the
adored Maria. The book, paced more like a long short story than a novel,
consists primarily of Jacob's agonized indecision about approaching Maria,
resulting finally in fate bringing them together (to her satisfaction as well as
his). In spite of the subtitle "A Comedy of Love," Jacob's trials are funny only
in a raw-nerves way. The writing is clear and competent, however, and readers
may find that the very unlikelihood of the popular Maria's affection for such a
schlemiel enhances the book's appeal. DS
Paxton, Tom, ad. Belling the Cat and Other Aesop's Fables; illus. by Robert
Rayevsky. Morrow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08159-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
688-08158-4. [40p]. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
As in this team's first collaboration, Aesop's Fables
(BCCB 11/88), the rhyming text is set into spacious, dramatically lined spreads
that project an ironic tone reflective of creature foibles. Rayevsky's animals are
acutely drawn, with figures and expressions exaggerated to witty effect, color
restrained for maximum impact, and details imagined with quirky finesse.
Paxton's verses don't always scan smoothly-he occasionally tosses
discombobulating pentameters into an alternating tetrameter-trimeter scheme, for
instance, or pads his quota of syllables with unnecessary words. On the whole,
though, he brings a balladeer's easy lilt to the tales, rendering the morals as
[ 194 ]
humorous as they can possibly be: "Who needs whom to feel complete?/ Feet
need the stomach; stomach needs the feet!" BH
C.U. Language arts
Pierce, Meredith Ann. The Pearl of the Soul of the World. Joy Street/Little,
1990. ISBN 0-316-70743-0. 243p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
In the third volume of the Darkangel trilogy (BCCB
7/82 and 2/85), Pierce again achieves a triumph of style and concept over the
drawbacks of convoluted intricacy and, to a lesser extent, the occasional bit of
recapitulation. To save the world from her evil rival, Aeriel must penetrate the
stronghold of the witch and outwit her through magic--and, in the end, Aeriel
must choose between her own good and that of the world. The intrepid
protagonist is a truly heroic figure, and her role in the struggle for good against
the forces of evil is both credible and exciting within the parameters of an
imaginative and forceful high fantasy. ZS
Pillar, Marjorie. Pizza Man; written and illus. with photographs by Marjorie
Pillar. Crowell, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04838-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-
04836-X. 40p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
While color photographs would have better caught the
tangy reds and golds, the black-and-white photos here make a clear step-by-step
introduction to the art of pizza-making. The text is exceptionally simple and
direct ("I'm a pizza man. Let me show you how I make my pies") with action
photos of pizzamaker Victor Hanna mixing the dough, stirring the sauce, and, of
course, flipping the dough in the air. In all, this is a tribute to a favorite food, a
first-hand introduction to sequence and process, and a strong portrait of a hard
day's work ... in heaven. RS
D.V. Occupational orientation
Pluckrose, Henry. Move It!; ISBN 0-531-14020-2. 
Store It!; ISBN 0-531-
14021-0. Each book: illus. with photographs by Chris Fairclough. Watts,
1990. 32p. (Ways to... Books). $10.40.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Although the backcover copy ("Each book focuses on
a particular action verb ... ") appears to have been written by someone who
hasn't read the books, these, like Cut It! and Join It! (BCCB 2/90) are crisply
designed introductions to basic physical concepts. Move It! provides an
unenlightening definition of gravity ("Our planet earth pulls everything toward
it") but further pages on wheels and wind and power are clear and accompanied by
exemplary color photos. 
Store It!, about containers, is also sometimes
conceptually fuzzy ("The lids keep the contents airtight and stop them from
changing") but features some intriguing questions ("Why does a perfume bottle
have a smaller hole than a drink bottle?") and guessing games ("Can you match
these things with their containers?"). Both books include some rather weak
suggestions for further projects; prefer in-action enactments of the
demonstrations mentioned above. RS
D.V. Everyday life concepts
[195]
Powling, Chris. Hiccup Harry; illus. by Scoular Anderson. Dutton, 1990.
ISBN 0-525-44558-7. 64p. (Speedsters). $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
In the same invitingly designed series as Rose
Impey's Desperate for a Dog (BCCB 1/90), Hiccup Harry is a one-joke book
based on a situation most children find inordinately amusing. Everyone has
suggestions for hiccup cures, but Harry can't stop and can't stop getting himself
in trouble, as in the episode when his hiccup-halting headstand accidently tips
Harry into the school fire alarm. "Wait for me in my office, Harry." While this
lacks even the minimal wit of Desperate for a Dog, the humor is direct and
comfortably familiar. The many slapstick cartoon illustrations make it look like
a joke book-an attractive prospect to the intended audience of beginning and
reluctant readers. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning; Reading, reluctant
Quackenbush, Robert. Clear the Cow Pasture, I'm Coming in for a Landing!:
A Story of Amelia Earhart; written and illus. by Robert Quackenbush. Simon,
1990. Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-68548-1; Paper ed. ISBN 0-671-69218-6. 36p.
Trade ed. $11.95; Paper ed. $3.95.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
Illustrated with cartoons that afford their subject more
dignity than is usual for the series, this is an easy-to-read biography of the great
aviatrix that includes all the pertinent high points and world records.
Quackenbush doesn't flinch from the sadder aspects of Earhart's life ("Mr.
Earhart was often drunk"), but who let slip the misspelling "Lindberg" in the
text, captioning, and jacket copy? The series' trademark marginal comments are
here delivered by birds, whose comments are sometimes funny, twice tasteless,
and only occasionally pertinent. Endpapers chart Earhart's flights and standard
plane maneuvers. RS
Ritchie, Alan. Erin McEwan, Your Days Are Numbered. Knopf, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90321-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80321-1. 
[176p].
Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Things are rough for Erin's family-her mom just
lost her job and her dad, a nursing student, is thinking of going back to his
much-hated job on an oil rig. Erin, twelve, takes an after-school job so she can
slip money into the rainy day sock in her mother's dresser. Erin's problems
multiply-she has to keep her job secret from her parents, she is about to flunk
math, and her parents are increasingly anxious about their finances. All these
problems are solved when Mom gets her job back and Erin passes math after her
employer shows the school how Erin has spotted an important billing error at
work. When faced with the fact that Erin can learn math if she is taught
patiently, her insensitive teacher worries (uncharacteristically) if Erin likes him.
The Nova Scotia setting is unusual and the story, although too-neatly contrived,
comes to a satisfying ending. Math-haters will appreciate Erin's insistence that
her teacher stop saying "math is easy"; instead, "math is hard but we have to do
it anyway." KP
D.V. Teacher-student relations
Robbins, Ken. A Flower Grows; written and illus. by Ken Robbins. Dial,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0765-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0764-9. 32p.
Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
[ 196 1
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Hand-tinted photographs show each stage of the
greening and growth into flower of an amaryllis plant. The pictures are
handsome albeit repetitive, and the text is poetic if at times imprecise. The
imprecision does not imply inaccuracy, but to say "then they nourish it and treat
it with care, and the bulb rewards their effort first by sending up a tiny shoot of
tender green" leaves unclear exactly what "nourish" means. Fortunately, an
appended author's note gives more detailed information. This is attractive but
perhaps limited in its appeal to children who enjoy or want to try gardening,
since the tone is static and the topic a narrow one. ZS
C.U. Botany
Rogers, Paul. The Shapes Game; illus. by Sian Tucker. Holt, 1990. ISBN 0-
8050-1280-X. 26p. $12.95.
M 
3-5 yrs. 
Designed to encourage children's visual acuity in
distinguishing shapes, this book introduces circles, squares, triangles, crescents,
rectangles, spirals, ovals, diamonds, and stars. A page that has a rhyming text
and the appropriate shapes faces a page on which the shapes are combined in a
montage. The rhymes scan, but the text displays dubious use of shapes; for
example "I spy a snowflake/ The flashing of a gem/ A flower shape, a spark
shape/ A twinkle-in-the-dark shape/ What's the word for them? STARS."
Children may have seen flowers and sparks that were not star-shaped, or may be
confused by the geometric facing page that has wavy lines, curved lines, and
squares and rectangles of color. The pictures have a good sense of design but are
minimally effective in presenting the concept of spatial variation. ZS
Ross, Tony. Mrs. Goat and Her Seven Little Kids; written and illus. by Tony
Ross. Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-31624-0. 28p. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Although he has retained the basic plot of this old
folktale, Ross updates the scenes with spoofy graphics that depict Mrs. Goat's
children generating chaos with skateboard, toy tank, soccer ball, and other clutter
while she sets off to the supermarket. The Hungry Wolf gets a music teacher to
help him disguise his voice ("If you don't, I'll bite your beak off"), an artist to
paint his paw to resemble a hoof ("Do a good job of it, and I won't bite your
nose off"), and a dentist to cut off his telltale tail. When the kids finally open
the door, they're all gobbled up except the youngest, who crawls from the coal
bucket to tell Big Mother Goat, who in turn butts the napping wolf so hard that
her kids shoot out of his mouth. 
The watercolor illustrations shift the story
from a symbolic to a literal level, opening up an array of humorous possibilities
that diffuse the suspense of stranger danger. The kids, for instance, evoke less
sympathy when we can see the villain's obvious ploys-how could anyone be
silly enough to mistake those painted claws for a hoof?--but the littlest goat's
spunky suspicions restore a semi-heroic point of view and provide a happy
ending. BH
Sharmat, Marjorie Weinman. Nate the Great and the Musical Note; by
Marjorie Weinman Sharmat and Craig Sharmat; illus. by Marc Simont.
Coward, 1990. ISBN 0-698-20645-2. 48p. (Break-of-Day Books). $11.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Easy-to read mysteries can seem tediously worked out
to the adult critic; here Nate the Great laboriously decodes "A note. Step left
[ 197 ]
until you reach the middle. Step up and you will solve this riddle." The note's
from Rosamond, who has taken to giving piano lessons (and rewarding her cats
with gold stars), and it's addressed to Pip, who badly needs a haircut, so he can .
S. "see sharp." While this doesn't have the smooth inevitability of a puzzle
naturally solved, the story's clues are clear and logical, encouraging beginning
readers to pay word-for-word attention. The easy-reading rhythms are played for
humor: "I read the note once. I read the note twice. I read the note three times.
Some things get better with time. 
Rosamond's note just got stranger."
Simont's illustrations are cartooned with finesse. RS
Slote, Alfred. The Trading Game. Lippincott, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-
32398-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32397-2. 200p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed.
$12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
One of a group of sixth-graders who enjoy trading
baseball cards almost as much as they enjoy playing the game is Andy, whose
collection is inherited from his father. One of Andy's friends has a card (rare, but
of little value) that pictures Andy's grandfather, whose baseball career was brief.
In Dad's collection, worth thousands, there's no card of Grampa. Through some
intricate trading-including one card snatched by a friend-and through getting to
know Grampa better when he agrees to help coach Andy's team-Andy, who is
the narrator, gains perspective on the relative importance of trading, collecting,
and valuing cards versus the pleasure of game participation and the problem of
making quick judgments about others. This has the insight one expects from
the author, and the credibility of situation and development that mark earlier
books. What it lacks is pace, often being slowed by details that tend to be
repetitive. ZS
D.V. Grandfather-child relations
Smee, Nicola. The Invitation; written and illus. by Nicola Smee. Little, 1990.
ISBN 0-316-79894-0. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Ebullient, occasionally chaotic, the line-and-wash
illustrations for an improbable story (first published in Great Britain) are colorful
and offer more comedy than the text. Leo, who looks like he's about eight,
finds a prize in a box of cereal: 
an invitation to a free night at Rosso's
Restaurant. Mom dons a long dress, Dad a tuxedo, and Leo his best pants and a
bow tie like Dad's. Rosso's Restaurant is stately and glamorous; a small combo
plays sedately. All this changes when Mom invites the waiter to dance with her
and their stellar performance proves a catalyst for other dancers. Mom swings
from the chandelier; Leo finds the diamond earring lost by his partner-it's in
his dessert. They are invited back the next evening by a delighted Rosso. A
silly story, but its exaggeration and action will doubtless be appealing to young
listeners. ZS
Snyder, Zilpha Keatley. Libby on Wednesday. Delacorte, 1990. ISBN 0-385-
29979-6. [196p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Although she lived with her father, grandmother, and
great-aunt, it was Libby's absentee mother who had insisted that Libby needed to
be "socialized." That was the end of being tutored at home (wonderful) and the
beginning of eighth-grade classes (boring) that covered material Libby had
[ 198]
learned years before. This isn't a mother-knows-best book, but it does develop
into a story of peer relationships, group dynamics, and the evolution of strong
friendships emerging from a writing club that Libby had originally resented as
part of the abhorred socialization. The background, with its extended and
supportive family, gives warmth and solidity to a novel that is percipient in
characterization and believably positive in outcome. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Family relations
Soto, Gary. Baseball in April. Harcourt, 1990. ISBN 0-15-205720-X. lllp.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Eleven short stories, told with tenderness, optimism,
and wry humor, portray the lives of Mexican-American children in Fresno, heart
of California's Central Valley. While the cultural context is authentic, the
characters are all school-story ordinary and recognizable: a girl dismayed at the
destruction of her Barbie doll ('"Darn it,' she hissed. 'Her head's gone'"); a boy
who wants to be The Karate Kid; another boy whose lip-synching to a
(skipping) record of "La Bamba" turns from humiliation to triumph. Chicano
children and parents will be pleased to find a book that admits larger possibilities
than the stereotype of the noble-but-destitute farmworker; kids of all cultures
will feel like part of this neighborhood. RS
Stevenson, James. National Worm Day; written and illus. by James Stevenson.
Greenwillow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08772-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
08771-X. 40p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
In a format popularized by Arnold Lobel, Stevenson
does a simple but classy job of telling three stories about an oddly assorted
group of friends: a worm, a snail, a mole, and a rhinoceros, who offer three
slice-of-life adventures supported by some minor characters. The stories are
simple, funny, ingenuous, and-the seasoning that improves the flavor of those
ingredients-salty. That touch makes the book appealing, as Herbie the worm
celebrates National Worm Day, Rupert the rhinoceros discovers he isn't the most
popular creature on the scene, and--in an episode with Herbie, Dawn the Mole,
and Rupert-Rupert discovers that behavior modification can produce gratifying
results. Stevenson manages to be comic with great economy of line and with
touches of enjoyable incongruity: Rupert is a tender shade of lilac, for example,
and he gets his tusk stuck when he tries to dig-and-disappear the way Herbie and
Dawn do. ZS
Stock, Catherine. Armien's Fishing Trip; written and illus. by Catherine Stock.
Morrow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08396-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08395-
1. 34p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Removed with his family to the Cape Flats by the
South African government's Group Areas Act, Armien returns for a special
weekend at his former seaside home of Kalk Bay. Bragging to his friends that
his Uncle Faried is going to take him out for some "real fishing," Armien then
stows away on the boat, which is caught in a terrible storm. This is universal
adventure specifically set. The town and Armien's friends are an ethnic and
cultural mix, a fishing community united by their bond with the sea. Double-
S199]
page spreads of all the neighbors at the dock are likewise multi-colorful, a strong
and sunny contrast to the stormy, blue-washed pages of Armien's heroic rescue
of fisherman Sam. Like Stock and Karen Williams' Galimoto (reviewed below)
set in Malawi, Armien's Fishing Trip celebrates the singularity of its cultural
context by touching chords common to kids everywhere. RS
Stolp, Hans. The Golden Bird; illus. by Lidia Postma. Dial, 1990. Library ed.
ISBN 0-8037-0751-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0681-2. 56p. Library ed. $11.89;
Trade ed. $11.95.
NR 
Gr. 4-6. 
Dying of cancer, eleven-year-old Daniel is comforted
by a number of mystical visitations, including his dead father, three birds, and
God. While giving a passing acknowledgment to the anger and sadness dying
children experience, this is a passive, sentimental book, resolved with assurances
of heaven and reunion with dead loved ones. It's too wispy to be effective
fiction, and the non-sectarian free-for-all parade of bedside spirits would probably
count it out for religious education as well. Line-and-wash illustrations are
delicate and poignant, emphasizing the fragile mood of the text. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Stowe, Cynthia. Home Sweet Home, Goodbye. Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-
590-43001-7. [128p]. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Being in a state of shock can make you do funny
things. When Charlie learns that his dad wants to sell the house he and his
mother have occupied rent-free since his parents' divorce seven years ago, he is
stunned. How can he face moving to a new neighborhood and a new school in
the middle of term, not to mention losing his best friend Mark? Is it any wonder
Charlie performs some irrational acts, like picking a fight with the school bully
or putting a dead fly in his father's girlfriend's drink? Charlie's first-person
narration is humorous, but some of the subplots seem contrived: he befriends
the school bully, who just happens to be transferring to Charlie's new school;
he has his first date with a girl he met over the telephone, who will be at his
new school, too. Charlie's frantic efforts to meet the moving day deadline are
initially funny (as is his Mom's classic denial of the fact) but wear a bit thin
towards the end, when his parent's quick reconciliation and projected remarriage
provide a happy but too-convenient finale. Despite these flaws, Stowe's gift for
comic dialogue and eye for the absurd make this an entertaining time-passer.
RAS
D.V. 
Moving, adjustment to
Strauss, Gwen. Trail of Stones; illus. by Anthony Browne. Knopf, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90582-0; Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-80582-6. 35p. Library
ed. $9.99; Paper ed. $6.95.
R* 
Gr. 10-. 
A dozen sophisticated poems illustrated by Anthony
Browne's pen-and-ink drawings are based on fairy tales, mostly from an anti-
hero's point of view. The father of Hansel and Gretel confesses his weakness,
the witch and a dwarf cast different lights on Snow White, an aging prince
celebrates Rapunzel's patience, an ambivalent wolf awaits Red Riding Hood,
Cinderella laments her childhood, Bluebeard pursues his solitary madness, the
fox-woman reveals her dangerous double life, the frog princess triumphs with
temper, the queen who outwitted Rumplestiltskin longs for his company, the
[200]
Beast despairs of Beauty, and Sleeping Beauty contemplates her sensuous
awakening. Strauss' style is lean but resonant with phrases that play on the
characters and situation, while Browne's art probes the stories' darker tones of
mystery. The wolf's slanted eyes peer enigmatically from a furred space between
Grandma's frilly cap and a neatly turned sheet-a picture that deepens the
suspense of his anticipation: "She will have the youngest skin/ I have ever
touched, her fingers unfurling/ like fiddle heads in spring./ My matted fur will
smell to her of forest/ moss at night. She'll wonder about my ears/ large,
pointed, soft as felt/ my eyes red as her cloak/ my leather nose on her belly."
For high-school students, a meet companion to Anne Sexton's poetic fairy tale
variants. BH
Tafuri, Nancy. Follow Me!; written and illus. by Nancy Tafuri. Greenwillow,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08774-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08773-6. [24p].
Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
This wordless book follows a young seal as it
follows a crab to its fellows and the sea, while mother (father?) seal looks on
protectively. The thin plot will seem slight to even the youngest lookers, who
may also question the chase's apparent change of direction halfway through the
book. Tafuri's ink-and-watercolor spreads are, as usual, efficiently attractive,
with the black-outlined animals posed against a stylized Arctic backdrop. Seals
do eat crabs-and most tenacious toddlers will recognize the poetic injustice that
keeps this one from even getting close. RS
Tompert, Ann. Grandfather Tang's Story: A Tale Told with Tangrams; illus.
by Robert Andrew Parker. Crown, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-57272-9;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-57487-X. 32p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Drawing on a traditional Chinese form of storytelling
with seven standard shapes cut from a square of paper, Tompert recounts the tale
of two fox fairies whose magic transformations almost end in death. As one
changes into a rabbit, the other changes into a dog that hunts it, and the
predator/prey transmutations escalate until one is shot by a hunter and the other
rescues him. The sequence might become repetitive but for Parker's skillfully
paced variations of composition, texture, pastel tones, and page design. His pen-
and-watercolor art adds drama to the chase, while the stylized tangram insets will
motivate children to try their own versions. The three-fold tangram crown above
the publisher's name perhaps outdoes itself, since the rules of the game demand
that "all seven tans must be used; they must touch, but none may overlap."
However, not to quibble about a book that so ingeniously translates an old
medium into a new one and that will prove trendsetting for storytellers who can
extend the concept to flannel- and story-boards. BH
C.U. Storytelling
Tresselt, Alvin. Wake Up, City!; illus. by Carolyn Ewing. Lothrop, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08653-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08652-7. 32p. Library
ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
New illustrations interpret again the direct and
evocative text, here revised, of a book first published in 1957. Tresselt's
description of some of the things that happen when the day starts in a large city
are just as applicable now as then; Ewing's paintings add some touches that will
[201]
please feminists (a policewoman, a woman bus driver-at least, a bus driver who
could be a woman) and some that reflect the architectural variety, the bustle of
various activities, and the multiracial composition of the urban scene. ZS
C.U. City life
Van Raven, Pieter. Pickle and Price. Scribner's, 1990. ISBN 0-684-19162-8.
202p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Pickle is thirteen, a slow learner whose abusive father
supervises a rural prison farm. Price is black and older, a convict who has just
been released from the farm and who is determined to make something of his
life. Price is not pleased when Pickle announces he's running away from home
and wants Price to come with him in the car he's stolen from his father. The
rest of the story deals with the encounters they have as they travel together, and
with the respect and affection that grow as they get to know each other better.
They work for a woman who cheats them, and for a professor; they meet a
Native American who is an alcoholic and who befriends them; they have an
encounter with police, and Pickle rescues Price by brandishing his father's gun,
also stolen, then gives him the car so that he can get away. The author writes
with good flow and pace, and his characters are believable; the plot seems-
despite some dramatic moments and an adequate amount of action-weak, as
though the structure were an appendage to planned relationships among the
major and minor characters. ZS
C.V. Ethical concepts; Friendship values; Interracial understanding
Walter, Mildred Pitts. Mariah Keeps Cool. Bradbury, 1990. ISBN 0-02-
792295-2. 140p. $12.95.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
Mariah Loves Rock (BCCB 10/88) was a lively, if
choppy, friends-and-family story featuring black characters; this sequel is a
disappointing combination of too much plot and excessive didactic
overstatement. It's summer. Mariah and Lynn's troubled half-sister Denise has
come to live with them; Mariah and her friends are training to compete in a
citywide swimming and diving competition; Lynn is secretly helping the
homeless. None of these plot threads is given its due, with Mariah's winning of
the gold medal (over the favorite, a racist white girl) an unconvincing result for a
girl who had never dived before that summer. The writing is often confusing
("Along with her natural force she moved in tune with the spring of the board to
give herself the maximum lift") and earnestly belabored: "So try to understand
Denise. She misses her mama and her friends. Give her time. Why don't you
go back and tell her you won't mind if she doesn't go if she will wish you well
and hope you win." Denise, in fact, is the most interesting character here,
unaffected by the priggishness that seems to have developed in the other
characters. RS
D.V. Sisters
Warren, James A. Portrait of a Tragedy: America and the Vietnam War.
Lothrop, 1990. ISBN 0-688-07454-5. 208p. illus. with photographs. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Summarizing thirty years of history in fewer than
two hundred pages is no easy feat. Warren's introductory survey of America's
longest war gives his readers the big picture, providing concise descriptions and
thought-provoking analysis. Beginning with the French colonialization of
[2021
Vietnam, Warren explains the rise of Vietnamese nationalism, the role of Ho
Chi Minh, and the reasons for American involvement. Emphasizing the politics
behind the war and the attitudes of American presidents from Truman to Nixon,
Portrait shows multiple points of view: the attitudes of the North Vietnamese,
Vietcong, South Vietnamese, American military, and public are all considered.
Particularly helpful is Warren's ability to capture key concepts
(counterinsurgency, containment) in a few sentences. Making judicious use of
secondary sources, the author highlights key conflicts, military engagements and
operations, providing the reader with enough background information to
understand their significance. Unfortunately, some of the army-issue black-and-
white photographs have a generic quality. One, captioned "A B-52 Stratofortress
in flight over Vietnam" could have been shot anywhere. Maps, which would
have been useful throughout the book, are limited to a handful in the first
chapter. The map with the most information is also the hardest to read. But the
oversize format, double-spaced text, bibliography, and chronology make this an
accessible and helpful resource. Warren successfully proves his thesis that the
tragedy of Vietnam was not only the massive loss of life but also the fact that
the conflict ultimately was unwinnable, given the lack of popular support for the
South Vietnamese government. RAS
C.U. History-U.S.
Watanabe, Shigeo. Let's Go Swimming; illus. by Yasuo Ohtomo. Philomel,
1990. ISBN 0-399-21896-3. 32p. (I Love Special Days Books). $10.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Crayon drawings show small Bear moving from
splashing about in a washtub on the lawn (Mrs. Bear supervising) to a visit to
the municipal swimming pool (Mr. Bear supervising). Bear goes through the
usual stages of trepidation and acclimatization and achieves a modicum of
success at his first swimming lesson. Friends cheer, parents are patient and
encouraging, and this is another example of a book in which Watanabe presents,
simply and effectively, an event that looms large to a small child: 
the
acquisition of a new skill. ZS
D.V. Parent-child relations; Self-confidence
Watson, N. Cameron. The Little Pigs' Puppet Book; written and illus. by N.
Cameron Watson. 
Little, 1990. 
ISBN 0-316-92468-7. 
[32 p]. 
$14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-4. 
Like The Little Pigs' First Cookbook (BCCB 11/87),
this is an invitingly formatted project book, filled with good ideas and the kind
of compulsively detailed asides so necessary to that favorite activity, planning.
"For a winter scene: A. Choose a dark cloth. B. Pin white cloth or paper onto
it for snowy ground. C. Glue on lots of cotton balls for snow." The puppet
projects here, however, are more complicated than the cooking projects in the
first book, so the picture-book format is somewhat at odds with the level of
difficulty in the text. Included are instructions for three kinds of puppets, three
kinds of stages, tips on script writing, special effects, ticket making ("Try to fit
all information into a 1 1/2" x 3" space"), and refreshments, including
instructions for origami-like "paper serving packets." As was true of the earlier
cookbook, the framing story about the three brothers Pig is irrelevant and rather
distracting, but the project pages themselves are perfect for those kids who love
to follow the directions. RS
[203 ]
Weiss, Ann E. Who's to Know?: Information, the Media, and Public
Awareness. Houghton, 1990. 
ISBN 0-395-49702-7. 
[192p]. 
$14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-12. 
In a lively expos6, Weiss argues that the "right" to
know is fragile at best and can be easily crushed by political and economic
interest. Who's to Know traces the history of censorship in Europe and the
United States and expounds the thesis that the gains in access to information
during the last thirty years were dramatically reversed by the Reagan
administration. Weiss suggests that the media's ability to keep us informed is
hampered by an increasing concentration of ownership, the need to attract
advertising dollars, and the public's preference for "infotainment" and soft news.
While she gives some dramatic examples of government coverups (from
Watergate to radiation leaks), Weiss also shows that the media often blunders,
unwittingly broadcasting government "leaks" and terrorist propaganda. Her
extensive use of both historical and current events (from William Randolph
Hearst's involvement in the Spanish-American war to CNN's coverage of
Tiananmen Square) add depth to her analysis. Weiss marshalls her facts and
figures with authority. She provides balanced coverage of such complex issues
as personal privacy vs. the right to know, using as examples Gary Hart and a
rape victim whose name was published in the newspaper. Who's to Know?
should inject its readers with a healthy dose of skepticism about government and
the media, and leaving them with a strong desire to ensure free access to
information. RAS
C.U. Journalism; Social studies
Weiss, Harvey. Cartoons and Cartooning; illus. by Harvey Weiss and others.
Houghton, 1990. ISBN 0-395-49217-3. 
[64p]. $13.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
Although this book casually covers topics such as the
history of cartoons (including the Bayeux tapestry, no less), various kinds of
cartoons (comic strips, editorial cartoons, animated cartoons, etc), drawing
cartoons, and "being funny," the immediate appeal, of course, is the
illustrations. Unfortunately, too few of the cartoons included here are actually
funny. This is partially because most of the jokes are stale, but the author's
explanatory captions also deserve some of the blame: "In this gag panel the
dogs are shown overdressed and uncomfortably hot while the not-too-intelligent
looking hot dog man is standing by his wagon daydreaming or thinking about
selling his hot dogs. Everything is in the one picture .. ." While many kids
will read anything about cartoons and comics, they will probably be disappointed
at the absence of their favorites; long on Prince Valiant, Barnaby, and Felix the
Cat, this is fairly oblivious to the last twenty years and such kid-pleasers as
Garfield, Roger Rabbit, and Mad magazine. 
The section on drawing is
patronizingly uninformative: "A backward or forward C makes a good-looking
ear," "Animal noses--especially on dogs and cats-are usually big black
circles," "Hands, which are not easy to draw, can be done in many different
ways." For more information, inspiration, and fun, try Harvey Kurtzman's My
Life as a Cartoonist (BCCB 1/89) or Bill Peet's Bill Peet (BCCB 6/89). RS
Wenzel, Dorothy. Ann Bancroft. Dillon, 1990. ISBN 0-87518-418-9. [63p.]
illus. with photographs. (Taking Part). $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[204 ]
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Handicapped with dyslexia, young Ann Bancroft felt
confident only outdoors or on the athletic field. She struggled through college
and became a physical education teacher, climbing mountains in her spare time.
In 1986, Ann, as a member of Will Steger's expedition, became the first woman
to reach the North Pole via dogsled. Details of the polar expedition are
sometimes unclear: "By the thirty-fifth day of the expedition, three sleds and
twenty-eight dogs were left. Since the remaining three sleds were almost as
heavy as they were in the beginning, their progress slowed." While conveying
little of Ann's personality beyond laudatory references ("Determined and
stubborn, Ann had beaten the odds, amazing herself, her parents, and the
system"), this middle-grades biography is serviceably written, with the inherent
appeals of a determined heroine and her exciting quest. Dramatic color
photographs add both information and atmosphere. RS
D.V. Perseverance
Wersba, Barbara. The Farewell Kid. Zolotow/Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-026397-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026378-4. 
155p. Library ed. $12.89;
Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
This is a sequel to Just Be Gorgeous (BCCB 12/88)
and Wonderful Me (BCCB 4/89) and again has nonconformist Heidi Rosenbloom
as narrator. It also brings back the protagonist of an earlier Wersba book,
Harvey Beaumont (The Carnival in My Mind, BCCB 10/82), to achieve a happy
love affair between two hitherto unhappy poor little rich kids. Declaring she
will not go to college, Heidi rents a former barbershop so that she can set up a
dog rescue operation, and Harvey eventually joins her, becoming her lover and
hoping for marriage. The story is not wholly believable, but that's part of the
fun. The style is yeasty and the characters are colorful. The whole, however,
seems to be less than its parts because of the uneven pace, the repetitious
incidents (trouble with obedience from the dogs, for example) and the lack of
variation in tone. ZS
D.V. Independence
Wild, Margaret. The Very Best of Friends; illus. by Julie Vivas. Harcourt,
1990. ISBN 0-15-200625-7. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Jessie and James are an affectionate, aging couple
who run "a farm with fifty cattle, twenty chickens, four horses, . . . three
dogs"-and one cat, William. James loves William, Jessie does not; but they
compromise until James dies and Jessie rejects William in her grieving
isolation. Almost too late, she rescues him from the wild, a tomcat turned lean
and mean with a torn ear and bald patches. The cycle of death and reconciliation
doesn't really comprise a plot, but young listeners will be held by the loss and
recovery of a vulnerable pet. As in her art work for The Nativity (BCCB 9/88),
Vivas' spare watercolor spreads are strong on expressive postures and unexpected
perspectives. There may be a moment of confusion between the gray spotted
dogs and the gray striped cat, all remarkably alike in shape, but the main
characters and creatures ultimately emerge with unmistakable individuality and
homely appeal. BH
D.V. Death, adjustment to
[ 205 ]
Williams, Karen. 
Galimoto; illus. by Catherine Stock. 
Lothrop, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08790-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08789-2. 32p. Library
ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
You won't get more than three pages into this
without listeners insisting "What's a galimoto?"--a suspense (we're not telling)
well served and fairly resolved in this simple story set in Malawi. Kondi wants
to make a galimoto, but he doesn't have enough wire in his "box of things."
Undeterred, he trades his knife, combs junkyards and backyards, and teaches a
little girl how to use a stick to probe an anthill-all industrious strategies for
getting more wire to build a galimoto. Refreshingly contemporary details about
life in Kondi's village are casually inflected in the text and pictures, with
children playing at an anthill twice as big as themselves, another child wearing a
"Disco" t-shirt, mothers shopping at a store that sells aspirin as well as colorful
cloth. Stock's watercolors, summer-green and flexibly lined, inform Kondi's
quest with good-natured dignity. To the satisfaction of all, the book closes with
a double-page close-up of a galimoto in action. Better have on hand an ample
supply of old hangers and paper clips--even the most sophisticated American kid
will want to attempt the construction of this elegant little toy. RS
D.V. Love for toy; Perseverance
Wood, Phyllis Anderson. The Revolving Door Stops Here. Cobblehill, 1990.
ISBN 0-525-65022-9. 188p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Eric, now seventeen, has been in several foster homes
since he was eight; his mother has died and his father, who had left his family
before that, has sent support checks but has never made an effort to see or write
to his son. When his tearful foster mother tells Eric that he will have to go in
order to make room for her married daughter's family, he wonders who will take
in a person his age. The revolving door stops when a school counselor and his
wife offer Eric a home, eventually taking him with them when they move and
giving him permanence and security. Eric finally hears from his father, who
suggests they meet at an airport where he's changing flights. Offended by the
cold, business-like manner added to the years of neglect, Eric gives up his dream
of reunion with his natural father and accepts the fact that his family consists of
the people who love him. The writing style is weak, as is the characterization;
both lack depth or nuance. The plot is realistic but a bit too pat at the end, with
the offer of a permanent home, the acquisition of new friends in the small town
to which they have all moved, and the arrival of a baby who is instantly loved
by Eric as his little brother. ZS