Aardema, Verna, ad. Pedro and the Padre: A Tale from Jalisco, Mexico; illus.
by Friso Henstra. Dial, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0523-9; Trade ed. ISBN
0-8037-0522-0. 32p, Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Sent away from his home because he refuses to work,
Pedro becomes a bell ringer for a village priest. Unfortunately, he sleeps on the
job, shirks his hoeing, and lies, but-true to the trickster tradition-he outwits
everyone he meets and learns the moral lesson ("HOW TO TELL THE
TRUTH") lightly if at all. Earth tones and pen-and-ink texturing of solid shapes
distinguish Henstra's art, and storytellers will enjoy the combination of familiar
and unusual motifs. It's too bad there's no source note to help evaluate the
adaptation, but the dearth of Mexican folklore in picture book format makes this
a likely selection. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
D.V. Laziness, overcoming
Archer, Jules. Breaking Barriers: The Feminist Revolution from Susan B.
Anthony to Margaret Sanger to Betty Friedan. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-
83104-2. 207p. illus. with photographs. (Epoch Biographies). $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
This entry in the Epoch series considers the American
feminist movement through three of its major figures: 
Susan B. Anthony,
Margaret Sanger, and Betty Friedan. The biography of Susan B. Anthony is
unexceptional, but the section on Margaret Sanger, a heroine less often praised,
is excellent, vividly depicting not only her struggle for women's right to birth
control (ironically, the book only hints at contraceptive forms other than the
condom) but also the impact her work had on the lives of women of all classes.
The section on Betty Friedan, enlivened with quotes from the author's interview
with her, is also strong. The writing generally lacks subtlety, however, and this
problem particularly weakens the "historical essays" or overviews, which also
tend to be disjointed (a paragraph on female clerics precedes one on female
motorcyclists, for instance, with no segue or explanation) and oversimplified
(Sandra Day O'Connor was not appointed to the Supreme Court just "to appease
women"). Mentions of other countries' gender inequalities (without discussion
of their feminist movements) are confusing rather than illustrative in a history of
American feminism. Doreen Rappaport's American Women: Their Lives in
Their Words (BCCB 1/91) gives a better idea of the power of women and
[1]
women's history. Archer's book has no notes; an index and bibliography are
included. DS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
D.V. Devotion to a cause; Sex roles
Avi. Nothing But the Truth: A Documentary Novel. Jackson/Orchard, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08559-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05959-6. 
[192p].
Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 7-10. 
In the course of only a few days, ninth-grader Philip
Malloy becomes a national celebrity when his homeroom teacher, Miss Narwin,
gets him suspended for singing along with the daily morning tape of The Star-
Spangled Banner: "it's sort of a ... patriotic thing with me." This, anyway, is
the story that shows up in the paper and on the radio; the actual course of events
is somewhat different. Avi tells the story through an Up the Down Staircase
montage of conversations, excerpts from Philip's diary, school memos,
newspaper reports and hate mail; and it is apparent from the start that Philip is
less patriotic than he is annoying, deliberately goading Miss Narwin because she
flunked him in English, thus preventing him from joining the track team. And
he doesn't sing, he hums-a distinction pointed most wittily (and poignantly) in
the book's last (punch)line: "I don't know the words." The real theme here is
literacy, not liberty, with the characters fumbling and grasping for language-
slogans-to express themselves, as in this speech from Philip's father: "I don't
think we even own a flag. But that doesn't mean we don't love our country.
Believe me. We just don't make a big thing about it. It's not that kind of
showy thing with us. But not being allowed to sing 'The Star-Spangled Banner'
S.. 
Well, that's like, sort of, not being allowed to, you know, pray. A personal
thing." And while the school administration's memos speak more clearly than
Mr. Malloy, they distance themselves from the controversy, suggesting, for
example, that there may be problems in Philip's "home arena." Miss Narwin is
the hero here; while ultimately sympathetic, Philip is the pest that lurks in
every classroom and everybody; both characters lose in the end. Part school
farce, part shaggy dog story, this novel turns a sharp ear to "the words thing,"
what we mean and what we say. RS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Teacher-student relations
Blos, Joan W. The Heroine of the Titanic: A Tale Both True and Otherwise of
the Life of Molly Brown; illus. by Tennessee Dixon. Morrow, 1991. Library
ed. ISBN 0-688-07547-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07546-0. 40p. Library ed.
$14.88; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
6-9 yrs. 
Illustrated with lavish and vigorous watercolors that
sprawl across large double-page spreads, this tall-taleish-and occasionally
rhyming-rendition of the Molly Brown saga has the feel and appeal of a folk
epic. Born in Missouri in 1876, Molly left home to get rich in boomtown
Leadville, Colorado, where Molly sang for gold and silver coins and met and
married a miner named J. J. Brown who made her rich: "By this time, J. J. was
making so much money, they set silver dollars in the bedroom floor just for
decoration." Molly's exuberance eventually wore J. J. out, and she took off for
Europe and Asia, only to later return home on the "unsinkable" Titanic. She
survived, of course, commandeering a lifeboat ("'Move over, sailor,' Molly
[2]
shouted. 'I was born in a cyclone on the Mississippi River, and I don't plan on
drowning at sea"'), telling stories to the other evacuees, rowing and hoping.
"Molly Brown? The unsinkable Molly Brown?/ There was glory in her story,
And it won her great renown./ For when the ship Titanic sank/ Molly did not
go down." The opulent details of Molly's person as well as her houses are
generously imagined by illustrator Dixon, who well matches the larger-than life
personality lavishly filigreed by Blos (who includes a historical note about what
is actually known about the real Molly Brown's life. Half-mythical and all-
American, Molly is an outrageous read-aloud heroine that kids will be glad to
meet. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
Buckley, Helen. "Take Care of Things," Edward Said; illus. by Katherine
Coville. Lothrop, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07732-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
688-07731-5. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
On the day his big brother Edward went back to
school, Tom was unhappy at being left behind; he wasn't sure, by lunchtime,
that all the things he'd done were really useful. The very amicable housekeeper
assured him that he'd fed three pets, and taken care of toys and had a parade to
entertain everybody. Soothed, Tom took his nap, later reporting to Edward, "I
took care of things." "Good," his brother said, "I knew you would." The
illustrations are pedestrian, and story is fairly static, but the book has many
aspects with which the lap audience can identify, particularly being responsible
and having that appreciated. Both parents work, and it's rather nice to have a
caretaker who is kind and supportive and is not presented as the focus of the
problem of adjustment. ZS
D.V. Brothers; Responsibility
Bunting, Eve. A Turkey for Thanksgiving; illus. by Diane de Groat. Clarion,
1991. ISBN 0-89919-793-0. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
The festive table is set, the food is cooking, and the
hostess, Mrs. Moose, is disconsolate because "Everyone always has a turkey for
Thanksgiving. Everyone but us." Her loving spouse promises, "I will go this
minute and find you a turkey for Thanksgiving," and off he goes, donning warm
clothing, into the snowy day. En route he picks up the invited guests (Sheep,
Porcupine, Rabbit, and Mr. and Mrs. Goat). Turkey tries to flee, but falls down;
nervously, he goes to the Moose home. It seems (and some listeners will surely
have guessed this) that when Mrs. Moose said she wanted a turkey, she meant
she wanted one as a guest. Slight, but adequately told; a bit contrived, but the
humor and the kindness should appeal to the read-aloud audience. The watercolor
paintings are colorful but not brash in tones, more admirable for their technical
proficiency than for their grace or composition. ZS
C.U. Thanksgiving
Carr, Terry. Spill! The Story of the Exxon Valdez. Watts, 1991. Library ed.
ISBN 0-531-10998-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-15217-0. 
64p. illus. with
photographs. Library ed. $18.90; Trade ed. $18.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
This photodocumentary addresses, in full color, the
Prince William Sound ecological crisis following the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil
[3]
spill. It's a story both suspenseful and sad; Carr has neatly summarized the
events and surveyed their repercussions as far as possible with court decisions
pending and the jury still out on the environment's recovery from trauma to flora
and fauna. The level here is introductory, but the information will serve as
background for more deeply focused reports such as Roland Smith's Sea Otter
Rescue: The Aftermath of an Oil Spill (BCCB 11/90). Clear maps, a selective
reading list of primarily journalistic articles, and an index make this
indispensable for the reports that will inevitably be required on such a landmark
accident. BH
C.U. Ecology
Caseley, Judith. 
Dear Annie; written and illus. by Judith Caseley.
Greenwillow, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10011-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
10010-4. [32p]. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Grandpa has been writing to Annie ever since she was
born: "Welcome to this world. When I saw you for the first time through the
window at the hospital, you looked like a rose." Annie's mother answers for
Annie for a time ("She'll be dancing soon!"), then Annie is dictating her own
letters ("Mama says in the summertime you'll take me swimming"), and finally
is able to write all by herself ("Mama took me to ballet class. I liked it, except
when the teacher pushed on my knees. It hurt"). Grandpa's postcards and letters
are filled with love and respect, and, as Annie announces to her classmates, there
are-so far-86 of them to treasure. The line-and-watercolor illustrations of the
letters and the cozy details of Grandpa's and Annie's lives are bright vignettes set
within lots of white space, giving the book an open and friendly tone. The
affection between a grandparent and child is rarely captured with such easygoing
warmth. Everybody needs a pen pal like Grandpa, so get out the stamps and
crayons. RS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Clifton, Lucille. Everett Anderson's Christmas Coming; illus. by Jan Spivey
Gilchrist. Holt, 1991. ISBN 0-8050-1549-3. 28p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
First published in 1971, Clifton's story-poem,
originally illustrated by Evaline Ness, here has handsome paintings by a winner
of the Coretta Scott King Award. The story of a black child who misses his
father but still enjoys the color and warmth of Christmastime and is confident of
his mother's love is vividly translated into visual expression by Gilchrist. The
tender faces of mother and child, the smiling guests, the decorated tree are
composed with restraint yet rich with color, and the pictures also reflect the
affectionate humor of some of the text. ZS
C.U. 
Christmas
Conford, Ellen. Loving Someone Else. Bantam, 1991. ISBN 0-553-07353-2.
151p. $15.00.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Looking forward to the expensive college of her
choice, Holly is depressed by her father's financial collapse; she decides to take a
summer job to earn college money. The job, acting as helper-companion to two
elderly sisters, seems unattractive until their debonair nephew shows up.
Instantly smitten, Holly stays on, hoping for a relationship with Mr. Charming.
[4]
She is, in a spoofy pattern that will be familiar to paperback romance fans, the
object of instant interest to the nice boy-next-door type, while he is considered
by the snobbish Other Girl to be her property. There's some diversity in the
characters of the odd, elderly Brewster sisters-shades of Arsenic and Old Lace-
but the tongue-in-cheek tone does not quite rescue the story from formula
clich6s. ZS
D.V. Adaptability
Corbin, William. Me and the End of the World. Simon, 1991. ISBN 0-671-
74223-X. [256p]. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
"By the week before last Christmas," Tim begins,
"just about everybody had heard the world would come to an end the first day of
May." The time is 1927, Tim is thirteen, and he's determined to get a few
things done before May. Four things: beat the bully who's been persecuting
him, make amends for his behavior toward an elderly neighbor, hitch his sled to
cars for a ride on a particular street, and kiss pretty Judy Felton. By the end of
the story, when May has come and the world still exists, all missions have been
accomplished. The writing style gets a bit folksy occasionally, perhaps because
most of the characters seem stereotypical, but the concerns of Tim's life should
interest readers who share them, and the placid wholesome story has the humor
and coziness of a Norman Rockwell picture. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Family relations
Crew, Linda. Nekomah Creek. Delacorte, 1991. 
ISBN 0-385-30442-0.
[192p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Robby, the engaging narrator of this light-hearted
(but not too frothy) family story, is given a convincing voice by Linda Crew.
His family is casual and affectionate; Mom's work takes her out of the home,
Dad happily serves as cook and caretaker; Robby knows their house may be
messy at times but he enjoys his parents and his siblings, two-year-old twins.
Sent to the school counselor because he spends too much time reading, Robby
begins to fear that his family situation will be deemed inadequate, his fear
engendered by the fact that a classmate has been taken from her parents and put
in a foster home. When he learns that was a case of parental abuse and that the
counselor thinks his parents are fun and his home attractive, Robby is
immensely relieved, a denouement expectable but satisfying. This is a funny,
sunny story that says-without being too obvious about it-a great deal about
children's fears, about familial relationships, and about peer pressure. ZS
D.V. Family relations; Sex roles
Curtis, Patricia. Animals and the New Zoos. Lodestar, 1991. ISBN 0-525-
67347-4. 60p. illus. with photographs. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
The very title implies an indictment of old zoos, and
Curtis doesn't hesitate to criticize the way animals have been treated for the sake
of public exhibition. Her coverage of recently developed simulated habitats
includes the five major ecosystems: grasslands and savannas, deserts, woodlands,
rain forests, and tundras and taigas. Although the text tends to take a catalogue
approach, the descriptions are well written and the color photographs appealing.
A "checklist of things to look for and questions to ask" when readers visit a zoo
[5]
will alert them to become more observant, and a list of good zoos to visit will
point them in the right direction; the stories of mistreated elephants will break
their hearts. BH
D.V. Animals, respect for
Danziger, Paula. Earth to Matthew. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-30453-6.
[160p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
In this third book about Matthew (Everyone Else's
Parents Said Yes, BCCB 2/90, Make Like a Tree and Leave, BCCB 11/90), he is
still antagonistic toward classmate Vanessa and sister Amanda (an unhappy pre-
adolescent) but having a first boy-girl relationship with Jil! (who's substituted
the exclamation point for the second "1" in her name). The squabbles among
sixth-grade peers, the jokes, the problems, the theme of conservation, and the
balance between Matthew's family life and his school life all are realistic albeit
occasionally exaggerated for comic effect. The story ends with a detailed account
of a class visit (an overnight stay at the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia) that's
a minor comedy in itself. Bright, breezy style and a good ear for dialogue
compensate for the fact that the incidents and relationships are not tied by a
strong story line. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Brothers-sisters
Dash, Joan. The Triumph of Discovery: Women Scientists Who Won the
Nobel Prize. Messner, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-671-69332-8; Paper ed. ISBN
0-671-69333-6. 148p. illus. with photographs. Library ed. $13.98; Paper ed.
$8.95.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
In biographies of four women scientists who have
won the Nobel Prize, Dash does a creditable job of describing the scientists'
personalities and an excellent job of describing their research and the consequent
discoveries that led to their attaining the status of Nobel Laureates. There is
occasionally an adulatory tone, but for the most part Dash focuses objectively on
the strong commitment to seeking new facts, the problems the four women had
because they were women in a male-dominated field, and their shared persistence
in the face of obstacles. The four are Maria Goeppert-Mayer, the only woman
besides Marie Curie whose prize was in physics; and three whose prize was in
medicine: Rosalyn Yalow, Barbara McClintock, and Rita Levi-Montalcini. The
author communicates the excitement and satisfaction of a life in science, and she
is clear in making the nature of the biographees' findings comprehensible. A
list of the ten Nobel Prizes that have gone to women scientists is appended, as
are a bibliography and an index. ZS
C.U. Science
Dawson, Jill, ed. How Do I Look?; illus. with photographs by Sally Feldt.
Virago/Trafalgar Square, 1991. Paper ed. ISBN 1-85381-222-6. 107p. Paper
ed. $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
In this book, says the editor in her foreword, "young
women talk about how they feel when they look in the mirror, and what they
feel from the inside, looking out." The young women interviewed are of varied
race, age, sexual orientation, and background. Some voices are individual and
fascinating: Yasmin discusses her decision, made at the age of seventeen, to
[6]
adopt traditional Muslim dress for women; Anne, an amputee, asks "how do you
even begin to assess your own emotions on entering a changing room with
young able-bodied women, most of them slim but all saying, 'Oh, I've got a
horrible body,' when you're in a wheelchair, just wanting to try on a pair of
trousers?" The emphasis, however, seems to be on problems with weight and
eating, and although the stories of such suffering make sad reading they are not
particularly enlightening. Interviews are occasionally followed by Dawson's
analysis, and poems introduce each section. Black-and-white photos of women
(but not those interviewed) appear throughout the text; lists of (British only)
counseling centers and eating-disorder related books are appended. DS
D.V. Self-appraisal
DeClements, Barthe. 
Wake Me at Midnight. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-
84038-6. 154p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
The alluring title, along with the cover painting of a
nightgowned girl under a full moon, promise a mystery story, but the best part
of this book is its honest, kids-eye view of ordinary life dramas. Caitlin doesn't
know who is secretly digging in her neighbor's backyard at night; she is also
perplexed by the shady dealings going on at another house down the street.
She's already worried about the boy next door, nicknamed "Bones" for his
excessive skinniness; Caitlin's subterfuges for making him eat are touching and
believable. Missy is a new girl who has moved into the neighborhood, and the
fact that her father is a hypnotist provides some appealing, if not always
convincing, how-to's and anecdotes, but does nothing to further the plot. The
mysteries are not very well set up or resolved, but the daily details, such as
Caitlin's care of her baby brother, are real, and conveyed with insight and
respect. RS
Derman, Martha. Tales from Academy Street. Scholastic, 1991. ISBN 0-590-
43703-8. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Nine tales of the unusual describe the events
throughout one school year on Academy Street. One boy discovers that he has
brought his sneakers to life; a mysterious gardener may have some peculiar
origins; two brothers find a mirror that seems to sow dissension in those who
view themselves in it. The ideas are inventive but unfocused, and most are
inadequately explained or explored (in the chapter where a boy, after meeting a
talking shrew, becomes one for several hours, we never hear about his
transformation or shrew-experiences, which would surely be the most interesting
part). The shallow writing fails to convey atmosphere, and since the stories lack
an individual payoff the reader expects a final denouement to the series, some
justification for this peculiar year, that never arrives. DS
Dionetti, Michelle. Coal Mine Peaches; illus. by Anita Riggio. Orchard, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08548-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05948-0. 32p. Library
ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Told as a fictional reminiscence of three generations
of an Italian-American family, this story is based in part on the author's
memories of her own grandfather, an inveterate tale-teller. The title, in fact,
refers to a tale told by the fictional grandfather when he was a boy in a coal-
[7]
mining town, that it got so hot in the mine in summer that peaches grew out of
the coals. (The "peaches" were the coal-nugget-sized plums they were eating.)
The story moves on to Grandfather's marriage and his children and their children
and family reunions and the special love the narrator had for her grandfather and
for his stories. The figures in the paintings are sometimes awkwardly drawn,
but the pictures have warmth and color, echoing the simplicity and affection of
the text. ZS
D.V. Family relations; Grandparent-child relations
Driscoll, Jack. Skylight. Jackson/Orchard, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08561-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05961-8. [192p]. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 9-12. 
Buddy is a poor ex-farm boy in a small Michigan
town in the early 1960s, embarking on an affair with glamorous Phoebe,
daughter of the incredibly rich Mr. Crouch. Despite the strain of the difference
in their backgrounds he follows her to Smith, hoping to enter Amherst and stay
with her, but he discovers she has taken another lover and returns to Michigan.
The fervent self-absorption of the narrator lacks authorial perspective, and
Buddy's leaden and pretentious observations (he commences a job driving an ice
cream truck with the following sober reflection: "I hoped my upbringing, my
growing up poor, had taught me to meet these working-class people easily, to
satisfy their simple desire for ice cream") quickly grow tiresome; things
presumably intended to be meaningful, such as Phoebe's leaving Buddy her
diaphragm as a pledge of fidelity when she goes off to Smith, end up silly,
particularly in the absence of any real humor. There are some interesting views
of the pre-Vietnam era becoming the Vietnam era, but the author and his
characters spend so much time on contemplation and philosophy ("You don't
simply reject the character of place and genes, contesting your whole life as
though the choice existed to accept another, a better one, without coming to
grief," intones Buddy's dad) that the reader will find it difficult to care. DS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Duffey, Betsy. The Gadget War. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-84152-8. [64p].
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-4. 
Kelly Sparks has always been proud of the gadgets
her inventive mind has suggested: forty-three inventions and she's only in third
grade. In Chapter 2, "Hate at First Sight," a newcomer provides competition,
and his name is Albert Einstein Jones. From then on it's a battle of wits and
gadgets, as each tries to outdo the other; neither is above a few dirty tricks.
After a minor disaster in the school cafeteria, a rebuke to both inventors results
in their becoming friends. This has humor, and most of it is the disaster humor
younger readers particularly enjoy. Unfortunately, that's about all it has. It's a
one-gag situation and the recurrence of the gag makes each battle seem less
amusing. The writing is light, the characters drawn with little depth, and the
liberal use of exclamation points, capital letters, and italic type-face overdone.
ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
[8]
Dumbleton, Mike. Dial-a-Croc; illus. by Ann James. Orchard, 1991. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-08545-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05945-6. 32p. Library ed.
$14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Possessed with a brilliant idea for making money,
Vanessa sets out with a bullwhip and trapping net to find a crocodile: "You
have a choice. You can be ten handbags and five pairs of shoes, or you can help
me make lots of money." 
Dial-a-Croc chooses the latter and becomes a
superstar. Yet fame and fortune can't keep him from missing the Back of
Beyond: "You have a choice," he says one day. "You can be my breakfast with
toast and jam, or you can take me home to my friends." Vanessa chooses the
latter, and receives a present of "shoes and a handbag to match-mock crocodile,
of course." So much for macho. And it is satisfying to see a girl, bedecked in
jungle jeans and snake-brimmed hat, pulling off a farfetched enterprise with
panache. James' slapdash watercolor cartoons give lots of room for Croc to
exercise his talents-this is a live-action read-aloud for any group of
entrepreneurial adventurers. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Animals, respect for
Dwyer, Kathleen M. What Do You Mean I Have a Learning Disability?; illus.
with photographs by Barbara Beirne. Walker, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-
8103-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8102-0. 48p. Library ed. $15.85; Trade ed.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-4. 
Convinced he is stupid and forgetful, Jimmy is
diagnosed (the specific disability is not named) and then sent to a tutor, he learns
that there are other children who, like him, are intelligent but have been
handicapped by their learning disability, and that one can improve. Jimmy does
improve, and the story ends with his school-assigned paragraph about the way he
now feels about himself. While this page, along with some earlier conversation
between Jimmy's parents, strikes an artificial note, the present tense narration is
immediate, and the book should encourage children like Jimmy and help other
children understand them. The photoessay format provides a friendly perspective.
A list of variously famous (and twice-misspelled) "Other People with Learning
Disabilities," appears at the back of the book followed by a list of "Sources of
Help." ZS
D.V. Handicaps, overcoming; Self-confidence; Teacher-student relations
Fleischman, Paul. The Borning Room. Zolotow/Harper, 1991. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-023785-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023762-7. 
[112p]. Library ed.
$13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 6-8. 
Georgina begins her story when she's eight, and
Fleischman deftly sets the stage for her narration: it's 1859, the family lives on
a farm in Ohio, and while Father and Grandfather read an abolitionist newspaper,
they are well aware that it is illegal to conceal information about an escaped
slave, even in a free state. This fact, however, does not stop Georgina from
hiding an escaped slave woman who then helps in the birth of Georgina's newest
brother. The book moves from Georgina's childhood through the war years,
through the changes in the family, through deaths and births and sadness and joy;
the freedom sought by black Americans and the freedom of religion sought by
[9]
many people, particularly exemplified in the character of Georgina's gentle
grandfather. Smoothly knit, this is a moving family chronicle that concludes in
1918. ZS
D.V. Family relations
Fletcher, Susan. The Stuttgart Nanny Mafia. Karl/Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-
689-31709-3. [160p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Eleven-year-old Aurora tells her tale of woe: already
feeling ignored because her mother has remarried and had another child, Aurora is
dismayed when Mom says she's going to work for her husband (she's a dental
hygienist) and is hiring a German au pair girl, Tanja. Almost all of the book is
devoted to plans for, or execution of, dirty tricks that will either make Tanja
want to leave or make Mom dismiss her. Tanja does leave, but by then Aurora
is ashamed of herself, fond of Tanja, and ready to be nicer to Tanja's
replacement. There are humorous moments, but for the most part this is an
overextended record of a self-centered, often unkind, child, and the fact that
Aurora is going to reverse her stand and appreciate lovely Tanja is made
predictable through heavy signals. ZS
D.V. Social behavior; Stepparents, adjustment to
French, Fiona. Anancy and Mr. Dry-Bone; written and illus. by Fiona French.
Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-29298-2. [28p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
Elegance is French's hallmark, whether the style is
Art Deco, as in her Greenaway Medal picture book Snow White in New York
(BCCB 3/88), or in these innovative paintings that combine Caribbean colors
with black and white silhouette patterns. The story is a contest between the
rich, skeletal Mr. Dry-Bone (Death) and the poor, handsome trickster Anancy.
Both are courting clever, beautiful Miss Louise, who will marry the man who
can make her laugh. Mr. Dry-Bone conjures to no avail, but Anancy dresses in
bits of clothing from all the animals and makes Miss Louise-a seamstress-
laugh till the tears roll down her face. The visual balance of flamboyance and
restraint is nowhere so evident as in the contrast between Anancy's shadowed
appearance at Miss Louise's door, in the next-to-last double spread, and the final
surprise of his outfit sunbursting on the viewer in brilliant hues. Even the
endpapers harmonize linear intricacy with symmetrical simplicity. Here's a
graphic classic for the folklore shelf. BH
C.U. Storytelling
D.V. Ingenuity
Goode, Diane. Where's Our Mama?; written and illus. by Diane Goode.
Dutton, 1991. ISBN 0-525-44770-9. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
In a humorous variant on the theme of my-mother-is-
the-most-beautiful-woman-in-the-world, Goode sets her story in Paris early in
this century. Mama, looking like a happy Mary Poppins, tells her two eldest
children to stay right there and wait while she, holding the baby, goes off to
retrieve her hat that's blown away. After a time, the children begin to cry; a
kindly gendarme says he will help them; he trots them about Paris (to a theater,
a pastry shop, a circus, etc.). No mama. Finally the children remember that
they'd been told to wait at the station ... et voild, Mama! Just improbable
[ 10]
enough to prevent vicarious separation anxiety, this is a cheerful period piece
with paintings of characters that are both comic and engaging. ZS
D.V. Mother-child relations
Greenwald, Sheila. Here's Hermione: A Rosy Cole Production; written and
illus. by Sheila Greenwald. Joy Street/Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-32715-8.
[112p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Hermione Wong has a passion for fame and for her
cello, and with the help of her friend and manager Rosy Cole she plans to use
her instrument to attain world renown. Attempting to be as daring and original
as the famous (and deftly satirized) rock star Pomona, Hermione and two string-
playing friends form a cello-rock band that performs a stunningly ill-received
school lunch concert ("I thought things were looking up when some of the
kitchen staff joined in"). She then appears at her cello recital (intending to
perform Saint-Saens' "The Swan") dressed in a swan costume that sends the
audience into fits of laughter and prevents her from actually playing her solo
piece. True love for music wins out, however, when an impromptu performance
gets her lessons from a famous cellist. Hermione's matter-of-factness about her
ardor for music makes it all the more credible ("Soon the music had made me
feel a hundred percent okay"), particularly when combined with her authentic
blend of brashness and mortification. Breezy line drawings contain the same
fresh and offhanded wit as the easy-to-read text. DS
D.V. Self-expression
Hersom, Kathleen. The Half Child. Simon, 1991. 
ISBN 0-671-74225-6.
[176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Lucy is the only one in her family who seems to
appreciate her strange younger sister Sarah. Some townfolk say that Sarah, with
her slurred speech and stumbling walk, is a changeling, and only Lucy is upset
when Sarah disappears in the upheaval of Cromwell's rebellion. The mid-17th
century English setting is well-evoked, although political events are awkwardly
inserted. The devotion of the two sisters is a strong focus for the story, but the
narrative leaps across years, even decades, too abruptly, to tell us of Sarah's
fate-and even that comes via another character's interpolations into Lucy's first-
person recollections. 
While the ending supplies a half-mystical, perhaps-
possible conclusion to Sarah's wanderings, it's too ambiguous to be entirely
satisfying. Despite the periodic vagueness of the storytelling, the semi-fantasy
atmosphere is convincingly distilled, and in this kind of story, atmosphere is-
almost--everything. RS
D.V. Sisters
Hest, Amy. Love You, Soldier. Four Winds, 1991. ISBN 0-02-743635-7.
[48p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
The author has used the names of her two children in
a gentle, touching story that is narrated by Katie, age seven when she begins her
account with Daddy's departure to serve in World War II. She and Mama are
brave and lonely, and they both enjoy the added company when Mama's
childhood friend, Louise, moves in. She too has a husband at the front, and
she's pregnant; Mama is away when Louise's labor pains begin, and it is Katie
[ 11 ]
who trudges with her in a snowstorm to the hospital. Katie loves Louise's baby
and misses her when the war is over and Louise joins her husband. Daddy does
not return, and Katie is resentful when her widowed mother, as time goes by,
looks favorably on the courtship of Louise's brother Sam. But by the time that
Mama is ready to join Sam in Texas and marry him, Katie has begun to believe
what an elderly neighbor has said: "Love is risky ... but it's worth it." This is
not a story with depth or nuance of structure, but it's a believable story about
several kinds of love, and it speaks to the sadness war brings without dwelling
on its violence. ZS
D.V. Adaptability
Hodges, Margaret, ad. St. Jerome and the Lion; illus. by Barry Moser. Orchard,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08538-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05938-3. 32p.
Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
A somewhat fragmentary saint's tale is given
cohesion and interest by Barry Moser's scrupulous watercolors and Hodges'
simple and dignified adaptation. When a wounded lion calls at Jerome's
monastery, the monk heals him and gives him a home and work, guarding the
donkey at pasture. 
But the lion falls asleep, and the donkey is taken by
merchants on their way to Egypt. The lion, ostracized by the monks who
believe he has eaten the donkey, eventually gets the donkey back and he-and the
merchants-are forgiven. "'God has taught us a lesson,' said Jerome. "Here is
our trusty friend, proved innocent by a miracle.'" The compassion is clear, so is
the story; a subplot about the jealousy of Jerome's dog for the lion is more
obliquely resolved (but tenderly illustrated with a gold-toned silhouette). All of
the pictures glow with different lights: the monastery walls washed in night
light; the hard hot sun on the laboring lion, performing the missing donkey's
tasks; the candlelight that guides Jerome in his nightly translation of the Bible.
The last picture is puzzling, setting Jerome and the lion against a background of
the crucifixes on Calvary. Children will, however, appreciate the solemnity of
the portrait, and the noble friendship between saint and beast. The design is
open and handsome; a source note is included; the book is dedicated to librarians,
"because Jerome is their patron saint" RS
C.U. Religious education
D.V. Forgiveness
Hoffman, Mary. Amazing Grace; illus. by Caroline Binch. Dial, 1991. ISBN
0-8037-1040-2. [26p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
4-8 yrs. 
Sometimes, if it's done with aplomb, you just don't
mind a message. Such is the case with amazing Grace, a girl who loves
stories-made up, in books and movies, or out of Nana's long memory.
Skillfully composed, richly toned paintings portray an expressive black girl in
varied postures of imaginative play: charging into battle as Joan of Arc, draped
over a fence as Anansi the Spider, seeking her fortune in a pair of seven league
galoshes, doctoring her goodnatured Ma and Nana with swathes of bandage.
Alas, when a part for Peter Pan comes along at school, Raj reminds her that
Peter was a boy, and Natalie, that Peter was not black. But Nana takes the
downcast Grace to the ballet "Romeo and Juliet," starring a black dancer whose
performance inspires Grace to practice for winning the role she wants. The
understated simplicity of the text, combined with Binch's graceful graphic
[12]
images, lifts this picture book above the ordinary and will propel it into any
child's private realm of enchantment. BH
C.U. Dramatics; Reading aloud
D.V. Imaginative powers
Hurwitz, Johanna. "E" Is for Elisa; illus. by Lillian Hoban. Morrow, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10440-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10439-8. 
[80p].
Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Elisa, last encountered in Russell and Elisa (BCCB
1/90), is four now and delighted to be in nursery school. She still wants to do
everything that her eight-year-old brother does, and she still resents it when
Russell calls her a crybaby. In this episodic cumulation of small events in the
life of Elisa, Hurwitz touches, sympathetically but never sentimentally, on
concerns and triumphs that should appeal to Elisa's peers: wanting to wear a
new garment even if it's inappropriate, exploring the mystery of letters that spell
words, trying to jump from the same height as Russell does, etc. The writing is
direct, simple and low-keyed, and relationships among family members is as
natural as their dialogue. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Jennings, Paul. Unreal! Eight Surprising Stories; ISBN 0-670-84175-7;
[112p]. Uncanny! Even More Surprising Stories; ISBN 0-670-84174-9; [144p].
Each book: Viking, 1991. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
These stories of the unexpected read like something a
preteen Rod Serling might have dreamed up: 
each generally features an
unfortunate protagonist (usually male), a deadpan style, and a lavish helping of
the gross and gruesome. Jennings plays more for laughs than for creeps ("There
wasn't much left of him-just a skeleton, sitting on the toilet," for instance, or
"I got my nickname of the Cow Dung Kid on one of these trips"-lavatory
humor figures prominently throughout) with stories of embarrassing but magical
underwear, lethal manure, and Marcus' special lipstick that makes every woman
want to kiss him. The stories are puerile but successfully so, told with a fair
amount of imagination that is sometimes at the expense of logic. The pacing
tends to lag in the longer stories, and the Australian colloquialisms may confuse
some readers. Overall, however, these are good bets for junior urban legend fans,
who may find the unintentionally flying dog of "UFD" every bit as engrossing
as a poodle in a microwave. DS
Johansen, Hanna. A Tomcat's Tale; tr. from the German by Susanna Fox; illus.
by KAthi Bhend. Dutton, 1991. ISBN 0-525-44583-8. 142p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Less a tale than a series of episodes, this is a well-
observed, rather meandering account of a cat's daily life. Cat lovers will relish
the fidelity to feline behavior: "He hoped there'd at least be a fly. A cat who is
locked in a room with a fly has plenty to do." On the other hand, these
descriptions can edge into the meditative, as in the amusing but extended
consideration of cats' manners when one asks a question of another. Humor
saves such passages from becoming coy, but young readers may nonetheless find
the occasional action a bit too leisurely. Both the writing and the translation are
stylish, and Bhend's pen-and-ink drawings are elegantly drafted. BH
[ 13]
King-Smith, Dick. The Toby Man; illus. by Lynette Hemmant. Crown, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-58135-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-58134-5. 
[128p].
Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
In a nifty animal fantasy echoing the Bremen Town
Musicians, a destitute eighteenth-century boy sets out to be a highwayman like
his father, who robbed one traveler too many. Toby's first attempt is a failure:
"Stand and deliver!" says he to his first victim .... "Stand in the river?" queries
the deaf old woman. With the help of an old donkey, a mastiff, a ferret, and a
magpie, Toby finally pulls off a robbery-with unexpected results. This has all
the motifs of a hero's journey, with plenty of room for discussions of justice: all
the animals that he steals were mistreated; Toby intends to rob the rich in Robin
Hood tradition; and the parson who eventually rescues him from prison presents
the court with an argument for mercy in the case of a wayward child. The
adventure has a Dickensian quality at an easy-to-read level. An ace of a different
suit from the author of Ace: The Very Important Pig (BCCB 12/90). BH
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Animals, kindness to; Honesty
Lankford, Mary D. Is It Dark? Is It Light?; illus. by Stacey Schuett. Knopf,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91579-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-81579-1. 26p.
Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.00.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
This concept/puzzle book glows with clues from the
first page on. "Is it square? No, it's round," is illustrated by a swoony still life
of a piece of toast topped by a square of butter, partnering an egg with a yolk as
round and yellow as-as what? Other pages contrast near and far, little and big,
down and up, empty and full, loud and quiet, wet and dry, hot and cold, under and
over, dark and light, dim and bright, "shadow and shimmer." It's the moon, of
course, revealed on the last double-spread, but cleverly foreshadowed all along.
"Is it little? No, it's big," for example, contrasts a world globe and a small
button, round and white, that mimics the position of the moon in relation to the
earth. And while the moon may be "cold" (a pearly scoop of ice cream), the
pictures here are round and warm, echoing the hushed tone of Lankford's simple
questions. The last spread shows a full moon, along with the word for "moon"
in fourteen languages, hovering over a multicultural cast of children, a pretty-if
conceptually crowded--conclusion. RS
Leslie, Clare Walker. Nature All Year Long; written and illus. by Clare Walker
Leslie. Greenwillow, 1991. ISBN 0-688-09183-0. 56p. $16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
In her first book for children, a wildlife artist
describes the changes, from month to month, of a New England year. In
January, for example, the topics explored are hibernating animals, animals that
stay active through the winter, and a boxed list of "January Facts." For
February, it's birds that stay north during the winter, having a winter garden
indoors, and "February Facts." Both the text and the small awkward paintings
give facts about weather, flora, and fauna, and for each month there is a full-page
picture. This is useful for browsing and suggests activities, so that it can
stimulate an interest in nature, but it's a bit patchy and often assigns to a
particular month (as in January hibernation) a natural phenomenon that is
[ 14 ]
seasonal. The index is preceded by a list of field guides, some general reference
books, and a brief list of resource centers. ZS
C.U. Nature study
Levit, Rose. With Secrets to Keep. Shoe Tree Press, 1991. ISBN 1-55870-
197-4. 160p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Now thirteen, Adrianna Espirikos doesn't understand
why she should become violently nauseated at seeing a film, in life-science
class, of a male organ. After all, she'd seen this kind of film every year since
fifth grade. The reader will quickly guess why, because at night Adrianna hears
her father's voice murmuring in the bedroom of a beautiful older sister,
Philomene. To Adrianna, Papa is physically abusive, and she is appalled when
he also hits a younger sister. Eventually, Adrianna takes the initiative, reporting
to the parents of a friend what has happened, and bringing the authorities in to
deal with the situation. This is a credible story of incest and physical abuse, and
it includes aspects typical of most case histories: a domineering father, a
neglected and passive mother, a child who is afraid to tell anyone about her
sexual subjugation. The book loses impact because of the slow pace; although
other aspects of Adrianna's life (a bully who teases her because she is plump; a
new friend who encourages her to diet) give some contrast, they seem more to
pad the story than to balance it. ZS
D.V. Parent-child relations; Sisters
Lisson, Deborah. The Devil's Own. Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-
0871-X. 169p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
A time-shift book is set on a group of islands off the
coast of Australia; although the jacket flap refers to the authentic historical detail
of a story "based on the 17th century wreck of the vessel Batavia," no notes or
sources are provided. Julianna is fifteen, sullenly bored, and determined not to
enjoy the yachting vacation with her family. Restless, she takes a dinghy to a
nearby island and finds herself (300 years back) in a turgid imbroglio of
shipwreck and murder and danger and love and mutiny. The passage from reality
to fantasy (and vice versa) is awkward and the pace of the story is uneven, but
the mixture of isolated setting, danger, and suspense will appeal to many readers.
ZS
Loomis, Christine. My New Baby-Sitter; illus. with photographs by George
Ancona. Morrow, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09626-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
688-09625-5. 48p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
With a long prefatory note addressed to parents and
making many sensible suggestions for choosing a sitter, giving instructions on
childcare, and preparing the child so as to decrease separation anxiety, this is a
useful book for both parents (or other dispensers of childcare) and children. In
the main text, Loomis explains why it may be necessary to call in a sitter or to
take children to somebody's home, and it allays trepidation by describing some
child-sitter encounters. Ancona's color photographs reflect the reassuring note of
the text, and picture both givers and receivers of care as a multiethnic group. ZS
[15 ]
McMillan, Bruce. Eating Fractions; written and illus. with photographs by
Bruce McMillan. Scholastic, 1991. 
ISBN 0-590-43770-4. 
[32p]. 
$13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Clear, sharp color photographs show two children
enjoying a banana, salad, pizza, and two kinds of baked goods. Each time the
food is shown whole, and then it's cut into either halves, thirds, or quarters, then
each fractional concept is repeated. The pictures show the children enjoying the
food, and slipping some of it to an appreciative dog. Four recipes are included,
meant for adults but pointing out what processes can be contributed by children.
The repetition of the concept is an aid to learning and the limitation of the text
to just a few fractions is appropriate for young children. Nice job. ZS
C.U. Arithmetic
Meddaugh, Susan. 
The Witches' Supermarket; written and illus. by Susan
Meddaugh. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-57034-4. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Helen and her dog Martha, respectively costumed as a
witch and a cat, are out for Halloween when they inadvertently discover the
strange supermarket hidden down a dark alley. Although Helen doesn't notice
the unusual produce, readers who take the time to examine the pictured labels
will know that something funny is going on: 
Poison Apples, Deadly
Nightshade, Apples with Worms .... 
"I'm glad Momma doesn't shop here,"
says Helen when she sees the meat department: Baby Brown Bats, Iguana
Chops, and Shake 'n Bake Snake. Helen figures out where she is when she sees
a customer test-driving a broom, and she gives herself away when she tells the
manager that she's looking for some ... dog food. "SHE'S NOT A WITCH.
SHE'S NOT A WITCH. 
DON'T LET HER OUT THE DOOR! 
THE
WITCHES' SUPERMARKET WON'T BE A SECRET ANYMORE!" A melee
ensues. Meddaugh's ink-and-crayon illustrations demonstrate the fact that detail
is everything, as in a candy department that features Bug Bars, Tooth Targets,
and Chemo-belle Chewies; the climactic double-spread havoc of witches and cats
and flying brooms and groceries has energy as well as wit. Tasty stuff for eaters,
readers, and trick-or-treaters. RS
Miller, Luree and Scott. Alaska: Pioneer Stories of a Twentieth-Century
Frontier. Cobblehill, 1991. 
ISBN 0-525-65050-4. 
[128p.] illus. with
photographs. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-9. 
Half-a-dozen anecdotal portraits of Alaskan settlers,
politicians, and adventurers form a personalizing look at the history and
development of the state. Frank and Mary Miller came to Fairbanks for the turn
of the century Gold Rush; Jim and Millie Dodson ran a pioneering airplane
service; Marty Rutherford remembers the devastation of the 1964 earthquake.
The other subjects include a fishing family, an Inupiat legal advocate, and a
young couple who live in the bush and periodically work on the North slope.
Although the point-of-view and writing style is consistently adulatory, and in
the case of the bush couple, self-congratulatory, there is enough detail and
history to give the subjects depth and context. The specifics of early air travel,
for example, are exciting, and the lore of hunting, trapping, and fishing, has an
Outdoor Life appeal. Alaska's economic and ecological problems are mentioned
[16]
in a few desultory passages, but the overall tone is old-fashioned and upbeat, a
tribute to "pioneer children all, stubborn optimists, who believed that in
America hard work and perseverance could overcome any obstacles." A glossary,
bibliography, and "Selected Facts about Alaska" are appended. RS
Miller, Margaret. Whose Shoe?; illus. with photographs by Margaret Miller and
others. Greenwillow, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10009-0; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-10008-2. [40p]. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
A toe-tapping companion to Whose Hat? (BCCB
3/88), this fresh look at feet includes baseball cleats, clown shoes, baby shoes,
ballet slippers, hockey skates, flippers, running shoes, and waders-and one
ringer: appropriately enough, horseshoes. As in Whose Hat?, a big, bright
color photo of the shoes in question ("Whose shoe?" is followed by a pair of
photographs that show an adult (or horse) and a child employing the particular
shoe. The book is spacious and simple enough to use for identification or
gameplaying with a large group, but there's enough wit to keep things from
getting too easy, as in the photo of a little boy matching his bare feet up with a
baby shoe-shod teddy bear, or, as in the case the clown, ladies and gentlemen, a
really big shoe! RS
Nash, Ogden. The Adventures of Isabel; illus. by James Marshall. 
Joy
Street/Little, 1991. 
ISBN 0-316-59874-7. [32p]. 
$14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
" . . .
Isabel, Isabel, didn't care"-but young
listeners will-about Marshall's wide-eyed (and open-mouthed, frequently)
paintings of intrepid Isabel's adventures. Nash's epic is included in many
anthologies for children, but it's good to have a picture-book rendition that
includes a bereted bear, a roller-skating witch, and, funniest, a hairy and hideous
giant who makes his first appearance in a surprise vertical double-page spread.
Isabel's horrible dream, "worse than a dinosaur, worse than a shark," is a
Jujyfruity menace. Lots of fun to look at; lots of fun to read aloud. RS
D.V. Courage
Numeroff, Laura Joffe. If You Give a Moose a Muffin; illus. by Felicia Bond.
Geringer/HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024406-2; Trade ed. ISBN
0-06-024405-4. [32p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
In a companion volume to If You Give a Mouse a
Cookie (BCCB 7/85), a muffin, tossed by a boy out a kitchen window, brings
its consumer (moose) through the open door, seeking jam to go with the muffin.
This sitcom, long on repetitive pattern to an extent that makes it less "com"
than "sit," belabors the joke, as the moose goes from one project to another,
making a fearful mess that the boy's mother doesn't notice. The illustrations
have humor and vitality, with space to set off the line-and-wash pictures that
have a Bill Peet exuberance in their execution. The disaster-humor will no doubt
appeal to the nursery set enough to make the slightness of the running gag
unimportant. ZS
[17]
Patterson, Nancy Ruth. The Shiniest Rock of All; illus. by Karen A. Jerome.
Farrar, 1991. ISBN 0-374-36805-8. [80p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Robert Reynolds is a goodhearted but scrappy little
guy, witness his apology for unseemly behavior on Halloween: "Dear Mrs.
Snead, I'm sorry if you thought I was hissing and spitting at you on Halloween.
It was part of my costume as a fried egg. Thank you for the one piece of
sugarless gum you gave out." And, while's he's brave enough to make fun of
Ashley Alston's show-and-tell demonstration of good manners ("Never ever bite
into a whole piece of bread") he's not tough enough to take her teasing about his
lisp (even though he does manage to throw his pb&j sandwich at her before
bursting into tears). It all gets sorted out, eventually, in this amiable slice-of-
life story: Robert works on his speech impediment with a friendly therapist,
Robert and Ashley find common cause, Robert manages to get into more trouble
with Mrs. Snead. Economically told and often touching, this is a good portrait
of a good-and brave-boy. RS
Peck, Richard. Unfinished Portrait of Jessica. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-
30500-1. [176p]. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 7-10. 
Jessica, almost fourteen when her story starts, is the
narrator of a story that has depth and nuance in its depiction of characters and
their relationships, yet the writing is always clear and direct. Jessica, child of
divorce, has always idolized her handsome father and been cool to her mother,
with whom she lives. Sent to Acapulco on a Christmas visit to the home of her
Great-uncle Lucius, where her father is staying, Jessica blames every signal of
paternal disaffection on circumstances or on other people; only when confronted
with unmistakable evidence that Dad is a womanizer as well as an extravagant
parasite, does she admit the truth-and hastily depart. The final three chapters
deal with the growing bond between mother and daughter, with a last encounter
with Dad, and with the death of Lucius. All of these characters are definitively
drawn, as are the several minor characters who are part of the Mexican setting.
What Peck has done is to picture the rites of passage from adolescence to
maturity in one special situation, but there are aspects of Jessica's concerns,
needs, and problems that have universal application for young adults. ZS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Parent-child relations
Penner, Lucille Recht. Eating the Plates: A Pilgrim Book of Food and
Manners. Macmillan, 1991. 
ISBN 0-02-770901-9. 
[128p.] illus. with
photographs. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
In a welcome holiday complement to Giblin's From
Hand to Mouth (BCCB 12/87), Penner retells the Pilgrim story with a particular
eye on what they ate and how they cooked. She begins with the shipboard
delights of the Mayflower ("Cheese was different. It didn't get as hard as the
biscuits. Instead, the cheese quickly turned green and moldy"), describes the
hardscrabble early months of the colony, and the settlers' gradual acceptance of
American grains, fruits, and vegetables. A Pilgrim menu-from corn soup to
hot nuts-complete with recipes adapted for moder kitchens, concludes the
easy-to-read text. While food is the focus, the author also includes more general
information about living conditions and social customs, some details of which
will engross young readers: "It was good manners to wait until you were done
[ 18 ]
eating to scratch. It wasn't pleasant to see your neighbor mash a flea and then
reach into the trencher you were sharing." Period prints add atmosphere, and
there are a bibliography and glossary. RS
C.U. 
Thanksgiving
Pfeffer, Susan Beth. Most Precious Blood. Bantam, 1991. ISBN 0-553-28838-
5. [176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
In a stream of bitter recrimination for Val's having
skipped a family dinner, cousin Michelle tells Val a family secret: "You're
adopted, you bitch. You're no more a Castaladi than Kit is." Kit is Val's best
friend (and daughter of her father's lawyer); the Castaladis are a wealthy and
powerful family reputed to be connected to "the mob." As an adjustment-to-
adoption story, this is overly melodramatic; as mob-melodrama, it's a pretty
good novel. After being stonewalled all around, Val eventually learns that she is
indeed adopted, but she is at least relieved to discover that her father didn't have
someone killed in order to obtain her (one of the more unsavory rumors lurking
about Most Precious Blood, where all the girls attend high school). The fight
scenes and arguments are exciting, although the characterization of Michelle is
over-the-top, making her out to be more psychotic than just jealous. Kit has her
own problems: a father who is at Mr. Castaladi's beck-and-call; a violently
alcoholic mother who slashes Kit's mattress during a drunken rage. The
revelation of friendly Sister Gina Marie's true identity at the end is so unlikely
that Pfeffer might as well have gone all out and fingered her as Val's real
mother. Although the first chapter is confusing, introducing too many issues
and characters at once, the storytelling soon becomes swift and fairly smooth. It
would make a great TV movie. RS
Rankin, Laura. The Handmade Alphabet; illus. by Laura Rankin. Dial, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0975-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0974-9. 
[32p].
Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
All ages. 
Unlike many books that are recommended by their
publishers for "All Ages," this one is; Laura Rankin's pictures of the hand
positions for each letter of the alphabet are beautiful, dignified, and clear. The
objects used for her manual alphabet are familiar, and with each handshape is a
fresh interpretation of the word for which the accompanying letter stands. For
"L" the hand shows the edge of a sleeve of lace; for "M" the handshape is
reflected in a mirror, for "D" a dragonfly is poised at the tip of the index finger.
The artist's draftsmanship is impeccable, her palette soft, with each full-page
picture showing a hand (with fingers in letter positions) and a letter, the spacious
paintings as notable for composition as for concept. ZS
C.U. Language arts; Special education
D.V. Handicaps, overcoming
Rappaport, Doreen, ad. The Journey of Meng; illus. by Yang Ming-Yi. Dial,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0896-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0895-5. [32p].
Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
This Chinese folktale (no source given) is a fierce
one, involving the same kind of suicidal sacrifice as Lafcadio Hearn's The Voice
of the Great Bell (BCCB 9/89). Meng Jiangnu's husband Wan has been taken
[ 19]
away by soldiers to help build the Great Wall. After a disturbing dream about
him, Meng goes to the Wall, only to discover that Wan has been killed by the
heavy labor, and his body, along with hundreds of others, interred in the Wall
itself. After lightning splits open the tomb, Meng drips blood from her finger
onto the exposed bones, trying to identify those of her husband: "Let my blood
penetrate the bones of my beloved." The story is dramatic, but the pen-and-
watercolor illustrations fail to convey an intensity to match Rappaport's
retelling. The pictures are competently drafted but staidly posed, with an
unrelieved procession of middle-distance perspectives. Given the events of recent
years in China, the tale takes on contemporary resonance, especially in its
ending, where Meng leaps into the sea rather than marry the emperor, who has
been dismayed by her boldness but taken with her beauty. And when the soldiers
"drag her from the sea. Cut her body into pieces and grind her bones to dust,"
Meng's remains, thrown back into the sea, become thousands of silvery fish.
This ending may be puzzling to the usual picture book audience, but will be
appreciated by more sophisticated readers able to ponder the farther reaches of
love and altruism. RS
Reynolds, Susan Lynn. Strandia. Farrar, 1991. ISBN 0-374-37274-8. 277p.
$14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Sand is forced to leave her Raeth family when, in
order to escape marriage to Tamin, she pretends to lack the all-important "talent"
of doraado-calling. The doraado are dolphins, who come bringing fish in
response to the Raeth women's telepathic calls. Shunned and scorned (and later,
hunted by her jilted fianc6), Sand finds a community and a new love among the
Midislanders, the working-caste of the island Strandia. This is a competently
developed fantasy with an impetuous heroine who experiences loss, love, and
danger-most exciting is the scene in which Sand has been tied up and set adrift
in a rowboat to await the Mother's justice, or be rescued by doraado. The last
third of the book wanders too far afloat, taking Sand to another continent where
she discovers that the world is threatened by an approaching star, and she must
return to Strandia to warn everybody. This section is overextended, and the
ending, in which Sand rejects two human suitors in favor of the affections of a
doraado who playfully calls her "mudball," is peculiar. RS
Robinet, Harriette Gillem. Children of the Fire. Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-
689-31655-0. [144p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
In a story about the Chicago fire of 1871, the
protagonist is Hallelujah, who is black and orphaned. She lives with a kind
couple, and feels guilty when she tricks them into promising her that she can go
watch the next fire in that dry autumn when there were so many. The author has
clearly done a great deal of research, and many of the historical details are of
interest; unfortunately, such details crowd the story line so that the narrative is
drawn-out and repetitive. Hallelujah meets other children, bringing a white child
(separated from her parents in the confusion) home; several children join in
selling fused glass and pieces of metal as souvenirs. Selfish and callous at first,
Hallelujah gains sympathetic insight during the course of the fire and the start of
rebuilding, but the character change seems imposed by authorial decision rather
than emanating naturally in response to events. ZS
D.V. Helpfulness
[20
Say, Allen. Tree of Cranes; written and illus. by Allen Say. Houghton, 1991.
ISBN 0-395-52024-X. [32p]. $16.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
A crosscultural Christmas is the surprisingly revealed
focus of a picture book that has a recollective mood. A little Japanese boy is
afraid his mother will be angry that he caught a cold while playing in a forbidden
pond; Mama is upset, but she is also abstracted, and ignores her son in favor of
folding paper cranes, and digging a tree out of the garden. It is a worrying
mystery to the boy-"Is she digging a hole because she is angry with me?"-but
Mama soon reveals the truth: tying the cranes and affixing candles to the tree,
she explains that in California, where she was born and raised, today is
Christmas. "And when all the candles were lit, she fell silent. She was
remembering. She was seeing another tree in a faraway place where she had been
small like me." Cool-toned watercolor paintings face each page of the spare
text, echoing the honest deliberation of the prose. Quiet portraits of the boy
alone, banished to the tub or his room, are balanced by seasonally appropriate
pictures of mother and child; while the small Japanese pine looks little like what
we think of as a Christmas tree, its candlelit serenity is entirely in keeping with
the spirit. The kite that appears next to it in the morning is as much a delight
as the snow that has fallen in the night and the snowman the family makes in
the yard. Too direct to be sentimental or nostalgic, the book seems an honest
memory empathetically conveyed. RS
C.U. Christmas
D.V. Intercultural understanding; Mother-child relations
Schwartz, Alvin, ad. Ghosts!: Ghostly Tales from Folklore; illus. by Victoria
Chess. HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021797-9; Trade ed. ISBN
0-06-021796-0. 
[64p]. (I Can Read). Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Schwartz's In a Dark, Dark Room is one of the very
few easy-readers that acknowledges the fascination horror holds for primary-
graders; his latest collection speaks plainly to the same appeal. Of the five short
stories, a poem, and a "spell," the best is "A Little Green Bottle," a story in
which a dead girl continues to harass a classmate she had bullied in life. "Kate's
ghost began to haunt Joe. It hid in his desk at school, and whispered scary
things to him." But Joe tricks the ghost and gets his revenge, and . .. "if you
ever see a little green bottle washed up on the beach, DON'T OPEN IT!!"
Chess' portrait of the trapped, beady-eyed ghost is almost as scary-and just as
funny-as the pictures of Kate, alive, tormenting her prey. All of the pen-and-
watercolor illustrations are tidy and cheery and creepy, a combination at which
Chess has long excelled. The pictures deliver the punchline in "The Haunted
House," in which a little boy is unafraid of his sister's surprise "BOO!" but feels
somewhat differently about what he spies over her shoulder. "The Teeny-Tiny
Woman," in this version collected in Cornwall, finds teeny-tiny teeth on the
gravestone, just the right size for her teeny-tiny, toothless mouth. Retold in a
style that is simple but not choppy (although "The Umbrella" is obliquely
brief), and accompanied by a page of brief notes, all the tales will lend
themselves to elaboration and innovation--one way or another, kids will
guarantee that these stories, and their ghosts, continue to wander. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
[21]
Sharpe, Susan. Spirit Quest. Bradbury, 1991. ISBN 0-02-782355-5. [122p].
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Eleven-year-old Aaron Singer, along with his parents,
is spending the summer on the Quileute Indian reservation on the rural
Washington coast. Despite his initial shock at his minority status ("No one had
ever called him a white kid before, and he wasn't sure whether he was offended.
He was white, of course") he makes a Quileute friend, Robert. Aaron becomes
interested in tribal traditions and legends ("It means something but maybe not
exactly what it says"), and he and Robert conceive the plan of going on a spirit
quest as a rite of passage ("A spirit quest," says Robert, "is, like, you have to go
into the wilderness"). They eventually succeed in getting parental permission for
a camping trip (authentic to the point of forgotten forks and food accidents) with
Robert's older brother Joe, during which Aaron finds and helps free a trapped
golden eagle. Characterization of both adults and children is believable, and
Sharpe is terrific at evoking the impressive coastal landscape. The writing is
smooth and understated, addressing cultural issues without descending to
sentimentality or preachiness, so that the primary focus of the book remains the
simple and appealing story of two summer friends. DS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Sloat, Teri. From One to One Hundred; written and illus. by Teri Sloat.
Dutton, 1991. ISBN 0-525-44764-4. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
A series of busy, imaginative, and colorful pictures
show objects, on separate pages, from one to ten and then, by tens, from ten to
one hundred. A frieze at the foot of each page shows what creatures or objects
appear three (or six, or ten, or thirty) times; the number is also more or less
cleverly designed into each picture. There's a game element because some of the
objects are not easy to spot; for example, two of five socks are playfully worn
on an animal's front paws. Some of the objects in the pictures vary from the
example in the frieze; in the page for twenty, a blue and red bird is shown, while
the twenty birds in the pictures are of several different species. The lesson is
inviting, and there's lots to look at. ZS
C.U. 
Counting
Smith, Barry. A Child's Guide to Bad Behavior; written and illus. by Barry
Smith. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-57435-8. [32p]. $9.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
A multilevel concept book, this combines lessons in
time-telling, alliteration, and etiquette: If 9:30 is the time to "Greet Grandma"
(and spill her coffee onto the rug) then 10:00 is time to "Play with her purse"
(and her lipstick). And so one obstreperous little boy wreaks havoc throughout
the day, each calamity illustrated by a sequence of small colored cartoon panels
that gracefully elaborate on the basic idea. 1:00 "Games in the garden" for
example, offers a host of hot tips for young troublemakers. The tone is a trifle
arch, and the humor will be lost on the younger kids, but older ones--especially
big brothers and sisters-will enjoy the devilish antics. RS
D.V. Everyday life concepts
[22]
Smith, Janice Lee. There's a Ghost in the Coatroom: Adam Joshua's
Christmas; illus. by Dick Gackenbach. HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-022864-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022863-6. [96p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade
ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Like the earlier books about Adam Joshua, this is
light comedy with an element of mystery that most readers will find transparent,
a device possibly (and wisely) intended by Smith to make her audience feel more
clever than Adam Joshua and his classmates. Led by their teacher, the class
plans and puts on a dinner for parents; based on Old English Christmas feasts
(more or less) there is entertainment as well as food and costumes. The author
tends to overdo running gags, so that Sidney's desire to play the king or the
insistence of three other boys that they be the three musketeers weighs the story
down, but Adam Joshua fans won't mind a bit. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Spinelli, Jerry. There's a Girl in my Hammerlock. Simon, 1991. ISBN 0-671-
74684-7. [208p]. $13.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Eighth-grader Maisie has decidedly confused
motivations for trying out for the school wrestling team, but most of them have
to do with her crush on Eric Delong: "Classes? Subjects? Forget it. The
capital of Canada is Eric Delong. Twelve times twelve equals Eric Delong. The
action word in a sentence is Eric Delong." And Eric Delong is on the wrestling
team. Maisie endures the sneering skepticism of the coach, taunts from the
other wrestlers, and eventually, the refusal of other teams to take her on. Her
determination to fight is indefatigable, and gives this very funny story a heart
and a heroine. The plot turns unexpectedly: the coach turns out to be Maisie's
strongest supporter; Eric turns out to be a jerk; the rift between Maisie and her
best friend over Maisie's wrestling is left unresolved. And, she never wins a
match. The dialogue is fast and fresh; the humor is areal-thing junior high (as
when Maisie farts during a demonstration with the coach); the energy is non-
stop. With its rowdy atmosphere and antics, this is a fresh respite from the cozy
formulas of most middle-grade school stories. RS
Stones, Anthony. Bill and the Maze at Grimley Grange; written and illus. by
Anthony Stones. Wolfhound/Dufour, 1991. 
ISBN 0-86327-249-5. 
32p.
$10.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
It's too bad that the prequel to this Irish publication
(Bill and the Ghost of Grimley Grange) has not been more widely distributed in
the U. S., since there's such a dearth of good picture book ghost stories. Here,
Bill decides to venture into the moonlight and make his way through the maze of
hedges in the garden visible below from his bedroom window. The plan? To
unwind a ball of string h la Jason and the Minotaur. There are lots of other hints
of that myth, including several would-be monsters, but the real hero is Sir
Grimley, the beheaded but benign ghost who leads Bill through an underground
passage and secret door to safety. The story's active ingredients will be a sure
hit, while the pen and ink drawings-alternating color with black and white, and
faintly reminiscent of Ardizzone's style-add shivery lines that take full
advantage of cobwebby tunnels and other surprises. BH
D.V. Courage
[23 ]
Turner, 
Ann. 
Stars for Sarah; illus. 
by 
Mary 
Teichman.
Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026187-0; Trade ed. ISBN
0-06-026186-2. [3 2p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Bright accents contrast with quiet, often dark colors in
the night scenes of Sarah's bedroom. Surrounded by familiar sights and objects,
Sarah feels trepidation about what lies ahead in the new home to which the
family is moving. To each item in her daughter's catechism, a perceptive and
honest mother responds in as reassuring a way as she can: some things will be
the same (the way Sarah's dolls are arranged, or stars painted on the bedroom
ceiling) and some will be different (the friend next door won't be there) and some
will be new and nice, like a small neighbor who has a pet rabbit. This is
probably too low-keyed to appeal to every child, but the warmth of the mother-
child colloquy and the fact mother is both patient and truthful will appeal to
some. ZS
D.V. Adaptability
Vail, Rachel. Wonder. Jackson/Orchard, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08564-
3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05964-2. 122p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
Jessica acquires her nickname, Wonder, on the first
day of seventh grade, in honor of her new polka-dotted dress: "Looks like a
Wonder Bread explosion!" "Reasonably popular" in the sixth grade, Jessica's
now an outcast, mocked by the same girls who used to be her friends. Using a
motif as familiar in middle-grade books as it is in middle-grade life, first-novelist
Vail brings a good ear ("Junior high sucks") and a good memory ("I sat alone at
lunch again today. Everybody's worst nightmare") to a story that's been told
before but rarely with such energy and humor. Anything but immune to the
taunts of her former friends, Jessica takes refuge in I-don't-care (and very seventh-
grade) sarcasm, an attitude that evaporates when cute Conor calls "for the math
homework": "I saw him writing down the math homework in class today. Not
that I sit and stare at him all the time, which I do, but today I was particularly
watching him write down the math homework and trying to copy the way he did
it." The early-adolescent courtship rituals are well-observed but off-handedly
effected, as in this recollection of a game of spin-the-bottle: "I got kissed twice,
both times by Miles, and it was no big deal. It was like being bumped into."
Jessica's own maturation is a realistic mix of high drama and hysteria, with
childish games of toy-boat racing flickering between first real kisses: "His
breath smelled like Crest. I shut my mouth because I remembered that mine
smelled like orange M&M's." Unlike the many school stories that depend upon
an anygirl/anyplace blandness to hit home, this one has the wit to create a real
character. Nice though Conor seems to be, somebody ought to introduce Jessica
to Betsy Byars' Bingo Brown-a perfect pair. RS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Age-mate relations
Voigt, Cynthia. The Vandemark Mummy. Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-689-
31476-0. [208p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Phineas, twelve, and fifteen-year-old Althea have
come with their father to the small college in Maine where he has a faculty
position; their mother has stayed on the West Coast because of her job. Both
[24]
children are excited by the fact that Dad is also asked to be curator of a newly-
donated Egyptian collection that includes a mummy. Voigt does a particularly
good job of smoothly integrating a mystery that almost becomes a tragedy, a
good deal of information about Egyptian customs, a perceptive picture of
academic politics, and a strong story about familial loyalties. There is suspense
in the primary story line of the stolen mummy and there is a gratifying absence
of clich6d solutions. ZS
D.V. Father-child relations
Watson, Wendy. Thanksgiving at Our House; written and illus. by Wendy
Watson. Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-395-53626-X. 
[32p]. 
$14.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Tidy little dumpling figures of the busy members of
an extended family fill (but do not crowd) the pages of a holiday story that is told
through a combination of poetry and folk rhyme. Pastelled and precise, the
members of the family gather, having fun during both preparation and
celebration of the feast. Small children may enjoy the frenzy as well as the
rhythm of the jingles, but the quality of the latter is so variable as to-at
times-lessen the book's impact; for example, "Piping hot, smoking hot/ What
I've got/ You know not/ Hot hot pease, hot hot hot/ Hot are my pease, hot."
ZS
C.U. Thanksgiving
Wild, Margaret. Let the Celebrations Begin!; illus. by Julie Vivas. Orchard,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08537-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05937-5. 32p.
Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
"We are planning a party, a very special party, the
women and I. My name is Miriam, and this is where I live. Hut 18, bed 22."
In a concentration camp. Without historical background on World War II, the
audience for this spacious, playful-looking picture book (it doesn't have the
foreboding density of Hiroshima No Pika (BCCB 10/82), which suggests older
readers) will be somewhat at a loss to understand the poignancy of the story, in
which female inmates strip off bits of their ragged clothing to make stuffed toys
in hope of helping young survivors celebrate the anticipated Allied liberation.
Even for adult readers, a few aspects of the book are puzzling. The narrator's
"best friend, Sarah" appears to be at least teenaged, yet the text says that she and
four-year-old David "think they have always lived" in the camp. Children may
even have trouble picking out the narrator from other lookalikes huddled together
on the bunks. Otherwise, Vivas' illustration treat the subject with great dignity,
drawing a fine line between starved bodies and joyful faces. The story itself,
despite an abrupt transition between the narrator's dream of liberation and its
sudden reality, accrues meaning from the framework of quotes, the opening from
an historical account of toys made by Polish women in Bergen Belsen and the
closing from survivors' descriptions of the liberation. For situations where
adults want to introduce the Holocaust to young children, this will offer an
opportunity to do so, albeit with a liberal amount of explanation. BH
C.U. History-World War II
D.V. Resourcefulness
[25
Woodson, Jacqueline. The Dear One. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-30416-1.
[160p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Twelve-year-old Feni's middle-class life in a black
suburb of Philadelphia is rocked when Rebecca, fifteen, pregnant, and from
Harlem, comes to stay. The girls' mothers are friends from college; a third
friend, who lives nearby with her female lover, is also helping Rebecca through
her pregnancy. Mama and Marion feel an obligation to Rebecca's mother, a sad
alcoholic, but Feni feels scared and pushed-around: "Don't tell me it's our
decision because it's not! I don't care how tight you and Clair were at Spelman,
our house isn't some home for pregnant girls! This is my life, too, now and
I'm going to decide who I do and don't want in it!" The best scenes in this book
are the angry ones, such as Feni's confrontations with Rebecca, or when Feni
reminds her mother of past alcoholic abuses, but the story too often slides into
sermons on recovery, black and gay pride, self-esteem, and open adoption. The
conflict between the two girls seems pushed out of the way rather than credibly
resolved. But when it's fierce, it's real. RS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Zheng, Zhensun. A Young Painter: The Life and Paintings of Wang Yani-
China's Extraordinary Young Artist; by Zheng Zhensun and Alice Low; illus.
with photographs 
by Zheng Zhensun. 
Byron Preiss/New China
Pictures/Scholastic, 1991. ISBN 0-590-44906-0. [80p]. $17.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-. 
Four translators have worked successfully to produce
a translation that is smooth and colloquial, interpreting the authors' text so that
their biography of a remarkable art prodigy is both stimulating and informative.
Yani was three when she first began painting; her meteoric career has been
fostered by a father who recognized her talent, realized she needed encouragement
rather than training, and indeed gave up, in time, his own career as a painter to
further his child's career. Fifteen at the time the book was published, Wang
Yani has already had solo exhibitions in Great Britain, Germany, and the United
States (at the Smithsonian Institution). Admiring but not hyperbolic, the text
gives a rounded picture of the artist as a person and discusses her work in great
detail; it is illustrated by color photographs of Yani and myriad reproductions of
her paintings. Full pages of such reproductions as well a smaller pictures in the
wide central margins are carefully captioned and individual paintings identified
and described. A glossary of Chinese terms and an index are provided. ZS
C.U. Art