Ackerman, Karen. Araminta's Paint Box; illus. by Betsy Lewin. Atheneum,
1990. ISBN 0-689-31462-0. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
In telling the story of an object that passed from one
person (or family) to another during the westward trek in the middle of the
nineteenth century, Ackerman gives an account nicely gauged to the
[ 151]
comprehension and interest of primary-grades independent readers. Line and wash
pictures, bright and not too busy, show the spectrum of travelers or residents
who acquire, in turn, the box given to young California-bound Araminta. The
writing style is simple and direct, and the fact that the box eventually returns
into the hands of its original owner should appeal to readers, who will probably
not cavil at that coincidence or at the repetitiously convenient loss or
misplacement by so many owners of the paint box. ZS
Aiken, Joan. Return to Harken House. Delacorte, 1990. ISBN 0-385-29975-3.
[128p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
When Julia arrives for a summer in the gloomy
English house where she was born, she finds that her father is in Switzerland for
an undefined period and her stepmother does not want her around. Neglected and
lonely, Julia becomes possessed by the spirit of a maniacal seventeenth-century
resident of the house, Joshua Harkin, and begins speaking involuntarily in
strange voices until her sleepwalking results in a climactic fall from a parapet
during a storm. Aiken has taken advantage of Gothic conventions to develop an
eerie setting and suspenseful plot on the eve of World War II. Unfortunately,
just as the story assumes a full-bodied shape, she breaks it off without giving
readers enough clues to figure out what happened to the troubled earlier
inhabitants of the house and how their fate links with Julia's family. Why Julia
doesn't simply call her mother to retrieve her also remains a mystery, as do the
repeated references to King Charles I when it is actually William and Mary's
reign that is encompassed by the dates over Harkin's door; and, for that matter,
the spelling of Harken House after a resident named Harkin. It's too bad, too,
because Aiken's style is as smooth as ever, and her characterizations as credibly
practised. BH
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Alexander, Lloyd. The Philadelphia Adventure. Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-
44564-1. [160p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Philadelphia is the setting for the fifth book about the
intrepid nineteenth-century heroine Vesper Holly. Scheming to control Brazil's
natural resources, arch-villain Helvitius is also intent on destroying Vesper, her
guardian, Brinnie, and anyone else nearby. An amazingly resourceful young
man, Toby ("The Weed") Passavant, has been added to the cast of characters as an
innocent love interest for Vesper; bumbling Brinnie is characteristically jealous.
Alexander has thoroughly researched the events and personalities surrounding the
1876 World's Fair. The combination of historical fact, non-stop danger and
intrigue, and masterful writing style adds up to another energetic predicament for
Vesper Holly. KP
Allen, Linda. When Grandfather's Parrot Inherited Kennington Court; illus. by
KatinkaKew. Little, 1990. ISBN 0-316-03413-4. [75p]. $12.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Black-and-white line drawings that have a quasi-Jazz
Age raffishness illustrate a story, first published in England, that is pleasant but
predictable. It is predictable that the members of an extended family, dotty and
mercenary, will connive to find a way to get the inheritance away from the
[ 152 ]
parrot; it is predictable that little Miranda, only child in the family and an animal
lover, will win the inheritance through her kindness; and it is predictable that
gentle Aunt Lucille (with whom the orphaned Miranda lives in proud near-
poverty) will have a romance with the vet who comes to take care of the parrot
Still, many readers enjoy the comfort of formula, adequately styled and paced,
and if the characters are mildly lampooned they are at least varied. ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Bingham, Mindy. Berta Benz and the Motorwagen: The Story of the First
Automobile Journey; illus. by Itoko Maeno. Advocacy Press, 1989. ISBN 0-
911655-38-7. 48p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Based on a true incident, this is the story of a journey
by a German housewife and her two sons, who stole off.one night with one of
the prototype motorcars Karl Benz (as in Mercedes Benz) had invented. This was
1888, and Benz had been trying in vain to attract investors; because of a local
law restricting use of the invention, Benz couldn't drive it far enough to prove
its usefulness. With no experience at driving or at making repairs, Mrs. Benz set
off to prove the motorwagen's roadworthiness. Fuel had to be purchased in
pharmacies, in small amounts, but this first cross-country drive was successful.
The story is smoothly told, but the picture-book format (oversize pages, a large
amount of space given to the line and wash illustrations) and the purposiveness
of the text, reflected in an appended page (addressed to parents) on positive female
role models and on non-sexist attitudes, weaken the book. A story loses impact
when the reader finds it concluding with a lecture, however important the lecture
may be. ZS
D.V. Self-confidence
Brooks, Jerome. Naked in Winter. Jackson/Orchard, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-
531-08466-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05866-2. [224p]. Library ed. $14.99; Trade
ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 7-10. 
Set in late 1940s Chicago, this is an evocative story
of adolescence and its rites of passage. A good student at a boys' public high
school, Jake Ackerman takes comfort in his group of close friends, hopes to go
to college, worries because he isn't aggressive enough with girls. Jake's parents
quarrel, and that's upsetting; it's even more upsetting when his father announces
that he's bought a house near Midway Airport (in a neighborhood that was
almost rural at the time), a move that makes Jake's mother furious and Jake
desolate. He commutes to his old school, but the friendships wane; he falls in
love, but there are tensions and a breach; he realizes how much he loves his
father when Pa becomes ill, and he learns that Ma's bitterness masks an equally
strong love for Pa. While the book is redolent of the period and of Chicago and
of a Jewish family's strength and tenacity, it is in the characterization of Jake
that Brooks excels: Jake is the narrator, and his honesty, his joy in being loved,
his apprehension about himself, and his need for independence that sometimes
vies with his need for security are vivid, convincing, and moving. ZS
D.V. Father-son relations; Self-confidence
[ 153 ]
Browne, Anthony. The Tunnel; written and illus. by Anthony Browne. Knopf,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-94582-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-84582-X. 26p.
Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
"Once upon a time there lived a sister and brother
who were not at all alike.... The sister stayed inside on her own reading and
dreaming .... 
The brother played outside with his friends. . . roughing and
tumbling." When their mother sends them out together after one argument too
many, Jack decides to explore a tunnel and does not come back. It is Rose who
must brave the underground dark and a scary forest to rescue Jack, who has been
turned to stone. Rose's hug warms him back to life. Both story and graphics
suggest many fairy tales, including a picture of Little Red Riding Hood on
Rose's wall, the book she reads, her hooded red coat, and creatures that are shaped
Rackham-like from the wood of trees. Motifs from Beauty and the Beast are
clear when Jack dons an animal mask to frighten Rose, and of course her name
and her courageous love in restoring Jack to human appearance reflect Beauty's
role. The exemplary blending of realism and fantasy in picture book format
shows how resonantly fairy tales can influence literature beyond the constant
replays of illustrated new editions that are currently besieging the market Close
watchers will recognize artistic shades of Browne's Hansel and Gretel,
Piggybook, and Gorilla, but this is an imaginative invention unto itself. BH
C.U. Storytelling
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Cameron, Ann. Julian, Dream Doctor; illus. by Ann Strugnell. Random
House, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90524-3; Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-80524-
9. [64p]. 
(A Stepping Stone Book). Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $1.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
If Julian has not already won readers' hearts with his
exploits in Julian's Glorious Summer (BCCB 12/87) and Julian, Secret Agent
(BCCB 12/88), he will here when he tries to find out his father's secret dream for
a birthday present. Surprised at hearing his father mumble "two snakes ... big
ones," Julian duly catches them and presents them at the family party, only to
discover that snakes are his father's recurring nightmare. All ends happily when
Julian's father determines to touch the reptiles and overcome his long-standing
fear. Several aspects of the plot are contrived, including the children's successful
questioning of Julian's father as he sleeps outside in a hammock and the
convenient appearance of a large mother snake with long babies during the
children's first hunt in the park. However, Cameron's style is elegantly
smooth-Julian's opening description of his parents is a winner-and the
characters come alive through easy dialogue and involving action. BH
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Father-son relations; Fear, overcoming
Cobb, Vicki. Why Can't You Unscramble an Egg? And Other Not Such Dumb
Questions about Matter; illus. by Ted Enik. Lodestar, 1990. ISBN 0-525-
67293-1. 40p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Like its companion Why Doesn't the Earth Fall Up?
(BCCB 2/89), this presents basic scientific concepts in an appealingly cartooned
and easy to read question-and-answer format. Most of the questions ("Why does
[154]
an ice cube float?" "How much does air weigh?" "Why isn't the Earth egg-shaped
or a cube?") are accompanied by simple demonstrations, although one of them
involving a yardstick and air pressure is underexplained, if particularly dramatic.
Arranged in a logical sequence of increasing complexity, the questions are
intriguing and essential ("Why does wood bur?") and the responses are both
thorough and commonsensical. RS
C.U. Science-experiments
Cole, Babette. Cupid; written and illus. by Babette Cole. Putnam, 1990.
ISBN 0-399-22215-4. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
After comically capitalizing on fairy tales with Prince
Cinders (BCCB 5/88), Princess Smartypants (BCCB 6/87), etc., Cole turns to
mythology with an updated revision of the god-boy of love, whose mom, the
goddess of beauty, decides to move the family down from Olympus to Earth for
the Miss World Competition. Cupid's father, the god of thunder ("Bang!"),
warns him to behave, but Cupid flies defiantly to the top of the grocery-store
canned-goods display, eludes the babysitter, and snatches a neighbor's toy bow,
pinging people into lovesickness with suction arrows. 
After a slapstick
kidnapping, Cupid escapes and returns with his parents to the Land of the Gods,
where he receives a golden replacement for his broken bow, "and he's been
causing trouble ever since." Kids unfamiliar with Cupid may need a background
explanation to fully appreciate the spoof, but they'll certainly never forget the
manic pink-winged toddler who, with his snaggle-toothed dog, flies through
these chaotic scenes keeping cultural literacists from getting too pompous. Pair
with Mordicai Gerstein's Tales of Pan (BCCB 7/86) for a fuller pantheon. BH
Collins, Tom. Jane Fonda: An American Original. Watts, 1990. ISBN 0-531-
10929-1. [130p]. $13.90. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Some people cannot forgive Jane Fonda her antiwar
activities ("especially for being right") but at the same time, "many others who
also worked to try to stop that war consider her opposition nothing less than
heroic." For some, in fact, the actress is "Jane of Arc," a comment made
facetiously by Fonda's former husband Roger Vadim, but apparently taken as
gospel by Collins. "The Bible says a prophet is not without honor save in his
own country, and Jane was certainly no exception to the rule." 
That a portrait
of an admirable, complicated woman emerges from this adulatory biography is a
credit to the tenacious Fonda, whose myriad activities and zeal speak for
themselves. While the actress (whom Collins interviewed) doesn't let any cracks
show, she is candid about the problems of growing up with a hard-to-please
father, her mother's suicide, and her struggle with bulimia. About her political
campaigns, the book is less forthright, allowing that she "made mistakes," but
not telling us what they were. Still, an interesting lesson in media-literacy for
those who know Fonda only as an aerobics instructor. RS
Corbeil, Jean-Claude. The Facts on File Junior Visual Dictionary; by Jean-
Claude Corbeil and Ariane Archambault. Facts on File, 1989. ISBN 0-8160-
2222-4. 160p. illus. $18.95.
M 
Gr. 6-. 
Divided into subjects such as "Animal Kingdom,"
"Measuring Devices," and "Symbols," this visual dictionary is almost 150 pages
of precise, computer generated drawings. Each drawing is defined by its parts--
[155 ]
the description of parts of bathroom scales includes "weighing platform" and
"display." The lines that connect the definitions to the illustrations of the
objects are clean and easy to follow for older students, but are too thin for young
users. The "Sports" section is most pragmatically useful, defining the parts of
the equipment and playing fields of most major sports. The headings on many
pages are misleading or inadequate-the page entitled "Continents" labels not
only the land masses but also the oceans and large seas. Terminology is
sometimes awkward-in the juxtaposition of a nude male and female, the man's
sexual organ is labeled "penis" and the woman's is labeled "sex"; the male
member of the bovine family on the page "Farm's [sic] animals" is incorrectly
named "ox." On the opposite page, the definitions of the parts of a formal
European-style "pleasure garden" alternate between the technical ("paling fence,"
"pergola") and the idiomatic ("clump of flowers"). Some of the inclusions are
simply fatuous, such as the picture of a "memo pad," "memo book," and "set of
coloring pencils." 
This dictionary will be occasionally useful to students
searching for technical details, but the labelling problems severely limit its
usefulness. KP
Curry, Ann. The Book of Brendan. Holiday House, 1990. ISBN 0-8234-0803-
5. [176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Drawing on some of the Celtic lore that inspired
Lloyd Alexander and Susan Cooper, Curry tells the story of young Elric, a
student in eighth-century Holybury Abbey, and Bridget, the daughter of a local
Thegn. The two young people lead the forces of truth, including King Arthur
and his queen and Merlin awakened, against the Magic of Lies wielded by an evil
wizard, Myrdden, who casts spells of sickness and conjures soldiers from Druidic
ground. The premise of an illuminated book whose herbs and creatures (a
blessed bird, small dragon, and engaging monkey) come to life is intriguing, and
the plot is well conceived. Unfortunately, the style is overexplanatory, with
characters assigned predictable roles and the concluding battle scene anti-climactic
in its easy outcome. While the hell-hound Azab makes a threatening villain, the
Ocean of Doubt and and other abstractions border on caricature. Nevertheless,
readers who aren't ready for the Prydain chronicles or The Dark Is Rising will
enjoy this simplified sample of high fantasy. BH
D.V. Loyalty
Derwent, Lavinia. Sula. ISBN 0-86241-068-1, 160p; Return to Sula. ISBN 0-
86241-073-8, 128p. Each book: illus. by Peter Rush. Canongate/David &
Charles, 1990. Paper ed. $4.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
First published in Britain in 1969 and 1971, Sula and
its sequel are set on a Scottish island and focus on Magnus Macduff, a reluctant
scholar, a secret artist, a boy who lives with his dour grandmother and is happier
outdoors than at home or in school. Derwent, a popular author in Scotland for
many years, tends to romanticize almost every aspect of island life as well as the
characters, but she does draw a colorful picture, and her writing style has good
pace and flow. The books are weakened by a propensity for type-casting and,
even more, by a repetitive use of incident-such as the efforts of a local girl to
arouse Magnus' admiration. In the first book, a new teacher on the island is
used as counterpoint and observer to establish the fact that life on Sula is
S156 ]
"peaceful and natural," to quote the back cover description, and that Magnus is a
rebel, albeit artistically talented. In the second book, Magnus returns to Sula
after a visit to the mainland because he has won a painting competition. In both
books, there is a fantasy element that never blends with the realistic matrix, as
an old seal has anthropomorphic thoughts: just before Magnus returns, "Old
Whiskers" muses, "What had become of the boy? Magnus had been missing for
days. Or was it weeks?" ZS
Ekoomiak, Normee. Arctic Memories; written and illus. by Normee Ekoomiak.
Holt, 1990. ISBN 0-8050-1254-0. 32p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
As a catalogue of intriguing Inuit art work, this will
serve elementary graders studying Inuit and other far-north Native American
cultures, although there is little attempt at cohesion from one page to another.
Each painting or wall hanging is accompanied by a paragraph in Inuktitut and
English describing various aspects of traditional life: In the Iglu, Arctic Spring,
Playing on a Snowbank, Ice Fishing, Okpik-The Lucky Charm, The Body
Needs to Travel, Hanging Fish, The Shelter, The Curse, High-Kick Game,
Blanket-Toss Game, The String Game, Ancestral Hunters, Mermaids and the
Narwhal, Nativity, and The Spirit of Liberty. Two pages on the history,
language, and art of the Inuit, along with an autobiographical note by the artist,
conclude the book. Rich in color and shape, the art has authentic power and the
text informational value. Though it is neither organized nor comprehensive, the
book can serve as a primary source more vivid than outsiders' descriptions, to
which readers will have to turn, for instance, for some explanation of cultural
rationale behind the tragic story of "The Curse," about some teenagers who set
themselves adrift after having their names dishonored by a criminal in the South.
A valuable supplement. BH
C.U. Art appreciation; Social studies
Ellis, Sarah. Next-Door Neighbors. McElderry, 1990. ISBN 0-689-50495-0.
[154p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
It's 1957, and Peggy's family has just moved from
the country to Vancouver, where her father has been named minister in a local
church. Peggy is twelve (although her behavior and thinking sometimes seem
like those of a younger child) and painfully self-conscious; her brave but
misbegotten attempt to make friends at school results in ostracism. "Nobody
really looked at Peggy. They all just moved in and began to whisper." She does
find friendship with two unlikely neighbors: George, a younger boy whose
family immigrated from Russia; and Sing, the gardener and "houseboy" of Mrs.
Manning, whose good manners barely manage to disguise a cold and bigoted
heart. "The thing is that Sing's room is in the basement. Mrs. Manning has a
bolt on the door going down there from the kitchen. She locks it at night." The
theme of prejudicial scapegoating is confidently woven into an essentially
optimistic school-and-family story, with neither characterization nor plot
succumbing to didacticism. Plenty of gentle humor, an open and inviting style,
and a young heroine both exasperating and admirable recommend this to a wide
audience. RS
D.V. Peer group relations; Tolerance
[ 157]
Esbensen, Barbara Juster. Great Northern Diver: The Loon; illus. by Mary
Barrett Brown. Little, 1990. ISBN 0-316-24954-8. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A prime readaloud to accompany storytelling sessions
featuring Native American legends or a film showing of The Loon's Necklace,
this is a smooth natural history narrative in picture book format. Handsome
paintings dramatize a text describing the loon's biannual migrations, striking
plumage, eerie calls, and territorial, flight, breeding, and feeding patterns. Both
author and artist walk the fine line between aesthetics and information: in spite
of her lyrical style, Esbensen never tips the factual balance by becoming self-
indulgently poetic, and Brown satisfies viewers with eye-catching landscapes that
maintain accuracy of botanical and avian detail. The brief opening free verse and
the concluding depiction of a snow-filled nest at night are examples of inspired
nonfiction for the young. BH
C.U. Nature study
Eyles, Heather. Well I Never!; illus. by Tony Ross. Overlook, 1990. ISBN 0-
87951-383-7. [32p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
"As usual," Polly isn't ready for school on time,
insisting that there's a witch in the bedroom (where the tee-shirt is), vampire in
the bathroom (shorts), werewolf on the stairs (socks), and a ghost in the
cupboard who is preventing Polly from getting her shoes. An annoyed Mom
becomes a convinced Mom when she goes to get the clothes herself: "'Toads
and slugs' bottoms!' shrieked the witch, who looked very fetching in Polly's tee-
shirt." But together, hand in hand, Mom and Polly eventually discover what
imagination can wreak upon the most innocuous pile of clothing. Tony Ross'
bright cartoons both confound and clarify the situation, which turns about
several times with dizzying shifts of now-you-see-'em-now-you-don't
perspectives and perceptions. This mother and daughter make a brave team. RS
D.V. Fear, overcoming; Mother-daughter relations
Fienberg, Anna. Wiggy and Boa; illus. by Ann James. 
Houghton, 1990.
ISBN 0-395-53704-5. [112p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Boa didn't mean to summon the pirates out of her
uncle's book. Even though he sometimes acts like Captain Bligh, running her
life with nautical precision, Uncle Bolderack doesn't deserve to be strung up by
his former crew. But the pirates disagree, and it's up to Boa and her scrawny
friend Wiggy to save him. An unlikely hero, Wiggy enlists the aid of his
parents, a pair of absent-minded musicians who magically soothe the savage men
into a more amiable frame of mind. The parent-child scenarios in this tall tale
are reminiscent of Roald Dahl, but Fienberg is considerably gentler in her
humor. 
Wiggy treats his negligent parents with Matilda-like fortitude,
desperately trying to keep the house clean: "When the small brown insects in
the kitchen first came to Wiggy's attention, scurrying in between the cake
crumbs, and the smeared knives... he decided he'd have to take matters into his
own hands." Fienberg has an eye for grossness that should delight young
readers. The scratchy pen-and-ink drawings reflect the exaggerated humor of the
story. Short-listed by the Australian Children's Book Council of the Year
award, this tale is a promising first effort. Hope for a sequel. RAS
[ 158 ]
George, Jean Craighead. One Day in the Tropical Rain Forest; illus. by Gary
Allen. Crowell, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04769-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
690-04767-3. [6 4 p]. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Following a now-familiar pattern (One Day in the
Desert BCCB 2/84, etc.) George makes drama large and small out of the minute-
by-minute events in an ecosystem. A sloth makes her weekly journey to the
floor of the forest, army ants parade and pillage, trees "battle each other for
sunlight." A human drama overarches: the rain forest will be plowed under for
cropland unless Dr. Rivero finds a nameless butterfly so "a wealthy industrialist
would buy the Tropical Rain Forest of the Macaw, name the butterfly for his
daughter, and save the forest from the bulldozers and chain sawyers." While the
human inhabitants of this forest play largely sentimental roles, the forest itself
is center stage, with the conflicts and cooperation of its organisms providing
gripping ecological theater. Pencil illustrations are cool-toned and attractive; a
bibliography and index are included. RS
C.U. Science
D.V. Ecological awareness
Gibbons, Gail. Beacons of Light: Lighthouses; written and illus. by Gail
Gibbons. Morrow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07380-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
688-07379-4. 32p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-3. 
The history of lighthouses is told in a picture book
format for independent readers. Although the narrative is simple, the vocabulary
and some of the concepts are more difficult than is typical in picture books:
"Augustin Fresnel ... found a way to increase the light by using prisms. The
prisms of the lens bent the light beam and concentrated it, making the light
visible for many miles." 
However, each difficult concept is clarified with
supplementary illustrations or text. Gibbons' depictions of people are done in
her signature cartoon style, but she has added depth, taking advantage of her
subject to develop an attractive technique for seascapes--dots of blue and green
paint scattered over watercolor waves. Actual lighthouses were researched and are
included in the illustrations. KP
Gilmore, Kate. Enter Three Witches. Houghton, 1990. ISBN 0-395-50213-6.
[228p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
This is a deft merging of reality and fantasy, as
sixteen-year-old Bren, accepting the fact that his mother and grandmother are
witches, tries desperately to keep the fact from the girl with whom he's fallen in
love. Erika is a dancer, playing one of the witches in Macbeth, and Bren is
working (frantically) on the play's lighting. The third witch is black, also a
member of the household, and there's an extra surprise-witch introduced in a
humorous last twist. A yeasty mix of mounting a play, enjoying the New York
scene, falling in love, and coping with an irrepressible family, this is good fun,
with a writing style that sports an excellent ear for dialogue. ZS
Glimmerveen, Ulco. 
A Tale of Antarctica; written and illus. by Ulco
Glimmerveen. 
Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-590-43360-1. 
[32p]. 
$12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
5-8 yrs. 
Papa penguin "is glad to make a new friend" when he
meets his first human (presumably a scientist), but when "the new people" move
in-well, there goes the continent. The beach becomes crowded and littered, and
the fish taste funny. When Papa is caught in an oil slick, Mama penguin does
the loyal, penguin-like thing. "She climbs over the piles of garbage to the
shelters of the people" where "everyone ignores her desperate pleas for attention
until she reaches the shelter where Papa's friend lives." Papa is saved, and the
book ends with a vaguely cleansing snowstorm. The laudable message is
subverted by the anthropomorphism-no need to worry about these plucky
penguins. Watercolor paintings of the polar landscape's beauty and desecration
are delicate if didactic, but the penguins seem incongruously cartooned. RS
D.V. Ecological awareness
Goodall, John S. The Story of the Seashore; illus. by John S. Goodall.
McElderry, 1990. ISBN 0-689-50491-8. 
[6 0p]. $14.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Using his now familiar device of alternating full and
half pages, Goodall provides a table of contents for a wordless book in which
watercolors portray scenes at various English seacoast towns that have become
popular resorts. From the early 1800s when a royal visit was the catalyst for
such popularity, the changes in such resorts as Brighton and Blackpool are
pictured; the book ends, with chronological progression and geographical
expansion, showing seacoast resorts abroad. Architectural and costume details
provide a visual record of change, but the setting and the lack of story may limit
audience appeal in the United States despite the lively action on some of the
pages. ZS
C.U. History-England
Grimm, Jacob Ludwig Karl. The Frog Prince or Iron Henry; tr. by Naomi
Lewis; illus. by Binette Schroeder. North-South/Farrar, 1989. ISBN 1-55858-
015-8. 26p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Lewis' translation remains essentially faithful to the
1812 edition of the Grimm's version, making occasional changes in the verse
sections to preserve the rhyme. Overall, she strikes a good balance between the
formal language of fairy tales and the colloquial expressions of everyday speech:
"I don't want clothes and jewels," says the frog. "But I would like some love
and affection." Schroeder's illustrations, with their dramatic use of perspective
and shadow, provide a unique interpretation of this familiar tale. They place it in
a sinister, fantastic landscape where mountains, trees, and even animals wear
human faces. The princess, a girl-woman of unconventional beauty, exhibits
frigid disgust at the prospect of an amphibious bed-partner. Schroeder captures
the frog's-eye view as he patiently climbs the palace stairs, where at the top
stands the princess, her face beyond the frog's line of sight. Here, and in the
transformation scene, multiple images create a sense of movement. Painted in
intense green, the pictorial sequence of frog turning into prince evokes the pain
and terror of the transformation. This is surreal and sophisticated, less likely
[160 ]
than the Alix Berenzy variant (BCCB 10/89) to find a wide, popular audience,
but this adaptation deserves consideration because it powerfully suggests the
mythic and symbolic elements of the tale. RAS
Gripe, Maria. Agnes Cecelia; tr. from the German by Rika Lesser; illus. by
Alix Berenzy. Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022282-4; Trade ed. ISBN
0-06-022281-6. [288p]. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
With a spooky first sentence--"It seemed to happen
only when Nora was home alone"-this ghost story promises more than it
finally delivers. Fifteen-year-old Nora feels left out of family affairs, and has felt
so ever since she came to live with her cousins after her parents were killed in a
car accident. This is a potentially interesting conflict, but it is only expressed in
long expository passages that are constantly belied by the loving attention Nora
actually gets, and readers will soon become impatient with all the introspective
musing. "Some days Nora couldn't stop wallowing in her own thoughts, even
when they were cruel and unjust." There's a sure-allure doll-ghost motif, but
while the supernatural element occasionally provides an effective chill, it is
based on an overcomplicated series of resemblances between Nora's situation and
that of Agnes Cecelia, who lived in the house many years ago and who has now
seemingly returned. The nature of the pattern and identity of the ghost will be
apparent to readers long before Nora catches on, although she is constantly beset
by coincidences-"Funny this should turn up now!"-that beg questions of both
the intelligence of the heroine and the integrity of the plot. Nora's encounters
with the ghostly Cecelia have a stilled, expectant mood that is tellingly
underplayed, as is a tense encounter between Nora and her grandmother, who
must face painful secrets about her own mother that Nora has uncovered. A
good story is in here, but has not yet been carefully carved out. RS
D.V. Family relations
Gross, Ruth Belov. True Stories About Abraham Lincoln; illus. by Jill
Kastner. Lothrop, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08798-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
688-08797-3. 48p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Twenty-two one-page chapters, each facing a full-page
watercolor painting, describe episodes in Lincoln's life for young readers, many
of whom will especially appreciate this accessible format. Lincoln's boyhood
and political career are punctuated with specific scenes such as his playing a joke
on his stepmother by walking children upside down across the ceiling to leave a
trail of muddy footprints. While there's no room for some of the less obvious
aspects of the statesman's life-his wife's mental aberrations are never
mentioned, for example-the balance between generalization and detail is a
careful one, considering the limitations of scope. The illustrations are strong in
color and composition, though some of the facial expressions seem stilted,
especially in poses of Lincoln grieving over the war or delivering the Gettysburg
address. Nevertheless, the overall visual effect is an inviting one, well supported
by the solid introductory narrative. First published in a paperback edition with
different illustrations in 1973. BH
C.U. History-U.S.-Pictorial presentation
[161]
Gruenberg, Linda. Hummer. Houghton, 1990. ISBN 0-395-51080-5. [192p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Twelve-year-old Hummer is the only child of midwest
dairy farmers. When she's home, she spends her time either in the barn or on a
horse. 
At school, Hummer tells whoppers about spending her weekends
shopping or traveling in Europe. Unable to stop lying, Hummer is hiding the
truth-her mom has gone crazy and her helpless father is living in the
milkhouse. Like many first novels, this has enough plot for three books- it is
a story of a family dealing with mental illness, a tale of friendship between
Hummer and an old man, and a horse story. The complexity of the plot almost
gets away from the author and she leaves several holes: what does Hummer say
to her foster parents during the two weeks she stays with them? How does
Hummer make up with her new friend Charlotte after missing their riding dates?
While the writing style is sometimes awkward ("Hummer felt rather overawed"),
this is an unsentimental portrayal of life on a dairy farm, with summer
wonderfully evoked: "the windows were open and the kids were yelling and
Hummer could smell the water in the ditches and the dust and the barns and the
fields." Hummer's life improves believably when her mother gets psychiatric
help, concluding an authentic book about contemporary rural life. KP
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Hamanaka, Sheila. The Journey; designed by Steve Frederick; written and illus.
by Sheila Hamanaka. Orchard, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08449-3; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-531-05849-2. 40p. Library ed. $18.99; Trade ed. $18.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-. 
Powerfully excerpted from Hamanaka's mural by
designer Steve Frederick, this progression of images bears witness to the tragedy
that befell Japanese-Americans during World War II. It begins with a picture of
a Japanese farmworker grasping a peach, proceeds through scenes of prejudice,
violence, and incarceration in the concentration camps, and closes with postwar
claims for governmental apologies and repatriations. The text is a relentless
condemnation, unfortunately weakened by undocumented controversial
statements ("President Franklin D. Roosevelt, himself a believer in the racial
inferiority of the Japanese .. .), overstatement ("America in 1941 was a land of
lynchings") and unexplained references ("But like the banished Noh character
Yoroboshi . ."). 
Captions and explanations of the illustrations are sometimes
unclear as to what they are pointing out; one central figure of a watchful woman
is left unmentioned. Ironically, this image is perhaps more powerful for
standing unlabeled, as the captioning tends to limit the emotional impact of the
text. Like much overtly political art, the artist's mural (reproduced in full in the
back) and the book it inspired are deliberately didactic. While the scenes depicted
should not be forgotten, this largely lacks the individual vision that truly leads a
reader/viewer to informed empathy, though it is a useful, sometimes striking,
introduction to a terrible time. RS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Herman, Charlotte. The House on Walenska Street; illus. by Susan Avishai.
Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44519-6. 80p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Seven episodes in the life of eight-year-old Leah, a
girl in 1913 Russia, are simply told but sometimes puzzlingly underdeveloped.
[ 162
Living with her mother and younger sisters in a small village, Leah has small
adventures, such as going to the store, taking care of her sisters (and her mother,
in one touching episode) and writing letters to her cousins in America. One
chapter in which their house is ransacked by Cossacks is dramatic but uneasily
set among the lighter anecdotes--perhaps it's a part of history that needs more
flesh than a first chapter-book can provide. An episode in which Leah runs from
the house to escape punishment and joins in a parade begs questions (a parade?
is it real?) that beginning readers need answered, not elliptically left behind. A
scene in which Leah causes the local shoemaker to fall on the floor is left
similarly unresolved. However, Leah is an appealing girl whose dreams, fears,
and mistakes will resonate for those looking for a historical "girl story" set in
unusual circumstances. RS
C.U. History
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Hest, Amy. Fancy Aunt Jess; illus. by Amy Schwartz. 
Morrow, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08097-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08096-0. 32p. Library
ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
With her stylish clothes and attractive figure, "Aunt"
Jess turns heads wherever she goes. Becky admires her mother's cousin and
enjoys eavesdropping on the women's conversations, especially discussions of
the current man in Jess's life. Despite the encouragements of many (including
an apparently jealous butcher's wife) to find a husband, Jess is not ready to settle
down. For one thing, as she tells a confused-but-curious Becky, the man she
marries must give her goose bumps. Becky, who looks to be about eight, may
be too young to understand much of the adult banter taking place around her, but
she does notice when Aunt Jess gets the goose bumps during a service at the
local synagogue, and happily assists at the subsequent wedding, which follows
rather abruptly. Though the romantic theme may be lost on some young
listeners, Becky's friendship with Jess, complete with Friday night sleepovers,
heart-to-heart talks, and special bakery cookies, will strike a chord with children
who enjoy a special friendship with an adult. Schwartz's strongly patterned
watercolors lovingly recreate Brooklyn in the late forties. Unfortunately, she is
more successful with her characters' clothes than with their faces, which
sometimes show a bland similarity of expression (or lack thereof). Well-suited
for one-on-one sharing, this picture book invites discussion of how Mom and
Dad met and married. RAS
D.V. Aunt-niece relations
Hirst, Robin. My Place in Space; by Robin and Sally Hirst; illus. by Roland
Harvey and Joe Levine. Orchard, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08459-0; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-531-05859-X. 40p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Weird little drawings of a small Australian town serve
as foreground for dramatic paintings of the universe-all illustrating exactly
where Henry Wilson and his sister Rosie live. Just like wise-guy kids who put
interminable return addresses on their envelopes, Henry tells the bus driver about
Gumbridge, Australia, the southern hemisphere, Earth, the solar system, the
solar neighborhood, the Orion Arm, the Milky Way... "'Most of space is just
that--space,' added Henry, trying to relieve the driver's puzzled look." Children
will appreciate this cosmological cumulation, which satisfies a need for order,
[ 163]
predictability, and egocentricity. The science is sound, presented in enough
detail to be interesting but with enough simplicity to be recalled and repeated
aloud. Illustrations effectively combine two techniques (and artists) to convey
the context of a bustling, down-to-earth earth (complete with several funny
dramas that run from page to page) in a dizzying photorealistic firmament of
planets, stars, and supergalaxies. It all begins to look like home. RS
C.U. Astronomy
D.V. Environmental concepts
James, Mary. Shoebag. Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-590-43029-7. 
[144p].
$10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr.5-8. 
The publisher 
invites 
us 
to identify 
the
pseudonymous "Mary James," "a popular young-adult author"; our marker is on
M. E. Kerr for this book filled with Little Little-like repartee. Shoebag is a
young cockroach who one day wakes up to find himself turning into a boy.
Leaving his world of "things that live behind and under and in back of" (to the
sound of a maternal plea to "promise you'll never step on your own mother")
Shoebag takes up a human life with a family whose entire attention is focused
on the well-being of pampered daughter Pretty Soft, a TV "spokesgirl" for toilet
paper. Pretty Soft (formerly Eunice), who keeps tension at bay by gazing into a
mirror and reciting the words "I see my own beauty, may it last forever," clearly
needs a lesson, and Shoebag is just as clearly the one to help her learn it. The
daffy premise is never convincing but always appealing, spiked with barbed
observations on the family lives of both cockroaches and humans. Most of the
humor is carried in the conversations, which sometimes fall into a he-said-she-
said rhythm that overstates the jokes. But for all its cleverness, this has a Dale
Carnegie stick-up-for-yourself theme that gives heart to the wit. RS
D.V. Self-confidence
Jenness, Aylette. Families: A Celebration of Diversity, Commitment, and
Love; written and illus. with photographs by Aylette Jenness. Houghton, 1990.
ISBN 0-395-47038-2. [48p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
The seventeen families photographed and interviewed
here together demonstrate a splendid array, ethnic and otherwise: Jaime lives
with his mom and dad and little brothers; Eve divides her time between her
father's and mother's houses; Ananda lives with her parents in a religious
commune; Elliott was adopted by Tom and Dmitri, two gay men. Each family
is focused by the viewpoint of one of the children: "I learned sign language
before I could speak, so there's no problem of communication. Just like babies
learn English, I learned sign language, 'cause that's what my mother used; it was
just a language used around the house." The consistently upbeat perspective of
the text and portraits (clear but not particularly revealing) make this a bit of a
coffee table selection-but for most children, an eye-opening one. RS
C.U. 
Social studies
D.V. Family relations
Johnson, Annabel. 
Gamebuster; 
by Annabel and Edgar Johnson.
Cobblehill/Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-65033-4. 
[192p]. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
[ 164]
M 
Gr. 7-9. 
Scott, a star high-school quarterback, has had a game
injury that means his football days are over. When he overhears (in unlikely
circumstances) discussion of a terrorist plot, he becomes involved in danger
shared by a former teacher, Miss McGill, who serves as romantic interest when
paired with a Navajo, Nighthawk, who helps Ms. M. and Scott and Scott's
secret agent father in a desperate bid to foil the terrorists. All four of this quartet
are heroic, and the bad guys are villanous indeed. This isn't badly written, and it
has a great deal of action that will appeal to many readers, but it is so
implausible and so often based on coincidence that the plot is almost ludicrous.
ZS
D.V. Father-son relations
Kaplan, Marjorie. The Fifteenth Peanut Butter Sandwich; illus. by Eileen
McKeating. 
Four Winds, 1990. 
ISBN 0-02-749350-4. 
[64p]. 
$12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Kathy's parents are delighted at the prospect of
working for a year in London, but all Kathy can think about is what to do with
Romeo, her 10-year-old, yellow-striped tabby. She literally chews over the
problem-a peanut butter sandwich for each possible solution. Kathy's letter to
the queen requesting special permission to bring her cat into England despite
quarantine laws elicits a kind but firm no. The family who is renting their
house has three cats already (Romeo does not like other cats), and each of the
neighbors proves an unlikely caretaker: one has a cat-chasing dog, another
would keep Romeo as a mouser without supplementing her diet with cat food.
Readers will see long before Kathy does that old Mrs. Welk, who pretends to be
busy in order to mask her loneliness, is the obvious solution, and indeed the
ending is predictably tidy (Click, click, click, clunk! Everything fell into place
with a loud clunk inside Kathy's head"). 
There's not much depth of
characterization here ("The mother looked like all mothers, except that she was
sneezing") and the plot is single-tracked, but children will identify with Kathy's
desperate state of worry and will find the reading easy. BH
D.V. Animals, love for
Kennedy, X. J. Fresh Brats; illus. by James Watts. McElderry, 1990. ISBN 0-
689-50499-3. [48p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
This gallery of poetic mischief-makers features the
ghoulish, gross, or catastrophic humor that children love most in the middle
grades. It's hard to select favorite examples-students will be popping these
poems at each other like spitballs: "To the bottom of his drink/ Dad beholds an
earthworm sink./ For her bio project, May/ Must have used the ice-cube tray."
Often the straightforward joke ends with a twist, as in the case of "jealous
would-be-actor Jay," who sabotages the Yuletide play with marbles, only to end
up in a cast different from the kind he envied. These irrepressibly rhymed verses
make an irresistible introduction for reluctant readers as well for enthusiastic
listeners. To be illustrated with black-and-white drawings by the same artist
who livened up the preceding volume, Brats (BCCB 7/86). BH
[ 165 1
Kessler, Ethel. Stan the Hot Dog Man; written and illus. by Ethel and Leonard
Kessler. Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023280-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
023279-X. [64p]. (I Can Read Books). Library ed. $10.95; Trade ed. $10.89.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Sixty-five-year-old Stan's retired from the bakery, but
he's not ready to retire, and his flashy red and blue hot dog truck is all set to go.
Stan is a kindly hot dog man, selling his dogs two for one when he discovers a
customer can't afford the four his family needs; and Stan's a lifesaver as well,
taking in a bus driver and her charges when all are stranded in a blizzard. While
the plot lacks momentum, this easy-reader has an appealing focus (food) and a
real-life drama that new readers will find comfortable. It's nice, too, to have an
easy-reader protagonist who is neither young nor green. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Older-younger generations
Klein, Norma. Just Friends. Knopf, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90213-9;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80213-$. 
[19 2p]. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
Isabel, a typical Norma Klein girl/woman of the
Upper West Side, finds her senior year one of great transition for her, her three
best girlfriends, and her buddy-from-childhood Stuart: she experiences sex with a
boy in her class, gets ready for college, and finds that her feelings for Stuart are
not as platonic as she had thought. Although the plot has some odd wrinkles,
such as the quickly dismissed breast cancer of one of Isabel's friends, the
characters are drawn with subtlety and breadth. Particularly well depicted are
Isabel's parents, resigned to their disappointing marriage, and Isabel's best friend
Lois, a quiet and thoughtful bystander to the romances of the other girls.
Combined with Klein's characteristically smart dialogue and smooth exposition,
it all makes for an enjoyable read. DS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Kliment, Bud. Billie Holiday. Chelsea House, 1990. ISBN 1-55546-592-7.
11 p. illus. with photographs. (Black Americans of Achievement). $17.95.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
Like all the others in the "Black Americans of
Achievement" series, this is introduced with an essay by Coretta Scott King
called "On Achievement"---an inspiring introduction that stands in slightly
ironic contrast to the painfully honest and direct biography that follows.
Kliment's portrait shows the fatal effect racism had on Holiday's life and career,
but he is equally candid about her hellbent self-destruction. Most of all, he gives
a comprehensive picture of the jazz world of the thirties and forties. Holiday's
first record was with Benny Goodman; she later toured with Count Basie (having
once to darken her skin when a manager was afraid audiences would think she
was white) and Artie Shaw. Her heroin habit, troubles with men, and arrests are
discussed forthrightly, often pointed with incisive quotes from the singer herself:
"The case was called 'the United States versus Billie Holiday.' And that's just
the way it felt." While her life probably serves more as object-lesson than role
model material, Holiday's singing (and songs: "God Bless the Child," "Strange
Fruit") is a powerful legacy, and well-introduced by this book. Discography,
chronology, bibliography and index are all included. RS
[ 166]
Landau, Elaine. Child Abuse: An American Epidemic; Revised edition. Julian
Messner, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-671-68874-X; Paper ed. ISBN 0-671-68875-
8. 128p. Library ed. $11.98; Papered. $5.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
When the first edition of this book was reviewed
(BCCB 5/85), it gave balanced coverage, cited actual cases, described physical,
sexual, and psychological abuse, focused on the role and motivation of adult
caretakers who were perpetrators, and provided information about preventive
measures and about sources of help. This revised edition does all those things,
and the revision has been thorough: substantial rewriting, information and
examples brought up to date (as is evident from the chapter bibliographies) and
provision of a bibliography, index, and list of sources from which help may be
obtained. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Landis, J. D. Looks Aren't Everything. Bantam, 1990. ISBN 0-553-05847-9.
[192p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Rosie's best friend, Jeanie, is in love with a potato-
or at least, a waiter dressed up as one: "Call me Spud." Jeanie doesn't care that
she has never seen Spud without his Potato Man uniform. After all, looks
aren't everything, right? Wrong, says Rosie, who harbors a secret crush on
Jeanie's brother, Handsome Harry Higgins: "I like handsome boys. That's what
I like.... Handsome boys. I mean, what else is there when you get right down
to it." To get Harry's attention, Rosie worms her way into the family business,
La Maison de Trash, but without apparent success. Despite her romantic
failures, Rosie freely dispenses advice to both Jeanie ("The basic thing to know
about guys is that they're more nervous about girls than girls are about them")
and to her mother, whom she accompanies on her first post-divorce date: "With
me along, you have a hundred years of experience in a sixteen-year-old body."
Woven throughout this funny story are satiric comments on consumer society,
some of which may hit home. Especially on target is Rosie's description of
teen-age kissing: 
". . . their lips are like caterpillars that have attached
themselves to your face. They squirm, they wiggle, and all of a sudden they
seem to die .... " A welcome vacation from Sweet Valley High. RAS
Lang, Susan S. Extremist Groups in America. Watts, 1990. ISBN 0-531-
10901-1. [144p]. $12.90. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
Grabbing the reader's attention with her opening
description of four brutal racially-motivated murders, Lang quickly convinces us
that violent extremism is alive and well in America. The history and causes of
racism and anti-Semitism are briefly discussed, but the book tends to be more
descriptive than analytical. Lang focuses primarily on right-wing extremists (Ku
Klux Klan, neo-Nazis, religious extremists, and skinheads) but also discuses the
activities of such left-wing groups as the Black Liberation Army. While she
clearly disagrees with the views expressed by the extremists, Lang assumes her
readers already share her contempt, and thus fails to debunk the myths of Aryan
superiority and "racial purity." She does a good job of showing how hard it is,
given the First Amendment, to combat racist propaganda and the willingness of
many racists to die for their beliefs. Particularly disturbing is the new alliance
between old-guard Nazis and young skin-heads. "I am a violent person ... I
love the white race, and if you love something, you're the most vicious person
[167]
on earth," boasts one young skinhead. Relying primarily on secondary sources,
Lang's use of quotations skillfully reflects the warped logic of her subjects.
Though suffering from occasional lapses in style ("another type of bigot has
been brewing in the United States"), Lang's account provides adequate coverage
of a pressing subject RAS
C.U. Social studies
Lawlor, Laurie. Second-Grade Dog; illus. by Gioia Fiammenghi. Whitman,
1990. ISBN 0-8075-7280-2. 40p. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
One of those happy hits with built-in child appeal,
this is homely fantasy about a lonely dog that decides to attend school for the
company it might provide. Treated royally by his middle-aged owners, Bones
nevertheless tires of tearing up toilet paper, so he disguises himself in shirt,
shorts, sneakers, and backpack and joins the morning student crowd. Bones is as
successful in the classroom as he is on the playground until a finicky fire
marshal observes that he's a dog and sends him home-accompanied by a troop
of rebellious classmates who promise to visit him after school next day.
Exuberant pencil and paint illustrations cartoon the action with compositional
flair, extending the spoof on grown-ups in general and officials in particular with
colorful aplomb. BH
Lerner, Carol. Dumb Cane and Daffodils: Poisonous Plants in the House and
Garden; written and illus. by Carol Lerner. Morrow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-
688-08796-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08791-4. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade
ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Like her companion volume Moonseed and Mistletoe:
A Book of Poisonous Plants (BCCB 3/88), this overview of common shrubs,
climbers, vegetables, and decorative plants with poisonous properties is
handsomely illustrated. Lerner's detailed botanical drawings and paintings are the
real highlight of the book, though descriptions of the plants and explanations of
their effects on humans, especially children and house pets, are capably written.
Young readers will be surprised to find some of our most attractive garden
flowers-narcissus and lily-of-the-valley among them-included as
troublemakers, along with common house plants such as philodendron: "Their
leaves-and sometimes other plant parts as well-contain sharp crystals. If the
plant is chewed or eaten, these crystals cut into the mouth and throat like
hundreds of burning spears. The tongue, mouth, and throat swell, sometimes so
badly that it becomes impossible to breathe." This will leave kids with a
healthy respect for knowing what flora to look at and leave alone. BH
C.U. Botany
Lester, Helen. The Revenge of the Magic Chicken; illus. by Lynn Munsinger.
Houghton, 1990. ISBN 0-395-50929-7. 
[32p]. 
$13.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
While this doesn't have quite as foolproof a plot as
The Wizard, the Fairy, and the Magic Chicken, it has the same appeal of three
absurd creatures acting on magic-empowered impulse. In the course of their
perpetual arguments over who is the greatest in the world, the Fairy turns the
Wizard into a cow, the Wizard turns the Fairy into a blueberry muffin, and the
[ 168 ]
Magic Chicken gets transformed into a ballerina for laughing at them both.
Disgruntled, the Ballerina Chicken uses his pickle power to scare them with
Gnarly Gnitbats, Awesome Alligators, and an Enormous Elephant, but he
garbles the spell and breaks a tree over their heads with the weight of his
creations. Sprightly watercolors and a playfully childlike tone redeem the lame
ending, where the three magicians are reconciled with a hug and restored to their
former shapes. BH
Lewin, Ted. Tiger Trek; written and illus. by Ted Lewin. Macmillan, 1990.
ISBN 0-02-757381-8. 34p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
In a misty early-morning scene, several trekkers
mounted on elephants set out through an Indian jungle, observing wild dogs,
monkeys, deer, and a tiger hunting to feed her cubs. Lewin's dignified
watercolors blend the big cat into undergrowth and even into the shadowy "ruins
of an ancient palace where a maharajah once lived." Beside a lake, as a peacock
screams dramatically across a double spread, the tiger kills a chital fawn---"in a
few days she must hunt again. She may not be so lucky the next time, but
today she and her family will eat." Lewin wisely relies on the inherent natural
drama of the scenes, underplaying each with camera-like objectivity while
focusing the compositions with subtle painterly perspective. 
This is an
expedition on which few children could expect to go; they'll relish the experience
of a picture book safari. BH
C.U. Nature study
Lowry, Lois. Your Move, J. P. Houghton, 1990. ISBN 0-395-53639-1.
[108p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
"James Priestley Tate, age twelve, had an
overwhelming urge for the first time in his life, to use deodorant" in this third
book about J. P. and his sister Caroline. J. P.'s sudden fascination with
personal hygiene is sparked by his crush on Angela Galsworthy, newly arrived at
his private school from London, England. Suddenly, J. P. finds chess (his
former passion) a bore, starts walking into walls, tripping over his own feet, and
confiding in a total stranger. It must be love! Anxious to sustain Angela's
interest, J. P. tells her that he is suffering from triple framosis, a rare but fatal
disease. Angela believes him and J. P. is stuck with his lie. Lowry's brand of
comic realism combines a keen sense of the absurd with a sympathetic
understanding of early adolescent angst. This fast-paced plot contains only one
implausible element: J. P.'s conversation with a stranger in the park who acts
as his conscience and sounding board. J. P.'s ardency makes him seem a cousin
to Byars' Bingo Brown. Like Byars, Lowry articulates her hapless hero's
thoughts in words more witty than he could imagine (or appreciate); at the same
time she keeps the narrative and dialogue spontaneous, natural, and humorous.
RAS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Mayne, William. Antar and the Eagles. Delacorte, 1990. ISBN 0-385-29977-
X. [176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr.5-8. 
Strong, suspenseful storytelling married to a
confident use of folkloric motifs makes this one of Mayne's most accessible
fantasies. Climbing for the second time ("he remembered, too, that he was
[169]
going to be very frightened") to the steeple of the church, six-year-old Antar is
taken by an eagle to help rescue a very special baby: the embryonic Great Eagle,
asleep in a golden egg, captive to a King. His eagle taskmasters harsh but just,
Antar learns to live in their mountain eyrie, to communicate in squawks and
bows and pecks, and, finally, to fly. The scenes of Antar's abduction and forced
march to the eagle home are tense and exciting; his evolving respect for his
captors is credibly developed. And while the eagle clan has a fierce nobility,
they aren't above pranks, tricks or general disagreeableness. A formidable kitten
adds a comic accent. Fantasy fans won't be put off by the tender age of the
protagonist, "the child who shall lead them" being a respectable convention in
the genre. Less introverted than much of Mayne's fiction, this has a compelling
narrative drive with natural, cliff-hanging chapter endings that recommend it for
classroom reading aloud. Choose your own adventure. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
McFarland, Cynthia. Cows in the Parlor: A Visit to a Dairy Farm; written and
illus. with photographs by Cynthia McFarland. Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-
31584-8. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
"Where does milk come from?" is often the first of a
toddler's ever-more complicated questions about causation, and this photoessay
concisely provides the answer: milk comes from cows. While not as fully
informative as Gail Gibbons' The Milk Makers (BCCB 5/85), this clearly shows
the basic workings of a dairy farm, including haymaking, silaging, feeding, and
automatic milking. 
The color photos are sometimes dark (particularly
unfortunate in a picture of hay drying in the sun) and transitions are abrupt, but
the commonsensical tone informing both text and pictures is forthrightly
informative. RS
D.V. Everyday life concepts
McKenna, Colleen O'Shaughnessy. Eenie, Meanie, Murphy, NO! Scholastic,
1990. ISBN 0-590-42899-3. [128p]. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
This fourth entry in a likable series (BCCB 10/88,
2/89, 10/89) takes Collette to camp, where she encounters First Love (including
an entirely innocent but subtextually suggestive scene where he teaches her how
to fish) and a mean fellow camper, Peally, who will stop at nothing to get
Tommy back. Peally's tricks (decorating Collette's cabin with her underwear,
etc.) are deliciously nasty; readers will writhe at her reading of Collette's (stolen)
diary out loud at dinner. While Collette does wreak satisfying revenge, Peally
remains refreshingly unreformed at the end of the summer and the book.
Straight-ahead funny fare for those who don't understand why everybody else
thinks Anastasia Krupnik so amusing. RS
Meddaugh, Susan. 
Tree of Birds; written and illus. by Susan Meddaugh.
Houghton, 1990. 
ISBN 0-395-53147-0. 
[32p]. 
$13.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Harry is too fond of the injured bird he rescues to let
it go, even after it's healed and longing to rejoin the flock of Green Tufted
Tropicals that waits patiently in a tree outside Harry's window--even after the
whole tree full of GTTs turns blue with cold. 
This wildly anthropomorphic
[170
picture-book fantasy features cartoon illustrations of scenes such as Harry's
rushing out, in a cat costume, to try and frighten the birds away ("The birds were
not fooled"). The story leaves something to be desired in the credibility
department, but a surprise ending makes up for the overextended plot ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Miller, Margaret. Who Uses This?; written and illus. with photographs by
Margaret Miller. Greenwillow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08279-3; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-688-08278-5. 
[40p]. 
Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
Crisp color photographs, simply composed and
clearly focused, form the basis for a guessing game about "tools of the trades,"
which are grouped together on the last page of the book. Opposite the first
boldface question "Who uses this?" is pictured a hammer; turn the page to find
the answer, "Carpenter," set between a craftsman working on a house and a
young girl hammering on a building project. 
The choice of objects is
imaginative-including a juggling club, football, rolling pin, watering can,
leash, baton, scissors, and paintbrush--and the candid shots equally so, with the
dogwalker fielding a dozen canines down a city sidewalk and, on the page
opposite "Barber," a child cutting her teddy bear's hair. Perhaps the children are
a bit squeaky clean (except for one, who has just stepped in paint), but a
conscientious ethnic balance and a book design skillfully calculated for group
showing as well as one-on-one sharing make this a preschool coup. BH
D.V. Occupational orientation
Peyton, K. M. Darkling. Delacorte, 1990. ISBN 0-385-30086-7. 
[256p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
When fifteen-year-old Jenny discovers that her
irrepressible Granpa Murphy has spent his gambling winnings ("I came up on
the three o'clock yesterday at thirty-three to one") on a Thoroughbred colt for
her, she is thrilled. Her family is already emotionally and financially tattered,
with her father a vegetable and her mother embittered and secretive, but Jenny
keeps Darkling in spite of all objections. When the colt is two, Jenny goes to
work for a neighboring trainer in exchange for Darkling's keep and training fees,
hoping that he will be a successful racehorse. At the stable she grows closer to
her long-time crush Goddard Strawson, who is an aspiring jockey and the son of
her family's landlord. Jenny is believable and appealing as she grapples with her
loyalties to her family and her uncertainty in her emotional and physical
relationship with Goddard; Peyton's portrait of her heroine is characteristically
sure. Granpa, however, is a stereotype of the lovably eccentric old Irishman, and
the domestic melodrama gets out of hand with a subplot about a dark secret from
the past involving adulteries between Goddard's and Jenny's parents. Although
the book lacks the cohesion and impact of Flambards in Summer (BCCB 11/74)
or The Beethoven Medal (BCCB 9/72), equiphiles will enjoy the classic rags-to-
riches plot. DS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
[171]
Polacco, Patricia. Thunder Cake; written and illus. by Patricia Polacco.
Philomel, 1990. ISBN 0-399-22231-6. 
[32p]. 
$14.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
In a picture book that will appeal mightily to any
child who has quaked at the sounds of a thunderstorm, Polacco illustrates a first-
person narrative about a little girl's experience on her grandmother's farm in
Michigan. A Russian immigrant, Baboushka placates her granddaughter's fears
by baking a "Thunder Cake" that requires the two of them to gather ingredients
to the count of the approaching booms: ". . . you got eggs from mean old
Nellie Peck Hen, you got milk from old Kick Cow, you went through
Tangleweed Woods to the dry shed, you climbed the trellis in the barnyard. ...
only a very brave person could have done all them things." The art features an
array of earth tones in sweeping compositions that use organic shapes and
patterns inventively. The figures occasionally strike a coy pose, but Polacco
relies less on her signature use of pencilled faces against luminous color, and the
result is a better blend. A recipe for Grandma's Thunder Cake is appended for
young listeners who want to crawl out from under the bed and try it. BH
D.V. Fear, overcoming; Grandparent-child relations
Poynter, Margaret. A Time Too Swift. Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-31146-
X. [192p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
This first novel is, according to the jacket copy,
"largely autobiographical" and based on the author's experiences as an adolescent
in the early 1940s. Living in San Diego, Marjorie (the narrator, fifteen) meets a
nice young serviceman who is shipped off after the Pearl Harbor bombing. Her
brother enlists in the Marines, her friend's father is killed, a Japanese-American
family who are her friends are sent to an internment camp. Marjorie's father is a
bigot and a bully, but she loves him anyway; her hitherto-meek mother defies
Dad and takes a wartime job. Eventually Marjorie forgets her serviceman and
realizes she loves her brother's best friend, who is 4F; she and her parents are
overjoyed when her brother is shipped home, hurt but not crippled. As often
happens in a first novel, the author has put in too much in an effort to record the
many facets she remembers of the wartime experience. This dilutes the story's
impact, but it has a cohesive structure and is adequate if not impressive
stylistically. ZS
D.V. Sex roles
Prelutsky, Jack. Beneath a Blue Umbrella; illus. by Garth Williams.
Greenwillow, 1990. ISBN 0-688-06429-9. 64p. $14.95.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
As he did in Ride a Purple Pelican (BCCB 1/87),
Prelutsky makes the smallest byways a poetic occasion in this rhyming romp
around the American countryside. Percival Peake rides a white bear from Point
Barrow to Eek, John Poole's mule gives out between cool Sedalia and hot
Joplin, and Amanda finds a flounder near New London on the sound. Several of
the fifty states put in a jovial appearance, along with some of their humble
occupants, from kids to crows. Prelutsky has an unerring sense of popular
appeal; these verses bounce as rhythmically as children do on a bed or jumping
rope. They also feature plenty of reassurance and humor, staples for chanting.
Garth Williams' homey pen drawing and luminous colors enliven each full-page
[ 172 ]
illustration with a dramatic simplicity set off by spacious book design. Kids are
bound to set their own home towns into creative-writing motion. BH
C.U. Language arts-poetry
Pulver, Robin. Mrs. Toggle's Zipper; illus. by R. W. Alley. Four Winds,
1990. ISBN 0-02-775451-0. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Line and wash drawings illustrate a one-gag story that
should appeal to the age that appreciates disaster humor, adult readers-aloud may
appreciate the fact that the disaster is a mild one. Otherwise, this is a moderately
amusing book in which several other staff members try to help a teacher with a
jammed zipper after her concerned students have tried and failed. Each attempt at
pulling Mrs. Toggle's coat off results in everyone tumbling to the floor; the
only sensible person is the school custodian, who comes to the rescue with
needle-nose pliers. While the treatment doesn't quite live up to the promising
premise, young listeners will enjoy seeing the teacher stuck in a childlike
predicament and the other authority figures displaying a variety of exaggeratedly
childish reactions. ZS
Raymond, Patrick. Daniel and Esther. McElderry, 1990. ISBN 0-689-50504-3.
[160p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 9-. 
At the experimental British boarding school of
Dartington in the years preceding World War II, two teenagers fall in love, only
to be swept apart by forces more powerful than their own internal adolescent
drama. Esther is a beautiful Viennese refugee whose cool reserve finally gives
way before Daniel's intense, creatively chaotic nature. Daniel tells the story in
1939, three years after it began, and his narrative fully realizes a complex world
in which he finds his calling as a composer only to hear that the man who
inspired him has been killed fighting Fascists in Spain. So, too, Daniel loses
Esther just as the two of them have established a close bond-she is sent to
rejoin her parents in Europe, and he is summoned by his American father. To
focus on Daniel's immediate emotional deprivation, Raymond has set the
narration before the Holocaust, leaving the implications of Esther's fate and of
Daniel's eventual reactions to the reader's imagination. These characters and
their peers come alive through vivid scenes that hold one with a strength of
detail and of mood that recalls the bitter-sweet reflection dominating A Separate
Peace. BH
C.U. History-World War II, 1939-1945
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Reid, Margarette S. The Button Box; illus. by Sarah Chamberlain. Dutton,
1990. ISBN 0-525-44590-0. 24p. $12.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
In a first-person narrative with which many children
will identify-enviously-a boy describes playing with his grandmother's
button box. Sorting through this round treasure chest, he imagines the buttons
as belonging to elegant costumes, rough and ready clothes, uniforms, and
assorted other garments that are depicted, paper-doll-fashion, in the full-color
illustrations. He makes patterns according to size and color, plays guessing
games with Grandma, makes a button hum along a twisted string, and learns
what buttons are made of: seashells, sand (via glass), wood, horns, etc. "When
it's time to put the buttons back, I pretend I'm very rich, counting all my gold.
[ 173]
I like to feel the buttons then, the bumpy and the smooth. I like the way they
sound-clickety tappety-falling through my fingers, one by one, into the box."
Rich, indeed, and an inventively varied page design incorporates art featuring the
same neat, satisfyingly rounded shapes as the subject. A one-page history of
buttons concludes the story, which will send children straight to the nearest
caretaker with a request for their own button box. Simple toys are best, and
when they're done as well as this, simple books as well. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers
Rylant, Cynthia. Soda Jerk; illus. by Peter Catalanotto. Jackson/Orchard,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08464-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05864-6. 
4 8p.
Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Twenty-eight free-verse poems, all narrated by a
young soda jerk in a Virginia drugstore, depict small-town life without
prettification. The best poems are those that don't rely on the soda jerk
framework, such as "When my Grandaddy died," "I have got these," "Doug
Oaksberry tried to kill himself." Restrained, effective pieces about loneliness,
mourning, and isolation, these rely on understatement and observation. "My
grandaddy's glass eye/ would confuse you/ because you weren't sure/ which side
of his nose/ to look to/ since/ it wasn't real clear/ which eye worked and which
didn't." In many of the poems, however, the reader is merely an audience for the
unbelievably knowing perceptions of the speaker, who sees and understands
everything from his soda-counter vantage point (CTips are okay/ But the secrets
are better"). The style tends to be rambling and unfocused; the pieces often seem
more like artistically arranged prose than poetry. Six double-page-spread
paintings are included, isolated from the poems and likely to be ignored in this
format; they are effective tableaux, curiously voiceless and faceless in a manner
reminiscent of a cozier Edward Hopper. DS
Sachs, Marilyn. At the Sound of the Beep. Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44571-
4. [128p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Twins Mathew and Matilda are in sixth grade and are
good companions despite having different interests and abilities; when their
parents announce that they are separating and that each will keep one twin, the
children decide to run away. They go to San Francisco because they have one
relative who will, they feel, understand their plight-but Uncle Ben is out of
town and the twins take refuge in Golden Gate Park. There's certainly plenty of
action, as the two meet some of the many homeless and become involved in a
murder mystery. Sachs is a competent writer, and her compassion for her
characters, especially for the indigent park-dwellers, permeates the story.
Unfortunately, this sentiment also obtrudes on the story, partly because of its
own weight and partly because there are brief, interpolated pages in the form of
newspaper headlines or quotations from newspapers. The twins help solve the
mystery and catch the murderer, and they thankfully return to their home, where
their parents seem to have had a reconciliation. ZS
Sauer, Jim. Hank. Delacorte, 1990. ISBN 0-385-30034-4. [260p]. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
[174]
M 
Gr. 7-10. 
Sixteen-year-old Richard narrates the story of his
junior year, focusing on his growing friendship with girl-next-door Allie Boggs
(in preference to a glossy and heartless senior), his ten-year-old brother Hank's
attachment to Allie's troubled younger sister Emma, and finally Hank's
unexpected illness and death. Although the writing is competent, the limited
viewpoint of the narration grows tiresome, particularly as the novel is long,
slow-moving and rambling. Richard shows little of the emotional growth that
the rest of the characters constantly attempt to teach him. Characterization is
both amorphous and simplistic, and Hank's prescience and moral courage (he
catches fatal meningitis from a vagrant he befriends) mark him immediately as
Too Good For This World, leaving us relieved rather than sorry at his exit. DS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Brothers
Schami, Rafik. A Hand Full of Stars; tr. from the German by Rika Lesser.
Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44535-8. [224p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
In a four-year diary detailing daily life in Damascus,
Syria, during the political upheavals following World War II, the narrator
describes his school, friends, sweetheart, family (especially beloved Uncle
Salim), and the steps that lead him to become an underground journalist. The
pressures of poverty, constant danger of arrest, and reality of torture in prison
emerge from observations of the fate that befalls several of the narrator's
intellectual mentors, his father, and a harmless old bum who wanders through
the neighborhood. This is a journal of maturation, sometimes slow-moving but
vivid in its cumulative effect; within a setting halfway around the world, U.S.
readers will find themselves face to face with familiar characters and reactions as
the narrator finds the courage to pursue love and career in spite of an oppressive
situation. BH
D.V. International understanding
Seuss, Dr. Oh, the Places You'll Go!; written and illus. by Dr. Seuss. Random
House, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90527-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80527-3.
[48p]. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
This has the bright extravaganza of structures and
creatures that Seuss fans expect, and the same felicity of rhyme but less word-
play. It may be less successful than most Seuss books because it doesn't tell a
story, instead having a didactic message and repeated idea. The idea is that if you
(the reader) will forge ahead, accept life's blows, not just sit around waiting for
something to happen, etc. etc., you will be a success. "And when things start to
happen/ don't worry. Don't stew/ Just go right along You'll start happening
too," or "With banner flip-flapping/ once more you'll ride high/ Ready for
anything under the sky/ Ready because you're that kind of a guy!" Message and
audience don't seem to fit each other. ZS
Shuker, Nancy. Elizabeth Arden: Cosmetics Entrepreneur. Silver Burdett,
1990. ISBN 0-382-09587-1. 
112p. illus. with photographs. (American Dream
Books) $11.98.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
Under the rubric of the series ("The American Dream:
Business Leaders of the 20th Century") Elizabeth Arden, n6e Florence
Nightingale Graham, is clearly entitled to be included. Combining commercial
[ 1751
genius and indefatigable ambition, she worked with concentrated application at
building and enlarging her cosmetics empire, as successful in its merchandizing
of products as in its proliferation of services, or salons. At the same time,
Shuker does not hesitate to show her subject's less appealing personal
characteristics-a selfishness and autocratic willfulness that drove away friends,
family, and employees. 
A special point of interest is Arden's behavior
contrasted with the first self-made millionairess in the United States, a beautician
named Madame Walker, who was descended from slaves and who poured her
profits back into the black community. Despite a sometimes pedestrian style
and occasionally irrelevant black-and-white photos, this gives many such
glimpses of fashion's historical context and of women's progress in the work
force. Bibliography and index are appended. ZS
D.V. Industry
Te Ata. Baby Rattlesnake; ad. by Lynn Moroney; illus. by Veg Reisberg.
Children's Book Press, 1990. ISBN 0-89239-049-2. 32p. $12.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Two colorful picture books (see imprint information
for Xiong's Nine-in-One, Grr! Grr! below) each present a simple, repetitive
folktale that will appeal to young listeners. "Nine-in-one, Grr! Grr!" is the
chant the first tiger sings after learning from a wise man how many cubs she
will have each year. Afraid the world will soon get overpopulated by tigers, a
bird tricks Tiger into remembering the song backward ("One-in-nine, Grr!
Grr!"), thereby changing the prophecy. The vivid watercolor and silkscreen
illustrations are designed after the style of Hmong embroidered story cloths.
Baby Rattlesnake also follows the format of each page of text faced by an
illustration, but in this case the brightly-colored pictures are made with cut paper
and gouache paints that color the tale with a postmodern flair. Set in the
American Southwest, the story tells of a baby rattlesnake who gets his rattle too
soon. He learns his lesson when he tries to scare the chiefs daughter. Both
stories would work equally well for reading aloud or storytelling. KP
Trenary, Jill. Jill Trenary: The Day I Skated for the Gold; by Jill Trenary
with Dale Mitch; illus. with photographs by Dino Ricci. Simon, 1989. ISBN
0-671-68315-2. 60p. (Time of My Life Books). $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Faces come and go mighty quickly in the field of
amateur athletics, and the "autobiographies" by these starring participants are
often just as ephemeral. While a little too perky, Jill Trenary's story is direct,
focused and as informative about the world of figure-skating as it is about the
skater herself, who came in fourth at the 1988 Olympic Games. In the series'
context of "the time of my life," Jill recalls the last day of the Calgary
competition when she, Debi Thomas, Katarina Witt and several others performed
the deciding freestyle segments of their routines. 
She provides plenty of
technical detail, shows generosity to her peers, and is candid about her own
performance: "They were not really mistakes, but I had wanted them to be triple
jumps instead of doubles. 
I might have done better but it was a good
performance, one I could be proud of." Plenty of colorful action shots add
glamour and excitement RS
[176
Updike, David. A Spring Story; illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. Pippin, 1989.
ISBN 0-945912-06-4. 40p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
An atmospheric tale recounts the adventures of two
boys meeting up with old Mr. Birch, who lives at the edge of the marsh and tells
them about "running tiddlies up and down the creek"---riding icebergs on the
tide. On a warm March day, the two boys try their hand at it, resulting in a wild
trip that almost takes them to sea. This is a much more cohesive and credible
story than An Autumn Tale (BCCB 2/88). The writing is at once well-focused
and spacious, creating a rare sense of free time for roaming around with dogs and
pushing the limits of the land. Parker's blue-based paintings emanate the same
tone with clean compositions, easy color blends, and horizontal brush sweeps.
Without nostalgia, the book rings of strong remembrance that will stir
recognition in today's-and tomorrow's-children. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Wallace, Bill. Danger in Quicksand Swamp. Holiday House, 1989. ISBN 0-
8234-0786-1. 181p. $14.95.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
Best friends Jake and Ben (the narrator) would like to
spend summer vacation earning money for a fishing boat. When Jake finds an
abandoned boat near their homes in rural southeast Oklahoma, they can't believe
their luck. But compared to the amazing events that follow, the discovery of the
boat is nothing. The two boys find a treasure map hidden in the boat, a murderer
stalks them, and they are stranded on an island surrounded by alligators and
quicksand. Jake and Ben face melodramatic death several times; just before he is
rescued from suffocating in quicksand, Jake says to Ben, "Tell my daddy I love
him." The scene in which the boys trap an alligator in a pit and bludgeon it to
death with shovels (and cook it for dinner) is graphically described. The style is
Hardy Boys exclamatory, with cliff-hanging chapter endings ("Swim, Ben!
Swim!!!") that may annoy even the most reluctant readers. Still, for those who
have loved and outgrown Eth Clifford's thrillers (Help! I'm a Prisoner in the
Library BCCB 4/80, etc.), Bill Wallace could be a simple step. KP
Willey, Margaret. Saving Lenny. Bantam, 1990. 
ISBN 0-553-05850-9.
[160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 7-10. 
Kay had convinced her best friend Jesse to ask Lenny
for a date-she couldn't have known then how fast the new couple would shut
her out. In alternating, distinctively voiced chapters, the two girls recall what
happened to their friendship while Jesse and Lenny have "the undisputed romance
of the century." Willey deftly combines empathy for her adolescent characters
and readers with a seasoned perspective on their dramas. While readers may, like
Kay, soon become impatient with Jesse's infatuation, they will understand it,
and perhaps be a little jealous, "the kind of jealousy that makes you wonder what
it would be like to be so crazy about someone. When it hasn't happened to
you." As was true in Willey's last book, If Not for You (BCCB 9/88), the sad
spiral of the romance is inevitable and believable: it isn't until they run away
together to an isolated beach cottage that Jesse understands that Lenny isn't a
dark romantic figure; he's clinically depressed, a condition that the author renders
with considerable acuity and a welcome lack of problem-novel melodrama. With
a prose style that is at once quiet and forthright, Willey demonstrates an
unassuming respect for her readers and their passions. RS
[ 177]
Xiong, Blia. Nine-in-One, Grr! Grr!: A Folktale from the Hmong People of
Laos; ad. by Cathy Spagnoli; illus. by Nancy Horn. Children's Book Press,
1990. ISBN 0-89239-048-4. 32p. $12.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
See Te Ata, Baby Rattlesnake for review.
Yee, Paul. Tales from the Gold Mountain: Stories of the Chinese in the New
World; illus. by Simon Ng. Macmillan, 1990. ISBN 0-02-793621-X. 64p.
$14.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-. 
Eight original stories-brilliantly illustrated with
eerily textured, mask-like portraits-make a haunting companion to use with the
tales in Laurence Yep's The Rainbow People (BCCB 4/89), which were drawn
from a WPA oral narrative project. Yee never indulges in stylistic pretensions
as he releases these dramatic blends of realism and legend from what seems long
silence. The manager of a fish cannery turns trickster to foil a greedy boss, a
young man arranges burial for a group of Chinese railroad workers after meeting
his father's ghost in a deserted tunnel ("Take chopsticks; they shall be our
bones"), a young woman's gift of ginger root saves her betrothed's life and,
eventually, their love. A few of the tales focus on the personal price of clashes
between old traditions and new influences. From romance to sly humor to
conflicts of the living and dead, these carry mythical overtones that lend the
characters unforgettable dimension-humans achieving supernatural power in
defying their fate of physical and cultural oppression. The combination of Yee's
piercing portrayals and Ng's monumental images against background effects of
cracked canvas must--as the author hopes in his afterword-"carve a place in the
North American imagination for the many generations of Chinese who have
settled here as Canadians and Americans, and help them stake their claim to be
known as pioneers, too." BH
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Pride in background and heritage