Abrams, Kathleen S. Guide to Careers Without College. Watts, 1988. ISBN
0-531-10585-7. lllp. illus. with photographs. 
(Alternatives to College).
$11.90.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
There's no question that a book giving information
about careers that can be achieved without a full college program serves a need.
This book, which gives general information followed by chapters on certain
kinds of careers (service industries, building trades, health, for example) and
provides chapter bibliographies in addition to a general bibliography and an
index, is limited in its usefulness, however, for two reasons. One of them is
that it doesn't provide many facts about most of the careers mentioned; the
second is that-under the chapter categories-it omits so many careers. Under
"Health," for example, it gives facts (training, career opportunities) for only five
kinds of jobs. For a better book in the same series see the Dubrovin review
below. ZS
C.U. Vocational guidance
Ames, Lee J. Draw 50 Beasties and Yugglies and Turnover Uglies and Things
that Go Bump in the Night; written and illus. by Lee J. Ames. Doubleday,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-385-24626-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-24625-0. 64p.
Library ed. $12.95; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Satisfy fifty third-graders, fourth-graders, fifth-graders,
sixth-graders along with anybody else in the library (maybe you) who wishes
those kids would sit down and do something. RS
D.V. Industry
Auch, Mary Jane. Mom Is Dating Weird Wayne. Holiday House, 1988. ISBN
0-8234-0720-9. 
146p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr.5-8. 
"Weird" Wayne is the local TV weatherman, and
seventh-grader Jenna is not at all happy that he and her mother seem to be
showing a romantic interest in each other. Even while waiting for phone calls
and support checks that don't come, Jenna hopes that her divorced parents will
get back together. This adjustment-to-divorce story has been written many times
before, and there is a predictable progression in Jenna's wishful thinking of
[ 115]
Dad's return, her anger at Wayne, and her eventual acceptance of him after he
finds her lost dog during a blizzard. However, the formula is enlivened with a
considerable amount of slapstick invention, most of it involving two favorite
holidays, Halloween and Thanksgiving. RS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to
Baker, James W. Birthday Magic. ISBN 0-8225-2226-8. Christmas Magic.
ISBN 0-8225-2227-6. Halloween Magic. ISBN 0-8225-2228-4. Valentine
Magic. ISBN 0-8225-2229-2. Each book: illus. by George Overlie. Lemer,
1988. 48p. (Holiday Magic). $6.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Holidays and magic tricks: two sure appeals, and
attractively packaged here in a set of four sturdy small volumes. While some of
the tricks are variations on the same theme or technique, there's no duplication
among the books, and each trick is at least visually related to its holiday.
Birthday Magic features lots of I-can-guess-your-birthdate tricks, Christmas
includes a sawing-the-lady-in-half trick with a paper tree performing stand-in
service, Halloween and Valentine involve the use of many paper pumpkins and
hearts, respectively. The illustrations are sometimes awkwardly drawn but
clearly show the magic techniques. The tricks are easy and require few materials:
paper, cards, string, etc. Great for holiday programming, but the kids will enjoy
these year-round. RS
C.U. Holidays--programs
Bates, Betty. Tough Beans; illus. by Leslie Morrill. Holiday House, 1988.
ISBN 0-8234-0722-5. 89p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Nat Berger is in fourth grade, he is bothered by the
rudeness and bullying of Jasper, the new boy in class, and he enjoys his
friendship with Cassie, the daughter of a Vietnamese refugee family. In the first
chapter Nat, who has collapsed while playing baseball, is hospitalized and learns
that he has diabetes. Eventually, Cassie's family moves away, Nat discovers
why Jasper is so nasty and they become friends; and Nat learns to cope with the
regimen and restrictions of a diabetic, the component that is the core of the
story. The writing is direct, a bit choppy, believable as the voice of a fourth-
grader but-like the characterization-flat. There is a purposive air to the story,
as though other aspects were fitted around a plan to write about a child's
adjustment to diabetes so that readers would learn. If so designed, the goal is
worthy, but the achievement of it seems contrived. ZS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Beirne, Barbara. Under the Lights: A Child Model at Work; written and illus.
with photographs by Barbara Beirne. Carolrhoda, 1988. ISBN 0-87614-316-8.
56p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Eleven-year-old Michelle is a professional model who
narrates the story of how she got interested in the job and went about doing it.
Starting out by proving to her parents that she could be responsible for keeping
her grades up, she signed with an agency and began with go-sees, eventually
[ 116]
getting calls for a variety of work from clothing catalogues to fashion shows.
The text is careful to include details of the hard work that underpin this
fashionable pursuit; there's no time for after-school activities or hanging out
with classmates, and Michelle gets fewer calls as she matures and outgrows
junior sizes. At the end of the book she announces her decision to retire.
However, there aren't many young readers who wouldn't want to trade places for
a chance to see what modeling is like, and this book, with its clean design and
generous array of color and black-and-white photos, is the next best thing to
pounding the pavements of New York. BH
C.U. Vocational guidance
Berke, Art. Babe Ruth. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10472-9. 
112 p. illus.
with photographs. (Impact Biographies). $12.90.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Art Berke is a publicist, so that a modicum of
hyperbole is expectable, as is the emphasis on the positive in describing Ruth as
a person. The author does not elide the facts that Ruth was a juvenile delinquent
who spent time in a Baltimore reform school, and that he was known for his
"carousing," but Berke passes them by rather quickly to focus on Ruth's prowess
in baseball and his role as a popular sports idol. The text has some PR puffery,
but it is adequately written, adequately researched, and more detailed and
informative than most sports biographies. Chapter notes indicate some of the
sources used by the author; photographs are standard issue; useful appended
material includes an index, a bibliography, and some baseball statistics. ZS
Buckley, Kate. Love Notes; written and illus. by Kate Buckley. Whitman,
1989. ISBN 0-8075-4780-8. [32p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Created by someone completely in tune with 8- to 9-
year-old sensibilities, this is the love story of Katy and Joe, who exchange notes
in school, almost lose their friendship because of playground teasing, but work
out a resolution that includes their whole peer group. Bordering the bright
double spreads are jump-ropers chanting traditional rhymes about boys and girls,
all reflecting the love-hate teasing that signifies attention to the opposite sex at
this stage. The illustrations suffer from awkward drafting of facial expressions,
sometimes to the point of distortion, but the lively colors and composition,
together with the child appeal, more than compensate. (When Joe drops his note
during a game of monster-chase with Katy, one young listener gasped with
foreknowledge: "Uh-oh.") You won't be able to read this aloud without having
kids tune in with their own versions. "Roses are red/ Tulips are blue, I kissed
a cow/ And thought it was you." Happy Valentine's Day. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Childress, Alice. Those Other People. Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21510-7.
186p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Using a series of monologues by about a dozen
narrators to give readers a shifting perception of a single event, Childress
challenges readers to see as "those other people"--a teacher, a black student, a
[ 117]
homosexual-do. Most of the story is Jonathan's, a young, gay, computer
instructor at a suburban school. He has-perhaps-witnessed a student's sexual
molestation by a teacher. We also hear from the student, Theodora, as well as
the teacher, Rex Hardy, and others, whose own situations are gradually brought
out (and changed) by the alleged attack. The shifting narration is an interesting
device, and Childress carefully keeps the story on track. Yet the language is stiff
and self-conscious, and each character sounds a single note more tuned to a
particular sociological theme rather than to individualized concerns. Almost
every character contains the beginnings of a perceptive story, but none of them
gets the chance to say quite enough. RS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Corcoran, Barbara. The Sky Is Falling. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-
31388-8. 185p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
It did seem to Annah that what happened to her
family in 1931 was equivalent to the disaster of the title. Dad lost his job and
went to Chicago to look for work, Mother joined her parents in Florida, brother
Herb had to drop out of college, and Annah was sent to live with Aunt Edna in
an isolated cabin in rural New Hampshire. Bullied by intransigent classmate
Mabel, Annah feels an outsider until she makes friends with another newcomer,
Dodie. Dodie is victimized by her brutal stepfather, is the protector of her blind
brother, and is eventually separated from her alcoholic mother-all of which
seems on the heavy-handed side. Annah, whose character seems to strengthen on
a diet of adversity, gives up her chance to live with the former family servant she
loves in order to let Dodie take her place, a circumstance that makes the servant
seem peculiarly hospitable. Convincing as a story of the Depression era, the
novel is marred by immoderacy (the plight of Dodie, the viciousness of Mabel)
but is, as is usually true of Corcoran's work, capably written. ZS
D.V. Aunt-niece relations
Cross, Gillian. The Dark behind the Curtain. Dell, 1988. Paper ed. ISBN 0-
440-20207-8. 199p. Paper ed. $2.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Faced by the principal with a choice of being turned
over to the police or joining the school play, petty thief and general malcontent
Jackus chooses to be in the play. It's Sweeney Todd, starring his friend (maybe)
Marshall as the demonic barber. When trouble begins-spilled paint, stolen
props and valuables-Jackus seems to be the culprit. He knows better, but who
would believe the real story? No one else seems to hear the whispering, no one
else saw the tiny footprint in the paint.... Like the ghosts of miserable street
orphans who haunt the production, Jackus is a scruffy outsider; like Sweeney,
popular Marshall hides a razor beneath his charm. Sweeney Todd is a very scary
play and this is a very scary thriller, with ample menace provided by both the
living and the dead. Reprinted from a book originally published in Britain in
1982. RS
[ 118 ]
Demi. Demi's Reflective Fables; written and illus. by Demi. Grosset, 1988.
ISBN 0-448-09281-6. 28p. $16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Delicately detailed circular drawings, line and wash,
almost fill each recto page; facing the picture, a fabular text is framed by a ring
of small paintings that reflect some aspect of the larger one, and the invitation to
reflect on each fable and its brief, italicized moral is meant to be ramified by the
use of an included mylar mirror that will literally reflect each circle.
Unfortunately, although this gimmick does not detract from the book's value, it
certainly fails to add to it. The text consists of thirteen traditional Chinese
fables, chiefly to do with animals, and while they are interesting as a contrast to
the more familiar fables of Aesop or La Fontaine, they are not distinguished in
the style of their retelling nor are they pointedly effective in the statements of
the moral conclusions. ZS
Donnelly, Judy. Who Shot the President? The Death of John F. Kennedy.
Random House, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99944-4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-
89944-X. 48p. illus. with photographs. (Step into Reading). Library ed.
$6.99; Paper ed. $2.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
In the same series as the author's excellent The
Titanic: Lost and Found (BCCB 6/87) this is another attempt to cover a
sophisticated subject in an easy-reader format. While maintaining a romantic
attitude toward JFK and his accomplishments, Donnelly gives an otherwise
straightforward account of the "killing" (despite the low reading level, the
introduction of the word "assassination" would not have been amiss) and the
continuing speculation about its circumstances. Beginning with the events of
November 22, the following chapters cover Kennedy's career, the arrest and
murder of Oswald (did Jack Ruby really say "You killed the President, you
rat!"?), the funeral, and the Warren Commission and subsequent investigations.
Large print, short sentences and many photographs, some in color, make this
attractively-designed volume suitable for older poor readers as well as for the
primary audience. RS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Driemen, J. E. Atomic Dawn: A Biography of Robert Oppenheimer. Dillon,
1989. ISBN 0-87518-397-2. 
[160p]. illus. with photographs. (People in
Focus). $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
For a younger audience than is Larsen's Oppenheimer
and the Atomic Bomb (BCCB 12/88), Driemen's book is a straightforward
account of the physicist's life, giving slightly more emphasis to his personality
than to his professional accomplishments. Scientific information is sketchy,
and some terms, atomic pile, for example, are not explained, while others, like
train compartment, are. There is also an annoying overuse of quotation marks to
excuse slang and cliche: "For Kitty and Robert, it was a case of-almost-'love
at first sight.'" No footnotes, but a reading list of adult titles and an index are
appended. RS
[ 119]
Dubrovin, Vivian. Guide to Alternative Education and Training. Watts, 1988.
ISBN 0-531-10584-9. 
112p. 
illus. with photographs. 
(Alternatives to
College). $11.90.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
A job well done; this is an excellent guide book in its
organization, coverage, direct simplicity of writing style, and provision of
sources for further information. 
Unlike its companion volume in the
"Alternatives to College" series (see Abrams review above) this text urges
consideration of a carefully-detailed set of factors before making a decision about
what career to follow, where to get training, and whether the proposed choice
suits the individual reader. College is not ruled out; information about part-time
or short-term academic study is provided. Sources for help and for further
information are given through text and bibliography; an index is included. ZS
C.U. Vocational guidance
Ehrlich, Amy. Where It Stops, Nobody Knows. Dial, 1988. ISBN 0-8037-
0575-1. 212p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Nina is the narrator, a young adolescent who is
increasingly puzzled by her mother's behavior. Why do the two of them keep
moving from one town to another, back and forth across the country? Why is
Nina told not to let any friends know where she is after each move? Then there's
the $16,000 Joyce has hidden-stolen, she says-which may be an explanation
for their repeated flights. And then the suspicion that Joyce is not her mother's
real name. Ehrlich does a fine job of building suspense and adding clues, and
she's equally adept at portraying the intricacies of the relationship between Joyce
and Nina, especially as trust is eroded but never love. Thus the poignant ending
is believable, for Nina has then joined the parents from whom "Joyce" had
kidnapped her (in the hospital, when she was a three-day-old infant) and Nina
visits her in prison. Trenchant and touching. ZS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Gardner, Robert. Science and Sports. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10593-8.
112p. illus. with photographs. (Venture Books). $11.90.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
A teacher of physical science and a coach for his
school's football and baseball teams, Gardner is well-qualified to write a text that
uses various aspects of sports to illustrate basic principles of physics. Gardner
shows how the construction of cycling tracks, the size or shape of pieces of
sports equipment, the importance of momentum for a long hit in baseball, the
way a swimmer may shave his head or a skier bend her knees relate to what is
known about gravity, speed, collision, rotation, or the exertion of force. A final
chapter entitled "Food, Energy and Health" gives, briefly, facts about the human
body and the ways in which it obtains and uses energy. A short bibliography,
most of which is relevant (Sports Riddles?) precedes the index; photographs and
diagrams are, for the most part, informative and are well-correlated with textual
references. ZS
C.U. Physical Education; Science
[ 120]
Gottlieb, Gerald. 
The Adventures of Ulysses; illus. by Steele Savage.
Linnet/Shoestring, 1988. ISBN 0-208-02222-8. 170p. $16.50.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
In swashbuckling prose that often rings with classic
similes, Gottlieb retells Ulysses' adventures as the Greeks make their way home
from Troy. The adaptation emphasizes two contrasting themes: Ulysses' piety,
including a sense of sacrilege in butchering the Trojans; and his role as trickster,
which emerges inherently from the stories of his survival. With as exciting a
plot and cast as any epic, this has folkloric narrative patterns that will hook
young readers who have never heard of the Odyssey. The details of the young
hero's first boar hunt, the call to war, the doomed voyage home, and the dramatic
return to a wife besieged by suitors will make good classroom reading aloud as
well. A list of Greek gods, a pronunciation glossary, and an index are included.
With competent but conventional black-and-white illustrations, this is a reprint
of a 1959 title. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Greene, Jacqueline Dembar. Out of Many Waters. Walker, 1988. ISBN 0-
8027-6811-3. 200p. $16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
For safety's sake, Isobel and her sister Maria decide
they will stow away on different ships in order to escape the Portuguese
Catholics who had kidnapped them, ordering them to convert from Judaism or
face the harshness of the Inquisition. Isobel, twelve, takes refuge on a Dutch
ship bound for Amsterdam; after several hazardous adventures that call on, but do
not exceed Isobel's courage and resourcefulness, the immigrant party lands in
New Amsterdam to become its first group of Jewish refugees. The story has
historical value and should be useful in religious education programs. 
It is
weakened, however, by stylistic flaws, one of which is the use of illogical
translation: it is hardly likely that a child who speaks only Portuguese would say
to an adult who speaks only Portuguese, "Perdao, Padre, Forgive me." Too, it
becomes unwieldy when so much information is furnished in the guise of
conversation. ZS
C.U. Religious education
Greenwald, Sheila. Write On, Rosy! (A Young Author in Crisis); written and
illus. by Sheila Greenwald. Joy Street/Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-32705-0.
96p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Rosy's search for a talent has landed her in trouble
again. She can't think of a topic for her Young Authors project, so Mrs.
Oliphant suggests she try investigative reporting-which Rosy does, spying on
the principal, Dr. Gormley. Rosy's "discoveries" (that Dr. Gormley is running
an illegal orphanage, etc.) are a bit too naive to be believable, and there is less
bite in the writing than is usual from Greenwald. Still, Rosy's unself-conscious
charm is in great evidence, and Hermione is again the best friend you love to
hate. "My best friend Hermione's lifelong ambition is to become the heroine of
a book titled Here's Hermione" (Take note, Ms. Greenwald). Plenty of ink
drawings add ironic zest RS
[ 121]
Gwynne, Fred. A Little Pigeon Toad; written and illus. by Fred Gwynne.
Simon, 1988. ISBN 0-671-66659-2. 48p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 3-4. 
This diverting book looks like a picture book for
young children (oversize, large type, just a few words per page) and indeed young
children may enjoy it once the jokes are explained, but older children who
understand the word-play will be the prime beneficiaries of Gwynne's humor.
The large-scale paintings interpret a child's misunderstanding of what she hears;
for example, "My teacher says I get along well with my piers." (Child sitting
serenely on a pier) "Daddy says he pitched a tent" (Daddy, on the pitcher's
mound, hurls a canvas tent). No didacticism is intended, but this could be used
to stimulate discussions about words in between giggles. ZS
C.U. Language arts
Haas, Jessie. The Sixth Sense: And other Stories. Greenwillow, 1988. ISBN
0-688-08129-0. 180p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Nine short stories develop the relationship between
humans and animals in a collection that weaves together several sets of
characters who meet and affect each others' lives: an old woman and her grand-
niece, the former grieved by the death of her cat and the latter by conflict with
her father, a boy and his determination to become a horseman; another boy who
saves a greyhound from routine extermination after a disappointing race; a girl
who finds unexpected serenity, in the midst of tensions over her parents' divorce,
on a goat farm. The voices are variously first and third person, the narratives
tightly crafted to focus on a perceptual turning point in an adolescent's life. The
"pets" are individualized without losing their creature traits. Respect for animals
is, in fact, the theme of the collection. Although some of the plots are more
strongly structured than others-"Tanglewood," for instance, deftly telescopes a
complex family transition while the title story seems to meander a bit- these
make a real contribution to the short story genre, being both resonant and
readable. BH
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Harlan, Judith. Hispanic Voters: A Voice in American Politics. Watts, 1988.
ISBN 0-531-10586-5. 112p. illus. with photographs. $12.90.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
While "Hispanic Voters" is probably a too-limiting
misnomer, this is a solid introduction to Hispanic immigration, assimilation,
and participation in the U.S. political structure. Harlan covers immigration
reform laws, bilingual education and the "English-only" movement, and political
and union organizing, providing, along the way, capsule portraits of Hispanic
leaders such as Cesar Chavez and Henry Cisneros. 
Her discussion is
comprehensive and controlled, synthesizing institutional, cultural and
demographic forces to explain the current political impact of the various
Hispanic communities and showing their divisions as well as unity.
Unfortunately, source citation is incomplete, and the six-book bibliography
includes no books published after 1983. RS
C.U. 
Social studies
[122 ]
Hayashi, Nancy. 
Cosmic Cousin; written and illus. by Nancy Hayashi.
Dutton, 1988. ISBN 0-525-44387-8. 87p. $9.95.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
A story about two kids who become friends through
the books they share at the public library could have been a librarian's dream
come true. Eunice is a voracious science-fiction fan and is overjoyed when she
finds, tucked into her library copy of Terrors of the Time Warp, a note from
"Cosmic Cousin": "To Whom It May Concern, If you liked this book try
Trapped in the Asteroid Belt." Eunice, styling herself "Solar Soulmate," begins
planting her own recommendations, as well as starting a search for Cosmic
Cousin's identity. A wonderful device, an entertaining, if somewhat patterned,
story-so what's the problem? 
Mrs. Rindfuss, the librarian: an unfunny,
unfriendly stereotype. Rindfuss spends most of her time shelving and checking
out books (and getting a real kick out of overdue fines), a waste of talent,
considering her way with a reference question: "Finally, Mrs. Rindfuss eyed
Eunice over the top of her glasses. 'Now what is it you want?'" And, to
complete the portrait, Hayashi pictures the librarian in a baggy tweed suit and
frayed sweater, her ensemble topped by a bun. In a Roald Dahl story, Rindfuss
might have been just another entertaining oddball, but in this book the realistic
tone turns caricature into cliche. RS
C.U. Book Week
Heller, Ruth. Kites Sail High: A Book about Verbs; written and illus. by Ruth
Heller. Grosset, 1988. ISBN 0-448-10480-6. 43p. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
With the same verve she brought to Chickens Aren't
the Only Ones (BCCB 2/82), Heller romps through an explanation of verbs.
The verses are saved from a forced quality by their interaction with the
exuberantly varied illustrations. Against the verso of a dramatic stage backdrop
appears one stanza, "The INDICATIVE MOOD just states a fact," and across a
visual pause to the recto facing it, "We ACT." The following spread shows an
underseascape: "The SUBJUNCTIVE MOOD expresses a wish ... or uses the
words 'as though' or 'if.' If I WERE a fish, as though that COULD BE, I'd
SWIM in a beautiful tropical sea." One brilliant array of chocolate candies
displayed close up lures young readers through the following information: "The
IMPERATIVE MOOD makes a request. 
Please TAKE just one . . .and
LEAVE the rest." Graphic pace and word play make this an ingenious lesson
that no classroom grammarian should miss. BH
C.U. Language arts
Hermann, Spring. Flip City. Orchard, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08385-3;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05785-2. 246p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr.5-8. 
Flip City is a gym, and the book follows the
progress of four young gymnasts: Mercy (will she get those pounds off in time
for the big competition?); Von (will her strict Vietnamese family accept her
romance with handsome Riccio?); Dina (will the other girls accept her once they
know her terrible secret?); and Jules (the rich girl who has everything-but
love). 
There's a predictable rhythm of savor-their-triumphs-share-their-
[123 ]
heartbreaks, and the characterization is stock-isn't it about time for an Asian
character who's not a math whiz?-but this is fun, and there's plenty of
authentic jumping and tumbling to keep aspiring gymnasts happy. RS
Hubbell, Patricia. The Tigers Brought Pink Lemonade; illus. by Ju-Hong Chen.
Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31417-5. 32p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Twenty-one short poems range from lightweight to
airy. All are rhymed and heavily rhythmic, while a few are downright musical.
"Dance of the Mice" has the most vivid images, even to the literal appearance of
stanzas shaped like waves: "their tails/ are silver lashes/ their whiskers/ silver
threads/ and the beach is silver-flooded/ flooded gold beneath the moon/ as the
mice/ go midnight dancing/ to the waves'/ hypnotic tune." Others seem slightly
forced; "The Thief," for instance, leans heavily on the rhyming of "peach" and
"beach" without much lyrical inspiration between. However, the nonsensical
humor strengthens the total collection for reading aloud, or-in conjunction with
the precisely rendered, bouncy illustrations-alone. The art, which varies from
darkly intriguing compositions to a lollipop-bright cartoon style, turns the
collection into a picture book. BH
Hutchins, Hazel. 
Casey Webber the Great; illus. by John Richmond.
Annick/Firefly, 1988. Trade ed. ISBN 1-55037-023-5; Paper ed. ISBN 1-55037-
022-7. 120p. Trade ed. $7.95; Paper ed. $4.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
As she did in The Three and Many Wishes of Jason
Reid (BCCB 6/88), Hutchins here spins a simple, humorous fantasy based on a
single (and singularly appealing) magical element: a coat that makes its wearer
invisible. 11-year-old Jason and his older sister had played with the "magic" coat
as children but it is only now that they realize its true properties. Jason uses the
coat to attract attention as a master magician; Morgan (less convincingly) uses it
for shoplifting, an activity she quickly repents. The theme of "belonging" is
occasionally overstated, and the heritage of the coat seems pasted on, but the
story and the magic have a Danny Dunn-like directness that will ensure
popularity among reluctant readers, especially boys. Literal and plentiful
charcoal drawings liven up the pages. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Jaspersohn, William. Grounded. Bantam, 1988. ISBN 0-553-05450-3. 234p.
$13.95.
NR 
Gr. 9-12. 
After a shouting match with his parents in the
morning and a rough day in school, Joe Flowers lights out, encountering drug
runners and a romance with a girl who is just as sensitive and misunderstood as
he is. Joe tells the story, and while sophomoric self-centeredness may be an
unfortunate symptom of adolescent development, it does little to propel a plot.
The drug smuggling story line is neither suspenseful nor believable, and in any
case, serves only as background for a tedious series of conversations between Joe
and Nan about the meaning of life: "I understand why I ran away. Why we met
and why I'm here is exactly as you said it was. Synchronicity. Our lives were
on a similar course. We had to meet. And you've taught me a lot." A
[124]
meditative trance, in which Joe watches the creation and natural history of the
world, teaches him the M.O.L.: evolution. So, after catching out the smuggler
(who happens to be Nan's father whom she had thought killed in the Vietnam
War fifteen years ago) Joe, evolved, goes home and forgives his parents. RS
Joosse, Barbara M. Better with Two; illus. by Catherine Stock. Harper, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023077-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023076-2. 32p. Library
ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
5-7yrs. Every day Laura watches Mrs. Brady and her dog Max follow a
punctilious routine, including walks ("slowly, because Max is very old"),
elevenses ("Max has perfect manners.... He never spills a drop of tea nor
leaves a crumb of biscuit"), and rocking or sometimes singing on the porch
swing ("Max likes 'I've Been Working on the Railroad' best"). Then Max dies.
Laura tries to cheer up her elderly neighbor with small gifts, but it is only
Laura's company for tea that finally lightens Mrs. Brady's sadness. Softly
washed drawings create a hushed, even expectant mood for the interchange that
resolves the story. This has a quiet, distant quality but makes an appropriate
companion for Hans Wilhelm's livelier I'll Always Love You and other tender
tales of lost pets. BH
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Older-younger generations
Kendall, Carol, ad. The Wedding of the Rat Family; illus. by James Watts.
McElderry, 1988. ISBN 0-689-50450-0. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
This decorously ornamented retelling of a Chinese
folktale concerns the ambitious marriage plans that a highborn rat couple (who,
between their teeth, refer to each other as "My Precious" and "My Beloved") have
for their youngest daughter. Power and Influence are what matter, so Precious
tells Beloved to go ask the Sun-but the sun insists he is less powerful than
Black Cloud, who refers Beloved to Wind, who gives way to (the Great) Wall,
who complains that rats are eating him away. Who, then has more Power and
Influence than Rat? Cat, who is more than happy to oblige: "the cat family
were well pleased with the prospect of enfolding the rat family into their own
lives." A cautionary tale enlivened with considerable wit is illustrated with
delicately small-scale paintings of the rats in opulent dress; the larger paintings
of Sun, etc. have a cartoon quality that is awkward but energetic. RS
D.V. Humility
Klein, Robin. Laurie Loved Me Best. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-82211-6.
203p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
As often happens, best friends Andre and Julia envy
the other's life style; in both cases, in this intriguing novel by a popular
Australian author, it is because neither really knows what the other's home life
is like. Chapters are alternately by the two girls (14-year-old classmates) so that
the reader can see how much Julia detests her mother's hippie commune, and
how heartsick Andre is about the marital discord that ruptures what appears to be
a happy family. The dual narration also makes it clear why both girls respond to
[125 ]
the blandishments of handsome young Laurie, who appears to be a drifter and
who convinces each girl that he's fond of her, although readers can probably
predict the revelation that Laurie is a persistent (possibly pathological) liar.
Plot, characterization, and writing style are impressive: strong, nicely knit,
psychologically sound. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Jealousy, overcoming
Kuklin, Susan. Taking My Cat to the Vet; written and illus. with photographs
by Susan Kuklin. Bradbury, 1988. ISBN 0-02-751233-9. 32p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-3. 
In a companion to Taking My Dog to the Vet (BCCB
10/88), young Ben tells readers about taking his cat Willa, adopted as a kitten
from the A.S.P.C.A., to the veterinarian for a standard checkup. The vet, a
woman, explains her way through the examination, testing Willa's eyes and
ears, taking her temperature, trimming her nails, and giving her shots. The
dialogue rarely strains to be informative, and the large color photographs are well
composed and businesslike. 
The author/photographer steers clear of
sentimentality, gives listeners a preview of procedures that can be intimidating if
not scary, and lists suggestions for a successful visit to the vet, including tips
for preparation, waiting room, exam room, and return home. Too bad the cat
can't read them. BH
C.U. Pets, care of
Kurtzman, Harvey. My Life as a Cartoonist; by Harvey Kurtzman with Howard
Zimmerman. Minstrel/Pocket, 1988. Paper ed. ISBN 0-671-63453-4. Paper
ed. $2.75. illus. and with photographs. 108p.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Harvey Kurtzman is probably best known as the
creator of MAD magazine (and popularizer of Alfred E. Neuman); this easy-
going autobiography shares those stories as well as some precise observations
on cartooning and humor. "For me, writing a story is like blowing up a
balloon. The more energy you put into blowing up a balloon, the scarier it
gets. And then, at some moment--and you're not exactly sure when-it
happens. Surprise!" Kurtzman is candid about his childhood ("One of the
reasons I wanted to draw was to look good in the eyes of my friends"),
professional successes, and failures ("I never did get to do the perfect humor
magazine"). Liberally illustrated with example's of Kurtzman's work, this is an
entertaining look at the comic book world, as well as a thoughtful primer for
aspiring cartoonists. Binding and paper quality are not the best; it would be nice
to have library editions available for this interesting series of easy-to-read
autobiographies. RS
Larrick, Nancy, comp. Cats Are Cats; illus. by Ed Young. Philomel, 1988.
ISBN 0-399-21517-4. 80p. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
With twice as many selections as appeared in
Livingston's Cat Poems (BCCB 6/87) and only a few cases of duplication ("The
Open Door" by Elizabeth Coatsworth, "Cat" by Eleanor Farjeon, "The Song of
the Jellicles" by T.S. Eliot, and 'The Cat Heard the Cat-Bird" by John Ciardi),
[ 126]
this anthology is a worthwhile investment for ever-ready fans of the feline.
Where Trina Schart Hyman's illustrations for the earlier book were humorously
literal, Ed Young's are suggestive dark shapes on brown paper. The effect is of
one of images shadowing the 42 poems, which include favorites such as Karla
Kuskin, Eve Merriam, Lilian Moore, and Valerie Worth, along with others of
renown in children's literature. This is a solid selection with striking art, the
latter especially notable for varied textures and perspectives that catch the reader
by surprise as often as do the verbal nuances. BH
Levinson, Riki. Our Home is the Sea; illus. by Dennis Luzak. Dutton, 1988.
ISBN 0-525-44406-8. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
A boy whose name and age are not given (he looks,
in the illustrations, to be about 9 or 10) describes his journey home from a
school in Hong Kong to his family's houseboat in the busy harbor. The
paintings are deftly composed and detailed, the use of color impressive, the child
appealing. The text is descriptive, minimally weakened by the fact that it
seems, at times, to function more as a series of captions for the double-page
spreads than as a controlling narrative. What the book does show is the
universality of children's interests and concerns. Here the never-named child
moves with curiosity and perceptual acuteness through the city scene to the
warmth and security of home and family. ZS
Lewis, Naomi, ad. Cry Wolf and other Aesop Fables; illus. by Barry Castle.
Oxford, 1988. ISBN 0-19-520710-6. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Paintings that have a dramatic use of strong colors, a
highly textural quality, and a wonderfully capricious variation in composition
illustrate a rather sophisticated retelling of some of the familiar fabular material.
Lewis, who begins with an interesting and erudite preface, has chosen to present
the morals in-usually-rather lengthy verse, a decision that militates against
use by younger children. For example, the moral for "One Swallow" reads,
"Several morals I observe/ The feckless get what they deserve/ Hasty actions,
lacking thought/ Bring disaster in their court/ Superstition is a snare/ Don't go
by hearsay; use your mind/ Swallows too should have a care/ Swallows, stray
not from your kind." ZS
Little, Emily. The Trojan Horse: How the Greeks Won the War; illus. by
Michael Eagle. Random House, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99674-7; Paper
ed. ISBN 0-394-89674-2. 48p. (Step into Reading). Library ed. $6.99; Paper
ed. $2.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
At a time when many young people look blank at the
mention of Odysseus, it seems like a good idea, for informational purposes if
nothing else, to tell the story of the Trojan War in easy-to-read format.
Unfortunately, when you reduce the music and scope of full-scale storytelling,
you sacrifice a lot, and the choppy style here definitely represents a loss. The
use of the present tense, however, lends the tale an immediacy that belies its
ancient setting. The incidents are not badly selected, and the pen and wash
[ 127 ]
illustrations maintain a respectful distance without becoming melodramatic.
Even at half-mast, the story holds power, though anyone introducing the book to
readers should make sure to supplement it by reading aloud a more sonorous
version, such as the one by Gottlieb, reviewed above. The last chapter
introduces Homer (who did not "write down" the stories, as he is depicted doing
here) and Schliemann's archeological excavations at the site of Troy. A
pronunciation guide is appended. Good try. BH
Macaulay, David. 
The Way Things Work; written and illus. by David
Macaulay. Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-42857-2. 384p. $24.95.
R* 
Gr. 6-. Having explained the major mysteries of architectural history,
the Audacious Author here undertakes to explain everything else. This giant
reference/browsing book is organized into four parts: 
the mechanics of
movement, harnessing the elements, working with waves, and electricity and
automation. Concluding sections provide brief background on major discoveries
or inventions, plus definitions of technical terms. With a clarity built by
consistently proceeding from the simple to the complex, Macaulay depicts the
principles and mechanics of machinery. These are frequently injected with
diverting stories about a wooly mammoth, reports reputedly written by an
ancient explorer/inventor who makes ridiculous deductions from observing the
creature's actions and interactions. The stories are neither cute nor distracting
but serve to lighten both the condensed factual information and the gravity of
scientific assumptions. A lubricant of urbane wit reduces the friction of
resisting minds. 
Readers young and old will find out what they always
wondered about the workings of moder 
technology, from zippers to
transmitters. The more sophisticated will pick up the continuous visual jokes-
the Mammoth Tabernacle Choir that demonstrates principles of sound waves and
music, for instance, or the Trojan Mammoth, an anonymous nuclear gift with
chilling implications. The full-color drawings, diagrams, and book design that
allows them to energize the pages without overwhelming them amount to a
coup of instructive art. When molecular theory, aerodynamics, and the
microchip are demonstrated so clearly, it seems unfair to quibble, but there is the
occasional gap between knowledgeable writer and ignorant reviewer. One
example is the description of inertia, which omits the role momentum plays (if
any) in the operation of a potter's wheel. However, in light of what Macaulay
has accomplished here, the occasional caveat flickers out This is a work of
mammoth imagination, energy, and humor. It justifies every critic's belief that
information and entertainment are not mutually exclusive-good nonfiction is
storytelling at its best. BH
C.U. Industrial arts; Science
Marston, Hope Irvin. Load Lifters: Derricks, Cranes, and Helicopters.
Dodd/Putnam, 1988. ISBN 0-396-09226-8. 64p. illus. and with photographs.
$13.95.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
Following a brief introduction to the principles of the
pulley, block, and tackle is a catalogue of modern equipment with color
photographs as well as black and white diagrams and slightly sweetsy cartoons.
[ 128 1
The writing here is sometimes choppy and the coverage more perfunctory than
that of Fire Trucks (BCCB 3/85), expecially in the lack of photographic drama.
Terms are not always defined adequately (as in the case of "pneumatic"), and the
tone changes considerably as the text moves to more complex machinery (there
needs to be some explanation of how "a dragline winches back bucketloads of
ore, gravel, or earth" and "can also dig an underwater channel"). Young gapers
will enjoy browsing through the pictures and can apply their own background
knowledge to them-you have to understand already what a winch is to identify
it on the wrecker that is shown here. BH
McAllister, Angela. 
The King Who Sneezed; illus. by Simon Henwood.
Morrow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08328-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
08327-7. 32p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95.
M 
Gr.K-2. 
First published in England, this oversized picture
book features illustrations (flat, bright colors and stylized geometric details) that
can be regarded as a rip-off or as the most sincere form of flattery. It is
influenced heavily by In the Night Kitchen, even to having three white-capped
chefs. Unfortunately, it doesn't have Sendak's artistry. The story is moderately
funny, with the sort of humor that appeals to young children: odd foods (cheese
and onion milk shake, jelly with mustard sauce) and invented maledictions like
"Thundering Thimbles!" or "Fishcakes and Frying Pans!" The king lives in a
chilly castle in an icy northern land, his solitary prowl around the castle (it was
the "Official Afternoon Off" for all staff) resulting in a change of temperature,
new menus, and a happy King Parsimonious. Weak. ZS
McKissack, Patricia. Monkey-Monkey's Trick; Based on an African Folk Tale;
illus. by Paul Meisel. Random House, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99173-7;
Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-89173-2. 48p. (Step into Reading). Library ed. $6.99;
Paper ed. $2.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
The easy-to-read style of controlled vocabulary is
well-suited to this repetitive trickster tale based on an African story (although no
source is indicated). Hyena offers to help Monkey-Monkey build his new house,
but Monkey-Monkey refuses, knowing Hyena is "full of tricks." But when the
Beautiful Creature offers, Monkey-Monkey is grateful, even though he knows
"someone who sings that way." And when the Ugly Monster steals the stew,
Monkey-Monkey "knows someone who eats that way" but can't quite make the
connection. Eventually, Monkey-Monkey manages to turn the trick on the
trickster, who builds the house while the monkey, disguised as a zebra, "sat in
the sun and watched." Simple and rhythmic enough to encourage chanting
along, and full of enough twists to keep older kids interested, the tale is
illustrated with paintings that invest primitive forms with new-wave flair. RS
McNaughton, Colin. Jolly Roger and the Pirates ofAbdul the Skinhead; written
and illus. by Colin McNaughton. Simon, 1988. ISBN 0-671-66843-9. 42p.
$14.95.
[ 129 ]
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Called "Jolly" because he looks so miserable all the
time, Roger decides to live up to his nickname and joins up with pirates,
escaping his mad-for-cleaning Mum and hoping to find his Dad, last seen in an
inn on the Barbary Coast. Abdul the Skinhead and the other pirates of The
Golden Behind are a smelly, stupid lot, even allowing themselves to be captured
(and cleaned up) by Mum, until they're saved by Roger and the pirates' cook,
who has suffered amnesia since a bonce on the head. Guess who? While
weakened by too many annoying asides by the author, the flip tone suits the
spoof, and if one leaves out the parenthetical cuteness, this will be a lot of fun
to read aloud. "I'm Abdul 'the skinhead'-Hip-hip!/The 'Golden Behind' is my
ship . . . ." The illustrations combine boisterous double-page spreads with
smaller cartoon panels, all reeking with wit and stubble and a satiric edge that
will be enjoyed by kids who think they're too old for picture books. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
Murray, Marguerite. Like Seabirds Flying Home. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-
689-31459-0. 185p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Although Shelley Joyner is only an adolescent-she
turns sixteen in the course of the book-she acts as head of the family in
managing her frail father, Vernon, and childish mother, Catherine. Knowing
that he's terminally ill, Vernon has bought a house and moved them back to his
native Nova Scotia, which Catherine hates. Shelley, however, settles right in,
falls in love with neighboring young Arlan, and must hold strong to her new
home when her mother abandons her. The characterization of the protagonist and
her boy friend, along with many of the villagers, is sensitively drawn, as are the
dynamics of the parents' love-hate relationship. The plot is predictable and the
summary theme of acceptance overstated, but Arlan's courtship of Shelley will
hold readers with a penchant for the romantic. BH
D.V. Family relations
Nelson, Theresa. And One for All. Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08404-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05804-2. [192p]. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
A moving novel set in the years 1966 to 1968
portrays a family affected by the Vietnam war when their oldest son, Wing,
enlists in the marines. The viewpoint is his sister Geraldine's, but each member
of the family is vividly realized, including the youngest boy of six and both
parents, the father slightly deaf from World War II wounds. It is to the
novelist's credit that she concentrates on developing the home front-Wing's
long-term school problems, his friendship with a neighboring boy who turns
anti-war demonstrator, and the vivid detail of family rituals and dynamics-
before building to the inevitable and tragic climax. Plot, dialogue, and setting
are effortlessly authentic and never overwhelmed by the theme, which, while
compellingly effective, is neither didactic nor dominant over the emotional
impact. Smoothly written and easily read, this also manages to challenge
assumptions in a thought-provoking probe of the past. BH
D.V. Family relations; Peace
[ 130]
Nelson, Vaunda Micheaux. 
Always Gramma; illus. by Kimanne Uhler.
Putnam, 1988. ISBN 0-399-21542-5. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
There have been, in the last several years, many
books designed to inform and comfort the young child whose beloved
grandparent has become senile. This story does not use the designation of
Alzheimer's disease, but the pattern is there: the first forgetfulness, the
disorientation, the irrational behavior and violence that are so hard for a young
child to comprehend. Here the child is the speaker, first remembering all the
things she and her grandmother did together, then describing the painful
disintegration of Gramma's personality, and concluding with a regretful
admission that Gramma doesn't know her family any longer, but they all love
her, all visit often. Watercolor paintings that are simply composed but that
often have a smeared look are adequately integrated with correlating text. This
doesn't get sugary, but it has a sweet simplicity that makes it one of the best on
its sad subject ZS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Paulsen, Gary. The Voyage of the Frog. Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-
531-08405-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05805-0. [160p]. Library ed. $12.99; Trade
ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
David's beloved uncle Owen has just died of cancer,
and David has inherited a sailboat, the Frog, which the two of them often sailed
together. Now David takes the boat out to scatter his uncle's ashes, but he's
caught in a storm and swept hundreds of miles southwest. The survival story as
metaphor forms a predictable pattern here, but nevertheless one that will claim
attention. Many chapters end in cliffhangers, with a shark biting the hull, an oil
tanker looming overhead, and other life-threateners. The style seems modeled on
Hemingway's, with short sentences, dramatic pauses, and phrases repeated or
emphasized by connecting "ands." The simplicity of suspenseful effects and the
bare-boned rite of passage will probably steer young readers right to the ribbeting
finish: "Now there was the wind and the sea and the Frog. He had some sailing
to do." BH
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Self-reliance
Pelgrom, Els. Little Sophie and Lanky Flop; tr. by Arnold Pomerans; illus. by
The Tjong Khing. Farrar, 1988. ISBN 0-374-34624-0. 88p. $11.95.
NR 
Gr. 5-7. 
Confined to her bed with a serious illness, Sophie is
amazed one night to see her dolls come to life, but if you think it's going to be
that kind of story, hold on. Bored with the proceeedings, Terror the cat offers to
show the dolls What Life Has to Offer, and Sophie, always inquisitive, joins in,
beginning an educational journey into an almost Brechtian world of hardship and
corruption. She meets the doll Lanky Flop's indigent family, for whom Lanky
Flop steals food (taking after his father--"If he wasn't such a good poacher we'd
all have starved to death by now" says Lanky's mother), and watches them stuff
themselves sick, each in turn going outside to vomit. Lanky Flop takes up with
a good-natured floozie named Annabella, who soon dumps the doll in favor of
[ 131]
Teddy Bear. There is some self-sacrifice and friendship occasionally shown
among the characters, but most finer feeling is lost in the sordid details. On the
whole, this seems a mannered and perverse story, and Sophie's eventual
discovery (just before she dies) of What Life Has to Offer ("a lot") is a rather
queasy conclusion. The many pen sketches that accompany the tale are funny
and appropriately ironic, but the two-column format of the text is unappealing.
Said by the publisher to be for ages seven through ten, this would, if given a
more sophisticated format, actually be best appreciated by high school students
with a taste for the satiric. RS
Pollack, Pamela, comp. The Random House Book of Humor for Children;
illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky. Random House, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-
98049-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-88049-8. 311p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed.
$14.95.
R* 
Gr. 3-6. 
Compiled with discernment, this oversize anthology
is illustrated by soft pencil drawings that often have grotesque elements in their
comic appeal. Pollack has used excerpts and stories that are of high quality, that
stand alone, and that offer a range of some of the best humorous writing in
mostly contemporary fiction from writers such as Beverly Cleary, Sid
Fleischman, and Louise Fitzhugh (Twain and Kipling and T.H. White also fit in
nicely). This will appeal primarily to middle grades readers but because of the
inclusion of such writers as Shirley Jackson and Garrison Keillor, it will reach
an older audience as well. It is to laugh. ZS
Pope, Joyce. Kenneth Lilly's Animals; illus. by Kenneth Lilly. Lothrop,
1988. ISBN 0-688-07696-3. 93p. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
The subtitle not included on the title page, "a
portfolio of paintings," makes an accurate description of this handsome browsing
item, easily accessed for report purposes by an index and list of "facts and
figures" about each animal. The book is divided into types of environment-hot
forests, cool forests, seas and rivers, grasslands, deserts, and mountains-with
typical representatives of species common to each. The first section, for
instance, is introduced by a brief geographical summary followed by a page each
devoted to gorillas, okapi, tigers, gibbons, orangutans, slender loris, spotted
cuscus, scarlet macaws, chimpanzees, and Indian elephants. The meticulously
executed closeup paintings are well-designed to cross the page gracefully from
one animal to the next, and in most cases a baby or family group is shown,
along with an inset global diagram showing where the animals live in the wild.
Although there is no organizational continuity in the order of the animals'
appearance, the very breadth of selection gives an impressive sense of variety,
environmental adaptation, and understanding of the need for conservation.
Pope's descriptions of each animal, while limited to an encyclopedic shorthand,
give a surprising number of factual tidbits (giraffe babies land with a thump
when they're born to their tall upright mothers, camels intake the moisture from
their own breaths through a channel running from nose to lips, the harvest
mouse's nest grows taller with the plants from which it's made, young male
zebras have a close bond with their fathers). Some of the illustrations will be
[ 132]
familiar to Lilly fans-the jack rabbit, road runner, orangutan, walrus, harvest
mouse, and others, for instance, were included in a board book series for younger
children. However the scope and design of this volume make it an especially
handsome reference selection. BH
C.U. Conservation (unit)
Provost, Gary. David and Max; by Gary Provost and Gail Levine-Provost.
Jewish Publication Society, 1988. ISBN 0-8276-0315-0. 180p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
David and his grandfather, Max, have always been
close, but it is not until the last summer of Max's life that David learns all of
his grandparents' history. While this is a purposive book, designed to make the
Holocaust more meaningful to adolescent readers, it maintains its pace as a
narrative, has consistency of characterization, and is written in a smooth style
that has natural dialogue. What the authors have done to alleviate the heaviness
of Message is to build in suspense about whether or not an elusive artist is
indeed the friend of Max's youth, a man who had supposedly died in a
concentration camp. Max, and then David, pursue clues that indicate the man is
not only alive but at the same summer resort. There is a secondary plot in
which David discovers something about his grandmother, and there is a
convincing depiction of a loving extended family. ZS
D.V. Grandfather-child relations
Ryan, Mary E. I'dRather Be Dancing. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-440-50121-0.
[160p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 7-10. 
In a sequel to Dance a Step Closer (BCCB 1/85),
Katie Kusik is now living in Manhattan with her mother and her stepfather, and
she is both nervous and hopeful about having won a summer scholarship at the
American Dance Conservatory. There are rivals at the school and her career to
worry about, there are the boy she left behind her and the attractive choreographer
to decide between. Chiefly, its Katie's future as a dancer that's at stake, and by
the close of the story she has accepted the fact that she is more likely to be a
choreographer than a solo dancer. Like the first book, this gives a candid view
of the highly competitive world of dancers; it is not distinguished, however,
either for its characterization (stock characters, for the most part: the Don Juan,
the tough but inspired teacher, the jealous classmate) or for its writing style. ZS
Rylant, Cynthia. All I See; illus. by Peter Catalanotto. 
Orchard, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08377-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05777-1. 3 2p. Library
ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. Generously scaled photo-realistic watercolor paintings project
the story of a shy boy, Charlie, who, while summering by a lake, becomes
fascinated with the work of a painter named Gregory. Secretly watching Gregory
paint and hum Beethoven's Fifth symphony to his white cat, Charlie eventually
communicates by canvas, leaving first a picture and then messages before
coming out into the open for lessons, a gift of paints, and friendship. Gregory's
individual quirks (he only paints whales-"it is all I see") form a characterization
[ 133 ]
that emerges naturally as part of a larger story about the visionary space needed
to create. It's a theme which all children, boxed in as they are by structured
requirements, can fit to their own creative needs. "Charlie, too, looked out
across the water, and he knew Gregory's whales were there somewhere. He also
knew that something was waiting for him, waiting to be seen and to be painted."
The art is oddly literal to accompany a story that consciously suggests more than
it states, but the verbal and visual images are both warm and expansive so that
the spirit of neither is violated. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers
Schwartz, Alvin. Gold and Silver, Silver and Gold: Tales of Hidden Treasure;
illus. by David Christiana. Farrar, 1988. ISBN 0-374-32690-8. 128p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6 A conglomeration of true and legendary stories that Schwartz
distinguishes from each other in concluding source notes, this will give young
readers a taste of the adventure many children long for when they make up
treasure maps and dirt-crumple them for authenticity. Here they will meet
pirates as famous as Captain Kidd, literary characters, code breakers, underwater
explorers, miners, and others who have sometimes destroyed or been destroyed in
their search for gold. It's a book to browse through, handsomely designed with
pencil sketches and maps, and carefully documented, but oddly organized, as
treasure hunts probably must be. Thus in the section entitled "No Good Came
of It" are juxtaposed a far-fetched Maine account ("probably a legend," according
to notes) of a curse on a pirate's treasure, "a true story" of the bad luck entailed
in Mexican gold changing hands in the Old West, and a widespread folktale in
which one thief kills the other only to drink poisoned wine soon afterwards.
Kids will probably blend the genres and skip the notes, much to the heightened
enjoyment of their fantasy lives-and reading. BH
Sills, Leslie. Inspirations: Stories About Women Artists. Whitman, 1989.
ISBN 0-8075-3649-0. [50p]. illus. with photographs. $16.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8 
This introduction to four women artists is as
commendable for its selection as well as its smooth writing and handsome book
design. The only subject likely to be familiar to children is Georgia O'Keeffe;
her work begins the book, priming the reader for three other individualists, Frida
Kahlo, Alice Neel, and Faith Ringgold, who had a much harder time asserting
their identities in the artistic establishment. (After graduating from high school
in 1948, Ringgold enrolled as an education student because City College of New
York did not allow women into the liberal arts program.) In their sometimes
bitter struggle and quest for creative vision, these women span the entire
twentieth century, with only Ringgold still alive and working. The brief,
informal biographies and the full-color reproductions-generous in both quality
and size-will be eye-openers for art students and browsers. BH
C.U. Art appreciation
D.V. Self-expression
[ 134]
Snyder, Zilpha Keatley. Janie's Private Eyes. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-440-
50123-7. [208p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
In a fourth book about the Stanley family, the
protagonist is thirteen-year-old David, whose investigation into the mystery of
who is stealing dogs is spurred by his sister (Jane, age eight) who has set up a
"detective agency." Precocious Janie manages, entertainingly, to get in and out
of trouble along with the six-year-old twins and two Vietnamese refugee
children. The solution of the mystery is nicely woven into the problems of the
Vietnamese family. The story is softened by the durable affection within the
Stanley family, and is lightened by the deft treatment of the love-struck swain of
stepsister Amanda. The mystery is credibly solved in a nicely crafted story that
has suspense, humor, and natural dialogue. ZS
D.V. Family relations
Southall, Ivan. Blackbird. Farrar, 1988. ISBN 0-374-30783-0. 136p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
Ivan Southall is usually a difficult but rewarding
writer, but Blackbird, like last year's Rachel (BCCB 4/87), seems obscurely
convoluted. It's 1942, and Will, his older brother Geoffrey, and their mother
have moved inland to avoid the possible invasion of the north Australian coast
by the Japanese. Lost in private war games, Will climbs to the roof of their
decaying house (the "Citadel") and discovers he is too frightened to get back
down. "An emptiness was lying ahead, and an emptiness lay behind. All he had
left was the corner in the middle." Will's fear is intensely realized but is
surrounded by too much else, delivered by a variety of viewpoints (including a
blackbird) in an overly ambitious prose style. The one character who emerges
fully is Will's mother, "a witch stirring up anxieties and dipping her spoon into
the cauldron"; she's brilliant, taunting, and bitter about her children, exile, and
marriage to the Colonel, who drops by very occasionally. The novel is
supposedly written by Will's speechwriter after Will has become prime minister,
which fact may or may not relate to the prefatory note asserting that Will and the
blackbird "are not a fiction." A compellingly textured story is hidden in this
book, but few young readers will have the patience to find it. RS
Steiner, Barbara. Whale Brother; illus. by Gretchen Will Mayo. Walker, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6805-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6804-0. 26p. Library
ed. $13.85; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr.K-3. 
In a touching story about an Eskimo boy, Omu,
whose protective love for other creatures brings him closer to his goal as an
artist, Steiner creates a sympathetic character, a believable story, and a
communicable understanding of an important aspect of the Inuit culture.
Disappointed because an artist, a trader, and his own father think his carving
inferior, Omu spends much time alone, often playing his harmonica while some
killer whales cavort in the water. When one of the whales is beached, the boy
keeps a vigil for days; then he carves an image of the whale, and it has the spirit
that was lacking in the earlier carving. The writing, including the whale-songs
Omu composes, has a dignified yet simple flow, and one of the strengths of the
[ 135 ]
story is in the unusual fact of parental advocacy of a creative career. The
paintings vary in effectiveness, some being composed with restraint but others
weakened by garish use of color. ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Stone, Bruce. Been Clever Forever. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
025919-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025918-3. 376p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
Stephen Douglass has been fatally clever since at
least first grade, when he presented his teacher with a list of questions that asked,
among other things, "Why are oranges called that? Coincidence, or what?"
Now, in tenth grade, Stephen's smarts have somehow gotten him on the wrong
side of notorious biology teacher Mr. Truelove, with consequences that stretch
all the way to Stephen's meeting the President, whoops, Charlton Heston. This
long novel has a plot that's all over the place, but it is propelled by a manic
eccentricity that recalls Zindel (Stephen recalls Zindel, too, and the year he had to
read all the "pig books": The Pigman, A Day No Pigs Would Die, and Animal
Farm. Oh, and A Separate Pig). In a rather obvious characterization, Mr.
Truelove turns out to be a tortured Vietnam vet, allowing for some darkly funny
moments at the Vietnam memorial in Washington. More interesting than
Truelove's portrayal are those of Stephen's parents, an up-and-coming law
student turned aging barkeep, and a 60's rebel turned Jane Fonda (the 80's
workout one). Like Stephen, the book is a little too clever too often for its own
good, but a lot of young smartasses may read this and see a challenging
reflection. RS
D.V. Self-evaluation
Strauss, Linda Leopold. The Alexandra Ingredient. Crown, 1988. ISBN 0-517-
57001-7. [144 p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
The misadventures of ten-year-old Alexandra, who
inadvertently-and chronically--does the wrong thing until her family "adopts" a
grandfather, Mike. Alexandra's impulsive kindheartedness leads her to do the
right thing where Mike is concerned, and she's rewarded, once she proves herself
responsible, by being able to keep the stray kitten she's been hiding. This
unfolds like a television production, a smoothly styled, episodic repetition of the
central problem with a predictable conclusion. Readers won't be surprised, but
they will be mildly entertained to the extent of identifying with a character
perpetually in trouble. BH
D.V. Older-younger generations
Tafuri, Nancy. Spots Feathers and Curly Tails; written and illus. by Nancy
Tafuri. Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07537-1; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-07536-3. 32p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95.
Ad 
2-4yrs. Tafuri's familiar animal figures-large, clean, and set into
spacious white backgrounds--become the subject of an identification game here.
"What has spots?" queries page one in large-size black type, while the opposite
[ 136 ]
page profiles the backside of a Holstein. The succeeding double spread answers,
"A cow has spots" and shows the cow eating hay. A chicken, pig, horse, duck,
and bull get similar treatment (what has feathers, a curly tail, a mane, a bill,
horns) after which they all appear together, at the end of the book, on their
country farm. Because the concept and execution are so carefully minimalized,
the flaws show up almost unfairly: not all cows have spots, so perhaps another
distinguishing feature could have been chosen; the same principle applies to the
bull--other animals (cows, even), have horns; the words "a mane" are spaced so
close as to seem like one word; the anatomical drawing of the pigs and horses is
more awkwardly stylized than that of the gracefully proportioned ducks and
chickens. In its total and striking effect, however, the book will create a natural
opportunity for response, especially in toddler and nursery school story hours.
BH
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
Talbert, Marc. The Paper Knife. Dial, 1988. ISBN 0-8037-0571-9. 
184p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
George had said he loved Jeremy's mother, but he
abused her physically; ten-year-old Jeremy didn't dare tell her, even after they ran
away, that George had abused him sexually. Taking refuge with George's
sympathetic parents, starting school in a new town, making a friend like Harriet
and having a good teacher like Mr. Williams all helped. But, as Talbert shows
(rather than just telling the reader), the corrosion and fear of being an abused
child don't end easily. Through a sad mistake the teacher, Mr. Williams, is
accused of molesting Jeremy and is asked to leave. He is proven innocent, but
the whole episode is an example of the ripple effect of child abuse: alienation
from others, suspicion, shame, guilt, distrust. The story deals with problem
behavior but it is solidly enough crafted to be more than a problem novel, since
Talbert deals perceptively with other relationships and with other facets of
Jeremy's life. He sees children as people, avoiding either condescension or
evasion in depicting them. ZS
D.V. Teacher-pupil relations
Thompson, Richard. The Last Story, the First Story. Annick/Firefly, 1988.
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55037-025-1; Paper ed. ISBN 1-55037-024-3. 126p. illus.
Trade ed. $8.98; Paper ed. $5.98.
Ad 
Gr.5-8. 
Summer and Orin (of 60's-era parents) find a
mysterious cave while fetching water from the spring for Summer's rustic
homestead in the mountains of western Canada. In the cave they meet a strange
wild boy who takes the two with him back to his people, the Children of the
Known. Their land is a paradise, and a temptation for Summer, who has been
unhappy since the accidental death of her father. If she stays, she will forget, for
like the Children of the Known, she must periodically drown her memories in
the River. The story has too much theme and not enough narrative, but its
fantasy premise is fairly simple, albeit told rather than shown. Occasional
flashbacks are confusing, but Summer's grief for her father is convincingly
handled, as is her and Orin's suspenseful escape back to their home. RS
[ 137 ]
Thomson, Peggy, ad. The King Has Horse's Ears; illus. by David Small.
Simon, 1988. ISBN 0-671-64953-1. 32p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Where Pevear and Rayevsky's Our King Has Horns
(BCCB 11/87) gave the Midas story a Russian flavor, Small places it in a Louis
XIV-like setting, with lots of gold filigree, elegant furnishings (check out the
King's shell-shaped bathtub) and identically coiffed poodles and ladies. The
king, here named Horace, has everything: gold, a warm dog, all the chocolate he
could eat and-horse's ears. Horace is a young king, and it is particularly
mortifying to him that his secret, piped by a piper who has plucked the tattletale
reed, is revealed at the King's wedding to "Betty." Luckily, she wouldn't have
his ears any other way, and horse's ears become the rage, including a new
hairstyle: "Oreilles du Roi surmontd d'un pouf." Small stylishly poses limber
human figures against operetta-ic palace backgrounds; tongues of both adapter
and illustrator are firmly but gracefully in cheek. RS
D.V. Self-acceptance
Troughton, Joanna, ad. The Quail's Egg: A Folk Tale from Sri Lanka; ad. and
illus. by Joanna Troughton. Peter Bedrick, 1988. ISBN 0-87226-185-9. 26p.
(Folk Tales of the World). $12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. In this Asian version of "The Little Old Woman and Her Pig",
a quail tries to retrieve her egg, which has rolled away into a rock crevice, by
begging the stone mason to help. He refuses, so she petitions the pig to
trample the mason's field, the thorny creeper to prick the pig into action, the fire
to burn the thorny creeper, the pool of water to put out the fire, the elephant to
muddy the pool, the mouse to scare the elephant, and the cat to chase the mouse.
Of course the cat does, "for the world would come to an end before a cat would
leave a mouse alone," and the events culminate in the quail's reunion with her
newly hatched chick. The watercolors are vivid if sometimes stiffly composed,
but the real mileage will come from storytelling this as a pattern familiar from
other popular picture-book variants, such as Nonny Hogrogian's One Fine Day.
The motive of saving the chick and the reliance on threats instead of favors make
for a slightly harder-edged tone of realism than that dominating some of the
related folktales. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Warren, Cathy. Roxanne Bookman: Live at Five! Bradbury, 1988. ISBN 0-
02-792492-0. 100p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Roxanne Bookman has a problem with losing: she
hates to lose but makes a habit of it. The contrast with her successful family
makes her feel even worse when she loses a championship baseball game for her
team, nominates her teacher for a public award during a fit of depression he's not
able to shake, and gets her friends involved in a game-show quiz competition
they're not really interested in. The theme here is coping with competition, and
the story, while light-toned and even glib, pursues the theme with no holds
barred. Roxanne does finally push her team and teacher to win, but only after
she (along with the reader) is given an explicit lesson in sportsmanship. The
[138]
parallel subplot of her mother's difficulty in asserting herself makes the moral
even more obvious. This is a sit-com show, patterned by didactic intent, but in
a format with which lots of aspects young readers will feel comfortably familiar.
BH
D.V. Sportsmanship
Winter, Jeanette. Follow the Drinking Gourd; written and illus. by Jeanette
Winter. Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99694-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-
89694-7. 48p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. After a note about the history of the Underground Railroad,
Winter tells the story of Peg Leg Joe, a white sailor who taught the Drinking
Gourd song to slaves as a signal of when and where they could escape. Here a
family follows his directions, flees across the Ohio, and finally makes it to
Canada. 
Complementing the few lines of text per page are dark-hued
illustrations horizontally framed with a fine black line and plenty of white space.
The perspective is two-dimensional, and the visual emphasis is on richly stylized
contrasting patterns in both landscape and human figures. The flat colors are
well balanced within each composition to focus attention on a dramatic incident,
although at some points the faces seem exaggeratedly fearful. It would have
been helpful to know in what sense the Joe was "legendary," ie. whether he was
an historical or fictional character, and to have pointed out in the introductory
note that other heroes such as Harriet Tubman and Sojourner Truth also used
signal songs in conducting slaves to freedom. However, the art carries the
weight of introducing children to a riveting piece of U.S. history, and the music
included at the end of the book will fix it in their minds. BH
Yue, Charlotte. The Igloo; written and illus. by Charlotte and David Yue.
Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-44613-9. 117p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-8. 
All the complexities of igloo-building are clearly
explained (and shown in precise and well-placed drawings) in a companion to the
authors' The Pueblo (BCCB 6/86). 
This is as its best when the focus is
technological, and the Yues cogently describe Eskimo hunting tools and
methods, sled building, and the preparation of clothes and food. Discussion of
Eskimo culture and society is vague and reverential, and while Eskimo customs
are referred to in the past tense, the authors don't give any indication of time
periods. In contrast to the fine technical drawing, sketches of people and snow
scenes are awkward (unfortunately, the review copy has several pages of
illustrations bleeding through the paper). Appended are an index, reading list,
and bibliography of adult references. RS
C.U. Architecture (unit); Social studies