Adkins, Jan. String: Tying It Up, Tying It Down; written and illus. by Jan
Adkins. Scribner's, 1992. ISBN 0-684-18875-9. 48p. $13.95.
M 
Gr. 5-. 
The strength of this book lies in its section of
descriptions and illustrations that teach how to tie several nautical knots.
Although the pencil and ink drawings are sometimes too crowded for complete
clarity, it is possible to learn the knots from this section if one is practicing
with a piece of string. Otherwise, the disorganized text includes advice for tying
plywood to the roof of a car, sewing on a button, and tying a tie. Some of the
large-scale drawings (like that of the car) are so busy it can be difficult to locate
the letters that match the step-by-step explanations within the text. Although
there are sufficient definitions for knot-tying terms, plenty of mysterious words
are used that are never defined, as in the phrase "hoist the topside mate using the
main or jib halyard with a winch." Adkins' whimsical writing style is both
amusing and distracting, as in the description of the bowline knot as "the
Abraham Lincoln of knots--common, useful, strong, deceptively subtle, and
elegant in its simplicity." While intermittently useful--especially for young
sailors-the problems of this book are too many to untangle. KJ
C.U. Hobbies
Avi. Blue Heron. Bradbury, 1992. ISBN 0-02-707751-9. 186p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Maggie, almost thirteen, has come to spend a month
with her father and his young second wife, Joanna, in a rented lakeside cottage in
Massachusetts. There's a new baby, about whom Maggie is curious but
ambivalent; Joanna is insistently but persuasively friendly. The problem is Dad.
Preoccupied with work, moody, oblivious to the baby, and nasty to Joanna, he
insists that Maggie have a good time but does little to ensure it. Maggie finds
refuge in quietly, minutely observing a blue heron that lives in a nearby swamp;
to her dismay, she also finds evidence that someone plans to kill it. The
conflicts are tense and intense and prevent the basically interiorized story from
becoming static. As in Paula Fox's The Moonlight Man, the father here shows
[253 ]
traces of real love for his daughter that make his eventual betrayal all the more
convincing and disturbing. A man with a few sad secrets, he is viewed through
the insistent lense of Maggie's perceptions. Joanna is a complicated, though
always sympathetic, character; Maggie is lucky to have her, a fortune not
extended to Maggie's father, who, it may be, loses both women in the end.
Honest and understated, this is a fine complement to Avi's adventure stories, and
an equally fine compliment to his craft. RS
D.V. Father-daughter relations; Stepparent-child relations
Baird, Anne. Space Camp®: The Great Adventure for NASA Hopefuls; illus.
with photographs by Robert Koropp. Morrow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-
10228-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10227-1. 48p. Library ed. $13.93; Trade ed.
$14.00.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Color photographs add to the appeal of a book that
will lure the spacestruck; the pictures are placed carefully in relation to the text,
so that the absence of captions creates no problem. While unduly fictionalized
(with exclamatory comments adding little), the text does give a full picture of
what happens to a group of campers each day of their stay at the Huntsville,
Alabama, Space Camp, and of how the camp is organized and (magnificently)
equipped. What readers may miss is information on how campers become
eligible to participate. Still, it's a handsome book, and it provides facts not
available in other space books published for young readers. ZS
C.U. Science
Barboza, Steven. I Feel Like Dancing: A Year with Jacques d'Amboise and the
National Dance Institute; illus. with photographs by Carolyn George
d'Amboise. Crown, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-58455-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
517-58454-9. 48p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.00.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
For fifteen years, Jacques d'Amboise and his National
Dance Institute have worked with kids in New York public schools, giving dance
classes throughout the year and building up to the Event of the Year, the
performance where all the students (and adult dancers as needed) join together.
This photo-essay follows d'Amboise through a year, starting with the selection
of student dancers (the text always calls them "dancers," never "kids") not on the
basis of their previous experience but their "desire to sweat like a professional."
The text then follows, month by month, preparation for the performance of
Chakra: A Celebration of India; as both regular dancers and the particularly
talented "SWAT team" ("It's like the police have specialists, we have
specialists," says d'Amboise) rehearse, d'Amboise takes a research trip to India,
and scenery and costumes begin to take shape. The pictures contain as much
action as still photographs can: Jacques and the dancers with open mouths and
flying feet, or the SWAT team with intense absorption on every young face.
The design is distracting, however, with photos backgrounded by angled colored
shapes (that emphasize the unevenness of the lighting in some pictures), and
little color cutouts dribbling across the white space; the typeface is artistic at the
expense of readability. The actual performance photographs are impressively
displayed, with pictures and white text on black pages recreating the dark of the
theater to dramatic effect. D'Amboise's warmth and vitality come across more
vividly in the Oscar-winning documentary He Makes Me Feel Like Dancing, but
this is a good print chronicle of an unusual program, and one that succeeds in
[ 254 ]
conveying the pleasure of shared experience in a big production. A note on the
history of the National Dance Institute is included. DS
C.U. 
Dance
Bauer, Marion Dane. What's Your Story? A Young Person's Guide to Writing
Fiction. Clarion, 1992. Trade ed. ISBN 0-395-57781-0; Paper ed. ISBN 0-395-
57780-2. 134p. Trade ed. $13.95; Paper ed. $6.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
With commendable patience and optimism, Bauer
undertakes the nearly impossible task of dissecting the essentially intuitive
writing process into planning a story, developing characters, focusing a point of
view, generating dialogue, enhancing story tension, and working through
revisions. Her concepts are clearly stated, but her examples suffer from a random
range; one short story given in full and drawn on throughout the book would
have been more effective than frequently improvised scenarios or brief references
to her own and others' books. However, the tone is accessible and the seasoned
advice valuable, especially in relating succinct precepts to the child's level of
experience: "I think of my main character's problem as a rope stretching from
the beginning of the story to the end. I never drop the rope, nor do I hang things
from it like a clothesline. Rather, I try to weave every part of the story in with
it." Bauer is also honest about both problems ("You probably can't get it
published anywhere") and possibilities ("There are many reasons for writing that
have nothing to do with being published"). BH
C.U. Writing
Beales, Valerie. Emma and Freckles; illus. by Jacqueline Rogers. Simon,
1992. ISBN 0-671-74686-3. 197p. $13.00.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Eleven-year-old Emma finally wrests from her parents
the pony they had promised her, and the result is nothing but disaster. She's too
young and undisciplined to handle Freckles, a lively and stubborn pony, and after
several disasters Freckles is returned to his original owner. Freckles then ends
up in the hands of a riding stable where he is treated cruelly, and a pining Emma
and her friends steal and hide him, hoping eventually to buy him back.
Although the writing is smooth, there's not much characterization; the evil
people, especially the riding-stable owner, are melodramatic villains, with the
stable being a Dickensian place seemingly designed expressly for punishment of
unloved children and animals. 
There's an appealing realism, however, in
Emma's desperate obsession with the well-being of all animals, including the
pony for which she's obviously not ready (and that's a nicely original touch in a
horse story). Kids may be confused by abrupt Americanizations in an obviously
British book (amid gymkhanas, Pony Clubbing, and hedgerows, mentions of
dollars and the American Horse Show Association sound odd), but they will love
the melodrama and the animal saga. DS
D.V. Animals, love for
Berck, Judith. No Place to Be: Voices of Homeless Children. Houghton,
1992. ISBN 0-395-53350-3. 148p. illus. with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-12. 
Rigorously documented, this is a sobering overview
of the lives of New York City children who are homeless, and staying in squalid
hotels, huge city barracks-style shelters, or-rarely-in small shelters run by
[255 ]
private nonprofit agencies. Chapters cover the economic climate that leads to
homelessness, the kinds of shelter available, the impediments to health and
education posed by homelessness, and the psychological burdens placed on
children who don't have their own places to live. Throughout, the dismal facts
are given witness by the stories of homeless children themselves, recorded by
Berck, who interviewed more than thirty young people, mostly adolescents,
living in hotels or shelters. These kids speak of drug dealing in the hallways,
the social stigma of homelessness, the need to care for parents who have given
up hope. Helped by a selection of black-and-white photographs, the book's
balance between information and anecdote is excellent, avoiding both fact-
packing and sentimentality. "You have to really be there to understand it," says
twelve-year-old Shama, but these stories and statistics go a good deal of the
distance. RS
C.U. Social studies
Byars, Betsy. Bingo Brown's Guide to Romance. Viking, 1992. ISBN 0-670-
84491-8. [160p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Bingo's affection for Melissa has not cooled, but he
has tired of the interrogative mode and has decided instead to give advice in the
form of a Guide to Romance, A Record of the Personal Ups and Downs of Bingo
Brown. Dedicated to My Brother, Jamie, as a Guide and Comfort to Him When
He Finds Himself, as He Surely Will, upon the Roller Coaster of Life. As a
narrative device, this is not quite as binding as Bingo's burning questions
(BCCB 4/88), and the plot is certainly less probing. On the light side, however,
Byars is consistently funny in tone and dialogue: "Fine! Great!" says Bingo's
angry mother. "Her nostrils were so flared now that Bingo thought he caught
sight of her brain. 'Then go to your room for the rest of your life.'" The
agonies of adolescence, too, have a naturalistic ring, as in Melissa's appearing
"bigger than life" when she returns to town after a significant growth spurt, or
Bingo's spying on her as she picks out "Health Supplies" in the grocery store.
Bingo's baby brother is the focus of some of the best lines ("You need teeth,
because teeth dam up the drool") and action ("Jamie did not know spaghetti was
to be eaten. He thought you slapped at it in a violent way and, later, when tired
of the violence, swept it off the tray onto the floor"). More episodic than
cohesive, this is nevertheless keen-eyed and better-written than most series titles.
BH
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Carris, Joan. A Ghost of a Chance; illus. by Paul Henry. Little, 1992. ISBN
0-316-13016-8. 144p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Twelve-year-old Punch Wagner's family takes a two-
week vacation in North Carolina. After he learns that the coastal town where
they're staying was once Blackbeard's home, Punch excites two other boys with
the idea of digging up the pirate's fabled buried treasure. The local boy in the
trio warns Punch away from Blackbeard's old home, now claimed to be haunted,
but Punch just won't listen. As the boys search for the treasure, they have
Hardy Boys-style misadventures, plus a Fenton Hardy Dad: "You and Tom
learned more about yourselves in these two weeks than most people learn in ten
normal years. And you did find treasure, though maybe not the kind you were
looking for." The plot's climax is not as scary as it seems meant to be, but the
[256]
ghost story keeps some integrity as the hauntings cannot be fully explained.
Pirate-crazy boys will enjoy daydreaming their way to riches along with Punch.
KJ
Christiana, David. White Nineteens; written and illus. by David Christiana.
Farrar, 1992. ISBN 0-374-38390-1. 32p. $15.00.
M 
4-7 yrs. 
The offbeat title and slick cover design promise a far
more sophisticated book than this one actually is. The "white nineteens" are
butterfly Buttercup's favorite pair of wings, and it seems that someone has
stolen them. Owl saw "twooo blue eyes" but isn't otherwise helpful; the Queen
(bee) suggests that Buttercup ask the Slithering Suzzies (worms); the culprit
turns out to be the Cat, who stole them for the Troll to use as a pair of ear-
warmers. A slight tale in any case, it is here overwhelmed by Christiana's
paintings; large double spreads that juxtapose little Buttercup and big menaces
such as the leaping cat and the gloomy troll. Lacking a story to support, the
paintings exist mainly to call attention to themselves, inviting a scrutiny that
reveals technical bravura (Buttercup perched on the brow of Owl, for example)
but emotional sterility. Eyecatching, certainly; empty, unfortunately. RS
Cristaldi, Kathryn. Baseball Ballerina; illus. by Abby Carter. Random House,
1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91734-9; Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-81734-4. 48p.
(Step Into Reading Books). Library ed. $7.99; Paper ed. $3.50.
R 
Gr. 2-3. 
The (unnamed) narrator hates ballet practice: "First
position. Second position. Third position. I make a face. There is only one
position for me. Shortstop." Her mother insists on the dance class, and the girl
and her best friend Mary Ann-likewise coerced-have made a pact not to tell
anyone else on their baseball team, the Sharks. So what's with Mary Ann's
getting all starry-eyed when Madame names her Queen Dandelion in the
upcoming recital piece The Dance of the Dandelions? Mary Ann says, "I wonder
if I get to wear a crown?" Sheesh. 
Baseball and ballet are successfully
coexistent by the end of this beginning-to-read, and fans of both will find an ally
in the narrator. The style has an easygoing swing, and crayon illustrations have
a companionably casual lilt. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Sex roles
Dugan, Barbara. Loop the Loop. Greenwillow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-
09648-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09647-6. 32p. Library ed. $13.93; Trade ed.
$14.00.
R* 
Gr. K-3. 
Stevenson's lively line and pastel ebullience are just
right for an engaging first book about an intergenerational friendship. Anne
meets Mrs. Simpson one day when the latter, elderly and erratic and a bit
boisterous, is being taken for a walk by her wheelchair attendant. (Here,
unfortunately, Stevenson's pictures contradict themselves most peculiarly, with
Anne giving the old woman a cup of lemonade after spilling the pitcher on the
ground.) Mrs. Simpson also turns out to be a yo-yo expert, who admits that she
is pretty good. "I'm magnificent," says Mrs. Simpson, "and I know it." In a
nursing home after breaking her hip, Mrs. Simpson is clearly not always in
touch with reality--but Anne loves to visit her and, when she is given Mrs.
[ 257 ]
Simpson's cat, sacrifices an object she loves (and one that's appreciated by Mrs.
Simpson) in an ending that is both funny and touching. This is a lively story
and at the same time one of the best books about old age for a young child. ZS
D.V. Older-younger generations
Elmore, Patricia. Susannah and the Purple Mongoose Mystery; illus. by Bob
Marstall. Dutton, 1992. ISBN 0-525-44907-8. 
[120p]. $14.00. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Lucy's the narrator, her friend Susannah is the brains
of the group, and Knievel is the third member of a team of young amateur
detectives. Who is setting fires at the home of Miss Quigley-and why? Is it
the pushy real estate agent who's trying to acquire the property? The grouchy
neighbor? The testy middle-aged cousin Ruth, who lives with Miss Quigley?
Or the new foster child, Theresa, who will be in the girls' sixth-grade classroom
next fall? There is an abundance of suspects and red herrings here, so that the
suspense is maintained. 
However, the pace is slowed by the plethora of
suspects, motives, and false clues. 
Only a reference to Lucy's hair and
Susannah's participation in a Black Poetry Recitation tells the reader that this is
an interracial friendship, a fact also evident in the illustrations. ZS
Emmerich, Elsbeth. My Childhood in Nazi Germany; by Elsbeth Emmerich
with Robert Hull. Watts, 1992. ISBN 0-531-18429-3. 
96p. illus. with
photographs. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Although the writing has a plain and occasionally
choppy quality, this honest account is one of the few children's books that
presents a non-Jewish German child's view of the war (see Christine
Nostlinger's Fly Away Home, BCCB 2/76, and T. Degens' Transport 7-41-R,
BCCB 3/75, for noteworthy fictional exceptions). In fact, the author makes no
mention of anti-Semitism at all, either because she was unaware of it or because
she was protected, in her natural state of childhood self-absorption, by the adults
around her-as she was in the case of her grandfather's repeated arrests for anti-
Nazi activities. What she did suffer, even more than rationing or bombing, was
the loss of her father, who died at the Russian front after serving in France and
other combat areas. The chronological organization is not always clear-cut, but
frequent section headings help orient browsers, who will also appreciate the
abundant black-and-white photographs of family and wartime scenes. What
commends this book are clearly remembered details of drudgery as well as drama
during a time when even the relatively privileged died or survived by luck alone
(a neighbor describes a couple's fate next door to the author's house after an
Allied raid: "Rose is decapitated and Albert's stomach is all out. My Daddy
found them"). It becomes increasingly clear here that whatever their parents'
politics, in children's lives, war is the ultimate villain. BH
C.U. History--Germany-World War II
Facklam, Margery. 
Who Harnessed the Horse?: The Story of Animal
Domestication; illus. by Steven Parton. Little, 1992. ISBN 0-316-27381-3.
160p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Chapter by chapter Facklam discusses the
domestication of various animals, from the expectable dogs and horses through
[ 258 ]
the more surprising silkworms and camels. In chatty, accessible language she
outlines the importance (or, in one chapter, past importance) of these creatures as
companions, beasts of burden, food, etc. She includes both animals selectively
bred by humans (the traditional definition of domestication) and those merely
used by them, which makes the definition of domestication somewhat confusing.
Although she mentions animal rights concerns, they're not explored deeply or
consistently; the detailed description of battery hen farming, for instance, really
needs a mention of the ethical questions involved. However, the book provides a
useful overview of the way our species has adapted animals, including those that
young readers may not have considered (such as ostriches and elephants), for use
in our daily lives. 
Appearing throughout the text are black-and-white
illustrations, frequently stiffly drawn and occasionally incorrect: in the horse
section, for instance, the animal labeled "Appaloosa" isn't-it's a pinto, and the
pair identified as Clydesdales look more like Belgians. DS
Fakih, Kimberly Olson. Grandpa Putter and Granny Hoe; illus. by Tracey
Campbell Pearson. Farrar, 1992. ISBN 0-374-32762-9. 116p. $13.00.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
"Neep! Neep! Grandpa Putter honked his horn and
waited for Jazz and Koo in the driveway." Thus begins a visit alternating
between the twins' wealthy grandfather, on one side of the family, and their
homespun grandmother, on the other side-and never the twain shall meet. The
plot is not short on incident, but the only thematic focus is the adults'
bickering, which becomes overused to the point of contrivance in holding
together disparate episodes. If the old people's enmity becomes predictable,
however, the ending is not: creditably, they don't make up, but sound ready to
launch into disagreements of more frenetic proportions when the children's
parents arrive home from Europe, "And Just in Time." Pearson's black-and-
white drawings make light of selected scenes such as the children's dinner at a
ritzy club, their delivery of food to a homeless person, their call on a judge who
raises chickens in his house, an illness, an accident, and an ill-fated excursion.
Despite its two-dimensional aspect, kids will probably enjoy the sprightly
details and childish behavior in adults who are supposed to know better. BH
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Fisher, Leonard Everett. Tracks across America: The Story of the American
Railroad 1825-1900. Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0945-7. 192p. illus.
with photographs. $17.95.
R* 
Gr. 6-. 
Visually impressive, with its profusion of
photographs and drawings, its clear print and wide margins, this tour de train is
just as effective textually. Fisher covers an enormous amount of material in a
book that is balanced, logically organized, and capably written. Occasionally
there is a quiet note of humor, as when, in describing a case of transportation
litigation, he says, "Farnam & Durant retained Abraham Lincoln, a reputable 47-
year-old lawyer." In discussing the early years of inventions and improvements
of railroads and locomotives through applications of civil and mechanical
engineering, the author makes clear the way in which each inventor (even those
who make mistakes) contributes to the body of knowledge. An extensive index
follows the bibliography, adding to the accessibility of a text that should appeal
to a wide range of subject interests. ZS
C.U. History--U.S.; Transportation
[259 ]
Freedman, Russell. An Indian Winter; illus. by Karl Bodmer. Holiday House,
1992. ISBN 0-8234-0930-9. 88p. $21.95.
R 
Gr. 6-. 
A pair of unlikely travelers to the territory that is
now North Dakota, naturalist/adventurer Prince Maximilian from Germany and
artist Karl Bodmer from Switzerland settled among the Mandan Indians during
the severe winter of 1833. Skillfully blending material from Maximilian's
account with background information on several Native American groups and
how they were affected by white settlement during that period, Freedman has
produced a readable, involving narrative with details lending great impact to
descriptions. 
A vivid selection of Bodmer's paintings and drawings,
meticulously reproduced and captioned, illustrates the book, which has the same
rare potential as David Macaulay's architectural history books in satisfying both
juvenile and adult audiences. 
The integrity of the research enriches the
poignancy of the facts: 
three years after the Europeans recorded their
observations of tribal life and culture, smallpox killed all but 130 of the 1600
men, women, and children who had befriended them. The bitterness of Chief
Four Bears' dying speech to his people tells more about the human cost of
Western Expansion than most textbooks will ever care to admit. BH
C.U. 
History, U.S.; Art
Goedecke, Christopher J. The Wind Warrior: The Training of a Karate
Champion; illus. with photographs by Rosmarie Hausherr. Four Winds, 1992.
ISBN 0-02-736262-0. 64p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
Thirteen-year-old Nick is the star pupil of his karate
class, just three promotions away from receiving his black belt. In this text
written by Nick's karate teacher (although only those who look at the back flap
will figure that out) and in Hausherr's blow-by-blow photographs, readers will
find a detailed log of karate training and competition, focused on Nick but
including other students, male and female, as well. Basic terms and tournament
scoring rules are defined within the context of the action; a history of the art is
effectively woven throughout. Goedecke's philosophy of karate as a mental and
physical discipline provides a balance to the smash-crunch cliches of martial arts
movies. 
The photos are sometimes grainy but always well-placed and
informative, illustrating basic moves and positions as well as at-home vignettes
of Nick and his family; a few tournament grimaces and some photos of martial
arts weaponry also add excitement. The tone is entirely upbeat-does this kid
ever lose?-and occasionally self-congratulatory, but both seasoned practitioners
and only-hopeful karate-kas will appreciate the front row seat. A minimally
useful note to parents about choosing a martial arts school is appended. RS
C.U. Recreation
Graham, Bob. Greetings from Sandy Beach; written and illus. by Bob Graham.
Kane/Miller, 1992. ISBN 0-916291-40-5. 
32p. 
(A Cranky Nell Book).
$12.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Sandy Beach may be in Graham's country, Australia,
but the situation and its humorous development have a universal appeal. The
narrator is a girl (nine or so, by the illustrations) who describes the family's
two-day outing at the beach, where they camp with apprehensive glances at some
bikers called the Disciples of Death and at a busload of unruly children. If there
[260 ]
is a moral to this laugh-a-page picture story, it's that one should keep an open
mind: the bikers are helpful and generous, and the ebullient children become
good playmates. 
Graham's line and wash pictures have a bright, sunny
nonchalance, plenty of action, and a comic sense that echoes the crisp throwaway
lines of the text. ZS
D.V. Family relations
Greenberg, Keith Elliot. Out of the Gang. Lerner, 1992. ISBN 0-8225-2553-4.
40p. illus. with photographs. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Alternating the stories of two former New York City
gang members, this photo-essay has a convincing immediacy in both its details
and its aims. Butch was a member of the 21 Junior Blackjacks and later, the
Crazy Homicides; Gino was part of a graffiti crew called the Kings of Graffiti.
Both are the rare success stories: Butch is now married, a father, and a member
of the Guardian Angels; Gino, after witnessing his gang beating up another boy,
left the gang and is now taking art and photography lessons. Black-and-white
photos are a little posed but give faces to the facts; the inevitably didactic text
may not keep kids out of gangs, but it will give comfort to those who refuse to
join, and it will also prove an eyeopener to more sheltered kids whose ideas of
gangs have been molded by glamorous Hollywood productions. A short reading
list is appended. RS
C.U. Social studies; Guidance
Griffin, Peni R. Hobkin. McElderry, 1992. ISBN 0-689-50539-6. 202p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
When Griffin's story of Liza and her older sister Kay
begins, readers know only that they are in Texas, that they are running away, and
that they have assumed new identities. What is hinted (broadly) is that Kay has
been abused by their stepfather but hasn't explained this to the little sister she is
protecting by removing her from danger. They camp out in an abandoned house
after riding a bus to a small town, and here they start a new life, Kay finding a
job and Liza staying home and learning how to keep house. What shouldn't
work, structurally, but does, is a fantasy element: Hobkin is a fairy who had
come over from England with an early settler, and (usually invisible) he turns a
helping hand, often saving Liza from domestic disaster, and at times from real
danger. Kay is impatient with Liza's reports of Hobkin, but most of the local
people simply take his existence for granted. Occasionally, he's been seen; at
the close of the story Kay sees him too. The author has made the two facets of
the book credible, but it's the seamless blending that is impressive; the people
and the plot are effectively interactive in this inventive tale. ZS
Harrison, Maggie. Angels on Rollerskates; written and illus. by Maggie
Harrison. Candlewick, 1992. ISBN 1-56402-003-7. 106p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Liberally illustrated with realistic pencil drawings,
this English import has six chapters, each a distinct episode about the three
children of a family in which the oldest (age seven) is called "Bigun," and his
siblings "Middlun" and "Littlun." The book's title is also the title of the last
chapter, and it refers to Middlun's drawings of angels. The simplicity of the
writing and the cozy, everyday situations of the mild plots are reminiscent of
[2611
Carolyn Haywood's stories, but here there is a bit less cohesiveness and a bit
more cuteness. ZS
D.V. Family relations
Hazen, Barbara Shook. Alone at Home; illus. by Irene Trivas. Atheneum,
1992. ISBN 0-689-31691-7. 60p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Amy, who has long yearned to be old enough to stay
home alone without a babysitter, is delighted when the regular after-school
caretaker can't come, and Mom and Dad (both work) agree that just this once, if
an adult neighbor brings Amy home from school, she can be on her own. At
first Amy revels in freedom; then she is perturbed because she's made a mess
while preparing a parental surprise (no-bake cookies), then she feels lonely, and
finally her nervousness turns to terror when she hears a strange noise. By the
time Mom and Dad get back, Amy feels she's been a failure at being
independent. Her parents point out that she's been brave, that she obeyed all the
safety rules, and that her cookies are delicious. Illustrated with inviting ink
drawings and simply told, this has enough action to hold a reader's interest, and
the situation has a universal appeal. ZS
D.V. Self-reliance
Henry, Joanne Landers. A Clearing in the Forest: A Story about a Real Settler
Boy; illus. by Charles Robinson. Four Winds, 1992. ISBN 0-02-743671-3.
[64p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Based on primary source material, this is historical
fiction that has chapter/episodes rather than a continuous narrative structure. The
time is 1834, the place is Indianapolis, and the protagonist is nine-year-old
Elijah Fletcher (whose unpublished manuscript provides many of the incidents
for the book). Elijah changes schools, has minor adventures with his brother
Cooley, visits Cincinnati, and goes to a county fair, among other activities.
The writing is smooth but rather flat, the characterization minimal, and the
inclusion of historical information at times obtrusive; period details are,
however, convincing. ZS
Herman, Charlotte. Max Malone, Superstar; illus. by Cat Bowman Smith.
Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-8050-1375-X. 68p. (Redfeather Books). $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Max and his pals, Gordy and Austin Healy, try to
break into the TV commercial biz. Although Max gets annoyed with his sister
Rosalie's suggestions for his audition, as Austin's manager, Max follows
Rosalie's model in coaching Austin. Max's chutzpah in becoming a manager
provides the humor, and Max's unsolicited advice to Austin provides the
conflict, but the writing is sometimes choppy and the action overexplained.
While not as funny and fresh as Herman's other stories about Max (Max Malone
and the Great Cereal Rip-Off and Max Malone Makes a Million, reviewed last
June) series followers probably won't mind much. Let's hope Max can get into
more trouble in the next book. KJ
C.U. Reading, easy
[ 262 ]
Hest, Amy. Pajama Party; illus. by Irene Trivas. Morrow, 1992. Library ed.
ISBN 0-688-07870-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07866-4. 40p. Library ed. $13.93;
Trade ed. $14.00.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
An awed observer at her thirteen-year-old sister's
pajama party, Casey, along with two friends, determines to have a "three-girl
pajama party," complete with junk food, sleeping bags, and a dress code: "Wear
pajamas. 
No nightgowns allowed. Jenny said it wasn't fair about the
no-nightgowns rule. She was mad, I think, because Kate and I have matching
rainbow flannels from Kid Boutique." The evening's events are predictable-a
little best-friend feuding, a surfeit of chocolate-chip cookies, Kate's away-from-
home anxiety-but cozily satisfying, and flattering to third-grade readers in the
way it gives them a preteen-theme. 
Watercolor illustrations are small and
sophisticated enough to keep this from looking like a picture book; the narrative
voice is lively; the enticing details will have kids making party plans of their
own. RS
C.U. Reading, easy
D.V. Friendship values
Heymsfeld, Carla. Coaching Ms. Parker; illus. by Jane O'Conor. Bradbury,
1992. ISBN 0-02-743715-9. 85p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Mike and his fourth-grade classmates feel that the
class honor is at stake: their very nice teacher, Ms. Parker, has confessed that
she can't play baseball, and the annual game between the teachers and the sixth
grade is looming. Some of the best players organize a coaching squad, and their
rookie, Ms. Parker, works hard and cheerfully in a series of very funny (but
never slapstick) sessions that readers should find enjoyable. Mike suffers from
ambivalence, having been urged by his parents to coach a sixth grade sister. In
her first children's book, the author has written a story with good pace, warm
family relationships, a plug for reading (Mike moves from able-but-reluctant to
engaged reader), and an ending that should please everybody without straining
credulity. ZS
D.V. Family relations; Teacher-student relations
Hill, Elizabeth Starr. Broadway Chances. Viking, 1992. ISBN 0-670-84197-8.
[160p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
At the conclusion to The Street Dancers (BCCB
7/91), Fitzi had convinced her parents that their decision to be performers was
not her own. An audition for a Broadway show, however, is apparently much
more pleasant than one for a soap opera, and in this sequel, Fitzi joins her
grandfather and parents by landing a part in the huge new musical in town. She
loves her modest chorus role with its solo dance, and she's pretty fond of Mark,
the handsome teenage lead. As understudy, Fitzi learns the star's role, but she's
not worried about having to play it-not with competitive Tiffany in the part.
When Tiffany inevitably disappears, the story takes on a darker tone during the
police investigation, but the show goes on. 
Many of the show business
elements are suggestive of Streatfeild's fifty-year-old Ballet Shoes and Theatre
Shoes, including the self-centered Tiffany, Fitzi as reluctant understudy, and the
daily life in a family of performers. Tiffany's kidnapping gives a contemporary
[263 ]
slant, but there's a good old Broadway happy ending. Stage-struck readers who
loved the Shoes books will like the fresh new Fitzi stories. KJ
Holmes, Mary Z. Dear Dad; illus. by Geri Strigenz. ISBN 0-8114-3503-2. See
You in Heaven; illus. by Rick Whipple. 
ISBN 0-8114-3502-4. 
Two
Chimneys; illus. by Geri Strigenz. ISBN 0-8114-3506-7. Each book: Stone
Bank/Raintree/Steck-Vaughn, 1992. 48p. (History's Children). $12.96
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
The format (44 pages of text and 3 of historical notes)
does not vary in a simply written series of historical novels for the middle
grades; the illustrations are correct in period details but pedestrian in caliber. In
Two Chimneys, the feisty daughter of English immigrants tells of the events of
1628 in Jamestown, where she chose to stay despite the vicissitudes of hard
labor and hot summers. Elsy, middle child of a slave family, is the narrator of a
poignant tale of separation and mistreatment in See You in Heaven, set in 1836.
Dear Dad is set between 1942-1945, the story of a Jewish family in Florida to
which Dad returns when the war ends. Holmes creates believable characters and,
throughout the "History's Children" series, a real sense of the impact of
incidents that are not historically significant in themselves but that shape the
lives of everyday people in momentous times. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
Jenkins, Jessica. Thinking about Colors; written and illus. by Jessica Jenkins.
Dutton, 1992. ISBN 0-525-44908-6. [34p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
In her first book for children, artist Jenkins presents
such concepts as individual (and differing) reactions to colors, the use of colors
in language (seeing red, feeling blue) and the range of hues for each color. To a
limited extent, she succeeds, since a line of color-daubs (for example, rose red,
flame red, strawberry red, crimson red, scarlet red, etc.) atop each spread affirms
the existence of variations. Unfortunately, either the labelling or the color
registration has led to some odd results (the so-called "royal blue" is actually
purple), and the use of invented distinctions ("bruise blue," "lobster pink,"
"booger green") may add to the confusion. Still, the combination of visually
attractive colors and the message closing the double-page spread on black ("I am
black and Simon is white. But we're all the same inside") make the book
appealing. ZS
Kaye, Geraldine. Somebody Else's Baby. Hyperion, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 1-
56282-150-4; Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-149-0. 138p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade
ed. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Terry, an English girl of seventeen, realizes that she
is pregnant and, since she was in a dark room while drink-fuzzy at a party,
doesn't know who the father is. She is ambivalent about whether to keep the
baby or give it up for adoption, finally deciding on the latter. The story is in the
form of a journal intended for the baby to read at some later date, and some of the
entries are unconvincingly long; while Terry's ambivalence and the attitudes of
her friends and family are believable, the text seems overextended.
Characterization is adequate and dialogue is smooth and realistic. ZS
[264]
Kelleher, Victor. Del-Del; illus. by Peter Clarke. Walker, 1992. ISBN 0-8027-
8154-3. 180p. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Promotional copy accompanying the galley claims
for the book an affinity with Stephen King and V. C. Andrews ("in language and
detail appropriate for young adults"-somebody at Walker needs to get out more
often): while the Andrews analogy doesn't hold, there are certainly ties with
King's books, particularly The Shining. And, at least for the first third,
Kelleher's book rivals, even betters, much adult pulp horror for sheer scariness.
Del-Del is the bleak and creepy persona assumed by seven-year-old Sam on the
occasion of the anniversary of his sister Laura's death. Sam's grandmother
believes he is possessed by the devil, and a kind of exorcism seems to turn the
trick, but the second third of the book reveals that Del-Del, apparently
unexorcised, is actually an alien refugee from a distant planet. It seems a bit
lame, but as the last third shows, rightly so, as Kelleher reveals that both
manifestations of Del-Del were the desperate psychotic attempts of a gifted little
boy to hide from the reality of his sister's death. The story is told by Sam's
other sister Beth, and the family tensions are fraught and well-wrought. Surely
paced and pretty spooky, Kelleher's book even has an advantage over King's and
Andrews' sagas: it's shorter. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Ketteman, Helen. Not Yet, Yvette; illus. by Irene Trivas. Whitman, 1992.
ISBN 0-8075-5771-4. 24p. $11.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
Bright, cheerful gouache and pencil pictures show an
African-American father and daughter making all the preparations for what is
obviously going to be a surprise birthday celebration for Mom. The read-aloud
audience is given several clues about what's going on, as Yvette and Dad shop
for presents and flowers, make and frost a cake (companionably licking the
bowl), and thriftily use decorations saved from the Fourth of July. No sex-role
stereotypes here, with Dad happily assuming his share of housework. There is a
warm family feeling, a bit of suspense, and a nice little switch: Yvette has
repeatedly asked "Is it time yet?" and been told "Not yet, Yvette," but it's Dad
who asks, as Mom approaches the front door, "Is it time yet, Yvette?" ZS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Killien, Christi. The Daffodils. Scholastic, 1992. 
ISBN 0-590-44241-4.
[144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
The Daffodils are a school softball team, and eleven-
year-old Nicki expects to be elected captain this year, having led the team to a
championship the previous year. A new girl (sophisticated, bra-wearing, rule-
flouting, instantly popular) is chosen captain; Nicky has to overcome her
jealousy and try to salvage what she sees as a deteriorating group, with both the
level of play and personal relationships becoming worse. Readers who expect a
sports story (player with bat on cover) may be disappointed; this is really less
about softball than about the uneasy stage where some girls are happy to play
with dolls and others are ready to play with boys. Since many in the book's
potential audience will be concerned with both, the story has the undeniable
appeal of problems and situation with which readers can identify; however,
[265 ]
characterization is of variable depth and the pace of the book is uneven. This
should be useful, however, as fare for reluctant readers. ZS
C.U. Reading, reluctant
D.V. Age-mate relations
King-Smith, Dick. Paddy's Pot of Gold; illus. by David Parkins. Crown,
1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-58137-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-58136-1. 114p.
Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.00.
Ad 
Gr. 2-5. 
Tailored to St. Patrick's Day reading, this focuses on
the friendship between an Irish farmgirl and a 174-year-old leprechaun, P. V. W.
R. H. O'Reilly, whom Brigid spots on her eighth birthday. The plot is more
low-key than usual for King-Smith, whose Foxbusters (BCCB 10/88) and other
novels have injected sharp wit into children's fiction about anthropomorphized
animals. Occasionally slow-paced but easy to read and attuned to a child's
perspective, this features episodes with various barnyard creatures, a climactic
encounter with a fox, and a sad parting that entails one happy aspect-successful
treasure-hunting-which children will relish. A touch stereotyped ("A pipe and a
nice drop, and you have a happy lep"), and missing King-Smith's idiosyncratic
dash, this nevertheless makes cozy holiday reading. Occasional pen-and-ink
hatch drawings vary the format and hold special appeal for fans of the currently
marketed, rubbery troll toys that O'Reilly so strongly resembles ... in his own
green-skinned, red-haired way. BH
Kleitsch, Christel. Cousin Markie and Other Disasters; illus. by Paul Meisel.
Dutton, 1992. ISBN 0-525-44891-8. [96p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Scratchy cartoonish ink drawings illustrate a rather
patterned but pleasantly humorous story for independent readers in the primary
grades. Ben, who considers his cousin Markie a weird character, is not enthralled
when he hears his mother speaking on the telephone. "Sure, we'd be glad to
have Markie for the weekend. I know Ben would-" His younger cousin, pesty
and precocious? The outcome is predictable: Some getting into trouble, some
achievements on Markie's part, some too-cute scenes with Ben's baby sister.
Italicized passages of Ben's daydreams interrupt rather than link or reinforce the
sporadic action of the plot, and the characterization is barely rounded, but readers
will probably enjoy the humor and action of the author's first book. ZS
C.U. Reading, easy
Kline, Suzy. Mary Marony and the Snake; illus. by Blanche Sims. Putnam,
1992. ISBN 0-399-22044-5. 64p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-3. 
Mary Marony is not happy about starting second
grade in a new school, and the reason becomes apparent when the teacher calls on
each pupil to "stand up, say your name, and tell us one thing about yourself."
Mary stutters out her name and her favorite subject, "muh-muh-math": "Why did
one of her favorite things have to be an M word?" Inevitably, there is a class
pest who picks on Mary's stutter; it is also predictable (but satisfying) that Mary
gets revenge, makes friends, starts speech therapy, and saves the day when a
garter snake escapes from the terrarium. You-are-here classroom dramas have
great appeal for those just mastering reading, and any child who's been teased
[266 ]
(that is, any child) will enjoy Mary's triumph. Kline's style is easy and
conversational; Sim's pencil illustrations show both humor and empathy. RS
C.U. Reading easy
D.V. School, adjustment to
Krasilovsky, Phyllis. The Man Who Was Too Lazy to Fix Things; illus. by
John Emil Cymerman. Tambourine, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10395-2;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10394-4. 32p. Library ed. $14.93; Trade ed. $15.00.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
In a story that should appeal to the young audience's
taste for disaster humor, Krasilovsky introduces a young bachelor who prefers
rocking and reading to repairing his property and possessions the hard way. As
the pictures (bright, breezy, cluttered, exaggerated) show, everything is done in
slapdash fashion: cardboard instead of a new pane when a window breaks, gum
instead of cement to patch a sidewalk, shoe polish instead of paint to cover a
scratch in a door. When his family comes to visit, he directs-but does not take
part in-a full-scale rehabilitation program. The running gag is stretched, and
while the situation has humor, it has little plot development and ends with the
man being given a birthday cake in the form of a house . . . which his cat
immediately knocks over and ruins. ZS
Kuskin, Karla. Soap Soup; written and illus. by Karla Kuskin. HarperCollins,
1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023572-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023571-3. 64p.
(I Can Read Books). Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $13.00.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
With a slightly more advanced reading level than her
previous Something Sleeping in the Hall (BCCB 11/85), Kuskin's new
collection of I Can Read poetry, at its best, uses short words and simple
reversals that are both surprising and fun to read aloud. "In winter there is too
much ice./ In summer/ ice is very nice." While some of the selections are a
little bland ("Isn't it queer/ that an ear/ can hear?") others have a deceptive naivete
that recalls Stevie Smith ("I am very fond of you/ but/ I get tired of you too").
The many watercolor illustrations are closely cued to the poems, giving a
figurative expression to the verbal imagery that will be helpful to beginning
readers (as well as often spooky-funny in their own right-"There is a me inside
of me," for example). With most rhymes providing some version of a poetic
punchline at the end, struggling decoders will quickly learn that reading provides
its own rewards. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Laird, Elizabeth. Kiss the Dust. Dutton, 1992. ISBN 0-525-44893-4. 281p.
$15.00.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
In this exciting, behind-the-headlines story, Tara and
her family are Kurds living in the Iraqi city of Sulaimaniya. It's 1984, and Iraq
is engaged in war with Iran while at the same time battling Kurdish insurgency.
As Tara's father's involvement with the pesh murga (Kurdish fighters) becomes
apparent to the government, the family is forced to leave their comfortable life in
the city and go to the Kurdish-controlled mountains, the first step in a long
journey to safety. Excepting an occasionally romanticized note, the novel easily
incorporates cultural and political details within the fiction, and dots of everyday
realism, often provided by Tara's baby sister Hero, balance the drama. Fast-
[267 ]
paced and easy to read, the story has a number of booktalkable episodes, such as
the scene where Tara's family crosses a treacherous mountain range to reach the
(relative) safety of Iran. The author's brief afterword describes the terrible recent
history of the Kurds; the novel itself charges the facts with human interest. RS
C.U. Social studies
Lankford, Mary D. Hopscotch Around the World; illus. by Karen Milone.
Morrow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08420-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08419-
2. 48p. Library ed. $14.93; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Librarians couldn't ask for a more multicultural
approach than Lankford has featured in her survey of a pastime as popular with
the ancient Romans as it is with contemporary Texans. 
After a brief
introduction to the game's surprising history, the text comprises nineteen double
spreads that are each dedicated to the description and instructions for a variant of
the game, with a diagram and children depicted playing it. The organization is
alphabetical, including Aruba, Bolivia, Czechoslovakia, El Salvador, France,
Germany, Great Britain, Honduras, India, Italy, Nigeria, People's Republic of
China, Poland, Trinidad, USSR, and U. S. (Alaskan, Potsy, Texan). Milone's
friendly watercolors start with a map and proceed to scenes that suggest landscape
settings for the game as well as ethnic diversity among the players. An
annotated bibliography attests to the meticulous research supporting this playful
piece of folklore, which will give children a jump (sorry) on their playground
peers. BH
C.U. Recreation
Lawson, Amy. Star Baby; illus. by Margot Apple. Yolen/Harcourt, 1992.
ISBN 0-15-200905-1. 69p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Although the story's central premise involves a baby
who falls from the stars in response to a wish, more of a miracle is the fact that
such a whimsical conceit is developed without recourse to fey sentimentality.
Allie, turning "nine on the ninth day of the ninth month," wishes on a falling
star, per her grandfather's advice, for a baby sister. The star turns into a
bouncing baby, lighter than air, whom the family names Sammy (alas, it's a
boy) and of whom Allie quickly becomes jealous. While the tone is breezily
charming, ballast is added by Allie's grumpiness, and by her father's tart
bemusement: "We are not keeping this-this-little chunk of matter that fell
through the earth's atmosphere." Allie's friends, too, are a realistic lot whose
fascination with the Star Baby overwhelms their appreciation of Allie's birthday
party. "Hilary ran into the house screaming, 'Where is he?' at the top of her
lungs. Hilary never screamed or shouted. She was quiet and shy. We always
made her play the dead person when we put on plays." Pencil-and-charcoal
illustrations have a rounded retro flavor that enhances the flaky-fable tone. This
may be a little too cute for some people, but those who can manage it without
winking will find the book an offbeat selection for reading aloud. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Baby, adjustment to
[268 ]
Lewis, J. Patrick. The Moonbow of Mr. B. Bones; illus. by Dirk Zimmer.
Knopf, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-95365-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-85365-2.
32p. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
The old man who drives his mule-drawn wagon into
The Gap every Indian summer sells, along with practical odds and ends, "magic
jars with mysterious labels-Sundrops, Snowrays, Moonbows, Rainflakes, and
Whistling Wind." The village kids treasure these until a newcomer pries one
open and declares that there's nothing inside. "Maybe you got a bad jar," says
Mr. Bones, but the audience is disillusioned. Only after Mr. B. empties his last
jar of moonbows into the creek does a curve of eerie light arch over the
mountain waterfall and make believers of them all. A brief note explains that
"the moonbow is an actual natural phenomenon that appears under certain
weather conditions at Cumberland Falls, Kentucky," but Lewis has made a good
story of it. Zimmer reinforces the legendary tone with a rustic setting and
homespun characters; sharp pen-and-ink hatch patterns the lush-green watercolor
illustrations, their pictorial frames ingeniously varied with insets and overlays.
Even story-hour skeptics may fall for this one. BH
Lindbergh, Anne. Three Lives to Live. Little, 1992. ISBN 0-316-52628-2.
183p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
While the title is a play on soaps, this book is a
suds-free realistic fantasy, distant kin to Freaky Friday. Garet writes the story as
an assigned autobiography for her seventh-grade English class, but although her
teacher may believe that her "troubles began in July, when I got my twin sister,
Daisy," no one will believe that Daisy appeared suddenly out of nowhere. Daisy
actually came down the laundry chute, whose slogan exhorts "Be fifty years
ahead of your time"-which is what Daisy is. In fact, the maddeningly prissy
and manipulative Daisy seems to be Garet's grandmother at the age of twelve,
which makes things rather awkward since Garet's sole surviving relative, with
whom she lives, is the same grandmother at sixty-two; as if that revelation
weren't enough, it becomes clear that Garet herself is another version of her
"grandmother," who had been pushed down the laundry chute at the age of two.
This takes a different slant than time travel stories usually do: the girls aren't
supposed to go back to the old time. The humor is astringent and domestic, and
there's an offhand championing of environment and self-determination over
heredity that justifies the differences between the three "versions" of the same
person. 
The school-assignment framework is a bit mannered, but the
relationship between Garet and the enigmatic Daisy makes the book readable to
the light-hearted end; throughout, it's a funny and interestingly offbeat story.
DS
D.V. Grandmother-child relations; Self-acceptance; Sisters
Lyttle, Richard B. Ernest Hemingway: The Life and the Legend. Atheneum,
1992. ISBN 0-689-31670-4. 212p. illus. with photographs. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Ernest Hemingway may have yielded his hero status
to more contemporary figures, but there will be Hemingway assignments and
Hemingway followers for some time; this biography will be a useful resource
for both fans and report writers. The author traces Hemingway's turbulent life,
[269 ]
including his journalistic work in and outside of wars, his four marriages, and
his writing. Lyttle keeps a particularly close eye on the variance between the
life and the legend, noting Hemingway's alteration of the facts in aid of his
"tough guy" image, although the absence of notes leaves readers to wonder
whether even more fabrication slipped by unnoticed. There's not much analysis
of the Nobel prize-winner's relationships or even much description of his
writing, so the book is a chronicle of his life rather than a portrait of his
character, but it's a competent and readable chronicle nonetheless. Numerous
black-and-white photographs, bibliography and an index are included. DS
C.U. American literature
Mahy, Margaret. The Girl with the Green Ear: Stories about Magic in Nature;
illus. by Shirley Hughes. Knopf, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-92231-8;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-82231-3. 10 0p. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
This collection of nine short stories (culled from four
of Mahy's previous collections) finds the author in a mixed mode, agreeably
companioning the goofy zest of her fiction for younger children with the
lyricism of novels such as The Changeover. Some of the tales-involving
nature spirits, talking plants, a baby dragon-are pure fantasy; others, such as
the one about a little boy who makes a mud pudding for a tree, are cozily
realistic. "The Good Wizard of the Forest" is a gentle, Oscar Wilde-ish blending
of the natural and magical worlds, a theme Mahy pursues throughout all the
stories. While an arch note pipes up here and there, the collection provides
funny dialogue, luscious descriptions (matched by Hughes' ink sketches), a
generous ecological lesson, and fair evidence of Mahy's abundant imagination.
RS
D.V. Ecological awareness
McFall, Christie. America Underground. Cobblehill, 1992. ISBN 0-525-
65079-2. 80p. illus. and with photographs. $14.00.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
From grubs and caverns to tunnels and pipelines, the
subterranean world is a very active one. In his slim volume, McFall wastes no
words while describing underground phenomena--both natural and man-made.
Interesting facts about mining, the water table, geysers, and places where the
U.S. government keeps its oil reserve are included. Although there are ample
black-and-white photographs, drawings, and maps, no depths are given for
underground objects, nor is there a cut-away illustration of subterranean layers to
explain visually how everything fits below the surface. McFall's terse style
becomes deficient when he devotes only two pages to hazardous and nuclear
waste and dismisses those issues with the concluding sentence: "The completion
of this task [getting rid of waste] will have to be carried out by future
generations." Despite its flaws, America Underground is a competent survey of
a deep subject. KJ
C.U. Science
McKissack, Patricia C. A Million Fish . .. More or Less; illus. by Dena
Schutzer. Knopf, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90692-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
679-80692-X. 32p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.00.
[ 270 ]
R 
5-8 yrs. 
The clue here is purple alligators and mauve fish, and
the tone is tall: in Bayou Capateaux, say the two fishermen to young Hugh
Thomas, they once caught a wild turkey weighing five hundred pounds, were
chased by a cottonmouth with legs, fought off an attack by giant mosquitoes,
and found a Spanish lantern from 1542-still burning. But that's nothing like
what happens to Hugh after the two men leave. If listeners don't quite believe
the million fish that Hugh catches, and the fate of all but three, they'll be all the
wiser to yarns and how to spin them. The play between fantasy and reality is
neatly handled, with action following exaggeration in an ambiguous way that
leaves the ending open as to who's telling the truth and who believes what. The
African-American characters and swamp setting swirl across the pages in thick,
rounded strokes of brazen-hued paint, well-matched with the story's brassy flash.
BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Medearis, Angela Shelf, ad. The Zebra-Riding Cowboy: A Folk Song from the
Old West; illus. by Maria Cristina Brusca. Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-8050-1712-7.
32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Illustrator Brusca gives the Old West a historically
appropriate multicultural tilt here, picturing the cowboys as a mixed bag of
whites, Hispanics, and African Americans. The "educated greenhorn" who tames
the fabled Zebra Dun is black; the horse itself is striped and bronzy-yellow.
Medearis's adaptation of the cowboy lyric is sometimes thumpy but has a
Western twang, and the music is provided on the endpapers (although you might
have some trouble matching all the syllables to the given notes). The tone is
broad but pointed by Brusca's watercolor illustrations, which are spiky and
kinetic, colored with an unlikely light that adds to the fabulated flavor. A
historical note is appended, and while the adaptor states that she found the song
in a "book of cowboy songs," she doesn't supply the title. RS
C.U. Music; The West
Merriam, Eve. Fighting Words; illus. by David Small. Morrow, 1992.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09677-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09676-X. 32p. Library
ed. $14.93; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse have
nothing on Dale, on the farm, and Leda, in the city. "They really hate each
other." These two kids envy just about everything about each other, so they
meet one day for a fight. "Leda goes first. OAF." The battle revs up quickly
("DIMWIT, KLUTZ"), with Small's shifting, delightfully surreal landscapes
providing the fighting ground, as well as grounding for the metaphors.
Shoulder-deep in a river, for example, the two exchange appropriately aquatic
epithets: "Dale flounders. FLUKE. Leda fishes around for a retort. SMELT."
And in the end the two, exhausted, shake hands and agree to "meet halfway again
soon." The elegantly lined watercolors are a crisp complement to this wacky
vocabulary lesson, which shouts for audience participation. RS
C.U. Language arts
D.V. Urban-rural contrasts
[271]
Namioka, Lensey. Yang the Youngest and His Terrible Ear; illus. by Kees de
Kiefte. 
Joy Street/Little, 1992. 
ISBN 0-316-59701-5. 
[136p]. 
$13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
With his family recently emigrated from Shanghai to
Seattle, Yang's father thinks his children could be (should be) a first-class string
quartet. While Eldest Brother (first violin), Second Sister (viola), and Third
Sister ('cello) love music, Yingtao, the youngest, is tone deaf and his playing of
the second violin part clearly demonstrates the fact. Too bad his father doesn't
approve of baseball-that's where Yingtao's true talent lies. His best friend
Matthew's father is a baseball coach . . . but Matthew prefers the violin.
Although a bit too patterned, this story of of mix-matched family expectations
and the powers of best-friendship has a lively first-person perspective on being
the new kid in a new culture. Yingtao learns not to stand when a teacher enters
the room (alas); Matthew learns to use chopsticks. While many of the cultural
exchanges are on a fairly superficial level, the book has a sobering side, deftly
introducing the racism Yingtao's mother faces at the supermarket, the repeated
failure of Matthew's father to remember Yingtao's name, and the tight situation
Matthew's family is facing since his father has been laid off. The general tone is
light, though, and the reading easy. RS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
O'Callahan, Jay. Tulips; illus. by Debrah Santini. Picture Book Studio, 1992.
ISBN 0-88708-223-8. 26p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
"In the whole world, Grand Ma Mere loved two
things best: Pierre, and her wonderful tulips. ... As for Pierre ... well, Pierre
loved to play tricks." Set in a magnificent Paris mansion, this is an arch-
sophisticated trickster tale in which young Pierre, despite the family's wealthy
breeding, pursues a boys-will-be-boys course of obnoxious, non-stop practical
jokes. It's not till he tries to fool proper-looking Grand Ma Mere with a black
tulip amidst her beds of red that he meets his match and gets a grand
comeuppance from all the servants he has plagued each summer. Veteran
storyteller O'Callahan knows his trade, and Santini capitalizes on fashionable
1920s attire with chic pen lines and elegantly modulated watercolors. Both
paintings and text are haute style, but young listeners will relish Pierre's
brattiness and relate, despite the upstairs-upstairs atmosphere, to a finale in
which love is tempered with mutual respect between mischief-maker and peace-
maker. BH
D.V. Grandmother-child relations
Oughton, Jerrie. How the Stars Fell into the Sky: A Navajo Legend; illus. by
Lisa Desimini. Houghton, 1992. ISBN 0-395-58798-0. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A more abstract story than Rodanas' Zuni tale,
reviewed below, this Navajo myth describes First Woman's attempt to write
laws by carefully patterning stars in the sky. Coyote comes along and offers to
help but then, impatient to be finished, throws all the stars up at once, resulting
in the chaos and confusion with which we must live. The adaptation is spare,
with details shorn away for a primal effect. A note attributes the legend to a
turn-of-the-century medicine man, Hosteen Klah, though no textual source is
given for purposes of comparison. (Is the first phrase-"When the pulse of first
[ 272 ]
day carried it to the rim of night"-a ritualistic opening or contemporary poetic
fancy?) 
Desimini's paintings maintain a surrealistic distance, with simply
focused compositions, dark colors, and smoothly sculpted shapes. Combined,
the artistic and narrative images make a striking introduction to the constellation
of Native American creation myths. BH
Parker, Nancy Winslow. Working Frog; written and illus. by Nancy Winslow
Parker. Greenwillow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09919-X; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-09918-1. 40p. Library ed. $13.93; Trade ed. $14.00.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
A frog named Winston narrates his history, beginning
with his capture from a pond to his life at the zoo. The dry text, written for
early readers, presents Winston's story seriously. The cartoon-like illustrations
display a wit that the text does not-a zookeeper hops high into the air to throw
a net over Winston, Winston tries to impress a scientist with the length of his
legs, a dejected Winston slumps in the holding tank, and Winston gnaws on a
cigar-shaped worm. The narrative could serve as zoo propaganda, since Winston
gradually comes to accept his role as a zoo-display as though he is fulfilling his
civic duty ("Winston-Working Frog"). He contents himself by watching the
"new faces, new hats, new coats" and is proud that he has "not missed one day of
work." This book contains a lot of information about bullfrogs and zoos, mixed
in with an undeniable lesson of conformity. KJ
C.U. Nature study
Pearson, Kit. Looking at the Moon. Viking, 1992. ISBN 0-670-84097-1.
212p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8 
In a sequel to The Sky Is Falling (BCCB 6/90)
Pearson continues the story of Norah-now thirteen-and her younger brother
Gavin, who have become thoroughly at home after three years as "war guests" of
a large, extended Canadian family. They cannot go back to England until the
war is over (it's now 1943) and life with the Ogilvies seems more real than
England, anyway. This is the story of an island summer and of Norah's
romantic love for one of the older cousins, Andrew. Andrew is being pressured
by his patriotic family to enlist while the fighting still goes on-but he confides
in Norah his misery at the prospect of killing someone. As she does with other
facets of the story, Pearson keeps the concept of pacifism in perspective; like
Norah's adoration, it is treated with dignity but never overwhelms the narrative
flow. This balanced and perceptive approach also governs the characterization;
the story is a worthy successor to the winner of the Canadian Library
Association's Book of the Year Award for Children. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Brothers-sisters
Pilkey, Day. Dragon's Fat Cat: Dragon's Fourth Tale; written and illus. by
Dav Pilkey. Jackson/Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08582-1; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-531-05982-0. 48p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Dragon (blue and bulbous) finds Cat (fat, gray and
frozen) in his snowy yard one day, and a friendship-among other things-is
born. Dragon tries to take good care of Cat, and even his mistakes stem from
affection; feeding Cat ice cream and catsup, for example. Pilkey's text is simple
and straight-ahead; most of the humor is delivered visually in the luridly colored,
[273 ]
loony but loving illustrations. Both Dragon's tender stewardship and his
mistakes (trying to put Cat on the toilet!) are childlike; kids will want to take
both creatures home with them. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Pets, care of
Pomerantz, Charlotte. Serena Katz; illus. by R. W. Alley. Macmillan, 1992.
ISBN 0-02-774901-0. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
The father of the Duncan family had talked to Serena
Katz on the telephone (she was one of his best customers for housepaint) but had
not met her until she invited them to visit her in New York City. 
In an
amicably improbable story, the Duncans hear Mitty-like hero tales about Serena:
one says she's a great pool player, another neighbor of the Duncan clan
recognizes the name as a famous motorcyclist, a third wonders if it's the same
Serena Katz who is a great magician. The visit is made, the friendship is sealed,
and Serena promises to come to Elmsville to visit in turn-and she does, deftly
landing her hot air balloon in the Duncans' yard. The youngest set will enjoy
the exaggeration, the nonsense, and the action in the story of a bespectacled,
hair-in-a-bun living legend, brought to life with lightly-hatched watercolor
cartoons. ZS
Porte, Barbara Ann. Taxicab Tales; illus. by Yossi Abolafia. Greenwillow,
1992. ISBN 0-688-09908-4. 56p. $13.00.
R 
Gr.2-4. 
Ten friendly stories about the Rabinowitz family
feature Abigail, the narrator; Sam, her brother; Dad, a cab driver; Mom, an ex-
cab driver turned painter; and their small dog Benton, "brave and well behaved."
Except for Benton, this is a conversational family, with Abigail retelling tales
their father has narrated about his fares-a famous actress, a wealthy boy taking
his goose to show-and-tell, a television producer who uses the children in a
show, a little girl on her way "to get chicken pox," a man masquerading with a
donkey head. Mom spins pretty good yams, too, and both kids seem to have
inherited the talent. Porte's own storytelling is varied and inventive; if there's
any weakness, it's in the occasional anticlimactic ending ("Chicken Pox," Parts I
and II, for instance). Overall, though, the humorous tone and easy text project
the same warm quality that has attracted beginning readers to her Harry series.
Abolafia's black-and-white cartoons have a tongue-in-cheek dash that polishes
many a verbal scenario with comic visual effects. BH
Porter, A. P. Zina Garrison: Ace. Lerner, 1992. ISBN 0-8225-0499-5. [6 4p.]
illus. with photographs. (The Achievers). $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 4-7. 
Although this sports bio of an important African
American tennis pro begins with a teasing, "can-she-do-it?" chapter about
Garrison's 1990 Wimbledon Final against all-time champ Martina Navratilova,
it's not until the last chapter that we learn, barely, that Garrison lost the match.
There's lots of hype here, lots of sports page prose, but curiously little
information about the game of tennis itself or Garrison's style of play, which is
simply described as "fast." The sports history is weak as well: while Althea
Gibson is twice pictured, she's never mentioned in the text; and while the book
correctly states that the United States Tennis Association did not admit black
[274 ]
players, it does not state that, much less when, this policy changed. The book
is better on Garrison's personal life, her bulimia, struggles with her mother's
death, playing temperament, and claim to powers of clairvoyance. There are no
sources or index; photos are carelessly placed but include some good action
shots. RS
C.U. Physical education
Powell, Randy. Is Kissing a Girl Who Smokes Like Licking an Ashtray?
Farrar, 1992. ISBN 0-374-33632-6. [192p]. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
The question of the title is given a lovely coup de
grace on the last page; in between is a funny and tender tale of an unlikely
friendship. Biff, eighteen, is a slightly nerdy pinball fan whose best friend is a
ninth-grader and who has never had a date; Heidi is a tough-talking fourteen-year-
old who meets Biff while visiting her aunt, Biff's big sister's best friend. Heidi
pushes Biff around, making him drive her to the store and buy her cigarettes;
blithely, she also apparently informs the beautiful Tommie that Biff has a secret
crush on her. And he does-so why is this obnoxious Heidi making his life so
pleasantly complicated? As in many YA novels, the adults here are ineffectually
ephemeral, leaving Biff and Heidi plenty of room to sort things out for
themselves. Fans of Ron Koertge (The Arizona Kid, etc.) will feel at home with
this pair, whose sparring is innocent, exasperating, and ultimately rewarded with
the promise of romance. RS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Poynter, Margaret. 
The Uncertain Journey: Stories of Illegal Aliens in El
Norte. 
Atheneum, 1992. 
ISBN 0-689-31623-2. 
163p. 
illus. with
photographs. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
El Norte is the United States, and as Poynter states in
her introduction to these twelve personal narratives of illegal immigrants, "El
Norte represents their only hope of survival. They must work or their families
will starve." What Poynter does not say, nor is it indicated in any of the case
histories, is that many immigrants come and they and their families starve
anyway. Each of the chapters is a success story, sometimes a qualified one,
ending with a where-are-they-now postscript: "Despite the fact that each man is
sending $150 a month to his family in Guatemala, business is so good that they
have saved almost enough money to buy another truck and set up shop at
another street corner." There's a bleaker story at the core of the problem of
illegal immigration, but Poynter has not gotten at it. This is not to say that she
scants hard facts: all of the people profiled here (mostly from Mexico and
Central America, two from the Caribbean) had difficult, dangerous journeys, and
many have been sent back to their countries, only to return again. While in its
entirety the book gets repetitive, the individual escape stories are authentically
sad and scary, and some have the suspense of adventure fiction. They could be
fiction:-although there are photos of some of the subjects, Poynter does not
indicate where or how she got her material (and one reference to immigrants
working in "the stockyards of Chicago" is out-of-date; there are no stockyards in
Chicago). Like Brent Ashabranner's The New Americans: Changing Patters in
U.S. Immigration and Into a Strange Land (BCCB 9/87), however, this is a
personalizing perspective on an important dilemma. RS
C.U. Social studies
[ 275 ]
Rendal, Justine. A Child of Their Own. Viking, 1992. ISBN 0-670-84418-7.
[96p]. $13.00. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
The Darlings, "(for that is what everyone called them,
and so they thought it was their proper name)," are a family of dolls who live in
a posh London toy shop, and Mrs. Darling's greatest fear is that they will be
bought by a Serious Collector. "'Serious Collector' did not sound like someone
who would truly play with them. For dolls cannot truly come alive, cannot
have adventures or birthday parties or a cosy evening meal round the dining table
unless a child plays with them." The absence of a child, however, does nothing
to keep the little Darlings from enjoying these very things, and the book
consistently suffers from an inconsistent fantasy matrix. In any event, the
family is purchased by what appears to be a Serious Collector whom the dolls
call The American Lady (and nickname "Tally") and taken to America where they
undergo a series of small dramas that will be familiar to genre fans. Aside from
some talk among the dolls that sounds suspiciously like recovery jargon
("Emma, Emma, my dear, remember that each of us has his own needs and you
do not control everything") the story has a dated, sentimental tone that is not
helped by a surfeit of author asides ("And now you probably think this is the
happy ending. But if you've been looking at this book carefully, you'll know
there are more pages and the story isn't finished at all"). The closing revelation
that the American Lady is actually the author would be self-congratulatory if
only one could figure out for what. RS
Robertson, Claire. Letters of a Lovesick Teenager. Hutchinson/Trafalgar
Square, 1992. ISBN 0-09-174149-1. 184p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Possibly because A-the author doesn't try to be too
cute or too funny, B-there's a good balance of other aspects of Gilly's life, and
C-the voice (and angst and self-preoccupation) seems truly that of a young
teenager, this story sustains interest despite the strictures of the format. Gilly is
thirteen (later fourteen) and suffering a familiar gamut of woes: the inadequacies
of her appearance, the hostility of an older sister, the temporary rift in a best-
friendship, the worry about Mum and Dad sparring, and of course the agony and
ecstasy of being smitten by the class dreamboat who is dating the class siren.
The letters are written to the editor of an advice column, and although this is set
in England, it speaks for and to adolescents anywhere. ZS
D.V. Self-confidence
Rodanas, Kristina, ad. Dragonfly's Tale; ad. and illus. by Kristina Rodanas.
Clarion, 1992. ISBN 0-395-57003-4. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A tale prominent in Zuni lore is here adapted to
picture book format with large-scale illustrations in desert-warm hues. The
message is unobtrusive, yet applicable to our own time through a story
smoothly told. The ancient Ashiwi people are so blessed with corn harvests that
they show off their wealth with a mock battle, throwing bread and dough as
weapons. After the godly Corn Maidens, disguised as beggars, witness this
travesty and are turned away by all but two children who offer them food, they
punish the people with a drought. It is a toy dragonfly that one of the children
fashions from corn leaves that intercedes with the Corn Maidens on behalf of the
starving children. Literal pictures have the textured effect of pastel and colored
[276 ]
pencil, with costumes and landscapes drawn in careful detail. The art has a
studied quality that is occasionally stiff but more often statuesque, as in the
scene of the villagers' trek against a bleak background of snow-covered mesas.
A source note introduces the tale, which will enrich primary-grade discussions of
Native American cultures and make an unusual yet natural selection for special
occasions such as a library's Thanksgiving story hour session. BH
C.U. Storytelling
Sargent, Sarah. Jerry's Ghosts and the Mystery of the Blind Tower. Bradbury,
1992. ISBN 0-02-778035-X. 131p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Jerry's mom leaves him for a few months with his
grandmother in small East Bent, Wisconsin. Maybe because he's new, lonely,
or destined to become their friend, Jerry is the only person to see the "ghosts"
who inhabit the windowless tower in the local museum. Mattie and her little
brother, Edward, aren't traditional ghosts-their bodies were destroyed over a
hundred years ago in their uncle's electrical laboratory, but their insubstantial life
forces remain. Ever since the children's accident, the evil uncle has kept his life
in his body with electricity, but now he's searching for a new body to occupy.
Jerry is the intended victim. This spooky story has a great set-up, but it doesn't
live up to its potential. Jerry and the uncle never even see each other, much less
have the expected confrontation in the laboratory. There is too much time spent
on Jerry and Mattie's frustrated romance and not enough on action, or even on
any other character's reactions to Jerry's unusual behavior. Nevertheless, the
ghost story is effective because of Jerry's averageness-readers will identify with
him easily and start looking around for their own ghost friends. KJ
Savage, Deborah. A Stranger Calls Me Home. Houghton, 1992. ISBN 0-395-
59424-3. [240p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
"We are only guests on the land," says sixteen-year-
old Fiona in this story of three young people struggling to define their
relationship to the land, the past, and the Maori and white cultures of New
Zealand. Half-wild Fiona is white, but Maori-speaking and -identified, since her
traveling father leaves her under the eye of Maori friends in his almost constant
absence; Simon's biological father is Maori, and despite Simon's upbringing in
a white home and community he seeks a connection with his Maori origins;
Paul, Fiona's distant cousin, is a white New Zealander by birth but has only
reluctantly returned from his beloved American home. When Simon and Paul
travel in search of Simon's Maori father, they focus on the village where Fiona
lives, trains horses, and waits eagerly for the day when the property will pass to
her. Although she attempts to help Simon in his quest, she is distracted by her
attraction to both boys, disturbed by her own trouble with the past, and finally
devastated when her Maori "cousins" seek to lay tribal claim to the land she
hopes to inherit. Although the Maori are occasionally romanticized, the book is
both subtle and powerful, with an overlay of mysticism and sensuality that
keeps the atmosphere charged. Serious questions are raised about the sins of the
past ("That's your blood," says Simon about Fiona and Paul's common
ancestor, who appropriated land, including a tapu burial ground, from the
Maoris. "He passed that violation down to you") and the nature of belonging;
readers may find the portrait of Simon particularly thought-provoking as he
comes to grips with being a hated other in a white-dominated land. Readers who
[277 ]
found Savage's A Rumour of Otters (BCCB 10/86) rewarding will enjoy this
well-written and at times haunting story. DS
D.V. Pride in background and heritage
Scott, Virginia. Sylvia Stark: A Pioneer; by Victoria Scott and Ernest Jones;
illus. by Karen Lewis and with photographs. Open Hand Publishing, 1992.
Paper ed. ISBN 0-940880-38-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-940880-37-7. 64p. Paper ed.
$6.95; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Some family photographs and many black-and-white
drawings illustrate a biography in the publisher's "African American
Contributions" series. The life story of Sylvia Stark, born a slave in 1839, is
interesting not because of great deeds but because she and her family are a fine
example of the courage and stamina of those pioneers, white and black, who
followed the westward trails to begin a new life. After painstakingly purchasing
their freedom, the Starks left Missouri, first to Salt Lake City, then to
California, and at last to settle on a British Columbian island where their
descendants still live. The writing is choppy and has an uneven pace, but the
book is illustrative of the concept of history as a cumulation of the lives of
ordinary (if extraordinarily tenacious) people. Most of the material was obtained
from archives and interviews. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Service, Pamela F. Weirdos of the Universe, Unite! Karl/Atheneum, 1992.
ISBN 0-689-31746-8. 136p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
In her efforts to be different from the crowd, Mandy
starts a secret "WEIRD" club in which she's the only member. When Owen
moves to her small Iowa town from California, Mandy recruits him and they
become best friends. The day they go to the public library to begin an English
paper on mythology, a sudden storm knocks out all the power in the building
except for the computer terminal they're using for research. It speaks to them in
cryptic messages, and the next thing they know, Mandy and Owen find
themselves the most ordinary members of a team created to save the earth from
space aliens. The rest of the team are the mythological figures they were
researching in the library: Coyote, Siegfried, Dragon Princess, Baba Yaga, and
the Hored King. The enemy is a race of garbage-can-shaped beings who are
approaching earth in a huge ship. In this fantasy, the allegorical garbage is
eventually sent spinning back into space, but not before Siegfried and Dragon
Princess have chopped several of the oozy things in half. Like a comic book,
this plot has several superheroes but not the visual aids to help describe some
otherwise unexplained scenes, such as exactly how Baba Yaga travels in her
mortar and pestle. The story is too crowded with legendary characters to sort
out, unless you're already a fan of mythology. If you are, pick this up to see
how Baba Yaga has adjusted to the twentieth century, and Siegfried has not. KJ
Skinner, David. You Must Kiss a Whale. Simon, 1992. ISBN 0-671-74781-9.
94p. $14.00.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
A vague, determinedly offbeat story about a girl and
her little brother who live with their inventor mother in an abandoned house in
the desert encloses an equally quirky, unfinished short story written by the
[278 ]
children's missing father. Evelyn's mother has taken the children to the desert
so that she can study its cyclical storms and design the Ultimate Raincoat. The
interior manuscript concerns a little boy who receives a letter that only says,
"You must kiss a whale." Or does it say, you must kill a whale? This question
is not as compelling as Skinner would apparently like it to be, and the book as a
whole has a pretentious postmodernish aura that would be more at home in an
adult literary magazine than it is in a book for children. Despite the presence of
two stories, this book doesn't really have a plot, or even much in the way of
characters; instead, it's an uncompelling picture of a thematic landscape, filled
with portents and purpose, but emptied of anything that would connect us to
them. What the book does have is a clean, transparent style that promises well
for a more focused effort. RS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Smith, William Jay. Behind the King's Kitchen: A Roster of Rhyming
Riddles; by William Jay Smith and Carol Ra; illus. by Jacques Hnizdovsky.
Wordsong/Boyds Mills, 1992. ISBN 1-56397-024-4. 56p. $19.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Like Smith's Birds and Beasts (BCCB 3/91), this
book is elegantly decorated with the woodcuts of Ukrainian artist Jacques
Hnizdovsky, who died in 1985. The text here, however, comprises poetic
riddles, both folk and literary. Arranged into lyrically titled sections that include
riddles about the sky and weather, plants, animals, tools and equipment,
household items, bodies, and a concluding miscellaneous assortment, the
collection offers wide variety in subject and range of difficulty. Each riddle is
followed by the answer in italics and is footnoted if there's an author; sources are
included in the acknowledgments. Along with traditional riddles are skillfully
composed ones by the two editors and by a number of other authors, from
Symphosius and the Bishop of Sherborne to J. R. R. Tolkien and Richard
Wilbur. Perhaps William Jay Smith's personal best is the last: "It leads you a
chase through a tangle of words/ And gives but the bones when you look for the
birds." (Are you stumped? The answer is Riddle.) Rhyme and wordplay cast
these into a genre all their own, one that can combine popular appeal with
critical attention in language arts programs, or simply yield some fun for friends'
and family sharing. BH
C.U. Language arts
Smothers, Ethel Footman. Down in the Piney Woods. Knopf, 1992. Library
ed. ISBN 0-679-90360-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80360-2. 152p. Library ed.
$14.99; Trade ed. $14.00.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Well contented with her family, ten-year-old Annie
Rye deeply resents the three stepsisters whom her mother suddenly incorporates
into the household. Although this is the central conflict in the book, a number
of chapters instead focus on dramatic action, including a brother's near-fatal
illness, a sudden plague of snakes, runaway hogs, a cross burning and violent
racial confrontation, a rescue from a well, and a major baseball game for which
Annie Rye's father must have a uniform the family cannot afford. All these
events may have taken place-Smothers' first novel is autobiographical-but
they are crowded together into episodes that are simply too much to develop in
one short novel. The heavy dialect ("Brat done stuck up for me. She sho nuff
did") will have its champions as well as its detractors: on the one hand, it
[279 ]
represents authentic spoken record; on the other, it may summon stereotypical
images and deter less confident readers. The rural Georgia setting of the 1950s is
capably established in this first novel, as are the character dynamics of the
principal cast. BH
D.V. Stepfamilies, adjustment to
Southey, Robert. The Cataract of Lodore; illus. by David Catrow. Holt, 1992.
ISBN 0-8050-1945-6. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Yes, this is another picture book version of
Southey's aqueous poem; although it will inevitably be compared to the one
illustrated by Mordicai Gerstein (BCCB 11/91), with which it has some
similarities, it's an engaging romp in its own right. Here Papa Southey sits
firmly in his armchair, feet on hassock, informing his children "how the water/
Comes down at Lodore" while remaining oblivious to the cataract rushing
through his house (a portrait-the Duke of Wellington?-looks down in
dismay). Our diligent hero does not notice, despite his children's gestures, that
his chair, hassock and end table (complete with lamp) have been swept up in the
flood and are now carrying the family apace through the rapids. Although a bird
begins to nest in his lamp, and the children's hair and the dog's wiry ears are
streaming like banners from the velocity, nothing, neither precipitous drop nor
the passage of salmon in the other direction, will divert the poet from his
explanation. The humor here is broader than in Gerstein's version, particularly
the valiant efforts of the family mutt to guard the nest of eggs from harm, and
the closeups of Dad unperturbed in rolling waters that seem destined to douse
him, his offspring, and his really ugly orange plaid chair. The repetitive parts of
the text are left en bloc, possibly the better to speed through; the pen and
watercolor Constable landscapes and realistically depicted fish and birds blend
companionably with the more outrageous images of pets and family. Kids will
love the approach and the extraneous jokes-be sure to point out the now-
hatched eggs illustrated on the back flap. Don't think of it as a choice between
this version and Gerstein's, both topflight picture books; think of it as a chance
at two effervescent waterfalls in a genre full of mere dribbles. DS
C.U. Reading aloud
Stevens, Kathleen. Eddie's Luck. Atheneum, 1992. ISBN 0-689-31682-8.
169p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Eddie's luck is always bad, according to Eddie. His
parents and teachers think most of Eddie's misfortunes are caused by the fact that
he plunges ahead before he stops to think. Eddie just blunders along-
accidentally siphoning out a school fish tank, rushing down a blocked-off
stairway during a fire drill, climbing on top of the gym lockers to rescue a
frisbee. His funniest mistake is when he doesn't listen to his medieval history
assignment and reports on "A Day in the Life of Fred, the Pheasant," complete
with a stuffed bird as a visual aid. Eddie means well, he just always does the
wrong thing. But he finds he has to start using his head when his grandfather,
Pop, gets out of the hospital and comes to recuperate with Eddie's family. Pop
helps Eddie both out of a tight spot and into some big trouble by including him
in a scheme to get Pop back to his own house. Stevens avoids heavy-handed
morals-if Eddie learns any lessons during Pop's stay he'll realize it later, like a
[ 280 ]
normal kid. Although the ending is a little weak, the family interactions are
always natural: "An eleven-year-old comedian. Or is eleven your IQ?" KJ
D.V. Grandfather-child relations
Strauss, Gwen. The Night Shimmy; illus. by Anthony Browne. Knopf, 1992.
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-92384-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-82384-0. 32p. Library
ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $15.00.
R* 
4-8 yrs. 
Admirers of Anthony Browne have learned to look
carefully in the corers of his pictures, and Gwen Strauss' readers know to read
between her lines (Trail of Stones, BCCB 4/90). Here is a picture book about
the recovery of Eric, who "did not like to talk." His alter ego, the Night
Shimmy, takes care of his emotional needs, including the dispersal of bad dreams
(which involve lizards) and companionship in games of spy. A girl in the park
changes all that, offering the quiet companionship of flying a kite shaped like
that verbal bird, the parrot. The Night Shimmy resists Marcia at first, but Eric
manages to reconcile his old and new selves in the end, when Marcia and Eric
make "silent wishes" and say goodnight. This could have been a case study, but
it is instead a series of spare, mysterious images that will capture children's
imaginations in much the same way as Sendak's work does. In fact, Mickey in
the Night Kitchen appears on the back cover of Eric's bedtime book. The black
frames around each picture give way at the end to open sky and a clear promise
of light (and flight). The art itself includes a stunning variety of Browne's
characteristic pattern-changing wallpaper, portraits that alter expression as they
watch the characters, a symbolic scene of Marcia and Eric romping in an apple
tree complete with serpent, and a luscious primeval forest scene with brilliant
parrots and a gorilla slipped in from one of Browne's earlier books. 
A
triumphant book to look at and think about. BH
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Sweeney, Joyce. Piano Man. Delacorte, 1992. ISBN 0-385-30534-6. 227p.
$15.00.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
Fourteen-year-old Deidre is smitten by Jeff, the
twenty-six year old composer/pianist who's moved into the Florida apartment
building where she lives with her mother. This is far from a formula treatment
of the not-smooth course of true love; Sweeney treats both the course of Deidre's
crush, and the supporting sub-plots about her mother (Deidre feels that her
mother ought to be more responsive to the man who's in love with her) and her
best friend (whose boyfriend gets treatment for exhibiting psychotic violence)
with a realism that avoids both rapture and tragedy. Jeff goes back to the woman
he loves but salvages Deidre's friendship. The plots are smoothly integrated, the
characters are well-defined and consistent, and the writing has, in both dialogue
and exposition, a natural flow. ZS
D.V. Love; Mother-daughter relations
Terkel, Susan Neiburg. Ethics. Lodestar, 1992. ISBN 0-525-67371-7. 135p.
$15.00.
M 
Gr. 7-12. 
Attempting to convey to junior high and high school
readers questions that have bedeviled thinkers for centuries, Terkel has set herself
a tough task; that she only partially succeeds can be faulted as much to the
[281]
complexity of her topic as to the watered-down treatment it receives here. The
book is excellent in describing the ways in which children as well as societies
develop moral codes; the reports of moral reasoning experiments done by social
scientists are intriguing. However, what Terkel often presents as self-evident
fact is actually opinion-a dicey proposition where ethics are concerned. In
discussing the Kitty Genovese case, for example, she states that while onlookers
should have called police, "bystanders have no moral commitment to risk their
lives to rescue someone else." That is arguable, something the author also
misses in an earlier discussion of My Lai, which she sees only as a conflict
between following orders or opting out of the killing. To ask "if we are selfish
and aggressive, as Freud suggested, can we learn to be good?" is a loaded
question that begs several definitions. (This same kind of slippery construction
is used later when Terkel states that "people who value self-interest set a very
different course from those who value justice," and it goes haywire when she
proceeds to say that the former tend to be interested in money and power while
the latter "choose helping or teaching professions.") To state that slavery and
sexism and apartheid are categorically "immoral" seems like simple virtue-
except to those, using the very methods of moral reasoning Terkel explains, who
don't agree. "Follow your heart," as Terkel advises in her closing chapter, is not
necessarily a dictum that will take readers where she wants them to go. RS
C.U. Philosophy
D.V. Value building
Thayne, Emma Lou. Hope and Recovery: A Mother-Daughter Story about
Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia, and Manic Depression; by Emma Lou Thayne and
Becky Thayne Markosian. Watts, 1992. ISBN 0-531-11140-7. 189p. illus.
with photographs. $13.90. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
The title and subtitle say it all: Emma Lou Thayne
(mother) and Becky Markosian (daughter) here relate, in alternating sections, the
story of Becky's slide into mental illness after graduating from high school in
Salt Lake City. Becky's anorexia led to compulsive dieting and bulimia, but it
was not until a manic period in Seattle that her friends conspired with Becky's
parents to get her onto a plane, back to Salt Lake, and into a hospital. Recovery
was slow, and both mother and daughter credit the use of antidepressant medicine
for Becky's current stability and happiness (now thirty-nine, Becky is married, a
mother of three, and has a productive career). While the focus is on Becky, most
of the story, as told here, is the mother's, an empathetic and sensitive witness.
The book may have too much adult perspective (on both authors' parts) for some
adolescent readers; on the other hand, there's a welcome lack of troubled-teen
melodrama. While it's long and occasionally repetitive, here's a good, clear look
at a parent and child coming through hard times together. RS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Waddell, Martin. Farmer Duck; illus. by Helen Oxenbury. Candlewick, 1992.
ISBN 1-56402-009-6. 34p. $15.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Talk about lazy. On this farm, "the duck did all the
work. The farmer stayed in bed." Oxenbury's first picture gets this relationship
straight right off, with the fat farmer lolling in bed with the paper and a box of
bon-bons while the clearly long-suffering duck presents the next course. The
duck fetches the cow from the field, herds (on his back) the sheep, saws the
[ 282 ]
wood, does the ironing, all to the bedridden call, "How goes the work?"
Revolution is soon at hand, and the farmer is driven out of bed and off the farm,
where the animals create a worker's paradise of cooperation, celebrated by the
artist in a sunny double-spread that contrasts with the moody and miserable
weather that had held thus far. Oxenbury's animals are a superbly drawn and
empathetic bunch; her farmer a monument to sloth. Animal Farm without the
irony, this will undoubtedly inspire young couch potatoes to clean up their acts.
Oh, sure. RS
D.V. Cooperation
Wallace-Brodeur, Ruth. The Godmother Tree. Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1992.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022458-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022457-6. 
120p.
Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $13.00.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Laura is not happy to be suddenly moving across the
county during the last week of fifth grade, but her father, a farm hand, needs a
new position after being fired for telling off the alcoholic owner of the farm
where the family had lived. Ryan, Laura's soon-to-be-eighth-grader brother is
even more unhappy; he had big plans to star on the local summer baseball team,
and there's no team at all in their new town. In some ways, this is a sensitive-
girl's summer story, as Laura learns to love their new home, finds a special
place (the "Godmother Tree" of the title) to cherish, and grows to understand her
difficult brother and herself. That's a time-honored plot, but Wallace-Brodeur
writes forthrightly and freshly, allowing the rural Vermont setting to inform and
envelope the story without waxing excessively lyrical. 
There's some
sentimentality in a scene where Laura and her mother go to Gramma's house,
but the emotional effects, like the landscaping, are generally understated. The
book was originally published for the Vermont Migrant Education Program, an
association implicit in the theme that even though Laura has found security and
happiness in her Godmother Tree, the possibility of being uprooted again is
always before her. RS
D.V. Family relations
Walsh, JillPaton. Grace. Farrar, 1992. ISBN 0-374-32758-0. 256p. $16.00.
R* 
Gr. 7- 
Grace Darling, twenty-two, was alone with her
parents on the morning of September 7, 1838; during her dawn watch in the
lighthouse tower, she saw a shipwreck and persuaded her father that she was
capable of rowing with him on a rescue mission. This true event, and much of
the aftermath, have been used by the author to blend fact and fiction with
consummate skill in creating a narrative that is powerfully dramatic in its initial
impact and sharply observant in describing the consequent events. Idolized by
press and pulpit, Grace (who tells the story) is disturbed by the concurrent
animosity of those who feel they should share in the praise and the financial
rewards. Jill Paton Walsh, citing her sources in an appended author's note,
corroborates the fact that coastal residents expected and usually received a bounty
for a rescue mission. Grace was therefore resented because local residents, some
of whom had gone to the rescue not knowing that the Darlings had taken all
survivors back to the lighthouse, felt cheated. The characters are drawn with
depth and nuance, the language and idiom are appropriate to the place and period,
and the whole story has the tight-knit feel of a tapestry in word. ZS
D.V. Courage; Ethical concepts
[283 ]
White, Ruth. Weeping Willow. Farrar, 1992. ISBN 0-374-38255-7. 24 6p.
$16.00.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
A fine second novel by the author of Sweet Creek
Holler (BCCB 10/88) chronicles Tiny Lambert's high school years from 1956 to
1960, which include a realistic range of incidents lent suspense by the
protagonist's attempts to avoid and then overcome sexual abuse by her
stepfather, Vern. His characterization, along with those of Tiny's mother, the
rest of the family, and a cast of friends, is vividly rendered, the plot following
variably but believably from their patterns of action. Vern's portrayal, for
instance, is of a man soft enough to swap his most cherished possession, a gun,
for a dog he doesn't want just to hush his daughter's crying, yet selfish enough
to violate her. There's a lot going on in this story: subplots include Tiny's
discovering her musical talent, inheriting a mountain farm from her alienated
grandfather, and identifying a mysterious figure who has haunted her fantasies.
The end is telescoped too neatly, but the blend of family problems, peer
dynamics, and period details is ultimately a smooth one. BH
Williams, Sheron. 
And in the Beginning . . .; illus. by Robert Roth.
Atheneum, 1992. ISBN 0-689-31650-X. 40p. $13.95.
Ad 
6-9 yrs. 
According to this literary creation myth, Mahtmi,
"the Blessed One," created the first man, Kwanza, in his image, that is, black.
Cultures across time and around the world have viewed God in their own images,
so there's no lack of precedent for this; however, the story becomes troubling
when Mahtmi gets around to creating the other races. "He created another being
out of the red soil of what we now know as Georgia, another out of the sandy
beaches of Normandy. .. another with horsehair for its head. .. fish eyes for this
one's eyes, and on and on after that fashion, biding his time till the original one
came home." Mahtmi loves all of his children, but Kwanza remains "the finest
creature 'cause he had created him first and was fond of him in a special way."
The idea that one race finds special favor with the Almighty has found terrible
expression in the 20th century; how would we feel, for example, about a story in
which God awards first place to the blonde and blue-eyed, because the "glistening
of his skin is second only to my own"? And in the end, when Mahtmi gives
Kwanza something special (curly hair) to raise his self-esteem, it seems a sad and
dubious honor that this "will set him apart from every other man forever."
While the storytelling here is overelaborate and sometimes confusing in its
narrative shifts and vague pronominal antecedents (too many hes), there are some
lilting, affectionate touches, and Kwanza's need for proof of his father's affection
is a feeling with which any child can identify. Roth's watercolor paintings are
finely drawn, sophisticated and a little cool, emblemizing rather than
characterizing, but their misty tones provide satisfying atmosphere. RS
D.V. Self-acceptance
Wilson, Budge. The Leaving. Philomel, 1992. ISBN 0-399-1878-5. [208p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Well-crafted, genuinely young adult short stories are
hard to come by, but the nine included in this volume, a recipient of the
Canadian Young Adult Book Award, qualify. Set in Nova Scotia, many scenes
are illuminated by vivid writing. Most of the protagonists and/or narrators are
[284]
adolescent girls in conflict with their mothers, though a few plots involve a
friend, cousin, or sister. Although the collection as a whole occasionally strikes
a repetitive thematic note, the characters are invariably delineated with a focused
clarity that will have readers wishing for longer fiction from the same author.
The tone is varied and the age appeal broad, ranging from the tragedy of a high
school student's denying her favorite teacher ("The Metaphor") and the
sophisticated irony in a tale of twins ("Waiting") to a family's romance with a
lodger or a thirteen-year-old's confessions about menstruation to a pen pal she
has mistakenly assumed to be another girl. While the adult characters form a
strong presence, the adolescent voices take center stage in a collection that could
inspire classroom discussion as well as leisure reading. BH
Wood, Audrey. Silly Sally; written and illus. by Audrey Wood. Harcourt,
1992. ISBN 0-15-274428-2. 32p. $13.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
"Silly Sally went to town, walking backwards, upside
down," and along the way she acquires a number of unusual friends, including a
jigging pig, leapfrogging dog, singing loon, sleepy sheep, and even a handsome
prince in the guise of Neddy Buttercup, "walking forwards, right side up." As
well as providing plenty of scope for some Simple-Simon story hour charades,
this silly tale satisfies appeals of rhyme, repetition, cumulation, reading along,
and disaster humor A la The Napping House, as Neddy tickles the whole crew
awake after the sheep has made them sleep. Although the art is unsubtle and
flat, relying on cartoon cliches, the tone is appealingly goofy, and kids will
enjoy looking ahead on the road to town and finding each new animal that joins
the parade. Limber up! RS
C.U. Story hour
Wrightson, Patricia. The Sugar-Gum Tree; illus. by David Cox. Viking, 1992.
ISBN 0-670-83910-8. 60p. $11.95.
R* 
5-9 yrs. 
Sarah and Penny have a volatile relationship, but
their squabbles usually end in tolerant reconciliation; after all, they are best
friends. It was probably because they had already been testy about assembling a
hideaway that Penny became so angry when Sarah called her a "gloop." That did
it. Penny climbed high into the sugar-gum tree and announced that she wasn't
coming down until Sarah said she was sorry. Wrightson, one of Australia's
most eminent writers, shows (again) that she is as adroit in realism as she is in
fantasy: the social impasse is handled in distinctive style and with affectionate
humor as two sets of firm but tactful parents and a team from the Fire
Department try to talk Penny down. It's Sarah who succeeds, and both girls
make it clear-without being rude-that they're a team and can solve their own
problems. Invitingly scrawled pen-and-wash illustrations have a summery tone,
capturing the backyard atmosphere as well as the vicissitudes of friendship. ZS
D.V. Friendship values
Wunderli, Stephen. The Blue between the Clouds. Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-8050-
1772-0. 114p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
The time is 1939, the setting is a small town in
Utah, the narrator is Matt, and his deftly-knit story is concerned with his
friendship with Two Moons (a Navajo who lives with Matt's family) and with
[285 ]
Matt's burning desire to fly after seeing a stunt flyer. While heavy on accent
("they kept handin' me food, and I kept eatin' .
. ") the narration has a
convincing young-teen tone. The boys have already tried flying with home-made
wings after hearing the story of Daedalus and Icarus in school, but when Matt's
father tows home part of a real plane, the determination to fix it and fly it
becomes an obsession. Threaded through this often-funny story of friendship and
small-town life is a deeper theme of human relationships (all kinds) and the
inevitability of change. When Two Moons' grandfather dies, the arrangement he
had made for the boy ends, and Two Moons is forced to leave his loving friends
and become his unpleasant older sister's ward. There is no improbably happy
ending but a wistful closing tone that is touching without being sentimental.
ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Intercultural understanding
Zolotow, Charlotte. This Quiet Lady; illus. by Anita Lobel. Greenwillow,
1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09306-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09305-1. 24p.
Library ed. $13.93; Trade ed. $14.00.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
A minimal text and subdued, affectionate tone make
this picture book just right for the very young child being introduced to concepts
of change and family continuity. Lobel's album-style paintings, with flowing
line and soft colors, show a small girl (the narrator) on each verso page. Her
first comment is "This baby smiling in her bassinette under the crocheted throw
is my mother," and on the facing page is a full-page picture of the baby. Other
pictures, in chronological development, show mother going through childhood
and adolescence, being a happy hippie, going to college, and moving on to
marriage and motherhood. A gentle book that should appeal to young children
ends, appropriately, with that most important of events, the narrator's birth; it's
labeled "The Beginning." ZS
D.V. Mother-child relations