Alexander, Alison. Science Magic: Scientific Experiments for Young Children; by Alison
Alexander and Susie Bower; illus. by Carolyn Scrace. Prentice-Hall, 1987. ISBN
0-13-795311-9. 37p. $10.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Nineteen easy experiments are organized into five sections: "Moving
Heat," "Colorful Light," "Mirrors and Images," "Water Works," and "Tones,
Tunes, and Telephones." 
Each experiment occupies a double-page, heavily
illustrated spread, with a list of the materials needed, instructions, and a brief
explanation of the natural phenomenon being demonstrated. One experiment, for
instance, involves putting a balloon over a soda bottle half filled with cold water,
then placing the bottle in a bucket of hot water to watch the balloon expand, or in
cold water to watch it collapse ("Hot air needs more space than cold air, so some of
the air is pushed into the balloon, making it stand up"). The art is garish but
lively, and it shows clearly what is being done. If only one caption didn't say
"You can lie the bottle on its side!" Useful for family or classroom projects. BH
C.U. Scientific recreation
Ancona, George. Turtle Watch; written and illus. with photographs by George Ancona.
Macmillan, 1987. ISBN 0-02-700910-6. 47p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
A photodocumentary records the work of oceanographers as they try
to rebuild the sea turtle population on the northeast coast of Brazil through a
project called TAMAR. Every night during the nesting season, they track down
the turtles, transfer the eggs to a safer location, and protect the released hatchlings
on their way to the sea. An important part of the project is educating fishermen
and their children to the importance of preserving what they used to eat or sell-six
out of seven species of sea turtles in this hemisphere are endangered. The details of
the turtles' egg-laying, of the project's operation, and of two local children's
participation are vividly projected in both pictures and text. The ending seems
abrupt-one wishes for more information on the habits and characteristics of the
sea turtle, but the book is successful within its defined focus; it will serve as a
springboard to further exploration on the part of students intrigued by this
absorbing, carefully designed presentation. BH
C.U. Biology
D.V. Environmental concepts
Avi. Romeo and Juliet: Together (and Alive) At Last! Orchard/Watts, 1987. Library ed.
ISBN 0-531-08321-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05721-6. Library ed. $11.99; Trade
ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
When his best friend Saltz falls in love with shy Anabell, Ed tries to
help out by casting the two in a slapped-up-quick, after-school production of
[21]
Romeo and Juliet. It's a cute, albeit overextended, idea, and while the plotting
holds no surprises, Ed's wry narration, a motley group of (oddly unsophisticated)
eighth-graders, and plenty of congenial high jinks and pratfalls keep things
moving. Saltz himself is an unlikely, and therefore all the more fun, Romeo: "He
shuffled along as usual, now and again stopping to hitch his pants, tie a shoelace,
fix a sock, all the stuff that had broken down since leaving his house fifteen
minutes before." This is a sequel to S. O. R. Losers (reviewed in the December,
1984 issue). RS
Beatty, Patricia. Charley Skedaddle. Morrow, 1987. ISBN 0-688-06687-9. $11.75.
Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-7. 
In one of Beatty's best historical novels, set during the Civil War, a
tough boy from a Bowery gang enlists as a drummer boy with the 140th New
York Veteran Volunteers. 
Charley is twelve, anxious to see battle and gain
revenge for the older brother who had been killed at Gettysburg. Alas, when battle
comes, Charley is terrified and runs away, eventually taking refuge with an elderly,
taciturn woman who lives alone in a rural community. Gradually, Charley learns
to care for Granny Bent and for the beauty of the Blue Ridge Mountains; gradually,
she accepts and becomes fond of him. In time, he expiates the guilt and shame he
feels as a deserter and proves (without melodrama) to himself and others that he
does have courage. This is a rite-of-passage story as well as a wartime adventure
story; it speaks out against war and slavery without obscuring of the medium by
the message. Despite the cute title, this is less flippant than most of Beatty's
books, not as funny but much more substantial. The setting is vivid, the
characterization strong, and the structure solid. The author's appended notes give
background information, distinguish between what in the book is fact and what is
fiction, and explain her modified use of mountain dialect. ZS
C.U. History
D.V. Courage
Bible, adaptations of. The Book ofAdam to Moses; ad by Lore Segal; illus. by Leonard
Baskin. Knopf, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-96757-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-
86757-2. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
A retelling of part of the first five books of the Old Testament is
based on a comparison, Segal's eloquent and informative preface states, of some of
the most important versions in English and in German. What Segal has done is
simplify the language and give cohesion to the narrative without sacrificing
sonority, sequence, or flow. The tone is reverent, the language comprehensible.
Baskin's black-and-white illustrations are handsome in their dramatic sweep and
strength. ZS
C.U. Religious education
Borland, Hal. Plants of Christmas; illus. by Anne Ophelia Dowden. Crowell, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04650-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04649-9. 28p. Library
ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Meticulously detailed botanical paintings of plants that have been
part of the Christmas tradition are on the verso pages. Facing each is a page that
gives every plant's common and scientific names, and that describes ways in which
the plants have been used (oak for the Yule log, for example, or mistletoe for peace
[22 1
and for romance) and includes legends pertaining to them. Not substantial (only
twelve plants are considered), but handsome. ZS
C.U. Christmas
Brown, Ruth. Our Puppy's Vacation; written and illus. by Ruth Brown. Dutton, 1987.
ISBN 0-525-44326-6. 32p. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
As pedestrian as the title and concept may sound, this is an inspired
book, not only because of the strong art and endearing main canine, but because
every small child will identify with the playful activities featured on each page.
The opening picture shows a puppy, slightly bleary from travel in the back of a
station wagon, surrounded by an adoring bunch of kids who promptly take him to
the beach for a romp with the sea gulls, the waves, a frog-anything that moves.
Subsequently, he digs up a mole, licks a dripping ice cream cone, alienates bees,
befriends farm animals, falls in a heap by the fire---"And that was only the first
day!" The animal expressions are alive, the humans well drawn; the Cornish set-
ting is radiant, and the whole composed with palpable texture and light. Well
worth the trip! BH
Bunting, Eve. Ghost's Hour, Spook's Hour; illus. by Donald Carrick. Clarion, 1987.
ISBN 0-89919-484-2. 32. $12.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
A prize for Halloween but cathartic for any night of the year, this is
a powerful evocation of childhood fears. When the narrator is awakened in the
middle of the night by scary noises, he and his dog Biff make their way to his
parents' room only to find them gone. The trip down the stairs takes a lot of
courage, with a bonging clock and a sudden encounter with the mirror scaring boy
and dog almost right off the page. All ends well, with both bedded down on the
couch beside Mom and Dad, who had moved because of the wind banging a branch
against their window. Bunting is proficient at the spare narrative and sound effects
that accumulate for such a realistic depiction here. It is Carrick's watercolor
paintings, however, that galvanize the text into action. The vivid contrasts of
light and dark, along with sudden shifts of shape, color, perspective, build tension,
catch the breath, and keep the eye moving. Satisfying as story, art, and empathy.
BH
C.U. Halloween--Stories
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Clifford, Eth. The Man Who Sang in the Dark; illus. by Mary Beth Owen. Houghton,
1987. ISBN 0-395-43664-8. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
A gentle but involving period piece in which 10-year-old Leah, her
little brother Daniel, and their mother adjust to the poverty and loneliness of
Depression life after Papa's death. The cheap apartment building into which they
move becomes a community as the elderly owners befriend the children, Mama
falls in love with the owners' nephew-a blind musician living on the floor
below, and Daniel decides not to stay with a wealthy patron who has offered to
adopt him. The ending, when they all buy a house together, is almost too good to
be true, but the warm family feeling generated by this kind-hearted group will
persuade readers to suspend their disbelief and savor the old-fashioned setting. BH
D.V. Interpersonal understanding
[23 ]
Climo, Shirley. A Month of Seven Days. Crowell, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04656-
1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04658-8. 
Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Part third-person narrative, part journal, this Civil War story is set
in Georgia in 1864. Father is serving in the Confederate Army, and Zoe (12-year-
old protagonist, journal writer) is alone with her younger brother and pregnant
mother when a Yankee captain and some of his men take over the house and
demand cooking and other services. Zoe is both angry and fearful, but-like her
sensible mother-she puts up with what she must. Unlike her mother, Zoe tries
several schemes to frighten the superstitious captain. At the end of a week, the
soldiers leave, but not before Zoe has learned that some Yankees are honest and
kind and that some of her neighbors are secretly helping with the war effort, as she
herself courageously does. This is written adequately, and the characters are well-
defined if not always depicted with nuance, but the structure seems too dense, with
too much happening in only seven days and too much depending on the gullibility
of the Yankee captain. ZS
D.V. Courage
Cole, Brock. The Goats; written and illus. by Brock Cole. Farrar, 1987. ISBN 0-374-
32678-9. 184p. $11.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
Brock Cole's picture books have hinted at his writing talents, but
here is proof of an unusual capacity for sustaining fiction. Two outcasts, a boy
and a girl, are left by their fellow campers on an island with no food or clothes. In
a much larger sense, these two are social misfits, already marooned from their
families and peers. They know it and, in an urgent but steadily credible story, they
create a relationship that is unique, yet puts them back in touch with the rest of the
world. There are many levels here. The action of survival and evasion of
authorities when the children run away will hold readers on a plot basis. The main
characters' vulnerability, desperate connection, and eventual expansion into trust of
some black, inner-city, fresh-air camp kids create a different kind of suspense which
is climaxed by a triumphant commitment after their success almost tears them
apart. Their progress is marked by the emergence of each from an almost nameless
anonymity to comfortable familiarity with each other and themselves. The style
does not miss a beat, either in narrative or dialogue, asserting itself without
ostentation. 
Brock hints at sacrificial myth in the boy's story of a haunting
experience in a Greek cave, supposedly inhabited by a god to whom worshippers
sacrificed goats. Yet the symbolic allusions here and elsewhere reflect rather than
obtrude, even when reinforced by references such as a deputy Sheriff's trapping
them in his goat-farm jeepster. Several complicated thematic questions of social
cruelty and moral obligation arise subtly, through concrete development. This is
an unflinching book, and there is a quality of raw emotion that may score some
discomfort among adults. Such a first novel restores faith in the cultivation of
children's literature. The bookmaking, including Cole's watercolor cover and pen-
and-ink chapter heading sketches, is meticulous. BH
D.V. Friendship values; Boy-girl relations
Cole, Joanna. Evolution; illus. by Aliki. Crowell, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04598-
0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04596-4. 
31p. (Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science).
Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
As is typical of this series, the text is lucid, simple, and sequential;
the drawings are carefully labelled and are nicely integrated with the text, and the
format is spacious, with broad margins and good-sized print. The text is
[24]
continuous, moving from the introduction of fossil remains to an explanation of
the evolutionary process and the concept of survival of the fittest, and to the
emergence of moder humans. ZS
C.U. Science
Conrad, Pam. Seven Silly Circles; illus. by Mike Wimmer. Harper, 1987. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-021334-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021333-7. Library ed. $10.89; Trade
ed. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-6. 
Nicki, the protagonist of I Don' t Live Here (reviewed in the January,
1985 issue), imprints her face with seven bright red circles while fooling around
with a rubber-tipped arrow. Too embarassed to appear in front of her friends, she
tries to hide in her room and even, during her parents leaf-raking party, behind a
mask until a family emergency makes her forget about her appearance. As a story
standing on its own, this has some problems: Nicki's friend Jeffrey suddenly
appears halfway through the book without introduction, and the basic episode
seems overextended. As an easy read for fans of the first book, however, it will be
a popular choice. BH
D.V. Everyday life concepts
Cooney, Caroline B. Among Friends. Bantam, 1987. ISBN 0-533-05446-5. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Even when the Awesome Threesome was still a going concern, Jen-
nie-popular, brilliant, talented-had always been its center. But now, at the
beginning of junior year, Hillary and Emily are resentful of Jennie's ever-
increasing success at, it seems, everything: "A person should know when to back
off. Jennie only knows when to surge on ahead." Jennie, sought after by almost
all the boys, goes after the one who won't have her, Paul "Classified," so called for
his utter secrecy about his family life. This all unfolds in a series of diary entries
kept for English class by the Threesome, Paul, and two other classmates. It's a
worn, too-convenient device, sometimes giving us too many sides of the same
story, but teens love the form, and the voices and narrative are strong enough to
keep things moving. Most of the focus is on Jennie and Paul, and how family
circumstances have driven them to extreme behavior. In Jennie's case, particularly,
the motivation is unconvincing because the stereotyping of her success-driven
parents is so extreme: "their best trophy of all: their daughter." Much better
drawn is the aching tension among the Threesome: mean, often lacerating, but
poignantly resolved in the end. "And the hug with Emily---oh, the hug with
Emily--oh, the hug of a friend who forgives you and you forgive her--oh, that
was a hug to see." RS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Friendship values
Cooper, Ilene. The Winning of Miss Lynn Ryan; illus. by Susan Magurn. Morrow, 1987.
ISBN 0-688-07231-3. $11.75. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Fifth-grader Carrie has a crush on Miss Ryan, a new, pretty teacher
who favors the child who is neat, conforming, and popular. Carrie can't write a
report that doesn't have ink blots or spelling errors. Forced by parental dictum to
spend time with Luke, the class pariah who is absorbed in the study of insects,
Carrie slowly comes to realize that Luke has intelligence and integrity, and that her
adored Miss Ryan (who cannot see Luke's worth because he doesn't fit her
conventional pattern) is superficial and rigid in her attitude. The classroom
dynamics and the protagonist's inner conflicts are well realized, the scene in which
[25]
Carrie watches the emergence of a butterfly from its chrysalis deeply moving. The
depiction of Miss Ryan tends toward the stereotypical, and the ending is a bit pat,
but this is a good example of an amusing story that has, despite its slightness,
both nuance and popular appeal. ZS
D.V. Group acceptance; Individuality, expressing
Dixon, Jeanne. The Tempered Wind. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-689-31339-X. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
Gabriella has had an isolated, overprotected childhood, and when she
is orphaned, at the age of thirteen, she is reluctantly taken in by an aunt who
arranges a scholarship at the Young Ladies Christian Academy-but neither the
home nor the school experience is a happy one. The story, set in the 1940s, is
told convincingly by Gabriella, now 17, as she looks back on that unhappy time
and the move to Montana (answering an ad for a farm chore girl, lying about her
skills) where she finally finds a career, an admirer, and friends. Gabriella is a
dwarf, and her story is candid, often bitter, as she describes the prejudice that adds
obstacles to her physical limitations. The first-person characterization is strong,
and the narrative style compelling despite some exaggeration in the depiction of
minor characters. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Courage; Handicaps, overcoming
Donahue, Marilyn Cram. The Valley in Between. Walker, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-
8027-6745-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6731-1. 
Library ed. $15.85; Trade ed.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
In a novel that is set in the San Bemardino valley in the years 1857-
1862, Donahue focuses on the family of a doughty heroine, Emmie, who is twelve
when the story starts. Emmie's parents are Union sympathizers, sensible people
who see that there are good and bad in every kind of human, including the Indians
and Mormons reviled by the bigoted. The book has a good balance of personal
narrative-as Emmie grows older, falls in love, and learns tolerance toward people
like a crusty old aunt-and the panorama of documented events that climax with
the flood of 1862. This has no important historical figures, but it's fine historical
fiction giving a vivid picture of a community affected by internal and external
changes; it is written with good pace and flow. A chronology, a list of suggested
readings, and a bibliography of sources are included. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Facklam, Margery. Spare Parts for People; by Margery and Howard Facklam. Harcourt,
1987. ISBN 0-15-277410-6. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
Surveying the advances in medicine that make today's transplants,
implants, and therapy possible, the authors do an excellent job of showing how
scientists build on the work of others (sometimes on failures or errors) and how
each new technique and discovery is part of a broad picture as well as an individual
achievement. The work of bioengineers, biochemists, and electronics technicians
is cited as well as the more visible work of doctors on the fast-moving frontier
where so much has happened and so much more is predicted. Case histories afford
some contrast to the research described, and both are exciting and dramatic. A
glossary and a bibliography are appended. ZS
C.U. Science
[26
Farber, Norma, ed. These Small Stones; ed. by Norma Farber and Myra Cohn Livingston.
Harper, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024014-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024013-X.
Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 4-6. 
An imaginative idea with innate child appeal has benefitted from two
dedicated poets' simmering of selections over several years. These are 60 poems
about small things "In my Hand," "On the Ground," "In the Air," "Outside," "On
the Table," or as "A Piece of It All." The organization is arbitrary: the first
section treats of marbles (Valerie Worth), matches (X.J. Kennedy), and jumping
beans (Mary Ann Hoberman); the second sings of sandpipers (Charlotte Zolotow)
and beach stones (Lilian Moore); the third celebrates fireflies (Elizabeth Madox
Roberts), mosquitoes (Jose Emilio Pacheco), etc. What lifts the anthology above
the average is the number of poems with that ineffable quality of verbal surprise
that arrests a reader and sends him or her back again for an immediate second read-
ing. There is also a thoughtful balance in tone, technique, and cultural context.
Several poets are represented at their simplest but best: Lillian Morrison in
"Burning Bright," Julia Cunningham in "Little Bird," and Livingston herself in
"Math Class." Her afterword discusses the development of the work before Norma
Farber's death. Children who "study the lives on a leaf" will find a kindred voice
in Theodore Roethke's description or, again, in Pablo Neruda's assertion, "Fleas
interest me so much.... " BH
C.U. Literature-poetry
Fine, John Christopher. Oceans in Peril; written and illus. with photographs by John
Christopher Fine. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-689-31328-4. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
With missionary zeal, an expert in maritime affairs presents the facts
of ocean pollution and the implications for our present and future dependence on
food from the sea. Beginning with the example of conch depletion on an island off
the coast of Venezuela, Fine details the effects of reef destruction, species overkill,
toxic waste contamination, and environmental imbalances resulting from
overpopulation and deforestation of the land. Though sometimes repetitive and
slanted by rhetorical phrases such as "the merchants of war," the text makes a
strong case for each person's taking responsibility before "we are condemned,
poisoned by our own misadventure in progress." A bibliographic section includes
organization periodicals, books, and some universities and graduate schools
offering specialties in ocean science. A stimulating book for ecological research
and discussion. BH
C.U. Biology
D.V. Environmental concepts
Garden, Nancy. The Door Between. Farrar, 1987. ISBN 0-374-31833-6. 183p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Third in a fantasy series (Fours Crossing, Watersmeet) set in a small
New Hampshire town, this follows the traditional pattern of the struggle between
good and evil as Melissa and her friend Jed pursue the mystery of a pack of vicious
ghost dogs and try to avert the doom planned for Fours Crossing by the evil hermit
of the earlier books. Garden is a writer with strong narrative sense, so that her
story has good flow and pace; what her novel lacks is clean structure and the ability
to stand on its own rather than depend on iterated references to past events. ZS
Gondosch, Linda. Who's Afraid of Haggerty House? illus. by Helen Cogancherry.
Dutton/Lodestar, 1987. ISBN 0-525-67198-6. 134p. $11.95.
[27
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
In a sequel to Who Needs a Bratty Brother? (reviewed in the
February, 1986 issue), sixth-grader Kelly makes a new friend when she calls at the
Haggerty house, reputedly haunted, to sell Christmas cards. There are seances
(patently spurious) and an intriguing attic and pleasant old Mrs. Haggerty. At
home there are squabbles with friends. What this has is plenty of small-scale
action, characters who are defined but tend to be stereotyped, and an ending to
satisfy sentimental readers, with a Christmas sequence in which Mrs. Haggerty is
given a puppy, is thrilled because the son she hasn't seen for a long time comes
home, and Kelly has a rapprochement with her friends. Not substantial but mildly
amusing. ZS
D.V. Older-younger generations
Gordon, Ruth, ed. Under All Silences: Shades of Love. Harper, 1987. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-022155-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022154-2. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 9-. 
Rich but never heavy, this collection of 66 love poems offers a taste
of Maya Angelou, Adrienne Rich, Kenneth Rexroth, e e cummings, Kenneth
Patchen, Amy Lowell, and a range of others, including many translations from
non-Western cultures and/or earlier times. Although varied in mood from the
gently affectionate to the passionately sexual, the poems share an intimate I-thou
tone that will involve young readers immediately, whether they are browsing or
making their way through the carefully juxtaposed selections. 
A few
choices-Yeats' irresistible "Song of Wandering Aengus," for instance-are well
known, but many are not popularly anthologized, and the expressions of love
common to contemporary, ancient Egyptian, or Medieval Japanese poets make a
striking statement about emotions that young people of today share with those in
other periods and places. More informal than McCullough's Love Is Like the
Lion's Tooth (reviewed in the June, 1984 issue), this is an intensely personal but
generally moving anthology. BH
C.U. Literature-poetry
Halam, Ann. The Daymaker. Orchard/Watts, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08310-1;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05710-0. 
173p. Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
In a far-future society where magic has replaced technology, 10-year-
old Zanne is sent away to Covenant school, where she learns to control and deepen
the magic-making skills inherited from her mother. Magic comes easily to Zanne;
always a headstrong girl, she is fascinated instead by stories of the old days before
magic and the Covenant: "Couldn't people move mountains without magic?"
After discovering a hidden cache of forgotten machines, Zanne becomes determined
to find the fabled (and forbidden) Daymaker, which can make machines run without
magic. Halam's prose is stately and often powerful, and while the story is slowed
down with explorations of the moral intricacies of magic and technology, this
material is fresh and thought-provoking, and adds a dimension to the world-
building often slighted in fantasy fiction. The ending indicates the possibility of a
sequel; it would be most welcome. RS
Hamilton, Virginia. A White Romance. Philomel, 1987. ISBN 0-399-21213-2. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
Through her running partner, Didi, Talley Barbour gets involved
with a charismatic drug dealer named David and with Didi's boyfriend, an addict
called Roady. This is the story of two couples, vividly characterized both as
[28]
individuals and as a self-made "family" with dynamics shifting according to the
needs and demands of each. The emotional, sexual, and racial tensions are honestly
drawn as these four, all from broken homes, try to ease their loneliness with some
kind of caring company. Even villainous David, who manipulates Talley into an
affair and then dumps her when she's courted by a "straight" black athlete, Victor,
shows a vulnerable spot for his old buddy Roady. Roady's decision to give up
drugs is welcome if a bit mystifying in origin-Victor's relationship with Talley
is a more credibly developed resolution. The action here is internal except for a
few memorable scenes, one set in a high school hall lined with lockers, another at
a rock concert; yet Talley's journey from child to adult makes an absorbing first-
person narrative that will touch contemporary young readers. BH
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Intercultural understanding
Harris, Joel Chandler. Jump Again! More Adventures of Brer Rabbit; ad. by Van Dyke
Parks; illus. by Barry Moser. Harcourt, 1987. ISBN 0-15-241352-9. 
40p.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Five more stories in the same format as Jump include "Brer Rabbit,
He's a Good Fisherman," "The Wonderful Tar-Baby Story," "How Brer Weasel
Was Caught," "Brer Rabbit and the Mosquitoes," and "Brer Rabbit's Courtship."
The text here is not quite as relaxed and musical as in the previous book. The
"ain'ts," "gimmes," and "doins"' have been replaced with standard expressions
which, while respectful of the original elements, don't translate with the same
storytelling rhythm. In addition, Julius Lester's more complete collection (The
Tales of Uncle Remus, reviewed in the July/August, 1987 issue), which is adapted
in a lively style of its own, offers brisk competition. However, Barry Moser's
paintings are still artistically spicy and obstreperously true to the animal
characters, and young readers, who won't care about nuances of idiom, may find
this a more approachable format. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
D.V. Ingenuity
Haseley, Dennis. The Counterfeiter. Macmillan, 1987. ISBN 0-02-743120-7. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
James is sixteen, has few friends, and-although there is little
tension between him and his parents-is aware that his desire to be an artist rather
than go to college has no parental support. Two things loom large in his life; one
is his infatuation with Heather (schoolmate, harpsichord player, poetry lover,
polished speaker of French) and the other is his dogged production of a counterfeit
$500 bill, a project that had begun casually and had become a passion. James
cashes the bill and invites Heather to go from Cleveland to Montreal for lunch.
There she confesses that she's involved with another boy, so James suggests that
she go home, as planned, after lunch; he stays in Montreal and finds solace (and
presumably a renewed dedication to his goal) in sketching. He decides to let his
parents know that he will stay on briefly. This has an unusual situation, but it is
so slowly and repetitively developed as to limit the book's substance and perhaps
also its appeal. The writing style is competent and the characters adequately but
not deeply drawn; a minor flaw is the incorporation of some elements that make no
observable contribution to the plot, such as the encounters with slovenly friend
Harold. The story seems unfinished rather than open-ended, amoral rather than
immoral. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
[29 1
Hearne, Betsy. Love Lines: Poetry in Person. Margaret K. McElderry, 1987. ISBN 0-
689-50437-3. 68p. $7.95.
Books written by a Bulletin staff or committee member receive a brief descriptive
announcement rather than an evaluation and rating.
Gr. 9-. 
A collection of 59 lyric poems about love explores the joys of
discovery, the riches of relationships, and the sorrows of loss.
C.U. Literature--poetry
D.V. Interpersonal understanding
Herzig, Alison Cragin. The Ten-Speed Babysitter; by Alison Cragin Herzig and Jane
Lawrence Mali. Dutton, 1987. ISBN 0-525-44340-1. 144p. $12.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
As exuberant and entertaining as its title, this is a prime example of
a book whose crafting lives up to its popular appeal. Fourteen-year-old Tony
arrives at his summer live-in babysitting job to find that his employer is about to
leave him and his young charge, Duncan, in the house alone while she visits the
Bahamas. Tony copes with a series of catastrophes that are due partly to his own
inexperience, partly to natural disasters, and partly to two burglars. Between
sunburn, a hurricane blackout, a hatching mallard egg, peed-on sheets, and crank
phone calls, Tony makes friends with a girl his own age, biking five miles back
and forth to the beach with Duncan wobbling happily on his kiddy seat. While the
house deteriorates, the inhabitants flourish in spite of some odd sleeping, eating
and bathing patterns. The humorous details of Tony's endless weekend forge the
situation into a non-stop story with resourceful, individualistic characters and a
climactic ending that involves Duncan's favorite staple--Jello. By the authors of
Oh, Boy! Babies! BH
D.V. Resourcefulness
Hildick, E. W. The Ghost Squad and the Prowling Hermits. Dutton, 1987. ISBN 0-525-
44330-4. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
In this addition to a series of detective stories in which the characters
are ghosts or live people who communicate with them (computer messages,
touches by icy fingers) the elaborate structure of the ghost community sags by its
own weight. It's still a concept that will appeal to many readers, and there's
humor in the dialogue, but the development is uneven. Both the good-guy ghosts
(children) and their live young friends work desperately to outwit the evil plans of
Dr. Purcell (ghost) by which hermit ghosts--under certain conditions-move in to
inhabit living bodies. ZS
Hilton, Suzanne. The World of Young Herbert Hoover; illus. by Deborah Steins. Walker,
1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6709-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6708-7. Library
ed. $13.85; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Black-and-white illustrations of mediocre quality (poor figure
drawing) add little but period details to an adequate account of Herbert Hoover's
boyhood in Iowa and (after being orphaned) in Oregon. This hasn't the weakness
of many juvenile biographies, an effusive or adulatory tone, but it is written in a
plodding style, with awkward phrasing and some repetitiveness. It is clearly based
on careful research, however, so that it is dependably informative. Chronological
notes give facts about Hoover's adult life, and a bibliography of sources is
appended. ZS
[30]
Hilts, Len. Quanah Parker. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1987. ISBN 0-15-200565-X. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-9. 
Unabashedly fictionalized in dialogue and in ascribing thoughts to
the subject, this biography is nevertheless grounded in research and has an
extensive bibliography. Unfortunately, the author's note on sources does not
identify for young readers which aspects of the text are fact and which are imagined.
The narrative is well-written, for the most part, and that fact, together with the
extraordinary aspects of Quanah Parker's leadership of the Comanche resistance,
charges the book with the magnetism of a good historical novel. There are a few
slips-Quanah Parker at one point says to himself, "Hey, at least I'm joining the
hunt"-that stretch the thin line that Hilts is walking in this type of presentation,
but the book will bring alive the tragic drama of Native American defeat in the face
of pioneer expansion. BH
C.U. History-U.S.-Frontier and pioneer life
Hurwitz, Johanna. Russell Sprouts; illus. by Lillian Hoban. Morrow, 1987. Library ed.
ISBN 0-688-07166-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07165-1. Library ed. $10.88; Trade
ed. $10.25. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 1-2. 
Hurwitz at her ingenuous best has an infallible ear for the way
young children talk, and an empathy that fortunately excludes sugar icing. In this
series of episodes in the life of a first-grader, the writing has a directness and candor
and humor that are reminiscent of Beverly Cleary's writing for younger children.
Russell has small adventures that arise from the new experiences he's having at
school, and most beginning readers, as well as the read-aloud audience who enjoyed
earlier books about Russell, will enjoy them-and the cozy illustrations-as much
as they did the first books about Russell. Maybe they'll enjoy the report card he
produces (to rate his parents) even more. ZS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Jones, Diana Wynne. A Tale of Time City. Greenwillow, 1987. ISBN 0-688-07315-8.
$11.75. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
It's 1939, and a trainload of excited, apprehensive English children
who are being evacuated to rural safety have just reached their stop. Vivian,
eleven, fears a range of mishaps-but it never occurs to her that she'll be
kidnapped by two boys from Time City, a place outside time, a place where past
and future people and ghosts flow in and out. The city's existence is threatened,
and Vivian (passed off as a visiting cousin) shares with the boys the dangers,
adventures, and discoveries that lead to a legend's return and to the unmasking of
the evil pair who plan to take over Time City. This lacks the humor that is
usually an attractive component of the author's work, but it has her characteristic
facility as a storyteller and as a designer of plots that are innovative and wholly
conceived. ZS
Kesden, Bradley. Sex, Drugs, and AIDS; produced by Oralee Wachter and Lynne Smilow.
Bantam, 1987. Paper ed. ISBN 0-551-34454-4. 76p. (illus. with photographs).
$3.95.
NR 
Gr. 7-12. 
Inaccurately billing itself as "the first book that talks frankly to
teens about AIDS" (see books by Margaret Hyde and the Silversteins), this is
adapted from an educational video hosted by teen actress Rae Dawn Chong. The
adaptation is uneasy, with grainy photos, an unnattractive mix of layout designs,
and balloon-captioned dialogue that is hard to follow. The real problem, though, is
[31 ]
that most of the solid information here is found in the eight-page question-and-
answer appendix, while the book proper leaves too much out In one vignette, for
example, a girl is telling her friends that she prefers condoms to the Pill, an
either/or opposition that begs more questions (not answered until the appendix)
than it answers. 
Miss Chong tells us that there are only two kinds of
sex-vaginal and anal intercourse-that can spread AIDS, a hasty generalization
that, again, is cleared up in the appendix, but many kids won't read that far. We're
also told that it's perfectly OK to share makeup; while this may not spread AIDS,
it is never a good idea. RS
C.U. Sex education
Kipling, Rudyard. Gunga Din; introduction by Kingsley Amis; illus. by Robert Andrew
Parker. Harcourt, 1987. ISBN 0-15-200456-4. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
A stunning picturebook edition of a Victorian poem, this represents
the artist at his personal best and the writer at his most Colonial. The Indian
water-carrier Gunga Din is, of course, the hero of the piece, but the vilification he
takes from the British troops-as voiced by the typical barrack-room, beer-tilting
narrator-may be more musical than comfortable for contemporary young readers.
The watercolor and gouache paintings project the irony of the soldiers' military
misery, their reliance on a "blackfaced crew" as beasts of burden even during the
1857 Indian Mutiny. The layering of white on night blue or on midday orange
gives a textured depth to these clean compositions, sharply defined by black pen
outline and strong, rhythmic shapes. For older readers than the usual picturebook
audience (and there's calculated appeal for adults, witness Kingsley Amis' brief
introduction), this will serve as a prime example of narrative art as well as an
introduction to Kipling's narrative poetry. BH
C.U. Literature-poetry
D.V. Courage
Kitchen, Bert. Animal Numbers; written and illus. by Bert Kitchen. Dial, 1987. ISBN 0-
8037-0459-3. 24p. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Like his Animal Alphabet (reviewed in the May, 1984 issue),
Kitchen's large-scale paintings are marvelously effective, with his animals twined
about, or perched on, or contained within, the large digits that are set off by white
space on the oversize pages. The numbers go from one to ten, then come 15, 25,
50, 75, and 100. The final page has facts about each animal, giving its name,
which is not on the original page; this emphasizes the fact that it's a counting
book but may prove frustrating to some children, who may wonder what animals 6
and 7 are (shrew and opossum). ZS
Klass, Sheila Solomon. Credit-Card Carole. Scribner, 1987. ISBN 0-684-18889-9.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Sixteen-year-old Carole Warren is shocked when her father gives up
his flourishing dental practice for a new career as an actor, her mother goes back to
work, and they ask that she cut up her credit cards and earn her own spending
money. The premise is an interesting one, though overstated; the Warrens are
repetitively established as a family of devoted shoppers in the beginning, for
instance. Carole's foil is boyfriend Jim, who rebels against his conservative
banker father by eschewing materialism in any form and supporting humanitarian
causes. There is a sub-plot in which one of Carole's friends helplessly watches her
mother being bilked of her savings by a grasping boyfriend and rescued by a true-
hearted suitor. Carole's conversion to higher values is a bit glib, but that's
[32 1
consistent with her personality-this is a light-hearted look despite the weighty
theme. BH
D.V. Money-acquisition and use; Value building
Klein, Norma. My Life as a Body. Knopf, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99051-X; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-394-89051-5. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-10. 
Augie is a senior at a small, progressive private high school in
Manhattan, and she's far from enthralled when the school counselor asks her to
tutor a new student, Sam, who has suffered physical and mental damage because of
an accident. Sam is confined to a wheelchair, and Augie is uncomfortable and self-
conscious at first; as Sam improves, the two begin to talk, become friends, and
eventually become lovers. They are found in flagrante delicto by Sam's mother.
Time, parental censure, and separation (Augie goes to the Rhode Island School of
Design) bring a painful rift-and in time this pain also passes. This is a subtle
and sophisticated novel, believably told by Augie, four-letter words included. It
deals perceptively with romantic and physical love felt for (and by) a person who is
handicapped, but has wider implications for all young people who suffer adolescent
pangs of indecision, ambivalence, and inadequacy. Klein's portrayal of Sam's
parents (protective, acquisitive, critical) and of Augie's (gentle, tolerant,
intellectually absorbed) are particularly sharp. Good style, good characterization,
interesting theme, and natural dialogue are strong points in a perceptive story, and
they compensate nicely for an uneven development of plot. ZS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Komaiko, Leah. Annie Bananie; illus. by Laura Cornell. Harper, 1987. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-023261-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023259-5. 32p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade
ed. $11.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
"Annie Bananie, My best friend/ Said we'd be friends to the end."
In verse, the narrator bemoans her best friend's moving away, remembering all the
fun they had together, and all the dares each got the other to take: "Made me brush
my teeth with mud/ Sign my name in cockroach blood." Halfway through this
litany, and rather abruptly too, she quits complaining, and starts consoling: "Make
some new friends,/ Try to write... " while reminding Annie that she'll never
find another friend "like me." The situation's a common one, the rhyme scheme
pleasantly bouncy, and Cornell's bright line and water color illustrations have an
energetic, off-the-wall humor. RS
D.V. Friendship values
Lelchuk, Alan. On Home Ground; illus. by Merle Nacht. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1987. ISBN
0-15-200560-9. $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Back in 1947, when Aaron was almost ten, three men dominated his
life. The first was Burt, a young veteran still suffering from war wounds but
always willing to take Aaron to a Dodgers game. The second was Jackie
Robinson, whose courage as an athlete and a black pioneer Aaron witnessed first
hand. The third was Aaron's father, a Russian Jewish immigrant never quite at
home in the new country. All three men were tough in their own way, on their
own home ground, and it is the culmination of the book when Aaron, after adoring
Burt in his Brooklyn territory and Jackie Robinson in the stadium, finally sees his
father "at home," galloping splendidly on a huge horse in the country, and un-
derstands their conflicts enough to overcome them. This is a subtle first-person
[33]
narrative, almost an adult short story, but there's plenty of baseball talk peppering
the character dynamics. The combination of brevity and depth will make it an ideal
period piece for reading aloud and discussion of roots and parent-child relationships.
BH
D.V. Father-son relations
Levinson, Marilyn. A Place to Start. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-689-31325-X. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
The narrator is adolescent Grant, who is worried about the tension
between his parents; Mom is away from home more and more in her new job as a
salesperson of computer software; Dad is increasingly jealous of her relationship
with her boss. Grant and his younger sister are desolate when Dad leaves, and
Grant is angry when he discovers that his mother is having a romance with his
favorite teacher. He finds it hard to be forgiving, but his adjustment is helped by
the comfort he gets from a new friend, Samantha. A bit shaky grammatically, the
story is adequately written, perceptive in dealing with a stress situation, but slow-
paced. ZS
D.V. Family relations
Maestro, Betsy. A More Perfect Union: The Story of Our Constitution; illus. by Guilio
Maestro. Lothrop, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06840-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
06839-1. 48p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $13.00.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
In undertaking the difficult task of simplifying the Consititutional
Convention of 1787 into picture-book format, the Maestros have succeeded in
producing a smooth, informationally balanced text and some impressive double-
page spreads, though the closeup figures are stiff and awkward. Beginning with a
map and description of the states' disunity, they focus on the delegates' arrival in
Philadelphia, the ensuing debates, the compromises made and principles agreed on,
and the finalizing of the document that was ratified the following year. A five-page
appendix summarizes the articles of the constitution, names the signers, gives a
table of important dates, offers some interesting notes, and lists the amendments.
Since Jean Fritz' Shh! We're Writing the Constitution (reviewed in the
July/August, 1986 issue) is for a slightly older audience, this will be most useful
as the earliest introduction available to the Constitution. BH
C.U. History-U.S.-Pictorial presentation
Mayper, Monica. After Good-Night; illus. by Peter Sis. Harper, 1987. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-024121-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024120-9. 24p. Library ed. $10.89; Trade
ed. $10.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Illustrated with pointillistic black-and-white drawings that nicely
evoke the insubstantial aura of a night-time bedroom, this story poem captures,
through both sound and image, the woozy time between waking and sleeping,
when "a secret ocean hisses in the toilet tank" and Nan "hears her cave-bear mother
snore: sound asleep." 
As Nan falls further into sleep herself, Sis's pictures
become bigger and stranger: Nan's brothers sleeping down the hall become two
monkeys asleep in a tree above Nan's bed; the "tocks and rocks and bongs" of the
mantel clock become rows of sheep and snails and swans. In the last spread, Nan
sails in her bed above the house, across an endless forest, "fast asleep." Beautifully
and quietly done, this is perfect for that very-last bedtime story. RS
[34]
Meyer, Carolyn. Denny's Tapes. Margaret K. McElderry, 1987. ISBN 0-689-50413-6.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 8-10. 
Seventeen-year-old Denny hasn't seen his father (black) for years,
since his mother (white) was remarried to a white doctor whose daughter,
Stephanie, had seemed a pest when both children were younger. Now Stephanie
lives with them, and she and Denny are in love, but are not lovers. When his
stepfather finds the two embracing, he angrily evicts Denny. That is when Denny
decides he will tell his story in a series of tapes as he drives from Pennsylvania to
California to find his father, stopping en route for visits with both his
grandmothers. 
This is candid, sympathetic, and often perceptive, but it is
weakened by the facts that the entries are not always convincing as tapes, being
long-winded and often sounding (particularly in quoted dialogue) as though they
were written rather than spoken, and that the whole book has an aura of
purposiveness, almost more an exploration of an interracial situation in its various
ramifications than a story with its own momentum. ZS
D.V. Interracial understanding
Narahashi, Keiko. I Have a Friend; written and illus. by Keiko Narahashi. Margaret K.
McElderry, 1987. ISBN 0-689-50432-2. 29p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
A deceptively simple picture book is full of graphic echoes that
capture the eye as effectively as the text will catch children's fancy. The first-
person narrative is only one line per page: "I have a friend/ who lives/ in my
house" establishes, in the first three pages, the little boy and his shadow central to
each subsequent full-page painting. The illustrations are bordered by spacious white
margins that set off the interplay of light-yellow and shadow-blue washes as the
child cavorts in the park or on the beach. The ending has a poetic twist: "In the
morning/ he will be waiting with the sun./ He is yesterday's night/ left behind for
the day." Yet the dominant tone is playful, and young listeners will quickly
respond to the book as a game, identifying the friend as a shadow though the
narrator never does. To confound the mystery, there is a more substantive friend
in almost every picture, a little black dog whose slitted white eyes exactly reflect
those of the boy's shadow. The curving contours of each dreamlike composition,
the superimposed shapes, the lyrical motion, and the child-centered perspective will
move children through this book over and over again. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers
Nixon, Joan Lowery. A Family Apart. Bantam, 1987. ISBN 0-553-4532-5. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Announced as the first volume in the Orphan Train quartet, this is
based on a real program, the Children's Aid Society's placement of orphans who
travelled from New York City to the West to be adopted by residents there. In this
story, set in 1860, widowed Mrs. Kelley realizes she cannot support her six
children and gives them up for adoption. The protagonist is the oldest girl,
Frances, who disguises herself as a boy so that she can be paired with her baby
brother for adoption, and they are indeed taken together by a very nice family.
"Frankie" is rather quickly discovered to be Frances, and everyone is happy about
it. This tale is framed (to no advantage) by a contemporary setting and a
grandmother who tells the whole-book story. This has sentimental appeal,
sympathetic if not subtly-drawn characters, and historical interest. It suffers, albeit
not gravely, from a predictability that is based in part on stock situations (clearly,
the story of brother Mike, planned as the second book, is going to be one about an
[35]
adoptive family as unpleasant as his sister's is pleasant) and from an aura of must-
get-those-facts-about-slave-markets-and-the-Underground-Railroad-in-there. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Brothers-sisters
Price, Susan. The Ghost Drum: A Cat's Tale. Farrar, 1987. ISBN 0-374-32538-3.
187p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-10. 
Confidently pulling together a disparate lot of folk motifs, Price (in
the unnecessary and annoying guise of a cat-narrator) tells of the intertwining fates
of Chingis, taken by a witch in infancy and raised to be a Woman of Power, and
Safa, the unwanted son of a czar, who commands the baby to be locked in a tower
forever. From the homely enchantment of Chingis' house that walks on chicken
legs to the extravagance of the czar's palace, and the beautiful but deadly ice-apples
of the sorcerer Kuzma, this quasi-Russian world is shot through with magic,
rendered with an incantatory repetition of both language and story patterns. RS
Provensen, Alice. Shaker Lane; written and illus. by Alice and Martin Provensen. Viking
Kestrel, 1987. ISBN 0-670-81568-3. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
"The people who lived on Shaker Lane took things easy," and when
the ramshackle world of Norbert and Charlene La Rose and the Whipple boys and
Bobbie Lee Peach is disturbed by the threat of eminent domain for a reservoir, the
neighbors leave as laconically as they lived. As Virgil Oates puts it, "Can't
swim." It's always autumn in the Provensens' paintings of this quiet rural drama,
with the browns and russets of land and sky providing a comfortable background
for the rickety houses and piled-up yards of Shaker Lane's inhabitants. There's
plenty of wry humor here, and the whole has a tone of inevitability rather than
tragedy--even the painting of the new reservoir rising over the tops of the deserted
houses is quietly beautiful. A cool spring green intrudes with the spread depicting
the modem subdivision on newly christened "Reservoir Road," but Shaker Lane
gets the last word in the person of Old man Van Sloop, now living on a
houseboat. "I like the water." RS
Radin, Ruth Yaffe. Tac's Turn; illus. by Gail Owens. Macmillan, 1987. ISBN 0-02-
775790-0. 80p. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
The sequel to Tac's Island has Tac (Thomas Andrew Carter) setting
out for a visit to Steve's home near Philadelphia. Both boys have mixed feelings,
which emerge as Steve shows off his familiar territory and Tac feels very much an
outsider. The boys bicker and even hurt each other in testing their new friendship
through everyday episodes like biking falls and backyard camping. The last day
turns more dramatic when they enjoy a hot air balloon ride that Tac has won at a
bike-race drawing. Generally, however, this is a low-key albeit realistic one-week
slice of two boys' lives. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Rylant, Cynthia. Children of Christmas: Storiesfor the Season; illus. by S. D. Schindler.
Orchard, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08306-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05706-2.
38p. Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
A collection of Christmas stories; should have seasonal appeal.
They are brief, capably written, and touching in the 0. Henry tradition, mingling
sophistication and sentiment. One tale is about an elderly derelict, but most have
child protagonists, most are bittersweet rather than sweet. The problem with these
stories is that while they are about children (with format, vocabulary, and
[36]
illustrations that suggest a juvenile audience), they seem more likely to appeal to
adult readers than to children. ZS
C.U. Christmas
Sachar, Louis. Sixth Grade Secrets. Scholastic, 1987. ISBN 0-590-40709-0. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
Laura is the leader of a trio of girls who form a club and swear to
keep each other's secrets; they invite some boys to join, demanding commitment
to an embarrassing revelation as a condition of acceptance. There's also a long
(too long) period of fooling the teacher by writing anonymous messages on the
blackboard. This has the sort of humor that appeals to most middle grades readers
(shrill, often silly, fraught with name-calling), and it's adequately written. The
characterization is shallow, and the plot seems overextended. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Silverberg, Robert. Project Pendulum; illus. by Moebuis. Walker, 1987. ISBN 0-8027-
6712-5. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Silverberg's concept is intriguing: identical twins Eric and Sean
have been chosen from other volunteer-twins to participate in a project that will
take them, separately, in wider and wider arcs of time, into the past and the future.
Thus, Project Pendulum. It's an appealing concept and the writing has pace and
vigor; there are moments of high drama and flashes of wit. What makes this less
than Silverberg's best is the format, as the short accounts of the pendulum-swing
visits proliferate to the extent of losing impact. ZS
Smith, Lucinda Irwin. Growing Up Female: New Challenges, New Choices. Messner,
1987. ISBN 0-671-63445-3. 156p. illus. with photographs. $10.79.
M 
Gr. 7-10. 
The author calls this "a book about choices," and organizes her text
into chapters on the historical background of women's liberation, contemporary
roles and goals, decisions, relationships, appearance and health, and general
perspective. Both the author's commentary and the interviews with notable figures
such as Billie Jean King, Cheryl Tiegs, and Peggy Fleming have a slick, quick
magazine tone that is not always bolstered by information. The section on birth
control choices, for instance, has three sentences on the pill with no mention of
any controversy about side effects. Generalities abound: "Throughout the 1950s
and 1960s, through mass production, fashionable clothes became affordable and
accessible to everyone." The positive aspects of the book are its easy appeal and
emphasis on the range of possibilities teens can take advantage of if they don't fall
into traditional traps; several questionnaires are calculated to involve readers. With
black-and-white photographs, a one-page bibliography, and index. BH
D.V. Sex roles
Snyder, Carol. Leave Me Alone, Ma. Bantam, 1987. ISBN 0-553-05442-2. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
The narrator, Jamie, is fourteen and wishes her mother, who tends to
carp, could be more like Grandma. Somehow, when Grandma tells Jamie to do
something, it doesn't sound critical. Still, Jamie is aware that her own whining
"Leave me alone, Ma," is the same thing Mom says to Grandma. (Despite the
frequent use of the phrase, Jamie otherwise refers to or addresses her mother as
"Mom.") This is more situation than plot, as Jamie tries to cope with the fact that
her best friend resents the growing affection between her brother and Jamie, to get
[37]
her parents to realize that demands of jobs are spoiling family life, to help a
younger child with a difficult home situation. Periodically (but not believably),
Jamie writes to the Mayor of New York to complain about civic failures or tell
him about herself. This has moments of humor, cohesion but little substance, and
sympathetic characters with little depth. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Friendship values; Parent-child relations
Speare, Jean. A Candle for Christmas; illus. by Ann Blades. Margaret K. McElderry,
1987. ISBN 0-689-50417-9. $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Nurse Roberta bustles too much, but she's kindhearted in
understanding Tomas' anxiety on Christmas Eve when his parents have not
returned from a trek to their cattle range. She even takes him back to his own
house, lights a fire, and decorates a tree. But then she's called out on an
emergency, and Tomas is left to keep the place warm and wait. Suddenly he wakes
from a drowsy dream of a giant candle, runs to retrieve his own candle from the
window outside, and finds his parents just arrived after a hard cattle drive through
the snow. The story is a traditional one with which any child can identify, from
feelings of desertion to happy ending. The watercolor paintings catch the cold
setting of a British Columbia Indian reservation during a forty-below winter. The
outdoor scenes are almost brittle with still, gray-white tones livened by spots of
color. Contrasting with these are warm interiors of plain, homey rooms, the last a
scene of parents and child united on a patchwork quilt that softly repeats the colors
of the Christmas tree. BH
Townsend, John Rowe. The Persuading Stick. Lothrop, 1987. ISBN 0-688-07260-7.
$10.25. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Beth is a third child, undemanding at home and often disregarded by
her classmates. Then one day she finds a strange silvery stick that seems to give
her power, a power she asserts half proudly, half fearfully. With the help of the
stick, she persuades her mother to have her friends over for tea, her teacher to let
the class out early for recess, an old shopkeeper to provide ice cream free for her
friends. But Beth is always drained after using the stick, aware of its dangers and
unable to get rid of it. The last, climactic use of the "magic wand" comes with her
persuading her brother not to commit suicide, after which she realizes "I couldn't
do anything with the stick that I wouldn't have been able to do without it." This
is a compact story with tight pace and quickly established characterization. The
dialogue, brevity, and teasing crossover from science fiction to realism will make
it appealing for independent readers or classroom reading aloud. BH
D.V. Self-confidence
Van Allsburg, Chris. The Z Was Zapped; written and illus. by Chris Van Allsburg.
Houghton, 1987. ISBN 0-395-44612-0. 54p. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
SpR 
5-8 yrs. 
... not to mention B (badly Bitten), F (firmly Flattened), N (Nailed
and Nailed again), or any of the others in Van Allsburg's letter-by-letter destruction
of the alphabet. Each of the 26 acts of the "play" (performed by the Caslon
Players) is devoted to a single center-stage letter and the particular mayhem being
visited upon it. Captions are on the versos of the pictures, providing a guessing-
game element that may be fun for the first go-through but that ultimately irritates,
working against the simple-yet-sinister tone of the book. The Cont6-pencilled
menace here is quiet, still and sophisticated, etched with impeccably gray shadows.
"D," for example, drowning in a trompe l'oeil fishbowl, has the elegant repose of a
corpse in a British mystery. Even the more innocuous scenes, like the "I," "nicely
[ 38 ]
iced," become perverse in context, as we infer the intent of the icing to be not
decoration but suffocation. Handsome, impish, maybe even brilliant in its own
peculiar way, but who is this book for? RS
Wersba, Barbara. Love is the Crooked Thing. Harper, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
026367-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026366-0. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
In the first book about (and narrated by) plump Rita Formica,
sixteen, she is desolate as the story ends, for her lover Arnold-twice her age, quiet
and gentle-has agreed with her parents that he is too old for her, and has left
town. In this sequel to Fat: A Love Story (reviewed in the June, 1987 issue), Rita
decides that she will somehow get the money to go to Zurich and find Arnold; she
has no address but knows he's in that city. Wersba manages, just, to keep Rita's
visit (undisclosed to parents) credible, and to make the means (working for a
paperback romance mill) refreshingly amusing. This is just as adroit as the first
book and just as witty, but a bit more bittersweet. ZS
Westall, Robert. Rachel and the Angel and Other Stories. Greenwillow, 1987. ISBN 0-
688-07370-0. $10.25. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 8-12. 
Recurring images link the seven fantastic stories collected here: the
fallen angel of the title story who challenges Rachel to name a "good and just
man" or face the destruction of her town; the mysterious waif who appears outside
the shop window of a lonely antique dealer in "A Nose Against the Glass" (more
than a nod to Wilde's "The Selfish Giant" here). "Urn Burial," "Peckforton Hill,"
and "The Big Rock Candy Mountain" (previously published in Robin McKinley's
collection Imaginary Lands, reviewed in the April, 1986 issue) all tell of secrets
hidden in the earth. The two angel stories are gorgeous tales of beauty surrounded
by darkness, but most of the others, while clever, suffer from over-compression of
too many ideas and themes, coming across as too-short novels rather than long
short stories. The last, "Artist on Aranor," is an extended nightmare of sadistic
misogyny, detailing the treatment of two beautiful female robots at the hands of a
"silly" man. While this one ends with what Westall obviously believes to be a
"feminist" message, it isn't really, leaving the story thematically ambivalent and
decidedly unpleasant. RS
Whelan, Gloria. Next Spring an Oriole; illus. by Pamela Johnson. Random House, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99125-7; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-89125-2. (Stepping
Stone). Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $1.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Historical fiction at an easy level is hard to find, and this pioneer
story, narrated by 10-year-old Libby Mitchell on her journey from Virginia to
Michigan in 1837, is smoothly written and appealing. The wagon trail is not
easy, and Whelan is careful to include a taste of the physical and emotional
hardships, from the discomfort of head lice to tension between Mama and Papa.
She's also careful in her presentation of the Potawatomi Indians, who figure in the
story when the Mitchells nurse one of their children back to health after a bout of
measles. Papa mentions the whites' unfair treatment of the Indians, and later the
little girl's family shows up with food to help the Mitchells survive their first
winter. There's even an ecological theme in Papa's love of the trees he refuses to
girdle for farming, but the story, though brief, is well enough developed to
outweigh the messages. BH
C.U. History-U.S.-Frontier and pioneer life
[39]
Wilson, Willie. Up Mountain One Time; illus. by Karen Bertrand. Orchard/Watts, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08325-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05725-9. Library ed.
$12.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 4-7. 
The young mongoose Viggo waits, with some trepidation, for the
time when he will leave the city to live in the bush, one day, "but not too too
soon." But when his mother fails to return from a hunting expedition, Viggo
realizes it is now time to leave his comfortable home and wise friend Clovis (a
goat) and seek his ancestral haunts. Judging by the lilting almost-patois of
Viggo's speech, this appears to be set in the Caribbean, but it could be any sleepy
tropical town, an unfortunate lack of specificity that extends to Viggo himself,
who never seems particularly mongoose-like, but could be any young wandering
animal, tempted by the (relatively) easy living of the city but longing for the
beauty and freedom of the wild. The narrative style, while lyrical, lazily shifts
between Viggo's point of view and an omniscient one, slowing the story and
confusing the boundaries of the fantasy element. RS
D.V. Independence
Wittman, Sally. The Boy Who Hated Valentine's Day; illus. by Chaya Burstein. Harper,
1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-126594-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026593-0. 29p.
Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Cheerful illustrations in bright colors have an informal quality, with
more vigor than polish. The story is told with direct simplicity, and although not
structurally impressive, it has a final turn of events that should amuse the
audience. Having been pushed into a position of saying he didn't like Valentine's
Day (which he did), Ben was ignored by his classmates: no valentines in his box
in second grade. In third grade, Ben had a wonderful idea: imitating the signatures
of his peers, he gave himself a valentine from every child in the room. Then he
felt sorry for a newcomer, and gave all his faked valentines to the new boy. And
then---that's the twist. ZS
D.V. Kindness
Yolen, Jane, ed. Spaceships and Spells: A Collection of New Fantasy and Science-Fiction
Stories; ed. by Jane Yolen, Martin H. Greenberg, and Charles G. Waugh. Harper,
1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026797-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026796-8. Library
ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Despite the title, only a few of the thirteen stories collected here (all
published for the first time) are even nominally science fiction; one of these, John
Forrester's "Beneath Their Blue, Blue Skins" is a very good story about a girl who
finds herself on the "wrong" side of an inter-species war. The others, and most of
the fantasy stories which form the rest of the anthology, are unexceptional,
flaccidly plotted around insubstantial premises. Two other stand-outs, though:
Robert Lawson's White Goddess story, "The Silver Leopard," and Elizabeth
Helfman's "Voices in the Wind," a tender story of a lonely old couple who wish
themselves into hearing voices in the wind and rain. RS