Aiken, Joan. The Last Slice of Rainbow: and Other Stories; illus. by Alix Berenzy.
Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020043-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020042-1.
Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
In the first of these nine stories, Jason wins a gift rainbow from
the Wind, gives pieces away to those in need, and feels all the better for it. In the
second, Clem pursues the tooth fairy in search of the dream she stole from him,
loans it to her, and feels better for it. Not all the stories are so optimistic; one
ends with a disagreeable princess suffering an empty life, another with a young
painter forever frustrated in his work. The tales all depend on a multiplicity of
marvels, and an occasional overload cancels out the effect. The images are vivid
but bizarre. Legs run off by themselves, bits of face turn to glass, a heroine must
plunge her bleeding hand into a tubful of spiders, a boy has "two butterflies
whirring like helicopters inside his mouth," another's heart flutters "like a lark
inside a biscuit tin," a tree sends love messages to a girl, a queen is punished with
screaming hair that she pulls out by the gobful to solve the kingdom's problems.
The book may have some appeal for the crowd that draws rainbows arching over
white unicorns, but it lacks the crisp wit and tight structuring of Aiken's better
work. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers
Ammon, Richard. The Kids' Book of Chocolate. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-699-31292-X.
74p. illus. and with photographs. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
A chocolate aficionado walks readers through a bit of history,
technology, and taste testing, beginning with information on the Aztecs' use of
chocolate and its subsequent spread through the Spanish explorers to the rest of
Europe. He then describes the processing and manufacture of candy and concludes
with a conglomeration of recipes, places to visit, a food value chart, untrue
"myths" about chocolate, jokes, and a list of books for further reading. Black-and-
white photographs extend textual descriptions, as in the picture of cocoa bean pods
with a ruler showing their size; a map, diagrams, and old-fashioned prints further
illustrate the book, which is indexed. A lightweight confection. BH
C.U. Nutrition (unit)
Arnosky, Jim. Gray Boy; written and illus. by Jim Arnosky. Lothrop, 1988. ISBN
0-688-07345-X . $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
One of those spare, almost predictably tragic dog stories that
nevertheless holds the reader to the inevitable end. Gray Boy is a huge animal, part
Labrador, given to Ian by his father, who died shortly afterwards in a car accident.
[129 ]
Much as Ian loves the dog, he and his mother recognize and worry about the streak
of uncontrollable wildness in him. Finally, Gray Boy destroys a neighbor's prize
rabbits and runs away, surviving entanglements with various wild animals until a
fight with a trapped fisher leaves the dog critically injured. In trying to rescue
him, Ian himself falls through ice and gets retrieved by the dying dog, an event
foreshadowed by an earlier fishing trip in which Gray Boy has retrieved a fish for
Ian. This has dramatic action, homey characters, and a wild setting that will ease
reluctant readers through the short text or function as an attention-getting read-
aloud. BH
D.V. Animals, love for
Ashabranner, Brent. The Vanishing Border: A Photographic Journey Along Our Frontier
With Mexico; illus. with photographs by Paul Conklin. Dodd, 1987. ISBN
0-396-08900-3. 175p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
In 1986, the U.S. Border patrol apprehended over 1.5 million
illegal border crossers from Mexico, according to jacket copy, which continues,
"But during the same year, Mexicans crossed the border legally almost 200 million
times to work, shop, visit. . ." Ashabranner's investigative journey is recorded in
a text that is sympathetic and lucid, based on many interviews on both sides of the
border. He points out how interdependent the neighboring areas are, especially in
the establishment of U.S.-owned assembly plants in Mexican border cities, in the
sharing of conservation or irrigation schemes, in the back-and-forth flow of tourist,
family, or business crossovers. 
The book is marred occasionally by florid
passages, but is informative and detailed, is given variety by cited interviews, and
is enhanced by the many well-placed photographs. A bibliography and an index are
appended. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Bawden, Nina. Henry; illus. by Joyce Powzyk. Lothrop, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07894-X.
$13.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Henry is a baby squirrel adopted by a family waiting out the
London Blitz on a country farm during World War II. With her characteristic
subtlety of craft, Bawden develops scenes and dialogue that bring the reader to
realize what Henry means to the narrator, her two brothers, and her mother as they
all await her father's return from naval duty. The youngest, Charlie, is particularly
touching in his desperate attachments to any strong male figure-a farm hand, an
Italian prisoner of war-and in his vague fears about the father he can't quite
remember. His question of whether his dad will like the squirrel clearly translates
into one of whether his dad will like Charlie. There are many realities here, death
in a neighbor's terminal illness, her son's decision to stay with his father on the
farm afterwards. 
This is a story that speaks of family unity in the face of
dislocation and separation. BH
D.V. Family relations
Bernstein, Joanne E. Grand-Slam Riddles; by Joanne E. Bernstein and Paul Cohen; illus.
by Meyer Seltzer. Whitman, 1988. ISBN 0-8075-3038-7. 30p. $7.75.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
This runs the gamut, as do most riddle books, from funny and
very occasionally clever puns to puns that are contrived or that depend on latent
[ 130]
content to be understood. All are in question and answer form, and are grouped
under headings that are more or less pertinent. The pencil drawings, in cartoon
style, have vigor, and the humor, however stretched, is the kind that children find
eminently and interminably quotable. ZS
Blocksma, Mary. Action Contraptions: Easy-To-Make Toys That Really Move; by Mary
Blocksma and Dewey Blocksma; illus. by Sandra Hulst. Prentice-Hall, 1987.
ISBN 0-13-003352-9. 64p. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
After an introduction to the tools and materials needed, 35
projects are organized into four basic constructions: "minute mites" (a few quickies
involving balloons and a frisbee cut from a styrofoam plate), "spinners" (several
kinds of tops), wind spinners (weathervanes made from plastic cups), and crazy cars
(the longest and most varied section). These are ephemeral by nature-the most
liberally used material is tape-but they will keep children busy, which is more
important than the actual product. A few seem unecessarily doomed to quick
garbage disposal, for instance the "carrot car" that calls for raw vegetable wheels.
Patterns are repetitive, but there's an effort to build on basic principles for
inventive effects, as in explaining "two ways to make wheels turn" (spin the axle,
spin the wheels). With spaciously formated instructions and clear, black-and-white
diagrams. BH
Brown, Marc Tolon. Arthur's Baby; written and illus. by Marc Tolon Brown. Joy Street/
Little, 1987. ISBN 0-316-11123-6. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Having been through a good many traumas with Arthur already,
young listeners won't be too surprised to find he's suffering some pangs of sibling
rivalry with the arrival of a new baby sister. And they won't be disappointed in
the humor that's injected into Arthur's dose of adaptation. The spacious cartoon
strips document a classic sequence: peer reactions ("You'll have to change all
those dirty diapers!" says Muffy, holding her nose), Arthur's understated anxiety ("I
think babies are taking over the world!"), Mother showing Arthur a snapshot of
himself, aged one and crowned with a bowl of mashed peas-and of course the
classic conclusion, in which Arthur solves the baby's problem when no one else
can. Young listeners know what to expect of Arthur; now they know what to
expect of a new baby ("Burp!"). BH
D.V. Baby, Adjustment to
Buchan, Elizabeth. Beatrix Potter; illus. by Beatrix Potter and Mike Dodd. Hamish
Hamilton, 1987. ISBN 0-241-12051-9. 54p. (Profiles). $9.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Capably written in 12 brief chapters and illustrated with a
mixture of crosshatch portraits and drawings from Potter's books, this is a
sensible, non-adulatory biography of the first moder picture-book artist. Potter's
domination by her demanding parents, the untimely death of her fianc6, her
brother's alcoholism, and her eventual happiness on a country farm with her
husband William Heelis are interwoven with her development of Peter Rabbit,
Squirrel Nutkin, The Tailor of Gloucester, and other classic animal characters.
U.S. children researching Potter will note with interest her relationship with Anne
Carroll Moore of the New York Public Library and subsequent cordiality to
visiting Americans. BH
C.U. Illustrators (unit)
[ 131 ]
Carlson, Nancy. Arnie Goes to Camp; written and illus. by Nancy Carlson. Viking, 1988.
ISBN 0-670-81549-7. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
Arnie is not nearly as enthusiastic about two weeks of overnight
camp as his mother is; he's lonely and homesick before he even gets there.
Gradually, however, and-to the author's credit-with no dramatic episode, he
begins to enjoy his counselor, bunk-mate, nature walks, campfire stories, and even
pranks. Except for a few bee stings, Arnie's home free with the "Best New
Camper" award. Nothing new or different here, and Arnie doesn't seem quite as
lively as Carlson's Harriet. However, with its action-packed animal cartoons, the
book is a good one to share with any young child about to trek off to camp, even
if the picture book audience seems a bit young for that experience. BH
D.V. Adaptability
Carrick, Donald. Harald and the Great Stag; written and illus. by Donald Carrick. Clarion,
1988. ISBN 0-89919-514-8. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
The young hero of Harald and the Giant Knight (reviewed in the
June 1982 issue), who was earlier disillusioned about tournaments and jousting,
here challenges the hallowed hunting customs of the Middle Ages. Harald has
glimpsed the Great Stag targeted by the baron for sport, and he throws the dogs off
track by scattering the Stag's droppings in "a crazy pattern over the forest floor."
Saved from discovery by an old hunter who also admires the Stag, Harald escapes
the severe punishment that would have accompanied his deed but retains an
indelible impression of how it feels to be hunted. The watercolor paintings are
rich in woods hues, with occasional spreads featuring festive trappings of medieval
attire. The dappled lighting and soft textures graphically emphasize the shadows
into which the Stag escapes. A thoughtful blend of historical and contemporary
themes. BH
C.U. History
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Caseley, Judith. Silly Baby; written and illus. by Judith Caseley. Greenwillow, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07355-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07356-5. Library ed.
$11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Caseley's interest in design and texture is evident in the
ornamental details of paintings that are adequately set off by white space. The
people in her paintings, however, are stiff figures, often awkward and sometimes
cut off at the hips. The story of a small child's adjustment to dethronement is
fairly standard, but the telling, in its style and humor, is better than standard, as
Lindsay begins to appreciate the fact that her newborn sister's behavior is normal
and that she herself had performed the same "silly" way. ZS
D.V. Baby, adjustment to
Christian, Mary Blount. The Maltese Feline; illus. by Kathleen Collins Howell. Dutton,
1988. ISBN 0-525-44334-7. 53p. $10.95.
M 
Gr. 2-4. 
Adhering to a formula frequently found in primary-grades stories
about child detectives, this is slight, contrived, and pedestrian in style, with the
narrator and his two peers doing the investigating, while the local police are called
[ 132]
in only to make the arrest. On his way home from a Little League tryout, Fenton
sees the fat cat whose collar says "MAC." Readers are given broad hints that the
collar belongs to a wealthy woman named Mary Alice Collinbacher, and that the
cat is a pregnant female. Fenton and his friends do trace the cat's owner (M. A.
C.) in response to a lipstick-scrawled note tucked into the cat's collar. Small
marks for Fenton's persistence and the author's provision of a happy ending, but
there is little more to recommend the book. Not that that will stop ever-voracious
mystery fans. ZS
Cleary, Beverly. A Girl from Yamhill: A Memoir. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07800-1.
illus. with photographs. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-. 
While young people who are Cleary fans will certainly enjoy her
autobiographical account of childhood and high school years, it is probable that
die-hard adult fans will appreciate the book even more as they share memories of
the past. The author sees her child self with the same clarity and objectivity as she
has seen her fictional characters, and her reminiscences have a resultant integrity
and candor. She is honest but not bitter about a mother who was both possessive
and domineering, she gives a vivid picture of life during the years of the
depression, and she is persuasive rather than dramatic in describing the experiences
that are universal to childhood. ZS
C.U. Authors, Children's authors (unit)
Cohen, Miriam. It's George; illus. by Lillian Hoban. Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-688-06812-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06813-8. Library ed. $11.88; Trade
ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 1-2. 
Lillian Hoban's pictures of the members of Miriam Cohen's first
grade class have always been as endearing, as the children's true-to-life antics.
Many a recognition reflex has been registered by beginning readers, and the books
have also been popular with the read-aloud audience. Here classmates in a multi-
ethnic schoolroom learn to appreciate the special quality of George, who is far
from the best student in first grade, but who wins deserved media publicity for
being quick-witted enough to telephone an emergency number when an elderly
friend, on whom he calls every day, collapses. ZS
C.U. Reading aloud; Reading, beginning
D.V. Age-mate relations; Consideration for others
Doherty, Berlie. Granny Was a Buffer Girl. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08354-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05754-2. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 6-9. 
In a beautifully crafted story that has won the Carnegie Award,
the matrix for memories of an extended English family is given by Jess, about to
go to France for a university year abroad. The family gathering (three generations)
introduces characters, and the ensuing separate segments are woven into a cohesive
if varied single fabric. This is a testament to family love, it is a piece of social
history, and it is a fascinating read that involves the reader in making connections
among the roundly depicted characters. Good pace, good style. Good awarding.
ZS
D.V. Family relations
[ 133 ]
Donnelly, Elfie. A Package for Miss Marshwater; illus. by Ute Krause. Dial, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0454-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1453-4. 64p. Library
ed. $9.89; Trade ed. $9.95.
M 
Gr. 2-4. 
Miss Marshwater is stereotypically lady-like until she unwraps
two duck-billed platypuses in a package sent her from Australia. A and Bea, as
they're called, transform her into a relaxed and happy woman simply by echoing
everything she says and providing the company for which she has been so lonely.
Although there's some redeeming humor, the creatures seem a bit cutesy and the
story contrived: A and Bea have babies (Cee and Dee), who echo Miss
Marshwater's words in babytalk. "And," as the ending abruptly has it, "that's the
story." Easy to read, with funny illustrations, this may serve as practice for
transition readers, who will get a kick out of names like the landlady's (Mrs.
Wolfbottom). BH
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Duffy, James. Missing. Scribner, 1988. ISBN 0-684-18912-7. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Kate, age ten, knew she should never accept a ride from a
stranger, but Mr. Atwood knew her mother (he said) and so did his wife. That's
how the story starts, as Kate is kidnapped. 
Her sister Sandy, despite the
embarrassing fact that Kate has run away twice, is sure that this time is different,
that Kate is in danger. 
That sort of reasoning is one of the weaknesses of the
book, as retired policewoman Agatha Bates makes a series of conveniently correct
assumptions as she works with the town police to catch "Mr. Atwood," who has
kidnapped Kate because she looks like his own child who had disappeared some
years ago. The writing style and pace of the story are unimpressive, but readers
will enjoy the suspense as the text moves back and forth between the detective
efforts in Kate's town and the big, silent house where the kidnapper tries to
persuade Kate that she will be happy being his child. ZS
Dygard, Thomas J. The Rookie Arrives. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07598-3. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Ted, who had been a high school hero as a third baseman, had
held out for a major league offer, he comes to the Kansas City Royals ready to take
over the position from an aging superstar, Lou Mills. This is formula sports
fiction (brash rookie makes good), but it's capably written, with game sequences
that baseball buffs will enjoy, and it gives a realistic picture of major league ball
as big business, as the coaches, owners, and manager of the team make their
decisions about hiring, trading, and playing or benching men on their roster. ZS
Fleisher, Gary R., M.D. First Aid for Kids; illus. by Susan Gray. Barron's Educational
Series, 1987. ISBN 0-8120-5814-3. 20p. $9.95.
R 
Gr. 5-. 
Heavy board pages that will lie flat are cut on one side to form a
color-coded index to types of accidents and illnesses. The author, medical director
of The Children's Hospital in Boston, is crisply informative and authoritative,
giving illustrated step-by-step procedures for dealing with a wide range of medical
crises, frequently suggesting those points at which professional help should be
sought. The book should be useful to anyone responsible for child care, in or out
of the home, both as instruction in recognition of symptoms and danger signals,
and in providing facts about such help as the nonprofessional can give. ZS
[ 134]
C.U. Health and hygiene
Folsom, Michael. The Macmillan Book of How Things Work; 
by Michael Folsom and
Marcia Folsom; illus. by Brad Hamann. Macmillan, 1987. Trade ed. ISBN 0-02-
735360-5; Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-71139-5. 77p. Trade ed. $15.95; Paper ed.
$8.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
A much more effective approach than most technological
overviews of this sort, the Folsoms' presentation is well-organized to answer the
questions either burning or lurking in most children's minds about how television,
telephones, and other common electrical or electronic mechanisms work. The
explanations are selectively simplified and clear, as are the labelled color drawings
and diagrams in their uncluttered, two-column format. An extensive table of
contents directs students looking for specific material: the section "At Home," for
instance, includes electrical system (generator, switch, circuit, fuse and circuit
breaker, meter), water system (reservoir, storage tank, water treatment, sewer
system), etc. Business, transportation, musical, and medical machines are also
covered. Two indexes, one to the illustrations and one to the text, offer further
help in accessing information, but browsers just may get caught by their own
curiosity to take in the whole book. BH
C.U. Industrial Arts
French, Fiona. Snow White in New York; written and illus. by Fiona French. Oxford,
1986. ISBN 0-19-279808-1. 32p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 3-4. 
Snow White, in this Art Deco spoof of the traditional tale, is a
Kewpie-doll blonde, and her newly-acquired stepmother is a slinky brunette Theda
Bara. Angry at what she sees in the Mirror (the New York Mirror) praising Snow
White, the villainous stepmother tells a bodyguard to kill Snow White. The rest
of the plot is adapted in similar style: S.W. is taken in by 7 jazz musicians when
the hit man lets her go; her sleep is caused by a poisoned cherry put into her
cocktail, her recovery (cherry dislodged when a coffin-bearer stumbles) leads to
marriage when a handsome society reporter smiles at her awakening. 
This
sophisticated picture book may not be appreciated by very young children, but
independent readers (who do not need the very large print that's used) should enjoy
as much of the joke as they can comprehend. Distributed in 1987 in this country,
the book won the 1986 Kate Greenaway Award in Great Britain, and the
illustrations are indeed distinctive, with geometric abstractions, handsome use of
silhouettes, and intriguing complexities of perspective and color used as
backgrounds for the svelte, elongated figures in John Held style. ZS
French, Michael. 
Us Against Them. Bantam, 1987. ISBN 0-553-05440-6. 
151p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 8-10. 
Misunderstood outsiders in their small town in upstate New
York, seven teens, led by charismatic Reed, form a club. When an abandoned gas
station the group had used as a club house is to be torn down, Reed decides they
should all go to the Adirondacks for a few days, a trip he keeps extending through
manipulating a "unanimous" vote of the members. Tragedy strikes when the father
of two of the girls comes to look for them and is killed-accidentally?-in a tussle
with Reed. It's good melodrama, and the details of wilderness survival will appeal,
but thematic concerns tend to overwhelm the narrative, and the characters remain
faceless-we're told about the great bond between them, but we don't see it. Reed
[ 135 ]
is a better developed character; more than a stereotyped megalomaniac, he is a
strong leader, competent, encouraging and kind, his obsessive need for control
masking insecurities the others come only gradually to see. RS
D.V. Friendship values
George, William T. Beaver at Long Pond; written by William T. George and Lindsay
Barrett George; illus. by Lindsay Barrett George. Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-688-07107-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07106-6. Library ed. $11.88; Trade
ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Beautifully detailed illustrations (watercolors, dyes, and colored
pencils) that are meticulous in their depiction of flora and fauna show the actions
of a beaver in the quiet dark of night. The text is not as impressive as the pictures
because it has little substance and because it leaves so much unexplained; for
example, how does the beaver breathe in his lodge, the construction of which is
not made clear. ZS
C.U. Nature study
Griffiths, John. Cuba: Pearl of the Caribbean. Batsford/ David and Charles, 1987. ISBN
0-8521-9704-7. 64p. illus. and with photographs. $17.95.
NR 
Gr. 6-8. 
The operative question in assessing yet another countries-of-the-
world entry is whether or not it provides anything more than an up-to-date
encyclopedia article. On the plus side, this Cuba includes many informative
charts, maps and graphs of health and population statistics, hurricane occurences,
imports and exports, often accompanied by provocative questions. Under a tourism
graph, for example, is the question "What reasons are there for the different graphs
for socialist and capitalist countries?" On the other hand, this is overly adulatory
and uncritical, implying that the biggest problem Cuba faces (aside from Ronald
Reagan) is convincing the populace to eat green vegetables. The Bay of Pigs is
briefly (and fairly) mentioned,the Marielitos not at all, and the Missile Crisis only
in the glossary, defining the word blockade but not mentioning who wanted the
missiles. The author does say about Cuba that "that which is good can be
applauded, reservations can be held about what is not," but does not appear to have
taken his own advice. RS
Hall, Lynn. Flyaway. Scribner, 1987. ISBN 0-684-18888-0. 120p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
This is Lynn Hall at her serious, perspicacious best. Ariel,
seventeen, is the narrator, and both she and Robin, her fourteen-year-old sister, hate
their father. There are few people who would understand this, for to the outside
world Frank Brecht is a model father. He is not physically abusive, but he
controls rigidly all that his children do. Ariel is determined to escape after
graduation; Robin is so unhappy that she runs off with a married man just to get
away from home. Only as she leaves, anticipating freedom, does Ariel have a
glimpse of understanding of her father's love-a love that is destructive but
undeniable. This isn't a story with a lively plot, but it is a beautifully developed
narrative of family tension that is nicely paced, smoothly written, and acutely
perceptive in its depiction of character, especially the characters of one parent who
is harshly domineering and the other timidly subservient. ZS
D.V. Father-daughter relations; Self-reliance
[ 136 ]
Hall, Lynn. In Trouble Again, Zelda Hammersmith? Harcourt, 1987. ISBN 0-15-
238780-3. 138p. $13.95.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
Zelda, the narrator, is in fourth grade, lives with her mother in a
trailer park, and is repeatedly in trouble because of schemes that fail due to her
naivete (or maybe it's her stupidity) and sometimes amuse but more often irritate
her long-suffering mother. Like buying a moribund horse for her mother's
birthday, or pursuing a boy on whom she has a crush and announcing she's his
new girlfriend (response: "Bug off, Zelda") or embarassing Mom by playing
detective and falsely accusing neighbors. The print is large, the structure episodic,
and the action plentiful if forced, so that the book, which totally lacks the literary
quality of most of Hall's books for older readers, has some appeal to readers. ZS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Hanmer, Trudy J. Haiti. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10479-6. 
86p. illus. and with
photographs. (A First Book). $9.90.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
As is true of most series books about other countries, this
follows a well-established format, dealing briefly with facts about economy,
geography, religion, and other aspects of the Haitian culture before moving on to a
more detailed treatment of the country's turbulent history. The information is
useful, although it offers no new insights or fresh interpretation of events; it
concludes with the takeover by a military junta after the flight of "Baby Doc"
Duvalier in 1986. The writing style is dry, often to the point of dullness, and is
marred by generalizations and-less often--patronizing explanations, but the text
is accurate and the tone restrained. The glossary is inadequate, the index adequate.
ZS
C.U. Social studies
Hoffman, Mary. Nancy No-Size; illus. by Jennifer Northway. Oxford, 1987. ISBN 0-19-
520596-0. 23p. $8.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
From England, a picture story book about the middle child in a
biracial family confronts the feelings often held by middle children. Nancy isn't
old enough to do some things, or tall enough; she isn't young enough to enjoy the
privileges of a younger sibling. The author treats Nancy's feelings by use of a
repetitive and negative pattern: "So she wasn't big and she wasn't small. She was
no size at all. ... So she wasn't dark and she wasn't fair. She was no colour at
all.... So she wasn't first and she wasn't last. She was no place at all." With
her fifth birthday, the story ends, Nancy feels that she is old, big, tall, "Nancy-
shaped and Nancy-coloured." The last reference is to one of the strong points of
the story, showing siblings whose skin-tones differ. 
This will find some
sympathetic ears, but the combination of negative approach and sudden conversion
is not effective. The illustrations are cluttered with details, but the bright pastel
hues are cheerful. Better concept than execution here. ZS
D.V. Self-confidence
Hopkins, Lila. Eating Crow. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10499-0. 135p. $12.40.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
Croake Douglas, the black protagonist, finds the behavior of a
new classmate offensive; he responds to Ezekiel Silverstein's silent contempt by
[ 137 1
harassing him and then, learning that Zeke is mute, by "eating crow." The boys
become friends, together fighting local bullies, heroically rescuing Zeke's pet
crow, the loquacious Piccolo, and learning to appreciate the therapeutic talents of
the eccentric root-and-magic dealer, old Miss Sophie. While it's nice to have a
book about interracial friendship and kindness to animals, the story is both
completely predictable (Zeke talks) and heavily over-written, with florid phrases,
redundant use of words, and erratic use of dialect. ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to; Friendship values
Hughes, Monica. Sandwriter. Holt, 1988. ISBN 0-8050-0617-6. $11.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Princess Antia of Kamalant is not at all eager to make a state
visit to Roshan, "all desert and dirt and flies," particularly because she believes the
purpose of the trip is to marry her off to Jodril, heir to the Roshan throne. Antia
secretly loves her tutor Eskoril, so when he urges her to go ("Trust me
completely") and send him reports, she complies, eventually discovering the real
reason for her visit and, too late, the duplicity of her tutor. The fantastic element
here is kept to a minimum, personified in the Sandwriter, an old woman versed in
the ways of the desert who guards the "heart" of Roshan. There's not much
suspense here, and too much quasi-mystic musing instead of action, but feisty and
headstrong Antia is a true heroine, and the book could serve as a stepping stone to
the books of Robin McKinley and other stories about "girls who do things." RS
Hunt, Morton. Gay: What Teenagers Should Know about Homosexuality and the AIDS
Crisis. Rev. ed. Farrar, 1987. Trade ed. ISBN 0-374-32525-1; Paper ed. ISBN
0-374-42524-8. Trade ed. $13.95; Paper ed. $6.95. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
Gr. 9-12. 
While this new edition of a book first published in 1977 has
been updated to include information on AIDS and newer statistics on homosexual
behaviors, it appears (in the light of ten years perspective) that what most needed
revision is Hunt's patronizing and offensive attitudes toward his subject. He tells
us, correctly, that we cannot generalize about homosexuals, but it soon becomes
apparent that, to Hunt, there are only two kinds: those of whom he approves
(quiet, monogamous, and inconspicuous-he calls them "straight gays") and those
who he finds strange ("A sizable minority look and act like creatures of some other
society or even some other planet"), "airy-fairy," and "queer." "Let's agree that
we-the author of this book and its readers--aren't being scornful or contemptuous
when we use this term; we're only being descriptive." "Queer gays" include
transvestites, married men, pedophiles and leathermen, as well as "the macho gay
man, the flaming faggot, the diesel dyke and the disco freak." Hunt claims it is
acceptable for him to use these terms because homosexuals use them among
themselves, but he misses the ironic way in which gays speak these words, an
ignorance and insensitivity that extends to his condescending talk about "camp" and
"gay taste." While Hunt states that "queer gays" and "straight gays" together
comprise a statistical minority of homosexuals, he fails to tell us what the rest of
them are doing. The new AIDS information is accurate, as far as it goes: while
Hunt gives us lengthy looks at drag balls, cruising bars and (approvingly) small
dinner parties, his discussion of AIDS is limited to safe sex guidelines and the drop
in gay promiscuity, nowhere personalizing this crisis facing the gay community
today, nor the courageous responses that are addressing it. The best book on this
subject remains Hanckel and Cunningham's A Way of Love, A Way of Life,
[ 138]
which, while also in need of revision, demonstrates both comprehension and
respect. RS
Hurwitz, Johanna. Teacher's Pet; illus. by Sheila Hamanaka. Morrow, 1988. ISBN
0-688-07506-1. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
As a world-class conformist and achiever, fourth-grader Cricket
confidently expects that she will adjust to the fact that a new girl, Zoe, is just as
smart, and it's equally hard to accept the fact that the fourth-grade teacher plays no
favorites. Cricket struggles with jealousy, is angry at herself (and Zoe) when she
makes mistakes due to a tension she's never had before, and eventually recognizes
two things that show she has gained maturity and perspective: she can see why
she hadn't been popular in the past, and she can accept Zoe as a friend, realizing
that it is less important to be The Best than to do the best one can. Hurwitz's
writing has, despite a few stylistic weaknesses, an easy flow and humor;
characterization is believable if not deep, and the plot is realistic if not unfamiliar.
ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Self-appraisal
Hyde, Margaret Oldroyd. Know about AIDS; 
by Margaret O. Hyde and Elizabeth H.
Forsyth; illus. by Debora Weber. Walker, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-
6739-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6738-9. 68p. Library ed. $11.85; Trade ed.
$10.95.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
Solid evidence to support Surgeon General Koop's assertion that
children can and should be made to understand the threat of AIDS, this is factual,
compassionate, and non-judgmental. While younger children might need help
understanding such terms as venereal disease, and older ones more information on
safe sex, on the whole this is precisely targeted for upper elementary readers. Hyde
and Forsyth are careful to distinguish between what is known about AIDS (that it
cannot be spread by casual contact, for example) and what is not known or only
tentatively proven -
the qualifier "no one really knows" crops up with poignant
regularity. Several personal anecdotes (whether fictional or not is not clear) about
children and parents with AIDS are woven in, allowing readers a personalizing
perspective that humanizes the statistics. Indexed, with a good reading list. RS
C.U. Health and hygiene
Isadora, Rachel. The Pirates of Bedford Street; written and illus. by Rachel Isadora.
Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-05208-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
05206-1. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Colorful paintings that show both what Joey is doing and what
he is imagining speak effectively to the theme of a child's creative instinct.
Coming home after seeing a pirate movie, Joey draws pictures on the stoop;
rebuked by the landlady and sent to the basement to get a bucket of water for
cleaning his chalk drawings, Joey becomes immersed in drawing more pictures in
the basement. Papa comes home and helps him clean up; the landlady shows her
understanding by giving Joey a drawing pad and crayons so that he can keep the
pictures he draws. Thus, this shows approval of Joey's activity, and it's pleasant
to look at, but it's a story that's structurally slight and that lacks the impact of
action. ZS
D.V. Creativity
[ 139]
Jones, Diana Wynne. The Lives of Christopher Chant. Greenwillow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-
07806-0. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
A decade ago, in Charmed Life, Jones introduced a wonderfully
fresh fantasy world--or, rather, a series of divergent worlds simultaneous in time-
in which two children of the Chant family took it for granted that part of their
education was the study and perfection of witchcraft. Christopher Chant is their
ancestor, this new story being set many years before Charmed Life. Here
Christopher is a boy, quickly learning through a series of deftly-structured
adventures how great his power is, and slowly adjusting to the fact that he has
been chosen as the next Chrestomanci, the arch-magician of a wholly-conceived
fantasy world that is firmly rooted in realism and is leavened with wry humor. ZS
Khalsa, Dayal Kaur. I Want a Dog; illus. by Dayal Kaur Khalsa. Potter, 1987. ISBN
0-517-56532-3. 22p. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
In an effort to impress her parents with the fact that she is
responsible enough to take good care of the dog they have adamantly refused to get
for her, May adopts a rollerskate. She walks the rollerskate on a leash, leaves it
outside any building that has a "No Dogs Allowed" sign, and gives it all the tender
loving care a pet should have. Her parents are impressed with her devotion, but it
is several years before May gets her dog. This is a slight-if amusing--concept,
not very convincing but very nicely told. The paintings are bright, usually
crowded with details, the figures stiff as paper dolls. ZS
Lavine, Sigmund A. Wonders of Tigers. Dodd, 1987. ISBN 0-396-09153-9. 78p. illus.
and with photographs. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
While some of the animals in this series don't seem to fit its
title (Wonders of Mules,... Dairy Cattle, etc.), the tiger decidedly does. Lavine
culls through the considerable folklore that has accrued to this magnificent beast,
then moves on to physical characteristics, behavioral patterns, and threat of
extinction because of human encroachment on wild habitats. Black-and-white
photographs, prints, and diagrams illustrate the rather formal text, which is
indexed. BH
C.U. Zoology
Le Guin, Ursula K. A Visit from Dr. Katz; illus. by Ann Barrow. Atheneum, 1988.
ISBN 0-689-31332-2. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Line and wash drawings that are undistinguished but pleasant in a
cozy but uncluttered way, are a bit repetitive but will certainly appeal to young
animal lovers, as a sick child is visited by Dr. Katz. Dr. Katz is the collective
name for the two family cats, sedate Philip and the younger, more lively, Lorenzo.
Marianne, who has been whiny about staying in bed with the flu, is delighted by
the antics and affection of "Dr. Katz" and falls asleep with two marmalade cats
snuggled against her. Slight but soothing. ZS.
Lerner, Carol. Moonseed and Mistletoe: A Book of Poisonous Wild Plants; written and
illus. by Carol Lerner. Morrow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07308-5; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-688-07307-7. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
[ 140]
R* 
Gr. 4-6. 
A book that will intrigue children as well as benefit them, this
describes and illustrates various types of poisonous plants: those poisonous to the
skin; others with poisonous berries, leaves, flowers, or roots; some poisonous
bushes and trees. The text is an interesting mixture of description, instruction, and
commentary. The gummy juice of poison ivy, for instance, "is so strong that the
amount on a pinhead can give a rash to five hundred people. And it has a long life:
scientists got skin rashes from touching a dry plant sample that was one hundred
years old." The book is handsomely formated, with each page framed in a green
design and illustrated with either black-and-white detail drawings or meticulous
full-page paintings of the specimens discussed, which include hemlock, mountain
laurel, mistletoe, and many others. BH
C.U. Botany
Levin, Betty. The Trouble with Gramary. Greenwillow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07372-7.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
The trouble with Merkka's grandmother Mary is that she's an
old-fashioned eccentric in a small fishing village dedicated to becoming a tourist
attraction. Gramary's scrap metal is considered an eyesore by the local vendors of
progress, and they pressure her throughout the book to sell off, get out, and forget
her welding business. Ironically, her artistic scrap-metal creations finally put
Ledgeport on the map, but not before she has suffered a stroke and the novel has
exposed a whole cast of characters caught in the awkward clutch of change. This is
an ambitious novel in both scope and technique, and it occasionally suffers from
switching focus. The book starts as a dog story, and several of the most vivid
passages entail the rescue of a sheep dog from the sea and later, its herding a flock
off an island onto a boat. As soon as the dog is safe, it fades into the background
to be replaced by a series of complicated community and family dynamics. The
device of alternate voices-Merkka's in brief, first-person, italicized commentary at
the beginning of every third-person chapter of story development-further diffuses
narrative attention, especially when she suddenly addresses her new baby sister near
the end. On the other hand, the incidents are convincing; when the book does
concentrate on one figure, it comes to life with realistic impact. BH
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Lindgren, Barbro. The Wild Baby Gets a Puppy; ad. by Jack Prelutsky; illus. by Eva
Eriksson. Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06712-3; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-06711-5. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
A third book about the adventurous baby of The Wild Baby and
The Wild Baby Goes to Sea has come from Sweden, fantastically conceived by
Lindgren, illustrated with bravado and an echoing humor by Eriksson, and adapted
by Prelutsky into bouncing, lilting verse. Here Baby Ben is disappointed at
getting a toy dog when he'd been expecting a real one for his birthday, but in the
magic of the night the puppy, Rags, comes alive-and the two, joined by Ben's
toys, go off on a flight that is varied and joyful. Pure nonsense and great fun. ZS
Lyon, George Ella. Borrowed Children. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08351-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05751-8. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Twelve-year-old Amanda, the oldest girl in a large, poor
Kentucky family during the Depression, has to quit school to take care of the
[ 141]
house and new baby after her mother's difficult delivery. As a reward, she's sent to
her grandparents' comfortable home in Memphis for a worry-free vacation.
Observing her alcoholic aunt's unhappy marriage makes her realize how rich her
mountain background is, and she returns to it with a ready heart. Although the
theme is clear, it is not simplistic. Neither setting is generalized: at home, Mandy
recognizes that the boys get preferred treatment and suffers the strains of poverty as
her mother manipulates their finances to make ends meet. The grandparents are
well delineated as an older couple who must make peace with their past in the
shape of children who have not turned out as expected. The book's strongest
point, in fact, is subtleties of human exchange. Not a lot happens externally, but
the period flavor is unobtrusively strong and the Cinderella aspects of Mandy's
service and success will appeal to readers. BH
D.V. Family relations
Mayne, William. All the King's Men. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-385-2962-6. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
First of three long stories, "The King's Men" is told by
Joachim, Swiss, age 44, one of a group of dwarfs at a medieval court, and it is
both colorful and touching in its depiction of the often-brutal treatment of human
beings who are owned and who, as little people, see the plight of another kind of
little people, children. All of the tales are beautifully written, but the second is
structurally repetitive (two people captured by the fairies return to find those at
home have aged) while the third, a contemporary story, is a borderline fantasy, as
strong in its own way as the title story. ZS
Miller, Margaret. Whose Hat?; written and illus. with photographs by Margaret Miller.
Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06907-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
06906-1. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
1-3 yrs. 
A photographic game of identification for the very young, this is
simple and spacious in graphic design. The first page asks, "Whose hat?" while
the second shows a crisp white chefs hat against a blue background. Page three
portrays the chef wearing his hat as he chops a colorful assortment of vegetables,
and page four has two children, also wearing chefs hats, cooking under the word
"Chef." 
This format repeats itself through hats for a fire fighter, pirate,
construction worker, nurse, police officer, cow hand, magician, and witch. There's
an element of dress-up here that children will enjoy, though the joke of throwing
in a witch with realistic working role models may not be clear to them. The book
offers plenty of room for response as a toddler group read-aloud, along with lively
pictures for browsing. BH
Moore, Lilian. I'll Meet You at the Cucumbers; illus. by Sharon Wooding. Atheneum,
1988. ISBN 0-689-31243-1. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
One of those rare books that combines quality and appeal (for
transitional readers yet), this is really a fictional development of the town mouse
and the country mouse-with a major thematic difference. Junius Mouse persuades
his bucolic friend Adam to visit the city and meet Amanda Mouse on her birthday.
Several elements make the trip special for young readers or listeners. One is
Moore's knowledge of children's interests: the details of preparing a birthday
present with a message in riddle form, the delight of Adam's zooming around in a
toy car, the momentary suspense of his sudden disappearance. Then there is
[ 142]
Adam's fresh perspective on what he sees: traffic lights appear as jewels, a bridge
seems to be "a great shining web hanging in the air." With natural grace, Adam's
poetic thoughts appear in verse form throughout the story, but he only realizes
he's a poet during a trip to the children's room of the library. At the end of the
book, Adam has ventured and gained. "Not often does one smell roasted peanuts.
Not every day does one discover that he is a poet... ." Now it is Amanda's turn
to overcome her fear of the faraway and find seeds that taste of the sun. A golden
read-aloud. BH
D.V. Fear, overcoming; Friendship values; Urban-rural contrasts
Park, Barbara. Almost Starring Skinnybones. Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-
99831-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-89831-6. Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $10.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
A sequel to Skinnybones finds Alexander Bell Frankovitch
starring in a cat commercial after winning a contest with his honest essay about
Kitty Fritters cat food. This taste of glory leads him to grab the limelight in an
assembly program and try out for the school play. He only gets a bit part but is
pivotal in forcing the lead actor past terminal stage fright so the show can go on.
Like Park's other books, this is funny and reflective of young readers' insecurities,
but it's more frenetic than usual, with Alex's craving and smart-mouth bids for
attention a source of irritation in an unrelenting first-person narrative. The ending,
in which another junior high student confronts Alex with his obnoxiousness, is a
welcome dramatic pause-better late than never. BH
D.V. Group acceptance
Quackenbush, Robert. Who's that Girl with the Gun? The Story of Annie Oakley; written
and illus. by Robert Quackenbush. Prentice-Hall, 1987. ISBN 0-13-95761-1.
31p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Like the 14 other books in his biographical series,
Quackenbush's Annie Oakley hits the high spots of childhood and career, with
full-page cartoons illustrating the text. These are bright yellow, with smaller
drawings of a poodle (important to Annie's courtship by Frank Butler) telling her
puppies further facts about the great sharpshooter. The format here is cutesier than
Jan Gleiter and Kathleen Thompson's Annie Oakley, the only other biography of
Oakley for this age group, but the narrative is more straightforward and better
detailed, without fictionalized scenes and conversation. Though neither book is as
interesting as the subject, whose life was a series of compelling stories, both titles
will be used in a collection where children report on famous American historical
figures. BH
D.V. Initiative; Sex roles
Rabe, Berniece. Rehearsal for the Bigtime. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10504-0. 136p.
$12.40.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Eleven-year-old Margo is blond, blue-eyed, adorable, and never,
in her view, taken seriously. She sets out to change that by taking up the clarinet
and forming a group with three other kids who are willing to practice for her strict
"listener," a high school musician. Although the exposition is stiffly handled, the
situation will appeal to readers. There's never any real question about Margo's
out-playing her arch antagonist, stuck-up Ernestine; each episode simply reinforces
[ 143 ]
the group's unwavering commitment to work harder until the school year's final
recital makes them number one. BH
D.V. Perseverance
Reit, Seymour. Behind Rebel Lines: The Incredible Story of Emma Edmonds, Civil War
Spy. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-15-200416-5. $12.95 Reviewed from
galleys.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
This is more historical fiction than biography and, unfortunately,
less successful because of it. Reit's brief introductory source note testifies to
background research, but the fictionalization is cliched: in the course of the story,
Emma's ears perk up, she breaks into a grin, her friend's eyes twinkle, her cheeks
redden ("Romance-fiddlesticks"), 
etc. 
The spy episodes themselves are
remarkable and would have been exciting in straight narrative form, which also
would have eliminated the need for words like "darky" and "niggers" or the dialect
attributed to Emma when she disguised herself as a black slave ("Mah name Cuff.
Ah'm lost"). Edmonds was an abused child who ran away from home at 16 and
lived with audacious defiance of nineteenth-century social conventions. The
subject is a natural for study of the role of women in U.S. history. Children will
be drawn by the drama here but should have access to a more substantial account,
even at this simple level. BH
D.V. Sex roles
Rogers, Jean. Runaway Mittens; illus. by Rie Munoz. Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-688-07054-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07053-1. Library ed. $11.88; Trade
ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
The snowy spaces of the Alaskan settings are vividly evoked in
the deftly stylized paintings of the artist (both she and Jean Rogers are Alaskan)
with their textured skies and rosy-cheeked people. The story, however, could be set
anywhere, since it deals with two themes familiar to most children: the perversity
of objects that are repeatedly mislaid, and a love for animals. The story line is not
substantial, but it has an easy flow, a mild humor, and an appealing ending as
little Pica, who has many times lost his mittens, decides he can do without them
when he finds they are under a litter of new-born puppies. ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Service, Pamela F. Stinker from Space. Scribner, 1988. ISBN 0-684-18910-0. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A first-class, funny science fantasy that will hook middle-grade
readers right from the first scene, when Tsynq Yr evades a Zarnk enemy cruiser,
crashes to earth, and has to inject his mind into the body of a skunk for lack of a
better host. He's found by a lonely girl, Karen, who renames him Stinker and,
with the help of her neighbor Jonathan, returns him safely to the Sylon
Confederacy in outer space. What gives this traditional plot its punch is the
author's consistent detailing of Stinker's transformation: in trying to convince a
dog not to attack, he appeals, "We can play together, chase the ball, find loathsome
things to eat." Although enamored of peanut butter, Stinker absentmindedly pops
the occasional grub into his mouth. The children, too, are realistic in their initial
[144]
antipathy: "I can't go up there and talk with him .... 
He's a boy!"... "She's a
girl! Tell her I'm sick or something." Space shuttle officials get their fair share of
ridicule when Stinker pirates a craft ("Uh, good morning, Madam, may I use your
telephone?" asks an astronaut of Karen's mother after landing in front of her
house). The situation is gratifyingly absurd, the development satisfyingly natural.
BH
D.V. Friendship values
Smith, Doris Buchanan. Karate Dancer. Putnam, 1987. ISBN 0-399-21464-X. 169p.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
An only child, Troy is a stable, intelligent fourteen-year-old
whose parents approve of his talent as a cartoonist (he does work for the local
paper) but-without interfering-are unhappy about his other passion, karate.
Smith, in a story that has both depth and popular appeal, smoothly knits the
several aspects of Troy's life: 
his relationship with his parents, his
disappointment that his own lack of discipline has delayed acquisition of a black
belt, and (as per title) his amazed discovery that he enjoys and is good at ballet
when a girl on whom he has a crush begs him to partner her for a performance of
Coppelia. Conflict and drama are added by several sub-plots, and everything that
happens is germane to everything else. ZS
D.V. Parent-child relations; Self-discipline
Stevenson, James. The Worst Person in the World at Crab Beach; written and illus. by
James Stevenson. Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07299-2; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-688-07298-4. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
In a sequel to The Worst Person in the World (reviewed in the
October, 1978 issue) the elderly grouch-of-all-time goes to a seaside resort that has
everything he likes: awful food, lots of mosquitoes and jellyfish, and cold fog.
Perfect! Well, almost perfect; there are a mother and son who play wheezing
accordion duets, and the worst, who is always referred to thus, grudgingly misses
the hostility when the pair depart. There is a happy if quirky ending. Like the
first book, this should amuse Stevenson's fans, since the entertaining cartoon
drawings are augmented by some very nice forms-in-fog paintings, the irascible
protagonist is a comic non-hero, and the relatively happy ending, after the return
from Crab Beach, preserves the cantankerous attitude of the worst. ZS
Sullivan, George. Center; with photographs by George Sullivan and Aime LaMontagne;
illus. by Don Madden. Crowell, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-14582-4; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-690-04580-8. Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
Profusely illustrated with line drawings and photographs, most
of which are uninformative, this is a book that is highly specialized, focusing on
the shots, the passes, the strategy, and the techniques that will help the reader do a
good job as center on a basketball team. The material is logically arranged, and the
information is, despite an occasional stylistic error, given in a clear, direct writing
style. ZS
C.U. Recreation
[ 145 ]
Swann, Brian, ad. A Basket Full of White Eggs: Riddle-Poems; illus. by Ponder Goembel.
Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08334-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05734-8. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 1-3. 
Richly textured double-page spreads, which look like colored
pencil and pastel drawings on watercolor paper, satisfy the eye of the beholder who
considers these fifteen folkloric riddles in poetic form. They are not all easy to
guess in spite of broad pictorial hints, and there's a challenging mix of easy and
hard ones. The author has drawn lyrically on a range of cultures from Mayan to
Lithuanian, Italian, and African, each reflected in the artist's dramatic landscapes.
A riddle from the Ten'a of Alaska, for instance, reads "Far off in the distance,/
something white is/ chasing a flash/ of red fire," and the viewer is treated to a
sweeping snow scene across which a red fox tracks with bushy tail streaming
behind. The Visayan (Philippine) riddle "I run, I run./ When I arrive/ I bend down
and/ let fall/ all my white hairs" incorporates the suggestion of a figure in a curling
wave of surf against a curving shoreline. For an Aztec riddle, the graceful hands of
women slapping tortillas seem to echo the movements of butterflies overhead in
dry heat. An eyeful, an earful, a cause to pause .... 
BH
Taylor, Theodore. 
The Hostage. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-385-29576-6. 
$14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
Big blue whales and playful porpoises are agreeable candidates for
animal rights campaigns, but Taylor, like Colin Thiele (reviewed below),
champions the cause of a less popular animal, the killer whale. 14-year-old
Jamie's family barely gets by on their fishing north of Vancouver, and when a
glitzy new marine park in California offers $100,000 for a big killer whale, it
seems like the answer to their dreams. 
Catching the whale is surprisingly easy
(Jamie and his father trap it in a cove); the problems begin when the trapping
becomes a media event, prompting activists to demand the whale's release.
Among them is impetuous Angie, whom Jamie loves, and who undertakes a
dangerous attempt to free the whale herself. The moral tension might have been
greater had Taylor not made chief nemesis Zachary Cooke (the marine park
promoter) such a money-hungry stereotype, and it is curious that Taylor's plea for
the whale's freedom seems based on its "almost human" characteristics. But the
fishing details are strong, and Jamie's family a realistic confusion of dreams and
responsibilities. RS
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Thiele, Colin. Shadow Shark. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026179-X; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-06-026178-1. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Like the Theodore Taylor book reviewed above, this is the story
of a hunt for a dangerous sea predator, in this case, for an immense white pointer
shark nicknamed Scarface, who threatens the waters near Cockle Bay in South
Australia. To their delight, 12-year-olds Meg and Joe are invited to accompany the
great shark hunter George Lane, helping and witnessing the greatest attempt of his
career. The hunt itself is exciting, but never romanticized: by turns tedious,
dangerous and exhausting, the two attempts fail, the last leaving Meg and Joe
stranded with Meg's severely injured father on a lonely island-little food, no signs
of rescue. Any combination of shark hunting and survival story has tremendous
[ 146 ]
appeal, of course, and both parts of the novel are filled with you-are-there detail and
immediacy. Although lacking the thematic depth of Taylor's book, this has story,
drama, and heroism, and is especially recommended for reluctant readers. RS
D.V. Perseverance
Townsend, John Rowe. Rob's Place. Lothrop, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07258-5. 
$11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Rob is miserable. He's jealous of his infant stepsister, angry
because he is forced to give up his bedroom to her, lonely because his only two
friends have gone away, and apprehensive because his father has missed two of
their precious Saturdays. The imaginative daydreaming Rob has done about being
a heroic castaway on a desert island begins to take over, so that what has been a
pleasant escape now becomes an imposed other life in which all of his angers and
fears are played out. Townsend, always a compelling writer, uses a device that is
borderline-believable: a girl Rob's age sees that only a visit to the small island in
a local park (a place that had given rise to the complex fantasy-life) will help solve
the problem, after Rob, on a visit with her and with his stepfather, has narrowly
escaped a panic-induced near-drowning. She talks him through a last visit, a
purging of anxieties, and an acceptance of the new alignments in family life
(stepfather whose friendship has been rejected, father whose marriage plans had
engendered rage) to gain new perspective and stability. Save for the heroic role of
the girl and the sometimes protracted fantasizing, this is a story that has great
strength: vigor, pace, and psychological insight. ZS
D.V. Father-son relations; Friendship values
Vernon, Adele, ad. The Riddle; illus. by Robert Rayevsky and Vladimir Radunsky. Dodd,
1987. ISBN 0-396-08920-8. 32p. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Rayevsky, the witty illustrator of Mister Cat-and-a-half
(reviewed in the December 1986 issue), teams up with another Russian-born
illustrator to dramatize a clever Catalan tale that will appeal to an older picture-
book audience. A king is delighted when a charcoal maker explains a riddle: ten
cents a day is plenty to live on, and to pay back a debt (take care of his mother),
save for his old age (take care of his son), "and still have something left over to
throw out the window" (give his daughter a dowry). The charcoal burner promises
not to tell anyone else until he's looked upon the king's face one hundred times-
which he does when a schemer pays him a hundred coins for the answer. The art
work here is strongly stylized, with portraiture that is slyly expressive and scenic
panels that suggest stage backdrops. 
The flat perspectives benefit from
backgrounds that are texturally varied; compositions are carefully considered and
clean. A good read-aloud to small groups of second and third graders hooked on
their own contemporary riddles. BH
Weil, Lisl. New Clothes: What People Wore-From Cavemen to Astronauts; written and
illus. by Lisl Weil. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-689-31298-9. 62p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Copious black-and-white cartoon drawings that are lively if not
precise accompany a brief historical introduction to clothing, from Mesopotamian
and Egyptian styles, through Greek and Roman, Medieval, Renaissance, and
modern. Fashion and function are loosely connected in sweepingly general
commentary: "People were tired of dignity, and once again wanted to look sporty
[147 1
and ready for action. Maybe that was because people were beginning to move
around the earth in ways they never had before." While many of the assumptions
are speculative ("Men were still busy making money and could not be bothered
with clothes that got in their way") or even judgmental ("In their bustles, women
did not look very pretty ... "), the descriptions are readably organized and detailed.
An opening statement defines the scope as being primarily European and
American. An acceptable supplement to other sources for students doing reports
on the subject. BH
C.U. 
History
Wyss, Thelma Hatch. Here at the Scenic-Vu Motel. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
022251-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022250-6. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Jake Callaghan, high school senior, is the narrator of a
humorous story about himself and the six other students who are attending school
in town because there is no high school in their small community, Bear Flats.
The Board of Education of Pine Valley is putting up the seven, therefore, at the
Scenic-Vu Motel. At first suspicious, the motel owner proves to be a loving
surrogate mother. Jake is the leader, laying down laws for behavior that ensure
moral conduct and good grades. The rules don't prevent fun or romance, so readers
should enjoy the story despite the fact that its development is predictable, its
characters verge on the stereotypical, and its humor depends in part on repetition.
ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Education, valuing and seeking
Zolotow, Charlotte. Everything Glistens and Everything Sings: New and Selected Poems;
illus. by Margot Tomes. Harcourt, 1987. ISBN 0-15-226488-4. 96p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Of the 72 poems included here, only 17 are previously published,
and the 55 new ones show Zolotow's gift for evocative description. Diction and
device are always kept simple and clear, but perceptions are often more complex,
witness "In the Museum": "The horse from 200 B.C./ is made of stone,/ but the
way he holds his head/ shows/ someone long ago/ loved a horse like him/ though
now/ both horse and sculptor/ are dead." Many verses focus vividly on the child's
feelings: "I remember that night/ with the snow/ white, white, white,/ and my
mother's arms around me/warm and tight." As a collection, the poetry is marked
by verbal contrast, internal and end rhyme in free verse forms, and observation of
ordinary detail to focus a young reader's attention on nature and human nature.
Empathetic. BH