Aiken, Joan. Give Yourself a Fright: Thirteen Tales of the Supernatural.
Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-440-50120-2. [192p]. $14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Not really a scary collection, this contains a variety
(in both quality and subject) of stories that have in common a macabre twist.
Several of the stories link the power of poetry with that of demonic force-"The
Ill-Natured Muse," for instance, about a suave safecracker tortured by the
tiresome spirit of Laodameia, who forces him to copy out canto after canto.
"Aunt Susan" is a deliciously Hitchcockian tale and "The Jealous Apprentice" is
a story, reeking with underworld argot, about a school for thieves run by the
strict and highminded Gwen Forbush. The most powerful story by far is "The
Lame King," which describes the drive of a strong old couple to the "Last
House," where, it appears, they will be euthanized. Death here is not the spectre
it appears in the other stories: "it was like walking into a grove, Mrs. Logan
thought," where one is sung to sleep. The above four are the best selections; the
others are standard issue ghost stories. RS
Andrews, Jean F. The Flying Fingers Club. Kendall Green/Gallaudet, 1988.
Paper ed. ISBN 0-930323-44-0. 100p. Paper ed. $3.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Donald, the protagonist, is a learning-disabled child
who is bitter about spending a second year in third grade and getting help
through work in a special class. The new school friend he makes, Matt, is deaf
and has come, with an interpreter, to try fitting into an ordinary school
classroom. Matt teaches Donald to fingerspell and sign, and this ability to
communicate makes it possible for them to enjoy playing together and also to
work as a team in solving the mystery of who is stealing the newspapers that
Donald's sister delivers. This is a story that is in every respect adequate (plot,
characterization, style) but no more; it is informative about some of the
problems of deaf or learning-disabled children and how they cope with such
problems, but the provision of that information slows the narrative. ZS
Baker, Barbara. Third Grade Is Terrible; illus. by Roni Shepherd. Dutton, 1988.
ISBN 0-525-44425-4. 106p. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Liza suffers bone-crunching disappointment in being
arbitrarily transferred on the first day of third grade from glamorous Mrs. Lane's
[ 141 ]
class, to which she's been looking forward with her best friend, to a strict and
homely teacher who demands that Liza do her work well or redo it. The
protagonist is empathetically presented, yet realistically immature in her
reactions. While the style is simple, the characterizations are less so, a dynamic
reminiscent of Cleary's books for the same age level. Particularly well handled
is Liza's temperamental intensity and her transition between an old and new
friend. Baker has captured the shifting fortunes of classroom life at a gracefully
lowered reading level. The black-and-white drawings are adequate but somewhat
stiffly exaggerated in expression. BH
D.V. Teacher-student relations
Block, Francesca Lia. Weetzie Bat. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
020536-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020534-2. [96p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 9-. 
Only in Los Angeles. Like much of the new-wave
culture it celebrates, there's no doubt that this is the kind of book that's mostly
style: "'You are my Marilyn. You are my lake full of fishes. . .. my pink
Cadillac, my highway, my martini, the stage for my heart to rock and roll on,
the screen where my movies light up,' he said." That's My Secret Agent Lover
Man comforting Weetzie Bat after the death of her father. Weetzie met My
Secret Agent Lover Man when a genie gave her three wishes. My Secret Agent
Lover Man was one, a beautiful house was another, and "a Duck for Dirk" the
third. Dirk is Weetzie's best friend, a Duck is a cute guy, and with the genie's
help, Dirk meets the perfect Duck named Duck and everybody moves into a
beautiful house (left to Dirk by his just-dead Grandma Fifi), where they all have
a baby, Cherokee Love. Oh, and don't forget Cherokee's evil twin, Witch Baby:
"As soon as she could talk, she would go around chanting, 'beasts, beasts,
beasts,' over and over again." Stranger than any of this is the fact that the
author makes it all work. Her theme is friendship, her tone affectionate, her
imagery sentimental but true to type. The prose alternates rhapsodies-in-neon
with I-can-read conversations: "'I feel weird,' Weetzie said. 'Me too,' Dirk said.
Duck scratched his head." You will too, but despite its startling subject matter,
this is one innocent-sweet-book. RS
D.V. Family relations; Friendship values
Bonners, Susan. Just in Passing; written and illus. by Susan Bonners.
Lothrop, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07712-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07711-
0. [32p]. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
Communication is established without words, both in
the story and by the story, in a book that has gentle humor, variety, and the sort
of pattern (rather than plot) that produces viewer-involvement. 
Realistic
pictures, some in small frames, are executed in mixed media: pen and ink,
watercolor, and colored pencil and they show how, beginning with the moment
when an elderly woman sees the unselfconscious yawn of an infant she passes,
seeing a yawn evokes a similar action. Yawn produces answering yawn as
people and animals pass each other. Incidentally, the passing scenes inform
young children about aspects of everyday life and about their environment. ZS
D.V. Everyday life concepts
[ 142]
Bowkett, Stephen. Gameplayers. Gollancz/David & Charles, 1989. ISBN 0-
575-03932-9. 159p. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
For thirteen-year-old John, the Dungeons and
Dragons-like fantasy game he plays is both adventure and refuge. In the game he
is Jan Wildblood, a fierce warrior contesting the evil wizard Scorbius. In real
life he is "ordinary John Warner-sometimes he felt he would give anything to
change places." Despite John's firm friendship with his older sister, his family
is troubled and unable to find the magic solutions and strength that help Jan in
his quest. While the interior fantasy story is formulaic, it is blended skillfully
and in pleasing proportion to the realism. John's fellow game-players are a
dramatic mix, including good friends, the school scapegoat, and Jeff, the
"routemaster," whose identification with the evil wizard increases as the game
progresses. Of particular interest to D&D players, the spooky-eyed cover (latest
trend in YA jacket art) will draw in suspense fans as well. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Branscum, Robbie. Cameo Rose. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
020559-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020558-X. [96p]. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
The narrator, a beautiful orphan in love with her
neighbor Billy Joe, starts her story with an attention grabber: "It was a plain
fact that I didn't know who killed Homer Satterfield, and I figured I knew
ever'body and ever'thin' that went on in the Arkansas hills where I lived." She
questions all of them, too, in "assisting" her grandfather, who's the local sheriff
and who is shot and hospitalized shortly afterwards. Cameo Rose is obviously
the next victim, and readers will race her to identify the culprit. The characters
here are well realized but the dialect is heavy going and the plot is too farfetched
to support the tonal weight of suspense, romance, and poignancy. However, as
a regional mystery, this will hold its own with Branscum fans. BH
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Carlson, Nancy. Poor Carl; written and illus. by Nancy Carlson. Viking,
1989. ISBN 0-670-81774-0. [32p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
In a refreshing switch from most adjustment-to-baby
stories, this one begins with big brother enumerating the reasons why he's glad
not to be the new baby: "Poor Carl has to eat yucky rice cereal and strained
prunes"; "when it's Carl's nap time, Mom and I make cookies and she lets me
lick the bowl." On the other hand, "everyone thinks he's so cute" and "he
doesn't have to eat Brussel sprouts," but on balance, big brother is happy and
proud to be just that. Carlson's dog-family is an appealing lot (even grumpy,
sleepy Mom, feeding Carl his breakfast), but the pictures aren't as clever as
usual from this artist; while Carlson's sense of perspective has always been
skewed, the drawing here is unusually awkward. RS
D.V. Baby, adjustment to; Brothers
[ 143 ]
Carson, Jo. Stories I Ain't Told Nobody Yet: Selections from the People
Pieces. Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08408-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05808-5. [96p]. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
Arranged on the page to appear almost as free verse,
these are 49 brief excerpts from anecdotes Carson has heard among Appalachians
and has adapted for public performance. They are loosely organized into five
sections called Neighbors and Kin, Observations, Relationships, Work, and We
Say of Ourselves. These are voices roughened by labor and tried by tribulation.
They range from a battered woman warning others about her ex-husband ("he
does love you, he loves you hurt and he will hit you again") to a black man
recalling, after a waitress refuses to serve him and his daughter, the beating he
received in jail after a sit-in more than 20 years before ("this is the same story as
the one that cracked my head open. The only thing that changed is the law").
There are jokes along with the pain, women's viewpoints as well as men's,
fragments of experience shaped into monologues and dialogues, a balance of
dialect with straightforward informality of style that's easy to read aloud.
Students taking speech or drama classes will find some inspiring pieces here, as
will those interested in collecting oral history or researching their roots. "I could
fill you up with stories, stories I ain't told nobody yet, stories with your name,
your blood in them. Ain't nobody gonna hear them if you don't and you ain't
gonna hear them unless you get back home. When I am dead, it will not matter
how hard you press your ear to the ground." Listen and learn. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Charlton, Michael. Wheezy; written and illus. by Michael Charlton. Bodley
Head/Random, 1988. ISBN 0-370-31150-7. 26p. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-3. 
This thinly veiled bibliotherapy has a noble aim and
needed information, but also some organizational problems. 
William has
asthma, and along with the physical pain, feels lonely and unable to participate
in sports or have a pet like the other children do. His doctor instructs him in the
causes of asthma attacks and the use of medical inhalers; his teacher suggests
William start an asthma scrapbook (William's cover for the scrapbook is a
drawing of an asthma-tortured soul that will evoke instant recognition in anyone
who's sufffered the affliction). 
Pages of the scrapbook alternate with the
narrative, and there is a third cartoon monologue that runs along the right-hand
margin, an arrangement that is hard to follow. The information is fairly
complete (although it does not caution against the potentially habit-forming
effects of asthma inhalers) but it does need to be tidied up. RS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Christopher, Matt. The Spy on Third Base; illus. by George Ulrich. Little,
1988. ISBN 0-316-13996-3. 62p. (Springboard Books). $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
In this sequel to The Hit-Away Kid (BCCB 5/88)
third baseman T. V. Adams displays his seemingly uncanny ability to figure out
what the opposing team is going to do next. Nothing magic about it; T. V.
simply has learned to observe and remember the styles and skills of the other
players. But a newspaper picks up on the "psychic" angle, and T. V. has to
endure the jealous taunts of his teammates as well as threatening phone calls that
warn him to keep quiet. Like the first book, this has a lot of detailed baseball
[144]
action that will appeal to fans, but it lacks a strong narrative. The phone calls
seem pitched in only to mark time between games, and the revelation of their
source is out in left field. Still, an easy walk. RS
Cobb, Vicki. Why Doesn't the Earth Fall Up? and Other Not So Dumb
Questions about Motion; illus. by Ted Enik. Lodestar, 1989. ISBN 0-525-
67259-1. 40p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Cartoon style drawings, quasi-humorous in tone,
illustrate a text that deals with such questions as "Why Does a Rolling Ball Stop
Rolling?" or "What Is a Swinging Object Good For?" Cobb is an experienced
science writer, and her answers here are clear, succinct enough to inform without
overloading the comprehensive abilities of middle-grade readers, but giving
enough coverage to make concepts of the laws of motion understandable. ZS
C.U. Science
Conford, Ellen. Genie With the Light Blue Hair. Bantam, 1989. ISBN 0-553-
05806-1. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
Although Jean, the narrator and protagonist, is
fifteen, this light fantasy is-in both style and subject-liable to appeal to a
younger audience. It's a familiar pattern: the genie who misinterprets magic
wishes, creating comic dismay. Here the genie is Arthur who's blue from head
to toe, who looks like Groucho Marx, and who is terse and rather bossy. Jean
tries a few wishes, but nothing seems to work out well, even when she's turned
into the most popular girl she knows and thereby acquires that girl's handsome
boyfriend. Eventually, Arthur announces he's made a mistake, that he was really
assigned to Jean's aunt. The plot is featherweight, but it probably won't
diminish the enthusiasm of Conford fans, who expect humor, good dialogue, a
pleasant writing style, and only enough characterization to lend credence to the
action. That's what they'll find here, a capably written story that's entertaining.
ZS
Crew, Linda. Children of the River. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-440-50122-9.
[224p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
A long-favorite plot of both writers and readers is here
given an absorbing contemporary context. Sundara has a crush on the local
football hero, Jonathan, who is interested in her as well, but her aunt and uncle
don't approve. With her aunt and uncle, 13-year-old Sundara escaped from
Cambodia at the beginning of the Khmer Rouge terror. Now, four years later,
she has no idea if her parents and sister are alive and still carries the guilt of
having Aunt Soka's baby die while in her care on the packed and hysterical
refugee boat. "They made me throw her into the water." Even in Oregon, Soka
is determined to bring Sundara up as a proper Cambodian girl (no dates, and an
eventually arranged marriage with a Cambodian boy) and, while encouraging
Sundara's determination to become a doctor, is afraid and unable to show her
niece love. Except for the idealization of Jonathan as a sensitive, always-there
hero, the story is neither sentimental nor sensational: both the horror and the
romance are real. This first novel is notable for its strong storytelling and
thorough characterization. 
While teens will enjoy the romance, it's the
relationship between Sundara and her aunt that is most involving, both as a
[ 145]
dramatic family portrait and as a picture of "new Americans" who know they
will never see their home again. RS
D.V. Aunt-niece relations; Boy-girl relations
Delacre, Lulu, comp. Arroz con Leche: Popular Songs and Rhymes from Latin
America; tr. by Elena Paz; comp. and illus. by Lulu Delacre. Scholastic, 1989.
ISBN 0-590-41887-4. [32p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
3-6 yrs. 
This bilingual collection of folk rhymes, chants, and
fingerplays from Mexico and Puerto Rico (and a couple from Argentina) is
illustrated in bright pastels that are a little too sweet but have an attractively
fluid line despite their occasionally awkward perspective. The translations
sometimes sacrifice rhyme for literal meaning, and sometimes just the opposite.
"Ting-a-ling, ting-a-long. Ting-a-ling, ting-a-long./ With her I will marry, with
her I belong" does not really have much to do with "Tilin, talAi, sopitas de pan.
Alli viene Juan, comi6ndose el pan," and some metric adjustment will have to
be made if children want to sing the English words to the appended music. An
acceptable addition, however, to the Spanish-language collection. RS
Galbraith, Richard. 
Reuben Runs Away; written and illus. by Richard
Galbraith. Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08390-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
531-05790-9. [32p]. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
2-5 yrs. 
Anna may love her teddy bear Reuben, but he's tired
of being tossed around, hung up by clothespins, parachuted out of a tree ...
"Reuben had had enough." So he runs away to the city, and there endures much
worse: smog, crowds, snobbery, and the ultimate ignonimity of being sold to a
junk shop. All ends well, with Reuben brought back home through a plot
device that's more than a little contrived. 
The large, bright, watercolor
illustrations could tell the story alone, and they add dimensions of drama and
detail that compensate for the slight idea and text. RS
Golder, Stephen. Buffy's Orange Leash; by Stephen Golder and Lise Memling;
illus. by Marcy Ramsey. Kendall Green/Gallaudet, 1988. ISBN 0-930323-42-4.
32p. $8.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
At the Red Acre Farm Hearing Dog Center, friendly
Buffy was trained to listen for certain sounds (doorbell, telephone, baby crying)
and to react appropriately. "When the alarm clock goes off in the morning,
Buffy jumps on the bed." In the course of finding out how Buffy helps the
Johnson family, readers also learn about sign language and TDDs, and, more
essentially, the fact that deaf people share the same interests and problems as
everyone else. There is undue emphasis on the color of Buffy's leash, implying
that all Hearing Dogs have orange leashes ("The special leash and collar tell
people that he is a Hearing Dog") although this is not always true. Colored-
pencil illustrations are plentiful and clear, but in one case unhelpful: 
to
illustrate that "Buffy can go wherever the Johnsons go" with a picture of the
family and dog strolling in the park does not convey the fact that Hearing Dogs,
like Seeing-Eye Dogs, are allowed in places that other dogs are not However,
told in simple, direct prose, this is a good introduction not only to Hearing
Dogs, but also to the daily life of deaf people. RS
[ 146 ]
Graham, Bob. Bath Time for John; ISBN 0-316-32304-7. Here Comes John;
ISBN 0-316-32305-5. Here Comes Theo; ISBN 0-316-32307-1. 
Where Is
Sarah?; ISBN 0-316-32306-3. Each book: written and illus. by Bob Graham.
Little, 1988. 32p. $4.95.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
Four small books about two children and a dog, first
published in Great Britain, are written and illustrated with pleasantly low-key
humor. They describe very small events in the lives of John (too young to talk,
a lively crawler) and his older sister Sarah and their bouncy dog Theo. In the
first book of the series, Sarah gives chase when Theo runs off with John's bath
toy, and John crawls out of his little tub to follow. In the other titles, John
meets a snail, he takes his first wobbly step, and all three play in tall grass in
the last book. The unpretentious scope of the stories makes their activities
familiar; the ink and crayon pictures have the same light touch as those in the
books by James Stevenson. 
The author is Australian, the stories have a
universal appeal. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Environmental concepts; Everyday life concepts
Grant, Cynthia D. Phoenix Rising; Or How to Survive Your Life. Atheneum,
1989. ISBN 0-689-31458-2. [160p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Rather old-fashioned in its singleminded exploration
of The Problem, this is a competently crafted novel about a girl adjusting to her
older sister's death from cancer. 17-year-old Jessie has found her dead sister's
diary, and selections from it alternate with Jessie's narration. From the diary, we
learn of Helen's fear, anger, and ultimate acceptance of her disease ("Today is all
we have"); Jessie goes through similar stages of her own. Helen is idealized, and
the members of her family each too-predictably show different ways of coming
to terms with her death. While YA literature has become increasingly more
subtle in its handling of self-help topics, the straight-ahead "death book" is still
widely popular, and this novel will answer the perennial appeal. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Sisters
Gray, Nigel. A Balloon for Grandad; illus. by Jane Ray. Orchard, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08355-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05755-0. 30p. Library
ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R* 
4-7 yrs. 
A picture book with plot, poetic writing,
psychological reassurance, natural ethnic representation, and exceptional art, this
uses particularized details to focus on an experience of general concern among
children. Sam's balloon has blown out the back door, and as his father holds
him close, they have that throat-catching experience of watching a beloved object
fly high ... and away. Dad comforts Sam by describing an imaginary journey
"high over the sparkling blue-green sea where silver fish leap from the waves;
high over the hot yellow sand of the desert where scorpions, and spitting spiders,
and sidewinder snakes hide from the heat" to Grandad Abdulla's. 
"And
sandgrouse will peck at it... and falcons will fall on it, and hawks will fly after
it, and vultures with their big hooky beaks and their sharp talons will tear at it,
but the dry desert wind will help it to dodge and weave and nothing will harm
it." Of course, when Grandad Abdulla receives the balloon he immediately
perceives it as a message from Sam "to show that, although he's so far away,
he's thinking of me." Associating the loss of a toy with separation from a dear
[ 147 ]
family member brings this story very close to home, and those common
sadnesses are brilliantly lightened by Chagallian art lending child-like perspective
to the landscapes-both physical and emotional-that are crossed here. The
sudden, almost cubist contrasts of shape and color in the illustrations reflect the
jerky flight of the balloon, which is also captured in the rhythms of the prose.
The book design itself is filled with complex patterns balanced by enough free-
floating space to save the images from clutter. For Everychild. BH
D.V. Grandparent-child relations; Love for toy
Harrison, Michael, comp. The Oxford Treasury of Children's Poems; comp by
Michael Harrison and Christopher Stuart-Clark. Oxford, 1988. ISBN 0-19-
276055-6. [175p]. illus. $17.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
An anthology of old favorites and less familiar poems
has no discernible arrangement of material, has a broad range of chronological
appeal-including many poems to read aloud to quite young children--and has a
variety of illustrative techniques in color and in black and white. These come
from diverse artists, but information on this is not prominently displayed, and
while there is an index, not all the pages are numbered. The quality of the
selections ranges from silly-but-fun to incisive or beautiful; there's nothing
fatuous or jingly: a nice selection of poetry. ZS
Henkes, Kevin. Jessica; written and illus. by Kevin Henkes. Greenwillow,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07830-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07829-X. [24p].
Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Henkes' latest dauntless heroine is Ruthie, a little girl
whose best friend is Jessica. "There is no Jessica," say Ruthie's parents (in big
boldface type), but Ruthie stands firm by her imaginary friend, even taking her
along to the first day of kindergarten where a surprising-yet inevitable-new
friend is found. Jessica may be invisible, but there's nothing unreal about the
strong friendship Ruthie shares with her, vignettes of which are pictured in tiny,
tidy, line-and-watercolor illustrations scattered cleanly and cleverly among the
text. This is an exceptionally well designed picture book, with a witty use of
white space and an imaginative variety of type and line placement. For example,
the line "And if Ruthie was glad, Jessica felt exactly the same" tootles out of
Ruthie's horn as she blithely marches through a meadow of wildflowers.
Henke's felicitous prose makes this a prime pick for reading aloud to kids and
their significant others, invisible or not. RS
D.V. Friendship values; Imaginary powers
Hines, Anna Grossnickle. They Really Like Me!; written and illus. by Anna
Grossnickle Hines. Greenwillow, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07734-X;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07733-1. [2 4p]. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Little Joshua begins his story with "My big sisters
are mean," and the pictures show Abby and Penny teasing but (realistically) not
always without provocation. 
Put in charge of Josh by their errand-bound
mother, the girls blindfold their brother, walk him about, and pretend they are
leaving him alone in the woods. They go off, Josh removes the blindfold and
discovers he's right at the front steps. He hides, they panic. Rueful, the sisters
[ 148 ]
ply him with kind attentions when he does emerge from under the porch.
Conclusion: 
"They really like me." Line and crayon pictures, neat but
repetitive, complement a story that deals realistically with a situation that will
be familiar to most children with siblings, is simply told, and is adequately
illustrated but has a sedate quality, particularly in the passiveness of the
children's faces. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Hissey, Jane. Old Bear Tales; written and illus. by Jane Hissey. Philomel,
1988. ISBN 0-399-21642-1. 75p. $16.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Each chapter, in this book about the articulate toys
of a household, is a separate episode, the pencil and crayon illustrations being
highly textured and realistic if sugary in depicting toys that are plush or furry or
wooly (All stuffed bears in the lead roles, although there are some other toys).
In the first chapter the bears decorate a dollhouse for Christmas, in the second
they wrap one of their number as a Christmas gift, in the third they go on a
winter picnic. Like the illustrations, the writing is just sugary enough to lose
effectiveness as narrative. Still, the appeal of the subject matter will no doubt
make the book palatable for the read-aloud audience. ZS
Johnson, Angela. Tell Me A Story, Mama; illus. by David Soman. Orchard,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08394-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05794-1. [32p].
Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Bedtime serves as the setting for a mother-daughter
conversation in which the child requests a story and then proceeds to remind her
mother of all the details. This is more a friendly family history than a story,
however, and the similarity between the child and her mother as a child, as well
as between the mother and the grandmother as a younger woman, may confuse
young listeners ("which one said that?") unless the adult reader can simulate two
distinctive voices with natural ease. The realistic watercolor paintings are
dominated by warm browns and are spaciously formatted, if occasionally posed.
A modest but welcome addition to the decreasing number of books centering on
the experience of black characters. BH
C.U. Family life (unit)
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Joosse, Barbara M. Anna, the One and Only; illus. by Gretchen Will Mayo.
Lippincott, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32323-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-
32322-0. 
[144p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Moving to a new town, starting third grade there, and
already overburdened by her older sister Kimberley, who was neat and bright and
pretty, made Anna feel both apprehensive and inadequate. Well, one way to
make an impression is to wear lots of jewelry the first day of school, right?
Wrong, as Anna discovers when the jewelry contributes toward such disasters as
staining her sister's borrowed (without permission) blouse or catching in the
rings of a notebook and causing binder and pencil box to spill. This is the sort
of light disaster humor primary grades readers enjoy, and it pervades the rest of
the story as well. Few readers will be surprised when Anna proves to be kind
[149 1
and sensible in the final episode, since they will have found her a sympathetic
character throughout. This isn't as well written as Beverly Cleary's stories
about Ramona, but it will probably evoke the same empathetic enjoyment and
amusement. ZS
D.V. Adaptability
Katz, Welwyn Wilton. The Third Magic. McElderry, 1989. ISBN 0-689-
50480-2. [208p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Ambitiously and extensively plotted, this science-
fiction/fantasy saga takes Arthurian legend for its narrative core. 15-year-old
Morgan LeFevre has come to Tintagel to help her father with a TV documentary
on King Arthur. Morrigan, a Sister in a matriarchal society on the planet Nwm,
has also been sent to Tintagel, but centuries before, where her ordained destiny is
to become Morgan Le Fay, sister of Arthur and mother of Mordred. Arthur and
Earth are pawns in a classic good-and-evil conflict between the Circle and the
Line, its evil male counterpart. The story gets far more complicated than this (it
eventually turns out that Morgan is her own ancestress) and readers not familiar
with genre quirks will be quickly swamped. The first third of the book is
convoluted even by genre standards, but once Morgan is kidnapped to Nwm and
embarks on a quest for the Grail, most of the confusion is cleared up and the
book gains excitement and direction. The plotting leaves little room for theme
or character development, but fantasy fans who enjoy cleverly worked-out time-
and-space-travel-fiction will find here a unique recasting of a legend. RS
Landis, J. D. The Band Never Dances. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
023722-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023721-X. [288p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade
ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
Gr. 7-10. 
An attempt to show the rock and roll world from an
insider's perspective, this tells of a female drummer's (quick) rise to stardom.
16-year-old Judy Valentine's passion for drumming began, she tells us, in the
womb, and was later nurtured by her older brother Jeffrey, who is now dead, a
suicide. Judy keeps his ashes in her tom-tom, so Jeffrey can dance while she
plays. 
Yeah, it's weird, but the obsession is almost supported by the
melodramatic plot and purple prose: "I just stood there, quiet and still, going
crazy for the man I knew was doing this all for me, and for them, and for the
world forever kissing his feet and biting his scornful lips with soft kisses and
promises of nights of love." Who's biting who? Fun in a trashy-novel kind of
way (but no sex or drugs, and Judy only drinks Tab) this has hints of authorial
behind-the-hand laughter scattered throughout ("He said my name, softly,
whisperingly, when I passed him in a hotel or backstage, Judy, Judy, Judy .. ")
that indicate Landis may know better. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Le Guin, Ursula K. Catwings Return; illus. by S. D. Schindler. Orchard,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08403-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05803-4. [56p].
Library ed. $10.99; Trade ed. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Although the startling ingenuity of winged felines is
necessarily diminished by a second appearance, this is still a story that qualifies
as heartwarming without becoming maudlin. Secure in their barnloft with
[ 150
access through the pigeonholes, two of the four cats in Catwings (BCCB 9/88)
decide to visit their mother, Mrs. Jane, in the city. 
They find the old
neighborhood under attack by wrecking balls and barely rescue Mrs. Jane's last
kitten, winged and black, before saying good-bye to their aging mother, who has
been adopted by a benefactor. Schindler's pen-and-wash drawings are as precisely
delicate as Le Guin's writing style. A neatly formatted book that will appeal
mightily to cat (and series) lovers. BH
Maass, Robert. Fire Fighters; written and illus. with photographs by Robert
Maass. Scholastic, 1989. ISBN 0-590-41459-3. 
[32p]. $12.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Although the text of this read-aloud book is a bit
choppy, it gives information that is adequate in what is covered and how clearly
it is stated. The oversize pages accommodate color photographs of good quality
and the subject is usually of considerable interest to the read-aloud audience, both
because of the dramatic nature of the work of fire fighters and because of the
perennial lure of that Big Red Noisy Important vehicle. The combination of
good coverage and good photographs makes this one of the best books on the
subject. ZS
Martin, C. L. G. Day of Darkness, Night of Light; illus. by Victoria M.
Williams. ISBN 0-87518-357-3. Shaffer, Ann. The Camel Express; illus. by
Robin Cole. ISBN 0-87518-400-6. 
Each book: Gemstone/Dillon, 1989.
[46p]. (It Really Happened!). $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
These two books in the easy-to-read series "It Really
Happened!" draw on inherently dramatic facets of history. The first is based on
the fires that threatened the Great Lakes area during an especially dry season in
1871, and the second, on background information about the "U.S. Camel Corps"
and the pony express. A documentary note follows each story. Unfortunately,
both suffer from the stiffness of contriving a plot to fit events. In Day of
Darkness .... 
young Daniel helps the citizens of Menominee, Michigan, fight
a heroic battle to save their town from fast-moving flames. In the end, he sees
his archenemy Barth, who taunts him for cowardice in an opening incident,
exposed for dressing as a woman to shelter on a rescue ship. The Camel Express
throws in an unlikely series of wolves, Indians, and bandits to heighten the
suspense when an old man takes his granddaughter on a dangerous camel ride to
deliver a pony-express mail bag. These books do have value in showing that the
past is as lively as the present, but one wonders if young readers wouldn't enjoy
a factual account as much as, or more than, a fictionalized one. The black-and-
white drawings in Camel Express are much better drafted and less postured than
those in Day ofDarkness. BH
Mayne, William. Gideon Ahoy! Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-440-50126-1.
[160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 6-9. 
Gideon is a deaf, mentally retarded seventeen-year-old
undergoing a transition that provokes one family crisis after another. Mum,
Grandpa Catt, twin toddlers Mercury and Tansy, and even Dad, who rushes in and
out of the scene between sailing assignments, are all well realized. 
The
viewpoint, however, is twelve-year-old Eva's, and she has special insight into
[ 151 ]
the limitations, logic, and language of Gideon. His expressions for pleasure
("Dththth"), upset ("Rauh"), hunger ("Hyagh"), etc. become familiar to the
reader, as does Mayne's use of the present participle for Gideon's actions,
projecting the boy's perpetual state of "now" without sense of past or future. As
portraiture, this is masterful, and there is suspense in Gideon's running away
when his job on a canal boat is terminated. The family reactions when he lies in
a coma from which he may never recover make one of the most subtly developed
denouements in children's literature. Mayne is an experimenter, one of the few
who will take a chance on unusual techniques of crafting fiction for the young.
The perspectives he works with here are sometimes acutely on target ("Eva
wiped the [twins'] mouths with a towel, streaking it blue. Saints, she thought.
Stains") and sometimes a bit self-conscious ("the little ones remembered how
whiskers would tickle tummies, and were on the table walking them into it,
while Mum tried to stow stray legs in night-clothes"). Yet any reader with the
concentration to adjust to the odd twists of associative language-and there's
plenty of literal narrative to balance them- 
will be caught up in Gideon's fate
and rewarded with insights richly written. BH
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
McKenna, Colleen O'Shaughnessy. Fourth Grade Is a Jinx. Scholastic, 1989.
ISBN 0-590-41735-5. [176p]. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
McKenna's first novel about Collette, Too Many
Murphys (BCCB 10/88) was a model of the well-made school and family story;
this sequel is just as fresh, warm, and funny. Fourth-grade looks like it's going
to be a lot of fun-until Mrs. Johnston breaks her leg and Collette's mother is
asked to substitute. Collette is horrified, suggests her mother take up aerobics if
she feels like a change of place, and then tries to amend the insult with an I-love-
you-Mom hug. "'Thank you,' said Mother politely before she broke away to
finish putting out the napkins." Of course Mom does a great job, even winning
over snotty Marsha, and rising to the occasion for any number of entertaining
classroom disasters, including a priceless encounter with a world-weary milk
money monitor. It's good to see a widely appealing school story set in a
parochial school; equally refreshing that the school is headed by a nice nun. RS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations; Teacher-student relations
McKissack, Patricia C. Nettie Jo's Friends; illus. by Scott Cook. Knopf,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99158-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-89158-9. [32p].
Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Nettie Jo is trying to stand still for her flower-girl-
dress fitting when Mama says that Annie Mae, Nettie Jo's tattered old doll, must
have new clothes to go to Cousin Willadeen and Charles Henry's wedding.
Unfortunately, nobody in the family has a spare sewing needle. From there, the
plot follows a folkloristic pattern of animal helper tales, with Nettie Jo going to
a rabbit, a fox, and a panther for help in finding a needle. After she relieves each
creature of a problem, all three bring her a needle in an ending that's somewhat
more mystical than traditional. 
Densely textured paintings portray, with
sweeping, rounded motion, a pigtailed black child and slyly caricatured animals
in an old-fashioned southern setting. The intensification of patterned narrative
[ 152]
devices with unexpected artistic depth make this a solid story hour choice for
small groups that can gather close to the ruddy, subtly toned illustrations. BH
Miller, Margaret. At My House; ISBN 0-694-00276-3. In My Room; ISBN 0-
694-00271-2. Me and My Clothes; ISBN 0-694-00272-0. Time to Eat.; ISBN
0-694-00264-X. Each book: written and illus. with photographs by Margaret
Miller. Crowell, 1989. [16p]. (My First Words). $3.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
3-18 mos. 
Clean, simple, and well photographed, these four
books show one object per page against a solid-colored background: an apple
and a banana on facing blue pages, for instance, with the identifying words
clearly lettered above the pictures. All the books emphasize objects common in
a baby or toddler's life, from bottles to potty chairs, and are of a manageable size
with rounded corers and sturdy binding. The children shown on the covers are
multi-ethnic and appealing without being cloying. While this kind of series has
been done before and done well, it will be endlessly useful in any public library,
nursery school, or day care setting where well-designed board books tend to meet
an early demise among teething patrons. BH
Nabwire, Constance. Cooking the African Way; by Constance Nabwire and
Bertha Vining Montgomery; illus. with photographs by Robert L. and Diane
Wolfe. Lerner, 1988. ISBN 0-8225-0919-9. 
48p. 
(Easy Menu Ethnic
Cookbooks). $9.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
While many of the tastes and textures here may daunt
the average, underage, American P B and J consumer, this book will be a handy
resource for study units on Africa. 
After a necessarily overgeneralized
introduction to "the land, the people, the food," and common utensils and menus
of various peoples, the text is organized by food groups: breads and staples (e.g.
fufu), snacks and appetizers (meat on a stick), fruits and vegetables ("versatile
plantain"), soups and sauces (groundnut sauce), main dishes (meat curry), and
desserts (vermicelli and raisins). Instructions are clear and ingredients relatively
easy to obtain. Like other books in the series, this includes safety tips, a metric
conversion chart, and an index. Geographic sources are given for the recipes, all
of which are drawn from the fifteen countries of West and East Africa. BH
C.U. Africa (unit)
Namioka, Lensey. Island of Ogres. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
024373-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024372-4. [208p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade
ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Another story of medieval Japan (Valley of the
Broken Cherry Trees, Village of the Vampire Cat, and others) that features the
courage and sagacity of the ronin (retired samurai) Zenta and Matsuzo. In this
tale of a power struggle on an island, a third ronin, Kajiro, plays a major role.
There's a bit of a love story, an element of mystery, good historical details, and
rather more depth of characterization than is usually found in adventure novels.
Namioka's style, plot, and pace are strong. ZS
[ 153 ]
Park, Barbara. My Mother Got Married (And Other Disasters). Knopf, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-92149-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-82149-1. 
128p.
Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Park has consistently shown an ability to shed
humorous light on potentially dreary situations. In this sequel to Don't Make
Me Smile, Charles' unhappiness about his parents' divorce and about being
"displaced" by stepfather Ben (and Ben's teenage daughter and preschool son)
makes him a prime candidate for a surprisingly fresh treatment of a common
theme. 
Although the protagonist's first-person voice is entertaining, his
selfishness is candidly realistic. At one point he ruminates about having to
share a room with five-year-old Thomas: "Sharing is not normal.... The only
time lions like to share is when they're already finished eating. And to me,
that's not sharing. That's full." Later he refuses to feel flattered that Thomas
follows him around: "It would be like wading through a swamp and coming out
with a leech on your leg. You would never really feel proud that you're the one
it picked." The author has a way of introducing information naturally. In
describing his best friend, Charles talks about how his "mother says it's getting
hard to tell us apart. This is funny only if you know Martin is black." The plot
is hardly noticeable among the family interactions. Charles denies adjusting to
the new situation even after Ben's quiet understanding brings them closer. But
he does accept it, and comes close to admonishing readers (many of whom will
have known similar situations) to do the same. BH
D.V. Sharing; Stepparents, adjustment to
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. The Whooping Crane: A Comeback Story; illus.
with photographs by William Mufloz. Clarion, 1988. ISBN 0-89919-455-9.
88p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
There's inherent drama in examining a bird that has
come close to extinction; from a world population of 21 in 1941, the number of
whooping cranes has grown to almost 200. Patent turns a practiced hand to
describing the bird's life cycle and characteristics, as well as the complex rescue
efforts of scientists who have resorted to various environmental and breeding
experiments to rebuild dwindling flocks. The color photographs capture the
beauty of the bird, while the black-and-white photos extend the information in
pictures of incubating eggs or of chicks getting weighed and sprayed with
protective antibiotic. A natural pick for ecology reports. BH
C.U. Nature study
Petersen, P. J. How Can You Hijack a Cave? Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-440-
50063-X. 146p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
A basketball star who has a summer job as a tour
guide at Cathedral Caverns, Curt is surprised to find that his boss is a girl his
age, Lori (who says they're both basketball players looking for the right
college). It is Curt and Lori who rescue a millionaire's daughter from the cave
in which kidnappers are hiding her; they are daring and courageous in finding
another entrance to the cave and incidentally learning to appreciate each other.
The setting is dramatic; the plot is also dramatic but never unbelievable. Carried
along by humor and a brisk pace, this adventure has likable characters (albeit not
[ 154]
deeply drawn) and the appeals of suspense, danger, and often-amusing dialogue.
ZS
D.V. Courage
Pierce, Tamora. 
Lioness Rampant: Song of the Lioness Book Four.
Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-3116-8. 320p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Fourth and last in a series of fantasy/adventure
stories, this continues the quests, the triumphs, the magic, the battles, and the
love affairs of Alanna (woman, knight, warrior who has become a living legend)
and concludes with her victory over evil forces and her betrothal to a reformed
(but not venal) rogue. Like the three earlier books, this has plenty of action-
usually but not always well-paced-and well-structured plot; it has the appeals of
good winning over evil, and of the resilient courage of a believably heroic female
protagonist. ZS
Porte, Barbara Ann. Harry in Trouble; illus. by Yossi Abolafia. Greenwillow,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07722-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07633-5. [4 8p].
Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Harry just can't seem to hang on to his library card.
His dog, Girl, ate the first one. The second, his father put through the washer.
The third is in such a safe place that Harry can't remember where it is. Luckily,
the librarian is very understanding (though not above exasperation: "Harry, does
this story have an end?") and offers to keep his card in a file at the library. This
latest entry in a series about a boy who takes life just a mite too seriously is
told in an easy-reader style touched with dry humor. Perhaps in an effort to
break up longer sentences, there are a number of unnecessary commas: "You
needed someplace safe to keep it, where Girl couldn't eat it, and your father
wouldn't wash it." While the ending is somewhat flat (Harry finds his lost card
in Aunt Rose's piano bench) readers will empathize with the anxiety and enjoy
the revelation that when he was a kid, Harry's dad lost things too. Abolafia's
cartoon illustrations are as friendly as usual, more flexible in layout and design,
and in full color. RS
D.V. Father-son relations
Richardson, Jean, comp. Beware! Beware!: Chilling Tales. Viking, 1989.
ISBN 0-670-82544-1. [128p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Written especially for this anthology, nine stories of
eerie magic or ghosts or corporeal possession make a deliciously chilling
experience for the fans of the macabre. The best ones, expectably, come from
established writers like Jane Gardam, Jan Mark, Peter Dickinson, and Alison
Prince. Originating in England, this has a universal appeal in its stories of a
ghost who gloats too soon, a boy who acquires-and loses-a twin, a tunnel in
which new messages appear in the code devised by two schoolboys ... only
they are written at the top of the tunnel's ten-foot arch. ZS
[ 155 ]
Rogers, Paul. Somebody's Awake; ISBN 0-689-31490-6. Somebody's Sleepy;
ISBN 0-689-31491-4. Each book: illus. by Robin Bell Corfield. Atheneum,
1989. [17p]. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
2-4 yrs. 
Perhaps inevitably, Somebody's Awake has more
liveliness than its rather confusing companion. 
In Sleepy, somebody isn't
sleepy at all, and proves it by energetically getting ready for bed, only to fall
asleep before Mom can read him a story. While this message-mixing will be
familiar to parents, toddlers can't see themselves that clearly. But breakfast
mess, they love. "Somebody" makes breakfast "all by himself," the confident
text given a twist with pictures of showering cornflakes, spilled milk, and
general havoc. But Somebody more than makes up for the mess with the cup of
tea (teabag in tap water) he brings upstairs to Mom and Dad. While facial
expressions tend toward the vapid, both books are cleanly designed with warm
and casual watercolors, including a too-true portrait (in Awake) of a sleepy but
forbearing Mom: "I can hear the water running." Slim but pleasant additions to
the toddler collection, though at eleven dollars apiece, not cheap. RS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Ryder, Joanne. White Bear, Ice Bear; illus. by Michael Rothman. Morrow,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07175-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07174-0. [32p].
(Just for a Day Books). Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
M 
Gr. K-3. 
This is first in a projected series that attempts to
show animal behavior from a you-are-it perspective. "Outside your window
snow is falling, calling you, changing you ... ," and "you" become a polar bear
(although the term "ice bear" is preferred throughout). While the full-color
double-page spreads successfully evoke the cold drama of the Arctic, the
paintings, like the text, rely primarily on a romantic appeal. "The air is cold and
good! You feel like running in the cold fresh air." The gimmick encourages an
unconscionable degree of anthropomorphism, allowing the bear powers of
metaphor ("You ... see others moving slowly like pale ghosts across the ice")
and assigning the power of intent to the moon, which "shines its silver light so
you can see the white snow ... 
." The fact that polar bears eat seals is
delicately hinted at but ultimately dodged: the seal gets away, and, Max-like, the
bear is called to a house by "good supper smells" and turns back into a boy. A
sympathetic but sentimental introduction to the polar bear, this needs less
whimsy and more facts. RS
Rylant, Cynthia. Mr. Griggs' Work; illus. by Julie Downing. Orchard, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08369-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05769-0. 
[32p].
Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Line drawings and the controlled brightness of
restrained crayon work are the media for pictures that have clean composition and
that are nicely synchronized with the text. Elderly Mr. Griggs is the postal
worker in a small office, and he loves his work so much that it often occupies
his thoughts at night and obtrudes in other ways (an acorn-bearing squirrel makes
him think "Special Delivery," a lost parcel is a challenging mystery fifteen years
later). The style here is pleasantly simple and direct; the plot is on the static
side, consisting of Mr. Griggs being ill and then happily returning to work when
[ 156
he recovers. Nice to have a story about someone who enjoys a job that is not
glamorous, but this lacks the action or humor or suspense that make a picture-
story appealing to most of the read-aloud audience. ZS
Sattler, Helen Roney. 
Tyrannosaurus Rex and Its Kin: The Mesozoic
Monsters; illus. by Joyce Powzyk. Lothrop, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-
07748-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07747-1. [48p]. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr.4-6. 
Sattler is fast becoming the lexicographer of
dinosaurs, with Baby Dinosaurs, Pterosaurs, Dinosaurs of North America, and
The Illustrated Dinosaur Dictionary already to her credit. Here she describes the
large variety of carnosaurs that roamed the world between 200 and 65 million
years ago. Generously scaled, labelled watercolor illustrations will attract young
browsers, who seem to gulp down names such as Carcharodontosaurus and
Yangchuanosaurus shangyouensis while finding ordinary words quite indigestible
(a pronunciation guide and index to the dinosaurs does appear at the end of the
book). A helpful map and a time chart augment the catalogue-style text, which
is especially careful to mention how complete are the skeletal remains upon
which scientists base their conjectures about an animal's appearance and
characteristics. A brief bibliography suggests eight titles for further reading.
BH
C.U. Paleontology (unit)
Schwartz, Henry. 
How I Captured a Dinosaur; illus. by Amy Schwartz.
Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08370-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05770-
4. 32p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
"I asked Mrs. Fegelman if all the dinos were dead."
When her teacher replies in the affirmative, but adds that there have been some
"strange sightings," Liz begins to compile a scrapbook of Bigfoot-like
newspaper stories, and goes with her family on a serendipitous vacation to Baja
(scene of strange sightings), where she finds "Albert" (Albertosaurus) and takes
him home. "This seemed like a good time to remind my parents that they had
promised me any pet I wanted on my birthday." The text of Schwartz-papa
provides just the right nonchalant tone for his daughter's funny paintings, which
place big blue Albert in her trademark, 1950's-meet-the-80's, California setting.
All the kids back home love Albert, of course, and he's a big hit at school
assemblies. A touch overextended but nicely told, and it's equally gratifying to
see a story that features a girl with dino fever. RS
Shaffer, Ann. The Camel Express. See review under Martin, above.
Shaw, Janet. Changes for Kirsten; illus. by Rente Graef and Keith Skeen.
Trade ed. ISBN 0-937295-44-2; Paper ed. ISBN 0-937295-45-0.
Tripp, Valerie. Changes for Molly; illus. by Nick Backes and Keith Skeen.
Trade ed. ISBN 0-937295-48-5; Paper ed. ISBN 0-937295-49-3.
Tripp, Valerie. Changes for Samantha; illus. by Luann Roberts. Trade ed.
ISBN 0-937295-46-9; Paper ed. ISBN 0-937295-47-7. Each book: Pleasant
Company, 1988. 65p. (American Girls Collection: A Winter Story).
Trade ed. $12.95; Paper ed. $5.95.
[ 157]
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Kirsten is set in 1854 and describes the life of a girl
who is a member of a family on the Minnesota frontier. Samantha is set in
Manhattan in 1904; the protagonist is an orphan living with an aunt and uncle
who are wealthy enough and kind enough to take three more orphaned girls
(Samantha's friend Nellie and Nellie's little sisters) into their home. 
In the
third book, a family anticipates the return of their soldier father (World War II)
and Molly hopes he'll arrive in time to see her take a lead role in a Red Cross
show. Historical details are accurate, and the plots are adequately structured, but
the writing styles of both authors are rather labored, and the characterization
(again, in all three books) is superficial. Each of these books is furnished with
several pages of historical background and a stiff paper insert that is part postcard
and all promotion. ZS
Sieruta, Peter D. Heartbeats and Other Stories. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-025849-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025848-9. [224p]. Library ed. $12.89;
Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
These nine short stories-all but one featuring a male
protagonist-are characterized by an unpretentious style and generous tone.
Their subjects are familiar: 
getting your own bedroom, finally; missing a
girlfriend who has moved away; "25 Good Reasons for Hating My Brother
Todd." That last is one of the best stories, combining humor and sharp empathy
to tell about a smart and sensitive "nerd" whose older brother is a handsome,
popular jock. Emery's reasons are funny (#17: "He has teeth like Chiclets") and
touching (#22: "He has lots of dates") and finally wry (#25: "My mother
always did like him best"). In "The Attack of the Jolly Green Giant," David
knows his teasing of Molly has gotten out of control, "but I'm afraid to stop.
Because if I stop, she won't notice me at all." A few of the stories are
melodramatic and seem more liked outlined scenarios for longer fiction, but, on
the whole, this is an easy, friendly collection, which, because of its humor and
directness. should appeal to reluctant as well as more seasoned readers. RS
Stanek, Muriel. I Speak English for My Mom; illus. by Judith Friedman.
Whitman, 1989. 
ISBN 0-8075-3659-8. 
[32p]. 
$10.50. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
Lupe Gom6z helps her mother in all kinds of ways:
she answers the phone, helps with the shopping, takes her mother to the
dentist-all because her mother can speak and read only Spanish. "At school I
use English all the time. At home Mom and I speak Spanish together. And
outside our home I speak for her." A situation that will be familiar to many
children (and librarians in immigrant neighborhoods), not to mention a portrait
of a resourceful relationship, this ends with Mrs. Gom6z beginning English
classes. The fact that most of Mom's dialogue is in English ("'What did the
doctor say?' Mom asked") may be an unavoidable narrative device, but it will
confuse younger readers. Stiff but pleasant pencil drawings generously fill out
the story. The book would be a good candidate for bilingual treatment or a
Spanish edition. RS
D.V. Helpfulness; Mother-daughter relations
[ 158]
Stevenson, Suqie. 
Jessica the Blue Streak; written and illus. by Suqie
Stevenson. Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08398-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
531-05798-4. 32p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
3-6 yrs. 
Cartoon style brio of line and exaggerated action
make this story of a puppy's first day in her new home both amusing and lively.
Even for the read-aloud audience to whom both animals and disaster-humor
appeal, however, this may seem an overextended one-gag situation: the puppy
dashes about wreaking havoc as the family's five children chase her around. ZS
Sufrin, Mark. Payton. Scribner, 1988. ISBN 0-684-18940-2. 151p. illus.
with photographs. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Given Walter Payton's prowess as a football superstar
and his popularity as a record-breaker who is also a nice person (nickname:
"Sweetness") the biographer who resists hyperbole is to be commended.
Certainly Sufrin gives the great halfback his due, but he avoids being fulsome in
describing the career Payton concluded with his spectacular performance with the
Chicago Bears. The book has a good balance of material about Payton the
player and Payton the man; the writing style is smooth, with a narrative quality
that makes the book pleasant to read. An index gives access to the contents; the
usual list of facts about the biographee's lifetime performance is included-in
this case, with unusual statistics. ZS
Swindells, Robert. A Serpent's Tooth. Holiday House, 1989. ISBN 0-8234-
0743-8. [136p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Lucy is up against more than the usual dose of
adolescent woes. Her father's career move has thrust her into a new school with
hostile peers; her activist mother and establishment father are strained to the
point of separation over Mum's leadership of AMANDA (Apton Magna Anti
Nuclear Dump Action), and the NERDS (Nuclear Effluent Recycling and
Disposal Services) are stirring up the town against AMANDA protesters camped
out in Pit Field, the proposed disposal site. Even more mystifying are people
who appear to Lucy but to no one else-men pushing a handcart to various
houses and dumping the contents in Pit Field. A nuclear disaster set off by
terrorists near a French dump wakes the English town to its own danger, but
what really stops the digging is the discovery that Pit Field was the burial
ground for the town's Black Plague victims in 1349. The plot is somewhat
overloaded and the fantasy element undeveloped beyond functional ghostly
appearances. Yet the dynamics among Lucy's family and friends, along with her
relationship to the old woman who has inherited a family responsibility to
observe the memory of those interred, support the action. The analogy of plague
and nuclear threat is clearcut and timely, while the exposure of human strength
and weakness in face of such destruction invites discussion. BH
D.V. Parent-child relations
Thomas, Ruth. The Runaways. Lippincott, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-
32345-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32344-1. [304p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed.
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[ 159 1
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
It is not unusual, in contemporary fiction about
friendship between a boy and a girl, to find that the two have been drawn
together by the fact that both are loners. In this story from England, two eleven-
year-old classmates who happen to be together when they find a thief's cache of
money in a deserted house, are so upset by adult interrogation that they run off
together despite the fact that each dislikes the other. Nathan is small and bright
and black and hostile; Julia is tall, lanky, white, an academic laggard who can
barely read. This is the story of their days on the road (with one telephone call
to tell parents that they are alive and well) and the growth of trust that becomes
friendship. Pace and style as well as firm characterization hold the reader's
interest to an extent that is remarkable in what is basically a two-character story.
ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Self-reliance
Tripp, Valerie. Changes for Molly and Changes for Samantha. See review
under Shaw, above.
Updike, David. An Autumn Tale; illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. Pippin,
1988. ISBN 0-945912-02-1. 40p. $13.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
An eccentric and slightly self-conscious story, this
nevertheless has a dreamlike appeal rooted in the well-remembered intensity of
childhood fantasies. It begins with a pumpkin that young Homer carves into a
jack-o'-lantern with a hole on the bottom to put his head through. When the
harvest moon rises, Homer dons the pumpkin and finds he can understand the
surrounding trees, which uproot themselves for a tryst and carry "Mr. Pumpkin"
(and Homer's dog Sophocles) with them. Homer experiences a moment of
nightmarish panic when he can't get the pumpkin off or keep up with an elm
retreating toward home, but he is helped along by an old apple tree, relieved to
find the pumpkin comes off easily when the trees resettle at daybreak, and
"happy to be only a boy" eating the oatmeal his mother has cooked for him
(shades of Where the Wild Things Are). Parker's watercolor paintings visualize
this eerie venture with brilliant hues against shadow-streaked textures; he's
managed to walk the fine line between literal meaning and imaginative
impression. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers
Vigna, Judith. Boot Weather; written and illus. by Judith Vigna. Whitman,
1989. ISBN 0-8075-0837-3. [32p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
In this likable combination of prepositional
instruction and make-believe play, Kim can go anywhere she wants when she
has her favorite winter boots on. "Up hills": she climbs her slide and pretends
it is a mountain. "Over rocks": a mound in the backyard becomes the surface of
the moon. "Above snow": a teeter-totter becomes a ski-jump. Vigna's
unassumingly sprightly paintings depict Kim's well-equipped backyard opposite
scenes conjured by Kim's equally well-equipped imagination. The concept is
appealing and instructive, if slightly static in execution, and like Kim's slide,
makes a great jumping-off point for adventures in both grammar and fantasy.
RS
D.V. Imaginative powers
[ 160]
Westall, Robert. 
Ghost Abbey. 
Scholastic, 1989. ISBN 0-590-41692-8.
[176p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Here's a haunted house story that, from the spooky
cover to the happy but unsettling ending, delivers the goods. Twelve-year-old
Maggi Adams, her younger brothers, and their father go to Foxwist Abbey when
Dad gets a job there supervising its restoration. Maggi, overburdened and
bereaved since the death of her mother, hopes it will be a new start for the
family. The Abbey has it all: gargoyles, locked rooms, a garden maze ... as
well as a real ghost and mysterious singing voices. It also, suprisingly enough,
provides a warm and funny romance for Dad in the person of Ms. McFarlane,
owner of the Abbey and a fervent believer in "faith." The Abbey and its
inhabitants are filled with secrets, and Maggi is content to explore them until
she realizes the nature of its ster protection: the Abbey gives new life to the
caretakers it calls, but strikes with a vengeance against anyone who seems to be
harming it in any way. While providing all requisite thrills, this is gentler than
most of Westall's fiction, even to the characterization of the Abbey, which is
really the main character here. RS
D.V. Family relations
Wrightson, Patricia. Balyet. McElderry, 1989. ISBN 0-689-50468-3. [144p].
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Like other Aborigine spirits Wrightson has written
about, Balyet is both playful and dangerous, her thousand years of solitude
making her yearn for the company of young humans whom she lures to their
deaths for the sake of a moment's warmth. 
Mrs. Willet, "an aboriginal
Australian and a Clever Woman" on a trip to tend the sacred sites of her people,
finds teenage Jo stowed away in her old car. Rebellious Jo repeatedly breaks
promises to stay safe in camp: she wanders into rocky gullies, trysts with two
brothers motorcycling nearby, and neglects a babysitting charge who wanders
into the wild and almost dies at the hands of Balyet. Yet it is Jo who
precipitates the crisis that lays the spirit to rest, through Mrs. Willet's ancient
magic. The author's note acknowledges a nineteenth-century source for the
legend of Balyet and advises readers that she, rather than the human characters, is
the center of the story. 
Indeed, none except Mrs. Willet is more than
functionally developed, but the intensity of the triangle between spirit, old one,
and youngster is magnetic enough to hold the book together, and Wrightson's
verbal landscapes are, as always, vividly rendered. BH
D.V. Older-younger generations