Adler, David A. A Picture Book of Abraham Lincoln; ISBN 0-8234-0731-4. A
Picture Book of George Washington; ISBN 0-8234-0732-2. Each book: illus.
by John and Alexandra Wallner. Holiday House, 1989. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
The first in a projected series of picture book
biographies that will include Martin Luther King, Jr., Thomas Jefferson, and
Benjamin Franklin, these two books are tailored to preschool and primary grade
children for holiday occasions and American history units. The continuous texts
are simplified in short, straightforward sentences without anecdote or detail.
Although they sometimes seem dry and choppy ("In Springfield Abraham fell in
love with Mary Todd. She was lively and smart. They were married in 1842"),
they're neither excessively adulatory nor condescending. 
The full-color
illustrations, too, are stiff in pose and composition but have a kind of
traditional, tidy appeal. Useful. BH
C.U. History-U.S.--pictorial presentation
[ 267 ]
Allen, R. E. Ozzy on the Outside. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-29741-6.
[224p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 9-12. 
Mom had always exhorted Ozzy to be someone
special. Now, shocked and angry after his mother's death in a car accident, Ozzy
lights out for New Orleans, his first stop on the way to becoming a Famous
Writer. This first novel has a predictable plot (a young woman on the bus gets
Ozzy to admit his grief and go back home) and narrative voice (horny teenager
with big dreams) that is wearingly patronizing but altogether authentic. While
we are meant to understand that Ozzy's dreams of fame are delusory, we are also
supposed to take seriously his self-identification as a writer, which isn't really
supported by the shallow characterization. 
The girl Ozzy meets-Maysie
Perlmutter-is a bit of a down-home stereotype, but the caricature is enlivened
by some funny repartee: "I don't call black people niggers and I don't call
Mexicans spics and I don't call Jews Jews, so you can just stop your lecture
right here and now." In fact, it is the secondary characters here who are most
sharply delineated, giving some life and color to the familiar story. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Self-evaluation
Amadeo, Diana M. 
There's a Little Bit of Me in Jamey; illus. by Judith
Friedman. Whitman, 1989. ISBN 0-8075-7854-1. [32p]. $10.50. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-4. 
Softly shaded brown and white pictures illustrate a
story that is touching albeit told without sentimentality. Brian, who looks to be
about nine or ten in the pictures, is the narrator; his ambivalence between his
loving concern for younger brother Jamey, a leukemia victim, and his irritation
at how little time his parents now have for him are equally convincing. When
Jamey's doctor suggests that Brian might be a good enough match,
physiologically, to give Jamey a chance to live, Brian agrees to a bone marrow
transplant. The story makes it clear how much all of the members of a family
in which a child has cancer are involved. One of the strong aspects of this candid
book is that the ending is quite realistic: Brian knows the transplant is a hope,
not a cure, and he does hope. "Because of that little bit of me in Jamey," he
ends, "he may come home, to stay." ZS
D.V. Brothers
Ammon, Richard. Growing Up Amish. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31387-
X. 102p. illus. with photographs. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Focusing on sixth-grader Anna and her family, this
intersperses an account of day-to-day Amish life with general information about
Amish history, religion, and traditions. Transitions are abrupt; for example,
Anna's school day is interrupted twice for chapters on Amish origins and
language, and scattered through the text are boxed explanations of "myths" and
"facts" about the Amish. The tone throughout is adulatory, occasionally cloying
("Most of the children have done chores in the barn before coming to school, so
there's a faint scent of horses mixed with the sweet aroma of body odor accenting
the classroom"), and the author tends to gloss over contradiction and conflict.
After stating that the Amish "do not encourage or seek" non-Amish ("English")
friends, Ammon goes on to mention Elizabeth, "valued as a trusted 'Englisher'
[ 268 ]
friend." Amish children never shirk work---"they actually look forward to their
chores"-and adolescent rebellion is quickly dismissed: "some teens may engage
in some 'worldly' activities, such as sneaking into a movie or drinking. Once
they become baptized, though, they give up such foolishness." But the customs
and details of clothing, language, and play, including rules for a few games, will
prove fascinating for more secularized children, who may not be easily convinced
that a society with no TV, bicycles or Daylight Savings Time can still exist.
Photos are pertinent but of variable quality; an index, bibliography, and reading
list are appended. RS
C.U. Religious education
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Blackwood, Gary L. The Dying Sun. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31482-5.
213p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Life has become crowded and dangerous in
Matamoros, where Mexicans have started to rebel against settlers from the U.S.,
so James decides to follow his parents lead and move to the cold north-
Missouri. The story takes place in the mid-twenty-first century, when the sun
has cooled and the polar caps are expanding, forcing the world's population
towards the equator. Science fiction takes second place to a survival theme here,
as James and his over-easygoing friend Robert make the hard journey north,
beset by the elements and some dangerous people, including a vivid villain,
Sunny Shanahan. James isn't an exceptionally involving narrator, but the antics
of Sunny and Robert give human interest to the landscape. Crises follow crises
in a predictable rhythm, but, as in the author's first novel Wild Timothy (BCCB
9/87), the wilderness lore and the (often backfiring) Robinson Crusoe-like
ingenuity required of James have their own appeal. RS
D.V. Resourcefulness
Browne, Gerard, illus. The Car and Truck Lift-the-Flap Book, illus. by Gerard
Browne. Lodestar, 1989. ISBN 0-525-67273-7. 17p. $11.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
A simply written anonymous text accompanies the
enticing main attraction: bright and snappy lift-the-flap illustrations of various
vehicles (tractor, racing car, backhoe, fire engine, etc.). Hoods lift to show
engines (with main parts labelled), a truck cab lifts to show a cozy bed and
galley, an ambulance door opens to reveal the cot and oxygen tank within. Each
picture features at least three layers of flaps; mechanical details are variably
detailed, and smaller illustrations (2-D only) show various kinds of ambulances,
tractors, etc., other than the one under examination. With not quite enough
information for true trucksters, this is a great learner's-permit introduction for
younger children. RS
Burns, Kay. Our Mom; illus. with photographs by Rick Reil. Watts, 1989.
ISBN 0-531-10677-2. 48p. $9.90.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
"Our Mom is in a wheelchair. 
Her legs are
paralyzed." 
The writing in this photodocumentary is a bit choppy, but it
conveys two messages: one is that this attractive mother of four does, within the
limitations of her physical disability, the sorts of tasks that other mothers do-
[269]
including driving a station wagon and doing the weekly shopping. There is no
mention of a father. The second facet of the book is the explanation of just how
Mom copes (the process of getting from wheelchair to car, getting dressed
without standing up). The author writes from experience, being a paraplegic,
and her book should be useful to allay curiosity, to show children that there are
more similarities than differences between those who have physical handicaps
and those who don't, and-for readers whose families include someone who is so
disabled--that there are other families who have adjusted to such limitations.
Large print on each spaciously laid-out page faces a page with one or several
black and white photographs of variable quality. ZS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Carter, Alden R. Up Country. Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21583-2. 256p.
$15.95.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
Sixteen-year-old Carl Staggers talks a tough line. In
fact, he thinks of himself as "the professor," a straight-A student who ices
anyone trying to thaw his protective veneer. Carl lives in the basement so he
won't overhear his alcoholic mother's sexual encounters upstairs, and he fixes
and resells stolen car stereos so he can get out of his hellish home, get an
education, and live a white-collar life in the suburbs. When his mother is
arrested (again) for assault and remanded to an alcoholic treatment center, Carl is
sent "up country" from Milwaukee to his aunt and uncle's farm, where he slowly
reveals his vulnerability-a development credibly detailed in the novel-and
recognizes how big his problems really are. The suspense of Carl's crime,
arrest, and punishment sustain the gradual pace of his inner change, and the
secondary characters are well developed both individually and in relationship to
the protagonist. There's also a satisfying love story that unfolds between Carl
and an appealing farm girl nearby. 
The C.O.A. (children of alcoholics)
explanations are a bit overt at the end, but not enough to detract from the solidly
realistic positive ending. This would have been melodramatic had it not been so
carefully delineated; Carter has created a character who will involve YA readers
and a situation that will make them think about the ways they solve whatever
problems loom in their own lives. BH
D.V. Mother-son relations; Urban-rural contrasts
Cohen, Barbara. Tell Us Your Secret. Bantam, 1989. ISBN 0-553-05810-X.
171p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Two weeks at a seminar for young writers brings
changes in the attitudes of most of the twelve adolescents who are the
registrants, the intensive exposure resulting in an ability to share secrets and to
accept each other's idiosyncrasies. Thoughtful, at times painful in the way that
therapeutic progress can be painful, this is not a book for every reader. It
focuses on inter-relationships and self-knowledge rather than action; because
there are so many characters involved and because some of them have deep-rooted
fears or inadequacies, the story has an intricate pattern rather than the clear focus
that makes an impact on readers. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Fear, overcoming
[270 ]
Collins, David R. To the Point: A Story about E. B. White.; illus. by Amy
Johnson. Carolrhoda, 1989. ISBN 0-87614-345-1. 
56p. (Creative Minds).
$9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
E. B. White's life was in many ways uneventful, and
Collins, to his credit, has tried to evoke the inner journey rather than
overdramatize the external aspects. Born the youngest in a wealthy family,
White valued the time he spent alone outdoors more than any schooling that was
forced on him. Words were early on his favorite private plaything, however, and
by the time he was twelve, he had published a story in St. Nicholas Magazine.
From college he got experience editing a daily newspaper, along with good
advice about clean writing from several professors. His work at The New Yorker
and Harper's, his marriage to editor Katharine, and the writing of his children's
books all get a competent, low-key introduction. Aside from some occasional
stylistic condescension ("It was a fun summer!"), this is well suited for children
writing reports on their favorite authors. The black-and-white drawings are
uneven, adequately composed but stiff in facial and anatomical drafting. BH
D.V. Self-expression
Conford, Ellen. Jenny Archer, Author; illus. by Diane Palmisciano. Little,
1989. ISBN 0-316-15255-2. 61p. (Springboard Books). $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Like A Job for Jenny Archer (BCCB 4/88), this
overextends a mildly funny misunderstanding into a somewhat amusing
situation. After her teacher has praised her composition, Jenny is more than
eager to tackle the next writing assignment, an autobiography, "the story of your
life." Jenny's own limited experience ("She was only a kid. She didn't have a
story to tell yet. She'd hardly even had a life yet") causes her to imagine a more
interesting life history, in ten chapters, one for each year, including such drama
as the time she met her evil twin, Horrible Hortense, in an elevator in the
Empire State Building. Mrs. Pike is less than pleased, at first, and it seems
awfully unlikely that a girl of Jenny's age would not understand that an
autobiography was supposed to be true. But Mrs. Pike comes around, the value
of imagination is given its due, and Jenny gets a gold star. Good for her. RS
Crutcher, Chris. Chinese Handcuffs. Greenwillow, 1989. ISBN 0-688-08345-
5. 202p. $12.95.
M 
Gr. 8-12. 
Dillon Hemingway faces a lot of problems. Not only
had his older brother committed suicide, he'd done it in Dillon's presence. Not
only was Dillon in love with his brother's girl, but also he discovered that her
parents' new baby was in fact the girl's child and his nephew. Not only did the
other girl he found attractive fail to respond, but also he learned that she had been
sexually abused by her father and was now being sexually abused by her
stepfather. Given this plethora of woe plus the fact that the third-person
narrative is interrupted (often at considerable length) by long letters to Dillon's
dead brother, it's surprising that the story is as effective as it is. While all the
problems don't really add up to a plot, the characterization is sound and
consistent, and Crutcher's writing has both insight and fluency. ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to
[271]
Dines, Carol. Best Friends Tell the Best Lies. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-
29704-1. 213p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
This first novel sports a great first sentence: "Tamara
told me her mother's a murderer." While fourteen-year-old Leah isn't sure how
much to believe of her best friend's wild stories, she is entranced by Tamara's
defiance, unconventionality, and dark desires--"the next day Tamara wore her
chain and padlock again. She told me she was going to hand Caesar the key to
the lock." That Tamara is in fact a very troubled girl is quite apparent to Leah's
mother, who holds her responsible for Leah's newly acquired rebellious attitude.
Passions fly convincingly here, and between Tamara and Leah, Mom and Leah,
Mom and her boyfriend Jos6, Leah and her boyfriend Miguel (Jos6's nephew),
the arguing becomes a bit relentless, with each character raging in turn. Many
readers love this kind of noise, however, and Tamara's magnetism provides an
attractive and suspenseful core to the story. The ending is quiet and painful,
beautifully understated, but somewhat at tonal odds with the rest of the story.
The cover illustration of three happy teens having a snowball fight seems to
have wandered in from another book. RS
D.V. Friendship values; Intercultural understanding
Dodds, Dayle Ann. Wheel Away!; illus. by Thacher Hurd. Harper, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021689-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021688-3. 32p. Library
ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
Just the ticket to liven up a sleepy story hour, this
variant of an old favorite takes a runaway wheel on an onomatapoetic adventure.
"Oh no! 
See it go!" begins the journey, and the bicycle wheel starts rolling
("pa-da-rump pa-da-rump pa-da-rump-pump-pump") across the brightly collaged
landscape. Down the hill, through the mill, between the pens ("oink oink
oink") and on top of the hens ("Boink boink boink"), the wheel wreaks
delightful disaster until slowed at the top of the mountain ... and down again,
back through it all, much to the glee of the kids who didn't catch all the sound
effects on the outward trip. The verse is set in imaginative variety among the
colorful, Keats-like collages of paper dolls and spattered paint, the trail of the
wheel traced by a lovely line of multicolored bouncing balls. Night falls on the
return trip, for which the double-page spreads turn vertical, the colors become
muted, and the little boy is finally able to afix the wheel to his bike. Noisy and
nimble. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
Dolan, Edward F. MIA: Missing in Action; A Vietnam Drama. Watts, 1989.
ISBN 0-531-10665-9. 128p. illus. with photographs. $12.90.
R 
Gr. 6-12. 
The story of men missing in action during the
Vietnam war reads like a dramatic mystery, but one with tragic implications for
the victims' families as well as for others involved or concerned. Dolan has
done two extraordinary things with this report. He has simplified and clarified
the political/military entanglements of the Vietnam conflict as backdrop for the
ongoing complexities of the U.S. government's search for MIAs, and he has
documented his research more faithfully than any juvenile writer since Judie
Mills in her biography of John Kennedy (BCCB 6/88). With brief recaps of
[272]
several cases in which servicemen crashed or were captured during the war, Dolan
discusses the possibilities of their survival, the controversy over negotiations
with Southeast Asian governments, and the questionable identification of
remains that have been returned. 
His examination has a point-by-point
objectivity that does not diminish the suspense of the subject nor the symbolism
of MIAs for a war America lost. Statistics are up to date, with sources cited;
footnotes, bibliography, and index are all thorough. BH
C.U. History-U.S.
Donnelly, Judy. Moonwalk: The First Trip to the Moon; illus. by Dennis
Davidson and with photographs. Random House, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-
394-92457-6; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-82457-1. 
48p. (Step into Reading).
Library ed. $6.99; Paper ed. $2.95.
M 
Gr. 2-3. 
This easy-to-read rendition of the first trip to the
moon seems overwhelmed with its own drama. Not content to let the facts
provide their own excitement, the author promiscuously peppers the narrative
with exclamation points ("It [the moon] looks like an enormous ball!") that in
their superfluity lead to a monotonous tone. Occasionally, the prose itself gets a
little heated ("The side of the craft facing the sun could get dangerously hot. So
the astronauts keep Apollo in a slow spin. It turns like meat on a barbecue
spit") and hazards are overemphasized, with too many reminders that the
astronauts could "die on the moon." They didn't, of course, and the present-tense
telling could confuse an audience for whom this event is history. But the facts
are here, the (few) photographs provide down-to earth evidence, and the many
color paintings provide a comic-book clarity. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Ehlert, Lois. Eating the Alphabet: Fruits and Vegetables from A to Z; written
and illus. by Lois Ehlert. Harcourt, 1989. ISBN 0-15-224435-2. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
A delicious way to practise letters, identify foods, and
experience colors, this picture book begins "Apple to Zucchini, / come take a
look. / Start eating your way/ through this alphabet book." The illustrations
and book design are tantalizing, from endpapers that feature miniature rows of
fruit and vegetable icons, to a title page with a funny face made of fruits and
vegetables, to spacious spreads overflowing with both the common and the
unusual: "A a" shows apricots, artichokes, avocados, asparagi, and apples.
Endive, fig, Indian corn, jalapeno, jicama, kiwifruit, kohlrabi, kumquat, leek,
mango, papaya, persimmon, pomegranate, quince, radicchio, rutabaga, star fruit,
swiss chard, ugli fruit, vegetable marrow, and xigua all make surprise
appearances amidst familiar bananas, cabbages, potatoes, and strawberries. All
letters and words are presented in both upper and lower case. There are a few
pictures that may defy identification: the cauliflower is too stylized to be
realistic, and the huckleberries look just like the blueberries, but the total
aesthetic effect is so satisfying as to make these minor quibbles indeed. A
glossary of fruits and vegetables in the book gives pronunciation and botanical
information on each. A fabulous advertisement for natural foods as well as for
appetizing words. BH
C.U. Language arts; Nutrition
[273
Ethridge, Kenneth E. Viola, Furgy, Bobbi, and Me. Holiday House, 1989.
ISBN 0-8234-0746-2. 164p. $13.95.
M 
Gr. 6-8. 
Stephen, the narrator, is in ninth grade; Bobbi is his
girl and Furgy his eccentric pal who makes odd noises and walks like a chicken.
Viola is the neighbor (age 78) who begins as an odd-jobs employer and soon
becomes so dear a friend that Stephen brings Bobbi and Furgy to meet her.
When Viola is hospitalized with a broken hip, her two daughters plan to put her
in a nursing home. The ending is fairly predictable: her young friends organize
a rescue and home care program, with the help of a part-time nurse. There will
probably be some appeal to readers in the Samaritan example and the breezy
writing style, but the book is weakened by cardboard characters, structural
contrivance, and a series of stylistic gaffes like ". .. the car was the least dirtiest
thing around ... " or "The Tigers not only played lousy ... " While it may be
an attempt at adolescent verisimilitude, the slang is inconsistent and overdone.
ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Older-younger generations
Ferris, Jean. Looking for Home. Farrar, 1989. ISBN 0-374-34649-6. [176p].
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Daphne begins her story when she is seventeen, afraid
of her abusive father, and all the more responsive to the affection of a popular
senior, Scott. Their one-night (prom night) lovemaking results in Daphne's
pregnancy. She doesn't tell Scott; taking her savings, she goes to another town.
Two things happen: she changes her mind about having her baby adopted, and
she finds three dear people who become her friends, almost her "family."
Although this has an aura of one-lucky-coincidence-after-another scenario, the
story is nicely written and the characters drawn with depth and insight, especially
Daphne's three friends: the former doctor for whom she works as a waitress, the
black college student who also works in the restaurant, and the woman customer
who looks like a bag lady but proves to be a well-to-do artist who welcomes
Daphne and her baby into her home. ZS
D.V. Friendship values
Gaeddert, LouAnn. A Summer like Turnips. Holt, 1989. ISBN 0-8050-0839-
X. 71p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
"Bruce had expected Gramps to be sad" but he did not
anticipate the magnitude of Gramps' overwhelming depression; the man hardly
seemed to be himself when he greeted Bruce, who was arriving for his annual
visit, the first since Gram died. Gramps occasionally manages to be loving and
social, but most of the time he sits watching TV or lies in bed, lashing out at
Bruce whenever the boy tries to cheer him up. There's enough material in the
story for a full-length novel; by limiting herself to a brief book, Gaeddert isn't
able to give quite enough character or narrative development to fully engage
readers' empathy. However, both love and conflict are clear, plausible, and
unsentimentally portrayed, and Gramp's eventual recovery is realistically halting
and unoccasioned by melodrama or convenient catharsis. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Grandparent-child relations
[274 ]
Glenn, Mel. Squeeze Play: A Baseball Story. Clarion, 1989. ISBN 0-89919-
859-7. 135p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
There's a new sixth-grade teacher, and Jeremy and his
classmates soon learn that Mr. Shore is a martinet whose barking voice and rigid
discipline extend beyond the classroom to the baseball diamond. Jeremy, who
tells the story, becomes increasingly resentful as Mr. Shore persists in
domineering and bullying his team. It is the protagonist's elderly friend Mr.
Janowicz, a gentle but far from timid Holocaust survivor, who has the courage
to confront Mr. Shore at the end of a game in which, despite Shore's hostility,
Jeremy's class wins when Josie is brought in as a relief pitcher. The characters
are convincing, the writing style is adequate, the situation is handled with
insight; the weaknesses of the book are the structure (predictable and
monotonous) and the slow pace. ZS
Goodall, John S., illus. The Story of a Farm; illus. by John S. Goodall.
McElderry, 1989. ISBN 0-689-50479-9. 72p. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Goodall uses his usual device, half-pages alternating
with full pages, so that there are partial changes in the paintings spread before
the viewer of a wordless picture book. Unfortunately, the device seems to serve
little purpose, since the partial changes do not consistently affect the
chronology, the presentation of activity, or period details. The pictures show
changes in an English farm and its environs, from the Early Middle Ages to the
present; a table of contents provides historical clues. The concepts of passage of
time and changes in life style (as well as clothes, activities, architectural details,
and technological advances) seem more mature than the format would indicate.
ZS
C.U. Social studies
Granger, Michele. The Summer House Cat; illus. by Lindy Strauss. Dutton,
1989. ISBN 0-525-44488-2. [96p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-4. 
Billed as a "beginning novel," this is a story that
focuses very simply on a girl's persuading her parents to adopt the cat they find
during a vacation week near the beach. Eight-year-old Charlotte has allies in her
baby-talking little sister Tessa and in soft-hearted Mom. That just leaves Dad,
whose will steadily erodes in face of opposition (there's already a bad-tempered
cat back home in the city) and who proves basically amenable even when a
search for the stray holds up their departure on the ferry. There's little dramatic
action here, but the animal adoration and the resolution of family tensions will
appeal to many a transitional reader. BH
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Green, Susan. Self-Portrait with Wings. Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-32677-1.
206p. $13.95.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Eleven-year-old Jennifer Rosen would like nothing
better than to fly across the ice like the star skater in her class, but her thin,
stick-like limbs are stiff despite all her efforts. Then, with some new iridescent
pencils, she draws a self-portrait with wings and wakes up the next morning
with a real pair of invisible, albeit no less awkward, wings. Much of the book
[ 275 ]
is devotedto the mechanics of Jennifer's trying to get through school, skating
Sactcie, a daumv, and various bus rides, with huge wings that hurt when they're
bumped or crushed. This becomes repetitious (only once does Jennifer try an
experimental flight in the park, which ends in disaster), and her reluctance to tell
her mother for fear of an amputation belies the woman's portrayal as a sensitive
artist and loving mother. Between Jennifer and her best friend, there's a
convincing relationship with some realistic dialogue, peppered by typically
overused junior high exclamations of "ohmagod" and "forgodsake," but the
narrative seems wordy and the fantasy labored. Readers will, however, appreciate
the Kafkaesque aspects of life with unexpectedly literal lift and drag. A similar
story that flies higher is Black andBlue Magic by Zilpha Keatley Snyder (BCCB
11/66). BH
D.V. Meeting difficult situations
Greenwald, Sheila. Rosy's Romance; written and illus. by Sheila Greenwald.
Joy Street/Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-32704-2. 
106p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Inspired by their new obsession with teen romance
series like Sugerwater High and Sakrinhill Quints, Rosy and Hermione decide to
turn Rosy's rather bohemian older sisters into real teens. As Hermione says of
Anitra and Pippa, "they may be teens, but the Sakrinhill Quints wouldn't let
them through the door." Thus is born Project Romance, as Rosy and Hermione
scheme to get the sisters "dates and crushes and parties and ... " to the prom,
"the most exciting thing of all." Paperback daydreams and romantic reality
collide most entertainingly here, and Project Romance becomes an apt mix of
slapstick and send-up while Rosie's own romance (complete with an anonymous
love note) begins without any machinations at all. Rosie and Hermione are
engaging as always, and Anitra and Pippa prove themselves to be a pair of really
good sports. RS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Haskins, James. India under Indira and Rajiv Gandhi. Enslow, 1989. ISBN 0-
89490-146-X. 
[104p], illus. with photographs. 
$15.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
This is Haskins at his best: a thoughtful, moderate
tone, a good balance of personal and political material, and enough background
to make the chronological narrative more meaningful. The roles of Mohandas
Gandhi and, even more, of Jawaharlal Nehru are described in enough detail to
make it clear why Nehru's daughter Indira became Prime Minister. Haskins is
particularly candid about the careers and philosophies of Rajiv and his brother
Sanjay, and the text, which concludes with political events of 1987, reserves
judgment about Rajiv's success as Prime Minister. A divided bibliography and
an index are provided. ZS
C.U. History-India
Haynes, Mary. Catch the Sea. Bradbury, 1989. ISBN 0-02-743451-6. 172p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
When her artist father goes to New York for an
important exhibition of his work, Lily, who's supposed to be busy starting
[ 276 ]
eighth grade, is left to guard their summer cottage and their secret: Dad is
supposed to be working on some "dumb-and-ugly" seascapes for a wealthy
patron, and he's not. During the week he's gone, Lily fends off the paron,
makes a friend of a woman, an astronomer, in a neighboring cottage, and begins
a tentative exploration of her own creativity. Haynes' writing is simple and
clear, confidently blending thematic questions--"You're sure you're not an
artist?"-with the emotional palette of Lily's life: her loving but distracted
father, and her mother, far away and famous in Paris. Lily's evasions of the
forbidding patron, Mrs. Phipps, add humor and suspense, and the characters, like
the sea Lily works so hard to paint, revealingly change in the shifting light. RS
D.V. Creativity; Parent-child relations
Heslewood, Juliet. Earth, Air, Fire, and Water. Oxford, 1989. ISBN 0-19-
278107-3. 181p. illus. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Folklore from Polynesia, Australia, New Zealand, the
Americas, the Mediterannean, Africa, Europe, and the Far East is organized
thematically around the four elements. There is considerable variety of tone:
some of these are creation myths of turmoil and upheaval while others are
folktales of love and loss. Though the stories of Daedalus, Persephone, Sedna,
and the Kelpie may be familiar to readers, most of the twenty-four selections
will not be. The adapter has cited her sources-some scholarly and some
popular-in notes on each story and has mentioned a few of the changes she has
made. Considering the diversity of the material, these read fairly smoothly,
though they'll ultimately be drawn on more for school than for personal use and
might in fact be most effective as a resource for storytellers. Dramatic black-
and-white illustrations with scratchboard effects are scattered throughout the
book. BH
C.U. Literature-study and teaching; Storytelling
James, Betsy. Long Night Dance. Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-525-44485-8.
[208p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Romantic readers will be attracted to this Cinderella-
like fantasy of a sixteen-year-old who rescues herself from a house where her
father works her to the bone and values her only for the possibility of a
financially advantageous match. The catalyst of Katyesha's bid for independence
is her rescue of an injured seal-man from the shore. Loving him makes her
realize how starved for joy and self-esteem her life has been. Although the
ending offers the prospect of their union, Kat plans first to visit her mother's
benevolent family, members of a hill-country bear clan, to strengthen her own
sense of identity. The setting is a vaguely Scottish coast with fictional, slightly
mythical inventions. 
While at times the writing is poetically spare, it
occasionally becomes overwrought: "She looked at him as though from deep
waters-some of them the tidal abandon of joy, some of them a safe familiar
dread. . .. His harsh and certain voice poured around her like water, and
withdrew. She crouched, drenched, in the silence of its ebb." This self-
conscious style shadows the competent plot and characterization. At one point,
the seal-man, Nall, has "laid his hand earnestly on her thigh," saying "'To dance,
to swim ... ' His voice was harsh with weariness. 'To sing. To dream. They
are the same.'" Those characters who develop naturally, Kat's brother for
[2771
instance, are more vivid than those intended to portray wisdom, as is the
Downshore couple who help heal Nail's wounds. In spite of some forced
artifice, the fairy tale overtones, including a "Beauty and the Beast" motif, will
hold attention. BH
D.V. Self-reliance
Kitchen, Bert. Tenrec's Twigs; written and illus. by Bert Kitchen. Philomel,
1989. ISBN 0-399-21720-7. 24p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
Kitchen's animal pictures are always impressive,
deftly textural and beautifully detailed and colored. Most of the creatures in this
picture book are from central or southern Africa, and they include-in addition to
the title creature (Tenrec)-a warthog, a pangolin, a stork, and an anteater.
Kitchen is careful to specify the family (small-scaled pangolin, streaked tenrec),
and he provides notes on all of them in the final pages. What is weak is the
story: Tenrec goes from animal to animal to ask if it is foolish to build
buildings of twigs, and finally he gets the encouraging word he's been seeking
from the Milky Eagle Owl, so he happily returns to his building.
Unfortunately, the device is repetitive and the resultant text is flat. ZS
Klein, Robin. Enemies; illus. by Noela Young. Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-525-
44479-3. [64p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
First published in Australia in 1982 in serial form,
this is a story that's slightly overextended but that shows the sympathetic and
quiet humor that pervades Klein's longer and more complicated books. Their
mothers are best friends, but Mary-Anna and Sandra have a flourishing dislike for
each other; neither is overjoyed when, due to a weekend trip by one set of
parents, they have to share a room. Not unexpectedly, proximity fosters
understanding, and getting lost together while on a visit to the city increases that
understanding and leads to mutual trust and even friendship. A bit pat, but few
readers will object to the happy, tidy ending. ZS
D.V. Friendship values
Koller, Jackie French. Impy for Always; illus. by Carol Newsom. Little,
1989. ISBN 0-316-50147-6. 57p. (Springboard Books). $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-4. 
Cousin Teeny, twelve, has changed since her last
visit two years before, and eight-year-old Imogene ("Impy") doesn't like the new
Christina one bit: "She was right about not being teeny anymore. She was
almost as tall as Imogene's mom, and she was getting all lumpy and curvy like
Mom, too." Christina doesn't like to splash in the pool or play with dolls
anymore, instead evincing an interest in obnoxious Michael Radnor, who once
put cat droppings in Impy's doll's diaper. "'That's hysterical,' she shrieked. 'I
love it! I have got to meet this guy.'" 
A convincing, if slight,
acknowledgement of the puberty gap, this keeps things moving with plenty of
clear-cut conflict, some slapstick mayhem, and realistic motivations from both
sides. Although the ending (and the illustration) is sugary---"There's still lots of
stuff we can do together, and no matter what, I'll always love you Imogene"-
this is acceptable transitional reading for girls eager but not quite ready for
Blume. RS
[278 ]
Krensky, Stephen. Witch Hunt: It Happened in Salem Village; illus. by James
Wading. Random House, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-91923-8; Paper ed.
ISBN 0-394-81923-3. 48p. (Step into Reading). Library ed. $6.99; Paper ed.
$2.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
While not as inclusive a treatment of the Salem trials
as Karen Zeinert's The Salem Witchcraft Trials (BCCB 4/89), this has the
considerable advantage of a smooth, storytelling style that admits the dramatic
without spilling into the sensational. Krensky's retelling is straightforward,
beginning with Betty Parris' "fits," and continuing through the subsequent
strange behavior of the other girls, the accusations, trials, and eventual
exonerations. Short sentences and simple vocabulary are used effectively: "They
were the star witnesses. Testifying against the witches was a kind of job for
them. And they had become very good at it." While some of the watercolor
illustrations seem content to evoke a generic colonialism, many, including the
cover, have the requisite dark drama. RS
C.U. History-U.S.-Colonial
Little, Jean. Hey World, Here I Am!; illus. by Sue Truesdell. Harper, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024006-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023989-1. 89p. Library
ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Nice. Very nice. The voice is that of Kate (Look
Through My Window and Kate, which introduced the girl whose exploration of
self was both sensible and tender) and thoughts and memories are expressed in a
series of poems and brief anecdotes. They are wonderfully vivid and each is
complete in itself, but what is most impressive about them is that they do two
things simultaneously (and do them both well): 
they reveal Kate as an
individual and they speak for all adolescents who are sensible and sensitive and
intelligent. Scratchy line and wash pictures, black and white, have the humor of
cartoon art. ZS
Mallory, Kenneth. Rescue of the Stranded Whales by Kenneth Mallory and
Andrea Conley. New England Aquarium/Simon, 1989. ISBN 0-671-67122-7.
64p. illus. with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
"The" in the title here may be a bit misleading here,
since most children doing reports on stranded whales will think of the more
famous 1989 incident involving California Gray whales trapped in the frozen
Arctic Ocean. (See review under Whittell.) This rescue operation involves pilot
whales stranded in 1986 off the coast of Cape Cod, and it represents a scientific
breakthrough in understanding why whales beach and how they can be saved.
Personnel from the New England Aquarium manage to save three young whales
from an entire pod of nearly forty mothers and juveniles, most of which must be
put to sleep on the beach. The logistics of moving the whales, caring for them
during their recuperation, and returning them to sea (equipped with radio and
satellite transmitters) is a dramatic story, and the newsworthy color photographs
make exciting viewing. Overall, this is a report that will satisfy children's
scientific curiosity as well as their concern for saving threatened wildlife. BH
C.U. Nature study
D.V. Environmental awareness
[279
Marie de France. Proud Knight, Fair Lady: The Twelve Lais of Marie de
France; tr. by Naomi Lewis; illus. by Angela Barrett. Viking, 1989. ISBN 0-
670-82656-1. 
100p. $19.95.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
After an introduction to the twelfth-century writer
Marie de France, Naomi Lewis delivers graceful prose translations of twelve
stories revolving around chivalrous love and fealty. The formal narrative quickly
becomes a familiar voice, and the events are laced with fairy tale magic,
legendry, and medieval adventure. Lovers tryst, undertake challenges, change
shape, die heartbroken, or triumph depending on their destiny and the heart with
which they meet it. Junior high and high school readers who have outgrown
fairy tales but enjoy Robin McKinley's work will revel in these, and students of
the Middle Ages will find in the tales an immediacy of detail that lends
perspective on the high culture of the period. The pictures, both full-page and
illuminated miniatures, are drawn, colored, and composed with exquisite
restraint BH
C.U. History-Medieval
Mazer, Norma Fox. Heartbeat by Norma Fox Mazer and Harry Mazer. Bantam,
1989. ISBN 0-553-05808-8. 165p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Several years before, Amos had saved Tod's life after
a swimming accident; they became best friends and Tod now, as a high school
senior, had a chance to do something for Amos. Although shy, Tod agreed to
talk to Hilary (the girl Amos admired) on his friend's behalf. In the John Alden
tradition, Tod falls in love with Hilary; she responds, but she also becomes fond
of Amos. Neither wants to hurt him, and the problem is accelerated when Amos
is hospitalized. His illness, infectious cardiomyopathy, proves fatal. Painfully,
Tod realizes that he and Hilary can never go back, laden as they are with grief and
guilt, to their former relationship. It's a moving story, psychologically intricate
and convincing, that explores the conflict between romantic love and loyalty to a
friend in a way that is broader than the immediate situation of the story. ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Friendship values
Miller, Christina G. Coastal Rescue: Preserving Our Seashores; by Christina
G. Miller and Louise A. Berry. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31288-1. 120p.
illus. with photographs. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
This examination of a threatened U.S. ecosystem
describes the way beaches build and shift naturally, then goes on to show how
artificial breakwaters, coastal construction, and pollution have destroyed both
wildlife and the terrain that supports them. 
The text is well written and
organized, with black-and-white photographs and drawings adequately extending
the information. Although the tone is straightforwardly honest in assessing
shore damage despite recent legislation, a final chapter suggests what young
readers can do to inform themselves and make a difference in the future. A
glossary, list of sources for more information, bibliography (divided into
juvenile and adult books, plus articles), and index complete the book, which will
be especially helpful in environmental units, as well as for families with homes
near or vacations planned by the sea. BH
C.U. Nature study
[280 ]
Nilsson, Ulf. Little Bunny & the Hungry Fox; ISBN 0-87701-605-4. Little
Bunny at the Beach; ISBN 0-87701-610-0. EaO book: illus. by Eva Eriksson.
Chronicle, 1989. 25p. $6.95.
R 
1-3 yrs. 
Toddler picture books with just the right amount of
suspense, these are illustrated with appealingly scruffy drawings that leave plenty
of space for the imagination. In the first, Little Bunny violates her mother's
prohibition "not to go out by herself" and of course has a close call with a fox.
In the second, she defies Big Brother Rabbit at the beach, drifts out to sea, and
comes to her senses just in time. Both narrative and dialogue are spare but
natural ("'Fine,' said Big Brother Rabbit. 'You can float out to sea all by
yourself then'"), and the child figure saves herself either by action or by good
judgement The light-hearted art buoys up the theme in both books. BH
D.V. Self-reliance
Pendergraft, Patricia. Brushy Mountain. Philomel, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21610-
3. 207p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Thirteen-year-old Arney Burdette hates old man
Hooker with a passion so strong that he fantasizes about killing him, and once
even tries to. Instead, he ends up saving Hooker's life three times, from
drowning, from fire, and from an explosion. Arney also helps his sister Sal
deliver Hooker's twin grandsons, one dead, in a terrible storm during which
wolves surround the shack. If this seems like a lot of plot to develop in a
limited amount of space, it is, and the book falls back on some stock characters
(especially a fat girl who's set on kissing Arney) and repetitive devices.
However, Arney's family and first girl friend are clearly drawn, and readers who
find the heavy dialect accessible will get involved in the mountain community of
Weedpatch. BH
D.V. Community life
Priceman, Marjorie. Friend or Frog; written and illus. by Marjorie Priceman.
Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-44523-X. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
"Kate's best friend was green and spotted, which is
unusual in a friend but attractive in a frog. Kate met him on the beach in
Florida" and "invited him north to live with her family." Packing is not a
problem-he has only one belonging, "a towel with the name Hilton on it."
Kate's New York City apartment, however, does prove problematic, and after her
mother's ultimatum, Kate must find Hilton a new owner. 
The three
applicants-a chef, a boy genius, and a romantic--have dubious intentions, so
Hilton escapes ("'My prince!' screamed Miss Lavender. 'My dinner!' hollered
Monsieur Fromage. 'My science project!' squealed Donald"). The ending is
contrived, but cleverly. While Kate realizes "that you can't really own a frog,"
she also discovers that "any frog who's truly a friend will try to stay in touch."
The watercolor illustrations that accompany this flurry of activity are action-
packed themselves, with fly-away lines, quick-sketch changes of expression, and
jolly splats of color. Fresh and funny. BH
D.V. Pets, love for
[281 ]
Pringle, Laurence. Living in a Risky World. Morrow, 1989. ISBN 0-688-
04326-7. 105p. illus. with photographs. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
Although the format would indicate a middle-grade
and junior high audience, Pringle's latest is a sophisticated, densely argued
analysis of risk (both real and perceived), probability, and calculation of costs
against benefits in assessing the likelihood of hazards. It's all rather heavy-
going, particularly as the author prefers the statistical to the anecdotal, and
sometimes becomes obscure: "Suppose, for example, a job has an estimated
risk of one death among every 10,000 workers in a year. Suppose also that
workers are willing to face that risk for $300 dollars in additional pay each year.
This is interpreted to mean that the workers value the life of one of their fellows
at $300 times 10,000 workers, or $3 million." Part of Pringle's point is that
such calculations are too narrowly focused, failing to take all germane factors
into account, but he still needs to be more clear in explaining how such
projections are made. This book is at its best when discussing the actions (or
inactions) of various regulatory agencies, and in its thoughful analysis of how
people perceive risks, and how those perceptions change in response to social,
technical, and mass-media forces. Documentation is occasional; a glossary,
reading list, directory of agencies, and an index are appended. RS
C.U. Social studies
Radford, Ken. The Cellar. Holiday House, 1989. ISBN 0-8234-0744-6. 171p.
$13.95.
NR 
Gr. 5-8. 
SiAn is a young (her age, and the era of the story, are
indeterminate) orphan who accepts a job as companion and housekeeper for an
elderly pair of sisters and their even more elderly father, affectionately and
repetitively referred to as "the old seafarer." The family lives in a spooky old
house (setting of Radford's earlier novel House in the Shadows) in northern
Wales, and Sian is convinced the house is haunted by a ghost who cannot rest.
There's little suspense in the gradual revelation and materialization of the lonely
ghost, primarily because the author relies on tired tricks (a found diary, a bricked-
off cellar) to advance the story, and some of the effects are calculated: Sian's
wielding of a candle (that-what else?-goes out) in the scary cellar may be
atmospheric, but it seems a little silly, given that everyone else in the book has
access to a flashlight. The writing is often confused ("When dusk fell and their
evening's work was finished.. .") or cliched ("Nature was awakening after its
winter sleep and Sian could feel the excitement surging within her") and the
story is burdened with an excess of whimsy, both in the unneccesary character of
Sidn's imaginary friend, "Faraway," and in the dimpled quality of Sihn's
conversation: "There's nothing more precious than happy memories, for no one
can ever take them away." RS
Rowland, Jada, ad. 
Rapunzel; ad. and illus. by Jada Rowland.
Calico/Contemporary, 1989. ISBN 0-8092-4400-4. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
In retelling this Grimm tale, with its haunting image
of a girl whose love climbs her hair into an enchanted castle, Rowland has
romanticized both the story and the paintings that accompany it. She adds a
[ 282 ]
nightingale to reinforce the motif of Rapunzel's singing, along with motivations
for the witch's hatred of men (a wizard deserted her at the altar) and a happy
ending brought about by the remorseful witch herself. The watercolors are
somewhat reminiscent of Elisabeth Zwerger's in style and hues, but with a more
sweetened tone and less linear dash; they are well composed and, with the
exception of a shorn Rapunzel who comes startlingly too soon for her
appearance in the text, well placed in relation to the storytelling. BH
Rylant, Cynthia. But I'll Be Back Again: An Album. Orchard, 1989. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-08406-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05806-9. [80p]. illus. with
photographs. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
One greets this autobiography with mixed emotions.
On the one hand, it is well written and revealing of Rylant's painful childhood,
some of which will offer points of identity for young readers. On the other
hand, there stretches the endless vista of autobiographies as a new genre for every
young (or even middle-aged) children's and YA writer with a will to share
personal background outside of fictional crafting. The thematic focus here is on
Rylant's perceived loss of her parents, her father to alcoholism and,
simultaneously, her mother to a nurses' training program that took her away
from her child for several years. Loving care by grandparents and cousins,
crushes on boyfriends and the Beatles, a handshake from her hero Bobby Kennedy
are all remembered in sharp focus. Not everyone will care about what happened
to Rylant's childhood friends, but the description of the first kiss, and later ones
as well, will have inherent appeal. Verses from the Beatles are somewhat
irrelevantly interspersed, and snapshots of Rylant growing up are appended.
Honest and heartfelt. BH
D.V. Self-expression
Sacks, Margaret. Beyond Safe Boundaries. Lodestar, 1989. ISBN 0-525-67281-
8. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Elizabeth Levin, the narrator, describes some of the
changes in her life beginning with the arrival of her new stepmother (instantly
loved by little Elizabeth, deeply resented by her older sister Evie) at their South
African home. The story is set late in the 1950s and in the early 1960s, and it is
both a story of the universal perils and concerns of adolescence and the story of a
child who, coming from a careful and conservative Jewish family, learns from
her own experiences and from Evie, who has become an idealistic activist in the
fight against oppressive government policies. Elizabeth, developing a rising
anger as she knows more about the excesses of apartheid, sadly concludes-- after
Evie is smuggled out of the country-that some day she too will leave to seek a
better life. The author, who came to this country from South Africa, writes
with perception and candor about the relationships between races and classes, but
she has written a convincingly personal story without allowing the message to
overwhelm the book. ZS
D.V. Intercultural understanding; Stepparent-child relations
[ 283 ]
Schwartz, David M. If You Made a Million; illus. by Steven Kellogg.
Lothrop, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07018-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07017-
5. 40p. Library ed. $14.88; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
A companion volume to How Much Is a Million ?
(BCCB 7/85) this has the same oversize format and the same kind of ebulliently
comic drawings. The text builds from the known (pictures of coins and bills of
familiar denominations, including the various combinations of coins that make
one dollar or bills that total one hundred dollars) and proceeds blithely to a
million. Each time, the author suggests what you can purchase if you earn a
specific amount; you are also invited to consider the interest your money would
earn if it were banked. The picture book format indicates a young audience, but
the concepts and the appended notes on such subjects as compound interest,
checking accounts, and income tax should extend the range of readership. ZS
C.U. Arithmetic
Silverstein, Herma. Teen Guide to Single Parenting. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-
531-10669-1. 62p. illus. with photographs. (Teen Guides). $11.90.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
"Every year, 192,000 teenage girls become single
mothers. Often they must cope with holding down a job or going to school and
making a home for their baby. It's not easy, but it can be done." While there is
some practical introductory advice on finding support systems to help cope with
schooling, finances, housing, and birth control, the major portion of the book is
a sensible primer on child care. Chapters covering stages of development from
birth to 6 months, 6 to 15 months, and 15 months to 2 years tell the teenage
parent what to expect, physically and emotionally, and how to react. Healthy
food, safety tips, and suggestions for frustrated single parents (including Parents
Anonymous toll-free numbers) all find their way into these brief, accessible
chapters. Librarians will be happy to see that reading to babies gets a strong
emphasis right from birth. Illustrated with color photographs of black, white,
Asian, and Hispanic children, this is a solid addition to a valuable young adult
series that also includes Brown's Childbirth and Nourse's Birth Control (both
BCCB 11/88). BH
C.U. Health and hygiene; Sex education
D.V. Baby, adjustment to
Singer, Marilyn. The Case of the Fixed Election; illus. by Richard Williams.
Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025845-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025844-6.
[80p]. Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
There are three candidates for student council president
and as the campaign progresses, there is increasing evidence of dirty tricks. One
of the candidates is Dave Bean, who-with his twin brother, Sam-does some
detective work to ferret out who did or said what and for what reason; their
investigations reveal the power-hungry classmate who is the culprit. The story
loses suspense as the clues to labored incidents emerge; it seems an overextended
treatment (although it is not really a long story) that is unleavened by humor or
drama and that lacks any interesting characterization. ZS
D.V. Ethical concepts
[284 ]
Sundvall, Viveca. Mimi and the Biscuit Factory; tr. by Eric Bibb; illus. by Eva
Eriksson. R&S/Farrar, 1989. ISBN 91-29-59142-2. 26p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Animated and amusing, the illustrations combine
bland colors and a raffish line, and are nicely integrated with the ingenuous first-
person text of a picture story book first published in Sweden. Mimi, the
narrator, achieves two of her life goals (she's in first grade) when her class visits
the biscuit factory and-on the same day-she gets a loose tooth. Sundvall has
a keen ear for the pattern of children's speech and an understanding of their
behavior; smoothly translated, her story has universality and humor. ZS
D.V. Everyday life concepts
Thompson, Julian F. Goofbang Value Daze. Scholastic, 1989. ISBN 0-590-
41946-3. 261p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 8-10. 
Not science fiction, but set in a futuristic community
under a dome, this is the plaintive and humorous story (told by Gabe) of the
censorship struggle at his high school. Gabe's a friendly kid, he loves and
enjoys his supportive parents, and he loves his girl Dori, who is bright and
pretty. Dori has one problem: her father is too serious, too tense. Thompson
knits plot threads into a convincing whole, despite a cumulation of almost-stock
characters: Dori's father for one, Gabe the activist-nonconformist for another,
and several of the censorious adults (the school directors; the ranting and militant
congressman, Mr. Orrifice). Amongst the issues that arise are the abuse of
testing for AIDS, student behavior regulations, pressure on school athletes.
Gabe protests, volubly and repeatedly; as Dori's father says when the authorities
respond in hostile fashion, "This Gabe, he seems to think he's free to practice all
the liberties our laws allow him to, and use all their protections, too. Well,
they can't stand it." To some extent, the forces of reason are vindicated in this
tart examination of values education. The book is often funny, despite a somber
ending (Dori's father commits suicide, Dori leaves town), and the humor may
make the theme more provocative, but the writing is weakened by the type-
casting, the determined comedy-script aura of the dialogue, and the improbability
of some of the incidents. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Parent-child relations
Watkins, Will. Sid Seal, Houseman; illus. by Toni Goffe. Orchard, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08384-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05784-4. 89p. Library
ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Wealthy Mr. and Mrs. Livingston de Swine and their
son Waltham lead a stuffy life until they discover low-class but multi-talented
Sid Seal cavorting in their bathtub. Sid makes himself invaluable as a waiter,
musician, and all-around companion to Waltham, whose routine becomes
considerably less boring with the mildly adventurous episodes Sid stirs up.
These range from being trapped by a snowstorm in a sweet shop overnight to
picketing a heartless landlord who has torched his own building for the
insurance. Even in the latter, there's an element of the farce that dominates the
book, which is saved from archness by cavalier tongue in cheek. A light,
smoothly catered readaloud in the magical-nanny tradition. BH
D.V. Friendship values
[285 ]
Whittell, Giles. The Story of Three Whales: A True Adventure; illus. by
Patrick Benson. Gareth Stevens, 1989. ISBN 0-8368-0092-3. 28p. $9.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
This is a well-simplified account of an Inuit's
discovering several California Gray whales trapped in the Frozen Arctic sea
during the early winter of 1988, and of a Russian ice-breaker's freeing them after
others' futile attempts. The continuous text is set beneath capable pen-and-ink
hatch drawings that catch the action without violating the spacious calm of the
surroundings. The general characteristics of the animals, their special plight, and
the international attention to them as symbols of ecological concern get brief but
balanced attention. A list of organizations that send information on saving
whales and other endangered wild species, a bibliography of children's nonfiction
and fiction about whales, and a list of important words related to the subject
(with definitions and sample usage) will give young readers or listeners a chance
to act on the sympathy naturally evoked by the book. BH
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Wisniewski, David. The Warrior and the Wise Man; written and illus. by David
Wisniewski. Lothrop, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07890-7; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-07889-3. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Tozaemon was the greatest warrior in Japan; his twin
brother Toemon was the greatest sage. In this folk-like story, Wisniewski uses
the traditional folklore patterns of the setting of tasks: whichever brother first
returns with the five elements should succeed their father as emperor. The
writing style is fluent and well-paced; the nicely-integrated illustrations are bold
and dramatic, done in beautifully detailed cut-paper technique that combines color
and-in effective contrast-black silhouettes. 
On a few pages, a dark
background makes the print less easy to read. ZS
D.V. Pacific attitudes
Woods, Geraldine. Affirmative Action. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10657-8.
128p. illus. with photographs. (Impact Books). $12.90.
Ad 
Gr. 8-10. 
Woods does an adequate job of giving historical
background for her account of the establishment of federal laws and programs
dealing with affirmative action, and of their testing in court cases. She also cites
many opinions on both sides, maintaining neutrality in what has been and
continues to be a controversial issue. Separate chapters present the cases for and
against affirmative action, and a final chapter presents-very briefly-the
author's views on what the future holds for affirmative action. The writing style
is inert and heavy, but the book should prove useful because of the importance
of its subject. Footnotes, a bibliography, and an index are appended. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Worley, Daryl. Billy and the Attic Adventure; illus. by John Daab. Tyke,
1989. ISBN 0-924067-004. 32p. $9.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
First in a series designed to teach the seven cardinal
virtues, this simple and secular demonstration of "Faith" is effective and age-
appropriate, if slightly bare-boned. Billy has climbed up to the attic to explore,
[ 286 ]
but slips on the way down, grabbing the edge of the opening. His eyes covered
by an old cap he found, Billy won't jump into his father's waiting arms: "I can't
SEE you!" "'You don't need to,' said dad. 'I can see you.'" So Billy lets go,
falls, and lands in a hug. Pencil illustrations are equally simple, with a hazily
photographic quality and a variety of perspectives and page design that heighten
the drama. Children may be puzzled by the lack of a traditional story, but this is
the kind of concept book that works best in the context of conversation. Most
children will probably be able to appreciate Billy's leap of faith; that they can
make the conceptual leap to the abstract is open to question. RS
C.U. Religious education
D.V. Faith; father-son relations
Yolen, Jane. Piggins and the Royal Wedding; illus. by Jane Dyer. Harcourt,
1989. ISBN 0-15-261687-X. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
With all the children who act as flower girls or
ringbearers, it's surprising more picture-book stories haven't focused on the
subject, but here's one that does it up royally. Piggins fans who remember the
wealthy Reynard family from previous books (BCCB 4/87 and 5/88) will not be
surprised at how well-connected it is. Trixy and Rexy are to star in a princely
wedding, but the ancestral ring disappears from the ceremonial pillow right in
Rexy's paws, and Piggens the butler must be summoned from his tea at the
Reynard home ("he does not like crowds") to solve the mystery. It's a silken
thread, a scrap of silver paper, and sniff of chocolate that give the thief away, and
it's the intricate watercolor paintings that save the scenario from becoming
repetitious. Dyer's rich colors, varied compositions, and tongue-in-cheek
celebration of pomp and circumstance will give young listeners more to look at
than they might see from a perch in Westminster Abbey. BH