Adler, C.S. Tuna Fish Thanksgiving. Clarion, 1992. ISBN 0-395-58829-4.
165p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Gilda, the narrator, is thirteen and is deeply disturbed
by the fact that her parents are getting a divorce. Her career-oriented mother is
moving to a one-bedroom apartment in another school district. Her father is
going to marry Pam, who has made it clear that she has room in her big house
for Gilda and her siblings (Avery is a shy loner of eleven; Bliss is an eight-year-
old clinger who wants only to be where her cat is accepted). Thanksgiving
looms, and Gilda the traditionalist tries desperately to have the standard family
dinner; however, Dad is joining Pam's family, Mom is eating with her support
group, and Bliss has gone to Manhattan-with her cat-to be cosseted by
Grandma. The title tells the ending: the tuna fish sandwiches at a depressing
zoo cafeteria may be an unconventional holiday meal, but Gilda recognizes the
fact that she will long remember it. This is one of Adler's best: the situation is
realistic, the complexity of relationships is depicted with candor and insight, and
the outcome is logical. Each person adjusts as is best for him or her, with Gilda
moving into Pam's so that she can stay in the school she likes, Avery staying
with Mom to get away from the bullies in his old school, and Bliss happily
adjusting to a life of ease in the one place her beloved cat is welcome, her
grandmother's house. ZS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Stepfamilies, adjustment to
Aiken, Joan. A Foot in the Grave; illus. by Jan Pienkowski. Viking, 1992.
ISBN 0-670-84169-2. 128p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
First published in Great Britain, this funny and
sophisticated collection of ghost stories has one small black-and-white picture
and one full-page, poster-simple color painting (in a style that resembles
pointillism, and with collage) for each of the eight stories. In the title story, an
activist ghost, Great-aunt Millicent, takes a vengeful lead when a developer
proposes to dig up the entire graveyard (the Differentiated Baptist burying
ground) and move it to a Garden of Remembrance. Like some of the other tales,
this is even more funny than it is macabre. There are, however, some stories,
such as "Light Work" and Beezlebub's Baby," that are permeated by an eerie
quality heightened by suspense of the kind Aiken so often and so deftly
maneuvers. ZS
[197]
Ancona, George. Man and Mustang; written and illus. with photographs by
George Ancona. Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-02-700802-9. 
[48p]. $15.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
The title may be romantic, but it's not sexist: the
focus of this book is the work men imprisoned in the New Mexico State
Penitentiary do in gentling captured mustangs so the horses can be adopted by
members of the public. The book actually begins with the roundup of mustangs
(taking several pages to depict the procedure), before going on to describe the
meeting between inmates and horses, the training process, and the show at which
gentled mustangs are exhibited. The pictures suffer from gray overtones, and the
book takes awhile to get to its main subject. It's still absorbing on several
levels, however, and the combination of wild horses and skilled, tough men will
give it broad appeal. DS
Arnosky, Jim. Long Spikes; written and illus. by Jim Arnosky. 
Clarion,
1992. ISBN 0-395-58830-8. 90p. $12.95.
R 
Gr.5-8. 
A nature narrative opens with one of several
suspenseful scenes when a pack of coyotes kills a pregnant doe, whose yearling
twins escape. The male eventually goes his own way, ruts and mates, loses an
antler to hunters, and, in a final chase scene, struggles furiously with the same
coyotes. Although the text once or twice slips into slightly anthropomorphic
terms (Long Spikes is once "entranced" by mayflies and again "enthralled" by his
reflection), the story is generally as clear-headed as it is clearly written. The fate
of an old buck that is shot suggests that Long Spikes' life will be ended by
humans if not coyotes. National Geographic specials will have prepared animal
lovers for the kind of blunt, tooth-and-claw hunting action here, and readers who
are not generally absorbed by wildlife lore will appreciate the story's brisk pace.
Occasional pencil drawings begin as quiet decoration but pick up darker dramatic
tones as the story accelerates. BH
C.U. Nature study
Barbalet, Margaret. The Wolf; illus. by Jane Tanner. Macmillan, 1992. ISBN
0-02-711840-1. 34p. $14.95.
NR 
Gr. 2-4. 
The metaphor is at the door. In this pretentious
picture book illustrated with spooky soft colored-pencil drawings, Tal hears a
wolf's howling "worse than he could have imagined. It was worse than his
nightmares. It was the worst thing, coming closer every night" Tal's mother
boards up the windows and forbids the three children to play outside; Tal offers
to sacrifice his cat, and then himself, to appease the prowling wolf's hunger;
after half a year of this nonsense Tal opens the door and lets in the wolf. "'I've
let the wolf in,' he said proudly. He smiled. 'I think it might stay with us.'"
Details in the text and pictures let us know that this is a contemporary story,
meant at some level, that is, the level at which most children will interpret it, to
be realistic. So what's going on here? Is there a real wolf? (It is never pictured.)
Is the wolf, for this fatherless household, a symbol of past tragedy still nipping
at their heels? Or are we supposed to generalize about the wolves all children
face, and so forth? That won't work-for a story to resonate on an empathic
plane it first has to succeed on the literal one, but this tale sacrifices event to
emblem. Red Riding Hood's wolf is scary because he bites. This wolf doesn't
[ 198 ]
have any teeth-and is scarier for the lack. Unlike the wolves and witches of
folklore, the threat in Barbalet's story is never made concrete and knowable, and
therefore tameable. Readers won't be fooled by the happy ending. RS
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Bendall-Brunello, John. The Seven-and-one-half Labors of Hercules; written and
illus. by John Bendall-Brunello. Dutton, 1992. ISBN 0-525-44780-6. 62p.
(Speedsters). $10.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Well, maybe it isn't all twelve, and maybe mucking
out the Augean Stables is a little more complicated than cleaning the stairs, but
this Hercules-a contemporary boy-makes an appealing hero. Upon finding
his mother's note listing seven chores (and with a mysterious torn-off bit at the
end), Hercules is somewhat daunted by the amount of work involved but gamely
makes an effort: "I'm not named Hercules for nothing." Everything-from
fixing Grandma's vase to taking the dog for a walk-goes wrong, and the
cumulating pile-up of disaster humor will be loved by kids in direct proportion
to the degree with which it is loathed by some critics. The ending is a bit of a
let-down (the note was meant for Dad; the torn-off bit said "Have a good day"),
but the everyday empathy and mythic resonance combine for a story that will
have depth for those at a heroic task themselves; namely, learning to read, a skill
for which Bendall-Brunello's direct, brief text and many manic drawings give
practice fine and fun. RS
C.U. Reading, easy
D.V. Perseverance
Big Bear's Treasury: A Children's Anthology. Candlewick, 1992. ISBN 1-
56402-002-9. [93p.] illus. $18.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-8 yrs. 
First published in England in 1990, this is an
excellent choice for a family in which there are both very young children and
independent readers. Thirty-five selections (all previously published material,
some of it excerpted, much of it available in the United States) include the
original art work. The range of sophistication is broad. While the material is
varied in genre and mood and vocabulary difficulty, the quality does not vary but
is consistently high. Familiar characters include Handford's Waldo, Oxenbury's
Tom and Pippo, and Shirley Hughes' Trotter Street bunch; the picture-book
edition of Waddell's title story about Big Bear is reviewed below. ZS
C.U. Reading aloud
Boughton, Richard. Rent-a-Puppy, Inc. Atheneum, 1992. ISBN 0-689-31730-
1. [112p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
Sixth-grader Nikki Savier falls in love with her dog's
six puppies on the day they're born. She and her best friend, Tyler, concoct a
plan to convince Nikki's parents to let them keep the whole litter. Tyler
advertises Rent-a-Puppy, a temporary pet rental service, and soon puppy rental is
providing enough cash to pay for vet bills and dog food. Naturally, this
unorthodox scheme is doomed from the start, and the promising and light-hearted
premise is doomed, too, by overwritten prose. For example, when Nikki nurses
Hope, the runt of the litter, she becomes so attached to the puppy that "Hope
seemed almost like her own creation, like a wilting flower one might save from
[ 199
a frost and, with loving care, cause to bloom and be bright" Nikki feels things
very intensely, as a child whose pets are threatened might, but the story gets
overly dramatic when Nikki contemplates losing her pets in the chapter entitled
"Woe": "She walked swiftly onward, facing straight into the wind, her mouth
set in a rigid frown, her eyes dark with woe." When the puppies predictably get
loose in the house, Dad becomes emotional, too: "In the deep blue of his eyes
raged an approaching storm." Such pervasively heavy-handed writing weighs
down a contemporary and interesting plot. KJ
Brenner, Barbara. Rosa & Marco and the Three Wishes; illus. by Megan Halsey.
Bradbury, 1992. ISBN 0-02-712315-4. 32p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Cultural literalists may scorn this slender
contemporary take on an old story, but beginning readers will be reeled right in.
When Marco and his bossy sister Rosa finally catch a fish, Marco insists the
fish is talking to him. "This fish says if we let it go, it will give us three
wishes." Rosa is scornful, and then angry when Marco lets the fish go. "No
more talk. No fishes and wishes!" She becomes even more angry when Marco
hungrily (and absentmindedly) wishes a taco out of thin air, and she, just as
thoughtlessly, wishes the taco onto the end of his nose. "It stuck there, sauce
and all." Sisterly good will-and one last wish-prevail. Neat little line-and-
watercolor illustrations of the rowboating duo are a tidy complement to a story
in which justice, if not dinner, is served. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Brisson, Pat. Kate on the Coast, illus. by Rick Brown. Bradbury, 1992. ISBN
0-02-714341-4. 34p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
This followup to Kate's previous journeys, Your Best
Friend, Kate (BCCB 3/89) and Kate Heads West takes Kate to the west coast:
her father has been transferred from New Jersey to Seattle and apparently has
unlimited vacation time, taking the family on jaunts to Alaska, San Francisco,
Hollywood, Hawaii, and Yosemite. They also tour Seattle and its environs, and
Kate faithfully records the details of all the jaunts in letters to her best friend
Lucy. The tone is peppy, with a good balance of travelogue and family drama
(mostly involving Kate's bratty brother Brian) and the cartoon illustrations are
bright and sparky. This doesn't have the narrative drive of the first book, which
covered one long trip, and the inclusion of a map showing the places Kate
visited would have been useful (the endpapers do include a generalized map of the
U.S). Still, it's painless geography, and a seductive vision of vacationing that's
all high spots and no boredom. RS
C.U. Geography; Social studies
Collier, James Lincoln. The Clock; by James Lincoln Collier and Christopher
Collier; illus. by Kelly Maddox. Delacorte, 1992. ISBN 0-385-30037-9. 162p.
$15.00.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
In a novel set in Connecticut in 1810, fifteen-year-old
Annie is sent to work in a textile mill by her father, charming but feckless. She
is sexually harassed by the overseer, Mr. Hoggart, a drinker and a bully. When
Annie learns from another worker that he is sure Hoggart is stealing from the
[200 ]
owner, she risks the overseer's anger by investigating. The pace and dialogue of
the story are adequate; characterization ranges from an almost melodramatic
picture of the evil overseer to the more subtle depiction of Pa, always in debt and
ready to sacrifice Annie's plans for teacher training. The Colliers show clearly
how powerful the male adult of the family was in this period, and they are
equally explicit in showing the harshness of labor conditions in the
industrialization of the society. As in Paterson's more subtly developed Lyddie
(BCCB 2/91), the details of social history are strong, but the messages of
Annie's story are purposive enough to overbalance the book as narrative. ZS
C.U. 
History, U.S.; Women's studies
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Coman, Carolyn. Losing Things At Mr. Mudd's; illus. by Lance Hidy. Farrar,
1992. ISBN 0-374-34657-7. [32p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
Six-year-old Lucy's visit to "a distant relative," Mr.
Mudd, sours almost immediately when he forbids her to wear the valuable ruby
ring he has just given her. All of Mr. Mudd's things are beautiful, and all of
them are off limits. When she defies him and loses the ring, they quarrel but
later reconcile over the loss of her loose tooth. The moral is everpresent here
("Lucy always found it easier to apologize when she wasn't mad"), as an aging
antique dealer learns to value human relations more than things. And a little
child shall lead them. Children who are interested in these lessons will probably
follow the story with bated breath. The book is illustrated with computer-
generated graphics effecting a superrealistic quality that at first seems almost
surrealistic--especially in the contrast between black and white outline and color
overlay-but eventually the perfection becomes cold and one longs for a human
quirk in the smoothly modulated colors and photographic shapes. BH
Cone, Molly. 
Come Back, Salmon; illus. with photographs by Sidnee
Wheelwright. Sierra Club/Little, 1992. ISBN 0-87156-572-2. [48p]. $16.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Starting with a field trip of fifth-graders, Cone
describes the successful venture of Jackson Elementary School students to clean
up and restock a polluted stream in Everett, Washington. Between candid color
photographs and a detailed narrative that includes kids' natural, bantering
dialogue along with descriptions of Coho salmon eggs developing in a carefully
attended tank, the complexities of retrieving an environment from destruction
become readily apparent and even suspenseful. Readers will cheer when the first
fish swim back to Pigeon Creek to spawn. And maybe, just maybe, some
dedicated teacher, principal, or science student will be inspired to lead similar
recovery projects. BH
C.U. Nature study
D.V. Ecological awareness
Corey, Dorothy. 
Will There Be a Lap for Me?; illus. by Nancy Poydar.
Whitman, 1992. ISBN 0-8075-9109-2. 
[24p]. 
$11.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
Realistic illustrations, watercolor and colored pencil,
are set in the home (large, apparently suburban) of an attractive black family.
[201]
Kyle is wistful and envious when his baby brother is born: having missed
sitting on his mother's lap when her pregnancy made that difficult, he does not
enjoy later seeing the baby on Mother's lap so much of the time. However,
Mother makes it clear that she and Kyle will still have time together and that she
enjoys the lap-sessions just as much as he does. 
This doesn't have the
poignancy of Ann Herbert Scott's On Mother's Lap (BCCB 12/72), but it is just
as astute in reassuring young children that the advent of a sibling doesn't lessen
maternal love for the older child. ZS
D.V. Baby, adjustment to; Mother-child relations
Cousteau Society. An Adventure in the Amazon. Simon, 1992. ISBN 0-671-
77071-3. 45p. illus. with photographs. $14.00.
Ad 
Gr. 4-8. 
"Adventure" may be putting things a little strongly;
instead, this is is an attractively photographed survey of the Amazon and its
flora, fauna and people. Sometimes all on the same double-spread, as in the one
that shows ceremonially painted Txuhamei men; a small photo of Cousteau's
famous Calypso coming ashore; an Indian child chewing on a frond, and (most
peculiarly) a picture of four turtles floating on a log. Three different sizes of
type are used, which makes it difficult to figure out what you're supposed to read
first; in all, this is more gallery than narrative. 
Given TV and National
Geographic exposure, Cousteau's name has become both brand name and
imprimatur, and you might be able to use the book as bait for Peter Lourie's
rather better organized Amazon (BCCB 11/91) and other excellent titles on rain
forests and the Amazon basin. Cousteau's book includes a map and a sketchy,
teensy-typed, index. RS
D.V. Ecological awareness
Cummings, Pat. Talking with Artists. Bradbury, 1992. ISBN 0-02-724245-5.
96p. illus. with photographs. $18.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
The fourteen artists here have already said a good deal
to children through their illustrations, but Cummings' set of candidly child-like
questions ("Where do you get your ideas?") brings out telling background
patterns. Almost all of the interviewees drew compulsively from a young age-
most of them astonishingly well, if the samples of their childhood art are
indicative. They speak of art supplies with sensuous reverence and recall persons
whose encouragement or direction was crucial to their development. Few have
children living with them, and all work compulsively. The photographs of each
artist as child and adult, along with reproductions of their early and recent work,
combine with an easygoing text for the impression of-well, maybe not a
fireside chat, but at least a classroom visit, something many schools find
increasingly hard to afford. As inspiration for budding artists or information for
reports, this will make a natural companion to picture books by the award-
winning subjects, who are arranged alphabetically from Victoria Chess to David
Wiesner and who represent a range of styles and interests. BH
C.U. Art; Children's literature
dePaola, Tomie, ad. Patrick: Patron Saint of Ireland; ad. and illus. by Tomie
dePaola. Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0924-4. 32p. $15.95.
[202 ]
Ad 
6-9 yrs. 
Children will probably be more interested in the brief
appended stories about Patrick's miracles than they will be in the story proper,
an historical account of the saint's life. dePaola doesn't give any sources for his
picture-book biography, but it sometimes reads as if necessary pieces are
missing. For example, when young Patrick is a slave in Ireland and hears in a
dream that a ship is coming to bring him to safety, how does he know that the
ship "was more than two hundred miles away"? How does he escape? Where
does he get the money he offers the captain for passage? Later, who is the
"Victoricus" who, again in a dream, tells Patrick to return to Ireland? It seems
as if compression has resulted in confusion. Illustrations are signature dePaola,
using his familiar palette and formalized figures in decorative tableaux that are
attractive if not very energetic. A boatload of baying wolfhounds, later lined up
for a meal of boar, perks up the pageantry. RS
C.U. Religious education; St. Patrick's Day
Dolan, Edward F. The American Wilderness and Its Future: Conservation
versus Use. 
Watts, 1992. 
ISBN 0-531-11062-1. 
[144p.] illus. with
photographs. $13.90. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
This methodical examination of the controversy
surrounding the use of public forests reads like an excellent term paper. It is
thorough and progresses logically, with a brief survey of the differing kinds of
public lands and the problems they face, a short history of the conservation
movement ("Our National Parks: Their Story"), and more detailed chapters that
focus upon specific kinds of wilderness and the threats they face from pollution,
recreation, and logging. Meticulously evenhanded, Dolan only once allows
himself some fighting words (and welcome spark), when he refers to the
lumbering practice of clear-cutting as "carnage." The organization is clear, with
a dependable series of rubrics ("The Plans for Yosemite," "The Troubled
Mississippi") to keep readers on track. It's as dry as sawdust, but will be useful
to those preparing term papers of their own. RS
C.U. Conservation
D.V. Ecological awareness
Elish, Dan. 
The Great Squirrel Uprising; illus. by Denys Cazet.
Jackson/Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08595-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05995-2. 113p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Led by Scruff, a strong-willed squirrel with
Napoleonic tendencies, a group of pigeons and squirrels blocks all the roads into
Central Park and, with the help of a ten-year-old girl named Sally, tries to take
the park back from the loud and messy humans. 
The fantasy element is
awkward, primarily because the animals can understand Sally and each other, but
Sally can't understand them. A self-educated mouse named Mort partially
communicates with her by ripping words out of newspapers, often with vague
results. The difficulty in communication between Sally and her animal friends
makes for a slow-moving story, although there is one exciting scene where Mort
gets kicked up onto the conductor's head during an outdoor concert ("The man
grabbed at his head and did what looked like a tribal rain dance. The orchestra,
following his lead, picked up the tempo"). The funniest bits derive from the
[ 203
takeoff on New York politicking by hapless humans in face of feral fury. Tiny
pen-and-ink illustrations at the start of each chapter are lively and funny. KJ
Esbensen, Barbara Juster. Who Shrank My Grandmother's House? Poems of
Discovery; illus. by Eric Beddows. HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-
06-021828-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021827-4. [48p]. Library ed. $14.89; Trade
ed. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
The first poem, "Pencils," is the best ("There is a
long story living/ in the shortest pencil"), but the others are not far behind.
Unreliable cloud maps reshape with the wind; a geode contains "crystal traffic
thin as a splinter"; a white bird breaks into a prism of "one cardinal one/ bluebird
and five/ parakeets; "a rainbow will come/ fighting your thumb/ numb/ on the
nozzle" of a hose; sand dollars spill "from the green silk/ pocket/ of the sea";
homework paper feels "lonesome/ for words and circles/ and/ spelling your name
and/ assignments." The images here are clean, simple, and surprising. The
words are arranged on the page for special notice of sound effects and are
surrounded by Beddows' brightly lit, full-color images that play on a fifties' tone
without getting stuck there. Both the familiar subjects and the bountiful white
space open these twenty-three poems to a child's discovery. BH
Everett, Gwen. Li'l Sis and Uncle Willie: A Story Based on the Life and
Paintings of William H. Johnson; illus. by William H. Johnson and with
photographs. Rizzoli, 1992. ISBN 0-8478-1462-9. 32p. $13.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
An education specialist in charge of public programs
at the National Museum of American Art, Gwen Everett has skillfully fitted a
story to previously existing art without the artificial contrivance such
amalgamations often display. The first-person narrative is a fictionalized
recollection by the niece of African-American painter William Johnson, who
returns to South Carolina from his travels in Europe, stays long enough to
befriend her, returns to his wife in Denmark, and corresponds with Li'l Sis until
he goes into a mental institution. The biographical and historical information is
blended naturally into the observations of a child whose voice is clear and candid.
The pictures themselves are gripping, with heavy lines, sharp angles, and deep
colors shaped into direct, pared-down compositions that are spaciously and
lavishly reproduced. Johnson's style, although varied according to different
periods of his work, has a consistently powerful simplicity that will particularly
appeal to children, while his life makes an honestly dramatic story. BH
C.U. Art
D.V. Uncle-niece relations
Gale, David, ed. Funny You Should Ask: The Delacorte Book of Original
Humorous Short Stories. Delacorte, 1992. ISBN 0-385-30535-4. [224p].
$15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Sixteen children's writers set their pens to being
funny. For some, such as Marjorie Sharmat, it comes naturally; for others, such
as Marion Dane Bauer, it's a diverting stretch; still others, such as Walter Dean
Myers, have been more effectively funny elsewhere. The best stories are from
Barbara Ann Porte ("The Taxicab Family') and M. E. Kerr ("The Author"); both
tales are about stories and writing, and both demonstrate an instinctive
[ 204
confidence in the short story form, a feature not always readily apparent in
compilations of this kind. Most of the other stories are once-over-lightly
realistic comedies, excepting Janet Taylor Lisle's "Those in Peril on the Sea"; a
peculiar tale of a little girl obsessed with death, this seems to have wandered in
from another collection. Invitingly grouped as stories about family, friends, and
school, the book has a range of reading and interest levels, and each story is
followed by the (sometimes interesting, sometimes windy) author's
commentary. RS
George, Jean Craighead. The Missing 'Gator of Gumbo Limbo: An Ecological
Mystery. HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020397-8; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-06-020396-X. [176p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $14.00. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Liza (the narrator), her mother, and three other
homeless people live in the beautiful wilderness of a "hammock," a Florida
forest niche that is threatened by pollution and tourism. Sixth-grader Liza is
particularly concerned because Dajun, the twelve-foot alligator they all love,
seems to have disappeared. Jean George is a knowledgeable and polished science
writer, and she gives a great deal of information in this story, which is more a
plea for ecological conservation than it is a narrative; the facts overwhelm the
story line (more a pastiche than a strong plot) and the use of dialogue to convey
information weakens the impact of the narrative flow. ZS
C.U. Nature study
D.V. Ecological awareness
Giblin, James Cross. Edith Wilson: The Woman Who Ran the United States;
illus. by Michele Laporte. 
Viking, 1992. ISBN 0-670-83005-4. 
[64p].
(Women of Our Time). $11.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Giblin's account of Edith Bolling Wilson's life is
brisk but never clipped, and it focuses on her role as the president's wife. The
subtitle refers to the responsibilities assumed by Edith Wilson after her husband
was disabled by a stroke; her critics felt she assumed too much power, while her
supporters admired her competence and industry. 
Giblin is objective in
presenting the facts, and restrainedly admiring in his tone. An authorial
afterword points out that all the dialogue, which is woven into the text with
smooth naturalness, is taken either from the subject's correspondence with her
husband or from her autobiography. This is part of a publisher's series that
should be useful for both history and herstory units. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.; Women's Studies
Giganti, Paul, Jr. Each Orange Had 8 Slices: A Counting Book; illus. by
Donald Crews. Greenwillow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10429-0; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-688-10428-2. 24p. Library ed. 14.00; Trade ed. $13.93.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
The subtitle is deceptive, since this is not a
traditional counting book so much as an exercise in adding and even
multiplication. For example, in one double-page spread the text reads, "On my
way to my friend's house I bought .
." three bags of gum balls, each bag
containing three boxes, each box containing six gum balls... "How many gum
balls were there in all?" If children for whom the picture book format is
[205 ]
appropriate cannot multiply eighteen by three, they can count the pictured
gumballs on the page, while primary graders can use their skills in sets and
multiplication. Donald Crews' paintings are vividly colored and are cleverly
composed to ramify the mathematical concepts introduced by the author, a math
teacher. ZS
C.U. 
Mathematics
Gliori, Debi. New Big House; written and illus. by Debi Gliori. Candlewick,
1992. ISBN 1-56402-036-3. [26p]. $13.93. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Cheerful, busy family scenes bulge out of the frames
of line and wash pictures, and the minimal structure of the plot is just right for
easy assimilation by preschool listeners. The narrator is an amicable boy whose
toddler twin siblings contribute more than their share to the chaos of too little
space. After some unsuccessful (but interesting) house hunting, a do-it-yourself
project is launched, and soon there is an additional wing to their old house.
Good punch line, too: "And Granny says we have so much room, she's
thinking of selling her house and moving in with us." ZS
D.V. Family relations
Goble, Paul, ad. Crow Chief: A Plains Indian Story; ad. and illus. by Paul
Goble. Jackson/Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08547-3; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-531-05947-2. 32p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Stylized, stylish, and strongly decorative, Goble's
distinctive paintings use symbol, design, and repetition to illustrate a retelling of
a Plains Indians myth that is both a pourquoi story and a hero tale. The culprit
is Crow Chief, who has driven the buffalo away so that the People have no
meat; the hero is Falling Star, who tricks Crow Chief and ties him to the tipi
poles-and there the white bird slowly turns black with soot from the fires
where buffalo meat is roasting. And that is why crows, once white, are now
black. Goble discusses the legend of Falling Star, "the Savior," in a prefatory
note that should be of special interest to storytellers. ZS
C.U. 
Storytelling
Goldin, Barbara Diamond. Fire!: The Beginnings of the Labor Movement;
illus. by James Watling. Viking, 1992. ISBN 0-670-84475-6. [64p]. (Once
Upon America). $12.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Writing for a series that emphasizes the roles of
ordinary people in historical events, Goldin focuses on a Jewish immigrant
family whose oldest child is involved (but escapes) in the tragic fire at the
Triangle Shirtwaist Company in Manhattan in 1911. Although this was by no
means the "beginnings of the labor movement" claimed by the subtitle, it was
indeed a catalyst, in New York City, for reform of fire safety legislation and for
the strength of the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union. The book is
carefully tailored for a primary grades audience, as are the author's appended notes
on her research. The protagonist is Freyda's sister, eleven-year-old Rosie, and it
is through her eyes that readers learn of the dangerous conditions at the factory,
the horrors of the fire, and the determination of the survivors that such a
catastrophe should not happen again. ZS
C.U. Social studies
[206]
Goodall, John S. Great Days of a Country House; written and illus. by John S.
Goodall. McElderry, 1992. ISBN 0-689-50545-0. 58p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
This book follows a format different from Goodall's
earlier Story of a Seashore (BCCB 3/90), etc.; here, double-page, oversize
spreads in formal frames depict aspects of life in an English country house, with
captions indicating the historical period and describing the action within the
scene ("Tudor Period, 1485-1603 . . . A great feast with music and
entertainment"). There are some revealing images in the watercolor tableaux: a
riotous and messy Tudor feast entices lesser mortals peeping from galleries
above; an inset of an Edwardian maid's dismal quarters contrasts with the
sumptuous bedroom of her mistress; and a library graced by elegant guests in the
late Georgian era houses wounded soldiers in World War I. Some things are
never explained-whether the house stays in the same family throughout, for
instance, or where the money for post-war restoration came from-and most
American children won't know the social history glimpsed through these
vignettes. Nadia Wheatley's My Place (BCCB 7/90) covers a similar idea better,
but young Anglophiles in particular will enjoy Goodall's verdant vision of
aristocratic life. DS
C.U. History-England; Social studies
Haas, Dorothy. Burton and the Giggle Machine; illus. by Cathy Bobak.
Bradbury, 1992. 
ISBN 0-02-738203-6. [160p]. 
$13.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Burton Knockwurst is trying to develop something
that will help his friends with their various miseries: Tish has a new puppy
with a destructive chewing habit, Jonathan has had his chemistry set seized by
the school principal, and Kevin has a traffic ticket for speeding on his
skateboard. Burton's solution is the giggle machine, which by strategically
tickling, joking, and releasing "risible ions" causes its users to view the world in
a happier light. Meanwhile, the evil Professor Savvy from Burton's Zoom
Zoom Va-ROOOM Machine is back, plotting to steal all the Knockwurst
family's inventions from their workshop, until his encounter with the giggle
machine brings an end to his plans. Haas' The Secret Life of Dilly McBean
(BCCB 11/86) has a better balance of absurdity and the everyday; the pacing here
is off, and the characters aren't quite silly enough to justify their one-
dimensionality. They're still fun, though, and Burton's limitlessly inventive
imagination remains a draw, especially for fans of the first book. DS
Hanrahan, Brendan. My Sisters Love My Clothes; illus. by Lise Stork. Perry
Heights Press, 1992. ISBN 0-9630181-0-8. 32p. $12.95.
R 
6-9 yrs. 
Louie has very cool clothes. Trouble is, his sisters
think so too. Nora wants to wear his three-green-stripe tube socks, and even
promises to wash them. "I really want to wear those socks-but I'm basically a
good brother, and Nora's not so bad, and they do need washing." Ella wants his
jams, Sarah wants his shark bite T-shirt, Heather promises to take Louie to a
school football game if she can borrow his fluorescent orange windsurfing jacket
... even baby Rachel has taken his favorite duckbilled fishing cap. So Louie
goes to school in "plain socks, old jeans, boring T-shirt, plain old jacket and a
regular, old baseball cap." On the other hand, Louie's sisters seem as cool as his
[207 ]
clothes, and it's clear they think their younger brother is pretty special. This
might be an idealized treatment of sibling clothing wars, but the message is both
apt and lightly worn. Generously sized and spaciously arranged illustrations
extend the theme by contrasting black-on-white line drawn Louie with his
brightly decked and magic-markered sisters. The hey-dude tone and look is akin
to Pinkwater; the generous spirit is all Louie's. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Sharing
Haskins, Jim. 
One More River to Cross: The Stories of Twelve Black
Americans. Scholastic, 1992. 
ISBN 0-590-42896-9. 
[160p]. 
$13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
This collective biography of a dozen African-
American heroes is by turn genuinely lively and minimally efficient. The author
exhibits enthusiastic detail for millionaire Madam C. J. Walker and explorer
Matthew Henson, but slows down to generic descriptions of Charles Drew's
scientific and Ralph Bunche's political contributions. The other subjects-
Crispus Attucks, Marian Anderson, Romare Bearden, Fannie Lou Hamer, Eddie
Robinson, Shirley Chisholm, Malcolm X, and Ronald McNair-fall somewhere
in between, with a balance of readable, generalized portraits in the nature of a
survey that may lead students to discover an interest and pursue it further (a
bibliography of books and articles is appended). One example of Haskins'
teasers is a reference to McNair's two-year doctoral study of Lasers. "Then a
flood destroyed all his notes. But he spent only a short time worrying about the
loss." What flood? How? When? Where? Equally puzzling is a reference to
the death of Bunche's mother. On one page, she "felt much better in the new
climate" On the next, "In spite of the healthier climate, Olive Bunche's health
was getting worse." The problem here is not so much misinformation as a
compression of facts that leads to oversimplification. At the same time, there
are memorable lines that will startle black and white readers alike into realizing
just how many African American "firsts" have been buried outside the memorial
pages of official U.S. history books. BH
C.U. History-U.S,
Hi9yilmaz, Gaye. Against the Storm. Joy Street/Little, 1992. ISBN 0-316-
36078-3. [207p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 6-10. 
With the same kind of writing power Staples exerted
in Shabanu, Daughter of the Wind (BCCB 10/89), Higyilmaz brings a faraway
experience very close to home for readers following twelve-year-old Mehmet
from his Turkish mountain village to the streets of Ankara. The future holds
little promise for villagers, Mehmet's parents decide, so they journey, along
with relatives, to the big city in hopes of work and the comforts that wages can
buy. A simple, direct narrative builds to inevitable climax as Mehmet becomes
estranged from his family, who abandon their traditional way of life for a
materialism impossible to attain. The orphaned friend whom Mehmet rescues,
sick and starving in the street, turns from him to the promise of a comfortable
life in the U.S. 
The urban poverty that engulfs the protagonist generates
inevitable tragedy; here, the weak and vulnerable do not survive, even the loyal
dog, the steadfast horse, and the true friend. But if Mehmet's dreams are altered,
they are also strengthened, as he returns alone to the village where he was born.
Nuanced and honest in its projection of human dynamics, Hicyilmaz' first
[208]
novel-shortlisted for the Guardian and Whitbread awards in England-affords an
intimate look at a humble hero's coming of age. BH
D.V. Urban-rural contrasts
Hjelmeland, Andy. Kids in Jail; illus. with photographs by Dennis Wolf.
Lerner, 1992. ISBN 0-8225-2552-6. [40p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
Illustrated with black-and-white photos of various
juvenile detention facilities, this is a soberly matter-of-fact documentary on the
juvenile justice system, fully living up to its prefatory aim: "The intention of
this book is not to scold or preach." Focusing on the true story of John, an
adolescent inmate of Minnesota's Red Wing Correctional Facility, the author and
photographer record the details of his family life, arrest, detention at a juvenile
center, hearing, subsequent sentencing to the Austin Boys Ranch (from which he
ran away), and his stint at Red Wing. More general facts about juvenile crime
and correction are carefully related throughout, giving the book a good balance of
information and empathy. This is less melodramatic than many true-teen-
dramas, and therefore more convincing, although the problems of the prison
system are not examined. The introduction explains that models were used in
photos that show faces of teens; even here, the lack of stageiness and
sensationalism shows respect for readers. A brief reading list is appended; an
index would have been helpful. RS
C.U. 
Social studies
Hooks, William H. Peach Boy; illus. by June Otani. Preiss/Bantam, 1992.
Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-35429-9; Library ed. ISBN 0-553-07621-3. 48p. (Bank
Street Ready-to-Read). Paper ed. $3.50; Library ed. $9.99.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Illustrated with neatly lined paintings that are
attractively colored if a bit too placid, this is a read-it-yourself version of the
famous Japanese folktale. Momotaro, born from a huge peach (unlike the
miniature child in the original tale, which parallels the Thumbelina motif), is
called to save his elderly adoptive parents and their village when it is threatened
by the oni monsters. Enlisting the aid of a dog, hawk, and monkey, Momotaro
defeats the monsters, a cartooned quartet of demons, in a sequence of pictures that
wake up to the action. The design is clean and the reading easy, with none of
the choppiness often associated with the easy-reader genre. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Houston, Gloria. My Great-Aunt Arizona; illus. by Susan Condie Lamb.
HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022607-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
022606-4. 32p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
This is a picture book to pair with Cooney's Miss
Rumphius (BCCB 1/83) in discussing the contrasting lives of two women.
While Miss Rumphius roams the world, Great-Aunt Arizona stays home in
Appalachia and teaches her fourth grade students that "someday you will go" to
the faraway places she won't ever see. Arizona's life seems none the less
satisfying for spending it in the Blue Ridge Mountains, which beckon with
tantalizing beauty in these verdantly idealized double-page spreads. The red-
haired (and later, white-haired) heroine charges through each illustration with an
[ 209
infectious energy that will convince young listeners how far, as a last line
asserts, "she goes with us in our minds." BH
D.V. Education, valuing and seeking
Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane. Hoang Anh: A Vietnamese-American Boy; illus. with
photographs by Lawrence Migdale. Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0948-
1. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Born in a refugee camp in Malaysia, Hoang Anh, the
youngest of four children in a "boat family" that was luckier than many,
describes his family's history and the way they live now in San Rafael,
California. Color photographs of good quality are carefully placed in relation to
a text that is direct, informative, and convincing as the voice of a young
adolescent. There is a good fusion here of cultures, as Hoang Anh talks of his
Vietnamese heritage and the pattern of daily life that includes school, sports,
chores, holidays, and the diversity in a multiethnic classroom. An index and a
glossary add to the usefulness of a fine photoessay. ZS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Adaptability
Hutton, Warwick, ad. The Trojan Horse; ad. and illus. by Warwick Hutton.
McElderry, 1992. ISBN 0-689-50542-6. 
[32p]. 
$14.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
The trick to recasting an episode from the Aeneid in
picture book format depends upon selection and tone. Both factors have been
carefully weighed here in a matter-of-fact narrative that reduces the gory details to
straightforward statements ("by morning the Trojans who were still alive left
their broken city in a weeping trail of conquered people") but doesn't flinch from
epic proportion, as in the picture of two sea snakes consuming the soothsayer
LaocoOn and his sons. 
The fixed smile on Hutton's wooden horse is
disconcerting, but then, it probably was to the Trojans, too. The watercolor
paintings project a sense of monumental scale through cleverly shifting
perspectives and vertical figures. The tragedy is not so much softened as
distanced, and the emphasis on the horse offers a lasting symbol, as "over the
smoking ruins of Troy its bright painted eyes still gazed." BH
C.U. History, ancient
Jabar, Cynthia, comp. ed. Shimmy Shake Earthquake: Don't Forget to Dance
Poems; comp. and illus. by Cynthia Jabar. Joy Street/Little, 1992. ISBN 0-
316-43459-0. [26p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Eighteen poems comprise this mini-anthology; the
selections include both previously published original poems and traditional
material. Some of the cartoon-like pictures seem excessively laden with neon
pink or orange, but they have a vitality that matches the bounce of the verses.
Among the authors are Ogden Nash, Nikki Giovanni, Lillian Morrison, Jack
Prelutsky, and Langston Hughes (although Jabar seems to miss entirely the dark
irony of his "Dream Boogie"). Almost all the poems are funny, and most have a
lively, lilting, suitable-for-jumping-rope appeal. ZS
[210 ]
Kasza, Keiko. A Mother for Choco; written and illus. by Keiko Kasza.
Putnam, 1992. ISBN 0-399-21841-6. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
In a twist on Eastman's classic Are You My
Mother?, baby bird Choco goes searching for a mom, but no one seems to look
enough like him to fill the bill: Mrs. Giraffe may be yellow, but she doesn't
have wings; Mrs. Penguin has wings, but she doesn't have big, round cheeks;
Mrs. Walrus has the cheeks, but not the striped feet. Finally Choco meets Mrs.
Bear, who looks nothing like Choco, but holds him and kisses him just like a
mommy, so he goes home with her and joins her other children (a pig, an
alligator, and hippo). The watercolor illustrations are a blend of the touching
and the comical, with lots of soft round shapes and white space. The message-
that parents are defined by what they do rather than how they look (or how one
acquires them)-is warm and reassuring, particularly to adoptees, stepkids, and
other children who for various reasons don't resemble their caretakers. Many
young readers, however, will be concerned about the unexplained absence of
Choco's first mother, and they might also wonder if they could also be so easily
replaced if they disappeared. Still, it's bright and upbeat, and the animal cast
usefully distances the idea for children not quite up to the directness and truth of
MacLachlan's Mama One, Mama Two (BCCB 4/82). DS
D.V. Adoption, adjustment to
Klein, Robin. All in the Blue Unclouded Weather. Viking, 1992. ISBN 0-670-
83909-4. 162p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Pastel pink-and-green cover art and the Lord Tennyson
title seem like harbingers of nostalgia, but while the eleven related stories in this
collection are optimistically breezy, they are saved from sentimentality by the
specificity of their details. Set in rural Australia just after World War II, the
stories focus on the four Mellings girls. Grace, the oldest, is poised to leave
home after her "debut" down at the Mechanic's Hall; Heather is thirteen and
suitably superior; Cathy will do almost anything to win snobby classmate
Marjorie Powell's approval; Vivienne, the youngest and dreamiest, is the one
who discovers Marjorie's sad secret. The joker in the pack is cousin Isobel, a
breathtakingly imaginative troublemaker who aspires to the convent (when, that
is, she isn't blowing smoke rings and pretending to be Joan Crawford). As in
the author's previous collection, Tearaways (BCCB 5/91), the stories sometimes
rely on "trick" endings that are in fact predictable, but since the trick usually
involves the girls' putting one over on their parents or enemies, readers won't
mind a bit. Sunny and funny. RS
D.V. 
Sisters
Koller, Jackie French. The Last Voyage of the Misty Day. Atheneum, 1992.
ISBN 0-689-31731-X. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Denise and her mother have come to stay in the old
family house on a Maine coastal island; her father's sudden death has left them
with little money. Denny dislikes the house, the island, the school where she is
a freshman, and-above all-the boy, Spence, who teases her on the school bus.
It is the boat Misty Day and its mysterious elderly owner, "Mr. Jones," that
provide a new interest for Denny. Who is the man, and where did he get a boat
that supposedly had disappeared (over thirty years before) with its original owner,
[211 ]
Rufus Day, aboard? Koller paces the mystery's solution deftly and develops it
logically; characters and their relationships grow and change believably. The
story moves to a dramatic ending in which Denny and Spence (now a friend) and
the daughter of "Mr. Jones" unite in giving him the right to spend his final days
(he is terminally ill) on his beloved boat, making a long-planned voyage. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Older-younger generations
Kronenwetter, Michael. United They Hate: White Supremacists in America.
Walker, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8163-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8162-4.
[144p.] illus. with photographs. 
Library ed. $14.85; Trade ed. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Kronenwetter's historical treatment of the organized
white supremacy movement in this country not only allows us to appreciate the
ironies of an 1845 anti-foreigner group called the Native American Party; it also
tempers sensationalism with perspective. While not dismissing the current
threat of the several KKKs, for example, Kronenwetter does point out that their
combined membership amounts to less than six thousand (a number not
footnoted; the notes in general are adequate but less than thorough). 
The
historical survey is clear and well-organized, as is the picture of contemporary
groups ranging from the Klan to LaRouche followers to skinheads. A chapter
on "Why People Join Hate Groups" is superficial, with the stated reasons (the
need to belong, self-hatred) as applicable to members of Weight Watchers as they
are to neo-Nazis. Missing is any discussion of the Bill of Rights, an important
context for the analysis of such events as Nazi demonstrations and cross-
burnings. Still, the comprehensive approach is valuable, and caption heading
included with the bound galley promise a variety of intriguing photos. RS
C.U. History--U.S.; Social studies
Kuklin, Susan. How My Family Lives in America; written and illus. by Susan
Kuklin. Bradbury, 1992. ISBN 0-02-751239-8. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
In a spacious format that will work well for both the
preschool listener and independent reader, Kuklin's newest photoessay presents
three young children growing up in bicultural circumstances. Sanu's father is
Senegalese, her mother black American; Eric's father is from Puerto Rico, his
mother is an Hispanic-American born in New York; April's parents were born in
Taiwan. Each of the chapters is told through the voice of the child, a device
Kuklin manages less self-consciously than most. Says Eric, "when my parents
are at work, my mommy's mommy, Nana Carmen, takes me shopping at the
carniceria, the Spanish meat market. I get to pay." The profiles casually blend
everyday America (playing baseball, eating pizza) with specific cultural activities
(Sanu's Senegalese clothing, April's Chinese calligraphy). Definitions aren't
always clear, with Sanu, for example, seeming to call herself African-American
because her father is African, a more restricted usage than that currently in
vogue, and Kuklin does not make the distinction between Puerto Rico (a U.S.
Commonwealth) and the foreign countries of Senegal and Taiwan. Still, the
level, amount, and kinds of cultural detail (lots of eating, for example) are
appropriate for the intended audience, and Kuklin's color photos show happy
families, lively parties, and tasty foods. One recipe from each family is
[ 212 ]
appended, but a don't-do-this-alone note should have been included, particularly
for a recipe that involves deep-frying a whole stuffed fish. RS
C.U. 
Social studies
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Lavies, Bianca. The Atlantic Salmon; written and illus. by Bianca Lavies.
Dutton, 1992. ISBN 0-525-44860-8. 32p. $14.50.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
With her usual informative competence, Lavies here
traces the life cycle of the Atlantic salmon from freshwater eggs through stages
of growth, exit to the sea, and return for spawning. The text is clear and realistic
(particularly about predator-prey relationships, with one page showing a
dragonfly nymph ingesting a tiny salmon, the next showing a larger salmon
snacking on a dragonfly nymph), and it's admirably honest about our ignorance
of the species ("How they find their way to their feeding waters-what guides
them-is still largely a mystery"). 
The real draw here, though, is the
photography (although some indication of scale would have been useful):
amazing shots of a salmon egg, looking like some undiscovered planet in an
underwater galaxy; vivid images of spiky, prehistoric-looking aquatic predators; a
double-page spread of battered adult salmon returning home to spawn. Many
readers will enjoy Lavies' brief note about the lengths to which she went to
obtain the pictures; it should make all of them give more thought to the fish on
their dinner plate. A good companion to Cone's Come Back, Salmon, reviewed
above. DS
C.U. Nature study
Livingston, Myra Cohn. I Never Told and Other Poems. McElderry, 1992.
ISBN 0-689-50544-2. [48p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Forty-two poems, none more than a page long (and
most considerably less) show a range of form (concrete poetry, haiku, cinquains,
free verse, etc.), tone, and subject, but Livingston retains her usual sharp focus
throughout. Some of the best poems here are imagistic reworkings of familiar
ideas, as in "Calgary," about Canada geese in flight, or "Lasiocampidae," about
tent caterpillars "building/ webs of camp tents/ stretched between trees, covered/
with endless yards of mosquito/ netting," or "S: 
Silent Shark," where
alliteration is made elegant. Kids who are bored stiff by discussions of poetic
form will unknowingly savor it here, and confirmed poetry fans will revel in the
variety at hand. DS
Lowry, Lois. Attaboy, Sam!; illus. by Diane De Groat. Houghton, 1992.
ISBN 0-395-61588-7. [128p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Sam and Anastasia Krupnik are a team that has
displayed an astonishing degree of talents and precocity; unfortunately, this latest
installment in their saga shows both at a far more generalized level. Sam
Krupnik, who knew Morse code at two (All About Sam, BCCB 10/88) here gets
kudos for tapping out S*A*M on the typewriter. His big sister Anastasia, who
gave her teacher poetry when she only wanted verse (Anastasia Krupnik, BCCB
1/80) is churning out doggerel. In honor of her mother's birthday, she writes:
"I'm glad that you are 38./ I'm glad you're Katherine, not just Kate./ I'm glad
[213 ]
our father is your mate./ Your size and shape are really great." Okay, it's
supposed to be bad, but why is Anastasia writing bad verse? The attenuated plot
follows Sam as he collects his mother's favorite smells to concoct a homemade
perfume for her birthday: his father's pipe, some hair, baby poop and spit-up
("I've always loved the smell of new babies," says an unsuspecting Katherine),
chicken soup, sea water ... and yeast A similar plot, more gracefully handled,
can be found in one chapter of Judith Caseley's Hurricane Harry (BCCB 11/91).
While Lowry's latest has little of the fresh detailing of others in the series and
veteran fans may be dismayed to see two well-loved characters played a little
lazily, the broad humor will probably find a broad audience. RS
Maestro, Betsy. 
How Do Apples Grow?; illus. by Giulio Maestro.
HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020056-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
020055-3. [32p]. (Let's-Read-and-Find-Out-Science Books). Library ed. $13.89;
Trade ed. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
Apples are a popular picture book subject, with two
new titles this spring. The Maestros' How Do Apples Grow?, part of the
reliable Let's Read-and-Find-Out series, is written for a young audience. Their
simple explanations of the processes of pollination and apple growth make a
good introduction for a preschooler's first field-trip to an orchard. On the other
hand, Micucci's slim The Life and Times of the Apple (imprint below) includes
not only the basic information about apple development, but also has interesting
apple trivia scattered across its pages ("Stone Age lake dwellers preserved apples
by drying them in the sun," "About one in five apples is pressed into juice and
cider"). Micucci describes pollination more thoroughly than do the Maestros,
but his explanation of grafting omits a definition for the process. The pencil and
watercolor illustrations in the Maestros' book are bucolic and in pastel shades;
the same medium in Micucci's is comical and cartoon-like. For older children,
An Apple Tree through the Year by Claudia Schnieper (BCCB 11/87) or The
Apple and Other Fruits by Millicent Selsam (BCCB 2/74) feature more
sophisticated explanations and detailed photographs of apple development. With
so many good books about apples around, an interested kid could stay supplied
for days. KJ
C.U. Botany
Marino, Jan. Like Some Kind of Hero. Little, 1992. ISBN 0-316-54626-7.
216p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Ted convinces his best friend Will that the two of
them should try out for the local lifeguard squad: "Face it, Will, swimming is
the only sport we don't stink at." Ted is tired of being a wimp, tired of being
picked on by super jock Ray Denson, and wants to impress girls. The lifeguard
training involves a lot of work and time, causing Ted to shirk his other
responsibilities, such as a summer lawn-mowing job and his guitar study; in
fact, his music teacher tosses him out after it becomes apparent that Ted has not
been practicing. Marino has a light touch, and Ted's narration is convincingly
that of a fourteen-year-old boy, but the book is message-laden and -driven, as
Ted, in his misguided efforts to swim with Denson and the rest of the fast crowd,
messes up his summer and his relationships with friends and family. In an
agreeable conclusion, Ted comes through at a time when Will really needs him
and, at the same time, gets a little perspective on his priorities. Most readers
[214 ]
will probably feel themselves one step ahead of Ted throughout the novel: some
will feel superior, some empathetic, and some may lose patience waiting for him
to catch up. RS
D.V. Friendship values; Responsibility
Marshall, James. Fox Outfoxed; written and illus. by James Marshall. Dial,
1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1037-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1036-4. 48p.
(Dial Easy-to-Read). Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $11.00.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Just as he does with his episodic easy-to-read/read-
aloud texts, Marshall endows his bright pictures with an exaggerated humor and
spatial improbability. His fans, who have come to expect just such nonsense
from him, will appreciate these three brisk anecdotes in which Fox is a bit too
clever for his own good, so that he suffers logical consequences (twice involving
his beloved comic books) that can evoke sympathy as well as amusement. ZS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Martin, Rafe, ad. The Rough-Face Girl; illus. by David Shannon. Putnam,
1992. ISBN 0-399-21859-9. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
An Algonquin Indian Cinderella variant sometimes
anthologized as Little Scar-face or Burnt-face (no source notes are given here),
this has many features in common with the European version, except that the
heroine is tested for her truthfulness and vision rather than for her small feet!
The Rough-Face Girl is disfigured by sparks from the fire that she is forced to
tend by her evil sisters, who are determined to marry the somewhat prosaically
described "very great, rich, powerful, and supposedly handsome Invisible Being."
Neither proves able to see him, however; it is only the Rough-Face Girl who
can win him by describing his bow (a rainbow) and sled runner (the Milky Way)
to his sister. A pourquoi aspect of the tale-the proud sisters turning into
aspens that quake before the wind-is omitted here. While the illustrations have
a darkly classical quality, the wording is sometimes colloquial ("Off from the
other wigwams of this village stood one great huge wigwam") or explanatory
("When she looked at you she didn't see just your face or your hair or
clothes.... And she could tell if you had a good, kind heart or a cold, hard,
and cruel one"). Yet the total effect is nonetheless striking. The story is strong
enough to thrive on almost any straightforward retelling, and the paintings,
while romanticized, are warmly drawn and richly colored, with firelit bodies and
hints of historical landscapes and ritual masks. Along with Ai-Ling Louie's
Yeh Shen (BCCB 3/83) and other culturally varied picture book versions, this
will make an impact on youngsters in folklore units, Native American studies,
and story hour sessions. BH
D.V. Truthfulness
Mazzio, Joann. The One Who Came Back. Houghton, 1992. ISBN 0-395-
59506-1. [208p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
"I'm gonna hide and you find me," says Eddie
Chavez. When Alex can't find his friend, he assumes that Eddie has gone back
to where the two had left their bikes at the base of the mountain trail. But Eddie
isn't there, isn't anywhere, and back down in Albuquerque, no one believes
Alex's story of Eddie's disappearance. The police, Eddie's mother, Alex's own
[215 ]
mother, think Alex is hiding something, perhaps covering up the fact that Eddie
has run away to visit his older brother imprisoned in Texas. Alex, though,
gradually becomes convinced that Eddie died on the mountain, and what seems to
have been simply a well-wrought mystery/survival story becomes-as well-a
complex picture of a teen absorbed in feelings of guilt and consequent
depression. Despite occasional passages of fancy writing, Mazzio generally
keeps the story taut, its suspense maintained by a proper balance between
narrative and psychological elements. The friendship between the two boys
includes cultural conflicts and comparisons (Eddie is Hispanic) and is well-
conveyed through the very ordinariness of its details; other characters, such as
Alex's bartending mother, add presence and depth. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Intercultural understanding
McHargue, Georgess. Beastie. Delacorte, 1992. ISBN 0-385-30589-3. [192p].
$14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Mary, Theo, and Scott didn't know each other at the
beginning of the summer. As the only children on a scientific expedition to
locate a Scottish sea monster (not the Loch Ness), they discover they have a lot
in common-fighting boredom. At first, it's enough to explore the ruins of a
nearby castle. When they turn their attention to their parents' frustrated research,
the three friends find a way to create a pseudo-monster for the expedition's high-
tech instruments to detect. 
The action moves along briskly due to the
combination of the energetic characters and several subtle mysteries that don't
seem connected until the book's end. The disjointed introductions of Mary,
Theo, and Scott make for an awkward first chapter, but by using this technique
McHargue is able to avoid singling out one main character and 14beling this a
"boy" or "girl" book. A well-knit combination of adventure/mystery/animal
story, in an exotic setting, with broad appeal. KJ
McKinley, Robin. My Father Is in the Navy; illus. by Martine Gourbault.
Greenwillow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10640-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
10639-0. [24p]. Library ed. $13.93; Trade ed. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Gentle, rather pale, colored-pencil drawings have a
'fifties feel to them that adds a bit of nostalgia to a quiet but direct story of a
little girl who does not remember her father, a captain in the Navy. "There was
a picture of him on the mantel in the living room. I knew to say 'Good night,
Daddy,' when I went to bed. But I didn't remember him." Now, though, Daddy
is coming home, and Sara and her mother go down to the dock with all the other
waiting families. And when Daddy hugs her, Sara remembers her father. The
brevity and restraint of the text allows the ending a poignant surprise, and the
simplicity makes the story immediate to young children in a way that Jane
Yolen's similarly themed, but overcomplicated All Those Secrets of the World
(BCCB 4/91) is not. Gourbault's illustrations have a sophisticated, fluid line
that saves them from sentimentality; the whole is a successful exercise in
understatement. RS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
[216 ]
Metzger, Lois. Barry's Sister. Atheneum, 1992. 
ISBN 0-689-31521-X.
[240p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
In seventh grade when she begins her story, Ellen
Gray is not delighted when her mother, Loretta, announces that she is pregnant.
Ellen, already upset by her father's long absences (he's a naval officer aboard a
nuclear submarine), is further upset when she learns that her newborn brother
Barry has cerebral palsy. At first she wants nothing to do with Barry, but once
she begins to love him, Ellen spends all her time caring for her brother and
helping him learn motor and communication skills. The book is a bit too
heavily weighted with information about cerebral palsy to be wholly effective as
a story about familial reaction to a child who is limited by it-but those
reactions are believable, as are the changes in the attitudes of most of the
characters. This is, although less effective as a narrative than Elizabeth Laird's
Loving Ben (BCCB 10/89), a novel comparable in its sensitivity and
compassion. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Handicaps, overcoming
Micucci, Charles. The Life and Times of the Apple; written and illus. by
Charles Micucci. Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08539-2; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-531-05939-1. 32p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
See review under Maestro, above.
Miklowitz, Gloria. Desperate Pursuit. Bantam, 1992. Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-
29746-5. [160p]. Paper ed. $3.99. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Fifteen-year-old Nicole, the narrator, had been very
happy to be Michael's girl; she wasn't in love with him, but she enjoyed his
devoted attention. Then she met Shane, who was neither as handsome nor as
popular as Michael, yet was far more appealing to her. Although this novel
develops slowly, its pace contributes to the tension, as Michael becomes
increasingly agitated and hostile, posing a danger to Nicole and Shane, and at
times seeming suicidal. The psychological framework is credible, especially in
Michael's relationships with his parents (his domineering father refuses to
believe there is danger when Nicole's worried mother telephones to warn them)
and in Nicole's ambivalence about how best to handle the situation. The
presentation is convincingly adolescent; the ending is convincingly sugar-free.
ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Mills, Claudia. Dinah for President. Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-02-766999-8.
[128p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
At lower school, Dinah was a big frog in a little
pond; as a sixth-grader just starting middle school, she feels "like a tadpole adrift
in the Atlantic Ocean." She decides to make a splash by becoming the first
female class president (her loyal friend Suzanne is running for secretary), and she
eventually seizes upon, with characteristic zeal, in-school recycling as her
platform. The subplot of Dinah's growing friendship with an old lady to whom
she reads The Wind in the Willows (Dinah begins, with discomfort, to realize
her own resemblance to Toad) is well harmonized with the main story, where
Mills fortunately does not feel obliged to let Dinah win the election. The
[217]
lessons, such as the offhand reminders that friends can be found in unexpected
places, are light-hearted, and Dinah remains the same ebullient and wayward
heroine as in Dynamite Dinah (BCCB 4/90); this is one campaign that will
claim a high reader turnout. DS
D.V. Civic competence and responsibility
Nims, Bonnie Larkin. Just Beyond Reach and Other Riddle Poems; illus. with
photographs by George Ancona. 
Scholastic, 1992. ISBN 0-590-44077-2.
[32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Large-scale color photographs on the left answer the
easy-to-read poetic riddle posed on each preceding right-hand page. Some of the
fourteen riddles will be comparatively easy to solve, others may baffle readers:
"It turns a nothing/ into a street/ where opposite ends/ can easily meet." (A
bridge). Still the sometimes-rhyming verses may amuse and challenge readers.
The last is cleverly shaped like its answer as it ascends the page, levels off, and
drops again: "a/ sharp/ square/ stair/ that/ builds/ and builds/ until/ it's/ up there
then it/ slips away/ down/ under/ I/ wonder/ where?/ ?/ ?" (an escalator). ZS
Nixon, Joan Lowery. A Deadly Promise. Bantam, 1992. ISBN 0-553-08054-
7. 169p. $16.00.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
In a sequel to High Trail to Danger (BCCB 7/91) in
which Sarah had come west to Colorado to find her father, she is now dedicated
to clearing his name and solving the twin mysteries of why he was accused of
murder and where to find the clue of which his dying words had hinted. Joined
by her young sister Susannah, Sarah is slow to realize that the fifteen-year-old is
trying to win over one of Sarah's two suitors. The time is 1880, and the story
has good details of period and of locale; it is less effective in its characterization
(static and with little depth) and in its plotting, which is both stretched and
predictable. ZS
O'Dell, Scott. 
Thunder Rolling in the Mountains; by Scott O'Dell and
Elizabeth Hall. Houghton, 1992. ISBN 0-395-59966-0. 
[160p]. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 6-9. 
As in so many books in which he championed the
cause of the oppressed, Scott O'Dell here identifies with the persecuted Nez
Perce, attacked by the United States Army in 1877. The narrator is the daughter
of Chief Joseph, and the dramatic story is beautifully told by O'Dell and his wife
(finished by Hall at her husband's request and after his death) through the brave,
sad voice of Sound of Running Feet. Chief Joseph and the Nez Perce Indians
were forced to leave their beloved valley in Oregon and begin a long journey;
although they did not protest, they were attacked and forced into militant rebuttal
as their numbers dwindled. Hall cites sources and provides, in an afterword,
information about the survivors. Poignant and powerful. ZS
C.U. 
History--U.S.
Peck, Sylvia. Kelsey's Raven. Morrow, 1992. ISBN 0-688-09583-6. [2 4 0p].
$14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
The author of Seal Child (BCCB 12/89) holds to
realism here, though fantastical elements seem to hover near a plot centered on
[218 ]
an old raven that transforms the life of thirteen-year-old Kelsey Martine. The
chimney sweep who helps recover the injured bird from the Martines' New York
city apartment falls in love with Kelsey's mother, Aubrey, which increases
Kelsey's desperation to know who and where her father is. Given the rich
mother-daughter relationship so vividly detailed here, it seems a bit out of
character that Aubrey has been unwilling to discuss this matter, but the other
aspects of the novel are credibly developed, especially the jealousy that grows
between Kelsey and her best friend over the first boy to whom they're both
attracted. The two girls' shifting interests between the boy and their old fantasy
game, in which they imagine themselves as part of a secret society of
"cloakwomen," is realistic in reflecting early adolescents' back-and-forth
movement between adult and childhood concerns. A climactic (and unnecessary)
gas explosion strains the subtlety of tension here, but the romantic ending will
appeal even to those readers who see it coming a mile away. BH
D.V. Animals, love for; Friendship values; Mother-daughter relations
Perrault, Charles. Puss in Boots; ad. by Lincoln Kirstein; illus. by Alain Vads.
Little, 1992. ISBN 0-316-89506-7. 32p. $15.95.
R* 
4-7 yrs. 
Puss in Boots has been richly caparisoned lately
(BCCB 12/90), and this appearance may top them all. In fact, if Puss weren't
such a swashbuckling figure, Vads' art might overwhelm him with Cocteau-like
landscapes and an oversize cast of ogreish characters (including a king who looks
like W. C. Fields). Of the actual ogre, we never see more than his foot and
fingers. It's enough. He does appear as a lion, with Puss in a position that may
win awards for an all-time feline posterior view. But Puss triumphs and, despite
a civilized demeanor at the royal wedding of his master, looks with catlike
appetite at the seven mice that brush and polish his now-pure-gold boots. The
play of light and dark in these subtly satiric paintings creates an almost
surrealistic glow over the baroque backdrops-all well worth another investment
in Perrault. BH
Prater, John. Along Came Tom; written and illus. by John Prater. Bodley
Head/Trafalgar Square, 1992. ISBN 0-370-31411-5. 29p. $15.95.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
Set off by ample white space, nicely composed line-
and-watercolor pictures echo the humor of the text, a plaintive record by two
little girls of the devastation caused by every appearance of their toddler brother,
Tom. Although repetitive, the story uses the predictability of Tom's mayhem
to amuse the read-aloud audience that particularly enjoys disaster humor and can
anticipate the next catastrophe when Tom comes along. Cereal-spillers and
crayon-snatchers will enjoy being teased, and their older siblings will appreciate
this exposure of the indignities they suffer. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Pullman, Philip. The Broken Bridge. Knopf, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-
91972-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-81972-X. [256p]. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed.
$15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Ginny's mother, a Haitian artist, died when Ginny
was only a week old; now sixteen, Ginny lives with her white father on the
coast of Wales. Ginny is also an artist, proud of her black heritage and hoping
[219 ]
to pick up where her mother left off: "I'm going to grow up, live, and be a
painter in the way she couldn't." Ginny's certainty is shattered when her father
announces that her half-brother Robert, of whom she's never before heard, will
be coming to live with them, and her shock deepens when she discovers that her
father had been married to Robert's mother, not hers. That's the beginning of a
series of revelations, misconceptions, and eventual understandings that lead her
through a dizzying summer of exploration of the past and contemplation of her
own future; the turns are too numerous to list, but Ginny does learn that her
mother is not dead-she disowns Ginny, however, when they meet. Pullman is
an excellent writer and he evokes mood and relationships well, but there's way
too much going on here: Haitian voodoo themes, the metaphor of the title (it
involves a local legend about a bridge), Ginny's experience growing up black in
a virtually all-white area, the abuse Ginny's father suffered as a child, and so on.
Despite the lack of focus, this is still a thoughtful realistic novel, as well as an
interesting change of pace from Pullman's Ruby in the Smoke (BCCB 5/87).
DS
D.V. Family relations
Reiss, Kathryn. The Glass House People. Harcourt, 1992. Trade ed. ISBN 0-
15-231040-1; Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-231041-X. [288p]. Trade ed. $16.95; Paper
ed. $6.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
A tragic family secret is revealed when Beth, sixteen,
and her slightly younger brother go with their mother Hannah to spend the
summer with her parents and older sister Iris. Hannah hasn't spoken to her
family in years; Beth eventually learns that a teenaged Hannah had made a play
for Iris' fianc6 Clifton, who was killed when he was pushed down some stairs
during a confrontation between the two girls and their parents. Every one of
them now has a different version of what really happened that night; intermittent
flashbacks show readers the truth. It's all terribly complicated and melodramatic,
but Reiss is a good storyteller and at her best with family hell (see also her first
novel Time Windows, BCCB 10/91, for another variation on the theme). Iris,
crippled by polio, embittered, and often drunk, is a Tennessee Williams refugee;
the teenaged Hannah (shown in flashbacks) a pouty sexpot. Gossipy, gothic,
and the teensiest bit trashy, this is perfect for those kids ready to move on from
V.C. Andrews but not quite ready for Rebecca. RS
D.V. 
Sisters
Reynolds, Jan. Down Under; Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-224182-5; Paper ed. ISBN 0-
15-224183-3. Far North; Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-227178-3; Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-
227179-1. Each book: written and illus. with photographs by Jan Reynolds.
Harcourt, 1992. 32p. Trade ed. $16.95; Paper ed. $8.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Following her eloquent portraits of Tibetan and
Saharan culture (BCCB 11/91), author/photographer Reynolds here offers child-
sized visits to opposite sides of the world: Sisters Kari and Sara are part of the
Sami tribe that follows the reindeer in the northern Lapland region of Finland;
Amprenula is a Tiwi aboriginal girl who lives on Bathhurst Island off the coast
of the Northern Territories in Australia. In both books, the details-finding
food, racing reindeer-are appropriately child-centered, and while the photos in
Far North are sometimes Krementz-glossy, they will appeal to children intrigued
by "distant lands." 
Reynolds' viewpoint is respectful if culturally
[220 ]
overcompensatory ("[Amprenula] is proud to be an aborigine living with her
family in the bush"); afterwords to adults are a bit gushy but contextually
informative. RS
C.U. Social studies
Samuels, Barbara. What's So Great about Cindy Snappleby?; written and illus.
by Barbara Samuels. Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08579-1; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-531-05979-0. 32p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Spiky-haired Dolores (of Faye and Dolores, BCCB
4/85, and Duncan and Dolores, BCCB 3/87) wants desperately to be included
when her tidy big sister Faye invites over supercilious Cindy Snappleby ("Let's
play jacks," says Cindy. "I haven't lost a game in years"). Dolores tries to join
in with the big girls, much to their horror, but Faye's family loyalties finally
win out after Cindy screams at Dolores (Miss Snappleby's jacks game is upset
after an up-close and personal encounter with Howie, Trina, and Uncle Bob-
Dolores' frogs). The text here is inventive and witty without losing childish
authenticity; Dolores is irritating as well as endearing, and Samuels makes such
good fun of the odious Cindy that it's rather a pity to see her routed. Fastidious
yet lively line-and-watercolor illustrations float pleasantly in lots of white space,
although Dolores' mess sometimes overcrowds the composition. 
Young
Doloreses may not pick up on the satire at their own expense, but they'll still
relish this fantasy-inspiring triumph of a younger sister. Be sure to draw their
attention to the cover, where Dolores puts the final touches on her painting of
the soon-to-be-late great Cindy disappearing into a shark's mouth. DS
D.V. Sisters
Schick, Eleanor. I Have Another Language: The Language Is Dance; written
and illus. by Eleanor Schick. Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-02-781209-X. [32p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Pale black-and-white pencil drawings are spacious and
graceful (although not always anatomically accurate), the lines of dancers' figures
expressed by an author/artist who has been a dancer. The text is minimal and
poetic, perhaps too static to appeal to most readers, as a child describes
rehearsing and then taking part in the first theatrical performance by her class.
Children who are also dancers or who are dance buffs may respond to the
unnamed protagonist's rhapsodic comments on the joys of dancing--others may
find the mood rather tenuous. ZS
C.U. Dance
Seltzer, Isadore. The House I Live In: At Home in America; written and illus.
by Isadore Seltzer. Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-02-781801-2. [29p]. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
This chatty ramble past a dozen American homes
shares a little architecture, a little sociology, a little history; most of all, it will
give readers a brief look at what it's like to live in a trailer, a pueblo, a log
house, or a California adobe. While built as long as seven hundred years ago, all
the houses included are extant, a fact emphasized by Seltzer's (sometimes
awkward) montaging a hand-tinted photo of a young person in front of every
painting. Each dwelling gets a double-spread, three-quarter-page illustration); the
[221]
pictures contain some distracting elements (dogs, birds) and facile coloring but
are careful to provide lots of brick-by-brick detailing that will have readers
picking their favorite places to live. RS
C.U. Architecture
Sherrow, Victoria. Separation of Church and State. Watts, 1992. ISBN 0-531-
13000-2. [128p.] illus. with photographs. $12.90. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Centering on the rights implied in the first
amendment, this book examines the history of the idea of religious freedom and
analyzes the United States' landmark status in stipulating that freedom in its
Constitution. Specific legal cases (Minersville School District vs. Gobitis,
where a school board expelled a pupil for refusing for religious reasons to salute
the flag) and issues (why churches don't generally pay taxes and under what
situations they must) are discussed in light of the words of the amendment. The
author traces the complications and contradictions of the subject well enough to
make it interesting as well as useful for research, and her material is solid and
up-to-date (for instance, Gulf War reservists who objected to fighting are
mentioned), with a particularly intriguing overview of the results of America's
unique commitment to religious liberty. Endnotes and a bibliography are
included; the text of the Williamsburg Charter is appended; the finished copy
will have photographs and an index. DS
C.U. Social studies
Siegel, Beatrice. The Year They Walked: Rosa Parks and the Montgomery Bus
Boycott. 
Four Winds, 1992. 
ISBN 0-02-782631-7. 
[12 8p]. 
$13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
After a few pages about Rosa Parks' childhood, the
author focuses on the boycott that became a landmark in the struggle for civil
rights. Save for omission of some background information (the NAACP
discussion of a test case before the December 1, 1955, incident that was the
catalyst for the boycott) the important facts are all included and are accurately
presented. The book is weakened, however, by the author's penchant for florid
writing and by a tendency to be adulatory, particularly in reference to Martin
Luther King, Jr. A selected list of sources and a brief list of additional titles for
young readers are appended. For a fuller account, readers may wish to look at
Rosa Parks' autobiography, reviewed in the February issue. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.--Civil Rights
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Thesman, Jean. When the Road Ends. Houghton, 1992. ISBN 0-395-59507-X.
[176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Twelve-year-old Mary Jack Jordan desperately tries to
hold together her new foster family: 
a well-intentioned but weak-willed
Episcopalian priest, his resentful wife, and two other foster children-a young
girl who has been so severely abused she will not speak, and a teenage boy
embittered by rejection. The precarious balance of the group shifts when Father
Matt's sister, nerve-damaged and aphasic from an automobile accident, adds one
too many burdens and is shipped off with all the kids to a vacation cabin where
their caretaker deserts them and they must either pull together or fall apart. In
[ 222 ]
spite of the large cast, the character dynamics are subtly developed except for a
gratuitous villain who threatens the children's hardwon security. There's plenty
of action without his interference, and the narrator is convincingly voiced. If the
ending seems too good to be true, it is nevertheless carefully prepared and
satisfying. BH
D.V. Family relations; Friendship values
Van Steenwyk, Elizabeth. Ida B. Wells-Barnett: Woman of Courage. Watts,
1992. 
ISBN 0-531-13014-2. 
[144p]. 
illus. with photographs. 
$13.90.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Born in 1862 to parents who were slaves, Wells-
Barnett was a fighter all her life, a seeker of justice, an advocate of civil rights, a
militant activist who campaigned for black equality and who, because of her
writing and speaking, became a nationally known figure. Never one to mince
words or make concessions, Ida Wells-Barnett had loyal supporters in the United
States and in England, but she also made enemies among some more
conciliatory members of the black community, as well as among white
Southerners. Her biographer gives full credit to Wells-Barnett for her courage
and persistence but is candid about the fact that this remarkable woman was an
irritant to many. 
Chapter notes, bibliography, and a glossary add to the
usefulness of a well-written book that explores an important aspect of civil
rights history; the finished copy will include photographs and an index. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.--Civil Rights
D.V. Courage; Devotion to a cause
Veglahn, Nancy. Women Scientists. Facts on File, 1992. ISBN 0-8160-2482-
0. 134p. illus. with photographs. (American Profiles). $16.95.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
Eleven biographical sketches describe the lives of
American women who gained distinction in a scientific field; many were
pioneers in areas that had been the prerogative of male scientists; several won or
shared a Nobel Prize. Some were native-born, others immigrants; some worked
alone and others as part of a team; all made significant contributions to the body
of scientific knowledge, and all were in time honored for their work. 
A
chronology and bibliography follow each account, and a good index gives access
to the book's contents. Veglahn is a dependable and clear writer of nonfiction;
what adds to the usefulness and appeal of her lively writing is the fact that her
chronological arrangement of material gives historical perspective, and her focus
on the emergent roles of women creates its own commentary on the subject of
the changes from the mid-nineteenth century (when botanist Alice Eastwood was
born) to 1984, when Mildred Dresselhaus became the first woman to be elected
President of the American Physical Society. ZS
C.U. Science; Women's Studies
Voigt, Cynthia. David and Jonathan. Scholastic, 1992. ISBN 0-590-45165-0.
[256p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
Framed by an initially confusing and ultimately
unnecessary Vietnam setting, the core of this story takes place on Cape Cod
during the Korean War, although it is the events of World War II that inform the
novel's greatest thematic concerns. As all this might indicate, Voigt's latest
[223 ]
book is an ambitious effort. Henry and Jonathan, both sixteen, are best friends
until Jon's cousin David, a twenty-year-old survivor of the Holocaust, comes to
live with Jon's family. David, who has spent many years in a posh mental
hospital, is beautiful, difficult, and cruel, shrugging off-mocking-all of
Henry's efforts to "feel sorry for him." David seduces Jon's sister, sexually
taunts Henry, and resists any efforts at friendship. Eventually, David kills
himself, an act that seems more vengeful than despairing. The relationship
between the three boys makes a powerful triangle; unfortunately, the characters
seem but to exist only for what they can reveal about history and the Holocaust.
Voigt isn't didactic or preachy; in fact, she is far more daring on the subject than
most writers for children or teenagers, but the novel is overintellectualized,
consisting of too many Talmudic, often confusing, sometimes obscure,
occasionally incomprehensible, paragraphs that take readers away from the story.
"Picking up information piecemeal, that's what Henry was doing. But he didn't
know what Jon was thinking. And he didn't know what Jon was thinking." On
the other hand, there are characters (such as Jon's weepy but funny mother) and
conversations (such as a desperately ironic exchange between Jon and Henry's
Yankee grandmother) that further theme and story. As a dark contrast to such
Holocaust heroics as Number the Stars, this is a valuable effort; unfortunately,
the intensity of theme is not supported by a grounded story. RS
Waddell, Martin. Can't You Sleep, Little Bear?; illus. by Barbara Firth.
Candlewick, 1992. ISBN 1-56402-007-X. 32p. $14.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
"Big Bear is the big bear, and Little Bear is the little
bear." They live together in a cozy Bear Cave, but Little Bear, afraid of the dark,
can't sleep. Big Bear, who only wants to relax with his book, goes to the
Lantern Cupboard for the "tiniest lantern," then a bigger lantern, then the
"Biggest Lantern of Them All" and still Little Bear can't sleep: he's afraid of the
dark outside the cave. A moonlight walk satisfies Little Bear's fears, and Big
Bear finally gets to finish his book. The storytelling is repetitive in a way that
seems meant to be cozy but comes across as coy and a bit patronizing. While
this pair isn't as engaging as, say, Gabrielle Vincent's Ernest and Celestine (and
Little Bear is no Little Bear), their sleepytime patter might make for
satisfactorily soothing fare. Firth's crayon-and-wash illustrations have a gently
lined warmth that nestles dark and light together for a lulling effect. RS
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Weaver, Lydia. Child Star: When Talkies Came to Hollywood; illus. by
Michele Laporte. Viking, 1992. ISBN 0-670-84039-4. [52p]. (Once Upon
America). $12.00.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
In a story set in the Coolidge years, Joey's widowed
mother makes a scant living as an extra and a pianist in the film industry. One
day when Joey is with Mama at the studio, a jovial comedian puts the boy in
some shots. And that is how a star is born. The book gives some period details
and some facts about movie-making, but it is more an expos6 of how juvenile
actors were treated (no child labor laws, no mandate about schooling) than a
convincing narrative. 
Occasional full-page pencil illustrations have a
sophisticated, jazzy tone. ZS
[224 1
Wexler, Jerome. Wonderful Pussy Willows; written and illus. with photographs
by Jerome Wexler. Dutton, 1992. ISBN 0-525-44867-5. 
[32p]. 
$14.50.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Handsome color photographs, many highly
magnified, are carefully integrated with text in a book that may be of as much
interest to independent readers as it is to the read-aloud audience for whom it is
also appropriate. Because pussy willows have either staminate or pistillate
forms, it is easy to see how reproduction takes place as Wexler goes through the
life cycle and explains each stage. This is botany presented in a way that should
encourage observation and perhaps even further interest in plants. ZS
C.U. Botany; Nature study
Wieler, Diana. Bad Boy. Delacorte, 1992. ISBN 0-385-30415-3. 
[184p].
$15.00.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
The "bad boy" is A. J. Brandiosa, a good,
hardworking hockey player who turns into a monster on the ice after he discovers
that his best friend and teammate Tully Brown is gay. A.J.'s anger is fueled by
conventional sexual fears, but perhaps stronger is his resentment of Tully's
secret: "For three years I told him everything, and he didn't tell me this." It's
good to see a gay-teen theme thoroughly immersed in a real plot; the hockey
action provides a fast and furious background for the equally violent emotions.
Tully's lover Derek, another hockey player, is a sexy, menacing creep, and,
again, it's good to see a gay character who is less than sympathetic,
sanctimonious stereotyping being the usual order of things in the YA novel.
The tone is rough-and-ready, the small-town Saskatchewan setting is gritty, the
resolution optimistic but sermon-free. RS
D.V. Friendship values; Tolerance
Williams, Karen. First-Grade King; illus. by Lena Shiffman. Clarion, 1992.
ISBN 0-395-58583-X. [112p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Adapting to the vicissitudes and delights of first
grade, Joey King may prove to be as much an everychild as Beverly Cleary's
Ramona. Joey learns (at last!) to read, adjusts to the substitute for wonderful
Mrs. Fulks, copes with a bully who teases him about his name, and learns to
respect the social gulf (at least on the playground) between a first grader and the
lofty third grade status of his brother Daniel's circle. (Daniel is the hero of
Williams' first novel, Baseball and Butterflies, reviewed in the 10/90 issue.)
Light, pithy, funny, with good writing style and characterization, this is
enjoyable for a read-aloud audience as well as for independent readers. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Age-mate relations
Wilson, Johnniece Marshall. Poor Girl, Rich Girl. Scholastic, 1992. ISBN 0-
590-44732-7. [176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
The title is a bit melodramatic for what is a pleasant
story of a young black girl's attempts to earn herself a pair of contact lenses the
summer before her tenth-grade year. Miranda is frustrated because, on one hand,
her parents say there is no extra money for the lenses; at the same time, the
school counselor tells Miranda that her parents earn too much money for her to
qualify for the school summer jobs program. But Miranda is persistent, and
[225]
although her money-making efforts are not always believable (what sleepaway
camp would hire a junior counselor based on a fifteen minute phone interview?)
they are consistently admirable. Wilson's writing is sometimes awkward and
repetitive, but Miranda's dogged (literally, in her dogwalking business)
persistence makes a strong and sympathetic focus for an engaging summer story.
RS
D.V. Perseverance
Yep, Laurence. Dragon War. HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
020303-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020302-1. [320p]. Library ed. $14.89; Trade
ed. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
In the fourth volume of a high fantasy series (BCCB
11/82, 5/85, and 7/91), the exiled dragon Princess, Shimmer, and her
companions move through one episode of danger/quest/magic to another. Their
ultimate goals include restoring the Inland Sea, rescuing the human boy who is
an enchanted captive of the evil Boneless King, and reinstating Shimmer. The
story is told by Monkey (sage and wizard) and will undoubtedly have a special
appeal to buffs of the genre and to those Yep fans who have responded to the
drama and suspense of the previous volumes, which were just as action-packed as
this mission-accomplished volume, presumably the last in the series. ZS
Zolotow, Charlotte. 
The Seashore Book; illus. by Wendell Minor.
HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020214-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
020213-0. 
[32p]. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $15.00. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
When a child who has never seen the sea asks his
mother what it is like, she invents a day at the shore, with her son as contented
protagonist. From the gray of pre-dawn, through sunshine and tidal flow and
surging water, the small boy's day is filled with creatures of shore and sea, with
the pleasures of having a picnic and being warmed by the hot noonday sun after a
bracing dip. For children who know the seashore, this is a nostalgia trip; for
others it may be a bit static. The illustrations are very attractive realistic
paintings, but there are pages--an off-scale crab, an ocean that is blue rather than
green as the text describes it-that may raise questions among younger
listener/viewers. ZS
D.V. Environmental concepts