Ackerman, Karen. Song and Dance Man; illus. by Stephen Gammell. Knopf,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99330-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-89330-1. 32p.
Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Grandpa is a bit tubby, bald and bespectacled in
Gammell's bright, clean pictures (nice shading, nice composition) for a picture
book told in the second person. Grandpa takes three grandchildren up to the
attic, where he arranges lights and gives a performance that enchants his
audience. They tell him they wish they could have seen him dance in "the good
old days" but he says he wouldn't trade a million good old days for the time he
spends with the narrators. Still-he glances back up the attic stairs, and "we
wonder how much he really misses that time on the vaudeville stage . . .. "
There's an engaging warmth to the story, a little humor, a poignant note, and a
refreshingly different role for a grandparent. Nice, too, to have an elderly person
who is still active and capable. ZS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Agee, Jon. The Incredible Painting of Felix Clousseau; written and illus. by
Jon Agee. Farrar, 1988. ISBN 0-374-33633-4. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Clousseau's painting for the Grand Contest of Art is
different from the other entries: The King on His Throne, The King on
Horseback, The King in Armor. Clousseau's is a duck--and it quacks. And
walks. Clousseau is famous for a while, until his painting of a volcano erupts,
[62]
his waterfall overflows, and, as for The Sleeping Boa Constrictor . .. "One
night, it awoke" (for an hommage d Crictor). The brief, deadpan text leaves the
punch lines to the solid, simple pictures, which are heavily outlined and
dominated by black. Young children will enjoy the living pictures, older ones
will appreciate the ironic tone and ending, when Clousseau, tired of celebrity,
"returned to his painting," walking back into the same picture seen on the first
page. RS
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
Aiken, Joan. The Teeth of the Gale. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
020045-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020044-8. 307p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Continuing the successful combination of adventure,
romance, and history that distinguished the first two books of this trilogy, Go
Saddle the Sea and Bridle the Wind (BCCB 5/78, 11/83), this is set in a
turbulent period of Spanish history, the 1820's. Felix, now a college student, is
called home by his Spanish grandfather to respond to a written request that Felix
help the beautiful Dona Conchita find and retrieve the three children who have
been spirited away by her husband, declared evil and probably mad. Felix
responds with alacrity, since his name had been forwarded by his beloved Juana
(now preparing to take her vows as a nun). Aiken has managed again to knit
enough colorful characters and cliffhanger situations for two books into a
coherent whole, and if now and then Felix, the narrator, or wily Conchita or evil
Don Ignacio seems to be more theatrical than real, few Aiken fans will care. ZS
Anderson, Joan. From Map to Museum: Uncovering Mysteries of the Past;
illus. with photographs by George Ancona. Morrow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN
0-688-06915-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06914-2. 63p. Trade ed. $11.95; Library
ed. $11.88.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
This author-illustrator team have collaborated on a
"living history" series that includes Joshua's Westward Journal. Here they
document the work of David Thomas, Curator of Anthropology at the American
Museum of Natural History, in his exploration of a Spanish mission site on St.
Catherine's island off the coast of Georgia. Following an introduction by Dr.
Thomas himself and a description of his exhibit, Anderson backs up to the
beginning of his archeological expedition, from his hunt for the site through the
details of mapping, digging, classifying, preserving, and studying. 
The
knowledge that a nail is as important a treasure as a gold medal is crucial to the
account: "It's not what you find but what you find out that counts." Thus the
stress on any clue that "ecofacts" (fish scales, animal bones, shells) can give
about the lifestyle of a people ("It was determined that the Indians who lived
under Spanish influence and adopted European agricultural methods developed
more tooth decay and bone disease"). Business-like black-and-white photographs
and maps on every page expand a balanced report that benefits considerably from
an expert's cooperation. BH
C.U. Archaeology
Banish, Roslyn. Let Me Tell You About My Baby; written and illus. with
photographs by Roslyn Banish. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020383-8;
[63]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020382-X; Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-446084-3. [64p]. Library
ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95; Paper ed. $3.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7yrs. 
Clear, informal black-and-white photographs
accompany the first-person narrative of a young boy whose mother is about to
have a baby. He recites the usual litany of mixed feelings-Mom's lap is
crowded, "the baby makes her sleepy," etc.-along with pleasure in his
grandparents' visit, excitement/apprehension at the baby's arrival, the reassurance
of his parents' love, and the growing awareness of pleasure in his brother's
company (this baby's smile is irresistible enough to offset even his fiercely
howling face). The photographs are better than the text, which tends to be
choppy and begins irrelevantly ("That's my Mom and Dad and me. There's a
baby growing inside my Mom. We have bread to feed the ducks") and ends at
the same pond with the baby looking away from the ducks that his older brother
is showing him. The photographs, however, portray a warm, happy family
preparing for and responding to the arrival of a sibling. Both the delivery and
nursing scenes are discreetly honest. This will be useful where Joanna Cole's
excellent and more varied books, How You Were Born and The New Baby at
Your House (BCCB 2/85, 11/85), have circulated widely. BH
D.V. Baby, adjustment to
Barber, Antonia. The Enchanter's Daughter; illus. by Errol Le Cain. Farrar,
1988. ISBN 0-374-3217-1. [30p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
Some of Le Cain's finest painting distinguishes this
literary fairy tale about an enchanter who imprisons his daughter in an isolated
land of magic. She longs to know her identity and begs for company until
finally, preoccupied by his search for the secret of eternal youth, he distracts her
with storybooks. These lead her to knowledge and flight, which ends happily in
reconciliation with her true family. The story is traditionally structured and
sparely told without pretentious embellishment. There are hints of Japanese
setting but no notes on origin. Le Cain's art, which can be stylized to the point
of coldness, is here softened by a nuance of color and shape sometimes
reminiscent of Dulac. The quality of reproduction does unusual justice to these
subtleties. The full-page Orientally flavored compositions are elaborate but
never out of control, absorbing and reflecting back the impact of the narrative
conflict between life and death. A picture book that will extend its hold well
beyond the usual preschool audience. BH
D.V. Perseverance
Beatty, Patricia. Be Ever Hopeful, Hannalee. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-
07502-9. [208p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
In a sequel to Turn Homeward, Hannalee (BCCB
11/84), the protagonist and her younger brother Jem are back from the North,
where they had been sent to work in a Yankee mill. Now the Civil War is over,
their older brother (who has lost an arm) has come home, and they decide to
travel from their small Georgia town to Atlanta, where they hope there will be
opportunity to earn money and have a better life. What they find is that even the
major cities of the South are having a hard time. Mama gets a job as a
housekeeper, Hannalee (who is the narrator) works for a Yankee shopkeeper
whose daughter Mary Anne helps Hannalee with her reading. Big brother Davey
[64]
is falsely accused of murder, and it is Hannalee and Mary Anne who find a
frightened black girl, Delie, whom they know has witnessed the shooting and
can testify to Davey's innocence. Like the first book, this is provided with an
excellent section of author's notes at the back of the book. As is true in most of
Patricia Beatty's books, this has a spunky protagonist and plenty of action; there
is a faint aura of purposiveness, but if the purpose was to show the plight of the
poor Southerner (black or white) after the war, it has surely been achieved. A
minor weakness in the style, basically smooth and well-paced, is the uneven use
of speech patterns, as in characters who at times say "you" and at other times,
"ya." ZS
C.U. History-U.S.-Reconstruction era
Bentley, Judith. Archbishop Tutu of South Africa. Enslow, 1988. ISBN
0-89490-180-X. 96p. illus. with photographs. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Any biography of the courageous black clergyman
who was the first black Archbishop of the Anglican Church in South Africa, and
who was awarded the 1984 Nobel Peace Prize, would be both interesting and
useful. Here, despite a tilt toward hyperbole and that static quality that often
results when research is book-based rather than done in situ, Bentley does a
creditable job of describing the biographee's life and work and in relating it to
the larger picture of black-white relations under the persecution and restriction of
apartheid. Many of the photographs will seem familiar to readers, and some are
of poor quality. A chronology, a glossary, a reading list, and an index are
appended. ZS
C.U. History-South Africa
D.V. Courage; Devotion to a cause
Betancourt, Jeanne. Crazy Christmas. Bantam, 1988. Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-
15643-8. [128p]. Paper ed. $2.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
This lively first-person narrative stars Aviva Granger,
who moves every week between two households (her parents have joint custody).
Though Mom's old farmhouse is obviously the warmer, child-oriented home,
Dad's fashion-conscious wife does provide Aviva with a peaceful retreat-until
Aviva's puppy threatens to taint the apartment decor. Betancourt's strength
comes in not relying on the situation to carry the novel, but rather on her
humorous elaboration of the implications and complications, from which her
protagonist evolves a new sense of values. Aviva's anxiety to get her mother
out of the apartment before her father comes home is acutely conveyed, as are her
conflicts about being in two places at once during a holiday, her ongoing delight
in a new telephone shaped like a banana, and the job in her stepmother's store
("This is what I didn't have my first day of being a Christmas-present wrapper:
patience or lunch"). The sub-plot of her friendship with a boy whose father has
deserted him and whom her Mom's family plans to adopt almost stretches the
situation too far, especially in a trip to New York where Aviva helps him search
the Bowery; but the characterization is well realized where it could have been
oversimplified into functional roles. Engaging and too true. BH
D.V. Stepparents, adjustment to
[65 ]
Brown, Fern G. Teen Guide to Childbirth. 
ISBN 0-531-10573-3. Nourse,
Alan E. Teen Guide to Birth Control. ISBN 0-531-10571-7. Both books:
Watts, 1988. 62p. illus. and with photographs. $11.90.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
These teen guides feature up-to-date information in an
unintimidating format and texts that are simple to read but never condescending.
Where Nourse's style is straightforward, however, Brown's is more lively,
conveying the excitement of birth without suggesting that it's easy. In Fern's
book, informational diagrams and frank color photographs of labor and delivery
extend the facts, which are organized into brief sections covering routines such as
prepping and afterbirth pains. The you-are-there immediacy is enhanced by
several examples of women going through labor, one of whom has a Caesarian.
Nourse's text is methodical in explaining the reproduction system and various
methods of birth control, carefully describing the advantages and side effects of
each. The illustrations are helpful here, too, with one diagram showing how to
put on a condom. Both books have a glossary and index. These are basic,
realistic, and right on target for the group that most needs them. BH
C.U. Sex Education
Burton, Marilee Robin. Tail Toes Eyes Ears Nose; written and illus. by Marilee
Robin Burton. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020874-0; Trade ed. ISBN
0-06-020873-2. 32p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
This will serve as a puzzle for wiggly young
listeners. They'll see a bright yellow page with brown or black body features-
tail, "toes" (hoofs, really), eyes, ears, nose-and guess, depending on their
competence, what appears on the verso: a horse. Facing that, they'll find a
bright blue page with bits of a pink body and discover, upon turning the page, a
pig. The process includes a mouse, cat, dog, rabbit, elephant, bird, and boy,
concluding with pages of tails, toes, eyes, ears, and noses, just for comparison.
A final spread features bits and pieces of a parade, which viewers can easily use
their imaginations to fill in or . . . turn the page. The actual drawing is
primitively childlike, but the bold colors, uncluttered design, and playful aspects
of identification make the book a good bet for toddlers. BH
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
Byars, Betsy. Beans on the Roof; illus. by Melodye Rosales. Delacorte, 1988.
ISBN 0-440-50055-9. 65p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr.2-4. 
The Beans are a benevolent crew, almost self-
consciously so. We get to know the whole family here because each of three
children and both parents are inspired by a school assignment to write a poem on
or about their tenement rooftop. Mr. Bean, who sells fruit and vegetables, sings
of his love for Mrs. Bean, who takes a break from her cooking to eulogize the
children, each of whom expresses a different sentiment in rhyme. The middle
child, George, is the only one who can't wax lyrical, and his anxiety lends a bit
of suspense to the proceedings. Though Anna's poem is not selected for
inclusion in the school paper, her project has clearly reaffirmed the pride of a
family not far removed from illiteracy ("Children, my father could not read. He
could not even write his name"). Byars' capacity to build an episode with quick
dialogue and selective description obscures the contrivance, while the short
[66]
chapters, spacious format, and carefully easy text will make the book accessible
to readers who need practice. BH
D.V. Family values
Cameron, Ann. The Most Beautiful Place in the World; illus. by Thomas B.
Allen. Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99463-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-
89463-4. 57p. Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $10.95.
R 
Gr.3-5. 
The narrator starts out with what sounds like a
travelogue introduction to his country, Guatemala, but after a bit of description
winds into a story of great integrity. Abandoned by his father, he moves into
his grandmother's house with his mother, who soon marries another man and
leaves him behind. Juan's absorption of his grandmother's values and his
learning to trust her love for him helps overcome his loss. Her support of his
schooling in face of financial need is told with simple power. Cameron's style
is succinctly graceful ("Stories are important here, and cars aren't") but
realistically natural ("I need my rest. I have had enough sleeping with children.
Children kick"). The easy-to-read text, the handsome pencil drawings, and a
setting that will take U.S. children into lives led elsewhere make this a winning
choice for reading aloud or alone. BH
D.V. Education, valuing and seeking; Grandparent-child relations
Chaikin, Miriam. Friends Forever; illus. by Richard Egielski. Harper, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021204-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021203-9. 
[128p].
Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Molly is worried that her lack of math ability will
keep her out of the Rapid Advancement class when she is promoted to seventh
grade. So, she begins giving her self a little "help" with tests by writing key
formulas on her palm. She and her friends are also worried about their girls'
club sweaters: when are they going to come? These plot strands casually hold
together Chaikin's latest entry in her series of books about Molly. It's an
innocent narrative, given resonance with details of Brooklyn life in the 1940's
and the first signs that something terrible is happening to the Jews in Europe.
As in the best period fiction, the historical detail informs rather than intrudes,
with the cozy everyday focus taking appealing prominence. RS
D.V. Friendship values; Honesty
Chaucer, Geoffrey. The Canterbury Tales; ad by Selina Hastings; illus. by Reg
Cartwright. Holt, 1988. ISBN 0-8050-0904-3. 77p. $17.95.
Chaucer, Geoffrey. Canterbury Tales; tr. and ad. by Barbara Cohen; illus. by
Trina Schart Hyman. Lothrop, 1988. ISBN 0-688-06201-6. 
[88p]. $17.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
See editorial, this issue. BH
Cohen, Daniel. 
Phone Call from a Ghost: Strange Tales from Modern
America; illus. with photographs and by David Linn. Dodd/Putnam, 1988.
ISBN 0-396-09266-7. 
l10p. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-8. 
Cohen doesn't do much for his credibility factor when
he announces in the introduction to his latest collection of stories that "All of
[67 ]
them are set in America. Well, one is in Canada, but that's close enough." All
the stories, sprinkled with "real names" and exact dates, are supposed to be true,
but few have enough documentation to give a real frisson of authenticity.
However, they are clearly and simply told in a conversational style that lends
itself to reading aloud (try having the kids do this with each other) or to
elaborated retelling. Scariest is "Something in the Room" ("Whatever it was had
the face of a rotting corpse"), but "The Frenchman's Body" and "My Hands Are
Free from Blood" are close seconds. No, it's not Poe, but both subject and
author have a wide audience of otherwise reluctant readers. RS
Cooney, Caroline B. Camp Girl-Meets-Boy. Bantam, 1988. Paper ed. ISBN 0-
553-27273-X. [192p]. Paper ed. $2.95. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
Gr. 6-7. 
Although the review slip claims this is "For anyone
whose (sic) ever been to camp or even heard about it ... " it may strike those
who have been campers or counselors as another formulaic romance set in a
camp that is just this side of believable. Vi and Marissa are counselors, Alicia
is the camp nurse, and all three have their minds firmly set on possible
attachments with either the camp director or counselors at the boys' camp
nearby. There are some amusing incidents of the usual camping-humor type:
ploys on dates, pranks in cabins, rivalries and friendships. All of it is handled
superficially here, as is the characterization. 
None of these weaknesses is
compensated for by a thin plot and a mediocre writing style. ZS
Cooper, Ilene. Queen of the Sixth Grade. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-
07933-4. 163p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Sixth grade "queen" Veronica has decided to start an
exclusive club at Kennedy Middle School: the AKG, Awesome Kennedy Girls.
Robin, Veronica's best friend, is honored to belong, but the friendship falls apart
(and Robin is ostracized by the club) when the boy Veronica likes turns out to
like Robin better. After much convincingly detailed misery, Robin gets a
chance for her own queendom (and revenge) when she gets a part in a TV
commercial. Sixth-grade meanness has rarely been better portrayed, and the
fairytale turnabout, though too easy, gets a realistic twinge when Robin finds
out the primary reason she got the TV part was her curly red hair, not her talent.
The narrative is predictable and characterization skimpy (we never quite
understand how Robin and Veronica could be best friends, while a third character,
Sharon, appears too suddenly in the middle of the book) but the realistic
treatment of a familiar situation lends great appeal. RS
D.V. Friendship values
Cormier, Robert. Fade. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-440-50057-5. 
[310p].
$15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
Fade is brilliant in conception, intricate in structure,
and will probably be as controversial as other Cormier books have been. It uses
two first-person voices and one that is an authorial third; it has explicit scenes of
sexual encounters, including one that is incestuous, and there are indeed rough
language and violence. But-there are also a taut dramatic impact, elements of
fantasy and mystery, and strong characters in the multi-generational story of the
Roget family. The novel begins in 1938 with Paul's account of his discovery,
[68]
at age thirteen, that he can become invisible. He learns that this ability descends
from uncle to nephew in his family, and that while in the "fade" he is tempted to
acts of violence. The account breaks off, and a new speaker is introduced, a
young woman who is related to Paul; her comments make it clear that he
became a famous author, that he died young, and that his closest cousin (her
grandfather) considers the fading fictional rather than autobiographical. The
shifting of voice is not as successful here as in I Am the Cheese, seeming more
obtrusively a literary device, and some parts of the story are padded. There's
never a pat or expectable ending to a Cormier novel; here the introduction of a
new character, the nephew/successor Paul has been waiting for, brings still more
dramatic suspense. And, in the end, waits the question-unanswered-as to
whether it is all invented or whether it will happen again: the manic violence
of another, younger nephew who will fade. ZS
Costabel, Eva Deutsch. The Jews of New Amsterdam; written and illus. by Eva
Deutsch Costabel. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31351-9. 32p. $13.95.
M 
Gr. 3-4. 
The text here does an adequate job of simplifying the
facts of European persecution that led Sephardic Jews to New Amsterdam. Also
included is condensed information on their settlement, the residents' resistance to
it, subsequent restrictions, and the Jews' adjustment in terms of trades and life
style. The problem comes with the picture book format, which presents
awkwardly doll-like cartoon figures (alternating color with black-and-white
illustrations) across from sentences like this: "The refugees immediately wrote
to family and friends in Holland about their treatment in New Amsterdam, and
these Sephardim of Amsterdam petitioned the Dutch West India Company to let
the Jews stay in New Amsterdam, pointing out that experienced merchants
would make useful and productive settlers in the colony." The subject itself
suggests an audience of youngsters researching reports at a more advanced level.
The book concludes with a glossary of three words, source notes from adult
publications, and an index. BH
C.U. History-U.S.-Pictorial presentation
Crowther, Robert. 
Robert Crowther's Most Amazing Pop-Up Book of
Machines; written and illus. by Robert Crowther. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-
82339-2. 12p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Unlike the many pop-up books that ostensibly offer
redeeming educational value along with the bells and whistles, this one has no
pretenses other than fun. The theme is machines, the appeal is disaster: a crane
lifts and drops a box marked "Fragile" (while a nearby bird comments "He's
having a smashing time"); a wrecking ball evacuates a flurry of nervous birds; a
dump truck showers a ditchdigger with rocks. The art is casually comic,
accompanied by off-the-wall comments ("I'm not dozing. I'm bulldozing") that
reinforce the genial mayhem. Be prepared for sound effects: SCREEEECH!! RS
Deem, James. 
How to Find a Ghost; illus. by True Kelley. Houghton, 1988.
ISBN 0-395-46846-9. [144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
It's hard to tell whether this is a spoof on spooked
kids or whether it's really taking itself seriously. The author addresses his
readers familiarly, opening with a section testing their perceptions of ghosts and
[69
then suggesting places where ghosts are likely to appear, along with several
ways to assure being there when they do and methods of reporting an encounter.
Throughout this advice are sprinkled stories of people who may have seen ghosts
(there are lots of maybes in this book and not a few contradictions), including
the contrasting experience of the Berini family, who exorcised their poltergeist,
and a 19th century woman named Rose, who tracked the household ghost,
identified her, and described her in an 1892 report to the British Society for
Psychical Research. "... Rose's research not only proved the existence of Mrs.
Swinhoe but it prepared her for her future career. In 1895, Rose completed
medical school, graduating with high honors. Not only was she among the first
women doctors in England, she was definitely well prepared for the research,
problem solving, and dedication that her profession demanded. Unlike the
Berinis, Rose wanted to understand ghosts better." Well, with that in mind,
young readers may want to grab a flashlight and head for the nearest likely haunt,
stopping first at the library to browse through some of the books and journal
articles listed in the three-page bibliography ("Quantitative Investigation of a
'Haunted House' with Sensitives and a Control Group"). BH
DeSantis, Kenny. A Dentist's Tools; illus. with photographs by Patricia A.
Agre. Dodd/Putnam, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-396-09043-5; Paper ed. ISBN
0-396-09044-3. 48p. Library ed. $10.95; Paper ed. $4.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Most practitioners of pediatric medicine and dentistry
believe, today, that it is best to be candid with young patients (without alarming
them) and that the more children know about instruments and procedures the
better prepared they are to accept the routines of a checkup and the discomfort of
necessary treatment. Here a simply written text, clear photographs that are well-
placed in relation to the text and that are adequately labelled, and neat
organization (Checkup, Prevention, Repairing a Tooth) keep the information
sequential and pertinent. The photographs show men and women as dentists, the
patients are racially diverse. At best, reassuring; in any case, useful. ZS
Fine, John Christopher. The Hunger Road; written and illus. with photographs
by John Christopher Fine. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31361-6. 
[90p].
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Informed by the author's experiences in Cambodia,
Ethiopia, and other poverty-stricken areas, this book attributes most of the
world's hunger problems to corruption and inefficiency, and, in the cases of
Ethiopia and Cambodia, to deliberate starvation of political opposition. Most of
the facts are attributed if not documented; what's lacking are clear organization
and logical progression of ideas. A recounting, for example, of the author's visit
to an Ethiopian grain market is confusing, and the overheated rhetoric
obfuscating: "The cost will be measured in military terms; the final assessment
of courage, in romantic terms; but for the suffering children, who die quietly,
unnoticed, coughing until a frail heart gives out, there is no roll of honor, no
military parade, no requiem." Fine is referring there to the Afghan resistance,
but what does he mean? However, for readers who can puzzle out the prose,
there is much valuable information, and the author's dedicated indictment
contains a healthy anger. To be illustrated with the author's photographs. RS
[70]
Forrester, John. The Forbidden Beast. Bradbury, 1988. ISBN 0-02-735410-5.
[144p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Like the two first books in this trilogy (Bestiary
Mountain and The Secret of the Round Beast, BCCB 1/86 and 2/87) this has
some exciting episodes, a continuing battle between forces of good and evil, and
some intriguing concepts about humanoid creatures, but is too crowded with
characters and concepts and oblique references to be dramatically effective despite
its moments of high drama. It does have series appeal, as it continues the
adventures of the characters who have come to Old Earth to struggle against the
Forbidden Beast, the villain of this science fantasy in which the Round Beast is a
hero. ZS
Giblin, James Cross. Let There Be Light: A Book about Windows. Crowell,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04695-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04693-6. 162p.
illus. with photographs. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Including "curiosity" as well as light and air among
the reasons people put holes in their dwellings, Giblin's historical survey of
windows covers a good 12,000 years and an equally impressive span of cultures.
Details of glass and papermaking are thorough, and there is a smooth blend of
technological and architectural developments. As was true of the author's From
Hand to Mouth (BCCB 12/87), social commentary runs fluently throughout:
why Moslems constructed windows that allowed one to see out but not in; the
differences between cultures that built windows facing a courtyard and those that
built them facing the outside. This is as much a history of how people live as it
is a history of windows, and Giblin's impeccable research shines through. RS
D.V. Environmental concepts
Gorman, Carol. Pornography. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10591-1. 
128p.
illus. with photographs. $12.90.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
Perhaps the distinction between literature and
pornography is that people read the first and "use" the latter. For what use, this
book doesn't exactly explain for young readers whose experience may be limited
to Playboy, but it is otherwise a comprehensive and objective survey of a topic
currently under charged debate. After a brief run-down of court decisions and
famous cases (Ulysses, for example) Gorman focuses on current research into
links between pornography and sexual violence, "unlikely alliances" between
conservatives and feminists, and child pornography. 
Throughout, there is
thoughtful commentary on the conflict between intellectual freedom and the right
of a society to legislate moral behavior. Gorman is occasionally repetitive and,
in her discussion of pornography and violence, could have explained more clearly
the difference between causal and correlated data, but the book is well-documented
and provides plenty of material for debaters on all sides. RS
C.U. Social studies
Gorog, Judith. Three Dreams and a Nightmare; and Other Tales of the Dark.
Philomel, 1988. ISBN 0-399-21578-6. 156p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
The macabre and the fantastic pervade the usually
down-to-earth matrices of a collection of short stories that are unusual in their
[711
pace and plot, impressive save for the occasional flat, non-sequential ending.
The style is polished, and the wit in exposition as well as in dialogue may be as
appealing to readers as the drama and suspense of that brief gem, "The Perfect
Solution," in which an amateur chemist discovers a way to mend torn sweat
shirts-or the reversal of a standard role for a giant in "Hedwig the Wise." ZS
Greenberg, Jan. Just the Two of Us. Farrar, 1988. ISBN 0-374-36198-3.
[160p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Holly is in seventh grade, lives in Manhattan with
her mother (divorced, working, lonely) and has one good friend, Max, who is the
younger son in a theatrical family, the Appelbaums. 
When her mother
announces that they'll be moving back to her old home in Iowa, Holly is
desperate. She finally, with the support of all four Applebaums, convinces her
mother that it would be a good idea if she lived with the Applebaums for the
summer, worked with Max as a party-giving firm, and joined her mother in Iowa
in the fall. The description of the vagaries of Holly and Max Enterprises is
almost slapstick, and this broad humor pervades other aspects of the writing,
including the dialogue and-to a lesser extent-the characterization. Expectably,
Holly is relieved when summer is over and she's on her way to Iowa. There's
some humor here, but it's heavy-handed to the extent that the story is
unconvincing rather than entertaining. ZS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Grimm, Wilhelm. Dear Mili: An Old Tale; tr. by Ralph Manheim; illus. by
Maurice Sendak. Farrar, 1988. ISBN 0-374-31762-3. 40p. $16.95.
R 
Gr.3-5. 
Since the discovery, in 1983, of a previously
unknown tale (found in a letter and presumably an original story) by Wilhelm
Grimm, and the subsequent announcement that a translated version would be
illustrated by Maurice Sendak, there has been excited anticipation of its
publication. This information is included in the jacket but not within the book
itself, nor is a source note provided. The art exceeds informed expectation, as
Sendak again responds with sensitivity to a tale that is sentimental, somber, and
devout, a Gothic fragment that is given beauty by the gravity and tenderness of
the pictures. Sent into the woods by her mother because a war is moving closer
to them, a little girl takes her refuge with an old man who is kind and who sends
her home on the third day with a rosebud. He is Saint Joseph, who says "Never
fear. When this rose blooms, you will be with me again." The child goes home
to find her three days have actually been thirty years. After a blissful reunion,
mother and child sleep; in the morning neighbors find them dead, St Joseph's
rose lying between them. The soft pastels, the intricacies of the foliage, and the
depiction of the child's guardian angel as another charming little girl, make the
book visually memorable. ZS
Haines, Gail Kay. 
Micromysteries: Stories of Scientific Detection.
Dodd/Putnam, 1988. ISBN 0-396-09000-1. 
180p. illus. with photographs.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Paleontology, genetics, computer technology,
medicine, and other scientific fields are touched on in a series of accounts
(partially biographical) of the work of men and women who studied and solved
[72
such diverse problems as how to incorporate an integrated circuit into a computer
chip, how to purify aluminum, why euphoria-producing drugs work so quickly,
how to control diabetes, or why specific frequencies occur in the measurement of
heat waves. The writing is brisk, with infrequent hyperbole, and the author is
adept at clarifying a range of problems and giving the background information
needed by general readers. An index provides access to a text that introduces
some major scientists and that gives, through examples, a good picture of
scientific method. ZS
C.U. Science
Halam, Ann. Transformations. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08366-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05766-6. [256p]. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed.
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 6-12. 
In this sequel to The Daymaker (BCCB 10/87) Zanne
of Garth, now a covener, has been sent to investigate the troubled community of
Minith, infected with the bad magic of a maker, an ancient machine relic of the
long-dead technological world. While a prologue sets the scene, a reading of the
first book is necessary to appreciate fully Halam's intricate fantasy world. The
Minithers are a gloomy, hardworking people who have twisted the magical
Covenant: "the plain and simple agreement to do no harm to the world, which
had somehow become for Siri a monster. Yes, that was the only word. A
monster, with teeth and claws." Siri is a young girl Zanne hopes to save from
the terrible secret Minith is keeping. Darker and scarier than the first book, this
is also more intensely focused, with a tremendous Gothic climax. Magical
doings are kept to the necessary, characterization is complex and vivid, and
readers of spooky-children books will enjoy this as much as will fantasy fans.
RS
Hall, Lynn. Murder at the Spaniel Show. Scribner, 1988. ISBN 0-684-
18961-5. [128p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Somebody doesn't want Ted Quinn to judge Best of
Breed in the spaniel show, and kennel girl Tabby is determined to find out who.
There are plenty of suspects: a rival judge, a sleazy dog handler, and even
Tabby's employer Turner Quinn, a blind, autocratic dog breeder who hates his
twin brother Ted. The resolution of the mystery is far-fetched and attenuated; the
real interest here is in the details of dog breeding and showing. RS
Hammond, Tim. Sports. Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99616-X;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-89616-5. 64p. illus. with photographs. (Eyewitness
Books). Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-. 
First published in London, this oversize book has
bright and busy pages that give a great many facts about each of the sports
described in two or four pages each. What it doesn't have is either full
information about an individual sport or consistent information among them; the
index is so sparse as to give few additional clues. However, the text covers
about thirty sports (some are combined, as in "Martial Arts") and usually gives
information about the playing area, uniforms, equipment, and plays or signals.
[73]
The most visible gaps are a sequential description of how the games are played,
including the time-frame, and explanations of such procedures as fouls, penalties,
time outs, etc. ZS
C.U. Physical education
Harley, Rex. Last Laugh. Gollancz/David & Charles, 1988. ISBN 0-575-
03920-5. 156p. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
In his first book for young adults, Harley proves
equally adept at realism and fantasy, with five short stories that are admirable
examples of that genre. Style and structure are impressive, and the author is
particularly deft at the establishment of character through dialogue and
exposition. There are both acidity and humor in the realistic stories, one of
which deals with school vandalism seriously ("The Keeper of the Key") and
another that sees the comic side of mischief that harms nobody. 
"Mr.
Gostelow's Demon" is a contemporary tale, but it has a Gothic awfulness in the
fate that befalls a cold, hard man who has ruined the lives of two families.
Readers will want more Harley. ZS
Hirtling, Peter. Crutches. Lothrop, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07991-1. 
[160p].
$12.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
The place is Austria, and the time is 1945. His father
has been killed in the war, he's been separated from his mother on a transport,
and his Aunt Wanda is dead. With no one to turn to, Thomas attaches himself
to a one-legged man, Crutches, who feeds the boy, cares for him, and, hardest of
all, eventually lets him go when they locate his mother. There are three
portraits here: the boy, the man, and the face of war. The author has achieved
concentrated strength by particularizing each of these. Though sometimes the
context goes unexplained, the incidents are vivid enough to make the story
cohesive. When Thomas and Crutches "organize" some piglets from the
countryside, for instance, the tension of crossing check-points and the breakdown
of the trailor on bombed-out roads speaks for itself. Other elements are
somewhat more mysterious-the survival of a beautiful Jewish woman with a
luxury apartment in which Crutches and Thomas take shelter until their return to
Germany. Most impressive is the characterization of Crutches, an embittered,
anti-Hitlerian ex-soldier who tries to protect his battered heart from further
incursions but who cannot resist getting involved. The translator has worked
effectively to capture Hartling's trenchant style without becoming choppy, and
readers will get involved in spite of the fact that this is less about the dangers of
defeat than about its drudgeries. BH
C.U. History-World War II-1939-1945
Haskins, James. Shirley Temple Black: Actress to Ambassador; illus. by
Donna Ruff. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-81957-3. 
58p. (Women of Our
Time). $10.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
It is unlikely that even the most sophisticated young
heart can be hardened against Temple's films of Heidi and A Little Princess; this
biography shows the sometimes painful real story behind the dimpled
melodrama. Temple began her film career in the sleazy "Baby Burlesks" (the
kind of films, as Haskins points out, that the grown-up Shirley Temple would
[74]
crusade against as exploitative) but her star took off after Stand Up and Cheer,
and she had a phenomenal, though relatively brief, reign as "America's
Sweetheart" until 1940. "As a teenager, Shirley didn't have much luck getting
more roles. She was not pretty enough to attract movie audiences." Haskins is
no sob-sister, and his account is candid in discussing the actress' trials and
triumphs. He does a good job of placing Temple within historical context-
through her relationship with black actor Bill "Bojangles" Robinson, her status
as a symbol of better times for Depression audiences, and, more recently, in her
role as savvy politican and ambassador. An effective counter to fan magazine
hype and an illuminating portrait of young Hollywood. RS
Howard, Ellen. Her Own Song. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31444-2.
[192p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Flashbacks are inserted in a narrative that begins in
1908, when friendless Mellie, eager to be accepted by the other girls, joins them
in vituperative abuse of the local man who runs a laundry service, Geem-Wah.
Living with her adoptive father and his sister, Mellie remembers her adoptive
mother with grieving love. She knows nothing of her natural parents. This has
an element of mystery, as Mellie comes to know Geem-Wah's family and learns
that she was sold in infancy to a Chinese couple and later was taken away by the
authorities and given to her white adoptive parents. Based on a true incident, the
story, set in Seattle, is competently written except that the message about
prejudice (worthy in itself) overshadows the narrative and that Mellie's ability to
spend time with Geem-Wah and others in his home is conveniently made
possible by the fact that her aunt, for the first time, goes on a vacation and her
father is injured and hospitalized. ZS
D.V. Interracial understanding
Hurwitz, Johanna. 
The Cold and Hot Winter; illus. by Carolyn Ewing.
Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07839-7. 132p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
In this engaging sequel to The Hot and Cold Summer
(BCCB 5/84), Hurwitz again demonstrates what makes her books so popular
with middle-graders. Derek and Rory are happy that their friend Bolivia is back
for a visit, but Derek also needs to talk to Bolivia about his fears that Rory has
become dishonest. And when Christmas presents (Bolivia's new Swiss Army
knife, Derek's hamster) start disappearing, Derek is convinced that Rory is the
culprit. He's not, but Hurwitz uses the situation to lightly touch upon concerns
of truthtelling, loyalty, and trust. In a humorous parallel to this serious
situation, there's another plot thread that involves a mysterious moving
snowman, uh, person. The dialogue is natural, the humor unforced, and the
fifth-grade perspective controlled and right on target. RS
D.V. Friendship values
Isaacson, Philip M. Round Buildings, Square Buildings, & Buildings that
Wiggle Like a Fish; written and illus. with photographs by Philip M. Isaacson.
Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99382-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-89382-4.
121p. Library ed. $16.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R* 
Gr. 6-12. 
An aficionado of fine buildings, Isaacson has
undertaken the daring task of teaching readers to observe three-dimensional
[75]
structures through the two-dimensional medium of a book. The format is crucial
here: beautifully composed and reproduced color photographs are numbered for
reference in the text, which describes almost poetically the effects of contrasting
architectural elements, styles, shapes, materials, and functions. There is no
effort to convey systematic historical information. In fact, it is only in an
appended list that one can find background information on the 93 international
buildings featured here, from the 17th century Taj Mahal through houses,
palaces, barns, and offices to an early 20th-century church in Wimauma, Florida.
The emphasis is entirely on visual literacy, with stunning examples such as the
facing pictures of two light-filled ceilings, Michaelangelo's dome at St. Peter's
and the fan vaulting at King's College Chapel. For those few textual passages
separated from the pictures to which they refer, the numbers act as guides. The
writing is lyrical without abandoning fact, and the photographic perspectives are
arresting. An enticement for high school art students as well as an eye-opener for
younger readers. BH
C.U. Architecture
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
Keller, Charles, comp. It's Raining Cats and Dogs: Cat and Dog Jokes; illus.
by Robert Quackenbush. Pippin Press, 1988. ISBN 0-945912-01-3. 
48p.
$10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
"What's the difference between a coyote and a flea?
One howls on the prairie and the other prowls on the hairy." A veteran at
compiling joke books, Keller runs the gamut here from clever to just plain silly.
Puns ("Are cats rich? No, most are purr") and word play ("What happened to the
cat that swallowed a ball of string? She had mittens") account for most of the
entries, with a few leaning too hard on adult-sounding aphorisms ("Why couldn't
the dog catch his tail? It's hard to make ends meet these days"). Black-and-white
cartoons echo the low-down humor in an easy-to-read book that will quickly find
its own audience. BH
Kellogg, Steven, ad. Johnny Appleseed: A Tall Tale; ad. and illus. by Steven
Kellogg. Morrow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06418-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
688-06417-5. 42p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Oversize pages have given Kellogg a fine opportunity
for pictures that are on a large scale, colorful and animated if often busy with
details. His version of Chapman's life is more substantial than the subtitle (A
Tall Tale) would indicate, since the text makes clear the difference between what
Chapman really did and what myths grew up about his work, his life, his
personality, and his achievements. There's some exaggeration, but on the whole
the biography is factual and written with clarity. ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to; Helpfulness
Landau, Elaine. Surrogate Mothers. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10603-9.
128p. illus. with photographs. $12.90.
R 
Gr. 8-. 
Maintaining a careful neutrality, Landau explores
many of the intricate issues that have raised legal, religious, and ethical
[76
arguments about surrogate motherhood and, to a lesser extent, about some of the
other ways in which people who are sterile or physically unfit for parenthood can
have children through new medical techniques such as in vitro fertilization or
artificial insemination by a donor. While the text has some stylistic lapses and a
modicum of repetition, it covers the range of birth technologies, the legal
decisions that have been made, and the mass of decisions that the courts have yet
to make. 
Case histories and statements by surrogate mothers offer some
contrasting material, with the much-publicized case of "Baby M" covered in
detail. Source notes (by chapter) are provided, as are a bibliography and an
index. ZS
Lasky, Kathryn. The Bone Wars. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07433-2. 378p.
$12.95.
M 
Gr. 7-9. 
Set in the 1870's, this historical novel is based on
the frenetic rivalry between those paleontologists, British and American, who
were competing for fossil finds that would enhance their reputations. Not only
did they use unscrupulous methods, they also disagreed over displaying the bones
they had found in the northwest: should these be shown to an ignorant public or
kept in private collections? Incorporating material sympathetic to the Native
Americans who were being forced off their lands, Lasky has used some historical
figures and facts, explaining her methods and citing some of her models but
providing no sources. While there is much of interest to science-oriented readers,
the structure of the book is cluttered, the interpolation of factual passages into
the fictional narration often awkward, and the protagonist endowed with an
ability to sense facts (productive strata, ways to improve on the work of
professionals) that is not credible. Occasionally there are anachronisms in the
use of words. 
At any rate, the hero and his English friend make a great
discovery, dig it up and ship it all on their own, and succeed in their plan to
make "dinosaur" a household word. Why the book begins with a scene in which
five-year-old Thad is under a bed in which his mother, a prostitute, is being
murdered by a brutal customer is not made clear. ZS
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Lawlor, Laurie. How To Survive Third Grade; illus. by Joyce Audy Zarins.
Whitman, 1988. ISBN 0-8075-3433-1. 80p. $8.95.
R 
Gr. 24. 
Although there's no official document to the effect,
Ernest is unquestionably the class outcast. Small for his age and subject to his
working mother's "economical haircuts," he builds model airplanes in the
basement as a retreat from vicious teasing at school. A change comes with the
arrival of a boy from Kenya, Jomo Mugwana, whom Ernest befriends and who
in turn fends off bullies and offers to involve Ernest in soccer and after-school
camraderie. 
Ernest also wins a competition when his balloon flies the
farthest-an answer from a southern Indiana farm boy attests that a cow almost
ate the message-but this subplot provides more action than credibility. It's the
peer dynamics, the lonely protagonist, and the natural, easy-to-read style that
work well here. BH
D.V. Group acceptance
[77]
Levine, Abby. What Did Mommy Do Before You?; illus. by DyAnne DiSalvo-
Ryan. Whitman, 1988. ISBN 0-8075-8819-9. 32p. $11.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
It's true that the title is a question lurking at the back
of many young minds. Once it's expressed, this book might make a good
vehicle for telling the parent reader's own story. The first double spread shows a
child looking at a family album with her mother. Subsequent illustrations
follow the mother's growth from a baby through various stages of childhood ("In
those days, Mommy didn't do everything right") to the moment when Mommy
becomes a mother. The tone may be a little too sweet for some ("And though
you and Mommy had scarcely met, you both knew just what to do!"); the
watercolor paintings textured with pastel crayon effects have some awkwardly
drawn figures but will invite response in early book-sharing sessions. BH
D.V. Parent-child relations
Levy, Elizabeth. 
The Case of the Gobbling Squash; illus. by Ellen Eagle.
Simon, 1988. ISBN 0-671-63655-3. 49p. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Unlike the in-demand kid detectives she reads about in
books, Kate can scrape up only one client: Max, fellow classmate and amateur
magician who's lost his hat-trick rabbit Edwin. Um, Edwina, who is soon
found-the mystery now is how to palm off the baby bunnies. This early
chapter book has a just-enough wisecracking tone, an authentic classroom
setting, and fairly uncontrived situations. Three of Max's magic tricks play a
part in the story, and readers will be happy to find explanations and instructions
for the tricks in the back of the book. RS
Lindgren, Astrid. The Ghost of Skinny Jack; illus. by Ilon Wikland. Viking,
1988. ISBN 0-670-81913-1. 25p. $10.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
A little girl remembers her grandmother's story about
a farmhand, Skinny Jack, who pretends to be a ghost and ends up scaring himself
stiff and cold. So he remains for a hundred years until, on a dare, the new
parson's maid brings his body into the parlor and back out to the graveyard,
where .... 
After this story is over, the little girl and her brother have to walk
home through the woods, where .... 
The legend of Skinny Jack is pretty good
stuff, with a teasing blend of reality and the supernatural. The framework story
of the children visiting their grandmother seems to complicate things
considerably (the little girl's getting caught by a branch echoes Skinny Jack's
getting caught by a church door-both terrifying but natural events) and gives
the book a nostalgic air. The text is long for a picture book, but the subject is
an attention grabber and will appeal to middle-grade readers as well as primary
grade listeners. The realistic scenes are in pen and ink with bright color, the
ghostly ones in lugubrious shades of pastel textured on rough watercolor paper.
BH
C.U. 
Halloween; Storytelling
Lukas, Cynthia K. Center Stage Summer. Stamp Out Sheep/Square One,
1988. Paper ed. ISBN 0-938961-02-0. 157p. Paper ed. $4.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Budding actress Johanna's involvement in no-nuke
demonstrations is practically accidental, something she was prodded into by her
[78 1
radical sister Dana. But Byron, Inc., which has offered Johanna a college
scholarship, is not pleased, and neither is Johanna's boyfriend. This is formulaic
but competently written, and the anti-nuclear background adds interest. The too-
tidy ending undermines the theme of standing up for one's convictions at all
costs because there aren't any costs: Johanna gets to keep the scholarship, stars
in A Doll's House, and gets a new, better boyfriend. Characterization is equally
tidy, excepting angry, obsessive Dana, a more complicated and ultimately more
interesting character than her sister. RS
D.V. Sisters
Mark, Jan. Fun; illus. by Michael Foreman. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-
82457-7. 28p. $11.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Line and wash drawings that are simply composed but
appealingly animated illustrate a story of parent-child relations and the reversal of
stereotypical roles. The story, too, is simply composed and should warm the
collective hearts of those members of the read-aloud audience who, like James,
patiently endure entertainment devised by adults based on what they enjoy.
Mom and Dad like being noisy and active. James likes to sit still and watch
things. A cloud. A caterpillar. Eventually James learns of a place where he can
do things his way and not stop Mom's fun, in a modest but innovative tale that
uses exaggeration to make its point-but just enough. A nice pairing of talents
here. ZS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Mazer, Norma Fox. Silver. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-06865-0. $11.95.
[257p]. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Mrs. Silver is very happy when she and Sarabeth get
a chance to move to the other end of their trailer park; it means a different-
richer-school district. Sarabeth isn't so sure, until she meets Grant, a beautiful
rich girl who welcomes Sarabeth (anointing her "Silver") into her clique, a coup
that Sarabeth pulls off under less than honest pretensions. Mazer doesn't ever
resort to the easy or expected in this novel, and it's a particular pleasure to see
some rich kids in YA fiction who aren't lonely, bored, and disaffected. Like all
kids, however, they have problems, as Silver discovers when new friend Patty
reveals she is being sexually abused by her uncle. Even here the novel doesn't
become didactic, and Mazer allows the girls and Mrs. Silver to solve the problem
themselves, wisely keeping herself out of the way. Neither the lives of the rich
nor those of the trailer park residents are romanticized or stereotyped, but are seen
honestly through Silver's perspective, which is realistically limited. We never
get a full picture, for example, of Mrs. Silver's romance with chimneysweep
Leo, just as we never quite find out why Silver's new boyfriend unexpectedly
drops her. It's a convincing viewpoint and perspective, more revealing than
most so-called first-person YA novels. RS
D.V. Friendship values; Mother-daughter relations
McCarter, James. The Space Shuttle Disaster. Bookwright/Watts, 1988. ISBN
0-531-18164-2. 32p. illus. with photographs. (Great Disasters). $10.90.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Double columns on each page are broken by diagrams
and color photographs, most of which are informative and carefully placed in
[79]
relation to textual references. Save for a description of the explosion of the
Challenger and a discussion of its causes and its impact on future space flight
(including some information that is already dated), the book gives basic
information about the space program (shuttle anatomy, space technology, the
next century) that is available in many other titles. The writing is clear,
however, and the material is logically organized, so that the added appeal of
information about a spectacularly dramatic and tragic event should attract readers.
Appended are a glossary, a brief reading list that consists chiefly of Watts titles,
some specifications for the space shuttle, and an index. ZS
McGowen, Tom. The Magician's Company. Lodestar, 1988. ISBN 0-525-
67261-3. [144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
This is a fantasy set in the 24th century, when the
world is just beginning to recover from the destruction of the "Age of Magic"
(technological sophistication) by the "Fire from the Sky." A sequel to The
Magician's Apprentice (BCCB 2/87) the story again centers on the boy Tigg, his
mentor Armindor (Master Sage) and their adventures. Added to their company is
a young girl, Jilla. The magician has found some treasures from the Age of
Magic (a compass, a telescope) while in the Wild Lands; now he has come to
share the finds with other sages and to warn them of a threat to world security
from the creatures called "the reen." Most of the story is concerned with the
machinations of a powerful evil man who tries to use the reen to help him gain
knowledge, magic, and even more power; this entails a series of capture/escape
and evasion/detection ploys in which the skill of each major character plays a
part. Structure and pace are good; the writing is occasionally repetitive
(descriptions of characters or their traits that have already been explained) but the
action and suspense should appeal to fantasy buffs. ZS
Meyer, Carolyn. 
A Voice from Japan: 
An Outsider Looks In.
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-15-200633-8. 212p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
Starting with a prologue that acknowledges the
cultural barrier between outsiders and insiders, Meyer proceeds to give a visitor's
view of contemporary Japanese society, with emphasis on the life style of young
people. The coverage is better organized than in Voices of Northern Ireland:
Growing Up in a Troubled Land (BCCB 11/87) and the interviews better
integrated with the factual information. Meyer reports on selective aspects of
language, religion, education, and family, with observations on the tension
between tradition and change. This is a readable travelogue, with no pretensions
to analysis but with lively commentary based on a month's first-hand
impressions. Readers will feel as if they have gone along on the author's tour.
BH
D.V. International understanding
Munro, Roxie. Blimps; written and illus. by Roxie Munro. Dutton, 1988.
ISBN 0-525-44441-6. [32p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
"People like to look at blimps, and they often feel an
odd affection for them," an affection that this picture book for older readers both
informs and affirms. The lengthy text clearly explains the scientific principles
that allow a blimp to fly, the difference between balloons and blimps, and, step-
[ 80
by-step, how a blimp is blown up, gets off the ground, and comes back to earth.
"Flying in a blimp is like flying in your dreams," a feeling conveyed beautifully
in the pictorial combination of looming perspectives and precise detail. Not
content with simply providing blimp's-eye-view landscapes (although these are
handsome), Munro has quietly filled each painting with facts. The intricacies of
tethers, levers, and a gizmo-filled dashboard, all placidly hanging beneath a
pillow of helium, is an airborne combination of dreams and machines. RS
Nourse, Alan E. Teen Guide to Birth Control. See Brown, Fern, above.
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. Appaloosa Horses; illus. with photographs by
William Mufloz. Holiday House, 1988. ISBN 0-8234-0706-3. 74p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Patent incorporates some solid historical background
into this profile of a breed that was not officially recognized until 1938.
Following a discussion of the Nez Perce and Palouse tribes' development of the
horses and the subsequent disbanding of the animals by white settlers are
chapters on Appaloosa traits and on organizations sponsoring activities for
riders. 
Black-and-white photographs show common markings, including
blankets and spots, roans, and combinations. A natural for browsers in "the
horse stage" or students seeking information for reports. BH
Patterson, Charles. Marian Anderson. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10568-7.
160p. illus. with photographs. $12.90.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Relying heavily on Anderson's autobiography My
Lord, What a Morning, Patterson gives a competent, if adulatory, outline of the
black contralto's life and career. The biography is at its best in describing
Anderson's hard work in the face of racial discrimination and her trouble with
foreign languages; it is less successful in conveying the nature of the music she
loved and sang. We are told, for example, of Anderson's affinity for the songs of
Strauss, Brahms, and Wolf, but get no sense of what Lieder are or sound like, a
lack that extends to the discussion of the singer's success with spirituals. The
anecdotes-Anderson's recital at a Danish prison, the D.A.R.'s refusal to let her
sing in Constitution Hall-are well-quoted and include one first-rate prima donna
story: upon hearing Anderson audition with one of her favorite spirituals, an
imperious teacher stopped her with "Wait a minute! You're singing like a
queen, and I have not crowned you yet." RS
C.U. 
Music
D.V. Perseverance
Paxton, Tom, ad. Aesop's Fables; illus. by Robert Rayevsky. Morrow, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07361-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07360-3. 40p. Library
ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr.2-4. 
Highly textured, slightly macabre, the nicely
composed paintings (brown, red, grey) add touches of action or humor to the
rhyming adaptations of ten familiar fables. Rhyme and scansion are used
competently, but the elaboration of the pithy originals, the occasional
convolutions of phrase, and the padding-by-dialogue do Aesop a disservice,
although the concepts are adhered to within the extended structures of the
adaptation. ZS
[81]
Pearson, Gayle. The Coming Home Cafe. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-
31338-1. [224p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
In the years of the Depression Era, many young
people left home to ease the burden on their families and to join the migrant
"roadies" travelling in search of a job. Having met one such migrant, Eddie,
fifteen-year-old Elizabeth decides to join him, hopping a freight train for
Cleveland, which Eddie has heard is a good place for jobs. He's wrong. The
two meet a third victim of the Depression, a black woman named Lenora, and
eventually they all make a home together in a deserted restaurant They are a
family, supporting each other emotionally and financially. This is moving in
its depiction of the painful adjustments made by so many in a troubled time, but
the story seems stretched in order to incorporate incidents and character sketches
that illustrate the ambience of the peripatetic life led by so many during the
Depression Era. Style and characterization are adequate; pace is uneven. An
epilogue by Elizabeth is dated 1939, and brings readers up to date on what has
happened to her and to Eddie, with whom she has corresponded. She has never
heard from Lenora. ZS
D.V. Friendship values
Pittman, Helena Clare. Once When I Was Scared; illus. by Ted Rand. Dutton,
1988. ISBN 0-525-44407-6. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Daniel and his mother have run out of coals for the
stove, and the nearest neighbor to help them is on the other side of two hills and
a frightening dark wood. While Rand's atmospheric watercolors convey a brisk
and misty autumn twilight that seems more alluring than dangerous, Daniel's
errand is clearly a perilous journey. In encountering obstacles-roots, rocks, a
bear-Daniel shape-changes, allowing Rand some dramatic double-page spreads
of a fox, bobcat, and eagle as Daniel transforms himself. The lines between
reality, fantasy, and metaphor are unclear, and a shift of time and point of view
on the last page confuses events further. A weak text, but Rand's mountain
woods and cozy cabin interiors have a palpable feel for the season. RS
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Polikoff, Barbara Garland. My Parrot Eats Baked Beans: Kids Talk about Their
Pets; written and illus. with photographs by Barbara Garland Polikoff.
Whitman, 1988. ISBN 0-8075-5349-2. 64p. $10.50.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
A photodocumentary features informal (sometimes
self-conscious) narratives by eight children who describe life with their
animals-guinea pigs, a parrot, a cat, sheep, a horse, fish, a rabbit, and dogs.
The text is anecdotal and the black-and-white pictures are candid. Each child
concludes his or her comments with a tip, which is sometimes obvious ("Talk
to your sheep in a nice way. They'll learn to trust you, and you can train them
better"). There's no effort to be systematically informative here, but there is a
sense of what's involved in animal ownership, from basic responsibility to
individual humor. Young readers will identify with these stories, from the
misery Maya feels when her cat disappears during a visit with her divorced father
to the scuba-diving ambitions Steve develops through setting up his salt-water
[82
tank. A first step for those who want pets and a pleasant affirmation for those
who already have them. BH
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Prince, Maggie. Rachel on the Run. Hodder & Stoughton/David & Charles,
1988. ISBN 0-340-33806-7. 96p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
In this elementary school thriller, twelve-year-old
Rachel regains consciousness but not memory after a car crash and escapes with
the feeling that whoever she is, she must hide. An untrustworthy Inspector
Smith seems to be pursuing her, but she finds her way almost instinctively to a
cave in the seaside cliffs, befriends a derelict and a gypsy boy, and concludes that
she is somehow guilty of a crime. Plenty of clues make it clear to the reader
that she has been kidnapped and is the subject of a massive search. There's no
attempt at characterization, but there's also never a moment's lag in the action-
in fact, the poisonous adder in the back of the truck where Rachel hides is a bit
much. 
The pace will probably serve to skim readers over the unfamiliar
Briticisms, (lorry, bonnet, and tarmac in the first paragraph, for instance), and
the return of Rachel's memory through a combination of dreams and familiar
images is carefully calculated to heighten the suspense. BH
Ricklen, Neil. Daddy and Me; ISBN 0-671-64537-4. Grandma and Me. ISBN
0-671-64540-4. Grandpa and Me. 1988. ISBN 0-671-64539-0. Mommy and
Me. ISBN 0-671-64538-2. All books: written and illus. with photographs by
Neil Ricklen. Simon, 1988. 24p. (Super Chubby Books). $4.95.
Ad 
6 mos.-2 yrs. 
The first of this series is the best, with lots of action
in the high-quality color photographs as Daddies toss their babies high in the air,
pour sand on the ground, bang on pots and pans, hug and tickle their toddlers.
Grandpas, too, paint, hammer, and build with their heirs. Grandmas and
Mommies play in the kitchen, mop, dust, make orange juice, and cuddle. Wait a
minute. Didn't we lay those stereotypes to rest in the 60s and 70s? Well, the
babies are beautiful, the adults spic and span, the board books thick and sturdy
with rounded pages. Sometimes the subjects seem a little camera-conscious, and
there's the occasional puzzling word, like "picking" on the double spread that
shows Grandpa looking at crayons with an engrossed child. Lots of families
will enjoy sharing these, and anyone with a bit of imagination can counter the
cliched images with individualized storytelling and identification. BH
D.V. Family values
Silverstein, Herma. Teenage and Pregnant: What You Can Do. Messner,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-671-65221-4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-671-65222-2.
[160p]. Library ed. $10.29; Paper ed. $5.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
While the title might embarrass or even scare off
readers who most need the information, the book fulfills the title's implicit
promise of objective, sensible, and comprehensive advice. Silverstein includes
information on abortion, adoption, and keeping one's baby; prenatal care and
childbirth; and (peculiarly, at the end) methods of birth control and information
on sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS. 
Throughout, there are
thoughtful comments by teens who have had abortions or experienced childbirth
[83]
and motherhood. A state-by-state listing of organizations that help pregnant
teens and a useful reading list are appended. RS
C.U. Sex education
Simmonds, Posy. Lulu and the Flying Babies; written and illus. by Posy
Simmonds. Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99597-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
394-89597-5. 22p. Library ed. $10.99; Trade ed. $9.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
As obstinate as Sendak's I-don't-care Pierre, Lulu has
an additional endearing quality: she's a whiner. "WHEN are we .... 
going to
the PA-ARK?!" But it's too cold to play in the park, so Dad decides they will
go to the museum instead. "Don't want to see the dinosaur! Don't WANT to
see the pictures!" 
Sensible Dad dumps her on a couch inside the museum
("Horruble Daddy"), where Lulu, picking her nose, gets her comeuppance from
two cherubs come to life, who take her flying through the museum and in and
out of paintings. Bratty, chunky Lulu redeems the whimsical conceit, and the
cartoon style layout and ballooned dialogue will attract readers old enough to
laugh at Lulu's foibles. RS
Simon, Seymour. How to Be an Ocean Scientist in Your Own Home; illus. by
David A. Carter. Lippincott, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32292-5; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-397-32291-7. 136p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Salt (sea and table) and water are the primary
ingredients for most of the twenty-four projects and experiments in this
collection; other materials and equipment should be readily available. While a
few of the projects involve plants and animals, including brine shrimp (aka sea
monkeys) most have to do with measuring salinity, waves, and currents, with
bowls, aquariums and bathtubs providing stand-in service for the ocean.
Instructions and diagrams are clear, as are Simon's explanations of the various
phenomena. Good for science fair, as well as for those kids who just need a
respectable excuse for playing with water. RS
C.U. Science-experiments
Sloan, Carolyn. The Sea Child. Holiday House, 1988. ISBN 0-8234-0723-3.
128p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
"Jessie had never seen another person in all her life.
Only Danny." Danny is nine-year-old Jessie's father; her mother left when
Jessie was born. The two of them live on The Sands, the only piece left of a
village that has been drowned by the sea. Isolated from the mainland by
supernaturally dangerous waters, Jenny is happy with their Robinson Crusoe-
like existence; as she grows, Danny becomes sad because he knows her mother
will come to claim Jenny when she is ten. Part selkie myth, part ghost story,
this is an elusive mystery, never too tidied up. The appealing motifs are many,
and Jennie's visit to the mainland (through a secret passage), where she meets a
girl who has heard of Jenny from a "crazy" old man, gives the story a realistic
cast that heightens the unsettling fantasy. RS
Slote, Alfred. A Friend Like That. Lippincott, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-
32311-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32310-7. [160p]. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[84]
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
In the first book about the eleven-year-old narrator
Robby (Moving In, BCCB 1/88), he and his sister are relieved when their
widowed father doesn't marry his business partner Mrs. Lowenfeld. Now Robby
is apprehensive when another woman seems to have taken Dad's fancy, and he
finds a way to avoid going home when Dad invites Mrs. Nathanson to dinner.
Having been adjured to get home on time, Robby picks a fight so that he'll have
to go to the principal's office, which would mean Dad would have to come to
school after work. 
All does not go according to plan: Robby, who has
confessed the truth to the principal, Miss Bradsbury, cannot tell Dad; he runs
away, but his friend Beth helps him turn back. Two results: Robby and Dad
finally begin to communicate, and Dad becomes smitten with Miss Bradsbury.
Like the first book, this has perceptive handling of characters (all well-defined)
and relationships, good pace and structure, and a competent style that is
especially strong in natural dialogue and quiet humor. ZS
D.V. Father-son relations; Teacher-pupil relations
Stanley, Diane. Shaka: King of the Zulus; by Diane Stanley and Peter
Vennema; illus. by Diane Stanley. Morrow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-
07343-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07342-5. 40p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Like her middle-grade picture book biography Peter
the Great (BCCB 10/86), this recounts the life of a major historical figure whose
complexities have been subject to much historical investigation. Outcast as a
boy, Shaka is driven to prove himself as a warrior, eventually becoming chief of
a clan that he builds from obscurity to dominance in a vast empire. Each double
spread, with formally coordinated text and full-page pictures, focuses on an
important scene in his rise to power. At least twice, his violence and cruelty are
explained in context of the times, and his mental instability is suggested, along
with his military genius. The format is decorative, with traditional design
motifs and illustrations dominated by browns and tans. Although the human
figures seem stiff and sometimes glamorized, the rounded shapes and smooth
lines render panoramic the movement of the subject, his warriors, and their
landscape. BH
C.U. Africa (unit)
Tapp, Kathy Kennedy. Den 4 Meets the Jinx. Margaret K. McElderry, 1988.
ISBN 0-689-50453-5. [128p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
A series of episodes highlights Adam's frustration
with his five- year-old sister Jessie, who seems to misunderstand, mix up, or
upset everything, including and especially his Cub Scout meetings in their small
trailer home. She ruins his magic show, insists on being part of the horror
movie he makes, wraps and gives away family items as Christmas presents, and
ends up swinging from the pifiata at the Cub Scout Banquet. The plot is a bit
aimless, and Jessie's shenanigans are repetitively cute and occasionally forced.
However, the tension between the two siblings is real, and the incorporation of
both their points of view fairly well handled. BH
D.V. Brothers-sisters
[85 ]
Terkel, Susan Neiburg. Abortion: Facing the Issues. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-
531-10565-2. 160p. $12.90.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
"Depending upon the conviction of the reader, I am
constantly accused of being partial to the 'other side."' Terkel sees this
"passionate objectivity" as the strength of her book, and there is certainly plenty
of ammunition for all (not both, a distinction Terkel makes clear) sides. She
describes the history and current status of abortion laws, the medical procedures
involved, and the religious, ethical, and political viewpoints that inform the
controversy. Well-documented statistics on abortion and public attitudes (backed
by a comprehensive, ten-page bibliography), along with undocumented quotes
from women who have had abortions are used to lay out the questions. Terkel
doesn't have any answers (although through a typesetting error an anti-abortion
quote is wrongly 
attributed 
to the author), preferring instead to provide a context
for the debate that is often lacking in both "pro-life" and "pro-choice" literature.
If she takes any stand, it is that abortions are rarely undertaken casually, and that
a woman facing the prospect always lacks the one thing she needs for a
thoughtful decision: time. RS
C.U. Sex education
Thacker, Nola. Summer Stories; illus. by William Low. Lippincott, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32288-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32287-9. 
150p.
Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
From a series of ten episodes emerges the
atmospheric impression of a ten-year-old's summer experience with relatives.
Legalistic Uncle Herman, ladylike Aunt Phoebe, bossy Tralice, lively Jim, and
companionable Carrie Mae live on the shore of a southern bay. The narrator,
Red, fits as harmoniously as her hot temper allows into the rules and
expectations of this traditional household. The pace of both the vacation and the
book is meandering, with action focused on catchig a fish or box turtle, picking
blackberries, or enjoying a community picnic. Though there's no specific
indication of period, the descriptions summon an ambience of earlier times. The
dialogue is occasionally forced, but the family emerges fully characterized. A
comfortable, if somewhat nostalgic, first novel. BH
Tsuchiya, Yukio. Faithful Elephants: A True Story of Animals, People and
War; tr. by Tomoko Tsuchiya Dykes; illus. by Ted Lewin. Houghton, 1988.
ISBN 0-395-46555-9. 29p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr.2-4. 
A true story of World War II, in a translation that has
been newly illustrated, this story of a sad facet of war has been popular in Japan
since it was first published there in 1951. It describes the decision to kill the
animals in a Tokyo zoo instead of chancing their escape during a bombing;
rather than expose the population to the chance of dangerous beasts prowling the
streets, the zoo staff (by Army edict) killed those creatures that might do damage.
It was hard for the elephant keepers to let the gentle giants who were their
beloved charges starve to death, but that was what they reluctantly did, after
unsuccessfully trying to kill them with medication. There is no explanation of
why the slow death was chosen rather than shooting. This is a tragic tale, meant
to remind children of one of the many ways that war brings unhappiness; the
tragic effects even bludgeon the reader. "Their small, loving eyes began to look
[86]
like round rubber balls in their drooping, shrunken faces." Lewin's illustrations
are sensitive and are appropriate to the text, but on many pages the large scale of
the paintings of elephants demands distance for optimal effectiveness. ZS
D.V. Peace
Tunbo, Frances G. Stay Put, Robbie McAmis; illus. by Charles Shaw. Texas
Christian University, 1988. ISBN 0-87565-025-2. 158p. (Chaparral Books).
$15.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Eighth in a university press' series of books intended
for younger readers, this historical novel is set in Texas in 1848. Twelve-year-
old Robbie finds himself responsible for five younger children and his
grandmother when their wagon train splits apart after a dangerous river crossing.
Both Robbie and Grammie (who had seemed apathetic and irresponsible) rise to
the demands of the occasion, providing food and shelter and comfort to the
others; eventually they are found and are reunited with their families. This is an
impressive first novel: the style is smooth, the period details and the characters'
achievements convincing, and the characterization consistent if not deep. The
book's primary appeal will probably be its Robinson Crusoe aspect, as these
pioneers cope with the perils and problems of the wilderness. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
D.V. Courage; Self-reliance
Vigna, Judith. I Wish Daddy Didn't Drink So Much; written and illus. by
Judith Vigna. Whitman, 1988. ISBN 0-8075-3523-0. 38p. $11.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Lisa is excited because her father has built her a
beautiful sled for Christmas, but she is hurt and disappointed when he is too
drunk to take her sledding. Their friend Mrs. Field, whom Mom met in a group
"for people who have a lot of drinking in their family," won't be coming over
for dinner, either. "Daddy's feeling sick." As always, Vigna's treatment of a
difficult issue is sensitive and straightforward, providing story as well as comfort
(Mommy and Lisa take the turkey on the sled over to Mrs. Field's) but with no
false reassurances. The pen and wash illustrations have warmth and a Christmas
glow, but the picture of a drunken Daddy in a Santa Claus suit, lurching into
Lisa's room to hide the sled, is strong stuff, even (maybe especially for) for
children who daily witness such events. Given the charged natures of both
Christmas and alcoholism, this is probably better off shelved with the
bibliotherapy or parenting books, rather than in the holiday collection. RS
C.U. Bibliotherapy
Voake, Charlotte. First Things First; written and illus. by Charlotte Voake.
Joy Street/Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-90510-0. 45p. $12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Although pleasantly illustrated with lightly
humorous line and wash drawings, this collection of material for the young child
seems casually compiled and uses familiar devices, so that it offers little that is
new. There's an alphabet (3 sets of letters) and a double-page spread that deals
with digits 1-10; there are colors and animals and insects and vehicles and shapes
(3) and two pages that illustrate verbs (sit, crawl, jump, look, touch ...) and so
on. Good for lap-based sessions on identification, but neither unusual nor well
[87]
organized, since (for example) a counting verse and the pages about digits are
separated by a page that shows three fish shapes. ZS
Wallace, Bill. Beauty. Holiday House, 1988. ISBN 0-8234-0715-2. 177p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
Beauty was his mother's horse and becomes eleven-
year-old Luke's salvation when he and his mother are forced (Dad has gone,
Mom's lost her job) to leave Denver, and go to live with Grampa in a small
Oklahoma town. Sometimes Luke longs for a younger, faster horse, but Beauty
becomes his friend, and she also serves as the link for friendship between Luke
and his diffcult grandfather. This is a sentimental, predictable story with slight
characterization, but Luke's narration is credible, economical, and involving.
Beauty herself is from a long literary line of noble beasts, but her death scene
("She looked up at me with her big, brown sleepy eyes") will leave few genre
fans unmoved. RS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations; Animals, kindness to
Watson, Wendy. Talesfor a Winter's Eve; written and illus. by Wendy Watson.
Farrar, 1988. ISBN 0-374-37373-6. [32p]. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Three tales within a tale are framed by Freddie Fox's
skiing accident-a dramatic beginning that allows family and friends to comfort
him with stories that are subtly related to the situation. After he's safely home,
bandaged, and eating a muffin, Grammer distracts him from his throbbing paw
with a tale about a greedy raccoon who floats away after consuming too many
lighter-than-air muffins. Bert Blue Jay counters Freddie's fever by reminiscing
about a shoplifting weasel caught when the butter hidden under his hat melts.
After Nellie Mouse occupies him with another tale of imposters exposed, Freddie
snuggles off to sleep in his warm den. The style is one of relaxed, backwoods
yarh swapping: "'What's the weather?' someone called out. 'Like a miser's
heart, and growing colder.'" Watson's watercolors are cozy without becoming
cutesy, and they're nicely varied in a spacious format that will encourage good
readers or supply enough illustration for younger listeners; similarly, the short
chapters will serve either independent reading or picture book sharing. BH
Webster, Harriet. Winter Book; illus. by Irene Trivas. Scribner, 1988. Trade
ed. ISBN 0-684-18891-0; Paper e'i. ISBN 0-689-71235-9. 113p. Trade ed.
$12.95; Aladdin Paper ed. $4.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Interspersing craft ideas, games, and experiments with
bits of scientific, historic, and cultural lore, this is entertaining as well as
project-prodding winter reading. The numerous projects include quilts, bird-
feeders, and snow art; among the science experiments, readers are challenged to
test the veracity of folk wisdom about weather (a tip on how to tell the
temperature via cricket chirps seems a little unseasonal). Some of the directions
should be more explicit, but parents and group leaders should be able to help
kids get the drift. RS
C.U. Seasons (unit)