Adler, David A. Thomas Jefferson: Father of Our Democracy; illus. by Jaqueline Garrick.
Holiday House, 1987. ISBN 0-8234-0667-9. 48p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Starting with Jefferson's childhood in Virginia, this recounts his
education, political development, and family life in context of the emerging
country that he served and led. The facts are sometimes presented in catalogue style
("He would also be responsible for lighthouses, the minting of coins, new
inventions, and weights and measures"), and the text is somewhat stiff, as are the
gray wash drawings that illustrate it. However, the information itself is clearly
organized and articulated. Adler does not flinch from discussing Jefferson's
ownership of slaves nor from summarizing his complex conflict with Hamilton's
Federalists. A list of dates, table of contents, and index will help guide students
using the book for research. BH
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Aliki. Dinosaur Bones; written and illus by Aliki. Crowell, 1988. Library ed. ISBN
0-690-04550-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04549-2. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
In a companion volume to three earlier books about dinosaurs,
Aliki explains how, based on discoveries of fossil remains and the rock strata in
which they were found, scientists have been able to classify species and assign
them chronological niches. The text is written simply and clearly, and the cartoon-
style drawings give additional information through captions and comments-in-
balloons. An index-chart gives habitats and geological periods, and the text gives,
in addition to facts about scientific history, a sense of the way knowledge is
gathered, sifted, organized, and perenially questioned. ZS
C.U. Science
Asbjornsen, Peter C. The Three Billy Goats Gruff; retold and illus. by Janet Stevens.
Harcourt, 1987. ISBN 0-15-286396-6. 32p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
While preserving many of the favorite lines ("T-r-i-p, T-r-a-p!
T-r-i-p, T-r-a-p!") and the traditional comic horror of the ugly troll, Stevens has
updated things a bit, draping the first billy goat in diapers and a pacifier, and the
third in a studded leather jacket. (The second suffers the woes of middle children
everywhere, decked in an ordinary pair of overalls.) Purists may be annoyed, nor
will they appreciate Steven's revision of the third goat's bravura challenge; here it
becomes "... I've got beside an angry feeling, and I'll poke you and kick you and
scare you and send you reeling right off this bridge." This is a classic example of a
[ 81,]
folk tale that didn't need to be illustrated in the first place, much less again, but the
free-wheeling illustrations have action and humor, and may appeal to parents
unable or unwilling to scare the little ones into giggles through the power of
words and rhythm alone. RS
C.U. 
Reading aloud
Blackwood, Alan. Musical Instruments. Bookwright Press/Watts, 1987. ISBN 0-531-
18146-4. 32p. illus. and with photographs. (Topics). $10.40.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
A functional introduction to stringed, wind, percussion,
keyboard, and electronic instruments devotes a brief section to each after the
opening explanation of sound waves, pitch, frequency, and tone. Both text and
illustrations suffer from the survey syndrome of too much diversity served up too
quickly, and there is some faulty editing (saxophone is misspelled in one caption,
for instance, which is juxtaposed with a misplaced modifier in the text).
Nevertheless the color photographs and pithy text do deliver information that
children need for reports and can use as an alternate source to the encyclopedia. BH
C.U. Music-study and teaching
Blumberg, Rhoda. The Incredible Journey of Lewis and Clark. Lothrop, 1987. ISBN
0-688-06512-0. 143p. illus. and with photographs. $15.00.
R* 
Gr. 6-. 
Profusely illustrated by photographs of artifacts and prints from
museums and institutional archives, this is a most impressive addition to the body
of books about the three-year journey of exploration (1803-1806) led by
Meriwether Lewis and William Clark. Their mission was instigated by President
Jefferson, their goals were to chart a route to the Pacific, to be friendly to the
Native American tribes they met, and to note (for Jefferson's encyclopedic
interests) flora, fauna, and other natural features of the western lands. Blumberg's
writing is dignified but never dry, and her sense of narrative makes familiar history
an exciting story. Maps are included, as are a bibliography, an index, chapter
notes, and an "Aftermath" that describes participants' lives after 1806. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
D.V. Courage; Devotion to a cause
Bosse, Malcolm J. Captives of Time. Delacorte, 1987. ISBN 0-385-29583-9. 255p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 8-. 
The versatile Bosse here presents a powerful story set in the
Middle Ages, told with compelling convication by Anne, who is sixteen when the
narrative begins. This is a novel of memorable pace and color and style, but
readers must expect the violence, cruelty and superstition that were rife in the
period: Anne is raped, as her mother has been; her parents are murdered, her lover
raped by his killer. There is plague, and there is brutality-but there is also the
excitement of new knowledge and new inventions; Anne learns from an uncle the
intricate art of clock-making in a time when the idea of a clock was fought with
fear and anger. Bosse brings the past to life in a remarkably effective story. ZS
C.U. History-Europe
[82
Bowe-Gutman, Sonia. Teen Pregnancy. Lemer, 1987. ISBN 0-8225-0039-6. 71p. illus.
$9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
One of the simplest, most clear-cut guides yet published for
young people on the subject of teen pregnancy, this addresses the reader directly and
explicitly on the responsibilities of sex. The discussion begins with a few hard-
core statistics but launches quickly into a discussion of developing individual
values. There's a healthy emphasis on the money involved in raising a baby, the
restrictions, and the physical/emotional health problems early pregnancy can cause
teenagers. Explanations of conception and contraception are accompanied by
diagrams and a complete rundown of birth control methods, including rate of
effectiveness and side effects. There's textual support for the teenager to refuse
intercourse, although AIDS is not cited as an important reason. The disease is
mentioned once in the description of condoms but does not appear in the index. A
chapter of case stories replays scenarios of pregnant teenagers who have chosen
various "solutions," from marriage to abortion. A section on "where to go for
help" lists addresses and phone numbers of national organizations, along with
some books for further reading. The writing style is easy enough for elementary
school children studying sex and reproduction but will not insult poor or reluctant
high school students. BH
C.U. Sex education
D.V. Sex conduct
Brown, Drollene P. Belva Lockwood Wins Her Case; illus. by James Watling. Whitman,
1987. ISBN 0-8075-0630-3. 64p. $9.75.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A political activist, a pacifist, a teacher and a lawyer, Belva
Lockwood became the first woman entitled to practice law before the Supreme
Court, and she twice was a candidate for president (1884 and 1888). Brown's
biography of this indomitable woman is not unduly laudatory, it is adequately
written although the author is given to conjectural phrases ("Belva must have spent
many hours..."), and it is based on source material that is cited at the back of the
book. The text provides a good balance of personal and career material, and it
remains brisk and objective in recounting the obstacles and opposition met by a
pioneer in the legal profession. ZS
D.V. Perseverance
Campbell, Hope. Looking for Hamlet: A Haunting at Deeping Lake. Macmillan, 1987.
ISBN 0-02-716400-4. 238p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 6-9. 
The author's own experiences as an actress lend credence to the
details of plays and productions; unfortunately, the characterization, plot, and style
are less convincing and substantial. What the writing lacks in narrative strength is
obscured rather than mitigated by the uneasy juxtaposition of realism and fantasy
and the contrivances of plot development. A young actress who yearns to play
Ophelia to a perfect Hamlet, Kate Powell comes to an Adirondack resort with her
mother; she meets a too-colorful group of odd people, she meets her "Hamlet," and
she meets and talks to a ghost who had once worn Ophelia's costume, had died in
suspicious circumstances, and was the grandmother of Kate's new love. Alas, this
is overwritten. ZS
[83 ]
Carter, Alden R. Illinois. Watts, 1987. ISBN 0-531-10387-0. 90p. illus. and with
photographs. (First Book). $9.90.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
A competent though superficial addition to a series on the states,
Illinois opens with the author's airplane flight into Chicago, which serves to
launch some geographical observations. Most of the text is a historical survey
from Indian settlement to white expansion and into present-day problems and
prosperity. This contains many relevant facts and is smoothly written, though it
lacks human interest stories or vivid detail. With black-and-white photographs and
an index, the book will serve its purpose for school assignments. BH
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Cazet, Denys. A Fish in his Pocket; written and illus. by Denys Cazet. Orchard/Watts,
1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08313-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05713-5. 32p.
(Tales of Gom). Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
Cazet has a way with drawing animals; though the main
character in this book, Russell, is a young bear, he is just as vulnerable as the
dreamy dog Gregory was in Frosted Glass (reviewed in the May 1987 issue).
Russell drops his arithmetic book into a pond on the way to school and, when he
confesses to the teacher, finds a little dead fish along with some watery moss. The
teacher is nice: "accidents will happen. But, Russell, they won't happen often if
we...take care." Russell is too upset to concentrate in school, but he makes a
paper boat and feels better after naming it (the "Take Care") and sending the fish on
its last voyage. While the story is a bit rambling, the childlike behavior will
strike sympathetic chords in young listeners who worry about their own destructive
accidents. 
Spaciously composed, double-page watercolor paintings of rural
autumn landscapes and riotous school scenes lighten the theme. BH
Chaikin, Miriam. A Nightmare in History: The Holocaust 1933-1945. Clarion, 1987.
ISBN 0-89919-461-3. 150p. illus. and with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Clear, well organized, and blunt, this recounts the systematic
process with which Hitler organized and perpetrated the destruction of European
Jews during World War II. The initial stages of persecution, life in the ghettos,
procedures in the concentration and work camps, and resistance movements and
rebellion are described with reference to the political and military shifts that affected
them. With a careful balance of human detail and general background, Chaikin has
done a creditable job of gearing the material to readers younger than the audience
for Meltzer's Never To Forget: The Jews of the Holocaust. In a few instances,
such as the description of a prisoner electrocuted on barbed wire at Auschwitz, the
style dramatizes where it doesn't need to-the circumstances project their own
horror-but the total effect is a controlled narration of events beyond control. The
black-and-white photographs are tragically revealing. The bibliography, some of it
annotated, is divided into "Diaries," "Anthologies," "Song Books," etc. for students
doing further research. Several eyewitness accounts were collected by the author.
Indexed. BH
C.U. History-World War II, 1939-1945
Chetwin, Grace. The Riddle and the Rune. Bradbury, 1987. ISBN 0-02-718312-2. 263p.
$13.95.
[84
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
The first of a trilogy introduced by its prequel, Gom on Windy
Mountain, this draws on many devices of the quest adventure but defines them with
style and attention to detail. Gom's father, a humble woodcutter, has just died, and
Gom sets out to seek his mother, Harga the Brown, a great wizard who
mysteriously deserted her last and ninth child on the day of his birth. Pursuing
him is Katak, an evil conjuror in the shape of a gigantic, vulturous bird
representing the force of evil that threatens to take over the world of Ulm. Naive
Gom uses his talent for talking with animals to befriend many on his journey,
including a sea creature that Katak nearly turns into a dragon, and a horse that must
figure in the next book. By the end, Gom has found his mother and his own
power of wizardry--obviously just the first round of the battle. While both the
riddle and the rune seem a bit worn with past appearances in high fantasy, Chetwin
polishes them up enough to involve young readers who are fresh to the
convention, and her writing, including occasional songs from various characters,
has become smoother with use. BH
Chiasson, John. African Journey; written and illus. with photographs by John Chiasson.
Bradbury, 1987. ISBN 0-02-718530-3. 55p. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
With more than half the page space of this oversize book being
used for photographs, the text that describes the life-styles in six communities of
Africa is fairly brief although it covers salient features of climate, topography,
urban-rural contrasts, and the ways in which such factors influence how people live
and work. Chiasson, whose color photography is of superior quality, has chosen
six cultural groups of diverse kinds (a fishing village, a nomad community, a
moder city, farmers, river people, and the drought-stricken provinces of northern
Ethiopia) to describe. 
While the writing style is not comparable to the
photography, being rather flat and sedate, it is direct and the material gives a good
idea of the vastness of the continent and its enormous diversity. There is no index.
ZS
C.U. Social studies
Christian, Mary Blount. Penrod Again; illus. by Jane Dyer. Macmillan, 1987. ISBN
0-02-718550-8. 56p. (Ready-to-Read). $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
Five more easy-to-read stories reveal Griswold the bear being
unwittingly upstaged by his friend Penrod the porcupine. There are spring
cleaning, picture-taking, and house-moving scenarios, a variation on the folktale
"It Could Always Be Worse," and a Christmas exchange. These are not quite as
solid as the first, but there's still some fresh humor, and the well-placed watercolor
illustrations add a lot of verve. BH
C.U. Reading, beginning
Cole, Joanna. The Magic School Bus Inside the Earth; illus. by Bruce Degen. Scholastic,
1987. ISBN 0-590-40759-7. 40p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Having recharged their batteries after The Magic School
Bus Inside the Waterworks, Cole and Degen risk another of Ms. Frizzle's scientific
fantasy field trips, this time to the center of the earth. Along the way, her class
learns first-hand about rock formations, fossils, layers of the earth's crust, and
volcanic eruptions. Although this is in picturebook format, it is the independent
reader who will appreciate its cartoon format and be able to jump around the
[ 85]
double-page spreads from facts to jokes to story and back again. The pace is a
little frenetic, but the energy and humor of the presentation is irresistible; even the
endnote distinguishing fact from fiction has been livened up as a dialogue between
an irate reader and the author and artist. There will be no lack of reading riders for
the next trip. BH
C.U. Geology
Cresswell, Helen. Moondial. Macmillan, 1987. ISBN 0-02-725370-8. 202p. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Minty Kane's mother drops her off for summer holidays with
Aunt Mary, at an old National Trust mansion reputed to be haunted, and then has
an automobile accident on the way back home. Lonely and tortured by the idea of
her mother lying in a coma, Minty develops her sixth sense into the power to
travel back in time through the garden sundial. There she rescues two children,
Teddy and Sarah, both trapped in unhappy situations, and relates her adventure to
her mother on tapes that eventually bring Mrs. Kane back to consciousness.
Cresswell is adept at the conventions of fantasy; her style and transitions are
impressive. There is a bit too much reliance on traditional trappings, particularly
in the character of Miss Raven, the witch who doubles as Sarah's wicked governess
and presents an obscure threat to them all. 
There are also some points of
confusion: early on, Aunt Mary hints at stories about a giant footman haunting the
place; but Teddy, whose ambition it is to become a six-foot footman, seems to
have died of consumption as a child, which Minty confirms in finding his
headstone. 
In spite of the message that love conquers time, the contemporary
realism here is more touching than the time-slip fantasy. What holds the two
together is a vivid emotional tension-the loneliness of unhappy children-with
which any young reader can empathize. BH
Cross, Gillian. Roscoe's Leap. Holiday House, 1987. ISBN 0-8234-0669-5. 
160p.
$12.95.
R* 
Gr. 6-9. 
First published in England, this is a spellbinder. The setting, an
isolated, decaying mansion that spans a stream, is Gothic, romantic, mysterious.
Why is the children's mother, Mrs. Roscoe, so tense that her son and daughter,
(Hannah and Stephen, 15 and 12) are afraid of her? Why does Doug, who takes
care of old Uncle Ernest, in the other half of the house, never cross over to visit
the children although it is clear that he cares for them? Finally, why is Stephen so
terrified by the childhood encounter with an automaton that he blocks the memory?
The arrival of a student who is working on a thesis about the ancestor who built
the house is a catalyst for unravelling the mystery. This has pace and suspense, a
nicely crafted plot, and distinctive characterization and style. ZS
Crossley-Holland, Kevin. British Folk Tales: New Versions. Orchard/Watts, 1987. ISBN
0-531-05733-X. 382p. illus. $22.95.
R* 
Gr. 4-. 
In both range and depth, this is a rich collection of 55 British
folktales adapted from widely varied sources which the author has cited in careful, if
idiosyncratic, end notes. While some of the titles sound familiar, the versions here
may not seem so. The satisfyingly rhythmic "Frog Prince" is distinctly different
from Grimm #1. "King of the Cats" appears in monologue form, and '"The Small-
Tooth Dog," a variant of "Beauty and the Beast," has acquired a modern setting.
The author is intimate with this lore, and some of his innovations render the tales
[ 86 ]
more immediate. A few, however, seem slightly disconcerting. Casting "The Sea-
Woman" (about a Selkie) as a tale within a tale, for instance, distracts more than it
adds. Yet Crossley-Holland has a strong sense of selection and consistent respect
for motif. His most vivid writing adheres closely to the basic shape of the tales.
In many cases, as he himself says, "the best thing a reteller can do is 'translate' the
dialect into modem English and keep well out of the way." The bookmaking is
worthy of the text: handsome print on fine, creamy paper with discretely miniature,
skillful scratch-board drawings opening each chapter (the illustrator remains
mysteriously unidentified). In its revealing and revitalizing of the traditional, this
makes a long-lasting contribution to readers and storytellers alike. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Curry, Jane Louise. Me, Myself and I: A Tale of Time Travel. Margaret K. McElderry,
1987. ISBN 0-689-50429-2. 184p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
John James Russell, narrator and boy genius, is now sixteen, a
graduate student and an inventor who plans to amass a quick fortune with which to
woo and win the beautiful (and openly acquisitive) Polly. J.J. is left alone in the
lab when Professor Poplov ("...world authority on holography and a stack of other
things") goes out of town. Poking about, J.J. gets into enough trouble to fill a
book, and that is just what happens: his bungled efforts at focused time travel
result in a troika team (J.J. at 16, at 12, at 8) that pursues the bad guys and effects
a restoration of lost academic/industrial credit, a capture of the very bad guys, and a
new love object for our hero. This is funny, it's certainly going to appeal to sci-fi
fans, and it's capably written-but the plotting is dense and the pace relentless.
ZS
DeClements, Barthe. No Place For Me. Viking Kestrel, 1987. ISBN 0-670-81908-5.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Copper Jones, age 12, is the narrator; as she begins her story her
mother is in an institution "drying out" again, her stepfather is taking a job
elsewhere, and Copper is being sent to stay with Aunt Dorothy's family. Unable
to fit into the routine and the rules, Copper is turned over to another set of
relatives. This time, it is not her behavior that causes trouble, but external
problems. There have been references to her dead father's sister, Aunt Maggie the
witch, earlier in the story, so it will surprise few readers to find that Maggie (yes,
presented as a white witch and part of a coven) provides the solution, being patient
and sensible and loving. There are some visits to Mom and a clear message that
Mom's values have been acquired by Copper and that she is beginning to see that
she must change in order to be stable and happy. The writing style is adequate and
the events believable, but both the characters and the plot seem structured
purposively rather than evolving naturally. ZS
D.V. Aunt-niece relations
Delton, Judy. Angel's Mother's Wedding ; illus. by Margot Apple. Houghton, 1987.
ISBN 0-395-44470-5. 128p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
The fourth in a series, this is very much dependent on its
predecessors for an acquaintance with several characters who make their appearance
unidentified (including a family friend named Alyce) and with situations to which
there is unexplained reference ("She was very glad her mother had taken that trip
[87]
with Aunt Beth"). Children who have followed Angel's previous adventures,
however, will enjoy the predictable but amusing mishaps of Mrs. O'Leary's
marriage to Rudy Pappadopolis. 
Some of Angel's worries about details like
clothes prove well grounded: the bridesmaid shows up in a dress identical to the
one her mother is wearing for the wedding, and Rudy ends up saying his vows in
his clown pants. But the unexpected is the highlight: Alyce's appearance as a
lighted Christmas tree at the "holiday-theme" shower for the bride, or little Rags'
confusion of "ring bearer" with "ring bear" and his ensuing behavior. Love
conquers all, of course, a resolution that will be welcome to many children whose
parents are remarrying. BH
D.V. 
Stepparents, adjustment to
Demi. Demi's Opposites; written and illus. by Demi. Grosset, 1987. ISBN 0-488-18995-
X. 48p. $10.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Although subtitled "An Animal Game Book," this is really a
concept book, with captions, a rhyming text, and (for some pictures) directions
like "Find this panda asleep. Find this panda awake." The pictures are bold,
bright, some cleanly composed, some heavy with design detail. There's nothing
egregiously wrong in this book of opposites, but there are a number of minor
flaws that weaken it: one page deals with black/white and left/right, but doesn't
explain the latter; a concept like fast/slow can't be shown, and the concept of
old/young simply isn't shown. In sum, adequate, but not as impressive as Demi's
alphabet nook or her counting book. ZS
Eagles, Douglas A. Nutritional Diseases. Watts, 1987. ISBN 0-531-10391-9. 93p. illus
and with photographs. (First Book). $9.90.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
A useful overview of the subject, with good organization of
material and with a marshalling of facts that makes for an informative rather than
an interesting text. Although there is an occasional vague reference, most of the
text is accurate and up-to-date. The first chapters give background information but
most are devoted to a specific disease or group of diseases: arteriosclerosis,
bulimia and anorexia, obesity, and diabetes, for example. A glossary, an index,
and a brief bibliography are appended. Tight binding is a weakness of the series.
ZS
C.U. Health and Hygiene
Foster, Sally. Where Time Stands Still. Dodd, 1987. ISBN 0-396-09090-7. 62p. illus.
with photographs. $13.95.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
The setting is Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, and the subjects
are camera shy. After an introductory note on Amish history, Foster escorts the
reader, via her black-and-white photographs of Amish children, through their
school activities and farm chores. The text is solidly informative during the first
half of the book but begins to meander later on with descriptions and shots of
various children at play during the summer time. Even here, however, one picks
up the flavor of a rural way of life on simpler terms. BH
D.V. Inter-cultural understanding
[ 88 1
Freedman, Russell. Lincoln: A Photobiography. Houghton/Clarion, 1987. ISBN
0-89919-380-3. 150p. illus. with photographs. $15.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-9. 
With confident ease of selection, Freedman has made his way
through some of the quantities of documentary research on Lincoln to shape a clear
account of his personal and political life. Unlike many photodocumentaries, the
text is as substantial as the pictorial content. Both are vivid and revealing of the
times as well as the man. Some shots from the battlefield render the Civil War
more immediate than any words could, but the thematic explanations of political
shifts and social attitudes toward slavery are essential in understanding the context
of the war. This is a carefully conceived and designed book. Following the
closing chapter on Lincoln's assassination is "A Lincoln Sampler" from his
speeches and writing, a section on relevant historic sites open to the public, a
bibliographic note on sources, and an index. Students who come to this for reports
may find themselves browsing through the whole thing. BH
C.U. History-U.S.
Gallo, Donald R., ed. Visions: Nineteen Short Stories by Outstanding Writers for Young
Adults. Delacorte, 1987. ISBN 0-385-29588-X. 230p. $16.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Information about the authors follows each of nineteen original
short stories, most of them impressive examples of the genre, all of them written
by established men and women. Among the familiar names: Joan Aiken, M.E.
Kerr, Walter Dean Myers, Richard Peck. The tales are grouped under such
headings as "Adjustments" or "Kinships," and include both realistic and fanciful
writing, most of the work being of fine quality and the rest only slightly less so.
There is variation in style and mood. 
Unlike its predecessor, Sixteen Short
Stories by Outstanding Writers for Young Adults (reviewed in the February, 1985
issue) this has no final section of questions addressed to the reader, and gains
dignity by this omission. ZS
Gerstein, Mordecai. The Mountains of Tibet; written and illus. by Mordecai Gerstein.
Harper, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022149-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022144-5.
23p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
A Tibetan boy grows up dreaming of sights beyond the
mountains, "cities and oceans, and people of other races," but he ages and dies
before he can see them. 
Given a choice of reincarnation among myriad
possibilities of time and situation, he takes the same place and parents, though this
time he is born a girl. This is an unusual theme for Western picture books, and it
could both broaden young listeners' awareness and at the same time underscore
their love for the familiar. Gerstein's full-color illustrations, which are framed in
small squares at the start, expand into circles that symbolize galactic reaches and
global variety of animals and peoples, then retract into the reality of choices. He
has proved to have a deft touch with both mythology (Tales of Pan) and folklore
(The Seal Mother), maintaining a light simplicity in his art and adaptations
without sacrificing central patterns. BH
D.V. Death-understanding
[89]
Glass, Andrew. Chickpea and the Talking Cow; written and illus. by Andrew Glass.
Lothrop, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06175-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06174-5.
30p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $13.00.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
Based on a Sicilian tale with elements of Tom Thumb, this is
the story of a tiny boy, Chickpea, who's swallowed by a cow. 
Seizing the
opportunity to garner his poor parents some fame and fortune, Chickpea pretends
to be the cow's voice but, during an audience with the Emperor, gets coughed up
when the cow is forced to bow. All ends well with his papa's reassurances that "I
would rather have you, just as you are, than a whole herd of talking cows." This
will be a welcome theme for young listeners, who may feel, upon occasion, as
undersized and useless as Chickpea. 
The story has some weak points: the
introductory motif is odd-a scene of enchanted golden cows to which picnicking
lords and ladies tie "silver coins wrapped in soft napkins"-and Chickpea's minute
size isn't immediately clear. However, the tale as a whole, together with its wash
drawings textured by fine lines and masses of unoutlined color, has a homespun
drama. BH
Greenwald, Sheila. Alvin Webster's Surefire Plan for Success (and How It Failed); written
and illus. by Sheila Greenwald. 
Little, 1987. 
ISBN 0-316-32706-9. 
90p.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Alvin is a whiz kid at school, but he's not sure about his
qualifications as a big brother. After his parents tell him the news about the
coming baby, he decides to prove he's still #1 by coaching a math tutee to success
on a final exam. What he finds out is the importance, not of being first, but of
valuing others. Although the message is obvious, the tone is light and the text
broken up with cartoon drawings and excerpts from Alvin's "book" on tutoring.
Geared to entertain readers making the transition from picture books to novels. BH
D.V. Baby, Adjustment to; Friendship values
Hallman, Ruth. Search Without Fear. Dodd, 1987. ISBN 0-396-08924-0. 
159p. illus.
with photographs. $10.95.
NR 
Gr. 7-9. 
Stiffly posed photographs of mediocre quality illustrate a story
that seems designed primarily to introduce facts about the Canine Unit of the
Virginia State Police and that has a melodramatic series of crisis situations in lieu
of a plot. An orphaned adolescent, Dee reluctantly flies to Virginia to live with
her brother when their grandmother dies. Her flight is interrupted by a bomb scare
and a search by dogs, and from then on it's slam-bang action all the way, including
another bomb scare, an accident, a lost child, and Dee's being captured by an ex-
convict. Dogs and troopers play a prominent part in all rescue operations, and
facts about them are laboriously introduced into dialogue and exposition. There are
no redeeming literary qualities. ZS
Heintze, Carl. Medical Ethics. Watts, 1987. ISBN 0-531-10414-1. 
118p. illus. with
photographs. $11.90.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
Writing on a topic that has always been complex but that has
had increasingly controversial aspects as medical technology, new drugs and
changing procedures bring further debate, an experienced science writer does a good
job in discussing today's medical-legal-moral issues. Heintze provides historical
background, defining ethics and medical ethics and explaining how some facets
change while others do not; he then moves on to chapters that deal with such
[90]
topics as euthanasia, organ transplants, and artificial insemination. His attitude is
non-judgmental, his material capably written and carefully organized, his tone calm
and impartial. 
Good coverage of important issues provides substantial
information. End papers include chapter notes, a bibliography, an index, and
replication of the Hippocratic Oath and the Helsinki Declaration. ZS
C.U. Science; Social studies
D.V. Ethical concepts
Helldorfer, M.C. Daniel's Gift; illus. by Julie Downing. Bradbury, 1987. 
ISBN
0-02-743511-3. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Citing the 15th-century Wakefield cycle of mystery plays as her
inspiration, Helldorfer has adapted a section from the Second Shepherd's Pageant
about a boy, Daniel, who falls asleep while a thief steals his favorite sheep.
Daniel recovers the sheep, named Mammoth, after finding it wrapped like a baby in
the thief's family cradle. Shortly thereafter, a heavenly visitor announces the
Christ child's arrival, and Daniel abandons his angry brothers to worship with the
gift of his pipe. Outside of their historical text, the two episodes seem a bit
disjointed, but the medieval settings for the watercolor illustrations have been
carefully rendered. If the figures are slightly stiff, the colors are fluid, and the book
is elegantly designed after the fashion of illuminated manuscripts. The joining of a
folklore motif with the Christmas story makes for tonal variation unusual in
holiday fare. BH
C.U. 
Christmas
Holder, Heidi, illus. Crows: An Old Rhyme; ad. and illus. by Heidi Holder. Farrar, 1987.
ISBN 0-374-31660-0. 26p. $14.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
An old counting rhyme has been invested with a story about a
weasel and mink who part, reunite, marry, bear children, venture, suffer, and
rejoice. Facing each page of narrative art are pictured the crows whose numbers
designate the action: "One is for bad news/ Two is for mirth/ Three is a wedding/
Four is a birth." Beneath the crows appears yet another picture-story of a rabbit
couple. The connection between the pictures for the story and the pictures for the
rhyme is complicated, and the elaborate framework of symbols and motifs, though
aesthetically satisfying, further strains the narrative flow. Balanced against this
problem is the beauty of the art, its meticulous line work and tonal blending. The
sharp detail of drapery, feathers, and plants contributes to an overall sense of
crafting in composition and design. BH
Hopkins, Lee Bennett, comp. More Surprises; illus. by Megan Lloyd. Harper, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022605-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022604-8. 58p. (I Can
Read). Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $9.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Continuing one of his best ideas-anthologizing poetry into an
easy-to-read format-Hopkins includes 35 selections by Karla Kuskin, Mary Ann
Hoberman, Jack Prelutsky, N.M. Bodecker, and others who display a knack for
simple, entertaining rhymes. The rhythmic repetition, humor, and narrative
quality of pieces like "If You Ever Meet A Whale" (anonymous) or "My Nose"
(Dorothy Aldis) make them natural practice material. Although these are not
difficult to find elsewhere, their appearance here is convenient and reinforces
[91]
teachers' using more creative approaches to reading by exercising skills with
inventive language and imaginative literature. BH
C.U. Reading, beginning
Huff, Barbara. Welcome Aboard! Traveling on an Ocean Liner. Clarion, 1987. ISBN
0-89919-503-2. 118p. illus. and with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Although it's unlikely that most young readers will ever make it
aboard the QE2, Huff gives them an armchair tour that's just as much fun in its
own way. Her descriptions have a you-are-there immediacy, and her knowledge of
shipping history is conveyed as exuberantly as bits of practical experience (keep
track of your jogging mileage by swapping coins from port to starboard pockets).
The rhythm of the voyage and its myriad activities are all here, with pauses for
dancing on deck in a storm or just gazing out to sea. There's a solid chapter on the
Titanic and a light one on ocean liner personnel ("Seventy-nine Thousand Eggs,
One Disc Jockey"). 
A final section offers suggestions for the land-locked,
including visits to docked ships, ordering information for charts and other
materials, and a list of movies. BH
Hughes, Barbara. Drug-Related Diseases. Watts, 1987. ISBN 0-531-10381-1. 91p. illus.
with photographs. (A First Book). $9.90.
M 
Gr. 6-9. 
Like other books in this publisher's series, this is neatly
compartmentalized, provided with index, glossary, and bibliography, and well-
supplied with facts and illustrations that are up-to-date. No qualifications for the
author are furnished, however, and this may bear a relation to the fact that in an
otherwise crisply factual book about the use, abuse, and effects of various kinds of
drugs there should be such careless imputations (by including it as a topic in the
chapter on alcohol) that hypoglycemia is a disease only of alcoholics or that
hepatitis "comes from a virus that enters the body via a dirty needle." A later
reference clarifies this as one of several methods, but the first reference is
reprehensible. ZS
Jenkins, Lyll Becerra de. The Honorable Prison. Lodestar, ISBN 0-525-67238-9. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 9-. 
Much more than a political indictment of dictatorship, this is a
powerful novel about the characters victimized by it. Seventeen-year-old Marta
Maldonado is the narrator, and her story unfolds with terrifying inevitability as she
and her family are rounded up and imprisoned because of her father's journalistic
criticism of a South American military regime. Marta's voice is clear and
observant of the details that accompany the family's isolation and starvation as her
father lies dying of tuberculosis and she, her brother, and her mother fight for
survival. 
Even without the rape and torture that accompany many arrests, some
of the scenes are excrutiating: the killing of the brother's pet chicken forecasts the
murders of several sympathetic campesinos who try to help them. There is also a
moment of passion, as Marta is briefly attracted to a local youth whose uncle
betrays them. And there is humor, the staple of their survival. The controlled
structure of the writing is such that even the reader falls into the rhythm of the
children's weekly outings to the market early on, and then into the time-effacing
apathy that possesses them as hunger sets in. In place of the sensationalized
shortcuts that might have created a temporary shock effect, Jenkins opts for a much
[92]
more effective, journalistic patience. The General is finally overthrown, but not
before the family-and the reader-have been forever altered. Although this is
fiction developed at an adult level, it will hold young adults in a relentless grip and
inject their thinking with new social awareness. BH
C.U. History-Modern
D.V. Democratic understanding
Kandoian, Ellen. Under the Sun; written and illus. by Ellen Kandoian. Dodd, 1987. ISBN
0-396-09059-1. 32p. $11.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
A child's common question serves to take young listeners around
the world and demonstrate a science concept at the same time. "Where does the sun
go when I go to bed?" asks Molly, and her mother replies that "it goes to the
Mississippi River where a little boy watches it set from his houseboat," and then
across the U.S. and the ocean to Japan, China, the Mongolian Desert, and Eastern
Russia, where a little boy lies wondering the same thing just as Molly is about to
wake up. An afterword suggests demonstrating the principle with a globe or ball
and flashlight. The sunny, pen-and-wash illustrations never overload the concept,
but gently tie it together with simply composed pictures of children and animals
unified by the same phenomenon. In fact, the stress on commonality makes this
a logical addition to recent booklists on world peace. A multi-purpose book for
nursery school or family discussion. BH
D.V. World concepts
Keller, Beverly. Only Fiona. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023270-6; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-06-023269-2. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-5. 
Fiona is ten, she's new in town, and she finds it hard to gain full
admittance in the neighborhood peer group. That's the first theme, and few readers
will be surprised that acceptance comes. The second theme is Fiona's impassioned
and protective love for every form of animal life. Ants and bees and fish are
among the creatures about whom there are episodes, and it is in part her
compassion that endears Fiona to her new friends. There is some quiet situation-
humor in the story and commendable attitudes toward animals. The writing style
is brisk and the dialogue and characters convincing. What weakens the story are a
sort of determined cuteness and the fact that Fiona is so naive at times as to seem
obtuse. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Animals, kindness to
Klingsheim, Trygve B. Julius; photographs by A. Jakobsen. Delacorte, 1987. ISBN
0-385-29611-8. 60p. $11.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
There's no other word for it: Julius is cute. And that's the zoo
officials' problem when the newborn chimpanzee is rejected by his mother. They
have to raise him in a loving home without becoming too attached to him or
letting him think he's a real human child. It's tricky, but the director and the
doctor take turns so that neither of their families will monopolize his affections.
This is a photodocumentary of Julius' adoption, development, and triumphant
return to his own kind on Monkey Island at the Kristiansand Zoo in Norway. The
[93
color photography is well-reproduced and entertaining, the account strengthened by
a basic theme of respect for animal life. BH
C.U. Zoology
Krantz, Hazel. Daughter of My People: Henrietta Szold and Hadassah. Lodestar, 1987.
ISBN 0-525-67236-2. illus. and with photographs. (Jewish Biography Series).
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
The story of a woman who was educated and energetic beyond her
times but who, rather than feeling a social misfit, lost herself totally in the cause
of Jewish pioneers in Palestine. One of the founders of the Jewish women's
welfare organization, Hadassah, Szold devoted her life to medical needs of the poor
and, during the Nazi regime, the problems of Youth Aliyah refugees. There are
several strong aspects of the biography. Rather than fictionalizing material from
Szold's youth, the account begins with her documented work from the age of 49 to
her death at 83. It draws on primary sources, including Szold's own words (though
sources are noted only generally in the acknowledgements), for an accurate
portrayal. 
On the other hand, nobody's perfect, and Szold's singleminded
determination and self-abnegation is shown in such an uncritical light that one
feels periodically the strain of martydom ("I have taken a huge burden on myself"
and other words to that effect are a constant theme in her quotes). However, there's
plenty of historical context here to make the book valuable for both Jewish and
women's studies assignments. BH
D.V. Service to others
Laird, Elizabeth. The Road to Bethlehem: An Ethiopian Nativity. Henry Holt, 1987.
ISBN 0-8050-0539-0. 32p. illus. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Adapted from Ethiopian nativity stories and illustrated with
paintings from 18th-century illuminated manuscripts, this will serve as an art
history resource as well as a Christmas book. The text weaves familiar New
Testament motifs with popular legends and miracles into a cohesive narrative.
When Mary escapes to Egypt with the baby Jesus, she cures many illnesses: "The
dumb spoke, the lame ran, the deaf heard and the blind could see." The radiant
paintings project much of the book's impact and are more vividly reproduced than
those in Laird's book about St. Tekla Haymanot in The Miracle Child: A Story
from Ethiopia. Each picture, captioned with helpful commentary, is intense in
color and beautifully balanced with rhythmic shapes and traditional patterns. BH
C.U. Art appreciation; Christmas
Landau, Elaine. The Homeless. Messner/Simon and Schuster, 1987. ISBN 0-671-
63492-5. 101p. $9.79.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
Anecdotes about actual cases, some in first person, give grim if
vivid testimony to the fact that the plight of the homeless in our country is a
serious and growing problem, especially since so many institutions have released
mentally ill patients who have nowhere to go. Shelters run by religious or other
groups cannot feed and house the many who are ill, who have run away from
home, who have lost all physical and financial assets, who are derelicts on drugs,
or who for many reasons are rejected by, or not deemed qualified by, welfare
[94
agencies. The writing is sober, the text carefully organized, the topic important.
A brief index and a bibliography are appended; no sources of help are listed. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Lattimore, Deborah Nourse. The Flame of Peace: A Tale of the Aztecs; written and illus.
by Deborah Nourse Lattimore. Harper, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023709-0;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023708-2. 41p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Drawing on her research in pre-Columbian art and Aztec
tradition, Lattimore has made up a story about a boy, Two Flint, who retrieves the
New Fire from Lord Morning Star to end the war in which his father has been
killed. The heart of the tale is a sequence in which Two Flint is tested by a series
of nine evil demons. Although this pattern may be familiar to young listeners, it
is more drawn out than usual, and the concluding explanation could have been
subsumed into the introductory note for a cleaner ending to the tale. The elaborate
illustrations incorporate stylistic elements and motifs from Aztec art, including flat
profiles and stylized patterns. Falling somewhere between fiction and folklore, this
will nevertheless give children an aesthetic impression of Tenochtitlan culture. BH
D.V. Peace
Lively, Penelope. A House Inside Out; illus. by David Parkins. Dutton, 1987. ISBN
0-525-44332-0. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 4-6. 
With crisp wit Lively has written 11 short stories about the "five
humans, thirty-nine animals and several thousand insects" that inhabit the Dixons'
house at 54 Pavilion Road. The main characters are imaginatively developed:
Willie, the white terrier; Sam, a foolhardy mouse; Nat, an uncommon pillbug; and
a pugilistic spider. The humans serve as amusing props. Point of view accounts
for much of the humor, both in style ("'It's not me that's underfoot,' Willie would
grumble, 'it's you who are overdog'") and in plot. Willie is so childlike in his
susceptibility to trouble that young readers will hold their breaths with suspense
and sympathy as he digs for a nonexistent bone that a hostile cat has assured him
is buried in the forbidden rose garden. Lively's postcript inviting children to
consider the inside-out of their own houses is irresistible on top of such inventive
storytelling. BH
Mazer, Harry. The Girl of His Dreams. Crowell, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04642-1;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04640-5. 214p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
This is a love story that's sweet without being sugary, original
without being outlandish, sophisticated without being outr6. It's the story of a
nice young man, Willis, who was the main character in The War On Villa Street,
who is a factory laborer, a dedicated runner, a shy loner who knows exactly what
the girl of his dreams is like. She isn't the least bit like Sophie, who's a loner,
too, having left the farm where her brother treated her like a servant and come to
the city to be independent. They are both simple, good people who learn that
reality can be better than a dream as they stumble toward a permanent relationship.
The characterization has depth and compassion, the story is taut in structure and
smoothly written, and the sub-plot (Willis crashes a college track meet and almost
wins) is exciting and credible. ZS
D.V. Marriage, preparation for
[95]
McCurdy, Michael. The Devils Who Learned To Be Good; written and illus. by Michael
McCurdy. Joy Street, 1987. ISBN 0-316-55527-4. 
32p. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A traditional Russian story tells of an old soldier who, on his
journey home from the army, aids two beggars and thereby acquires magic objects
that help him rid the tsar's palace of devils. The devils, a noisy troop who can't
resist a game with the soldier's cards that never lose, end up losing all their gold
to him and getting tied up in his sack that holds anything. The ending, in which
the devils grow "quite fond of the old soldier, and rather fond of helping those in
need as well" seems a little preachy for a folktale (a source note would have been
helpful). 
Still, the adaptation is smooth, and it ably supports the fine black-and-
white wood engravings, which have a stem humor effected by expressive figures
and strong linear contrasts. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
McKenzie, Ellen Kindt. Kashka. Henry Holt, 1987. ISBN 0-8050-0327-4. 
258p.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
The Princess Ekama is nine years old when she is deposited at
the court of Nazor by her evil guardians, the power-hungry Lady Ysene and her
vicious brother, the Lord of Xon. Here the child finds kindness and gets to know
and love Prince Aciam as well as the two irrespressible cousins, Piff and Kashka.
Lively, daring, and courageous, the cousins are the true heroes of the story, which
is a rather overdone fantasy-adventure (royal kidnapping, magic objects that confer
power, and a relentless procession of melodramatic incidents) that should please
readers who enjoy derring-do, stock characters, lots of action, and cliffhanger
situations. Characters are varied, but not well-developed; plot is all. ZS
Mitchell, Adrian. Our Mammoth; illus. by Priscilla Lamont. Harcourt, 1987. ISBN
0-15-258838-8. 23p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Soft-hued watercolor paintings have humor and animation as
well as the appeal of a huge hairy mammoth that emerges from a beach-borne
iceberg. The Gumble twins, Bing and Saturday, who are the joint (occasionally
awkward) narrators of this low-keyed fantasy, see the amicable beast emerge as the
iceberg melts; they take it home, perched aloft and steering by gentle ear tugs,
where Mom's reaction is that the poor thing must be hungry. They name the new
pet "Buttercup", and Mom finds a book entitled How to Look After Your
Mammoth. 
The style is light, the concept appealing, but the execution
(particularly at the end) a bit flat. Nothing happens. ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Nolan, Dennis. The Castle Builder; written and illus. by Dennis Nolan. Macmillan, 1987.
ISBN 0-02-768240-4. 30p. $12.95.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
"The boy" builds a sand castle for his tiny beach doll and then
projects himself into imagining the successful defense of the castle against a
dragon and an attacking ship. The stormy sea, however, is unconquerable, and it
destroys the castle as surely as the boy leaves his fantasy world, saving his doll in
the nick of time. This is a carefully designed book, from the first gray endpaper to
[96]
the last, and almost too studied. Each picture fills a full-page frame opposite a text
mounted by three coats of arms. Black-and-white pen drawings are textured with a
stipple effect over photo-realistic compositions. 
The duality of trompe l'oeil
screened by a surface of dots serves the fantasy theme well, though most young
listeners will need an adult explanation at the transitions. BH
D.V. 
Imaginative powers
Norman, Howard. Who-Paddled-Backward-With-Trout; illus. by Ed Young. Little, 1987.
ISBN 0-316-61182-4. 30p. $13.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Norman cites his source, an old man of the Swampy Cree
Indians in northern Canada, and leaves it to readers to discover the humor in this
translated tale'about a boy who sets out to find a new name. The joke is on macho
quests: Trout-with-Flattened-Nose wishes, after some experimental misnomers, to
become Who-Paddles-a-Canoe-Better-Than-Anyone. 
Instead, after a complicated
series of mishaps with some hungry beavers, he's assigned the title name: Who-
Paddled-Backward-with-Trout. 
The story is full of simple but subtle surprises.
When the beavers chew one of his paddles into a fish shape, the boy complains
"'This isn't the trout I'm looking for....' Just then the paddle said, 'You're right,
I'm not!' It leaped off the fishing line and swam away." Or, in the end, "'It's a
fine, strong name,' the trout interrupted. 'And you most certainly have earned it!'"
Young's black silhouette illustrations form an elegant sequence of shapes without
becoming static. The medium itself is well suited to folklore, for it is faceless but
expressive. Aside from the aesthetic considerations, children, who are not always
as coordinated as they would like to be, will enjoy reading about a character who
thematically bumps into things. BH
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. 
Wheat: The Golden Harvest; illus. with photographs by
William Munoz. Dodd, 1987. ISBN 0-396-08781-7. 61p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Photographs of excellent quality (some in color, and some in
black-and-white) illustrate a text that is typical of Patent's writing: crisp style,
logical organization, no padding. She describes the plant and its parts, explaining
which parts are used for which food products; she discusses the different kinds of
wheat, how wheat is grown and harvested, and how wheat products are processed
into foods. A glossary and an index are appended. ZS
Peretz, I.L. Even Higher; retold by Barbara Cohen; illus. by Anatoly Ivanov. Lothrop,
1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06453-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06452-3. 30p.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
I.L. Peretz narrated a traditional Hassidic story of a Litvak who
followed a Ukrainian rabbi to see where he really went on Rosh Hashanah when
the villagers boasted he rose to Heaven. The Litvak, who had scoffed at such a
notion, witnessed instead the rabbi humbling himself by cutting wood and, dressed
in peasant clothes, lighting the fire for a poor widow. Cohen's conversational
adaptation does, as she hoped, make the tale "more accessible than the original to
contemporary American children," although the opening reference to Missourians
(also known as "doubters") seems incongruous and distracting. 
The literal
watercolor illustrations are generally well-drawn, with a few strident color contrasts
(both the Litvak and the rabbi seem to have turquoise eyes). For collections where
folktales are popular or religious traditions are up for discussion. BH
D.V. Religious understanding
[971
Pinsker, Judith. A Lot Like You. Bantam Books, 1988. ISBN 0-553-05445-7. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
You're a sophomore, you are friendly and pretty and bright; you
are also so fat that you're used to jokes about cutting off the view or needing to
test the chair. Barbara (usually called Bo or Butter) can't forget how nice Howard
had been to her when they were in a skit together. Popular, handsome, a star
athlete and an upperclassman, Howard reappears after a long absence (mourning his
mother's death) and-to the shocked surprise of his classmates-he's fat. A lot
like Bo. Their sympathetic friendship moves, with obstacles, toward revealed
affection in a fairly formulaic pattern, but the story is saved from mediocrity by
good style and pace and a pervasive if quiet humor. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Posell, Elsa. Homecoming. Harcourt, 1987. ISBN 0-15-235160-4. 
230p. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Based on the author's childhood experiences, this is the story of a
Russian Jewish family oppressed by the military and the local petty tyrant when
the Revolution occurred. The narrator is Olya, one of six children who, because
their father worked for the Tsarist government, lacked for nothing. After 1917,
they were deemed doubly guilty: supporters of the Tsar and Jewish. Olya's
description of the persecution they suffered, Papa's flight to America and their fear
that they would never be able to join him, Mama's death, and the dangerous
journey to the Dutch port are vividly detailed. ZS
D.V. 
Courage
Pringle, Laurence. Home: How Animals Find Comfort and Safety. Scribner, 1987. ISBN
0-684-18526-1. 71p. illus. with photographs. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
From a prairie dog's hole in the ground to the aerial architecture
of a spider web, Pringle categorizes and describes some of the homes animals build
or borrow. He does not spurn the lowly louse, as an example of parasitic dweller;
nor the male stickleback, which builds and guards its watery nest; nor the
spittlebug, blowing its home of bubbles on a plant stem. What's striking about
the style here is the uncompromising commitment to scientific reporting. While
young readers may not read the book from cover to cover, the information they
search out for reports will be as factually complete as possible in a succinct
introduction. The examples are plentiful and diverse enough that one could have
wished for more of the generally high-quality black-and-white photographs, and an
outline summarizing the principal types of animal shelter would not have been
amiss. A two-page bibliography includes adult and juvenile titles along with
magazine articles. Indexed. BH
C.U. Zoology
Rappaport, Doreen. The Boston Coffee Party; illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. Harper,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024825-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024824-6. $10.89.
[98]
basis for a simply written piece of fiction for beginning independent readers. A
greedy Boston merchant, hoarding coffee so he can raise the price, is set upon by a
group of angry women who force him to surrender his keys and then help
themselves to coffee beans. The author begins by focusing on two small sisters
who report the merchant's behavior and set off the spark for the women's action.
This is just right for the intended audience, since it's easy to read, has action,
punishes avarice, and doesn't give more historical background than a young child
can absorb. ZS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Ray, Deborah Kogan. My Dog, Trip; written and illus. by Deborah Kogan Ray. Holiday
House, 1987. ISBN 0-8234-0662-8. 48p. $11.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Allie, growing up in a West Virginia coal mining community,
narrates the story of how her daddy brings home a dying puppy that she nurses
back to health. Named Trip because it's constantly underfoot, the dog becomes
her best friend before its sudden disappearance. Allie is distraught until Trip is
finally found, and her intensity gives the story its emotional momentum. The
development of the family is low-key but warm and real. The dialect is direct,
natural, and graceful, a narrative reflection of the black-and-white drawings. A
clean, true voice of childhood experience. BH
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Sargent, Pamela. Alien Child. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025203-0; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-06-025202-2. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
As far as she knew, Nita was the only human being left on earth,
living with her guardian (an alien form, vaguely feline, always kind) in a huge
deserted research institute. When, as an adolescent, she discovers that a teenage
boy, Sven, lives in another part of the complex, she decides that they must visit
the cryonic life-bank from which they had both been rescued. Sven decides they
must use the library to learn about their forebears. Eventually, after they make a
trip into the wilderness and after they meet a human visitor (who does not stay)
they decide that they will bring four embryonic creatures to life and start a new and
better world. This has many of the ideas that have made other Sargent books
popular: survival of global holocaust, protection and teaching by an artificial
intelligence, a bit of Brave New World (or not-so-brave) and the perpetuating of the
human race. What this lacks and what lessens its potential appeal are the pace of
earlier books and the sense of danger that lends suspense. ZS
D.V. Courage
Selden, George. 
The Old Meadow; illus. by Garth Williams. Farrar, 1987. ISBN
0-374-35616-5. 193p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Another story about the people and animals in the Old Meadow
community has the same appeals-affectionately humorous black-and-white
drawings, a text that stresses cooperation and friendship without intruding on the
story line, animal characters, and amusing dialogue-as its predecessors. Here a
visitor (a mockingbird whose Southern charm and lovely song affect everyone
[ 99 ]
deeply) is instrumental in helping the Old Meadow residents save the home and the
independence of the old man who is their closest neighbor. ZS
Selsam, Millicent (Ellis). Strange Creatures That Really Lived; illus. by Jennifer Dewey.
Scholastic, 1987. ISBN 0-590-40707-4. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Softly drawn and nicely detailed illustrations in colored pencil
show creatures that have lived on earth and become extinct. While some of the
pictures show size by comparing creature to object (giant land turtle and 13-foot
automobile) the artist has not tried to keep species in scale with each other. This
is an excellent book for browsing, with varied subjects, not too much information
for listeners with a limited attention span, and with a gentle plea for conservation
of present, threatened species. A list of creatures, in the order in which they are
presented in the text, serves as a finding device although it is not alphabetical in
arrangement, and it gives habitats and approximate dates of existence. Selsam's
writing, as always, is clear, direct, and accurate. ZS
C.U. Science
Seuss, Dr. I Am Not Going to Get Up Today; illus. by James Stevenson. Random House,
1987. ISBN 0-394-89217-8. 36p. (Beginner Books). $5.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
The master rhymester catches that moment of morning rebellion
when it's just too hard to get up. "My bed is warm./ My pillow's deep./ Today's
the day I'm going to sleep," declares the boy portrayed in Stevenson's bouncy
watercolor cartoons. The lad elaborates his ultimatum with an exaggerated energy
that belies his intent. Not food, nor noise, nor prodding, nor police can move
him, and his mother finally gives his breakfast egg to the arresting officer. The
unrhymed ending is a bit of a textual letdown, but it serves well enough as a joke.
Readers won't protest practicing their skills on this one. BH
C.U. Reading, beginning
Sheridan, Sybil. Stories from the Jewish World; illus by Robert Geary. Silver Burdett,
1987. ISBN 0-382-09312-7. 40p. (Stories from the Religious World). $8.96.
M 
5-8 yrs. 
A dozen stories from Jewish tradition are adequately told with
brief but specific source notes. Unfortunately, adult readers will have to reorganize
the selections for any historical continuity: A tale about Rabbi Akiva is
sandwiched between a Midrash legend of the Ark and the Bible story of Esther. An
18th-century Hassidic tale precedes one about Judah's revolt against Syria in 168
BCE, and a description of a kibbutz appears between a 2nd century fable about the
fox and the grapes and a Medieval tale of the Golem of Prague. There are also a
few awkwardly contemporary phrases ("Mordecai! My goodness, I forgot," says
Ahasuerus). On the other hand, the selections are a good length to read aloud, and
they introduce moral and political themes that could generate discussion, especially
in context of religious education. Illustrated with dramatic (overly dramatic in the
exaggerated facial expressions) double-spread watercolor paintings framing the text.
BH
Shreve, Susan. Lily and the Runaway Baby; illus. by Sue Truesdell. Random House,
1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99104-4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-89104-X. 62p.
(Stepping Stone). Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $1.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[ 100]
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Eight-year-old Lily is a third child suffering the pangs of sudden
sibling arrival, her "unexpected" baby sister Muffin. The older twins have long
since asserted their positions in the world of family and school, but Lily feels
sorely neglected and decides to run away. Since she is lonely and in charge of
Muffin at the time, it seems logical to take the baby with her to the Trenton Home
for Children. The train ride is unexpectedly complicated, though, and a woman
steals Muffin while Lily is in the bathroom. Where the police fail, Lily succeeds
in recovering the baby-and realizing, finally, how much she loves her. As an
easy-to-read adventure, this is smoothly scary-and-reassuring at the same time, but
the tone is deceptively light for such a potentially tragic situation. In addition to
the baby's kidnapping, Lily's dashing off from the police could easily have turned
her into another lost child instead of a self-sufficient heroine. 
Shreve is a
competent writer, however, and the plot and protagonist's dilemma will certainly
hold attention. BH
D.V. 
Baby, adjustment to
Silverstein, Alvin. The Mystery of Sleep; by Alvin and Virginia Silverstein; illus. by
Nelle Davis. Little, 1987. ISBN 0-316-79117-2. 43p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
With their customary clarity, the Silversteins have simplified
scientific information on sleeping patterns, needs, and problems. Although they
explain the methods researchers have used to investigate dream cycles and other
phenomena, they don't forget to include matter-of-fact references to a child's special
concerns, such as bed wetting and night terrors, nor the details that would catch
his or her interest ("The recordings from one night's sleep use up about half a mile
of EEG paper!"). Always aware of a young reader's limited background (although
sleep patterns are measured by electric currents, subjects don't get a shock in the
process), the authors word the text simply but precisely, as in describing the way
the mind arranges experiences of the day into dream stories. The treatment of
insomnia is reassuring and the warning against the use of drugs well handled.
Although it's a shame there's no index or bibliography, the organization is clear
from the table of contents. A first-rate introduction. BH
C.U. 
Biology
Slote, Alfred. Moving In. Lippincott, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32262-3; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-397-32261-5. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Robby is the eleven-year-old narrator who, with his sister Peggy
(13) and their widowed father, has just moved to a new town where Dad is going
into partnership with an old acquaintance, Ruth Lowenfield, recently divorced.
Robby and Peggy dislike Ruth and are apprehensive because Dad seems smitten;
Peggy's solution is to be openly hostile, Robby's is to pirate a computer program
of Dad's, hoping that by giving it to Ruth's ex-husband he can be a catalyst to a
reunion. Mr. Lowenfield, a nice man, quickly returns the stolen material and Dad
never knows, to Robby's relief. This doesn't have the depth of some earlier Slote
books, but it has many strengths: 
good pace, natural dialogue, strong
characterization, and a pervasive humor. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Ethical concepts; Father-child relations
[101 ]
Smith, Elizabeth Simpson. A Guide Dog Goes to School; illus by Bert Dodson. Morrow,
1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06846-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06844-8. 51p.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
In a friendly, informative text, Smith introduces the development
of training guide dogs for the blind after World War I and then follows one pup
from birth to graduation with her new mistress. 
The account includes
qualifications for which the young dogs are tested and selected, their year of
socializing with a 4-H family, work with a trainer, and transfer and training with
the blind owner. There have been several good books on guide dogs, including
Bernard Wolf's Connie's New Eyes: and Richard McPhee's Tom and Bear: The
Training of a Guide Dog Team, but this is a fresh supplement to either.
Spaciously formatted, with large print and appealing black-and-white pen drawings.
BH
Sullivan, George. Treasure Hunt: The Sixteen-Year Search For the Lost Treasure Ship
Atocha. Henry Holt, 1987. ISBN 0-8050-0569-2. 150p. illus. with photographs.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
While laying thorough historical groundwork with an account of
the Spanish galleon Atocha 's sinking off the Florida keys in 1622, Sullivan never
loses the excitement of the recovery operation led by Mel Fisher from 1970 to
1985. Both stories are dramatic, and the text has been carefully paced to reveal
details that add suspense to some first-class reporting based on interviews with the
divers, photographers, archeologists, historians, and others involved in the search
and restoration. The risks, frustration, strain, and even tragedy (Fisher's oldest
son, daughter-in-law, and a young diver were drowned when their boat capsized)
show up along with the triumph of riches and research. This makes history as
exciting as mystery. With black-and-white photographs (many by the author), a
brief bibliography, and index. BH
C.U. History
Tejima, Keizaburo. Fox's Dream; written and illus. by Keizaburo Tejima. Philomel,
1987. ISBN 0-399-21455-0. 42p. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
First published in Japan, this story combines a spare but poetic
text and, on oversize pages, stunningly dramatic color woodcuts. A fox walks
alone in the cold silence of a winter's night; lonely, he imagines he sees
companions in the icy forms of the moonlit branches; then he finds a mate.
Tejima uses color to accentuate changes: from the blue/white chill of the first
pictures through the move to color as the fox fantasizes, and then back to
lavender/white (less cold) as the fox finds the vixen. Almost every double-page
spread is a picture worth framing. ZS
Terban, Marvin. Mad as a Wet Hen! And Other Funny Idioms; illus. by Giulio Maestro.
Clarion, 1987. Trade ed. ISBN 0-89919-478-8; Paper ed. ISBN 0-89919-479-6.
63p. Trade ed. $12.95; Paper ed. $4.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Idioms, and the explanations for them, are grouped under such
headings as animals, body parts, colors, and hats. An alphabetical list with page
numbers is appended. Cheerful cartoon-style illustration, red-tinted, add to the
humor of a collection nicely gauged for the middle-grades reader. Lightweight, but
enjoyable; occasionally the explanations go beyond the meaning, as in "'That
[ 102
costs an arm and a leg.' That's way too expensive and it isn't really worth it," or
"'She spilled the beans.' She upset the plans by accidentally letting a secret out."
ZS
C.U. Language Arts
Turner, Ann Warren. Time of the Bison; illus. by Beth Peck. Macmillan, 1987. ISBN 0-
02-789300-6. 54p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Scar Boy yearns for his adult name, and it is clear to a reader
early on that this prehistoric child of the caves will find a new name in connection
with his burning desire to draw, sculpt, and paint. Art is forbidden in his tribe
because his people fear its power, but when Scar Boy makes a lifelike mud horse,
his father takes him to the summer clan gathering, where he is apprenticed to
Painter of Caves and promised the name Animal Shaper. Both the narrative and
the softly-shaded, brown-toned drawings assume many similarities between ancient
and contemporary peoples; indeed, except for external trappings such as the name
"Mammoth Man," the story could almost be that of a native American boy several
centuries ago. The characters are more prototypical than developed, but the writing
is smooth and the subject of prehistoric life has considerable appeal and classroom
emphasis among children looking for easy, transitional fiction. BH
C.U. 
History-Prehistoric
Van Laan, Nancy. The Big Fat Worm; illus. by Marisabina Russo. Knopf, 1987. Library
ed. ISBN 0-394-98673-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-88763-8. 
22p. Library ed.
M 
2-4 yrs. 
Flat colors prevail in paintings that are uncluttered and that are
better composed than drawn; the pictures accompany a text that has a chain-of-
events appeal but that is slight and as flat in writing style as it is in color. A bird
and a worm argue about whether or not the former will eat the latter (worm goes
underground); then the bird has the same argument, taking the other side, with a cat
(bird flies off), and the pattern is repeated when the cat climbs a tree to escape the
dog. Even very young children may wonder why each victim didn't just go, why
all the "OH NO YOU'RE NOT...OH YES I AM. YES...NO" etc. ZS
Vander Els, Betty. Leaving Point. Farrar, 1987. ISBN 0-374-34376-4. 210p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
A sequel to Bomber's Moon (reviewed in the September 1986
issue), which described the trials of two children of a missionary family in China
in 1942, is again set in China, where the author spent much of her childhood, and
is again told by Ruth, the older child. The setting is Kwangchen, the time is
1950, when the new communist regime was being established. Ruth's family,
like the other foreign families, is waiting for permission to leave the country and
is unhappily adjusting to being treated with harshness, contempt, and hostility by
their Chinese neighbours. The author gives a vivid picture of the groping of the
newly-promoted, the crudeness of propaganda methods, and the myriad injustices of
a chaotic period, but she never lets the background overpower the story, and she
shows in depicting both groups (particularly the mission's teacher and the young
Chinese woman who becomes Ruth's friend) that individuals can resist the
pressures of hatred or fear to be patient and tolerant. ZS
D.V. Courage; Friendship values
[103 ]
VanOosting. Maxie's Ghost. Farrar, 1987. ISBN 0-374-34873-1. 118p. $10.95.
NR 
Gr. 4-6. 
When Maxie's parents died in a plane crash, the grandmother he
adored was too ill to care for him. Now, on Halloween, his fourth-grade teacher is
taking the class to a party at Maxie's orphanage. Maxie thinks he sees someone (a
ghost?) waiting by the old elm tree that holds the tire swing. He and his friend
Judy are swinging wildly when lightning splits the tree open and he is knocked
into a coma, a state of consciousness in which he meets his grandmother's spirit
and discusses the alternatives of following her into death or returning to his little
sister Mercy. Some of the incidents here are vividly rendered, but there are too
many diverse elements grafted onto the central episode. Maxie's teacher, his
friends Buddington and Judy, his sister, and his grandmother each have walk-on
parts instead of consistently focused development, and there are several abrupt
shifts in point of view. 
The plot seems contrived to dramatize the kind of
experience documented in cases where people who have almost died describe
sensations of light, hovering outside their bodies, and meeting with dead loved
ones. BH
Vardeman, Robert E. Road To the Stars. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026289-3;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026288-5. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Offered, at the last moment, a chance to join the passengers on a
trip to space, Cliff Macklin gives up his plans to study archeology in an Earth
college, and signs on. The "explorership" Magellan is headed for a planet thought
to have intelligent life forms; the goal of the exploration to to find habitable
worlds that will relieve the population problems of the Earth. This has most of
the standard appeal of science fiction: the danger, adventure, advanced technology,
and curiosity about the frontiers of space. The weakness of the story is the
shallow characterization; the writing style is inadequate, as is the plotting, but the
plot embellishments, a steady stream of frenetic crises, seem more appropriate for
cartoon than for narrative. ZS.
Vivelo, Jackie. A Trick of the Light: Stories to Read at Dusk. Putnam, 1987. ISBN 0-
399-21468-2. 116p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
All of the nine stories in this collection have an eerie quality
although two are not fantasy; all are outstanding as examples of the genre,
structurally tight and deftly conceived and written. One of the most interesting
tales is "The Fireside Book of Ghost Stories," in which various readers find stories
that affect their lives and then disappear, and one of the most engaging is "A
Plague of Crowders Or, Birds of a Feather," which shows the deserved malice with
which a family of vicious bullies is treated by a long-suffering history teacher. ZS
Wakefield, Pat A. A Moose for Jessica; by Pat A. Wakefield and Larry Carrara;
photographs by Larry Carrara. Dutton, 1987. ISBN 0-525-44342-8. 
60p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Jessica is a cow (a real cow) on a Vermont farm, and the story
(told by her owner, Larry Carrara, and first-time author Wakefield) is a true one,
documented by Carrara's many color photographs. The text describes the way a
moose appeared on the Carrara property, became smitten with the cow, and stayed
for 76 days; during that time the Carraras made sure that the thousands of visitors
didn't hurt the moose or encroach on his space. Many of the photographs show
the moose nuzzling Jessica and some show her returning affectionate gestures. The
[104]
book makes clear the care taken by the Carraras to protect the moose's health and
safety, but it never becomes sentimental. ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Watts, Barrie. Apple Tree. Library ed. ISBN 0-382-09436-0; 
Trade ed. ISBN
0-382-09440-9.
Birds' Nest. Library ed. ISBN 0-382-09439-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-382-09433-3.
Dandelion. Library ed. ISBN 0-382-09438-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-382-09442-5.
Ladybug. Library ed. ISBN 0-382-09437-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-382-09441-7.
All four books illus. by Helen Senior. Silver Burdett, 1987. 25 p. illus. and
with photographs. (Stopwatch Books). Library ed. $8.96; Trade ed. $6.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
With texts slightly younger than the excellent Carolrhoda Nature
Watch series, which also includes books on the apple tree and the lady bug, these
four books are uniform in their fine color photography, well-designed format, and
scientific teaching approach. Each book challenges young readers to observe the
reproduction cycle of the subject, which is closely followed through a series of
pictures described in the text. A concluding observation leads to a question
nudging them to think further ("Next spring the ladybug will wake up. Then it
will look for a mate. What do you think will happen then?"). The final spread
invites them to "tell the story" in their own words, with key photo insets to help.
Although the blue titmouse in Birds' Nest is indigenous to Europe, its habits are
close enough to the American tufted titmouse for U.S. consumption. Children
may, however, question the appearance of only four hatchlings after being
encouraged to count eight eggs. BH
C.U. Science
Wersba, Barbara. Beautiful Losers. Harper, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026364-6; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-06-026363-6. Library ed. $11.95; Trade ed. $11.89. Reviewed from
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Third in a trio of first-person accounts of an unusual love affair,
this describes the reunion of Rita (now 18) and Arnold (twice her age) after a long
separation demanded by her parents for Rita's good and agreed to by Arnold (also
for Rita's good). Here he comes back to propose marriage but, when Rita decides
they should live together instead, he accepts her decision with his usual gentle
amicability. There are problems and parental pressures and, in the end, a wedding
ceremony-but this is far from the standard romance. Rita is a lively, sensitive
voice; she and the other characters are firmly drawn; the writing has momentum
and wit. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Marriage, preparation for
Willard, Nancy. The Mountains of Quilt; illus. by Tomie De Paola. Harcourt, 1987.
ISBN 0-15-256010-6. 32p. $12.95.
M 
5-7 yrs. 
The narrator's grandmother, a magpie, and four magicians (of
Cleveland, Sandusky, Elyria, and Detroit) figure in this frothy fantasy. While
Grandmother is quilting, the magicians are meeting, and one of their magic
inventions-a flying carpet-becomes the centerpiece for her quilt while she ends
up as star enchantress at their Tuesday meeting. The magpie flies here and there
facilitating things, switching Grandmother's glasses, for instance, so she can see
the magic. Once Willard begins weaving her wordplay into narrative themes, the
story pulls together, but the magicians seem to indulge in a lot of scene-setting
[ 1051
wizardry first. The flat-dimensioned, pastel-toned art features stiff cartoon figures
and offers no action to extend the description. It's odd, too, that in such a carefully
designed book, the thin type face should be unevenly inked to the point of paleness
against expanses of white space. Both the writer and the artist have done better
work. BH
Williams-Garcia, Rita. Blue Tights. Lodestar, 1987. ISBN 0-525-67234-6. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 7-9. 
Adolescent, black, talented as a dancer, self-centered, and torn as
so many teenagers are between a conviction of her own ability and fear that she has
no ability, Joyce is restless and apprehensive. Dissatisfied with ballet class, she
finds her metier when she joins an African dance group; she also finds (and loses,
when she makes sexual overtures) a Black Muslim convert who is drummer for the
group. The author has created characters that are more interesting than appealing,
and in this first novel she shows an understanding of the turmoil of adolescence.
Unfortunately, the structure of the novel is both weak and uneven in pace, and the
writing style is fraught with such solecisms as "They focused longingly into each
other's gaze..." or "In some ways, Joyce was her child like she was no other
mother's" or "Their wads of dollars pulled unconsciously out of bus pass wallets
and gym socks were always welcomed." ZS
D.V. Self-confidence
Williamson, Walter. Behind the Scenes: The Unseen People Who Make Theater Work.
Walker, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6704-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6703-6.
156p. illus. with photographs. Library ed. $15.85; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
In a companion volume to Early Stages: The Professional
Theater and the Young Actor (reviewed in the March 1987 issue) Williamson
presents profiles of individuals who have been successful in different facets of
production or management of plays, and of a playwright. The combination of
authorial explanation and the personal comments of those who have been
interviewed gives a rounded picture of what each person does, how it fits into the
total production schedule, and what kind of job preparation was necessary. A
bibliography, a glossary, a relative index, and a list of unions are provided for a
book that should prove useful and-although flawed by stylistic errors and
occasional non sequiturs-interesting to adolescents who are theatre buffs. ZS
C.U. Career guidance
Wilson, Johnniece Marshall. 
Oh, Brother. Scholastic, 1987. ISBN 0-590-41363-5.
$10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
An episodic story about two brothers, Andrew and Alex, is told
by the latter, who is the younger and more responsible. 
His chief gripe is
Andrew's continually borrowing his old bicycle, which forces him to deliver his
newspapers by bus and on foot. Andrew also takes some of his money, as well as
keeping their room messy and hanging out with friends who tease Alex whenever
they see him. After several confrontations, they make a transition into friendship,
and Alex finally gets his new bike. This first novel meanders through extraneous
scenes that don't move the plot forward very clearly, but the dialogue is realistic,
[ 106 ]
as is the intensity of the boys' love-hate relationship and the portrayal of a solid
Black family. BH
D.V. Brothers
Yektai, Niki. What's Missing; illus. by Susannah Ryan. 
Clarion, 1987. 
ISBN
0-89919-510-5. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
While there's no story here to catch the fancy of the read-aloud
audience, there are humor and action as appeals, and a concept that encourages
observation. For each picture, an element is missing. "What's missing?" is
followed, when the page is turned, by a second picture that shows the missing
object in place; for example, a child is shown in a stance that suggests she's riding
a vehicle; sure enough, the second picture has a beginner's bicycle being
ridden--otherwise the illustration is the same. The game element should make
this popular. The cartoon-style figures in line and wash drawings have little polish
but they are simply and humorously composed. ZS
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
Yolen, Jane. Owl Moon; illus. by John Schoenherr. Philomel, 1987. ISBN 0-399-
21457-7. 30p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Oversize pages are used in a remarkably effective way by
Schoenherr, whose watercolor paintings, in double-page spreads, are economically
composed scenes of a winter night that are strikingly dramatic and truly evocative
of the cold and silence described in the text. The latter is also spare and poetic, a
child's account of going, silently, with her father in hopes that an owl will answer
Pa's imitation of an owl's cry. This is a fragment, but a memorable one, in which
story and pictures are nicely matched, each reinforcing the other. ZS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Zindel, Paul. The Amazing and Death-Defying Diary of Eugene Dingman. Harper, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026863-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026862-X. 184p. Library
ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
While fiction in diary form has great appeal for young adults, it's
hard to get right, poised perilously between self-dramatization and irrelevant chat.
In his latest, Zindel slips in both directions, but, on the whole, manages nicely.
At fifteen, Eugene is sent off (by his mother, for less than entirely selfless reasons)
to a summer job at an Adirondack hotel, and this book is his diary. The entries are
a mix of goofy anecdotes and newspaper headlines, tales of misadventures in the
dining hall, paeans to a beautiful but heartless (A la Kerr) local girl, and
throughout, the ache to talk to his father, who moved out when Eugene was nine.
The humor is sometimes strained, and the pathos tugs too hard, but Eugene's
triumph over his tormentors (including himself) if not his father, is satisfying.
RS
D.V. Father-son relations