Afanasyev, Alexander Nikolayevich. 
The Fool and the Fish: A Tale from
Russia; ad. by Lenny Hort; illus. by Gennady Spirin. Dial, 1990. ISBN 0-
8037-0861-0. 24p. $12.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
This Russian pike has every bit as much magic
power as the flounder in "The Fisherman and his Wife," but the Fool is quite a
bit jollier than either the fisherman or his wife. In return for freedom from the
bucket in which he's been caught, a pike grants all Ivan's wishes, from hauling
heavy buckets of water to building a palace for the Tsar's daughter, who has
fallen in love with the Fool. Certainly the happily-ever-after ending provides a
nice balance for the moral saga of an overambitious woman's downfall, so pair
this with Grimm in story hours. There's enough drama in the large paintings to
show the pictures to a group, too. Spirin's Flemish Renaissance art is precise
in detail but rollicking in tone, with ruddy, richly costumed characters warming
up the snowy scenes. BH
C.U. Storytelling
Armbruster, Ann. Astronaut Training; by Ann Armbruster and Elizabeth A.
Taylor. Watts, 1990. ISBN 0-531-10862-7. 64p. illus. with photographs.
(First Books). $11.90.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
From this brief presentation, space program
enthusiasts can learn about the history of manned flight, the qualifications and
training of astronauts, and the possibilities of being selected as an ascan
(astronaut candidate). Definitions of difficult terms, added parenthetically
throughout the text, are usually helpful but sometimes as difficult as the words
being defined (the definition of "umbilical" contains the word "fetus"). While
the descriptions of the training program are intriguing, the terminology will
prove occasionally confusing to young, literal readers: "Now they are called
astronauts and enter the training pool. In the training pool they work at keeping
their skills sharp while they wait to be called to fly a mission," might create the
image of several young astronauts in a large swimming pool. Such confusion is
the exception, however, and much information is contained in the crisp color
photographs and well-organized text. Addresses for "Places to Visit" and
"Information Sources" are an added bonus. KP
C.U. Vocational guidance
Ashabranner, Brent. The Times of My Life: A Memoir. Cobblehill, 1990.
ISBN 0-525-65047-4. 114p. illus. with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Ashabranner's autobiography is refreshingly
unassuming in its focus on a world wider than a writer's garret. Born in
Oklahoma in 1921, the author recalls what was, in many ways, an everyday life:
growing up in the Depression and years of the Dust Bowl; going off to college,
meeting his wife, and finding his way as a writer; joining the Seabees in WWII.
"My mates were awed by someone who could put words on paper and make a
story out of them, just as I was awed by someone who could handle a Caterpillar
tractor or wire a hospital for electricity." Later years in the Point Four and
Peace Corps programs took the Ashabranner family to exotic locales in Africa
[109 ]
and Asia, but the author never allows travelogue to overwhelm ordinary reality:
"When I was a boy, I had wanted to write stories about strange people in faraway
places. Now I was writing stories like that, but the people didn't seem strange,
and the places didn't seem far away." As in his books about young people in the
U.S. and abroad, Ashabranner reveals himself here as an open and generous
observer, happy to take a look around and skillful in reporting what he sees. RS
C.U. Social studies
Baker, Alan. Benjamin's Balloon; written and illus. by Alan Baker. Lothrop,
1990. ISBN 0-688-09744-8. 32p. $12.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
A third book about an engaging if anthropomorphized
hamster has the same spacious and simple format as the first two. There's
Benjamin, golden brown and nicely textured, his expressive eyes regarding with
apprehension or dismay the sky and snow through which a bright balloon, a
snowmade plane, and a snowball in turn take him. Benjamin is not happy about
being carried aloft or dumped in the snow or rolling down a hill-but he's never
in danger and never hurt, so the preschool child can enjoy the quiet humor of a
book that's just the right length and not too complex. ZS
Barrie, Barbara. Lone Star. Delacorte, 1990. ISBN 0-385-30156-1. 
182p.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
It's 1944, and Jane Miller is trying to adjust to life in
Corpus Christi, Texas, where her family has moved to recover from her father's
role in defrauding insurance customers. Bereft of her fancy Chicago apartment
and extended Jewish family, she begs for a Christmas tree in order to be more
Slike her new best friend. The tiny, secret tree provokes a crisis when Jane's
visiting orthodox grandfather discovers it-at the same time as they hear the first
news reports of Nazi concentration camps. This is a close and honest look at a
child's struggle with being different. A stranger to two worlds, Jane is also
threatened by her brother's leaving to become a soldier, by her parents' constant
fighting, and by her grandfather's exclusive definitions of Jewish tradition.
Indeed, his suspicion of Gentiles is equaled only by prejudice on the part of a
teacher who persecutes Jane for what he perceives as Yankee impudence. This is
a tightly focused book, its pace heightened by dramatic scenes (especially Jane's
trips downtown with her grandfather to sell his tacky line of dry goods), closely
observed character dynamics, an ending that leaves important questions open for
readers to think about, and enough emotional momentum to insure that they
will. BH
D.V. Adaptability; Grandparent-child relations; Mother-daughter relations
Beirne, Barbara. A Pianist's Debut: Preparing for the Concert Stage; written
and illus. with photographs by Barbara Beirne. Carolrhoda, 1990. ISBN 0-
87614-432-6. 56p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Like Jill Krementz's A Very Young Musician,
reviewed below, this is a sunny portrait of a child's devotion to music. Leah
Yoon is eleven, and a student at the Julliard School in New York. She hopes to
have a professional career as a concert pianist, and is realistic about the work her
ambition requires: "I get up at 5:30 A.M. and practice for two hours before
school. Then, in the afternoon, I practice from 3:00 P.M. to 6:00 P.M." The
first-person format is more unstudied here than in the Krementz, and while the
[110]
photos aren't as glossy as hers, they convey more information and personality.
Beirne does an especially good job, in both text and pictures, of showing all
sides of Leah's life: waiting for her grandmother (with whom she lives) to
finish work at the beauty shop; talking with her piano teacher; making music
with school friends; meeting then-President Reagan after performing at the
Kennedy Center when she was eight. Librarians will especially appreciate the
homely shots of Leah perusing the card catalog and the shelves to learn more
about The Well-Tempered Clavier. RS
C.U. 
Music
Berger, Barbara Helen. Gwinna; written and illus. by Barbara Helen Berger.
Philomel, 1990. ISBN 0-399-21738-X. 127p. $18.95.
NR 
Gr. 4-6. 
When the Mother of the Owls gave the lonely couple
a child, she of course extracted a promise: upon turning twelve (and, it turns
out, growing wings), the child must return to her. Despite her parents' best
efforts, wingd& Gwinna does make her way back to Mother, who sends her on a
mystical quest to "where the song begins ... to the mountain." There is much
here about song and sky and mountain and grasses which seems meant to be
evocative but is more often pretentious warbling: "The song rippled out from
the Tree, through all the other grasses and trees of that land, farther and farther
away, until everything was still. And no one spoke. For silence is before all
song, and after." While the writing is pretty, it is padded ("all is new, and all,
and all is new"), relentlessly whimsical ("the animals were merry, even gruff
brother bear"), and trite ("a rosy glow bloomed in the sky, touching all the
mountain's ice and snow with rose"). The imagery is so thick that the story is
almost entirely obscured, and Gwinna herself is lost in the clouds. Full-page
paintings are well drawn but sweetly colored and undramatic. An author's note
promises that some of her royalties will go to replenish "the trees who were the
source of paper for this book." RS
Berleth, Richard. Samuel's Choice; illus. by James Watling. Whitman, 1990.
ISBN 0-8075-7218-7. 40p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
A continuous text illustrated with paintings that give
good period details is based on an episode of the Revolutionary War, the Battle
of Long Island. Several of the characters are historical figures, though not the
protagonist/narrator, Samuel, a young black man who is owned by a wealthy
farmer, Isaac van Ditmas. The latter is opposed to the rebel Patriots, while
Samuel is at first unsure of where he stands; but a persuasive and literate girl
(also a slave) helps him in his choice, so that it is in large part due to his help
that Washington's men cross from Brooklyn to Manhattan despite a storm.
Although this makes a fictional-and predictable-episode the fulcrum for
factual military action, it is a story that is smoothly told, is consistent with the
known facts, has the appeals of danger, drama, and a sympathetic hero. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.-Revolutionary War
Brady, Philip. Reluctant Hero: A Snowy Road to Salem in 1802. Walker,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6974-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6972-1. 159p.
Library ed. $17.85; Trade ed. $16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Thirteen-year-old Cutting Favour is sent from his
New Hampshire home to Salem, Massachusetts, to sell a sledload of furs and
[ 111 ]
shingles so that his family will have money to buy food. The title refers to the
courage and resourcefulness Cutting shows in defending a girl from a bully, in
outwitting the enemy he makes in that defense, and in guarding the money he
makes by his persistent salesmanship and his skill at carving. The girl, Selina,
becomes his companion; the approval of Cutting by Selina's family augurs well
for their budding romance. Like many first novels that are period fiction, this is
marred by a tendency to depend rather heavily on descriptive details based on
research. The writing style is stiff, but the pace of the story is well-maintained.
Characterization is adequate if not subtle, and the plot is believable if at times
predictable. ZS
Braune, Anna. The Wonderful Toys; by Anna Braune with Savilla Sloane; illus.
by James Graham Hale. Zolotow/Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020619-
5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020618-7. 119p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
M 
Gr. 2-4. 
"There were seven toys: 
White Bunny; Cow;
Rebecca, who was a doll; Velvi, the black-velvet cat; Teddy Bear; Sheep; and
Alli, the tin alligator. They all lived together in a rather unusual dwelling-a
trunk." The toys, who had been consigned to the trunk when the Child went
away to boarding school, pass the time in their individual ways, watching the
adventures of the mouse family who shares the trunk, listening to the sounds of
the house, or, in the case of Sheep and Alli, entertaining silent thoughts of love
for each other. Eventually, after a threat of abandonment, the toys are retrieved
and restored for the return home of the Child, who wants to take them to college.
This is static and heavily sentimental, but it features varied characterizations and
old-fashioned charm in a secret-life-of-toys story that may appeal to readers fond
of Winnie the Pooh and The Velveteen Rabbit. DS
Butler, M. Christina. Stanley in the Dark; illus. by Meg Rutherford. Barron's,
1990. ISBN 0-8120-6158-6. 29p. $12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Stanley, a plump little mouse, sees a full moon that
seems to be wedged between the branches of a tree; other animals either laugh at
him or threaten him as he pursues his goal. Threatened by an owl, Stanley falls
out of the tree, landing close to a pond where his cheese-really a reflection of
the moon-seems to be waiting. (Shades of Chelm and its fools.) The night is
almost over, but Stanley does find some real cheese, left by a picnicker, for his
supper. The watercolor illustrations have a soft quality that's a nice contrast to
the strength of the predators' faces; the writing style is cozy, but the structure of
the story is weak, a compilation of chase-and-escape incidents. ZS
Carlson, Lori M., comp. Where Angels Glide at Dawn: New Stories from
Latin America; comp. by Lori M. Carlson and Cynthia L. Ventura; introduction
by Isabel Allende; illus. by Jos6 Ortega. Lippincott, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-
397-32425-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32424-3. 114p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade
ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
Ten short stories by highly respected Latin American
writers are newly translated here, some of them for the first time. The dominant
tone is slightly surrealistic, often with strong political overtones; yet these are
all, in terms of content and style, stories about--or accessible to-young
people. Mario Bencastro's "A Clown's Story," which is narrated by a young
man whose father has been institutionalized and who must close down the circus
[112]
he's inherited, reflects "the sad reality" of El Salvador. More subtly, a child
fantasizes scenes to correct the grim reality surrounding her in Reinaldo Arenas'
"With My Eyes Closed," set in Cuba. Ventura's full-page, black-and-white
woodcuts illustrate the book, novelist Isabel Allende introduces it, and a glossary
and brief biographies of the contributors are appended. Generalized geographical
commentaries after each story present a vapid contrast to the forceful fiction:
"Mexico is the only Latin American country that borders the United States. As
a result, many Mexicans are well-informed about events and trends in the United
States." Still, this is an innovative collection much needed for balance in junior
high or high school students' literature classes, which are often primarily
oriented to European and North American representation. BH
C.U. Literature
Cross, Gillian. Twin and Super-Twin; illus. by Maureen Bradley. Holiday
House, 1990. ISBN 0-8234-0840-X. 169p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Twins Ben and David, and their pal Mitch, are in
perennial conflict with the Wellington Street gang. Cross' first chapter shows
the bitter hostility between them as the two groups argue about a Guy Fawkes'
night bonfire. The "Super-Twin" of the title refers to David, whose right
forearm turns into a Roman candle, then into a string of sausages, then into a
snake. There are repeated confrontations with the enemy gang, repeated chances
of adults discovering the magic secret, and repeated dangers caused by David's
arm, such as his unplanned skyward ascent when the arm has changed into a
bunch of balloons. Eventually, but just a bit tediously, the two gangs get
together and enjoy sharing a large, satisfying bonfire and fireworks display.
There is a great deal going on but, as is often true of busy writing, the narrative
is overwhelmed by the ornamentation. First published in England, this is not as
successful as most of the realistic fiction Cross has written, in part because of
the realism and fantasy never mesh, and in part because the fantasy is not
convincing in itself. ZS
Dalton, Annie. Out of the Ordinary. Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
021425-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021424-4. 243p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed.
$14.95.
M 
Gr. 6-9. 
Fifteen-year-old Molly Gurney has been selected,
because of her impulsively penned wish for adventure, to protect "The Change-
Thinge of Launde," a mute child pursued by an evil Magus. Although the word
ordinary is used repeatedly to depict Molly, we know from page two-when she
glances up and sees an octagonal fantasy tower instead of the stone house
everyone else sees-that she's not. This is unfortunate, because Molly's
ordinary life in a low-income, one-parent British home is involving, as opposed
to the sketchy fantasy world that intrudes (in italics) on the book's capably
developed family story. Set up for a final battle that could only go one way, the
Change-Thinge's world is flattened into capitalized clich6s contrasting sharply
with the freshly detailed relationships between Molly and her haphazard mother,
alienated brothers, and newly acquired boyfriend. The most suspenseful conflict
here, in fact, is not the Change-Thinge's fate, but Molly's subtly changing
reality. Thus, while Dalton's first novel is distracted by an overambitious
scheme, her writing shows potential for fiction of more carefully defined focus.
BH
[113 ]
De Lint, Charles. 
The Dreaming Place; illus. by Brian Froud.
Preiss/Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-31571-6. 
138p. (Dragonflight Books).
$14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Nina suspects her funky cousin, Ashley, of using
black magic to change her into a different animal every night during her dreams.
The dreams become nightmares, and Nina, increasingly disturbed, isn't aware
that Ash is trying to help her. For a refreshing change, the fantasy is based on
Native American mythology (Nina's spirit is going "totem-seeking" and she is
under the power of Ya-wau-tse, to whom her hippie parents dedicated her as a
child). Unfortunately, the cover art represents the only medieval/Celtic character
who pops up unexpectedly in this spirit-world. 
An emphasis on realism
sometimes hinders the shift to the fantastic elements (the medieval woman tells
Ash during her trip through the spirit-world that "your father's just a jerk for not
wanting you"). While Ash's motivation during her quest to save Nina is
unconvincing, the plot is compelling, and the Native American flavor is
unusual. The conversational writing style might even encourage some realistic
fiction fans to give this fantasy a try. KP
D.V. Cousins
Doren, Marion. Nell of Blue Harbor. Harcourt, 1990. ISBN 0-15-256889-1.
153p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
The Lucy Maud Montgomerish title aside, this is an
unevenly written but often touching story about a girl who must shoulder the
responsibilities her parents never seem to remember. Nell has always lived on
The Farm, a gentle commune founded by her father and several other Vietnam
vets. After eleven years, though, the family has to leave when Nell's father,
Tip, refuses to turn over some government payments to the common treasury.
Tip is disabled, and Nell's mother, Ilse, doesn't like to work, so the family's
new life in a small Maine seacoast village seems doomed to failure. Tip works
haphazardly, Ilse writes poetry, Nell takes care of baby Abigail, the cooking, and
the house. The hostile characterization of Ilse is superficial, with none of the
subtleties afforded Tip, whose forgetting to get a Christmas present for Nell
seems all the more sad because of his general goodwill. Nell herself is brave and
admirable, but always believable: 
her handling of daily confusion is an
improvisational shuffle as involving as her handling of the (somewhat unlikely)
big moments, such as when Tip and Ilse leave the children alone during a furious
blizzard. Despite the contrivances of the plot, fans of "that Anne-girl" might
find this title entirely to their liking. RS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Ehlert, Lois. Feathers for Lunch; written and illus. by Lois Ehlert. Harcourt,
1990. ISBN 0-15-230550-5. 34p. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
At least as far as cats are concerned, this one's just as
tasty as the illustrator's Growing Vegetable Soup and Eating the Alphabet
(BCCB 7/89). The cat's on the loose ("his food in a can is tame and mild, so
he's gone out for something wild"), stalking through a gorgeous garden of
collage-and-paint flowers to catch the robin, blue jay, house wren, etc., that live
there. Picture books rarely acknowledge so bluntly the predatory instinct,
although most kids will be relieved to find that in this story, "cats can't fly and
they can't soar, and birds know what their wings are for." Like the flowers,
[114]
Ehlert's birds are vividly stylized with no loss to the accuracy of their
depiction-according to an author's note, all the birds are pictured life-sized.
Page design is bold, clean, and witty, and kids will enjoy the printed sound
effects ("O-KA-LEE O-KA-LEE") as much as they will like finding the cat
amidst the camouflage. A picture glossary of "the lunch that got away" is
appended. Yummy. RS
Elkington, John. Going Green: A Kid's Handbook to Saving the Planet; by
John Elkington and others; illus. by Tony Ross. Tilden/Puffin, 1990. Paper
ed. ISBN 0-14-034597-3. 11p. Paper ed. $8.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
A readable handbook is divided into sections that
explain major environmental problems, suggest procedures for a "green audit" to
see what each reader can do at home or school, describe A-to-Z ideas, and list
useful books and organizations for more information. The authors strike a good
balance between realistic discussion and encouraging advice. Their insistence
that each individual has the power to decide and do something ("Refuse, Reuse,
and Recycle") about the serious pollution problems delineated in the text will
inspire young readers not only to new awareness, but also to meaningful
practices, even on a small scale--switching from juice boxes to thermos bottles,
for instance. Ross' abundant, full-color cartoons are funny without being
condescending. Lively, accessible, and practical, this should be required reading
for children and adults together. BH
C.U. Conservation
D.V. Ecological awareness
Elledge, Scott, comp. Wider Than the Sky: Poems to Grow Up With. Harper,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021787-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021786-3. 358p.
Library ed. $19.89; Trade ed. $19.95.
R 
Gr. 5-.
Philip, Neil, comp. A New Treasury of Poetry; illus. by John Lawrence.
Stewart, Tabori & Chang, 1990. ISBN 1-55670-145-4. 256p. $25.00.
R* 
Gr.5-.
Here we have two fine traditional poetry anthologies. Many librarians, some
teachers, and a few parents will already have easy access to the selections, which
range from Shakespeare to Gwendolyn Brooks and represent enduring favorites.
Philip's book is slightly more expensive, $25 to Elledge's $20; but Philip's has
two hundred and eighty-eight poems to Elledge's two hundred, so they're about
even. Philip's book has author, title, and first-line indexes; Elledge's has only 
h
author and title combined. Both anthologies concentrate on the Anglo-American ( 
,
tradition, and both have conservatively good taste; you can't go wrong with the
caliber of poets represented here. The real difference, then, is in organization and ./
packaging. The publishers of Elledge's book boast that "the poems are in P
random order and there are no illustrations." Thus, "you can pick it up at any
time, open to any page, read as many poems as you want, and put it down
again." This is true. Dudley Randall's tragic "Ballad of Birmingham" is
followed immediately by Kenneth Grahame's perky "Duck's Ditty." But alas
for human beings, we think by association, even unto narrative patterns. It's a
shock to the system to leave the world of racist bombs ("She clawed through
bits of glass and brick,/ Then lifted out a shoe] 0, here's the shoe my baby
[ 115]
wore, But, baby, where are you?") and wander into a sylvan glen where "All
along the backwaterj Through the rushes tallJ Ducks are a-dabbling./ Up tails
all!"
The fact is that anthologies tell the anthologist's story, and Philip's story is
coherently told. With an eloquent introduction and eight cohesive but not
restrictive sections, these poems add to each other like kaleidoscopic designs.
What a pleasure to move from A. E. Housman's "blue remembered hills" to
Edward Lear's "beautiful pea-green boat"-two impossible worlds realized with
brilliant imagery. 
In Elledge's book, "The Owl and the Pussy-Cat" is
sandwiched between Sandburg's "Buffalo Dusk" and Alfred, Lord Tennyson's
"The Eagle," breaking up what would have been a compatible tone-flow. In
addition, Philip's book has handsome wood engravings that decorate the pages
without overwhelming the poetry-something graphically akin to the vocal
expression of a poem subtly read aloud. What Elledge does provide is a solid
section of explanatory notes, which will give deep satisfaction to adult readers
("a glimmering girl: Maude Gonne, a woman with whom Yeats had fallen in
love a few years before writing this poem") and entirely lose young readers, each
of whom will have his or her own "glimmering girl" clearly in mind. Almost
every poem in Wider Than the Sky and A New Treasury of Poetry is a diamond;
we are only reminded of the importance of settings. BH
Faville, Barry. Stanley's Aquarium. Oxford, 1990. ISBN 0-19-558197-0.
152p. $14.95.
R* 
Gr. 9-. 
In this unusual and introspective horror story from
New Zealand, narrator Robyn Kemp takes a job mowing lawns for Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Swinton and finds the eccentric Mr. Swinton devoted to his collection of
piranhas ("'I always like the blood to drain out of the meat' he said. 'It helps to
liven up the feeding ritual'"). Stanley says he's been selectively breeding the
"pug-nosed Draculas with fins"-Robyn's term-to produce predatory fish who
can exist in the cold waters of the local and tourist-ridden lake. Robyn's
resemblance to Stanley's lost daughter leads the old man to become obsessed
with her (to the point of a pathetic-and insufficiently explained-physical
overture) as well, whereupon the plot takes several surprising and threatening
twists and progresses with sinister tranquility to its ominous end. The action
here is psychological, not physical; the book starts slowly and unfolds with a
measured but relentless pace through the narration of its wary and humorous
young protagonist. This is a highly literate (and literary-Coleridge's "Kubla
Khan" figures prominently), atmospheric novel that should appeal not only to
horror fans ready for a more Hitchcockian approach, but also to serious readers in
general. DS
Fisher, Leonard Everett. The Oregon Trail. Holiday House, 1990. ISBN 0-
8234-0833-7. 64p. illus. and with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Starting with a striking quote from Amelia Knight's
pioneer diary, Fisher describes the Oregon Trail in this addition to his
handsomely formatted series on national landmarks (see Monticello, BCCB
6/88). The continuous text is well balanced with black-and-white maps,
historical photographs, paintings, and drawings that provide the vivid detail often
lacking in such a brief treatment. While including settler's accounts of Indian
attacks, Fisher makes an honest effort to balance the statements (e.g., about
[ 116 ]
"women and children . . . burned by the savages") with a Native American
viewpoint. There are a few exceptions: Fisher's statement that "From 1836 to
1847, Marcus Whitman nearly succeeded in bringing Christianity and
civilization to the Cayuse" has an imperialistic ring. But while the information
is sometimes generalized, the tone is never romanticized: "We lost everything
but our lives," writes one settler in a letter quoted at the book's end. "And
many," concludes Fisher, "lost everything, including their lives." A solid
companion to Russell Freedman's Children of the Wild West (BCCB 4/84),
though Fisher's book has no bibliography. BH
C.U. The West
Fleischman, Paul. Shadow Play; illus. by Eric Beddows. Zolotow/Harper,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021865-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021858-4. 40p.
Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
With only twenty cents left, two children pass up a
carnival exhibit of "the world's biggest and meanest bull" for a shadow play of
"Beauty and the Beast," which, after all, features the bull as Beast. Like the fairy
tale, staged here before an audience drawn in shadowy pencil textures, this is
about the magic interchange of illusion and reality. It is an ugly, hunchbacked
ticket seller who manipulates the elegant puppets; the latter are elaborately
silhouetted, with Rackham flourishes, in contrast to the plain-drawn, Norman 
7
Rockwell-style children. Fleischman and Beddows have wrought a sophisticated
interchange of text and art (appropriately in black, white, and shades of gray), and
adults will notice a few Greek statues that seem to recall Cocteau's film of
"Beauty and the Beast." Literal-minded young listeners may wonder why the
bull doesn't turn "into the handsome prince he actually was" but will probably
chalk it up to the mystery of the book. The actual power of the book-besides
imaginative crafting on the part of both author and artist-is leaving mystery to
be explored instead of explained. BH
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
Getz, David. Thin Air. Holt, 1990. ISBN 0-8050-1379-2. 120p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Even though his asthma caused Jacob to miss over
forty school days last year, he refuses to be in the special chronic illness class,
especially after a friendly chat with the school principal. Mr. Macombo tells
him the Special class eats and has recess with the other sixth graders, and they
even put on a play about their lives. "It's really quite moving." Just what
Jacob needs, when his father is always out of town, and his mother and older
brother Isaac try to do everything but breathe for him when he has, or looks like
he's going to have, or has just had, an attack. This is too funny to be another
didactic problem novel, with Jacob's mother pre-pouring his juice into individual
portions so he won't exhaust himself, and Isaac all too willing to stay home
from school and take care of Jacob, who's having none of it. "He'll be good to
me! He'll talk to me! He'll read to me. He'll tell me jokes. He'll turn on the
television. He'll switch the channels for me. He'll heat up the soup and hold
the spoon for me!" This first novel is more a picture of a situation than a story,
but the portrait is too true. Jacob's attacks are scary, but he's even more
frightened of the attention for which they single him out. Getz scores some
wicked points off of "disability awareness," and though Jacob would cringe at the
term, the novel makes a strong case for matter-of-fact mainstreaming. The
[ 117]
relationship between the brothers is exasperatedly loving, and Jacob himself is a
likably manic smartmouth and the best kind of hero-he doesn't know how
brave he is. RS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Glassman, Judy. The Morning Glory War. Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44637-
0. 119p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A first novel is based in part on incidents in the
author's childhood in Brooklyn during World War II. Jeannie, the narrator, is in
fifth grade. One facet of the story is Jeannie's correspondence with a soldier,
who responds to her letter for a school cheer-our-boys project with a letter that
says he pictures her as fifteen or sixteen. And cute. And probably a cheerleader.
How can Jeannie resist letting him think so? This causes a mild crisis, as does
the "war" of the title, in which a rival wrecks Jeannie's beloved windowbox of
morning glories. Jeannie collects newspapers to defeat her rival in a contest,
works at a Victory Garden and makes friends with an Italian boy in her
accelerated class. Both the protagonist and the secondary characters are developed
through natural dialogue and involving scenes. This is engagingly written and
gives a convincing picture of a pleasant child and of a period that was a
memorable part of her life. ZS
Gordon, Susan. Asian Indians. Watts, 1990. ISBN 0-531-10976-3. 64p. illus.
with photographs. (Recent American Immigrants). $12.40.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
With a good balance of information on India,
immigration patterns, and Indians living in America today, this is a dry but
valuable addition to a useful series. The book begins with a chapter on early
(1900-1946) immigration from India, describing the newcomers' hard lives as
lumberers, railroad workers, and farm laborers. Social and legal discrimination
against the immigrants was present from the start and, as the book shows, has
continued into the 1980s. Contemporary Indian life in America is shown from a
variety of perspectives, including religious, cultural, and political, and while
there is little anecdotal material, a few Indians (including conductor Zubin
Mehta) are briefly biographied. Plenty of color photos and charts break up the
textbookish format. Although it lacks the personalizing touch of the immigrant
oral histories compiled by Brent Ashabranner (The New Americans) and Janet
Bode (New Kids on the Block, BCCB 11/89), this is a welcome social studies
supplement. An index and brief source list are included. RS
C.U. Social studies
Gregory, Cynthia. Cynthia Gregory Dances Swan Lake; illus. by Martha
Swope. Simon, 1990. ISBN 0-671-68786-7. 
48p. (A Time of My Life
Book). $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Prima ballerina in the American Ballet Theatre,
Gregory focuses on her role as Odette-Odile in "Swan Lake," going through each
part of the day of performance, from breakfast with her small son to her return
home after a post-midnight celebratory party. The photographs are both
handsome and informative. The text gives interesting details of rehearsal,
costume changes, stage makeup, and the dancing itself. Gregory has no false
modesty ("As I enter the room all the dinner guests stand and applaud ... " and
"The people in the audience leap to their feet and shout 'Brava' for me..."), but
[ 118 1
she also makes it clear that the arduous training and technique a prima ballerina
must perfect do merit the kudos. ZS
Hall, Lynn. The Tormentors. Harcourt, 1990. ISBN 0-15-289470-5. 102p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Cesare, nicknamed Sox, is fourteen and the proud
owner of German shepherd Heidi, "the best dog in the neighborhood." He is
inconsolable-and angry-when she is stolen. Neither the mystery nor the
solution here are particularly ingenious, but Sox's love for Heidi and his
tenacious efforts to get her back are conveyed with direct honesty and empathy.
The narrative is swift--"So, time was important. I had to find her fast"-and
easy to follow. Sox is a brave and appealing hero, with whom many boys,
especially, will be able to identify. RS
C.U. Reading, reluctant
D.V. Pets, love for
Harley, Rex. Here and Never. Gollancz/Trafalgar Square, 1990. ISBN 0-575-
04754-2. 127p. $19.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Alice can't understand why her mother has brought
her to Cornwall to stay with Uncle Max, and she's further puzzled when she
hears, some days later, a telephone conversation in which Max is expressing a
troubled concern to Mum. What Harley does, with great success, is to use
Alice's first-person account as a foil for what Alice is blocking: the suicide of
her lover. Alice's diary entries detailing the relationship are interspersed with
scenes of the Cornwall visit. In fine style, the author manages to sustain
suspense while clarifying the mystery. Both the plot and the characters are spare
and sharp in their development. 
ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Uncle-niece relations
Haynes, Mary. The Great Pretenders. Bradbury, 1990. ISBN 0-02-743452-4.
135p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
New girl Molly has seriously offended Eloise (queen
of the fifth grade and daughter of the mayor); now a whole lonely summer
stretches before Molly, who stays with a babysitter while the other kids play
ball, ride bikes, and elaborately ignore her. A grudgingly undertaken friendship
with a younger boy and pantomime lessons (along with some words of wisdom)
from a retired actress help matters out, and if Molly and Eloise don't become
friends they do at least declare a truce. While the story isn't really new, it has
the advantages of a credible and likable protagonist, a familiar situation, and an
authentic small-town summer atmosphere. The writing is occasionally self-
conscious but more often shrewdly offhand, as in a funny sequence of insult-and-
hang-up calls between Eloise and Molly. RS
D.V. Moving, adjustment to
Heller, Ruth. Merry-Go-Round: A Book About Nouns; written and illus. by
Ruth Heller. Grosset, 1990. ISBN 0-448-40085-5. 43p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
"Nouns name a person, place or thing, a damsel, a
forest, a dragon, a king. These nouns are all common, and they're very nice, but
proper nouns are more precise. King Arthur is this person." After a graphic
[ 119 ]
display of examples in her characteristically lavish double spreads, Heller goes
on to versify the distinctions between abstract, concrete, compound, and
collective nouns, adding rules for the 
singular, plural, possessive, and
determiner as well. The artist's skill at juggling color and pattern in eye-
catching designs makes up for the awkward drafting of faces; animals and objects
outweigh humans here, anyway, and the book will prove just as useful as
Heller's others on words (Kites Sail High: A Book about Verbs, BCCB 1/89)
and on biological concepts (Chickens Aren't the Only Ones, BCCB 2/82). BH
C.U. Language arts
Herzig, Alison Cragin. Sam and the Moon Queen; by Alison Cragin Herzig and
Jane Lawrence Mali. Clarion, 1990. ISBN 0-395-53342-2. 168p. $13.95.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Sam and his mother have fallen on tight times, and
have had to move into a tiny apartment with Mom's friend Mona. But things
are even harder for a young homeless girl Sam meets and christens December.
She is tough and untrusting, caring only for her dog Harley and her friend Annie,
a shopping-cart lady who paints lipstick lines on her face and who can foretell
the future. Really. Annie tells Sam to get December off the street, but her
insistence isn't all that convincing in a novel that has the faintest whiff of it's-
fun-to-be-homeless, where the biggest danger of sleeping in the street is being
picked up by the "white van" from the hospital. To Sam, December's pathetic
collection of toys looks like "the lighted things you see in store windows at
night." December gets help for her dog from a lady passing through the park
who recommends a good veterinarian. "She gave me her doctor's name and told
me to say that Harley was a friend of her dog Football." And why do people
pick through trash? "We just hate to see good things thrown away because they
got a little chip here or a crack there." The solution to the problem is just as
sentimentalized as the problem itself: Sam's kind landlord (whom everybody
thought was just the janitor) makes a cozy rent-free room for December and her
dog, and Sam's mother wins fourteen thousand dollars in the lottery. This is a
hodgepodge of good intentions and melodrama, but kids may enjoy the exploits
of Sam and December, a plucky pair indeed. RS
D.V. Resourcefulness
Hickman, Martha Whitmore. When Andy's Father Went to Prison; illus. by
Larry Raymond. Whitman, 1990. ISBN 0-8075-8874-1. 40p. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
From its opening lines--"Andy Wilson was feeling
very grumpy and sad. He was also feeling very scared"-to its methodical plot,
this revision of When Can Daddy Come Home? (1983) is determined to fill a
gap. The case-study scenario is cleaned up, however, with a family whose
airtight unity and loyalty help Dad toward parole and seem to guarantee his
rehabilitation. Black-and-white illustrations, which are framed, like the text, in
peach-toned paper, also show a scrubbed and clean-cut cast. The writing and the
drafting are competent, the tone purposive. For kids to whom this approach
may seem heavy-handed, the title at least serves fair warning. BH
C.U. Bibliotherapy
D.V. Adaptability
[ 120]
Hubbard, Woodleigh. C Is for Curious: An ABC of Feelings; written and illus.
by Woodleigh Hubbard. Chronicle Books, 1990. ISBN 0-87701-679-8. 34p.
$12.95.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
Working on a conceptual level more abstract than is
usual for an alphabet book, Hubbard is variously successful in evoking the A
(Angry) through Z (Zealous) of emotions. "Angry" is a redfaced dog-dinosaur
beast, its green-scaled black body (with feet that look like strawberries) jagged
across a double-page spread. Most kids will get the connection. What, though,
is "zealous" about a dog with a flower between its teeth, waltzing in a moonlit
meadow? 
The cows jumping over the moon are clearly "happy," but is
"impatient" the best word for a dog straining at a leash to get a mouse? These
may be over-literal questions, but they're just the ones a young audience will
have. The visual appeal of the book is less questionable. Unlike too many
other picture books mining the postmodern vein, this one never seems self-
consciously arty or smirking in its weirdness. 
Hubbard's animals have
recognizable ancestors in dogs, cows, and Picasso (for a five-legged "playful"
something-or-other), and their angular shapes and hot colors are vibrantly
matched. The book's humor is occasionally adult ("obedient" is a haloed piano
practicer) but not at the expense of the intended audience, who will readily make
up their own adjectives for this handsome array of funny animals doing funny
things. RS
Irwin, Hadley. Can't Hear You Listening. McElderry, 1990. ISBN 0-689-
50513-2. 202p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Tracy, the sixteen-year-old narrator, has two serious
worries. One is that her relationship with her mother (a best-selling writer) has
become tense and acrimonious. The other is that one of her trio of good friends,
Stanley, has become addicted to alcohol and drugs, although he claims he's in
control and has no addiction. There are other facets to the story: Tracy's job;
her friendship with Mary Agnes and Amy; her concern abut what seems to be a
temporary rift between her parents. Basically, this is-albeit well-written-a
slow and repetitive progression to Tracy's decision that it is more important to
tell someone about Stanley and to get help for him than it is to keep silent. So
Tracy tells Mom and this brings them together, conveniently ending their
communications failure. Not Irwin's best, but a realistic enough problem novel.
ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Mother-daughter relations
Ivimey, John W. The Complete Story of the Three Blind Mice; illus. by
Victoria Chess. Joy Street/Little, 1990. ISBN 0-316-13867-3. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
How did they get that way? Ivimey's verse tells:
"Three Small Mice. Three Small Mice. Pined for some fun. Pined for some
fun." The Small Mice leave home ("and all the luggage they took was a
comb"), beg for food from the Farmer ("Three Starved Mice. Three Starved
Mice"), and get chased into the brambles by the farmer's wife. "Three blind
mice ... ." This pourquoi gloss on an old rhyme was written at the turn of the
century, and Chess clearly relishes its gruesome charm. The characters-all
mice-are tidily placed in a cozy vernal setting that would be picturesque were
the Farmer's Wife's eyes somewhat less malevolent. And as for the Three,
blinded-no, you never have seen such a sight in your life. RS
[ 121 ]
Joseph, Lynn. Coconut Kind of Day: Island Poems; illus. by Sandra Speidel.
Lothrop, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09120-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09119-
9. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
K-3. 
Thirteen poems recalling an idyllic childhood on the
island of Trinidad are set into double spreads textured with intense pastels on a
rough surface. Some of the descriptions are vividly rhythmic, as in "The Jumbi
Man," who is forceful enough to send young listeners diving under the covers.
However, the dialect seems inconsistent. In "Miss Teacher," the narrator says
"Miss, I sorry I late ag'in"; several pages later, "We up and pullin' again." In
another poem, "we both start yellin"' in one verse but are "standing" in the next.
The pictures of black children playing against backgrounds of lush tropical and
seaside scenes are evocative of a Caribbean paradise as nostalgic as the verses.
BH
Joubert, Jean. White Owl and Blue Mouse; tr. by Denise Levertov; illus. by
Michel Gay. Zoland Books, 1990. ISBN 0-944072-13-5. 64p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-3. 
The little blue mouse has decided it's time the white
owl stopped scaring her family: "this wicked bird who ate all the mice must be
driven away from this part of the world." She leads him on a chase until dawn,
when, confused by the bright sun, the owl falls into the hands of a pedlar who
sells him to the circus. 
Children will appreciate the blue mouse's change of
heart, despite its unlikelihood, when she sees the owl forlorn in his cage, and
will be happy when she frees him. This is a quiet tale, satisfying in its simple
language and patterns. Michel Gay's ink-and-watercolor illustrations have the
same direct appeal as the text, with a cartooned expressiveness reminiscent of
good Disney. The book's spacious design will encourage those just beyond
beginning-reader stage; Levertov's translation makes for smooth reading aloud as
well. RS
D.V. Friendship values
Klausner, Janet. Talk about English: How Words Travel and Change; illus. by
Nancy Doniger. Crowell, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04833-5; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-690-04831-9. 198p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
This chatty, anecdotal history of the English language
traces it from its Saxon roots through Norman, Latin, and Greek influence to
modern English. The cultural forces behind linguistic evolution, such as
exploration and invasion, are briefly and clearly summarized, and individual
figures of importance (Chaucer and Shakespeare) given their due. The book is
chock-full of examples: Old English and Middle English phrases are contrasted
with modem "translations," and Latinate formations contrasted with Anglo-
Saxon; the occasional guessing game appears as well. Chapters also examine
the origins of plant and animal names, coinages and eponyms, and words whose
meaning has shifted over time. Klausner's scholarship is thorough, she has a
welcome resistance to some favorite and faulty word-origin myths, and her
informal style makes a grand and possibly daunting subject highly accessible to
interested readers. There is no index of words discussed, but suggestions for
further reading are appended. DS
C.U. Language arts
[ 122 ]
Krementz, Jill. A Very Young Musician; written and illus. with photographs
by Jill Krementz. Simon, 1990. ISBN 0-671-72687-0. 48p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
As in other of this author's photo-essays, the pictures
(all in color) are of superb quality and the text is in the first person. Here the
narrator is fifth grader Josh Broder, a trumpet player. Josh enjoys playing his
instrument, participating in musical activities in and out of school and, in the
summer, studying at Interlochen. He's serious about music lessons and practice,
but it's clear that he has a sense of humor and enjoys other interests, so the book
has some lightness and variety. In addition to describing his musical life, Josh
discusses all of the instruments in the school band. The text has little
spontaneity, but it's informative and will probably appeal strongly to other
children who are music students. ZS
C.U. Music
Leibold, Jay. 
Fight for Freedom; illus. by Leslie Morrill.
Montgomery/Bantam, 1990. Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-28766-4. 116p. (Choose
Your Own Adventure). Paper ed. $2.75.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
You are a young American student who has won a
trip to South Africa, and you will be surprised to discover that this trip is far
more educational then those generally offered by the Choose Your Own
Adventure agency. It's 1976, and you visit an impoverished community for
blacks, get (don't get) caught in a pass raid, help (don't help) black freedom
fighters, stop (don't stop) white terrorists. Most of all, you listen to or recall
lectures from your accompanying teacher Joyce Jenkins: "Look at how the
security forces are trying to muzzle Steven Biko and the Black Consciousness
movement. If you keep eliminating the leadership, instead of having an
organized opposition to negotiate with, of course you'll have anarchy and
violence." This is doggedly didactic, with both vocabulary and conceptual levels
above the usual for this series. Despite the popular format and the timely topic,
it's really the sort of book calculated to please nobody: series fans will get bored
with the rhetoric, and activists will be annoyed by the turn-to-page-ninety-or-
forty-seven approach to the South African conflict. In a book about racial myths
and realities, to have "you" be a half-black kid from New York City who has
"inherited" his father's Trinidadian accent also seems askew. RS
C.U. Social studies
Livingston, Myra Cohn, comp. If the Owl Calls Again: A Collection of Owl
Poems; illus. by Antonio Frasconi. McElderry, 1990. ISBN 0-689-50501-9.
114p. $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 6-10. 
Lest you shy away from what appears to be a
specialized topic, come and read. Owls have attracted great poets (of greatly -
varied cultures), whose range of emotion in capturing these birds with words will
surprise many a reader. Livingston's introduction evokes the owl's mythical
resonance, and her list of contents forms a rhythmic incantation of its own-
"Owls in the Light, Owls in Flight, Owls to Delight, Owls of Night, Owls to
Fright" Frasconi's arresting black-and-white woodcuts further the total effect of
an elegant piece of bookmaking. However, it is the poems themselves that lure
one on, from haunting Native American chants ("The owl feathers sing in the
air") to funny verses by David McCord (especially "The Hitchhiker"), X. J.
Kennedy, John Gardner, Jack Prelutsky, Lewis Carroll, and even Sir Walter
[123 1
Scott, who rarely cracked a smile in print. Some of the poems are, of course,
hushed, including Livingston's own ("If you seek answers/ you will find them/
trembling/ on the ground"), or summon the mouse's point of view ("where the
smallest letters/ cower in the dark" as Esbensen writes). The poets range from
Shakespeare to the little-known but sharp-sighted Clarice Short. Whether the
selections are conceptually sophisticated, as is the piece from Julia Fields'
"Alabama" or simple folk rhymes, they are accessible in style. The subject
lends itself to sonorous effects, and if there seem a few too many to-wit-to-woos
on a straight readthrough, browsers won't be struck by it. In fact, this is made
to order for reading aloud; teachers take note, and start with the translation of
Robert Desnos' playful lines, all ending in long u sounds. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Lyons, Mary E. Sorrow's Kitchen: The Life and Folklore of Zora Neale
Hurston. Scribner's, 1990. 
ISBN 0-684-19198-9. 
144p. illus. with
photographs. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Arrogant, demanding, and intimidating, Zora Neale
Hurston must have been far more admirable than likable. Young adulthood took
her from a small black community in Florida, through the South as a wardrobe
girl with a theater troupe, to high school and first years of college in Baltimore
and Washington. 
By 1925 she was in Harlem, studying anthropology at
Columbia University, writing stories, and working as a secretary to the novelist
Fannie Hurst. Collecting folklore in Florida, Louisiana, and the West Indies,
Hurston sought to preserve authentic black stories, myths, and beliefs, even
passing herself off once as a travelling bootlegger to get people to trust her.
While this biography is occasionally disorganized, mentioning a second marriage
long after mention of its dissolution, for example, it does a spirited job of
conveying the subject's passions and accomplishments. Lyons manages an
intimate tone that easily weaves quotes from Hurston's books with the
biographer's own perceptions: "Zora was the most amusing member of the
Harlem group, but she also had a stubborn, even unpleasant streak." Lengthy
excerpts from Hurston's fiction, autobiography, and folklore collections are well-
chosen; readers will probably especially enjoy Hurston's investigations into the
voodoo of New Orleans and Haiti. "At midnight the lid was lifted. Here was the
moment! The bones of the cat must be passed through my mouth until one
tasted bitter." Among the photos are several portraits of Hurston and-for the
horrifically inclined-one of an alleged zombie. RS
C.U. Anthropology
Matas, Carol. Code Name Kris. Scribner's, 1990. ISBN 0-684-19208-X.
152p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
In a sequel to Lisa's War (BCCB 9/89), a story of the
rescue operation mounted by Danish citizens to save Danish Jews from a Nazi
roundup, it is Jesper (code name Kris) who is the narrator. Jesper has continued
working as a member of the resistance; he thinks often of Lisa, now safely in
Sweden, and of her brother Stefan, who had been his best friend. The story is
told as a flashback, as Jesper, now imprisoned, recalls his underground struggle,
describing with terrible clarity the German treatment of the Danes and the
courageous persistence of the resistance fighters. Matas maintains Jesper's point
of view, and does not overwhelm his own dramatic story with background
[124]
details, so that the book is strong in its narrative quality despite its documentary
aspects. ZS
D.V. Courage
McClung, Robert. Hugh Glass, Mountain Man. Morrow, 1990. ISBN 0-688-
08092-8. 166p. illus. with photographs. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
An appended afterword, a list of acknowledgments,
and a bibliography attest to the research done by the author and indicate the
varied accounts that led him to write this book as historical fiction rather than
biography. It begins with Glass at age fifty, covering the years 1823-1824 and
giving a few facts about some of his subsequent adventures. Like other trappers,
Glass was repeatedly exposed to danger; often encountering hostile Native
Americans, he felt most betrayed by the two men (Jim Bridger and John
Fitzgerald) who left him alone and took his rifle with them after Glass had been
severely mauled by a grizzly. They had been ordered to stay with him and bury
him when he died. Miraculously, he survived. This is a true survival story as
well as the story of the protagonist's determined efforts to track down Bridger and
Fitzgerald and gain revenge. Although there are passages that sag a bit, for the
most part the book is well-written, with good pace, a balance of fact and fiction,
and-expectably, from an author who is a biologist-vivid details about the
flora, fauna, and terrain of the mountain country through which Hugh Glass
traveled. A few period prints are included. ZS
D.V. Resourcefulness; Self-reliance
McDonald, Collin. Nightwaves: Scary Tales for After Dark. Cobblehill, 1990.
ISBN 0-525-65043-1. 112p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Some new and some time-proven plots have been
expanded into eight mostly contemporary tales. The original stories include
"Geraniums," in which a mother transforms her rebellious daughter into a
flower, and "The Radio," in which a boys' radio portends his fate. The kinks
have not all been worked out-it is unclear in "Color Crazy" why certain colors
drive some people, but not others, mad; and in "Changing Burt," we're never
sure if Rick has succeeded in changing his grandfather's old dog into a sabre-
toothed tiger. Creepiest are stories inspired by the oral tradition of campers-in
"The Dam," a woman sees the ghost of her childhood friend, and a group of girls
on their first camping trip is terrorized by a phantom murderer in "Forest Eyes."
The writing style is occasionally choppy, but it is also brisk and true to teenage
conversational jargon. Readers searching for a new book of "really scary stories"
will be satisfied with the variety of horrible fates met by these young
protagonists. KP
Meyer, Carolyn. Because of Lissa; Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-28802-4. 
[19 2p].
The Problem with Sidney; Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-28803-2. [176p]. Each book:
Bantam, 1990. (Hotline). Paper ed. $2.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 7-10. 
After Lissa Mainzer kills herself, four friends get
together and start a teen problem hotline in her memory. You can see the
calculated potential for a series, as the friends try to counsel callers, deal with
their own problems, and fight, love, and compete among themselves.
Information about various teen problems is earnestly worked in, and Meyer is a
fluent enough writer to keep several subplots going: will Angie Montoya break
[ 125 1
up with her too-macho boyfriend to date wacky Jack Mertz? Will Lan Nguyen
get his sister away from her abusive husband? Will rich kid Kurt Lundquist
continue to resist the sultry allure of his girlfriend's seductive mother? Book 2,
The Problem with Sidney, resolves some but not all of these questions, raises
others, and helps the homeless. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Mother Nature. Mother Nature Nursery Rhymes; [by Sandy Stryker and Mindy
Bingham]; illus. by Itoko Maeno. Advocacy Press, 1990. ISBN 0-911655-01-
8. 32p. $14.95.
NR 
2-4 yrs. 
How many clich6d phrases, sentimentalized images,
forced rhymes, star-crossed rhythms, and grammatical distortions can you forgive
for good intentions? If it's a lot, you probably won't mind reciting "Five little
penguin chicks, all in a row,/ Dressed up for dinner with no place to go./ 'Oh!'
they imagine, 'What wonder! How nice/ Something to eat besides raw fish on
ice!" If it's not a lot, you may balk at chanting "Plastic and glass/ Plastic and
glass/ Recycle these items/ Don't put in the trash." The watercolor paintings in
which these verses are couched are competently drafted, though somewhat
oversweetened. Like all simple forms of literature, nursery rhymes require the
most inventive touch to avoid becoming simplistic. The lessons here are
undeniably important, but admonition has overcome imagination. BH
D.V. Ecological awareness
Murphy, Jim. The Boys' War: Confederate and Union Soldiers Talk About the
Civil War. 
Clarion, 1990. 
ISBN 0-89919-893-7. 
110p. illus. with
photographs. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Just in time to follow up on the interest stirred by the
PBS series on the Civil War, this will serve long-term student research needs as
well. Various chapters cover young soldiers' enlistment, battle experiences,
living conditions, food supplies, medical and sanitary problems, and
imprisonment. Drum and bugle corps boys get special attention, since they
tended to be the youngest recruits. The author acknowledges that we have no
statistics on how many underage boys fought or died in the war, but there were
many; and some of their eyewitness accounts, here woven into background
explanations, are vivid. Unfortunately, the sources for these are not directly
documented, although readers could track a few of them from names cited in the
text to names appearing in titles of the bibliography (Private Elisha Stockwell,
Jr. Sees the Civil War, for instance). 
Numerous historical photographs,
reproduced in sepia and well-placed in the text, add significant impact to the
information. BH
C.U. History-U.S.-Civil War
Parnall, Peter. Woodpile; written and illus. by Peter Parnall. Macmillan, 1990.
ISBN 0-02-770155-7. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Using his distinctive technique of black ink and
colored pencil, Pamall draws and describes his woodpile, with the story's limited
action provided by the small animals that live in, under, and around the wood.
An occasional flash of color is revealed in a tiny apple, two lilac blossoms, a
piece of blue sky. The author's self-indulgent musings ("My woodpile is
memories of sore muscles, old schooners .. .") about the logs and the animals
[ 126]
are too formless to interest a lively story-hour audience. Young listeners will
question the description of a wasp's home--"She chews rotten wood from maple
and oak till it is fine enough to flow, and forms it into thin mfch6 to build her
paper home. When the sun climbs high and creatures from Beyond seek shelter
in the shadowy pile, rising air keeps her home moist and cool." Teetering
between poetic and static, this book will need the concentrated attention of a one-
on-one, quiet-time lap reading. KP
C.U. Nature study
Philip, Neil, comp. A New Treasury of Poetry 
See review and imprint
under Elledge, Wider Than the Sky, reviewed above.
Le Prince de Beaumont, Marie. Beauty and the Beast; tr. by Richard Howard;
illus. by Hilary Knight. Simon, 1990. ISBN 0-671-70720-5. 36p. $14.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
This puzzling edition of Beauty and the Beast was
first published 27 years ago by Macmillan, a fact indicated nowhere in the book,
including CIP information and jacket copy. Thus the undated afterword by Jean
Cocteau, who died in 1963, appears to have been voiced from the grave for a
1990 picture book. Most mysterious of all is Cocteau's theory that the story "is
British in origin," inspired by ghost stories and rumors "of certain great families
who were hidden away because of some birthmark or blemish that might frighten
society and dishonor a noble name. Possibly one of these monsters, shut up in
some Scottish castle," gave Madame Le Prince de Beaumont the idea. Cocteau,
who created a classic film based on the tale in 1946, surely knew of Le Prince de
Beaumont's earlier French version and some of its predecessors. Howard's
translation is graceful but literal, resulting in a long text for a picture book.
Knight's illustrations are refined, Disneyesque caricatures with sweeping lines
and touches of art deco and of Chinese painting cast in technicolor. Of more
interest to fairy tale collectors than for library or school collections with other
versions available. BH
Rappaport, Doreen, ed. American Women: Their Lives in Their Words.
Crowell, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04817-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04819-
X. 318p. illus. with photographs. Library ed. $16.89; Trade ed. $16.95.
R* 
Gr. 9-. 
The material in this collection is arranged by thematic
sections ("Settling the West," "Work and Politics," "Race and Ethnicity," etc.)
introduced by and interspersed with the editor's competent historical, cultural,
and biographical commentary. The voices gathered here (approximately sixty
women in all) are rich and diverse: the old and young, wealthy and poor, joyful
and grief-stricken are all heard from, and eras from the Colonial to the
contemporary represented. Sources range from the famous (Anne Bradstreet has a
poem included) to the anonymous (a turn-of-the-century Chinese woman tells of
her sale into American prostitution), and well-known pieces such as Sojourner
Truth's "Ain't I a Woman" speech appear alongside the lesser or even completely
unknown, such as an understated, moving, and previously unpublished account
of the nineteenth-century courtship of a well-bred Spanish-American girl. Even
those who approach the book only as a tool for research will find themselves
engrossed in the stories-don't miss Jacqueline Cochran's cocky account of
female World War II pilots testing planes the men were afraid to fly. Black-and-
[ 127 ]
white photographs (too often undated) appear throughout the text; source notes, a
further bibliography, and an index are provided. DS
C.U. 
History, U.S.
D.V. Pride in background and heritage; Sex roles
Sakai, Kimiko. Sachiko Means Happiness; illus. by Tomie Arai. Children's
Book Press, 1990. ISBN 0-89239-065-4. 32p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
The natural egocentricity of children often contributes
to their resentment and grief when a beloved grandparent no longer knows them.
Here the child (and the narrator) is Sachiko, named for her grandmother. She
describes the change in Grandma, her resentment when Grandma doesn't know
her, her anger when Grandma says she is five years old and wants to go home to
Sher mother. They go for a walk, and young Sachiko (who looks to be about ten
or eleven, and sounds that age) realizes that this is still the person she loves;
nderly, she invites her "friend" to come home with her and stay. This picture
of a victim of Alzheimer's Disease and of a child's reaction is particularly
affecting because it is in first person and told with simplicity and directness.
The family heritage is Asian, but the situation is of universal interest. The fact
that the story deals with rather complex emotions and a mature response
indicates a discrepancy between the reader who will understand the nuances and
the picture book audience for which it seems intended. The full-page crayon
drawings are bright but repetitive; the print is large, with space below and an
ornamental floral panel to the side. ZS
D.V. Grandmother-child relations; Illness, adjustment to
Schulman, L.M., comp. The Random House Book of Sports Stories; illus. by
Thomas B. Alien. Random House, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-92874-1;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-82874-7. 248p. Library ed. $16.99; Trade ed. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
In an oversize book with handsome pencil drawings,
Schulman includes both short stories and excerpts from books; the sixteen
selections are by some well-known authors (Hemingway, Thurber, Saroyan) as
well as by some less well known. Readers who are familiar with the superb
baseball writing of Roger Angell may be surprised to find that his piece here is a
tennis story. The selections have diversity of style as well as representing a
diversity of sports; the writing ranges from fairly good (John Updike's "Man and
Daughter in the Cold," which is at times ornate, or James Thurber's "You Could
Look It up," a baseball story heavy with "nix," "skidoo," and "Whatta ya
mean?") to very good, as in Jay Neugeboren's "Ebbets Field," which is artfully
constructed and written with pace and polish, or a fantasy-touched tennis story,
"The Phantom Drive," by William T. Tilden II. 
ZS
Sheppard, Jeff. The Right Number of Elephants; illus. by Felicia Bond.
Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025616-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025615-X.
32p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
Counting backwards is a playful challenge for
children who have just learned to count up to ten; countdowns also have the
inherent suspense of leading to some kind of take-off. Add to that a wildly
inventive series of illustrations depicting the number of elephants needed to pull
a train out of a tunnel (ten) to paint a ceiling (nine) to supply shade at the beach
(eight) etc., and you come up with some thoroughly imaginative picture book
[ 128 ]
entertainment for young counters. Perhaps most satisfying is the scene of the
six-elephant phalanx shielding the small protagonist with "a bit of company on
a very deserted street at a very deserted time of day." But the flying circus (five),
the elephants tripping an opponent in a race (four), and the very special friend
(one) are not bad, either. Bond has used neat tricks of linear perspective and
color contrast to speed the pictures along, allowing plenty of space for the action
to unfold and exaggerating facial expressions and body poses without overdoing
them. Ten for tempo. BH
C.U. 
Counting
Sherman, Eileen Bluestone. Independence Avenue. Jewish Publication Society,
1990. ISBN 0-8276-0367-3. 145p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Elias, a Russian Jewish immigrant of fourteen, has
come to America with his Hebrew teacher, pretending that the man is his uncle
and that he himself is seventeen. By this ruse, he hopes to earn enough to bring
his family to Texas to join him-Texas, because his journey has been made
possible by the Galveston Movement, which promised jobs and housing to
Jewish immigrants. However, it is in Kansas City that Elias finds work, adapts
to the new land and the new language, and eventually achieves financial security,
romance (daughter of the boss), and a reunion with his six-year-old brother, the
family's only survivor of a pogrom that happened after Elias left Russia. The
story begins in 1907, and the period details are carefully consistent. The
characters tend to be stock figures (Elias is a Horatio Alger hero; his employer,
Mr. Birenbaum, a heart-of-gold benefactor; and his relative, Aunt Ethel, a heart-
of-flint do-gooder who capitulates in the end) and the writing style is pedestrian,
with an occasional error; the four-time use of "traucoma" instead of "trachoma"
can hardly be a typo. ZS
D.V. Industry
Shulevitz, Uri. Toddlecreek Post Office; written and illus. by Uri Shulevitz.
Farrar, 1990. ISBN 0-374-37635-2. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
This picture-book fable about society's decline of
humane concern describes a village post office that's really a social center until
an inspector closes it down. Vernon Stamps, the postmaster who has been kind
to strays both human and canine, must lock up his benign shelter and go to "a
big city far away, where there is much post-office business but little time for a
friendly hello." The strays drift or die, the post office is torn down, and "all that
remains are its two flower boxes." Shulevitz's watercolor art emphasizes
angular shapes and, appropriately, sunset colors. The light fades with the
appearance of the militaristic postal inspector, whose gray-blue gloom throws a
shadow across the floor and drains the room of warmth. Don't look for realism
here: the dog that's supposed to be "part wolf and part Alaskan sled dog" looks
more like a hound, and the figures have an automaton quality almost like
puppets. However, it's not the stylization as much as the portentous tone that
will leave preschoolers puzzled. Discuss this one with independent readers,
especially as a companion to the Provensens' Shaker Lane (BCCB 10/87) and
other books marking the passage of time and its erosions of tradition. BH
D.V. 
Community life
[ 129]
Sloat, Teri, ad. The Eye of the Needle; based on a Yupik tale as told by Betty
Huffman; ad. and illus. by Teri Sloat. Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44623-0.
32p. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
From what is evidently a reshaped amalgam of Yupik
folktales, Sloat has created a picture book that will make smooth reading aloud
to children who appreciate cumulative stories. When Grandmother sends Amik
out to hunt after a long Alaska winter, he finds consecutively larger sea
creatures, all of which he swallows, from needlefish to a whale. Then, of
course, he's too big to fit back into the hut, and Grandmother has to pull him in
through the smoke hole with her magic needle. Never mind; he spits everything-
out, enough to feed the whole community. The rounded shapes of the softly
textured, color-pencil drawings fill each page with energetic action. However
true this may or may not be to the Yupik tradition, it's a jolly celebration of the
oral stage. And who wouldn't love to go out into the world, become a giant,
return home, and regain manageable proportions in time to be taken care of?
You can have your seal and eat it too. BH
Steel, Danielle. Martha's New Puppy; ISBN 0-385-30166-9. Max Runs Away;
ISBN 0-385-30213-4. Each book: illus. by Jacqueline Rogers. Delacorte,
1990. 
32p. $9.95.
NR 
Gr. K-2. 
In Martha's New Puppy, the author deals with caring
for a pet and with the child of divorce who spends time in two households. The
story line is frail, the writing style is pedestrian, and the illustrations have the
sugary quality of some inexpensive greeting cards. These flaws are present, also,
in Max Runs Away, which is equally sentimental and even more pedantic, as
seven-year-old Max, resentful at how little time his parents seem to have for him
(both have jobs, and there is always trouble with the younger twins) runs away
but realizes that he loves his siblings and that everybody loves him. The books
are purpose-dominated, contrived, and condescending. ZS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Pets, care of
D.V. Jealousy, overcoming
Thiele, Colin. Jodie's Journey. Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026133-
1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026132-3. 169p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
In the weeks before her twelfth birthday, Jodie
Carpenter is jumping her horse for a junior championship when the soreness and
swelling in her joints becomes unbearable, and she's diagnosed as having
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. As Jodie's condition deteriorates from clumsy
movements to a brace to a wheelchair, she suffers not only from crippling pain
but also from others' incomprehension of it. Thiele's detailing of this process is
smoothly incorporated into a horse story that culminates in the devastating
Adelaide Hills bush fires known as Ash Wednesday (1983). The several plot
dimensions will involve young readers as well as inform them about the disease
that keeps the author in a hospital while he writes his novels. BH
D.V. Courage; Handicaps, adjustment to
Thomas, Joyce Carol, comp. ed. A Gathering of Flowers: Stories about Being
Young in America. Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026174-9; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-06-026173-0. 236p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
[ 130
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
Eleven short stories (all but one written for this
collection) make up, in the editor's words, a "sampling of the rich colors and
voices that make up today's America," including "stories about Anglos, stories
about Hispanics, stories about Asians, Native Americans, and African
Americans." 
The collection is indeed rich and colorful, containing strong
individual voices that range in tone from Lois Lowry's cool, gothic-scented "The
Harringtons' Daughter" through Gerald Haslam's matter-of-factly bizarre
"Upstream" to the editor's liquid and sensual "Young Reverend Zelma Lee
Moses." This is a subtle and sophisticated assortment, but one dominated by an
appealing honesty and authenticity. DS
Todd, Leonard. Squaring Off. Viking, 1990. ISBN 0-670-83377-0. 
150p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Set in 1950s Savannah, this old-fashioned coming-of-
age story is filled with boyish sentiment. Motherless, thirteen-year-old Willy
longs for his father Trag's love and respect-and for LuJane Jessup, a small-time
stripper that Trag brings home one night. LuJane is like the Julia Roberts
character in Pretty Woman: impulsive, smart, funny, and beautiful, she teaches
both father and son the real meaning of love. There's a lot in here about
LuJane's magnificent breasts, which figure largely in helping Willy to escape a
crazed simpleton. Willy's friendship with Champ Womack, a young black
boxer, is authentically uneasy, beginning in a tense scene where Willy tries to
boss the other boy around. 
While this relationship is more real and less
predictable than the father/son/stripper triangle, its fictional development is
hampered by an overly-calculated plot that too often turns on the unlikely or
coincidental. Thematic concerns are too insistently clear, with the best scenes,
in fact, going to LuJane, who seems the least hampered by overexplanation, or
"excessive sufficiency," a phrase she uses to explain why she "absolutely"
couldn't wear a padded bra. Boys will love LuJane, whose appeal is even more
primal than sex: "She was the most beautiful woman Willy had ever seen,
except maybe for his mother." RS
D.V. Father-son relations; Growing up
Van Kirk, Eileen. A Promise to Keep. Lodestar, 1990. ISBN 0-525-67319-9.
147p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Sent from London to spend the wartime summer of
1940 on the farm of distant cousins, fourteen-year-old Ellie and her older sister
Johanna are both smitten by the charms of Curt, a handsome young Austrian
refugee. Both girls are patriotic, but it is Ellie whose compassion is so clear to
Curt that it is to her he turns when he is hiding a wounded German flyer who
has parachuted into the area. Faced with that knowledge, Ellie is torn: should
she report the flyer (and Curt) to the military authorities, or should she protect
Curt and help a man who is, while an enemy, seriously wounded? The situation
presented is an interesting one, and the author, in this first novel, makes it
understandable and even touching that Ellie should choose to be loyal to her
friend Curt. What isn't quite as believable is the total blindness of all the
English to Curt's fierce loyalty to the Third Reich and to the rather obvious fact
that someone is stealing food and clothing that just might be benefitting the
man who is being hunted. ZS
[ 131
Van Raven, Pieter. A Time of Troubles. Scribner's, 1990. ISBN 0-684-
19212-8. 180p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
In this thoughtful story set in the 1930s, adolescent
Roy Purdy goes with his father (newly released from prison) from the East Coast
to California. This is a vivid picture of the Depression: the hardships suffered
by many, the courage displayed by some, and the desperation that fostered labor
resistance. It is also a sensitive story of the relationship between a responsible
young man and his irresponsible father who choose opposite sides in a struggle Z
between land owners and field pickers who are trying to unionize. Few juvenile
novels have so successfully focused on the plight of migrant farm workers
during the Depression, and on their efforts to organize for decent living
conditions and wages. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
D.V. Father-son relations
Viorst, Judith. Earrings!; illus. by Nola Langner Malone. Atheneum, 1990.
ISBN 0-689-31615-1. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Realistic it is. "I want them. I need them. I love
them. I've got to have them." The object of this girl's obsession is getting her
ears pierced, and her determination will endear her to young listeners even as
adult read-alouders, just like her mom and dad, get "tired of hearing this stuff."
The full-color drawings portray a red-headed, corkscrew-curled youngster who 
_
energizes the white space across which she gyrates. Text and illustrations are
both fun. They would have been even more fun if something had happened-at
the anticlimactic end we are left staring, along with the ever-hopeful narrator, at
a night sky full of "beautiful, glorious earrings for pierced ears." A story about
fantasizing needs to be more richly fantasized, but kids will apply their own
clamorous imaginations to this familiar scenario. BH
Wersba, Barbara. The Best Place to Live Is the Ceiling. Zolotow/Harper, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026409-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026408-X. 
184p.
Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
Archie's father has sent him to a therapist, and this is
sixteen-year-old Archie's notebook-as requested by Dr. Gutman. After firmly
establishing his shyness, timidity, and low self-esteem, Archie does the
improbable. He picks up the wallet (with ticket and passport) of a man who has
collapsed and been taken away by paramedics at Kennedy Airport, Archie's
favorite hangout. From there on, it's Switzerland, spies, danger, romance,
remorse, and humor all the way, as Archie (using the name on the passport)
evades villains and picks up a girl. If this were serious, it would be ridiculous-
but it isn't serious, it's a spoof, and one that is fast and funny. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Whitmore, Arvella. The Bread Winner. Houghton, 1990. ISBN 0-395-53705-
3. 
138p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Sarah, twelve, has high hopes for a better life after
her parents sell the farm and move into town. But it's 1932, and there's no
work to be had, hard as Daddy tries. It is (credibly) Sarah who puts the family
back on its feet financially; her plan to sell a few loaves of bread (made by the
[ 132 ]
recipe that had once won a blue ribbon) grows into a flourishing business and,
eventually, a family-run bakery. The plot includes Daddy's unsuccessful trip
West to hunt for a job, and the story gives a convincing picture of the way
residents of a small town help each other. The characterization is sturdy, the
structure modest but satisfying, and the writing has a smooth narrative flow. ZS
D.V. Family relations; Industry; Resourcefulness
Willis, Val. The Surprise in the Wardrobe; illus. by John Shelley. Farrar,
1990. ISBN 0-374-37309-4. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
In this follow-up to The Secret in the Matchbox
(BCCB 7/88), bright colors and a lavish use of ornamental detail are used in
pictures that have elaborate borders framing each double-page spread. Wide-eyed
students of several races dominate some of the scenes; others are schoolroom
interiors or landscapes crowded with inventive minutiae. 
The text is less
impressive than the illustrations: Bobby brings a surprise to school, a witch he
has found in his wardrobe. They students have fun flying, and the little witch
creates havoc with her magic while the teacher sees nothing and refers to the
witch as "the new girl." This children-know-best aspect will probably appeal to
readers, as will the disaster humor of classroom chaos, but the plot is
structurally slight and lacks the wit of its predecessor. ZS
Wright, Betty Ren. The Ghost of Ernie P. Holiday House, 1990. ISBN 0-
8234-0835-3. 130p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
"He'd come to the cemetery to say good-bye, and he'd
found out something he didn't want to know. Ernie the boy was gone, but a
part of him-the mean, bullying, trick-playing part-was still around. Jeff had
never been so scared in his life." It was bad enough being bossed around by
Ernie P. when he was alive. Now that he's dead, Jeff finds the former school
bully even harder to handle. Emie died before he could complete his "Top Secret
Project" and he wants Jeff to finish it. Jeff decides to camp out in his room for
the summer to avoid Ernie's ghost, but then everyone thinks he's grieving over
his lost "friend." Nothing could be further from the truth. Wright builds up
tension through a series of nerve-wracking situations, so that we soon share
Jeff's paranoia. A combined sense of menace and humor enliven many of Jeff's
ghostly encounters, as when he catches a fish that looks just like Ernie. The
climax, a hair-raising encounter with a "witch" (actually a mentally unbalanced
woman), is powerful. Character development is realistic, as Jeff slowly learns to
conquer his fears and grows in empathy for Ernie's ghost. An engrossing read.
RAS
Wurmfeld, Hope Herman. Trucker; written and illus. with photographs by Hope
Herman Wurmfeld. Macmillan, 1990. ISBN 0-02-793581-7. 64p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
For older truck fans than is Horenstein's Sam Goes
Trucking (BCCB 5/89), this photodocumentary follows a trucker, Phil Marcum,
on his routes that range from Canada to Florida. The photos are a bit dark, and
often peripheral to their primary subject: a section devoted to Phil's weekend at
home, for example, gets a disproportionate amount of attention and the photos
there are poorly coordinated with the text. A "kickball" game looks more like
softball, and are "Grandpa" and "Grandaddy" the same person? Otherwise, this
does a fair job of showing how a trucker's days and nights are spent: driving,
[133 ]
loading, eating, sleeping. The job doesn't look nearly as interesting as most
young truck enthusiasts imagine it to be, but Wurmfeld can't be held responsible
for that-a softball weekend may indeed be a highlight after all those hours on
the road. RS
D.V. Occupational orientation
Yolen, Jane. The Dragon's Boy. Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026790-
9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026789-5. [128p]. 
Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed.
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
This elaborative variant on the Arthurian legend has
the young king-to-be getting a sword from a stone-but it's in the way of a
trade, not a test. Artos purchases the sword with a stone given to him by a
shadowy dragon who lives in a cave near castle Beau Regarde, home to Artos'
foster father Sir Ector. 
The dragon gives Artos "wisdom" as well, an
apprenticeship Yolen tells of more than she shows. 
That the dragon is
"Merlinnus" is a well-prepared surprise, an apt conclusion to this historical
(rather than fantastical) what-if tale of Arthur's beginnings. While the writing is
sometimes self-conscious, with words seemingly put into Arthur's mouth rather
than naturally emitting from it, the narrative is smooth. Give this to Arthurian
buffs as a new angle, but recommend it as well to the larger audience who can
appreciate a good story about the smallest, the youngest, the smartest, who
triumphs fairly in the end. RS
Zheleznikov, Vladimir. Scarecrow; tr. from the Russian by Antonina W. Bouis.
Lippincott, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32317-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-
32316-6. 148p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Set in a small town in contemporary Russia, this is
the story of twelve-year-old Lena, newly arrived to stay with her grandfather,
who lives in poverty rather than sell the collection of paintings in his family
home. After allowing the other children to believe she "told" on them to the
teacher in order to protect a boy she likes, Lena is scapegoated and bullied.
These scenes are strong, especially one in which her classmates bum Lena in
effigy, and Lena's masochistic enjoyment of her victimization is uncomfortably
real. For the most part, the dialogue, the characterizations, and the relationships
evoke a picture of common concerns and group dynamics among young
adolescents, but the writing is often self-conscious, and the ending, which bears
strong resemblance to The Hundred Dresses, seems unrealistically sentimental in
such a strong context. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Grandfather-child relations