Ackerman, Karen. Just Like Max; illus. by George Schmidt. Knopf, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-90176-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-80176-8. 32p. Library
ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-3. 
This story is simple and sentimental, not unlike the
intergenerational plot of Ackerman's Song and Dance Man (BCCB 11/88) but
without its vitality. 
An extended family occupies the four floors of a
brownstone; Aaron, the small boy who lives on the third floor, spends as much
time as he can with Great-Uncle Max, a tailor who lives on the top floor. When
Uncle Max has a stroke and is slowly convalescing in Aaron's apartment, Aaron
brings down all the sewing paraphernalia. He makes a dress, following the
tricks he'd quietly absorbed as he watched Max work. The dress is peculiar, with
crooked seams and raw hem, but Aaron proudly presents it to his mother. The
gently composed and softly colored paintings are blurry and a bit repetitive, but
interesting for their economy of line and restrained use of space. ZS
D.V. Consideration of others; Uncle-nephew relations
Baer, Edith. This Is the Way We Go to School: A Book about Children Around
the World; illus. by Steven Bjorkman. Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-590-43161-7.
[38p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
A first-grade's perfect first-day book. In rhyming
couplets and morning watercolors, kids (some in a hurry, some lost in thought,
some waving at the reader) go off to school-by foot, car, bus, El train, trolley,
bicycle, boat, radio ... "and the famous Metro line suits Igor and Ilyana fine."
The various vehicles ("Bianca, Beppo, Benedetto, ride aboard the vaporetto") are
informative and interesting, and the multicultural lesson is deftly understated.
Pen-and-watercolor illustrations are fresh and optimistic: these kids can't wait to
get to school. A closing world map provides geographic context for cultural
comparisons. Baer's book makes a boon companion to Is Anybody Up? (BCCB
12/89), Ellen Kandoian's introduction to waking up around the world. RS
D.V. International understanding
Bentley, Judith. Harriet Tubman. Watts, 1990. ISBN 0-531-10948-8. 144p.
illus. with photographs. (Impact Biographies). $13.90.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
This new biography of "the Moses of her people"
traces Harriet Tubman's life from her birth in slavery through her adventure on
[21]
the Underground Railroad to her honored old age. The writing is diligent rather
than lively, rendering Tubman's acts of heroism curiously unexciting, and the
phraseology tends to be skittish, referring to Harriet as a "sassy young girl" and
mentioning the "unwanted attention" young female slaves could receive from
masters and overseers. The author has done some serious research in records of
the time, and the best parts of the book are the quotes from Tubman herself and
those who knew her. When departing from first-person accounts, however, the
book dutifully chronicles her courageous life without conveying her spirit.
More scholarly but less readable than Ann Petry's Harriet Tubman (BCCB
11/55), Bentley's book provides notes and bibliography, and is illustrated with
period photographs and drawings. DS
C.U. History-U.S.
D.V. Courage
Bode, Janet. The Voices of Rape. Watts, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
10959-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-15184-0. 144p. Library ed. $12.90; Trade ed.
$11.95.
R* 
Gr. 7-12. 
This is one of those rare nonfiction books that
manages to bring both intensity and evenhandedness to an emotional subject.
Through judiciously selected information and well-edited interviews, Bode
informs the factual with the personal, addressing the text directly to teenage
readers who have been or might be victims or perpetrators of rape-i.e.,
everyone. After an introductory discussion among ninth-grade classmates
revealing many common attitudes, both male and female, Bode alternates
victims' and perpetrators' stories before detailing post-rape reactions, treatment,
reporting, and court procedures. She talks with police, prosecutors, and defense
attorneys, as well as emergency roomf nurses, crisis intervention center
counselors, and psychologists. Yet the resulting text never seems fragmented; it
is cohesive, concise, to the point, and up-to-date in terms of research and social
realities. The tone is frank but not sensational. Her section on rape prevention
is one of the few "you can help do something about this" conclusions that seems
both immediately relevant and possible for young people. 
Source notes
document specifics, and there's an extensive, current bibliography of adult and
young adult books for further information, along with an index. BH
C.U. Guidance
D.V. Interpersonal understanding
Bolick, Nancy O'Keefe. Shaker Inventions; by Nancy O'Keefe Bolick and Sallie
G. Randolph; illus. by Melissa Francisco. Walker, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-
8027-6934-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6933-0. 96p. Library ed. $13.85; Trade
ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
A description of Shaker inventions, many of which
became lucrative items when sold in "the World" (i.e. outside the Shaker
community), is presented in a dry text. The authors refer often to the religious
and practical motives that inspired the members of this almost-disappeared
religious group (two Shakers still living at the time of publication) that once
had many settlements. However, the comments are repetitive, albeit slightly
rephrased, and don't give much added insight into motivation. The focus is, as
per the title, on inventions, but at times a captioned picture may be pages away
[221
from a corresponding textual reference. The writing tends to be adulatory in
tone; the illustrations are occasionally crude and/or uninformative. An index is
appended. ZS
C.U. Religious education
Brooks, Bruce. Everywhere. Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020729-9;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020728-0. 70p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
SpR 
Gr. 5- 
Dooley is eleven and black, the nephew of Lucy
Pettibone, a housemaid who "had mysteriously become a nurse over the
summer." Brought along to the house by his aunt, Dooley seems an unlikely
but outspoken candidate to help Peanuts' grandfather, who has suffered a heart
attack. "I reckon we ought to go about saving your granddaddy. It's interesting,
at least. And ain't nought else to do." Peanuts is ten, white, smart but
credulous, going along with Dooley's plan to save grandfather with "the soul
switch," a technique gleaned, Dooley says, from comic books. "Indians out west
use it all the time when a brave gets shot. Always works." And it works here,
with unexpected results for the two boys as well as for Peanuts' grandfather, and
for the animal chosen to "trade off" for his life. "The turtle looked at me. There
was no doubt, none whatsoever, that it had a soul." The intriguing dynamics of
Dooley and Peanuts' one-day friendship are effortlessly displayed through
dialogue recollected in Peanuts' narration, which is itself occasionally clouded by
self-conscious musing. This is a brief but ambitious novel, its theme of
transcendent connection sometimes overly abstracted but just as often soundly
realized, as Peanuts discovers the ties of love that can make sense of apparent
disorder. While not nostalgic, the telling has a formal, distant quality that will
probably limit the book's appeal among its intended middle-grades audience, but
older readers and adults will certainly appreciate its quiet power. RS
D.V. Friendship values; Grandfather-child relations
Byars, Betsy. Hooray for the Golly Sisters; illus. by Sue Truesdell. Harper,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020899-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020898-8. 64p.
(I Can Read). Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed.$11.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
As she did in The Golly Sisters Go West (BCCB
11/86), Byars has given the easy-to-read genre a shot of wacky humor that will
smooth the way for kids still stumbling over phonetics. In five short stories,
Rose and May-May Golly, two pioneering showgirls-er, thespians-who now
seem to have mastered the art of driving their covered wagon, cross a big river
("'Very big river,' said Rose"), find out that pigs don't substitute very well for
rabbits in a magic act ("rabbits don't go Weeeeee"), brave their way through a
swamp, devise a high-wire act on the ground, and deviously entice a crowd to
yell "Hooray for the Golly Sisters!" As in all good limited-vocabulary writing,
Byars turns the simplicity to her advantage, spoofing the choppy style with
dialogue in which the childlike sisters echo each other. Truesdell's watercolor
cartoons reinforce the absurdity with quick-study lines that seem to run away
with the pages. The characters are in constant motion, the horse rolls its eyes
expressively, and the entire cast strikes poses of droll absurdity. Westward ho!
BH
C.U. Reading, beginning
[23]
Carter, Peter. Borderlands. Farrar, 1990. ISBN 0-374-30895-0. 424p. $16.95.
M 
Gr. 9-12. 
The first verse from "Home on the Range" provides
the epigraph for this historical novel about a Texas boy eking out a living where
the buffalo roam. Thirteen at the beginning of the book, Ben Curtis narrates the
story of how he and his older brother, newly orphaned, join up with a cattle drive
in 1873 and how his fortunes rise and fall with those of Abilene and Dodge City
in the next few years. Ben is involved with every possible historical personage
and event (Wild Bill Hickock and the Chicago Fire both have a place in the tale),
and Carter crams the book with details, mostly correct (although his equestrian
terminology falters and Briticisms such as "Father Christmas" creep in
occasionally) but of dubious necessity except to drive home the period
atmosphere. We are meant to learn so much through Ben's Huck Finn-like
strivings to make sense of-that is, put a contemporary slant on-the moral and
commercial world that his observations, shrewd and naive by turns, grow
tiresome. The settings are vividly realized, both in their high color (the
language is consistently salty even when the dialect wavers) and their squalid
reality, and the actual trail drive has real appeal as Ben relates the excitement and
danger of driving herds of skittish longhorns across wild country, but it's only
one major event in a book whose focus is weakened by its excessive number of
major events. DS
C.U. History-U.S.
Cheetham, Ann. The Pit. Holt, 1990. ISBN 0-8050-1142-0. 154p. $14.95.
M 
Gr. 6-9. 
The red cross painted on his front door, the
mysterious new lodger with an unreasonable fear of rats, strange findings
excavated at the nearby demolition site ... Oliver knows something is wrong
even before he hears the anguished weepihg in the cellar. In a time-shift that is
sometimes carelessly handled, Oliver becomes a five-year-old boy in 1665
London, when the city was ravaged by the bubonic plague. While the
contemporary scenes are fairly dull, Oliver's frightened existence in a "death
house" (one infected by plague) is vividly evoked to a point that teeters on
horror-movie sensationalism: "He knew they had died, even though their eyes
were closed, because the three young faces were hideously swollen and
discolored, and because the smell of dead flesh filled the room .. ." Such over-
the-top detail is real, and viscerally effective, but may ultimately be more
entertaining than the author intended. To balance such wallowing, perhaps, the
theme is melodramatically overstated: "He was seeing not merely the dead of
London, and of the terrible plague time, but that great multitude no man could
number. All the dead of history. A cry broke from him at last, a real cry of
anguish, not a child crying but a man." Jill Paton Walsh in A Chance Child
(BCCB 4/78) and Ann Schlee in Ask Me No Questions (BCCB 5/82) have both
shown that the horrors of history can be powerfully conveyed through restrained
and quiet writing; this one's for Stephen King fans. RS
Cole, Joanna. The Magic School Bus Lost in the Solar System; illus. by Bruce
Degen. Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-590-41428-3. [40p]. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
Ms. Frizzle, that amazing science teacher with the
wacky wardrobe, and her magic school bus (last seen in The Magic School Bus
Inside the Human Body, BCCB 4/89) are back for yet another zany adventure.
[24]
This time Arnold has brought Janet, his know-it-all cousin, along for the ride.
Janet has done it all: "I've been to Mars lots of times." "Just ignore her,"
advises Arnold. But Janet is hard to ignore, and is never surprised by anything:
"My bus has bigger rockets than your bus," she says, as they take off. Things
get really exciting when Ms. Frizzle is lost in space and Janet takes over. Kids
who enjoy poring over Handford's Waldo books will appreciate the abundance of
visual gags, a hallmark of this series as well. Facts both standard and esoteric
are effortlessly slipped into the story in the form of the children's bite-sized
reports: "The Tipped Over Planet, by Ralph. Uranus spins differently from the
other planets. It seems to be lying on its side compared to most other planets in
the solar system." The multiplicity of text formats (narrative, diagrams,
captions, reports, and cartoon balloons) invites casual browsers but is never
overwhelming or cluttered. Full of jokes ("Look! It's a U.F.B!" "A what?"
"An Unidentified Flying Banana"), the book will draw the most reluctant readers.
A fact table gives statistics for science reports while explanatory end notes
provide some humorous disclaimers: "Attaching rockets to your school bus will
upset your teacher, the school principal, and your parents. It will not get you
into orbit anyway." No, but it's certainly worth a try! RAS
C.U. Astronomy
Collington, Peter. On Christmas Eve; written and illus. by Peter Collington.
Knopf, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90830-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80830-2.
32p. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
The jacket flap and dedication of this wordless book
promise a story about how Santa visits children without a chimney; that
pourquoi, however is here subordinated to a theme of deliciously self-centered
wish-fulfillment. While a little girl sleeps on Christmas Eve, a winged fairy
arranges Santa's arrival, a feat that includes the cooperation of dozens of other
fairies who stand in as landing lights for Santa's sleigh. The candle-wielding
bands also guide his way to the girl's Christmas stocking, wherein Santa
deposits every single present asked for in her Christmas list. The joy of getting
has seldom been so appealingly conveyed, and the pictures are matter-of-factly
detailed to provide the fantasy with concrete possibility. Sequencing is clear,
with panels of small-scale pantomime (fifteen of present-opening alone)
occasionally giving way to larger paintings that set a wintry Christmas tone.
Santa's landing sequence is an adventure in itself, and the falling snow is
endlessly pretty. RS
C.U. 
Christmas
Cormier, Robert. Other Bells for Us to Ring; illus. by Deborah Kogan Ray.
Delacorte, 1990. ISBN 0-385-30245-2. 
[128p]. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Darcy Webster is eleven, and Kathleen Mary O'Hara
is the first Catholic she's ever met. Both girls are outsiders in the Frenchtown
neighborhood-Darcy because she's a Protestant, Kathleen Mary for being
Irish--and together they build a friendship: "You and me against the Canucks,
the Micks, everybody in the whole, wide world. Including the Japs and the
Nazis." This story of a 1940s friendship is told in retrospect by Darcy, who
recalls the time she and Kathleen gave some beloved playthings to the Salvation
Army as a gesture of impending adolescence; the time Kathleen baptized her
[25
(leading a terrified Darcy to wonder if she can eat hamburger on Friday); the
times when both girls needed miracles, and how some of them came true.
Occasionally nostalgic in its war-at-home atmosphere, the story is simply told
but so imbued with the wisdom of retrospect that it has little immediacy, and
sometimes becomes unnecessarily self-conscious: "Hold the phone. I am lying
again. And also engaging in self-pity. The truth is that most of the time I did
not make friends, because I didn't try. I was too shy .... " The honesty of the
recollections, such as the incident when Kathleen is hit by a car while running
away from her drunken father, has a subdued effect and on the whole gives the
story a greater integrity than most Christmas heart-warmers. 
However, the
ending, in which Darcy hears miraculous Christmas bells and says "good-bye to
that lost childhood" is pat, and seems to indicate that this is really a book for
adults, rather than one that will actively engage young readers. RS
D.V. Religious understanding
Cousins, Lucy. Maisy Goes to Bed; ISBN 0-316-15832-1. 
Maisy Goes
Swimming; ISBN 0-316-15834-8. Each book: written and illus. by Lucy
Cousins. Little, 1990. 16p. $10.95.
R* 
3-5 yrs. 
A better-than-usual use of paper engineering, in two
books for the young child, incorporates flaps, tabs, strings, and slides to achieve
an integration of devices with story. When Maisy (a mouse) goes swimming,
she takes off each garment (from brown boots to orange undies) before donning a
striped swim suit. Color is smoothly introduced, items of clothing slide off
naturally, boots pulling down and shirt going up over Maisy's head, and a
glimpse through the changing room doors beside the pool show-in a gentle
message-everything neatly stowed. The bedtime book may be even more
appealing to the audience, since it has so many familiar end-of-day activities. It
closes with Maisy in bed reading a tiny book with pages that turn to show
pictures of animals, and with Maisy falling asleep under a quilt that shows,
when lifted, a favorite toy clutched in Maisy's paw. The books have bright,
strong colors, bold lines and plenty of white space, and a minimal text printed to
color-coordinate with the pictures. While too fragile for most school or library
use, this is a clever pair. ZS
D.V. Everyday life concepts
Day, Alexandra. Carl's Christmas; written and illus. by Alexandra Day. Farrar,
1990. ISBN 0-374-31114-5. 32p. $10.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
As they did in Carl Goes Shopping (BCCB 1/90), a
big Rottweiler and the baby in his charge center an almost-wordless picture
book. When the baby's parents go out for the evening, Carl and the baby
"decorate" a plant beside the Christmas tree, donate a goody basket and warm hat
to the needy, peek into cozy windows, and welcome Santa with all his reindeer.
Unlike the fantasy in Day's previous book, which was cleverly convincing by
virtue of vague backgrounds featuring adults with their backs turned or too busy
to notice a canine nanny, this story involves grownups who actually interact
with the baby as s/he rides on Carl's back through a snowy night. This
diminishes the credibility considerably, but Carl's fans will probably enjoy the
rich holiday paintings anyway. A series souvenir. BH
C.U. Christmas
[26]
Deaver, Julie Reece. First Wedding, Once Removed. Zolotow/Harper, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021427-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021426-0. 216p. Trade
ed. $13.95; Library ed. $13.89.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
The narrator, Pokie, is thirteen, and her older brother
Gib is her best friend: a comfort when she's unhappy, a protector when
protection's needed, and a sharer of Pokie's interest in making model planes,
watching real ones, and planning to become a pilot. This is a gentle, loving
story that never descends to the saccharine. Pokie adjusts first to missing Gib
when he goes off to college and then to feeling left out when he falls in love and
marries. In a quiet, perceptive narrative Pokie learns that circumstances may
alter without weakening the bond between people who love each other. It is
unfortunate that the awkward jacket art does not live up to the quality of the
writing. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Jealousy, overcoming
Dillon, Barbara. A Mom by Magic. Lippincott, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-
397-32449-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32450-2. [144p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade
ed. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
The woman in a Mother Goose costume, hired at a
shopping mall to supervise a lucky-dip wishing well, was taken aback when
Jessica announced that what she really wanted for Christmas was a Mom. (Her
mother had died when Jess was two.) Although the come-to-life mannequin who
appears at Jessica's door is destined to go back to her department store post on
Christmas night, most readers will entertain justified hopes that the Christmas
Mom, beautiful Amalie, will somehow become a permanent fixture in the lives
of Jess and her father, both of whom love her. And so it is: the donor (Mother
Goose) and Jess and Amalie arrange to concentrate their psychic powers in a set-
your-watches wish-in. Fantasy and realism don't always mesh, and both style
and characterization tend to be adequate rather than impressive, but readers will
doubtless enjoy the triple appeals of a Christmas setting, magic, and a wish
granted. ZS
Durell, Ann, ed. The Big Book for Peace; ed. by Ann Durell and Marilyn Sachs.
Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44605-2. 120p. illus. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 2-6. 
An impressive array of talent, variety within the
parameters of a theme, and a theme of importance make a book that is
memorable. All the pictures, poems, and stories (only one nonfiction piece) are
new, contributed for the book by over thirty distinguished and popular writers
and illustrators of children's books. Among the contributors are Maurice
Sendak, whose cover monster has a nest of birds on its head, and Jean Fritz,
who writes a moving story about the Yupik Eskimos; Lois Lowry's story deals
with compromise in a personal relationship, and Marilyn Sachs contributes-in
simple, direct terms-the record of a young activist. The publisher's income and
the contributors' royalties will go to five organizations that work for peace. ZS
D.V. Peace
Fiedler, Jean. Be Smart about Sex: Facts for Young People; by Jean and Hal
Fiedler; illus. by Hal Fiedler. Enslow, 1990. ISBN 0-89490-168-0. 128p.
$17.95.
[27]
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Indulging in the question-and-answer format so often
relied upon in teen sex and health books, this one is fairly well organized, non-
judgmental, and explicit in its recounting of sexual facts, fantasies, and
experiences. Such candor is especially valuable in what the authors call "the
Age of AIDS," where such information as how to put on a condom acquires a
new context. The facts about AIDS and other health issues are generally accurate
and up-to-date, although a statement that connects non-IV drig use and AIDS is
not correct. Information about sexual activity includes advice to talk to parents,
counselors, and religious leaders, and the option of abstinence is repeatedly
pointed out. 
The emphasis here is on "safe sex," with little on sexual
development, birth control, or abortion, although appendices list sources for
further information. The design is stodgy, with line illustrations that are not
always well-placed, a textbookish format, and a jacket that manages to be lurid
and dull at the same time. RS
C.U. Sex education
Fradon, Dana. Harold the Herald: A Book about Heraldry; written and illus. by
Dana Fradon. Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44634-6. 4 0p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
In this follow-up to Sir Dana: A Knight, Sir Dana (a
talking suit of armor) comes to Miss Quincy's class to talk about his 14th-
century friend Harold, herald to Prince Lionel. While Harold was responsible for
all kinds of activities (organizing jousts, writing wills for knights, delivering
proclamations and love letters), the emphasis here is on the herald's
responsibility as record-keeper of the coats of arms: their origins, etiquette,
meanings, and design. Sir Dana is a sometimes annoying narrator ("Ho! I but
jest") yet he conveys a great deal of information about heraldry, its language, its
colors (such as gules, azure, sable, and vert), patterns (ermine and vair), shapes
(fess, chevron, saltire, lozenge, etc.), and animal symbols ("A man with a dog
on his shield would be loyal, would never desert his master, and would willingly
die for him"). The examples are clearly drawn and colored, and easily copied.
Accompanying cartoon illustrations are often silly but keep the format open and
inviting. New horizons for graffiti artists. RS
C.U. History-Middle Ages
Goode, Diane, comp. Diane Goode's American Christmas; comp. and illus. by
Diane Goode. Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44620-6. 80p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Designed as a companion to the illustrator's
American Folk Tales & Songs, compiled by Ann Durell (BCCB 11/89), this is
equally attractive but contains less interesting selections. Some of the poems
included are e.e. cummings' "little tree," Poe's "The Bells," and Moore's "A
Visit from St. Nicholas"; Langston Hughes' "Carol of the Brown King" is
pleasantly unfamiliar. Stories include excerpts from The Peterkin Papers and On
the Banks of Plum Creek that don't have quite enough verve to stand alone. The
folktales "Brer Rabbit's Christmas" and "A Baker's Dozen" are better choices,
but it's too bad there are no source notes. Songs (melody lines only) include
"I'll Be Home for Christmas" and "Silver Bells." The American focus is a
refreshing change from the free-for-all anthologies usually published for this
season; the illustrations are cozy if not particularly wintry. RS
C.U. Christmas
[28]
Gordon, Sheila. The Middle of Somewhere. Jackson/Orchard, 1990. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-08508-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05908-1. 154p. Library ed.
$13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
For younger readers than is Naidoo's Chain of Fire
(BCCB 5/90), this is also a story of South Africa's forced removals of black
communities to desolate areas of the country. Rebecca and her best friend Noni,
both nine, are worried by the talk they've been hearing about a place called
Pofadderkloof: "there it will all be new, and clean, and nice." The government
makes extravagant promises, but most of the villagers resolve to stay where they
are, despite promises and threats. Noni's family is among those who leave, "in
the dark, like jackals," and Rebecca feels lonely and deserted. The childlike
viewpoint is sometimes artificial but consistently maintained, and Rebecca
herself is a rather timid, passive character who does not provide a strong enough
center for the story. Because the story is about waiting-for Mama's biweekly
visits home, for Papa to be released from prison, for the government to make its
next move-it is static, an accurate reflection of reality but less effective as
fiction. Characterization is variously subtle but generally idealized. Essentially
optimistic, the book ends with Nelson Mandela's (and Papa's) release from
prison and the implied promise that "they won't have the nerve to start
bulldozing now. The whole world is watching." RS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Family relations
Griffiths, Helen V. 
Caitlin's Holiday; illus. by Susan Condie Lamb.
Greenwillow, 1990. ISBN 0-688-09470-8. 96p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
When Caitlin sees the beautiful blonde doll at the
Resale Shop she immediately swaps her beloved doll Jodi for the glamorous
stranger. 
The new blonde, however, proves to be alive-and extremely
uncooperative: shallow, vain, and greedy, Holiday spends most of her time
playing her tiny boom box, getting a tan on the windowsill, and mourning her
lost wardrobe: "There was a sweater with silver stars on it and a jeans skirt that
fit just right and a satin robe-I looked beautiful in that satin robe-and a leather
coat .... " Caitlin is fascinated with Holiday, even when she steals doll clothes
from Caitlin's friends (after pretending, in their presence, to be inanimate), bites
them when she thinks that they've ruffled her dignity, and throws tantrums at the
slightest excuse. Eventually, after Holiday scares away a burglar, she and
Caitlin work out some rules for peaceful coexistence. Despite occasional lags in
the story, the idea is well-executed and the contrast between responsible Caitlin
and demanding and materialistic Holiday not only carries a subtle message about
youthful egocentrism but is truly funny, with Holiday's plastic character ("I can
be a friend ... I like to try new things") logically consistent and maddeningly
captivating to the end. DS
Grosser, Morton. The Fabulous Fifty. Karl/Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-
31656-9. [224p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
"In 1921, when we were both fifteen, money was hard
to get." The speaker is Solon Demetrios Janus, the Greek-American member of
a club whose president is Tony Ammanati, Sol's best friend. This is a three-
layered story, with the first two parts fitting smoothly together, as Sol describes
the efforts (not ethical) of his club to win (by amassing newspaper coupons) one
[29
of the prizes in the Philadelphia Clarion's contest, and the harsh punishment
meted out by his father for getting into a fight. The weakness of the book-
which otherwise is effective, with good style and sturdy characterization-is that
the third part, with another setting and a new plot line, is almost a separate
story. The club wins one of the prizes, and both Tony and Sol go to New York
for the World Series, all expenses paid; much attention is given to accounts of
the Giants-Yankees games and to the lucrative betting by the boys on the results
of those games. ZS
Heide, Florence Parry. The Day ofAhmed's Secret; by Florence Parry Heide and
Judith Heide Gilliland; illus. by Ted Lewin. Lothrop, 1990. Library ed. ISBN
0-688-08895-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08894-5. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade
ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Ted Lewin's wonderfully detailed watercolor paintings
of Cairo streets or equally impressive portraits of the speaker, Ahmed, and his
family, are nicely integrated with the direct, simple text. Independent readers
will get a vivid impression of the bustle and color of the city, the read-aloud
audience will share in the suspense of Ahmed's references to the secret he is
saving to tell his family at the end of his work day (delivering containers of
fuel), and readers-aloud will be equally touched by Ahmed's sense of
responsibility, his appreciation of his city, and his joy in his "secret": the
achievement of having learned to write his name. ZS
D.V. Responsibility
Hilton, Nette. Prince Lachlan; illus. by Ann James. Orchard, 1990. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-08463-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05863-8. 32p. Library ed.
$13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Enfant Terrible Routs Villain. In a breezy picture
book first published in Australia, sometimes-crowded line-and-wash pictures
have a humor and vitality that combine effectively with the wry understatement
of the text. The read-aloud audience should quickly see the pattern of the action;
a sample is: "Crash went the drawbridge. Slide went the rug. Thud went the
table. Smash went the vase. 'Prince Lachlan is home,' said the queen. 'I
know,' said the king." When the Great One (thief and villain) decides he wants
the royal castle, it is the obstreperous noise and instant-if-minor damage by the
visiting Lachlan that frightens the Great One into running away. The queen and
the prince wonder why; the king says "I know." ZS
Hoban, Tana. Exactly the Opposite; illus. with photographs by Tana Hoban.
Greenwillow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08862-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
08861-9. 32p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
One of Tana Hoban's best concept books, with her
usual high standard of color photography displayed in pictures that are, with two
exceptions, paired to show opposites. 
The bonus here is that some of the
pictures are susceptible to more than one interpretation-and neither is wrong.
For example, one picture shows the front view of a sheep lying down; facing it
is a sheep standing. Up and down? Back and front? Both. The two single
pictures are of a child's feet (one shoe tied, the other untied) and of a child's
hands (one hand curled into a fist, one with fingers spread wide). There are no
captions, and none needed. ZS
[30]
Hole, Dorothy. Margaret Thatcher: Britain's Prime Minister. Enslow, 1990.
ISBN 0-89490-246-6. 128p. illus. with photographs. (Contemporary Women).
$17.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
A useful biography that has good balance between
Mrs. Thatcher's career and coverage of her personal life, this is marred by a
recurrent note of adulation and by some minor lapses in the writing. The book
concludes with a discussion of some of the events of 1989 in which or about
which Margaret Thatcher was concerned. Many photographs (some posed, some
candid) are included, as are a list of books and articles for further reading and an
index. The writing style is clear and rather dry despite the occasional phrases of
laudatory gush. This should be of interest in a social studies program, as well as
appealing to those readers who are curious about the biographee. ZS
C.U. England-History; Social studies
Horvath, Polly. No More Cornflakes. Farrar, 1990. ISBN 0-374-35530-4.
134p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
"Since Mom has been pregnant, she's been scarfing
up the old cornflakes like nobody's business ... She concentrated so hard on
those cornflakes it was like she and they were one," says ten-year-old Hortense,
who is horrified by the thought of a baby sibling and feels left behind by
everyone she knows. Her older sister has formed a family-excluding (or at least
Hortense-excluding) bond with friends her own age, her mother and father spend
an embarrassing amount of time publicly pretending to be rabbits, and even her
normally compliant friend Doris has had the temerity to take ballet lessons
without Hortense. She tries to make a soul-mate of her crisp Aunt Kate, a
professional writer and fellow resident of the Hemple house, but finds her a
demanding if stimulating figure ("If there's one thing I can't stand," says Aunt
Kate to a wounded Hortense, "it's people emoting all over the place").
Eventually Hortense finds a friend in formerly alarming Virginia Vermeulen ("I
thought she was a walk on the wild side, but here she was sounding like the
voice of reason"), with whom she has more in common than with wimpy Doris,
and she finally greets the birth of brother Max with delight and acceptance,
stating "I don't think our family will fall apart just because it keeps changing."
Hortense is the Midwest's answer to Anastasia Krupnik-witty, sophisticated
and literate, with her uncertainty and occasional loneliness apparent beneath the
self-confidence of her narration. Characterization is deft throughout, with Aunt
Kate a particular standout: delightfully free from any climactic sentimental
thaw, she tolerates Hortense only because Hortense has proved herself
sufficiently civilized to be interesting. This is a funny, flowing, sharply
observed portrait of family life. DS
D.V. Baby, adjustment to; Family relations; Friendship values
Hughes, Shirley. The Snow Lady: A Tale of Trotter Street; written and illus.
by Shirley Hughes. Lothrop, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09875-4; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-688-09874-6. [32p]. Trade ed. $13.95; Library ed. $13.88. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Another story about the people who live on Trotter
Street (a modest interracial neighborhood in an English city) has the usual
double appeal of other books by Shirley Hughes: a cozy story of everyday life,
and illustrations that are notable for their line, color, composition, vitality, and
[31]
humor. This is a Christmas tale, the story of a child whose neighbor, Mrs.
Dean, is not unkind but who repeatedly complains to Samantha about her noisy
dog, her noisy friends, and diverse minor infractions. Mrs. Dean is away when
Sam and her pal Barney build a sour-looking snow lady and spell out, in stones,
"Mrs. Mean." Mrs. Dean shows up unexpectedly, on Christmas Eve, and Sam
is worried about hurt feelings when Mrs. Dean sees Mrs. Mean in daylight. A
thaw solves the problem, to Sam's relief., This isn't a dramatic story, but it
does have the charm of everyday activities; it has a modicum of suspense, and it
has (without belaboring the point) a neat little message about loving-or at least
being nice to-your neighbor. ZS
D.V. Consideration of others; Older-younger generations
Hurwitz, Johanna. Aldo Peanut Butter; illus. by Diane de Groat. Morrow,
1990. ISBN 0-688-09751-0. 113p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
"On Aldo Sossi's eleventh birthday, he received five
dogs . . . Each one was a surprise .... 
none of them was housebroken."
That's the kickoff. The rest of the book works out the problems presented by
the two dogs Aldo decides to keep-and has to keep up with-in his parents'
unexpected absence from home. His sisters aren't much help; in fact, they
present problems of their own, as does a neighbor who is convinced that Aldo's
dogs are digging up her lawn. The problems are more interesting than the
solutions, which tie up the ending a tad too neatly, but fans of the series won't
mind. Aldo is a reliable character, Hurwitz a competent writer, and dogs a
perennially favorite subject. A guaranteed sale. BH
D.V. Pets, care of
Hutchins, Pat. What Game Shall We Play?; written and illus. by Pat Hutchins.
Greenwillow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09197-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
09196-2. 24p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Stylized decorative details are incorporated into the
animal characters of Hutchins' ink and watercolor pictures. Duck and Frog
search for their friends, asking the title question; as they spy each one, the search
party grows. Finally Owl makes the decision: they will play hide-and-seek; the
others hide and Owl must look for them. The story line is simple, and young
children will enjoy the accumulation of animals, the fact that they have been
seeking hidden friends all along, and the fact that they all can easily be seen by
Owl from his high perch and by readers from theirs. ZS
Jones, Adrienne. Long Time Passing. Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
023056-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023055-X. [256p]. Library ed. $14.89; Trade
ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Jonas frames his memories of the time of the
Vietnam War with scenes from the present, and he expresses the theme of the
book by his musing: "Who are the heroes? The dissenters who sacrifice
everything they love, or those who, with docility and, often, a terrible bravery
serve their country's military?" Son of a marine officer but sympathetic to
dissenters such as Auleen, the girl he loves, the adolescent Jonas is torn, but at
the news that his father is missing in action, Jonas leaves Berkeley and enlists.
At the end of the story, years later, Jonas and Auleen meet again and embark on
a cross-country drive. The author presents the issues of protesters and defenders
[32]
of the war very clearly, and the writing style has pace and narrative flow. What
weakens the story is that some of the characters seem chosen as examples of
types or attitudes, and that, in several instances, long passages of description of
events or causes are presented-unconvincingly--as dialogue. ZS
D.V. Father-son relations; Peace
Kaizuki, Kiyonori. A Calf Is Born; tr. from the Japanese by Cathy Hirano;
written and illus. by Kiyonori Kaizuki. Orchard, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-
531-08462-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05862-X. 40p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade
ed. $13.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Thick-textured paintings depict spacious scenes from
a farm on which, one cold winter night, a calf is born. Although a few well-
drafted human figures appear, the focus is on a natural cycle that unfolds with
calm certainty. Simply composed backdrops add monumental scale, although
this is marred once or twice by the centered calf's being partially lost in the
picture book's gutter. Also, one wordless double spread is unaccountably
dedicated to a pitchfork stuck in the hay; this follows text from the preceding
page in which a vet reassures the mother cow, "Don't worry. Your little one
will be better soon." The emphatic tones of wood-brown and straw-gold radiate
warmth against the snowy landscapes. With a simple text of several lines per
page, this makes a dignified introduction to birth and a quiet statement of respect
for animal life. BH
Kaye, Marilyn. The Real Tooth Fairy; illus. by Helen Cogancherry. Harcourt,
1990. ISBN 0-15-265780-0. 32p. $12.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
After losing her first tooth, Elise is so determined to
see the tooth fairy that she only feigns sleep that night, and she is thrilled to find
that the night visitor is her mother: "Oh, what a lucky girl she was! Some
mothers were teachers, or doctors, or fire fighters. Elise's mother was the one
and only tooth fairy." Elise's friends, at first awed at the news, later report that
the tooth fairy who visited them resembled one of their family members. Elise's
mother explains that the tooth fairy, in order to avoid frightening unwary
children, always takes the guise of a familiar loved one when she enters a child's
bedroom. This explanation satisfies the entire playground, and Elise herself is
vouchsafed a dream vision of what the tooth fairy really looks like (she bears a
striking and unfortunate resemblance to a Barbie doll). The illustrations, though
occasionally coy and awkwardly drafted, are down-to-earth, realistic pencil and
watercolor, enlivened by occasional visions of winged and wand-wielding parents
carrying bags of baby teeth. This book offers a wise and loving celebration of a
low-profile childhood heroine in the dual incarnation of radiant tooth fairy and
sleepy parent. DS
Kelly, Eamon. The Bridge of Feathers. Poolbeg/Dufour, 1990. Paper ed. ISBN
1-85371-053-9. 110p. Paper ed. $6.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
These fourteen Irish fairy tales will prove a boon to
storytellers and a diversion for children who enjoy reading folk and fairy tales.
The language moves easily: 
"... he swore by this and that, the sop and the
rock and the comb of the cock and the depth of the well." Traditional refrains
have a special lilt: "Did you see this girl of mine with the wig with the wag
with the long leather bag that stole all the money I ever had!" There are also
[33]
brief bursts of Gaelic, but these are always translated at the bottom of the page,
and kids can skip over them without stumbling. Variants of old favorites-"The
Cat and the Yard of Cloth" for "Puss in Boots," and "The Wolf and the White
Kid" for "The Wolf and the Seven Little Kids"-are mingled with less familiar
stories of changelings, giants, kings, transformations, and magic. A rolling
read-aloud for classroom or family circles. BH
C.U. Storytelling
Kesey, Ken. Little Tricker the Squirrel Meets Big Double the Bear; illus. by
Barry Moser. Viking, 1990. ISBN 0-670-81136-X. 32p. $14.95.
R* 
5-9 yrs. 
"Don't tell me you're the only youngsters never heard
tell of the time the bear came to Topple's Bottom? He was a huge high-country
bear and not only huge but horrible huge. And hairy, and hateful, and hungry!
Why he almost ate up the entire Bottom before Tricker finally cut him down to
size, just you listen and see if he didn't. .. ." And listen kids will, to this
language that plays like Carl Sandburg's and doesn't fool around when it comes
to plot. Folktale elements emerge without seeming either self-conscious or
precious. After Big Double eats a couple of little ground animals, just to whet
his appetite, he finds himself eye to eye with Tricker the tree squirrel, who
admits to being impressed: "you may have been a little short-changed in the
thinking department but when it comes to running, jumping, and climbing you
got double portions." In addition to music and wit in the words, which will
sustain repeated read-aloud sessions, there's wild satire and more action than
usual (without loss of control) in the masterful watercolors with which Barry
Moser portrays this archetypal cast. Lots of writers and painters who have
concentrated their artistry on adults can't switch to children without loud tonal
flaws, but Kesey and Moser have proved the exception. Like the hazelnuts
ripening in the tree below Tricker's "cottonwood high rise," this picture book is
"just about perfect!" BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
D.V. Ingenuity
Kudlinski, Kathleen V. Hero Over Here; illus. by Bert Dodson. Viking, 1990.
ISBN 0-670-83050-X. 56p. (Once Upon America). $11.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Set in 1918, this is the story of a boy of ten who
copes with the illness of his mother and his sister during the influenza epidemic
of 1918. His father and brother are at the front, so there's only Theodore to take
care of his kin. The war ends, father comes home, and Theodore is surprised
when his parents talk about him as though he were a hero. Heroes were "Over
There," fighting-but readers learn that there were heroes over here too. What
Theodore does is believable. His story has pace and flow despite its brevity, and
it gives a vivid picture of the depredations of the "Spanish flu." Like Zibby
Oneal's A Long Way to Go (BCCB 9/90), this is an entry in the "Once Upon
America" series, brief stories designed to introduce to younger readers the concept
that ordinary people and the events of their lives are as much a part of history as
wars or rulers or explorers. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.-World War I
D.V. Responsibility
[34]
Kuklin, Susan. 
Going to My Nursery School; written and illus. with
photographs by Susan Kuklin. Bradbury, 1990. ISBN 0-02-751237-1. 33p.
$12.95.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
In a fine photo-essay, the narrator, one of a class of
four-year-olds, tells a lot about policies and procedures through his simple
description of his own day. Heath mentions his own separation anxiety in the
first days ("I didn't want my dad to leave"), but now that stage is over, and it is
clear that he is happy and busy. The teachers are firm about rules, friendly and
welcoming, comforting when a child is distressed. Heath talks matter-of-factly
about sharing, but he doesn't say that this is imposed. The color pictures are of
an excellent quality; a thoughtful postscript is addressed to parents. Informative
and cheerful, this maintains the child's voice in a way that increases the
accessibility of the recorded experiences. An unusually good introduction to the
great mystery of what goes on at a nursery school. ZS
Lagerlof, Selma. The Legend of the Christmas Rose; retold by Ellin Greene;
illus. by Charles Mikolaycak. Holiday House, 1990. ISBN 0-8234-0821-3.
32p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
While the rough edges of Robber Mother and her
family have been softened for a young audience, Greene has done a creditable job
of adapting Lagerlof's sentimental tale about an outlaw family who guards the
secret of a magical garden that blooms amid the snow on Christmas Eve. As
always, Mikolaycak's drafting is sinuously impeccable, although here somewhat
overformal, never quite getting to the heart of the spiritual passions that are the
story's core. The frosty presence of the snow, for example, is more strongly
evoked than the sudden miracle of faith revealed in the Christmas garden. The
tale is intriguing in its flowering of Christian miracles from Germanic folk
roots: a synthesis fit to the spirit of the season, and a thoughtful companion to
more festive read-aloud fare. RS
C.U. Christmas; Reading aloud
D.V. 
Faith
Lindbergh, Reeve. 
Johnny Appleseed; illus. by Kathy Jakobsen. 
Joy
Street/Little, 1990. ISBN 0-316-52618-5. 
[34p]. $14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Elaborately detailed folk paintings provide a rich
complement to Lindbergh's plain-spoken poem about Johnny Appleseed: "The
man who planted apple trees / Once stood here on this land/ A sack of seeds
upon his back/ A Bible in his hand." Told from the point of view of Hannah, a
little frontier girl whose family was visited by the gentle sower, the poem has
the sturdy rhythm of sampler verse and is appropriately bordered by quilt squares
containing small vignettes from Johnny Appleseed's travels. The poem ends
with a now elderly Hannah, "her own trees grown so tall," meeting him once
more: "He said farewell and traveled on/ And did not come again/ But in this
orchard, sharp and sweet,/ His apples still remain." Dominated by alluring blue
tones, Jakobsen's idealized paintings of colonial America are cozy and balanced,
with scenes of home, woodland, and river that appear both comfortable and
exotic. The pictures are filled with small particulars that will hold a child's eye,
[35]
and the steady measures of the verse invite reading aloud and along. A useful
historical note about John Chapman, the real Johnny Appleseed, is appended.
RS
C.U. History-U.S.
Lobel, Anita. Alison's Zinnia; written and illus. by Anita Lobel. Greenwillow,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08866-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08865-1. 32p.
Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $14.95.
R* 
4-6 yrs. 
An unusual alphabet book incorporates reinforcement
of individual letters into a dazzling display of floral painting as Lobel links girls'
names, flowers, and verbs in a chain of floral gifts. Each page has a painting,
below which is a line of type, below which is a large letter and a smaller strip of
painting across the bottom of the page. The text reads: "Alison acquired an
Amaryllis for Beryl. Beryl bought a Begonia for Crystal. Crystal cut a
Chrysanthemum for Dawn. Dawn dug a Daffodil for Emily... ." The alphabet-
set will enjoy the continuous-loop ending, as Zena zeroes in on a Zinnia for
Alison. ZS
Lomas Garza, Carmen. Family PictureslCuadros de Familia; written by Carmen
Lomas Garza and Harriet Rohmer; Spanish text by Rosalma Zubizarreta; illus.
by Carmen Lomas Garza. Children's Book Press, 1990. ISBN 0-89239-050-6.
32p. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Not a picture book, this is instead an album of
paintings accompanied by explanatory captions. 
Drawn from the artist's
memories of growing up in a small Texas town, the paintings are naively styled,
straightforward depictions of what life was like in her Hispanic community:
celebrating a birthday, picking cactus, making tamales, going to church. This
would be nostalgic but for the specificity of the images and memories: "This is
my grandparents' backyard. My grandmother is killing a chicken for dinner. My
grandfather is in the chicken coop trying to catch another chicken. Later, my
family will sit down to eat Sunday dinner-chicken soup." The painting shows
grandmother calmly breaking a chicken's neck while one surprised child spills
his snowcone. Another shows people playing "cakewalk," a musical-chairs
game "to raise money to send Mexican Americans to the university." The
paintings are filled with small patterns and details, with each leaf and blade of
grass sharply defined. The flat perspective iconographically places the activities
on a two-dimensional plane that gives each scene a formalized dignity. This is
an honest portrayal of a culture rarely seen in children's books, and (more
important as far as children are concerned) every page offers a lot to look at. The
text is in both English and Spanish. RS
Low, Alice. Zena and the Witch Circus; illus. by Laura Cornell. Dial, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0405-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0404-6. 4 8p. (Easy-
to-Read). Library ed. $9.89; Trade ed. $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
Despite considerable publicity to the contrary,
witches have a fairly benevolent reputation in contemporary children's books.
They cast spells not for evil, nor for good, but for fun. Zena, the youngest and
smallest in the third-grade witch class, can't cast spells yet, so Head Witch
Hildagrump says she can't be in the school play, er, Witch Circus. Witch or no,
nobody likes to be left out, and most new readers will identify with Zena's
[36]
attempts to join in, and her later vindicatory triumph over a dragon, er, dog.
"'Zena saved us,' the witches cried." The story line is baldly contrived but
broadly appealing, matched by line-and-watercolor illustrations that are crowded
yet energetic, with Zena's reckless-redhead curls flying every which way. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Lyon, George Ella. Basket; illus. by Mary Szilagyi. Jackson/Orchard, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08486-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05886-7. 
[32p].
Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
This simple picture book focuses on a beloved object
which assumes mythic proportions as time goes by. 
Originally used for
collecting eggs, Grandmother's white oak basket seems always to contain
whatever the occasion requires: "If Mama wanted to cut out paper dolls,
Grandmother would say, 'Go look in my little basket.' If Mama was hungry,
Grandmother told her, 'The basket is full of ripe plums."' The basket becomes
ingrained in family folklore, increasing in importance even when it gets lost in
Grandmother's move to an apartment: "everything she couldn't find was in it."
Finally turning up after the old woman's death, the basket has "nothing in it but
a spool of thread" and lots of memories. Colored pencil and watercolor pictures
have a subdued glow, but their quiet tones aren't matched by the awkward
drafting. Music for Grandmother's song, which runs through the text, is
included at the back. RAS
D.V. Grandmother-child relations
Malterre, Elona. The Last Wolf ofIreland. Clarion, 1990. ISBN 0-395-54381-
9. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
When Devin and his friend Katey witness Squire
Watson killing a mother wolf, they determine to save the litter he's sworn to
find and destroy. Successful at moving the three cubs to a safer den, the children
feed them until a village bully betrays their location. Only one male, Sdhoirm,
is left to Devin's care, and his fate in a civilization hostile to wolves is
inescapable. Set in Ireland in 1786, this openly states historical facts--"Because
of the English laws, Catholics were not allowed to own land or to go to
Catholic chapels"-not a subtle device, but less artificial than trying to
incorporate the information into dialogue. As an animal story, the narrative
builds keen involvement to the last climactic three pages, which will reduce
readers to the same stage of melt-down as the best dog books going. Interwoven
with the plight of the wolf are some dynamic scenes offering insight into human
interaction as well, and into parallels between injustice on social and
environmental planes. BH
C.U. Ireland
D.V. Animals, love for; Ecological awareness
Mazer, Anne. The Yellow Button; illus. by Judy Pedersen. 
Knopf, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-92935-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-82935-2. 32p. Library
ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Most children are intrigued, at some point, with the
concept of widening boundaries, usually starting with their name and home
address and ending with something like " ... the solar system, the universe."
Here Mazer begins with a button in a pocket in a dress of a girl and ends with
[37]
"... and in that universe was one yellow button, shiny and round, nestled in
the pocket of a little girl ... ." While the concept may appeal, the presentation
is static; the softly colored pastel pictures are effectively composed but at times
awkward in detail to the detriment of the whole. ZS
D.V. Spatial concepts
McCuaig, Sandra. Blindfold. Holiday House, 1990. ISBN 0-8234-0811-6.
167p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Fifteen-year-old Sally ("Flame") O'Leary treasured her
secret friendship with the Goldstein brothers, handsome Benji and troubled, blind
Joel. They provided an escape from her narrow Catholic upbringing. Sally is
especially intrigued by Joel, whose belief in the occult and psychic phenomena
both fascinates and frightens her. But now both brothers are dead: blamed for
their double suicide, Sally suffers a nervous breakdown. During sessions with
her psychiatrist (a shadowy figure who drives a car James Bond might be proud
of) and on her own, Sally relives the friendship. While her breakdown and
recovery are powerfully conveyed, the use of Sally as narrator is less effective,
with language that seems out of character. Describing seagulls on the beach,
Sally recalls: "They left, somewhat indignant, wailing discordant sound as they
winged out into the turbulent thermals." 
Conversations, especially those
involving the Goldstein brothers, are at times overwrought and melodramatic, as
when Benji tells Sally: "Flame, you're a blind man's light at the end of his dark
tunnel. I must not take that hope, or enjoy your love when it is what my
brother wants most." While Joel's suicide is foreshadowed, even expected,
Benji's is not. The triggering factor, a misunderstood horoscope, is not very
convincing, but the joint suicide underlines the dependency between the two
brothers. While this Australian first novel shows promise, it suffers from too
many problems: Sally must deal not only with the suicides but also with an
absent father, a sick mother, and "Lifesaver," a beachcombing tramp who suffers
from mental illness. Despite these weaknesses, the plot contains enough
elements (suicide, the occult, a love triangle) to hold even reluctant readers.
RAS
McKenna, Colleen O'Shaughnessy. Murphy's Island. Scholastic, 1990. ISBN
0-59043552-3. [144p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Collette's not happy when, just as she is about to
enter sixth grade at Sacred Heart, her father (a shadowy figure in the previous
books about Collette) packs up the family to spend the autumn on a Lake Erie
island where he is working on a law case. Collette's new school is small, where
the fifth and sixth grades are in one classroom, the girls are clique-y, and the one
boy she's befriended snubs her during school hours. This latest entry in a cozy
series is all-familiar and all-appealing. As usual, McKenna demonstrates her
unstudied knack for conveying how kids think and talk, without the earnest
research that informs too many school-and-family series. This story has a
sentimental ending that seems straight out of Reader's Digest's "Drama in True
Life" feature; kids will love it. RS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Moving, adjustment to
[38]
McKissack, Patricia. W.E.B. DuBois; by Patricia and Fredrick McKissack.
Watts, 1990. ISBN 0-531-10939-9. [128p]. (Impact Biographies). $13.90.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Like the DuBois biography by Virginia Hamilton
(BCCB 9/72) this has been carefully researched, calling attention to events in
black history and in the civil rights struggle as well as to DuBois the man, the
writer, the educator, the activist. The writing does not have the polish of
Hamilton's book, but it, also, is candid about the subject's weaknesses while
praising his many accomplishments. 
The McKissacks show clearly what
DuBois' role was in the long, slow, hard fight for black civil rights; they
explain how for him, as for Paul Robeson, resentment of prejudicial treatment
led to leftist politics. There are a number of stylistic flaws (chiefly in grammar
or syntax) that are jarring: ". .. the life experiences of each man was ... "; or,
in speaking of Marcus Garvey's calling a Back-to-Africa convention," ... for
the purpose of transporting American blacks to Africa, who it was hoped ... ."
Still, an informative and occasionally impassioned tribute to an indefatigable
reformer is valuable, and the appended material is useful: a bibliography, a
correlated section of chapter notes, and a list of the written work of W.E.B.
DuBois. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Medearis, Angela Shelf. Picking Peas for a Penny; illus. by Charles Shaw.
State House Press, 1990. Trade ed. ISBN 0-938349-54-6; Paper ed. ISBN 0-
938349-55-4. 36p. Trade ed. $11.95; Paper ed. $5.95.
M 
4-6 yrs. 
This is a sunny, vaguely rhyming story about two
black children during the Depression: "Now times were hard and times were
tough/ so picking peas for a living was plenty good enough." The young girl
who tells the story is, along with her brother, helping their grandparents harvest
the peas; they are spurred on by Grandpa's promise of a penny a pound and a trip
to town. A pair of happier laborers has rarely been seen; while Shaw's pencil
drawings are expressively atmospheric, the perpetually smiling faces of the two
children look like an illustrator's wishful thinking. The trip to the store ("We
look at all the pretty things, and peer into each bin") is a cheery reminder to look
on the bright side: "You can buy a lot with a penny during the Depression."
An unrealistically pleasant look at hard work during tough times. RS
Moore, Robin. Maggie among the Seneca. Lippincott, 1990. Library ed.
ISBN 0-397-32456-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32455-3. 
[144p]. Trade ed.
$11.95; Library ed. $11.89. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
Gr. 5-7. 
Having set off in search of her Aunt Franny at the end
of The Bread Sister of Sinking Creek (reviewed last month), dauntless Maggie
and Old Jake Logan are soon captured by Seneca Indians on the warpath.
"Maggie caught sight of the scalps, dangling from the warriors' belts. They
were palm-sized circlets of hair, black and blond. The blood from the scalps still
ran in rivulets down the warriors' naked thighs." Jake escapes by leaping into
the river after a stray arrow cuts through the rope the Senecas were using to tie
him to a tree; Maggie is adopted by the tribe, renamed Redwing, and married off
to a blond-haired, blue-eyed warrior named Firefly. The consummation of this
marriage is coyly accomplished: "It is not possible to tell everything that
[39]
happened to Maggie that night... It is enough to say that, for the first time in
her life, Maggie knew what it was to fling herself away, out of her body, and to
feel at one with the earth and the water and the stars overhead." Firefly dies after
his foot is bitten off by a wolf; Maggie has a baby and names it Hoot Owl;
Maggie escapes, finds Franny, and resolves to go back for little Hoot Owl,
secreted in the forest by a mysterious witch woman. To be continued? RS
C.U. History-U.S.--Colonial
Morrow, Barbara. Help for Mr. Peale; written and illus. by Barbara Morrow.
Macmillan, 1990. ISBN 0-02-767590-4. 
[32p]. 
$14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-3. 
This sedate story has a historical base: the moving of
the family and the extensive collection of the colonial artist and taxidermist,
Charles Willson Peale, from one combined home and display site to another in
Philadelphia in 1794. It is ten-year-old Rubens, one of the Peale children, who
comes up with an idea that solves the problem of transportation: a parade of
Rubens' friends, each carrying one animal. This may have a limited audience,
given the probability that Peale is an unfamiliar figure to most children, but
they'll enjoy the fact that a child solves the problem. Small, framed watercolor-
and-pencil picture have good period details and tidy composition and plenty of
animals (stuffed and live) to appeal to primary grades readers. ZS
D.V. Resourcefulness
Moss, Marissa. Regina's Big Mistake; written and illus. by Marissa Moss.
Houghton, 1990. 
ISBN 0-395-55330-X. 
[32p]. 
$13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Almost any child can sympathize with Regina, who
feels unequal to the task of drawing a jungle or a rain forest. On either side of
Regina, classmates are drawing beautiful pictures, while she is making mistakes
and having to start over. Turning a yellow blob into a moon, she decides that
her picture will be a night scene; the finished product draws praise from her
classmates and kudos from the teacher. Children may find the story slight, but
they probably will enjoy the solace of having another child struggling to
achieve, and succeeding. Crayon and wash drawings are modest in line and mass,
realistic if not polished, and happily interracial; that is, jeers and cheers are
exchanged without regard to racial distinctions. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Mother Goose. The Orchard Book of Nursery Rhymes; comp. by Zena
Sutherland; illus. by Faith Jaques. Orchard, 1990. ISBN 0-531-05903-0. 88p.
$21.95.
Note: Books written by The Bulletin's editors or advisory committee are given a
descriptive annotation rather than a review.
3-6 yrs. 
This collection of seventy-six favorite and familiar
nursery rhymes is illustrated with many full-color paintings "that place the
verses in an eighteenth century setting, reflecting the historical period when
many of them first appeared in print." A first-line index and notes on the
rhymes and illustrations are appended. RS
[40]
Nichols, Janet. American Music Makers: An Introduction to American
Composers. Walker, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6958-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
8027-6957-8. 232p. illus. with photographs. Library ed. $19.85; Trade ed.
$19.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
With a text unevenly distributed between the technical
and anecdotal, this introduction to ten American composers may intrigue
neophytes, but will be best understood by young musicians. 
While a
continuous history might have more effectively conveyed the development of
serious American music (Gershwin is the only pop composer represented, and
the treatment is cursory), readers will be able to discern the line-twisting,
jagged, sometimes doubling back-from the piano fantasies of Louis Moreau
Gottschalk in the early 19th century to the minimalist compositions of Philip
Glass in the late 20th. Nichols is at her best when discussing the compositional
theories and methods of contemporary composers Glass, George Crumb, Steve
Reich and Milton Babbitt; her analysis of earlier composers such as Ives and
Edward MacDowell is more biographical. There is a photo of each composer,
and a glossary is provided. RS
C.U. Music
Paulsen, Gary. Woodsong. Bradbury, 1990. ISBN 0-02-770221-9. 132p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
The autobiographical stories Paulsen tells here are as
gripping and well told as anything he's ever cast into fiction. They rely on
observations of a wild Minnesota setting, the dogs he ran in preparation for the
Iditarod, and the race itself. The theme of respect for animal nature as it is rather
than as it is sentimentally or clinically projected emerges as a natural theme, and
Paulsen considers his own human ignorance with a perspective of humor, even
humility. His passion for sledding leads to the centering of details through a
straightforward narrative without stylistic distractions. Kids who have enjoyed
his novels will see this as a natural extension-may, in fact, find here a clearer
voice. Unquestionably, they will meet some memorable canine characters and
the challenge of Alaska's unyielding winter. The individuality-and sometimes
violence-of the dogs who lead their human and probably save his life make for
strong reading. BH
D.V. Animals, respect for
Peet, Bill. Cock-a-Doodle Dudley; written and illus. by Bill Peet Houghton,
1990. ISBN 0-395-55331-8. 48p. $14.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Like many a Peet creation, Dudley is in trouble
through no fault of his own, a situation certain to evoke instant reader
identification. Dudley crows so gorgeously every sunrise that his barnyard
companions hold him personally responsible for each new day. "'You've done it
again, Dudley,' said Trevor the turkey. 'Nice crowin'.'" And when Gunther the
jealous goose chases Dudley into the woods, old Sol misses his favorite rooster
and refuses to rise. While the premise is just the other side of silly, the story is
naturally told and generously imagined. Peet's cartoons are as classy as ever,
with a brightly appealing barnyard populated with expressively charactered
creatures. He even manages the trick of drawing a smiling sun who in no way
resembles a happy-face sticker. RS
[41 ]
Pendergraft, Patricia. The Legend of Daisy Flowerdew. Philomel, 1990. ISBN
0-399-22176-X. 190p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Halfway between Southern Gothic and Cinderella
variant, this tells the story of thirteen-year-old Daisy Flowerdew, sent to her
mother's house after Granny Henry dies. There she experiences cruelty to top
even that shown her by the children in a school she briefly attended. Her pretty,
insecure mother is too ashamed of Daisy's odd looks and mute ways to give her
any affection; her stepfather pays a local ne'er-do-well, hateful Elmer Goots, ten
dollars to marry her. Daisy's only consolation is a packet of paper dolls who
materialize into real people, one of them a prince. When Daisy runs away from
a bizarre wedding breakfast hosted by three spinsters and their aging father, she is
caught and walked-tied with a rope-to Elmer's house. At the moment he
threatens to rape her, however, her prince appears and flies away with her. There
are some very powerful scenes here, but the delicately developed fantasy does not
always fit with an exaggerated realism bordering on melodrama. The paper-doll
idea is the most original and best realized of the novel. The malicious
buffoonery of the three spinsters, on the other hand, seems to distend fairy-tale
archetypes with Tennessee Williams effects. Dialect is naturally handled in
conversations, though using set for sit throughout the otherwise standard
English narrative seems to strain the effect. The atmospheric magic may well
overcome such objections. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers
Price, Leontyne, ad. Arda; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. Gulliver/Harcourt,
1990. ISBN 0-15-200405-X. 32p. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Like the publisher's Swan Lake retold by Margot
Fonteyn (BCCB 5/89), this lengthy adaptation is by an artist whose
identification with the starring role is complete. As was also true of Swan Lake,
there is some disparity between the picture book format and the grandly romantic
tale of a captive Ethiopian princess and her forbidden love for an Egyptian hero.
Like many Aida productions, this one is lavishly appointed, with gold borders,
opulently colored paintings, and delicate narrative friezes heading the text. While
some of the paintings, such as the one of Alda's moonlit confrontation with her
father, are dramatically effective, others hide the drama in crowded patterns and
colors. The friezes tell the story more clearly, conveying the passions of the
story through formalized pose and gesture. Aside from incorrectly attributing the
story to Verdi, there are no historical notes, but there is an afterword by Price on
her personal feelings about the role. Price's 1963 recording of the opera is
terrific; try using book and music together. RS
C.U. 
Music
Provensen, Alice. The Buck Stops Here: The Presidents of the United States;
written and illus. by Alice Provensen. Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
024787-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024786-X. 64p. Library ed. $17.89; Trade ed.
$17.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
From Washington ("First and foremost, Washington/
Our best beloved President One") through Bush ("And now George Bush is
Forty-one./ Good luck to him and all to come"), this presidential pageant offers
lots to look at. Each president is given a mnemonic couplet or quatrain, and
most are afforded full- or double-page spreads that include a portrait cleverly
[42]
surrounded by smaller pictures, slogans, maps, and symbols that give some
historical context. Harry Truman sits at a desk littered with papers referring to
NATO, the UN, Potsdam and Korea; behind him bursts the atomic bomb while
the twin suns of Germany and Japan set out of sight. Kennedy's picture
("Thirty-five, Kennedy, young John F.J One more President shot to death") is
carried aloft by a crowd that also displays signs about Cuba, the Peace Corps,
civil rights, and the Test Ban Treaty. The visual tone of the ink-and-watercolor
illustrations is pure Americana, evoking old campaign posters and cigar boxes,
and the flat perspectives of Colonial painting. While the pictures are filled with
stories and details and words, the designs are well-balanced, clean, and uncrowded.
The total effect is disarmingly light (Carter in a peach orchard, Reagan on a
marquee) and wittily informative (philatelist FDR surrounded by stamps that
picture highlights of his tenure). Appended notes explain most of the visual and
textual references. RS
C.U. History-U.S.
Pullman, Philip. The Tiger in the Well. Knopf, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-
679-90214-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80214-2. [416p]. Library ed. $16.99; Trade
ed. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-. 
"You know what your memory's for? It's for getting
things to look right when you make them up." Sally Lockhart (first introduced
in The Ruby in the Smoke, BCCB 5/87) is driven to question her own memory
when she receives a court summons informing her she is being sued for divorce
by Arthur Parrish. Sally has never met Parrish, but that certainly is her name,
in her handwriting, in the marriage registry at Southam Rectory. Parrish wants
custody of Sally's daughter Harriett, now two, whose impending arrival was
announced at the end of Shadow in the North (BCCB 4/88). While occasionally
distracted by a complicated subplot involving Jewish criminals and socialists and
Sally's growing social conscience, this third Sally Lockhart story is suspenseful
and menacing, its terrors closer to home than the exotic threats posed by Ah
Ling and Axel Bellman in the previous books. The horror and effectiveness of
Parrish's demand for Harriett are wound tighter as Sally takes her daughter all
around London in futile attempts to protect her. When Sally eventually
discovers that Mr. Parrish is in fact working for someone else, murky half-
remembrances, "like a great slow fish moving a fin" begin to tell her the nature
of the beast. As always, Pullman demonstrates too much integrity to resort to
pastiche or melodrama; his vision of Victorian London is far from a jolly good
time. RS
Rylant, Cynthia. Henry and Mudge and the Happy Cat; illus. by Sugie
Stevenson. Bradbury, 1990. ISBN 0-02-778008-2. 48p. $11.95.
R* 
Gr. K-3. 
It's hard to keep a series fresh, especially at the easy-
to-read level, but this may be the best Henry and Mudge book since the first
two. The important new addition to a two-star cast is a cat with "a saggy belly,
skinny legs, and fur that looked like mashed prunes." ("'Are you sure it's a
kitty?' said Henry's father.") This benighted stray falls in love with Mudge,
however, and Mudge loves it ("but Mudge also likes turkey gizzards," says
Henry's father). Posters at first fail to produce the owner ("'Don't put the cat's
picture on them,' said Henry's father, 'or we'll have that cat forever'") until one
day a policeman shows up looking for his lost cat, which he describes as
[43]
looking "something like mashed prunes." Bingo! But it's hard to let a friend
go, though a present of thirty giant dog bones and a gold police badge eases the
pain. Stevenson's affectionate illustrations win again, too, with confident, full-
color depictions of this ludicrous family, especially mashed in a couch cuddle
dominated by huge Mudge and the shabby cat. BH
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Pets, love for
Schnieper, Claudia. 
Lizards; illus. with photographs by Max Meier.
Carolrhoda, 1990. ISBN 0-87614-405-9. 48p. (Nature Watch). $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Outstanding color photographs, clearly captioned,
illustrate a continuous text that will fit as naturally into classrooms as those
ubiquitous terrariums containing the kinds of lizards described here. Focusing on
the eye-catching emerald lizard but including many other species as well,
Schnieper covers feeding and breeding patterns, physiological characteristics, and
widely varied environmental adaptations. Well designed, this combines clear
information with stopped-motion subjects that won't disappear in a crack or fade
into ground cover before kids can get a good look. A glossary and index are
included. BH
C.U. Nature study
Scholes, Katherine. Peace Begins with You; illus. by Robert Ingpen. Sierra
Club/Little, 1990. ISBN 0-316-77436-7. 4 0p. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
First published in Australia, a quiet book that
explores different ways of defining or interpreting or achieving peace has a
worthy theme but may be limited in appeal because it is repetitive, sedate, and at
times rambling and too abstract. The softly drawn and softly colored pictures of
adults and children are impressive technically and aesthetically, but they seldom
relate specifically to the text on the facing page. A final page headed "How to be
a peacemaker" advocates learning about oneself, becoming an activist, and
working to see the point of view of others and solve problems peacefully. ZS
D.V. Peace
Seabrooke, Brenda. Judy Scuppernong; illus. by Ted Lewin. Cobblehill, 1990.
ISBN 0-525-65038-5. 64p. $12.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
A series of 31 free-verse poems relates, with vivid
specifics of detail and image, the story of a girl who moves into a southern
town, captivates three friends her own age (including the narrator) with her
imaginative flair, and then disappears as mysteriously as she came. Each poem
develops an episode that reveals, with subtlety and depth, a hidden facet of the
outsider and of the narrator's discoveries about her. Judy Scupholm, or
"Scuppernong" as the girls call her, seems to have the freedom to eat, roam, and
dress however she wants. She comes to a birthday party bearing the best gift,
nested amidst quantities of tissue, "a tiny bottle of nail polish/ glowing like a
ruby in the sun/ ... Jungle Red." Judy says her absent father is Norwegian.
She says nothing about her reclusive mother, but others do: their "voices drifted
out/ droning, monotoning, /lifting and dropping, like boats on a tantalizing sea.
... she drinks, you know." And finally the most moving poem, "The Bottles,"
solves the mystery of a pile of splintered glass "crystals" growing in the
greenhouse behind Judy Scuppernong's house. The summer setting is projected
[44]
with potently selective descriptions: "... big-faced fans/ like electric flowers
turned/ from side to side on long stems ... ." The effect is one of a lean but
atmospheric narrative, too immediate to slip into the pitfall of nostalgia. Young
readers will be drawn to these characters and will see themselves. Lewin's black-
and-white watercolors make the most of their half-page space by focusing on
parts of people's bodies-feet, backs, torsos, or heads-with unusual
perspectives. His images suggest more than they define-an important quality
in illustration for poetry. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Service, Pamela F. Under Alien Stars. Karl/Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-
31621-6. 214p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Cherishing the memory of his father, a "Resister"
killed by the aliens who have conquered Earth, Jason is suspicious of his
mother, a "collaborator" who works for the occupying Tsorians. Mom is
actually a spy, and enlists Jason's help in abducting Rogav, general of the
Tsorian force. The Tsorians are like us (except smarter and purple) and Jason
grudgingly befriends Rogav's daughter Aryl while Mom falls for Rogav. They
all work together to ward off the Hyzkois, another alien race intent on capturing
Earth. While characterization is stock, the space-opera plot is suspensefully
managed, alternately narrated from Jason's and Aryl's perspectives. 
The
gradually emerging theme that conquering aliens might be good for Earth's
development is a change from the more usual alien-paranoia, but the idea is not
very convincingly put and is a little creepy besides. RS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Shelby, Anne. We Keep a Store; illus. by John Ward. Jackson/Orchard, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08456-6; Trade ed. 0-531-05856-5. 32p. Library ed.
$14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
It's hard to tell at first glance exactly when this story
about a rural black family takes place. In the country store portrayed here, the
pop comes in green glass bottles, the candy is scooped into little paper bags, the
cash register neither calculates change nor talks. But the men sitting around the
old wood stove swapping stories about the old days wear Reeboks, and the
narrator's mother wears designer eyeglasses. Men customers talk and whittle on
the porch, the womenfolk congregate in the back yard to peel apples. There's no
plot here; instead, it's a prettified idealization of contemporary country living:
"Whenever we need anything all we have to do is walk across the yard to the
store and get it. We don't even have to pay ourselves for it." Real storekeepers'
children know better. The nostalgically glowing illustrations show shelves in
neat array and, overall, an appealing tidiness. 
Excepting one little boy
purchasing a sack of penny candy, nobody is pictured buying anything. RS
Shrapnel, Pamela. Freddie the Frightened and the Wondrous Ms. Wardrobe;
illus. by G. Brian Karas. Knopf, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90155-8; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-679-80155-3. 
[80p]. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
"At seven-thirty each evening the horror begins.
Freddie has to go to bed." Frightened Freddie knows there are monsters under his
bed, inside his closet and waiting outside his window. Of course Mom and Dad
[45]
don't believe him, but cousin Penelope (a.k.a. "the Wondrous Ms. Wardrobe")
takes his problem seriously. Shipped out for a visit, "because she's being
difficult," Penelope gamely tackles the Cardigan Zombie, the Troll in the hall,
and the Creature beneath the bathtub. But even a champion monster-basher like
Penelope can't face the Googyman alone. A little monstrous in her own right,
Penelope fascinates Fred with improbable tales of maternal abuses: "'The worst
time, though, was when she nearly pounded me to death with half a dozen
doughnuts-just because my room was a bit of a mess' .... 
Fred studied the
back of her neck. Did doughnuts leave scars?" Short chapters and bouncy style
in this Australian import make it a good choice for both read-aloud and -alone.
For kids who want their monsters taken seriously. RAS
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Southall, Ivan. The Mysterious World of Marcus Leadbeater. Farrar, 1990.
ISBN 0-374-35113-9. 180p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Several times the winner of Australia's top children's
book award, Southall is a writer whose style has a distinctive voice but is so
intense as to be difficult for some readers' assimilation. The plot here is
minimal: adolescent Marc, come to visit his recently-widowed grandmother,
finds that she is gone and that the family homestead (to which Marc had been
told he was the part heir) is up for sale. Hunting for Gran, he finds and has a
long discussion with another person who had loved Gramps. 
The
characterization is adequate, the framework more situation than plot, the pace
slow. An example of the style is the first paragraph: "Leadbeater, M. R.
Answering to Marc. Year Eleven student. Faintest light of the English class
presided over by Miss Gorgeous. The incredible, the ravishing Miss G. Almost
beyond credence, this lack of star quality, for eloquence seemed ever at the tip of
his tongue." ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Grandparent-child relations
Stanley, Diane. Good Queen Bess: The Story of Elizabeth I of England; by
Diane Stanley and Peter Vennema; illus. by Diane Stanley. Four Winds, 1990.
ISBN 0-02-786810-9. [40p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
This compressed history of Elizabeth I's life and
times benefits from a combination of selective text and elaborated art. Stanley's
formal, full-color illustrations on every page showcase the principal characters
with precise detail and pure, tightly patterned hues. The personal and the politic
are companionably balanced, as are background information and specific incident.
Despite the picture book format, older elementary-grade readers who are the real
target audience can be persuaded to read this by the sophisticated pictorial style
and the uncondescending narrative, as was the case with Stanley's biography of
Peter the Great (BCCB 10/86). A brief introduction explains the European
context of religious tension between Catholics and Protestants during the
Reformation, and a bibliography lists a dozen other books-nine adult and three
juvenile-on Elizabeth I. BH
C.U. History-England
D.V. Sex roles
[46 ]
Stevens, Janet, ad. How the Manx Cat Lost Its Tail; ad. and illus. by Janet
Stevens. Harcourt, 1990. ISBN 0-15-236765-9. 32p. $14.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
A pourquoi tale about how the Manx Cat loses its
tail by arriving just as Noah slams the door of the Ark gives artist Janet Stevens
plenty of latitude to play with her favorite subject, the humorous depiction of
animals. 
Double spreads seem spaciously composed but are, on closer
inspection, filled with rollicking details: scenes of Shem, "in charge of all the
birds of the air"; Ham, "in charge of all the fish and animals of the sea"; Japhet,
"in charge of all the animals of the forest and jungle"; Noah's wife, "in charge of
all the pets--dogs, cats, ponies, birds, goldfish, and every other pet you can
think of"; and, of course, Noah, frantically calling louder and louder for his
favorite cat ("HERE, KITTY, KITTY, KITTY!") until his wife comes along
with a soft "Spss, pss, sps sps sps pss" that brings the Manx in, barely. Kids
will quickly pick up the escalating refrain and relish the mounting tumult as the
waters rise along with the general panic. Stevens' drafting manages to be both
accurate and vigorous, with loose, swinging lines surging like the storm and
rounded like the waves. Colors are deep but carefully blended to avoid clashes
that would overload the action-packed scenes. This one will be a read-aloud
favorite for both lap-sitters and large groups. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Stolz, Mary. Bartholomew Fair; illus. by Pamela Johnson. Greenwillow,
1990. ISBN 0-688-09522-4. 152p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Queen Elizabeth I of England, a wealthy cloth
merchant, a scullery maid, a poor student, his aristocratic schoolmate, and a
cruelly treated apprentice all make their way to Bartholomew Fair with high
hopes, some of which are fulfilled (even exceeded) and some not. Each character
affects another, so that by the time sleep overtakes them, all retain some striking
impression of the day. The sense of time anticipated, passing, and gone is
strong, even overtly stated in a lady-in-waiting's reflections on aging. The fair
itself fades before the dynamics among those who attend it; yet readers are left
with a sense of local hurly-burly and, even stronger, the contrast of rich and poor
in Elizabethan England. Stolz's characterizations ring clear as the bells of
London, her style is strongly knit with humor, and the plot wends enticingly to
a close not entirely foreseen. Picaresque and picturesque, this will enrich many a
historical unit with human dimensions. BH
C.U. History-England
D.V. Self-reliance
Taylor, John Robert. Hairline Cracks. Lodestar, 1990. ISBN 0-525-67304-0.
138p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Sam's mother has disappeared, and he is taken to stay
with his dad and stepmother, who assure him that everything is all right: "She
needed a break, Sam. Working too hard, getting uptight-you know." It turns
out, though, that Mum (and her journalist boyfriend Davis) Knew Too Much
about something, and are either hiding . . . or kidnapped. Sam and his best
friend, hardboiled computer whiz Mo (Maureen), determined to find Mum, take
off, barely-constantly-one step ahead of the bad guys. 
Good and bad
characters are easily sorted out, the story is fast-paced and adequately suspenseful,
[47]
and the kids vs. adults confrontations are self-righteously appealing. There's a
terrific threatened-torture scene: "I did know that I was a coward and that I'd
betrayed Davis. It was the price I had to pay to save Mo from the pliers." The
cover picture of two kids and a nuclear steamstack makes this look like a
suspenseful environmental thriller, but any ecological awareness is strictly
accidental to the story, which is really more like one long chase scene. RS
Taylor, Mildred D. Mississippi Bridge; illus. by Max Ginsburg. Dial, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0427-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0426-7. 
[64p].
Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Told by the white boy whose attempts at friendship
with his black neighbors were recounted in Roll of Thunder, Hear My Cry and
other books in the series about the Logan family, this is Jeremy's description of
a tragedy on the Rosa Lee River. He watches as a store owner insults two black
customers and as a bus driver unseats all the black travelers to accommodate a
last-minute crowd of whites. His affection for two of the white passengers, a
little girl and her grandmother who don't participate in the racism except by
being part of a society favoring them, is equalled by his pain over the treatment
of the blacks. It is the little girl and her grandmother who die when the bus
hurtles over a bridge with rotten planks, and it is this irony that lends more
subtle dimension to the story than has characterized some of Taylor's other
indictments of racism. The conflict between an unjust father and his ethical son
also add power to the scenes, which are smoothly developed in rural Southern
dialect To be illustrated with 10 pictures in black and white. BH
C.U. History-U.S.
D.V. Interracial understanding
Treseder, Terry Walton. Hear 0 Israel: A Story of the Warsaw Ghetto; illus. by
Lloyd Bloom. Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-31456-6. 41p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
A first-person narrative begins with young Isaac's
description of his brother's bar mitzvah, as anti-semitism rages around them in
World War II Poland. In the second chapter, he recounts the death of his mother
in childbirth and of all his younger siblings from starvation or typhus in the
Warsaw Ghetto. In the third chapter, he rides a train to Treblinka; and in the
fourth, he and his father are marched away to be killed. How the narrative
survives seems to be a matter for suspension of disbelief. This is more
prototypical than fictionally developed, which may make it useful in the many
Holocaust curriculum units being developed currently, but which makes it less
involving and authentic than books such as Aranka Siegal's Upon the Head of
the Goat (BCCB 2/82), Uri Suhl's On the Other Side of the Gate (BCCB 9/75),
Christa Laird's Shadow of the Wall (BCCB 5/90). or Chana Abells'
photodocumentary The Children We Remember (BCCB 10/86). The debate
about Jews' accepting their victimization is incorporated through a conflict
between Isaac's brother, who wants to resist, and his father, who meets their fate
stoically and influences the narrator to do so: "They all knew they were going to
die.... I felt proud to be a man among them." Papa's reassurance that Isaac
will meet his dead family in heaven and have his bar mitzvah there seems, on the
other hand, somewhat foreign to Orthodox Jewish tenets. Bloom's six black-
[48]
and-white paintings reflect a Chagallian rounding of shapes arched together, with
strong focus on traditional motifs. BH
C.U. History-Modem
D.V. Faith
Williams, Karen Lynn. Baseball and Butterflies; illus. by Linda Storm.
Lothrop, 1990. ISBN 0-688-09489-9. [80p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
In a promising first novel from the author of
Galimoto (BCCB 4/90), Daniel's younger brother Joey is a thorn in the side,
besting Daniel not only at handwriting, but also at baseball. While his friends
look forward to a summer of baseball, Daniel dreads it: "He was afraid of the
ball. It was a hard ball .... 
Mostly though, he didn't care enough about the
game." What Daniel does care about, passionately, is his butterfly collection,
and how to keep a captured butterfly alive. 
Williams provides enough
information about Daniel's favorite insect to help us understand and even share
his fascination. Her presentation of Daniel's love-hate relationship with his
younger brother is right on target. When Joey returns from the hospital, after
being treated for a burn, Daniel's concern quickly turns to jealousy: "His mood
had changed in an instant .... Now he felt like being mean. He almost wished
he had a burned hand." Williams tackles with both empathy and humor third
grade dilemmas such as the agony of having to bring an uncool present to a
birthday party: "Books. That was worse than, than... than underwear. Daniel
remembered the time Martin Howard brought Ian a set of He Man underwear as a
birthday present .... 
Everyone at the party chased Martin around with the
underwear, yelling 'Cooties,' and Martin wasn't invited to another party for two
years." Baseball, butterflies, bratty brothers, and birthday parties-with so many
potential hooks, this book is sure to strike a chord with younger readers. RAS
D.V. Brothers
Williams, Vera B. "More More More," Said the Baby: 3 Love Stories; written
and illus. by Vera B. Williams. Greenwillow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-
09174-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09173-3. 32p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed.
$12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Three stories, three babies, three loving adults who
cuddle and kiss and love their babies, each of whom cries "More. More. More."
Or, sleepily, "Mmm. Mmmm. Mmmm." The babies are white and black and
Asian in heritage, the loving adults are a father, a mother, and a grandmother.
The gouache paintings have more verve than grace, and the patterned text has
more appeal than substance, but the idea of love expressed in terms a young
child can understand will undoubtedly captivate the preschool audience. ZS
D.V. Family relations
Woodson, Jacqueline. Last Summer with Maizon. Delacorte, 1990. ISBN 0-
385-30045-X. 105p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
"Gonna learn about strength this summer, Margaret,"
says downstairs neighbor Ms. Dell, whose powers of prophecy are well-regarded
by Margaret and her best friend, Maizon. It is a hard summer for Margaret: her
father dies of a heart attack, and Maizon has applied for admission to boarding
school, leaving Margaret with the prospect of facing sixth grade by herself.
While this first novel prefers conversation over action, the best-friendship of two
[49]
young black girls in Brooklyn is honestly portrayed, including the little swipes
of meanness that jostle with the shared care and loyalty to make a bond.
Margaret's grief over her father's death is hard and convincing, but she seems
unrealistically comforted by some cathartic poetry-writing. Maizon's trials at
boarding school are offstage, hinted at by her lack of letters to Margaret and only
revealed for certain when she decides to come back to the city. Although
underdeveloped, this story will appeal to readers who want "a book about
friends"; they will learn enough about this pair to wish them well. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Friendship values
Zelinsky, Paul O., ad. The Wheels on the Bus; paper engineering by Rodger
Smith; ad. and illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky. Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44644-
3. 16p. $14.95.
R* 
4-6 yrs. 
The wheels on this bus really do go round and round,
the wipers swish-swish-swish, and, funniest of all, the babies waah-waah-waah
while their mothers' eyes roll with frustrated dismay. And, oh joy, this bus is
on its way to the library. There's inherent wit in the joining of repetitive chant
with the push-and-pull tabs of a pop-up book, but Zelinsky is not content to let
the gimmick alone do his job for him. His colors are post-moder pinks and
purples while the woozy perspectives are post-office WPA and Thomas Hart
Benton. The last picture is magnificent, sprawling paint and perspectives and
pop-ups across a double-spread to reprise the entire song. A real trip. RS
Zubrowski, Bernie. Balloons: Building and Experimenting with Inflatable
Toys; illus. by Roy Doty. Morrow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08325-0;
Paper ed. ISBN 0-688-08324-2. 79p. (Boston Children's Museum Activity
Book). Library ed. $12.95; Paper ed. $6.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
This latest addition to a good series presents balloons
as an enjoyable, inexpensive medium for learning by doing. Budding engineers
will enjoy building propulsion models of a monorail, car, boat, submarine, and
whirlaway, while painlessly absorbing such scientific concepts as force,
pressure, and controlled variables. A few of the projects, such as "Inflatable
Furniture" and "Making an Air Mattress," are more recreational than educational,
but even here Zubrowski manages to sneak in a few scientific concepts. Step-
by-step directions (including a section on "How to blow up a balloon"-with a
bicycle pump) and clear diagrams are supplemented by "troubleshooting" advice
dealing with inevitable, unforeseen technical problems. The "experiments" are
really demonstrations of physical principles; Zubrowski encourages his readers to
tinker with their models to improve on their results. A "What's Happening?"
section following each demonstration explains the reasons for the observed
phenomena in easily understood terms. The projects, varying in degree of
difficulty, lend themselves to both individual and class participation. RAS
C.U. Science-experiments