Adler, David A. A Picture Book of Harriet Tubman; illus. by Samuel Byrd.
Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0926-0. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-3. 
Like other entries in Adler's series of easy-to-read
American biographies (see Eleanor Roosevelt, BCCB 4/91), this account of
Harriet Tubman's life is simple and direct, but occasionally choppy in its
transitions. After describing Tubman's hard upbringing on a plantation, for
example, Adler recounts her escape, stating that "Harriet ran to the house of a
white woman who had once offered to help her." Who? How did they meet?
The text also jumps uncomfortably between the events of Tubman's life and
those of the larger world, moving from her meeting with John Brown in 1858,
to the election of Lincoln in 1860, back to Harriet and her work during the Civil
War. The illustrations (amateurish in depicting human figures, somewhat better
in color and composition) reinforce the abruptness of the text, with disparate
images clashing on facing pages. But the text is honest about the facts of
slavery (even if one illustration of the young Harriet cowering under a whip is
more awkward than tragic) and provides the incredible and inspiring facts of this
heroine's long life. RS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Ashley, Bernard. Cleversticks; illus. by Derek Brazell. Crown, 1992. Library
ed. ISBN 0-517-58879-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-58878-1. 32p. Library ed.
$10.99; Trade ed. $10.00.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
First published in Great Britain, a story that is
realistically illustrated with line and colored pencil drawings evokes the
atmosphere of an interracial classroom where the protagonist, Ling Sung, feels
the pangs of being a non-achiever. Other children are praised for their newly
acquired skills: Terry can tie shoelaces (Ling Sung cannot) and Manjit can write
her name (Ling Sung cannot). By chance, our doleful hero discovers that two
long-handled paintbrushes can be used as chopsticks-and Ling Sung is adept at
using chopsticks. Admiring compliments boost his morale, and soon Ling
Sung is teaching everybody in class. This says a great deal, very simply, about
children's need to achieve, to conform, to belong. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Self-confidence
Aylesworth, Jim. Old Black Fly; illus. by Stephen Gammell. Holt, 1992.
ISBN 0-8050-1401-2. 32p. $15.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
His irritating presence described in verse, an
indefatigable fly buzzes around a long series of objects. The fact that there's an
alphabetical element ("He played on the Keys by the kitchen door. He lit on the
List for the grocery store") is a bonus, and the lap audience will happily join in
with the text's periodic interjections of "Shoo fly! Shoo fly! Shooo." Capital
letters are in bright color-the "K" in "Keys," for example. Indeed, bright color,
in ebullient swishes and spatters and washes, dominates the paintings, which
have a happily frenzied quality and some sharp comic details that underline the
disaster humor of the text. ZS
[ 288 ]
Baldwin, Joyce. To Heal the Heart of a Child: Helen Taussig, MD. Walker,
1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8167-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8166-7.
[144p]. illus. with photographs. 
Library ed. $15.85; Trade ed. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
A pioneer in medical education for women, a dedicated
physician who overcame dyslexia, deafness, and sexist exclusion in her medical
education, Helen Taussig is best known for her discovery of a surgical
innovation that could save the lives of cyanotic children, often referred to as
"blue babies." Baldwin gives an adequate amount of information about the
biographee's personal life but focuses on her career, explaining clearly the
therapeutic procedures used and describing with respect-rather than hyperbole-
the many honors bestowed by Dr. Taussig's peers. This is good medical history
as well as good biographical writing, with the material carefully organized and a
text that will be buttressed by photographs, by an index, and by a bibliography.
ZS
Bierhorst, John, ed. Lightning Inside You and Other Native American Riddles;
illus. by Louise Brierley. 
Morrow, 1992. 
ISBN 0-688-09582-8. 
104p.
$14.00.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Some thirty-four Native American groups, broadly
scattered from Alaska to Chile, are represented in this collection of riddles. The
book, which is illustrated with organically rounded charcoal drawings and
formatted in a spacious design, will serve two functions: some of the riddles are
witty and translate easily from their original context to current vogue; others
offer insight into unfamiliar traditions within the framework of a playful genre.
Here's an example of the former: "The cave has a pig in it.... it's the tongue
in your mouth (Mexico: Chatino)." And who doesn't feel a stab of identity at
the title riddle? 
"What is there inside you like lightning? . . . meanness
(Oklahoma: Comanche)." On the other hand, who would guess that what "looks
like soft white clouds around the sky" refers to the "fat around a reindeer's fourth
stomach (Alaska: Koyukon)"? Readers who don't figure that one out will learn a
little something they didn't know about reindeer anatomy and the importance of
it to a far northern tribe. Bierhorst has adapted Native American folklore with
consistent integrity, and this is one of his most accessible collections.
Descriptions of tribal groups and sources and are listed at the end of the book.
In his introduction describing various kinds of riddles-hunters', dream guessing,
gambling, and so on-he explains the concept of haku ("very good," or "almost
right"), a Koyukon word spoken by the riddler in response to an answer that
makes sense even if it is not the one the riddler had in mind. Our children
should have such options! BH
C.U. Folklore
Blair, David Nelson. Fear the Condor. Lodestar, 1992. ISBN 0-525-67381-4.
138p. $15.00.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Through the voice of ten-year-old Bartolina, readers
learn of the oppressive cruelty of the feudal system that still obtained in rural
areas of Bolivia in the early 1930s. A member of a large, extended family of
Aymara Indians, Bartolina is devout and naive. Her father's departure (ordered by
the administrator of the estate, Don Luciano) to fight against "land thieves" in
[289 ]
the Bolivian war against Paraguay is the first omen of a period of upheaval.
This prompts the warning of the title: 
Bartolina is told to beware of the
rapacious bird that can appear in the form of a man. As more men are sent away
and there is less food raised, an irate Grandmother wants to organize a protest-
but she is shot. Four years pass before Bartolina finds her father; when the story
ends she is fifteen, less ignorant and far less innocent in her understanding of the
system and its corruption. As a picture (rarely drawn) of Bolivian life and
political change in the years covered by the novel (1932-38), the book makes a
substantial contribution. As a literary entity it is less effective, inundating the
reader from the start with unexplained words, creeds, practices, and intricacies of
the system in which the patron is all powerful. ZS
C.U. History-South America
Blundell, Tony. 
Beware of Boys; written and illus. by Tony Blundell.
Greenwillow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10925-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
10924-1. 32p. Library ed. $13.93; Trade ed. $14.00.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
First published in the United Kingdom, this role-
reversal story has the exaggeration and disaster humor that most small children
enjoy, and the ebullient, busy illustrations reflect the same qualities. While the
plot is basically one repeated comic gag, the read-aloud audience may appreciate
the repetition and anticipate it. The plot: a very small boy is captured by a
hungry wolf who plans to cook his captive, but boy suggests a great recipe for
"Boy Soup," and the wolf runs about in a frenzy collecting the ingredients.
Several times this happens, each time the wolf being told he's forgotten the salt
and being given a new (equally complex) recipe. Finally the wolf collapses from
fatigue; the boy walls him up and goes off on the bicycle that was requested as
an ingredient for "Boy Cake." ZS
Burningham, John. Aldo; written and illus. by John Burningham. 
Crown,
1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-58699-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-58701-7. 32p.
Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
"Aldo is only friends with me, and he's a secret," says
the nameless narrator about her imaginary rabbit friend (not including ears, he's
about her height). The relationship of the girl and her capable and loving
companion is tenderly drawn, as he pushes her on the swing, reads her a story,
and accompanies her on imagined journeys. There's not much plot here, though,
and this lacks the multilayered psychological insight of Browne's The Night
Shimmy, reviewed last month; in his quiet way, however, Burningham may be
speaking more directly to the child's level ("I couldn't ever tell anybody about
Aldo. They would never believe me, and they would just laugh"). Illustrations
are a theme with subtle variations: informal line drawings form the mainstay,
but sometimes they're accented with a just a touch of color, as in Aldo's cross-
hatched gray fur and debonair green-and-white striped scarf; sometimes the whole
page is washed with one hue, as in the sunny scene of the narrator and Aldo
frolicking, and sometimes line-drawn cutouts of the narrator and Aldo appear
amid a landscape of thickly-textured pigment, as in the striking and wordless
scene of the girl and Aldo out at sea. Readers may connect Aldo's silent,
unwavering loyalty not only with their own imaginary companions but also
with pets and stuffed animals, and they'll appreciate this gentle acknowledgment
of the comfort a non-judgmental companion can provide. DS
[ 290 1
Carson, Jo. 
You Hold Me and I'll Hold You; illus. by Annie Cannon.
Jackson/Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08495-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05895-6. 32p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Remembering the day when her father got a phone
call about the death of his aunt, the young narrator describes the memorial
service that she and her family attended. The perspective is childlike, with
attention distributed equally between the girl's reluctance to clean up her room
and her sad uncertainty about the death. Of course, verisimilitude does not a
story make, and this one is slightly strained by the inclusion of a cryptic
allusion to even greater loss: "My mother decided she couldn't live with us
anymore and moved away. I don't like it when somebody says they are sorry to
hear something." On the plus side, adults will welcome the book as a chance to
discuss what children feel but cannot analyze or express (this narrator
notwithstanding), and there are precious few picture books that portray the stress-
ridden occasion of a funeral. Cannon's ingeniously patterned watercolor art will
give kids somewhere to look while they're undergoing bibliotherapy; the
perspective from the church ceiling says a lot about how dwarfed and distanced
children feel on such occasions. BH
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Father-daughter relations
Cole, William, comp. 
A Zooful of Animals; illus. by Lynn Munsinger.
Houghton, 1992. ISBN 0-395-52278-1. 88p. $17.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Nowhere is the tone of this anthology reflected more
clearly than in the last poem by John Gardner: "Always be kind to animals,/
Morning, noon, and night;/ For animals have feelings too/ And furthermore,
they bite." Cole's sense of humor is well paired with rollicking, spacious
illustrations by Munsinger, who draws animals with the easy aplomb of Wallace
Tripp. Her skill in drafting and her subtle coloration make the art an example of
intelligent cartooning that children will savor while they listen to verses by X.
J. Kennedy, John Ciardi, Kenneth Grahame, Aileen Fisher, Ted Hughes, and
William Cole himself. If it's a choice between this anthology and the one by
the Kennedys, reviewed below, get them both. BH
Colman, Penny. Breaking the Chains: The Crusade of Dorothea Lynde Dix.
Shoe Tree Press, 1992. Paper ed. ISBN 1-55870-219-9. 
144p. illus. with
photographs. Paper ed. $5.95.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
Born in 1802 and sent to Boston to live with her
wealthy grandmother when she was twelve, Dorothea became a teacher and
managed to convince the elderly Mrs. Dix to sanction a school in the Dix
Mansion-a harbinger, no doubt, of this pioneer educator and reformer's amazing
career as a social activist. She felt concern for the care and treatment of the
mentally ill; this cause became her passion, her crusade; she also worked for
nurses' training and herself nursed at military hospitals during the Civil War, and
she labored for programs to rehabilitate prisoners. The writing is moderate in
tone rather than laudatory: Colman lets Dorothea Dix's achievements speak for
themselves. Photographs and reproductions of contemporary prints are well-
placed in a sensibly organized text. Appended material includes a chronology, a
list of historic places to visit, a brief bibliography, and an index. ZS
C.U. Social studies
[291]
Coville, Bruce. Jennifer Murdley's Toad; illus. by Gary A. Lippincott.
Yolen/Harcourt, 1992. ISBN 0-15-200745-8. 
156p. (Magic Shop Books).
$16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
When given an assignment in her fifth grade English
class to write about a pet, homely Jennifer decides to buy one on the way home.
By accident--or maybe it's fate-Jennifer stumbles onto a magic shop and buys
a toad. Bufo is no ordinary toad. He is immortal, can speak, turns humans into
toads with a kiss, and has the Jewel of Perfect Happiness embedded in his
forehead. Bufo attributes all of his exceptional qualities to the fact that he was
one of the first toads from the mouth of the fairy tale character who spat out
vermin every time she spoke. The fairy tale elements are clever, but the Jewel
of Perfect Happiness is a contrived plot device that doesn't quite fit in. The
issue of Jennifer's homeliness is left realistically unresolved, although she is
diverted from her unhappiness when her ordinary life gets more interesting after
her discovery of the magic shop. The story is fast-paced and Bufo's comments
are often funny ("I had no idea I possessed such a powerful pucker!") but the
climax fizzles out when the reader has every reason to believe Jennifer will turn
an adversarial witch into a toad-while Jennifer seems to forget she has the
power. Nevertheless, this is a likable school story with a fairy tale twist. KJ
Cullen, Countee. The Lost Zoo; by Christopher Cat and Countee Cullen; illus.
by Brian Pinkney. Silver Burdett, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-382-24255-6;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-382-24256-4. 95p. Library ed. $14.98; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Since this playful version of the story of Noah and
his ark appeared, published in 1940 by Harper and Brothers, it may have been
forgotten by many. Part prose (conversations between Cullen and his loquacious
cat) and part poetry, the book describes the animals "who didn't get into Noah's
Ark, even though he sent them all invitations." There are long nonsense verses
about such creatures as the Lapalakes, the Treasuretit, the Squilililigee, and
others. A previous edition (BCCB 6/70) was illustrated by Joseph Low with
frolicsome pictures that are given a light, humorous quality by their casual line
and light washes. Brian Pinkney's colors are darker, with hatchings and
striations that are often more eerie than comic. ZS
Dexter, Catherine. The Gilded Cat. Morrow, 1992. ISBN 0-688-09425-2.
199p. $14.00.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Maggie, twelve, has always been interested in the
occult and is therefore especially intrigued when a little figure of a cat (purchased
at a yard sale) turns out to be a mummy of a kitten that had been the pet of a
boy pharaoh. The latter, in ghostly form, advises Maggie on magic that will
help her achieve the goal they both want: getting the gilded cat back to the
tomb from which it had been stolen. Pursued by a magician uncle who had
murdered him and who now seeks to destroy his spirit, the young ghost brings
danger and adventure into Maggie's life. There's plenty of action here, and the
supernatural is certainly attractive to many readers, but this is heavy with
contrivance and too often seems labored in its fantastic episodes. ZS
Dunlop, Eileen. Finn's Island. Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0910-4.
128p. $13.95.
[ 292 ]
R* 
Gr. 5-7. 
"Don't be such a fool, Finn," his father said when
Finn protested that they ought to have gone to live on the family island, instead
of staying on the farm they had come to when Dad lost his job at a Glasgow
school. The island is Hirsay, evacuated sixty years earlier by Finn's grandfather
and others because they couldn't cope with the harsh environment. Finn is
wildly excited, then, at the invitation to visit Hirsay with an agriculture student,
Douglas, and his son Chris. 
Dunlop does a remarkable job of creating
atmosphere, subtly developing characters and relationships that change and grow.
The island proves to be as rough and inhospitable as Finn was warned, and while
he gives up his idealized daydream of Hirsay, Finn gains a deeper understanding
of his heritage-and the true legacy of the island. ZS
Ehlert, Lois. Circus; written and illus. by Lois Ehlert. HarperCollins, 1992.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020253-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020252-1. 34p. Library
ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $15.00.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Ehlert here turns her hand to interpreting the "greatest
circus on earth" as a festival of colors and shapes. The abstracted figures are
depicted in vibrant and fanciful neon shades--cobalt bears, scarlet elephants, and
lime goats cavort across eye-poppingly contrasted (preponderantly black)
backgrounds. The text pages are several inches smaller than the covers, so that
every page seems bordered by the endpapers' row of vivid stars. It's not much
more than a series of terrific posters, however, because there's no story; each
"act" gets a double spread with a line or two of text ("For our next act, please
welcome the daring darling of our show, Princess Lydia, as she rides bareback on
her prancing horse") that never connects to pages previous or following. The
book is mainly about its own pictures, in fact, and the words are largely
superfluous except where, as with the flying Zucchinis, they're necessary for
identification of the performers. Still, for kids old enough to deal with the
abstraction, the visual impact is undeniable, and if you use the book with a
group, you know they'll be able to see the pictures from the back of the room.
DS
Everett, Percival. The One that Got Away; illus. by Dirk Zimmer. Clarion,
1992. ISBN 0-395-56437-9. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
"On the first day out, much to their surprise, they
caught one." And yup, this gang of cowpokes roped in a one, "1," that is, big
and blue and now corralled. The boys then find a whole bunch of Is in all colors
and sizes, nine ones in all, until one jumps the fence and runs away. "So they
rode out to look for the one that got away." 
Your appreciation of this
overextended joke will probably lag behind that of kids just learning wordplay,
but even they may be frustrated at the conclusion of the search: the cowboys
spy the 1 atop a butte, but when they get up there themselves, the 1 is gone.
Where? This one searched in vain for some clue in the pictures, which are
otherwise funny and angular, investing even the cacti with personality, with the
l's and the cowboys (not to mention the horses) competing for loopier looks.
Anyway the boys console themselves with their other eight, which, when they
return, have turned into just that: 8. One-der why? RS
[293 ]
Garland, Sarah. Going Swimming; written and illus. by Sarah Garland. Bodley
Head/Trafalgar Square, 1992. ISBN 0-370-31450-6. 26p. $13.95.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
Garland creates, in affable line and wash pictures, the
atmosphere of a busy, friendly crowd of parents and children enjoying an indoor
pool. This English picture book author and illustrator shows the same clever
simplicity here that she has exhibited in her earlier books (Going Shopping,
Having a Picnic, BCCB 9/85, etc.) so that the minimal text is all that is needed
to convey, along with the pictures, the action and humor of the story. A
mother, her small daughter, and a toddler brother have a great time, the latter
overcoming his fear and learning to paddle. In all, a cheerful outing. ZS
C.U. Community life
D.V. Fear, overcoming; Mother-child relations
Garland, Sherry. 
Song of the Buffalo Boy. Harcourt, 1992. ISBN 0-15-
277107-7. 249p. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Fiction about troubled times and places runs the
necessary risk of imposing story onto chaos: without a plot, there is no focus;
too much plot lends a betraying neatness to the situation. This novel, set in
postwar Vietnam, has a convincing balance. Loi, seventeen, is a con-lai, the
scornful name for a child of an American soldier and a Vietnamese mother.
Taunted by the other villagers, refused admittance to the local school, Loi has
two secrets: a photograph of herself, her mother, and an American soldier; and
her forbidden love for Khai, a boy who returns her love but who is not allowed
by his family to court her. It's a classic situation, of course, but Garland is
careful not to allow romantic cliches to overwhelm the sad, realistic
circumstances of Amerasian children. Learning that free passage to the U.S. is
available to children of G.I.'s and their families (including husbands), Loi and
Khai plot to fake her death, escaping the clutches of a lustful government official
who wants to marry Loi, and run away to Ho Chi Minh City, marry, and go to
America. None of this works out as planned, and while the ending is a happy
one, it is also sobering, as Loi learns the truth about her father and mother.
There are some travelogue-ish patches in the scene-setting, and a subplot
involving a scrappy orphan boy is a bit sentimental, but on the whole, the novel
is both a good love story and an honest portrait of the aftermath of war. RS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Goldstein, Margaret J. Brett Hull: Hockey's Top Gun. Lerner, 1992. Library
ed. ISBN 0-8225-0544-4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-8225-9599-0. 48p. illus. with
photographs. Library ed. $9.95; Paper ed. $4.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
It's seldom easy to be a rising star in the same field
as a famous parent, but Brett Hull is, he claims, a "laid back guy." In fact,
despite the impressive record of goals scored, he is not a great skater and is
inevitably compared to his father Bobby, "the Golden Jet." Traded to the St.
Louis Blues in 1988 because of his poor showing on the Calgary team, Brett
found his new coach more encouraging. Three years later, he became one of the
few ice hockey players ever to score 50 goals in the first 50 games of the season.
Goldstein includes an adequate amount of personal information, but most of her
text is devoted to the career of "the Golden Brett." 
Informative but not
[294]
stylistically impressive, the book (which ends with a page of statistics) will no
doubt delight hockey fans. ZS
Graham, Bob. Rose Meets Mr. Wintergarten; written and illus. by Bob Graham.
Candlewick, 1992. ISBN 1-56402-039-8. 26p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Rose and her family have just moved into a new
house, and children of the neighborhood have told Terrible Tales about the awful
man who lives next door, R. Wintergarten. It is reported that he rides a crocodile,
that he has a dog like a wolf, and that he eats people. Well, he certainly doesn't
respond when one of the children kicks a soccer ball over the fence and Rose
politely tries to get it back. However, after she's left, he relents and even kicks
the ball back over the fence himself. Concluding line: the ex-ogre says "Let's
play again tomorrow." Concluding line-and-wash drawing: the immense cactus-
like growths that make Mr. W's house gloomy are all being taken away, as is
the fence. The book has an unconvincing, slender plot, but the read-aloud
audience will no doubt enjoy the child's triumph and the story's humor. ZS
D.V. Fear, overcoming; Older-younger generations
Graham-Barber, Lynda. Doodle Dandy!: The Complete Book of Independence
Day Words; illus. by Betsy Lewin. Bradbury, 1992. ISBN 0-02-736675-8.
122p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
With varying degrees of success, Graham-Barber gives
the etymology of everything having to do with Independence Day, from concepts
(representation, unite) to verbs (burst, pledge) to tangible nouns (fireworks,
cherry pie). The histories of many of the nouns are interesting--did you know
the "'dachshund dog' was shortened to 'hot dog' when a newspaper cartoonist
forgot how to spell 'dachshund"'? Although the etymologies of some terms are
dull ("the basis for the word unite is the Latin word unire, 'to join together,'
from the Latin root unus, meaning 'one,' which evolved in Old French as
unite"), the author makes up for the lack of interest with historical tangents and
occasionally incomprehensible examples ("The day Ben founded the first Annual
Holly Triathlon, he put his John Hancock on a marriage license and then, with
his new bride and her father, watched Father Christmas lead the holiday parade").
The numerous pen-and-ink illustrations add a humorous sophistication and
consistency that is lacking in the text and a thorough index provides access to all
the historical terms mentioned. This fourth book in the publisher's holiday
series (see Graham-Barber's Mushy!, BCCB 3/91) may prove useful as a
lighthearted supplement to U.S. history classes. KJ
Greene, Carol. The Golden Locket; illus. by Marcia Sewall. Harcourt, 1992.
ISBN 0-15-231220-X. 33p. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Miss Teaberry's comedy of disaster begins
unprepossessingly when her cat digs up a gold locket. Miss Teaberry, who had
planned to weed zinnias, spends the day discovering that none of her clothes are
fancy enough for jewelry. That night, she does not sleep well for worrying
about robbers, and next morning she asks the milkman to give the locket to
some enchanting young girl, "from a secret admirer." Unfortunately, the girl
reciprocates with three squirming puppies, which Miss Teaberry asks the
milkman to give to some "winsome young man," who, of course, reciprocates
[295 ]
with a squawking parrot, which Miss Teaberry duly passes on to the enchanting
young girl. As the gifts get larger, the two adults get more weary until finally
Miss Teaberry figures a way out of the deadlock. This is simply but cleverly
written ("All night it sang. It did not sing well") and simply but cleverly
illustrated. Sewall's heavily outlined, rounded shapes have the rhythmic appeal
of Wanda Gag's, but with the addition of smoothly complemented colors. The
compositions focus on a limited number of large figures with plenty of clean
white space to set off their humorous poses. It's too bad that the "Indian
folktale" from which the author adapted her story (according to the back jacket
copy) isn't specified, but the folkloric pattern of escalating repetition is
authentically engaging. BH
Haskins, James. Thurgood Marshall: A Life for Justice. Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-
8050-2095-0. [172p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Although many pages seem heavily filled with
almost-solid paragraphs of print, the vitality and ebullience of the subject and the
drama of his career make this an exciting story of one man's dedication and of
the civil rights struggle in which he played so large a part. Thurgood Marshall
may be remembered in the future as a brilliant figure in the landmark Brown vs.
Board of Education of Topeka and as the first black man to be appointed to the
Supreme Court, but the details of his education and his legal career are also
impressive, and Haskins (despite an occasional stylistic lapse) has made a
substantial contribution in compiling this informative biography. Sources are
cited in a bibliography, and an index will be appended. ZS
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Hoover, H.M. Only Child. Dutton, 1992. 
ISBN 0-525-44865-9. 
122p.
$13.00.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Cody has never known any other kids. His parents,
two crew members on a spaceship, disobeyed orders by conceiving him, but by
the time he was born, the ship was too far into space to send him to Earth.
When Cody is twelve, the ship is due for maintenance, and he gets his first
chance to leave the ship. The entire crew is given a month's leave on the
isolated planet, Patma. During the long days, Cody's solitary expeditions along
the beach lead to his capture by a race of large, insect-like creatures. To protect
themselves, the intelligent creatures are living hidden from the human
settlements. When Cody returns to his hotel, he is shocked to learn the truth
behind the human colonization of Patma. The official, top secret statement
draws strong parallels to reality in human history ("Should the native population
in any way impede development, it can, at minimal cost, be confined to remote
reservation areas and disposed of by seemingly natural causes"). Hoover's
writing is simple and powerful, and she creates Cody's ethical dilemma well by
forcing him to sort through the rights, wrongs, and emotions of the issue.
Cody's strong reaction conveys the author's message, but is also believable
within his character and as a twelve-year-old's need for justice. KJ
Ikeda, Daisaku. The Cherry Tree; English version by Geraldine McCaughrean;
illus. by Brian Wildsmith. Knopf, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-92669-0;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-82669-6. 26p. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $15.00.
[ 296 ]
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Taichi and his sister, Yumiko, live in rural Japan; it's
just after the war, and their house is in ruins, their father is dead, and their
mother is away all day working. A stray cat leads the siblings to an old man,
who is hurrying to wrap a damaged cherry tree in order to protect it from the
winter's cold. The children help, and, after a bitter winter, the tree finally
flowers: "It used to blossom like this before the war," says a bystander, "but I'd
given up hope that it would ever bloom again." The story is a trifle saccharine,
but it's a welcome reversal of The Giving Tree, and it has a folkloric flavor that
will make its rhythm familiar to young readers. Wildsmith's delicate lines
combine exuberance and precision, whether in his open-air palette of spring
greens and pinks or the night scene of darker tones washed with golden
moonlight; even an American child who can't think of a cherry tree without
evoking George Washington will appreciate the final triumphant riot of pink
blooms. Overall, this is a gentle and visually appealing story of rebirth after
hard times. DS
Isadora, Rachel. Over the Green Hills; written and illus. by Rachel Isadora.
Greenwillow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10510-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
10509-2. 32p. Library ed. $13.93; Trade ed. $14.00.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Like Isadora's At the Crossroads (BCCB 5/91), this is
set in South Africa and depends heavily on that setting for its substance.
Sweeping watercolor sea- and landscapes provide a backdrop for a boy's journey
with his mother and baby sister to see his grandmother. The preparations for the
trip, their walk there, and the wait for Grandma Zindzi to appear from a visit
with some friends is the sum of a story which, were it set in hometown U. S.
A., simply wouldn't command attention (Zolani's helping a man with his pig
and later chasing an ostrich amount more to brief descriptions than to developed
incidents). As a travelogue, this is vivid and inviting; as a portrayal of a black
child's life in the Transkei, it may leave something to be desired. What's
exciting is Isadora's further exploration of a freer, looser graphic style that risks
dazzling color juxtapositions. BH
D.V. Grandmother-child relations
Karr, Kathleen. Oh, Those Harper Girls! or Young and Dangerous. Farrar,
1992. ISBN 0-374-35609-2. 182p. $16.00.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Set on the Harper ranch in West Texas in 1869, this
is the story of six sisters (March, April, May, June, Julie, and Lily) who embark
on a series of projects meant to be the financial salvation of inept Daddy's
investment. Each scheme is desperate, has little possibility of success, is not
quite within the law, and is particularly enjoyed and usually masterminded by the
youngest, Lily, who is thirteen. 
The cattle-rustling fails, the still for
moonshine blows up, but the holdup of a stage brings the six teenage girls some
censure from the authorities (i.e. jail, but a cozy jail) and then a fabulously
successful theatrical tour (The Harper Girls in Person, YOUNG AND
DANGEROUS!"). The book has a plethora of action, and enough humor to
amuse readers who can tolerate drawn-out stereotype and slapstick. ZS
D.V. 
Sisters
[297 ]
Kennedy, X. J., comp. Talking Like the Rain: A First Book of Poems; comp.
by X. J. and Dorothy M. Kennedy; illus. by Jane Dyer. Little, 1992. ISBN 0-
316-48889-5. 96p. $17.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
The authors' seasoned commitment to poetry shows
throughout this assortment of classic and contemporary verse for children. From
Robert Louis Stevenson to Dennis Lee, with samples of most of the best
children's poets ranging among the 123 selections, there's a sense of rolling
rhyme that carries the reader from one singing page to another. And there are
many pages, each designed to surround the poetry or set it into neat, discreet
illustrations that project graphic images from verbal ones. Dyer's art for "Old
Man Ocean" by Russell Hoban, for instance, is simply a full-page green
watercolor wash with a white rectangle that holds the poem and is bordered by a
moonlit strip of white sky at the top and a stylized series of whitecapped waves
at the bottom. In selection, scope, and visual format, this is likely to be a
volume many times revisited. BH
Kordon, Klaus. Brothers Like Friends; tr. from the German by Elizabeth D.
Crawford. Philomel, 1992. ISBN 0-399-22137-9. 207p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
First published in Germany in 1978, and smoothly
translated, this novel (based, an afterword reveals, on the author's childhood
experiences) is set in East Berlin in 1950. Frank is seven, his half-brother
Burkhard is fourteen, and their twice-widowed mother is the proprietor of a
restaurant. Woven through this touching story of fraternal affection are several
themes: Mother's marriage to a man that Burkie despises, the dedication that
both Frank and Burkie have to soccer, and Burkie's foolhardy insistence that
Frank keep secret the serious injury Burkie suffered in a game. Above all, it is a
candid and realistic account of the problems and pleasure of daily life-and it
ends, sadly, with Burkie's death and Frank's loving memories. ZS
D.V. Brothers; Death, adjustment to; Stepparent-child relations
Kronenwetter, Michael. Cities at War: London. New Discovery, 1992. ISBN
0-02-751050-6. 96p. illus. with photographs. (Cities at War). $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
The combination of many black-and-white
photographs and a text that grimly records the war years in London creates an
immediacy that is often found in film clips of that period. Kronenwetter begins
with a description of a metropolis that was rigidly divided into social strata and,
in analyzing the reaction of Londoners to the devastation of the blitz, concludes
with an evaluation of changes in attitude by the war's end. Primarily, this is a
measured photoessay, a bit heavily written but not dull; in fact, the events (and
many of the photographs) are so dramatic as to be both touching and chilling. A
list of sources, by chapter, and a bibliography precede the index. ZS
C.U. History-England
Lewison, Wendy Cheyette. 
Going to Sleep on the Farm; illus. by Juan
Wijngaard. Dial, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1097-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
8037-1096-8. 25p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $13.00.
R 
1-3 yrs. 
"How does a cow go to sleep-tell me how? ... A
cow lies down in the soft, sweet hay, in a cozy barn, at the end of day." A
father's rhythmic litany intones the nighttime routine of a cow, duck, horse, pig,
[298]
and hen before he gently picks up his sleeping son, who has been playing with
small toy animals, and puts him to bed. It's a genuinely sweet book, with
glowing art that's detailed in golden sunset tones. Although the farmscapes are
literal almost to the point of lacking tension, they are, after all, supposed to be
sleepy, and their juxtaposition with the photo-real father and son scenes makes a
neat shifting frame for the text-chant. BH
Llewellyn, Clare. My First Book of Time; illus. by Julie Carpenter and with
photographs by Paul Bricknell. Dorling Kindersley, 1992. ISBN 1-879431-78-
5. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
An oversize book has a combination of color
photographs and pastel wash details. While it has many interesting and
instructive features, it is weakened as a teaching device by the fact that the pages
are crowded, and by the fact that there are discrepant levels of maturity addressed.
For example, some of the text is written very simply: "Who is the oldest child
here? Who is the youngest child?" "Is Billy older or younger than you?" (This
is visually based on the numbers of candles on birthday cakes.) On the other
hand, "Draw a rectangle about 15 inches by 7 inches on a piece of heavy paper,"
or "Digital stopwatches have the same kind of timing button as analog
stopwatches" may not be comprehensible to the same age group. In addition to
material on how to tell time, the author covers such topics as days, seasons,
simple fractions, clocks, measuring time, and time zones. There are brief boxed
short topics (early clocks, Roman numerals) and the book concludes with a list
of words about time and with a sturdy paper foldout clock with movable plastic
hands. ZS
Machotka, Hana. Breathtaking Noses; written and illus. with photographs by
Hana Machotka. Morrow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09527-5; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-688-09526-7. Library ed. $14.93; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
In What Neat Feet! Machotka examined the kinds and
special uses of feet belonging to a variety of animals; here she turns the same
attention to another underestimated part of the anatomy. A leading question or
statement regarding a particular kind of nose ("A nose that's also a powerful
digging tool belongs to a ... ") appears opposite a closeup of the proboscis in
question, and the following double-spread identifies the animal ("PIG"), describes
the particular benefits of its nose ("This hard, flat nose will act like a shovel to
root out the tasty morsels from the dirt"), and offers a clear photograph of the
entire animal in question (although we don't always get a second look at the
nose). The zoology here is simple and understandable, with a straightforward
explanation of noses that smell underwater, noses that breathe but don't smell at
all (and how that animal does smell), noses that pick up the faintest scent, and
noses that pick up large trees. The cover photograph, a full schnozzle-shot of
the end of an elephant's trunk, is droll and compelling enough to make a reader
open the book, and many of the animals pictured inside display enough nasal
allure to rival Jimmy Durante. This is an easy and appealing read that will make
the importance of this physical feature as plain as the-well, readily apparent.
DS
[299 ]
MacKinnon, Debbie. 
What Shape?; illus. with photographs by Anthea
Sieveking. Dial, 1992. ISBN 0-8037-1244-8. 18p. $9.95.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
Color photographs show an engaging multiracial cast
of infants and toddlers, and of objects (most of which will be familiar to very
young children) that reinforce the concept of variety in shapes. First published
in England, the book pairs pages to reinforce identification of ovals, squares,
circles, triangles, rectangles, or the form of a star, a heart, or a diamond. On the
left is a picture of a child ("What shape are Sam's buttons? They're diamonds")
and on the right, labeled objects are gathered under the heading "more diamonds."
Basically, the book achieves its objective, although in this case, as is true
occasionally on other pages, there is the possibility that a child may misinterpret
what's presented: not all buttons or cake tins are in diamond form; there are,
also, some photographs in which a shape (a rectangular box wrapped in paper)
has stars, squares, and circles all over it. ZS
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
Martin, Jacqueline Briggs. The Finest Horse in Town; illus. by Susan Gaber.
HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024152-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
024151-9. 32p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $15.00.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
At the turn of the century, Prince was the finest horse
in his small Maine town, and Martin imagines three simple but characterful
stories of what might have happened to him: an unscrupulous horse trader
might have attempted to steal him, a local joker might have privately taught
him to dance to parade music, or he might have been tended by a farmer's
children when he fell ill. Although the framework of the stories-the horse
belonged to the narrator's great-aunts, the narrator heard about Prince from an old
watchmaker, and she's clearly inventing what might have happened-is rather
complex, it enhances the storytelling atmosphere; the creation of one's past in
the absence of any actual information is, after all, a traditional American exercise
(and kids will probably just take it as three stories about a horse). The luminous
illustrations are fluid yet precise watercolors filled with shimmery shadows,
jewel-toned landscapes, and classical compositions with a touch of Americana.
Prince himself is a small-town Bucephalus with an air simultaneously grave and
fantastical. Although a thoughtful mood pervades, this isn't a nostalgia book to
send young audiences into yawns; the strategic and gentle repetition gives the
text a curl-up-and-listen rhythm that's perfect for a rainy day readaloud. DS
D.V. Imaginative powers
Meltzer, Milton. 
The Amazing Potato: A Story in Which the Incas,
Conquistadors, Marie Antoinette, Thomas Jefferson, Wars, Famines,
Immigrants, and French Fries All Play a Part. HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-020807-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020806-6. 
[128p.] illus. with
photographs. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Jauntier in style than is Meltzer's wont, this is an
easily accessible and surprisingly interesting text that traces the evolution of
myriad varieties of potatoes, from the Peruvian tuber that could be so easily
grown, even high in the Andes, to the blight-resistant hybrid developed in the
1880's. Taken home by Spanish explorers, the potato was hesitantly accepted in
[300
Europe, eventually making its way to North America. Meltzer incorporates
dietary benefits, agricultural research, and historical events (particularly the
potato famine in Ireland) into his account of the importance of the potato as a
source of food. Boxed insertions, containing pertinent but tangential material, at
times seem an interruption of the text. Photos, a bibliography, and an index
will be included in the bound copy. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Nimmo, Jenny. Ultramarine. Dutton, 1992. ISBN 0-525-44869-1. 
199p.
$15.00.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Ned senses that he shares a secret with his sister,
Nell, but he's not certain what it is. He has a mystical infant-memory of being
cradled by the sea's waves, and Nell claims to hear "the ocean's footsteps."
Their mother knows the children must live by water, and she commutes to a city
job so they can live in a seaside house with a turret. The mystery of Ned and
Nell is revealed slowly, through half-told stories and Ned's partially-understood
memories. When their mother and new stepfather go off on a honeymoon, the
children are confronted with an aunt and hostile grandmother they've never
known before. At the same time, Ned and Nell meet a fascinating man on the
beach, who helps them sort out their past and survive present troubles. The
children's interest in their new friend's obsession, rescuing sea creatures, is a
convincing link between him, them, and a long-dead girl named Ultramarine. A
haunting story that wavers from reality to fantasy and quickly back again, the
dream-like, secretive quality of the narrative mesmerizes the reader until the
children's mystery is fully revealed. Somehow, it is believable when the sea
itself slips gently into the house under cover of night. KJ
D.V. Ecological awareness
Osofsky, Audrey. Dreamcatcher; illus. by Ed Young. Orchard, 1992. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-08588-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05988-X. 32p. Library ed.
$14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Ed Young's velvety soft pastels accompany a poetic
lullaby, without music, relating an Ojibway baby's experience in some idyllic
time that seems more fantastical than traditional. 
The Native American
dreamcatcher is a luminous image, a woven web hung over cradleboards to keep
out nightmares and let in happy images. However, as the heart of a picture book
plot, it may leave something to be desired for holding the attention of an
audience not quite attuned to such conceptual symbols. Whereas adults can revel
in the lyrical descriptions ("dreams of charms hung on the cradleboard-/ little
white shells tinkling in the breeze/ pheasant feathers ruffling/ sucking maple
sugar in a birchbark cone") and admire the scary, ghostly "bony long leg" that
tries to creep into the wigwam, preschoolers will need some supplementary
storytelling to figure it all out. Dark, flowered, vertical borders outweigh the
misty, otherworld effect of the double spreads. BH
C.U. Bedtime stories
[301 ]
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. Places of Refuge: Our National Wildlife Refuge
System; illus. with photographs by William Mufloz. Clarion, 1992. ISBN 0-
89919-846-5. 80p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Human overpopulation and commercial expansion
have turned the wildlife refuge system into a subject of both urgency and
controversy, which Patent has indicated in a dispassionate overview illustrated
with impressive color photographs. In surveying the history and variety of these
refuges, Patent is characteristically careful with facts and issues. Yet the account
remains curiously distant, perhaps because it doesn't lead readers, through in-
depth coverage, to care about a particular refuge or species. Nevertheless, the
tight organization, clear writing, handsome format and handy map, list of
addresses for more information, and index add up to a book that will be useful for
reports and can serve as background for less generalized coverage. BH
C.U. Conservation
D.V. Ecology
Pearson, Gayle. One Potato, Tu: Seven Stories. Atheneum, 1992. ISBN 0-
689-31706-9. 117p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Seven casually multicultural stories allow brief
glimpses into the lives of thirteen-year-old Lindsey Randall-Pena, her family and
friends. Lindsey is a bit of a worrier: she worries when her Mom goes off for a
week at a women's camp; she's uncomfortable watching an old woman eat alone
while she and her Dad are out for dinner; she's stuck with the word "potato"
rolling around in her head when Ms. Azumba assigns a free essay. 
Eric,
Lindsey's older brother, is both nervous and excited when a stupid bet he agrees
to puts him into an embarrassing situation in front of a pretty girl. This story
is funny and touching, but relies on an unlikely contrivance-an appearance on
David Letterman-for its conclusion; the other stories achieve better effects with
more subtle means. One of the best, and briefest, is a vignette about Lindsey's
adopted Vietnamese little brother: Tu is confused by the way his family seems
to play with his name (his father once said he was "tu skinny") but emerges the
hero on a family camping trip when he sees "tu eyes behind you" gleaming from
beyond the campfire. Homelessness is a small theme in a couple of the stories,
but Pearson is never preachy or sentimental, allowing her quiet storytelling to
speak for itself. RS
D.V. Family relations
Polacco, Patricia. Chicken Sunday; written and illus. by Patricia Polacco.
Philomel, 1992. ISBN 0-399-22133-6. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs.
. Mrs. Katz and Tush; written and illus. by Patricia Polacco.
Bantam, 1992. ISBN 0-553-08122-5. 32p. $15.00.
R 
5-8 yrs.
Polacco has created, in the same season, two picture books of such
striking similarity that they beg to be compared. Both books are consciously
directed at intercultural relationships: Chicken Sunday is the artist's recollection
of a childhood incident involving the African-American family next door to
whom she grew up; Mrs. Katz and Tush details the relationship that develops
between an old Polish-Jewish woman and a neighboring black child. The first
[ 302 ]
title refers to the meals "Miss Eula" prepared for her grandchildren and the
narrator: "fried chicken ... collard greens with bacon, a big pot of hoppin'
john, corn on the cob, and fried spoon bread." When the children try to earn
money for her Easter hat, they offend--and then befriend-an old Russian Jewish
man who is later touched by their making him Ukrainian Easter eggs. If the
concentration camp number tattooed on his arm suggests that he might not be
all that touched by Ukrainian Easter eggs, children will not pick up the visual
reference. What they'll get is a multi-ethnic bunch of kids doing good for each
other and their fellow humans. Mrs. Katz is more subtle in the relationships
department because of the sharper focus on two principal characters who interact
closely when young Larnel gives the lonely widow a kitten and then helps her
take care of it. Of course the cat escapes and has its own kittens, but the parallel
development of a new family (Mrs. Katz and Miss Eula both become surrogate
grandmother figures) lends some symbolic layering to the process, and the end is
deeply touching. It is touching not because of good intentions but because the
reader has been engaged with a patiently developed fictional situation despite the
interruptions for explanation of Jewish tradition and thematic emphasis ("Lamel,
your people and mine are alike, you know. Trouble, we've seen"). The art work
for both picture books is warm and exuberant, though the portraits in the second
book are, like the story, more expressively individualized. Indeed, in Chicken
Sunday, Miss Eula's eye-rolling and easy tears come uncomfortably close to
stereotype. On the whole, however, Polacco's artistic development from an
earlier reliance on contrasts between color and black and white to a more
cohesive portraiture is stylistically sure and supported by an alliance of intense
hues and varied patterns. Librarians will probably welcome both these books
not only because they represent an idealized racial outreach but also because they
do so in context of a story that has child appeal and is not overdependent on
elaborate art (see Isadora and Rylant in this issue). BH
D.V. Older-younger generations; Intercultural understanding
Robertson, James Jr. Civil War!: America Becomes One Nation. Knopf,
1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-92996-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-82996-4. 18 4p.
illus. with photographs. Library ed. $16.99; Trade ed. $14.00.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
As the extensive bibliography indicates, this study of
the American Civil War is based on a multitude of sources, some of which is
primary source material. Robertson crowds his pages with many facts, some
opinions, and a modicum of the sort of personal interpretation that is inevitable
in the assessment of historical events. 
What weakens the text is poor
organization of material, since chronological chapters (Chapter 5: "1861:
Fighting Begins" and Chapter 7: "1862: The Terrible Hand of War" may be
separated by a chapter such as the sixth, "Two Presidents and Their Problems,"
which gives biographical sketches of Lincoln and Davis that end with their
deaths in, respectively, 1865 and 1889. Periodically the text is interrupted by a
page or two of a column of print on such subjects as "One War with Many
Names" or "Waving Banners" which are not included in the table of contents.
Despite a predilection for colorful adjectives, the writing style is adequately
smooth and clear. A chronology and a glossary are appended. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
[303 ]
Roberts, Willo Davis. Jo and the Bandit. Karl/Atheneum, 1992. ISBN 0-689-
31745-X. 185p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Set in Texas in the late 1860s, this is the story of a
bright twelve-year-old whose powers of logic, persuasion, and imagination make
her instrumental in foiling a gang of criminals, and in saving the young bandit
(forced to participate by his evil stepfather) by whom she is smitten. Jo is a
likeable, if not quite credibly precocious, heroine; it seems clear, in a fairly
patterned western adventure tale, that the stern judge (Uncle Matthew) with
whom orphaned Jo and her young brother have been sent to live, will come to
appreciate his doughty niece. The novel begins with a hold-up of the stagecoach
in which the two children are traveling to Texas, and there isn't much
diminution of drama as the story goes on; it escapes being merely
sensationalism because the characterization is sturdily consistent and the writing
style smooth and resilient. ZS
Rosen, Michael. How the Animals Got Their Colors: Animal Myths from
Around the World; illus. by John Clementson. Harcourt, 1992. ISBN 0-15-
236783-7. 48p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
From the Zuni, New Guineans, Greeks, Chinese,
aborigines, Loma of Liberia, Khasi of India, Ugandans, and Ayoreo Indians of
South America, these nine myths explain animal characteristics from the time of
creation. 
Rosen's sources are listed at the book's beginning, but the
bibliography of respectable folklore journals gives no hint of how freshly the
pourquoi tales are told here in present tense, with wit and neat compression.
Leaving the archetypal integrity undisturbed, Rosen nevertheless manages to
characterize the animals with funny refrains ("I know, I know, I know," says
Tiger over and over), to preserve chanting rhythms ("See our paddles dive into
the water,/ See our paddles fly out of the water,/ See our paddles shoot through
the air"), and to keep vivid sound effects ("Foop,foop,foop, go Leopard's paws.
Shoo, shoo, shoo go Nyomo's feet"). Short and sweet, these will fit neatly into
brief bedtime sessions or story hour niches between longer tales. The angular,
collage-effect art leans on designer patterns that leap off the page in technicolor.
BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Rylant, Cynthia. An Angel for Solomon Singer; illus. by Peter Catalanotto.
Jackson/Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08578-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05978-2. 32p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
"Solomon Singer lived in a hotel for men near the
comer of Columbus Avenue and Eighty-fifth Street in New York City, and he
did not like it." Thus begins a poetic commentary on a lonely wanderer who is
touched at last by the warmly smiling Hispanic waiter, Angel, who welcomes
him nightly to a caf6 dinner. The protagonist's reconciliation of an urban
existential dilemma is openly nostalgic, even sentimental, as is the supporting
art, which evokes idealized visual images from rural Indiana and superimposes
them over misty street scenes. This is all very meaningful for adults, but you
have to wonder what preschoolers are going to make of that cat staring out of
Singer's dinner plate---oops, sorry, that's a full moon, not a dinner plate. As a
netaphor for what's wrong with American contemporary society, this could
304 ]
stimulate discussion among older kids who can make the figurative connections
suggested rather breathlessly by text and art. BH
Sachs, Marilyn. What My Sister Remembered. Dutton, 1992. ISBN 0-525-
44953-1. [120p]. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Their parents were killed in a car crash when Molly
was a toddler and her older sister, Beth, was five. Now, eight years later, Beth
has come (with her adoptive mother, wealthy Mrs. Lattimore) to visit Molly,
who has been adopted by Aunt Karen, their mother's older sister. The story is
told by Molly, now eleven, but the focus is Beth, a bitter adolescent trying to
cope with feelings of rejection and jealousy. Nuances of love and angst are
revealed with a rare combination of perception, compassion, and dramatic
conviction, as Molly struggles to understand her sister's behavior and Beth is
overwhelmed by memories that bring back the past. Taut and powerful. ZS
D.V. Family relations; Jealousy, overcoming; Sisters
Sherlock, Patti. Some Fine Dog. Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0947-3.
153p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
The closing of the silver mine in a small Idaho town
has forced Terry's father to leave home looking for work and has kept the family
on such a tight budget that Terry's mother always says no to the boy's plea for a
dog-until a lost border collie shows up. This is the story of Terry's adopting
the dog, juggling yard jobs with the choir practise that is supposed to gain him a
college scholarship, and ultimately making a choice between the dog's happiness
and his own. Although the style is occasionally heavy-handed (an old woman's
characteristic "heeHEE" is overdone, for instance, as are many references to the
dog's "red-brown eyes"), and the plot turns melodramatic when Terry gets
suddenly lost in a storm, the Catholic community is well drawn; the scene when
the dog ruins Terry's solo by howling makes a genuinely amusing climax.
Sherlock doesn't take the easy way out in this first-person narrative: Terry's
decisions are hard ones that keep the ending from being tied up too neatly. BH
Silverstein, Alvin. Smell, the Subtle Sense; by Alvin, Virginia, and Robert
Silverstein; illus. by Ann Neumann. Morrow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-
09397-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09396-5. 
90p. Library ed. $13.93; Trade ed.
$14.00.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
This has the Silversteins' usual painstakingly detailed
coverage of many aspects of their chosen subject, and the material is logically
arranged, so that-with the addition of index and bibliography-it can both
answer questions and stimulate further interest. Among the areas covered are the
structure and function of the human nose and the brain-parts and nerves
associated with the sense of smell, the various systems devised to classify
smells, some of the experiments that have added to our knowledge of how we
smell (the influence of molecular shape, for example), and smell disorders.
There are also discussions of smell "signatures" and of communicating by smell
(and-of more immediate appeal-a chapter on "those embarrassing body
odors"). ZS
C.U. Biology
[305 ]
Simont, Marc. The Lovely Summer; written and illus. by Marc Simont.
Bantam, 1992. ISBN 0-553-07716-3. 32p. $15.00.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Demonstrating that Viewpoint Is All, Simont
describes, in a simple but sly text, the pleasure a rabbit family derives from a
newly-planted garden. The gentle color of the paintings echoes the ingenuous
reaction of Gladys and Jerome and their progeny-but the pictures also show the
increasing frustration of the gardeners as the cottontails ravage the crops,
innocently assuming it's all been cultivated for their benefit. This is not too
subtle for a lap audience, which means that children will have the added pleasure
of understanding more than the story's characters do. ZS
Spinka, Penina Keen. Mother's Blessing. Atheneum, 1992. ISBN 0-689-
31758-1. 217p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 8-10. 
In a prequel to White Hare's Horses (BCCB 6/91),
Spinka has once again based her tale on the ancient mythology and legends of
the southwest Native American Chumash. The story is replete with Chumash
traditions and beliefs, including a mystical and drug-induced adolescent initiation
rite. This is the story of a girl who grows up to be a powerful young woman, a
wot (leader) of three villages. New Woman, whose name changes symbolically
twice in the story, is a true heroine-charming, intelligent, and brave. Her
charismatic diplomacy is equalled only by her fearless protection of others (she
dives into an icy river to save a drowning child; she champions a group of
disabled people against a hostile village). The tale moves quickly and believably
as New Woman sets off on a journey to find her spirit guide. During her travels,
she hears that her people are suffering from famine and she realizes that the
irrigated corn she has learned about in the east will save them. In only one
instance does New Woman seem too amazing to be true, when she wins an
argument with the father who disowned her at her birth because she was a girl.
A richly-layered combination of traditions, bravery, and legends. KJ
Stevermer, Carolyn. River Rats. Yolen/Harcourt, 1992. ISBN 0-15-200895-0.
214p. $16.95.
R* 
Gr. 7-10. 
If Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn had lived through a
nuclear holocaust, they would have joined the River Rats, the self-declared
family of six orphans in this story. Their home is an ancient steamboat that
they run like seasoned pros. 
They travel up and down "the river" (the
Mississippi), providing mail service and battery-supplied rock-and-roll concerts
in exchange for food and supplies. Their predictable life alters drastically on the
day they rescue a bedraggled "old guy" from a ferociously determined family that
is pursuing him. The River Rats later realize the desperate situation they're in
when their boat comes under attack from the old guy's enemies. The River Rats
are larger-than-life heroes; kids who not only can consistently beat grown men in
a fight, but also are willing to sacrifice themselves individually for the good of
the group. The story flows unencumbered on the natural prose, carrying both
the bitterness of old age ("Sure is different from the old days") as well as the
sarcasm of adolescence ("I'll bet you complained in the old days too"). This is
an exciting, heroic tale of unspoken bonds and loyalties in the dark setting of a
dangerous, apocalyptic world. KJ
D.V. Loyalty
[306 ]
Wallace, Bill. Buffalo Gal. Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0943-0.
185p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
The time is 1904, and narrator Amanda (almost
sixteen) is not happy about giving up her summer plans to travel instead with
her mother to Texas on an animal rescue mission: to save a herd of buffalo, an
endangered species. The writing style has an easy flow, occasionally broken by
awkward phrasing. It is clear from Amanda's first hostile encounter with David
(handsome, blue-eyed, part Comanche) that love will conquer all, and indeed it
does, after a series of adventures in which each saves the other from physical
danger or faces perils associated with the wilderness: attacking buffalo, a
striking rattlesnake, a punishing hailstorm. The mission is accomplished and
David indicates that after he graduates from Harvard Law School and they are
married, he will help his people. ZS
Yacowitz, Caryn, ad. The Jade Stone: A Chinese Folktale; illus. by Ju-Hong
Chen. Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0919-8. 32p. $14.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Chan Lo is a sculptor who lets the stone tell him
what to carve. When the emperor sends him a perfect piece of green-and-white
jade, with orders to create a dragon, Chan Lo hears instead soft splashing noises
and bubbles that suggest a statue of three fish. In deciding how to punish him
for disobedience, the emperor dreams the same sounds and eventually recognizes
the sculptor with great honors. The three sounds ("Pah-tah, pah-tah"; "Bub-
bubb-bubble"; and "S-s-s-ah"), the rhymed request Chan Lo makes of the stone
three times, the emperor's three advisers and his three dreams all contribute to
neatly sequenced suspense for storytelling. A note touches on the history of the
tale, and artist Chen describes his ink and watercolor paintings on rice paper as
an evocation of traditional wood-block prints. Like the story, these are
appealingly patterned, with soft clay tones and rounded shapes that have a
sculpted effect of their own. BH
C.U. Art; Storytelling
D.V. Creativity
Yee, Paul. Roses Sing on New Snow: A Delicious Tale; illus. by Harvey
Chan. Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-02-793622-8. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Like the stories about Chinese immigrants in Yee's
Tales from Gold Mountain (BCCB 3/90), this crosses realism with tradition for
a folkloric effect. Young Maylin is a heroine whose victimization by her father
and two brothers backfires when an Imperial governor from the old country
discovers she's the superlative cook who has created a dish called "Roses Sing on
New Snow." No longer can the men in her family take credit for the restaurant's
superior food; nor, as it turns out, will the Emperor of China ever taste it, for
Maylin's talent is uniquely her own and uniquely of the New World. Chan's
watercolors cast the Canadian frontier setting in ruddy tones. Most telling is his
varied use of perspective, including a closeup of the furious governor's eyes and
nose and later a picture of the diminutive Maylin flanked by towering guards.
Vivid art and clean writing are graced by a neatly feminist ending: "From that
day on Maylin was renowned in Chinatown as a great cook and a wise person."
BH
[307 1
Young, Ruth. Golden Bear; illus. by Rachel Isadora. Viking, 1992. ISBN 0-
670-82577-8. 32p. $14.00.
Ad 
2-4 yrs. 
Large-scale pictures, softly colored and simply
composed, show an engaging African American child and the toy bear (almost as
big as he is) that is the boy's constant companion. The song-text, for which the
melodic line is supplied on the endpapers (front and back), describes the bear's
participation in the child's activities. There is a minimum of print on the
oversize pages; "Cozy on the big green rug/ Talking to a little bug," is a typical
page of text, and another is "Making snowmen in the snow." The concept of
toy friends will appeal to many young children, but the book may be limited in
appeal because of the textual brevity, and the lack of plot or humor that might
offset it. ZS
Ziefert, Harriet. Sam and Lucy; illus. by Claire Schumacher. HarperCollins,
1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026974-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026913-8. 32p.
Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $15.00.
NR 
4-7 yrs. 
Sam and Lucy, dogs, meet one nice summer day in
the park. "Sam and Lucy liked each other a lot. They played tag ... 
they
danced . . . they rolled in the dirt ... 
and they mated." The cozy portrait,
complete with accompanying butterflies, of these two mating is evidently the
raison d'etre of this book, and adults should forgive themselves for gasping at
the picture, coming as it does after several pages of pointless, anthropomorphic
banality about two dogs on a date. Sam is a gentleman: after the dogs mate,
they sleep together under a bench, and then spend idyllic weeks awaiting the
birth of their puppies. When they arrive, Sam, a proud papa, takes Lucy and the
puppies back to his house and a happy welcome. Ha! The illustrations are
pleasant enough, although Sam and Lucy both look disconcertingly like stuffed
animals. It's hard to figure out exactly what Ziefert was intending with this tale,
but all that it succeeds in doing is giving kids sentimentalized and inaccurate
information about canine behavior, not to mention a blithe disregard for leash
laws and responsible animal care. A rather stunning example of barking up the
wrong tree. RS
C.U. Sex education