Anderson, Joan. A Williamsburg Household; illus. with photographs by George Ancona.
Clarion, 1988. ISBN 0-89919-516-4. 46p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
While the setting for this story is traditional and the color
photographs are posed, the perspective is unusual. A household in eighteenth-
century Williamsburg is described from the point of view of the black slaves who
work it. One boy, Aberdeen, has gotten into trouble for his defiant attitude. His
friend Rippon, in trying to find out what will happen to Aberdeen, discovers that
his own father will be allowed to rejoin their family for a while because his skills
as a carpenter are required. Both the text and the pictures reflect tensions-between
masters and servants, and, because of these forbidding constraints, between
servants. The mistress yells at the cook, the cook yells at her daughter. This is
often presented in the form of dramatic posturing, awkward dialogue and, in the
case of the black characters, undocumented dialect ("Here I is," Molly answered,
coughing"). Despite the dry-cleaned pageantry and obviously rehearsed portrayal of
Colonial life, however, the book should provoke discussion about the underside of
American history. A note on background research for the project, which drew on
Williamsburg historical interpreters for the cast of characters, is appended. BH
C.U. History-U.S.--Colonial
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Arnold, Terrell E. Think about Terrorism: The New Warfare; by Terrell E. Arnold and
Moorhead Kennedy. Walker, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6757-5; Paper ed.
ISBN 0-8027-6758-3. 
153p. 
illus. and with photographs. 
(Think Series).
Library ed. $14.85; Paper ed. $5.95.
NR 
Gr. 9-12. 
While there are many facts here, and some insight into terrorist
psychology (one of the authors was a hostage in the U.S. embassy takeover in
Tehran) this is written in a pedantic, occasionally patronizing style and arranged in
a textbook format with "review questions" at the end of each chapter. In contrast
to Milton Meltzer's excellent The Terrorists (reviewed in the October, 1983, issue)
this devotes a scant two pages to historical background: all we get on the IRA, for
example, is that it "calls for the unification of Ireland," and the impression is given
that this group sprang from nowhere. The pedantry descends to silliness in a
chapter called "What Can You Do?" which, although it states that one's chances of
becoming a hostage are slim, suggests that students study foreign languages and
cultures so as to be in a better position to talk with their captors and gives hints
on "how to make effective use of your time" if imprisoned by terrorists. No
source notes, but an appendix includes a glossary, addresses for further information,
some governmental position papers, a "multi-media" bibliography (books and
[221 ]
articles), and a peculiar bit on "a wise and friendly beast, a cool creature: The
American Civic Animal." RS
C.U. Social studies
Ball, Angela. Vixie. Oxford, 1988. ISBN 0-19-271555-0. 138p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
The time is 1908, the setting the English countryside
(Wiltshire), and the protagonist, Vixie, is eleven when this record of a year of
change begins. Economic conditions are already putting pressure on Vixie's
family when her father, a shepherd, dies on a cold and lonely night. Vixie has to
leave school and home and go into service as a housemaid. No melodramatic
events here, but the story of a rural family and their community is told with a
strong sense of narrative, has well-defined characters, and is leavened by humor.
ZS
D.V. 
Responsibility
Bellamy, David. The Forest; ISBN 0-517-56800-4. The River. ISBN 0-517-56801-2.
Both books: Potter, 1988; illus. by Jill Dow, 24p. (Our Changing World).
$9.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Two nature-watch narratives are set into luxuriously illustrated
picture books that explore, respectively, forest and river settings. Each book
specifies the flora and fauna thriving interdependently in an established habitat until
some ecological disaster strikes. In the case of the forest, oak trees and other old
hardwoods are cut down and replaced by young pines, destroying a delicate balance
of nature that takes a long time to re-establish. In the river, a factory overflow of
waste kills fish and plants before becoming diluted downstream. Adults who are
reading these aloud will need to divert young listeners into the game of identifying
the creatures mentioned in the text and numbered in the precisely detailed
watercolor art. Otherwise the descriptions will seem unrelieved and the sudden
disasters contrived. While some species do not appear in the U.S.-the Great Blue
Tit, for example-this will be a catalyst for environmental discussion among
preschool and primary graders. BH
C.U. Nature study
Bender, Lionel. Lizards and Dragons. ISBN 0-531-17075-6. Gloucester/Watts, 1988. 32p.
illus. and with photographs. (First Sight). $10.90.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
In a series that includes Whales and Dolphins, Plants,
Invertebrates, Pythons and Boas, Spiders, and other titles, this will have special
usefulness for students who keep lizards in classrooms or at home. The text is
simple, while the large color photographs and drawings are of high quality and
higher drama. In such introductory coverage, there are bound to be a few loose
ends; what, for instance, distinguishes Slow-worms or Glass Snakes, two types of
legless lizard, from real snakes? We don't find out, but readers do learn about the
characteristics of a fascinating range of species that appear in widely varied
environments. A chart drawn to scale helps identify representatives of the main
families, and there are directions for making a "flying lizard" from paper. Clearly
organized and indexed for reports. BH
C.U. Zoology
[222 ]
Berry, James. A Thief in the Village and Other Stories. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-531-08345-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05745-3. 148p. Library ed. $12.99;
Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
Nine short stories set in Jamaica portray young characters in the
light of some sharply defined incident. A girl gets her longed-for bicycle, two
children watch their coconut grove to catch a thief, a child relishes the rituals of
Sunday, a boy fights off a bully, another boy is barely saved from being swept out
to sea on a horse, yet another yearns to find his father. In some cases, the tone is
sad: one crippled lad seems doomed to lose his pet mongoose to heartless peers; a
second watches a hurricane destroy the bananas he had hoped would pay for his
shoes. In almost all the tales, the voices are true to an experience and to the
rhythmic language that expresses it. These scenes will take readers beyond
surburban America to a subsistence society that is nonetheless complex in family
relationships and community dynamics. BH
D.V. International understanding
Chappell, James. Little Johnny Raindrop; illus. by Charles Shaw. State House Press,
1988. ISBN 0-938349-28-7. 30p. $12.95.
NR 
Gr. K-2. 
Little Johnny Raindrop is born in a white fluffy cloud. "His
mother was so proud. She looked down at him and smiled. She was so happy."
As Mr. Wind puffs hard, the clouds merge and darken ("It will be exciting and fun,"
Johnny's mother tells him in a balloon caption), and Johnny hopes he will land on
a flower. Buried in the story are a few facts about a part of the water cycle, but the
writing is heavily laden with misleading anthropomorphism and poor science (or
anti-science) concepts, has an aura of saccharine sentimentality, and is written in a
style both coy and patronizing. The cuteness is, unfortunately, echoed in the
illustrations. ZS
Charbonneau, Eileen. The Ghosts of Stony Clove. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-531-08339-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05739-9. 150p. Library ed. $13.99;
Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
In a small town in the Catskills in 1809, Ginny Rockwell's
stepfather has urged her to set down on paper what began on that ill-fated night in
1804, when she and the half-Indian outcast Asher were mistaken for ghosts by the
reclusive Squire Sutherland, who carries the guilt of a terrible crime committed
many years before. There is a real ghost story here concerning the specter of the
wronged Sally Hamilton, but it lacks an effective chill: we barely understand the
nature of the threat when the ghost is put to rest, in a brief scene, halfway through
the book. The rest of this short novel is taken up with far too much plot (Asher
runs away, Ginny befriends the Squire, he dies and leaves Ginny his house, Asher
returns a few years later, they marry ... ) and subplots that are rambling and
confused, allowing neither the Gothic suspense nor historical romance its due.
Ginny's "memoir" is written with some archaic stylization that is occasionally
eloquent, occasionally obscuring, and the author works too much theme into the
conversations, weighing down the already overloaded story. RS
Christiansen, C.B. A Small Pleasure. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31369-1. 134p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Less a novel than a series of evocative sketches, this
present-tense chronicle of Wray Jean's junior year in a small town in eastern
[223 ]
Washington is written with forthright simplicity. Wray Jean wants to be
somebody. "Last year, I worked on my grades. A girl with goals has to get good
grades." This year she plans to work on her social development, memorizing
everybody's name from the yearbook, leading the baton twirlers with her fire
routine ("The band plays 'Hey, Look Me Over,' while I trace complicated patterns
in the night") and joining one of the exclusive girls' clubs. But her gentle father,
Daddy Dean, is dying of cancer, and Wray Jean begins to wonder just where all
these "leadership points" she's racking up are going to take her. This portrait is as
much remarkable for what it doesn't do as for what it does: Wray Jean's search for
success is exhausting but never empty, and her small town life is unsophisticated
but not sentimentalized. While the success-isn't-everything theme is overstated,
and Wray Jean herself overly casual in resisting the message, her narration has a
good balance of reflection and conversation and is precisely voiced, with a naive
and direct rhythm. Each of the characters is distinctly drawn: best friend Poe is
warm, smart, and direct; Mama, a complicated mix of tenderness and withdrawal;
Daddy Dean, a gently joking presence who dies quietly offstage. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Self-evaluation
Christopher, John. When the Tripods Came. Dutton, 1988. ISBN 0-525-44397-5.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Fans of the Tripods Trilogy (The White Mountains, The City of
Gold and Lead, The Pool of Fire) will welcome this prequel, and it should win the
author new fans as a science fantasy that has nicely controlled action, suspense, and
danger. Told convincingly by an adolescent boy, Laurie, this describes the first
encounter with the huge hemisphere from space that appeared to be hostile and
predatory; with typical Christopher subtlety, the second and more.serious drive by
the Tripods to control humankind is preceded by a lull. The resolution that
follows conflict is believable and, although this sets the stage for the trilogy, it
stands sturdily alone. A good read. ZS
Cochrane, Jennifer. Urban Ecology. Bookwright/Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-18165-1.
41p. illus. and with photographs. (Project Ecology). $11.40.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Divided into double-page spreads that treat various aspects of
urban ecology and suggest activities that will help young people in their
observations, this covers a topic crucial for contemporary city dwellers. The wild
animals that scavenge garbage, the birds that adapt to a high-rise habitat, and the
plants that take hold between areas of concrete offer some positive balance to
problems of waste disposal and pollution. The information itself is helpful and the
color photographs well placed with drawings and diagrams, but there are some
drawbacks. The print is very small and comes dangerously close to the gutters;
some of the activities would require major help from adults ("Make a Pond," etc.);
and a few of the examples include species that appear in Europe but not the U. S.
(the hedgehog, for instance). On the other hand, there's a careful balance between
facts and directives, many of which will spur young readers to become aware of
environmental checks and balances. BH
C.U. City life (unit)
Cohen, Barbara. The Orphan Game; illus. by Diane de Groat. Lothrop, 1988. ISBN 0-
688-07615-7. 199p. $12.95.
[224]
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Sally Berg, the ten-year-old protagonist, enjoyed the sustained
imaginative play of the orphan game she shared with her twin sister and two
cousins. A secret from other members of their extended family (gathered at their
vacation home), the game was one from which they especially wished to exclude
yet another cousin, the whining Miranda. This is a rather slow-moving story
about tolerance and compassion, as Sally learns that there are some nice facts to
Miranda's personality and tries to encourage the others to accept her.
Characterization and dialogue are adequate, but the fact that lack of pace is not
compensated for by a strong plot may limit reader interest. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Imaginative powers
Colman, Hila. The Double Life of Angela Jones. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-06781-6.
156p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-12. 
This is wish-fulfillment literature for public school students
whose envy for their boarding school counterparts is tempered by the comforting
belief that rich kids are shallow, bored, and lonely. Angela likes her life in a poor
neighborhood of New York: she has friends, a loving father, and is an A student at
the local rundown high school. Dad, however, wants his daughter to have a better
chance and finds her a scholarship to a ritzy boarding school in New Hampshire.
Angela goes, unwillingly, and meets a special boy: not one of the preppies, but a
townie who works at the garage where Angela has taken her roommate's-what
else-Porsche. Andy thinks she's a rich girl but is smitten anyway; Angela is
afraid to tell him otherwise. The setting and most of the characters are stereotyped
(especially Angela's poor-little-rich-girl roommate), and the situation is
overextended and predictable. However, Colman writes with a sure sense of her
audience, and Angela's outsider status at school (and later, on returning home for a
visit) conveys a sense of dislocation that will strike home for many readers. RS
D.V. Friendship values; Truthfulness
Colman, Warren. Understanding and Preventing AIDS. Childrens, 1988. Library ed. ISBN
0-516-00592-8; Paper ed. ISBN 0-516-40592-6. 124p. illus. with photographs.
Library ed. $10.95; Paper ed. $6.95.
R 
Gr. 5-10. 
Falling, in terms of reading level, between Hyde and Forsythe's
AIDS: What Does It Mean to You? and their book for younger readers, Know
about AIDS (reviewed in the June, 1987, and March, 1988, issues respectively),
Colman's book also has the advantage of a more attractive (and heavily illustrated)
format than either of the others. Like all information on AIDS in book form,
however, this is likely to be dated by the time students see it. Colman covers the
history of the disease, along with a chapter on other epidemics; describes
symptoms, prevention, and treatment; includes personal anecdotes from the lives of
Ryan White and others affected; and gives an explanation of the immune system.
The last indulges in anthropomorphism, ascribing motives and feelings to the
various cells and viruses: "But something must tell the system's protectors to
stop. Because now they're in a frenzy, completely unaware that they've destroyed
the enemy." Morally, this is a conservative approach, including brief information
about the use of condoms and contraceptive foam (no other varieties of safe sex are
mentioned) but reiterating several times a "just say no" approach to both drugs and
sex. An index, a list of agencies, and a brief bibliography are appended. RS
C.U. Health and hygiene
[225]
Dee, Ruby, ad. Two Ways to Count to Ten: A Liberian Folk Tale; illus. by Susan
Meddaugh. Holt, 1988. ISBN 0-8050-0407-6. 30p. $12.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
A Liberian folktale, according to the subtitle, tells of King
Leopard's selection of a successor to marry his daughter and rule the kingdom of
animals. Each creature tries to meet the challenge of throwing a spear so high into
the air that he can count to ten before it falls. Each does a dance first but
ultimately fails, until the graceful antelope counts by twos and succeeds ("it is not
always the biggest or the strongest, but sometimes the cleverest that wins the
prize"). Full-color illustrations are well-composed and tonally blended, though the
animals are anatomically stiff and their expressions blandly cartooned. There is no
source note telling where Dee got hold of the story or how much she adapted it.
The counting trick is everything and will probably carry listeners who have just
learned it themselves. BH
Dragonwagon, Crescent. Margaret Ziegler Is Horse-Crazy; illus. by Peter Elwell.
Macmillan, 1988. ISBN 0-02-733230-6. 30p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Margaret is horse-crazy, a disease that usually doesn't afflict girls
until sometime between fourth and sixth grades. She's only eight, and this looks
like a picture book, so the perfection of her portrayal may escape some of the
intended audience. Even so, descriptions of Margaret's 23 horse figurines, her
charts on the different breeds, her fantasy rides on a mythical black stallion (named
Midnight, of course) are true to form. The disappointment of her encounter with
the real animal at Country Life Riding Day Camp is equally authentic; a fat,
belligerent nag called Oleo steps on her foot, and it's only her brother's sporting
advice that gets her to try again. A funny story, with dead-pan cartoon illustrations
in black and white, this will make its own way through the early equine crowd.
BH
D.V. Perseverance
Dryden, Pamela. Riding Home. Bantam, 1988. Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-15591-1. 135p.
Paper ed. $2.95.
M 
Gr. 5-6. 
Formula fiction is no less formulaic when it uses two standard
patterns rather than one; here the success-after-obstacles horse story is combined
with the rapport-after-obstacles family adjustment story. Betsy works at a stable
three days a week after school and yearns for the horse her father has promised
she'll have-someday. She's jealous of her new stepsister Ferris, whose interests
(musical) are taken more seriously and whose academic record (both are in middle
school) is enviable. Eventually a true sisterly affection develops, and it is Ferris
who helps Betsy with her schoolwork and with her dreams for winning kudos as a
rider. Superficial, but grist for the popular fiction fan, this has adequate style, trite
situations, and shallow characterization. ZS
D.V. Step-siblings, adjustment to
Forman, James D. Cry Havoc. Scribner, 1988. ISBN 0-684-18838-4. 196p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
Opening with an ominous governmental memo regarding
"Research Grant 4387-J-1, Code Name: Cry Havoc," this moves swiftly into a
violent world where a murderous stalker rapidly brings a small town to bay. There
is terror from within as well, as fifteen-year-old Cathy faces her father's ambitions
for her, and her mother's mental illness. The two plot lines do not always mesh
successfully, and the straight-ahead horror of the genetically altered dogs is far more
[ 226 ]
controlled and compelling than the family story, which is filtered through the
father's middle-age angst. Still, the intensity of the situations and the writing is
effectively frightening, especially when the story lines do find each other, as in a
scene where Cathy realizes that her father, attempting to assert something to both
her and himself, intentionally lures the killer dog to their house. RS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Fox, Paula. The Village By the Sea. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08388-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05788-7. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
An intensive portrait of three characters reverberates with
insights that emerge from a child's involvement with her game. Emma must stay
with her aunt and uncle while her father has heart surgery and her mother attends
him. Adding to her concern about her father is the stress of hostile remarks from
Aunt Bea, an ex-alcoholic who is obsessed by old family jealousies: "... she has
a habit of resentment. It's a kind of addiction, too, like brandy." This grip of
hatred causes Aunt Bea to destroy the miniature village which Emma and a friend
have spent many days creating from flotsam they find on the shore. Bea's fury
seems contagious, and Emma barely overcomes, with the help of her uncle, a
violent urge for vengeance in the larger context of the two adults' village by the
sea. More than ever, Fox's style is compressed without seeming dense, each scene
and image allowed space for clean effect. Although the emotional layering is
sophisticated, the viewpoint is unfalteringly that of the child. The novel is easy to
read and complex to consider, an encounter that moves the reader from Gothic
narrative suspense to compassionate illumination of the dark in human nature. BH
D.V. Family relations
Fuchshuber, Annegert. 
The Cuckoo-Clock Cuckoo; written and illus. by Annegert
Fuchshuber. Carolrhoda, 1988. ISBN 0-87614-320-6. 27p. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A cuckoo shut out of its own clock is the focus for a book that
combines the utility of a concept book with the tiny-windows appeal of an Advent
calendar. When the witching hour strikes, the emergent cuckoo is invited out to
play by some ghosts and has a lovely hour until he finds, at one, that he cannot
get back into his clock and perform his duty. As the night turns to morn, and
afternoon, and evening, the cuckoo faces danger (a voracious owl), samples new
delights (chocolate), and longs for his clock. Each segment of the overlong text is
accompanied by a clock face, its hands moving to indicate the time. The passage
of time is also shown in the facing illustrations, all of which picture the same
stage-setting of a cozy cluster of buildings with the cuckoo's home prominently
centered. Far from being static, each picture changes with the time: morning light
gradually spreads, little tableaux on the sidewalk and appearing through the
windows portray time-appropriate activities (a baker setting up at 4:02 AM;
children in school at 8:00, etc.), and through it all, the tiny cuckoo flies. Like
Anno's diminutive dramas but with brighter colors and a more folk-like style, this
has game elements (find the cuckoo, point-and-name) that will help reinforce the
time-telling concept and the fun. RS
C.U. Time concepts
[227 1
Gelman, Rita Golden. Inside Nicaragua: Young People's Dreams and Fears. Watts, 1988.
ISBN 0-531-10538-5. 176p. illus. with photographs. $13.90.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
"Is Nicaragua the one where the good government is fighting the
bad guerillas? Or is it the one where the bad government is fighting the good
guerillas?" the author was asked after she spent eight months in Nicaragua, and her
wry comment is, "Depends who you ask." Gelman's style is conversationally
casual, her descriptions of living conditions and background events vivid, and her
sympathy for the many young people interviewed evident but hyperbolic. While
the author's sympathies clearly lie with the Sandinistas, the text is fairly objective,
citing comments both by Nicaraguans who support the government and by those
who do not. A glossary, a bibliography, and an index complete a text that is
topical and that should be useful in social stuides curricula. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Gerrard, Roy. Sir Francis Drake: His Daring Deeds; written and illus. by Roy Gerrard.
Farrar, 1988. ISBN 0-374-36962-3. 31p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-4. 
Gerrard is a fine painter and an excellent draughtsman, but in this
rhyming biography of Drake the colors are so muted as to be dull. Dullness
doesn't fit the blithe, lilting irreverence of Gerrard's verse ("Hello, sailor," said the
Queen, sit and tell us where you've been") or the comic/grotesque depiction of
pudgy little people. The verses skim but do not change the facts about Drake's
life; yet the combination of visual humor and slightly jingly rhymes makes one of
England's great mariners an almost-comic hero. ZS
Gillies, John. Sefor Alcalde: A Biography of Henry Cisneros. Dillon, 1988. ISBN 0-
87518-374-3. (People in Focus). $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Adequate in coverage and in balance between the young mayor's
personal and political life, not too adulatory in tone, but deplorably plodding (and
occasionally awkward in writing style), this is a useful biography despite its
weaknesses. A local official who has become a national figure, Cisneros is a good
example of achievement of success by virtue of diligence, integrity, and
intelligence, a Mexican-American who embodies in his personal and professional
life an Alger-like array of attributes. Preceding the chronology, bibliography, and
index are two special sections: "An Early History of Texas and Mexico," and some
precepts for readers by Henry Cisneros, a 24-point program entitled "Some Words I
Live By." ZS
C.U. History-Texas
D.V. Industry; Intercultural understanding
Goble, Paul, ad. Iktomi and the Boulder: A Plains Indian Story; retold and illus. by Paul
Goble. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08360-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
531-05760-7. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
5-7yrs. 
This is just what the doctor ordered for Paul Goble: a change of
tone from stories of dignified weight to a trickster tale adapted and illustrated with
mischief. Iktomi is so vain that he struts off toward the next village in his best
clothes and blanket. When the sun shines too hot, he gives the blanket to a
boulder; but when the rain falls he takes it back, infuriating the boulder so that it
rolls after him and pins him down. Finally, Iktomi tricks some bats into
destroying the rock, after which he sets off again, battered-looking but jaunty as
ever. The basic story is in large black print, the narrator's periodic remarks to the
[228 ]
audience in gray italics, and the trickster's comments ("That rock has a terrible
temper") in small print in the midst of the pictures. These are simply composed
against lots of white space that allows a smooth, amusing blend of diverse design
and color elements. The picture of Iktomi completely enveloped in his isolated,
tent-shaped blanket with rain and lightning aiming at its peak is particularly funny,
as are his lies to the bats ("He said that you sleep upside-down because you don't
know your 'up side' from your 'down side.'") The last depiction of Iktomi,
showing one leg in traditional garb and the other in an athletic sock to go with his
baseball cap, steps the story right into moder times. With source and background
notes and an attention-grabbing cover that portrays Iktomi upside down under the
rock ("Help!"), this is a coup. BH
Graham, Bob. Crusher Is Coming! written and illus. by Bob Graham. Viking, 1988.
ISBN 0-670-82081-4. 26p. $11.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
A deft hand and a sense of humor make Graham's lively line and
wash drawings enjoyable in themselves and a fine foil for the deliberate blandness
of a story told entirely in dialogue. The set-up: a boy is pleased but nervous at
the impending visit by his school's football hero. Pete reminds his mother to call
the visitor "Crusher," not to give him a kiss when he and Crusher come home, and
above all to keep baby sister Claire out of his room. The development: Crusher,
although politely responsive to doing whatever Pete suggests, is obviously
smitten by the baby and happily plays with her. The denouement: after Crusher
leaves, Pete gives Claire a piggyback ride just as his hero did. Clever, funny, and
touching without being saccharine. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Friendship values
Harvey, Brett. Cassie's Journey: Going West in the 1860's; illus. by Deborah Kogan Ray.
Holiday House, 1988. ISBN 0-8234-0684-9. 
36p. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Like the author and illustrator's My Prairie Year (reviewed in the
December, 1986, issue), this is based on actual accounts of wagon-train journeys
westward in the mid-19th century; this book, too, is illustrated by deft, soft, pencil
drawings that convey both mood and setting effectively with an economical use of
line. Cassie, whose name we learn late in the story (it is used on the jacket flap)
writes in diary form, although the absence of dates or other devices to separate parts
of the continuous text may not make this immediately clear to readers. On the
whole, an ingenuous, at times vivid, description of some of the vicissitudes of
going west. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.-frontier and pioneer life
Haskins, James. Corazon Aquino: Leader of the Philippines. Enslow, 1988. ISBN 0-
89490-152-4. 126p. illus. with photographs. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
In a prefatory note, the author cites sources used in the writing of
a biography that is as much up to date as a book can be by the time it is printed,
and that gives a sympathetic, if occasionally adulatory, picture of Aquino's early
life and her political career. Haskins furnishes adequate background information
about the history of the Philippines and the years of the Marcos regime that led to
the power struggle, the murder of Benigno Aquino, and the entry of his wife into
the tense political arena. The book is, unfortunately, weakened by lapses in
writing style that are unlike Haskins at his best; in the same paragraph, for
[ 229 ]
example, are "He did not know if his wife and children were themselves in a
prison camp," and "Maybe there was more to life than what he had believed." ZS
C.U. History-Philippines
D.V. Devotion to a cause; Responsibility
Hatchett, Clint. The Glow-in-the-Dark Night Sky Book; illus. by Stephen Marchesi.
Random House, 1988. ISBN 0-394-89113. 20p. $9.95.
R 
Gr. 3-up. 
While it won't ease the city kid's despair of never seeing more
than parts of the Big Dipper, this does solve one problem with most constellation
guides: how do you use the maps in the dark? The eight star maps in this book
glow, using luminous paint-dots to pick out the most well-known constellations.
Additionally, each map (for different times of the year in the Northern Hemisphere)
is in duplicate on facing pages, one with luminous lines tracing the "shape," the
other with just the stars, a useful device that will help novices over a familiar
perceptual hurdle. 
Literal and romantic (but not luminous) small paintings
illustrate the mythical figures. In the brief introduction, stargazers are reminded to
take along a flashlight to recharge the maps, and there is an unfortunate pre-
Copernican remark that the stars "move around the sky during the year." More
information about the stars can be found in any encyclopedia, but even kids not
astronomically inclined will want to try out the gimmick, and this book could be
used as a great special effect for story hours. RS
C.U. Astronomy
Havill, Juanita. Leroy and the Clock; illus. by Janet Wentworth. Houghton, 1988. ISBN
0-395-43666-4. 26p. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Leroy has gone to stay with Grandfather for the first time while
his parents are on vacation. This is the story of his adjustment, symbolized by a
grandfather clock whose loud bong paces Grandfather's activities and strikes Leroy
as strange and scary. In the course of the first 24 hours, the old man begins to
vary his schedule to include the boy, who in turn learns to appreciate the stately,
old-fashioned life represented by the clock. The full-page pastel drawings that face
the text are dominated by the rich mahogany of the clock. Though they are
slightly stiff, this quality seems peculiarly fitting to the awkwardness that
characterizes the two main characters' initial relationship. Bibliotherapeutic but
agreeably so, this details, without belaboring the obvious, a child's sense of
abandonment in an unfamiliar situation. BH
D.V. Grandfather-child relations
Henderson, Kathy. Market Guide for Young Writers: 1988-89 Edition. Shoe Tree, 1988.
ISBN 0-936915-10-2. 171p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-12. 
Wisely leaving the instruction in writing to others, this excellent
guide sticks to the facts of getting work published. The first third includes advice
and encouragment from young writers (aged 10-18) and editors; practical hints on
manuscript preparation; and a bracing reiteration to proofread and revise, revise,
revise. The remainder of the book includes more than 150 listings of publishers
and contests that encourage submissions from young writers. Each listing has
varyingly detailed information; all include a brief description and scope note,
subscription information (if a periodical), and comments by the editor or contest
director. Opportunities for publishing fiction, poetry, essays, plays, and visual art
[ 230 ]
are represented. The presentation and tone throughout are respectful, sensible, and
candid. RS
C.U. Writing for children
Hoffman, Mary. My Grandma Has Black Hair; illus. by Joanna Burroughes. Dial, 1988.
ISBN 0-8037-0510-7. 25p. $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
"My grandma," begins the never-named narrator, "is not at all
like the grannies in the books I read." Pictures of the sterotypical granny follow:
white-haired, complete with long apron, cane, spectacles, etc. as she knits or bakes
cookies. On facing pages are the narrator's granny, clad in pants and running
shoes, knitting a sweater that doesn't fit, driving a noisy car, burning toast. "A
little nutty . . ." says her daughter. BUT, the text concludes, Grandma (who
prefers being called Sylvia) tells wonderful stories about her years as the child of
trapeze artists. 
Then there's Grandpa (picture of a mature hippie) but, in
conclusion, ". .. that's another story!" Line-and-wash pictures are light and
amusing, and the story has the same quality, although it loses effectiveness by
exaggeration. ZS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Horgan, Dorothy. The Edge of War. Oxford, 1988. ISBN 0-19-271574-7. 108p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Set in Germany during World War II, this story of a Catholic
family who were not Nazis is a compelling record of the courage and resilience of
children under stress. The style is often stiff enough to be obtrusive, and there are
occasional passages that may accurately reflect characters' biases ("The French will
send in the black Moroccans, ahead of all the rest. They always do. Murdering,
raping, looting") but that could in some way have been refuted. The three children
of the Bruner family survive displacement and hunger, their mother's death, their
father's imprisonment, and the pervasive corrosion of fear and bias. Interesting as
a case history, this is too stylistically uneven to be successful as a narrative. ZS
C.U. History--Germany
D.V. Courage
Howard, Elizabeth Fitzgerald. The Train to Lulu's; illus. by Robert Casilla. Bradbury,
1988. ISBN 0-02-744620-4. 29p. $13.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
An exclamatory first-person narrative describes two young
sisters' nine-hour train ride from Boston to Baltimore. Although the girls are
travelling alone, the Travelers' Aid ladies and conductors assure them safe passage,
and it's only boredom that mars the trip. Beppy does her best to entertain Babs,
but both are relieved when they finally arrive to be claimed by grandmotherly Lulu
for the summer. This autobiographical glimpse of two black children in the late
1930's is as straightforward as its title. 
There's no conflict or thematic
development, but the watercolor drawings effect a you-are-there immediacy. BH
D.V. Self-reliance
Johnston, Tony. Yonder; illus. by Lloyd Bloom. Dial, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-
0278-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0277-9. 30p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed.
$12.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
A paean to the American rural tradition, this picture book opens
with a rider appearing against a verdant panorama: "Yonder is the farmer on a jet
[ 231 ]
black horse. Yonder are the hills that roll forever./ Yonder is the river that runs to
sea./ Yonder. Way over yonder." As the farmer marries, establishes a homestead,
has children, watches them grow up, and in the end dies, each event is marked by
the planting of a new tree in the yard. The poem has something of the appeal of a
life-cycle folk song, and the impressionistic paintings project an idyllic natural
setting resonant with lush seasonal color changes. There's a nostalgic strain to
both art and text, but the book will make an especially apt accompaniment for pre-
school and primary discussions of family and pioneer life. BH
Kidd, Ronald. Second Fiddle: A Sizzle and Splat Mystery. Lodestar, 1988. ISBN 0-525-
67252-4. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
In a sequel to Sizzle and Splat (reviewed in the March, 1984
issue), the narrator is again Sizzle (Prudence Szyznowski) who plays trumpet in a
youth orchestra and who again embarks on a detective venture with her pal, tuba
player Splat (Arthur Hadley Reavis Pauling III). This time it's a mystery about a
series of pranks that culminates in the burning of a Stradivarius violin. Like the
first book, this has a structure too fraught with incidents to be quite credible, but it
has wit and humor in dialogue, some lively characters, and an enjoyably
comfortable familiarity with classical music. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Kogawa, Joy. Naomi's Road; illus. by Matt Gould. Oxford, 1988. Paper ed. ISBN 0-19-
540547-1. 82p. Paper ed. $4.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Naomi is five when her mother goes to Japan to visit relatives,
and the girl cannot understand why it is taking her mother so long to return to
Canada. Her father, too, soon goes away, and then Naomi, along with her brother
and their guardian Obasan, leave themselves to go on a "holiday." 
Naomi's
viewpoint is strictly maintained, and it is only through the author's prefatory note
that readers will understand that the family (except for Mama, detained in Japan for
the duration) has been sent to an internment camp, victims of the anti-Japanese
hysteria that gripped North America during World War II. For Naomi, life in the
camp is composed of fragmentary adventures and discoveries, a friendship with a
Caucasian girl that begins in bigoted enmity (recognized by the reader, not Naomi),
and missing her parents. Adapted from the author's adult novel Obasan, this will
probably have trouble finding an audience-the ironic overlays are too
sophisticated for young children, and older ones will want more context and
narrative structure. Takashima's A Child in Prison Camp (reviewed in the
November, 1974, issue) takes a more straightforward approach. RS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Lewis, J. Patrick. The Tsar & the Amazing Cow; illus. by Friso Henstra. Dial, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0411-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0410-0. 
28p. Library
ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
An original story with folktale appeal, this relates the fortunes of
an old Russian peasant couple whose daughters have died and who have only a
cow, Buryonka, left to comfort them. This she does in high style, for her magic
milk turns them young again. When the wicked tsar hears of it and commands the
couple to bring him their cow, his greed leads him to drink more and more milk
until he's a baby and then ... nothing! His father and grandfather do the same,
but an ancestor appears who finally orders the animal and peasants back home,
[232 ]
where they find the daughters restored. Actually a rather sophisticated time fantasy,
this is compactly plotted and distinctively written ("The loss of their daughters
leaned on Stefan and Maria like fallen trees"). There are a few slips of logic:
young listeners may ask if the daughters have to die again; and a few will wonder if
so many generations of tsars wouldn't have turned time back well before the
children had died. However, during a period of rampantly insubstantial picture
book texts, this is satisfying, with sweeping pen-and-wash illustrations that
satirize the expressionless cow as much as the pretentious nobles. BH
Little, Jean. Little by Little: A Writer's Education. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-81649-3.
233p. illus. with photographs. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Written with direct simplicity, candid about small childhood
sins, and touching in the descriptions of being an outsider, of struggling as a
young writer, and of the loving relationship with her friend-and-critic father, this
autobiography describes Jean Little's life (up to the time of her first accepted
children's book) with the integrity and momentum that have characterized her
fiction. This should appeal to readers because of its unsentimental forthrightness
about the author's visual handicap, because of her triumph over this handicap, and
because of the fact that her books are loved. ZS
D.V. Handicaps, overcoming-blindness
Markle, Sandra. Science Mini-Mysteries: Easy-to-Do Experiments Designed to Keep You
Guessing. Atheneum, 1988. 
ISBN 0-689-31291-1. 
64p. illus. and with
photographs. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
A handy item for students whose science projects are due
"tomorrow," this contains 29 simple experiments demonstrating basic scientific
principles. Throughout, there is an emphasis on scientific method, and some of
the most interesting experiments are demonstrations of what can go wrong if
proper controls are not in place, challenging students to redesign the experiment.
Most of the experiments involve easily found materials, like balloons, salt,
vinegar, etc.; some require the use of dry cells and wire, and safety notes should
have been appended to these. Occasionally, the explanations are too brief: for
example, that an iron nail rubbed back and forth against a magnet will not itself
magnetize is demonstrated, but the reason is not made clear. In another experiment
demonstrating that fire needs oxygen to burn, readers are asked to put the
accompanying photos of the experiment in proper order; however, they already are
in order. Photos and instructions are clear; the few drawings, less so. RS
C.U. Science-study and experiments
McAfee, Annalena. Kirsty Knows Best; illus. by Anthony Browne. Knopf, 1988. Library
ed. ISBN 0-394-99478-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-89478-2. 32p. Library ed. $9.99;
Trade ed. $8.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Kirsty Little is intrepidly uncowed by reality. Taunted by Nora,
the school bully, whose mean little mouth is just one of Browne's expert touches
(another is the way the menacing echoes of Nora's pigtails pop up on nearly every
page), Kirsty imagines, in rhyming couplets, how it really is: "To get round town
she does adore her/ Little rickshaw pulled by Nora." Kirsty's father may be
unemployed, but Kirsty knows what's really happening in that backyard workshop
of his: "Not content with this small operation,/ He's set his heart on world
domination." And when Nora tries a little reality therapy ("Your mom's a drudge,
[233 ]
your dad's a slob"), Kirsty is pleased to see the bully turn into a toad and to see the
toad .. ."EXPLODE!" Browne contrasts precise paintings of dreary reality with
the more loosely styled fanciful flights: Nora at the rickshaw appears on a royal
blue Chinese plate; Mrs. Little (who is really a torch singer, you see) is a
voluptuous diva; and Nora's three-frame transformation into a toad is a warts-and-
all triumph. Catharsis for quiet dreamers everywhere. RS
D.V. Imaginative powers
McClung, Robert M. Lili: A Giant Panda of Sichuan; illus. by Irene Brady. Morrow,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06943-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06942-8. 85p.
Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
This story recounts the life of Lili, a giant panda, from her birth
in Sichuan to the rescue of her cub by a wildlife official, Chang, from a poacher's
trap. Although the amount of description may deter students looking for specific
facts, the writing is smooth, as is the blend of information and fictional narrative.
Chang's role in Lili's life, beginning with his finding her as a cub and continuing
when he saves her from starvation during a relocation program after the bamboo in
her area dies, is fortuitous but not incredibly so. There are enough natural crises in
the panda's life to give the book pace, and Brady's black-and-white drawings are
both well-drafted and attractive. An introduction sets the environmental scene, a
final section packs in some history of scientists' knowledge of the animal and its
current endangered status, and an annotated bibliography distinguishing adult from
juvenile titles suggests books for further reading. BH
C.U. Nature study; Zoology
McMullan, Kate. Great Advice from Lila Fenwick; illus. by Diane de Groat. Dial, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0529-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0529-8. 167p. Library
ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Since best friends Gayle and Kelly have previous commitments
(fat camp and swimming team, respectively) Lila Fenwick decides to invite the
fifth grade'sfemmefatale, Rita, on her family's two week-vacation at a Boy Scout
camp, where Dad has a job as camp physician. If nothing else, Lila figures on
getting some free vamp lessons from Rita: "The top of her body didn't seem to
move much, but with the bottom part it was a different story. A-right and a-left
and a-right and a-left ." Boys (all those scouts), birds (Mrs. Fenwick initiates the
girls into the passions of bird-watching), and bees (Lila saves another girl after a
potentially fatal sting) blend easily in a camp story touched with both humor and
depth. 
For example, Rita's flirtatiousness, though bone-deep, also masks
insecurities touchingly revealed in a scene where she's afraid to skinny-dip with
Lila and her mother. A sequel to The Great Ideas ofLila Fenwick. RS
D.V. Friendship values
Morpurgo, Michael. King of the Cloud Forests. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-82069-5.
14 6p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Ashley is fourteen when his father, a medical missionary, insists
he leave China and the dangers of the Japanese invasion. Disguised as a mute
Tibetan pilgrim, accompanied by his "father," a wise Chinese doctor, Ashley
makes a dangerous journey to the border where he and Uncle Sung are separated,
and Ashley, near death from starvation and cold, is found by a fabled Yeti tribe.
[ 234 ]
The ape-like creatures call him "Leelee" and seem to revere him as a god,
welcoming him into their idyllic community. Improbable never descends to
implausible here, even when Ashley eventually returns to England and discovers
why the Yeti welcomed him as a long-lost friend. Ashley is a clear-eyed but very
real fourteen, Uncle Sung is a convincing father figure, and the Yeti are depicted
with dignity and humor. It is unfortunate that, for the most part, the old-fashioned
boys' adventure story has been left to the choose-your-own crowd; here's a brief
and dramatic novel that may woo reluctant readers back to the fold. RS
Myers, Walter Dean. Scorpions. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024365-1; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-06-024364-3. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Jamal, who is black, and his best friend Tito, Puerto Rican, are
not terribly sophisticated twelve-year-olds when they are confronted with the
"choice" to join a gang, the Scorpions. Jamal's big brother Randy was the gang's
leader until he was imprisoned for murder, and running crack for the gang seems
like the only way to raise money to pay a lawyer for Randy's appeal. Along with
the job comes a gun, a powerful thing for Jamal, who never actually uses it but
finds he cannot bring himself to get rid of it until the gun finds its way into Tito's
hand. While Tito's grandmother and Jamal's mother and impish little sister ("Am
I cute or what?") provide, as well as they can, love and support, the Harlem world
portrayed here is unsparingly cold and frightening (the school nurse gives Jamal
tranquilizers to keep him tractable; the two boys pass a park filled with "thrown-
away people") and the barely comforting ending is clearly only a reprieve. Myer's
anti-gang message is strong but not didactic, effectively voiced through the words
and actions of the Scorpions themselves. His compassion for Tito and Jamal is
deep; perhaps the book's signal achievement is the way it makes us realize how
young, in Harlem and elsewhere, twelve years old really is. RS
D.V. Friendship values; Self-reliance
Page, Michael. The Great Bullocky Race; illus. by Robert Ingpen. Dodd, 1988. ISBN 0-
396-09200-4. 56p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
There's a clipper at Robe, Australia, outfitted to take fifty bales
of wool to England, but there are two sheep stations competing for the order ...
and the race is on. Veteran bullockies Donald and Foxy each vow to be the first to
finish the four-hundred mile trip to the coast, and each grudgingly agrees to follow
some rules, like "Rule Number Three. If one of the bullockies gets drunk on the
way, the other bullocky must wait until he gets over it." There's some humor
here in the banter between the crotchety drivers and in the recalcitrance of the
wagon-pulling bulls, but overall this is a placid presentation with a tendency to
sacrifice the vivid for the picturesque. And since an alliance is forged early on
between the bullockies' children, Alice and young Foxy, there isn't much
suspense. Ingpen's fine-lined paintings present characters, animals, and town
scenes against the hazy dust of the Australian bush, but they are more effective as
paintings than as illustration and seem to miss the humor in the text. A handsome
souvenir. RS
Perez, N.A. Breaker. Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-34437-5. 206p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Set in the hard coal region of Pennsylvania at the turn of the
century, this historical novel gives a compelling picture of the grimness of the
[ 235]
conditions in which miners worked, of the obstacles against unionization, and of
the hardships endured by child laborers. Unfortunately, although Perez has
constructed a perfectly adequate and believable plot, it becomes submerged in the
flood of facts about union struggles, the work of reformers like Mother Jones, the
opinions of men like Clarence Darrow. Pat McFarlane and his brother work as
"breaker boys" (those who break up the coal after mining) in the mine where their
father died; they are part of an Irish Catholic community that resents the more
recent immigrants, who are Polish. 
This bigotry gives way, for Pat, to
understanding and friendship as he gets to know some of his Polish neighbors and
to work with them in the union war resulting from the coal miners' strike of 1902.
The historical aspects are interesting, but they obtrude on the narrative rather than
merging with it. ZS
Perl, Lila. Don't Sing Before Breakfast, Don't Sleep in the Moonlight: Everyday
Superstitions and How They Began; illus. by Erika Weihs. Clarion, 1988. ISBN
0-89919-504-0. 90p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
After explaining superstitions as habits of belief with almost no
scientific basis, Perl organizes her discussion into fears involving the body, from
sneezes to fingernail cutting; problems that one encounters just walking around,
such as ladders, cats, and cracks in the sidewalk; food prohibitions; numbers; and
sleep and dreams. This is more desultory than the author's Blue Monday and
Friday the Thirteenth: The Stories Behind the Days of the Week (reviewed in the
June, 1986, issue); the anecdotes seem connected less by logical momentum than
verbal association, with transitions that are sometimes arbitrary or effected by
starred breaks in the text. Still, the writing is smooth, and this would make a
good companion to recommend with Alvin Schwartz' Telling Fortunes: Love
Magic, Dream Signs and Other Ways to Learn the Future (reviewed in the
December, 1987, issue) for the same age group. The scratchboard drawings are
appealing without being cutesy, and the book design is handsome. There's a brief
bibliography of adult books and an index. BH
Perrault, Charles. Cinderella; ad. and illus. by Fiona French. Oxford, 1988. ISBN 0-19-
279841-3. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
Effective in use of color and equally effective in combining
bright-blurred backgrounds and strongly defined forms within the composition of
single or double pages, this oversize picturebook version of the familiar tale is a
good choice for group use. The retelling is bare-bones simplified, with some
stepsisterly rancor and all violence removed; while a few adults will probably feel
such treatment makes the version appropriate for the read-aloud audience, few can
claim that the pared-down retelling has much suspense or stylistic distinction. ZS
Phillips, Louis. Going Ape: Jokes from the Jungle; illus. by Bob Shein. Viking, 1988.
ISBN 0-670-81520-9. 58p. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
"What did the octopus say to the shark? One of these days-
pow, pow, pow, pow, pow, pow, pow, pow-right in the kisser!" Well, you can
never have too many joke books, and this collection of wild animal jokes has three
things going for it: it has a very attractive cover; a generous proportion of the
jokes are actually funny (in a genuinely kid-like way); and few of the jokes depend
upon latent references or contexts (like, "that's a long way to tip a Rary") that
[236 ]
don't mean much to today's children, particularly those reluctant or poor readers
who find little pleasure in print. And all readers can appreciate what the mama lion
said to her son chasing a hunter: "How many times, Junior, do I have to tell you
not to play with your food?" Along with the humor and the tidbit text, kids need
joke books like this for social reasons: quizzing each other, screaming "Get it?"
and, generally, using jokes as a comfortable avenue to being accepted and liked.
RS
Rinaldi, Ann. The Last Silk Dress. Holiday House, 1988. ISBN 0-8234-0690-3. 348p.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Susan is fourteen, as ardent a supporter of the Confederate cause
as were other citizens of Richmond at the time of the Civil War. She adores her
father; despairs of ever pleasing the mother who unaccountably calls her a "Yankee
brat"; confides in Rhody, the black housekeeper; wonders why there has been a
breach between her parents and her older brother Lucien; and conceives the idea of
asking women to donate their silk dresses so that the Cause can have an
observation balloon as the Yankees do. Rinaldi does a good job of interweaving
these elements, a modest love story, and historical details. Although the writing
has some flaws (chiefly in the uneven use of phonetically-manifested dialect) it is
on the whole stylistically competent, with good pace and momentum, smooth
integration of fact and fiction, consistent characterization (including tyrannical
behavior by Lucien), and a particularly strong development of the theme. What
Rinaldi is concerned with is the relationship between white slave-owners and their
abuse and exploitation of black slaves. Susan discovers that her adored father is
not her natural father; she is a scorned "Yankee brat" because her mother
(emotionally disturbed after the death of a child) had an affair with a Yankee to take
revenge on her husband because he fathered a child by a slave. As Susan learns
about the prevalence of the latter practice in Southern society, she becomes
heartsick and angry. That so serious a theme is adequately treated but does not
overbalance the narrative is very impressive. A prefatory note gives information
about those parts of the book that are based on fact; a bibliography provides access
to the author's sources. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.--Civil War
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Schein, Jonah. Forget-me-not; written and illus. by Jonah Schein. Annick/Firefly, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 1-55037-001-4; Paper ed. ISBN 1-55037-000-6. 24p. Library
ed. $12.95; Paper ed. $4.95.
M 
Gr. 3-4. 
Written and illustrated by fourteen-year-old Jonah, this is based
on a visit by his grandmother just before she went into a nursing home, a victim
of Alzheimer's disease (erroneously referred to as "Alzheimer Disease" in the text
and on the cover). In one way this is useful, since it gives the reactions, at a
child's level, of "Becky" and her brother to Grandma's puzzling behavior. There is
little sentiment, since neither Becky nor Matthew is fond of their grandmother even
before the visit; it seems egregiously fond, therefore, to have the narrator say, after
Grandma's death, "I will never forget her for what she was to me." 
The
illustrations are awkwardly drawn and detract from, rather than contribute to, the
story. ZS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
[237]
Selsam Millicent E. A First Look at Seals, Sea Lions, and Walruses; by Millicent E.
Selsam and Joyce Hunt; illus. by Harriett Springer. Walker, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-8027-6788-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6787-7. 30p. Library ed. $11.85;
Trade ed. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Faithful to the tradition of scientific observation, the writers and
illustrator collaborate here to help young readers (or preschool listeners) recognize
different types of seals and sea lions and to distinguish them from walruses. This
is a job complicated by problematic scientific terminology (a "True Seal" is not a
"real seal" but a type of seal), and there is a confusing caption in the summary
implying that walruses are not a type of seal ("To Tell Walruses from Seals").
Overall, however, the book is as useful as it is attractive, especially since seals are
often a prime attraction at the zoo. Lots of white space frames accurate pencil
drawings that illustrate the answers to textual questions ("How do you tell seals
apart?" ... Which one has ears?" etc.). Two maps show the creatures' global
distribution, and a summary list, also illustrated, reviews conclusions on how to
classify eared seals, true seals, and walruses. An index doubles as a listing of the
species cited in the book. BH
C.U. Biology
Sheldon, Dyan. Alison and the Prince; illus. by Helen Cusack. Oxford, 1988. ISBN 0-19-
520643-6. 30p. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 3-4. 
In this Cinderella update, Alison is a nice girl (good mind, heart
of gold) who lives with her aunt and two beautiful cousins. Moping because she
hasn't been invited to the Prince's ball, Alison decides to go anyway. The
housekeeper makes her a dress, a friend gives her a lift in his taxi, another friend
(Bert, who pops up just for this) borrows some jewelry for her to wear. The prince
is enraptured. Alison finds the prince boring, loquacious, and persistent. By
midnight, the prince is chasing Alison and screeching a marriage proposal, and our
heroine is racing for the taxi, relieved at escaping her importunate suitor. Some
readers will enjoy the spoof, although the style is choppy and the prince so tedious
as to be unconvincing. Line and crayon drawings, rather fussily composed, have
some humor, but they seem a bit sophisticated for the audience that may enjoy so
slight a verson of the classic tale. ZS
Shura, Mary Francis. The Sunday Doll. Dodd, 1988. ISBN 0-396-09309-4. 
138p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Emmy can't think of anything good about turning thirteen. "I
can count on the fingers of one hand the number of teenagers I really like." And,
as usual, her beloved Aunt Harriet has sent a birthday gift of a doll, a strange one
this time, an Amish doll without a face. At first, this novel seems to be (and the
cover seems to indicate) a spooky-secrets story, which it is, but the secrets have
nothing to do with the supernatural; instead, Emmy's parents and older sister are
keeping something from her, not an unusual circumstance. "All my life I've been
taken out to buy M & M's and I'm tired of it!" says Emmy, referring to her
removal from the movie theater during the gruesome bits. Packed off to Aunt
Harriet's, Emmy eventually learns the secret (the breakdown and suicide of her
sister's boyfriend) and, perhaps more important, learns to accept her parents' well-
meaning imperfections. "Grow up," says a friend of Aunt Harriet's. "Let them off
the hook." This thirteen-isn't-so-bad-after-all story has more backbone than most
and is written with more than the usual measure of intensity. Readers will share
[238 ]
Emmy's desire to know the secret, an effect that adds narrative suspense as well as
thematic depth. RS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Skurzynski, Gloria. The Minstrel in the Tower; illus. by Julek Heller. Random House,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99598-8; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-89598-3. 64p.
(Stepping Stone Books). Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $1.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Although the Crusade ended three years before, in 1192, Alice
and Roger are still waiting for their father to return to France and are especially
worried now that their mother seems close to death. She sends the children, along
with a lute engraved with a special sign, to find her brother, Raimond. "Who else
will look after you when I'm gone?" Designed as easy-reading material for middle-
graders, this has the virtues of an attractive format and illustrations, a fast plot
composed of one near-escape after another, and even a feminist fillip: Alice is the
more intrepid of the siblings, Roger's gifts are for music and ventriloquism.
Formulaic in a way that will be comforting for reluctant readers, this may
encourage them a step or two away from the choose-your-own series. RS
Slier, Debby, comp. Baby's Words. ISBN 0-02-688751-7 
Busy Baby, ISBN 0-02-
688753-3 
Farm Animals. ISBN 0-02-688752-5. 
Hello Baby. ISBN
0-02-688750-9 
All books: 
Checkerboard Press, 1988. 
12p. 
illus. with
photographs. $2.95.
Ad 
6-18 months. 
A series of small, sturdy board books has good quality
photographs of familiar objects and can be used for identification and the
establishment of environmental concepts. 
Nothing original here, but the
combination of clean pages (no background clutter, and one-word captions) and
known objects should appeal. What weakens all the books is inconsistency:
sometimes the singular form of the word is used, sometimes the plural; sometimes
the scale is misleading; sometimes the caption may be a form of the name
(puppies) less likely to be known than a shorter form (dogs). ZS
D.V. Environmental concepts
Stein, R. Conrad. Illinois. Childrens Press, 1988. ISBN 0-516-00459-X. 144p. illus.
with photographs and maps. (America the Beautiful). $17.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Profusely illustrated in color with photographs and reproductions
of prints and portraits, this is a book with good coverage and efficient organization
of material. Useful as a minor reference source, it is weakened by occasional
generalizations (apparently made in an effort to add local color or humor) and by
stylistic errors. Like other books in the series, this has a compilation of "Facts at
a Glance," a list of important dates and another of important people (Jane Addams
to Studs Terkel), many maps, and an index. ZS
C.U. History-Illinois; Social studies
Stock, Catherine. Sophie's Knapsack; written and illus. by Catherine Stock. Lothrop,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06458-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06457-4. 32p.
Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
4-6 yrs. 
An enticing picture book begins with Sophie perched on her
[ 239 ]
father's shoulders gazing at the skyscrapers looming around them. "It's time to
show you some real sky, Sophie .... 
Let's hike up to Purple Cloud Rock next
week." 
Who could resist? Fluent, full-page watercolor paintings show the
preparations, drive to the country, hiking, and camping in an idyllically beautiful,
isolated mountain setting. The details of every snack or meal are delicious; the
expressions and postures of the figures project a warm family feeling that
culminates in Sophie's snuggling down between her parents in the tent during a
rainstorm. Fresh writing and art, this will inspire either action or envy on the part
of young listeners and adult readers. BH
C.U. Recreation, family
D.V. Family relations
Swindells, Robert. Staying Up. Oxford, 1988. ISBN 0-19-271546-1. 132p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
American kids may be surprised to learn that in England the
squares stay away from football games, leaving them to the rowdies, but one look
at the cheerleaders may tell them why. "The Ointment" cheers on its team during
the game, but the real fun begins afterward, with stones, bricks, and violent assault
on the opposing team's supporters. Win or lose. Fifteen-year-old Brian, a good
kid, envies the wildness of the Ointment; his girlfriend, Debbie, from the better
side of town, wants nothing to do with the group. In many ways, this is the
hoariest of problem novels, with heavyhanded messages about peer pressure,
drinking and drug abuse, and getting into cars with strange men. Unlike the sunny
suburbs in which these novels usually take place, however, this one is set in a
grimy, used-up factory town in northern England, the rowdiness of the football
hooligans just another part of a larger violence; and the author excels at conveying
the menacing atmosphere. American teens will see a different picture of England
here, a dark context that may revitalize a familiar plot RS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Symes, R. F. Rocks and Minerals; by R. F. Symes and the staff of the Natural History
Museum, London. Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99621-6; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-394-89621-1. 58p. illus. and with photographs. (Eyewitness Books).
Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-. 
An oversize book is arranged by topics on double-page spreads,
some of which have a brief introductory text; most of the written information is
contained in captions and labels for the profuse and excellent illustrations in color.
Written by members of the staff of the Natural History Museum in London, the
descriptive material is accurate, authoritative, and clear. The first group of two-
page topics consists of background information and the main classes of rocks; next
are explanations of uses of rocks (as tools, for buildings, for pigments); then a
discussion of rock-forming minerals leads to information on minerals, gemstones,
ores and metals, and the collecting and cutting of rocks and minerals. The small
type of the captions and index is a minor weakness. ZS
C.U. Geology
Thomson, Ruth. Making a Book; illus. with photographs by Chris Fairclough. Watts,
1988. ISBN 0-531-10532-6. 27p. (Making Series). $9.90.
Ad 
Gr. 3-6. 
Using the creation of Anthony Browne's Piggybook as its
example, Thomson takes readers through the stages of making a book, from initial
[240 ]
idea through finished book, ready to be read. This lacks the humor and detail of
Aliki's How a Book Is Made (reviewed in the November, 1986, issue), but the
format and photographs make it more likely to appeal to older children, for whom
the choice of the popular Piggybook as example will also appeal. It is ironic and
unfortunate that the binding of Making a Book is so tight that some text falls into
the gutter. RS
Ventura, Piero. Venice: Birth of a City; written and illus. by Piero Ventura. Putnam,
1988. ISBN 0-399-21531-X. 36p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Ventura's wonderfully diverse and detailed paintings, miniature in
scale but sweeping in composition, are used in effective combination with small
blocks of text to tell a cohesive and chronological story of the city called "the bride
of the Adriatic." A fine example of presenting history through pictures, this is
remarkable for its beauty and its use of perspective; the book closes with a four-
page fold-out that shows much of that part of Venice that is most famous. ZS
C.U. History-Italy
Waters, Marjorie. The Victory Garden Kid's Book: A Beginner's Guide to Growing
Vegetables, Fruits, and Flowers; illus. with photographs by Gary Mottau and
drawings by George Ulrich. Houghton, 1988. Trade ed. ISBN 0-395-42730-4;
paper ed. ISBN 0-395-46560-5. 148p. Trade ed. $19.95; paper ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-7. 
The co-author of several books for adult gardeners, Waters has
produced a how-to book that is clearly written, that provides authoritative
information, that is illustrated with well-placed diagrams and photographs, and that
is logically organized. The first section describes, chronologically, the garden
project of seven children (assorted ages), from choosing the site in the spring to
closing the garden in the fall; choosing tools, preparing to compost, and coping
with garden pests are included. The second part of the book is an alphabetical
arrangement of "Kids' Crops," a list of fruits, vegetables, and flowers that are easy
to grow; here special instructions for each plant supplement the information given
in the first section. An index gives access to the contents of a book that is, if a bit
long for younger children, both simple enough for easy reference for them and not
too simplified for the older child's cover-to-cover use. ZS
C.U. Botany (unit)
Weiss, Harvey. Shelters: From Tepee to Igloo; written and illus. by Harvey Weiss.
Crowell, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04555-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04553-0.
76p. Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
A brief introductory survey of various types of houses built
through history by different cultures, this is organized to cover igloos, tepees,
yurts, log cabins, adobe dwellings, beduoin tents, Japanese houses, tropical
houses, houses in and under the ground, stone houses, and geodesic domes. The
selection of these structures as representative seems somewhat arbitrary; however,
building techniques are described for each, along with the social and environmental
rationale that suited form to function. While generalizations are rife in coverage
this simple, the black-and-white diagrammatic sketches extend the information,
their captions often forming a subtext. Useful and accessible. BH
C.U. Architecture
[241]
West, Dan. The Day the TV Blew Up; illus. by Gioia Fiammenghi. Whitman, 1988.
ISBN 0-8075-1491-8. 28p. $10.25. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Although purposive, this story about life-without-television is
presented too blithely to be deemed didactic. The blue-tinted line drawings have an
appropriate flyaway humor, and the story has just enough exaggeration to make it
funny without being silly. A television addict, Ralph is desolate when his set
disintegrates and he faces the bane of childhood, nothing to do. Another child
suggests going to the library. After being assured of the fact that books can be
borrowed at no cost, Ralph takes the plunge-and a new world opens. Later,
books in hand, he sees his advisor, who's pulling her wagon to the park, she says.
"What on earth is a park?" Ralph asks. Thelma replies, "I think you've had
enough excitement for one day, Ralph. I'll tell you later," and trundles off. Neat.
ZS
Whelan, Gloria. Silver; illus. by Stephen Marchesi. Random House, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-394-99611-9; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-89611-4. 
60p. (Stepping Stone
Books). Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $1.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Nine-year-old Rachel is keenly involved in her father's dog-sled
racing. 
The story is framed between his placing second in an Anchorage
competition and third in the Iditarod. Meanwhile, he gives her the runt of a litter
from his lead dog, which occasions her own adventure; she follows the puppy
through a storm after it has been taken by a wolf to replace a dead cub. The plot is
unpretentious if predictable, the setting is crisply delineated, and the writing
smooth at a low reading level. Black-and-white illustrations, which have a
screened effect, are competently drafted and well composed to balance the text.
Although there's nothing unusual here, this has, like other titles in the Stepping
Stone series, effectively planned appeal for transitional readers. BH
D.V. Pets, care of
Wilhelm, Hans. Oh, What a Mess; written and illus. by Hans Wilhelm. Crown, 1988.
ISBN 0-517-56909-4. 30p. $12.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Franklin's family is a swinish lot that lazes about in a pen so
filthy that he's embarrassed to ask any of his friends over or even acknowledge his
siblings at school. Then Franklin wins a painting contest with a picture of a
rainbow so beautiful that it reforms his father into washing the wall on which it
hangs. That inspires Grandfather to change the straw, Mother to wash the curtains,
etc., until the whole house with its inhabitants is hospitably clean--except for the
occasional mud bath. Though not as natural a winner as Wilhelm's I'll Always
Love You (reviewed in the January, 1986, issue), this moral tale has lots of fun in
it. What's puzzling is the illustration, which is either a tribute to Helme Heine
(The Pigs' Wedding, The Most Beautiful Egg in the World, Friends) or such an
exact imitation that it could be termed blatant plagiarism. Not only are the pigs,
chickens, and mice perfectly reflective of Heine's characters, but the colors and
style of watercolor painting, the humorous postures, and even the theme of the
relation of art and life are signature Heine. Children will not care-it's a dilemma
for professionals to note and consider. BH
D.V. Neatness
[242 ]
Willard, Nancy. Firebrat; illus. by David Wiesner. Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-
99008-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-89008-6. 121p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Much against her will, Molly is sent to New York to take care
of her forgetful grandmother during summer vacation. Once there, she is miserable
until she and a young neighbor, Sean, become involved in a war with the
villainous Firebrat to save an enchanted crystal kingdom, which they enter through
a boarded-up underground train station. What makes all this unlikely is not the
premise-a common enough plot-but the piling on of fantastical devices and
symbols without development. The heroes leap from one danger to another at
breakneck speed, allowing the reader only a glimpse of yet another Dark Force or
elaborate assortment of metaphorically mixed creatures. There is a consistency of
bright metallic images and a clever echoing of realistic sights and sounds in the
children's fantasy world, but the overall effect is one of a surrealistic dream in
which the events are not rememberably clear. BH
D.V. Grandmother-child relations
Willis, Val. The Secret in the Matchbox; illus. by John Shelley. Farrar, 1988. ISBN 0-
374-36603-9. 30p. $12.95.
R* 
Gr. K-3. 
Innovative, sensitive without being sentimental, and nicely
balanced in the storytelling functions of text and illustration, this is a very
impressive first team effort. No one is particularly interested in seeing what
"secret" Bobby has in his matchbox until Helen Wells, a "good and polite little
girl," says "Yes, please," and screams when she sees a little dragon inside. The
idea of a dragon tiny enough to fit in a matchbox should appeal to the read-aloud
audience, and the development of a multiethnic classroom-set fantasy in which the
dragon grows (and grows and grows, pupils holding their nervous breaths, teacher
oblivious) is beautifully paced. 
The simple text and the subtle humor of
understated dialogue are as effective as the line and composition of the paintings,
which are framed by borders with designs and figures that echo the zest of the
action and the appropriately frenetic appearance of the classroom. Nifty. ZS
Windsor, Pat. The Hero. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-385-29624-X. 
225p. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Who is Joe Dean? When Dale has his first premonition, he
dismisses it as a nightmare-until he saves the little girl trapped under a bus.
When asked his name, Dale, seeking anonymity, replies "Joe Dean," and runs
away. A couple more incidents like this, and Joe Dean is the public's mysterious
hero and Dale's private torment. When his cold and spiteful father discovers Dale's
identity and gift, he sends him to Dr. Airman, a mysterious scientist who figures
somehow in the family's past and who now operates a "haven" for young people
with psychic abilities. Dale and his parents are complicated people reacting with
troubled ambiguity to Dale's powers; perhaps most telling is the scene where
Dale's mother, a psychic "monster" like Dale, says she is afraid of him and that he
should never return to their house. That the kindly Dr. Airman is actually intent
upon controlling the world, using Dale as his pawn, is never in doubt, so the latter
part of the novel doesn't generate quite the suspense of the first half. Nevertheless,
this is always a page-turner, and the lonely ending makes no compromises. RS
D.V. Family relations
[243 J
Wolf, Bernard. In the Year of the Tiger; written and illus. with photographs by Bernard
Wolf. Macmillan, 1988. ISBN 0-02-793390-3. 124p. $14.95.
M 
Gr. 5-. 
Focusing primarily on the activities of a single family in a small
farming village, Wolf's latest photo-essay attempts to show the great changes in
China since the 1949 revolution and, simultaneously, how much of Chinese rural
life has remained the same for centuries. The Chen family lives in Ai Shan in the
southeastern part of the country, where they operate a peanut oil press and engage
in small-scale farming, primarily of rice. Wolf shows us the details of their work,
as well as the family's other activities: marketing, schooling for the children,
recreation, and festivities. While the format and photographs are handsome, the
visual progression is static, and there is a superfluity of dark portraits and silvery
landscapes. The lengthy text is informative when describing, for example, how the
peanut press works, but there are too many abrupt jumps and an overindulgence in
hyperbole. "Rice grown with the sweat of their bodies. Rice that even an emperor
would praise, the like of which may not be found elsewhere in the world. It is this
that sustains them." Sometimes, it is difficult to make out exactly what Wolf is
getting at; for example, when he says "The short period following Mao-Tse Tung's
leadership of the nation saw the most awesome changes in China's long history,"
to what years is he referring? And, after telling us many times how happy the
Chinese are about working hard, Wolf then says "Some will be forced into jobs of
drudgery and boredom with no escape, their senses becoming dulled as they grow
bitter. One billion people! A heavy price for procreation." 
Both text and
photographs are overly reverent and humorless, filtered through an outsider's
romanticism. In describing how the women drag their laundry down to the river
for washing, Wolf remarks "Surely there is no lovelier washbasin than this on
earth." RS
C.U. International understanding
Woolf, Virginia. The Widow and the Parrot; illus. by Julian Bell. Harcourt, 1988. ISBN
0-15-296783-4. 26p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-. 
A mildly satiric rags to riches story about a poor widow whose
kindness to animals leads to her finding a fortune. Mrs. Gage has inherited 3,000
pounds from her miserly brother, but the will doesn't say where the money is and
the house burs down shortly after Mrs. Gage arrives to claim it. Only her
brother's bedraggled gray parrot, James, is left; yet it is James that leads Mrs. Gage
from the depths of despair to the gold hidden beneath the kitchen floor. Virginia
Woolf wrote this at the request of her two young nephews for their home-made
newspaper. They were disappointed in it at the time, and indeed, the readership is
still in question. Although the illustrations are pleasantly literal and understated,
the long text is well beyond the understanding of many preschool listeners and the
reading level of most primary-grade students. Nevertheless, for older children who
don't mind the picture-book format, the story will have appeal even if the low-key
send-up of Victorian literature escapes them. BH
D.V. Kindness to animals