Aaseng, Nathan The Disease Fighters: The Nobel Prize in Medicine. ISBN 0-8225-
0652-1. 
The Inventors: Nobel Prizes in Chemistry, Physics and
Medicine. ISBN 0-8225-0651-3. 
The Peace Seekers: The Nobel Peace
Prize. 
ISBN 0-8225-0654-8. All three books Lerner, 1987. 72p. illus. with
photographs. (Nobel Prize Winners). $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
In a series of books that give interesting information about men
and women whose signal contributions have been recognized by their winning of a
Nobel Prize, the subtitles may be doubling misleading: first, there is no attempt
to include-or even to list-all winners in the category the book covers, and
second, some of the material in each book, while relevant, is not about the winners
of Nobel prizes. In each volume, Aaseng gives background history and discusses
the work of eight or nine Nobel Prize winners (not always chronologically
arranged) in adequate style, not too dry, not too exclamatory. Photographs (there
are many) are of variable pertinence; each volume has an index and a glossary. ZS
Adler, Carole S. Always and Forever Friends. Clarion, 1988. ISBN 0-89919-681-0.
164p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Sixth grade seems empty to Wendy after her best friend moves to
Thailand and she maneuvers to join a popular group and avoid the class outcasts.
The relationship she builds with Honor, a studious black girl who is fiercely
protective of her privacy, and Jeremy, a goodhearted but hyperactive boy, makes
her realize that friendships are built through trust and flexibility rather than
similarity. This is centered on a problem of immediate concern to young readers,
and the dynamics and dialogue are natural. At a few points, the plot seems
engineered to suit the theme, which is complicated by a subplot involving
Wendy's adjustment to a new step-family (her mother's husband and his three
children). The protagonist, however, is refreshingly "average" in her reactions and
capacities, and the issue of race relations is incorporated with honesty and aplomb.
BH
D.V. Friendship values; Intercultural understanding
Alexander, Martha. Even That Moose Won't Listen to Me; written and illus. by Martha
Alexander. Dial, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0188-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-
0187-X. Library ed. $9.89; Trade ed. $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Softly colored, neatly executed line and wash pictures in
Alexander's distinctively low-keyed style illustrate a story in the Nobody Listens
[ 149 1
to Andrew tradition. As a moose calmly munches his way through the family
vegetable garden, Rebecca's urgent pleas for intervention are dismissed by each
member of her family; even the moose, when she tries to frighten him off, ignores
Rebecca. When, too late, the others see the destruction in the garden and ask
Rebcca what in the world happened, she answers "I'm busy now," and promises to
tell them when she finishes building her toy rocket ship. Not a new idea, but an
attractive development of the concept, amusing, but-because of Rebecca's calm-
not quite convincing. ZS
Aylesworth, Jim. Hanna's Hog; illus. by Glen Rounds. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-
31367-5. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Aylesworth and Rounds have teamed up before (Hush Up,
Shenandoah Noah), and the folksy effect is predictably humorous. Here, an old
woman named Hanna plots to get her pig back from a neighbor who's stolen it.
He blames a bear, so Hanna waits till he goes to the outhouse, rakes the wall with
claw-like marks and grabs the pig, leaving plenty of ursine clues behind.
Conviction by suggestion--case closed. Characteristically, Rounds' figures are
simply composed, black-outlined mountaineers posturing against plenty of white
space. Hounds, chickens, and cats are the only litter, and they're occasional. The
star of the show, Hanna's Hog, is a ludicrous beast whose mustard color matches
the faces of the two main characters. Tellable without pictures, this will serve as
a good picture-book read-aloud as well. BH
Bergman, Tamar. The Boy From Over There; tr. from the Hebrew by Hillel Halkin.
Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-43077-1. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Beginning with the arrival of an orphaned Jewish refugee at the
end of World War II, this details his absorption into a Galilee kibbutz until the
children's evacuation in the war of 1948. The dynamics among the characters are
realistically developed, including one boy's resentment of the allowances made for
the newcomer, another's sensitive alliance, and the role played by a dog in bringing
the children together. By the end of the book, the protagonist has accepted the loss
of his mother, whom he had hoped was still alive, as his best friend has accepted
the loss of her father on the European front. There are some touching scenes, as
when another refugee relives her bitter past with the evacuation truck's "taking
away" her daughter. The focus of the novel, however, is on new lives. While
we've had many novels about children's experiences in the Holocaust, this is one
of the few and the best on a survivor's adjustment in Israel. There are occasional
cases of stylistic awkwardness, but in general the translation is smooth and the
dialogue natural. BH
C.U. History--World War II, 1939-1945
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Boutis, Victoria. Looking Out. Four Winds, 1988. ISBN 0-02-711830-4. 
$11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
It's 1953, and 12-year-old Ellen wants to be "an ordinary
American girl," just like her new best friend Judy, who prizes chewing gum,
wearing makeup, "anything purple," dirty jokes and circle skirts. Hard as she tries,
though, Ellen cannot escape the un-ordinary secret she hides so desperately: her
parents are communists, "reds," says Ellen, afraid the smallest slip could send her
[ 150]
parents to jail like the Rosenbergs, or on the run like the comrades her family
hides. Her biggest fear, and resentment as well, is that her parents love "the cause"
more than they do her. They're all real fears--especially well drawn are Ellen's
parents' fierce dedication to their beliefs and naive blindness to their own daughters'
needs. This does stack the deck a bit against "ordinary" Americans, all of whom
are depicted as leading shallow and meaningless lives, and the ending (Ellen decides
no longer to "duck-and-cover" during air-raid drills) seems forced, substituting 80's
rhetoric for a real conclusion. However, there's little else on this period for junior
high readers, who, regardless of their political persuasions, may identify with this
story of a girl who struggles into maturation while her parents' attentions lie
elsewhere. RS
C.U. U.S. History-Modern-Stories
D.V. Individuality, expressing
Buscaglia, Leo. A Memory for Tino; illus. by Carol Newsom. SLACK/Morrow, Library
ed. ISBN 0-688-07483-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07482-0. Library ed. $12.88;
Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
Gr. 3-5. 
"You give but little when you give of your possessions. It is
when you give of yourself that you truly give." That little epigraph by Kahlil
Gibran introduces this equally banal fable of Tino, a good-hearted little boy who
gives away his family's TV set to Mrs. Sunday, the lonely old lady who lives on
the hill. At first unaccountably disturbed by this action, Tino's parents soon
realize the magnitude of the gift their son has given, not just to Mrs. Sunday, but
to themselves. As his mother says, "Tino is just a child, and yet he's wiser than
we are"-to which Tino's father (quite refreshingly) replies, "You mean you think
we should let her keep the set?" Well, yes, for the TV is a gift of love, or, as Mr.
Buscaglia more often has it, "feeling good." And Tino gets something just as
important in return: "a memory of happiness." This is the sort of nonsense that
writers for adults too often think they can get away with during their occasional
forays into children's books: patronizing, didactic, and dull. The illustrations are
trite and awkwardly drafted. RS
D.V. Generosity; Older-younger generations
Byars, Betsy C. The Burning Questions of Bingo Brown. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-
81932-8. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
With her particular talent for rendering sad situations from a
good-humored protagonist's perspective, Byars has written a very funny book
about the first love between two classmates whose teacher is desperately lovelorn
over an aerobics instructor. While Bingo's girlfriend, Melissa, returns his
affection, Mr. Markham is driven to a suicide attempt by rejection. There are
many points to admire here. One is the high-spirited reflection of classroom
conversations and dynamics, which Bingo observes during his perpetual journeys
to the pencil sharpener. A second is the smooth blend of plot and subplot, as the
reader realizes that it is the child who is normal and the adult who has lost control.
However, neither is stereotyped. Bingo grows wiser with the usual spurts and
setbacks of pre-adolescent realization. Mr. Markham is a sensitive, witty,
intelligent teacher who is unstable and makes a terrible mistake, but who has the
affection of his class and who recovers his balance. The honest, capable handling
of Bingo's guilt by his mother, who at first appears to be something of an airhead,
[ 151 ]
is another coup. There is a range of humor, from hilarious ("He, who had been in
love three times in one day and had already had four mixed-sex conversations!") to
ironic ("Bingo knew his name would not be picked. He had never been chosen for
anything in his life"). Maintained in both style and incident, these passages are
too numerous to mention, although some, like the description of Bingo's perfect
grandmother, are memorable. This is a story that children are going to get a lot
out of and love, while adults appreciate both craft and content. BH
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Teacher-student relations
Clifford, Eth. Scared Silly; illus. by George Hughes. Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-
46845-0. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
Sensible Mary Rose Onetree and her excitable sister Jo-Beth are
accompanying their father on a trip when he gets sidetracked (as he often does) to
the Walk-Your-Way-Around-the-World-Museum. It's a bizarre establishment run
by a retired shoe tycoon, along with his brother, nephew, housekeeper, and cook.
Several generations of magician/inventors have filled the place with trick rooms
and tunnels into which the three travelers keep disappearing. There's a mystery as
well (who stole the Chinese emperor's priceless shoes and Egyptian sandals?)
which is accidentally solved by the girls before they leave. The pace is frenetic,
the events are unlikely, and the two girls are barely saved from stereotype by
occasionally assuming characteristics that contradict their personality niches. BH
Cole, Babette. Prince Cinders; written and illus. by Babette Cole. Putnam, 1988. ISBN
0-399-21502-6. 29p. $12.95.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
Prince Cinders, victimized by three big hairy brothers who dance
at the Palace Disco, is visited by a klutzy fairy with a Star of David wand. After
several misbegotten attempts, the prince is transformed into a gorilla, who scares a
princess waiting at a bus stop. She believes that the prince who suddenly appears
at midnight actually scared away the gorilla. The frightened prince leaves his
trousers behind in his rush to get away, but of course he's found by the fit, gets
married, and enjoys watching his brothers turned into housework fairies. More
slapstick than satire, this will appeal to kids overfed with clich6d Cinderellas,
though it doesn't measure up to wittier creations by Jay Williams and others. The
watercolor cartoons show the same goofy exaggeration as those in Cole's Princess
Smartypants (reviewed in the June, 1987 issue). BH
Colman, Hila. Rich and Famous Like My Mom. Crown, 1988. ISBN 0-517-56836-5.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
On the "poor little rich girl" theme, this is a story told by
thirteen-year-old Cassandra, whose beautiful mother (father's decamped) is a rock
star. Cassandra has everything money can buy-but she's often lonely in her
mother's absence, has no friends, and feels smothered by being overprotected. She
meets and is fascinated by a tough, independent bag lady, Mollie, and tries to help
her and some other street people. Through this she makes a friend, a classmate
who goes with her to do volunteer work in a soup kitchen. Later she meets a
compatible boy; still later she reveals her new interest to her mother, who
promptly gives a benefit concert for the homeless (due to a convenient
cancellation, the concert's at Madison Square Garden). This is not badly written,
[ 152]
but it has a patchwork plot, a message about helping the homeless that is
obtrusive albeit worthy, and characterization that seems largely type casting. ZS
D.V. Kindness to others
Conford, Ellen. Poor Jenny Archer; illus. by Diane Palmisciano. Little, 1988. ISBN 0-
316-15262-5. (Springboard Books). $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Jenny has a problem: 
only twenty-seven cents to buy her
mother a birthday present. The problem is compounded by the fact that Jenny
plans to buy a fur coat so her mother won't feel poor any more. A number of
money-earning plans fall through, including dog training, baby sitting, and house
selling, each with its built-in incident of disaster-humor. Finally, Jenny settles for
buying her mother a lace collar and realizes that not being able to afford something
doesn't equal poverty. 
It's a benevolent story, mildly funny if slightly
overextended (Jenny seems old enough to know better than to try and sell her own
house for money to buy her mother a birthday present). The transition readers for
whom this series is intended (see the Duncan review, below) will be able to
empathize and feel superior at the same time. BH
D.V. Value building
Dickinson, Peter. A Box of Nothing. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-385-29664-9. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Late for school and therefore trying to avoid his mother on the
street, James ducks into an abandoned shop. An old storekeeper gives him a box
of ancient, high-quality nothing and then disappears. Because of the box's magical
properties, James is drawn into the future-world of a fossilized Dump. His guide
through this inferno is a creature called the Burra, which, with its crazy assortment
of mismatched parts, represents collective, activated garbage ("We are a democratic
institution"). Everything in the Burra and its environment is part of everything
else except the rats, a vicious Nazi-like society that patrols the Dump, and the
giant, capricious gulls. This is an inventively fantastical world, with a gripping
start and an entertaining middle. The end gets obscure with a race between the rats
and the Burra to create a new universe, but the action is undeniable and James'
escape satisfying if not entirely logical. An imaginative romp through the refuse.
BH
Duncan, Lois. Wonder Kid Meets the Evil Lunch Snatcher; illus. by Margaret Sanfilippo.
Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-19558-8. (Springboard Books). $9.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
His first day in the new school starts out even worse than fourth-
grader Brian Johnson expects it to. He and his sister Sarah are jumped by a sixth-
grade bully, Matt, whose gang of lunch-grabbers terrorizes the school. Yet that
very incident leads the Johnson children to make some new friends, and together
they concoct a scheme to convince Matt of the existence of Wonder Kid, zapper of
bullies. Unfortunately, they have to produce Wonder Kid in the flesh but, in doing
so, discover their own wondrous capacities. This is sprightly wish fulfillment for
any kid: a skinny, lonely nerd whose only refuge is the world of comic book
[ 153 ]
heroes becomes one. The plot has some unlikely moments, but it's fun and all
done with stylistic ease and easy-to-read style. BH
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Ellis, Sarah. A Family Project. Margaret K. McElderry, 1988. ISBN 0-689-51444-6.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Eleven-year-old Jessica does a school project in preparation for
the coming of her new baby sister, whom she and her two older brothers anticipate
and welcome with enthusiasm. Jessica, in fact, has a special touch with baby
Lucie, and she is shattered when Lucie is a victim of crib death. This is a story of
a family-already changed by the oldest son's departure and stressed by the second
son's rebellious adolescence-pulling through a crisis that traumatizes the mother
to the point where she can hardly function. Although Jessica's point of view is
consistently maintained, each complex character develops in a different way, which
makes the novel an ambitious one. There are a few points when the mother's
rigidity is perhaps overemphasized (she often talks in capital letters), and the tenant
downstairs seems one character too many. In general, however, the cast is subtly
portrayed, especially the rebellious brother, and there are some memorable scenes
that will touch young readers with a realization of the resilience that is crucial in a
loving family. BH
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Ernst, Lisa Campbell. Nattie Parson's Good Luck Lamb; written and illus. by Lisa
Campbell Ernst. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-81778-3. $11.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
Handsomely composed pictures justify an old-fashioned story
about a girl whose weaving saves her favorite sheep, Clover, and her grandfather's
hard-pressed farm. Since most of their wool must be sold, Nattie practises
weaving on bits she collects and saves. Clover's wool is too coarse to sell, but
when hard times threaten, Nattie weaves it into a shawl, incorporating the
raspberry stains from Clover's latest feast into a skillful design. The shawl
immediately sells to the first customer who sees it, much to the shock of the
miserly storekeeper, and the money buys hay for the whole winter. The ending's
contrived, as is Clover's capacity to worry and understand his mistress'
conversation. However, Nattie's determination and success will satisfy young
listeners, and the illustrations' coloration, line work, and crosshatch texturing have
a life of their own. BH
D.V. Ingenuity
Esbensen, Barbara Juster, ad. The Star Maiden: An Ojibway Tale; illus. by Helen K.
Davie. Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-24951-3. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
A star maiden yearns to leave the sky and come to the rich,
peaceful land depicted in this Ojibway tale. Appearing in a dream to a young brave
and then following him home (his only role appears to be as guide), she becomes
first a rose, then a blue prairie flower, and finally, happily, a water lily. This is a
poetically adapted tale, one of many star myths common to Native American lore.
Each page of text is faced with a a watercolor painting divided into two frames of
related scenes and bordered with traditional Indian motifs. The compositions are
[ 154]
consequently complex but carefully coordinated around focal points of attention. A
gently appealing tale in a rich visual setting. BH
Fine, Anne. Alias Madame Doubtfire. Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-28313-4. 
$12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-. 
Novels about divorce for children are rarely funny; here's one that
will have readers laughing from the first page. Lydia, Christopher, and little
Natalie have arrived, for their regular Tuesday tea with Dad, carrying yet another
letter from Mom ("'Aha!' he cried. 'Another missive from the Poisoned Pen.
How is your mother, anyway?'") which, as usual, says she'll have to cut the
children's next visit short, and which, also as usual, the children have already
opened and read. "It came under their general heading of self-defense." Mom
(Miranda) has also decided to employ an after-school housekeeper; in the hope of
seeing more of his children, Dad (Daniel), a usually out-of-work actor, manages to
get the job-by getting up in drag as the magnificent and sublimely capable
dowager Madame Doubtfire. The kids catch on quick and are at first gleeful for
Daniel's company and the harmless (they think) deception, but then comes a
remarkable scene when Miranda, believing she has a friendly ear, spills all her
anger at Daniel to Madame. The children join in, at first playfully, and then with
barely disguised malice aim their own darts at the helpless target. While Daniel
gets most of the good lines ("'Fractions are useful,' Daniel told his son. 'Nobody
ever gets all they want out of life.'") it gradually becomes apparent that this wit is
also his weakness, a carelessness that can hurt his children. Miranda, at first
seeming a cold career woman, is equally revealed as a mother who works terribly
hard at her job and family. This novel is a special combination of high humor and
genuine pain (the first often expressing the second), showing, ironically and
perfectly, in this "broken home" the bonds of shared history and love that keep a
family together. RS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Family relations
Fritz, Jean. China's Long March: 6,000 Miles of Danger. Putnam, 1988. ISBN 0-399-
21512-3. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 7-. 
Although the author's intended audience is young people, this
aaccount of the long, dogged march of the Chinese Red Army in 1934 and 1935
compares favorably with some of the best adult books on the subject. Because
Fritz is adept at gauging her intended audience, and because most of her material is
based on interviews with survivors, the writing has an easy flow and an immediacy
that make the ordeal vivid and personal. Jean Fritz loves the country where she
spent most of her childhood, and her book is a felicitous blend of sympathetic
understanding and an objective assessment of historical events. ZS
C.U. History--China; Social Studies
D.V. Courage; Devotion to a cause
Gackenbach, Dick, ad. Harvey, the Foolish Pig; retold and illus. by Dick Gackenbach.
Clarion, 1988. ISBN 0-89919-540-7. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
This "free adaptation of an Armenian folk tale" features a
destitute pig who sets out to ask the great King of Animals how to become rich.
On the way he meets three other animals who commission him to ask questions
for them as well: a wolf asks where to find a good meal; a pretty, rich pig asks
[ 155 ]
how to become happy; a dry tree asks how to ease its thirst. The King directs the
pig to all the answers, but alas, the pig is so greedy and foolish he becomes the
wolf's supper. Gackenbach's jovial watercolors in brown, blue, and gold lighten
the tone of the precipitous ending in much the way Galdone's did for The
Gingerbread Boy (though one could have done without naming the unfortunate
fortune-seeker "Harvey"). Each of the creatures is caricatured for full dramatic
effect, and the action is swift and sure. Though not oversize, the book is
spaciously enough designed to use in small-group read-alouds. BH
Goble, Paul. Her Seven Brothers; written and illus. by Paul Goble. Bradbury, 1988.
ISBN 0-02-737960-4. 27p. $13.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
After his foray into historical legend with The Death of the Iron
Horse (reviewed in the April, 1987, issue), Goble has returned to a Cheyenne myth
about the creation of the Big Dipper. 
The story tells of a girl skilled in
embroidering deer and buffalo skin clothes with porcupine quills. In tune with the
spirit world and language of the animals, she makes clothes for seven brothers,
journeys to their tipi, and happily sets up housekeeping as their sister. When a
buffalo chief demands her in marriage and she refuses, the eight young people must
escape a vengeful stampede by climbing a tree into the sky, where they become the
stars of the Big Dipper. Goble's full-color illustrations are consistent with the
style that has shaped his other ten books, showcasing landscape compositions
punctuated by Native American motifs and harmonic nature imagery. It is much to
his credit that he gives complete references for the story sources from which he
adapts the text and that he describes the setting, with a note on artistic techniques
used to reflect it. BH
Graham, Thomas. Mr. Bear's Boat; written and illus. by Thomas Graham. Dutton, 1988.
ISBN 0-525-44375-4. 30p. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Paintings that are uncluttered and often humorous albeit
inelegant are nicely coordinated with a well-paced, simply written story. Mr. Bear
builds a small sailboat, and Mrs. Bear awaits its completion with growing
anticipation. Comes the summer day when they take off, sails hoisted and picnic
basket well filled; battered by a succession of troubles (motor boats, scuba divers, a
low-flying airplane, loss of basket, being becalmed) the bears eventually get back
to their own beach, where they contentedly picnic. How enthralling for the very
young, who love disaster humor! How satisfying and reassuring to have a safe-
home happy ending. The audience can "read" the story from the pictures, and even
the naivete of the latter seems to fit. ZS
Hahn, Mary Downing. Following the Mystery Man. Clarion, 1988. ISBN 0-89919-680-
2. 180p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
Madigan is so enchanted by the handsome stranger who rents a
room in her grandmother's house that she fantasizes he's the father she's never
known. By the time she lets herself recognize suspicious signs that he's a thief,
she's followed him too far-and becomes victim of a kidnapping. This is a novel
that scores high on several counts: it's a solid first-person narrative, a tightly
plotted thriller, and a vivid character portrayal of the antagonist as well as the
protagonist. Clint James has a tangible charisma, and his complexity along with
Madigan's vulnerability is clearly realized against the backdrop of a small-town
setting. Readers will be waiting in line. BH
[ 156]
D.V. Father-child relations
Henkes, Kevin. The Zebra Wall. Greenwillow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07568-1. $10.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Flopsy? Florinda? Frito? The Vorlob family is compiling a
list of F-names for the expected baby, who follows Adine, Bernice, Carla, Dot, and
Effie. It's got to be another girl, right? And when the time comes to name Baby
(the family awaits inspiration) Mrs. Vorlob decides, one, the name will begin with
"Z", and two, her sister, bossy and eccentric Aunt Irene, will get to do the
choosing. Ten-year-old Adine hates this idea almost as much as she does Aunt
Irene, who has moved in to help out, and for companionship-her husband's run
off. While the conflict between Irene and Adine provides central tension, it does
not overwhelm the basic new-baby story of a confidently idiosyncratic family.
Mrs. Vorlob, "robust and real," is definitely in the running for World's Best Mom.
While brooking no objection to her own slightly skewed outlook on life, she is
sensitive and understanding of an occasionally embarrassed Adine's desire for a
little conformity. Baby Zachary is going to have a great time. RS
D.V. Aunt-niece relations; Baby, adjustment to
Hobbs, Will. Changes in Latitudes. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31385-3. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 7-9. 
Teenage Travis, the narrator, describes a Mexican vacation with
his mother (in a hostile relationship with her husband, who'd refused to come
along) and his idealistic little brother Teddy. Teddy is interested in protecting the
local turtles, an endangered species; Mom is interested in another man; Travis is
interested in females and in himself. Primarily in himself: Hobbs, in this
unfortunately overwritten first novel, does succeed in depicting Travis as a lazy,
self-centered, and uncooperative boy. Travis' one soft spot is Teddy, but Teddy's
death (intracranial hemorrhage, congenital) while on a turtle-rescue mission seems
contrived as a way to end the story and to effect a family reunion with Dad, a
repentant Mom, and sister Jennifer, who has been part of the Mexican trip but not
relevant to the action. There's some interest in the conservation angle and pathos
in the death of Teddy, but this is mediocre in style, structure, and characterization.
ZS
D.V. Brothers; Death, adjustment to
Jacobs, Paul Samuel. Born Into Light. Scholastic, 1988. ISBN 0-590-40710-4. 147p.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 6-10. 
Just before sunrise on a spring morning in 1913, ten-year-old
Roger Westwood sees an intense burst of light in the woods near his house, and
soon after, a wild naked boy comes running into the yard. Easily tamed by the
gentleness of Roger's sister Charlotte, Benjamin (as they name him) becomes a
member of the family, astounding them with his quick learning and growth, and
his ingenuous kindness. In a war game with the other boys, Benjamin says "I
would never hurt your kind." The family soon acquires another child of that
morning, Nell, beautiful and strange like Benjamin, but, also like him, easily tired
and growing old too quickly. "They will be like meteors, bright and full of light,
but quick expiring," says Roger's doctor father, who has some idea of the
differentness of Benjamin and Nell. The story of the two and the others like them
[ 157 1
is related seventy years later by Roger, whose voice is etched from the beginning
with a quiet, measured sadness that allows horror but no sensationalism to intrude
on what readers will only gradually realize is a science fantasy story. Like Ray
Bradbury but without his nostalgia, Jacobs writes of ordinary people whose lives
are changed through contact with ultimately unknowable aliens, distant relations
who "one day, sooner than we would like, will all be taken from us." RS
D.V. Interpersonal understanding
Johnston, Ginny. Scaly Babies: Reptiles Growing Up; by Ginny Johnston and Judy
Cutchins. Morrow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07306-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
688-07305-0. illus. with photographs. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Exceptionally well written and illustrated with striking color
photographs, this is also ecologically centered. Environment is inherent to the
conceptualization and organization as well as being the emphasis of a concluding
summary. In describing each creature's life cycle and characteristics, the authors
consider its place in a natural habitat and food chain. The sections on snakes,
lizards, crocodilians, and turtles include lively descriptions and immediate detail
("The Gila monster drags the lifeless body under a rock and munches it").
Stereotyped human reactions to reptiles are effectively countered with intriguing
graphic and textual information. The bold, potentially distracting book design
actually works for smooth coordination of print and pictures; glossary and index are
included. BH
C.U. Biology
Johnston, Norma. The Potter's Wheel. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-06463-9. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Sixteen-year-old Laura describes her visit with a glamorous,
imperious grandmother-the potter whose balance and serenity Laura copies-
during a reunion of her mother's extended family. Mother, who's had a conflict
with Gran, is in England.) There's a fragmented romance, and a great deal of
juggling of family relationships as wealthy Gran organizes festivities to celebrate
the restoration of the village in which she owns so much property. Laura gains
confidence when she is pushed into taking responsibility and is successful, and this
enables her to gain perspective on her feelings about her parents. This is
adequately written if overpopulated, uneven in depth of characterization,
occasionally weak in the use of awkward phrasing or inappropriate action, yet it
has some interest as a family story. ZS
D.V. Family relations; Grandparent-child relations; Self-confidence
Klein, Norma. Now That I Know. Bantam, 1988. ISBN 0-553-05472-4. 
$13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
As she did in Breaking Up, Klein here looks at the problem of
having a homosexual parent, in this case, a father. Nina, thirteen, is a "J.C.K."
(joint custody kid) who spends half the week with each parent. Her mother is
bitter and lonely; her father somewhat better off, spending a lot of time with best
friend Greg. That Dad and Greg are lovers will be sooner apparent to readers than
[ 158
to Nina, who finds out on her birthday that Greg is moving into her father's
apartment. Smoothly, if with little depth, this tells of Nina's fears--of becoming
second in her father's heart, of his getting AIDS-and her eventual (and too abrupt)
adjustment to the situation. While not sexually explicit, this is familiar Klein
mood and milieu-an Upper West Side populated by kids much smarter than their
parents. Along the way, Klein tosses out a couple of bits of sexual information so
incomplete as to constitute misinformation: friend Dara sees a TV special on teen
pregnancy and says "Did you know there's only one day every month someone can
get pregnant? Maybe even less. Maybe just twelve hours," and, at another point,
Dad tells Nina that she doesn't have to worry about his getting AIDS because he's
only slept with Mom and Greg, which fails to take Greg's sexual history into
account. RS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Lapenkova, Valentina. Russian Food and Drink; by Valentina Lapenkova and Edward
Lambton. 
Bookwright/Watts, ISBN 0-531-18175-8. 
45p. 
illus. with
photographs. (Food and Drink). $11.90.
M 
Gr. 6-9. 
On the review slip for this title, in a series first published in
England, the publisher states, "A comprehensive, beautifully illustrated test (sic)
combining typical Russian recipes with a historical, geographical and personal
account of the Russian people and their country." In 48 pages, that's a lot to cover
and indeed the coverage is superficial, so that this is neither a satisfactory
cookbook nor a satisfactory social studies book. Most of the text is devoted to
such topics as dining out, food stores, growing food, meals, and markets. Color
photographs, diagrams, and recipes fit into a two-column format. There are some
careless errata in the recipes; for example, using butter in a recipe but referring, in
an appended safety note, to being careful because "hot oil burns," or parenthetically
defining smetana as sour cream on one page, while the glossary explains that
smetana "is quite different in flavor and texture from sour cream." The glossary
itself seems to have some odd inclusions: "labor camp," for example. A brief
bibliography and an index are also provided. ZS
Lester, Helen. Tacky the Penguin; illus. by Lynn Munsinger. Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-
395-45536-7. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Lester and Munsinger have a way with kooky creatures, witness
their collaboration on The Wizard, the Fairy, and the Magic Chicken. Tacky is a
worthy successor, an "odd bird" who doesn't fill the standard penguin bill. While
his tuxedoed companions Goodly, Lovely, Angel, Neatly, and Perfect march 1-2-3-
4, 1-2-3-4, flower-shirted Tacky marches 1-2-3, 4-2, 3-6-0, 2 1/2, 0. When his
friends dive, Tacky cannonballs. When the hunters come, though (thump ...
thump ... thump), Tacky manages, by his unpenguin-like behavior and raucous
singing ("HOW MANY TOES DOES A FISH HAVE?/ AND HOW MANY
WINGS ON A COW?") to dissuade them from capturing the whole lot. This is an
extended joke, but nonetheless effective. The full-color cartoon drawings, vaguely
reminiscent of Wallace Tripp's, are funny in detail and expression; the theme is
one that will appeal to any wayward young listener. BH
D.V. Individuality, expressing
[ 159
Linn, Margot. A Trip to the Doctor; illus. by Catherine Siracusa. Harper, 1988. Library
ed. ISBN 0-06-025843-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025839-X. Library ed. $10.89;
Trade ed. $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
2-4 yrs. 
A book designed to inform (and probably to reassure) very young
children about the procedures used during a routine medical examination is
lightened but little improved by making a guessing game out of each procedure.
Example: "Who is going to check Joey's mouth and throat? The doctor. What
will he use? See if you can guess." Shown: an ice cream cone, a teddy bear, a
tongue depressor, and a light. Open the facing page on which the doctor stands
alone, and the reverse of the flap shows the examination. Fun verges on foolish
here, although the clean look of the stiff crayon drawings and the level of
information are appropriate for the intended audience. 
Usable, but not as
substantial as similar books by Anne Rockwell and Fred Rogers. (Note: prices on
the author's A Trip to the Dentist, reviewed in the February issue, are the same).
ZS
MacLachlan, Patricia. The Facts and Fictions of Minna Pratt. Harper, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-024117-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024114-4. Library ed. $11.89; Trade
ed. $11.70. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 4-7. 
Minna is eleven, her beloved brother a year younger; their father
is a psychologist, their mother a writer, contentedly disorganized. A devoted
member of a string quartet, Minna produces excellent tone on her cello, but has not
yet achieved a vibrato. Few writers could do what MacLachlan does: she makes
Minna's quest pulse with humor and suspense enough to attract readers who do not
share Minna's passion for Mozart, or her devotion to practice sessions for a quartet
competition. Smoothly blended into this theme are Minna's concerns about the
peculiarities of her parents (especially as they compare to the very proper parents of
Lucas, the viola player she loves) and developing tolerance of her own
shortcomings. The intellectual and musical atmosphere are not gauged for popular
appeal, but the author's style and humor, her lively dialogue, and her wonderfully
vivid characters should attract and hold even those readers who have never before
considered writing imaginary letters, as Minna does to her hero, Wolfgang
Amadeus Mozart. "Dear WA Mozart," one letter begins, "You probably don't
know me..." ZS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Mahy, Margaret. Memory. Margaret K. McElderry, 1988. ISBN 0-689-50446-2. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
On the fifth anniversary of his sister Janine's death from a fall,
drunken nineteen-year-old Jonny Dart, "swollen with apparitions," is wandering the
streets of the city. He meets a bedraggled but charming old woman named Sophie,
who seems to mistake him for someone else ("It's lovely to have you here.
There's no one quite like one of your own, is there!") and takes him to her home, a
decrepit building with an enormous purple water tap affixed to the front, courtesy
of Sophie's late husband, a plumber. The house is filled with junk and cats and
memories-all belonging and carefully placed, but in the wrong places: cheese in
the soap dish, soap in the sugar bowl, "a crazy stumbling contraption made up of
strange things fitted together." Almost despite himself, Jonny moves in, helping
Sophie to shop and bathe, teasing her about mistaking him for an old beau; sorting
[ 160
through her memories and, in the process, making peace with some of his own.
While occasionally thematically overstated and psychologically obvious, this is
strong, direct storytelling, told from Jonny's point of view: perceptive but not
pompous, with an edge of self-mockery that adds a poignant note to the narrative.
Sophie's confusion (revealed to be Alzheimer's disease) is skillfully portrayed,
containing its own wit and dignity and "longing to be busy and useful" that
becomes clear and moving to Jonny and readers as the story progresses to a
warming conclusion. RS
D.V. Older-younger generations; Service to others
Marrin, Albert. The War for Independence: The Story of the American Revolution.
Atheneum, 1988. 
ISBN 0-689-31390-X. 
illus. with photographs. 
$15.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
A spirited and thoughtful account of the American Revolution
(next to Vietnam, the country's longest war) bridges the period between the years
described in two earlier books by Marrin, Struggle for a Continent: The French
and Indian Wars and 1812: The War Nobody Won. Profusely illustrated by prints,
paintings, and maps, the text is notable both for its style and its depth. There are
many books about the War for Independence; this one links the events to the
people who effected (and were affected by) them, so that motivation and causation
are smoothly incorporated to heighten narrative impact and to increase readers'
understanding-rather than stuff them with names and dates. 
A sizeable
bibliography is provided. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
Marshall, James. Fox on the Job; written and illus. by James Marshall. Dial, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0351-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0350-3. 48p. (Dial
Easy-to-Read). Library ed. $9.89; Trade ed. $9.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
In this addition to a justifiably popular easy-to-read series about
Fox and his friends, Fox wrecks his bike showing off for some girls. The next
four episodes find him trying to earn money by becoming a shoe salesman (he
insults the customers), a carnival hawker (he's scared of the haunted house), a pizza
delivery person (he manages to disband a party with a box of mice intended for the
veterinarian), and a sleeper in a mattress display window (success at last). The
words are easy, the stories funny, the watercolor cartoons absurdly suited to Fox's
antics, which are calculated (correctly) to appeal to youngsters who need all the
humor they can get for the serious business of decoding. BH
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Initiative
McCaughrean, Geraldine. A Little Lower Than the Angels. Oxford, 1987. ISBN 0-19-
271561-5. 133p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
In a first novel from an experienced adapter and editor,
McCaughrean writes a lively and informative tale of medieval England, in those
days when the traveling troupes of performers of Mystery and Morality plays
offered resented competition for established celebrations in towns and villages. The
story concerns an apprentice, Gabriel, who is so cruelly treated that he runs away
to join a band of players and becomes the focus of a belief in miracle healing. The
[ 161]
plot has color and pace, the characters and dialogue are handled deftly, and the
historical details are smoothly incorporated. The structure gives strong form to the
informational aspect of a novel that marks an impressive debut. ZS
C.U. Drama-study and teaching
McHugh, Elisabet. Beethoven's Cat; illus. by Anita Riggio. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-
689-31364-0. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Cream for cat lovers, this is narrated by Wiggie, one of several
pets in the Carter family. 
In the process of researching his dissertation on
Beethoven, Mr. Carter has discovered that the great musician had a cat named
Ludwig which had a remarkable resemblance to Wiggie. Wiggie becomes
possessed with the notion that he's Ludwig's reincarnation, assumes strange
behavior, and begins to lose his hearing as well as his appetite. It takes an animal
psychiatrist to convince him, with the aid of a cartoonist's manual, that the
resemblance is exaggerated. This is so convincingly detailed that one expects it to
become a time fantasy, with Wiggie somehow accomplishing something
Beethoven seems to be urging him to do. 
It's a bit anticlimactic-and
attenuated-when the whole thing turns out to be a case of feline delusion, but it's
entertaining nonetheless, with the animal characters clearly imagined. BH
McMillan, Bruce. Dry or Wet? written and illus. with photographs by Bruce McMillan.
Lothrop, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07101-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07100-7.
Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
Concept picture books don't come much simpler than this one
-
facing before/after photographs illustrating "dry" and "wet"-but as is usual for
him, McMillan (Here a Chick, There a Chick; Counting Wildflowers)
demonstrates the concept with clarity, humor, and occasional wit. There's an
exuberant splash into the swimming pool, the gleeful hosing down of an
(extremely patient) dalmatian, a red umbrella raised in defense against the onslaught
of the garden spray. Children are pictured in all the photographs; whether in the
bathroom with the Anno/Escher-like wallpaper or in the gloriously summery
backyard, everybody looks to be having a terrific time. RS
D.V. Environmental concepts
Mills, Claudia. Cally's Enterprises. Macmillan, 1988. ISBN 0-02-767100-3. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Cally is in sixth grade at a private school, a conforming and
compliant child who goes along with the various after-school activities her parents
have chosen and with their "help" in doing homework (choosing a theme topic,
editing and typing it, helping with research and illustration). Two catalysts come
into Cally's life: one is Chuck, a breezy take-charge boy who enlists Cally's help
in the projects he's launched to earn vacation money; and the other is the substitute
teacher, Mr. Feinberg, who rejects all class papers (Cally gets her first "D") that
show traces of parental help and convinces the class that he wants its members to
think for themselves. Thus Cally comes to the point of telling her mother calmly
that she really doesn't want to continue gymnastics and ballet, and that from now
on she wants to be, within reasonable limits, self-directed. It's nice to have a book
about the desire for independence, so typical a development of the young teen
years, that is achieved without rancor or rebellion, and that also has good structure,
[ 162
sturdy characterization and a smooth blending of serious issues and humorous
incidents. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Self-confidence; Teacher-pupil relations
Moore, Elaine. Grandma's Promise; illus. by Elise Primavera. Lothrop, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-688-06741-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06740-9. 28p. Library ed. $11.88;
Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Kim has grown some since her appearance in Grandma's House
(reviewed in the April, 1985, issue), but the warm relationship she shared there
with her grandmother during a summer visit permeates her winter visit here.
There's no plot per se, but there's a storm soon after Kim arrives, so she and
Grandma have a mini-adventure without electricity for several days. They pack
pine cones with peanut butter and cornmeal for the birds, go ice skating, and
snuggle into a bed roll beside the wood stove. This is a rural idyll enhanced by
watercolor landscapes and cozy interior scenes. The dominant blues and grays
contrast vividly with the greens and tans of the last book-in fact the companion
volumes serve as a kind of child's dream of country living and grandparental loving
that holds the promise of permanent welcome. BH
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Morrison, Lillian, comp. Rhythm Road: Poems to Move To. Lothrop, 1988. ISBN 0-
688-07098-1. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-10. 
This anthology of nearly a hundred poems is imaginatively
organized into ten sections related to the movements of dancing, riding, water,
music, animals, entertainment, sports, work, technology, and mental activity.
None of the poems is inaccessible, although there is a considerable difference in
levels between a Ruth Krauss poem such as "Duet" and William Carlos Williams'
"Illegitimate Things." 
May Swenson crops up frequently, as does E. E.
Cummings. It's a lively collection, with lots of clamorous verse (Poe's "Bells,"
of course, and Southey's "Cataract of Lodore"), as well as an abundance of concrete
poetry which occasionally becomes gimmicky. On the whole, however, there's
tonal balance, with a combination of the traditional and the unusual. BH
Myers, Walter Dean. Fallen Angels. Scholastic, 1988. ISBN 0-590-40942-5. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-. 
Black, seventeen, perceptive and sensitive, Richie (the narrator)
has enlisted and been sent to Vietnam; in telling the story of his year of active
service, Richie is candid about the horror of killing and the fear of being killed, the
fear and bravery and confusion and tragedy of the war. This trenchant novel is
about a particular war, but it is an indictment of all war; Myers uses the language
of soldiers and he identifies with their concerns. A tough book, a vivid story. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Nixon, Joan Lowery. Caught in the Act. Bantam, 1988. ISBN 0-553-05443-0. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Second in the "Orphan Train" quartet, a series based on the work
of the Children's Aid Society which sent orphans by train to new homes in the
West in the years 1854-1929, this volume focuses on eleven-year-old Mike, whose
[ 163 ]
siblings are in other homes and who is taken in by a German immigrant family,
the Friedrichs. Mr. Friedrich is a harsh, hostile man who knows that Mike had
once picked a man's pocket in New York and is determined to teach the boy,
through hard work, honesty as well as responsibility. The spoiled only son of the
family vengefully accuses Mike of several transgressions and is always believed,
although Mike is innocent. The plot is attenuated, a situation stretched into a
story and given some suspense by Mike's suspicion, aroused by overheard
conversation, that Friedrich has committed a serious crime and is in hiding (he
isn't) and by Mike's need to change his home (he does). Period details are
adequately handled; none of the characters or events of the story are historically
based beyond the fact of the agency's work. The writing style is pedestrian and the
characters seem overdrawn. ZS
Noonan, Michael. McKenzie's Boots. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08348-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05748-8. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Although he was not yet sixteen, Rod Murray was accepted into
the Australian Army; his motives were both patriotic and self-protective, for he
needed desperately to get away from an alcoholic mother and he knew-sadly-that
the girl he adored didn't care for him. Noonan, if a bit wordy, is effective in
drawing a pictures of a soldier who is gentle and compassionate. Awarded a medal
for his part in capturing a Japanese prisoner, Rod has secretly been sympathetic
toward his captive (they had met as butterfly hunters) but is killed soon after in
another encounter with the Japanese. This doesn't glorify war, and it makes a
strong assertion about true heroes on both sides of a conflict. Noonan writes
vividly in a story that has a stripped, strong plot with a nice fillip at the ending
and with solidly established characterization. ZS
D.V. Courage
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. Babies! Holiday House, 1988. ISBN 0-8234-0685-7. illus.
with photographs. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Illustrated with lots of informative color photographs of
beautiful babies, this is an easy to read guide for younger children to the stages of
infant development. Patent combines factual information ("Young babies are more
interested in looking at patterns than in seeing solid colors") reassurance ("It may
alarm you when the tiny body jerks with a hiccup but it doesn't bother the baby")
and practical advice ("You have to be sure nothing dangerous can be reached from
anywhere on the floor") in a smooth and simple text that will give older children a
welcome sense of involvment with and responsibility for a new arrival. RS
D.V. Baby, adjustment to
Paterson, Katherine. Park's Quest. Lodestar, 1988. ISBN 0-525-67258-3. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Park, eleven, has no information about his father beyond the fact
that he died in Vietnam; his overprotective mother refuses to talk about her
husband. When, in response to his urging, Park is permitted to go for a fortnight
to visit his father's family, he finds that he has an uncle and a grandfather, the
[164]
latter a stroke victim who cannot walk or talk. He also finds a brisk, caustic Asian
child whose mother is married to Uncle Frank. A series of revelations about
family affairs leads to new bonds, in a story that is honest, moving, and tender
without being sentimental. Interpolated passages of Park's daydreams (Arthurian
extravaganzas) add little to the furthering of plot or pace, although they give-
repetitively--clues to Park's behavior and his concerns; save for this stylistic
device, the writing is honey-smooth. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Death, adjustment to
Pilling, Ann. The Big Pink. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-81156-4. 149p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
British stories about all-girl boarding schools tend to follow the
hockey/prefect/ivy formula. Not this, not by a long chalk. When Angela's
missionary parents decide to leave her in England, she comes to The Moat, the
school run by her martinet Aunt Pat. Angela's assigned to the big pink dormitory,
but she is quickly, maliciously dubbed "The Big Pink" because she's overweight.
This is a story of adjustment, peer relations, and the self-confidence that follows
self-acceptance, and it deviates from formula by having strong characterization,
logical development of plot, and a smooth writing style leavened by realistic
dialogue and quiet humor. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Aunt-niece relations; Self-confidence
Powzyk, Joyce. Tracking Wild Chimpanzees; written and illus. by Joyce Powzyk.
Lothrop, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06734-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06733-6.
28p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
The author/artist has illustrated a diary describing her trek
through the Kibira Park forest in Burundi, Central Africa. There are six chapters
detailing her arrival, observations of wildlife on the trail, and departure, all during
the rainy season. Every page is partially or fully illustrated with watercolor
paintings of flora and fauna referred to in the text. Although the volume's size and
appearance suggest a picture book audience, this is in fact research material for
older elementary- grade readers, with information that is personalized by experience
and objectified by ecological themes. There's a map and a chart ("vertical
distribution of primate species"), along with an animal index and glossary. BH
C.U. Nature study
Pringle, Laurence. Rain of Troubles: The Science and Politics of Acid Rain. Macmillan,
1988. ISBN 0-02-77537-0. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Pringle systematically defines and describes acid rain, with its
effects on lakes, watersheds, flora, fauna, cities, and humans. In giving examples
and experts' opinions, he walks the fine line between presenting the pressure of the
problem and some perspective on it. Concluding chapters elaborate on the
economics and politics militating for or against remedies suggested in a previous
section. An up-to-date bibliography includes plenty of accessible articles for
researching students. 
Indexed and to be illustrated with black-and-white
photographs, drawings, and maps, this is thorough, scientific, and crystal clear.
BH
C.U. Nature study
[ 165]
Pullman, Philip. Shadow in the North. Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99453-1;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-89453-7. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 8-. 
In this sequel to Ruby in the Smoke (reviewed in the May, 1987
issue) Sally Lockhart, now twenty-two, has set herself up as a financial consultant,
helping, among others, elderly Miss Walsh invest a small legacy. Anglo-Baltic,
the company in which Miss Walsh invested her 3000, has collapsed under
mysterious, and deadly, circumstances. Sally promises to investigate, walking
fearlessly ("'You warned me about what, exactly? Let's be clear about it, Mr.
Bellman. What exactly must I stop doing, and what exactly will you do if I
don't?"') into a shadowy world, "more than a little devilish," which includes such
disparate elements as a master magician, a murder in Russia, a beautiful, doomed
heiress, and a terrifying war machine reaped from all the technological cunning of
the late nineteenth century. As he did in Ruby in the Smoke, Pullman weaves all
this together in a way that makes moral as well as narrative sense, constantly
shocking readers who have too-rosy expectations of what a neo-Victorian thriller
should be. Pullman also excells at the anticlimactic climax (remember Sally
casually tossing the ruby in the Thames): when Sally finally recovers the 3000,
it is hardly a triumph, for her whole world has been destroyed to obtain it. RS
Roberts, Willo Davis. Megan's Island. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31397-7. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Megan is ten, her brother Sandy a year younger; since their father
died when Sandy was a baby, Mom has had a hard time earning a living, and has
moved often in her search for a better job. Or so she says. It is only after a sudden
night flight to Grandpa's lakeside cottage that unfolding, threatening events bring
out the fact that their mother has been on the run and has changed their names.
The island refuge Megan and Sandy have found plays an important part in the
dramatic conclusion of the story, which includes the foiling of a planned
kidnapping. The plot is occasionally turgid, but that's compensated for by the
author's fluid writing style, the excitement of the action, and the solidity of the
characterization. ZS
Ryden, Hope. Wild Animals of America ABC; written and illus. with photographs by Hope
Ryden. Dutton, 1988. ISBN 0-525-67245-1. 30p. $12.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
From alligator to zone-tailed hawk, large full-color photographs
(one to a page) illustrate this alphabet of American animals. Some children may
be surprised that "seal" is found under "H" (Harbor seal) and "crab" under "X"
(Xanthid crab), but the photographs are notable in their placement of each animal
within its environmental context, highlighting important characteristics or
behavior: a beaver, for example, is shown dragging a stick through water; a lynx
is neatly camouflaged in the tawny background foliage. Appended facts about the
animals expand and explain the photos; it would have been nice had Ryden also
provided information about where in the country each animal lives. RS
Selsam, Millicent E. A First Look at Caterpillars; by Millicent E. Selsam and Joyce
Hunt; illus. by Harriett Springer. Walker, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6702-
8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6700-1. 32p. Library ed. $11.85; Trade ed. $10.95.
[ 166]
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Beginning with an emphasis on the different shapes of eggs,
Selsam leads beginning readers through observations of caterpillar parts, variations
in physical appearance, and the process of metamorphosis. With her customary
adherence to scientific investigation, the author directs questions at the reader, who
can figure out answers from the distinctively drawn, green and gray pictures on
every page. Practical application comes with the suggestion to raise a caterpillar
("If it is a moth caterpillar it will spin a cocoon. If it is a butterfly caterpillar it
will start to harden and change into a chrysalis"). A concluding identification chart
summarizes common identification points to look for: hair, spines, pattern, body
movement, horns, forked tails, silky tents. 
The index comprises a list of
caterpillars featured in the book. BH
C.U. Science
Service, Pamela F. The Reluctant God. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31404-3. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Service uses her own background as a student of archeology and a
participant in digs to give color and authenticity to the details of a fantasy in which
a prince of ancient Egypt appears in moder times and becomes the companion of
an archeologist's daughter. Part of the book is told as historical fiction, as Ameni,
whose twin brother will become Pharoah, copes with (or escapes) responsibility as
a royal prince. When the chapters shift to the present, he and Lorna go from Egypt
to London to retrieve a sacred relic, and these chapters are less convincing, as the
descriptions of Ameni's adjustment often include telescoped contrivance. On the
whole, a good read, though. ZS
Siebert, Diane. Mojave; illus. by Wendell Minor. Crowell, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-
690-04569-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04567-0. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed.
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 1-3. 
Stylized paintings of the desert and its creatures illustrate a first-
person poem in the voice of the Mojave, who, it appears, speaks in rather pedantic
couplets: "The beavertails; the hedgehogs stout;/ The jointed chollas reaching
out;/ The barrel cacti, fat and round -I All live upon my arid ground." Minor's
paintings are beautifully colored, with some dramatic perspectives, but their
composition is overly formal -
not a prickle on a cactus, nor hair on a coyote
seems out of place, belying the wind and harshness and wildness claimed
(ineffectively) in the text. RS
D.V. Environmental concepts
Silverstein, Alvin. Wonders of Speech; 
by Alvin and Virginia Silverstein. Morrow,
1988. ISBN 0-688-06534-1. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
Clear writing, good organization of material, broad coverage, and
the inclusion of recent research all contribute to an exemplary informational book.
The authors discuss the ways in which sound is produced in the human being, the
functioning of the brain in storing and sorting bits of the intricate communications
network, the learning of language, speech disabilities, artificial languages, and
other aspects of speech. Books that are entitled 'The Wonders of.. ." don't always
seem wonderful; here it is moot which is the more wonderful, the ability of people
[ 167
to speak or the extent to which scientists have discovered the complexities of how
the brain operates to produce speech and the memory on which it depends. ZS
C.U. Communications (unit); Science
Simon, Seymour. Galaxies. Morrow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06185-0; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-688-06184-2. 28p. illus. with photographs. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Part of an astronomy series that already includes books on the
sun, stars, and four planets, this meets the challenge of conveying immensity by
analogy. In describing the more than three hundred billion stars that make up the
Andromeda galaxy, for instance, Simon says,"If you were to count one star per
second nonstop, it would take you more than nine thousand years to count the stars
in that galaxy." The measurement of light-years gets similar treatment, with
reference to time as well as distance: "The light from the Andromeda spiral that we
see today first started on its journey more than two million years ago, when our
ancestors lived in caves." Dramatic photographs, computer-colored against black
backgrounds, show the shapes of spiral, elliptical, barred spiral, and irregular
galaxies. Although a concluding statement asserts that the universe is without any
boundary, the map that "plots the locations of one million galaxies" unfortunately
undercuts this idea with a round frame. Outside of such nitpicking, this is a solid
addition to children's understanding of scientific phenomena. BH
C.U. Science
Sleator, William. 
The Duplicate. Dutton, 1988. 
ISBN 0-525-44390-8. 
$12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
"It looks like a combination postage scale and video camera,"
says the sixteen-year-old narrator, David, in describing the object labelled Spee-
Dee-Dupe that he's found on the beach. The object proves, indeed, to be a
duplicating machine-but only of living things. That is how David produces a
clone; the clone has all David's memories and claims he is the original David.
Who joins the family for dinner? Who appears at school? Who courts the
charming Angela, and who tells about what they said and did so that the clone
won't make a mistake? Above all, what do the two Davids do when a third turns
up, and how do they handle a growing animosity? There are some points in the
story when the roles of the clones (referred to as Duplicates A and B) become
congested to the detriment of the book's pace, but fantasy fans will doubtless find
the concept fresh enough and eerie enough to compensate for this, and Sleator is,
as always, economical in casting and structuring his story. ZS
Snyder, Dianne, ad. The Boy of the Three-Year Nap ; illus. by Allen Say. Houghton,
1988. ISBN 0-395-44090-4. 32p. $14.95.
R * 
5-7 yrs. 
A trickster gets tricked in this clever folktale from Japan, with
delicately modulated illustrations that reflect stylistic and narrative techniques of
Japanese painting. Taro is a lazy boy who schemes to become the son-in-law of a
rich merchant by disguising himself as an ujigami and ordering the merchant to
marry off his daughter to "that fine lad who lives on your street" (Taro). Taro's
mother in turn tricks Taro into accepting a job as the merchant's storehouse
manager. "And as it turned out, the marriage is a happy one.... If he is not the
busiest man in town, neither is he the laziest." The pictures as well as the words
[ 168 ]
use an understated irony to suggest the duplicity and gullibility on display here. In
fact, several illustrations are witty parodies of well-known ukiyo-e woodcuts.
Contrasts of color and image are vivid but never exaggerated. The humor of
characterization does not detract from the aesthetic appeal of landscape and domestic
scenes. Lines are spare and meticulous, with each illustration framed in a black
brush-stroked rectangle. A satisfying picture book in every respect. BH
D.V. Laziness, overcoming
Sobol, Donald J. Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Treasure Hunt; illus. by Gail
Owens. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-06955-X. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
You'd think that by now criminals would know to stay away
from Idaville, where "every grown-up or child who broke the law got caught."
Encyclopedia Brown is the reason, of course, "better than a library for getting
answers. He was never closed." There are ten mysteries for readers to solve here, a
few depending on special knowledge (that a tennis pro has one forearm bigger than
the other, for example) but most relatively easily worked out through patience and
careful reading. (And, of course, Encyclopedia's ingenious solutions are found at
the back of the book.) Boys who won't read anything else love this series: for its
problem-solving activity, recurring characters like Bugs Meany, and its dumb
jokes--"'Relax,' Encyclopedia said gently. 'I've handled Bugs before. His breath
is worse than his bite.'" RS
Solomon, Chuck. Our Little League; illus. with photographs by Chuck Solomon.
Crown, 1988. ISBN 0-517-56798-9. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Although the term "Little League" is not used in the text, its use
in the title may lead readers (or readers-aloud) to wonder about the deviations from
usual Little League procedures; here, for example, the game is five rather than six
innings, and the pitching is done by the coach, an adult; these deviations are
acceptable in the more flexible program for the youngest members. The color
photographs are bright and clear, if repetitive; the text describes practice and a
division game, with an emphasis on sportsmanship, team effort, and enjoyment in
participation. ZS
Solotareff, Gregoire. 
The Ogre and the Frog King; written and illus. by Gregoire
Solotareff. Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07079-5; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-07078-7. 30p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Both text and pictures here dramatize the elements that grab a
young listener's attention. The cover itself shows the ogre with long sharp teeth,
knife, and fork upraised over a defenseless frog. However, by mid-book, the frog
has jumped through the window and landed on the sleeping ogre's nose, where it
looks enormous. This trick of perspective frightens the ogre, who promises to
forego tasty little animals and goes on a diet of mushrooms. On discovering the
frog's true size from some taunting birds, the ogre is shamed into leaving the
forest forever. The hurly-burly lines and colors are uproarious. The ogre is a red-
bearded, green-eyed, hairy monster that fills every page of his appearance until the
small animals replace him with a triumphant dance on the last double-page spread.
Satisfying and effective for story hours. BH
C.U. Storytelling
[ 169]
Spirin, Gennady, illus. The Enchanter's Spell: Five Famous Tales; comp. and illus. by
Gennady Spirin. Dial, 1988. ISBN 0-8037-0320-1. 
80p. $14.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A collection of fairy tales by Andersen, Cervantes, Hoffman,
Macdonald, and Pushkin is illustrated with wonderfully detailed and textured
paintings by a noted Soviet artist. Spirin's work is in the medieval tradition,
remarkable for its play of light and shadow and the fidelity of costume detail;
within the boundaries of his style, however, there is a varied response to the classic
tales he is illustrating, so that the pictures for "The Emperor's New Clothes" are
comic, while those for George MacDonald's "Little Daylight" are appropriately
eerie. The palette is rich but subdued, the page layout and book design impressive.
ZS
Steiner, Barbara. Tessa. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07232-1. $11.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
In a story set in rural Arkansas in 1946, fourteen-year-old Tessa
shares her father's interest in amateur archeology rather than her mother's social
ambitions and longing for town life. When Mama decides to leave her husband,
Tessa Mae is determined to spend the summer working outdoors with her father,
Roy Glen. Having a handsome college student on the dig makes the summer even
more pleasant. Still, by its end she has decided that "it wouldn't be right for her"
to live so casual a life. (Steiner doesn't make this decision a logical one). The
ambivalence is a facet of adolescent life with which most readers can identify, and
the family schism is convincing, but the story is weakened by the awkward and
inconsistent use of dialect and by the introduction of sub-plots that are tangential
and that slow the pace of the book. ZS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Switzer, Ellen. Greek Myths: Gods, Heroes and Monsters: Their Sources, Their Stories
and Their Meanings; illus. with photographs by Costas. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN
0-689-31253-9. $16.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Divided into creation myths, a description of the gods, humans'
beginnings, heroes and heroines, popular legends, and the Trojan War and its
aftermath, this is more a folkloristic resource than a lyrical retelling. Preceding
each story is a brief note discussing its origins, both literary and oral, with
historical context or archeological descriptions wherever pertinent. This is an
ambitious project, not only for its scope but also for its attempt to relate the tales
as they are known in Greece today, with variants favored by different sections of
the country and with photographs of the locations. The canon is so large and
complex that occasionally the text takes on the tone of a catalogue, and there are a
few shortcuts: "the beautiful Helen (who caused all the trouble)" is a description
that considerably diminishes the concept of fate described elsewhere; there is also
no mention of Achilles heel ("As had been prophesied, Achilles was killed shortly
after he defeated Hector, but the war went on relentlessly, with casualties on both
sides increasing"). On the whole, however, this draws together and links an
extraordinary amount of material with vivid immediacy, an important contribution
to the cultural literacy of today's young people, who will be amazed and intrigued
at the outrageous behavior of gods and humans alike. BH
[ 170]
Tessendorf, K.C. Barnstormers and Daredevils. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31346-2.
illus. and with photographs. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Tessendorf's account of the daring pilots, parachutists, and
stuntmen-and women-in the first decades of this century is detailed, voluble,
informative, repetitive in its examples, gushy in its style, and weakened by the
citing of dialogue that bears no attributions. Nevertheless, the appeal of the
subject with its inherent drama and danger is such that the book will undoubtedly
attract readers, especially those who are flight history buffs. The text includes
anecdotes about some famous barnstormers, including Charles Lindbergh. A brief
bibliography is provided. ZS
Tompert, Ann. The Greatest Showman on Earth: A Biography of P.T. Barnum. Dillon,
1987. ISBN 0-87518-370-0. 117p. illus. with photographs. (People in Focus).
$11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
P.T. Barnum was a complicated mix of intelligence and humbug.
Tompert has assembled the facts of his life competently and attempted a
perspective, though some aspects of Barnum's personality and times dangle
problematically. After a disclaimer that "it was common practice for showmen to
exhibit curiosities in display rooms," the text acceptingly lumps deformed animals,
misshappen humans, and odd mechanical displays together in the service of
explaining Barnum's fortunes. The latter varied wildly from success to failure,
which Tompert attributes to Barnum's inability to trust the right people. She also
makes an effort to address his neglect of family through total submersion in work
and discusses his boundless energy and optimism in the face of many disasters. On
the other hand, some of his contributions seem overrated: "Jenny Lind's tour
marked the beginning of real music in the United States." Barnum's pioneer work
in advertising, however, is undeniable and well described here. With black-and-
white photographs and prints, index, and bibliography. BH
Voigt, Cynthia. Tree by Leaf. Atheneum, 1988. 
ISBN 0-689-31403-5. 
$13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
World War I has just ended, and Clothilde (twelve) is laden with
much of the housework in addition to her worries about her parents and her older
brother, and her fear that the Maine peninsula on which they live and which is
legally hers, will be sold by her parents. The family is poor, and Mother seems
unable to accept responsibility; Father, facially disfigured during a battle, hides in
the boathouse. Nate, Clothilde's brother, has run off to live with the wealthy
paternal grandfather who had thrown them out of his home when Father enlisted.
The book is a mixture of strength and weakness; the setting, characters, and
situation are convincingly presented, while the pace of the story and the plot
development are slow and not always smooth, especially the incorporation of
episodes in which the protagonist hears a "Voice" with whom she conducts long
conversations. ZS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Walker, Alice. To Hell With Dying; illus. by Catherine Deeter. Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-
15-289075-0. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 2-5. 
"Mr. Sweet had been ambitious as a boy, wanted to be a doctor
or lawyer or sailor, only to find that black men fare better if they are not," so he
[ 171]
fishes and drinks and plays old blues songs on his guitar, and, whenever he feels
close to death, has the children called to bring him back: "to hell with dying,
man," says the heroine's father, "These children want Mr. Sweet!" There is a story
in here that tells of strong love and bonds within a small black community, but it
is rendered from an adult perspective ("His ability to be drunk and sober at the same
time made him an ideal playmate, for he was as weak as we were and we could
usually best him in wrestling, all the while keeping a fairly coherent conversation
going") and children may be bemused, to no effect, at Mr. Sweet's dyings and
resurrections. The illustrations are brightly colored, but combine realistic and
sentimental techniques into a jarring flamboyance. A few of the pictures are
portraits of Miss Walker; these, like most of the figure drawing, are stiff and
reverential, which, along with the overly-large and static layout, makes the book
seem more of a pretentious conceit for adults than a story for children. RS
D.V. Older-younger generations
Wallace, Barbara Brooks. The Interesting Thing that Happened at Perfect Acres, Inc.; illus.
by Blanche Sims. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31354-3. $12.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Perfect Acres, Inc., a housing development presided over by
perfectly nasty Mr. Snoot, has perfectly rectangular houses, perfectly boring
tenants, and, feels heroine Perfecta, perfectly dreadful rules, such as POOBFTASF
("Playing-outside-only-between-five-thirty-and-six-fifteen") and ROOBABS
("Reading-outside-only-books-approved-by-Snoot"). 
There's one house in the
neighborhood, a lovely old one, that Snoot does not control-and wants-and it is
there that Perfecta begins a magical quest with new-found friend Puck. What the
quest is for, they're not sure, knowing only that there are three trials to undergo,
each one to take them one step closer to solving the mystery of the old house.
Thematically, this sets up nasty, convention-bound adults (personified in Snoot)
against the freewheeling imagination of childhood (Puck and Perfecta) to a
surprisingly moving ending, but it is burdened by an excessively whimsical tone
and a surfeit of magical persons and devices. RS
D.V. Imaginative powers