Adoff, Arnold. Chocolate Dreams; illus. by Turi MacCombie. Lothrop, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06823-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06822-7. 64p. Library
ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
A rich confection of wordplay, rhythms, and
unexpected twists of rhyme and meaning from a poet in his element-chocolate.
Adoff has managed to turn chocolate into a metaphor for love, disappointment,
delight, sadness, and experience with forty-five poems that take a reader by
surprise and at the same time resonate with the familiar. Some are straight-out
funny, as in the case of "Chocolate Dreams. Five." Other samples are tongue-
in-cheek; the greedy narrator in "I Believe In The Theory That Says We Were
Visited Long Ago" says pompously, "and, of course, I chew my chocolate in
the/ cause of interplanetary peace." Extraterrestrials turn out to have a keen taste
for chocolate, which also inspires a "Horror Fantasy Chiller." 
There are
"Mathematical Metric Conversion" schemes, dreams, riddles, stories, fairy tales,
embarrassments ("In Public, I Pick A Piece Or Two From The Plate"), myths,
rescue missions, philosophies, geographies, profundities, slices of life ("In The
Moments Of Our Cookies"), cheers, and warnings ("Let The Biter Beware ...
In the center of each dark deep/ chocolate hunk/ there is a caramel/ chunk just
waiting to glue/ your teeth together/ forever./ Take care"). In all the poems
Adoff shows a combination of invention and control, depth and delight, that
marks his best work. The assortment of brown and full-color pop-art pictures is
luscious. (N.B. The reviewer is not a chocoholic and thus brings unbiased
perspective.) BH
Anderson, Joan. The American Family Farm; illus. with photographs by
George Ancona. Harcourt, 1989. ISBN 0-15-203025-5. 94p. $18.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
This generously designed volume includes three
respectful but not adulatory portraits of three family farms: the Macmillan dairy
farm in Massachusetts, a chicken farming cooperative in Georgia, and an
organic farm in Iowa run by the Rosmann family. The text is conversational,
detailing day-to-day labor and touching on larger ecological and economic issues
as well: "We're out to beat the statistics that say black farmers are losing their
land at a rate of 9,000 acres a week." Ancona's black-and-white photographs are
perceptive portraits of the families and the work. RS
C.U. Social studies
[49]
Anno, Mitsumasa. Anno's Math Games II; written and illus. by Mitsumasa
Anno. Philomel, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21615-4. 103p. $19.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
This companion to Anno's Math Games (BCCB
12/87) again introduces mathematical concepts of comparison, relationships,
symbolic representation, counting, and measurement. The first section, which
involves a magic machine that transforms whatever is put into it, is confusing,
but the rest is a fine introduction not only to concepts but to Anno's circuitous
creativity. A line of ants taking home a dissembled cookie, for example, leads
surprisingly but inevitably to the idea of "collections of dots," and the atom. A
drawing of five children is gradually reduced to a diagram of five circles that turn
into squares (courtesy of an Anno-patented circle-squisher) that can be stacked and
counted. Clear and clean schematic drawings are enlivened by the presence of
number-crunchers Kriss and Kross, and the many invitations to count and
compare are illustrated with finger-engaging paintings of children, beasts, and
birds. This might seem a tad obscure to children reading it on their own; the
book is the sort that both requires and inspires adult-child collaboration. RS
C.U. Mathematics
Ashabranner, Melissa. Counting America: The Story of the United States
Census; by by Melissa Ashabranner and Brent Ashabranner. Putnam, 1989.
ISBN 0-399-21747-9. 101p. illus. with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
The Ashabranners' examination of a crucial
governmental operation, which will take center stage during the upcoming 1990
census, is informed with historical perspective and contemporary anecdote. The
authors explain how census data are collected, collated, and used, including a
cogent explanation of congressional apportionment. Readers will enjoy the
stories of dogged enumerators trying to track everybody down even in
circumstances such as the Mount Saint Helens eruption in 1980. Sensitive
social and political questions about undercounting and illegal immigrants are
fairly discussed; unfortunately, the authors do not discuss the increasing
privatization and cost of census information. Photographs clearly chronologize
the refinements in census automation; glossary, bibliography, and index are
included. RS
C.U. Government
Babbitt, Natalie. Nellie: A Cat on Her Own; written and illus. by Natalie
Babbitt. DiCapua/Farrar, 1989. ISBN 0-374-35506-1. 32p. $11.95.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
When their owner dies, the cat Big Tom convinces
the cat-puppet, Nellie, to come away with him. He escorts her to a moonlit
session of dancing cats, a diversion in which Nellie, feeling a stirring in her
wooden limbs, takes part. Nellie decides she'd rather stay there, tucked into a
hollow in a tree, than search with Big Tom for a "new old woman." Not
Babbitt's best fantasy, but a pleasant if insubstantial story, this has beautifully
detailed illustrations, a bit softer than the paintings of William Pene du Bois,
but often like them in composition and even more in the clear colors of a
restrained palette. ZS
[50]
Bode, Janet. New Kids on the Block: Oral Histories of Immigrant Teens.
Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10794-9. 126p. $12.90.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Eleven young people, ranging in age from thirteen to
twenty, tell their own stories about coming to the United States. As in Brent
Ashabranner's The New Americans, Bode focuses on teens from Third World and
developing countries: Afghanistan, El Salvador, India, Cuba, the Philippines,
China, Mexico, South Korea, the Dominican Republic, Vietnam, and, in a
reminder of past immigrant waves, Greece. Most of the subjects have escaped
from war, repression, or poverty; all share a carefully qualified admiration for
their adopted country. The narratives are distinct in both voice and personal
detail, with varying attitudes towards the invariable cultural clashes between old
ways and new. Abdul, an Afghani, says, "other immigrants from different
cultures who come here get used to the American habits. They date girls. They
do what Americans do. But not so much us." But Martha, from the Dominican
Republic, rebels: "So what I did was told my mother I was going to the library,
but instead I met him." 
Bode begins the book with a brief chapter on
immigration, and introduces each narrative with a paragraph about the country of
origin, but the kids speak for themselves. A good collection of personal stories
that complements the headlines. RS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
C.U. Social studies
Browne, Anthony. Bear Goes to Town; written and illus. by Anthony Browne.
Doubleday, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-385-26525-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-
26524-7. 32p. Library ed. $10.95; Trade ed. $10.95.
M 
Gr. K-2. 
Browne's wonderfully architectural drawings, with
their interesting composition and macabre touches, have dramatic impact and a
strong story-telling quality. There are, however, grim touches (the skull over
the animal prison door, the human characters whose behavior ranges from
indifference to violence) in both the pictures and the text, coloring the story so
that it seems inappropriate for the picture book audience. Bear wields a magic
pencil (a la Harold and his magic crayon) and with it he draws the implements
that make it possible for him to break into an animal prison and rescue an
assortment of creatures. Doesn't quite jell. ZS
Burkert, Nancy Ekholm. Valentine & Orson; ad. and illus. by Nancy Ekholm
Burkert. Yearout/Farrar, 1989. ISBN 0-374-38078-3. 48p. $16.95.
SpR 
Gr. 7-. 
In an ambitious recasting of a fourteenth-century
French lay known only through subsequent literary reworkings, Burkert reverses
most current adapters' practice of casting historical verse into moder prose. Her
afterword states that "it was Chaucer's tales that prompted" her to choose a
poetic mode, and, although her text has neither Chaucer's narrative irony nor the
spare grace of troubadors at ease with the form, it is ingeniously rhymed and
metered in iambic pentameter couplets. The chivalric complexity of the tale,
about twin boys born to an empress cast out of her realm on the specious charge
of adultery, is propounded by its presentation here as a medieval play produced
by a family of ragtag actors. The scenes are flawlessly illustrated in Burkert's
detailed paintings, for which she freely acknowledges Breugel as inspiration. It
[51
is, of course, the art that reveals Burkert's subtlety of technique, style, and
content and that is the raison d'etre of the book. The graphic tone is in many
ways the most varied of Burkert's illustration to date, with robust action,
distinctive portraiture, and surrealistic effects coexisting in a rich blend of
sharply defined hues and line work. Burkert's irony is visual, surfacing in the
depictions of a narrator who plays the wise fool and in a troupe who relish the
slapstick of their storytelling trade. Although this appears to be a picture book,
it will be of special interest to the junior high and high school students who
enjoyed Proud Knight, Fair Lady: The Twelve Lais of Marie de France, (BCCB
7/89) or the illustrated adaptations of Chaucer that appeared last year (BCCB
11/88). BH
C.U. History-Middle Ages; Literature-poetry
D.V. Brothers
Carris, Joan. Just a Little Ham; illus. by Dora Leder. Little, 1989. ISBN 0-
316-12990-9. [144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Cory and Robert Lee are enchanted when their mother
brings home a baby mini-pig from the agronomy department of the university
where she teaches. The piglet is newly orphaned, and needs more care than the
lab can provide. Readers will enjoy the pranks and prowess of the clever piglet,
called Pandora for good reason. There is a plot of sorts (romance between
widowed Mom and nice agronomy professor) but most of the story has to do
with Pandora's behavior and people's reaction to her. Not substantial, but
adequately written and likely to be popular-it's hard to beat the combination of
an appealing pet and humorous dilemmas. ZS
D.V. Pets, care of
Conrad, Pam. The Tub People; illus. by Richard Egielski. Harper, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021341-8; Trade ed. 0-06-021340-X. 32p. Library ed.
$12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
The Tub People, which look appealingly like
miniatures from Fisher Price doll-house, farm, and garage toys, line up neatly in
the same order on the edge of the bathtub, where they play at swimming and
boating every day. Then disaster strikes. To the grief of his family, the Tub
Child is swirled down the drain: a very real fear of many young listeners. Only
the plumber's wire finally saves him, and the little community is moved to the
safer playground of a bed, where they take up mountain climbing and hide-and-
seek games. 
In its combination of the dramatic and the subtle, this is a
masterful picture book. The narrative takes for its patterns the rituals of play,
heightening the reality and injecting it with drama by excluding humans from
the action. The art, too, juggles the effects of order and chaos, the neat shapes
offset by strong color constrasts and lively patterns. Changes of expression are
minute ("Sometimes they would wink at each other, but it hardly showed"), and
the refrain of seven in line is satisfying ("the father, the mother, the
grandmother, the doctor, the policeman, the child and the dog"). The suspense is
perhaps artificially extended when the Tub Child leaves the plumber's toolbox
and inexplicably reappears later, but that's the way the world seems to work for
children whose lives are controlled by adults and unseen forces. This is a saga of
domestic danger and rescue that will appeal mightily to bathtime players. BH
[52]
Corcoran, Barbara. The Potato Kid. Karl/Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-
31589-9. [19 2p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Ellis, fourteen, had her summer all planned, and
especially looked forward to a month away from home working as a stable girl.
But the arrival of Lilac, courtesy of a church DO-GOOD project, changes
everything. Lilac is from the impoverished potato growing region in northern
Maine and Ellis, it seems, is expected to devote her summer to taking charge of
the sulky, neglected child. Neither Ellis (the narrator) nor Lilac is particularly
likeable; it's a credit to Corcoran's skill that she makes us care for them
nonetheless. The growing-and grudging-respect that develops between the
two is realistically halting, and while there's a bit of a fairytale finale, readers
will be happy that unwanted Lilac finds a home at last. RS
Cresswell, Helen. Bagthorpes Liberated: Being the Seventh Part of the
Bagthorpe Saga. Macmillan, 1989. ISBN 0-02-725441-0. [192p]. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
The unquenchable Bagthorpes set off yet another cycle
of chaos upon their return from a holiday in Wales (Bagthorpes Abroad, BCCB
10/84 and Bagthorpes Haunted, BCCB 11/85). A tramp has occupied their
house; bottles of milk, the delivery of which they've forgotten to cancel, line the
driveway. Lethally charming little Daisy pours the curdled milk into the
goldfish pond, the tramp dispenses with Mr. Bagthorpe's best Scotch, and Mrs.
Fosdyke gives up housekeeping on account of her nerves, frayed beyond repair
by the Bagthorpes' disasters and her conviction that she's prime target for a mass
murderer. There's a loose narrative thread of Mrs. Bagthorpe's trying to organize
the family into a non-sexist distribution of labor, but, as usual, the strength of
the humor depends on a spontaneous combustion of incidents sparked by the
irascible personalities of everyone concerned. Although there's no question
where it's all headed, the tit-for-tat dialogue and biting authorial observations
magnify this situation comedy with a kind of suspense that keeps upping the
ante for fans of the series-whatever can happen next? BH
Curry, Jane Louise. Little Little Sister; illus. by Erik Blegvad. McElderry,
1989. ISBN 0-689-50459-4. 32p. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
A well-written tale with motifs similar to Tom
Thumb's, this stars a tiny heroine born of an apple seed, beloved by her family,
and braver than they suspect. Brother has carved her furniture and made a
windowbox from which she can watch the wide world, where her parents have
forbidden her to venture. Yet twice she fetches back her forgetful brother in her
parents' absence. The third time, by climbing into his pocket and pretending to
be the voice of his conscience, she successfully steers him to the market,
through the sale of a calf, and back in a fierce storm to their barn, where she
directs the rescue of their livestock from a flood. The narrative is rhythmically
patterned in both the words and in the action that Blegvad's precise pen-and-wash
art reflects with verve. It's refreshing to find an adventurous, clever female in
context of substantial storytelling with picture-book appeal. BH
D.V. Brothers-sisters
[53]
Dewey, Jennifer. Can You Find Me? A Book about Animal Camouflage;
written and illus. by Jennifer Dewey. Scholastic, 1989. ISBN 0-590-41552-2.
[4 0p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
After introducing various kinds of camouflage by
color, shape, smell, or sound, Dewey gives examples in sections on sea animals,
insects and spiders, reptiles and amphibians, birds, and mammals. The text is
choppy but straightforward, with repetition serving as reinforcement and
spacious, captioned color-pencil drawings effectively demonstrating each point.
A few pictures are slightly unrealistic-the robin's nest looks more like a swirl
of (designer) grass than an actual nest, and the prairie rattlesnake is centered in a
clump of bright green grass rather than "the same tans, browns, grays, and
whites as the world it lives in." However, the drafting is competent, the
representation varied, and the conclusion-humans' conscious use of camouflage
for protection against evil spirits, for military disguise, or for hunting-a
springboard for discussion. BH
C.U. Nature study
Duder, Tessa. In Lane Three, Alex Archer. Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-
50927-0. 176p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Alexandra, the narrator, is fifteen, and as a serious
contender for the New Zealand swim team she hopes to take part in the 1960
Olympics. The author (a winner of an Empire Games silver medal) gives just
enough detail about training to give the story color, but not so much that it
swamps the narrative. Despite the handicap of very small print, this is a very
readable story: the convincing first-person voice gives immediacy, the main
thread of the plot (the rivalry between Alex and another swimmer) is balanced by
a tender love story and warm family relations, and the writing has both cohesion
and momentum. ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Family relations
Dunlop, Eileen. The Valley of the Deer. Holiday House, 1989. ISBN 0-8234-
0766-7. 139p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Anne's archeologist parents have taken the family to
the Scottish site of a Neolithic burial mound which must be excavated before the
valley is flooded for a new hydroelectric scheme. While her parents find an
ancient skeleton, Anne finds an old family Bible with evidence of a more recent
(1726) death, that of Alice, "deid the 24 juin 1726 blottit owt of the Boke of
Lyffe." Further evidence, including a mysterious (charmed?) stone, shows that
Alice died, at twenty-five, after being accused of witchcraft. Ambiguously
supernatural events, nightmares, and Anne's friendship with a disabled young
woman are convincingly blended, and Anne's obsessed search for Alice's fate
makes a suspenseful story. RS
Durrell, Ann, comp. The Diane Goode Book of American Folk Tales & Songs;
illus. by Diane Goode. Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-525-44458-0. 64p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-6. 
A first-rate collection to look at, listen to, and learn,
this features seven favorite songs for which you can never remember all the
[54 ]
words and nine fine-tuned traditional stories from various parts of the U.S. Davy
Crockett, the knee-high Man (Black American), Coyote (Pueblo), the twist-
mouth family (New England), the greedy wife (Puerto Rico), and three girls with
journeycakes (Appalachia) make an appearance in the stories, which range in
tone from down-home funny to suspenseful. Yankee Doodle, Buffalo Gal, Billy
Boy, Clementine, and others star in the songs, which are accompanied by
melody lines and full verses. The folklore is not watered down, and storytellers
will be glad to find in "The Coyote and the Bear" a variant of the Jack tale "How
Bobtail Beat the Devil," in "The Talking Mule" a variant of the talking potato or
turnip, and other cross-cultural motifs. Diane Goode's illustrations on every
page are polished in drafting and composition. She relies, appropriately, on
earth tones, with fine crosshatch for texture and shading. Her characters are
cleverly caricatured without becoming slapstick, and the bordered book design is
decorative without becoming exaggerated. 
A prime pick for family or
elementary-grade entertainment. BH
C.U. Music, American
Fine, John Christopher. 
Creatures of the Sea; written and illus. with
photographs by John Christopher Fine. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31420-
5. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Spectacular color photographs with half-page
descriptions catalogue 22 species distinguished by unusual characteristics that
enable them to avoid their enemies and feed in the sea. From the hermit crab,
with its anemone hitchhiking a ride, to the scorpion fish, Fine gives examples
of camouflage, symbiosis, and other natural phenomena of survival. Both the
information and graphics here are clear, but there doesn't seem to be any guiding
rationale to the selection of species. Thus, although scientific principles
emerge, they do so somewhat haphazardly. 
Still, the vivid underwater
photography will hold browsers, and the text will satisfy students doing marine
biology reports. BH
C.U. 
Biology, marine
Gerrard, Roy. Rosie and the Rustlers; written and illus. by Roy Gerrard. Farrar,
1989. ISBN 0-374-36345-5. [32p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
"Where the mountains meet the prairie, where the
men are wild and hairy / There's a little ranch where Rosie Jones is boss. / It's a
place that's neat and cozy, and the boys employed by Rosie / Work extremely
hard, to stop her getting cross." With this balladic kick-off, Gerrard launches
another historic spoof illustrated with his signature wit. When Rosie's hearty
crew leaves the ranch unprotected to visit their Cherokee friends, Greasy Ben's
outlaw band steals the herd. The subsequent chase scene leads Rosie, her boys,
and the viewer through some spectacular Western scenery, a perfect showcase for
the artist's favorite play with contrasting perspectives--diminutive, tall-hatted
humans against cacti or dazzling bluffs. Both the patterned landscapes and
detailed portraits make this one of Gerrard's best, while the verses, syllabically
crowded and sometimes hokey as they are, will round up young listeners by the
dozen. BH
[55 1
Gibbons, Faye. King Shoes and Clown Pockets. Morrow, 1989. ISBN 0-688-
06592-9. 2 31p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
The two main characters here are close, if unlikely,
friends in a rural Alabama setting. Raymond has just moved with his family
from his companionable grandfather's Tennessee farm into a trailer camp near his
father's new job. Bruce is the neglected son of the local ne'er-do-well and of a
mother who has walked out on the family. Both boys are haunted by a
problem-Raymond has lost his grandfather's valuable field glasses, and Bruce is
desperate to recover the beloved mutt his father has sold as a squirrel hound. The
dynamics of the novel are solid, including the secondary characters of a tough
teacher and a black girl involved in a class assignment with the two boys. The
prose, however, is drawn-out with less than selective detail, and the ending
contrived with a happy twist. Nevertheless, this is regional fiction with
escalating action that will appeal especially to dog lovers. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Gibbons, Gail. Catch the Wind: All About Kites; written and illus. by Gail
Gibbons. Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-30955-9. [32p]. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
This is the kind of topic best suited to Gibbons'
style, with a manageable amount of information to simplify into a serviceable
story and color cartoon art. 
Katie and Sam bring their savings to Ike's Kite
Shop to choose their entries in a kite festival. While they're looking around,
Gibbons explains a bit of history ("Chinese flew the very first kites more than
three thousand years ago") and depicts the use of kites for science experiments,
including Ben Franklin's proof of electricity, the Wright Brothers' aeronautic
work with box kites, and the National Weather Service's maintenance of kite
stations for forecasts from 1898 to 1933. Basic kite shapes, parts, and principles
of flight are also covered before Katie and Sam make their selection and join the
festival. Instructions for making a flat kite, launching it, and bringing it down
round off the presentation, which includes safety tips. A breeze for first flyers.
BH
Gleiter, Jan. David Farragut; by Jan Gleiter and Kathleen Thompson; illus. by
Francis Balistreri. Raintree, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8172-2904-3; Paper ed.
ISBN 0-8172-2912-4. 32p. (Raintree Hispanic Stories). Library ed. $11.50;
Paper ed. $6.95.
. Diego Rivera; by Jan Gleiter and Kathleen Thompson; illus. by
Yoshi Miyake. Raintree, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8172-2908-6; Paper ed.
ISBN 0-8172-2916-7 32p. illus. (Raintree Hispanic Stories). Library ed.
$11.50; Paper ed. $6.95.
-- 
. Juntpero Serra; by Jan Gleiter and Kathleen Thompson; illus. by
Charles Shaw. Raintree, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8172-2909-4; Paper ed.
ISBN 0-8172-2917-5. 32p. (Raintree Hispanic Stories). Library ed. $11.50;
Paper ed. $6.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-6. 
From a bilingual series of biographies, these three
books briefly recount essential points in the lives of famous Hispanic historical
[56]
figures. The writing is choppy but simple, admiring but not excessively
adulatory. Junipero Serra tells of the Spanish missionary's settling of the first
mission in what is now California; Diego Rivera, of the Mexican painter and
muralist; and David Farragut, of the Civil War admiral (son of a Spanish father)
who coined the phrase "Damn the torpedoes, full speed ahead." 
Color
illustrations are plentiful and serviceable, although in the case of Rivera, not
well-placed in relation to the text (and it's also unfortunate, in the case of the
artist, that there are no examples of his work). The Spanish and English texts
are cleanly spaced either on facing pages or consecutively on a page; each book
has a brief glossary. RS
Goodwin, Marie D. Where the Towers Pierce the Sky. Four Winds, 1989.
ISBN 0-02-736871-8. [192p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Lizzie is surprised when a strange boy shows up in
her bedroom one night; she is even more surprised when Jacques announces he is
a time traveler from the fifteenth century. And when the two of them are popped
back to 1492 France .... 
Jacques is an unwilling servant of a traitorous wizard
in the pay of the English during the Hundred Years War. Master Guy sent
Jacques into the future to find out if Joan of Arc would succeed in her quest to
have Charles VII crowned King. When the wizard recalls Jacques, Lizzie is taken
along, and the two young people decide to work secretly for Joan's victory. This
timeshift novel strains credulity in many different directions, but succeeds as a
suspenseful retelling of history. Most refreshing is the fact that Lizzie is a
blundering anachronism, saying of Joan, for example, "She kind of reminds me
of a student body president." Lizzie has a grumpy pluck that adds a zestful
contrast to the highmindedness of Joan and the pieties of Jacques; her courage is
all the more convincing for its reluctance. RS
Grossman, Bill. 
Tommy at the Grocery Store; illus. by Victoria Chess.
Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022409-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022408-8.
32p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Poor Tommy. "Tommy's mommy left poor Tommy
/ Sitting at the grocery store./ The grocer found poor Tommy sitting, Playing
on the grocery floor." The grocer mistakes Tommy for salami until he's bought
by a housewife, "thinking he was meat, And put him in a shopping bag/ And
took him home to eat." But upon finding Tommy has eyes, the housewife
decides he's not salami, he's a potato, so she takes him back to the store, where
the next shopper discovers he's a bottle ("It's a bottle; it has a neck"), and the
next returns the bottle upon discovering Tommy has skin. A banana? The a-b-
c-b quatrains clip along at a bouncy pace, and Chess' oblivious pig-people are a
perfect target for pre-school second-guessing. RS
Guarino, Deborah. Is Your Mama a Llama?; illus. by Steven Kellogg.
Scholastic, 1989. ISBN 0-590-41387-2. 
[32p]. $11.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
The title question forms the refrain for a little llama's
questions to each of his friends-a bat, swan, cow, seal, and kangaroo. The
dialogues in verse make page-turning riddles for young listeners: "She hangs by
[57]
her feet, and she lives in a cave./ I do not believe that's how llamas behave,"
responds one baby. "You are right about that. I think that your mama sounds
more like a ... Bat!" The text gives clues of the animal's characteristics, but
the graphics, of course, give the answer, and these are some of Kellogg's best.
The lines are clean as well as exuberant, the colors well-blended as well as
bright, and the compositions uncluttered as well as appealing. An ingenious
page design invites choral participation, and the ending will encourage a cozy
hiatus for bed/nap time. Both the sights and the sounds in the book are playful,
the hide-and-seek motif sure and secure in its appeal to a home, daycare, or
toddler-hour audience. BH
Hale, Lucretia. The Lady Who Put Salt in Her Coffee; ad. and illus. by Amy
Schwartz. Harcourt, 1989. ISBN 0-15-243475-5. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
A classic for over a century, The Peterkin Papers, of
which this is the first chapter, has delighted readers with its ineffable silliness.
In the usual pattern used by Hale, the members of this large family are baffled by
what is to them an insoluble problem, and they turn to the voice of common
sense, the Lady from Philadelpha. In this episode, the family seeks a remedy for
Mrs. Peterkin's disastrous coffee; it is the L. from P. who suggests that making
a fresh cup might solve the problem. The paintings are a bit busy but they're
amusing; the adaptation is deft, with nothing essential deleted, and all seams
smooth. Middle grades readers will enjoy tangential references and such puns as
contrasting "thyme" and "time," but this can also be used for reading aloud to
younger children. ZS
C.U. Reading aloud
Hamilton, Virginia. 
The Bells of Christmas; illus. by Lambert Davis.
Harcourt, 1989. ISBN 0-15-206450-8. 64p. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
The time is 1890; the setting a farmhouse in Ohio,
just off the National Road. It is Christmas time and twelve-year-old Jason
describes the preparations, the excitement, and his eagerness to see the cousin
who is also his best friend. Plot is minimal here, and it's not really needed, for
Hamilton is emphasizing the warmth and love in an extended family, the
happiness of the holiday, and the solidity and security of the family as it
celebrates Christmas. The Bell family is pictured by the illustrator in warm,
soft-toned paintings more laudable for composition than figure-drawing, and
attentive (as is the text) to historical details. ZS
C.U. Christmas
D.V. Family relations
Heller, Ruth. Many Luscious Lollipops: A Book about Adjectives; written and
illus. by Ruth Heller. Grosset, 1989. ISBN 0-448-03151-5. 44p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
The text begins: "An adjective's terrific/ when you
want to be specific/ It easily identifies/ by number, color or by size/ TWELVE
LARGE, BLUE, GORGEOUS butterflies." And there they are, blue and yellow,
filling a double-page spread. The colors are occasionally garish, and the picture
book format seems a bit juvenile for an audience that is being presented with
words like "mesmerizing" and "superlatives" or phrases like "peaceful
[58]
coexistence," but there is great diversity and technical brilliance in the art work,
and the text has rhyme, rhythm, humor, and a very clear presentation of the
concepts of different kinds of adjectives and what they do. ZS
C.U. Language arts
Hendry, Diane. Christmas on Exeter Street; illus. by John Lawrence. Knopf,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90134-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80134-0. 32p.
Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
This is a good example of a picture book where less
would have been more, because the excesses of the plot make the story dwindle
from comic to just silly. Too bad, because the illustrations are very nice ink-
and-wash, with a use of line that is reminiscent of Ardizzone, and a flair for
comic details. A hospitable English family welcomes not only assorted relatives
but also nine travellers whose car has broken down, and the minister and his wife
and four children, and three children from next door who are attracted by the
noise. It is Christmas Eve. Father Christmas has to take off his boots and
count on toes as well as fingers to be sure he remembers all eighteen children.
Too much cataloging of arrivals and sleeping arrangements, too little plot. ZS
C.U. Christmas
Hest, Amy. The Midnight Eaters; illus. by Karen Gundersheimer. Macmillan,
1989. ISBN 0-02-743630-6. 32p. $12.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Samantha's grandmother, who is visiting "only for a
while, you know, until the doctor says you're better," sleeps in Sam's bottom
bunk. With no interference from restrictive parents or doctors, the two of them
conduct a cozy night raid on the refrigerator, sharing ice cream and confidences
that confirm their mutual need for each other. The neatly contained illustrations
rely on selective detailing of interior scenes that consistently highlight the two
diminutive characters. The art is quietly toned, befitting secrets. The facial
expressions and writing occasionally become a touch coy (does "seals her lashes"
mean "closes her eyes?"), but most of the book projects an honest exchange
between two loving characters: "Will you die, too?" Sam asks Nana after their
discussion of Grandpa. "Of course I will! But I'm not ready yet. ... Ach, the
doctor! ... A nice enough boy, but he worries too much! ... Frail! Schmail!"
Every child should have such a roommate. BH
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Hest, Amy. Where in the World Is the Perfect Family? Clarion, 1989. ISBN
0-89919-659-4. 96p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
If the cool, present-tense narration of this middle-
grade slice-of-lifer makes Anastasia Krupnik seem like a country cousin, well,
maybe it's appropriate for the Upper East Side-West Side setting and story.
Eleven-year-old Cornelia's custody is shared between her divorced parents, who
live on opposing sides of the Park. The arrangement is amicable all the way
'round, but Cornie isn't at all sure she likes it when Dad's new wife becomes
pregnant. Cornie and her friends talk knowlegeably about "dethronement," but
even knowing she's acting silly doesn't keep Cornie from being jealous. The
realistic, contemporary situation is given texture by various other complications
[59]
and jealousies in Cornie's life: her best friend has a new friend, her Mom seems
intent on moving to California. Astringent humor keeps the pace moving, and
Cornie's a likable, one-of-us heroine whom readers will enjoy. RS
D.V. Baby, adjustment to; Family relations
Holmes, Barbara Ware. Charlotte Shakespeare and Annie the Great; illus. by
John Himmelman. Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022615-3; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-06-022614-5. 151p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
The impulsiveness and imaginativeness that
contribute to Charlotte's deserved reputation as a fibber stand her in good stead as
the playwright of her sixth grade class. There is fierce competition for the major
roles in her Halloween play, but Charlotte is determined that her shy best friend,
Annie, will have the lead. How could this miss? Annie's triumph over
nervousness has universal appeal; Charlotte recovers lost status after being bossy
and jealous, the play is a success, and the school scenes are balanced by some
substantial events on the home front. 
The sixth graders all sound a bit
immature, and the pictures are badly drawn, but structure and style triumph. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Jealousy, overcoming; Social behavior.
Horejs, Vit. Pig and Bear; illus. by Friso Henstra. Four Winds, 1989. ISBN
0-02-744421-X. 40p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Sometimes Pig and Bear sound more like two very
shaggy dogs: "A mosquito inside a room, for instance, is much fiercer and
treacherouser than he can ever be outside. Now, it is very important to find out
exactly whean outsect becomes an insect. I am deeply convinced that at this
in-between moment, the very small beings are harmless, while it is hard to catch
an outsect and almost impossible to outsmart an insect." So says Pig, in the
course of what could have been the simple procedure of shutting the door. Pig is
clever, talkative, and prickly; Bear is slow but steady, and a loving friend.
Witness his idea, for example, of opening a pawshop: "a place where animals
went when they didn't feel so good ... and a big warm paw patted them. Or
just held them. Tight." Unlikely in the way best-friendships often are, this duo
seems all the stronger for its quirks and tics. 
The book includes four
conversational adventures between the two friends, all characterized by circuitous
wit and tender loyalty. Henstra's spaciously set ink drawings capture both fun
and friendship. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Friendship values
Howe, John. Jack and the Beanstalk; ad. and illus. by John Howe. Little, 1989.
ISBN 0-316-37579-9. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
This lavish edition of a folktale favorite renders
characters and landscapes with elegant trompe l'oeil effects on a grand scale.
From his jagged teeth to his booted feet, the giant is fearsomely scaled from
Jack's perspective. Jack, selling the cow, climbing the beanstalk, hiding, or
shushing the chickens, is distinctively portrayed and more handsomely dressed
each time he claims a new golden prize from the sky. The squalid hut and
[60]
gargoyled castle center a detailed medieval setting against which the narrative
does not mince words-the giant was "killed where he fell." A visual adventure.
BH
Hughes, Shirley. Angel Mae: A Tale of Trotter Street; written and illus. by
Shirley Hughes. Lothrop, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08539-3; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-688-08538-5. 26p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R* 
4-6 yrs. 
Shirley Hughes has an unerring instinct for avoiding
sentimentality, and she manages to make this story of an English child's
participation in a Christmas play, and her adjustment to a new baby, touching
and funny and true-but never sugary. One way this is accomplished is through
the illustrations, which are comic and cozy; Mae, a happy participant in the
play, is a bit chubby, is not pretty, and wears glasses. A bit apprehensive about
being dethroned, Mae is disappointed when Mum goes into labor just before the
Christmas play but Grandma is there, Dad comes from the hospital, and Mae
surmounts a minor dramatic crisis (falling off her chair). The picture of Mae,
whining at the foot of the stairs as her pregnant Mum toils up to the third floor,
will be recognized with amusement by both parents and children. ZS
C.U. 
Christmas
Imershein, Betsy. Finding Red, Finding Yellow; illus. with photographs by
Betsy Imershein. Harcourt, 1989. ISBN 0-15-200453-X. 32p. $10.95.
Ad 
2-4 yrs. 
Open the book in one direction for photographs that
include bright red objects; open the book after flipping it over for pictures of
yellow objects. The format is a bit gimmicky, although young children may
enjoy its game element. The photographs are of good quality, some of them
filling the page, most of them showing familiar objects like leaves, radishes, an
umbrella, or wagons, but others may be less easy to identify. There is no text
in this not very original but attractive and moderately useful book. ZS
Impey, Rose. A Letter to Santa Claus; illus. by Sue Porter. Delacorte, 1989.
ISBN 0-385-29714-9. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
First published in England as A Letter to Father
Christmas, this has watercolor illustrations of adequate but not impressive
quality. The protagonist, little Charlotte, is too young to know what she's
writing, but as an excellent copyist, she loves to write. When her letter to Santa
Claus (copied from her mother's writing) becomes separated from her Christmas
wish list, Charlotte guesses wrong and mails a grocery shopping list. Santa is
surprised but he delivers the bread/carrots/fish etc. for which she's asked. And
that is how kind little Charlotte feeds the animal friends about whom she had
been worried. On the sugary side, this is occasionally marred by an awkward
textual jump, for example: Santa notes that the list looks like a shopping list.
"And of course, that's exactly what it was!" New paragraph: "From then on
Mom was even more busy than usual .... " ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to
C.U. 
Christmas
[611
Janeczko, Paul B. Brickyard Summer; illus. by Ken Rush. Jackson/Orchard,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08446-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05846-8. 62p.
Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
Paul Janeczko is known to poetry readers primarily as
an excellent anthologist; this is his first book-length collection, earlier poems
having been published in magazines or anthologies. The voice is that of a boy
who, just graduated from eighth grade, is experiencing the delights of summer
and looking forward to the more heady delights (as listed by Sister Mary Ellen,
when she "hoisted a storm warning") of high school; the last poem is a
description of the first kiss. Most of the selections, however, are descriptions of
the people of the town, a depressed milltown in New England, and they are
incisive and insightful, free verse that has parameters and focus and sharp
images. Accompanying the poems are seven thickly textured oil paintings
reflective of Janeczko's setting and reproduced in black and white. ZS
C.U. Community life (unit)
Jensen, Dorothea. The Riddle of Penncroft Farm. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1989.
ISBN 0-15-200574-9. 180p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Lars hadn't wanted to move from Minnesota to
Pennsylvania, but his parents felt that they should come to Penncroft Farm to
stay with Mom's Aunt Cass (ninety years old but still playing pranks like short-
sheeting Lars' bed). When Aunt Cass dies, her property is claimed by a local
man, but the will is missing. Lars solves the mystery and learns that he is the
heir. Meanwhile, throughout the book, there are encounters between Lars and an
oddly-dressed boy who has strange speech patterns and who proves to be a visitor
from another time. The story is broken by italicized passages that describe
events, as told by Geordie, of the Revolutionary War period, events in which he
had participated. The italicized passages are often pages long, breaking the thread
of the matrix-narrative, and making it clear that the historical information is
obtruding on the contemporary story, which is stylistically rather heavy-handed.
ZS
Jordan, MaryKate. Losing Uncle Tim; illus. by Judith Friedman. Whitman,
1989. ISBN 0-8075-4756-5. [32p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
"Uncle Tim was more fun than any other grownup I
knew," so Daniel is upset when his mother tells him that Tim has AIDS.
"'No!' I yelled back. I'd heard about AIDS, and it sounded pretty bad." While it
is high time that AIDS is being discussed with the picture book audience, the
bibliotherapeutic intentions of this story distance emotional impact.
Conversations (and illustrations) are stiff, and Daniel's anger and fear are laid out
in stodgy, casebook fashion: "I got scared and mad" ... 
"I felt sick to my
stomach and sort of prickly all over" ... "That made me feel good, not stupid."
How Uncle Tim got AIDS is not addressed, but the fact that he is a bachelor
antique dealer seems a coy way of implying his homosexuality, which is never
openly acknowledged. While unlikely to evoke the empathy a more naturally
told story would have, this is nevertheless a well-meant, age-appropriate
introduction to a sad subject. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to
[62]
Kalman, Maira. Sayonara, Mrs. Kackleman; written and illus. by Maira
Kalman. Viking, 1989. ISBN 0-670-82945-5. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
With the same visual verve she brought to the daring
but ill-conceived Hey Willy, Look at the Pyramids (BCCB 9/88), Kalman here
disciplines her considerable talent to the demands of a story. After seeing a
performance of The Mikado, Alexander wants to go to Japan, and big sister
Lulu, anticipating a piano lesson with the "dreaded Mrs. Kackleman," figures
this is a good time to get out of town. So off they go ("Bring back presents,"
say the parents) on a whirlwind tour, visiting a Japanese school and hotel, taking
the bullet train, and experiencing a Zen garden. "The quiet was so quiet that the
quiet filled the air." Surrealistic twinges are everywhere in both pictures and
text: a haiku-reciting frog, shoes for dinner, "a beautiful movie star named
Fujiko" who throws a party for an intriguing collection of clowns and clones.
The visual whimsy is consistently amusing, but several of the compositions
lack strong focus. This is post-moder with a vengeance, yet it's grounded by a
sensible (but funny) story, and the bond between Lulu and Alexander is a loving
core. Dreams and reality collide in witty ways, and underneath all the zaniness is
a true and affectionate portrait of Japan. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Keeping, Charles. Adam and Paradise Island; written and illus. by Charles
Keeping. Oxford, 1989. ISBN 0-19-279842-1. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Endpaper maps show a small island in the middle of a
creek, and Keeping's story (published in the year after his death) is a rather placid
account of what changes occurred after the borough councillors adopted a plan for
demolition and redevelopment of the area. On a marshy site (not suitable for
building) the children of Paradise Island build a playground with the help of two
elderly residents. Keeping's pictures are a combination of precise architectural
details, good if occasionally grotesque figure drawing, and scenes of group
action. He combines the use of brilliant color and of earth-tone pages that offer
a subdued contrast. Not his best book, but a slice-of-urban-life that's believable,
and pictures that are distinctively worth Keeping. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Kerby, Mona. 38 Weeks Till Summer Vacation; illus. by Melodye Rosales.
Viking, 1989. ISBN 0-670-82887-4. [73p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A new entry in the school story sweepstakes
distinguishes itself through hearty characterization and rough-and-ready kid-size
humor. Fourth grade is filled with adventures for Nora Jean and her classmates:
a snake in the girls' toilet, a spook house, a readathon. While there is some
didactic predictability in Nora Jean's relationships with the class "queen" and the
school bully, Kerby's overriding theme that school is fun and hard work is
successfully integrated into the entertainingly episodic story. A visit to Nora
Jean's class by the author of Friendly Bees, Ferocious Bees (BCCB 4/87) and
Cockroaches (BCCB 4/89) seems a bit self-promotive, but Kerby's first
excursion into fiction is otherwise wholly imagined. RS
[63 ]
Koral, April. Our Global Greenhouse. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10745-0.
64p. illus with photographs. (First Books). $10.90.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Koral's excellent summary of the greenhouse effect
combines scientific explanations with socio-political background in a clear,
concise text. The approach is balanced but the tone is uncompromising, with an
overall effect of involving readers in concerned response. 
Several easy
experiments demonstrate the scientific principles involved, and well-reproduced
color photographs are augmented by a few maps and diagrams. Elemental to
science units and classroom discussions on ecology. BH
D.V. Ecological awareness
Koralek, Jenny, ad. The Cobweb Curtain; illus. by Pauline Baynes. Holt,
1989. ISBN 0-8050-1051-3. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
This Christmas story is based on William Barclay's
The Legend of the Spider's Web; as adapted by Koralek, a shepherd who
overhears a conversation that threatens the Holy Family whisks them off to a
cave in the hills. There a spider who sees the sleepers huddled against the cold
protects them by spinning a huge web at the cave's mouth. When the king's
soldiers come, they assume that the web would have been broken had anyone
come into the cave. Thus Jesus is saved; thus the sparkling web, tossed aside on
a small tree, becomes the origin of the practice of decorating Christmas trees
with tinsel. Not too convincing as a pourquoi tale, this is nevertheless an
adequately told variant of the traditional Christmas story, and it is handsomely
illustrated by paintings (dramatic, effective composition and restrained use of
color) that are reverent in tone, and that suggest-in the use of line-a Near East
setting. ZS
C.U. Christmas
Livingston, Myra Cohn. Birthday Poems; illus. by Margot Tomes. Holiday
House, 1989. ISBN 0-8234-0783-7. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
Given a topic that enthralls children, Livingston's
skill, and the spacious, clean line-and-wash interpretations by Margot Tomes, it
would be hard to go wrong. This new collection by a major children's poet
focuses on either birthdays for a particular age or on activities (games, a visit to
a museum or from a clown) and traditional observances (invitations, birthday
cakes). The poems, all light in tone, rely on commonplace rhymes but do
maintain the viewpoint of children and those Tomes depicts are of assorted sizes
and colors. ZS
D.V. Imaginative powers
Martin, Rafe. Will's Mammoth; illus. by Stephen Gammell. Putnam, 1989.
ISBN 0-399-21627-8. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Oversize pages afford the illustrator ample space for
pages that are colorful but not overcrowded, lively if repetitive winter scenes in
which a small boy's imagination creates a ride on a huge mammoth when he
visits other animals and people in a prehistoric winter. The text is minimal:
although his parents have told him that mammoths were long extinct, Will
[64]
reports, when asked at the end of his day of imagined play, "What did you do
today, Will?" "I rode my mammoth." Nice pictures, thin story. ZS
D.V. Imaginative powers
Mayer, Marianna. The Unicorn Alphabet; illus. by Michael Hague. Dial, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0373-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0372-4. 32p. Library
ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
Romantic paintings and, below them, several lines of
textual definition, are ornately framed with trailing floral designs
(Tiffany/medieval) so that Hague's illustrations and Mayer's text are tied in an
artistic, if sentimental, whole. Unfortunately, the text often has little to do with
unicorns: "X," for example, reads "Xisuthros was a mystic hero who, like
Noah, built an ark. Armenian legend tells of a time when great floods covered
the earth, threatening all life. Xisuthros's ark sheltered the animals and sailed to
safety with them." More often the reference is there but is tangential, as when D
for daffodil includes the fact that the root was thought in medieval times to stop
bleeding, and "the horn of the unicorn was believed to heal in the same way."
ZS
McCaughrean, Geraldine, ad. El Cid; illus. by Victor G Ambrus. Oxford,
1989. ISBN 0-19-276077-7. 126p. $17.95.
R* 
Gr. 6-. 
Although the imprint page somehow emerged as
information about Pinocchio, there is no impact on the text or the illustrations,
both of which are magnificent interpretations of the mass of stories about the
great Spanish hero, El Cid. Exiled by the weak, vindictive King of Spain, El
Cid (Don Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar), who was already a soldier-hero, won new
glory for himself and his King in conquering the Moors who held much of the
country. The paintings are Ambrus at his best, rich and colorful, delicate in
detail and strong in composition, and permeated with humor. The writing has
the same qualities, but with even more wit and with the panache that obtains to
all those heroes whose stories of greatness are part history, part legend. Kudos
all around. ZS
D.V. Courage; Devotion to a cause
C.U. History-Spain
Mendez, Phil. The Black Snowman; illus. by Carole Byard. Scholastic, 1989.
ISBN 0-590-40552-7. [48p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
5-8 yrs. 
An ambitious picture book that attempts to combine
fantasy and social message in a Christmas story about two black children and
their mother. Jacob is an angry boy ("I hate being black! I hate it!") who
grudgingly agrees to help his little brother make a snowman--black because of
city grime. When they wrap the snowman in a scrap of cloth from the
garbage-in fact an African storyteller's lost kente introduced in the preface-the
snowman comes to life, showing Jacob his heritage of proud warriors and
helping him save his little brother from a fire. The problem here is didactic
overstatement. The author does not seem to trust his story to carry the theme
("Fight off the flames of all those bad feelings you carry inside"), and the
cultural heritage is strained by serving as deus ex machina ("Once again, the
[65]
Africans appeared and showed Jacob the way") when the snowman would have
been enough. Still, with dramatic colored-chalk illustrations intensifying the
action with sweeping lines, contrasting textures, and distinctive portraiture, this
does step into a dearth of Christmas books incorporating the black experience.
BH
D.V. Pride in background and heritage
C.U. 
Christmas-Stories
Miller, Jim Wayne. Newfound. Jackson/Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-
531-08445-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05845-X. 213p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade
ed. $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 7-10. 
Robert Wells begins his narrative on a Tennessee
mountain road after the last day of fifth grade and ends it at the beginning of his
freshman year at Berea College. In between come scenes that vividly recreate an
Appalachian community without ever rendering it quaint or representative. His
parents' divorce, the strain between grandparents of different socio-economic
classes, and the close ties among neighbors at the mercy of natural disasters and
stripmining economy form a steady structure. Each member of Robert's
extended family is distinctively characterized through linked stories that evoke a
setting resonant with rich traditions. 
We experience the hard work of
sharecropping tobacco, only to watch it destroyed by hail; we feel the status of
outcast in the transfer from a backwoods to a modernized school. If the direction
meanders at times, it's only for the sake of following an interesting side road.
Readers will find, by the end, that they have traveled deep into the country and
learned something of themselves as well as of those rooted in the region. BH
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Pride in heritage and background
Moerbeek, Kees. New at the Zoo: A Mix-and-Match Pop-Up Book; written and
illus. by Kees Moerbeek. Random House, 1989. ISBN 0-679-80076-X. 10p.
$7.95.
R* 
3-6 yrs. 
In the spate of paper engineered books that have come
out recently, this scores high for invention, information, and amusement. Five
animals-a monkey, zebra, hippo, camel, and tiger-open and close their
mouths at the viewer with lines such as "I like to swing through the trees ...
and eat bananas for lunch." For nonreaders, it's a guessing game; for beginning
readers, the answer is written in boldface beside the animal. Then, playing on
Chukovsky's discovery that a child's first sense of humor involves reversal of
known concepts, the book is divided horizontally so that the top and bottom
half-pages can be manipulated to compose nonsensical combinations of picture
and word-the top of the hippo over the bottom of the tiger, for instance, makes
a hipger. The figures are simple, the art sprightly, the pages sturdy. BH
Moeri, Louise. The Forty-Third War. Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-50215-2.
[208p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Twelve-year-old Uno Ramirez and his best friend Lolo
are conscripted from their Central American village by guerillas who hold them
in a mountain fortress, train them quickly, and send them into battle. The plot
[66 ]
revolves around the complexities of war between loyalists and revolutionaries,
the paisanos caught between, and the brutalities of both sides. Uno's father has
already been killed and his sister raped; while he's on a reconaissance patrol, he
and other recruits discover the bodies of a whole village slaughtered by
government troops. Convinced by what he sees and by heroic Captain Mendoza,
who commands his unit, Uno commits himself to the revolution, though he and
his fellow recruits are allowed to go home after a climactic battle. This is more
docudrama than fiction. A good many explanations and discussions seem
contrived to convey information that none of the characters would ordinarily
articulate, and there are awkward Americanisms ("I can hardly wait," Uno says
when ordered to return to maneuvers after a meal). The majority of characters are
type-cast. However, the scenes of conflict are taut and the protagonist's fears
vividly projected. For young readers who have never suffered more than a
deprivation of weekly allowance, the issues of hunger and oppression are clearly
demonstrated. BH
Morey, Janet. Famous Mexican Americans; by Janet Morey and Wendy Dunn.
Cobblehill/Dutton, 
1989. 
ISBN 0-525-65012-1. 
176p. illus. with
photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
A collective biography gives sketches of the lives of
fourteen contemporary Mexican Americans; the men and women who are
discussed represent such diverse fields as the law, sports, entertainment,
business, and public service at the local or federal level. This is a useful book,
and it gives interesting information about a spectrum of public figures. 
A
bibliography is provided, primarily of articles. The weakness of the book is the
plodding writing style, slowed by the inclusion of minor details. Still, the
coverage is good, with lesser-known citizens as well as such luminaries as Henry
Cisneros, Katherine Ortega, and Cesar Chavez. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Nabb, Magdalen. Josie Smith; illus. by Pirkko Vainio. McElderry, 1989.
ISBN 0-689-50485-3. 72p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Three stories about a spunky heroine form a sound
transitional "chapter book" for primary graders reaching beyond beginning-to-read
books. In the first story, Josie's good intentions for her mother's birthday go
awry when she tries to earn money for a present. In the second, she runs away
to avoid punishment for a classic mess resulting from her attempt to paint a
second-hand blackboard. And in the last and best story, she adopts a cat that
already belongs to someone else. Although this is clearly British, the mother-
daughter relationship, as well as the dynamics between Josie and her neighbors,
will elicit instant understanding from U.S. children. The print is generously
sized and spaced; the pen-and-ink drawings are amusing, especially of Josie
secreting the large cat, ears and tail popping out of a baby blanket, to her room.
BH
D.V. 
Mother-daughter relations
[67]
Newth, Mette. The Abduction; tr. by Tiina Nunnally and Steve Murray. Farrar,
1989. ISBN 0-374-30008-9. 256p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 9-. 
Brutally revealing of European explorers' cruelty to
the peoples they encountered and conquered, this translated novel chronicles the
capture of two Greenlanders, Osuqo and Poq, by Norwegians who kill the girl's
father and brother on board their ship, beat her betrothed into submission, and
rape her on the return voyage. Back in a more "civilized" port, the couple does
attract the friendship of a crippled serving girl, whose voice alternates with
Osuqo's, and a young scholar, but the imprisonment, degradation, and
humiliation that the Inuit experience is finally climaxed by a charge of
witchcraft. Their only escape, besides Osuqo's vivid memories of home, is to
the sea and certain death. The style is stark, the characterizations are solid, and
the historical background all too strong to dismiss, including ship captains'
logbooks, seventeenth-century descriptions, and Inuit stories. For high school
students investigating world colonization, this is a must, but it's also an
important book for any Anglo-American reader's understanding of our
ethnocentric past and present. BH
D.V. Pride in background and heritage
C.U. History-World
Nixon, Joan Lowery. Star Baby. Bantam, 1989. ISBN 0-553-05838-X.
[192p]. (Hollywood Daughters: A Family Trilogy). $14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
M 
Gr. 7-10. 
Sing out, Louise. 
Back in the thirties, Abby
"Cookie" Baynes was a celebrated child star, but at seventeen, she's a has-been.
"Hey! Hey, I know you! Didn't you used to be Cookie Baynes?" Abby's
mother keeps squeezing her into pink taffeta, but Abby can only get gigs for
Rotarian luncheons and D.A.R. dinners. "You're on after the dog act." The
characters, like the dialogue, are ridden with camp cliches. There's Mama, a
driven alcoholic; Linda Larkin, the bitchy ingenue; and Luke, Abby's soon-to-
be-a-soldier boyfriend: "It's not 'good girl' or 'bad girl' anymore. The world's
different now. The war's made it different. Don't be mad at me, Abby. Let me
hold you. Let me help you understand." We wouldn't dream of giving away the
ending. RS
Nunes, Susan. Tiddalick the Frog; illus. by Ju-Hong Chen. Atheneum, 1989.
ISBN 0-689-31502-3. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-7yrs. 
In this Aboriginal myth of seasonal cycles and
drought, the gigantic frog Tiddalick drinks up "all the water of the world."
Although the other animals complain to him of the heat and withering plants, he
does not respond to their pleas and is too big for them to force. The wise
wombat suggests they make him laugh, but the antics of the kookaburra, emu,
kangaroo, lizard, cuscus, and bandicoot simply bore him. Finally, Noyang the
eel dances himself into knots and fetches the laughter that releases the waters of
the world. To this day Noyang stays by Tiddalick's side to make sure the frog
never wakes in an ill humor again. Chen's watercolors are gracefully patterned
in dancing rhythms that reflect the tale itself. The dominant hues of blue and
[68]
green are punctuated by parched yellows, burnt orange, and scorched red. Told
and illustrated without pretension, this is a choice representation of Australian
lore. BH
C.U. Storytelling
Nuwer, Hank. Recruiting in Sports. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10796-5.
$12.90. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 8-. 
For readers interested in the world of college sports or
curious about ethical problems resulting from recruitment practices (particularly
financial ones), this should provide many answers. It is directed toward high
school athletes and gives advice to young women and men on what to expect,
how to respond, and what colleges have been penalized for unethical problems.
Sources are provided, by chapter, for citations in the text, and a bibliography is
included. The organization of material could be improved, but the real weakness
of the book is in the writing style, which is heavy, often repetitive, and
occasionally awkward: "It's been said without exaggeration that a coach's
alphabet begins with W[in] and ends with L[ose]," for example. ZS
C.U. Physical education
D.V. Ethical concepts
Parker, Mary Jessie. Night Fire!; illus. by Lynne Dennis. Scholastic, 1989.
ISBN 0-590-41423-2. [32p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
3-6 yrs. 
The progression of a house fire and subsequent events
is told in brief-mostly two-word-sentences: "Night comes. Sparks leap.
Papers smolder. Flames spread. Fire grows. Flames blaze." The family leaves
the house safely ("They hurry"), firefighters come, and "all are safe." At times,
the terseness becomes vague: "They're safe. They knock. Neighbors wake.
They call. They wait." The illustrations in moody night tones are overlaid with
diagonal crayon scribbles in a technique that seems as mannered as the text.
Despite its overstylization, the book is successfully simple in communicating
how a fire starts and how help is found. There's an appended list of fire safety
rules. RS
C.U. Safety education
Pinkwater, Daniel. Uncle Melvin; written and illus. by Daniel Pinkwater.
Macmillan, ISBN 0-02-774675-5. 32p. $13.95.
NR 
Gr. 2-3. 
Uncle Melvin spends his days with Charles and his
family: cooking breakfast, walking Charles to school, mowing the lawn. But
every night he goes back to the "Looney Bin." "He calls it the Looney Bin. It's
a special place for crazy people. Uncle Melvin lives there because he's crazy."
Melvin leaves messages carved into the lawn for UFOs, he thinks the President
is an iguana in disguise, he talks with animals, he can make rain and rainbows.
This is a sympathetic but silly introduction to mental illness; in fact, young
readers may come away believing that Melvin can indeed put rainbows in the
sky. 
That crazy people are better off than not is a pervasive-if not
persuasive-theme here, but children will be hard put to distinguish Melvin's
reality from their own. It is very nice to have a picture book that shows the
[69]
mentally ill as capable of love, work, and responsibility, but the fairytale aura
confuses the issue. Pinkwater's cartoonish illustrations have his usual wacky
warmth, picturing Melvin as a contemporary, day-glo St. Francis. RS
D.V. Uncle-nephew relations
Powers, Tom. Horror Movies. ISBN 0-8225-1636-5. Movie Monsters. ISBN
0-8225-1637-3. 
Each book: Lerner, 1989. 80p. illus. with photographs.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
It's the photographs, of course, that will get kids into
these books, each of which retells half a dozen plots from famous cinematic
nightmares. While the stories themselves have inherent appeal, Powers also
includes some brief running commentary on why people have such a compelling
interest in frightening themselves. Introducing King Kong, for example, Powers
writes "Audiences did not cheer for the airplanes. They cheered for the giant
gorillla. The gorilla was fighting for his freedom. He was fighting against the
danger and confusion of the modem world." The retellings are smooth and
simple, and the photos (mostly black-and-white, some color) are clear and
plentiful. The films covered include classics such as Psycho and Dracula as well
as the more recent Nightmare on Elm Street and Gremlins. Subject and style
will make this pair a good choice for reluctant readers. RS
Pringle, Lawrence. Bearman: Exploring the World of Black Bears; illus. with
photographs by Lynn Rogers. Scribner's, 1989. ISBN 0-684-19094-X. 42p.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
With a passion for wildlife since early childhood,
Lynn Rogers pursued his dream to study biology and specialize in research on
Ursus Americanus, the American black bear. Using Rogers' own superb color
photos of bears in the wild, Pringle gives some background on both the man and
the animal, following Rogers as Rogers has followed bears for two decades.
Starting with radio collars that he attached to bears in their dens, Rogers has now
progressed to befriending the animals and typing his notes on a lap-top computer
just a few feet away from their activities (his wife and children are shown
snuggling with cubs). The book is absorbing not only for its information on a
common North American species-Pringle's clear reportage of Rogers' data and
anecdotes-but also for its focus on a role model who determined what he wanted
to do and then made it happen. Bearman will probably be shelved with other
books on animals, but it's the best kind of career guide going. BH
D.V. Occupational orientation
C.U. 
Zoology
Ross, Jean. The Martlet Box. Cannongate/David & Charles, 1989. ISBN 0-
86241-151-3. 160p. $15.95.
M 
Gr. 6-8. 
Simon and Malcom, young teen-age cousins, are
visiting their great-uncle Henry in Edinburgh, and he tells them (in installments,
and tediously) about a fantastic adventure he and his sister Lucy (their
grandmother) had when he was the boys' age. The box of the title holds a
substance with magical powers, and the two boys are drawn into the same
adventure, a good/evil battle of titanic quality, with characters who live forever,
[70
locked in perpetual struggle. This novel, published after the author's death, has
a colorful setting, an appealing theme, and the attraction of magical events, but
the characterization is flat, and the writing style is ponderous, particularly
evident in much of the dialogue. ZS
Sandin, Joan. The Long Way Westward; written and illus. by Joan Sandin.
Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025207-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025206-5.
64p. (I Can Read Books). Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Large print and spacious layout facilitate independent
reading in this well-paced account of the travels of a Swedish family who go
from New York City to a small town in Minnesota, helped along their way by
members of the Svea Society and other Swedish-American residents. A
concluding author's note points out that in the "hunger years" of 1868 and 1869,
more than 50,000 Swedish emigrants came to the United States. For beginning
readers who enjoy the dignity of "chapter" books, there are four chapters in a
story that is nicely calculated to suit the audience in its length, its vocabulary,
and its simple coverage of unfamiliar historical details. ZS
C.U. 
Social studies; Reading, beginning
Sleator, William. Strange Attractors. Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-525-44530-7.
[134p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
This is the sort of book that makes a great deal of
sense while you're reading it. It appears that the strange calculator-type object
Max has in his pocket is a time machine, and two identical sets of fathers-and-
daughters are quite eager to get it away from him. Whom should Max trust?
Readers will know, right off, but it won't stop them from enjoying this cleverly
convoluted time-travel thriller. Sleator approaches the paradoxical dilemmas of
time travel with head-on assurance; in fact, the scientific questions are worked
out with more finesse than the characterizations. We are never quite convinced,
for example, of the attraction Max feels for bad-twin Eva, so it's hard for us to
believe he would sacrifice good-twin Eva because of the other's (non-existent)
allure. But the fact that he does leads to a frightening and fascinating trip into a
chaotic future where time is awry, courtesy of the "bifurcations" caused by
indiscriminate use of the time "phasers." RS
Slote, Alfred. Make-Believe Ball Player; illus. by Tom Newsom. Lippincott,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32286-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32285-2. 104p.
Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Henry, who is the narrator, is in fifth grade and is a
poor baseball player who compensates by playing imaginary games in which he
is a triumphant star. In fact, he's better at make-believe and acting than he
knows; he foils a burglary by pretending (using adult voices) that he's coming
downstairs with a shotgun. 
As for Henry's aspirations on the diamond, a
peculiar pick-off play is as far as he gets-however, he does follow his sister's
suggestion that he try out for a play. This is a nice mix of family story,
baseball, and believable solution to a child's problem. Nicely paced, smoothly
written, very amusing. ZS
D.V. 
Adaptability; Family relations
[71]
Smith, Cara Lockhart. Parchment House. Four Winds, 1989. ISBN 0-02-
785845-6. [17 6p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 6-8. 
A sinister tale with odd bits of humor, this recounts
the fate of Johnnie Rattle and the other children of Parchment House, a British
orphanage run by Reverend Slipper and Mrs. Padlock. Ceaseless in his efforts to
oppress the orphans, Reverend Slipper buys a huge robot, Archibald, to drill
them with facts about the Empire, the foreign mission work to which they're
doomed, and the machinery at which they toil daily. Although the Reverend
uses Archibald to punish Johnnie cruelly, the boy ultimately takes his revenge
through the robot, and the maddened Reverend meets a death worse than the one
he had planned for Johnnie. The mixture of Dickensian setting with science
fiction gadgets seems somewhat confusing, the real and mystical a bit muddled,
and the spoofery somewhat overextended. 
Dead birds, for instance, are a
dominant image: Reverend Slipper, who kills them and keeps the feathers, falls
on the very table he uses to snare them; a monstrous bird "Shape" scoops up
his body and flies off with it. Lady Vanilla-Vyne, one of the visiting committee
of governors, is described as "a very large lady in a fur coat and a big straw had
decorated with a dead pigeon and some velvet cherries." Readers hovering
between junior mysteries and gothics, however, may relish just such obvious
exaggerations and will certainly enjoy the dramatic suspense. BH
Stones, Rosemary, comp. More To Life Than Mr. Right: Stories for Young
Feminists. Holt, 1989. ISBN 0-8050-1175-7. 
[128p]. $12.95. 
Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Eight short stories, all by British writers, are
published here for the first time. While the subjects are widely varied, the
common tone is one of self-discovery by young women who realize that fathers,
friends, lovers, and others don't necessarily define them. 
In "A Family
Likeness" by Jacqueline Roy, a girl mourning her father realizes she doesn't have
to be a son to inherit artistic gifts. The protagonist of Jean MacGibbon's "The
Sexy Airs of Summer" explores emergent sensuality. The narrator of "Stilettos"
by Rosemary Stones describes her black boss Lynette's successful defense when
their shoe store is invaded by thugs. Ravi Randhawa's "India" details a girl
walking the tightrope between two cultures. 
Although "Hermes and
Aphrodight" by Susan Price is a feminist fairy tale, most of the other selections
are character studies with loose or low-key plots. The quality of writing ranges
somewhat unevenly from well-crafted to anti-climactic. 
The anthology
emphasizes humanity over political rhetoric, however, and is a viable choice for
discussion of sex roles and subtle social pressures. BH
Sweeney, Joyce. The Dream Collector. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-29813-7.
[208p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
For Christmas, Becky hits upon the idea of giving
her family wishes for presents. She presents each of them with a motivational
book-Creative Wishing-and they all, Becky included, get to work on
fulfilling their dreams. Little brother Tim wants a cat, Scott wants a fancy bike,
Julia wants to publish a poem, Mom wants to be rich, and Dad's not telling.
Becky herself wants the boy across the street--or does she? All the wishes are
[72]
fulfilled with varying degrees of difficulty, joy and regret; and there's a fair
amount of speechmaking in the end about the dangers of getting what you wish
for. Still, the premise is appealingly worked out, combining the daydreams of
paperback romance with the real conflicts within Becky's family. There is
suspense in how and when the wishes are granted, and Becky's wisecracking
voice makes for an involving narration. RS
D.V. Family relations
Watanabe, Shigeo. Ice Cream Is Falling; illus. by Yasuo Ohtomo. Philomel,
1989. ISBN 0-399-21550-6. 32p. (I Love Special Days Books). $10.95.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
Bear has never seen snow before, so this is indeed a
special day for him. He and his friends romp in the snow-"like ice cream
falling from the sky"-throwing snowballs and building a snow man. That's it,
but that's plenty for toddlers just venturing out into a snowy world where they
can enjoy the same adventures. Ohtomo's illustrations are low-key and pleasant.
While this book is less substantial than the first in their Special Days series, It's
My Birthday (BCCB 10/88), author and illustrator have a communicative
affection and respect for their very young audience. RS
Westall, Robert. Blitzcat. Scholastic, 1989. ISBN 0-590-42770-9. 
2 3 0p.
$12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
This is an animal story and a World War II story, and
it doesn't quite succeed as either one. The cat, Lord Gort, is determined to find
her master, Geoffrey, who is away fighting for England (echoes of Cavalcade
drift through the book, as does just a bit of The Incredible Journey). Lord Gort
prowls the countryside, having (despite her name) kittens, hopping rides on
airplanes, leading a group of bombed-out people and animals to safety after the
Coventry blitz. Animal instinct for home-finding is adequately documented, but
there are anthropomorphic overtones here. As a war story, this is better, having
Westall's usual vigorous style and sturdy characterization; the salt-of-the-earth
muddlers-through dominate the cast, but they are balanced by candid depictions of
those who are acquisitive or cowardly. ZS
Yolen, Jane. 
The Faery Flag: Stories and Poems of Fantasy and the
Supernatural; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman. Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN
0-531-08438-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05838-7. [128p]. Library ed. $15.99;
Trade ed. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
Yolen is often at her best in these nine stories and six
poems, which range in tone from traditional to eerie to humorous. The title
story, about a young laird who loves a fairy girl, draws on Scottish legend,
while the second, "Foxwife," is a Beauty and the Beast tale set in Japan. A
shape-changing story, a minstrel turned plowman who's killed for his magic, a
supernatural wolf that raises two human cubs in India and haunts their hunters,
and a princess who outgrows her mother's fate star in other stories. Two
selections, the mystical "Tower Bird" and the amusing "Happy Dens," satirize
fairy tales. Several of the poems, too, project familiar voices with an unfamiliar
irony-Rapunzel's haircut in 'The Golden Stair," Beauty's nostalgia in "Beauty
and the Beast: An Anniversary." 
Although ten of the selections have been
[73 ]
published previously, most have appeared in periodicals, and young readers will
be glad to find them together here with Trina Schart Hyman's compatibly
fantastical black-and-white drawings. BH
Yorinks, Arthur. Oh, Brother; illus. by Richard Egielski. Di Capua/Farrar,
1989. ISBN 0-374-35599-1. 40p. $15.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
"It was a sorry accident at sea many years ago that
caused Milton and Morris, twins from England, to be left all alone in the world,
fending as best they could." This rags-to-riches story of two brothers whose
ship goes down, leaving them washed up on the streets of New York, will claim
instant attention from young listeners, partly because of the ingenuity of text
and art, partly because of the slapstick effects of the boys' constant bickering.
Whether it's performing for a circus or selling apples, they never stop arguing.
Then an old tailor (whom they've tried to pickpocket) takes them in. After his
death, they disguise themselves and practise his trade so successfully that Mrs.
Guggenheim takes them to meet the queen in England, where the royal gardener
and nanny recognize their longlost scoundrels . . . er, children. The early-
twentieth-century setting is a perfect showcase for Egielski's satirical
combination of softly rounded shapes and absurdly deadpan characters. Even the
literal colors project an earnestness that never betrays the tongue-in-cheek tone of
the text. Fun for all ages. BH
Young, Ed. Lon Po Po: A Red-Riding Hood Story from China; tr. and illus.
by Ed Young. Philomel, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21619-7. 32p. $14.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
As he did in A-Ling Louie'sYeh Shen: A Cinderella
Story from China (BCCB 3/83), Young illustrates an intriguing Asian variant of
a favorite folktale, in this case one in which a young girl saves herself and her
sisters instead of waiting around in the wolf's stomach for rescue by a hunter.
Said to be more than a thousand years old, "Lon Po Po" is definitely the most
liberated version of Little Red Riding Hood, including an early French version in
which LRRH manages to save herself but not to dispense with the wolf. Here,
three girls have been tricked into opening the door for a wolf disguised as their
grandmother. When the oldest realizes the truth ("Po Po, Po Po, your hand has
thorns on it"), she convinces him to try the nuts of the ginko tree, after she and
her sisters have climbed safely, by letting them haul him up in a basket. Once,
twice, three times they drop the basket ("I am so small and weak, Po Po, I could
not hold the rope alone"), bumping the wolf's head and breaking "his heart to
pieces." The wolf makes an eerie appearance in Young's art, with white staring
eyes, a long sinister muzzle, and shadowy textured fur. Rendered in watercolor
and pastel, impressionistic images in each panel offer the kind of illustrative
suggestion best suited to symbols from oral narrative. A must for folklore and
storytelling collections. BH
C.U. Storytelling