Aaron, Chester. Alex, Who Won His War. Walker, 1991. ISBN 0-8027-8098-
9. 156p. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
In a suspenseful story set in a coastal Connecticut
town during World War II, fourteen-year-old Alex is trapped into silence by the
two Nazi spies who have invaded the home of an elderly neighbor and her
mother. Alex is frightened by the saboteurs' threat of violence; he is also struck
by pangs of guilt because he had-while reporting the discovery of a beached
corpse-failed to mention that he had also found the man's wallet. The story
gains momentum as it proceeds, with convincing details of wartime attitudes and
[29]
community life to balance the dramatic tension of the primary plot.
Characterization and dialogue are sturdy and smoothly incorporated into the
narration. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.-WWII
Ball, Duncan. Jeremy's Tail; illus. by Donna Rawlins. Orchard, 1991. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-08551-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05951-0. [32p]. Library ed.
$14.99; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Jeremy is DETERMINED to pin the tail on the
donkey, but instead becomes hooked to one very shaggy dog. While the text is
entirely straightfaced ("'Am I almost there?' he asked. 'Almost,' a boy said.
'But watch your step'") the swoony colored-pencil illustrations show the real
tail, uh, tale: out the door, onto a bus, up a girder loading onto a ship bound for
Egypt... "'Am I getting warmer?' Jeremy asked." The gag is overextended,
but the pictures of blissfully blindfolded Jeremy, wandering the world (and even
into outer space), are softly cartooned and filled with pleasing details and little
jokes, such as Jeremy, tail in hand, wandering into a herd of already finely-tailed
zebras on the Serengeti. Eventually, Jeremy gets back home and hits the target.
"'You peeked,' a girl said." And off he goes, DETERMINED again..... RS
Bauer, Marion Dane. Face to Face. Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-395-55440-3.
176p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
His father walked out when Michael was six, leaving
Michael and his mother to run their dairy farm alone. Now that he's thirteen,
Michael responds with surly resentment to his stepfather and idealizes the father
who left him. So Michael is thrilled when his father calls for the first time in
seven years to invite Michael for a summer visit to the Colorado whitewater
rafting camp where he's working. 
Bauer effectively builds Michael's
anticipation of the chance to start over with his dad, and she then convincingly
relates the destruction of Michael's opinion of his father after a devastating
rafting trip. When he realizes that his birth father is every bit as cruel as the
bullies at school, he has to face the hero image he's created of the man.
Michael's increasing depression and instability are woven well throughout the
narrative, accentuated by violent dreams in which he kills his enemies with a
shotgun. Michael's ultimate choice between life and death is a shock, but not a
surprise. Bauer concludes with an image of hope-an embrace between Michael
and his stepfather. KPJ
D.V. Father-son relations
Bergman, Tamar. Along the Tracks; tr. by from the Hebrew by Michael
Swirsky. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-55328-8. [256p]. $14.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 6-10. 
As in Ephraim Sevela's We Were Not Like Other
People (BCCB 10/89), the protagonist here is a Jewish refugee who has been
separated from his parents and, like hordes of other children during Hitler's
invasion of the Soviet Union, must learn to survive on his own for several
years. This he does with skill, luck, confidence, and the occasional tutoring of
other street urchins. The piles of burnt cinders where he sleeps in order to stay
warm, the routines of thievery that keep him from starving, and the wiles with
which he escapes incarceration by authorities lend this picaresque novel the depth
[ 30 ]
of wartime experience, with sudden, unexpected tragedies and comedies. The
book is long, beginning with a third-person account of the family's escaping
from Lodz and walking across Poland to the Russian border, and continuing with
Yankele's lonely saga in first-person. It's never demanding, however, and the
steady action turns up a range of characters, from traitors to unsung heroes,
whom the reader follows with the same kind of intense but almost impersonal
curiosity with which Yankele eyes his war-torn world. The book's tone, in fact,
reflects that odd mixture of toughness and vulnerability which often marks a
survivor, and which Bergman has caught and passed on (with the help of an
almost invisible translation from the Hebrew) to future generations. BH
C.U. History-World War II
D.V. Adaptability; Courage; Self-reliance
Block, Francesca Lia. Witch Baby. Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-020548-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020547-4. [112p]. Library ed.
$13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
Weetzie Bat (BCCB 2/89) ended happily, if not ever
after; this once-upon-a-time sequel begins with young Witch Baby feeling
increasingly left out of the Weetzie Bat family of fathers and mothers and lovers
and friends. "What time are we upon and where do I belong?" asks Witch Baby,
unconvinced that Weetzie and the others really love her: "Witch Baby did not see
her eerie, fairy, genie, moon-witch beauty, the beauty of twilight and rainstorms.
'You'll never belong to anyone,' she said to the bald girl in the mirror." Despite
her beauty and her ferocity ("Witch Baby bared her teeth") Witch Baby is not as
immediate a main character as was her stepmother Weetzie Bat; the sequel is, in
any case, entirely dependent upon the first book. Forlorn, lonely, angry, Witch
Baby fights with her step--half?.-sister Cherokee Love, falls in love with a boy
named Angel Juan, and runs away when his family is deported back to Mexico.
Eventually, she learns the truth about her father, My Secret Agent Lover Man,
and her mother, Vixanne Wigg. The theme is baldly rendered but sweetened by
the author's lyrical rhapsodies, and if the post-modern poetry seems slightly less
fresh the second time out, fans of the first book will still enjoy becoming
reacquainted with this strange and loving family. RS
D.V. Adoption, adjustment to
Booth, Barbara D. Mandy; illus. by Jim LaMarche. Lothrop, 1991. Library ed.
ISBN 0-688-10339-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10338-3. 32p. Library ed. $14.88;
Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Soft colors and a felicitous treatment of light and
shadow are appropriate in mood and perspective for a quiet story in which the
viewpoint is that of a deaf child, Mandy. The only other character is Grandma,
and their solitude may be meant to mirror the isolation of those who live in a
silent world. Mandy's world may be silent, but it is happy and busy; she bakes
cookies with Grandma, grieves when the latter loses a brooch she loves, and
braves the dark to look for-and find-the lost pin. The book may be too static
to appeal to all children, but it is a story of achievement and it shows two things
that are important to all children: the supportive love of a caretaker and a child's
adjustment to a physical limitation. ZS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations; Handicaps, overcoming
[ 31]
Brenner, Barbara. If You Were There in 1492. Bradbury, 1991. ISBN 0-02-
712321-9. [112p]. illus. with photographs. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
See editorial
Bunting, Eve. Night Tree; illus. by Ted Rand. Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-
257425-5. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Decorating the tree on Christmas Eve is not such an
unusual custom, but this Christmas tree is in the woods, where one little boy
and his family go each year to decorate it for the animals. Every year the tree is
a little bigger, like the two children, but the ornaments are the same: popcorn,
apples, tangerines, balls made of millet, honey and sunflower seeds. "We scatter
shelled nuts and breadcrumbs and pieces of apple underneath for the little
creatures who can't climb very well." 
With its twin appeals of Christmas
generosity and kindness to animals, this is a realistic story that will have young
listeners scouting for trees of their own to decorate. Bunting's quiet text and
Rand's watercolors have just the right nighttime mood, capturing the mystery of
the woods where there are "secrets all around us." This family tradition is both
cozy and mysterious, and a last doublespread of the animals' Christmas is a
tribute to the friendly beasts. RS
D.V. Animals, kindness to; Generosity
Byars, Betsy. 
Wanted . . . Mud Blossom; illus. by Jacqueline Rogers.
Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-30428-5. 150p, $14.00.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
The Blossoms are on the loose again: a proud Junior
has the honor of taking care of the class hamster for the weekend, Maggie is
astounded at the stand her devoted Ralph has taken on her cavalier treatment of
him, and Vern is in some unspecified trouble relating to Mad Mary. Mad Mary
has in fact disappeared, but Junior is even more upset about the apparent murder
of Scooty the hamster by Pap's dog Mud. Byars displays her usual down-to-
earth humor in charting Maggie and Ralphie's uncertain romantic course, and
Junior's furious agony at Scooty's supposed death is particularly genuine
("Junior couldn't bear to hear ordinary conversation, as if nothing had happened,
when his whole world had come to an end"). First-timers may find the cast and
the disparate plot strands a bit confusing at first, but series fans will devour the
new adventures of this continually appealing set of characters. DS
D.V. Family relations
Campbell, Eric. The Place of Lions. Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-262408-2.
186p. $15.95.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
Laced with the swashbuckling bravado of a men's
adventure magazine, this recounts the survival of a fourteen-year-old English boy
whose plane crashes on the Serengeti in Tanzania. With his father and the pilot
badly injured, Chris goes for help, encountering some unscrupulous poachers and
a noble old lion whose "time-worn yellow eyes" lock with the boy's in
instinctive empathy. Unfortunately, much of the phraseology is time-worn as
well, with "deep, resonant snarls of rage and hatred booming out of the
prehistoric mists of time," etc. The black Africans are relentlessly stereotyped,
in the following order, as: wildly reckless drivers, cheerfully subservient rascals,
or savagely heartless villains. (Campbell doesn't care for vultures either: "The
[ 321
worst imaginings of a nightmare could hardly conjure up something so jerkily
grotesque as this mad, hellish creature with its fixed, fanatic eyes, dancing its
uncoordinated mad dwarf's dance around the dead.") Overwritten cliches,
however, will whizz right by reluctant readers, who will go for the story's
muscularly manipulated action. BH
D.V. Animals, respect for; Courage
Cannon, A. E. Amazing Gracie. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-30487-0.
[224p]. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
Gracie had always felt protective toward her mother,
who was subject to severe depressions, and so she had mixed feelings when
Mom announced she was marrying Pete. Gracie's feelings were not at all mixed
when she learned on the day of the wedding that Mom had not told her they were
moving to the city or that Pete's six-year-old son, Sinjian, was going to live
with them. Cannon builds logically to the traumatic climax, when a despondent
Mom attempts suicide, and for the first time Pete and Gracie can talk freely
about their own relationship and their love for Mom. It takes courage, but new
friends and new perspectives help Gracie adjust to, and accept, her new life. The
changes are believable, convincingly emanating from the sensitively drawn
characters and their relationships. ZS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations; Stepparents, adjustment to
Carkeet, David. Quiver River. Geringer/HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-022454-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022453-3. 
[256p]. Library ed.
$14.89; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
In a sequel to The Silent Treatment (BCCB 6/88)
Ricky is again the narrator; now he is looking forward to his last year of high
school, but one thing hasn't changed: older brother Rodney is still patronizing
and pompous. Ricky has a summer job at a resort, but Rodney is nearby and
has acquired a girl friend; both he and she are studying a Native American tribe of
the Sierras. The writing style and the relationships are alike in having
momentum and color, and the best parts of the book are contained in the offhand
dialogue (about girls and sex, mostly) between Ricky and his roommate Nate.
The plot, though, is weakened by the implication that there is a last-living--or,
in fact, immortal-Miwok Indian (like Ishi, last of his tribe) in the hills. It's
interesting but not convincing, and results in a rather strained conclusion. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Responsibility
Cassedy, Sylvia. The Best Cat Suit of All; illus. by Rosekrans Hoffman. Dial,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0517-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0516-6. [48p].
(Dial Easy-to-Read). Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Not only does his new neighborhood offer nothing
more exciting than apples and raisins for Halloween treats, Matthew, stuck with
a cold, can't even go out trick-or-treating. So, dressed in his cat-costume, he
whines: about missing his best friend, about being inside, about all the dumb
costumes the kids are wearing. "Nobody was Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs
back where we used to live." But the arrival home of his mother, along with a
surprise guest, cheers him up: "No pins. No snowsuit. Nice ears. Better than
mine even. I got down on my hands and knees so we could look at each other,
[33]
cat to cat." Halloween stories are especially appealing to the beginning-to-read
set, and this one, cozy and familiar, will find a ready audience. Hoffman's
watercolor illustrations are more sophisticated than is usual for this format,
offering plenty of black-and-orange accents in a lush, iconographic style. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Moving, adjustment to
Choi, Sook Nyul. Year of Impossible Goodbyes. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-
395-57419-6. [144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-9. 
A gripping first-person narrative recounts ten-year-old
Sookan's survival of the Japanese occupation of North Korea and the
Communists' subsequent takeover in 1945. Even after Grandfather's death,
Mother holds the family together in the absence of her husband and three oldest
sons, but when she is detained at the 38th parallel guard station, Sookan and her
little brother must escape to the south alone. Tragedies are not masked here, but
neither are they overdramatized; the story has the same impact as Holocaust
fiction that depicts a people caught between forces demeaning their lives, as in
the case of the Korean "sock girls" who are rounded up at their knitting factory
and herded to the front to serve as whores for the Japanese soldiers. The
observations are honest, the details authentic, the characterizations vividly
developed. This is a novel both artless and artful, both revealing of a complex
culture and moving in its statement of human rights. Most of all, it proves that
powerful fictional effects derive from subtle scenes and patient pacing, even in
the case of dramatic situations. Readers will find themselves moved back in
time and forward in spirit. BH
C.U. History-World WarII
D.V. Courage; Peace
Cleary, Beverly. Strider; illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky. Morrow, 1991. Library
ed. ISBN 0-688-09901-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09900-9. 179p. Library ed.
$13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Leigh Botts, introduced in Dear Mr. Henshaw (BCCB
10/83) is now fourteen and about to begin high school, when he and friend Barry
find an abandoned dog on the beach. Their "joint custody" of Strider makes for a
casually inviting strand of episodes, providing Lee with a variety of anecdotes
and anxieties about the dog for his diary, the entries of which form the story.
Along with the inevitable custody battles with Barry, Leigh has other problems
("Problem-solving, and I don't mean algebra, seems to be my life's work"): his
Dad loses his trucking job; his Mom is worried about money; a boy at school is
mad at Leigh because he bought the wild shirt the other boy's mother made him
donate to the resale shop. There are new pleasures as well: joining the track
team, meeting a girl, teaching Strider to read (?!). Chapters are short-some just
a couple of pages-and sharply written, the diary entries recording Leigh's
mishaps and epiphanies with a minimum of fuss, as in a scene of Barry and
Leigh making car models: "I looked at Barry, and he looked at me. I could see
we both had the same thought at the same time: we had outgrown models."
This is a portrait of adolescence as seen from a middle-grade distance-near
enough to be cozy, far enough away to retain some glamor. RS
D.V. Growing up
[34]
Collier, James Lincoln. My Crooked Family. Simon, 1991. ISBN 0-671-
74224-8. 181p. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
The narrator, Roger, doesn't specify the city in which
he and his little sister Lulu live, but it's clear that they live in a slum, that both
parents drink, that Pa gets his money in mysterious ways, and that this all takes
place in 1910. The period is less important, however, than the milieu. His path
made easy by a fast-talking gang member, Roger is drawn into the same pattern
of thievery as his father, and the book ends with the implication that this will
continue, as Roger tells his mother he's joining the gang. She begs him not to
do so, but when he walks out, there has been no such commitment. Ma pours
herself another drink. 
There is some suspense in the unfolding of the
relationship between Pa and the gang members who are recruiting Roger, but the
emphasis here is on the sociology of tenement life rather than on the individuals
who are caught in that life of deprivation and ignorance. The first-person voice
is convincing, and the characters are equally believable. ZS
Cormier, Robert. We All Fall Down. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-30501-X.
[256p]. $16.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
"They entered the house at 9:02 p.m. on the evening
of April Fools' Day. In the next forty-nine minutes, they shit on the floors and
pissed on the walls and trashed their way through the seven-room Cape Cod
cottage." So begins this story about revenge and victims of revenge, about the
violence of misdirected anger and its effects on random targets. After the
trashing, the four boys assault fourteen-year-old Karen Jerome, coming home
early from a friend's. As she lies in a coma, her sister Jane falls in love with
Buddy, one of the unidentified vandals, who uses gin to ease the pain of his
parents' divorce. Stalking them all is The Avenger, a secret witness determined
to dispose of the villains the same way he murdered a classmate and his own
grandfather. The real villains here seem to be fathers: Buddy's father, who
deserts his family and neglects his embittered son; the father whose disappearance
seems to have left The Avenger a psychotic killer; gang leader Harry's father,
who, by paying all the damages his son inflicts, buys off publicity. Harry is an
Archie-like character-right out of The Chocolate War. In true thriller tradition,
each character here has a role to fulfill, no more and no less, and each does it
with pared-down efficiency. The action is compelling enough to buoy readers
across frequent transitions in point of view, which in fact serve to heighten the
suspense. Signature Cormier, with calculated impact, sinister implications, and
inevitable appeal. BH
D.V. Family relations; Friendship values
Easton, Patricia Harrison. Stable Girl: Working for the Family; illus. with
photographs by Herb Ferguson. Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-278340-7. 48p.
$18.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
"Today I'm needed at the barn," says the younger
daughter (aged about eleven in the pictures) in a family that trains Standardbred
horses for harness racing. Danielle's summer life at the racetrack involves
grooming, mucking out, taking horses to be shod, swimming them for exercise,
and learning to drive them (no riding for harness horses); come evening, she
watches her favorite win his race. This is an effective dip into a milieu rather
than a presentation of information; context and photographs generally clarify
[35]
what the text does not, but it rarely matters if they don't Barn photographs are
clear and the horses are of a universally kindly expression (Danielle remains
implausibly clean); race photographs are blurry with speed and action in the
evening light. Harness racing is an unusual subject and this is an interesting
look at the daily track life. True horse fanatics, who won't mind the absence of
riding, will wear the book out as they envy Danielle her casual pleasure in her
divine mission. DS
D.V. Occupational orientation
Ehlert, Lois. Red Leaf, Yellow Leaf; written and illus. by Lois Ehlert.
Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-266197-2. 34p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Ehlert uses a child's voice to describe the cultivation
of a silver maple seedling as it grows and becomes a tree purchased at a garden
center and planted by a father and child. The print is large, the color and
composition attractive but crowded, using twigs and seeds and fabric as well as
paint for double-spread collages. However, this is less effective than most of
Ehlert's work because the design sometimes overwhelms the text, as with, for
example, the flashy but uninformative collage accompanying the sentence "My
tree was loaded onto a truck filled with other trees and delivered to the garden
center." Other pictures, crowded with too many elements, lack focus. Appended
information about leaves and trees is useful but seems to be aimed at an older
audience than is the main text. ZS
C.U. Nature study
Fox, Paula. Monkey Island. Jackson/Orchard, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08562-7;. 151p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-9. 
"He was eleven years old and he had never felt so
alone in his life." Clay's mother has disappeared, pregnant and without her coat,
from the squalid hotel where they lived; his father had left weeks before, when
the family still had their own apartment. 
And Clay leaves too, finding
makeshift refuge and friendship in a small city park. Although he finds kind
protection from Buddy, a young black man, and Calvin, an old alcoholic, Clay's
life in the park is cold and tiring, scary and uprooted. There's a man who gives
out coffee and doughnuts, but the police send him away; Clay and Buddy
scrounge from trash barrels or buy food with the proceeds of can returns. Too
many recent novels about homelessness are romantic adventures filled with
exciting dangers and homeless "free spirits"; this book is simple and honest, true
to its story of one lost boy. The dangers here are cold and hunger and street
gangs; the homeless are "people trying to find better ways to sleep on stone."
Although there's some occasional speechmaking via Calvin and Buddy, Fox's
writing is always direct and quiet, and all the more so when she's describing hard
things, such as the "hot silence" of an unspoken family fight, or being
abandoned by a sad mother: "it was terrible that she had done that." Clay finds
his mother after being hospitalized for pneumonia; and, despite his deep
emotional wounds, the miracle of baby Sophie and the sustaining spirit of Buddy
allow him to trust again the possibilities of family. RS
D.V. Mother-son relations
[ 36 1
Geringer, Laura. Silverpoint. Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-023850-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023849-6. [160p]. Library ed. $13.89;
Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Turning twelve, Cora misses her father, who left
before she was born. Her best friend Charley's father is dead, and the two have
constructed a safe world of games, rituals, and icons that protect their lives from
loneliness. Cora's longing for her father, and her resourcefulness in face of his
absence, is believable, but the story and imagery have a determined eccentricity
that keeps readers at a distance. Cora dreams about Zeus and Europa; her mother
neurasthenically collects news items about "rescues"; Charley has two dolls,
made, he says, from the bullets that killed his father. A bag-lady fortuneteller
accurately divines the true nature of Charley's father's death; and, just as Cora's
dreams foretell, her father does come back-for an evening. Although the book
as a whole is mannered and diffuse, some individual scenes, and, especially, the
dialogue, are fresh and natural. RS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Friendship values
Gottlieb, Dale. My Stories by Hildy Calpurnia Rose; written and illus. by Dale
Gottlieb. Knopf, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91150-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
679-81150-8. 40p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.00.
Ad 
Gr. 2-3. 
"I put myself in someone's shoes by writing about
them," says eight-year-old Hildy Calpumia Rose, who is excited to have "a new
journal to write about my people in." Her people are friends, like downstairs
neighbor Hank, who tangos with Hildy on his wheelchair; family, like nervous
Aunt Henrietta who may or may not have traded her teeth to the tooth fairy for
her brother's dental school tuition; and various and sundry neighborhood
dwellers, baby-sitters, and passersby. More impressive than Hildy's stories are
her pictures: postmodern people-two-dimensional with triangular, expressive
faces-inhabit a vivid world of anti-pastels, with deeply bright blues and reds
predominating and expanding to the page edges. The text is more a series of
slices of life than stories, and frequently the slices are awfully thin or marred by
self-consciousness. Nonetheless, kids will long to perform Hildy's father's
"schlag test" (holding a full bowl of whipped cream upside down to make sure it
has been sufficiently whipped), and they will enjoy the cheerful and eye-
catchingly illustrated warmth of the heroine's bustling Brooklyn neighborhood.
DS
Greenfield, Eloise. Night on Neighborhood Street; illus. by Jan Spivey
Gilchrist. Dial, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0778-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
8037-0777-0. [32p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Greenfield's collection of seventeen poems acutely
captures the sounds and sights of an evening in an urban black community.
Some verses softly lilt ("rocking the baby/ rocking the baby/ swish, swish/
swish"); some bounce along ("When Tonya's friends come to spend the night/
Her mama's more than just polite"); some are soothing nocturnes ("only light
and shadow/ play on the sidewalk now/ it is the time when/ darkness and
stillness meet/ and most are asleep/ on Neighborhood Street"). Both big-city
realities, such as scary boarded-up houses and drug pushers, and any child's home
truths, such as being afraid of the dark, are here, but a loving array of parents,
[37 ]
children, and friends gives the book as a whole a cozy sense of security.
Gilchrist's full-page and double-spread paintings have a contributing warmth,
faithfully and realistically picturing each poem as a new leaf in a family album.
RS
Griffin, Peni R. A Dig in Time. McElderry, 1991. 
ISBN 0-689-50525-6.
186p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
While Nan and Tim's archeologist-parents are off on a
dig in the Middle East, Nan decides to have a dig of her own in Gramma's
garden. She finds several family artifacts, as well as a spell that uses each
artifact to travel into its past. Each object takes them back to the source of a
family secret or story. A broken shoe heel takes Nan and Tim back to their
parents' wedding; an Elk Lodge clip places them in the middle of a scary anti-
communist demonstration. Their second-to-last trip is particularly significant
because they save Gramma from drowning when she was a baby. On their
return, they discover that Gramma has died in the night, a sad event that causes
the children to reveal their time-traveling to their parents, who have returned for
the funeral. With less complicated machinations than much time fantasy and a
strong family focus, this would be a good introduction for those readers put off
by the more arcane reaches of the genre. RS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Henkes, Kevin. 
Chrysanthemum; written and illus. by Kevin Henkes.
Greenwillow, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09700-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
09699-9. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
There is always the danger, when starting school, that
one will be laughed at or teased for some reason. In this story of a mouse-child,
it's her odd name. Chrysanthemum has always agreed with her doting parents
that her name is perfect. Not now. Not when her classmates pretend to pick her
or smell her. 
"During naptime Victoria raised her hand and said, 'A
chrysanthemum is a flower. It lives in a garden with worms and other dirty
things.'" The tables turn, however, when the instantly-adored music teacher
shows up; she too was named for a flower (Delphinium) and what's more, she is
considering the name Chrysanthemum for her soon-to-be-born child. "'My name
is Lily of the Valley,' said Victoria." Cheery paintings of Chrysanthemum's
cozy family and her too-true classmates illustrate a story that is nicely structured,
wittily told, and universal in its appeal to any child who's been taunted for any
reason. ZS
D.V. Teacher-student relations
Hernmndez, Xavier. Lebek: A City of Northern Europe through the Ages; by
Xavier Hernndez and Jordi Ballonga; illus. by Francesco Corni; tr. by Kathleen
Leverich. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-57442-0. [64p]. $16.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Precise ink drawings, black and white, show changes
in a fictional seaside town of Northern Europe. The development is presented in
fourteen stages, each with a double-page spread that gives an overview followed
by a second spread that gives details of economic and political history in boxed
text or captions. While Corni's meticulous drawings (not unlike Anno's,
Macaulay's, or Ventura's work) show architectural details, the labelling is
[ 38 ]
incomplete, and not always clear. Pages are not numbered, and the "index" is
really a table of contents. Despite the choppy format of the second double-page
spreads, the book gives a good picture of how environmental resources, location,
and social needs affect and effect a culture as surely as do the events in its
history. ZS
C.U. History-Europe
Hilgartner, Beth. The Feast of the Trickster. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-
55008-4. [240p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
In a sequel to Colors in the Dreamweaver's Loom,
the Five companions from the World of the Loom are sent to Earth on a
mission. They must find 'Tsan, who was once their leader, but who has been
flung back to her original home on Earth by the Trickster. 'Tsan-better known
at Harvard as Alexandra Scarsdale-believes the time she spent on the World of
the Loom was merely a three-year period she spent brainwashed by a cult. There
are a few funny scenes as the naive Five first encounter humans. 
A
misunderstanding with some dirt bikers results in a one-sided battle with a state
trooper. Vihena, the Warrior companion, threatens the trooper with her sword,
gets a bullet in the shoulder, and the companions and their new earthling allies
rescue her from the hospital in a daring and humorous scheme. However, much
of the story lacks such action-the Five stay in Vermont, waiting for their
earthling friends to get a day off work so they can get to Boston to contact
'Tsan. The Trickster, an evil goddess who follows the companions in order to
thwart their efforts, makes a lot of threats but follows through only once. The
rest of the gods on the World of the Loom wring their hands and wait, much like
the gods of the Iliad, for the mortals to strengthen the warp of reality by getting
'Tsan back to their world. The potential for action in this story is wasted in too
much dialogue as the Five rely on their earth friends to complete their mission
for them. KPJ
Houston, Dick. Safari Adventure; written and illus. with photographs by Dick
Houston. Cobblehill, 1991. ISBN 0-525-65051-2. 14 5p. $14.95.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
Growing up in the 1950's in Ashtabula, Dick
Houston had an image of Africa that was formed by movies, particularly the
safari documentaries of Martin and Osa Johnson. And when as an adult, he went
to Africa to organize safaris of his own, Houston seems to have found pretty
much the same world that the Johnsons filmed: romantic, wild-animal, colonial
Africa. "When the African set my bags on the veranda outside my room, I felt I
had found the perfect place." Houston reports no dissonance between his young
dreams and modern (1972) Kenya; his descriptions of setting up a camping safari
company (before he's even been out to the bush) ring with boyish enthusiasm.
His encounters with the black Kenyans are consistently picturesque, as in his
description of a trip to the market: "Since Jack and I always did a volume of
business here, the hawkers knew us on sight and converged on us like hungry
lions. 'Come with me, Bwana!' they all jabbered, surrounding us, grabbing hold
of our arms, practically carrying us to their stalls." The details of the first safari
itself, especially a chapter on climbing Mt. Kilimanjaro, have more freshness,
and there are lots of True magazine-like encounters with lions and elephants.
The other safari participants are underdrawn to the point of anonymity, excepting
[39]
Elaine, an older woman who is characterized with more shtick than insight.
Two eight-page inserts of color photographs provide atmosphere. RS
Hughes, Monica. Invitation to the Game. Simon, 1991. ISBN 0-671-74236-1.
[192p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
It's overpopulated, robotized 2154, and Lisse and her
friends find themselves in a scenario familiar to most of their fellow school
graduates: permanent, subsidized unemployment, and restriction to one small,
scary area of a city. But while attempting to build a makeshift life in an old loft
apartment, the group hears enticing rumors about "The Game," and soon an
invitation arrives, offering a chance to join in. While seated in cozy chairs in a
secret government building, Lisse and the six others find themselves transported
to a deserted landscape for a while, only returning when Lisse has an accident
while the group is exploring. Intrigued, the friends go back several times more,
arguing whether or not the landscape is real or some kind of electronic or mental
manipulation. Both the bleakness of the realistic setting and the wilderness of
The Game are convincing, as are the arguments and cooperation among the
friends. This is a natural for both fantasy gamers and fans of survival stories,
and the eventual revelation of the nature of The Game is surprising but well-
prepared. RS
D.V. Cooperation
Isadora, Rachel. Swan Lake; written and illus. by Rachel Isadora. Putnam,
1991. ISBN 0-399-21730-4. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
For a younger audience than either the version written
by Margot Fonteyn (BCCB 5/89) or that by Mark Helprin (BCCB 12/89), this
has romantic paintings that are not as dramatic as Trina Schart Hyman's work in
the former nor as imaginative as the precisely organized draughtsmanship of
Chris Van Allsburg in the latter. What it offers that is distinctive is the use of
tutu-clad ballerinas (and Isadora's experience as a ballet dancer ensures both grace
and correct positioning) and the incorporation of accents in the background that
suggest the Russian origin of the ballet rather than the German version of the
bird/woman theme (prevalent in many cultures) on which the ballet was based.
The story of the prince who is trapped by a magician into betraying his true
love, the Swan Queen, ends with the prince killing the magician, releasing all
the swan maidens from his evil spell, and bringing the lovers together again.
The faces are awkwardly drawn, but the burst of golden color on the final page
echoes the joy of the closing words: "'We will never be apart again,' Siegfried
told Odette, as the first light of dawn shimmered across Swan Lake." ZS
Johnson, Dolores. What Kind of Baby-sitter Is This?; written and illus. by
Dolores Johnson. Macmillan, 1991. ISBN 0-02-747846-7. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Although it's nice to see an antidote for a
stereotypically-depicted baby-sitter, this isn't a convincing story. Illustrated
with paintings of an attractive black child and the white-haired, elderly woman
who's come to take care of him, the book reflects a familiar situation: resentful
child, convinced that all sitters watch soap operas, paint their toenails, and eat
the good stuff in the refrigerator. Mrs. Pritchard surprises Kevin: she puts on
her baseball hat, takes out a pennant and baseball cards, and reads a baseball book
when the game is over. She reads aloud; by the time Mom returns, Kevin wants
[40]
his new friend, "Aunt Lovey," to move in. Baseball fans come in all ages, but
few elderly women collect baseball cards or seem likely to bring all that regalia
on a baby-sitting job. All part of the ploy. The writing style is flat, Aunt
Lovey a bit sugary. ZS
D.V. Older-younger generations
Jones, Charlotte Foltz. Mistakes That Worked; illus. by John O'Brien.
Doubleday, 1991. ISBN 0-385-26246-9. 82p. $15.00.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Amusing and colorful paintings illustrate a
compilation of anecdotes about mistakes that have resulted in some new recipe,
product, or process. The brief entries are grouped under such headings as
"Tummy Fillers," "Doctor, Doctor," and "Fun, Fun, Fun." While some of the
"mistakes" are of dubious provenance (Was Jellico, Tennessee, really a
typographical error? Was it a "mistake" that Levi Strauss had pants made from
tent canvas?), most are recorded accidents, such as the unintended addition of
carbonated water that produced Coca-Cola instead of a planned headache remedy.
The writing style is brisk, often humorous, and both the theme and the brevity
of the entries should appeal to readers. A bibliography indicates sources; an
index gives access to contents. ZS
Jones, Diana Wynne. Aunt Maria. Greenwillow, 1991. ISBN 0-688-10611-0.
[224p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Mig, her brother Chris, and their Mum have dutifully
committed Easter holidays to Aunt Maria. Ma-rye-ah, as she insists her name be
pronounced, is a relative of their Dad, who disappeared off a seaside cliff after
becoming estranged from the family. This is an elaborate fantasy involving the
whole town of Cranbury, which has been divided by witchcraft into powerfully
conspiratorial women and zombie-like men. Anyone who doesn't like his/her
role gets turned into a wolf or cat or buried spirit. The premise is suspenseful,
but the pace is a bit encumbered and the mechanics are slightly murky. In
addition to a complicated narrative involving Mig's diary, lost along with Dad in
the accident and discovered later, there's an overload of cast and a repetition of
description that begs for tightening. On the other hand, the motif of a Pandora's
box-the mysterious container which Mig opens to release unknown power--
radiates a spontaneous, powerful appeal that is sustained by the main characters.
Newcomers to Diana Wynne Jones' work may become impatient, but fans will
relish the classically ominous tone. BH
D.V. Family relations
Kudlinski, Kathleen. Pearl Harbor Is Burning!: A Story of World War II; illus.
by Ronald Himler. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83475-0. [64p]. (Once Upon
America). $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of the
bombing of Pearl Harbor, Kudlinski's story uses fictional characters but actual
details of the event; like other books in the "Once Upon America" series, this is
designed to show how major events can affect the lives of ordinary citizens. Fact
and fiction are deftly knit, and the story is also used to show the multicultural
quality of Hawaiian life and the mutual tolerance of its citizenry. Frank
Hopkins, whose family has recently moved to Hawaii, finds that Kenji is the
only friendly boy in the fifth grade class. Together the new friends watch the
[41]
bombing, and Kenji's family takes Frank in while his mother, a nurse, reports
to the hospital. Frank's mother's prejudice is sensitively drawn; Frank's own
discovery that Kenji can be a "real friend" is heartening and believable. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Interracial understanding
Kuklin, Susan. 
Going to My Gymnastics Class; written and illus. with
photographs by Susan Kuklin. Bradbury, 1991. ISBN 0-02-751236-3. 33p.
$13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
One of the members of a beginning gymnastics class,
Gaspar is the putative narrator of a simple, direct continuous text in which
Kuklin describes basic exercises and defines a few terms. There isn't that much
needing definition, partly because nothing complicated is going on, and partly
because the color photographs make procedures clear. There is but one instance
in which a term is used (sitting "in pike") and explained but not shown. Two
teachers are shown working with nine young children (of both sexes),
encouraging but not rushing them, reminding them to be careful as well as to
use correct technique. Everybody seems to be having fun, and this book may
well encourage children to try it themselves. ZS
Lauber, Patricia. Summer of Fire: Yellowstone 1988. Orchard, 1991. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-08543-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05943-X. 64p. illus. with
photographs. Library ed. $17.99; Trade ed. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Introduced by a chapter that describes Yellowstone
Park and discusses its geophysical features, Lauber's text goes on to discuss the
fires that raged in the dry summer of 1988. Photographs are both dramatic and
informative; some are beautiful as well. The writing is cohesive and clear, the
material well-organized, so that readers can grasp facts about the fire itself, the
effects on flora and fauna, the regeneration of burned areas, and the as-yet-
unanswered questions that scientists seek on such topics as the ways that aspen
seedlings survive, or whether the routes of grazing animals change as new
meadows rise. While the quality of the photo reproduction is not as high as that
in either Patent's or Vogel and Goldner's books on the fire (both reviewed in the
7/90 issue), Lauber's account is more comprehensive. 
A glossary, a
bibliography, and an index are provided. ZS
C.U. Ecology
Liestman, Vicki. Columbus Day; illus. by Rick Hanson. Carolrhoda, 1991.
ISBN 0-87614-444-X. 56p. (On My Own Books). $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
See editorial
Lindberg, Becky Thoman. Speak Up, Chelsea Martin!; illus. by Nancy Poydar.
Whitman, 1991. ISBN 0-8075-7552-6. 157p. $10.50.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
"It sometimes seemed," thinks Chelsea about her bold
friend, "like Mary Lynne always got her own way." 
Chelsea does have
courage-motivated by an atrocity perpetrated by some fifth-grade boys ("Island
Fun Barbie had lost her head ... Who would do such an awful thing?"), she
stamps on the lunch of a friend's older brother-but she fears that such
assertiveness with Mary Lynne would end their friendship. Some moments are
gently funny: Chelsea glues rhinestones to her ears in an effort to pretend her
[42
ears are pierced, and she has a slightly strained visit to her father's house, where
her father's efforts to entertain her almost prevent both of them from having fun.
Unfortunately, the individual episodes lack punch and focus, detracting rather
than adding to the main plot. Lindberg resolves the central conflict with Mary
Lynne truthfully, however, and the book paints a sympathetic picture of third-
grade life and the ups and downs of friendship. DS
D.V. Friendship values; Shyness, overcoming
Lisle, Janet Taylor. 
The Lampfish of Twill; illus. by Wendy Anderson
Halperin. Jackson/Orchard, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08563-5; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-531-05963-4. 161p. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Twill is a tough place to survive, with its treacherous
coast and wild storms, so it's not surprising that the village fishcatchers have
fixated their grief and frustration in hunting for a creature that seems to represent
all the dangers of the sea. It takes a crazy old man-perhaps, we're never sure,
he's a ghost-and a young orphan boy to discover that the lampfish of Twill are
scapegoats which in fact represent a greater natural order. The ideas here are
impressive, especially the Underwhirl that pulls down the two main characters
and reveals the lampfishes' utopian habitat. By contrast, the actual development
sometimes suffers surface treatment, especially in passages that seem to expose
the fictional structure to explanation ("'I suppose next you're going to tell me
that's the reason everybody in Twill thought you were dead all those years,' Eric
said to Zeke. .... 'Right you are!' cried the fishcatcher"). Even the focus of
Eric's affection, Sir Gullstone Sea Gull, seems more functional than individual.
When the gull dies, we feel Eric has made progress toward letting things go-a
major theme in the book-more than we mourn the departed bird. On the other
hand, there's no lack of action and invention, and that's no small feat in
appealing to fantasy readers. Each of ten delicately textured, black-and-white
drawings depicts a dramatic scene along with miniature insets reflecting other
dimensions of the situation. BH
D.V. Animals, respect for
Litowinsky, Olga. The High Voyage: The Final Crossing of Christopher
Columbus. Delacorte, 1991 (first pub. 1977). ISBN 0-385-30304-1. 147p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
See editorial.
Lunn, Janet. 
One Hundred Shining Candles; illus. by Lindsay Grater.
Scribner's, 1991. ISBN 0-684-19280-2. 32p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Set in 1800, this Christmas vignette of rural life in
Upper Canada focuses on the plans of ten-year-old Lucy to brighten the family
Christmas. 
The family can't afford gifts, but Lucy-who has heard the
schoolmaster talk of city rooms lit by a hundred candles-makes five festive
candles, with her young brother's help. The surprise produces exactly the
parental pleasure for which Lucy had hoped. A pleasant holiday story is told in a
style that is fluent and direct, the framed line and wash drawings appropriately
simple if occasionally awkward in depicting the characters. ZS
D.V. Family relations
[43 ]
Maartens, Maretha. 
Paper Bird: A Novel of South Africa; tr. from the
Afrikaans by Madeleine van Biljon. Clarion, 1991. 
ISBN 0-395-56490-5.
[144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Since his father's death, Adam has been supporting
his sisters, brothers, and pregnant mother by selling newspapers outside their
black township of Phameng in South Africa. Even when the residents are
threatened with necklacing-being set fire in rubber tires-if they leave home for
work, Adam sneaks into the city for the weekend, sleeping under a freezing
stairwell, contracting a fever, and risking his life in order to collect his
newspaper money after his twin brothers are born. The story contains some
vivid scenes, once Adam's situation is established, especially the care shown
him by an old white man who shares his meager room with Adam and even sells
Adam's newspapers when the boy becomes too ill to work. Other aspects of the
book are less well developed, including the characterizations of Adam's family
and the nature of those who threaten him and his fellow workers. However,
readers familiar with South African politics will find that, despite a rather
choppy style of writing (or translation), this story increases their empathy with
young people caught in the tragedy of apartheid. BH
C.U. History-Modern
D.V. Interracial understanding; Perseverance
MacLachlan, Patricia. Journey. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-30427-7. 83p.
$13.50.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A collage of scenes, some present tense and some
past, portray eleven-year-old Journey's reaction to his mother's desertion of him
and his elder sister Cat. Their father's being long gone intensifies the trauma
and complicates the mending of a family that has always been sustained, Journey
finally realizes, by his grandparents. It is Grandfather who gives Journey back
his past, clarifies his present, and offers him a future-all in the form of
photographs that restore loving memories or focus attention on strong bonds.
Although the total effect of flipping through a photo album is vivid and integral
to the thematic motif, the segmentation of narrative with asterisks sometimes
seems more disjointed than necessary to convey the protagonist's development,
halting as that would naturally be. On the other hand, the scene fragments are
cinematically vivid, delivering a forceful memory of their own to perceptive
readers. BH
D.V. Family relations
Martin, Susan. I Sailed with Columbus; illus. by Tom La Padula. Overlook,
1991. ISBN 0-87951-431-0. 154p. $17.95.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
See editorial.
Marzollo, Jean. In 1492; illus. by Steve Bj6rkman. Scholastic, 1991. ISBN 0-
590-4413-1. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
See editorial.
McGraw, Eloise. The Striped Ships. McElderry, 1991. ISBN 0-689-50532-9.
[2 40p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[44]
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
It is 1066, and eleven-year-old Juliana, daughter of a
Saxon thane, is a horrified witness to the invasion of the Channel coast by a
fleet of Norman boats. The followers of William of Normandy loot and burn
and kill. Juliana, forced into bondage, mourns her warrior father and hopes that
other members of her family still live. She meets her younger brother Wulfric
and goes with him to Canterbury, where he is taken in by scholarly monks and
she moves from menial drudgery to working on what proves to be the Bayeux
Tapestry. Eventually Juliana finds her mother-now married to a Norman-and
it is only through talking to a Norman/Saxon monk that Juliana can accept this
union with the enemy. The focus is on the tapestry, but only after McGraw has
established background that makes the embroidery project more interesting and
has prepared readers for Juliana's interest in it. Although no sources are cited, it
is clear that the author has done considerable research, but the material about the
tapestry does not obscure the narrative. This is a trenchant period novel that has
strong characterization and solid structure and style. A glossary follows a brief
afterword about the fate of the tapestry over nine hundred years. ZS
C.U. History-England
Murphy, Claire Rudolf. Friendship Across Arctic Waters: Alaskan Cub Scouts
Visit Their Soviet Neighbors; illus. with photographs by Charles Mason.
Lodestar, 1991. ISBN 0-525-67348-2. 48p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
After a campaign of letter-writing by parents and
Scouting officials, eleven Cub Scouts from Nome, Alaska, get the chance to
visit their Soviet counterparts, the Young Pioneers, in Provideniya, a town two
hundred miles across the Bering Strait. The details of the trip-the new games
and food and friends-are appealing, and the theme of international understanding
is lightly worn. There is some confusion: the word potlatch is used twice but
never defined; the Young Pioneers organization is neither defined nor explained;
and while the Scouts are "a little confused because the Young Pioneers weren't
wearing their uniforms," neither are the American kids. Color photos are
plentiful and richly peopled, showing both Soviets and Americans enjoying a
host of good times. The conclusion briefly covers a return visit by the Pioneers
to Nome, and appended are a guide to the Cyrillic alphabet and a glossary. RS
D.V. International understanding
Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds. Shiloh. Atheneum, 1991. 
ISBN 0-689-31614-3.
[144p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Marty's soft spot for animals leaves him vulnerable
in the West Virginia countryside, where hunting is a common way to keep food
on the table. Shooting rabbits and deer makes him cringe, but sympathy for the
mistreated beagle he rescues from a brutal neighbor actually leads him to lie and
steal. Naylor shows sensitivity to the complex nature of moral action through
her protagonist's coming to terms with his family, his enemy, and his dog. The
mild dialect should not present problems in a text that's easy to read. Young
readers will be absorbed by the suspenseful plot, which will leave them with
some memorable characterizations as well as several intriguing ethical questions.
BH
D.V. Animals, kindness to; Loyalty
[45 ]
Park, Barbara. Rosie Swanson: Fourth-Grade Geek for President. Knopf, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-92094-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-82094-9. 
[114p].
Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5 
In a runaway sequel to Maxie, Rosie, and Earl (BCCB
9/90), Rosie recounts her bid to outstrip pretty Summer Lynne Jones and
popular Alan Allen in a race for fourth-grade president. She's determined that
somebody average (with glasses) should stand a chance, and she campaigns on
the issue of improving cafeteria food, which of course gives Park plenty of room
to exercise the humor of disgust so appealing to this age group. There's no
stinting on the meanness to which kids can stoop, including Rosie, who learns
unequivocally that stooping can backfire. Rosie's best friends, Maxie and Earl,
maintain sidekick status, and there are minor quickstudy characters as well,
especially the nasty girl who delights in downgrading Rosie's chances
("YOU'RE GONNA LUUUU-OOOOZE. 
YOU'RE GONNA LUUU-
OOOOZE"). While the third-person narration in the previous book was from
Earl's point of view, here the first-person narration is by Rosie, who has a
glibness that is natural but results in an offhand, sometimes choppy style. The
peer group dynamics are almost uncomfortably lifelike, the tone frenetic, and the
readership assured. BH
D.V. Group acceptance
Pelta, Kathy. Discovering Christopher Columbus: How History Is Invented.
Lerner, 1991. ISBN 0-8225-4889-2. [112p]. illus. with photographs. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-10 
See editorial
Pinkwater, Daniel. 
Wempires; written and illus. by Daniel Pinkwater.
Macmillan, 1991. ISBN 0-02-774411-6. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
After watching an old horror movie on Saturday
afternoon, Jonathan decides he wants to be a vampire. Dressing like one at
home isn't enough, he wants to wear his cape, make-up, and fangs to school,
too, but his teacher and parents soon put a stop to that. When an identical trio
of vampires (shades of the nocturnal bakers of In the Night Kitchen) climbs in
through Jonathan's bedroom window, he discovers the truth about vampires.
They talk more like they're from Brooklyn than Transylvania ("Hallo, sonnyboy
... How's by you?" and "Wempires! That's us!") and they think drinking blood
is disgusting ("Drinking blood-yich! ... Now for drinking, ginger ale is best.
Maybe you have some ginger ale in the house?"). After they leave, Jonathan is
far from disillusioned with the real thing-he still wants to be a "wempire."
The joke doesn't quite come off and the plot is thin, but the dialect presents
colorful opportunities for a read-aloud. Still, it's typical Pinkwater, silly and
lighthearted, illustrated with his familiar, dumb-but-fun magic-marker cartoons.
KPJ
Pullman, Philip. Spring-Heeled Jack: A Story of Bravery and Evil; illus. by
David Mostyn. Knopf, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91057-3; Paper ed. ISBN
0-679-81057-9. 112p. Library ed. $10.99; Paper ed. $8.00.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
In a format that combines crisply inked cartoons with
narrative text, Pullman and Mostyn both spoof and enjoy the conventions of
[46
Victorian melodrama. 
Rose, Lily, and Ned have been imprisoned in an
orphanage "where the porridge was as thin as the blankets" since their father
disappeared at sea and their mother died. They run away, intending to seek
passage on a ship to America, but are soon in the clutches of Mack the Knife
and his gang. Spring-Heeled Jack, who dresses like the devil and has springs in
his shoes to help him leap, comes to the rescue: I'm on your side, my dear!
I'm good! I catch villains! I avenge wrongs. I do all kinds of stuff." Good
does triumph, but not before a satisfyingly complicated sequence of events and
apparent reversals of fortune. The humor is unsubtle and occasionally labored,
but readers will enjoy its excesses as much as they will appreciate the novelties
of the format--and the footnotes: "3. Nob him on the canister: whack him on
the head." RS
Reiss, Kathryn. Time Windows. Harcourt, 1991. 
ISBN 0-15-288205-7.
[192p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Exploring the attic of the old house into which her
family has moved, Miranda finds a dollhouse that is an exact replica of her new
home. Certainly this is a device familiar to-and loved by-time-fantasy fans,
but here it acquires a turn even scarier than usual. When Miranda, thirteen,
looks through the windows of the dollhouse, she sees the two families who had
previously lived in the house: the first, a husband, wife and little girl who lived
there in the early 1900's; the second, a 1940's couple with two young sons.
Events in the lives of these families become increasingly frightening, as in each
case, the mother begins to hurt her children. And the past becomes the present
when Miranda's funny and warm mother becomes an abusive stranger. The
atmosphere is agreeably gothic, and the manipulations of the time-shift are
satisfyingly intricate without becoming convoluted. Miranda discovers a dark
secret-and a corpse-in the heart of the house, and manages to.... well, find
out for yourself: it's a good yam. RS
Sachar, Louis. Dogs Don't Tell Jokes. Knopf, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-
92017-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-82017-5. [176p]. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed.
$14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Seventh-grader Gary Boone, popularly (or, rather,
unpopularly) known as Goon, is a jokester. "Gary never cried," Sachar explains
rather baldly. "He laughed. The more it hurt, the more he laughed." Goon's
angst-ridden preparation for a stand-up comic routine in the school talent show
becomes an identity crisis in which he must sort out his real gift from a habit of
comically camouflaging his feelings. This aspect of the book is well developed,
but the non-stop jokes become wearing, and the actual appearance of one of
Gary's fictitious characters, Mrs. Snitzberry, seems too abrupt a break from
realism to fantasy--or, if it's a symptom of nervous breakdown, unconvincing.
The balance between action and character dynamics in There's a Boy in the Girls'
Bathroom (BCCB 4/87) is missing here, but the tension between humor and
poignancy is delicately maintained. Readers who enjoyed Class Clown by
Johanna Hurwitz (BCCB 4/87) will find a more complex, if sometimes
frustrating, treatment of the same prototype here. BH
D.V. Self-expression; Social behavior
[47 ]
San Souci, Robert D. The Christmas Ark; illus. by Daniel San Souci.
Doubleday, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-385-24837-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-
24836-9. 32p. Library ed. $16.99; Trade ed. $16.00.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Despite the painting on the dedication page (animals,
two by two) of what seems to be Noah's Ark, this is the story of a Christmas
ark manned by elfin sailors and commanded by St. Nicholas. There is a realistic
matrix: Sarah and Elizabeth are on shipboard with their mother, slowly sailing
to San Francisco, where their father has established a store to take advantage of
Gold Rush commerce. The Christmas ark flies down to the ship, where the girls
are on deck, and St. Nicholas picks them up for a magical voyage during which
they are allowed to pick one Christmas which they agree will be their special
Christmas. It will surprise few readers that they don't agree until they see their
sleeping father and the gifts he has prepared for them. That's it, and the girls
return to real life as abruptly and unconvincingly as they left it. The paintings
tend to be slightly florid, but they are technically proficient. The story may be
weak, incorporating a repetitive reve a deux within a narrow framework of period
fiction, but the combination of the flying ship and the Christmas setting should
appeal to the read-aloud audience. ZS
Sanfield, Steve. The Feather Merchants and Other Fools of Chelm; illus. by
Mikhail Magaril. Jackson/Orchard, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08558-9;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05958-8. 102p. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Inspired by stories he heard as a child, Sanfield
recounts the antics of citizens in the Yiddish fools' paradise of Chelm, including
the founding of the town and the endless philosophical debates that sustain it.
Why didn't God give wings to the cow, asks one elder, and finds his answer
when a low-flying bird relieves itself directly onto his head. 
From the
judgments of the rabbi (who repudiates information about the birds and bees
because when he put them together "nothing, absolutely nothing happened") to
the riddles of Oyzar the Scholar, these will add to the rich legacy bequeathed by
Isaac Bashevis Singer in The Fools of Chelm and Their History (BCCB 2/74).
Black-and-white woodcuts, spare but spontaneous, use traditional stylistic motifs
to innovative effect. An afterword describes the author's journey to the East
European sites where a thriving Yiddish culture was destroyed during the
Holocaust. 
Both the glossary and the bibliography will prove helpful to
storytellers as well as to young readers. BH
C.U. Storytelling
Sansevere-Dreher, Diane. Barbara Bush. Bantam, 1991. Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-
15817-1. [11 2p]. (Changing Our World). Paper ed. $2.99. Reviewed from
galleys.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
Despite the charisma of its subject, this biography is
tedious, in part due to the choppy writing style and in part to the fact that the
text is extended by the inclusion of peripheral material. Boxed digressions
include "The Central Intelligence Agency," "The Great Wall of China,"
Leukemia," and "Millie: 'The First Dog.'" A listing of presidents and their
wives omits Lou Hoover. The author frequently strikes an adulatory note, but
does provide facts. Appended is a "Special Message from Barbara Bush" about
reading (an appeal to children, published in a newspaper), a chronology, and an
[48]
index-and, oddly, a list of quick facts about the United States, including
statistics on life expectancy and on the per capita gross national product. ZS
Schlein, Miriam. 
I Sailed with Columbus; illus. by Tom Newsom.
HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022514-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
022513-0. [14 4p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
See editorial.
Shreve, Susan. The Girl Who Couldn't Hear. Tambourine, 1991. ISBN 0-688-
10318-9. [80p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Elizabeth, thirteen, tells the story of the 7th grade
musical (always the Big Event of the school year), of her own refusal to try out
because she has grown fat and has skin trouble, and of her deaf friend Lucy who
can't sing but does sign up for the audition. This could almost be a short story,
save for the fact that its duration permits the element of suspense, as sunny Lucy
valiantly tries to learn to sing, unaware of the fact that her classmates make fun
of her behind her back, literally, because then she can't read their lips. Eliza,
filled with gloom at the fact that the lead part was what she had been waiting for
since third grade (she sings well, but knows she'd look awful on stage), is
stunned when the director calls her to the stage.. Somebody has put her name on
the list, imitating her handwriting perfectly. Who could it be but Lucy? Eliza
is telling both her story and Lucy's but it is the image of the latter that
dominates the book; Lucy accepts her limitations with equanimity, is not afraid
to try something new, and has confidence in Eliza's ability and the conviction
that one should help a troubled friend. Shreve doesn't sentimentalize or
glamorize; instead of preaching, she lets her characters speak for themselves. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Handicaps, adjustment to
Sis, Peter. Follow the Dream: The Story of Christopher Columbus; written
and illus. by Peter Sis. Knopf, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90628-2; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-679-80628-8. 32p. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
See editorial.
Skurzynski, Gloria. Almost the Real Thing: Simulation in Your High-Tech
World. Bradbury, 1991. ISBN 0-02-778072-4. [64p.] illus. with photographs.
$15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Liberally illustrated by large color photographs of
professional quality, this is an interesting gathering of facts about high-tech
simulation, whether it concerns the simulation of an environment (wind tunnel
or quake table) or the simulation of a structure (aircraft, or building). The text
discusses the difference between physical simulation and computer simulation,
and considers the ways in which both of these contribute to safety, accurate
measurement, and economy. Using simulation in training, for example: an
F/A-18 fighter jet costs $40 million, while the F/A-18 simulator costs $20
million. Skurzynski concludes with a description of the computer-generated
"virtual reality" in which the operator can move inside the image. The writing
style is direct, the tone matter-of-fact; a glossary and an index are provided. ZS
C.U. Science
[49 ]
Sleator, William. The Spirit House. Dutton, 1991. ISBN 0-525-44814-4.
[192p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Sleator here steps away from his usual science-fiction
slant to write an eerie evil-spirit story that is both scary and convincing. Julie is
relieved that Bia, a Thai exchange student who has come to live with her family,
is not the earnest and bookish student he appeared to be in his letters, but she
soon becomes suspicious that Bia is not the same boy they were expecting. At
first charming, Bia becomes manipulative and secretive-and scared of the "spirit
house" Julie's younger brother Dominic builds in the backyard to make Bia feel
at home. Bia believes, as, increasingly, does Julie, that the house is inhabited
by a vengeful spirit named Phii-Gaseu: "Look like lady head... lady head with
no body and entrail coming from neck. Very bad spirit." The evil atmosphere is
enhanced by the possibility that Bia and Julie may be imagining Phii-Gaseu's
revenge; all of the events in the story are entirely possible, if unremittingly
frightening. A stormy climax is appropriately theatrical, and, just as Julie (and
the reader) decides that the spirit has been successfully propitiated, there's a nervy
twist in the last sentence. Title, author, and alluringly menacing cover art
guarantee that this won't be a shelf-sitter. RS
Stevenson, James. The Worst Person's Christmas; written and illus. by James
Stevenson. Greenwillow, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10211-5; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-688-10210-7. 32p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Fans of the curmudgeon known as "the worst" will
enjoy his by-now-expectable thawing; here he is a veritable Scrooge in his
responses to holiday greetings or invitations. However, propelled (literally) into
a Christmas party, the "worst person in the world" thaws to the point of giving
his dog a biscuit. For "the worst" that's sentimental largesse. The flyaway line
and light washes of the cartoon-like illustrations share the humor of the writing
and-nicely integrated-share as well in the development of the story. ZS
Stevenson, Laura C. The Island and the Ring. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-
56401-8. [304p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 9-12 
In the confusion created by a traitorous attack on her
father's castle, Princess Tania slips a powerful ring into her pocket. She is aided
in her escape of the fighting by a court minstrel named Eliar, and Tania forgets
all about the ring as the two of them travel to safety. In his desperation to
retrieve the source of his power, Ascanet, the evil ruler of their island, tracks the
ring to Tania. She discovers reluctantly that she now has the potential to
overthrow Ascanet. This has all the elements of classic high fantasy-an
appealing heroine, magic, action, journeys, love, several difficult ethical
decisions for Tania, and, of course, good versus evil. Lord Ascanet is a truly
despicable character who keeps his subjects in line with trained hippogriffs
(mythically huge predatory birds) and his servants under control by locking their
faces in boxes along a stairwell in his ice castle. The only flaw in an otherwise
very good fantasy is the lack of explanation for Tania's ultimate success; the
omniscient hermit explanation of the complex interweaving of the plot should
include the reason why Tania's tears defeated Ascanet. It is also refreshingly
satisfying for a fantasy to be kept to one volume. At the end of the story we're
sure that good has prevailed. KPJ
[50]
Stolz, Mary. Deputy Shep; illus. by Pamela Johnson. HarperCollins, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026040-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026039-4. 91p. Library
ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-5. 
Deputy Shep works-well, sort of works-the
nighttime police beat in a village whose canine citizenry has suddenly
experienced a rash of robberies. Whoever has taken Mrs. Whippet's cameo
brooch, Mr. Aire-Setter's silver spoon, Major Ridgeback's war medal, and Mrs.
Peke's ruby collar always leaves a button in place of the stolen object. Shep's
investigation, interrupted by frequent naps as well as by the report of a runaway
horse, the birth of the Bassetts' first puppies, and loud disturbances by lovesick
fire dog Chief Dal, is fairly haphazard; it's only coincidence that leads him to the
culprit. Kids won't mind. The reading is easy, the tone mildly funny, and the
black-and-white pencil drawings comically engaging. Dog-lovers or mystery
fans will gulp down the clever and contrived together. BH
Tripp, Valerie. Meet Felicity: An American Girl: Book One; illus. by Dan
Andreasen and with photographs. Pleasant Company, 1991. Trade ed. ISBN 1-
56247-003-5; Paper ed. ISBN 1-56247-004-3. 
[69p]. (The American Girls
Collection). Trade ed. $12.95; Paper ed. $5.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Nine-year-old Felicity Merriman would rather visit
her father's shop than help her mother with sewing or cooking; her proclivity for
action leads her to tame and ride a horse that's mistreated by a local drunken
tanner. The time is 1774; the setting, Williamsburg; and the series, a cleverly
formatted new addition to the American Girls doll collection. The characters all
appear in captioned portraits at the beginning of the book. Though they don't
gain much depth in the course of the story and their dialogue is clich6d, the plot
is fast paced and the reading easy. Capably rendered paintings, both full-page and
miniature insets, decorate a handsomely designed text. This will be snapped up
as a gift item and demanded in libraries as a popular historical fiction formula.
BH
C.U. 
History-U.S.-Colonial
D.V. Sex roles
Turner, Bonnie. The Haunted Igloo. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-57037-7.
[176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Boys, dogs, and adventure in the frozen North:
classic appeals are served here in a well-told historical novel. It's the early
1930's, and ten-year-old Jean-Paul, small for his age and lame, feels frightened
by his family's new life in Canada's Northwest Territories: he's afraid of the
dark and of the local Eskimo boys, and he feels intimidated by his strict but
loving father. And what will happen when the new baby comes? While the
working-out of the story is a little formulaic, and the writing is occasionally old-
fashioned ("her moods were as changeable as the Northern Lights") the total
effect is satisfying. Jean-Paul, after a scary initiation, becomes fast friends with
the Eskimo boys; the runt sled dog he raises becomes brave and resourceful; the
baby is safely delivered, in the "haunted" igloo, after a suspenseful sled ride
through a blizzard. Less introspective (and more fun) than Gary Paulsen, this is
a natural for the boys'-books shelf. RS
D.V. Fear, overcoming
[51
Ure, Jean. Plague. Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-262429-5. [224p]. $16.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Fran comes back from a month of "Outward Bound"-
like living to discover that London, her home, has been cordoned off, and the
children she sees outside the barrier are wearing gauze masks. After finding a
way through the barbed wire, she goes through the deserted streets to her house
where she finds her parents dead. In a parallel story, Shahid, one of Fran's
schoolmates, looks after his dying father and worries about catching the fatally
infectious plague himself. 
Eventually Fran, her now-mad friend Harriet
("Harry"), and Shahid find each other and try to make their way out of the city.
The desolation of these three adolescents, all high school seniors, is darkly
enthralling, but the story isn't up to the atmosphere. Harry wanders off; Shahid
catches the disease but doesn't die (why not?); the novel ends with Fran and
Shahid on the road to Cornwall, two hundred miles away. 
Such
inconclusiveness may be realistic, but it isn't particularly good storytelling
(and/or may indicate plans for a sequel). What works best in this book is its
sense of anonymous and deadly menace, and the brave spirits of three teens who
face it. RS
D.V. Friendship values
Westall, Robert. Echoes of War. Farrar, 1991. ISBN 0-374-31964-2. [96p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Five short stories on war bring home aspects of the
experience young Americans are unlikely to have considered. Not the battle
exploits or desperate refugee stories so prevalent, these pieces depict the effects
of war on those at home, or those in the next (and even the still next)
generation-those generally considered well out of it. Although the plotting is
occasionally weak, the images will impress: the boy who discovers that the
mines on his supposedly heavily fortified beach are purely mythical; the sadness
of the gung-ho Home Guard at seeing the Canadians and Americans perform the
job that the local boys hunger to do; and the shell-shocked grandfather
reminiscing about his collection of objects from the trenches ("Lot o' fellers still
owe me money, but they're dead. So I took a little thing from their kit,
instead"). The British idiom lends flavor to accounts that are more likely than
most to generate an understanding of the impact of this century's wars on
ordinary people's lives. DS
Yep, Laurence. The Lost Garden. Messner, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-671-
74159-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-74160-8. 117p. illus. with photographs. (In
My Own Words). Library ed. $14.98; Trade ed. $12.95.
R* 
Gr. 6-9. 
Whether his books are science fiction or realistic
fiction, Laurence Yep writes with a sure sense of what to emphasize and what's
tangential. To achieve the same kind of discernment in writing of his own life
is even more impressive, for Yep's sense of story is such that he never dwells on
what is personal-but-dull. A quiet humor pervades his writing, and some of the
anecdotes of this life story are made memorable by that wry humor. The book is
permeated with affection for members of Yep's family, but it is never cloying,
and he writes with perceptive retrospection of the ambivalence of belonging to
two cultures and with candor about the problems that entailed. ZS
[52 1
Yolen, Jane, ed. 2041: Twelve Short Stories about the Future by Top Science
Fiction Writers. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-30445-5. 222p. $16.00.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Young people are the protagonists in an anthology
that ranges in quality, with most selections being above average. A baseball
story, set in a future time when Fenway Park is sinking into the ocean, is
perhaps the least interesting ("The Last Out" by Nelson and Smith). Some of the
best include a story of variant cultures, "Beggarman" by Susan Shwartz; Yolen's
"Ear," a wry look at what lies ahead for "rock and roll deafness"; or the final
story-brief and pointed-in which Bruce Coville looks at the conformity of the
future in "Old Glory." ZS
Zambreno, Mary Frances. A Plague of Sorcerers. Yolen/Harcourt, 1991. ISBN
0-15-262430-9. [224p]. $16.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Jermyn is an apprentice magician in a world where
magic is commonplace but Jermyn's talent is not. Although his power is
considerable, he is still too green a magician to maintain control over his skills.
And it's right now that he's needed most-not only are the corrupt wizards at
Weather Hall intentionally creating disastrous weather, but also a plague has
struck down most of the honest sorcerers. This story of an ordinary boy with
extraordinary powers is highly reminiscent of the best of Diana Wynne Jones, as
is some of the humor-for example, Jermyn's misfortune in having attracted an
unusual familiar, an affectionate skunk named Delia. The psychological
resolution of the mysterious cause of the sorcerers' plague is slightly
anachronistic-the tale seems to shift from its vaguely Renaissance-like setting
to a modem one. But all the twists of the tale, from Delia the skunk to the
source of the plague to allusions of psychological abuse, make this a fresh
fantasy. KPJ
Ziefert, Harriet. Bigger Than a Baby; illus. by Laura Rader. HarperCollins,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026903-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026902-2. [32p].
Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Line-and-wash drawings in framed blocks illustrate a
book that deals with the basics of human reproduction as well as the concepts of
growth, change, emotions, and the learning process. Perhaps because the spread
is so broad, the coverage seems superficial. Directed toward young children, the
iterative text seems designed to reassure them that they will continue to grow
and learn in the same way that they have progressed from infancy to their present
state of preschool maturity. ZS
D.V. Growing up