Aaseng, Nathan. Florence Griffith Joyner: Dazzling Olympian. Lerner, 1989.
ISBN 0-8225-0495-2. 60p. illus. with photographs. (The Achievers). $8.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
A winning subject, Flo Jo makes for interesting
reading as well as photogenic television coverage. Aaseng exercises a smooth
style in covering the runner's youth as the determined seventh of eleven children
[ 101]
in a Watts housing project. In kindergarten, Griffith Joyner asserted her
trademark sense of style with a braid that stuck straight up; her standing as a
track star took longer to establish, but the account of her development in
combining hard training with relaxed races is inspiring. Abundant sports-news
photos in black and white illustrate the text. A role model to remember. BH
C.U. Physical education
D.V. Individuality, expressing; Perseverance
Adler, C. S. The Lump in the Middle. Clarion, 1989. ISBN 0-89919-869-4.
154p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Kelsey's misfortune of being born the middle of three
sisters is magnified by her apprehension about the summer looming ahead.
Under other circumstances, Kelsey, a beach lover, would look forward to a
couple of months on Cape Cod. This summer, however, Dad has lost his job
and the place on the beach is charity housing from an aunt. Meanwhile, Kelsey
hates the sacrifices the family expects from her, she can't stand her little sister's
bratty behavior, and she envies her older sister's cool bravery. Kelsey's
problems seem overly dramatic, especially when she gets caught in a string of
lies while attempting to interest a boy, Gabe. Yet Adler knows her audience and
has developed Kelsey's egocentric agony over family and romance to mirror that
of a typical adolescent. Readers will relate to Kelsey, feeling her confusion
when Gabe tells her his father is dying, as well as her relief when her dad has a
promising job interview. KP
D.V. Family relations
Adler, David A. We Remember the Holocaust. Holt, 1989. ISBN 0-8050-
0434-3. 147p. illus. with photographs. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Similar in organization to Milton Meltzer's Never to
Forget: The Jews of the Holocaust (BCCB 9/76) but closer in age level to
Miriam Chaikin's A Nightmare in History: The Holocaust 1933-1945 (BCCB
1/88), this nevertheless complements those books (Barbara Rogasky's Smoke
and Ashes is for an older audience) because of the distinctive voices of survivors
whom Adler has interviewed. Black-and-white photographs depicting them as
young people at the time of the war are scattered throughout the book along with
historical photos; some of the latter are familiar from frequent publication, while
others project uncommon impact. The material is organized chronologically,
from the German post-World War I depression through Hitler's rise to power,
Kristallnacht, destruction of the ghettos, development of the concentration
camps, and Allied liberation. Although readers will find themselves switching
back and forth from textual descriptions to the earlier placed photographs, Adler
has avoided the kind of repetition inherent in presenting each person's story
complete. The quotes are well incorporated into the informational context. An
extensive chronology, glossary, and list of suggested children's or young adult
books will be helpful to researching students, as will the bibliography and index.
BH
C.U. History-World War II, 1939-1945
D.V. Pride in background and heritage
[ 102]
Allen, Thomas B. On Grandaddy's Farm; written and illus. by Thomas B.
Allen. Knopf, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99613-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-
89613-0. 40p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Confidently sketched and openly composed pastel
drawings illustrate a nostalgic but unsentimental reminiscence of childhood
summers. There's no plot here, just a casual catalogue by the narrator of the
work and play he and his two cousins would enjoy while staying with their
grandparents. Grandaddy, a railroad brakeman, is away most of the week, so the
children have many chores and projects ("I liked it best when it was a big job
that needed doing") that make hayloft-jumping and skinnydipping seem all the
more rewarding. Untouched by trouble, this is an innocent text dedicated
primarily to captioning the serenely textured pictures. RS
Ancona, George. Handtalk Zoo; by George Ancona and Mary Beth; illus. with
photographs by George Ancona. Four Winds, 1989. ISBN 0-02-700801-0.
30p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
Color photographs show the bright faces and deft
hands of an interracial group of children who are visiting a zoo with two adults,
one of whom is co-author Mary Beth. Like the previous Handtalk (BCCB 5/74)
and Handtalk Birthday, this is permeated with the message that physical
limitations are a superficial difference; the five boys and girls shown here are
lively, responsive, and intelligent guides to the zoo and to the signs used to
describe its inhabitants. Signs for sentences ("Let's go see the bear") are
demonstrated in sequential photographs; fingerspellings are also given for the
animals' names. ZS
C.U. Language arts
D.V. Handicaps, overcoming-deafness
Andronik, Catherine M. Questfor a King: Searchingfor the Real King Arthur.
Atheneum, 1989. 
ISBN 0-689-31411-6. 
120p. illus. with photographs.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-12. 
While lacking the romantic allure of the tales
themselves, this summary of Arthurian research is thoughtful, open-minded, and
intrinsically intriguing. Examining the myths of the man himself, his family
and knights, Merlin, Camelot, and Excalibur; the author carefully sorts through
often contradictory medieval documents and the work of contemporary scholars.
Some of the research is too casually attributed and seems credulously strained:
"Not far away is a rise called Trusty's Hill. Trusty could be short for Tristram.
Many scholars believe that Tristram was Pictish, so it would be logical to find a
place in northern Britain named after him." This book isn't a good start for
those unfamiliar with the core stories of the legend, but for confirmed buffs it
will provide enlightening exercise. The typeface is fussy and hard to read; black-
and-white photographs, a reading list of nonfiction and retellings, and an index
are included. RS
C.U. History--Great Britain
[ 103]
Bach, Alice. 
Moses' Ark: Stories from the Bible; by Alice Bach and J.
Cheryl Exum; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-
29778. [192p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Thirteen stories, including those of Adam and Eve,
Noah, Moses, Deborah, Samson, Saul, David, Solomon, and Elijah, all feature
an eye-filling illustration at the beginning and knowledgeable notes at the end.
Bach and Exum have taken pains to point out important aspects of translation
and historical context, and their narrative is carefully rendered and readable. It is
perhaps going too far to claim that this is "the only collection of Bible stories
based on the original language, informed by the fruits of contemporary biblical
scholarship, and written especially for children." The authors give an example of
translating tevah as ark instead of basket in the story of Moses, but both Philip
Turner in Brian Wildsmith's Illustrated Bible Stories (BCCB 6/69) and Bernard
Evslin in Signs and Wonders: Tales from the Old Testament use ark as well.
Nevertheless, this does represent a solid alternative to those and other
collections. 
The stories are well told, with the exception of occasional
information-loaded dialogue ("What is an exodus?" asks a young adviser of the
Pharaoh) and a few awkward tonal breaks ("You haven't seen anything yet," says
Elijah in a confrontation with King Ahab, at whom the prophet had earlier
"growled with a sneer"). The balance of the text is smooth, and the Dillons'
powerful black and white drawings, together with a handsome book design, add
up to a thoughtfully conceived book. BH
C.U. Religious education
Banks, Lynne Reid. The Secret of the Indian; illus. by Ted Lewin. Doubleday,
1989. ISBN 0-385-26292-2. 147p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
"What I thought I saw," Omri's headmaster says
thoughtfully, "was two tiny, living people in the palm of a boy's hand." That
was indeed what he had seen, much to the dismay of Omri and his friend Patrick.
This is the third story about the diminutive character who bring adventure to two
English boys. The charm of little people and the appeal of shifts in space and
time will hold the fans of the first two books and will probably create new ones.
This isn't as well-constructed as the first book (The Indian in the Cupboard,
BCCB 10/81) so there is less suspense and rather less momentum, but it is well-
written and has enough action, along with its other appeals, to ensure the
attention of readers. ZS
Barden, Renardo. Gangs. Crestwood House, 1989. ISBN 0-89686-440-5. 48p.
illus. with photographs. (Facts About Books). $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-12. 
Divided into twenty brief "chapters" ith many color
photographs, this entry in a high-low series is attractively formatted. The
subject has great appeal, and Barden includes several anecdotes about the Crips
(the name "comes from the members' practice of shooting their enemies in the
kneecaps") and the Bloods, two big L.A. gang networks. With a bit of history,
a smidge of psychology, and touches of sociology and criminology, this is a
manageable summary of a topic of prurient or personal interest to many kids.
The sequencing of the short sections could have been more organized, and there
[104]
are no sources or bibliography, but the writing is smooth and unsensationalized.
RS
C.U. Social studies
Beatty, Patricia. Sarah and Me and the Lady from the Sea. Morrow, 1989.
ISBN 0-688-08045-6. 182p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Marcella is twelve, oldest of the three Abbott
children, and the narrator of a story set in Oregon in 1894. Because of a flood,
Mr. Abbott's business fails, and the family must give up their comfortable life-
style and stay at their summer home on the Washington State peninsula.
Marcella frets at the change, at what she considers poverty, at the necessity of
getting along with the local people. She's the last in her family to acknowledge
that their neighbors, the Kimballs, are kind and helpful; eventually the Kimball
girl who is her own age becomes a good friend. One of the bonds between them
is their concern for (as in the title) the young woman who is one of the
survivors of a wreck, and who is recovering from pneumonia and who cannot
speak English or be understood when she talks in what proves to be Russian.
Save for the flood, none of the material in the story is factual, although Beatty
explains in her usual closing author's note that some of the incidents (the
shipwreck, a dead whale washed ashore) were not uncommon. The story, which
is adequately written and strong in period details but not in characterization, has a
plot that is believable but lacks momentum. The book gives a good picture of
the helplessness of most moneyed women of the period, and Beatty moves this
one (Marcella's mother) from ineptitude to the acquisition of enough new skills
to make her announce that she wants to go into business. ZS
Blumberg, Rhoda. The Great American Gold Rush. Bradbury, 1989. ISBN 0-
02-711681-6. 136p. illus. and with photographs. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 6-. 
Profusely illustrated with cartoons and sketches from
publications of the gold rush years, 1848-1852, this oversize book is an
impressive combination of good bookmaking, thorough (and documented)
research, a lively writing style, and logical arrangement of material. Source
material, cited in an appended section by chapters, is used within the text; an
extensive relative index is provided, as is a bibliography that is divided into
primary and secondary sources. It is rare to find so illuminating a new book on
an old subject. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Calmenson, Stephanie. The Principal's New Clothes; illus. by Denise Brunkus.
Scholastic, 1989. ISBN 0-590-41822-X. 40p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
When jazzy dresser Mr. Bundy strides through the
school assembly wearing only his A-B-C boxer shorts and Argyle socks, expect
giggles. 
The humorous pin-striped illustrations alone could carry the story,
from the sly expressions of the trickster-tailors to Mr. Bundy's bemused look as
he checks the mirror after donning his "new suit." Adults will enjoy reading the
story aloud; there's plenty of satire, as in Mr. Bundy passing out gold stars to
whoever pleases him. Although this moder adaptation won't take the place of
Andersen's classic The Emperor's New Clothes, it proceeds from the sensible
[105]
idea that children will relish traditional comedy in the updated setting of a
school. KP
Carroll, Lewis. Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and Through the Looking-
Glass; illus. by Mark6ta Prachaticki. Wellington, 1989. ISBN 0-922984-01-8.
165p. $29.95.
R 
Gr. 4-. 
Prague artist PrachatickA, who won the 1984 Premio
Grafico prize at the Bologna Children's Book Fair for these illustrations, projects
a surrealistic tone with meticulous traditional drafting. Imaginatively reflecting
the sharp-edged fantasy world of Alice's journeys, her large-scale, pen-and-ink
drawings comprise a collector's item worthy of a place near Tenniel's original
art. With their eerie figures and illusionary frames and planes, the pictures will
fascinate children as well as connoiseurs. Many of the effects derive from
minute hatch and crosshatch, a technique drawing the eye deep into textural
contrasts and tantalizing perspectives. BH
Cohen, Susan. What Kind of Dog Is That?; by Susan and Daniel Cohen.
Cobblehill/Dutton, 1989. 
ISBN 0-525-65011-3. 
131p. illus. with
photographs. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-. 
The authors give brief descriptions, four or five pages
each, of twenty-five breeds of rare or unusual dogs, some of which are recognized
by the American Kennel Club, while others are not. (Technically, those not so
recognized are "rare.") A photograph or two is included in each short essay,
which gives facts about the history of the breed, about its appearance as it
matures, and about its personality and popularity. For the animal-lover, the
information and the pictures will be satisfying, especially since a bibliography, a
list of rare breed organizations, and a relative index make that information more
accessible. However, even animal lovers may find the undeviating tone of
rapturous admiration ("Then the British fell captive to the charms of the
vigorous Little Lion Dog") a bit tiresome. ZS
Cooney, Caroline B. Family Reunion. Bantam, 1989. ISBN 0-553-05836-3.
169p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
What was meant to be a quiet summer in Vermont for
the Wollcotts gets disrupted by an invitation to a family reunion. Everyone in
the family is apprehensive about the trip-Dad, who had run away before he
graduated from high school, stepmother Annette, who will be meeting her in-
laws, twelve-year-old Angus, who is afraid his relatives will think he's weird,
and fourteen-year-old Shelley, who anticipates lots of condescending pity about
their "broken home." Shelley's first-person narrative is flippant and at times
cynical, especially when she describes her father's progression of spouses as
Wife Number One, Number Two (her mother) and Number Three (Annette). The
story slowly reveals that Shelley's flippancy serves to hide her fears, and her
cynicism hides her anger at her mother for running off to France with a lover.
At the reunion, Shelley makes two big discoveries that help her understand her
family and herself. Although the family problems are serious ones, Cooney
writes with such a light touch that the story sometimes seems superficial, as in
Shelley describing her brother as "the VCR" of her life when she realizes she's
[106]
been watching him and not living for herself. In fact, the wholesome family
photograph on the cover suggests that Family Reunion would translate well into
a made-for-TV movie. KP
D.V. Family relations
Cooper, Michael. Klondike Fever: The Famous Gold Rush of 1898. Clarion,
1989. ISBN 0-89919-803-1. 80p. illus. with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Like the Blumberg title reviewed above, this is an
oversize book, profusely illustrated with contemporary photographs, with a
bibliography and a good index. The provision and arrangement of the material
are quite adequate, and only in two respects is this less impressive than the
Blumberg book: one is the fact that coverage is not as broad, and the other, that
Cooper tends to invent colorful details to dramatize incidents, particularly in the
first chapters describing the prospecting career of Robert Henderson. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
Cowing, Sheila. Searches in the American Desert; illus. with photographs and
maps by Walter S. Cowing. McElderry, 1989. ISBN 0-689-50469-1. 177p.
$14.95.
R* 
Gr. 7-. 
The organizing principle guiding the wealth of detail
in this book demonstrates the singular virtues of the well-chosen approach.
Cowing's subject is the American Southwest, her perspective is historical, her
theme is pilgrimage. Taking in turn the searches for gold, souls, freedom,
history, and other Grails both real and imagined, Cowing shows the lure of the
impossible landscape to be irresistible. The Spaniards came for treasure, the
Mormons found the natural hostility of the Great Basin preferable to the
persecution they suffered in the East, Robert Oppenheimer needed a secret place
to develop the atom bomb. For all of them, Native American inhabitants
provided both historical and contemporary evidence that life could be found and
made. The doggedness of some of the quests is staggering: it took several
explorers almost seventy-five years to determine that there was no river that led
to the Pacific through the southwest. Beginning in 1904, Los Angeles fought
for forty years to take water from Owen Valley, a controversy that still simmers
today. While other books provide an ecological awareness of the desert's natural
inhabitants, this one provokes a new look at ourselves-unwelcome but
tenacious intruders. RS
C.U. History-U.S.
D.V. Perseverance
Cuyler, Margery. Weird Wolf; illus. by Dirk Zimmer. Holt, 1989. ISBN 0-
8050-0835-7. 72p. (Redfeather Books). $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
On page one of a fast-paced story, nine-year-old Harry
Walpole turns into a werewolf. Harry is immediately hit with a werewolf's
insatiable appetite, not for blood from young women's necks, but rather for
McDonald's hamburgers. Naturally, Harry keeps his misfortune a secret and has
to think up excuses for appearing naked in unexpected places at dawn. After
doing some research in the school library, Harry learns seven ways to stop being
a werewolf and finds himself indebted to pesty Abby Horowitz after she
[107]
inadvertently breaks his curse. The pen-and-ink illustrations are bold caricatures
of people with enormous troll noses and silly expressions. Although the humor
and plot are comic-book obvious, this is destined for greatness in the opinions of
werewolf-crazy eight-year-olds. KP
Day, Alexandra. Carl Goes Shopping; written and illus. by Alexandra Day.
Farrar, 1989. ISBN 0-374-31110-2. 32p. $9.95.
R* 
4-6 yrs. 
Wordless except for the first and last pages ("I have to
go upstairs to get Aunt Martha's curtains. 
Take good care of the baby,
Carl ... Good dog, Carl!"), this is an entertaining picture narrative in which a
large black dog plays nanny. The setting is a department store, where the baby
rides on Carl's back-up the elevator, into the toy department, over to the
picture-book display, through the hats and gloves, for a rest on the rugs, to the
food counter, and finally, after opening all the pet shop cages, back beside the
buggy in time to assume a patiently-waiting expression. The plot is clearly
revealed by the pantomime, which is not always the case in wordless
picturebooks. The illustrations are thick paint on gray-blue paper, and the fluid
drafting of both human and animal against smoothly textured backgrounds
focuses the main characters with magnetic precision. Straightfaced details and
closely portrayed expressions lend humor to a wishful fantasy that will storytell
well with small children. BH
Dunrea, Olivier. Deep Down Underground; written and illus. by Olivier Dunrea.
Macmillan, 1989. ISBN 0-02-732861-9. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
"Deep down underground/ 1 wee moudiewort digs and
digs," setting up a rhythmic counting-rhyme cumulation of 2 earthworms, 3
beetles, 4 caterpillars, 5 spiders, 6 toads, 7 mice, 8 garter snakes, 9 sow bugs,
and 10 ants. These creatures variously patter and chatter, burrow and scrape,
scooch and scrunch, scurry and scamper, wriggle and wrangle, etc., until they are
STOPPED (backwards, one by one) when the moudiewort (Scottish for mole)
sneezes. Dunrea has infiltrated the underground with all the things children love
to look for, from bones and fossils to odd rocks, arrowheads, and lost objects
that will be fun to find and identify along with the numbering game. Especially
appealing to linger over with small groups or in a one-on-one session, this will
open the doorway to environmental discussion as well as reinforcing basic
arithmetic concepts. The watercolor illustrations, inventively designed with
bright-hued creatures against an earth-tone background, manage to repeat motifs
without becoming boring. It's a spacious maze under those roots--children will
want to tunnel right down there and look around. BH
C.U. 
Counting
Feil, Hila. Blue Moon. Karl/Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-31607-0. [192p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
When sixteen-year-old Julia Johnson reluctantly
agrees to spend the summer as an au pair on Cape Cod, she finds her odd charge,
nine-year-old Molly, obsessed with the memory of her late mother and resentful
[ 108]
of Cheryl, her practical soap-opera-writing stepmother. Julia grows fascinated
with Molly's dead mother and begins, like Molly, to believe that her ghost is
attempting to defend her beloved house and perhaps even Molly herself from
Cheryl's incursion. All the classic gothic conventions are here: the outsider-
heroine's narrative, a mysterious death, a dark male stranger, a sage family
friend, and natural phemomena galore of sea, storms, and fog. Unfortunately,
Feil jams too much into a small space, creating a confusing jumble rather than
the joyful excess that the genre demands, and the constant literary references
(from Bront# and du Maurier to, less logically, C. S. Lewis and Arthur
Ransome) are pointlessly fun rather than thematically useful. Still, Julia is an
appealing character and her story is readable and properly atmospheric; fans of the
genre will enjoy the peppery style but may be disappointed by the indifferent
plotting. DS
Friedrich, Liz. Teen Guide to Married Life. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10685-
8. 62p. illus. with photographs. $11.90.
M 
Gr. 9-12. 
While several books in this series have been helpful
and this one is badly needed, the information it offers is uneven, ranging from
sloppily written generalities ("With a decrease in the availability of project
housing and high rents . . .") to a fairly helpful last chapter on resolving
conflicts within a relationship. Part of the trouble is format; the glossary/index
just doesn't work. When assets are defined as properties or effects, the word
hardly makes sense in a textual discussion of living together that says "There is
no public commitment to one another, and therefore no pressure to stay together.
While you are young this may be an asset." The photographs are also
problematic. Many are posed or even ridiculous, as in the picture of a couple in
wedding clothes with a ripped piece of paper superimposed between their faces
and the caption, "Divorce can be a painful experience." For launching discussion
on choosing a partner, approaching marriage, becoming a couple, earning a
living, and planning a family-the subjects included here-this may serve a
function, but better books are needed. BH
C.U. Family life
Gibbons, Gail. Marge's Diner; written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. Crowell,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04606-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04604-9. 32p.
Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Children often appreciate a look behind the scenes of
some grown-up activity, and Marge's diner, with its focus on food, is a great
place to investigate. "Everyone in town knows Marge," and her twenty-four
hour diner always has something going on, on both sides of the counter. The
regulars come in for their usual ("Well, Mike, if you're here it must be 12:15.
Your burger is already on the grill"); Marge phones in her weekly supply order
(195 pounds of flour, 60 pounds of bacon, 125 pounds of sugar ... ); favorite
customer Mr. Reynolds gets a surprise birthday cake. There's no real plot here,
but the soup-to-nuts progression of the day's events provides its own pleasures.
The illustrations really need a warmer tone than Gibbons provides with her
[109]
efficient spreads, but the bright colors and plethora of diner detail will keep kids
looking. RS
Goennel, Heidi. Sometimes I Like to Be Alone; written and illus. by Heidi
Goennel. Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-31842-6. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
4-8 yrs. 
A faceless young narrator recites a litany of her
favorite solitary pursuits. Children will identify with most of her activities:
dancing, painting, trying on "grown-up clothes," or doing "nothing at all." A
few may find icing a cake, which the girl does with apparent ease, beyond them.
Goennel's unusual palette of flat colors defines shapes that work well within her
simple, pop-art compositions. 
A quiet book for the thoughtful child, this has a
short, repetitive text that makes it suitable for both read-aloud and read-alone.
RAS
D.V. Self-reliance
Hooks, William H. 
The Three Little Pigs and the Fox; illus. by S. D.
Schindler. Macmillan, 1989. ISBN 0-02-744431-7. 32p. $13.95.
R* 
4-7 yrs. 
With a perfect storytelling balance of invention and
convention, Hooks relates an Appalachian variant of The Three Little Pigs that
is subtly contemporized without leaving behind elemental tradition. Our hero is
"a tiny little girl runt named Hamlet," who has no trouble retaining her mother's
three basic rules of life: "... watch out for that mean, tricky old drooly-mouth
fox ... build yourself a safe, strong house out of rocks .. . come home to see
your mama every single Sunday." Hamlet's gluttonous older brothers fail on all
counts ("That's a lot to remember"), but the runty female fools the fox with an
old ploy ("'Are the dogs getting closer?' the fox mumbled from inside the chum.
'What dogs?' asked baby Hamlet.") and brings her brothers home for a Sunday of
snorting and eating to their hearts' content. 
The satisfyingly patterned
repetitions are spiced by well-timed surprises ("'Oh, shut up,' said mean, tricky
old drooly-mouth fox"). With an ear for colloquial wit and an eye on the family
dynamic that sends these characters on their journey of maturation, Hooks has
found a perfect fit in Schindler's watercolor scenes. Drafted with ease of
proportion, colored with rural blends, and elegantly underplayed in expression,
the animals are fresh and funny without being self-conscious. Pair this one with
James Marshall's funny cartoon version, reviewed below, and/or Jon Scieszka's
wolf's-eye view in The True Story of the Three Little Pigs (BCCB 9/89). BH
C.U. Storytelling
D.V. Ingenuity
Hurd, Thacher. Blackberry Ramble; written and illus. by Thacher Hurd.
Crown/Random House, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-57105-6; Trade ed. 0-
517-57349-0. 32p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
3-6 yrs. 
This sequel to The Pea Patch Jig (BCCB 10/86)
features softer shapes and colors, as well as a rather more diffuse story line.
Spring is here, and indefatigable Baby Mouse celebrates the season by annoying
Farmer Clem's animals, particularly Becky the cow: "Becky's tail looked like a
[ 110]
long rope to Baby." Baby's pratfall antics in the gently bucolic setting are
amusing, but both text and illustrations lack the vibrancy of the first book. RS
Hurwitz, Johanna. Russell and Elisa; illus. by Lillian Hoban. Morrow, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08793-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08792-2. 88p. Library
ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
In this latest addition to an amiable series, Russell
shares the limelight with three-year old Elisa. She finds it hard to impress an
older brother and is pleased when Russell deigns to participate in her new game
of playing barber with a friend's hair: "Annie held very still, and Russell cut
some of her hair. Cutting hair was much more fun than cutting paper, he
thought." Russell is less enthused about having his sister tag along to his first
ball game, especially since she insists on bringing Airmail, her doll. Elisa's
attachment to Airmail allows her to venture bravely under the dining room table
during her parents' dinner party in order to retrieve her doll. Unfortunately, she
falls asleep, waiting for the adults to leave, and wakes up alone, in the dark, and
terrified. The situational humor is akin to Beverly Cleary's, though lacking
some of her sparkle. Hurwitz excels in conveying the young child's point of
view without any condescension. The moments of laughter in this family story
ring true, and Hoban's gentle pencil sketches will encourage newly independent
readers. Short chapters and straight-ahead storytelling also make this ideal for
reading aloud. RAS
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Impey, Rose. Desperate for a Dog; illus. by Jolyne Knox. Dutton, 1989.
ISBN 0-525-44513-7. 62p. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
The title says it all: two sisters beg, scheme, and
dog-sit so persistently that finally their father is persuaded to relent and allow
them to have a dog. The simple text is broken up by pen-and-ink drawings,
which are flexibly formatted enough to keep this from looking like the easy-to-
read book it is. The ending is predictable, but the subject is a grabber and the
family arguments amusingly familiar. BH
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Perseverance; Pets, love for
Jurmain, Suzanne. Once Upon a Horse: A History of Horses-And How They
Shaped Our History. Lothrop, 1989. ISBN 0-688-05550-8. 175p. illus. with
photographs. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 6-. 
Jurmain conveys the ways in which, for thousands of
years, horses have influenced human civilization. The world was irrevocably
changed when the first horse was ridden, changed again when the first horse-
drawn chariot carried warriors into battle, and changed again when the invention
of the horse collar helped make the horse the most useful domestic animal. To
describe the horse's contribution to history, Jurmain includes myths, legends,
art, and fact in a readable narrative. The subject is divided by chapters that cover
each type of interaction between horses and people (e.g. "The War-Horse," "The
Messenger," "The Racehorse"). The result is a special-interest book for the
[111]
combination horse lover/history buff. The photographs of period artwork have
been carefully selected; the endnotes and index are adequate. KP
Kendall, Jane. Miranda and the Movies; written and illus. by Jane Kendall.
Crown, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-57357-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-57301-6.
208p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
"This is 1914, for Pete's sake, not the Dark Ages.
Right across the river from New York City and a lot of good it does me. We
might as well be in the middle of nowhere," Miranda sulks. But Miranda, who
lives with her sweet Aunt Lucy, is not only delighted when a motion picture
company moves into the house next door, but enchanted when she's invited to
take a role; it bothers her that, forbidden to associate with "those people," she
lies to Aunt Lucy, but it doesn't bother her enough to stop the secret
participation. This has clearly been based on research into the procedures and
practices of film-making in the early days of silent films, so it has some
interesting technical details. Unfortunately, characterization is both stereotyped
and superficial, and the writing style is pedestrian in both exposition and
dialogue. The plot is thin and predictable, ending with the town bigot getting
put in her place, the heart-of-gold film folk triumphant, and even Aunt Lucy
converted, albeit hesitantly, to the idea of a temporary move to California so that
Miranda can stay with the company. ZS
King-Smith, Dick. Sophie's Snail; illus. by Claire Minter-Kemp. Delacorte,
1989. ISBN 0-385-29824-2. [80p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
King-Smith has conceived a four-year-old heroine
who is amusing and endearing without being the slightest bit winsome or cute.
Independent readers can read this with no embarrassment, because the style is
sophisticated in the true sense and because there is a tart humor throughout the
episodic chapters that describe small but important events in the life of Sophie,
her family, her snail and other pets (wood lice, for example), and those others
fortunate (or, at times, unfortunate) enough to move into the restricted ambit of
a four-year-old's life. Delightful. ZS
D.V. 
Animals, kindness to
Kinsey-Warnock, Natalie. 
The Canada Geese Quilt; illus. by Leslie W.
Bowman. Cobblehill/Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-525-65004-0. 60p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Ariel and her grandmother have always been good
friends, but the quilt they're working on for the new baby brings them even
closer. Then Grandma has a stroke, and Ariel must adjust to the possibility of
death as well as the anticipation of birth. Kinsey-Warnock's first novel is a
heartwringer sure to bring tears to every eye as Grandma brings out the quilt she
has made secretly as a gift for Ariel. Pencil drawings add graceful dimension to
the tale, portraying the characters distinctively without limiting the emotional
resonance of the words. Sometimes the narration explains what has already been
shown through action or conversation ("Grandma was treating her like a close
friend, but Ariel felt a little frightened. She didn't want to think of Grandma
getting older"), and the occasional stylistic slip stands out in such a compressed
work ("Papa lay Grandma in the back seat of the car"). Overall, however, this is
[ 112]
brief but credibly developed with a strong Vermont setting, and the book is a
natural next step for readers who enjoyed The Patchwork Quilt by Valerie
Flournoy (BCCB 4/85). BH
Lawson, John. If Pigs Could Fly. Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-50928-9.
136p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Once upon a time, John Lawson wrote two subtle,
fanciful, evocative books: You Better Come Home with Me (BCCB 2/67) and
The Spring Rider (BCCB 11/68). Now, after a twenty-year silence, he has
produced another engaging story, this time a very funny piece set at the time of
the War of 1812. Readers may believe historical details at their own risk; it is
highly improbable, for example, that a Scottish regiment was defeated because
bees attacked the men under their kilts. The hero, Morgan James, is a Billy
Budd type who is so innocent and modest that he doesn't even understand that his
lady love is inviting his advances. There are some historical characters and some
invented ones (a feisty girl of ten will appeal to readers) and brisk action and an
effervescent style in this highly original story. ZS
Levinson, Marilyn. The Fourth-Grade Four; illus. by Leslie Bowman. Holt,
1989. ISBN 0-8050-1082-3. 57p. (Redfeather Books). $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Alex's eyesight is so poor he can't read assignments
on the board, see his friends when they wave from across the hall, or notice a
member of an opposite soccer team on the playing field. He's afraid to admit to
his best friends, Steve and Billy, that he'll soon be wearing glasses. In the past,
Alex has always laughed when Billy bullied other kids who were overweight or
wore glasses. Alex worries about what Billy is going to say, but his confidence
returns when he learns Billy has a problem, too-he was held back in first grade.
The story's rather heavy-handed themes are that Alex learns to stand up to Billy
and that there's no shame in wearing glasses. Since Alex and his two friends
call themselves "Los Tres Amigos," the book's title is confusing-the fourth
boy is shown on the cover, a boy with glasses whom Alex has decided is not so
bad. 
Although the suspense created by Alex's anxiety is resolved
unconvincingly, the prospect of first glasses is a very real childhood concern.
KP
Lewis, James. Learn While You Scrub: Science in the Tub; ISBN 0-671-
68999-1. Rub-a-Dub-Dub: Science in the Tub; ISBN 0-671-68385-3. Each
book: illus. by Joe Greenwald. Meadowbrook/Simon, 1989. 70p. Paper ed.
Learn $6.95; Rub-a-Dub $5.95.
R 
Learn 5-8 yrs; Rub-a-Dub 3-6 yrs. 
One might wish that
bathtime, at least, could be free of enrichment activities, but these easygoing
collections of toddler and kid-size experiments won't place a strain on either
parent or child. In fact, young children will already be performing most of the
thirty-odd activities included in Rub-a-Dub-Dub-splashing, squirting, pouring;
what this book does is to give some structure to, and explanation for, bathtub
phenomena. Wet soap and a washcloth, for example, demonstrate how water
makes soft things clingy and hard things slippery. Different-sized plastic cups
show that water in small containers will fit inside the big container, "but not all
[113]
of the water from a big container will fit into a small one." Learn contains
somewhat more complicated activities, many of which can be performed at a
sink, a nicety older children will appreciate. (All children, however, will enjoy
placing a coffee filter over the tub drain to see how much dirt washes off.)
Illustrations, instructions and explanations are clear and directed at parents;
equipment is all from everyday household stock. Too bad the pages aren't
laminated. RS
C.U. Science experiments
Livingston, Myra Cohn. Remembering and Other Poems. McElderry, 1989.
ISBN 0-689-50489-6. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Livingston's most recent poetry collection ranges
widely. The best selections include the title poem and some beautiful haiku
("Long Beach: February," "Rain: A Haiku Sequence"). The longest work,
"Sky Tales of the Assiniboin Indians," is in five sections, each one the core of a
sun or moon myth told with simple dignity. Other poems falter when tonally
pushed too hard to be childlike ("Friendship,") or funny ("Reading: Winter").
The work is strongest when the words reverberate without self-consciousness of
a young audience, as they do in "Stars"-"I will imagine/ in my hand/ ten
thousand shining grains of sand." Overall, the nature imagery is sharp-a
startling comparison of the Grand Canyon to an old highrise apartment building,
the moon lying on its back to stare into space, an acorn browning in fall, an
owl's call striking fear, a litany of western mountain plants. KP
Locker, Thomas. The Young Artist; written and illus. by Thomas Locker.
Dial, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0627-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-625-1.
32p. Library ed. $15.89; Trade ed. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Locker indulges his taste for grandiose landscapes and
Dutch Renaissance poses with the story of a young artist, Adrian, torn between
the outdoor scenes he loves to paint and the flattering portraits necessary for
commercial survival. After a successful apprenticeship with the old artist who
narrates the tale, Adrian is summoned to the castle to portray the king's court.
His inability to paint anything but the truth leads to many pictures of the
princess but none of the hypocritical courtiers. However, he's ultimately
rewarded by the king and supported in work of his own preference. Locker has
chosen well in creating a story to suit his Old Master illustrations-several of
his moder stories have suffered from stylistic anachronism. However, even here
the derivative work casts some question on the theme of original expression.
While this will not hold a young picture-book audience, it could inspire
discussion among older children with experience of social pressures and artistic
endeavors. BH
C.U. Art-study and teaching
D.V. Self-expression
Lyttle, Richard B. Pablo Picasso: The Man and the Image. Atheneum, 1989.
ISBN 0-689-31393-4. 246p. illus. with photographs. $15.95.
[ 114]
R 
Gr. 9-. 
After an honest disclaimer-"Because production
costs make it impossible to do justice to his work in one book, I strongly
recommend that you read this with companion volumes that have many
reproductions of his paintings and prints"-Lyttle offers his biography as
starting point from which to study Picasso. However, even a basic introduction
to such a complex subject must assume generous proportions, and the author has
integrated a great deal of information on the artist's life, work, and times.
Through descriptions of the two world wars and the many passionate
relationships influencing Picasso's art, this account makes it clear that, in terms
of historical events as well as personal dealings, a genius is not necessarily a
hero. Picasso's life reads like a soap opera, and Lyttle's style, as it was in II
Duce: The Rise and Fall of Benito Mussolini (BCCB 9/87), is accessible
without patronizing young adult readers. A few black-and-white photographs of
paintings and people are included, along with a brief bibliography. BH
C.U. Art appreciation
C.U. Time concepts
MacMillan, Dianne. My Best Friend Mee-Yung Kim; by Dianne Macmillan
and Dorothy Freeman; illus. by Bob Marstall. Messner, 1989. ISBN 0-671-
65691-0. 40p. $9.98.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Bonnie and Mee-Yung become friends when they
collaborate on their social studies "Salad Bowl" project, designed to introduce the
class to the American ethnic mix. Mee-Yung's family is typical rather than
individualized, but this isn't so much a story as a fictionalized survey of Korean
customs. Bonnie (and readers) learn about Korean food, music, clothing, Tae
Kwon Do, and cultural norms: "We all want to make our parents proud, so we
try our best. It's not just for my father. It's for the family's honor." While the
information is not delivered as efficiently as it would be in a good encyclopedia
or countries-of-the-world series, the fictional overlay and conversational format
are accessible and harmless. A glossary and reading list are appended. RS
C.U. Social studies
Manes, Stephen. Monstra vs. Irving; illus. by Michael Sours. Redfeather/Holt,
1989. ISBN 0-8050-0836-5. 74p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-5. 
Part of a new series designed to reach readers in
transition from picture books to chapter books, this is calculated to have high
popular appeal and a low reading level. Since Irving's little sister, Claire, seems
to get away with acting like a monster, Irving sends away for some (expensive)
Monster-Ade potion to experiment with his own transmogrification.
Unfortunately, Claire drinks it all and quickly sprouts a horn, bat wings, fangs,
and claws, whereupon she spills all the antidote. It's a fantasy children will
enjoy, especially since the adults witness and have to cope with magical effects,
but a number of the gimmicks are annoyingly repetitive, especially Claire's
giggling, which seems to have been substituted for detailing her as a character.
On the other hand, there's a need for entertaining reading materials at this level,
and Manes' book, with accessible format and energetic 
black-and-white
drawings, fills the bill. BH
[ 115]
Marshall, James, ad. The Three Little Pigs; ad. and illus. by James Marshall.
Dial, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0594-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0591-3.
32p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
The allure of James Marshall's folktale picture book
series lies in his coupling of traditional (well, more or less) texts with off-the-
wall cartoon characters that kids can chortle over while nestling secure in the
folds of familiar plot. Marshall, who proved he could execute a masterly wolf in
Red Riding Hood (BCCB 9/87) and who has had practice with beady-eyed pigs as
well, here produces a brick house of Victorian proportions that properly foils the
lean and hungry and not-too-bright villain. This wolf, like the pigs he has
eaten, gets consumed in the end. Perhaps the porcine brothers' jovial appearance
on stage, across the front and back covers of the book, will convince young
listeners that the demise of two of them was all an act or, better yet, a spoof.
BH
D.V. Ingenuity
Meltzer, Milton, ed. Voices from the Civil War. Crowell, 1989. Library ed.
ISBN 0-690-04802-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04800-9. 
203p. illus. with
photographs. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Using the same format as several of his previous
compilations, most recently The American Revolutionaries: A History in Their
Own Words, 1750-1800 (BCCB 7/87), Meltzer here arranges, in roughly
chronological form, excerpts from diaries, letters, speeches and songs. Read
through, the compilation is sometimes repetitious, particularly in the plentitude
of battlefield accounts, and many of the selections lack the stylistic distinction or
insight that truly revives the past. Vivid stylists are here, including Lincoln and
Twain as well as little-known memoirists such as David Thompson: "Between
the physical fear of going forward and the moral fear of turning back, there is a
predicament of exceptional awkwardness from which a hidden hole in the ground
would be a wonderfully welcome outlet" Most of the selections are around two
pages in length; Meltzer introduces each one with a note on context. As always,
the compiler is assiduous in including many perspectives that will give students
an anecdotal basis for understanding a complex war. Contemporary prints,
cartoon and photographs provide a visual counterpoint; a bibliographic essay and
an index are appended. RS
C.U. History-U.S.--Civil War
Monroe, Judy. Latchkey Children. Crestwood House, 1989. ISBN 0-89686-
438-3. 46p. illus. with photographs. $10.95.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
There is certainly a need for information that latchkey
children can use in undertaking self-care in face of emergencies, sibling fights, or
day-to-day responsibility for chores and homework. These subjects are partially
covered here through descriptions of the way typical children deal with them, and
there are some background facts as well, including two organizations to write for
further information (hotlines are mentioned but not listed). Unfortunately, the
text is sometimes fuzzy, as in subsuming baby-sitter, nanny, and housekeeper
arrangements under latchkey programs; or it is oversimplified, as in the
statement that "preparing siblings for self-care is harder than preparing a single
[ 116 ]
child to stay alone." References to unidentified "experts" and "studies" are
loosely made, as are generalizations: "they learned that obscene and threatening
phone calls seldom occur." Italicizing terms such as guidelines, day-care center,
stepbrothers and one-parent homes for definition in a glossary will seem patently
silly even to young readers. BH
C.U. Safety education
Morris, Judy K. The Kid Who Ran For Principal. Lippincott, 1989. Library
ed. ISBN 0-397-32359-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32360-3. 212p. Library ed.
$12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
What do you do if your teacher can't teach math and
makes you feel like an idiot? Fire him, of course! When her school principal
dies, a classmate convinces sixth-grader Bonnie Mann to run for the office on an
interim basis. Bonnie is a pushover when it comes to campaign promises,
easily succumbing to the kindergarteners' demand for more class pets (two
rabbits and two guinea pigs "so they can have babies"). During her campaign,
she uncovers some real problems with her school: the second graders are not
learning to write, and both the lunch room and the playground are in disrepair.
Third-grade teacher Mrs. Atkins, also running for the office, has her students
firmly convinced she can read their minds and thus, their ballots. Unfortunately,
Bonnie is a wishy-washy "good little girl" who lacks the appeal of some of the
minor characters, including the school janitor and Gail, the classmate who runs
Bonnie's campaign, and at times, Bonnie. While the premise and setting are
empathetically appealing, the story is overextended, the action thinly spread.
Since the book ends with Bonnie's election, readers don't get to see her as
principal-a sequel might make a more satisfying tale. RAS
Moulton, Deborah. Children of Time. Dial, 1989. ISBN 0-8037-0607-3.
198p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Like all children in an underpopulated future society,
David is "adopted," a month at a time, by childless couples who seek the
temporary joys of parenthood. But Lady Anastasia Gray doesn't just adopt
David, she kidnaps him, along with scores of other children she is preparing to
take over the world after projected general destruction. There's no shortage of
plot here, and there's plenty of Gothic appeal in Lady ("Mommy") Anastasia's
scary orphanage. The pitch is relentless ("But the tall black figure had moved
several lengths ahead of him and was beating his horse cruelly while he screamed
for the Children to exterminate the mutants forever") but involving; the
characters are easily sorted out; the story is convoluted but energetic. RS
Norman, Howard, ad. How Glooskap Outwits the Ice Giants and Other Tales of
the Maritime Indians; illus. by Michael McCurdy. Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-
61181-6. [64p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Six readable stories about the creator/hero of coastal
Canadian and Maine Indians tell how he protected humans by shrinking giant
animals and how he outwitted Ice Giants, evil magicians, a fierce storm bird
called Wuchowsen, and a man-eating, saber-toothed panther called Pujinskwest
before finding a new home beyond the human realm. These are basically
[117]
trickster tales, with a clear perspective on mortals' vulnerability: "'Human
beings are quite an invention!' a wolf shouted. 'Glooskap, you have a great
sense of humor!'" In a handsome graphic balance to the text, two black-and-
white wood engravings per story project linear gravity without becoming heavy.
BH
C.U. Indians of North America (unit)
Paulsen, Gary. The Winter Room. Jackson/Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN
0-531-08439-6; Trade ed. 0-531-05839-5. [112p]. Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
After an offputting preface ("If books could have
more, give more, be more, show more ... ") this settles into a quietly engaging
portrait, set in the recent penny-candy past, of a farm family in northern
Minnesota as seen by the younger son Eldon. The boy's observations are
sparely matter-of-fact, whether about the details of planting and plowing, or the
slaughter of a steer. "It's one of those things I wish I didn't watch but I do."
While this seems at first to be a collection of anecdotes organized around the
progression of the farm calendar, Paulsen subtly builds a conflict that becomes
apparent in the last brief chapters, forceful and well-prepared. Characterizations
are similarly realized, with details about Eldon's brother Wayne, for example,
casually building to a telling moment. 
Lyrical and only occasionally
sentimental, the prose is clean, clear, and deceptively simple. RS
D.V. Family relations
Peters, Lisa Westberg. Tania's Trolls; illus. by Sharon Wooding. Arcade,
1989. ISBN 1-55970-040-8. 56p. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A good pianist who suffers from chronic stagefright,
Tania is counting on her Grandma Inga's advice and comfort in regard to the
upcoming music festival. The help Tania gets is not quite what she expects:
"'Isn't this how fast your festival piece is supposed to be played?' Grandma Inga
reached in front of her and played a snatch of the song about twice as fast as
Tania had ever played it." It's quite refreshing to see a mean Grandma who isn't
suffering from Alzheimer's disease: Inga, who spins grand tales about her days
as a professional pianist, actually had a small-time career accompanying local
music groups; she sees Tania both as competition and as her chance to finally
succeed. The story occasionally goes into thematic overdrive with expository
passages, but the conflict between the two generations is tense and real and their
shared understanding of the musician's rewards is equally convincing. While
Tania's parents and friends can empathize with her stage fright, only Grandma
understands the scary importance of the music. RS
D.V. Fear, overcoming; Grandmother-child relations
Polette, Nancy. The Little Old Woman and the Hungry Cat; illus. by Frank
Modell. Greenwillow, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08315-3; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-08314-5. [24p]. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Modell's exuberant line and wash pictures, which
have a cartoon-comic effect, have more vitality than the story, which combines
[ 118 ]
several nursery tale themes and devices adequately but which seems derivative.
The little old woman is good at two things: baking cupcakes in cups and
mending tears. Her pet, left alone, eats sixteen cupcakes, cups and all, and then
goes on an eating rampage that ends with several people and several animals
inside the now-huge cat. Each group is, before being consumed, presented with
a cumulated list of previous victims; the last to be eaten is the little old lady,
but she cuts the cat open and everybody escapes. The cat blithely sews himself
back up. ZS
Porte, Barbara Ann. 
Ruthann and Her Pig; illus. by Sugie Stevenson.
Jackson/Orchard, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08425-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05825-5. 84p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R* 
Gr. 3-5. 
A fresh and innovative present-tense narrative
recounts the doings of farm girl Ruthann and her pet pig, which sports several
names, including Emestine and Franciswerner, before Ruthann settles on Henry
Brown. The cast gets introduced in practiced storytelling patterns: the italicized
words "Here comes Ruthann and her pig"-neatly set off in the text with
illustrated footprints-start a parade that periodically grows ("Here comes
Ruthann and her pig and her cat and her dog and her cousin Frank") and changes
("Here comes Frank's mother and father in their station wagon") like a smoothly
revolving stage. Through a series of episodes and letters, Ruthann and her
cousin develop a friendship, Grandma finds long-lost immigrant Grandpa, Frank
gets the pet he craves despite all allergies, and the parents of the two children
emerge as real characters kept where children like to keep them, in a secure, low-
profile background. The full-color cartoon drawings are light without being
cute, and the book design is broken up for a user-friendly look without being
obtrusively easy. Distinctively done and lots of fun to read out loud. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. 
Cousins; Pets, love for
Ray, Delia. Gold! The Klondike Adventure. Lodestar, 1989. ISBN 0-525-
67288-5. 90p. illus. with photographs. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-9. 
Like the Blumberg book and the Cooper book (both
reviewed above) about the Gold Rush, this is oversize and lavishly illustrated.
In coverage it corresponds closely to the scope of the Cooper book, i.e. not as
broad as the Blumberg book. Like the Cooper, it begins with an account of the
discovery of gold by Robert Henderson and continues with a description of
subsequent events in Henderson's life. Ray, however, is far more given to what
seems to be invented dialogue between Henderson and others; this kind of
stylistic embroidery is, to the detriment of the book, also prevalent in later
chapters. 
An index and a glossary are provided, but no list of sources or
recommended readings. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Reeder, Carolyn. Shades of Gray. Macmillan, 1989. ISBN 0-02-775810-9.
152p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
His father and brother had been killed by the Yankees;
his two sisters had died of typhoid and his mother of grief. Mama had left
[119]
instructions that twelve-year-old Will should stay with her sister in the Virginia
countryside. It is very hard for Will to accept his uncle, Jed, who had refused to
fight for the South; many of Jed's neighbors also feel that he is at best a coward,
at worst a traitor to the South. In an excellent first novel, Reeder develops,
believably, a change in Will's attitude as he comes to realize that neutrality is
not treason and that it has taken enormous courage for Uncle Jed to stand firm in
his pacific conviction. Minor plot threads (Will's adjustment to rural life, his
relationships with the local boys and his affection for his cousin Meg) provide
changes of tone and tempo in a novel that has, despite an uneven pace, both
momentum and nuance. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
D.V. Courage; Pacific attitudes; Uncle-nephew relations
Robinson, Nancy K. Angela, Private Citizen. Scholastic, 1989. ISBN 0-590-
41726-6. 146p. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Six-year-old Angela is engaging in the way that
Beverly Cleary's Ramona is engaging: ingenuous, ingenious, concerned with
other people and society from a first-grade viewpoint. She sends her life savings
($4.53) to the President to help the government; unfortunately, she mails it on
April 15, using the IRS form her parents can't find. This isn't quite as well
written as the Ramona stories, but it has the same kind of warmth and humor,
and it has a protagonist with whom readers can identify (or whom they can
recall): Angela always means to do the right thing and is consumed with dismay
when she learns it was wrong. ZS
D.V. Family relations
Say, Allen. The Lost Lake; written and illus. by Allen Say. Houghton, 1989.
ISBN 0-395-50933-5. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Luke, the narrator, has come to spend the summer
with his father, but Dad is a silent man and a busy one, so much of the time
Luke is alone and bored. He's all the more excited, then, when Dad proposes a
camping trip during which they will go to the isolated spot, "Lost Lake," Dad
had discovered with his father. The lake, it turns out, has become a popular
place, and Dad rather grimly hikes on, looking for privacy-and, eventually,
finding it in a place that Luke loves instantly. "It really seemed as if Dad and I
were alone in the world," the story ends, "I liked it just fine." The text has a
static quality, since it is low-keyed and little happens; it explores a relationship,
but not deeply, and it speaks with conviction of the pleasure of solitude and the
beauty father and son find in their own "lost" lake. The latter is expressed more
by the paintings than the text, however; the spacious composition and restrained
use of color are effective, as are the intimate scenes of an Asian-American father
and son. Both indoor and outdoor scenes are vivid in their establishment of
weather or time of day by quality of light. ZS
D.V. Father-son relations
Shpakow, Tanya. Baba; written and illus. by Tanya Shpakow. Knopf, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99802-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-89802-8. 40p. Library
ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
[ 120
R 
5-8 yrs. 
This well-styled picture book sports a no-nonsense
beginning reminiscent of Peter Rabbit's father having been put into a pie.
"Many years ago, in the windiest part of Old Russia, a little girl-baby was born.
She was sold to the Gypsies for a penny. They taught her how to sing ... how
to dance ... how to slip in and out of places without a sound." And how to tell
stories, eventually, to her grandchild, the narrator, who in turn tells the reader of
Baba's magic, of the "big black shoes that never wear out," of hiding in Baba's
capacious knitting bag to visit the Gypsies. Because fantasy and reality are
wound together, we're not sure whether Baba is flying through the air or
attending a Bingo game and this may confuse or put off some children, but we
are sure "Baba has secrets" that spark the narrator's dreams. The black-and-white
drawings are a powerful blend of shadowy figures and sharp expressions, with
contrasting values engineered for dramatic effect. A touch precious in parts, this
is nevertheless eerie enough for Halloween, and intriguing enough for year-
around read-alouds. BH
Smith, Howard E., Jr. All About Arrowheads and Spear Points; illus. by
Jennifer Owings Dewey. Holt, 1989. ISBN 0-8050-0892-6. 56p. $14.95.
M 
Gr. 4-7. 
If the title didn't promise that the book would cover
the whole topic of arrowheads and spear points, the contents wouldn't be so
disappointing. Young readers will probably look for, and be frustrated by the
absence of, familiar names of Native American tribes as they relate to the ancient
groups mentioned: "the copper point people," "the deer hunters," etc. Granted,
one reference is made to the Pueblo Indians whose hunting ceremonies probably
followed the "ancient tradition" of the "Folsom point people." However, one
token statement will not satisfy a child eager to match types of arrowheads with
tribes he or she knows. The chapters are organized by geographical area, leaving
the reader to struggle with time as it jumps from eleven hundred years ago to ten
thousand years ago to the year 1585. The addition of an illustrated timeline
could have alleviated the problem. Smith's affection for his subject inspires him
to make the overstatement: "the discovery in 1936 of the Sandia point ...
stunned the world." Good pencil drawings clarify otherwise incomprehensible
descriptions of specific spear points ("The Folsom point has a wide groove
running from the base almost to the tip on each side of the point"). The index is
thorough. Interesting sections, such as those describing the way a harpoon
works or the first human use of copper, appear too rarely. KP
Smith, Marya. Across the Creek. Arcade, 1989. ISBN 1-55970-013-0. 126p.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Sent to his grandmother's after his mother's death,
twelve-year-old Rye is lonely and bored, missing his mother and his father, who
is settling into a new job assignment and is temporarily unable to care for Rye.
Kicking around for something to do, Rye discovers a creek and an odd younger
girl playing there, constructing an altar of stones. It is this novel's signal
success that we are convinced of Rye's belief that this girl is his mother as a
child, transported across time. The two work together on their project, with Rye
discovering an affinity-like his mother's-for woodcarving. This is a quiet
story, credibly characterized and written with low-key assurance. While the
[ 121]
action is largely interior and the pace is often slow, Rye's longing for his
mother is made all the more moving for its understatement, and his discovery of
the girl's identity is a painful and effective catharsis. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Imaginative powers
Springstubb, Tricia. With a Name Like Lulu, Who Needs More Trouble?; illus.
by Jill Kastner. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN 0-385-29823-4. 167p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
The only place ten-year-old Lulu feels safe is on the
baseball diamond. Otherwise, numerous threats-Chinese food, sleep-away
camp-seem to exist just to make Lulu extremely nervous. So, how is it that
she happens to be the one walking by when baby Jenny decides to jump out the
window? Lulu makes a perfect catch but can't handle either heroinehood (go on
television?) or the demands of Jenny's young and angry mother. The characters
here are all originals, giving brisk energy to what could have been a sentimental
story. Lulu's determined nervousness is convincing, and her friendship with
Jenny's mother, Tilda, is characterized by realistic setbacks and suspicions.
Jenny herself is doggedly, delightfully difficult: "Jenny laughed. Then she
threw the truck at Lulu." RS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Standiford, Natalie. The Bravest Dog Ever: The True Story ofBalto; illus. by
Donald Cook. Random House, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99695-X; Paper
ed. ISBN 0-394-89695-5. 48p. (Step into Reading Books). Library ed. $6.99;
Paper ed. $2.95.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
A serviceable if somewhat stodgy introduction to a
favorite subject, this beginning reader tells the true story of the Alaskan dog that
led the sled team bringing the vital diphtheria medicine to snowbound Nome in
1925. While the language is appropriately simple (not one intrepid) the rhythm
has an unwelcome easy-read thumpiness: "The doctor did not have the medicine
he needed. Without the medicine the children would die. Without the medicine
many other people in Nome would get diphtheria and die too. The doctor knew
he had to get some medicine-fast." Crayon illustrations are a little stiff but
warmly colored, plentiful, and unpretentiously inviting. RS
C.U. 
Reading, beginning
Stevenson, James. Un-Happy New Year, Emma!; written and illus. by James
Stevenson. Greenwillow, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08343-9; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-688-08342-0. 32p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
Since wicked witches Lavinia and Dolores have
heckled their good-natured young counterpart Emma on Thanksgiving and
Valentine's Day, they were bound to bother her during other holidays as well.
Here Emma gullibly makes a resolution to try and be nice to them, while they
push her off a cliff on skis, trick her into shoveling their walk, and exclude her
from their party. Emma gets even by pretending to have mistakenly created
"ghastly-green-go-to-sleep-for-20-years fruit cooler" instead of "peppy punch for
New Year's," and then jars them awake by staging an invasion of outer space
creatures who will shrink them. These frenetic slapstick sequences bear more
resemblance to Saturday morning television cartoons than to Stevenson's wittier
[ 122 ]
comic-strip stories, but fans always welcome a comeback and witches are
perennially popular. BH
C.U. Holidays
Stewart, Gail. Adoption; ISBN 0-89686-443-X; Child Abuse; ISBN 0-89686-
442-1; Discrimination; ISBN 0-89686-445-6. Each book: Crestwood House,
1989. 48p. illus. with photographs. $10.95.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
In each of Stewart's books, the text is continuous,
broken only by topic headings and photographs, some of which seem irrelevant
or posed. One picture appears in two of the books, featuring the same child in
one book as abused and in another as adopted. The writing is clear and the
coverage is adequate, but the literary quality is weakened by the use of
generalizations, unidentified quotations, fuzzy definitions, stylistic errors ("The
most precious data . . . was . . .") and, within each book, a good bit of
repetition. Appended material is not adequate: combined glossary/indexes have
long listings under some entries; thirty page numbers are listed under "adoption"
in the 48-page book of that title. Under "For More Information" about child
abuse, one organization is given. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Talbot, John. Hasn't He Grown!; written and illus. by John Talbot.
Andersen/David & Charles, 1989. ISBN 0-86264-232-9. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Curved doorways and the use of exaggeration add a
zany note to a picture book that has no plot, just a situation that is dependent on
maternal boasting and, in a moment of candor, maternal apprehension. Two
young mothers meet and chat, each using phrases that Talbot interprets literally
in his pictures: a huge child is gnawing on furniture when Mum says "he's
practically eating us out of house and home." Or, "Give her a pencil and she'll
draw anything for you," shows wee Rachel producing intricate architectural
sketches. A good joke, but that's it, an extended gag rather than a story. ZS
Thompson, Brian, comp. Catch It If You Can; illus. by Susie Jenkin-Pearce.
Viking, 1989. ISBN 0-670-82279-5. 32p. $11.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
This collection of twenty-odd verses for young
children relies on two staples, rhythm and humor, that make toddlers listen:
"Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,/ Eating black bananas. Where do you think he
put the skins?/ Down the king's pyjamas." Such folkloric verses comfortably
share space with others by Farjeon, Livingston, McCord et al. With only one
poem per page or double-page spread, the format is open and inviting, with
plenty of room for the casual ink-and-wash illustrations. RS
Trease, Geoffrey. A Flight of Angels. Lerner, 1989. ISBN 0-8225-0731-5.
115p. $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
In need of a topic for their local history project,
Sheila and three friends decide to research the limestone caves under their city of
Nottingham. 
Their investigation becomes urgent when big-business
machinations threaten to close the wine and spirit shop where Sheila's father
[ 123]
works as the cellarman. The children learn about research through the local
librarian; they also engage in some mildly hair-raising explorations of their own.
The young detectives are a determined mixture of personality types and ethnic
groups (including a black girl who sings spirituals while trapped in a cave), all
serviceable if unmemorable. With too much reliance on fortuitous evidence, the
discovery that there is treasure in the wine cellar is a long foregone conclusion,
but the theme of history as an exciting search is winningly projected. RS
Turner, Ethel. Walking to School; illus. by Peter Gouldthorpe. Orchard, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08399-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05799-2. 
[32p].
Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
3-6 yrs. 
Written many decades before Stranger-Danger pervaded
the consciousness, Ethel Turner's poem is the grow-tall-my-son saga of a boy's
first walk to school. "Though horrid horses rear and plunge,/ And cows come
trampling, big and bold,/ And fighting boys are strutting out, I shall have no
one's hand to hold." The macho bravado ("Since I a soldier wish to be," "Were
you as brave as great big men") seems less sexist than quaint, a tone reinforced
by a nostalgic aura in the illustrations. 
These are skillfully drawn and
composed, the grainy color evoking a time-ago rural setting where the greatest
danger was a hound on a fraying tether. Despite the old-fashioned mood and
setting, the small scholar's brave passage will resonate for those just leaving the
hand-held security of home: "I am to walk now quite alone,/ No matter what the
things I meet." RS
D.V. Self-reliance
UNICEF. A Children's Chorus: Celebrating the 30th Anniversary of the
Declaration of the Rights of the Child. Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-525-44545-5.
26p. illus. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
In celebration of the thirtieth anniversary of the
adoption by the United Nations General Assembly of the Declaration of the
Rights of the Child, artists from many countries have each provided an
illustration for one of the ten principles. The concept functions clearly, since
each of the ten principles is very simply stated while the full texts are provided
at the back of the book. The layout of a double spread for each artist keeps their
varied styles from jarring. Helme Heine, Tony Ross, Anastasia Arkhipova,
Hannu Taina, Paul O. Zelinsky, Stepan Zavrel, Ingrid and Dieter Schubert,
Michael Foreman, Daniele Bour, and Satoshi Kitamura have contributed pieces
that are instantly recognizable as graphic translations of the text but that range
from funny to poignant in tone. Heine's "Treat us as equals" has an overweight
authoritarian grownup balanced evenly with a tiny child on a seesaw, which is in
turn balanced precariously on a globe. Principled, but appealing as well. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Van Raven, Pieter. Harpoon Island. Scribner's, 1989. ISBN 0-684-19092-3.
150p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Like the author's first novel The Great Man's Secret
(BCCB 4/89), this focuses on adult characters with young people serving as foils
[124]
and catalysts, but the writing here is less self-conscious and constricted than in
the first. 
The time is just before World War I, and Frank Barnes, a
schoolteacher, and his son Brady have come to small Harpoon Island after Mrs.
Barnes deserted them. Ten-year-old Brady is small and slow for his age,
unwilling or unable to do much talking. The two battle prejudice-against
Brady's oddness, against their German background-fomented by the local
preacher who sees his control of the village slipping away. That Brady salvages
their reputation by spotting a German sub is a bit neat, but Barnes' refusal of
apology ("Brady and I would not want to remain here because a violent act
changed people's view of us") is a welcome, if overstated, pacific note.
Smoothly written but placidly paced, this is thoughtful light fiction that will
probably have greater appeal for adult readers than for the junior-high audience
for whom it was intended. RS
D.V. Father-son relations; Tolerance
Waters, Kate. Sarah Morton's Day: A Day in the Life of a Pilgrim Girl; illus.
with photographs by Russ Kendall. Scholastic, 1989. ISBN 0-590-42634-6.
32p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
"Come thee with me. Let me show thee how my
days are," invites nine-year-old Sarah Morton, four-year veteran of Plimoth
colony. Despite the archaic language (explained in the glossary), this short
photoessay is a highly accessible account of pilgrim life. Attractive color
photographs invigorate the text. Especially intriguing is the sequence of ten
pictures showing how Sarah gets dressed: her "overgarments" include three
petticoats and a separate pocket. Sarah's day includes milking goats, cooking
meals (a recipe for cornbread is included), learning her letters, playing knickers
(marbles) with her friend, and reciting her Scripture verses. The child who
"interprets" Sarah's daily routine is a real natural. The only pictures which are
noticeably posed are the two of the family at breakfast and dinner: everyone
appears to be looking at their food rather than eating it. Notes at the end of the
book give some background information on Plimoth Plantation, as well as on
Sarah Morton (who really lived there) and Amelia Poole, the girl who interprets
her. The patterned mauve end-papers contain a 17th-century version of "Three
Blind Mice" and three riddles that Sarah would have known. A personable
resource for social studies reports on pilgrim life. RAS
C.U. 
History, U.S.-Colonial
Willard, Nancy. The Ballad of Biddy Early; illus. by Barry Moser. Knopf,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-98414-5; Trade ed. 0-394-88414-0. 40p. Library
ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
After a preface explaining that Biddy Early was an
Irish wisewoman for whom Willard's family named their cat, fifteen poems
weave together a shadowy, imagaic portrayal based on legend. In the first, an old
man in a pub describes Biddy's carrot-colored hair and her magic blue-glass bottle
filled with honey, sage, and gall. In the next poem, Biddy chants her shadow
into place and, in the third, wins the bottle with her bravery when she buries a
villain from whom the gravediggers have fled: "Even the wicked need a grave/
and it's a dreadful thing/ for any man to make his bed/ under the vulture's wing."
[125]
A speckled hen sings praises to Biddy ("let the nine nations of slugs honor her");
Biddy in turn praises her seven-toed cat ("Lullaby, your crescent claws") and her
lost pig ("may the thief that took you be a stone on Wednesday"). She advises a
gypsy queen, rescues a renegade, grows old, and dies ("I shall come back in water
and words and leaves"). There's a song patterned after "Who killed Cock Robin"
and an unforgettable invocation: "On my thumb/ I spun/ two roads/ from one
thread/ half silver,/ half gold./ I made them/ and laid them/ over the land/ and
said, 'May those who follow you/ find gold but not glowworms, coins but not
crickets,/ treasure but not tree toads,/ silver but not silence,/ money but not
moonlight,/ not magic,/ and not me.'" 
Moser's paintings, especially of Biddy
as a young and, later, an old woman (facing different ways), relate animals and
humans with facial expressions that reflect a common spiritual kingdom. The
tales of Biddy Early have found two able tellers. BH
C.U. 
Reading aloud
Yoshida, Toshi. Elephant Crossing; written and illus. by Toshi Yoshida.
Philomel, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21745-2. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
In this companion to Young Lions (BCCB 3/89), an
elephant herd successfully fends off predatory lions before being faced with an
even greater hazard: a giant cloud of desert grasshoppers. The insects quickly
strip the plain of grass and leaves and provoke the elephants and giraffes to
stampede. Although it contains information on elephant herding and defense
habits, this is more stretched as a story than was Young Lions. The
illustrations, too, while well-drawn, are picturesque and romantically colored
with sentimental lighting, in contrast to the dramatic vigor of the first book.
But the sense of adventure arising from natural events remains intact, honest, and
informative. RS
Zable, Rona S. Landing on Marvin Gardens. Bantam, 1989. ISBN 0-553-
05839-8. 136p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Housing costs have gone through the roof, and
fifteen-year-old Katie and her mother have no choice but to move in with Mom's
older (by twenty-five years) sister Rose. Aunt Rose is a loud, cantankerous
busybody, and Katie doesn't know how she's going to stand it. That Rose is a
loving, brave woman underneath it all will come as no surprise to readers, nor
will Katie's romance with the boy she loves to hate, but Katie's narrative is
brisk and funny, generously allowing Rose most of the best lines. The housing-
crisis theme is not cohesively integrated, but the story is strong enough to
withstand the occasional didacticism. RS
D.V. Aunt-niece relations