Aaseng, Nathan. Bob Dylan: Spellbinding Songwriter. Lemer, 1987. ISBN 0-8225-
0489-8. illus. with photographs. $7.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
It is true that Dylan has been secretive and often deliberately
misleading about his life, but he has been the subject of enough research and
writing to avoid the kinds of empty phrases that pop up in this biography
("Although he enjoyed many kinds of music, including rock 'n' roll, Bob became a
folksinger. It was an easy style for a young man like Dylan, because a person did
not have to be rich to be a folksinger"). Some of the statements are actually
misleading: "In a lazy sort of way, he has picked and chosen some of what he has
seen and put it to music," for instance, conveys nothing of the intensity of Dylan's
vision and performance. Sometimes the writing is simply odd ("he is protective of
his father, who has passed away"). There is some easy-to-read information to be
gotten here and a six-page "timeline" of Dylan's life, along with black-and-white
photographs, but the audience that is old enough to appreciate Dylan's music
deserves a more complex look at his life. BH.
Alexander, Sue. Lila on the Landing; illus. by Ellen Eagle. Houghton/Clarion, 1987.
ISBN 0-89919-340-4. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Eight-year-old Lila, constantly excluded from a neighborhood four-
some by bossy Alan, relies on her imagination for solitary games on the landing
in her apartment building. One day it's a ship, another day a library or a stage or a
newspaper office. Finally, the other children get tired of Alan's pushing them
around and make their way to Lila's Landing, where she stands her ground in a
confrontation with Alan and wins him over. The characters here are clearly drawn
and the conflict convincing. The only drawback is Lila's constant analysis of the
dynamics, which, in context of a first-person narrative, serves to restate action that
is already obvious. Still, Lila's patience and presence of mind are believably
impressive and may suggest to young readers the possibility of overcoming
rejection without compromising their self-sufficiency. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers; Leadership.
Ashabranner, Brent. Into a Strange Land; written by Brent Ashabranner and Melissa
Ashabranner. Dodd, 1987. ISBN 0-396-08841-4. 117p. illus. with photographs.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-. 
Like previous Ashabranner books that document a minority experi-
ence in America through the lives and voices of its adolescent members, this con-
veys both information and humanity. Primarily focusing on Indo-Chinese
refugees, the Ashabranners begin (through their interviews) with the reasons these
young people leave country and family, their sometimes dangerous escapes and
experiences in refugee camps, and their settlement and adjustment in the United
[1]
States. What comes through most clearly is courage: of the parents, sending their
children to a hoped-for better life; of the foster parents, bridging an enormous
cultural gap; and of the young people themselves. Most poignant are the stories of
Amerasian children fathered by American soldiers: "'I'm always watching on the
streets. Maybe that way someday I'll see him. His face will be my face.'" Index
and bibliography. RS
D.V. Self-reliance; Intercultural understanding.
Bach, Alice. Double Bucky Shanghai. Dell, 1987. Paper ed. ISBN 0-440-41996-4.
$2.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Grade5-7. 
For those who dwell not in Computerland, the author explains,
"Double bucky shanghai is how phreakers describe the very heaviest programming
code. I mean the max." The story is told by Jess (computer-knowledgeable) who,
with her best friend Stanwyck (computer hacker) investigates a series of robberies.
All of the thefts have been perpetrated in the apartments of the parents of students
at the posh private school attended by Stanwyck and Jess. The plot is a bit
tortuous, with elements of contrivance and coincidence, and the character depiction
is superficial. Some readers will find appeal in the action and danger; others in the
use of computer slang and the incorporation of computer know-how. ZS.
Bauer, Marion Dane. Touch the Moon; illus. by Alix Berenzy. Houghton/Clarion, 1987.
ISBN 0-89919-526-1. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Jennifer sits at her eleventh birthday party savoring the last small
package, which she expects will represent the horse her father promised to buy her.
Instead, she is crushed to find a china figurine of a palomino along with a note
guaranteeing her riding lessons. Nursing her grievances, she hurls the figurine
from her treetop hideout, only to see the horse become real-a beautiful but
willful, arrogant animal that teaches her a lot about the difficulties and
responsibilities of riding. This is a compact fantasy that works well in spite of
some sparsity of development. The triggering device, for instance, is hazy: does
the horse appear because he's been hurled away, like the frog prince? Will he
reappear on an ongoing basis, or is Jennifer's experience with him a one-time
venture? In general, the fantasy elements are dealt with simply: the horse is
invisible, and so is Jennifer when she's on him. More sure and complex are the
book's realistic aspects; Jennifer's relationship with her father, who also owned and
rode the fantasy stallion in his childhood, is convincingly rendered. Important to
both levels is the character of the horse, who suffers from claustrophobia after
being packed away for many years, in figurine form, in a box stuffed with shredded
paper. The theme of a child's reconciliation between her fantasy world and real life
is intriguingly reflected in the literary blend, and there's plenty of child appeal in
the subject for readers of the target age group. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers.
Bedard, Michael. A Darker Magic. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-689-31342-X. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Clearing out her classroom at the end of the school year, Miss Potts
finds an old handbill for a traveling magic show that had terrified her as a child.
Who could have put it there, and why, and does it have anything to do with Scott
Renshaw, the inscrutable new student and amateur magician? As Miss Potts and
her student Emily attempt to solve the mystery, a supernatural element becomes
steadily, and frighteningly, more apparent. Although the novel's structure is
shaky, the frights are genuine, and the intermittent comic relief provided by
[2]
Emily's too-big family in a too-small house has great verve, demonstrating the
same kind of deadpan zaniness that characterizes Jane Langton's novels. Comedy,
in fact, rather than mystery, seems to be this author's real gift. RS.
Benson, Mary. Nelson Mandela; illus. by Karen Heywood. David and Charles/Hamish
Hamilton, 1987. ISBN 0-241-11913-8. 50p. (Profiles). $9.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
First published in England, this biography of the South African
freedom fighter is also an indictment of the policy of apartheid and-to a great ex-
tent-a history of the struggle for racial equality in his unhappy country. Benson
writes in an unimpassioned tone, letting dramatic events speak for themselves; she
is candid about her subject (referring to Mandela's college years, "Although he was
not clever, he worked hard and was very popular.") rather than adulatory, save for
the closing oration. An index or a list of sources would have added to the value of
the book, but it is well enough written and Nelson Mandela well enough known to
be interesting to young readers. ZS
C.U. Social studies.
Blackwood, Gary L. Wild Timothy. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-689-31352-7. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 6-9. 
In an attempt to toughen up bookish, 13-year-old Timothy, his
father takes him along for a week of camping and fishing. But just a couple of
days into the trip, Timothy gets lost while looking for firewood and subsequently
spends three weeks surviving in the wilderness, emerging resourceful, tough, and
confident. The writing here is bland, and there is little to distinguish this from the
numerous other trial-by-wilderness books, but the details of building shelter,
finding food, and handling various dangers have built-in appeal. RS
D.V. Self-reliance.
Blume, Judy. Just as Long as We're Together. Orchard/Watts, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-
531-08329-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05729-1. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
The narrator is Stephanie, who's in her first year of junior high,
who's distressed by her parents' trial separation (and, when she visits Dad, by his
friend Iris), and who finds that best friends are not infallibly understanding or toler-
ant. Rachel has always been her friend, but both of them like a newcomer (Alison,
a Vietnamese adoptee) enough to make it a triumvirate. Blume is, as usual, fine-
tuned to the concerns of pre-adolescents and to their speech patterns, so that the
minor shifts and crises, joys and woes, of the characters are revealed by Stephanie
with a believable immediacy and with all-too-real emotional ups and downs. The
vicissitudes of life with friends, families, teachers and classmates, first dates, and
physical changes are told with candor for appeal and humor for spice. ZS
D.V. Friendship values.
Boon, Emilie. How Many Animals Can You See? written and illus. by Emilie Boon.
Orchard/Watts, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08301-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05701-1. 22p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Cheerful illustrations, sunny but not bold, show the cumulation of
ten animals in a counting book that is perfectly pleasant, but that offers nothing
unusual in format, concept, or visual presentation. A sample: "Otter comes out. I
see four," and a digit faces a page of animals in procession. Next page, "Mouse
joins in. I see five," and so on, adding up to ten creatures in a woodland class that
[3]
has had fun on its way to school. The very large print and the brevity of the text
may encourage reading readiness. ZS
C.U. Reading readiness.
Boyd, Lizi. The Not-So-Wicked Stepmother; written and illus. by Lizi Boyd. Viking
Kestrel, 1987. ISBN 0-670-81589-6. 30p. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
Daddy's new wife, Molly, is easy to hate at a distance, where Hessie
can imagine her to be "wicked, mean, and VERY ugly," with "wrinkled black
dresses." But when Hessie arrives for a summer in Daddy and Molly's house on
the lake, it's hard to resist the warm, friendly woman who invites her to feed the
ducks, pick blueberries, and learn how to swim. In spite of her fears and a brief
attack of homesickness for her own mother, Hessie finds herself part of a new and
happy family. The story is openly bibliotherapeutic, and the child's emotions and
anxieties are acutely real. The idyllic set-up for resolution will be reassuring to
youngsters in similar situations, even if their own paths do not run quite so
smoothly. Stylized, highly patterned watercolors show a childlike perspective that
echoes the all-important point of view. The angular, off-beat shapes in flat
dimension lend interest to a text that more traditional art might render stale. BH
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Stepparent-child relations.
Bradman, Tony. Dilly the Dinosaur; illus. by Susan Hellard. Viking Kestrel, 1987. ISBN
0-670-81682-5. 53p. $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Narrated by older sister Dorla, this includes four stories about toddler
dinosaur Dilly and the trouble he causes his family. In the first tale, he refuses to
take a bath; in the second, he throws a tantrum on his sister's birthday; in the
third, he watches all day at the window after his father predicts it will rain cats and
dogs; in the fourth, he paints his room after sabotaging his parents' efforts to
redecorate theirs. As an enfant terrible, Dilly will draw smiles of recognition from
children who remember their own exploits or must survive their siblings'. What
cloys sometimes is the self-consciously exclamatory first-person narrative. There
is also a slightly British cast-to have one's parents "cross" at one (a frequent
occurrence here) is a bit stronger in England than in the U.S., for instance.
Nevertheless, the details of child life are acutely rendered, the text manageable for
readers just out of beginner range, and the format, with its large print and pen-and-
ink cartoon drawings, unintimidating. BH
D.V. Brothers-sisters.
Bulla, Clyde Robert. The Chalk Box Kid; illus. by Thomas B. Allen. Random House,
1987. 
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99102-8; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-89102-3.
(Stepping Stone). Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $1.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Gregory's ninth birthday is shadowed by a move to a run-down
house after his father loses his factory job. Troubled by an insensitive uncle with
whom he has to share a room and by his new classmates' rejection, Gregory finds
solace in "drawing" the garden he wishes he had on the walls of a burnt-out chalk
factory nearby. Then a shy, withdrawn girl who has just won a prize for her art
work recognizes Gregory's talent, directs the teacher's attention to his
accomplishment, and best of all, offers him her friendship. As usual, Bulla
manages a poignant depth within the confines of simple style and narrative.
Understated and easy to read, this nevertheless tackles problems that are not easy to
solve without exercising the imagination. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers; Friendship values.
[4]
Cohen, Barbara. People Like Us. Bantam, 1987. ISBN 0-553-05441-4. $13.95. Re-
viewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Dinah, the 16-year-old narrator, is angry and disappointed when she
discovers that her mother and grandparents object to her dating Geoff because he
isn't Jewish. They aren't planning marriage, Dinah explains, just dating. Dating
leads to marriage, Gram says. Dinah refuses to stop seeing Geoff, and insists that
he be invited to her brother's bar mitzvah. This is a believable story about
prejudice on the part of people who decry bigotry in principle but feel their own
bias is rational. Cohen makes her point, and she is too good a storyteller to
fabricate an unconvincing plot or unconvincing characters, but her story is just
purposive enough to interfere with narrative. ZS
D.V. Interreligious understanding.
Corcoran, Barbara. The Hideaway. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-689-31353-5. $12.95. Re-
viewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Sent to a reform school because he had accepted the blame for injur-
ing a man when driving while intoxicated, 15-year-old Tom has run away. He had
never told the authorities that his friend Buddy had been the driver; now he wants
desperately to find Buddy and clear his own name. Hiding out in an empty summer
theater, Tom gets in touch with his supportive young half-sister, and he gets help
from an elderly man, Harv, who is not inquisitive or judgmental; both of them
help Tom solve his problem, especially after the long-sought meeting with Buddy
proves that he's completely contemptuous and callous. 
This has good
characterization, a competent writing style, and a modicum of suspense; it is
weakened by a plethora of small contrivances of plot and small stylistic errors. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Older-younger generations.
Davis, Jenny. Good-Bye and Keep Cold. Orchard/Watts, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08315-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05715-1. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Written in retrospect by Edda, now 22, this is a well-sustained
family story, mature and often moving, that focuses on Edda's mother, tragically
widowed by a mine accident. Edda, 8 at the time, adjusts both to Mama's going to
work and to her being courted by Henry John (gentle, kind, forever guilt-ridden
because he had accidentally caused the mine disaster). What makes this first novel
impressive is the delicate balance Davis keeps between the immediacy of personal
[5]
f
s
h
uenerai wayne s lorces. Ine cnange im inu•u.. 
, ........ 
._ 
.
pf
attitude among the members of Margaret's German-American family. Some of the
incidents are overly dramatized or sentimentalized, but on the whole this is good
historical fiction, bringing a period and an event to life and showing a spectrum of
behavior on both sides of the struggle. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
Dwiggins, Don. Hello? Who's Out There? Dodd, 1987. ISBN 0-396-08842-2. 85p. il-
lus. and with photographs. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
While a competent aerospace reporter, Dwiggins is often guilty of
egregious journalese, so that his text is laden with inadequate explanations (or lack
of explanations), poor logic and non sequiturs, and injections of inappropriate lan-
guage--"Curiously, the scientific search for extraterrestrial life began right here on
Earth in the last century." However, the text includes most of what is known
about the possibility of extraterrestrial life and the investigation of that possibility.
Only the last few chapters deal with recent investigative projects. A bibliography
and an index are appended. ZS
C.U. Science.
Emerson, Kathy Lynn. Julia's Mending. Orchard/Watts, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08319-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05719-4. Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
The place is upstate New York, the time is 1887, and the
protagonist is Julia, twelve years old and miffed because her missionary parents
have decided to send her to stay with country kin instead of her sophisticated
Manhattan grandmother. It's instant hostility between Julia and her cousin Grace,
and other relationships aren't much better. Julia's hopes of getting back to the city
are dimmed when she has a barn accident and breaks her leg. Julia and her cousins
eventually become friends, their slow acceptance solidified by the dangerous rescue
of a classmate trapped in a cave. Style, setting, and dialogue are capably handled;
while the pace is uneven, the dramatic ending compensates for any lag, and the
period details are convincing. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Cousins.
Engh, M. J. The House in the Snow. Orchard/Watts, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08317-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05717-8. Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
[6]
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
While the inhabitants of the House are never seen, there are lights at
the windows, laughing voices, and smoke from the chimney. But when two boys
escape-one from the House, the other from a wicked master in town-and meet,
the secret (a chest full of Cloaks of Invisibility) is revealed and wickedness over-
thrown. It's an old and appealing premise with strong folktale roots, but
characterization and theme are underdeveloped, and too much of the book is an
overextended account of the battle between the boys and the People of the House.
RS.
Euvremer, Teryl, illus. Sun's Up. Crown, 1987. ISBN 0-517-56432-7. 30p. $9.95.
NR 
Gr. K-2 
A wordless picture book shows a day in the life of the sun, pictured
as a giant figure with a halo of spiky golden hair around a golden face. The sun
eats breakfast, changes his pajamas for clothes (from shoes to tie), and flies around
the sky beaming rays of light from his fingers and, after a rain, getting out his
palette and brush to make a rainbow. Below, people go through activities ap-
propriate to the time of day. The concept is calendar-cute, its possibility for
engendering confusion about the sun a serious flaw in a book that has no
compensatory strength, since the pastel illustrations are, like the concept, on the
precious side. ZS.
Garfield, Leon. The December Rose. Viking Kestrel, 1987. ISBN 0-670-81054-1. 203p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
The colorful cant, the idiom and dialect of the London poor, and the
Dickensian type-casting make this an adventure story that creates a lively picture of
Victorian times-on the seamier side. The ragamuffin sweep who's called
"Barnacle" for his ability to cling as he climbs, is a filthy child, a biter and a liar
and a thief. He runs away with a stolen locket, is hunted by a dour police
inspector, and is taken in by a bargee, Tom Gosling, who has a Heart of Gold.
There are two plots: one is the predictable redemption of Barnacle, the other is a
wild concoction of international intrigue, espionage, treason, and murder, in which
both Barnacle and his mentor become involved and endangered. There are a few
instances of ethnic slurs that may be found offensive by some readers (". ..
Chinese reach-me-downs, still inhabited by slant-eyed moths," and "Mr.
Levy... with a fluttering, anxious manner, like a Hebrew moth in a church"),
but Garfield fans will enjoy the usual combination of salty dialogue, broad humor,
and plot and characterization that are deliberately overdone. ZS.
Giff, Patricia Reilly. Laura Ingalls Wilder: Growing Up in the Little House; illus. by
Eileen McKeating. Viking Kestrel, 1987. ISBN 0-670-81072-X. 54p. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
It's difficult to write about a life already so vividly described by the
subject herself. Giff occasionally repeats scenes that will be familiar from the
Little House series, but she does put the information into chronological
perspective, fill in some gaps (especially in Wilder's adult life), and provide facts
that Wilder chose not to fictionalize, such as the death of her baby brother in their
house on the banks of Plum Creek. The book cites no sources and stays on the
surface in the same way that Gwenda Blair's younger biography of Wilder did, but
the tone is benign and accessible to the age group that consumes the Little House
books. BH
C.U. American literature-study and teaching.
[7]
Goffstein, M. B. Artists' Helpers Enjoy the Evenings; written and illus. by M. B. Goff-
stein. Harper, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022182-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
022181-X. 24p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
"Blanc, Noir, Gris, Bistre, and Sanguine were artists' helpers by
trade," the text of this picture book begins, and this is prefaced by translations and
phonetic spellings for the five crayon friends. "Bistre" and "Sanguine" are
translated as brown and red -
whatever happened to "brun" and "rouge?" In
describing the activities of the five in the evenings in Paris, Goffstein manages to
achieve an ineffectual anthropomorphism, but gives some information about
shading, blending, highlighting, contrasting, and outlining that compensates for
the weak narrative. The illustrations are subdued in their quiet tones, a rather nice
change from the often-blatant primary and complementary colors of many picture
books. ZS
C.U. Art-study and teaching.
Greer, Gery. This Island Isn't Big Enough for the Four of Us! by Gery Greer and Bob
Ruddick. Crowell, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04614-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-
04612-X. 151p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Scott and Pete, both twelve, have managed to convince their parents
that they can cope safely with two weeks on an uninhabited island. Scott, the
narrator, then has to convince Pete that they can field-test the Tiny Tot Tent (an
imitation of the cottage visited by Hansel and Gretel) without shame. Or at least
without being detected. What they haven't planned on is the fact that there might
be others on the island. There are: two girls, who several times catch the boys in
a ludicrous situation, the aunt who's with them, and the mystery writer who has
built a three-tree treehouse. Little plot here save for the rivalry that, predictably,
ripens into friendship; no depth to the characterization; plenty of action, plenty of
humor. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations.
Grimm, Jakob Ludwig Karl. Red Riding Hood; retold and illus. by James Marshall. Dial,
1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0345-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0344-9. 32p.
Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
4-8 yrs. 
Some people are born to be funny; James Marshall can't help him-
self. Fortunately. Here he extends his high humor to a Perrault/Grimm tale with
a serious past. Sticking to the basic plot formula, he reduces the text to the mini-
mum, with a few choice bits of dialogue ("It is I, your delicious--er--darling
granddaughter," says the wolf, and later, "I'm so wicked... So wicked"). Most
of the high jinks are pictorial, however, and played out against some of the
boldest color compositions the artist has done. When the wolf comes to the door,
we are treated with a view of Granny's feet, replaced, ominously enough, by a pair
of gray clawed paws when Red Riding Hood knocks on the door. On the last page,
as proof that R.R.H. keeps her promise never to speak to another stranger, she
spurns the overtures of a large green crocodile. Marshall's version may be
counterproductive to the moral, however; this is one wolf not to be missed. BH.
Haiti in Pictures. Rev. ed. of Haiti in Pictures by Ken Weddle. Lerner, 1987. ISBN 0-
8225-1816-3. (Visual Geography). $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Revised by the geography department of the publisher, this is based
on an earlier edition published by Sterling Publishing Company. Unfortunately,
for all the information it provides, it has the style and appearance of a committee
[8]
product. Double columns of type and illustrations of variable quality (especially
poor black-and-white photographs) weaken the book. The text, divided into four
sections (The Land, History and Government, The People, The Economy), is
written in a dry, inert style. However, the material is fairly comprehensive, it has
been brought up to date, and it is well organized. Access is provided through an
index that is in quite small print. ZS
C.U. Geography.
Hartson, Eleanore. Maxie's Mystery Files: The Stalled Mall and Other Crazy Cases; by
Eleanore Hartson and Mark Taylor; illus. by Daniel Vasconcellos. Little, 1987.
ISBN 0-316-61423-8. 71p. $10.95.
M 
Gr. 2-4. 
Maxie, using her "mighty Mental Magic," solves four mysteries
with the help of her tediously wise-cracking younger brother. Since mystery
stories have wide-spread appeal, and since there are never enough to satisfy primary
grades fans, and since this book is easy to read, there will be an audience.
Unfortunately, the plots are flat, the logic superficial, and the writing style
relentlessly cute and breezy-less would have been more here. ZS.
Hazen, Barbara Shook. Fang; illus. by Leslie D. Morrill. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-689-
31307-1. 30p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
This isn't the first picture book to show a child conquering fear be-
cause he or she is protecting a fearful pet, but it's a nice treatment of the concept,
simple, convincing, and imbued with a childlike candor and affection. A small boy
confesses that he picked Fang because the dog was big and looked fierce. He lists
all the things he has feared, then describes Fang's terror at seeing babies or
puppies. Eventually, demonstrating to his pet that there is nothing to fear, the
boy gets over his own fright. The illustrations, paintings that are economically
composed and humorously detailed, are nicely integrated with the text and subtly
show how the fearful person may exaggerate size, ferocity, or intent of the
"enemy." ZS
D.V. Fears, overcoming; Pets, care of.
Hines, Abba Grossnickle. It's Just Me, Emily; written and illus. by Anna Grossnickle
Hines. Houghton/Clarion, 1987. ISBN 0-89919-487-7. 28p. $12.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
Young children will enjoy the restrained repetition of a running gag
as well as the always-endearing familiarity of a form of play that's universal. The
pattern used by Hines takes four pages, and a sample is (page 1) "From behind the
door comes a terrible roar, a howling and growling, a fierce sort of yowling!"
Pages 2 and 3 show the horrible creatures Mother thinks, audibly, might be on the
prowl, and page 4 shows a delighted child whose ruse has worked. "No! It's just
me... Emily." Plot enough for small children, appealing concept, and crayon
pictures that are uncluttered, fine-lined and permeated with the pleasure of loving
communication, combine to good effect. ZS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations.
Holl, Kristi D. Patchwork Summer. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-689-31347-0. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Her mother had decamped a year before, leaving Randi-then 12-to
do all the housework. Since that included caring for her baby sister Meggie, there
was no time left for anything but school and homework. Small wonder, therefore,
[9]
that when Mom walked back in, having found herself (as planned) and had a
romantic novel published, Randi was angry. Her mother didn't seem to realize the
pain she'd caused her husband and children or the burden Randi had had. This is a
story of ambivalence, as Randi seethes with resentment, hating what her mother
had done and baffled by the way Dad and Meggie seem to have forgiven Mom. The
bitterness and tension are vividly portrayed in a story that has characterization and
dialogue that are capably handled. What is less convincing is the motivation for
change when, at the end of the book, Randi decides to forgive her mother; it may
be the right decision, but Holl doesn't justify it. ZS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations; Self-reliance.
Howe, James. Carol Burnett: The Sound of Laughter; illus. by Robert Masheris. Viking
Kestrel, 1987. ISBN 0-670-81073-8. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Taking its cue from Burnett's own apparently boundless optimism,
Howe's biography is cheerfully upbeat, if a mite adulatory, perhaps a difficult trap
to avoid in discussing a star whose career was built on a genuine just-folks
likeability. While clearly relishing the fairy tale aspects of Burnett's rise to fame
(two mysterious benefactors), Howe does not disregard the pain in the comedi-
enne's life (and its contribution to her talent), forthrightly discussing her parents'
alcoholism, her own divorces, and daughter Carrie's drug problems. RS
D.V. Broken homes, adjustment to.
Isenberg, Barbara. Albert the Running Bear Gets the Jitters; written by Barbara Isenberg and
Susan Wolf; illus. by Diane deGroat. Houghton/Clarion, 1987. Trade ed. ISBN
0-89919-517-2; Paper ed. ISBN 0-89919-532-6. 36p. Trade ed. $13.95; Paper ed.
$4.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Although not didactic, this third picture book about a small zoo
resident gives advice on procedures to help people (and bears) cope with stress.
Albert, returning to the zoo after winning yet another marathon, finds that a new
and very large bear, Boris, is a hostile and taunting rival. Challenged to a race,
Albert becomes tense and feels ill; one of the zoo keepers makes up a list of
relaxing procedures that help Albert. Boris loses the race because a trick he had
planned catches him rather than Albert, but good sport Albert offers a rematch.
The writing is direct and brisk; the illustrations, bright and animated, are set
spaciously on oversize pages. ZS
D.V. Fear, overcoming; Social behavior.
Janeczko, Paul B., comp. This Delicious Day : 65 Poems Orchard/Watts, 1987. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-08324-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05724-0. Library ed. $11.99;
Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7 
"Meals for the eye... meals for the ear... meals for the
tongue.., meals for the mind-any and all of the 65 poems presented
here-and, yes, of course you may come back for seconds!" 
An inviting
anthology, from the jacket copy quoted above to the last poem by Arnold Adoff,
called "Past," a fresh mixture of imagery centering on time and food: "But I know
that tomorrow/ morning/ I'll wake up/ empty, and hungry for that/ next/ bite/ of
my new/ day." For younger readers than Janeczko's previous books have targeted,
this brings together a lively assortment of brief poems by Richard Snyder, ("O I
have Dined on This Delicious Day"), X.J. Kennedy ("The Cat Who Aspired to
Higher Things"), Dennis Lee ("Alligator Pie"), William Stafford ("Rover"), and
many others. Once again, Janeczko has shown characteristic sensitivity to mixing
[ 10]
the known and the unknown, to coordinating styles and subjects into a smooth
flow. The general tone is light and lively, varying from the abruptly humorous
(Jim Daniels' "Blubber Lips") to the softly descriptive (Gary Soto's "Stars").
Children who enjoy dipping their fingers into poetry will find here a tasty buffet of
structured and free verse. BH.
Joosse, Barbara M. Jam Day; illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. Harper, 1987. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-023097-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023096-7. 28p. Library ed. $11.89;
Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Ben often wishes that he were part of a large, noisy family instead of
a quiet twosome with his mother. When they step off the train for a visit with his
grandparents, however, he discovers that he is part of an extended family with
plenty of noisy cousins and bustling activities that include berry picking, jam
making, and biscuit baking. Only-children without the same advantages may feel
jealous! The pen and watercolor illustrations are literal and comfortable, fresh in
color if not in concept. A natural stepping-stone to discussion of different kinds of
family situations. BH
D.V. Family relations.
Klein, Norma. Older Men. Dial, 1987. ISBN 0-8037-0178-0. 226p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
Sixteen-year-old Elise is the sole object of her father's lavish affec-
tions. The psychological isolation of Elise's mother, June, becomes physical
when Elise's father arranges for a hospitalization from which June cannot release
herself. This is the story of Elise's discovery that her father has no use for women
who grow up, including his first wife, his stepdaughter, his second wife, his
mother-in-law, and, as soon as Elise begins to establish independence, his
daughter. Indeed, the book ends with a scene of his courting another woman with a
little girl. 
The writing here is capable and smooth, the characters clearly
delineated. At times the focus seems unrelieved, but the situation is solidly
established if psychologically obvious. The sexual scenes between Elise and her
father's stepson by a first marriage are both explicit and integral to the plot. BH
D.V. Father-daughter relations.
Lauber, Patricia. Dinosaurs Walked Here: And Other Stories Fossils Tell. Bradbury,
1987. ISBN 0-02-754510-5. 56p. illus. and with photographs. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Lauber succinctly explains what fossils are, how they are formed,
how they are found and studied, and what they tell about ancient forms of life. Di-
nosaurs themselves get an exclusive chapter, but equally interesting is the story of
the 40-million-year-old gnat trapped in amber or the fossil evidence for continental
drift. In every case, the illustrations and book design are as important as the text,
which, though well-written, doesn't convey quite the dramatic impact of a pictorial
comparison between a modem beaver skull and a fossil relative from 15,000 years
ago. Similarly, color photographs of the fossilized skeleton of a baby duck-billed
dinosaur that died while hatching out of its egg, of two fishes that died as the larger
tried to swallow the smaller, of Archaeopteryx bones and feathers imprinted in
limestone rock 140 million years ago, and even of a fossil leaf bed are mindbog-
gling. This is a lavish production that will engross children and complement
Caroline Arnold's Trapped in Tar: Fossils from the Ice Age (reviewed in the June,
1987 issue), which concentrates on the La Brea Pits. BH
C.U. Paleontology (unit)
[11]
Lee, Jeanne M. Ba-Nam; written and illus. by Jeanne M. Lee. Henry Holt, 1987. ISBN 0-
8050-0169-7. 28p. $13.95.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
The first time Nan goes to honor her ancestors on Thanh-Minh Day,
she is frightened by a black-toothed old woman, Ba-Nam, who takes care of the
graves. But when Nan and her brother wander off to play, they get lost in a storm
that makes Nan glad to see Ba-Nam, who guides them through the graveyard in the
driving rain and saves Nan from a falling tree. Set in South Vietnam, this is an
unpretentious story with full-page paintings effective for their clean, light shapes
against smoothly textured color backdrops. Although both text and art are slightly
stiff, Lee's depicting a common experience of fright in a foreign milieu will foster
cross-cultural awareness as well as give Southeast Asian refugee children another
much-needed picture book with which to identify. BH
D.V. Older-younger generations.
Locker, Thomas. The Boy Who Held Back the Sea; ad. and illus. by Thomas Locker. Dial,
1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0407-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0406-2. 28p.
Library ed. $14.95; Trade ed. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
The famous Dutch legend about the boy who plugged a hole in the
dike with his arm was told by Mary Mapes Dodge in Hans Brinker and is recast
here as a story within a story. The narrator is a woman who has come into her
naughty grandson's room to comfort him with the tale of another naughty boy
who became a hero. The text is personalized with details of the boy's adventure,
but Locker's full-page paintings are on a very different scale. His characteristically
monumental land- and seascapes have a seventeenth-century painterly tone with
dramatic chiaroscuro and posed figures. The graphic effect is not so much one of
moving listeners through the story as of arresting them with a series of crucial
scenes. Whatever the tension between an action-packed text and a style of illustra-
tion that creates pauses, the art itself is worth absorption. BH
D.V. Bravery.
Lowry, Lois. Anastasia's Chosen Career. Houghton, 1987. ISBN 0-395-42506-9.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Anastasia's at it again, having evolved a plan to remedy her thirteen-
year-old lack of grace and poise. The plan has three parts: 1) Anastasia will get her
composition on "my chosen career" written during winter vacation 2) by
interviewing a bookstore owner in downtown Boston 3) while satisfying her real
purpose of taking a modeling course at Studio Charmante. Naturally, Anastasia
does all three, in addition to making a lively new friend who turns out to have the
modeling potential that Anastasia realizes will never be her own lot. Along the
way, there are numerous funny scenes involving the odd assortment of teenagers
who turn up in response to the modeling school ad, and a more serious episode
involving one of them. Actually, Lowry cannot get Anastasia on a bus without
some hilarious bits, so the seedy modeling school offers lots of possibilities along
with its natural appeal to the target audience of readers. Anastasia may not have
glamor, but she's never at a loss for presence. BH
D.V. Occupational orientation.
Luenn, Nancy. Unicorn Crossing; illus. by Peter E. Hanson. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-
689-31384-5. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Though taunted by her older sister, Monica, Jenny believes with
yearning determination that she will see a unicorn on their vacation at old Mrs.
[12]
Donovan's country estate, called "Unicorn Crossing." Through several false
alarms--one a horse, another a dog-she keeps the faith until at last she's rewarded
with a vision substantiated by the disappearance of the rose petals she and Mrs.
Donovan picked for the unicorns to eat. The author of Arctic Unicorn writes for a
younger audience here, one often absorbed both by unicorns and intensely active
fantasies, as is the protagonist. The concept and imagery are a bit soft, but they do
have appeal, while the style is easy, the chapters brief, and the format spacious.
BH
D.V. Imaginative powers.
Lyttle, Richard B. II Duce: The Rise and Fall of Benito Mussolini. Atheneum, 1987.
ISBN 0-689-31213-X. $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 7-. 
A masterfully written biography, this has the absorbing quality of
fiction grounded in the meticulous attention to detail required of historical research.
In tone, Lyttle has achieved a nonjudgmental approach that allows him (and read-
ers) a close look at a complex character. He lets the political context speak for it-
self, and a gripping story it tells. In pacing the narrative, the author slows down
to an hour-by-hour account during crises in Mussolini's life, and the effect is to
intensify the reader's involvement while still providing more relaxed lulls for
informational background. This is particularly noticeable during the events leading
up to the end of World War II and Mussolini's death, but important incidents
during his takeover of the Italian government and his relationship with Hitler are
also dramatically presented without compromise of fact. The text is well balanced
in presenting the various periods, aspects, and contradictions of Mussolini's life,
both personal and political. One could wish for source notes, but in general, the
book is an achievement by any standards of biographical writing. BH
C.U. History-World War II, 1939-1945.
Manes, Stephen. Chicken Trek: The Third Strange Thing that Happened to Oscar Noodle-
man; illus. by Ron Barrett. Dutton, 1987. ISBN 0-525-44312-6. $10.95. Re-
viewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
In a bizarre story strongly reminiscent of Daniel Pinkwater's food-
obsessed fantasies (The Hoboken Chicken Emergency, Lizard Music, etc.), Oscar
Noodleman spends the summer racing around the country in a Picklemobile (well,
actually it's a RemDemTM that dematerializes and rematerializes wherever it's di-
rected) along with his cousin, a mad-inventor-type named Dr. Prechtwinkle, trying
to win a Bagful o' Chicken contest so Oscar can pay back Dr. Prechtwinkle for an
invention Oscar smashed, so Dr. Prechtwinkle in turn can pay back a neighboring
witch whose mansion was demolished by another of Prechtwinkle's machines, a
Transmogrifier that exchanged one type of food for another.... 
This is pure
slapstick obviously constructed on themes with known child appeal: contest sus-
pense, chase scenes, magic, inventions, fast-food products, best friends (Oscar's
shows up as a traveling companion), bad jokes, etc. It all works pretty well till
the climax, when things get out of hand with the appearance of a new contestant.
Escape fare that sometimes strains for fast and furious effects, this will still be fun
for young readers, especially those who enjoyed Oscar's earlier adventures, That
Game from Outer Space and The Oscar J. Noodleman Television Network. BH.
Mauser, Pat Rhoads. Patti's Pet Gorilla; illus. by Diane Palmisciano. Atheneum, 1987.
ISBN 0-689-31279-2. 42p. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Patti's dilemma involves the classic complications of telling a lie to
impress her classmates. Bored with her contributions to show-and-tell, she says
[13]
she has a pet gorilla, only to find herself inventing details that convince her friends
and even prey on her own fears. In the end, she faces the form of her own fanta-
sy-a brown bathrobe with a button "eye"-and confesses to the kids. This is a
small slice of life, limited in invention, but the school situation is realistic and the
vocabulary well tailored to children who have just left the picture-book and be-
ginning-reader stage. The print is large, the chapters are short, and the black-and-
white illustrations, though awkward in facial expression, are nicely drawn and
textured. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers; Truthfulness.
McDonnell, Christine. Just for the Summer; illus. by Diane deGroat. Viking Kestrel,
1987. ISBN 0-670-80059-7. $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Lydia goes to stay with her aunts Connie and May and enjoys the
prospect of being reunited with her friends Emily and Ivy, although she's worried
about her hospitalized father. While there are two themes, Lydia's concern about
Dad (whose illness is not described) and her desire for distinction-by-achievement
(she wins a prize for miniature dioramas), this is essentially an episodic story. It's
light, palatable, low-keyed reading, with characters and dialogue that are handled
competently but with little depth. ZS
D.V. Aunt-niece relations.
Miller, Luree. The Black Hat Dances: Two Buddhist Boys in the Himalayas; illus. with
photographs by Marilyn Silverstone. Dodd, 1987. ISBN 0-396-08835-X. 86p.
$11.95.
R 
Gr. 5-6. 
Since both author and photographer have lived in Asia for many
years (Silverstone has become a Buddhist nun in Nepal), this description of the
lives of Samdup and Tashi has an authoritative note. The former lives in a
monastery and is preparing for the religious life, the latter is a farmer's son. The
book gets off to a slow start by presenting facts about Buddhism in the United
States, a chapter that also includes anecdotes about individual children in Buddhist
families and information about the Buddhist faith-how it began, how it spread,
how it is observed. The major part of the text uses the lives of Tashi and Samdup
to give a broad picture of life in Sikkim, that part of India where the monastery and
the community that supports it are located. Since there is comparatively little
material about the subject for younger readers, this will be useful. The writing
style is simple and rather flat; the quality of the many photographs is variable. An
index and a list of suggested readings are provided. ZS
C.U. Religious education; Social studies.
Nelson, Theresa. Devil Storm. Orchard/Watts, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08311-X;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05711-9. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Is the old tramp really the son of pirate Jean LaFitte, and why does
he wander through Bolivar and Galveston and up and down the Gulf Coast? Buried
treasure? Against their father's explicit instructions, 13-year-old Walter and his
younger sister Alice befriend old Tom, giving him food in exchange for marvelous
stories, and they find their kindness repaid when Bolivar is hit by a hurricane that
threatens to kill the family. Based on a true incident of the hurricane that ravaged
the Galveston area in 1900, this is exciting once the storm gets underway, but the
preceding two-thirds of the book is rather tepid and sentimental. While most of the
characterizations are down-home stock, and dialogue too frequently given to ending
[ 14]
with portentous ellipses, Tom himself is a resonating figure: an ex-slave, perhaps
half-mad, condemned by a tragic secret to wander forever. RS.
Nicholson, Darrel. Wild Boars; illus. with photographs by Craig Blacklock. Carolrhoda,
1987. ISBN 0-87614-308-7. 43p. (Nature Watch). $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
With the striking color photography and uncondescending coverage
typical of the series, 
this book presents an animal whose intelligence and
adaptability are not widely known. The details are surprisingly interesting: the
boar's growth of a thick shield of protective skin before seasonal battles for leader-
ship; the piglets' habit of lying side by side, head to toe for close physical contact;
the trick a drift (group of boars) will pull in escaping a predator by running in fan-
like formation and circling back to surround and attack the pursuer.
Characteristics, reproductive cycle, social order, and ecological impact are all
considered in a neatly-organized, well-designed text that has a glossary and index.
BH
C.U. Nature study.
Nixon, Joan Lowery. Fat Chance, Claude; illus. by Tracey Campbell Pearson. Viking
Kestrel, 1987. ISBN 0-670-81459-8. 27p. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Backing up a bit from the time frame of Beats Me, Claude, this tells
the story of Shirley and Claude's childhoods and courtship. Ever the individual,
Shirley has an independent disposition that scares away most suitors-the last one
runs after he sees her riding a bull-until she sets out for Colorado to pan for gold
and finds herself parked next to Claude in the wagon train west. After saving him
from a rattlesnake and later staking out the same claim as Claude, she agrees to go
partners all the way. This represents endearing characters, adroit writing, and an
action-packed feminist pioneer tall tale all at once ("Shirley was born long and
lean, with hair the color of prairie dust and a mouth wide enough to hold a couple
of smiles at the same time"). To enjoy-north, south, and east as well as west.
BH
C.V. 
Sex roles.
O'Dell, Scott. The Serpent Never Sleeps: A Novel of Jamestown and Pocahontas; illus.
by Ted Lewin. Houghton, 1987. ISBN 0-395-44242-7. $15.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Although she has been bidden by King James to come to court,
Serena Lynn runs off to join the company that is sailing from Plymouth to
Jamestown in 1609. The "serpent" of the title is on a ring the king has given
Serena, telling her that it will protect her. There are many times that she hopes
the ring will do so, as she follows the man she loves to the New World. The dan-
gers and delays of travel, the tragedy of the Jamestown colony, and the story of the
Indian princess whom Serena comes to know are told with O'Dell's usual narrative
flair, his usual smooth blend of fact and fiction, and his usual ability to bring the
past to life. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
Paulsen, Gary. The Crossing. Orchard/Watts, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08309-8;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05709-7. Library ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
A child of the streets in a Mexican border town, Manny is thirteen
and a veteran in the battle to stay alive by any means: begging, fighting, lying,
[15 ]1
working, almost anything. His plan is to steal across the border, but there are too
many obstacles, too many dangers. He meets an American sergeant who drinks to
shut out his bitter memories, and the man promises to help Manny, but neither
expects that help to be the final act in their relationship, as the sergeant, killed by
thugs, presses his bloody wallet on the boy so that he can have a chance of
crossing and of making it on the other side. This is a darkly dramatic story,
forcefully told and shocking if effective in its violence. It is spare in structure, and
so concentrated that it seems almost a long short story. Although the protagonist
is a young adolescent, the somber tone and the seldom-relieved venality and
violence of the characters make a tale that may be of more interest to adults than to
juvenile readers. ZS.
Pendergraft, Patricia. Miracle at Clement's Pond. Philomel, 1987. ISBN 0-399-21438-0.
197p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
This first novel shows a faultless ear for southern rural dialect and
narrative style as it relates, in the words of a young boy, how three friends find an
abandoned baby, leave it secretly on the porch of a warm-hearted spinster, and
suffer the inevitable drama of the community's acknowledging not a "miracle" but
an illegitimate child. A subplot untangles problematic relationships between the
protagonist Lyon, his widowed father, and a bitter woman who inflicts on Lyon,
through her daughter Taffy, a longstanding antagonism toward Lyon's father. This
is a complex plot and cast of characters, all vividly rendered. Perhaps the ending is
a bit too neatly worked out, with Lyon's father marrying the baby's mother, but in
general Pendergraft has handled the complex dynamics of her book with the surety
and inner eye of someone remembering events. BH
D.V. Father-son relations.
Pfeffer, Susan Beth. The Year Without Michael. Bantam, 1987. ISBN 0-553-05430-9.
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Jody is the oldest, Michael is about to enter his first year of high
school, and Kay is the youngest; all of them are deeply upset because their parents
are having marital problems. When Michael fails to come home one day, the
others wonder if it is because of that situation-but they never find out. Michael
never comes home. This gives a sharp and painful picture of how a family can
disintegrate under stress: Kay and her mother fight bitterly, Mom is unrealistic and
inert, Dad's mother is sure it's her daughter-in-law's fault. Kay resents the fact
that Jody's responsible behavior wins the approval she herself lacks and longs for.
The months drag by, and each member of the family adjusts or accepts in a story
that gives a vivid and touching picture of a family bereft. One incident at the close
of the book fails to convince, unfortunately: Jody sneaks off to New York to look
for Michael, is approached by a young prostitute (female) who sends her to a 14-
year-old prostitute (male) who tells her what it's like on the streets. Jody starts
walking back to the Port Authority building, stops in at a church, is put up for the
night on the couch in the minister's office. Save for his homily about her role in
the family, this seems as unlikely as it is extraneous. ZS
D.V. Family relations.
Rutledge, Paul. The Vietnamese in America. Lerner, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-8225-
0235-6; Paper ed. ISBN 0-8225-1033-2. 64p. Illus. and with photographs.
Library ed. $7.95; Paper ed. $3.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
This straightforward text covers some basic geography, history, and
recent war-time politics of Vietnam before describing the refugee situation and
[16 ]
resettlement programs that have incorporated many Southeast Asians into Amer-
ican life. Except for a few specific stories that serve as examples, the narrative is
impersonal in dealing with the human drama of mass evacuation. Although there
is acknowledgment of controversy attending U.S. involvement in Vietnam, there is
no hint of the tragic problems of Amerasians (mentioned only in a list under
"Category 3" of Vietnamese nationals admitted under the Orderly Departure Pro-
gram). There is, on the other hand, no attempt to gloss over the kinds of cultural
conflicts even the most successful immigrants can have here. Black-and-white
photographs on almost every page help flavor the information, which will be
especially useful for school reports and as background for discussion among chil-
dren in classrooms integrating new immigrants. BH
C.U. History-U.S.
Selsam, Millicent E. A First Look at Poisonous Snakes; written by Millicent E. Selsam
and Joyce Hunt; illus. by Harriet Springer. Walker, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-
8027-6683-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6681-1. 27p. (A First Look At). Library ed.
$11.85; Trade ed. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Systematically and scientifically, as is their wont, Selsam and Hunt
lead readers through the process of categorizing and identifying poisonous snakes,
including the cobra family, vipers, pit vipers, and sea snakes. The snake's
ecological importance is mentioned, along with warnings on respecting and
avoiding poisonous types. A map overgeneralizes "Parts of the World Where
Poisonous Snakes Live" to the point of distortion, as in depicting Australia, which
has numerous poisonous snakes (the taipan and the tiger snake are among the
deadliest in the world) as being an area of "very little danger." Overall, however,
the spacious format, easy vocabulary, and fine drawings desensationalize the
subject while rendering it accessible to curious young readers. BH
C.U. Zoology.
Siegel, Beatrice. The Basket Maker and the Spinner; illus. by William Sauts Bock. Walk-
er, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6695-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6694-3. 54p.
Library ed. $11.85; Trade ed. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Focusing on a woman of the Wampanoag tribe in New England,
Siegel describes Yawata's daily duties and seasonal activities with special attention
to basket weaving as a central craft among Native American tribes in general. The
depiction of an English settler named Mary Allen offers a contrast, with her
household duties geared around spinning yarn and weaving cloth. This lacks the
compelling tone and cohesive structure of Siegel's A New Look at the Pilgrims.
Yet the narrative reveals cultural differences that will give readers insight into other
times and states of mind. An appendix gives a "Wampanoag Calendar," and a
bibliography lists juvenile books for further reading. With competent black-and-
white drawings and an index. BH
C.U. History-U.S.-Frontier and pioneer life.
Sullivan, George. Famous U.S. Spy Planes. Dodd, 1987. ISBN 0-396-08844-9. 58p.
Illus. with photographs. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Reading Sullivan's series on famous planes is like walking through
a convention hall of high-tech wares. The statistics are all there, presented compe-
tently, but there's not much human context. In this case, he starts with the Cur-
tiss JN, or Jenny, the first plane used for reconaissance by the U.S. over Mexican
revolutionary forces in 1916. Thereafter, a selection of craft ranging through
[17]
World War I and II models to the latest SR-71 (Blackbird) gets a double spread for
each, with photographs, brief historical background, and a listing of data.
Actually, the most recent models get an extra page or two on technical
development and are all the more interesting for the coverage. Young readers who
are enthusiastic about flying and have enjoyed browsing through the other volumes
will take to this one as well. BH.
Tessendorf, K. C. Uncle Sam in Nicaragua: A History. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-689-
31286-5. $12.95. Reviewed in galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Like the subject of Tessendorf's Kill the Tsar! Youth and Terrorism
in Old Russia, this is a dramatic historical canvas dotted with colorful, sometimes
bizarre figures, including soldier-adventurer William Walker and shipping magnate
Cornelius Vanderbilt. The book is strong on nineteenth-century history and even
through the Somoza regime, but coverage of current warfare is minimal. The au-
thor excuses this lack by citing the difficulty of objective perspective on the situa-
tion; yet a balanced presentation of both sides is not impossible, and students
looking for information will feel the need for a much broader discussion of
connections between past and present. The writing is overblown (one diplomat is
described as "the innocent of these annals"), with some inappropriate word choices
("The savages had desired a slaughter, but Morgan intervened"). Balancing
Tessendorf's unpruned prose, however, are some capably researched facts that
include first-hand quotes. An annotated bibliography of adult sources is included.
BH
C.U. History-U.S.
Thesman, Jean. The Last April Dancers. Houghton, 1987. ISBN 0-395-43024-0. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
It was her father who had used the term "April Dancers" one night
when he and Cat (Catherine) and her beloved Cameron had driven out to the
deserted family farm. By that time, Cat was already worried and heartsick about
Dad (unemployed, depressed, erratic, forgetful) and baffled by the fact that her
mother and grandmother seemed not to notice how peculiar Dad was, albeit always
gentle, apologetic, and loving. Because he forgets to pick her up for her driver's
test on her sixteenth birthday, Cat lashes out in anger; when he commits suicide,
she is sure it's because of her harsh words. Sent to stay with Aunt Leah in
California, Cat learns some family history that helps mitigate her guilt,
and-when Cameron pays a surprise visit-she accepts the fact that they may be
separated, temporarily, by college years and the disapproval of both their mothers,
but she is sure that the bond between them is a lasting one. Occasionally the
writing seems padded by repetitive or hazy passages, but the perception with which
the author develops Cat's ambivalence, her courage, and her resolution of sorrow,
is impressive. Narrative flow, dialogue, and pace are competently controlled. ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Father-daughter relations; Mother-daughter relations.
Van Leeuwen, Jean. Oliver, Amanda, and Grandmother Pig; illus. by Ann Schweninger.
Dial, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0362-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0361-9.
54p. Library ed. $8.89; Trade ed. $8.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Although Grandmother has appeared before in the series, this book
focuses on a week-long visit in which there's an adjustment to her arrival, an
establishment of new routine, and then a farewell. Each of the five stories conveys
an aspect of this cycle with humor and affection. The children are discombobulated
by some of the limitations of Grandmother's age, but they soon enter into a part-
[18 ]
nership, bending to retrieve things and finding her glasses in exchange for comfort
and stories. She, in turn, adjusts to their noise and acknowledges, before her
departure, that she will even miss it. Well written and more cohesive than many
beginning-to-read collections, with cozy, domestic, full-color illustrations, this
will be as popular for family read-aloud sharing as for classroom practice. BH
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Ventura, Piero. There Once Was a Time; written and illus. by Piero Ventura. Putnam,
1987. ISBN 0-399-21356-2. 156p. $19.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
The irregular use of double columns of print, broken by illustrations
or captions, makes many of the pages of this oversize book seem cluttered and at
times confusing. Ventura's approach is one that brings history to an accessible
view: not kings and battles and place names, but information about how people
lived and worked and dressed in a series of historical periods. Most of the text is
briskly and informally informative, but because it covers so broad a span there are
frequently abrupt jumps or awkward juxtapositions of details. The illustrations are
remarkably deft and detailed, as handsome as they are useful. Additional informa-
tion is provided by appended notes. ZS
C.U. 
History.
Voigt, Cynthia. Sons from Afar. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-689-31349-7. $13.95. Re-
viewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
In another story about the Tillerman family, Voigt focuses on
Dicey's brothers, James and Sammy. It is James, the older boy, who first begins
wondering about their father. They know he had abandoned their mother after
fathering the four children who bore the name of Tillerman because their parents
had not married. They learn his name (Francis Verricker) and travel from the East-
ern Shore to Baltimore and Annapolis to find what they can (he was a seaman, a
gambler who failed to pay his debts, a love-em-and-leave-em Lothario) and, in the
course of their probing and analyzing, they both learn to understand themselves and
each other. This has series appeal, of course, but it also has a strong narrative
flow despite several slow-moving passages. ZS
D.V. Brothers; Family relations.
Wallace, Barbara Brooks. Argyle; illus. by John Sandford. Abingdon, 1987. ISBN 0-687-
01724-6. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Delightful nonsense, this combines a plot with an improba-
ble/impossible twist that is firmly meshed with a realistic base. The style is
honed to simplicity and is given humor by the union of fantastic development and
bland style. A sheep named Argyle is happiest when he blends with the flock,
looking just like the others, doing just what they do. And then... Argyle finds a
patch of flowers of many colors, and as he eats them, a rainbow band of wool
begins to grow. That, of course, is the first step in a process that leads to Argyle
socks. The margin-framed paintings are impressive for their composition and their
restrained use of color, and they echo the quiet humor of the story to very good
effect. ZS.
[19]
Weatherill, Stephen. The Very First Lucy Goose Book; written and illus. by Stephen
Weatherill. Prentice-Hall, 1987. ISBN 0-13-941410-X. 29p. $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Five stories are told in cartoon strip format by a British humorist
whose off-beat ebullience should appeal to children everywhere. Although some of
the text may not be understood outside of Britain, most of it is explained by the
drawings. Lucy has a talent for getting into trouble that is equalled by an ability
to get out of it in some entertainingly silly way. For example, in "Lucy Goose &
the Birdbath," she finds the water frozen solid, enlists the help of various friends
(the horse blows on the ice to melt it but succeeds only in freezing the hair on his
nose), and finally is flown south by some helpful birds. Meanwhile, thirsty geese
in the desert are scanning the skies for the sign of a cloud, they espy the flying
rescue mission, and they signal. "In no time," the episode ends, "Lucy's bath
became a major tourist attraction." Weatherill uses some exposition and some
signs-within-frames to help tell the story, but most of it is carried by balloon
captions. Silly but fun, the book looks as if it were for very young children; yet
many of the comments and some latent content indicate that the chief audience is
the independent reader. Like most material in comic-book format, this is difficult
to read aloud without being staccato, making it probable that independent readers
are in fact the major audience, though preschoolers may find it fun. ZS.
Weller, Frances Ward. Boat Song. Macmillan, 1987. ISBN 0-02-792611-7. 
168p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Eleven-year-old Jonno already feels alienated from his family because
he is quieter than his siblings and overawed by his father's "Renaissance"
brilliance. The traditional summer vacation in Maine exacerbates this problem as
adolescent changes emphasize the father-son conflict, but a Scottish bagpiper
named Rob Loud reaches out to Jonno with his music, stories, and individualistic
perspective. Some of the writing here is repetitive: feisty Gram always "peppers,"
and Jonno's mother is forever chuckling, twinkling, or showing some other
characteristic sign of good humor. The main characters in focus, however, are
realized in detail, and the climax, in which Jonno takes a boat into the rough sea to
rescue his dog and is guided back by Rob's bagpipe music, will balance some of
the descriptive internal conflict for young readers. Even better is a tavern scene
subtly depicting a boy's first independent taste of the unknown. A hearty first
novel, this lacks stylistic grace but shows structural strength. BH
D.V. Father-son relations; Individuality, expressing.