Allan, Nicholas. The Thing That Ate Aunt Julia; written and illus. by Nicholas
Allan. Dial, 1991. ISBN 0-8037-0872-6. 32p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Bathroom humor has immense appeal among the
primary set; how do you think they'll feel about a toilet with teeth? Jeffrey's
toilet comes to life after Aunt Julia pours magic Thick Yellow Goo into the
bowl; the friendly monster is voracious, eating up the plates, the furniture, the
television and ... Aunt Julia. Jeffrey and "his new friend" then go for a walk,
scare strangers (Jeffrey's friend plays possum in a public loo), and swim at the
beach ("Jeffrey's friend loved water and flushed with excitement when it saw the
ocean"), finally coming home when the magic wears off. The toilet becomes
inanimate once again, and out steps Aunt Julia. The humor is very silly but has
on-target appeal; the cartooned illustrations are quick and clever, with ballooned
sound effects ("SLURP") and exclamations ("Help! A toilet!"). Try it in story
hour-they'll think of you in a whole new way. RS
Andrews, Jan. The Auction; illus. by Karen Reczuch. Macmillan, 1991. ISBN
0-02-705535-3. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
On his last visit to Gramps' farm, Todd cries with the
old man over an empty livestock pasture and impending auction, but the two
cheer each other up with reminiscences of good times with Gran, who died the
year before. One of these memories generates the only action in the story,
dressing up scarecrows to sit at the combine, at the sewing machine, and around
other objects to be sold. On the whole, this remains more situation than story,
though the inter-generational relationship is close and comforting enough to
offset some of the static tone. Full-color illustrations, stilted in the characters'
expressions, are otherwise well drawn and subtly hued. Youngsters familiar with
the trauma of uprooting may project their own energy into these quiet scenes.
BH
D.V. Grandfather-child relations
Argueta, Manlio. Magic Dogs of the Volcanoes; tr. by Stacey Ross; illus. by
Elly Simmons. Children's Book Press, 1990. ISBN 0-89239-064-6. 
32p.
$12.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
An original tale based on El Salvadoran folk motifs,
this is a not-quite-convincing blend of the sociopolitical and the legendary.
[ 135
Cadejos are magical dogs that are said to live on the volcano slopes in El
Salvador, here they are instrumental in defeating the wicked lead soldiers come to
oppress the local peasants. Themes of class struggle are often powerfully
implicit in folk literature, but one is rather too aware here of the author's didactic
intent. After the soldiers' defeat, in which they are melted by the heat of the
volcanoes, they see "that being made of lead was a weakness and decided to
devote themselves to professions more worthy than soldiering." Like Dr. Seuss'
The Butter Battle Book, the moral is pointed at the expense of the story.
Simmon's mixed-media paintings have more life than the story, matter-of-factly
incorporating the cadejos and volcanic spirits among the human figures and
natural landscape. Some of the paintings are too crowded and garishly colored;
the best, such as a strongly patterned picture of the (invisible) cadejos
confounding the soldiers, have a truly magical realism. The text is in both
English and Spanish. RS
Arrick, Fran. Where'd You Get the Gun, Billy? Bantam, 1991. ISBN 0-553-
07135-1. [112p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
Gr. 7-10. 
After Billy Federson kills his girlfriend, the victim's
best friend and another boy in their school have one question. Where did he get
the gun? 
A gruff-but-kindly policeman tells them-and us-a lengthy,
contrived, and very silly tale of how Billy might have gotten the gun. Okay.
Maybe a man bought it to protect his family but his wife freaked when she
found the baby playing with it so she took it and maybe threw it into the woods
where an old couple found it and took it home for make-believe target practice
until maybe a thrill-seeking rich kid robbed them and took the gun to a party
where maybe a girl intent on the thrill-seeker's attentions hid it in her purse to
taunt him with later instead maybe lost it to a drug dealer while she was scoring
some cocaine for her bored-debutante friend ... if getting ahold of a gun were
this complicated, gun control would be a dead issue. The vapid story is matched
by the melodramatic style and characterization, and Arrick's paperback-romancing
is shameless: "Her eyes glistened. 'You know what's awful, David? If it hadn't
been for this, we probably wouldn't have even gotten to know each other. It
took a tragedy for us to really meet.' 'Yeah,' he murmured." And why did Billy
do it? A lack of self-esteem, of course. RS
Beisner, Monika. Catch That Cat!: A Picture Book of Rhymes and Puzzles;
written and illus. by Monika Beisner. Farrar, 1990. ISBN 0-374-31226-5.
32p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-5. 
Sixteen riddles, puzzles, and visual games, all about
cats, are included in this slim volume. Challenges range from an undemanding
pictorial journey along yar-entwined letters of the alphabet to make a cat's
name, through a "My first is in chicken, but not in hen" traditional riddle, to a
"which two cats are identical?" puzzle requiring great visual sophistication (this
reviewer is still working on it). 
The rhyming text suffers from scansion
problems and does not always make clear what mystery the audience has to
solve. Readers old enough to make the extremely fine distinctions needed for
some of the pictorial enigmas will be put off by the picture-book format and the
more simplistic puzzles. 
Although more diffuse than her previous work,
Beisner's creepily atmospheric illustrations are ornate and vivid and full of
[ 136 ]
felines in unexpected places; young cat fanciers may find this book worth
examination on that account. Puzzle solutions are provided in the back. DS
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
Bell, William. Forbidden City. Bantam, 1991. Trade ed. ISBN 0-553-07131-9;
Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-28864-4. 200p. Trade ed. $14.95; Paper ed. $3.50.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
A Canadian high school teacher who has lived and
taught in China, the author uses the voice of seventeen-year-old Alex to tell the
grim story of Tien An Men Square in the spring of 1989. Alex has come to
Beijing with his father, a news cameraman, and he's excited because he's long
been interested in Chinese history. The story is both tragic and dramatic,
emerging vividly as an eyewitness account and rendered particularly poignant
because Alex makes some Chinese friends who have always revered the leaders of
the People's Liberation Army. They cannot understand how these folk heroes
could turn on the demonstrators, how they could lie to them and about them,
how they could kill and deny the killing. Well written, well paced, and all too
believable, this is an impressive novel. ZS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Courage; Devotion to a cause
Bellairs, John. The Secret of the Underground Room. Dial, 1990. Library ed.
ISBN 0-8037-0864-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0863-7. [128p]. Library ed.
$13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
Gr.5-7. 
In their latest adventure, young Johnny Dixon,
Professor Childermass, and Johnny's friend Fergie follow Father Higgins to
England when an evil spirit takes over the gentle cleric's body. The spirit is
attempting to return to the Isle of Lundy in order to set free five more demonic
knights, so Johnny, Fergie, the professor and the professor's long-lost brother
(conveniently endowed with ESP and conversant with magic spells) race to save
their friend and prevent the demon from completing his nasty task. In the brief
and occasional moments when non-corporeal spirits appear or leave messages the
writing manages to convey some spooky atmosphere, but otherwise this is a
melange of tourist information about the West Country ("They drank tea and
munched cream cakes covered with strawberry jam in an old-fashioned tea shop.
By the time they got back to Glastonbury, it was five in the evening. As soon
as they got off the bus, they went back to the church of St. John to see if Mrs.
Higgins's tomb slab had been moved"), condescendingly colloquial dialogue
("Whaddaya think we oughta do?"), and an arbitrary and coincidental plot that
doesn't even satisfy the reader by letting the boys be the final heroes. Lacking
the zip of Bellairs' other offerings, it makes the old Stratemeyer Syndicate series,
invoked by the professor himself ("Have you been reading too many Hardy Boys
adventures?") seem comparative-and inexpensive-models of writerly rectitude.
DS
Bisel, Sara C. The Secrets of Vesuvius; by Sara C. Bisel with Jane Bisel and
Shelley Tanaka. Madison Press/Scholastic, 1991. ISBN 0-590-43850-6. [64p.]
illus. and with photographs. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
A physical anthropologist walks us through her
examination of skeletons recently unearthed on the beach of Herculaneum, buried
for almost 2,000 years by the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 A.D. Several chapters
[ 137]
offer a fictional version of the victims' last day, with descriptions based on
archeological information recovered from the dig. These are fairly well
incorporated into the factual text, but it is the color photographs of the bones
themselves that will rivet readers' attention: "One of our most moving finds
was the skeleton of a young slave girl cradling the tiny skull of a baby." Bisel's
"reading" of these bones for lives once led brings history very close to home
indeed. Drawings, models, and photographed artifacts further augment the facts;
a glossary helps with definitions and pronunciations; and a chart highlights
events related to Mount Vesuvius, which also erupted as the Allied Forces
attacked Italy in 1944. With the same surefire catastrophic appeal as accounts of
the Titanic, this will inspire both science and history reports, leading to further
reading such as Ron and Nancy Goor's Pompeii (BCCB 11/86). BH
C.U. History-Ancient
Bode, Janet. Truce: Ending the Sibling War. Watts, 1991. Library ed. ISBN
0-531-10996-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-15221-9. [144p]. Library ed. $12.90;
Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Interspersed between discussions of problems,
suggestions for alleviation or solution of them, and advice on behavior patterns
that may militate toward general improvement of sibling (and step-sibling)
relationships, are boxed comments in which teenagers describe their experiences
and/or their feelings. Bode covers many aspects of the sibling war, from
everyday concerns to serious or even dangerous issues. The text is somewhat
uneven in style and is occasionally cursory in dealing with some aspect of the
subject, but on the whole the book is impressive because it is non-judgmental
and sympathetic, and candid without any trace of titillation or dramatization.
Source notes and a bibliography are included. ZS
D.V. Sibling relations
Carter, Alden R. RoboDad. Putnam, 1990. ISBN 0-399-22191-3. 
144p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
It's been almost six months since her dad suffered a
massive stroke that left him emotionally catatonic, but fourteen-year-old Shar
still can't believe that he will never recover. His lethargic behavior, sitting all
day in front of the television, eating snacks, earns him the nickname "RoboDad"
from Shar's younger brothers, who are both confused and angered by his altered
personality. Terrified by his irrational and violent outbursts, the whole family
suffers, but Shar most of all. While Mom buries herself in her work, Shar
curtails her social life to care for her father. Her formerly gentle "buddy" is
cruelly insensitive and sexually threatening: "He looked down at me with that
strange stare. Slowly, his big hands came up to cover my breasts. I was so
shocked that I went completely rigid. 'These are new,' he said." Most of the
characters are carefully drawn and their relationships convincing. Shar's new
boyfriend is scared off by her father; their budding friendship cannot stand the
stress of his unpredictable behavior. Family dynamics are especially well
portrayed, both the love-hate relationship between Shar and her brothers, and
Shar's alternating resentment of and dependence on her mother. There is no
happy ending, but a gradual reconciliation to the situation: "I remember the dad
I lost and miss him. And, I'll give this stranger what love I can in memory of
[ 138 ]
that dad I once had." Powerful and disturbing, the story is told with compassion
and honesty. RAS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Claverie, Jean. Little Lou; written and illus. by Jean Claverie. Stewart, Tabori
& Chang/Creative Education, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-88682-329-3; ISBN 1-
55670-162-4. 48p. $14.95.
M 
Gr. 2-5. 
"Momma says the blues started inside me way back
before I was born," says Little Lou at the beginning of this story of a young
black boy (the jacket says "in the American South of the 1920s") who has a love
and talent for music and who saves the day when gangsters threaten his beloved
blues club. The plot for the first half is slow and labored, with a great deal of
tiny print on each page. When the gangster story begins, the format changes to
comic-book panels and the plot grows progressively more confusing. The
illustrations throughout are detailed pencil sketches with pale washes (and their
period flavor and minutiae are impressive), but they are ironically cartoon-like in
execution in the first half and more dramatic and subtle in the graphic-novel
section. It's unclear who the intended audience is here-the illustrations have
too much detail and the text too much complexity for the picture-book style
employed, and those readers who would relish the comic-book format and
gangster story probably won't make it through the slower-paced first half. DS
Cottonwood, Joe. The Adventures of Boone Barnaby. Scholastic, 1991. ISBN
0-590-43546-9. 227p. $13.95.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
San Puerco (St. Pork?) is a little California mountain
town, populated by a variety of stereotypes including "Damaged Goods," the
local drunk; a "va-va-voom" floozie named Emma; Meyer "Miser" Tate, the local
Grinch; and a soccer coach named Walt, whose favorite epithet is "Great
galloping banana slugs." Underneath the self-conscious humor, however, is a
pretty good story about three boys in the town, Boone, Danny, and Babcock,
who play, plot, fight, and generally keep each other honest Boone is an affable
narrator too often subjected to authorial intrusion; Danny is the mixed-up son of
the local no'count; Babcock, the most freshly drawn of the three, is a smart fat
black kid who knows about fossils and flowers, and how to keep a dragonfly
hovering in front of his face. The story is predictable and sentimental, but the
plentitude of pratfall humor and the good-natured tone will recommend it to fans
of the pre-adolescent idyll. RS
D.V. Friendship values
Esterman, M. M. A Fish That's a Box: Folk Art from the National Museum
of American Art, Smithsonian Institution. Great Ocean, 1990. ISBN 0-
915556-21-9. 32p. illus. with photographs. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Color photographs of 35 objects from the Hemphill
collection of folk art (a part of the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum
of American Art) are accompanied by captions that give identification,
description, size, date or approximate date, and information about the artist if he
or she is known. The layout is occasionally crowded, but for the most part the
pages, which have a range of background colors, are effectively designed. The
objects pictured (presumably chosen as being particularly appealing to children)
are varied; most have a naive quality and are colorful. The minimal text (a brief
[ 139
line or two at the tops of the pages) is on the cute side, but it interferes very
little with the attractiveness of the book, with its function of providing
information, or with its unusual presentation of a particular kind of indigenous
art. ZS
C.U. Art
Fabian, Stella. The Opal Mystery. Brighton & Lloyd, 1991. Paper ed. ISBN
0-922434-39-5. [192p]. Paper ed. $3.25. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Rick has come with his father to Australia to help
find Uncle Bevan, missing and suspected of the theft of some valuable opals.
With the help of his cousin, Woody, and a kangaroo, Boomer, Rick finds his
uncle and the bad guy and the opals. The plot is patterned but satisfying, its
ingenuity (and writing style) barely one step ahead of the Hardy Boys: "Then
suddenly a shiver of excitement tingled along Rick's backbone." Lassie fans
will enjoy Boomer, whose role in the story is important but not
anthropomorphized to an objectionable degree. 
The characterization of
Iranpanunya, a friendly aborigine, is well-meant but patronizing, and the picture
of the outback is earnestly detailed. This is best regarded as a boy's-eye exotic
travelogue wrapped around a Boy's Life-familiar plot. RS
Ferris, Jean. Across the Grain. Farrar, 1990. ISBN 0-374-30030-5. 216p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Will doesn't seem to have much choice except to
follow his flaky sister Paige to her latest byway-the California desert, where
Paige has found a job managing a small diner, the Snakebite Cafe. Will hates
leaving the ocean, hates leaving for his senior year, but Paige is all the family
he has since the long ago desertion by their father and the more recent death of
their mother. Will and Paige have a funny, prickly relationship, with Will
always having to pick up after his sister, sometimes forgetting how much he
loves and needs her. The two manage pretty well together, companionably
running the cafe (but guess who always gets stuck with cleanup?) and making
friends with the customers. Will meets Mike, an angry, intensely demanding
girl who is obsessed with her equally intense mother, an anthropologist; he also
becomes close to Sam, an older man who teaches Will about woodcarving and
housebuilding and "growing into a man." Mike is engagingly irritating; Sam is
too reverently drawn, obviously an exemplar of the author's rather sentimental
ideas about masculinity: "Sometimes a man needed another man." But it's a
likable story, and the ending is sunny and satisfying, with Paige off on another
tangent (to open a vegetarian restaurant in San Francisco) and Will looking
forward to his first year at UCLA. Mike is going too (no surprise there), and
there's a suggestion that friendship may blossom into romance, a turn each of
them well deserves. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Older-younger generations
Gherman, Beverly. Sandra Day O'Connor: Justice for All; illus. by Robert
Masheris. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-82756-8. [64p]. (Women of Our Time).
$10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
The only child of an Arizona rancher and his wife,
Sandra Day is depicted as the model child, teenager, student, and daughter. This
laudatory note and the several instances of flowery or padded writing style
[ 140]
weaken a biography that has an interesting and unusual subject; Sandra Day
O'Connor really doesn't need sugar icing. 
An example of the stylistic
platitudes: "She might not smile much, but she knew the law." Gherman
describes adequately the biographee's personal and professional life, but gives
little evidence of O'Connor's being "one of the most ... controversial women
of today." ZS
Girard, Linda Walvoord. Alex, the Kid with AIDS; illus. by Blanche Sims.
Whitman, 1991. 
ISBN 0-8075-0245-6. 
[32p]. 
$12.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
The title seems like an upfront announcement of
bibliotherapeutic intentions; it actually refers to the matter-of-fact sobriquet used
to describe the new kid in Michael's fourth-grade class: "We'd all heard about
Alex." Avoiding both melodrama and excessive information-packing, this is a
casually told, even entertaining, story about the adjustment of a kid with AIDS,
and his often rambunctious classmates, to each other. Even the teacher learns
something: Alex figures he can get away with writing a mean poem about the
playground supervisor ("Mrs. Zanes lost her brains") because "he's sick," but it's
this event that makes Mrs. Timmers realize she's been far too forgiving. "I've
been taking it easy with you, treating you like somebody from outer space. I
made a mistake, Alex." Even the obligatory speech from the school nurse is
delivered within an unforced context: "If Alex got a nosebleed or a cut, we had
to be extra careful not to touch the blood in case we had a scratch or cut, too. A
teacher or the nurse would clean the blood up. 'Yuk,' said Louise under her
breath." Alex does cut himself later on the playground, but "it was no big
scratch and no big deal." Sim's bright line-and-watercolor cartoons show a
multiracial classroom as lively and natural as the text. 
Factually and
emotionally on-target, this is first and best a good story. RS
D.V. Friendship values; School, adjustment to
Goldin, Barbara Diamond. Cakes and Miracles: A Purim Tale; illus. by Erika
Weihs. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83047-X. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
To Hershel, blinded by an illness, and to his widowed
mother, Basha, Purim is a time to supplement a meager living with sales of
hamantashen. But Hershel is no longer willing just to haul wood and water for
the baking-an angel has appeared in his dreams and told him to make what he
sees in his head, something he's already practised with river mud. So Hershel
shapes the dough into beautiful figures, all of which sell quickly on the holiday,
and opens up new possibilities for his future as baker or craftsman. This is a
blessedly unsentimental picture of a blind boy who makes mischief and whose
mother chides him without tiptoeing around his handicap ("If you had eyes, you
could see all the mud on your clothes"). The paintings assert a strong rhythm of
rounded images and richly modulated colors, expressing warm affection between
the characters without oversweetening the scenes. An afterword summarizes the
origins and traditions of Purim, including a recipe for hamantashen. BH
C.U. Holidays
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
[ 141 ]
Hanft, Philip. Never Fear, Flip the Dip Is Here; illus. by Thomas B. Allen.
Dial, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0899-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0897-1.
32p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
Capably drawn crayon pictures show some action on
the baseball diamond in a read-aloud story with a formula plot that's nicely
executed. Baseball itself has subject-appeal, and the transformation from a boy
who is too little and too inept to a hotshot game-saver should appeal to young
children. 
There's a bit of contrivance in the fact that Flip is seen throwing his
mitt away just as an artist who happens to be a former minor league player,
Buster, emerges from his doorway. Learning that Flip's father is in the Navy
and on sea duty, Buster patiently coaches the boy until Flip is not only a good
fielder but a substitute pitcher who triumphs over the star of the opposing team.
The fact that Buster happens to be black while Flip is white is casually evident
in the pictures. The story is structurally forced but smoothly told. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Perseverance
Hines, Anna Grossnickle. Remember the Butterflies; written and illus. by Anna
Grossnickle Hines. Dutton, 1991. ISBN 0-525-44679-6. 32p. $12.95.
NR 
4-7yrs. 
For those who successfully weathered the "new
realism" in children's books, the title alone here has an ominously nostalgic
ring. Little Holly and Glen find a dead butterfly and bring it in to Grandpa for an
explanation. He reassures the children, telling them to "remember how beautiful
it was" and to be "glad that its life will go on and on because of the eggs it left
behind." They remember this lesson when-what else?-Grandpa himself dies
the next winter. This is a harmless book, but one that is stale and sentimental
and lacking the reassurance that a real story can provide. The illustrations of the
children at play in Grandpa's garden are cloyingly colored and awkwardly drawn,
and the characters wear all-purpose doleful expressions throughout the book.
The last page, which pictures the children skipping in the garden while singing
"We love you Grandpa. We love you and the butterflies, and we'll always
remember," looks like something out of the 1950s. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Honeycutt, Natalie. Ask Me Something Easy. Jackson/Orchard, 1991. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-08494-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05894-8. [160p]. Library ed.
$13.99; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
Addie tells the story, looking back as an adolescent of
seventeen, to the beginning-ten years earlier-of the crumbling of her family.
Victims of marital discord and divorce, Addie and her three sisters adapt, or fail to
adapt, in different ways, to Daddy's departure and to Mama's increasingly
neurotic behavior, which, for Addie only, included verbal and physical abuse.
There is some leavening in the story: a sympathetic counselor, a loving boy, a
rapprochement between Addie and her older sister, who had become Mama's
confidante and Addie's enemy. This might be grim were it not so skillfully
crafted, with a compelling writing style and with an impressive integration
between the subtly drawn characters and their interaction. ZS
D.V. Divorce, adjustment to; Mother-daughter relations
[ 142]
Hudson, Jan. Dawn Rider. Philomel, 1990. ISBN 0-399-22178-6. 173p.
$14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
In this story of Kit Fox, a Blackfoot girl of sixteen,
Hudson depicts the details of tribal life in the mid-eighteenth century. Blackfoot
men have captured a creature they call the "elk-dog" (a horse) and Kit Fox is
determined to ride the animal, feeling that she understands him, knowing that she
loves him. Hudson's lengthy bibliography indicates the reason for the depth and
color of cultural details in this story of a doughty heroine who rides despite the
disapproval of her elders and who saves her tribe by being able to ride for help
when they are attacked. Perhaps because Hudson was intent on showing how the
advent of the horse presaged changes in life-style for the Blackfoot as for other
North American Indian tribes, this narrative has less cohesion and pace than did
the recently-deceased author's Sweetgrass (BCCB 4/89), which was a Canadian
Library Association's Book of the Year for Children. ZS
D.V. Courage
Jones, Diana Wynne. Castle in the Air. Greenwillow, 1991. ISBN 0-688-
09686-7. [208p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Although the jacket flap calls this a sequel to Howl's
Moving Castle (BCCB 6/86) the book stands alone; only at the end of the story
does Sophie appear and does Howl stand revealed as the genie-in-a-bottle who has
been troublesome as often as he has been accommodating throughout the story
as he serves the protagonist, Abdullah. A poor merchant who has acquired a
cantankerous flying carpet, Abdullah becomes involved in a series of magical
adventures, primarily hunting for the kidnapped princess with whom he is
smitten. This is not as cohesive or as innovative as the first book, but it has a
cheerfulness, an ebullience, and an exaggeration in dialogue that are as funny as
Howl's Moving Castle and there is a varied cast of colorful characters. ZS
Karr, Kathleen. It Ain't Always Easy. Farrar, 1990. ISBN 0-374-33645-8.
229p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Jack, eleven, is the narrator of a story that begins in
1882, when he's taken in by the New York Children's Aid Society, along with
eight-year-old Mandy, whom he treats as a sister; both children are orphans.
They miss the west-bound train and are on their own, as they go west, to a series
of entertaining adventures and rather hackneyed situations: the kindly landlady
who takes them in, the farming foster-families who later separate them, and the
rescue of Mandy as a last melodramatic episode. Adorable Miss Blackman and
her dashing suitor go with Jack to wrest Mandy from an abusive farmer; the two
adults are betrothed and they not only adopt both children but buy the horse that
Jack loves so they can all be together on the ranch in the West. The structure is
heavy-handed, the mood is sentimental, and the writing style is pedestrian,
particularly in the dialogue: Jack uses poor grammar ("Mandy could of been," or
"You ain't never been") but-incongruously-also uses such phrases as "The
ethics of the enterprise settled to our satisfaction . . . ," and "... these
considerations were cogitating." ZS
D.V. Self-reliance
[ 143
Katz, Welwyn Wilton. Whalesinger. McElderry, 1990. ISBN 0-689-50511-6.
212p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Nick has come to Point Reyes as an assistant on a
scientific project; Marty is there as an au pair/babysitter for the children of two
scientists also participating in the environmental research. Both teens are
outsiders: 
Nick is angry, believing that charismatic project director Ray
Pembroke is responsible for the death of his older brother; Marty, a poor reader
and speaker, feels herself stupid around all the brainy scientists. Like the
author's previous The Third Magic (BCCB 2/89), this is an ambitious but
overcomplicated novel, with a fantasy element-Marty telepathically
communicates with a whale-that is in itself well-handled but is never quite
worked into the story as a whole. There's a mystery, as Nick tries to discover
what the evasive Dr. Pembroke is really up to; a romance, as the two teens find
emotional and physical solace in each other; there's sunken treasure and an
earthquake. The scene-painting of the California coast is vivid, as is the
characterization of the two protagonists, but the focus (and periodic shifts to the
whale's point of view) is diffuse. RS
D.V. Animals, respect for
Kirby, Susan. Shadow Boy. Orchard, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08469-8;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05869-7. [160p]. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Artie, who suffered a head injury in a car accident, is
in a rehabilitation program, and his progress is slow. Much of the story is told
from Artie's confused viewpoint, and the "shadow boy" is a reference to his
dimly-remembered normal self. 
His physical improvement is set back by a
second accident (jumping from a moving freight train), his running out of the
house suggested by a malicious adolescent acquaintance. The author gives a
convincing picture of a head-injured patient, but the research that makes the book
convincing also is obtrusive enough to make the narrative slow-paced and
purposive. ZS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Kroll, Steven. Mary McLean and the St. Patrick's Day Parade; illus. by
Michael Dooling. Scholastic, 1991. ISBN 0-590-43701-1. 
[32p]. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
This story is based on the parade that takes place in
Manhattan on March 17, and its heroine is a girl (Mary looks to be about ten)
whose family has fled the potato famine, as did so many Irish in the years 1845-
1849. Mary has asked the grocer, Mr. Finnegan, if she may ride with him in the
parade. He thinks not, but adds, "If you found the perfect shamrock, I might
change my mind." This would be a pleasant bit of easily-accessible historical
fiction, were it not that Kroll introduces fantasy that just doesn't mesh with the
realistic and interesting setting: a leprechaun is encountered twice (before and
after his trip to California) and fails to produce the shamrock but Mary's father
finds one. Paintings that are distinctive in their use of light and color face each
page of text, with faces and figures superior to the depiction of landscapes-the
people are vivid, the outdoor scenes are not ZS
Lang, Aubrey. Eagles; See Lawrence, Wolves for review.
[ 144]
Langone, John. Growing Older. Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-51459-4. 172p.
$14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Less cohesive than most of Langone's books, this is
an amalgam of facts, opinions, anecdotes, advice, and a sprinkling of quotations
and examples. Compressed, the author's message seems to be that old age does
not presuppose an ending of abilities or interests, that many societies respect the
elderly more than does ours, and that the aging process is an irresistible force,
although biological research may bring longer life expectancy. One weakness of
the book lies in the occasional implication that is stated as a fact: "If you can
get the older people in your life to follow these recommendations, you will be
helping them a lot. And because they will be living better lives, adjusting better
to their advanced years, any negative feelings you may have about the elderly are
almost sure to disappear and you will get along better with them." Since the
recommendations are couched in a patronizing tone, "negative feelings" may, in
fact, be provoked. Chapter notes are included. ZS
Latimer, Jim. Fox under First Base; illus. by Lisa McCue. Scribner's, 1991.
ISBN 0-684-19053-2. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Elegant of line and comic in mood, the restrainedly
colorful illustrations capture the bland sophistication of a story that is about
animals and is about baseball but that adds a dimension to that familiar
combination. What it has is sly wit of the oblique-reference type, so that readers
aloud can enjoy the fact (earnestly propounded by the detective chief inspector, a
female porcupine) that "Baseball is mostly played by birds. Blue jays and
orioles and cardinals. Tigers also play though-and giants." She is explaining
to credulous Bear, the protagonist, why she is searching for 100 missing
baseballs. The culprit, as the title suggests, is the fox who is literally under
first base; that's where he lives. All problems are solved, and (shown, for visual
variety, in silhouette) Bear and a friend settle down amicably to listen to Fox's
stories about (shades of "Field of Dreams") Shoeless Joe Jackson. The writing
style is light and lively in this outstanding team effort. ZS
Lang, Aubrey. Eagles; illus. with photographs by Wayne Lynch. Sierra
Club/Little, 1990. ISBN 0-316-51387-3. 64p. (Sierra Club Wildlife Library).
$14.95.
Lawrence, R.D. Wolves. Sierra Club/Little, 1990. ISBN 0-316-51676-7.
64p. illus. with photographs. (Sierra Club Wildlife Library). $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Lavish use of full-color photographs (with some
particularly impressive close-ups in Eagles) distinguishes this pair of books
likely to please young naturalists. 
The texts in both are clear and
straightforward, discussing the various species, their domains, life cycles, and
ecological importance. The books are not faultless: diagrams and maps in both
are inadequately explained or difficult to decipher, photo captions in Eagles are
sometimes misleading, and Wolves would have benefited from a section (like the
one in Eagles) detailing the threat humans pose to the subject's future existence.
Overall, however, the appealing format and informative, accessible text make
these highly readable as well as useful resources. DS
C.U. Nature study
[ 145
Leverich, Kathleen. 
Best Enemies Again; illus. by Walter Lorraine.
Greenwillow, 1991. ISBN 0-688-09440-6. 
[96p]. $12.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-3. 
Told in a more relaxed style than its predecessor, Best
Enemies (BCCB 5/89), this again features entertaining battles between good-kid
Priscilla and class snake Felicity, who somehow always manages to one-up
everybody, especially Priscilla. Truth be told, Priscilla lets herself in for it:
why, for example, did she tell Felicity about her lemonade stand? Felicity, of
course, opens a stand of her own, and is far more successful: "Her stand is
fancy. Her lemonade comes in regular and pink. She stole my spot. She's
getting all my money." And Felicity has the last word: "If you're waiting for
lemonade, little girl, the line starts back there." Some of Felicity's outrages
aren't so believable-even a substitute teacher would have Felicity figured out
long before the one here does--but they're all true to type and fun to watch from
a safe distance. The ending affords both girls their triumphs, Priscilla's by
happenstance and Felicity's by sheer force of personality. You really have to
admire her, pink ruffles and all. Somebody still needs to muzzle Priscilla's dog,
who again tiresomely punctuates the action with assorted barks and yips. RS
Levinson, Nancy Smiler. Your Friend, Natalie Popper. Lodestar, 1991. ISBN
0-525-67307-5. [128p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
The year is 1946, the place is Two Tall Pines Camp,
and Natalie and her best friend, Corinne, have just finished sixth grade. Natalie
clings a bit, because camp is new to her while Corinne is an old camper. To
some extent, this is a standard camping story (crush on the counselor, making
new friends, learning that someone who is shy and awkward can also be nice,
etc.) but there are some serious issues introduced, such as Natalie's encounter
with anti-semitism, and there are period details (the polio scare, the aftermath of
the war) that add substance to the smoothly written story. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Friendship values
Lewis, Brenda Ralph. Stamps!: A Young Collector's Guide. Lodestar, 1991.
ISBN 0-525-67341-5. 95p. illus. with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Designed with much of the same schematic precision
that's a major appeal of the hobby, this guide would make a fair accompaniment
to a first collection. Each double-page spread covers a different topic: some are
historical ("The first collectors," "Stamps go to war"); some technical ("How
stamps are made"); some practical ("Buying stamps by mail," "The tools of
collecting"). Haphazardly ordered, with "Airmails" following "Famous stamps"
and "Catalogs," the topics together give a comprehensive overview good for
beginners and with enough anecdotes to amuse seasoned collectors. Lots of
famous and otherwise intriguing, exemplary, or just-plain-beautiful stamps are
reproduced in large, full-color blow-ups. Captions contain as much information
as the main text, but a few are attached to the wrong illustrations. Valuable
appendices include a directory of "philatelically terminated" countries, world
maps labelled with stamp names, glossary, index, "Finding out more," and
"Parts of a stamp." An inviting introduction to cross-cultural literacy. RS
C.U. Hobbies
[ 146 1
Manes, Stephen. Make Four Million Dollars by Next Thursday!; illus. by
George Ulrich. 
Bantam, 1991. 
ISBN 0-553-07050-9. 
[112p]. 
$14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-6. 
When Jason Nozzle finds a book called Make Four
Million By Next Thursday!, he is determined to follow all the steps given by its
author, Dr. K. Pinkerton Silverfish, no matter how silly. Prepared to jump
through almost any hoop to gain the promised millions, Jason even wears
thirty-seven safety-pin-attached pieces of paper with dollar bill signs on them.
"We're ... uh ... doing something special in history class," he explains to his
mother. "I'm ... uh ... the national debt." Other hare-brained schemes include
planting his last dollar bill to grow a money tree and asking a rich family to
adopt him. Fans of Be a Perfect Person in Just Three Days! won't be surprised
to discover that Dr. Silverfish's book doesn't deliver the promised goods. Jason
doesn't make his millions, but readers will enjoy seeing him make a fool of
himself. Much of the humor comes from the zany, conversational tone of Dr.
Silverfish's "book." 
When Jason wakes up naked after following Dr.
Silverfish's advice not to wear out his clothes, he pulls out the book and reads:
"'Wait a minute! You dare consult the great Dr. K. Pinkerton Silverfish without
any clothes on? I'm shocked! Shocked!' Jason grabbed his bathrobe and went
back to the book." Funny, but unfortunately not original: the concluding
paragraphs are almost identical to those of the prequel, and many of the
situations are also very similar. More of the same is promised ("Make sure you
don't miss my next book, Be Famous in a Flash!"): let's hope it's not a carbon
copy of the others. RAS
Marino, Jan. The Day that Elvis Came to Town. Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-
54618-6. 204p. $14.95.
R* 
Gr. 7-10. 
Wanda is staggered to discover that her family's latest
boarder, Mercedes Washington, actually went to high school with Elvis Presley.
"'Oh, God,' I said. 'You actually saw him comb his hair.'" Mercedes herself is
no small attraction: glamorous, beautiful, and a talented singer, she becomes a
good friend to thirteen-year-old Wanda, even if she can't promise to get free
tickets to see the King. While it is gently told, there isn't a hint of nostalgia in
this coming-of-age story set in 1963 Georgia. Wanda's intermingling crushes
on Elvis and Mercedes are given a leavening context in Wanda's family and
boarders, a complicated and real collection of passions. Wanda's father is a good
man and a sad alcoholic, drawn with loving but honest restraint. April May, the
overnight guest who stayed forever, is funny and pathetic and vindictive, telling
Wanda about Mercedes' "secret": "She's nothing but a nigger girl." Wanda's
mother already quietly knew that Mercedes was black; the friendship between
these two women is a force that sustains the house. This is an adeptly blended
portrait of a family and the lovely visitor who changes it and leaves-but not
before Wanda gets her wish, and goes to the Elvis concert. "And he was fixing
his hair. 'What'd I tell you?' I could hear Mercedes say even though she wasn't
beside me.'" RS
D.V. Family relations; Interracial understanding
Markle, Sandra. Earth Alive! Lothrop, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09361-2;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09360-4. [40p.] illus. with photographs. Library ed.
$14.88; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[147
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Without headings, but topically divided, a text about
the many ways in which the surface of the earth changes or materials changed
below the surface give evidence of subterranean activity, covers a range of
phenomena. Handsome color photographs from diverse sources illustrate the
beauty of a limestone cave or a mineral terrace, the grandeur of canyons and
natural rock bridges, the desolation caused by flowing lava and volcanic ash.
The causes of natural wonders or disasters are clearly explained; an index gives
access to subjects. Informative and handsome, the book may encourage readers
to look for more material on the geological drama of our world. ZS
C.U. Science
Markle, Sandra. Outside and Inside You. Bradbury, 1991. ISBN 0-02-762311-
4. [40p.] illus. with photographs. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
In a picture book format that doesn't quite match the
level of difficulty (or probably audience interest) of the text, Markle describe the
morphology and physiology of the human body. 
The continuous text is
addressed to readers, beginning "Look at you, at your special body," and it gives
good coverage in a direct style, only occasionally dropping to cuteness or lack of
clarity in text or captions. Only one picture of the many (most are color
magnifications) seems mislabelled; the rest are nicely integrated with the text,
and the information "color enhanced and magnified" is given when applicable. A
combined glossary and index is appended. ZS
C.U. Science
Matthews, Downs. 
Skimmers; illus. with photographs by Dan Guravich.
Simon, 1990. ISBN 0-671-70070-7. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
From the author/photographer team that produced
Polar Bear Cubs (BCCB 5/89) comes another photographic picture book that
reinforces a respect for wildlife. The spotlight here is on an emptied parking lot
in a Texas chemical plant, which seabirds called skimmers have selected as a
rookery (after being crowded out of their beaches) because it is covered with
crushed oyster shells. Most of the simple text and striking color photographs
detail the life cycle of the bird, describing spring mating, brooding the eggs, and
nurturing the young till they're ready for independence. Although the chemical
plant is never named in the text, one of the signs ("CAUTION-WATCH FOR
SKIMMERS") has a Dow insignia below it, heartening readers with the idea that
such a company could assure refuge for a flock of 2,000 birds, producing 800
chicks annually as well as controversial chemicals. 
Whatever the PR
implications, kids will get the message: if a chemical company can care, why
not school, home, and individual? Hatch this one for natural history and
environmental discussions. BH
C.U. Nature study
D.V. Ecological awareness
Mayer, Marianna. The Golden Swan: An East Indian Tale of Love from the
Mahabharata; illus. by Robert Sauber. Bantam, 1990. ISBN 0-553-07054-1.
64p. (Timeless Tales). $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
While Mayer's introduction apprises readers that "The
Golden Swan and other tales in this series should be read not as works of
[ 148 ]
scholarship or adaptation but as works of pure imagination," this is nevertheless
drawn, if its subtitle indicates correctly, from the Mahabharata. 
The love
between an East Indian king, Nala, and his beautiful bride, Damayanti, brings
the wrath of a jealous trickster god, Kali, upon Nala's head. Although the two
lovers lose all and are separated besides, Damayanti's fidelity eventually restores
them to their kingdom and a happy life together. Such a summary gives no hint
of the sophisticated narrative complexity of the tale, nor of its powerful images
(Nala is literally dwarfed by his misdeeds). Mayer has undertaken a formidable
challenge, and her re-creation of the romance elements is effective. Less clear are
the plot turns hinging on gambling with dice, snake bite, and the power of
counting. Some of the most vivid details, too, seem changed to lesser effect:
Mayer's golden swans are more glamorous but less striking than the wild geese
of the classic version, and the dark "doe-eyed" Indian heroine has acquired the
blue eyes of a Western fairy tale princess. Nonetheless, the star-crossed quality
of the characters' actions, the gods' interference, and the ritualistic tests of
wandering all contribute to an epic tone, this one female in its heroics. Sauber's
lush-colored illustrations range from strong portraiture, especially in the
depiction of Damayanti, to the stiff dramatization characteristic of highly
commercialized Indian films. Whatever critical questions the books raises, it
will win the sympathy of hard-hearted junior high and even high school readers
without previous exposure to this landmark of Eastern literature. BH
C.U. India; Literature
D.V. Loyalty
McDonald, Megan. The Potato Man; illus. by Ted Lewin. Orchard, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08514-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05914-6. 32p. Library
ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Grandpa tells a story about his boyhood, in a picture
book that is stunningly illustrated by Ted Lewin's watercolor paintings, as
effective in composition as they are authentic in period detail. The Potato Man
(a produce peddler) had only one eye, Grandpa says, and his face "was as lumpy
as a potato itself." Children taunted the man, and stole his spilled potatoes:
"We shouldn'a taken these ... It's stealin'," said one. "He couldn'a saw us,"
was the answer. The writing of the dialogue is weakened by this kind of
phonetic spelling, especially the dropping of the "g" to produce peelin' and
barkin' and workin', et cetera. Grandpa's story ends with his remorseful attempt
at returning a pomegranate that's fallen off the wagon, and with the old man's "I
do believe it's yours. Merry Christmas to ya, too." The Potato Man's face is
never shown. Although this is static, it's a pleasant period piece. ZS
D.V. Ethical values
McIntyre, Rick. Grizzly Cub: Five Years in the Life of a Bear; written and
illus. with photographs by Rick McIntyre. Alaska Northwest Books, 1990.
ISBN 0-88240-373-7. 104p. Papered. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
In spite of the cuddly color photographs of this
grizzly cub, McIntyre's story is straightforwardly respectful of animals in the
wild and does not end happily. The pictures and descriptions of Little Stony and
his mother, Big Stony--both named after a hill central to their range--offer a
candid view of bear life, from feeding to play routines. Unfortunately, Little
Stony's curiosity, endearing in a young animal, eventually leads him to raid
[ 149 1
garbage and pose a potential threat to humans. During a move to the far reaches
of the Denali National Park, he dies from choking while unconscious on
tranquilizers. This is not played for its tragic aspects; the account has too much
integrity for that, and, in an optimistic ending, Stony's twin half-sisters seem to
show a promising caution that Stony lacked. But the book does underscore the
environmental conflict between wildlife and human encroachment, an issue
brought into sharp focus by the fate of one animal. BH
D.V. Environmental awareness
McMillan, Bruce. One, Two, One Pair; written and illus. with photographs by
Bruce McMillan. Scholastic, 1991. ISBN 0-590-43767-4. [32p]. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
McMillan's text for each double-page triptych is
always the same: "One, two, one pair." The snappy, full-color photos show, in
turn, the two parts of a pair (hands, faucets, feet) and the two together. All the
objects pictured will be familiar to most young children, and there's a loose
narrative sequence, showing a child washing up, getting dressed, and going out
to skate on a frozen pond, where-surprise!-we see that there are actually two
children, twins. A title page photo of one of them looking in a mirror is a sly
twist; the girls sharing cups of cocoa makes a satisfying end. The spacious page
design offers a lesson all its own, with the pictures of the two halves smaller
than the facing photo of the whole. Clear and simple as can be, and a welcome
spur for other-sock/mitten/shoe-hunting. RS
C.U. 
Counting
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
Miklowitz, Gloria D. Standing Tall, Looking Good. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-
385-30162-6. [160p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 8-12. 
"'The rewards are fantastic,' one of them said. 'Sign
up for four years and you've got over twenty-five thou for college afterward.
And you can write your own ticket on what you want to learn.'" No, this is not
an army recruitment commercial, but a conversation Paula just happens to
overhear when she is trying to figure out how to finance her college education
and recover from Dan, "bright and good-looking" but "undependable and
charmingly unfaithful." Drawn from actual accounts of recent recruits, this army
initiation novel describes the trial by ordeal of three teenagers during their eight
weeks of basic training. Paula, "a pretty redhead," David, a spoiled white rich
kid, and Carver, street smart and black, make a calculated trio. Predictably, the
two boys overcome their initial antagonism to become good buddies, while
David and Paula fall in love: "There was something about the kind of men who
sought out adventure and danger that had always appealed to her."
Characterization is shallow, stereotypes abound, but the actual details of army
initiation ("Do you know what you are, soldier?" "No, Sergeant!" "You are the
lowest of the low! You are a mindless worm, a yellow-bellied grunt. You are
so ugly I don't even want to see your face!") seem authentic enough. The
abusive language and calculated humiliations will be familiar to aficionados of
this genre, but are toned down here. No one dies or fails basic training.
Required reading for anyone with one recruit's naive outlook, "sick of being shut
away in classrooms after twelve straight years. And he didn't know what he
[ 150]
wanted to study anyway. Maybe the army was the answer!" Not subtle, but
entertaining nonetheless. RAS
Nixon, Joan Lowery. A Candidate for Murder. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-
30257-6. 212p. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
"It's my fault. She had on my coat. They thought
she was me," Cary says when a car hits Cindy, speeding up to her in a parking
lot. Cary is the narrator in a story that blends a political background (Cary's
father is running for office in Texas), a romance, and Cary's suspicion that
someone is stalking her. There are a few red herrings, but Nixon is too
experienced a thriller writer to slow her narrative with extraneous events or
suspects. Good familial relations are a foil for the melodrama and the potential
for danger that permeate a suspense-filled murder mystery. ZS
Paterson, Katherine. Lyddie. Lodestar, 1991. ISBN 0-525-67338-5. [192p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 6-9. 
"The truth be told, Mama had gone somewhat queer
in the head after their father had left." It is thirteen-year-old Lyddie who takes
charge of Mama and the younger children. When poverty brings separation to
the family, Lyddie is sent to work at a nearby tavern. The year is 1843, and
Lyddie goes on to Lowell, Massachusetts to work as a mill hand, since she's
determined somehow to earn enough money to make the family farm a viable
operation. Paterson continues to do her usual fine job of blending background
facts with a smoothly-told narrative in this story of industrial oppression,
workers' and women's rights, and prejudice (Lyddie takes a long time to reverse
the anti-Quaker sentiment inculcated by her mother). Characters are drawn with
solidity and consistency, and, while other important issues of the times appear
(Lyddie learns to respect a runaway slave), the focus on Lyddie as a maturing
member of the workforce community does not waver. ZS
Perl, Lila. From Top Hats to Baseball Caps, From Bustles to Blue Jeans: Why
We Dress the Way We Do; illus. by Leslie Evans and with photographs.
Clarion, 1990. ISBN 0-89919-872-4. 118p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
With major chapters devoted to pants, skirts, footwear
and hats, this is an informative but rather dry survey of how fashions (primarily
women's) have changed throughout history. The bibliography indicates the
research done for Perl's discussion of the influences on clothing, such as climate,
available materials, and social or physical activities that prompted changes in
garments. While the book contains many interesting facts and anecdotes, the
text is poorly organized, with a sort of tacking back and forth between periods, a
flaw particularly noticeable in the illustrations. Some of the pictures are
reproductions; those drawn for the book are often awkward. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Perl, Lila. Molly Picon: A Gift of Laughter; illus. by Donna Ruff. Jewish
Publication Society, 1990. ISBN 0-8276-0336-3. 
66p. (Young Biography
Series). $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Most children today will be unfamiliar with Molly
Picon, save for her appearance in Fiddler on the Roof; this biography does a
[ 151 ]
thorough if bland job of recording the actress' career. Beginning with her first
impromptu performance on a Philadelphia streetcar at the age of five, Molly's
gamine presence made her a standout in children's shows, and later in the Yiddish
theater and on Broadway. After World War II, she toured Eastern Europe,
performing for former inmates of the Nazi death camps. At first, no one laughed
at her jokes and routines: "It was simply that many of the survivors had
forgotten how to laugh." This is an admiring biography that occasionally,
through its catalogish roll call of Picon's achievements, becomes adulatory in
tone. All the facts are here, but little of Picon's personality is conveyed, nor is
there much sense of why she became such a popular star. Ruff's drawings are a
little perkier, but sometimes look too much like copies of photographs.
Chronology, source note, and index are included. RS
C.U. Theater
Porter-Gaylord, Laurel. I Love My Mommy Because ... ; ISBN 0-525-44625-
7. I Love My Daddy Because ... ; ISBN 0-525-44624-9. Each book: illus. by
Ashley Wolff. Dutton, 1991. 20p. $5.95.
M 
3-5 yrs. 
If you aren't annoyed by blissful anthropomorphism,
these two sturdy books provide a pair of pleasant litanies about good reasons to
love Mommy and Daddy. A little boy loves his mommy because "she reads me
stories"; turn the page to see a little kitten that loves its mommy because she
"listens when I talk." A lamb loves its mommy because she "feeds me when
I'm hungry," etc. Daddy is along the same lines, but a little more butch: he is
"big and strong" (eagle and chick) and "teaches me to be brave" (gorilla and baby)
and "protects our family" (musk oxen and calf). To her credit, Mommy is also
"big and strong" (elephant and calf). The paintings of the animal pairs are doe-
eyed and sentimental, but both books are cleanly designed in warm colors. The
back covers suggest that each is "perfect for sharing on a loving lap," but what
book isn't? RS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Rench, Janice E. Understanding Sexual Identity: A Book for Gay Teens and
Their Friends. Lerner, 1990. ISBN 0-8225-0044-2. 56p. $9.95.
M 
Gr. 7-12. 
Where Daniel and Susan Cohen's book When
Someone You Know Is Gay (BCCB 6/89) was nominally aimed at friends, this
one addresses itself directly to the young gay reader (although there are still some
don't-worry-you're-not asides to straight readers). The tone is friendly and
encouraging; the advice is sensible; the information more self-help optimistic
than matter-of-factual: "You will also come to understand that being gay is not
a hardship. It is like a special gift or talent that not everyone understands
easily." While the question-and-answer format includes the question "What do
gay couples do together?," the author skirts the physical until a much later
question on AIDS and safe sex, and the information there applies only to male
homosexuals. Fictional sequences that introduce each chapter aren't enough to
the point to be necessary, and documentation is scanted in favor of passive
constructions which can be confusingly inaccurate: "It is estimated that over 30
percent of all teens in general who commit suicide are gay or lesbian. This is
three times higher than the number of teenagers in general who kill themselves."
Appendices include a directory of organizations and hotlines, a reading list, and
[ 152]
an index. The Cohens' book remains the best single title on this subject for
teenagers. RS
C.U. Sex education
Roberts, Willo Davis. Scared Stiff. Karl/Atheneum, 1991. 
ISBN 0-689-
31692-5. [160p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
"Troubles come in threes, Pa always said. I knew it
was true." Rick's "troubles" get progressively more nightmarish. When his
truck-driver dad has a load of TVs stolen, Rick's mom suspects her husband of
complicity in the theft. This precipitates trouble number two: dad leaves,
perhaps for good. Then, mom disappears. The police suspect desertion, but
Rick is convinced she's been kidnapped. Luckily, Great-Uncle Harry is willing
to take Rick and his brother in, at least for a while. His mobile home, a
converted schoolbus, is nothing fancy, but the boarded-up amusement park next
door promises some excitement, especially when the kids learn how to turn on
the rides: "We had power in Wonderland." 
The action is fast-paced and
suspenseful, with the bad guys eventually chasing the kids through the
amusement park. The last few chapters verge on the over-explanatory, but
Roberts does not tie everything up in a tidy package. Dad may not come home,
the trailer park and amusement park will probably still be demolished, and the
boys' friend Conrad goes on living with his abusive father. A sense of the
children's powerlessness permeates the text, giving the story heightened dramatic
tension. This one should be easy to booktalk. RAS
D.V. Father-son relations
Rosenblum, Richard. Brooklyn Dodger Days; written and illus. by Richard
Rosenblum. Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-689-31512-0. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Bright, busy, line-and-wash drawings show the
expanse of Ebbets Field, the crowds struggling in and out of the ball park, and-
in particular-the group of five Brooklyn boys who attend a Dodgers-Giants
game in 1946. Baseball fans will doubtless share the boys' excited involvement
as famous names roll by: Durocher, Lavagetto, Ott, Reese, because Rosenblum
is describing an actual game. Only one of the boys, Marty, is a Giants fan, and
he's the one who catches a Dodger home run ball. Dodgers win, and one of the
boys later decides he'd rather have his team win than catch a baseball. The
ending is weak, and the story of the boys seems more of a device to get the
reader to the ball park so that there can be a description of game play (not too
full a description, at that) than to present a narrative about the boys. Adequately
told, but a bit patchy. ZS
Roth, Susan L. Marco Polo: His Notebook; written and illus. by Susan L.
Roth and with photographs. Doubleday, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-385-26555-
7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-26495-X. 32p. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Combining old prints and new handmade papers in
collage, this is a handsomely, but not always clearly, designed biography of the
explorer. Marco Polo's story is told in the first-person, via journal entries
spanning the twenty-four years of his travels and his stay in Cathay. Roth's
introductory explanation of her research is confusing ("I have created what I
imagine might remain of his original travel journals"), and the wide
chronological space between many of the entries gives the book a fragmentary
[ 153 1
quality enhanced by the torn-paper effects. The omission of captions or notes on
the historical reproductions is a real oversight, and leads to some confusion over
which artwork is Roth's and which is not. But Marco Polo's journey has a
romantic allure that cannot be hidden by the contrivances of format and concept,
and Roth is good about providing the details that give evidence to the wonder: A
concluding note retells the story and has a map tracing the journey. Although it
is plushly upholstered, this not-quite-a-picture-book, not-quite-a-biography, not-
quite-fiction has a hard time getting comfortable. RS
C.U. History
Saxby, Maurice, ad. The Great Deeds of Superheroes; illus. by Robert Ingpen.
Bedrick, 1990. ISBN 0-87226-342-8. 184p. $24.95.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
Saxby starts with an introduction ("We all need
heroes") that charts parallels among the stories presented here and discusses the
heroic pattern-heroines are to be included in a separate volume. Then, in
sections on ancient Greece, Sumeria and Babylon, old Scandinavia, the Old
Testament, old England, and medieval France and Spain, he gives some brief
cultural background before launching each tale. All of these stories have been
retold elsewhere, of course, and in some cases by great writers whose re-creations
are distinctive in their own right. The advantages of this volume are its
convenience as an anthology for students and its fire-breathing art by Ingpen,
whose portraits attain heroic heights. Perseus, Heracles, Theseus, Jason,
Odysseus, Gilgamesh, Sigurd, Vainamoinen, Moses, Samson, Beowulf, King
Arthur, Cuchulain, Roland, and El Cid are not diminished by detailed depiction;
rather, their faces lend haunting countenance to the bloody proving grounds of
young men in perennial pursuit of honor and glory. A bibliography of sources
and an index are included. BH
C.U. Literature
D.V. Bravery
Shusterman, Neal. Speeding Bullet. Little, 1991. 
ISBN 0-316-789-05-4.
200p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Tenth-grader Nick feels like he can't lose. This is a
scary but welcome new feeling for someone whose problem "was not that he
was stupid-the problem was that he was stupid and knew it." But his rescue of
a little girl from the subway tracks gives Nick a new purpose: saving people. It
also gets Nick a new girlfriend, Linda Lanko, who becomes intrigued with Nick
after he rescues an old man from a fire at a building site being developed by
Linda's tycoon father. Aspiring at once to fable and farce, this novel has much
energy but a bumpy texture, with the characters drawn from varying degrees of a
satirical perspective. The author can't seem to make his mind up about Linda
Lanko, for example, and the revelation that she has staged most of the occasions
for Nick's rescues is obscurely motivated, poorly plotted, and not much fun.
More effectively handled is Nick's friendship with Marco, a bumbling Sancho
Panza who proclaims to New York that Nick is a healer after he "saves" a jogger
who seemed to be having heart attack. This is a power that Nick doesn't want,
but the novel has a touching close in which Nick decides to try one last rescue.
While the Linda Lanko subplot seems to have wandered in from another book
(say, Bonfire of the Vanities), Nick and Marco have a story that is inventive,
urgently told, and would make a terrific movie. RS
[ 154 ]
Smith, Wendy. Say Hello, Tilly!; written and illus. by Wendy Smith. Bantam,
1991. ISBN 0-553-07160-2. 26p. (Bantam Little Rooster). $13.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Despite the heaviness of the message (taking the
initiative is a good way to overcome shyness), this story of bears at a birthday
party should appeal to the read-aloud audience. Tilly, who has tried several
dodges to avoid going to the party, sits alone until a newcomer (Pablo, just
arrived from Spain) appears and she realizes he is a stranger as well as a shy bear.
Friendship ripens so fast that by the time her father appears to pick her up, Tilly
can introduce Pablo as her best friend. The story is simply told, and the
illustrations, with their lively line and humorous narrative quality, echo the
sunniness of the writing. ZS
D. V. Age-mate relations; Shyness, overcoming
Stavsky, Lois, ed. The Place I Call Home: Voices and Faces of Homeless
Teens; ed. by Lois Stavsky and I. E. Mozeson; illus. with photographs by
Robert Hirschfield. Shapolsky, 1991. ISBN 0-944007-81-3. 172p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
In this compilation of monologues collected by
students in a dropout prevention program, thirty-one New York teenagers
forthrightly describe their experiences of living on the street, in prisons, in
shelters, and in youth detention "homes." The fact that many of the stories
sound the same is perhaps a reflection of poverty's banality (or that the stories
are being related third-hand); but it also tends to blur the personalities of the
individual subjects-a selection of longer interviews of fewer people might have
allowed us to know them better. The voices are authentic ("The way I got the
drugs was kinda slick"); sometimes self-critical, but just as often self-justifying;
these kids are matter-of-fact about the squalor, crime, drugs, and physical and
sexual abuse they routinely face and sometimes perpetrate. Each monologue is
accompanied by a photograph (almost all of black or Hispanic teens), but the
preface informs us that these "may be substitutes for the actual teens who are
'speaking."' So why include them?-such a proxy attempt at verisimilitude
sensationalizes the otherwise honest approach. Appended material includes a
glossary of street slang, a directory of organizations and hotlines, and an
annotated bibliography of books about the problems encountered by homeless
and otherwise troubled youth. RS
Williams, Karen Lynn. When Africa Was Home; illus. by Floyd Cooper.
Orchard, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08525-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05925-
1. 32p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Africa is home to Peter, a white child, whose parents
are taking him back to America. Despite his parents' many promises, Peter
refuses to be conned. "'Maybe we'll get a kitten in America,' Peter's father told
him the day they began to pack. 'I don't want a kitten,' Peter said. 'I don't
want to go to America.'" Cooper's rich, luminously mottled oils and Williams'
poetic text evoke a paradise that any child would be loathe to leave: "When
Africa was home, Peter played from the time the sun was still cool until his
shadow danced in the moonlight-and he never wore a hat" Peter's viewpoint is
refreshingly Afrocentric, his homesickness and culture shock real: "Winter came
in America and icy cold snow fell on the ground. Peter missed the warm rains of
Africa. In his new snowsuit and heavy boots, he felt like a statue." Thoughts
of Africa are never far from Peter's mind or from the illustrations. Even on the
[ 155
edges of a city snowscape, an African village, complete with giraffe, beckons,
ready to welcome Peter back. Simple, joyful, and culturally sensitive, this story
provides a welcome insight into another world. RAS
D.V. Moving, adjustment to
Wormell, Christopher. 
An Alphabet of Animals; written and illus. by
Christopher Wormell. Dial, 1990. ISBN 0-8037-0876-9. 64p. $17.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Full-color linoleum block prints, handcut, are framed
by heavy black lines, giving the gravely old-fashioned look of Bewick wood
engraving. The pictures are of animals, large and sedate on recto pages and with
two exceptions (Lobster and Narwhal) clearly identifiable. On each facing page
are upper and lower case letters and the name of the creature. All pictures are
reproduced in miniature on the endpapers (front and back), and a descriptive list
of "Some of the less familiar animals featured in this book" is appended. ZS
Yolen, Jane. Sky Dogs; illus. by Barry Moser. Harcourt, 1990. ISBN 0-15-
275480-6. 32p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Yolen's postscript explains that she has drawn from
history and from Blackfeet legends to tell the story of how the first horses (Sky
Dogs) came to the Piegan Indians (a Blackfeet band). The narrator is an elderly
man who was a boy when this occurred, and he describes the apprehension and
awe that gave way to pride and affection, as he and others learned to care for and
ride the Sky Dogs that so greatly changed their lives. The text is smooth,
poetic, and nicely suited to reading aloud or telling. Moser's paintings-all red,
gold, and brown-are starkly effective: 
spacious in the outdoor scenes,
beautifully detailed in the portraits of the narrator, He-who-loves-horses, and of
his chief, Long Arrow. ZS