Abercrombie, Barbara. Charlie Anderson; illus. by Mark Graham. McElderry,
1990. ISBN 0-689-50486-1. 32p. $12.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Charlie is a gray striped cat that appears out of the
woods to sleep on Elizabeth's bed every night. It's not till a storm keeps him
away that Elizabeth and her sister, Sarah, go looking for him and discover that
he spends the day with another family. The question Elizabeth asks Charlie,
"Who do you love best?" is a loaded one, for she and her sister spend weekends
with their father and stepmother in the city. So it's wise of Charlie to purr his
affection in the dark. "Just like Elizabeth and Sarah, Charlie has two houses,
two beds, two families who love him. He's a lucky cat" The message is overt
but carried by an appealing story and by pictures softened with pensive blue-
grays and fuzzy textures. This gentle fable will reassure many children who feel
lost between allegiances to divorced parents. BH
D.V. Pets, love for; Divorce, adjustment to
Ackerman, Karen. The Tin Heart; illus. by Michael Hays. Atheneum, 1990.
ISBN 0-689-31461-2. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Soft in line and color, nicely composed paintings are
carefully integrated with the text of a simply written Civil War story.
Mahaley's father operates a ferry from the northern side of the Ohio River;
Flora's father has a store on the Kentucky side. The two girls, best friends, play
together while passengers are buying and loading goods. Flora's father has made
a tin heart, cut in half, for the girls to wear as a symbol of their friendship.
When war comes the fathers are on opposite sides of the conflict, and the ferry
dock is changed. There is one dramatic episode, when Mahaley's father is
helping slaves escape (via the old dock) and Mahaley falls overboard. She is
rescued, and her father returns for her; both fathers begin to understand what the
children already know. "Not the river, not the war, was strong enough to keep
the two halves of a tin heart, of a friendship, apart forever." Oversimplified,
perhaps, but for the read-aloud audience the story is at a comprehensible level.
It's told with subdued momentum and in a restrained style that adds to the
effectiveness of the story by providing contrast with the drama of war's tension
and the flight to freedom. ZS
C.U. History-U.S-Civil War
D.V. Friendship values
[51]
Alexander, Sally Hobart. Mom Can't See Me; illus. with photographs by
George Ancona. Macmillan, 1990. ISBN 0-02-700401-5. 48p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Clear black-and-white photographs illustrate the
author's own story, told from the viewpoint of her nine-year-old daughter Leslie.
When Sally Alexander was in her twenties a rare disease caused her to go blind.
Her subsequent marriage, her two children, and the many activities pictured in
Ancona's photographs show a beautiful woman who has adjusted to her
disability admirably. For children, perhaps the most important aspect of the
book is the way it shows a child's reaction to a parental handicap. Like her
mother, Leslie has learned-apparently cheerfully-to accept what cannot be
changed. The writing is simple, direct, and matter-of-fact. ZS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to; Mother-daughter relations
Ames, Mildred. Grandpa Jake and the Grand Christmas. Scribner's, 1990.
ISBN 0-684-19241-1. [96p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Times are hard for Lizzie. The Depression is on, her
father can find barely enough work to support the family; her ballet teacher is
raising her rates; and bossy Aunt Mary Margaret insists that Lizzie's motherless
family come for Christmas, when Lizzie and her sister are supposed to gratefully
receive hand-me-downs from their stuck-up cousin. Why does Grandpa Jake, lost
and unmourned for so long by Lizzie's father and aunt, show up now? This brief
novel is, to be sure, a Christmas heart-warmer, but it never slips into easy
sentimentality or nostalgia. Grandpa Jake is a charmer (a bit stereotyped in his
endless stream of Irish blarney), promising Lizzie and her little sister a
Christmas filled with homemade cookies and perfect presents. His cookies are
delicious, and the presents are perfect-but they don't come from Jake, who
leaves town before Christmas, dodging out of his promise to see Lizzie perform
in The Nutcracker. The family relationships presented here are complicated and
often hard, and the realism of the hurts and squabbles lends justice to the
requisite happy ending. RS
D.V. Grandfather-child relations
Anderson, Madelyn Klein. Oil Spills. Watts, 1990. ISBN 0-531-10872-4.
64p. (First Books). $11.90.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
In this broad-based look at the petroleum problem,
Anderson deals not only with major spills from tankers such as the Exxon
Valdez and the Torrey Canyon, but addresses leakage in transport, intentional and
illegal dumping, and land-based contamination of groundwater as well. Clean-up
techniques and problems are matter-of-factly outlined and economic factors
considered. Despite its global approach, the book is not as useful as Roland
Smith's more specific Sea Otter Rescue (reviewed below). Anderson never puts a
date to the major oil spills she discusses, and her writing tends to be clumsy
("Using detergents also requires a lot of rinsing or their skins break out in
sores"; "A bird that comes down on oil gets it on its feathers and down"). Color
and black-and-white photographs are generally well-placed, although their
captions are not always clear or applicable. Words bold-faced in the text are
defined in a glossary, and an index is provided. DS
D.V. Ecological awareness
[52]
Angell, Judie. Don't Rent My Room! Bantam, 1990. ISBN 0-553-07023-1.
[144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
The narrative jumps from the perspective of one
character to the next in this story of many plots. In addition to the complex life
of sixteen-year-old Lucy Weber, her two younger brothers both have their own
tales. Lucy, a New York City native, rebels when her parents buy an old New
England inn. She gets them to agree that if she hates it after spending a summer
there, she can move back to the city and live with her grandmother. The story
loses its focus in the midst of daily crises at the inn-a heartbroken cousin, a
ghost, a romance, fickle waitresses, a hurricane, etc. Lucy's decision to go back
to New York seems to be a twist for its own sake, since her new life has been
anything but dull. Angell's light-hearted style always makes for a quick,
entertaining read, but why didn't she save some of the material for a sequel or
two? KP
Avi. The True Confessions of Charlotte Doyle. Jackson/Orchard, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08493-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05893-X. 
215p.
Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
This is an account by Charlotte of the voyage she
made at the age of thirteen from England to America. Left behind to finish the
school year (a rare concern for female education in 1832) Charlotte is to join her
family after a transatlantic voyage arranged by her father. Due to a combination
of circumstances that seem contrived, she finds herself the only female on a ship
whose mutinous crew resents their evil captain. Charlotte, all naivet6 at first, is
stricken with remorse when her misplaced faith in the ship's captain causes death
and violence, and she insists on signing on as a member of the crew. There is a
murder, Charlotte is accused of being the murderer, and the story becomes a
thriller. 
With lots of action and a smooth writing style, this novel has
characters and a plot that are sometimes too dependent upon a pastiche of
nineteenth-century literary conventions. ZS
Bible. Noah's Ark; illus. by Jane Ray. Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44653-2.
32p. $14.95.
R* 
4-8 yrs. 
Many of the recent Noah's Ark books rely on
gimmicks for their distinction; here's one whose simple faith in the story is
amply rewarded. The brief text is well-excerpted from the King James Genesis;
the illustrations combine the glowing detail of medieval tapestry with the
freshness of contemporary quilts. The "wickedness of man" is illustrated with
panels showing environmental destruction, argument, and cruelty to animals;
God is a great sun-face; Noah is black. There are many eye-filling pictures of
the two-by-twos and the stores of food and plants, but the book never gets the
schematic look that afflicts so many illustrated version of the tale. Ray's lines
and colors are soft, with a use of gold paint in the borders that adds warmth
rather than glitz. The animals are stylized but friendly, and Noah's family is
emblemized with no loss to their humanity. A final double-page spread shows
life renewing itself again, but the tone of the voyage has all along been one of
anticipated celebration. RS
C.U. Religious education
[53]
Bible. Tomie dePaola's Book of Bible Stories; illus. by Tomie dePaola.
Putnam/Zondervan, 1990. ISBN 0-399-21690-1. 12 8p. $18.95.
Ad 
6-9 yrs. 
While offering few surprises, DePaola's trademark
style gets an occasional stretch in this collection of Bible stories taken from the
New International Version. Many of the pictures are strictly decorative, their
stylization and symmetry so complete as to erase any resonance from the story.
The Word may say "My soul is overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death,"
but the illustration of Jesus in Gethsemane is devoid of emotional content.
Figures throughout, from Adam and Eve to Mary, are conventionalized, lacking
human dimension or personality. Some of the full- or double-page spreads are
vivid: the picture of David and Goliath is effective in its surprising perspective;
Moses' receiving of the Commandments is a dramatic landscape of bold and
simple shapes. The stories have been thoughtfully selected and excerpted; the
design is clean and attractive; there is a chapter and verse index. RS
C.U. Religious education
Bierhorst, John. The Mythology of Mexico and Central America. Morrow,
1990. ISBN 0-688-06721-2. 239p. illus. with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 9-. 
The third and last in Bierhorst's scholarly series about
myths of North, South, and now Central America, this is organized into three
sections: the storytellers, the basic myths, and building the mythologies. These
stories and images have not been popularized in the same way as European,
Scandinavian, African, or even Asian mythologies; in pioneering their literary
dissemination, Bierhorst is careful about regional distinctions, narrative contexts,
and preservation of unfamiliar patterns. The resulting array of lore is complex,
but advanced students will find striking evidence of common tale types such as
the Orpheus-like underworld journey in pursuit of a dead wife. Intriguingly, the
Mesoamerican land of the dead varies according to the cause of death. "Among
the moder Nahua these are (1) the paradise of the rain dwarfs, where drowning
victims go; (2) the sky world, for soldiers killed in battle and women who have
died in childbirth; and (3) the regular underworld, for everyone else"--except
babies, who "go to a special paradise where they sit beneath a tree of human
breasts, catching the milk in their mouths." 
The races of Adjusters and
Defenders, who peopled the earth in its earlier stages, built stone temples, and
were destroyed by floods, will appeal to the imagination of science fiction fans.
A few of Bierhorst's opinions will provoke argument, as in his assertion that
only myth embedded in or giving the illusion of history "can be used today for
public as well as private purposes" but his chapter on myths and nationalism
makes a valuable conclusion to the study. A glossary of Spanish terms and an
extensive section of footnotes and bibliographical references document the book.
Illustrated with maps and photographs of striking traditional art work. BH
C.U. Mexico
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Blume, Judy. Fudge-a-mania. Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44672-9. 14 7p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Peter, the long-suffering brother of five-year-old
Fudge, narrates the ebullient story of a very long three-week vacation. Long,
that is, to Peter, because his parents are sharing a summer house with the
Tubmans, and Sheila Tubman (Otherwise Known as Sheila the Great) is his
[54 1
arch-enemy. Blume manages to avoid slapstick, although she skirts it, probably
to the delight of new and old Fudge and Sheila fans. Disasters (minor) accrue,
Fudge and his new friend Mitzi are amusingly precocious, and there's wedding-
bells romance between Peter's grandmother and Sheila's grandfather. Something
for everyone. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Brothers
Bradman, Tony. This Little Baby; illus. by Jenny Williams. Putnam, 1990.
ISBN 0-399-22202-2. 26p. $13.95.
R 
1-2 yrs. 
Bustling crayon and wash illustrations (some in free
space, some line-framed, some used as frieze or border) illustrate the events of a
typical day in a toddler's busy life. The text uses the rhythmic pattern of the
nursery rhyme "This little piggy," beginning with "This little baby loves the
morning/ This little baby waves bye-bye." The first page shows baby being
taken out of her crib and, from her high chair, pulling the ribbon in her sister's
hair, with pictures of toothbrush, alarm clock, egg, cereal, etc. lined up below.
On the facing page baby waves to mother and sister while Daddy holds her.
Below are some items of outdoor clothing, a dog with a leash in his mouth, a
bird with a worm, and some mail. To the common activities and objects is
added the uncommon touch of a househusband capably managing the flurry and
chaos of childcare. ZS
Bunting, Eve. Our Sixth Grade Sugar Babies. Harper, 1990. Library ed. ISBN
0-397-32452-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32451-0. 
147p. Library ed. $12.89;
Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Carrying around a five-pound bag of sugar dressed as a
baby for a class project can be pretty embarrassing, especially if you're trying to
impress a seventh-grade boy. Vicki and Ellie, both smitten with their new
neighbor, "Thunk" ("Isn't that a great name? I made it up. T for Terrific.
HUNK"), devise several unlikely schemes to get his attention, but all to no
avail. Who can blame Vicki for dumping her sweet charge when he asks her to
go to the library with him. Sugar Baby's subsequent disappearance puts Vicki
in a state of panic: "I don't know what happened to my sugar baby... Maybe
someone's turned her into sugar cookies by now. Maybe they've eaten her.
Maybe she's fudge." Blaming her mild but disturbed next-door neighbor for the
disappearance, Vicki sets off a near-tragedy. Responsibility and honesty are
major themes here, but Bunting's light touch makes them easily digestible
lessons. Parental estrangement (Mom and Dad are divorced) and mother-daughter
conflict are both honestly dealt with. Characters are convincingly developed, and
Bunting shows a genuine understanding for pre-teen angst. RAS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Mother-daughter relations
Busselle, Rebecca. A Frog's-Eye View. Jackson/Orchard, 1990. Library ed.
ISBN 0-531-08507-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05907-3. 
191p. Library ed.
$14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Neela (Amelia) is the narrator, she's the seventeen-
year-old only child of self-absorbed parents, she has a violent crush on Nick, and
she's unhappy about two things: Nick is spending a lot of time with the girl
who's just joined his musical group, and she's lost her third-floor refuge since
her parents remodeled it to accommodate an elderly relative, Aunt Amelia. Aunt
[55]
Amelia isn't very friendly, but she does agree to help Neela learn something
about photography; both of them gain from the warm relationship that develops
after a brusque, almost reluctant beginning. Busselle doesn't crowd her canvas;
there is time for the characters to develop in depth, to change at a believable pace
and in a logical way. Busselle's second young adult novel fulfills the promise
aroused by her powerful first, Bathing Ugly (BCCB 3/89). ZS
D.V. Aunt-niece relations
Canadeo, Anne. UFO's. Walker, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6928-4;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6927-6. 160p. illus. with photographs. (Fact or Fiction
Files). Library ed. $15.85; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
In a graphic representation of the "two sides to every
story," this series features a gimmick in which the book is turned over to present
opposing arguments. Both sides are written by the same author; the fact that the
con-UFO side is far more convincing (and better documented) than the pro- may
have to do with either prejudice or reality, depending upon the reader's point of
view. Any UFO anecdote is appealing to aficionados, and both sides of this
book offer plenty, including famous close encounters such as Betty and Barney
Hill's, as well as lesser-known stories such as Joe Simonton and his "space
pancakes." Editing is occasionally careless; there's no running head or title page
information that indicates which side of the book is which; each side is
separately indexed and paginated. Only the con- side has a (brief) bibliography,
and there are no source notes, a lack particularly felt on the pro- side, which
begins to read like a string of National Enquirer anecdotes. A few photos add
drama. Too bad the same can't be said for the stodgy cover(s). RS
Carle, Eric. 
The Very Quiet Cricket; written and illus. by Eric Carle.
Philomel, 1990. ISBN 0-399-21885-8. 27p. $17.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
Remember the very hungry caterpillar and the very
busy spider (BCCB 5/85)? Well, guess what? "One warm day, from a tiny egg
a little cricket was born." The little cricket tries to answer greetings from each
of the insects he meets: a big cricket, a locust, a praying mantis, a worm, a
spittlebug, a cicada, a bumblebee, a dragonfly, mosquitoes, and a luna moth, but
when he rubs his wings together, nothing happens ... until he meets a female
cricket, whereupon "he chirped the most beautiful sound that she had ever heard."
You'll hear it too, because when you turn that page, the book emits a distinct
and realistically musical chirp from a device bound into the book. Although the
text is more repetitive than cumulative, it can be read with dramatic voices for
each creature (or, as suggested in the jacket blurb, as a voice-and-response game).
Similarly, the physical device is not integrated into the whole story as
continuously as in Carle's earlier books, but the final payoff is worth it; cricket
noises can be very soothing at bedtime. Consumers are assured that "the battery
will have a long life (a few years) as along as the book is always closed after
each use." Carle's paintings stand out as dramatically as ever, catching the
iridescent gleam of the insects' colors against plenty of white space. Having
engineered sight, taste, touch, and sound so aesthetically into book form, Carle
should go for smell next. BH
C.U. Science
[56 1
Collins, Pat Lowery. Waiting for Baby Joe; illus. with photographs by Joan
Whinham Dunn. Whitman, 1990. ISBN 0-8075-8625-0. 40p. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Black-and-white photographs occupy most of the
space in a story about a small girl and her reactions to a prematurely-born baby
brother. Missy is a bit worried about the fact that Joe has to be left in the
hospital, but she's also a bit resentful because her parents spend so much time
there. When little Joe comes home, Missy has feelings that are typical of the
dethroned only child; Joe cries too much, and he doesn't respond to her. This
informative but stiffly written story ends, as do so many stories of sibling
acceptance, with the older child's pleasure at having evoked an infant smile. The
book should be useful, since little information on premature birth is gauged for
young children. ZS
D.V. Baby, adjustment to
Corcoran, Barbara. Annie's Monster. Karl/Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-
31632-1. 188p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
The oldest-and, she feels, the most ordinary-of
four children, Annie MacDougal has acquired an Irish wolfhound that stirs up
protest in the community because of its troublesome size but that also saves the
life of a homeless, mentally disturbed woman. What will happen to both
misfits is a question that worries Annie deeply. The family dynamics here are as
strongly realized as the dog story, especially the portrayal of Annie's stern,
Scottish father, an Episcopal priest who is often at odds with his liberal curate
and even with Annie's more flexible mother. Corcoran's handling of plot
mechanics is occasionally obvious but generally capable, and readers already
sympathetic to humane consideration of animals can stretch their compassion to
include social outcasts as well. BH
D.V. Pets, love for; Social responsibility
Cuyler, Margery. 
Baby Dot: A Dinosaur Story; illus. by Ellen Weiss.
Clarion, 1990. ISBN 0-395-51934-9. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
After an entertainingly obstreperous first few days,
Baby Dot, the spoiled little sister of Bert and Gertie, learns to adjust to school.
Dot's family of brightly-colored dinosaurs, romping in their volcanic/tropical
landscape, is humorously middle-class, with a comfortably decorated cave.
Children will love the different shapes and colors of the dinosaur babies, and they
will relate to the common childhood trauma of starting school. The fact that
Baby Dot's spots make her different from the pastel crowd probably won't strike
the read-aloud audience as odd. KP
D.V. School, adjustment to
Danziger, Paula. Make Like a Tree and Leave. Delacorte, 1990. ISBN 0-385-
30151-0. [12 8p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
In a sequel to Everyone Else's Parents Said Yes
(BCCB 2/90) Matthew tells the story of several episodes in his life;
unfortunately, although they all have action and humor, and one involves a
worthy cause, they don't form a cohesive whole. There are a series of several
incidents in which the same characters appear, but no sustaining plot line.
However, Danziger's fans will probably enjoy the episode in which one member
[57]
of the Mummy Committee (part of the sixth grade's Egyptian Project) has to be
extricated from his cast by a doctor, or the disaster humor of the popcorn-making
by Matthew and his father. ZS
Fisher, Leonard Everett. Prince Henry the Navigator; written and illus. by
Leonard Everett Fisher. 
Macmillan, 1990. 
ISBN 0-02-735231-5. 
32p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
With so many biographies being published to
commemorate the quincentennial of Columbus' arrival in the New World, it's
easy to overlook another important figure in the history of navigation. Prince
Henry the Navigator never went on any of the voyages of discovery that he
financed to the Azores, the Madeiras, and along the coast of Africa, but his
passionate interest in the unknown and his financial backing sparked an age of
exploration that brought Columbus to America and de Gama to India. This brief
biography gives us a sense of how little was known of the world in 1416, the
year Henry opened his school of navigation. And no wonder: "Sailors did not
voyage to far-off places. Most captains sailed close to land and usually in
daylight." Fisher adequately explains the three navigational tools that Prince
Henry's scholars perfected (the astrolabe, quadrant, and compass) and that
"enabled mariners to navigate out of sight of land without the fear of becoming
lost." Readers will wonder why "Henry was too busy to go on any of the
voyages he financed," a fact the author mentions but does not explain. He does
provide adequate background on the historic, political, and economic reasons
behind Henry's quest for navigational supremacy ("if Portugal was to remain rich
and and powerful, she had to explore more of Africa and reach India") and
discusses the role Henry's school played in the voyages of Columbus. Dramatic
black-and-white paintings have an ominous, brooding quality. One shows Henry
looking over the cliff at Sagres, almost as if he were peering over the edge of the
world. No index or bibliography is provided, but a chronology of the Iberian
peninsula provides useful dates, and a map suggests the limits of Henry's world.
RAS
C.U. History-Europe
Fosburgh, Liza. The Wrong Way Home. Bantam, 1990. ISBN 0-553-05883-5.
180p. $14.95.
NR 
Gr. 7-9. 
Bent is fifteen; since her parents' divorce eleven years
earlier, she has been living with her adored mother, a victim of Huntington's
chorea, in a luxurious Manhattan apartment, with devoted Jamaican housekeeper
Ani to help them. Bent's father persuades her to live with him and his wife,
putting Mama in a nursing home as the doctor has advised. Mama dies, Bent
feels guilty. Daddy has a flirtation with a neighbor, Bent feels angry. Living
with Daddy isn't working out, so Bent prevails on two friends and Ani to drive
to Florida for a vacation. Daddy shows up, Bent agrees to try again to live with
him. Meanwhile, she has worried about inheriting Mama's disease. She has
given up smoking pot. 
She has felt remorse for having precipitated a
confrontation between Daddy and his rather nice wife. The novel is crammed
with too many plot threads and is superficial in development; the writing style is
mediocre, and the characters tend to be either unpleasant (selfish Bent, inept
Daddy, rude stepbrother) or true-blue sweet (patient stepmother, loyal Ani, and
[58]
friend Happy, who has sunnily adjusted to being of mixed race and to having her
only parent commit suicide). ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Father-daughter relations
Gardam, Catharine. 
The Animals' Christmas; illus. by Gavin Rowe.
McElderry, 1990. ISBN 0-689-50502-7. 
[26p]. $13.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
This recasting of an old motif is set in a
contemporary English village where a farm family is busily preparing for the
morrow, Christmas Day. The children gather mistletoe, Dad chops down a tree,
everyone works to decorate the village church. But when evening comes and
snow begins to fall, Mom discovers that all the animals have disappeared. The
eventual discovery of the animals caroling in an old ruined church high above the
valley is a nice surprise, but this sudden shift toward the fantastic (with
Christmas-card angels in the sky) is ill-prepared: why are the animals singing?
Perhaps this would work well in tandem with a straightforward singing of "The
Friendly Beasts." The pen-and-watercolor illustrations are smoothly drafted and
include several crisply seasonal landscapes. RS
Gerrard, Roy. Mik's Mammoth; written and illus. by Roy Gerrard. Farrar,
1990. ISBN 0-374-31891-3. 32p. $13.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
Like Gerrard's other picture books, this casts a
humorous light on history, or, in this case, prehistory. And, like Rosie and the
Rustlers (BCCB 11/89), it has lots of child appeal, as the abandoned young hero
Mik rescues a baby mammoth from the snow, walls the front of his cave, heats
it with fire, gathers and grows food, fends off a dangerous bear, catches fish,
decorates the cave walls with paintings, and finally becomes a hero by saving his
returning tribe from pursuing marauders-with a little help from his large pet.
"The moral is that little chaps/ May overcome life's handicaps,/ And, with some
effort, they perhaps/ Can triumph in the end./ For Mik won through on brains
and wit] Though fortunate, I must admit] To have one priceless benefit-/ A
mammoth for a friend." Of course it's the art that turns all these narrative
conventions of outcast turned survivor turned rescuer into something special, for
Gerrard's signature watercolor paintings show increasing versatility. Though the
perspectives are as arresting as ever, the art relies less on exaggerated contrast
between squat figures and looming landscapes and more on clever drafting,
texture, and color blends. The icy environs of a virginal winter vie with spring
greens and furry browns in a captivating sequence of spreads. Pair this with the
other perfect prehistoric farce of the season, Yorinks and Egielski's Ugh,
reviewed below. BH
C.U. History-Prehistoric
D.V. Self-reliance
Giblin, James Cross. The Riddle of the Rosetta Stone. Crowell, 1990. Library
ed. ISBN 0-690-04799-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04797-5. 
85p. illus. with
photographs. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
The Rosetta Stone has become a popular emblem of
the "Aha!" myth of archaeology; Giblin does a good and patient job of showing
just how gradually the stone revealed its secrets. Discovered in 1799, it was
more than a century before the stone was completely translated. Giblin shows
[59]
us the false trails, piecemeal discoveries, and incremental analyses that followed
the stone's discovery; along the way he unobtrusively shares lots of interesting
information about hieroglyphs, Egyptian history, archaeology, and
historiography. Accompanied by a translation of the stone's text, reading list,
index, and plenty of photos and well-placed diagrams, this is ready-made for
curriculum units on Egypt, but would be just as welcome in language arts
classes. Better still, try it out with the kids who like codes. RS
C.U. Archaeology; Language arts
Gwynne, Fred. Pondlarker; written and illus. by Fred Gwynne. Simon, 1990.
ISBN 0-671-70846-5. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
In witty corroboration of the influence of books,
here's the tale of a frog, Pondlarker, who was convinced by the story his mother
read again and again that his mission was to kiss a princess and become a prince.
His parents had a heart-to-heart talk with him, but Pondlarker continued to dress
like a prince and hunt for a princess. And one day, at last, he saw a sign:
"Princess, 4 miles." The denouement is unexpected, funny, and logical if
quirky-this is in the category of yes-I-CAN-stand-to-read-it-aloud-yet-again.
The illustrations have a vernal freshness of color, line, and action that intensifies
the story's vitality. ZS
Hamilton, Virginia. Cousins. Philomel, 1990. ISBN 0-399-22164-6. 125p.
$14.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
Hamilton is back in her fictional element here,
realizing a relationship between two characters who live out-to a bitter end-
the tensions between their own mothers. Cammy and Patty Ann are jealous
cousins, the first strong-minded and fiercely loyal to her dying grandmother, the
second beautiful and perfectly mannered on what seems, at first, a superficial
level. With the girls' older brothers as sometimes defiant foils, this is a
complex family drama, briefly developed through some unforgettable scenes:
Cammy visiting a nursing home to comfort Gram, Cammy caught in a
rainstorm and sheltering in her aunt's home, Cammy discovering that Patty
Ann's unemployed brother drinks too much, and, finally, Cammy watching
tragedy unfold at a summer-camp outing. By the conclusion, she has been
reconciled to an acceptance of death, as well as, on a happier note, to the father
she had lost through divorce. A poor relation, Elodie, is introduced too late in
the story to be as completely developed as Cammy and Patty Ann, but her role
as pawn between the two primary characters is nevertheless effective. Like
Marion Dane Bauer's On My Honor (BCCB 10/86), this is a powerful portrayal
of guilt and emotional survival. BH
D.V. Cousins; Death, adjustment to
Hanmer, Trudy J. Taking a Stand against Sexism and Sex Discrimination.
Watts, 1990. ISBN 0-531-10962-3. 142p. illus. with photographs. (Taking a
Stand). $13.40.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
This latest entry in the Taking a Stand series is really
a history of American feminism with some discussion of current affairs tacked
on. 
Hanmer, the principal of the Emma Willard School (which has its
appropriate place in this history), competently outlines women's struggle for
rights, and she makes clear the economic reasons for and consequences of the
[ 60]
oppression of women. The stories of leading nineteenth-century suffragists such
as Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Sojourner Truth are interesting, but the author
resorts to generalities and statistics when she discusses the twentieth century; the
chapter on "How to Become Involved" is more well-meaning than specifically
useful. Notes, a directory of women's rights organizations, and bibliography
are included. DS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Harvey, Brett. My Prairie Christmas; illus. by Deborah Kogan Ray. Holiday
House, 1990. ISBN 0-8234-0827-2. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
In a companion volume to My Prairie Year (BCCB
12/86) the narrator is again nine-year-old Elenore Plaisted, the author's
grandmother. The place is the Dakota Territory, the time is the turn of the
century, and the children are, with their mother, hoping that the blizzard won't
keep Papa from getting back in time for Christmas. The modest plot has
suspense, as the family anxiously waits. It has the appeal of the Christmas
setting and it has unobtrusively incorporated period details as Mama and the
children prepare homemade gifts and food, and brave the snow to chop down a
small tree. The author avoids sentimentality but imbues her story with a gentle
affection, and this quality is reflected in the soft pastel drawings. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
Hayward, Linda. The First Thanksgiving; illus. by James Watling. Random
House, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90218-x; Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-80218-5.
48p. (Step into Reading). Library ed. $6.99; Paper ed. $2.95.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
With its concise summary of the events leading up to
the first Thanksgiving, this is a fair-enough recap of the Pilgrim story marred by
some choppy writing and an overuse of exclamation points. "His name is
Samoset. He speaks English! ... Samoset comes back with an Indian named
Squanto. Squanto speaks even better English!" Antecedents aren't always clear:
"They know the Indians are watching them. They can see smoke from their
campfires. They can hear them in the woods." However, easy-reader history is
in demand, and this one is welcome, particularly for its resistance to
fictionalization. Illustrated with plenty of appealing watercolors. RS
C.U. Thanksgiving
Henkes, Kevin. Julius: The Baby of the World; written and illus. by Kevin
Henkes. Greenwillow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08944-5; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-08943-7. 32p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Kevin Henkes' mice-children here again are expressive
foils for toddler-sized foibles. Lilly's resentment of new baby brother Julius is
not a quiet thing: she bangs on her drum while the baby sleeps, frightens him
with her nifty disguises, sticks pins in her baby-doll version of her little brother.
When their parents encourage Lilly to croon pleasantries into Julius' crib, she
willingly complies: "I hate you. You're ugly." Lilly even offers advice to
passing strangers: "You will live to regret that bump under your dress." But a
slighting remark--one previously voiced by Lilly herself-from cousin Garland
about the baby restores Lilly's family feeling. "'Kiss! Admire! Stroke!' Lilly
commanded." Grownups will have as much fun reading aloud this witty text as
[61]
little Lillys will hearing it. Pen-and-watercolor illustrations are a bright bunch
in assorted sizes, gloriously capped by a facing pair of full-page portraits from
Lilly's "glorious dreams" (Julius beset by a cat-riding Lilly) and "ghastly
nightmares" (Lilly beset by a giant, fanged Julius, omnipotent in his high-
chair). Most adjustment-to-baby books gloss over just how much fun baby-
brother torture can be; it's refreshing to find one that really gets into it. RS
D.V. Baby, adjustment to; Brothers-sisters
Hill, Kirkpatrick. Toughboy and Sister. McElderry, 1990. ISBN 0-689-50506-
X. 121p. $12.95.
R* 
Gr. 4-7. 
Toughboy and Sister are apprehensive when their
father leaves them alone at a remote fishing cabin while he goes back to the
village to drink. This is their first uneasy taste of managing on their own, and
their relief at his return soon turns to despair when Daddy dies in an alcoholic
stupor. Far from their Athabascan Indian village and their friends, the two
orphans learn to fish and cook and protect themselves, all the while growing to
appreciate the other's unexpected gifts. Toughboy is eleven, Sister eight, and
their alliance is brave and real, captured in Hill's plainspoken prose: "When
they were grown-up, they could do anything they wanted to do. That was good
to think about when you were just a kid and you were going to have to do
something you didn't want to do at all." 
Their survival story is
straightforwardly rendered and elementally satisfying, its realism developed
through the clear details of living in the Alaskan wilderness. A bear scare adds
excitement, and eventual rescue by an old neighbor, Natasha, promises the
children a well-deserved new family. Strongly and simply told, this is an ideal
story for readers too young for the survival adventures of Gary Paulsen and Jean
George. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Death, adjustment to
Hodges, Margaret, ad. The Kitchen Knight; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman.
Holiday House, 1990. ISBN 0-8234-0787-X. 32p. $14.95.
R* 
Gr. 3-5. 
Margaret Hodges, experienced in adapting classics
such as Saint George and the Dragon, which was excerpted from Spenser's Faerie
Queene and also illustrated by Trina Schart Hyman (BCCB 10/84), has made a
resounding version of this medieval tale from Malory's Le Morte D'Arthur. The
kitchen knight is really King Arthur's nephew in humble disguise, come to win
his spurs by challenging every strong knight that comes down the pike-the
black one, the blue one, and, finally, the red one. The beautiful Linesse, whose
sister Linette first scorned the kitchen knight's ragged appearance, is his prize,
but she's imprisoned in a tower. 
Ours not to question the royal rules of
chivalry, though constant testing by physical thumps does seem increasingly
archaic from this distance. However, Hyman's paintings convey great dignity on
the whole affair. Her portraiture is stronger than ever. The monolithic weight
of war horses, armor, shields, and battle-field morality is balanced by graceful
lines and a sly glint in the expressions of the outspoken Linette. The borders
here are appropriately plain, with the graphic narrative furthered, instead, by
miniature insets that detail action happening somewhere other than in the full-
page scenes. This frame within a frame composition achieves a kind of
"meanwhile" storytelling effect appropriate to the tale within a tale. An effective
[62]
introduction to Arthurian legend for elementary and even junior high or high
school students. BH
C.U. English literature
D.V. Courage
James, Carollyn. Digging Up the Past: The Story of an Archaeological
Adventure; illus. by S. D. Schindler. Watts, 1990. ISBN 0-531-10878-3. 64p.
$11.90.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Since Damien's mother is an archaeologist, it's
believable that she helps her son and his friend Joe with a dig that fosters their
interest in local history and teaches them a great deal about the methods used by
archaeologists. The writing style is static and the amount of details about
methodology produces dialogue that is oversaturated with facts and instruction.
Most of the black-and-white drawings give information about how sites are
marked and dug, and the inclusion of a glossary, a brief bibliography, and an
index makes the book useful. ZS
C.U. Archaeology
Jonas, Ann. Aardvarks, Disembark!; written and illus. by Ann Jonas.
Greenwillow, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07207-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
07206-2. 40p. Library ed. $14.88; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
In this secularized version of the Flood story, Noah
releases the animals from the Ark in alphabetical order, beginning with the
aardvarks and working his way down to the zebras. What then, are all these
animals left behind? "Noah didn't know their names," but kids will love the
exotic parade of birds and beasts (and a butterfly), including zebus, zerens, zorils,
youyous, yaks, xerus, wapiti, wisents, wallabies, wallaroos, wanderoos,
waterbuck, wombats, wildebeests ... and that's just the tail end in a procession
of vertical double-page spreads that follow more than 130 unfamiliar animals
down the slopes of Mount Ararat. Day turns to dusk and night and morning as
we (with Noah) descend the mountain; the cleanly drawn animals are
proportionately sized, but they all get bigger as we near the bottom, resulting in
a few spreads that seem crowded. Most of the pages have a poster-like clarity,
with each of the animal pairs (many of which are extinct or endangered) boldly
labelled, and the changes in light and perspective give the book some
atmosphere. 
A list of the animals with a brief description of each and
pronunciation for some is appended. RS
D.V. Ecological awareness
Kamen, Gloria. Edward Lear: King of Nonsense; illus. by Gloria Kamen and
Edward Lear. Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-31419-1. 74p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
It is gratifying to read a bibgraphy that is fluent,
lively, based on careful research, and so balanced in treatment that it gives as
convincing a picture of Lear the person as it does of Lear the artist and writer.
Indeed, Kamen does a particularly good job of showing how Lear's gentle nature,
his humor, and his absorbed dedication to the creative life contributed to his
works. Despite personal problems (primarily chronic ill-health) Edward Lear
remained resolute and cheerful, his wit echoed in the sketches that accompany his
rhymes with their playful nonsense and invented words. Nicely gauged for the
[63]
middle grades audience, this biography makes clear the reasons why Edward Lear
is a perennial favorite. ZS
C.U. Language arts
Kimmel, Eric A. The Chanukkah Guest; illus. by Giora Carmi. Holiday
House, 1990. ISBN 0-8234-0788-8. 32p. $14.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Holiday story hours will benefit from this gentle
spoof (text first published in Cricket magazine) in which an old woman mistakes
a bear for the rabbi she expects to visit on the first night of Chanukkah. "Bubba
Brayna was ninety-seven years old and did not hear or see as well as she used to,
but she still made the best potato pancakes in the village." Thus it is that she
serves up a grand meal after playing dreidel with the bear, and sends him off with
the gift of a warm red scarf before the real guests arrive. Younger listeners
especially will enjoy the joke, which offers possibilities for dramatic
exaggeration in sharing aloud. Full-color illustrations, dominated by the golden-
brown hues of the bear's fur, the latkes, and the rabbi's beard, are broadly
humorous. The third and lightest of Kimmel's Chanukkah romps. BH
C.U. Hanukkah
Klein, Robin. Came Back to Show You I Could Fly. Viking, 1990. ISBN 0-
670-82901-3. 189p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Seymour is a timorous eleven-year-old boy whose
mother has stowed him with a bossy family friend for the summer holidays;
Angie is a wild older teenager with a tattoo and black fingernail polish; they
meet when Seymour runs into Angie's yard while escaping from a gang of
bullies. Long before Seymour allows himself to figure it out, readers will
understand that Angie has a serious drug problem. She lies to Seymour (and
convinces herself in the process) about her past, her family, her daily visits to a
remote clinic. Seymour's faith in his friend, even when he sees her shoplifting,
or when she asks him to lie to her landlady, is believable, as is his gradually
developing backbone, grown at Angie's impetuous insistence. 
Tough
encounters, such as when Angie takes Seymour along for a visit to her family,
are confidently placed amid scenes of the two sharing fantasies and adventures in
the city. By an Australian writer celebrated for her deftly popular touch, this is
occasionally didactic (with a happily hopeful ending), but engagingly written,
offering a pair of protagonists readers will be pleased to meet. Winner of the
Australian Children's Book of the year Award. RS
D.V. Friendship values
Manushkin, Fran. 
Latkes and Applesauce; illus. by Robin Spowart.
Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-590-42261-8. 32p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
A gentle family story set near Minsk, this describes
one Hanukkah when a blizzard prevents little Ezra and Rebecca Menashe from
digging up potatoes and picking apples. Instead of latkes and applesauce, they
must celebrate with soup, which they share with a starving kitten and dog that
come crying at their door. Such generosity pays off when the dog digs up
potatoes in the snow and the kitten leads Papa up into the branches of the apple
tree to discover some fruit clinging to the boughs. The writing has subtle
touches of humor ("'Apples are always a miracle,' declared Papa as he joyfully
tossed them down"), and the softly rounded, colored chalk drawings reinforce a
[64]
cozy world of harmonious companionship, where playing dreidel is the high
point of an evening filled with affectionate exchange. Back pages give a brief
account of the holiday's origin, a recipe for potato latkes, instructions for
playing dreidel, and a list of three other good books about Hanukkah. BH
C.U. Hanukkah
D.V. Animals, kindness to; Faith
Margolies, Barbara A. Rehema's Journey: A Visit in Tanzania; written and
illus. with photographs by Barbara A. Margolies. Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-
590-42846-2. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
A child's first trip away from home is the central
event in this brief photoessay about Tanzanian life. Nine-year-old Rehema
describes and explains the sights on her journey, beginning with her family
home in the Pare Mountains: "This is our brand new house. It is made of
cement. Our old house is made of mud and cow dung. Mama still cooks there."
Arranged haphazardly as if in a scrapbook, the clear color photographs provide a
glimpse of different aspects of Tanzanian culture. A lot happens in Rehema's
three-day trip: she takes in her first church service (complete with both baptisms
and confirmations), shops in the Arusha marketplace, meets members of the
Waarusha and Maasai peoples, and visits the Ngorongoro game reserve. The
brief, sometimes disjointed text and occasional candid picture (many are posed)
reveal, in a matter-of-fact way, facts about living conditions which may prove
eye-opening to an American child: "Even when we're on vacation from school,
we help weed the school gardens. At harvest time, we sell what we have grown
at the market. 
We use the money to buy chalk, pencils, and paper."
Unfortunately, the photographs of the game reserve animals are somewhat
generic in effect. The game reserve, ostensibly the highlight of the trip, is less
interesting than such common sights as piles of salt at the market place. With a
watercolor map that shows the stops on Rehema's journey, and an appended list
of Swahili words, this is a good secondary source for social studies reports.
RAS
Mazer, Norma Fox. Babyface. Morrow, 1990. ISBN 0-688-08752-3. 
165p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Toni is fourteen, and she knows she's lucky. Her
father dotingly calls her "babyface," her parents seem placidly happy, and she's
grateful for that rapport, aware of how bitterly the parents of her best friend,
Julie, fight. Toni's contentment doesn't last: Julie moves away when her
parents separate, and Toni's father has a heart attack. It's always been frustrating
to Toni that her sister (Martine, fifteen years older than Toni, lives in
Manhattan) doesn't seem to like her, but it is through her sister that Toni learns
a shocking truth about their parents. Dad had been so physically abusive to
Mom that she had decided to leave him, changing her mind when she knew she
was pregnant. Although the story has a faint aura of being nicely boxed and tied
with a bow, it is believable, it has good narrative pace and flow, and it is both
dignified and candid in depicting the discussions between Toni and the members
of her family as they work toward improving their relationships. ZS
D.V. Father-daughter relations; Sisters
[65 ]
McPherson, Stephanie Sammartino. Rooftop Astronomer: A Story about
Maria Mitchell; illus. by Hetty Mitchell. Carolrhoda, 1990. ISBN 0-87614-
410-5. 64p. (Creative Minds). $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Taught astronomy by her father, Mitchell became the
first woman member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and of the
Association for the Advancement of Science. She was in her forties when, at the
end of the Civil War, she joined the Vassar faculty. Mitchell's exciting life as
an astronomer and as a feminist emerges in spite of a static biography that does
not convey a picture of Maria Mitchell as a person. Useful but choppy and
poorly illustrated, the book faithfully records her devotion to her subject, her
accomplishments, and her effectiveness as a teacher. ZS
Morimoto, Junko. My Hiroshima; written and illus. by Junko Morimoto and
with photographs. Viking, 1990. ISBN 0-670-83181-6. 32p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
A picture book that inevitably will be compared to
Toshi Maruki's Hiroshima No Pika (BCCB 10/82), this is younger in graphic
tone and text. The narrator describes her pre-war childhood before detailing the
events of August 6, 1945, when she and her family were lucky enough to
survive the blast that destroyed their home and to shelter in a cave. After
witnessing death and devastation all around them, Marimoto, who was home
with a stomach-ache when the bomb fell, visited the ruins of her school to find
"an aluminum lunch box with burnt, black rice inside. I found the bones of
many of my friends." Although this does not have the power of Maruki's
paintings, the full-color illustrations, varied but spacious page design, and
authentic story combine for a telling effect A last page gives facts about the
bombing of Hiroshima, and endpapers include historical black-and-white
photographs together with an author's note to parents and teachers. BH
C.U. History-World War II, 1939-1945
D.V. Peace
Oliver, Stephen. My First Look at Home; ISBN 0-679-80622-9; My First
Look at Opposites; ISBN 0-679-80620-2. My First Look at Seasons; ISBN 0-
679-80621-0. My First Look at Touch; ISBN 0-679-80623-7. 
Each book:
illus. with photographs by Stephen Oliver and others. Random House, 1990.
18p. (My First Look at Books). $6.95.
R 
1-3 yrs. 
First published in England, four titles in a board book
series can be used for identification, for the establishment of concepts and sets,
and for learning the names of objects hitherto unfamiliar. The pages are sturdy,
the color photography of good quality, and the labelling adequate, if sometimes
confusingly placed. Two or four pages are devoted to different aspects of the
governing concept in each of the four books The concepts aren't always clearly
put, as when "a basket of fruit" identifies both container and contents, while
"fruit salad" ignores the former; or when sand in a bucket and a sandcastle are
used to illustrate "in" and "out". But these are, indeed, minor weaknesses in
what is basically a fine set of books for very young children. Most of the ideas
and pictures are crystal-clear, often using appealing toys (trucks, trains, puppets)
as examples. ZS
Orr, Katherine. My Grandpa and the Sea; written and illus. by Katherine Orr.
Carolrhoda, 1990. ISBN 0-87614-409-1. 32p. $12.95.
[ 66]
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Vividly set on a Caribbean island, this story is
narrated by young Lila, whose grandpa fishes in a dugout canoe carved from the
trunk of a tree. "He had never been to school, but he was very wise. He could
read the sea and sky like most of us read books." When big, high-powered boats
reduce the fish population too much for Grandpa to pay expenses, he tries to
drive a taxi and help Grammy in her bakery, but seems to pine away until an
idea for farming sea moss in floating frames takes him back on the water where
he belongs. The narrative and dialogue are natural enough to soften the moral,
which has a disarmingly open naivet6. Orr's primitivistic paintings depend on
oceanic hues brightened with red and yellow; the seascapes, full of sweeping
organic shapes, contrast with indoor scenes that bring this black family into
close perspective. A childhood vista of loving bonds and natural values. BH
D.V. Ecological awareness; Grandfather-child relations
Polacco, Patricia. Babushka's Doll; written and illus. by Patricia Polacco.
Simon, 1990. ISBN 0-671-68343-8. 34p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Bright and vigorous, Polacco's line and wash pictures
are nicely composed, set off by plenty of white space, and carefully placed to
echo the humor and warmth of the story. A Russian child, Natasha, comes to
visit her grandmother and is selfishly demanding. When Natasha wants food or
attention, she wants it immediately. Left alone for a time, Natasha plays with
Babushka's doll; the doll comes to life and is even more selfish and imperative
than Natasha, so that by the time Babushka returns (and the doll becomes mute)
Natasha understands why her grandmother had played with the doll only once.
Once is enough! As for Natasha, she "turned out to be quite nice after all," the
story ends. Lightly and effectively told, an amusing story has a message
conveyed by humor, not by preaching. ZS
D.V. Grandmother-child relations
Robinson, Margaret A. A Woman of Her Tribe. Scribner's, 1990. ISBN 0-
684-19223-3. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Annette, half Nootka Indian, has grown up in her late
father's village on the wild west side of Vancouver Island, but she and her
mother move to the city of Victoria when Annette wins a scholarship to the very
English St. John's Academy. Although most aspects of her new life seem alien
to Annette ("Hurry up. It was not a Nootka idea, not a Nootka expression, not
Nootka in any way at all"), she makes friends with lively Ukrainian-Canadian
Katie and develops an interest in art and anthropology, subjects through which
she can express and explore her Nootka culture. On returning to the village for
the holidays, she finds she has drifted apart from her Nootka friends and realizes
she must decide how the Nootka and white traditions will shape her life. This is
a beautifully balanced book about the importance of heritage, maturity, and
individual integrity; neither side of Annette's background is romanticized, and the
Native American characters, for once unstereotyped, are as well-delineated as the
others. The author has a refreshing faith in her readers and in her strong young
heroine, and she condescends to neither, succinctly conveying emotional
dynamics and history in apparently small moments. May Robinson soon follow
this sensitive and well-crafted first YA novel with others. DS
D.V. Pride in background and heritage
[67]
Rogers, Jean. 
Raymond's Best Summer; illus. by Marylin Hafner.
Greenwillow, 1990. ISBN 0-688-09391-4. 80p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-3. 
Like the first book about Raymond, Dinosaurs Are
568 (BCCB 10/88) this one has the dilemma of an implied audience too young
to read. Perhaps, as with Ramona, older kids might enjoy Raymond's low-key
adventures in a myself-when-young kind of way; even better is the prospect of a
first-grade read-aloud, evoking the pleasures of a season to come. Raymond is
funny, bright, and dogged in his quest to learn to float in his swim class; too bad
he's not so smart about the men removing valuables from the house next door.
A plane trip to visit Grandma and a trip to an aquarium-sharks-round off a
satisfying summer. Breezy and easy, this has the appeal of the familiar, and
Raymond is a likable little guy. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Perseverance
Rylant, Cynthia. 
A Couple of Kooks and Other Stories about Love.
Jackson/Orchard, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08500-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05900-6. 100p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 8-. 
This collection of eight stories presents an unlikely
but appealing assortment of lovers ranging in age from sixteen to seventy-five.
Each of the stories reflects the mysteriousness of love ("Then one day the bag
boy dropped her jar of mayonnaise and that was how she fell in love"); its
transforming power ("Delores stopped wearing T-shirts to work and instead wore
crisp white blouses with the sleeves rolled back"); its pain and arbitrary nature.
The best stories are those which deal with unconventional love experiences. In
"A Crush," Ernie, a mentally handicapped man, brings secret floral tributes to
Delores, who runs the hardware store. Rylant is at her best when she shows
rather than tells. "Certain Rainbows" is one of the weaker stories, because in
this interior monologue the grandfather of the bride waxes philosophical to the
point of editorializing: "Society has been relentless in grinding down the natural
sexual feelings of its women." More successful, because of what is left unsaid,
is "His Just Due." The unlikely hero, who rescues the wife and child of an
abusive husband, "almost went to technical school, he almost won a Chevy
Nova, he almost got married, and he almost died when his coal truck rolled over
on him. For the fourth thing, he had no complaints." While some of the
characters, especially the "Couple of Kooks" of the title story, seem a bit too
naive, Rylant's revealing descriptions and incisive wit usually cut through. This
is not a book for cynics-love here makes winners out of the most unlikely
losers-but occasional glimpses of profound truths and a sense of wonder make
it a collection to be savored. RAS
D.V. Interpersonal relations
Sachs, Betsy. The Trouble with Santa; illus. by Margot Apple. Random
House, 1990. Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-80410-2; Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90410-7.
64p. (Stepping Stone Books). Paper ed. $2.50; Library ed. $6.99.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Third grade is putting on a Christmas play and Billy
wants no part of it. "He might throw up right onstage!" Billy's stagefright is a
slender but agreeable thread for an essentially plotless Christmas story. The
third-graders learn about various Christmas and Hannukah traditions; Billy learns
about the spirit of giving from his grandfather; the play is a success, despite the
[68]
fact that Billy's best friend Howard, who's been so brave all along, yes, throws
up. Lots of dialogue, humor, and pleasant black-and-white drawings combine to
make this diverting seasonal fare. An unfortunate misprint allows a brief section
of the text to be repeated. RS
San Souci, Robert D., ad. The White Cat; illus. by Gennady Spirin. Orchard,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08409-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05809-3. 32p.
Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
An elaborate marriage of story and art celebrates the
French fairy tale tradition. San Souci's text is based on Madame D'Aulnoy's
1698 literary tale, which in turn draws on a folktale in which a king sends his
three sons on three tests to decide their inheritance. The youngest son produces,
at the end of the first year, the tiniest dog and, at the end of the second year, the
finest linen-both with the help of a magical white cat who becomes his human
bride when he breaks a spell bewitching her. 
Golden-toned paintings
embellished with fine detail depict scenes of courtly grandeur. The artist has
played subtly with contrasts of scale, using skillful miniaturizations to
demonstrate that the smallest can be the most elegant. The formal tone of
pictorial gentility never lessens the impact, serving instead to lend a distance
characteristic of fairy tale frames. The text is long and the art sophisticated for
preschool picture book audiences, but this will appeal to young romance and
fantasy fans in elementary school and perhaps even in junior high. BH
Schlein, Miriam. The Year of the Panda; illus. by Kam Mak. Crowell, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04866-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04864-5. 83p. Library
ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Soft pencil drawings, composed with restraint
illustrate the story of a child's love for a pet and subsequent interest in animal
conservation. Lu Yi, son of a farm family, is aware that the daxion mao (giant
panda) is a rare species, and he reluctantly tells a government messenger that he
has a very young panda he's rescued. To Lu Yi's joy, he's invited to come
along when his pet is flown to the Daxion Mao Rescue Center. Fascinated by
the Center's program, Lu Yi decides that he would like to accept the offer to
come back, when he is older, and be a student aide. A good cause, an unusual
setting, a happy and logical outcome, and an engaging pet are appeals adding to
the attraction of a gentle story that is nicely written and nicely paced. ZS
D.V. Animals, respect for
Schotter, Roni. Hanukkah!; illus. by Marylin Hafner. Joy Street/Little, 1990.
ISBN 0-316-77466-9. 32p. $13.95.
R 
3-7 yrs. 
In free and occasionally rhyming verse, this cheerful
picture book depicts a family's preparations and celebration of Hanukkah.
Everyone contributes something to the feast. The oldest children engage in a
frenzy of latke making ("Flip, flap here. Flip, flap there. Potato pancakes in
the air. Latkes flying everywhere") much to the delight of the family dog, who
sneaks off with an errant pancake. Ruthie paints a poster while "off in a corer,
tucked away, Sam shapes a dreydel of clay." In a dialogue reminiscent of
Rosemary Wells' Max and Ruby, Sam tries to get baby Moe to say Hanukkah:
"'Say Hanukkah, Moe.' 'Anoohah, Moe,' Moe says. 'Anoohah!' and drools on
Sam's foot." Moe can already say Dee-licious, an apt description of the
[69]
Hanukkah meal that leaves everyone stuffed: "But wait . . . there's more.
There's no escape. It's Grandma's famous lemon cake!" Schotter's light touch
is enhanced by Hafner's humorous pencil and watercolor illustrations, which
subtly incorporate the traditional Jewish colors of blue and white. The pictures
set the story in an indeterminate time, possibly the present but more likely a
not-too-distant past. Mom and Dad exchange coy looks (faces are not a strength
here) over her Hanukkah present, a nightgown. The origin of the holiday, a brief
glossary, and an explanation of how to pronounce Hanukkah augment the book's
usefulness. A good choice for preschool storytimes with a Hanukkah theme.
RAS
C.U. Hanukkah
Scott, Ann Herbert. Grandmother's Chair; illus. by Meg Kelleher Aubrey.
Clarion, 1990. ISBN 0-395-52001-0. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
In a picture book about four generations of a family,
a small girl and her grandmother talk about a child-sized chair and those who sat
in it: Katie's mother, grandmother, and great-grandmother. They look at a
photograph album, and the quiet story ends with Grammy telling Katie that she
can take the chair home. "And when you grow up, the little chair will go into
your attic, safe for another day." "Safe for my own little girl," says Katie. A
pleasant book, useful to help establish concepts of relationships and continuity,
though the pattern is static. The paintings lack distinction, but they have good
(if few) period details, and even the youngest of the lap audience will recognize
the fact that some of the pictures are meant to be old snapshots in an album. ZS
D.V. Family relations
Shaw, Margret. A Wider Tomorrow. Holiday House, 1990. ISBN 0-8234-
0837-X. [130p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
In a novel first published in Great Britain, Bobby
(Roberta) is trying to decide whether to go to college or to the United States
with Michael, who has a job there. She consults her grandmother, the famous
Tiffany Oliver, who had been a suffragette and an ambulance driver during World
War I, and had become an M.P. 
The story is told through Tiffany's
reminiscences, focusing on the struggle for women's rights and on the problems
of loving two men, one of whom was married. The flow of the narrative is
interrupted periodically by brief discussions of Bobby's problems or by answers
to questions she addresses to Tiffany. Save for a final, brief scene with Michael,
no other character appears on the present scene. This is an adequately written
first novel despite the awkwardness of the shifts between past and present; it
gives a convincing picture of the rigors of the war years, and it offers characters
who are well drawn but who, unfortunately, are eclipsed by the historical
material. The ending is pat but believable: Bobby and Michael have a farewell
scene in which they declare their love for the first time, take Grandmother as an
example of living a life that does not let love exclude a career, and agree that
separation will not diminish their love. ZS
D.V. Devotion to a cause; Grandmother-child relations
Slepian, Jan. Risk n' Roses. Philomel, 1990. ISBN 0-399-22219-7. 175p.
$14.95.
[70]
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
In a thoughtful period novel set after World War II,
Skip, eleven, is as enthralled as the other neighborhood children with Jean, who
is tough, daring, and domineering. Sharp-tongued Jean is a manipulator, and one
of the people she manipulates is Angela, the beautiful and retarded older sister of
Skip. Slepian is an astute and perceptive observer of group dynamics, and her
skillfully written story explores the intricacies of the relationships among the
children, the cruelty of Jean to Angela, and the way it moves Skip to a new
perspective on her feeling for her sister. The characterizations of Angela's
overprotective mother and of the elderly neighbor (a victim of Nazi persecution)
who is persecuted by Jean are powerful, both adding to the suspense of a story
about the effect on others of an unhappy vindictive child. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Sisters; Social behavior
Smith, Marya. Winter-Broken. Arcade, 1990. ISBN 1-55970-064-5. 
120p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Twelve-year-old Dawn is the quiet, middle one of four
sisters. She's learned to keep silent when questioned about her family so that
the social services people won't start visiting them again. Dawn's father is an
alcoholic who physically abuses his wife and children, and her mother makes her
living doing whatever she can. A painful scene depicts Dawn frying up a dozen
eggs, two at a time, in order to have them ready and waiting for her father when
he gets up. Dawn finds refuge away from her volatile family in a barn just over
the hill. There she meets Mr. Everley, a kindly old man who asks no questions
and who lets her take care of the horse he's boarding. Her love for the horse
pulls Dawn away from her family toward self-preservation, and although her
action seems mild, the last scene of Dawn gathering the courage to finally seek
help has a subtle effectiveness, and is a welcome climax: Dawn's constant inner
reminder that she shouldn't speak to anyone becomes redundant, even within
Smith's introspective style. Like the author's first novel, Across the Creek
(BCCB 1/90), this is powerful but slow-moving, and it lacks the pace or exterior
drama that might make it a stronger story. KP
Smith, Roland. Sea Otter Rescue: The Aftermath of an Oil Spill; written and
illus. with photographs by Roland Smith. Cobblehill, 1990. ISBN 0-525-
65041-5. 64p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Unlike many perfunctory treatments of current events,
this photodocumentary is by an expert with in-depth knowledge of the Valdez oil
spill and its effect on wildlife. Smith is an experienced zoologist whose writing
and color photographs are both clear and immediate, involving readers in the fate
of the sea otters by describing individual animals as well as general rescue
operations. The evidence presented here speaks more dramatically than any
ecological preaching could, and kids will benefit from discussions of the book in
environmental and natural history classes. Although there is no patronizing these
animals as "cute," they are undeniably appealing, with a few of the nursery shots
downright irresistible. A glossary defines technical terminology, which is kept
to a minimum, and an index gives access to the continuous text. BH
D.V. Ecological awareness
[71]
Stock, Catherine. Christmas Time; ISBN 0-02-788403-1; Halloween Monster;
ISBN 0-02-788404-X. Thanksgiving Treat; ISBN 0-02-788402-3. Each book:
written and illus. by Catherine Stock. Bradbury, 1990. 26p. $11.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
This disarming trio is a toddler-sized introduction to
three festive-and often difficult-holiday events. Each book introduces basic
traditions (trick-or-treating, Thanksgiving dinner, presents) from a preschool
view, not forgetting the anxieties holidays can provoke. In Halloween, a young
black child is afraid of monsters; the nameless narrator of Thanksgiving feels left
out of dinner preparations; the little girl in Christmas is afraid to talk to Santa.
All is resolved, and the holidays are happy. 
The pencil-and-watercolor
illustrations are simple, seasonal, and reassuringly tinted. It's good to see story
and concept so smoothly blended; equally good to see a new series so
refreshingly gimmick-free. RS
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Strachan, Ian. The Flawed Glass. Little, 1990. ISBN 0-316-81813-5. 204p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Shona MacLeod suffers a malfunction of her nervous
system that affects her coordination (poor) and her speech (very poor). Like
others on the isolated Scottish island where she lives, she is both excited and
apprehensive about the new "Laird", an American who has bought the island.
The story focuses on Shona's relationship with the Laird's son, who teaches her
to communicate via the computer his father has installed; her learning is slow
and it is believable and it is touching. As background to the major facet of the
narrative are the well-drawn minor characters of the book, which is written with
brisk pace, some suspense, and a vivid depiction of the island community. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Handicaps, adjustment to
Van Allsburg, Chris. Just a Dream; written and illus. by Chris Van Allsburg.
Houghton, 1990. 
ISBN 0-395-53308-2. 
[48p]. 
$17.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Walter will never throw his jelly doughnut wrapper
on the street again. Not after the dream that took him into a frightening future
where his neighborhood has become a monstrous trash dump, the forests have
been destroyed for toothpicks, smog chokes the atmosphere, and a hotel sits atop
Mount Everest. Could planting a tree make a difference? The banality of this
ecological fable may pass unnoticed by well-meaning adults, but kids might feel
harangued by the humorless and over-pointed nature of the story. 
Van
Allsburg's double-spread illustrations of Walter's visions convey a probably
unintended irony: 
colored in surrealistically unlikely tones, seen from
dramatically dizzying perspectives, filled with smoke and steam and strangely
colored light-this future is scary, but. . . beautiful. Walter's bed is a magic
carpet that takes him to the top of a smokestack, into the nook of a tree, onto
the cool blue slopes of the Himalayas, and amid the night clouds with a talking
duck-an odyssey far more fun than the final peaceful vision achieved after
Walter goes back for his doughnut wrapper: an idyllic suburbia with gracious
white houses, clotheslines, and motorless lawn mowers. Walter says "I like it
here," and falls asleep. The message is worthy if sentimentalized; the book
seems undermined by its own virtuosity. RS
D.V. Ecological awareness
[72
Vigna, Judith. My Big Sister Takes Drugs; written and illus. by Judith Vigna.
Whitman, 1990. ISBN 0-8075-5317-4. 32p. $12.95.
M 
5-8 yrs. 
The story reads like any number of YA problem
novels; it's the picture-book format that makes this a little different. Paul's
sister has made some creepy new friends, and one night she offers him "a little
red pill." (It's a little unnerving that this action only gets Tina grounded for a
week). After increasing family tensions, Tina gets picked up by the police ("The
other kids were doing crack, not me!") and is sent away to a special hospital for
help. A subplot about Paul's interest in soccer and his fears of ostracism
because of his sister never quite meshes into the story, which itself cannot
support the twin weights of melodrama and didacticism. Watercolor illustrations
leaven the lesson but seem static in their alternation of Paul appearing lonely
and Paul being comforted. RS
Weiss, Nicki. An Egg Is an Egg; written and illus. by Nicki Weiss. Putnam,
1990. ISBN 0-399-22182-4. 32p. $14.95.
M 
3-5 yrs. 
Using a repetitive pattern to present a concept, this
book has stiff pictures in dark colors, squarely set on bright pastel pages. The
large print states, "An egg is an egg/ Until it hatches/ And then it is a chick/ A
branch is a branch/ Until it breaks/ And then it is a stick." After each pair is the
refrain, "Nothing stays the same. Everything can change." The book has two
serious weaknesses. One is that its generalizations can be misleading: an egg
doesn't always turn into a hen's chick, and water isn't always tea when it's
brewed. The second is that after the iterated message about nothing staying the
same, the text ends (after commenting on a baby who grew and "now he is a
boy") with a mother's comment, "But you can always be a baby. You will
always be my baby," and the contradictory conclusion, "Some things stay the
same. Some things never change." On the literal level at which young listeners
will try to understand the book, which is simple in format, such contradictions
can be less amusing than confusing. ZS
Wetterer, Margaret K. Kate Shelley and the Midnight Express; illus. by Karen
Ritz. Carolrhoda, 1990. ISBN 0-87614-425-3. 48p. (On My Own Books).
$8.95.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
"Someone may still be alive in Honey Creek and I
have to stop the midnight express." There is a terrible storm and fifteen-year-old
Kate Shelley hears the bridge collapse under the weight of a locomotive. Can
she save the crew? Can she stop the express in time? Easy-readers are rarely
this dramatic, and the author's note indicating that the story actually happened in
late nineteenth-century Iowa adds a frisson of authenticity. 
Rather than
burdening the story with exclamation points or hyperbole, the author wisely
relies on the events themselves to convey excitement, and the styling is simple,
not choppy: "She held up the lantern to light her way over the bridge. But as
she did, a fierce wind blew out the lantern's small flame. Kate stared into the
darkness." Watercolor and charcoal illustrations are strong and stormy, with
enough dignity to make the book appealing to older reluctant readers. The
teenaged protagonist, as well, should widen the potential audience. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning; Reading, reluctant
D.V. Courage
[73]
Wexler, Jerome. Pet Gerbils; written and illus. with photographs by Jerome
Wexler. Whitman, 1990. ISBN 0-8075-6523-7. 48p. $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 3-6. 
First Pet Mice (BCCB 5/89), now Gerbils ... how
does Wexler make these rodents seem so irresistible? He doesn't make pet care
look easy, just possible-and personal: "Before buying my pets, I visited my
doctor and got a tetanus shot. It only hurt a little." Smoothly blending
information about the animal and advice on its care, Wexler covers buying,
housing, and feeding gerbils; handling and playing with them; medical care; and
mating and birth: "It's important to have homes lined up now, even before you
buy your gerbils." As in Mice, the photographs here are well-executed and well-
placed, with again an excellent sequence showing the growth and development of
babies. Advice is sensible, clear, and specific, including, for example, a section
on how to pick up a gerbil without damaging either it or yourself. The text is
in impeccable order, ending with a section on photographing gerbils; an index is
appended. RS
D.V. Pets, care of
Wiesner, David. Hurricane; written and illus. by David Wiesner. Clarion, 1990.
ISBN 0-395-54382-7. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Like the author's Free Fall (BCCB 5/88), this picture
book explores imaginative extensions of reality, but is all the more involving
for its basis in ordinary child life, rather than in the murky depths of a dream. A
hurricane is coming, and brothers David and George enjoy the drama of the
"green blizzard" of leaves, the creaking of the house, the lights going out, and a
cozy supper by the fireplace. The hurricane leaves in its wake a legacy of a large
fallen-down tree, "a sleeping giant" that provides the boys (and their cat) with a
vehicle for fantastic journeying as they imagine themselves on safari, riding the
seven seas, in space, and sometimes just sitting enjoying the view. "It just feels
good being here." 
With the hurricane providing its own meteorological
excitement, the imaginary games allow Wiesner plenty of scope for
phantasmagoric landscaping; Jumanji-like, all the games are foreshadowed in the
wallpaper pattern in the boys' bedroom. The tree makes a likely-looking space
capsule landed on a distant planet, or pirate ship awash in stormy seas; its allure
in plain dappled sunlight is also apparent, and readers will share the boys'
dismay when the chainsaw turns it into firewood. But as the book closes, the
wind is kicking up, and another tree just might fall. Robust and real, this one is
guaranteed to get them outdoors. RS
D.V. Brothers; Imaginative powers
Wilde, Nicholas. Into the Dark. Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-590-43424-1.
[176p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
Twelve-year-old Matthew is looking forward to a
holiday on the English coast, determined that his blindness won't keep him from
enjoying his first real taste of the country. He finds a friend in a local boy
named Roly, and together, with Roly acting as Matt's eyes, they explore the
coast and the countryside. It eventually becomes apparent that Roly is not the
village boy that Matt had thought him, but the ghost of a boy who lived at the
manor a hundred years ago. Many of the beloved ghostly conventions are well-
executed here: the boarded-up manor house, the hushed-up stories of tragedy, the
sorrow of a ghost unable to "pass over" until granted forgiveness. The added
[74]
twist of Matt's blindness serves the story well functionally (he doesn't know
that Roly can't be seen) and gives an authentically eerie and unusual slant to the
description (the third-personal narration is from Matt's sightless point-of-view).
Although many readers will guess Roly's true identity before Matt does, the
ending, if a shade overdetermined, is nonetheless dramatically satisfying. With
plot well-knitted and characters well-drawn, this is an absorbing and inventive
offering. DS
Yorinks, Arthur. Ugh; illus. by Richard Egielski. di Capua/Farrar, 1990.
ISBN 0-374-38028-7. 32p. $13.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
"Many, many, many, many, many, many years ago,
there lived a boy. His name was Ugh." Everything about this picture book
spells spoof, and it's spoof that's inventive enough to offer laughs at every
level, from kids to adults. It's so inventive that it spoofs invention. Ugh,
oppressed by the sisters and brothers who make him do all the work around the
cave while they go off and watch dinosaurs eat trees, makes prehistory by
inventing the bicycle. When Oy the scientist, Eh the Hunter, Um the spear
maker, Ah the doctor, and Ick the dirt seller convene their weekly world meeting,
Ugh happens to ride by on his bike, loses control (no brakes), and runs away to
hide, thinking that the crowd chasing him is mad. They are not mad. "'Hey,
what a thing!' said Ick, admiring the abandoned bicycle. 'Whoever make this, he
be king!'" True to the Cinderella tradition, the hero is found and identified,
while his siblings are eaten by a whale. "Ugh be big-shot boy the rest of his
happy life." Well, who wouldn't want to be Ugh, riding his two-wheeler with
both hands raised in triumph and a saber-tooth crown on? Short of that, who
wouldn't want to hear about Ugh, every night, and look at the hysterical pictures
Egielski has cooked up to go with this uniquely American tall tale of material
success? With a dinosaur on the cover. And endpapers that depict the whole
myth in cave paintings. The shapes and colors of the artwork are sturdy enough
to support stone bicycle wheels, while the compositions balance dinosaurian
perspectives with mammoth spaces. 
The characters sport some pretty
monumental hairdos, too. Yorinks and Egielski's past award books are all very
well, but this one is the real winner. BH
C.U. History-Prehistoric; Reading aloud
D.V. Ingenuity