Aardema, Verna, ad. Rabbit Makes a Monkey of Lion: A Swahili Tale; illus.
by Jerry Pinkney. Dial, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0298-1; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-8037-0297-3. 32p. Library ed. $11.89: Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Brilliant watercolors in camouflage hues of green and
brown illustrate an East African tale with some familiar motifs. Twice Rabbit
robs Lion's honey store and gets away by trickery, as do his fellow thieves
Bush-rat and Turtle. Finally, Lion hides in Rabbit's house but falls for the old
ploy of answering Rabbit's "How-de-do, Little House" while trying, of course,
to sound more like a house than a lion. Aardema cites her source (Zanzibar
Tales, 1901) and injects the adaptation with her style of sound effects, always
fun for reading aloud. Both the art-a vigorous balance of line and color-and
the story are full of action, a healthy addition to story hour sessions. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Aaseng, Nathan. The Fortunate Fortunes: Business Successes that Began with
a Lucky Break. Lerner, 1989. 
ISBN 0-8225-0678-5. 
76p. 
illus. with
photographs. $9.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Despite the fact that some of the photographs are of
poor quality or are uninformative, this compilation of "business successes that
began with a lucky break" is one kind of nonfiction many children read avidly.
In part, the allure is achievement; in part, the facts about the development of
such familiar products as Kleenex, Baby Ruth candy, and Kellogg's Corn Flakes
have inherent interest. Aaseng's style is crisp and clear, and each section is brief
and well-organized, with length varying from 4 to 10 pages. A useful device in
this series (other titles published at the same time are The Problem Solvers, The
Rejects, and The Unsung Heroes) is the inclusion-in the inside margin and in
small type-of explanations of such business terms as supply, demand, market,
premium, and partnership. Separately or together, the books provide a good
introduction to the business world. Each of the books includes a reading list and
an index. ZS
[241]
Adler, David A. Jackie Robinson: He Was the First; illus. by Robert Casilla.
Holiday House, 1989. 
ISBN 0-8234-0734-9. 
48p. 
(First Biographies).
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
This biography of the first black man to play on a
major league baseball team is clearly written, admiring but not adulatory, and
succinct without being terse. About half the page space is used for black-and-
white pictures that are competently drafted but stiffly composed. There are no
photographs; there is an index. Adler does a good job in covering the highlights
of Robinson's career and maintains a balance between facts about that career and
about Robinson's personal life; the information is accurate, the tone subdued, so
that any tension and action speak the more volubly for themselves. ZS
D.V. Courage
Alexander, Lloyd. The Jedera Adventure. Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-525-44481-5.
[208p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Like Vesper Holly's Illyrian, El Dorado, and
Drackenberg adventures, this one is a swashbuckling affair in which the narrator,
Vesper's guardian Brinnie, relates their dangerous but always triumphant travels
during the 1870s. Vesper is a superhero, and here she has met her equal in a
chieftain (there's even a hint of romance between them) who helps her cross a
desert, free the walled city Bel-Saaba from its despotic ruler, and save a street
magician who has eloped with a sheik's favorite daughter. This, and more, is all
done by way of returning a rare old library book that Vesper's father had
borrowed, before his death, from a scholar in Bel-Saaba. 
Arch villain Dr.
Helvitius proves, of course, to be the power behind the despot, and his scheme
to build a flying machine that will drop explosives and so win him the world is
foiled only by Vesper's instant grasp of aeronautic principles. Alexander's
fictional worlds are always inventively imagined and his stylistic capsules easy
to swallow ("He was the sort of fellow who should be a governor-general and
seldom is"). The whole series is valuable in that it bestows elegant writing on
unsuspecting young readers looking to gallop through books with familiar
characters and lots of action. BH
D.V. Bravery
Arnold, Caroline. Dinosaur Mountain: Graveyard of the Past; illus. with
photographs by Richard Hewett. Clarion, 1989. ISBN 0-89919-693-4. 48p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Similar in format and appeal to the author/
photographer team's Trapped in Tar: Fossils from the Ice Age (BCCB 6/87),
this focuses on Utah's Dinosaur National Monument, with stunning color
photos of bones from the quarry and a competent description of how they were
discovered, identified, and preserved. Since the site includes "more than half of
all the known types of dinosaurs that lived in North America during the late
Jurassic Period," the book is a natural choice for aspiring young paleontologists.
The subject itself has dramatic appeal, which is intensively heightened by
Hewitt's varied shots of models, scientists at work, and reconstructed skeletons,
[242]
often from ingenious perspectives. The continuous text is well organized, its
diverse information blended with unobtrusive transitions. BH
C.U. Paleontology
Asimov, Isaac. How Did We Find Out About Microwaves?; illus. by Erika
Kors. Walker, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6838-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-
6837-7. 63p. Library ed. $12.85; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
From the time that Isaac Newton examined the light
refracted by a prism, and pondered on the nature of light, scientists have held
differing theories about the phenomenon. 
Straight-line particle movement?
Waves? Subsequent research showed the variation of wave-length and of heat in
different parts of the spectrum and led to pure research (the Big Bang theory) and
applied research: masers, lasers, and the use of microwaves for cooking. As
usual, Asimov is accurate, direct, and sequential in his examination of a
scientific phenomenon, demonstrating both his prowess as a science writer and
his communicative awareness of the nature of science research, that pool of
knowledge to which so many have contributed. Diagrams are clear; an index is
included. ZS
C.U. Science
Bernal, Richard. 
'Night, Zoo; written and illus. by Richard Bernal.
Calico/Contemporary, 1989. ISBN 0-8092-4396-2. 19p. $11.95.
NR 
2-4 yrs. 
Lacking the beguiling irony of Montgomery's
'Night, America, reviewed below, this companion volume may fulfill its fall-
asleep function far too effectively. It bids 'Night to big-eyed and Disneyfied
chimps, gazelles, a woodchuck, penguins, etc., many of whom come equipped
with such indispensable accoutrements as nightcaps, blankets, milk and cookies,
and teddy bears. 'Nix. RS
Boyd, Brendan. Hoops: Behind the Scenes with the Boston Celtics; by
Brendan Boyd and Robert Garrett; illus. with photographs by Henry Horenstein.
Little, 1989. Trade ed. ISBN 0-316-37319-2; Paper ed. ISBN 0-316-37309-5.
128p. Trade ed. $14.95; Paper ed. $7.70.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
While Haskins' biography of Magic Johnson,
reviewed below, focuses on a star, Hoops spotlights an entire team and what's
involved in staying on top in professional basketball. The players, of course,
are key, and there's plenty of attention given to Larry Bird and his teammates.
It's clear, though, that this-and every-team has special characteristics
determined by the coaches, owners, managers, home base, and historical
traditions. While the text describes drafting policies, practice, equipment,
training, conditioning, strategy, court preparation, game procedures, road trips,
and common experiences among rookies and veterans, black-and-white
photographs (some grainy in reproduction) bring the inside action to the reader.
Though many of the specifics will change-coach K. C. Jones has already
retired-the family style of this team makes it a stable choice for a look at high-
powered professional sports. Young (and reluctant) readers will enjoy browsing
[243 1
through the smoothly written, liberally illustrated coverage for a look behind the
scenes and faces that are familiar from televised games. BH
C.U. Physical education
D.V. Teamwork
Burton, Jane. Animals Keeping Clean; Library ed. ISBN 0-394-92261-1; Paper
ed. ISBN 0-394-82261-7. Animals Keeping Cool; Library ed. ISBN 0-394-
92260-3; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-82260-9. Animals Keeping Safe; Library ed.
ISBN 0-394-92263-8; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-82263-3. Animals Keeping Warm;
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-92262-X; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-82262-5. Each book:
written and illus. with photographs by Jane Burton. Random House, 1989.
24p. Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $1.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Like Burton's previous set, How Your Pet Grows!
(BCCB 6/88), this quartet is probably more browsable than useful. Each book
is gathered around a central theme, but that's about it as far as organization goes.
Warm and Cool enumerate, through a series of captioned photographs, the ways
different animals seek and find comfortable temperatures; Safe features natural
defences; Clean, various washing and grooming habits. The excellent color
photographs include both familiar and exotic animals, although little attempt is
made to show where each animal lives, and the descriptive often tips into the
anthropomorphic: "The yellow-fronted Amazon parrot spreads her wings as she
enjoys a shower. She flaps, dances, and screeches with glee." Despite the
inappropriate preschool format, strange animal facts always appeal; Safe, with
its stingers, prickers, and poisons, will find an especially wide audience. RS
Byars, Betsy. Bingo Brown and the Language of Love. Viking, 1989. ISBN 0-
670-82791-6. [160p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-7. 
Fans of The Burning Questions of Bingo Brown
(BCCB 4/88) need not worry about Byars letting them down with this sequel.
It's just as authentically characterized, while the writing builds on the humorous
use of free association without losing control. Bingo's true love Melissa has
moved to Bixby, Oklahoma; her best friend Cici likes Bingo, but Bingo's macho
neighbor Billy has a crush on Cici; and to top it off, Bingo's parents are acting
immature about their own relationship because, it turns out, Bingo's mother has
become unexpectedly pregnant just when she's secured a job she loves. If the
plot sounds popularized, the style is singular. Bingo's first (unnecessary) shave
is a classically funny rite-of-passage scene, and the issues of sexual maturity are
treated in witty but age-appropriate ways. 
When buxom Cici finds Bingo
cooking dinner as part of his restitution for a $54 phone bill to Melissa, he tries
to ease her out of the kitchen: 
"You will have to excuse me now, I am
preparing, er, chicken chests." Enjoy. BH
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Ciardi, John. 
The Hopeful Trout and Other Limericks; illus. by Susan
Meddaugh. Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-43606-0. 52p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
A posthumous publication is illustrated by line
drawings that have humor rather than wit, and that often are in the macabre mode
[244]
that distinguishes so much of Ciardi's poetry as well. Here the limericks are
grouped under catchy rubrics like "Iron Men and Wooden Ships" or "Heights
made him dizzy," with a sometimes tenuous relationship between rubric and
selections. Limericks are a popular form; these include some that are pointed or
funny and some that seem labored. ZS
Clement, Claude. The Voice of the Wood; tr. by Lenny Hort; illus. by Fr6d6ric
Cl6ment. Dial, 1989. ISBN 0-8037-0635-9. 24p. $14.95.
SpR 
Gr. 4-. 
An old Venetian craftsman makes his finest cello
from a beloved tree that had "made music" for him many years before dying at
the end of a hard winter. He finishes the instrument on the eve of a carnival, but
the famous masked musician who comes forth to play can evoke nothing but
"brutal, grating noises, like crocodiles chewing and clawing their way across the
floor." Only when the musician hurls off his mask and celebrity can he begin
anew, whereupon the cello magically sprouts leafy branches and magical music
with "the voice of the wood." The art is impressive but studied, with surreal
canalscapes and costumed dancers posed in the manner of a still life. The grains
and textures of the varied surfaces are dramatic yet subtle, creating patterns of
contrast in what might otherwise become static compositions. 
This is a
mystical fable that will captivate adult philosophers more than picture book
listeners, but older children may be persuaded to consider the artistry. BH
D.V. Creativity
Cobb, Vicki. Getting Dressed; Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32143-0; Trade ed. ISBN
0-397-32142-2. Keeping Clean; Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32313-1; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-397-32312-3. Each book: illus. by Marylin Hafner. Lippincott, 1989.
32p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Brightly colored illustrations (some showing enlarged
details) contribute to a light tone that makes these two nonfiction books
enjoyable as well as informative. In the first book, Cobb focuses on those
inventions (buttons, zippers, sticky tape) that make it easier to get clothes on or
off and that keep them fastened when the wearer is active. The second book
describes both the implements (combs, toothbrushes, soap) that help keep
people clean and the reason for hygienic procedures. Occasionally there's a
comment one might challenge ("But brushing only became a habit in this
country after World War II," Cobb says when discussing dental hygiene) but for
the most part the text is accurate and competently written. ZS
Cohen, Susan. 
When Someone You Know Is Gay; 
by Susan and Daniel
Cohen. Evans, 1989. ISBN 0-87131-567-X. [180p]. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
While it's billed as a "book written for straight
teenagers on the subject of homosexuality," gay teens will find much here to
inform and reassure themselves as well. Writing in a casual, sympathetic voice,
the Cohens discuss the nature of homosexuality and its existence throughout
history; theories as to its causes; the relationships of gay people with their
families, friends, and churches; and the special concerns of gay youth.
[245]
Controversial topics such as gay parenting, promiscuity, and AIDS are addressed
fairly and responsibly, and throughout there are welcome touches of pithy
humor: in responding to the question as to whether homosexuality can be cured,
the Cohens write "You can make someone miserable but you can't make them
straight." Occasionally, the tone gets a little too laid back (calling Lord Alfred
Douglas an "upper-class twerp," for example). 
A reliance on those handy
"experts" who "say" is no substitute for attribution and footnoting; in one case
where the experts are named, one would still like to know how Drs. Ellis and
Ames arrived at their definitive conclusion that "sexual orientation is determined
between the second and fifth months of pregnancy." Far more enlightening (and
engaging) are the anecdotal quotes from gay teens as well as kids whose friends
or parents are gay. There is neither an index nor a bibliography, although a
directory of gay organizations and a list of books and movies of gay interest are
appended. Despite its technical flaws, this commonsensical treatment of a
controversial topic is the best YA book on homosexuality currently available.
RS
C.U. Sex education
D.V. Friendship values
Corcoran, Barbara. The Private War of Lillian Adams. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN
0-689-31443-4. 166p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Lil and her parents had just moved to a small town
where Dr. Adams had begun a busy practice; like many other services and
commodities, doctors were in short supply during World War I. In part this is a
story about Lil's adjustment to a new place and to her fifth-grade classmates, but
the focus is on her misguided patriotism, for Lil suspects too many people of
being spies. Her readiness to accuse old Mr. Panzi, the cobbler (a Jewish refugee
from Russian pogroms) just because he is dour and speaks another language,
leads Lil to what begins as a Halloween prank and ends with her shame at the
resultant violence when the elderly man is threatened by a crowd of agitated
adults. Corcoran supplies appropriate period details, and she makes her messages
about war and mob psychology in wartime very clear. She is also a competent
writer, and her style is smooth and controlled. Although the characterization is
believable, most of the characters tend to be typecast: Lil's quietly liberal father,
the bigot who delivers ice, the "Mornin'-to-youse" Irish maid, the classmate
who's a natural bully. The story ends with Lil and her friends pretending, while
playing a code book war game, that peace has come, a finale that invites
approbation but is arrived at rather abruptly. ZS
Cross, Gillian. A Map of Nowhere. Holiday House, 1989. ISBN 0-8234-
0741-1. 150p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Readers who share Nick's interest in fantasy games
should be the primary audience for this English story, but the deftness of the
writing style and the insight into motivation, ethics, and group dynamics will
no doubt draw other readers. Nick becomes involved with Joseph Fisher and his
sister Ruth when he finds Joseph's wallet in his own sports equipment bag and,
in the wallet, a note that seems to contain directions for an adventure game.
[246]
What creates a problem-and a crisis-is that Nick's older brother Terry is part
of a rough gang and they want Nick's cooperation in setting up a robbery of the
shop that provides a meagre income for the Fisher family. Nick's ambivalence
is painful, as is his guilt; his expiation is believable as he works through the
misery of divided loyalties. Characterization and relationships are established
with strength and perception, and Cross has done an unusually fine job of
blending the actions and reactions of her characters with the structure of a taut
story. ZS
D.V. Ethical concepts; Friendship values; Loyalty
Czerkas, Stephen. 
My Life with the Dinosaurs; by Stephen and Sylvia
Czerkas. Minstrel/Pocket, 1989. Paper ed. ISBN 0-671-63454-2. 108p. illus.
with photographs. Paper ed. $2.75.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Stephen and Sylvia Czerkas are "paleoartists" who
make scientifically accurate models of dinosaurs for museums and movies.
Dinos, model-building and special effects are three sure appeals, of course, and
like other entries in this series, the autobiography includes a lot of professional
detail, such as digging for dinosaur fossils, restructuring skeletons and
reproducing skin texture, and researching dinosaur anatomy and behavior to find
realistic poses for the models. While the Czerkas relate their story with some
over-breeziness ("This was our dream. And it has all come true") they also show
the pleasure to be found in painstaking and meticulous work: no glue gobs on
these dinos! Photos of models, a list of dinosaur museums, and a reading list are
included. RS
Davidson, Alan. The Bewitching of Alison Allbright. Viking, 1989. ISBN 0-
670-82015-6. 157p. $11.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
Be careful what you wish for . . . .
Morosely
discontented Alison Allbright evidently never heard this particular piece of
advice, and the elegant, friendly, rich Mrs. Considine seems to be the answer to
many prayers. Lonely for her own daughter "away at school in Switzerland,"
Mrs. Considine gives Alison everything she wants: clothes, status, admiration.
But even the besotted Alison realizes something is odd when Mrs. Considine
begins to call her "Camilla," her own daughter's name. "I wouldn't even tell
your family about the game we play. It's just a whim of mine." Related in a
cool, sinister tone, this novel has an irresistible combination of dream
indulgence and unsettling nightmare, perhaps most clearly demonstrated in the
scene where Alison/Camilla "savours" her own memorial service, kindly
arranged by Mrs. Considine after Alison has supposedly drowned in the lake.
While it is a contemporary realistic story, old fairy tale motifs abound: Mrs.
Considine is a scary, wicked witch, but complicated in her ambivalence toward
the daughter she re-creates; Alison is a transformed princess who finds her castle
becoming a prison. This is the kind of instantly appealing novel you won't
want to booktalk without multiple copies on hand. RS
[247]
Facklam, Margery. Do Not Disturb: The Mysteries of Animal Hibernation and
Sleep; illus. by Pamela Johnson. Sierra Club/Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-27379-
1. 47p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Meticulously lined and handsomely shaded pencil
drawings illustrate a text that characterizes "deep sleepers" (bears are the best-
known example), "in-between hibernators" (skunks, raccoons, etc.), and "daily
dormants" such as hummingbirds and pygmy mice. The descriptions are very
clear-a chipmunk's burrow sounds downright inviting-and the seasonal
sleeping patterns of bats, birds, cold-blooded sleepers (lungfish, snakes, frogs),
as well as animals' dream lives, comprise information not always easy to come
by. The book is indexed and well-designed with a roomy format. BH
C.U. Nature study
Fisher, Maxine P. Women in the Third World. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-
10666-7. 176p. illus. with photographs. $13.90.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Describing the accomplishments as well as problems
of women in the world's most impoverished countries, this is also a useful
introduction to women's lives in non-western cultures. Chapters focus on
childhood and adolescence, marriage and motherhood, education, health care, and
work, including agrarian, industrial, professional and political contributions. A
wide spectrum of situations is shown, with the author's synthesis of research
personalized by profiles of successful individual women. A smooth blend of
sociology, anthropology and economics filtered through a commonsensical
feminism. RS
D.V. International understanding
Gabhart, Ann. Discovery at Coyote Point. Avon, 1989. Paper ed. ISBN 0-
380-75497-5. 164p. Paper ed. $2.75.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Sent to stay at his grandparents' farm for a year while
his mother works in Mexico, Ance, a twelve-year-old city kid, begins to
question the circumstances of his father's death five years before. His dad had
disappeared while on a walk in the wilderness near the farm, and while Ance's
mother is sure he was killed in an accident, both grandparents seem to believe
their son Russell still lives: 
Grandfather believes Russell ran away;
Grandmother insists he has amnesia and will return. 
"I read about that
happening to this man just the other day in one of my magazines." The novel
isn't a mystery so much as it is an exploration of the family's attempts to come
to terms with the absence of a man they loved. Grandfather, bitter and afraid,
keeps himself aloof from Ance; Grandmother, longing for Russell, calls him
Rusty; and Ance wanders daily through the wilderness, befriending a coyote and
learning what his father loved. The growing bond between Ance and his sad
grandparents is convincingly developed through a skillful use of dialogue and
plot, and the eventual revelation of his father's fate is cathartic without being
melodramatic. Never a tear-jerker, this simple story comes honestly to its
considerable emotional effects. RS
D.V. Animals, respect for; Grandparent-child relations
[248
Goble, Paul. Beyond the Ridge; written and illus. by Paul Goble. Bradbury,
1989. ISBN 0-02-736581-6. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
This begins with the death of an old Plains Indian
woman whose spirit climbs away from her family, up a high ridge into the
beautiful land and outstretched arms of her dead ancestors. The rest of the book
describes, with several poetic quotes, some Native American rituals of burial and
beliefs in the Spirit World. Goble's illustrations-angular in a double spread of
gray rocks, smoothly surfaced in a skyscape of flying vultures-make a dignified
context for a moving, direct discussion of death. Goble has managed to make
personal what might have been anthropological. 
There is a sense of grieving
that may affect readers too much for group sharing; although the book could
serve as a discussion title for study of Indian life, children should be offered the
chance to experience it privately. BH
D.V. Death, adjustment to
Graham, Richard. Jack and the Monster; illus. by Susan Varley. Houghton,
1989. ISBN 0-395-49680-2. 25p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Soft colors, amusing details, and plenty of action
make Susan Varley's line and wash pictures as entertaining as they are perfectly
tailored to the text. Richard Graham's story, published originally in England and
comprehensible to a read-aloud audience anywhere, is a gentle spoof of the
dethroned child. Jack, who has a very nice older brother, is more than annoyed
when the monster-a baby brother-is added to the family. Jack's capitulation
and acceptance of the "monster" is predictable, but the consistency with which
Jack's viewpoint is maintained; the light, brisk writing style; and the fusing of
text and illustration make this a pleasant variant of the often-told story of finding
out that the new baby is fun. ZS
D.V. Baby, adjustment to; Jealousy, overcoming
Green, Connie Jordan. The War at Home. McElderry, 1989. ISBN 0-689-
50470-5. 137p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
The time is 1945, the setting is Oak Ridge,
Tennessee. Thirteen-year-old Mattie and her family have just moved to the
community because her father is participating in the top-secret work that led to
the first atomic bomb. Mattie is not happy when her cousin Virgil, twelve,
comes to stay with them although she first tolerates and later becomes fond of
him. Their relationship, and the rejection of Virgil by his parents that has won
Mattie's sympathy, are the armature for the story's broadening, but-as the title
indicates-the time and setting are of major importance. Although the pace of
the book is uneven, the author gives a good picture of the period and of the
atmosphere of the sealed community in which she herself spent her childhood.
ZS
D.V. Family relations
[249 ]
Green, Roger J. The Throttlepenny Murder. Oxford, 1989. ISBN 0-19-271601-
8. 197p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Pages filled with very small print may daunt some
readers who enjoy mysteries; the fact that this English story, set in 1885, is
written with some of the ornateness and circumlocution that are typical of the
literary style of that period may be a further limiting factor. Jessie, a thirteen-
year-old slavey who has been working for the dour, miserly Mr. Dobson (twleve
hours a day) is jailed; she is accused of having murdered her master, who was so
stingy that the townsfolk called him "Throttlepenny." There are also two adult
suspects, hints galore, Dickensian drama, more than a soupcon of
sentimentality, and never any doubt that little Jessie is innocent or that she and
her beloved John will be reunited. 
Just a bit too turgid in style and too
deliberate in pace to have the suspense and momentum a mystery needs, this is
interesting as a pseudo-period piece, although it may be of more interest to adult
than to adolescent readers. ZS
Grindley, Sally. Wake Up, Dad!; illus. by Siobhan Dodds. Doubleday, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-26018-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-26017-2. 24p. Library
ed. $12.95; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Any parent who has tried to cling to sleep despite the
prattling of a small child, and any small child who has lingered at a parental
bedside and prattled, should recognize the wry humor of this picture book. Line
and wash illustrations in pastel tones are also amusing, especially in the
depiction of Dad's face as he resolutely keeps his eyes closed while his daughter
chats. Sample: "Dad... Are you asleep, Dad? ... I can tell you what time it is
if you want me to... Wake up, Dad... Can we go to the zoo today, Dad?" No
response. However, when the child says, "Shall I go and get my recorder, Dad?
I can nearly play a tune on it," both Dad and Mum sit bolt upright and shriek
"NO!" Soon all three are snuggled together. Mission accomplished. ZS
D.V. Father-child relations; Everyday life concepts
Gutnik, Martin J. Immunology: From Pasteur to the Search for an AIDS
Vaccine. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10672-1. 
112p. 
(Venture Books).
$11.90.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
A useful, if flawed, survey of the work of
bacteriologists, physicians, biologists, and immunologists who have contributed
to the body of knowledge and to the advances in research, diagnosis, and therapy
that continue today. 
Gutnik has tried valiantly to cover science history;
occasionally he is repetitive ("Gymnasium" is more than once defined as a
secondary school) and occasionally obscure (what is meant by referring to Paul
Ehrlich as "historically brilliant" or Elie Metchnikoff as "the Russian
eccentric"?). The text is sprinkled with odd sequences: 
one chapter ends, for
instance, with "He died on August 20, 1915," speaking of Ehrlich, and the next
chapter starts, on the facing page, with "With the twentieth century just ten
years away ... ." Still, there is a great deal of information in the book, and the
provision of a glossary, a chronology of major contributions, and an index add to
its usefulness. ZS
[250]
Haskins, James. Sports Great Magic Johnson. Enslow, 1989. ISBN 0-89490-
160-5. [64p]. illus. with photographs. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Haskins is almost as practiced a hand at biography as
Earvin Johnson is at basketball, so Magic's amiable personality and enviable
skills get a smooth introduction. 
The first half of the book is the most
interesting, since it covers the major portion of Johnson's development.
Gameplay comprises most of the second half, with an emphasis on Johnson's
value as a guard in the rivalry between the Lakers and the Celtics. Black-and-
white action photos spice up the coverage, which reveals some of Johnson's hard
times as well as highlighting his success. No surprises here, but fans will
appreciate the easy-to-read information, enjoy the book's season recaps, and, like
Magic, pass it to their buddies. BH
C.U. Physical education
Hausherr, Rosmarie. Children and the AIDS Virus: A Book for Children,
Parents, & Teachers; written and illus. with photographs by Rosmarie Hausherr.
Clarion, 1989. ISBN 0-89919-834-1. 48p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Meant to be used by adults working with or caring for
young children, this has large type, black-and-white illustrations, and-as
explained in a prefatory note-additional information, in smaller type that is
meant to give more detailed or complicated facts to older children or to adults.
Included in the text are profiles of two children who have AIDS. This is a book
designed to give facts and to evoke sympathy; it achieves both goals, and it
manages to reassure children about the danger of contracting the virus while
pointing out the ways in which AIDS may be contracted. Although featuring
two kinds of type for two audiences seems only to make the book less appealing
to either, it's nonetheless useful, as is the appended material that precedes the
index. A page listing health care precautions also includes organizations that
will provide further information, a page headed "What we can do about AIDS," a
list of resources, and a bibliography, all of which are addressed to adults. ZS
C.U. Health and hygiene
Hayward, Linda, ad. Baby Moses; illus. by Barb Henry. Random House, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99410-8; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-89410-3. 32p. (Step
into Reading). Library ed. $6.99; Paper ed. $2.95.
NR 
5-7 yrs. 
While it's as easy to read as Hayward's version of
Noah's Ark (BCCB 6/87), this adaptation of the bulrushes story suffers from
both omission and addition. It does not mention, for example, that Moses was
an Israelite, only stating that "His mother had to save him from the wicked
Pharaoh." Invented material includes the animals who comment upon the baby
("Was the baby safe? 'Not yet!' said the snakes that wiggled in the sand") as he
sails down the river, and Pharaoh's allowing the baby to live "because he loved
his daughter." The pink skin and rosy cheeks of Moses and Pharaoh in the
awkward watercolor illustrations add to the ahistoric aura. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
[251]
Jackson, Julia A. Gemstones: Treasures from the Earth's Crust. Enslow,
1989. 
ISBN 0-89490-201-6. 
104p. 
illus. with photographs. 
(Earth
Resources). $16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
With a degree in geology and experience as Director
of Publications at the American Geological Institute, Jackson shows a solid
grasp of gemstone lore as well as mineralogy. Transitions are not always
smooth; there's a discombobulating jump, for instance, between a citation of the
curative powers supposedly associated with gems of various colors in the Middle
Ages and the gems associated with the twelve tribes of Israel and the twelve
apostles. There are also a few vague definitions: "To be considered a gemstone,
a material must be attractive enough to be used for personal adornment."
However, readers can get quite a bit of background and specific information
through browsing or tracking down specific facts through the index. Maps and a
glossary are helpful, as are the color photographs in a center gallery.
Unfortunately, the black-and-white photos are sometimes useless; while the
garnets and dark tourmaline crystals are clearly visible by shape and contrast with
the rock in which they're imbedded, for example, the turquoise and peridot are
unidentifiable by a novice. Nevertheless, the book is useful as an alternative
source to encyclopedias and adult guides and for reference on birthstones and state
gems; a list of books and periodicals for further reading is appended. BH
C.U. 
Geology
Jenness, Aylette. In Two Worlds: A Yup'ik Eskimo Family; by Aylette
Jenness and Alice Rivers; illus. with photographs by Aylette Jenness.
Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-42797-5. 84p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
Returning to the coastal village she wrote about
twenty years ago in Gussuk Boy and Dwellers of the Tundra, Jenness found
many changes in Scammon Bay: 
new houses, telephones, electricity,
snowmobiles, an airstrip. Concentrating on the lives of the Rivers family, this
photoessay explores how these changes have affected the traditional practices of
the Eskimo community, such as seal hunting, now done with rifles instead of
harpoons, from motorboats instead of kayaks. As Billy Rivers says, "I teach my
boys the way I've been taught, the way my dad taught me. What [sic] I think
that's wrong, I try to do better than my dad. And when I make a mistake, I try
to correct it to my boys, so they'll do it better than I did." More descriptive than
analytical, the book includes details of hunting, fishing, trapping and skinning,
schooling, family life, and recreation, which includes both women's basketball
and traditional dancing. The writing is generally clear although sometimes oddly
constructed, and the many black-and-white photographs lack captions but are
usually well-placed. While this may be a bit of an idealized portrait-the town
seems to have no real problems to speak of-there is no easy sentimentality for
the "old ways," and the depiction of a community attempting to maintain
customs and practices in the face of (and often with the aid of) rapid
technological change is edifying. RS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
[252]
Joosse, Barbara M. Pieces of the Picture. Lippincott, 1989. Library ed. ISBN
0-397-32343-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32342-5. 
135p. Library ed. $12.89;
Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
After her father's death, Emily and her mother move
to the Wisconsin countryside, where Mother is running her childhood home as
an inn. Emily, 12, is depicted as a selfish and lazy girl who is rude to the
guests, not much nicer to her overworked mother, and very sorry for herself.
She finds and cares for an injured Canada goose, eventually letting him fly away
when he has recovered. Rather abruptly, at the end of a story in which, alas, the
pieces of the picture never quite fit, Emily begins to understand her mother
better, partly through finding and reading her mother's girlhood diary. The
writing style is adequate, as is the characterization; what the story lacks is the
impact that can come only when there is cohesion. ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Mother-daughter relations
Kaufmann, John. Voyager: Flight around the World; illus. by John Kaufmann
and with photographs. Enslow, 1989. ISBN 0-89490-185-0. 64p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Dick Rutan and Jeana Yeager's historic 25,012 mile
non-stop flight around the world has inherent drama and appeal that will not be
undermined by this just-serviceable account. In a plain, sometimes dull, style,
Kaufmann explains how the Voyager was built, the aeronautic principles of its
design, and technical and financial setbacks. A concluding account of the trip
itself is brief but thorough. While budding pilots and plane designers will enjoy
the technical details, there may be too much of this for readers more interested in
the perilous adventure aspect of the flight and feat. The book design is
uninspired, with a dreary cover, only a few black-and-white photographs, and
some informative but textbookish diagrams. RS
Keaney, Brian. No Need for Heroes. Oxford, 1989. ISBN 0-19-271610-7.
114p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
As H. M. Hoover does in The Dawn Palace: The
Story of Medea (BCCB 6/88), Keaney builds his historical fiction on the
transitional tensions between a goddess-cult of the Great Mother and a cruel god
imposed by a war-like, patriarchal dynasty. The setting is King Minos' court
on Crete, and the protagonist is the princess Ariadne, who develops from a
victim to an independent woman responsible for helping Daedalus, Icarus,
Theseus, and the High Priestess escape from Minotaurian tyranny. The feminist
impatience with traditional heroism makes a modern foil for conventional
versions of mythology, and Ariadne herself is a sympathetic character. There's
too much plot for such a brief book, however, particularly with Keaney's
overambitious addition of Daedalus and Icarus as visitors from a future time.
Ultimately, the reader feels a kind of thematic manipulation at work, but the
action will hold students who want to explore ancient history from present
perspectives. BH
C.U. History-Ancient
[253 ]
Kennedy, X. J. Ghastlies, Goops & Pincushions: Nonsense Verse; illus. by
Ron Barrett. McElderry, 1989. ISBN 0-689-50477-2. 58p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
True to its title, this is full of ghastlies ("With his
hand-cranked freezer Weems/ Makes the ghastliest ice creams:/ Chocolate
toothpaste, cherry chunk/ [Chock full of pits], vanilla skunk ... "); and goops
("While filling cones, Disgustus GoopJ Leaned down so deep to take a scoop]
He fell headfirst with dreadful shriekJ Into the flavor of the week"); and just
plain groaners (on dinosaurs-"if they'd just laid a fresher gradeJ they wouldn't
be eggs-stinked"). 
The sixty-two poems include limericks, extravagantly
stretched rhymes, and nonsensical verses, most of them inventively wacky.
Many adults will not be able to read them all the way through without feeling
verbally bounced, but children will enjoy the carnival cadence. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Kerby, Mona. Beverly Sills: America's Own Opera Star; illus. by Sheila
Hamanaka. Viking, 1989. ISBN 0-670-82251-5. 
[64p]. (Women of Our
Time). $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Beverly Sills has accomplished a great deal, both as a
singer and as a promoter and popularizer of opera in the United States. Kerby
gives these achievements their due but also includes an excessive number of
cute, and pretty much beside the point, anecdotes. "In her wildest dreams,
Beverly never expected a wink, a matchbook, and a smoky fireplace would lead
her to marriage. But in a way, that's what happened." The inclusion of such
material may be an attempt to humanize the diva, but too often it seems
unintentionally to belittle its subject. That the author attempts to explain the
joys of opera to a young audience is laudable, but definitions are sometimes
unclear or inaccurate: "[coloratura singers] often trill, or rapidly sing two notes
over and over again," "an operetta is an opera which is sung in English and is
often funny." On the other hand, it seems unnecessary to gloss "Italian":
"(Italian is the language people speak in Italy)." But Sills' musical (as opposed
to marketing) contributions have often been slighted, and Kerby must be credited
for remedying that balance. Perhaps readers will take the author's suggestion to
listen to Sills sing. RS
C.U. 
Music
Kerrod, Robin. Read about Jet Airliners. ISBN 0-531-19052-8. Read about
Out in Space. ISBN 0-531-19053-6. Each book: Warwick/Watts, 1989. 32p.
illus. (Read About). $10.90.
Ad 
Gr. 2-5. 
Like the first two volumes in this series (Ballet and
Horses and Ponies, reviewed last month), these brief books treat popular topics
at an easy-to-read level. However, they also suffer from a somewhat disjointed
organization, especially Jet Airliners, which tries to deal with everything from
descriptions of turbofan action to air-traffic control (and includes an invitation for
readers to write their observations in the book). Out in Space has more logical
transitions and better focused information on rocket power, space travel,
satellites, and shuttle missions. Both books have copious color drawings and
diagrams, along with glossaries, indexes, and suggestions for projects. BH
[ 254]
Kunhardt, Edith. I Want To Be a Farmer; ISBN 0-448-09068-6. 1 Want to Be a
Fire Fighter; ISBN 0-448-09069-4. 
Each book: 
written and illus. with
photographs by Edith Kunhardt. Grosset, 1989. 32p. $6.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
These are really "play pretend" more than
informational books. Although they are accompanied by color photographs,
each projects a kind of cleaned-up fantasy version of what it's like to be a farmer
or fire fighter. In Farmer, a boy describes his parents' work day on a potato
farm, including an introduction to the brooder ("Peep, peep, baby chicks. I see
you"), the turkeys ("Gobble, gobble, gobble!) and the geese ("The gander sticks
out his neck and hisses at me. Go away, gander. He goes away"). Nathan rides
in Daddy's air-conditioned tractor cab and ends the day with dinner ("Baked
potatoes! Grandma and Grandpa come over for dessert") and with Daddy reading
aloud. In Fire Fighter, Holly talks about her father's work as a volunteer fire
fighter, shows off his equipment, tries on his uniform, and demonstrates
procedures for getting out of a burning house. This is a more straightforward,
cohesive text than Farmer; the photographs in both books are clear and well-
reproduced. Other titles have explored both vocations better, but preschoolers
will enjoy browsing through the pictures here, especially in conjunction with
day care or nursery school discussions of family occupations. BH
D.V. Occupational orientation
Lattimore, Deborah Nourse, ad. Why There Is No Arguing in Heaven: A
Mayan Myth; ad. and illus. by Deborah Nourse Lattimore. 
Harper, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023718-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023717-1. 32p. Library
ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
Like Lattimore's The Flame of Peace (BCCB 1/88),
this is a story put together from several versions and translations. It is based on
the Popol Vuh, a Mayan book hidden from the Spaniards and found 150 years
later by Padre Xim6nez. The first Creator God, Hunab Ku, tires of the noisy
animals he has made and tells the Moon Goddess and Lizard House, who argue
constantly about which god is greatest, to help him form a creature that will
worship properly. Both fail, but the quiet Maize God, who likes the earth
because "that is where his magic works its wonders," manages to demonstrate
the potential of two human spirits. This is a complex myth which, with formal
watercolor paintings depicting Mayan art motifs in stone gray and muted earth
colors, will generate discussion among students of folklore and Central American
history. The book design is occasionally obtrusive; elaborate designs, while
handsomely drawn, distract from the full page illustrations in cases where the
color and shapes have not been balanced. A brief author's note gives background
on the text, and endpapers depict Mayan symbols. BH
C.U. Mexico (unit)
Le Guin, Ursula K. Fire and Stone; illus. by Laura Marshall. Atheneum, 1989.
ISBN 0-689-31408-6. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
A variant of the friendly dragon theme, this is a
beautifully written story of two children who discover that the dragon terrifying
their town with screams of "RRRAAAHHHX! 
RRRAAAHHHX!" is really
[ 255 ]
hungry for rocks. Since everyone hides from the fire and brimstone in Rocky
Pond, it is only natural that Min (who floats because of her plumpness) and
Podo (who sinks because of his shortness) act on their intuition by throwing
stones from the pond into the air. The dragon snaps them up mid-air, the
townspeople follow the children's lead and provide plenty of rocks. The dragon
"got heavier, and cooler, and rockier, until it did not move at all.... All its fire
and hunger had been filled up, and it was only stone." The paintings, which are
thickly textured and filled with brashly colored, rounded shapes, are dramatic
without overshadowing Le Guin's carefully crafted words. The double-page
dragon is fiery, and the last spread, with the two children watching a sunrise
from a dragon-shaped hill, makes an organic accompaniment for their closing
song: "Dragon brightness/ feeds the earth./ Mother darkness/ gave us birth./ Sun
is fire,/ Earth is stone./ Sing together/ at the dawn!" BH
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Leon, George DeLucenay. Explorers of the Americas before Columbus. Watts,
1989. ISBN 0-531-10667-5. 64p. illus. $12.90.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Beginning with a two-page introduction on the fallacy
of considering Columbus the discoverer of the New World, Leon outlines the Ice
Age and the migration of Asian tribes across the Bering Strait. He also describes
archeological evidence for the North American settlement by these peoples before
he goes on to discuss exploratory voyages by the Irish and Vikings to North
America and, possibly, by Africans, Arabs, and Egyptians to South and Central
America. The treatment is brief and impersonal, but the writing is smooth, and
Leon is careful to distinguish between legend and documented fact. This is a
useful curriculum supplement, with black-and-white photographs, a bibliography
for further reading, and an index. BH
Levy, Elizabeth. 
The Case of the Mind-Reading Mommies; illus. by Ellen
Eagle. Simon, 1989. ISBN 0-671-63656-1. 53p. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
While the combination of mystery and magic ensures
that this easy chapter book will find readers, Kate and Max's second performance
lacks the freshness of The Case of the Gobbling Squash (BCCB 11/88). Kate is
desperately seeking a Mother's Day present that will take Mom's mind off
previous well-intentioned but misbegotten gifts, so she and Max decide to put on
a Mother's Day magic show. 
This isn't as funny as the first book and
contrivance reigns, but kids will enjoy the magic tricks (explained in the back of
the book) and the bumpy ("Maybe we can do a trick that makes my family
disappear-forever") but happy relationship between Kate and her mom. RS
Livingston, Myra Cohn, comp. Dilly Dilly Piccalilli: Poems for the Very
Young; illus. by Eileen Christelow. McElderry, 1989. ISBN 0-689-50466-7.
68p. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Poets of the past (Lear, Rossetti, Stevenson) and even
more contemporary writers of children's poetry are represented in a carefully
chosen mini-anthology for the read-aloud audience. Poems are loosely linked by
subject: a group of poems about wind and weather, or a sequence of insect
[256 ]
poems. 
Soft, scribbly black and white illustrations, most of which are
humorous, fit nicely into the uncrowded pages. The selections vary in length
and mood and form, but all are appropriate for the intended audience. ZS
C.U. Reading aloud
Mahy, Margaret. Nonstop Nonsense; illus. by Quentin Blake. McElderry,
1989. ISBN 0-689-50483-7. 120p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
"What a day to look forward to tomorrow!" says a
small book ghost, epitomizing the spirit of this happy potpourri. The same
ghost later gets mixed up with a cake and leaps out to scare the assembled
family. "Perhaps it's a sort of volcano cake," the father suggests. "It tastes
haunted!" the children maintain. In Mahy's nonsensical world, a cat spouts verse
after eating a poetic mouse. A couple who can't settle on a pet ("But, Mr.
Delmonico, my love, horses don't have eight legs. You're thinking of spiders")
get a big surprise. A word witch adds curses to her grocery list, but a benevolent
monster belies his appearance ("He had a lot of teeth, this monster, many of
them green and all of them sharp"). Interspersed between the short stories are
nonsense verses: "My sister's remarkably light,/ She can float to a fabulous
height./ It's a troublesome thing,/ But we tie her with string,/ And we use her
instead of a kite." Quentin Blake's offhand pen sketches are quite batty enough
to complement this light and lively concoction. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Markham, Marion M. The Birthday Party Mystery; illus. by Pau Estrada.
Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-49698-5. 48p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Mickey and her twin sister Kate are again
instrumental in solving a holiday mystery; this time the setting is the zoo where
one of their fourth-grade classmates is having a birthday party. When it is
discovered that the presents are missing and the birthday cake destroyed, police
are called in. The combination of the puzzle, the zoo setting, and the perennial
allures of twins and birthdays should appeal to readers; however, the nicely paced
story is more distinctive for being easy to read than for being well-written, and
the fact that the deductions of the twins so often outstrip those of the police is
less than credible. Pen-and-ink drawings are adequately placed but add little to
the story. ZS
Marks, Alan, ad. Childe Roland: An English Folk Tale; ad. and illus. by Alan
Marks. Bedrick/Blackie, 1989. ISBN 0-87226-400-9. 25p. (Folk Tales of the
World). $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
A series that has featured folk tales from India, China,
the Amazon, Borneo, Africa, Aboriginal Australia, Sri Lanka, and American
Indian cultures now focuses on a tale related to the venerable (but here
unmentioned) Scottish ballad Child Rowland. Originally, Merlin directs the
rescue of Arthur's daughter from fairyland. Arthur is not mentioned, but Childe
Roland is merely introduced as "the young prince" playing with his sister Burd
Ellen. When their golden ball flies out of the churchyard, Burd Ellen runs after
it and never returns. After seeking Merlin's advice, both her older brothers set
[257 ]
out after her, but they too disappear. It is the youngest son Childe Roland who
obeys Merlin's instructions to cut off the heads of all he meets in Elfland, to eat
nothing while he is there (shades of Hades), and to overcome the king of the
Dark Tower. 
An adventure with ancient motifs, this is smoothly written,
though it could have used some note about the context and source of the tale.
The watercolor illustrations are openly imagined and well composed, with good
drafting and subtle color blends. Perhaps a bit puzzling for preschool picture
book listeners (the three citizens of Elfland whom Childe Roland decapitates
seem such innocent victims), this would be valuable for children studying hero
journeys in folklore. BH
D.V. Courage
Marzollo, Jean. Getting Your Period: A Book About Menstruation; illus. by
Kent Williams. Dial, 1989. Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0355-4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-
8037-0356-2. 99p. Trade ed. $13.95; Paper ed. $6.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Easy to read and understand, this recognizes the fact
that a normal biological function signifies a complex rite of passage. In a direct,
unpatronizing tone, Marzolo combines information on menstruation with
quotations that show a reassuring range of reactions from girls who tell about
their own concerns and experiences. Chapters are informally arranged around
getting a period for the first time, changes during puberty, the function and
stages of the menstrual cycle, taking care of yourself during your period, a
question-and-answer section, other people and how they see you. Common
physical and emotional symptoms are the emphasis here, but there are brief
factual references to PMS, toxic shock syndrome, and sexually transmitted
diseases (including AIDS). Introduced by an OB-GYN and illustrated with clear
black-and-white anatomical drawings and diagrams, Marzollo's book should
become a standard hand-out. BH
C.U. Health and hygiene; Physiology
Matsuoka, Kyoko. There's a Hippo in My Bath!; illus. by Akiko Hayashi.
Doubleday, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-385-26189-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-
26188-8. 40p. Library ed. $12.95; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
A little boy's bath with Duckie turns out to be more
fun than either of them anticipated when the bathroom turns into a menagerie.
Duckie takes a dive and discovers a turtle on the bottom; the turtle points out
two penguins over in the corer; what seems to be a large rock turns out to be a
bubble-blowing seal .... 
The story has a cause-and-effect pattern that lends
propulsion to an agreeable ending-all the animals disappear under water when
Mother comes in with a nice warm towel. The yellow-washed illustrations glow
with bathtub steam, the silky skins of the little boy and his improbable sauna
mates have a just-scrubbed shine. A friendly fantasy, and mother doesn't even
scold about water on the floor. RS
D.V. Imaginative powers
[ 258 ]
Mayer, Marianna, ad. The Twelve Dancing Princesses; illus. by K. Y. Craft.
Morrow, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-02026-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08051-
0. 40p. Library ed. $14.88; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
This fairy tale is probably best known from the
Grimms' version, which Mayer has embellished with some romantic changes.
The seasoned sailor has become a golden-haired gardener named Peter, and his
cloak of invisibility a flower. The old woman who advises him on the road has
become a queenly apparition. He prefers the youngest princess, called Elise,
rather than the eldest and risks enchantment rather than betray her, where the
Grimm hero wins his reward by revealing the princesses' secret to the king. The
princes whose heads were cut off in Grimm are here merely held captive in the
underground world until Peter's love for Elise releases them. If Mayer's
elaboration is elegant, Craft's art is almost overwhelming. While each border,
illuminated letter, panel, and full-page illustration is shimmering, the total effect
is one of baroque decoration. Faces are unfailingly pretty, scenes idyllic, and
designs highly patterned. What's missing here are the rough edges that heighten
beauty by their very contrast. Although the bookmaking is lavish and the detail
entrancing, the tone sometimes tips the balance from sophisticated to flowery.
BH
Merriam, Eve. Where Is Everybody? An Animal Alphabet; illus. by Diane de
Groat. Simon, 1989. ISBN 0-671-64964-7. 32p. $12.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
This lively picture book will serve more as a game
for children who are learning to read and spell than for preschoolers working on
the alphabet. Each page is dominated by an animal whose name begins with the
same letter as the room in which he or she appears. Alligator is in the attic,
bear is in the bakery, cat is at the computer, dog is at the daycare center, etc., all
observed by a mole clicking photos with his candid camera. In every full-page
spread is an attractive assortment of things that begin with the same letter, and
children can try to find them all, though they're not listed at the end. The
illustrator has gone out of her way to plant some tricky objects: in kangaroo's
kitchen, for instance, a bottle of catsup, a head of cabbage, and a bunch of carrots
are displayed prominently beside some keys and a kettle. Other tough guesses
on the same page include a bowl of what appears to be either kidney beans or
cashew nuts. 
The page design allows enough white framing around the
illustrations to keep them from appearing cluttered, and the art itself is cleverly
drafted and freshly colored. BH
C.U. Language arts
Michels, Tilde. At the Frog Pond; tr. from the German by Nina Ignatowicz;
illus. by Reinhard Michl. Lippincott, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-32315-8;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32314-X. 32p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
M 
Gr. K-2. 
"Did you ever wonder how a tadpole turns into a
frog?" this begins, but the answer a few pages later is confusing. "Frogs swim
to the surface [where have they been?] and mate. Wobbly clusters of frog eggs
drift to the pond's banks where they hatch into thousands of tadpoles." Well,
yes, this all happens, but not at once, which is the impression given by both
[259 ]
text and illustration. This is a cleanly designed and very pretty book, with
delicate watercolors of the pond and its flora, fauna and weather, all accurately if
somehow romantically depicted. But like the picture of the frog cycle, some of
the paintings include too much, are underexplained in the text (what are those
bubbles on the frogs' ears?) or contradict the text (for example, a "wading" heron
who is pictured standing on a tree stump). Perhaps it is perverse to be so literal
about what is meant to be an evocative portrait of life at a pond, but nagging
questions and abrupt transitions tend to break the spell. RS
C.U. Nature study
Miller, Jane. Farm Noises; written and illus. with photographs by Jane Miller.
Simon, 1989. ISBN 0-671-67450-1. 26p. $8.95.
R 
6-18 mos. 
Like Miller's Farm Counting Book (BCCB 10/83),
this is a clear photographic concept book that does exactly what it sets out to do.
Each page features an animal in living color and characteristic pose, with a few
words to indicate the sounds they make. "Roosters crow: cock-a-doodle-do ...
Hens cluck. Chicks cheep, etc." Parents or child care workers can dramatize the
noises as much as they like, make a game out of identifying the animals,
introduce a discussion of farm life ("tractors go brum-brum"), or storytell a
nature walk ("streams gurgle"). The book could even serve beginning readers
who need more picture than print. Well designed, simple, and satisfying. BH
Milton, Joyce. Whales: The Gentle Giants; illus. by Alton Langford. Random
House, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99809-X; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-89809-5.
48p. (Step into Reading). Library ed. $6.99; Paper ed. $2.95.
R 
K-3. 
Illustrated with appropriately scaled dramatic portraits
that dive across double-page spreads, this easy-reader treatment of a popular
subject leaps with appeal. Milton understands what kids like about whales
("some whales are as big as small islands") and packs a considerable amount of
information into the constraints of the format, covering the various kinds of
whales and their birth, feeding, migration, and communication. The book closes
with a brief section on historical and environmental concerns, and invites readers
to try whale-watching. "Whales seem to like watching people, too." RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Montgomery, Michael. 
'Night, America; written and illus. by Michael
Montgomery. 
Calico/Contemporary, 1989. 
ISBN 0-8092-4397-0. 
19p.
$11.95.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
Daddies, especially, might appreciate this offbeat
bedtime book that bids goodnight to various American institutions such as
prairies, cowboys, astronauts, the Chicago Cubs, and the President ("'Night, Mr.
President"). 
These brief blessings accompany paintings-dramatic in a
picturesque kind of way-of the monuments at rest: Mr. President with his toy
soldiers left on the floor; the Cubs, whose bats and mitts get tiny beds of their
own. The last picture shows a little boy fast asleep, surrounded by toys that
recall the previous paintings. Saved from sentimentality by its barely ironic
[260]
offhandedness ("'Night, Redwoods"), and saved from yuppie slickness by its
warmth, this makes the Big and Important seem mighty cozy. RS
Murrow, Liza Ketchum. Fire in the Heart. Holiday House, 1989. ISBN 0-
8234-0750-0. 255p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Fourteen, Molly is baffled by the fact that her father
will tell her almost nothing about her mother's death ten years before. After
seeing a letter addressed to Dad and prying out a few clues from an elderly
relative, Molly sees some pictures and makes a contact in the California town
where her mother had been killed in a road accident. With the help of her
stepmother, Blair, Molly goes west to investigate the accident and to find
evidence that Mom was tracing her ancestors and looking for a buried gold
nugget from Gold Rush days. The ancestors (characters in an earlier Murrow
book, West against the Wind) having given clear directions in old letters, Molly
and Blair, with the help of a newly-acquired boyfriend, find the buried treasure.
Although some of the clues, solutions, and other plot details are a bit too
convenient, the sum of the parts is believable, and the combination of suspense,
buried treasure, good pace, and satisfactory working-out of small
misunderstandings among the characters make a strong, readable story. ZS
D.V. Stepparent-child relations
Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds. Alice in Rapture, Sort of. Atheneum, 1989. ISBN
0-689-31466-3. 166p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Fans of The Agony of Alice will stand in line for this
sequel about Alice's dating Patrick during the summer before they start junior
high school. The dynamics between Alice and her two best girlfriends, Alice's
yearning for her dead mother to help with the ordinary and extraordinary
problems of growing up, and her invididualistic approach to dating are smoothly
blended into a funny, sometimes poignant narrative. Some questions are quickly
resolved ("How was I supposed to eat and hold a rose at the same time?").
Others, such as working out a relationship with boys, take longer ("It was
comforting in a way to know that I didn't have to squeeze it all into a single
summer or all into seventh grade or even do it all in high school"). Naylor has
as natural a voice for preadolescent romance from the girl's perspective as Betsy
Byars has from the boy's in Bingo Brown and the Language of Love, reviewed
above. The two make perfect companions for booktalking. BH
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Osborne, Mary Pope, ad. Favorite Greek Myths; illus. by Troy Howell.
Scholastic, 1989. ISBN 0-590-41338-4. 81p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Retelling Greek myths for children is an ambitious
undertaking that puts the author in competition with the likes of Padraic Colum,
Olivia Coolidge, and Leon Garfield. This is a lavish edition with twelve stories,
almost all of which derive from Ovid's Metamorphoses: Phaeton and Helios,
Bacchus and King Midas, Ceyx and Alcyone, Minerva and Arachne, Apollo and
Daphne, Echo and Narcissus, Ceres and Proserpine, Callisto and Arcus, Orpheus
and Eurydice, Atalanta and Hippomenes, Cupid and Psyche, and Baucis and
[261 ]
Philemon. Although the adaptation does not have the stylistic distinction of
some of its predecessors, Osborne's mix of narrative and dialogue makes for an
informal tone that will disarm readers unfamilar with the tales. The bookmaking
is thoughtful, with striking, full-page paintings introducing the stories and pen
sketches concluding them. 
A guide to "Gods, Goddesses and Mortals," a
glossary of "Moder 
Words with Greek Origins," a note on "Who Wrote the
Greek Myths," a brief bibliography, and an index add to the attractive format.
BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. 
Where the Wild Horses Roam; illus. with
photographs by William Mufloz. Clarion, 1989. ISBN 0-89919-507-5. 72p.
$15.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
While there is adequate background here on the
characteristics of wild horses and their herd structure, the real emphasis is on
protecting them without over-grazing the environment in which they reproduce
so prolifically. Patent is objective in presenting arguments by ranchers, who
say the horses threaten their livestock, and organizations (listed, with addresses,
at the end of the book) that work against destruction of the animals. The
handsome color photographs, including stunning western landscapes, will hook
horse lovers, and the indexed text provides students with smoothly written
information for reports. BH
Peet, Bill. Bill Peet: An Autobiography; written and illus. by Bill Peet.
Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-50932-7. 190p. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
At a time when it seems that too many illustrators
don't draw very well, it's refreshing to have this album full of expert cartooning.
Bill Peet's reminiscences of his childhood and career as an artist are accompanied
by dozens of drawings, scenes both from his work and from his life. The textual
tone is observant rather than nostalgic, and Peet is candid about his difficult
childhood with a neglectful father, and about the ups and downs of his tenure at
the Disney studios and relationship with the autocratic Walt. While almost all
of the drawings are new with this book, Peet recreates many of his sketches for
101 Dalmatians, The Sword in the Stone, and The Jungle Book, revealing his
mastery of humorous movement, an animated quality that served him well in his
second career as an illustrator. The writing here isn't as strong as the pictures
and the book is too long, but Peet's many fans will enjoy this generous self-
assessment. RS
Plantos, Ted. Heather Hits Her First Home Run; illus. by Heather Collins.
Black Moss/Firefly, 1989. ISBN 0-88753-185-7. 22p. $4.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
It is Heather's first year of playing Tee-ball, and she
yearns to get a hit, especially because there are two out, with the bases filled,
when she comes to bat. Angry at the jeering calls after several strikes, Heather
takes a mighty whack. She's out at home plate, but she does bring in three
runs; although the read-aloud audience may wonder why the "home run" of the
title, the story ends with the coach saying, "As far as I'm concerned, it was a
[ 262 ]
home run!" Slight, but probably a satisfaction to beginning baseball players of
either sex, this is adequately written and is illustrated with bright line-and-crayon
drawings that are somewhat like the work of Paul Galdone. Staple binding. ZS
Reading, J. P. The Summer of Sassy Jo. Houghton, 1989. 
ISBN 0-395-
48950-4. 182p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
"Sassy Jo" was what her mother, Joleen, had called
her when Sara Jo was a baby. An alcoholic, Joleen had left when Sara Jo was
five; now, some years after her father's death, Sara Jo is leaving the aunt who
has taken care of her and is spending the summer with Joleen (who no longer
drinks) and Joleen's second husband and their two-year-old, Lily. This is a rite-
of-passage book as Sara Jo, the narrator, has her first menstrual period, becomes
interested in clothes, and falls sweetly in love. It is also a perspicacious
exploration of the often painful development of a reciprocated affection between
mother and daughter as Sara Jo works through years of anger and resentment at
Joleen, only gradually admitting to the latter and to herself how much she wants
her mother's love. The two facets of Sara Jo's summer are nicely balanced,
lightened by some humor in the relationship between Sara Jo and the younger
girl who lives next door, and given conviction both by the immediacy of the
narrator's point of view, and by the gradual pace of the changes in an
emotionally complex situation. ZS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations; Stepparent-child relations
Rice, Eve. Peter's Pockets; illus. by Nancy Winslow Parker. Greenwillow,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07242-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07241-0. 32p.
Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
As every boy, girl, man, and woman knows, clothing
with no pockets can be a grim fate when there are so many tempting tidbits to
pick up. Moreover we take pockets for granted and very often don't value them
till feeling around for them and finding them not there. That's what happens to
Peter when his mother fits him with new pants just in time for a walk with
Uncle Nick. Fortunately, Uncle Nick has pockets aplenty for the feather,
marble, ribbons, nickel, button, and ball that Peter collects, and Peter's mother
has just the solution-she sews bright new patchwork pockets up and down the
legs of his new pants. "No pockets? Who ever heard of such a thing!" Parker's
sturdy, rounded shapes and colored-pencil shading conserve the simplicity of
Rice's story, which characteristically-and successfully-portrays the world
from a young child's viewpoint. BH
D.V. Ingenuity
Sharmat, Marjorie. The Pizza Monster; by Marjorie and Mitchell Sharmat;
illus. by Denise Brunkus. Delacorte, 1989. 
ISBN 0-385-29722-X. 
45p.
(Olivia Sharp: Agent for Secrets). $12.95.
M 
Gr. 1-3. 
Like Eloise, Olivia Sharp has it all. A penthouse
apartment, three telephones, a pet owl, a chauffeur and limo, and her folks are in
Paris. But she's bored and lonely, and so sets out on a career as an ace problem-
solver, starting out with depressed Duncan, who's lost his best friend Desiree.
[263 ]
Beginning readers may enjoy the contrived (and superfluous) extravagance, and
the solution to the problem has a wry twist, but the wisecracking humor tries
too hard, and much of the detail (like the owl) is irrelevant. While pen sketches
have an appropriately satiric edge, the picture book size and format will
discourage those old enough to get the jokes. RS
Shusterman, Neal. Dissidents. Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-78904-6. 
183p.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
"Dissident" is a fancy name for how 15-year-old
Derek sees himself-left out, contrary, "obnoxious"-but it's an appropriate
name, given his lonely life as the son of the American ambassador in Moscow.
Derek went to Moscow after his father was killed in a car accident, and he is
convinced (rightly) that his mother, who didn't even come to her ex-husband's
funeral, doesn't really want him around. The novel explores serious family
concerns via an almost flip tone that, rather than trivializing, enhances the
feeling of desperation that lies just beneath Derek's outrageous rebellions, like
playing a little one-on-one with a statue of Lenin in a Soviet park. Derek's
dissidence gets a fierce test when he becomes involved with Anna, the daughter
of a real Soviet dissident who has been exiled to Romania. Anna wants to join
her father, and Derek believes he is the one to help her. Both emotional and
narrative tension are well-maintained throughout the story, and although the
climax tips over into contrived melodrama, it is resolved by a nicely ironic fillip
delivered by the General Secretary himself. While readers won't feel they know
Anna well enough to understand Derek's passion for her, and his sister (a brat)
and mother (Iron Lady) are two-dimensional, Derek's own pain and longing for
his father are powerfully realized. As he also demonstrated in last year's The
Shadow Club (BCCB 5/88), Shusterman is a strong storyteller and a significant
new voice in YA fiction. RS
D.V. Parent-child relations
Sowden, Harry, illus. The Grand Old Duke of York; illus. by Harry Sowden.
Gollancz/David & Charles, 1989. ISBN 0-575-04081-5. 20p. $6.95.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
Like so many books for toddlers, this spiral-bound
volume with laminated pages poses creative questions for the library processing
department; for example, where to put the date due slip. However, those
questions are well worth answering for this strikingly simple edition of the Duke
of York, whose men were down when they were down, up when they were up,
"and when they were only half-way up, they were neither up nor down." Sowden
illustrates the brief rhyme with bright, imaginatively patterned photographs of
wooden soldiers he made for his own children. While all the soldiers are
constructed in the same vaguely clothespin-like shape, each one is decorated
with ersatz military regalia of stars, stripes, flags, cigar rings and the occasional
moustache. The Duke himself is graced with a monocle. Young children will
enjoy finding the differences, and those with more patience than this reviewer
will also enjoy spying out those instances where the photographer has placed the
same soldier twice in the same picture. Get a couple of bags of wooden
[264 ]
clothespins, some shiny paint, and various glueable odd bits and you'll be in
business. RS
Thayer, Bonita E. Emily Dickinson. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10658-6.
144p. illus. with photographs. $12.90.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Certainly one of the most complex and mysterious
subjects in American literature, Emily Dickinson is a challenging choice for any
biographer. There's evidence of research here, but it has not been digested to the
point of a consistently organized presentation. This is especially evident in
transitions from one paragraph to the next: a leap, for instance, from Emily's
winning a bread-baking prize at a cattle show to her becoming a charter
subscriber to the Atlantic Monthly, from her romantic interest in Charles
Wadsworth to her father's scorn for Abraham Lincoln, from a discussion of
bustles to the death of Helen Fiske Hunt's son Warren. To her credit, Thayer
develops the theme of tension between a woman's traditional role and
Dickinson's genius, though most of the discussion of her poetry is confined to
quotations in the last chapter. What students will find here is a substantial
amount of information, indexed if slightly disorganized, along with black-and-
white photographs of Dickinson's family and contemporaries. There's also a
bibliography of adult books for further reading. BH
C.U. Literature-poetry
Trevino, Elizabeth Borton de. El Giero: A True Adventure Story; illus. by
Leslie W. Bowman. Farrar, 1989. ISBN 0-374-31995-2. 
[112p]. $12.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Loyal to the elected Mexican government of Lerdo de
Tejada, Judge Cayetano Trevifio was sent into exile in Baja California when
Lerdo was deposed by a military coup. The judge, with his daughter and son (the
"El Gliero" of the title, who was the author's father-in-law) and their wife and
aunt, work to build a home in the then-desolate outpost of Ensenada. The judge
also tries to establish a system of justice, but is foiled by the military
commander, who eventually puts Treviflo in jail. It is the son who, with the
help of two friends, reaches the commandante of Baja California after a dangerous
trek, a mission that results in his father's release and in the arrest of the power-
hungry, evil Captain Alanis. The story, based in part on fact, is capably told
and gives a good picture of the rough frontier of the late nineteenth century, and
of the relations between missionary fathers and some of the Native American
tribes of the lower peninsula. Family figures are seen kindly, but not to excess.
ZS
C.U. History-Mexico; Social studies
D.V. Courage
Weiss, Ellen. The Tiny Parents; by Ellen Weiss and Mel Friedman. Knopf,
1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-92418-5; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-82418-0. 82p.
Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $2.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Can Eddie and Marie save their mother and father?
Parents Norton and Marigold are a pair of argumentative, hapless inventors, and
[265 ]
the fights don't stop when they manage, via their Proton Enlarger, to shrink
themselves to the size of two-and-a-half inches tall. Most kids love to see
parents put into precarious positions via their own stupidity, and the silly but
forced story should provoke some easy laughs. With an appealing-if-perennial
premise and attractive paperback format, this could be fun to use around science
fair time. RS
Worthy, Judith. Eyes; illus. by B6ba Hall. Doubleday, 1989. Library ed. ISBN
0-385-24966-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-24965-9. 30p. Library ed. $9.95; Trade
ed. $9.95.
NR 
Gr. 2-3. 
Detailed, textured pictures of animals, overwhelmed
by busy backgrounds and a crowded page design, illustrate a series of jingly
rhymes that are seldom informative, possibly misleading in some cases, and
almost always too cute. Examples: "The elephant/ is huge and wise/ With lots
of secrets/ in its eyes," or "This dog has eyes/ that seem to say/ 'Come on!
Hurry up!/ I want to play."' ZS
Zaslavsky, Claudia. Zero: Is It Something? Is It Nothing?; illus. by Jeni
Bassett. Watts, 1989. ISBN 0-531-10693-4. 
32p. (Discovering Science).
$12.90.
NR 
Gr. K-2. 
No doubt about it, zero is a tricky number, and a
fascinating one for the younger children for whom this book seems to be
intended. Unfortunately, the book is both over-ambitious and underexplained.
Beginning with the concept that zero can mean "NONE AT ALL," the idea of
zero meaning "SOMETHING," as for example, its place in the numbers twenty
or one hundred, is then introduced but not explained beyond the statement that
"these zeros mean something." Then comes estimation and round numbers, but
the assertion that "numbers that end in zero are often called round numbers" is
backwards: round numbers usually end in zero. The distinction between the
letter O and zero is a good one; the paper odometer project is fun but pointless,
given the lack of explanation of zero as a placeholder; the sequence on other
names for zero begins reasonably but becomes ludicrous: "In tennis, LOVE is
another name for ZERO. 
LOVE sounds like the French word L'OEUF,
pronounced LUF. It means THE EGG. A zero looks like an egg." Zero
gravity, arithmetical operations, tic-tac-toe, and un-American temperature-taking
("Water turns to ice when the temperature is just ZERO") are all touched upon;
some riddles are included. A smattering of concepts that doesn't add up to much.
RS
C.U. 
Arithmetic; Counting