Aardema, Verna, ad. Borreguita and the Coyote: A Tale from Ayutla, Mexico;
illus. by Petra Mathers. Knopf, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90921-4; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-679-80921-X. 32p. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $15.00.
R* 
4-6 yrs. 
Flat, surrealistic landscapes dramatized by the intense
hues of a southwestern springtime form stagedrops for this Mexican tale in
which a little lamb, Borreguita, fools hungry Coyote three times. When she has
finally exhausted all her possibilities of escape, Borreguita charges into the very
jaws of death--"BAM!" It's a stunning double spread of curly white lamb
hurtling toward furry gray Coyote against a background of gut red (picture some
strategically placed teeth and a lolling tongue in there, as well). "Ow!" howls
the defeated coyote with a lamb-size toothache. Mathers' compositions are
deceptively simple; what lends them depth are the subtle watercolor textures and
sly changes of expression that energize each painting. Even the pictographic
endpapers show a witty command of narrative design. Here's a picture book that
will hold young listeners' attention with traditional suspense while opening their
eyes to new shapes and surprising contrasts. BH
Aleichem, Sholom. Around the Table: Family Stories of Sholom Aleichem;
selected and tr. from the Yiddish by Aliza Shevrin; illus. by Toby Gowing.
Scribner's, 1991. ISBN 0-684-19237-3. 84p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
This companion to an earlier volume, Holiday Tales
of Sholom Aleichem, includes five family stories set during Purim, Hanukkah,
Pesach, and Shabbat. Shevrin's thoughtful introduction mentions some of the
problems raised in translating from Yiddish to English, while a glossary offers
definitions of traditional terms. Like all of Sholom Aleichem's stories, these
tales may take oddly humorous or suddenly tragic turns: an ancestral clock
chimes 13 times and dies; a charismatic visitor steals away one night with the
household silver and jewelry (and maid); a man celebrates his family with a
string of complaints. This last story, a middle-aged monologue, is the first in
the book and probably the least immediate to junior high school or elementary
students in its ironic subtext (a rather young-looking cover may keep the book
from circulating in a high school library). 
The other tales, narrated by
[83]
youngsters with a sharp eye for observing the behavior of their quirky relatives,
are poignantly vivid and sonorously voiced. While the book is of special
interest to Jewish readers, it will also prove a rich addition to general short story
collections. BH
C.U. Holidays
Bach, Alice. Miriam's Well: Stories about Women in the Bible; by Alice Bach
and J. Cheryl Exum; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-
385-30435-8. 171p. $16.00.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Where the authors' previous collaboration, Moses'
Ark (BCCB 1/90), concentrates on the best-known-and, not incidentally,
male-Biblical heroes, this one focuses on women, whose primary achievement
is often giving birth to sons continuing a lineage of male leaders. Thus the
central conflict may be barrenness, and the resolution a miraculous pregnancy, as
in the stories of Sarah, Rebekah, Rachel, and Hanna. Other women achieve
stature through their wisdom or righteousness-Miriam, Ruth, and Abigail, for
instance. Few represent physical or military heroism, so it will seem odd that
the stories of Jael and Deborah are omitted here, unless readers are aware of their
appearance in the companion volume. Both names are mentioned in the notes
appended to the tale of Judith and again briefly in a final section that gives voice
to several women who appear fleetingly or anonymously in the Bible (Job's
wife, Huldah the Prophet, etc.). Students already familiar with the Bible will get
the most from these narratives, which sometimes jump backward or forward in
time (from Isaac's weaning back to Hagar's pregnancy with Ishmael, for
instance, and from Ishmael's survival in the wilderness to Isaac's old age). It is
those students, too, who will best appreciate the scholarship reflected in the
notes and who will bring perspective to the theological nuances of
fictionalization. The blending of fact and fiction is smoother here than in the
last volume, and the overall tone more low-key. 
An introduction adds
background, and a bibliography suggests adult books for further reading or
research. The Dillons' frontispiece and small sepia illustrations are tastefully
spare but decorative. BH
C.U. Religious education
D.V. Sex roles
Blumberg, Rhoda. The Remarkable Voyages of Captain Cook. Bradbury, 1991.
ISBN 0-02-711682-4. 
[160p]. illus. with photographs. $18.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
While the jacket flap quotes Blumberg's identification
of herself as a "compulsive researcher," she is unusual as such; most compulsive
researchers can't bear to omit any disinterred fact. What Rhoda Blumberg does is
weave pertinent facts into trenchant narrative, never padding or overextending,
and supplying not only chapter notes but also bibliographies of primary and of
secondary sources. Her tone is admiring, recognizing Cook's achievements but
acknowledging his frailties. The book lets the drama of Cook's voyages emerge
in the telling, and its focus-what Cook did and why his discoveries were
important-is clear. A spacious format and a liberal use of historical prints add
to the book's accessibility and appeal. ZS
D.V. Courage; Perseverance
[84]
Bosca, Francesca. 
Caspar and the Star; tr. by Philip Hawthorn; illus. by
Giuliano Ferri. Lion, 1991. ISBN 0-7459-2120-5. 34p. $12.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
A picture book from Italy tells the story of the
Nativity from the point of view of Caspar, one of the Three Wise Men, who,
after years of study and waiting, finally sees the sign he has been looking for:
"It's here! It's come! At last the star has arrived!" Knowing the star heralds the
birth of a "very special baby," he follows it (along the way encountering two
other babies as well as Melchior and Balthazar) to Jerusalem and Herod, and to
Bethlehem and the baby. Caspar's initial encounters with the wrong babies, and
the fact that the star periodically "stops," adds a merry-chase aspect to the story
that detracts from the focus of Caspar's quest. Herod's colloquialisms ("Invite
these strangers to the palace. I'd like a little chat with them") are jarring, and the
question of whether or not the Wise Men tell Herod about the baby is left
unanswered. However, the rounded, warm-toned paintings are cozy and humble,
a welcome relief from Christmas glitz, and the book as a whole has a homely
feeling that brings the miracle down to earth. RS
C.U. 
Christmas
Bradshaw, Gillian. The Dragon and the Thief. Greenwillow, 1991. ISBN 0-
688-10575-0. 154p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
The gods frown on Prahotep-at least that's what
everyone has told him ever since his difficult birth. Bad luck really does seem to
follow him at every trade he tries. In desperation he turns to thievery, and he's
not even very good at that. His luck begins to turn, however, when he makes
two friends-a deserter from the king's army and Hathor, the only dragon left in
ancient Egypt. The three friends buy a boat and head to Nubia to look for other
dragons. The rest of the story is a great chase down the Nile-a powerful priest
and wizard is after them so he can kill Hathor and become immortal by bathing
in her blood. Prahotep is clearly the hero, even though he finds his talents lie in
con artistry, and there is no doubt that the priest/villain is truly evil. The exotic
setting, magic, and fast pace will keep readers interested in an uncomplicated plot
that inspires cheers at the last encounter of the good guys and bad guys. KPJ
Chekhov, Anton. Kashtanka; tr. by Richard Pevear; illus. by Barry Moser.
Putnam, 1991. ISBN 0-399-21905-6. 48p. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Smoothly translated, a Russian classic is handsomely
illustrated by Moser's simply composed yet dramatic paintings. The story is
basically a standard plot of separation/reunion, but a simple plot in the hands of
a fine writer can, the story shows, make a strong impact. Kashtanka is lost
when her master, a cabinetmaker, is too befuddled by drink to retrieve her when
she crosses a street. Most of the story, to the delight of generations of children,
has to do with the household (a clown who has a trained animal act) into which
Kashtanka is taken. In the last sequence, the dog is used for the first time in the
circus act and hears the voice of her master's son. Few readers will object to the
fact that the story, told from the dog's point of view, contains some
anthropomorphism. ZS
[ 85]
Cole, Brock. Alpha and the Dirty Baby; Spanish ed. tr. by T. Gottlieb; written
and illus. by Brock Cole. Farrar, 1991. ISBN 0-374-30241-3; Spanish ed. 0-
374-30242-1. 32p. $14.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
In an old-fashioned kitchen, Alpha's parents quarrel
over the laundry, which causes Papa to storm off and swear to join the navy.
"The devil take me if I won't." So, of course, the Devil-or a devil's imp-
does take him, squeezing him into a lump of coal and assuming his appearance,
while the imp's wife squeezes Mama into a green egg, disguises itself to look
like her, and tries to foist a dirty imp baby on Alpha. But Alpha's no fool.
Like the heroine of Outside Over There, she beats the mischievous intruders at
their own game, cleaning what they've trashed and recovering her real parents
from the imps' spell. Cole's exuberant lines and pastel shades of watercolor
project some jubilant messiness, with chicken feathers, colored soap bubbles,
and red imps' hair flying at every angle. There's a loose joint or two in the
story (the imp's appearance to Mama is a bit arbitrary, since her words don't
contain the traditional invocation of Papa's), but the fun of seeing adults goof up
and of watching their child save the day holds sway. BH
D.V. Self-reliance
Cole, Joanna, comp. The Scary Book; comp. by Joanna Cole and Stephanie
Calmenson. Morrow, 1991. ISBN 0-688-10654-4. 128p. illus. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Divided into sections of stories, poems, activities,
and jokes, this is an attractive, not-too-spooky anthology for new readers. Some
of the selections, such as Joanna Cole's "Bony-Legs" and Arnold Lobel's
"Strange Bumps" are reprinted with the black-and-white illustrations (Dirk
Zimmer and Arnold Lobel, respectively) of their original editions; others, such
as Calmenson's colloquial retelling of "Taily-po," are illustrated with mildly
funny cartoons by Chris Demerast. The poems include favorites by, among
others, cummings, Ciardi, Livingston, and Unknown ("It isn't the cough/ That
carries you off;/ It's the coffin/ They carry you off in"); activities include tricks,
games, and tongue twisters ("Spooks scoop soup"); the jokes are real third-grade
("Monster child: Mommy, mommy, I hate my teacher's guts! Monster mother:
Then leave them on the side of your plate"). Many "scary books" are too hard
for the audience who appreciates them most; this one is perfectly gauged, and a
good lead-in to Schwartz's more sophisticated Scary Stories collections; see
review below. RS
C.U. Halloween; Reading, beginning
Croll, Carolyn, ad. The Three Brothers; ad. and illus. by Carolyn Croll.
Whitebird/Putnam, 1991. ISBN 0-399-22195-6. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Carolyn Croll has adapted a German youngest-is-
smartest folktale, moving it to Pennsylvania and employing Pennsylvania Dutch
folk-art style and motifs in the illustrations. The story is simple: an old farmer
decides to leave his farm to whichever of his three sons can fill the barn fullest
by the end of the day. Eldest son Gideon fills the barn with livestock and second
son Simon fills it even fuller with hay, but underestimated youngest son Amos
fills it fullest of all-with light from a candle (the cutaway views of the barn
interior may need some explanation). The illustrations are flat and stylized
without being ornate, which makes them cheerfully appropriate to the villainless
tale (as winner, Amos suggests the three sons share the farm). Although more
[ 86]
School of Tomie de Paola than Pennsylvania Dutch, the pictures have some
vivid color contrasts, and not only in the quilts hanging on the clothesline: the
dark and light views of the barn are evocative studies in black, lilac, and yellow,
and the verdant farmland is populated by rich-hued, cozily round animals,
including some appealingly dorky cows, that are likely to charm junior Amoses
longing for an agricultural opportunity. DS
D.V. Brothers
Crutcher, Chris. Athletic Shorts: Six Short Stories. Greenwillow, 1991.
ISBN 0-688-10816-4. 154p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
At his best, as he is in the first story in this
collection, "A Brief Moment in the Life of Angus Bethune," Chris Crutcher is a
nervy, energetic storyteller, not afraid to write a story about gay people-fat gay
people-that is both real and funny. That story first appeared in Gallo's
collection Connections, reviewed in the 12/89 issue; the other five stories here
are new, and are based on protagonists and secondary characters from Crutcher's
previous YA novels. "The Pin," about a father-son wrestling bout, is also
vintage, tough-but-tender Crutcher, but the other stories are panderingly didactic
about good kids who discover how good they are, and each gives the reader (this
reader, anyway) the disconcerting sense of being patted on the back just for
reading it. Crutcher's introductory notes to the collection and stories are
unnecessary and exacerbate the self-congratulatory tone. On the other hand, kids
are often a lot more susceptible to sentimental fiction than we give them credit
for, and Crutcher fans will enjoy these stories as a way to mark time until the
next novel. RS
Cuyler, Margery. That's Good! That's Bad!; illus. by David Catrow. Holt,
1991. ISBN 0-8050-1535-3. 32p. $15.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Kids will enjoy the push-me-pull-me tension of this
story about a little boy who is hoisted aloft by a balloon and taken on a perilous
tour of the jungle. Each hair-raising escape (from, say, a snake) is accompanied
by a relieved response ("Oh, that's good") which is immediately reversed ("No,
that's bad") when the little boy encounters more trouble (as when he escapes
from the snake, falls onto the back of a giraffe, and then falls into quicksand...
and is picked up by an elephant.. .who drops him at the feet of a lion ... Get
the picture?). The structure of the story, lots of sound effects ("SLOP!") and a
large format make for great audience participation material, and the line-and-
watercolor illustrations are disaster humor at its finest. Although kids will cheer
his pratfalls, it's hard not to feel sorry for the hapless little boy, and listeners
will be relieved that he's eventually brought back to his parents ... by a stork.
RS
C.U. Reading aloud
Ferris, Jeri. Native American Doctor: The Story of Susan LaFlesche Picotte.
Carolrhoda, 1991. ISBN 0-887614-443-1. 
[88p.] illus. with photographs.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
In 1889, Susan LaFlesche Picotte became the first
Native American woman to achieve a medical degree. Growing up as one of four
accomplished daughters of the Omaha chief, Picotte eventually left the Nebraska
reservation for an education in the East, including a stint at the primarily black
[87]
Hampton Institute, and finally receiving her degree from the Women's Medical
College in Philadelphia. Her life as a doctor on the Omaha Reservation is an
impressive record not only of arduous medical service, but also of labor as an
activist and spokeswoman for Native Americans. In 1913, two years before her
death, Picotte finally realized her dream of a hospital for Indians, which was built
in Walthill, Nebraska. Well-organized and adequately written, Ferris' text
provides a comprehensive list of sources and an index. Reproductions of old
photographs and period prints add interest. ZS
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Fisher, Leonard Everett, ad. Cyclops; ad. and illus. by Leonard Everett Fisher.
Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-0891-4. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Fisher has created a worthy successor for his Theseus
and the Minotaur (BCCB 10/88) in this picture book version of Odysseus' most
fearsome exploit, the defeat of the Cyclops Polyphemus. After a list of sources
and a brief introduction, both superimposed on a map of the Aegean area, the
story opens with several dramatic seascapes as the Greeks sail away from
burning Troy and encounter a storm sent by the angry gods. Polyphemus, with
his one green eye rolling around a vast forehead, is one of the scariest looking
giants in picture book history; Fisher has always been at his best with
monumental figures, and he pulls no punches in the scenes of the Cyclops
eating some of Odysseus' men and being blinded by the others before they escape
under the bellies of his sheep. 
Independent readers may not catch on to
Odysseus' trick of saying that his name is Noman (it looks like Norman
misspelled rather than No Man), but listeners will, and they are probably the
best audience for this blunt prose and the simply composed, heroically scaled
paintings. BH
Formichella, Annamaria. 
Tell It Like It Is: Straight Talk about Sex; by
Annamaria Formichella, Susan McIntyre and Marjorie Brant Osterhout;
developed by Sean Gresh. Avon, 1991. Paper ed. ISBN 0-380-75813-X. 226p.
Paper ed. $7.95.
R* 
Gr. 9-. 
Amazingly enough, this candid book delivers what
the title promises. An authors' note explains the method of gathering responses
from people aged approximately 16 to 25; a preface explains the philosophy
behind the book ("People need to learn to communicate verbally and nonverbally
with their peers and their partners... Before you can communicate anything to
your partner, you have to know within yourself what you believe and what you
want"). The rest of the book (divided into three sections, "Before," "During," and
"After") is reports from young people identified by pseudonymous name, age,
and state, intermingled with intelligent, understanding, and lively evaluation and
information from the authors. The stories range from tender (bearing out the
authors' observation that "sex .. . can be a source of joy and emotional
closeness that transcends the physical. It can also be a lot of fun") to funny
("Trusting the person helps a lot, because you have the 'well-if-this-doesn't-
work-we-can-always-play-Monopoly-or-go-canoeing-instead' 
feeling") to
humiliating (one man's lover recorded him imitating a parrot during lovemaking,
then played it at a party). Respondents are male and female, straight and gay,
sexually active and not. Interestingly enough, although respondents of both
sexes report on times they're glad they had sex, times they're sorry they did, and
[ 88]
times they're glad they didn't, nobody mentions a time they regretted saying no.
The range of material covered includes the necessity for birth and disease control
("Which is more awkward to say to a lover: 
'I have a condom' or 'I'm
pregnant'?"), how and when to talk about what you want, the possibility of
unsatisfying, depressing, or embarrassing sexual experiences ("All I really
remember of my worst sexual experience is lying there with him pounding away
at me shouting, 'Dammit, why don't you relax! I couldn't get a toothpick in
there with you so tense!'"), and how past experiences affect current attitudes.
The authors discuss religious considerations and parental response, and their role
in an individual's decision about what is right, stressing over and over again the
importance of making that decision for oneself. What's it like? is an important
question, as is Do other people feel this way? Page 27 of The Godfather really
isn't going to answer that for anybody; by responding to these questions and
supporting readers' right to decide, this book makes them more likely to say yes
or no with intelligence. Appendices on birth control, STDs, abortion, where to
get help, and further reading are included. DS
C.U. Sex education
D.V. Boy-girl relations
French, Vivian. One Ballerina Two; illus. by Jan Ormerod. Lothrop, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10334-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10333-2. 18p. Library
ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
A young girl (looking about ten in the line and wash
pictures) helps a very young girl with her ballet slippers; the older girl is trim in
a leotard, her hair in a tidy bun, while the little one wears a bunchy top and
wrinkled socks. Although the dancers wind down from ten pli6s through "seven
little jumps," and so on to two curtsies and "one happy hug," this is
conceptually too sophisticated to be of much use as a counting book. Text is
minimal, and the book is not very substantial. Ormerod's pictures are, as
always, deft, with the more sophisticated pictures of the older child (wearing red
and black) having captions in bold black, while the pastel awkwardness of the
happy younger child has uneven hand-printed words below. ZS
Gascoigne, Toss, ed. Dream Time; ed. by Toss Gascoigne, Joe Goodman, and
Margot Tyrrell; illus. by Elizabeth Honey. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-
57434-X. 184p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
A collection of sixteen stories by some of Australia's
best known writers for young people is loosely tied by the invitational theme,
"Dream Time." Like similar written-to-order anthologies that have been
produced in the U.S. (Gallo's Connections, for example), this volume rarely
shows its authors-novelists all-at their best. Wrightson's "You Can't Keep a
Unicorn," for example, is a touching reminiscence of a puppy, but it has little of
the power of her fantasy fiction. Christobel Mattingley's "Initiation," about a
young aborigine, is a bit sentimental, and Victor Kelleher also uses an
aboriginal theme to didactic excess. Thurley Fowler's "The Mimics," however,
is a tough and daring story about an aboriginal boy who wants to play tennis
with the white kids. Mary Steele's "Aunt Millicent," about an imaginary
relative who takes on a life of her own, is funny and well-formed; Lee Harding's
"Night of Passage" is eerie science fantasy, as is John Marsden's "The Dreamer."
Ivan Southall's "Not for the Ear of Alice" is self-indulgent and basically
[89]
unreadable. While it's probably better to send readers straight off to the novels,
this collection, with its wide variety of tastes and genres, may serve as an
introduction. RS
Greenberg, Jan. The Painter's Eye: Learning to Look at Contemporary
American Art; by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jordan. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-
385-30319-X. 96p. illus. with photographs. $20.00.
R* 
Gr. 6-12. 
The authors have accomplished several unusual feats
in this introduction to twentieth-century painting. They've managed to present
the technical elements of painting, design, and composition in a friendly I-thou
tone, with explanations grounded on specific observation of generously scaled,
full-color reproductions (handily repeated as needed for discussion). They've also
incorporated quotes from letters and interviews with the artists themselves,
which makes painting seem both a personal and accessible act. Examples from
twenty-two artists representing styles of abstract expressionism, abstraction,
minimalism, pop art, superrealism, op art, and new imagism appear here. In
addition to discussions of the artists' work that serve to substantiate textual
points, a final section includes brief biographies along with names of museums
where their paintings can be seen. A glossary, bibliography, list of books for
further reading, and index add to the usefulness of the book, which is well-
organized enough for researching art students but will also attract browsers. BH
C.U. Art appreciation
Greenberg, Martin H., comp. A Newbery Christmas: Fourteen Stories of
Christmas by Newbery Award-Winning Authors; comp. by Martin H. Greenberg
and Charles Waugh. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-30485-4. 191p. $16.00.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
The editorial selections are broad in reading range,
from Beverly Cleary's "Ramona, the Sheep Suit, and the Three Wise Persons" to
Hugh Lofting's "The Galloping Sleigh," a story with adult vocabulary and
appeal. There is variety of mood and style and an expectably high standard; this
very pleasant anthology includes stories or excerpted characters by a dozen other
Newbery authors, including Eleanor Estes, E. L. Konigsburg, Madeline L'Engle,
and Katherine Paterson. A holiday plum pudding. ZS
C.U. Christmas
Greene, Bette. The Drowning of Stephan Jones. Bantam, 1991. ISBN 0-553-
07437-7. 218p. $16.00.
NR 
Gr. 9-12. 
Carla is "thrilled and surprised" that she's dating
Andy, "handsome Andy with chin high and carrying his very own leather-bound
Bible." But she can't quite reconcile herself to the hatred Andy feels for Stephan
Jones and Frank Montgomery, a gay couple who have opened an antique shop in
a nearby tourist town in the Ozarks. "If I were president, first thing I'd do is to
make death for homosexuality the law," says Andy, who-as readers will know
from the title and some heavy foreshadowing--eventually kills Stephan by
throwing him off a bridge into a river. The topic of intolerance is timely, the
intentions are good, but this novel is by turn melodramatic and message-laden.
Carla's mother is the town librarian, fighting a battle against censorship;
without exception, the other characters are small-town, small-minded, right-wing
fundamentalist bigots who favor speechmaking over conversation. "You gotta
be kidding! Think our Constitution needs help from your mother? Well I don't!
[90]
I fought for our country, risked my life over in Korea-so I ought to know!"
Religion is pictured here as superstition, at best; useless, at worst-as when
Stephan screams (in Latin) for the Virgin Mary's intercession while being tossed
over the bridge. Overwritten ("Frank's laugh was deep and rich and as
contagious as a case of childhood measles") and overwrought ("'Compassion!'
shrieked the minister, his complexion now taking on a bluish-purplish hue.
'There is no compassion for sodomites!"'), this isn't a novel so much as it is a
diatribe. RS
C.U. Social studies
Hahn, Mary Downing. Stepping on the Cracks. Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-395-
58507-4. 216p. $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
Margaret and Elizabeth are good friends, both eleven
and in sixth grade, both with older brothers in the war, both given to shouting
"Step on a crack, break Hitler's back." The time is 1944, the narrator is
Margaret, who is as shy as Elizabeth is bold and fearless; both of them detest the
local bully, Gordy. Like almost everybody they know, the girls are militantly
patriotic. They're delighted when they discover that Gordy is hiding an older
brother, Stuart, who is a deserter-NOW they can get revenge by threatening
exposure! What Hahn does then is to develop convincingly, and at a natural
pace, the awakening in Margaret of a first understanding of what a pacifist feels,
a growing compassion for the plight Stuart is in-especially when he becomes
ill-and a realization that there must be other soldiers who have been drafted and
don't want to kill people. Perhaps even her beloved brother, whose letters have
been so cheerful? The story has historical interest, a strong message, and good
pace. What makes it outstanding is the integrity of the plot and the consistency
of the characterization. There's no neatly sweet ending. Margaret's brother is
killed. Margaret's parents remain bitter in their entrenched contempt for Stuart.
Her mother calls him a deserter and a coward, and tells Margaret that her efforts
to save him by bringing food and medicine were wrong, angrily sending her
daughter to her room and saying "I'm ashamed of you!" Potent stuff. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
D.V. Courage; Patriotism
Hermes, Patricia. Mama, Let's Dance. Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-35861-4.
168p. $14.95.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
"Dear Children: You mean everything in the world to
me. That's why I've stayed all these years. Now you're old enough to take care
of yourselves and each other." Leaving that note and fifty dollars behind, Mary
Belle's mother has deserted her three children. Ariel, the oldest at seventeen, gets
a job at a filling station and cautions the two younger girls (Mary Belle and
Callie) not to tell anyone that Mama has gone, or the County will send them to
foster care. The three barely make ends meet, and Mary Belle finally enlists the
secret assistance of her friend Amarius, an old black man, and his niece Miss
Dearly. The story is set somewhere in the South during the early years of the
civil rights movement, a turbulence that leaves the book untouched save for one
curious reference to Miss Dearly, a labor inspector: "She works, too, with all
the civil rights people who come down from the North, but she doesn't seem to
like them very much." Both Dearly and Amarius, who calls Mary Belle "Miz
Ma'y Belle," are stereotyped as nobly generous and self-sacrificing. They are
[911
positive portrayals, but two-dimensional nonetheless. Despite the typecasting
(Ariel is also impossibly good) and Mary Belle's sentimental narration, the book
has a tough core. The children's mother writes once, asking for money, and does
not come home for Callie's funeral, the girl having died as a result of privations
suffered. Although the story lacks a strong narrative drive, the situation of the
three children left on their own is explored with intensity. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Family relations; Interracial understanding
Hill, Susan, ed. The Random House Book of Ghost Stories; illus. by Angela
Barrett. Random House, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91234-7; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-679-81234-2. 223p. Library ed. $19.99; Trade ed. $18.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Seventeen ghost stories from England are, for the
most part, cozy or comic rather than spooky: the ghosts herein tend to be a
bumbling lot. Funniest are Brooks' "Jimmy Takes Vanishing Lessons" and
Lively's "Uninvited Ghosts," both previously anthologized; Leon Garfield's
"Laughter in the Dark" (written-to-order for this collection) is a more
sophisticated, mordant story of a mean old blind man who is tricked into
goodness by a ghost. Pearce's "The Yellow Ball" and Brown's "Sam and the
Sea" are poignant stories about children helping ghosts find redemption.
Scariest is Gordon's "Grandmother's Footsteps," about a fondly remembered
grandmother whose ghost is intent upon retribution for the death of her first, and
most loved, child. Occasional decorations and full-page paintings by Angela
Barrett are precise, gauzy, and insinuating. The design is elegant and spacious,
and if the book lacks the real chills of genuine threat, the stories are cleanly
written, well-constructed, and diverting. RS
Ho, Minfong. The Clay Marble. Farrar, 1991. ISBN 0-374-31340-7. 163p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Forced by war to leave their Cambodian farm, Dara,
twelve, and her family can hardly believe their good fortune in reaching a Thai
border refugee camp that has plenty of food and shelter for all. The camp also
offers precious rice seed, so that, when the war recedes, the family can go back
home and start over. While the story is dramatically grounded in real events, the
author's tone is instructive and the characters are idealized, displaying courage
and fortitude in overcoming every hardship and setback. The only exception is
Dara's older brother Sarun, who succumbs to military fervor, accidentally
shooting Dara's best friend Jantu in an excess of zealous patrolling. Jantu is the
chief, rather tiresome, dispenser of wisdom here, and her serene acceptance of
death ("'Sing me to sleep,' she whispered") makes Little Women's Beth look
like a whiner. There are, however, some gritty scenes here, as when Jantu orders
Dara to leave a helpless, stray child behind in a rushed escape from a bombing
attack, and the friendship between the two girls makes a strong focus for a
picture of a senseless, and endless, war. Unfortunate cover art depicts the two
girls as much younger than they are in the story. RS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Courage; Friendship values
[92]
Hoobler, Dorothy and Thomas. Aloha Means Come Back: The Story of a
World War II Girl; illus. by Cathie Bleck Library ed. ISBN 0-382-24148-7;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-382-24156-8. Next Stop, Freedom: The Story of a Slave
Girl; illus. by Cheryl Hanna. Library ed. ISBN 0-382-24145-2; Trade ed. ISBN
0-382-24152-5. The Sign Painter's Secret: The Story of a Revolutionary Girl;
illus. by Donna Ayers. Library ed. ISBN 0-382-24143-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-382-
24150-9. Treasure in the Stream: The Story of a Gold Rush Girl; illus. by
Nancy Carpenter. Silver Burdett, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-382-24144-4; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-382-24151-7. Each book: Silver Burdett, 1991. 55p. (Her Story).
Library ed. $14.98; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-5. 
In a series of simply written historical novels for the
middle grades, the authors have presented convincing narratives in which a young
girl plays a major part. Aloha Means Come Back is set in Pearl Harbor, where
the daughter of a U.S. Navy officer finds that their Japanese-American neighbors
are helpful, loyal, and as brave as Americans of other backgrounds are. In Next
Stop, Freedom a young slave and her older brother follow Harriet Tubman to a
Quaker household and the safety and freedom of the North. The Sign Painter's
Secret is set in Philadelphia, and the protagonist is a girl who, when the regular
messenger is captured by the British, dresses as a boy and brings a message to
Washington at Valley Forge. Since no sources are cited, this does raise the
question of credibility. Treasure in the Stream takes place in California in 1848,
and opens with Amy's family giving a dinner party at which wealthy Mr. Sutter
is the honored guest. The Gold Rush is not depicted as glamorous; in fact,
Amy's parents decide to go to San Francisco and start a business. Each book
concludes with a few pages of instructions for making something mentioned in
the story (a lei, a cornhusk doll, a facial silhouette, a paper Christmas
decoration) but the project adds little to the value of each title. There is,
however, value in having material for younger readers that has convincing
historical background, includes incidents that affected the lives of ordinary
people, and is written in a moderate tone and with clarity and pace. The
illustrations for each book are by a different artist, but all tend to be of pedestrian
quality. ZS
Jacques, Brian. Seven Strange and Ghostly Tales. Philomel, 1991. ISBN 0-
399-22103-4. 137p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
While all the stories here involve the paranormal,
many take a comic rather than shivery turn. Predominant are stories of the
trickster tricked: a cocky young graffiti vandal runs afoul of a strange museum
caretaker; a girl accustomed to stealing from the old ladies she works with finds
one prize not worth its price; and the devil proves less than a match for an
inveterate young liar ("My Auntie Dollie had one of these in her back garden,"
the lad says nonchalantly about Lucifer's stairway down to hell. "Uncle Al had
to fill it in, though, 'cause her poodle kept falling down it"). The ideas are
entertaining, with young protagonists of interestingly mixed morals, but the
twists don't always deliver what they ought-the stories lack the effective
conciseness that their form demands. Poetic epigraphs, unnecessary and
unrhythmic, introduce each story. Skip them and read for the sake of poor Gilly
Bodkin (star of the best story) who haunts the road asking four hundred years of
passers-by for sweets, and for the pleasure of seeing young and old troublemakers
getting what they deserve. DS
[93 ]
Jennings, Jay. Comebacks: Heroic Returns. Silver Burdett, 1991. Library ed.
ISBN 0-382-24109-6; Paper ed. ISBN 0-382-24115-0. 
57p. illus. with
photographs. (Sports Triumphs). Library ed. $14.98; Paper ed. $8.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Color photographs and inset mini-glossaries of sports
terms break up oversize pages with two columns of print in an addition to the
"Sports Triumph" series. Jennings has chosen five subjects, each in a different
sport: Rocky Bleier, Dave Dravecky, Olga Korbut, Greg LeMond, and Babe
Didrikson Zaharias. All but Korbut made a comeback after serious illness or
injury; the gymnast "came back" after making errors and losing points in the
1972 Olympics. The text is informative but is weakened by the author's
heartstring-plucking and by a tendency to pad the writing. Personal statistics
follow each biographical sketch; an index is provided. ZS
C.U. Physical education
D.V. Courage
Johnson, Joan J. Kids without Homes. Watts, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
11064-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-15228-6. 
191p. illus. with photographs.
Library ed. $13.90; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
It's a measure of this book's treatment of the subject
that one finishes it thoroughly depressed by the magnitude of the problem.
Working from extensive source materials, the author has done an excellent job of
wedding dry statistics to the chilling reality of having no place to go. Some
chapters are on homelessness in general: the history of the problem and the
reasons for its recent rise (decline in government housing subsidies, scarcity of
low-rent housing, dearth of employment opportunities), and the failure of every
level of government to to deal effectively with the problem. Johnson talks
about kids homeless with their families, throwaway kids, and runaways, and the
problems they face both within the system (refusal of many schools to accept
them, inability of adult shelters to find them a place) and without (drugs, disease,
and violence). The research sometimes results in contradictory information from
different sources, a fact only occasionally explained, but other than that it's an
impressive overview that may deter prospective runaways by shattering naYve
dreams as well as proving scholastically useful. DS
C.U. Social studies
Johnson, Sylvia. Roses Red, Violets Blue; illus. with photographs by Yuko
Sato. Lerner, 1991. ISBN 0-8225-1594-6. [64p]. $14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
First published in Japan in 1988 under the title
Colors of Flowers and Insects and impressive because of the stunning color
photography, this refers to a "translation of the original text by Wesley M.
Jacobsen" on the imprint page. Presumably, therefore, Johnson's text is adapted
rather than original. It is an interesting discussion of the causes of different
floral colors and of their roles in attracting pollinators. Some of the magnified
or ultraviolet photographs are particularly useful in showing the details of
invitational patterns. A glossary is provided. ZS
C.U. Botany
Joose, Barbara M. Mama, Do You Love Me?; illus. by Barbara Lavallee.
Chronicle Books, 1991. ISBN 0-87701-759-X. 26p. $12.95.
[94 1
R 
2-4 yrs. 
"Mama, do you love me?" asks an Inuit girl, and
then, as does every child, she pushes it farther. 
"How much? ... How
long?... What if I threw water at our lamp?" And Mama keeps reassuring
her, even to the fantastical scenario of the child's turning into a mean polar bear
that chases her mother into the tent; "still, inside the bear, you would be you,
and I would love you. I will love you, forever and for always, because you are
my Dear One." That final scene shows the child cuddled snugly into the arms of
the rounded figure of her mother, two affectionate look-alikes, large and small.
The shapes here are organic and spacious, with lively patterns freshening the
characters' clothing, and literal scenes depicting animal figures just short of
being too cute. What keeps them in balance is a kind of light-hearted joviality
that youngest bedtime listeners will respond to with warmth. Perhaps their
parents can work in a bit of the extensive information included in an annotated
glossary at the end of the book which explains, among other things, the masks
on the endpapers and the differences between traditional and contemporary Inuit
life. A neat companion to Ann Tompert's Little Fox Goes to the End of the
World and other query games. BH
D.V. Mother-child relations
Kerr, M. E. Fell Down. Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-
06-021764-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021763-4. [208p]. Library ed. $14.89; Trade
ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
"So you just left school," Keats says, "walked out
and the heck with your final exams and everything." John Fell says that's what
happened to him when his friend Dib died in a car accident with "Little Jack,"
who had been drinking, at the wheel. The other driver, Lenny Last, was also
killed. This, then, is the story of Fell's efforts to find out exactly what
happened, and there are flashbacks that explore the relationships among those
above and other characters, much of the material having to do with a friendship
(Nels and Lenny), a romantic triangle (Nels, Lenny, and Laura), and a
ventriloquist's dummy. The writing has vitality and substance, but the book is
less cohesive than earlier books about Fell and other members of "Sevens," the
most exclusive club at a posh preparatory school. This is in part due to the
time-shifts and shifts from first- to third-person narrative, and in part to the
intricacies of the relationships among a large cast of characters. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Kesey, Ken. The Sea Lion: A Story of the Sea Cliff People; illus. by Neil
Waldman. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83916-7. 48p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
A smooth operation by writer Kesey, who authored
Little Tricker the Squirrel Meets Big Double the Bear (BCCB 10/90) and by
artist Waldman (The Highwayman, BCCB 12/90), this is really fiction in the
guise of myth-and in the format of a picture book. The setting is the Pacific
Northwest. The plot is complicated by a number of magic objects, though the
pattern is basic: a crippled Indian boy proves himself against an evil sea spirit,
rescues a princess, and wins the respect of his tribe. It's also a pourquoi tale, as
the maidens lured by the spirit give birth to sea lion babies. Kesey's language
can be dramatically fresh ("I am my own tribe," roars the spirit as it enters the
longhouse) or disappointingly stale ("Oh, Eemook! You saved us from an evil
god! You were so brave and clever," gushes the princess). Similarly, the softly
[95]
blended, pastel-colored graphics fluctuate between a satisfying reflection of the
narrative and a designerly gloss over its power. On balance, the imagery in both
text and illustration is well worth a recommendation to readers who enjoy
folkloric fantasy or to adults looking for stories to read aloud to students of
Native American traditions. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Kimmel, Eric A., ad. Bearhead: A Russian Folktale; illus. by Charles
Mikolaycak. Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-0902-3. 32p. $15.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
See editorial, page 81.
Koller, Jackie French. IfI Had One Wish. Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-50150-6.
161p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Alec is in junior high and finds his older sister
exasperating and his little brother Stevie obnoxious. Usual family squabbling
story? No-because Alec is given a talisman by a bag lady to whom he'd been
kind, and he learns that her prediction is true: it's good for one wish. After
getting into trouble with his parents because of Stevie's tattling, Alec mutters,
"If I really had one wish it would be that precious little Stevie had never been
born!" The next morning, Alec discovers his wish has come true. The family
now has more money, so Dad drives a Porsche and Mom is now a lawyer. The
outcome is, as most readers will predict, that Alec is filled with remorse, misses
his brother, and hunts for the bag lady and--on Christmas Eve-the talisman is
returned to him, he wishes again, and there is Stevie, with the time frame shifted
back to the night of the original wish. The writing style, including dialogue and
relationships, is solid; in this novel it's the plot that's weak, the fantasy shift
being both predictable and unconvincing, and the all-ends-tied d6nouement too
pat. ZS
D.V. Brothers
Lavies, Bianca. Wasps at Home; written and illus. by Bianca Lavies. Dutton,
1991. ISBN 0-525-44704-0. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Even more up close and personal than her photos for
The Secretive Timber Rattlesnake (BCCB 12/90), Lavies' pictures of paper
wasps and baldfaced hornets have all the scary appeal of movie monsters. Not
that the book is sensationalized-it's just that a magnified full-color shot of
worker wasps feeding caterpillar to a host of larvae in honeycomb cells can't
help but look like something from Aliens. Excepting several abrupt shifts
between discussion of paper wasps and hornets (two species of social wasps) the
continuous narrative progresses logically, beginning with the nest, "a world of
darkness, vibrations, and chemical signals that are hidden from human senses,"
and then going to the nucleus of the hive, the queen. Explanations of wasp
behavior are clear and scientific ("A queen is the mother in the nest. Her colony
is her family. She creates it to ensure her own reproduction"), providing a level-
headed complement to the bug-eyed photographs and making them all the more
marvelous in their reality. There's a note on the picture-taking, but no index.
RS
C.U. Nature study
[96]
Lee, Jeanne M. Silent Lotus; written and illus. by Jeanne M. Lee. Farrar,
1991. ISBN 0-374-36911-9. 32p. $14.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
"Long ago in Kampuchea," a man and his wife had a
baby girl as beautiful as the lotus blossoms after which she was named. Alas,
she could neither hear nor speak, but she was quick to imitate the movements of
herons, cranes, and egrets-a talent that eventually won her fame as a court
dancer in the Khmer kingdom and, more importantly, the friends that she had
longed for as a lonely child. The story is as simply told as a fairy tale, but with
the realistic overtones of a child's adapting to disability rather than than being
transformed by magic. Serenely choreographed, the art work features spare
compositions and delicate outlines around colors that are solidly blocked and
shapes that are two-dimensional in effect. Occasionally the human figures seem
self-consciously flattened, but their motions are essentially graceful. The motif
of gray stone carvings depicted above each page of text is reflected in gray
endpapers as well as in a handsomely designed wordless half-title page and
concluding colophon, a thoughtful format for this Cambodian tale. BH
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Leedy, Loreen. Messages in the Mailbox: How to Write a Letter; written and
illus. by Loreen Leedy. Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-0889-2. 32p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Within the same disarming format in which Leedy
introduced kids to the basics of newspaper production (The Furry News, BCCB
5/90), she here explains the essentials of letter writing, including form, content,
kinds of letters, and the best part about writing letters, "getting letters back!"
The context for all this painless instruction is a multi-species classroom that
includes humans, a mouse, a fox, and an alligator teacher; the how-tos are
conveyed via cartoon-balloon dialogue and lots of sample letters: "Dear Senator
Long: I'm writing because of a problem I had with the Space Cops Stuff Co. in
Los Angeles, CA. They sold me a Space Cops Jet Pack that doesn't work, and
they won't give me a refund or a new one." Friendly letters, business letters,
invitations, sympathy notes, love letters, and-yuck-personal form letters
("You can write one letter and mail it to everybody!") are all here. References to
"See page 10 to learn more about addressing a letter" are confusing, because the
book is unpaged (although the cited information is indeed included). The
cartoons and crafty format make this an ideal how-to companion for Judith
Caseley's Dear Annie (BCCB 9/91). RS
C.U. Language arts
Levine, Arthur A. All the Lights in the Night; illus. by James E. Ransome.
Tambourine, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10108-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
10107-0. 32p. Library ed. $14.88; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
This is a picture book with inherent appeal as a
historical Hanukkah story. It's about two Jewish boys making a difficult
journey alone through anti-semitic tsarist Russia to live with their older brother
in Palestine. The narrative is convincing; the characterizations are natural; and
the resolution is touching as the boys, who have had to sell the family lamp that
has comforted them, sing their Hanukkah prayer with stars lighting up a night
sky. Ransome's paintings feature thick-textured snowy landscapes and richly
somber colors that engage the viewer's eye. Unfortunately, some of the
[97 ]
compositions' striking effects are marred by unevenly rendered facial expressions.
While several portraits-the train conductor's, for instance-are fluid and well
drawn, other closeups, especially of the two boys, seem stiff and awkwardly
detailed. The book will nevertheless make a solid addition to holiday read-aloud
selections and to collections where Jewish lore is in demand. BH
C.U. Hanukkah
Lingard, Joan. Between Two Worlds. Lodestar, 1991. ISBN 0-525-67360-1.
186p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
In a sequel to Tug of War (reviewed in the September,
1990 issue) Lingard brings the Petersonses, a Latvian refugee family, to Canada.
Fleeing the aftermath of World War II, they have been sponsored by a Toronto
family; all their plans are sadly changed when Father becomes ill and the
Petersonses' hosts move to another part of the country. It is up to the young
people in the family to earn money and to try to find a place to live and stay
united. Lingard does as good a job of building a convincing, solid tale of
adjustment and adaptability here as she did of describing the tension and courage
of displaced persons in Europe. Particularly astute are the many ways in which
the young people are shown to adopt new friends and new interests while
remembering old bonds with affection. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Industry
Little, Jean. Stars Come Out Within. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-82965-X.
263p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7- 
In a sequel to her first book of memoirs, Little by
Little (BCCB 7/88), the Canadian writer continues her story. Her struggles with
failing eyesight and her progress as a writer are described with simplicity and
candor; this is a story of hard work, despair overcome, friends and family whose
love and support brought joy. As Jean Little's sight grew more limited, she
adjusted (with pleasure but not without labor) to a talking computer and to the
beloved seeing-eye dog, Zephyr, pictured with her on the book's jacket. (On one
trip to England, Little took along Katherine Paterson as a "guide person":
"much as I admired Zeph's many skills, I soon realized that Katherine told better
stories. I also appreciated not having to take her out at regular intervals.") The
book stirs admiration and understanding rather than unwanted pity. It is not that
Jean Little never lost her sense of humor, but that it ultimately prevailed. ZS
D.V. Courage; Handicaps, adjustment to
Low, Alice, comp. The Family Read-Aloud Holiday Treasury; illus. by Marc
Brown. Joy Street/Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-53368-8. 154p. $19.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Profusely and attractively illustrated by Brown's
lively, cheerful paintings, this is a pleasant anthology for reading aloud to
younger children as well as for independent readers in the middle grades. There
are a few song lyrics (no musical notation), but most of the material consists of
poems or of excerpts from books. 
Some of the poetry is banal, but most of
the selections are from fine poets such as Bodecker, Ciardi, Giovanni, Hughes,
Lear, and Kuskin. A few of the prose selections, such as "George Washington's
Breakfast," by Fritz, are given in their entirety; the level of prose writing is
[98
uniformly high. There is no index; notes on all of the holidays are appended.
ZS
C.U. Holidays; Reading aloud
Macdonald, Maryann. Sam's Worries; illus. by Judith Riches. Hyperion, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-082-6; Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-081-8. 26p. Library
ed. $13.98; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
Sam worries too much: about the lunchroom lady
who looks like a witch, about the possibility of an earthquake, about monsters
(pictured with a distinct Sendakian cast), about losing his library books, about
the fact that he might not go to heaven because of all the cookies he's stolen
from the cookie jar. So, he can't sleep. His mother tries to reassure him.
"'Mrs. Sparks may look a little creepy, but she is not a witch. Your library
books are in a stack on the piano. And vampires and monsters and bogeymen
don't exist' Sam had not told her about the cookies." Sam isn't convinced and.
in a novel solution, cooks up a plan with his teddy bear, who agrees to do all the
worrying at night while Sam will take over during the day. Thus Sam sleeps,
and the morning is too sunny for him to worry about anything. The story is
honest in its realistic resistance to parental soothing ("Mothers don't know
everything"), and the fact that Sam-and his bear-come up with their own
remedy will be appealing to young children. Riches' soft watercolors are plenty
comforting in themselves, and the bear is a fine friend. RS
D.V. Fear, overcoming
MacGill-Callahan, Sheila. And Still the Turtle Watched; illus. by Barry Moser.
Dial, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0932-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0931-5.
32p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
M 
5-8 yrs. 
While it is commendable that the stereotyped
warpainted woo-wooing Indian is largely behind us, it unfortunately seems in
danger of being replaced with another of relentless nobility. Many moons, er,
"long ago" an old man carves a totemic turtle into a rock to "be the eyes of
Manitou the All-Father to watch the Delaware people and he will be our voice to
speak to Manitou ... 
And Manitou will bless our land with plenty, our
people with straight bodies and strong arms, and peace shall reign beside our
fires." Did people ever really talk this way, even in telling stories? In any
event, as time goes on and the Delaware fade away, no one comes to visit the
turtle, who slowly erodes while people (whose "shouting drowned the lark's
bright music") destroy the beautiful wilderness around him, pollute the water,
and, eventually (in the persons of boom-box wielding teenagers) blind him with
spray-paint. "He could no longer watch for Manitou." Until, that is, a man
who "had a sharp and knowing eye" and a "wise and loving heart," and who
"knew the ways of Manitou" (and who bears a startling resemblance to the
illustrator) finds him and arranges a new home in a botanical garden, to be seen
by "children, and their children's children's children. And he will speak of them
to Manitou." Like Alice Walker's picture book reviewed below, this story is
steeped in a didacticism that appeals to adults who, oddly, wouldn't stand for it
in a book intended for themselves. Self-aggrandizing references aside, Moser's
inkily precise watercolors confer dignity on the pretentious proceedings, with
[99]
even the picture, from Turtle's point of view, of Turtle being spray-painted,
possessing a cool beauty. RS
D.V. Ecological awareness
Martin, Jr., Bill. Polar Bear, Polar Bear, What Do You Hear?; illus. by Eric
Carle. Holt, 1991. ISBN 0-8050-1759-3. 26p. $13.95.
R 
2-5 yrs. 
Martin and Carle follow the format of their classic
Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What Do You See? (BCCB 2/84) in a simple picture
book about animals and the sounds they make. Each two-page spread of a single
animal is more sophisticated in texture and pattern than are the pictures in the
previous book. The lion's yellow and brown mane contrasts strikingly with his
tawny brush-stroked body, and the green floral boa constrictor and blue
hippopotamus are pleasantly bright. On the other hand, in Brown Bear it never
mattered how ridiculous the animals looked because one could see them (purple
cat, blue horse). The sounds heard by the animals in Polar Bear are sometimes
given unusual descriptions and will be difficult for the reader to reproduce
("flamingo fluting," "peacock yelping," "walrus bellowing"). The final spread,
of children wearing animal masks, is not the same kind of simple conclusion as
in Brown Bear, but it doesn't matter-the attractive collage will sell this book,
and there's plenty of room for audience participation. KPJ
C.U. Reading aloud
Mikaelsen, Ben. Rescue Josh McGuire. Hyperion, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 1-
56282-100-8; Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-099-0. 266p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade
ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Ever since Josh's older brother Tye was killed in an
accident, Dad has been drinking too much, yelling too much, threatening Mom,
and taunting Josh with his inadequacies. Now Dad has illegally shot a nursing
bear, and Josh wants to save her cub. Naming the cub Pokey, Josh takes her
home with them from their camping trip, but he soon discovers that the
government demands that the bear be given up for research purposes. This sets
the stage for a fast and suspenseful survival story, as Josh takes the cub and his
dog Mudflap, and runs away to the Yellowstone wilderness. While the dialogue
and characterization are standard issue (two gruff-but-kindly older men) and the
plot is occasionally unlikely (culminating in a virtual deus ex machina in the
person of the state governor flying down from Helena), the swift pace provides
drama, as do the sharp cuts from Josh's makeshift survival scenes to the
attempts by rescuers to find him, to the vignettes of Josh's father struggling to
find peace within himself. There's lots of Boy's Life appeal, energetic (and
believable) antics on the part of Pokey, and a cozy conclusion to make the book
a good choice for reluctant readers. RS
C.U. Reading, reluctant
D.V. Father-son relations
Morris, Ann. 
On Their Toes: 
A Russian Ballet School; illus. with
photographs by Ken Heyman. Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-689-31660-7. 48p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
The Vaganova Choreographic Institute trains boys
and girls as dancers for the Kirov Ballet. Color photographs of good quality
show the students at home and at their studies, playing in a park and in dance
[ 100]
classes. The youngest class consists of ten-year-olds, many of them already
showing the grace and poise that is so marked in photographs of the older
dancers. This is not a book about dancing or about ballet, although it surely
will appeal to balletomanes; its wider appeal is to all readers who are curious
about another culture, dedication to a performing art, and the glamor of the world
of ballet. Profusely illustrated, the text is simply written, informative, and
casual in style if a bit choppy at times. ZS
Nomura, Takaaki. Grandpa's Town; written and illus. by Takaaki Nomura; tr.
by Amanda Mayer Stinchecum. Kane/Miller, 1991. ISBN 0-916291-36-7.
3 2p. (Cranky Nell Books). $13.95.
R* 
4-7 yrs. 
In a story translated from the Japanese, Yuuta's
grandmother has died, and he and his mother, believing Grandpa is lonely, are
trying to convince him to come and live with them. All Grandpa will say is
"living here is okay, really," and he invites Yuuta to come along to the public
bath, where Yuuta learns on the way that Grandpa has lots of friends: the fish
man, the greengrocer, the attendant at the bath house. The public bath itself is
filled with friends: "Grandpa and I, the tatami-mat maker, his pesky son, the
cabinetmaker and the man from the plate-glass store-we all soaked in the bath
together." Nomura's watercolored woodcuts capture all the detail of the busy
streets, and the bath house filled with (discreetly) naked men is cozy with steam
and companionability. The firm lines of the woodcut enhance the warmth of the
colors, especially effective in a rub-a-dub-dub-six-men-in-a-tub picture and in
Grandpa and Yuuta's walk back home through the twilight. Kids will understand
why Grandpa doesn't want to leave, just as they will empathize with Yuuta's
wish for a return visit. Both a cultural and psychological twist on the usual
grandparent-child stories, the book includes the original Japanese text alongside
the English translation. RS
D.V. Community life; Grandfather-child relations
O'Kelley, Mattie Lou. 
Going to Town; written and illus. by Mattie Lou
O'Kelley. Joy Street/Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-63805-6. 32p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
In an anecdotal story that has an autobiographical
ring, O'Kelley describes the temporary move of a farm family to the city. With
her busy and colorful folk-art, she turns every painting into a cozy scene-from
a moonlit camp-out in the mountains to the busy downtown of a city on the
edge of technology. 
The billboards and store signs reflect a childlike
understanding ("John's Private Shop," "Lady-Things," "Money Bank," "Cut
Hair"). The nameless narrator, one of the younger children of the family,
describes only what happens to her and her little brother, leaving several
unanswered questions. Why did the family move from the farm in the spring and
back again at Christmas? What is the guarded vault-like door set into the hill at
the center of the zoo? What do her parents do while she and her little brother
explore the city alone? Not only does the juxtaposition of horse-drawn carriages
with automobiles and street cars suggest a past era; also indicative of the turn-of-
the-century South are the times when the children engage in conversation with a
stranger on the street and when the black "friends" who help the family move are
not present on the next page at the Christmas party. This book should be read
to children by an adult who can explain the differences (and similarities) between
then and now. KPJ
[ 101 ]
Pattou, Edith. Hero's Song. Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-233807-1. [320p].
$16.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
A gentle gardener and healer is forced by his destiny
to follow a hero's path. When his sister Nessa disappears during her visit at the
queen's court, Collun knows it is his duty to search for her. On his journey he
discovers that his family are not the ordinary village people he has always
thought they were; instead he and his sister are the children of the hero, Cuillean.
Gradually, Collun gets an interesting assortment of traveling companions,
including a would-be bard, an Ellyl (or Fair Folk) prince, and a self-reliant girl,
quite reminiscent of Lloyd Alexander's Prydain band. Embedded into the handle
of Collun's dagger (once his gardening trine) is a powerfully magic stone that
the evil Queen Medb would do anything to get Collun's adventures are action-
packed as he journeys north to rescue his sister while, at the same time, he must
use his magic dagger to destroy the horrible creatures that Queen Medb sends
after him. In her first novel, Pattou interweaves a well-crafted fantasy with Irish
folklore and the legendary homely atmosphere of the Irish royal court. She
avoids a pat happy ending by letting Collun learn some private, ambiguous
truths about his father Cuillean. An altogether satisfying fantasy. KPJ
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Paulsen, Gary. The Monument. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-30518-4. 151p.
$15.00.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Rocky had basically given up hope of being adopted
("it was my color and my left leg"), and she is pleasantly surprised by Fred and
Emma, the middle-aged couple who take her in: "I think they love me and are
very good to me and are completely drunk by nine o'clock every morning so that
the world is just one, long alcohol haze for them, but it isn't so bad." Rocky's
only real friend is a stray dog, Python, which she rescues from the sheriff, and
there is little excitement in her small Kansas town until an artist, Mick, comes
to design a memorial to the local boys killed in the Vietnam War. Mick is a
drunk and a dreamer, and he shows Rocky that she is an artist. "Draw," he says.
"It's what you do-draw." Paulsen's writing is clean and spare, etching, like
Mick, the lines of the small town in precise and telling strokes. The
characterization of Mick, though, is romanticized: despite his drinking and
dishevelment, he is too much the Untamed Artist in a community of philistines,
and the frenzied rage he unleashes in the townspeople who see, through his
portraits, who they really are, is not convincing. Better are the smaller moments
("Mick went through town like a chalk storm, the little colored bits in one hand
and the tablet in another"), in which Paulsen gives a solid sense to the work of
creation. RS
D.V. Creativity
Porter, A. P. Kwanzaa; illus. by Janice Lee Porter. Carolrhoda, 1991. ISBN 0-
87614-668-X. 56p. (My Own Holiday Books). $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
Illustrated with tidy, occasionally awkward crayon
drawings, this is a sometimes straightforward, sometimes obscure introduction
to the holiday of Kwanzaa, and, more than incidentally, to black American
history. Kwanzaa was conceived in 1966 by Dr. Maulana Karenga, who created
it "to remind his people of their African beginnings." The book explains the
symbols ("A symbol is something that stands for something else") and rituals of
[102]
the holiday, providing the Swahili names (with a pronunciation guide, although
the assertion that "Swahili sounds a lot like English" is puzzling). The book is
honest about black American history ("Slaves are people who are owned by other
people"), but idealistic about Africa, not mentioning the part Africans played in
the slave trade: "white people forced Africans to go to North America as slaves."
The statement that "the world's first communities were African" is debatable,
and to say that "slavery made African Americans forget their past" requires
further explanation. The easy-reader text is occasionally eloquent ("Many
children did not know their parents or sisters or brothers. They did not feel a part
of anything except slavery") but also confusing, particularly in conceptual
explanation ("The kinara stands for people who lived many years ago in Africa.
Africans hold up African Americans, just as the kinara holds candles"). Other
sentences cry out for amplification: "To African Americans, selfishness is
wrong." While the framework is shaky, the instructions for the rituals are solid,
and with the assistance of an adult interpreter, the book will be a useful,
welcome and welcoming, presentation. RS
C.U. Holidays
Provensen, Alice. Punch in New York; written and illus. by Alice Provensen.
Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-82790-8. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Provensen uses the Punch puppet of commedia del
l'arte tradition as her protagonist, but this is not the traditional Punch story; here
the puppet is stolen from the puppeteer, newly arrived from Europe. With his
quick wit and readiness for combat, Punch escapes his captors and slams into
indefatigable action at breakneck pace. The author uses appropriate exaggeration
in interpreting a theatrical medium, and she discusses, in a closing note, the
psychologically cathartic effect Punch has had for centuries, on viewers,
commenting that "His crimes and misdemeanors are committed to show the dark
side of our own natures," providing us with "a harmless outlet for our guilty
thoughts." Into the story the author injects some American caricature: although
he has never driven a car, Punch becomes chauffeur to Mr. Harry Helmstrump,
the richest man in the world. The paintings are boldly executed, with all the
vigor of a comic strip, but with great humor and relish for the improbable that is
somehow commuted to believable fantasy within the deft framework of
Manhattan streets. Colorful without being gaudy, this has an elegance of line
and composition that moderates the violent activity. ZS
Reeder, Carolyn. Grandpa's Mountain. Macmillan, 1991. ISBN 0-02-775811-
7. 171p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Carrie, eleven, has always felt her summers with
Grandma and Grandpa to be a safe haven, even now during the Depression.
When Grandpa learns that the state (Virginia) is acquiring land to build a national
park and that his home is threatened, he fights bitterly to save it and is
disappointed that many of his neighbors are glad to accept the money offered by
the state. The story has a realistic ending (Grandpa loses) and a believable
adjustment to a new home; the characterization and writing style are as sturdy as
they were in Reeder's first book, Shades of Gray (BCCB 1/90), but the emphasis
on the problem occasionally weighs down the plot and the moral is overstated
("this year, she'd face up to her problems instead of daydreaming about summer
in the Blue Ridge every time something went wrong"). Readers who remember
[ 103
Andy's Mountain by Bianca Bradbury (BCCB 9/69), which also dealt with the
loss of a mountain home threatened by the state, may enjoy comparing the two
books. ZS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Rodda, Emily. Finders Keepers; illus. by Noela Young. Greenwillow, 1991.
ISBN 0-688-10516-5. 184p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Patrick is the middle child in a chaotic household.
His greatest desire is to have a computer all his own, but he knows he has as
much chance of getting one as he has of winning a million dollars. Then one
day he gets a mysterious invitation to play in a television game show on
Channel 8--a station that doesn't exist. Patrick discovers that at the appointed
time, if he turns a TV to Channel 8, he can actually walk through the screen
into the Finders Keepers show. Patrick's job as a contestant is to find lost
objects that belong to the three Seekers. At first he only wants to win the Ezy-
Way computer, but eventually he starts to care about the Seekers and searches for
the lost things for their sakes. The fantasy element is funny-a weak Barrier
between two worlds though which all mysteriously lost things go (single socks,
keys, jewelry). In natural and believable ways, Patrick discovers he cares more
about his family and friends than winning a computer. Rodda does a good job of
describing a busy and realistic family, and she extends the fantasy to include a
happy ending-Patrick gets his computer. KPJ
Schermbrucker, Reviva. Charlie's House; illus. by Niki Daly. Viking, 1991.
ISBN 0-670-84024-6. 32p. $13.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
Charlie lives with his mother and grandmother in a
"shelter... made of corrugated iron and scrap, with two small windows and a
single door." The house is drafty and leaks in the winter, and it is surrounded by
similar dwellings in the South African black township of Guguletu. In a
narrative that places ordinary childhood play in a framework of dismal social
reality, Charlie, with the mud, clay, and trash surrounding the shelter, builds a
dollhouse filled with fantasy: electricity, a TV, an indoor bathroom, "a bedroom
all for himself!" The uses Charlie makes of rubbish are extraordinary and sad. A
matchbox becomes a TV, the carpet is strips from a plastic bag; his doll-mother
is a squeezed out toothpaste tube. Last of all, he makes a car out of mud and
dreams of driving away. Context is crucial here, and the author and illustrator
clearly show that Charlie's neighborhood is cold and poor, his creativity a tool
for survival. Daly's mixed-media and collage paintings achieve a double vision,
at once evoking the poverty of Charlie's materials and the richness of his
dreams. Tougher and more overtly political than Isadora's At the Crossroads
(BCCB 5/91) or Williams' Galimoto (BCCB 4/90), this is an intimate portrait
of imagination at hard work. RS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Imaginative powers
Schertle, Alice. Witch Hazel; illus. by Margot Tomes. HarperCollins, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025141-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025140-9. 32p. Library
ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
R* 
4-7 yrs. 
A choice companion for Sid Fleischman's Scarebird
(BCCB 9/88), this is a poetically precise story about the youngest of three
[104]
brothers. "Too little" or "too young" to keep up with heavy farm work, Johnny
grows a pumpkin and fends birds off it with a scarecrow made of a witch hazel
branch, a burlap sack, a gingham dress, and an old bonnet. When his brothers
take their corn harvest to the fair, Johnny has a fall celebration with Hazel and
wakes up during a windstorm to find her dancing under a huge pumpkin moon.
A picture book fantasy? A lonely boy's dream? The action works either way in
this backwoods American fairy tale where no parents ever appear but three
brothers make up a snug farm family. Margot Tomes' art is more thickly
textured with painterly effects than usual; the coloration is rich with autumnal
browns, reds, and grays, but the final picture of a thin new moon above five
pumpkin seeds buried in the ground has a green overlay that promises renewal
after Johnny finds Hazel gone and his pumpkin shell smashed. The portrayal of
Johnny, both visually and verbally, has particular appeal. He seems a child of
undemanding perceptions, and his world is well caught here with its cycle of
endings and beginnings. There's even the possibility, never stated, that the dress
belonged to a lost mother whom Hazel represents in bringing Johnny
protectively back to bed after his midnight foray. Both the narrative and the
illustration are honed to utmost simplicity but layered, so that there's depth,
without pretension to depth, in repeated readings. Give children a chance to mull
this one over. BH
Schwartz, Alvin, comp. and ad. Scary Stories 3: More Tales to Chill Your
Bones; illus. by Stephen Gammell. HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-
06-021795-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021794-4. 117p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade
ed. $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 4-8. 
It isn't often that source notes are among the most
valuable parts of a book, but the ones appended to these Scary Stories are more
than informative, giving readers a painless introduction to how folklore is
disseminated and transformed. In his note to "The Wolf Girl," for example,
Schwartz includes mention of Romulus and Remus, the wild boy of Aveyron,
and O'Dell's Island of the Blue Dolphins. And the stories collected here are
worth the documentation. Many are old tales given a contemporary setting, such
as "Footsteps," in which Liz hears someone in the house while she's doing her
homework. "Such Things Happen" is an old American story given a modem
twist by Schwartz, who has a witch vengeful because a neighbor has run over
her cat with his car. "The Red Spot," in which a spider bite turns out to be a
spider nest, is a popular urban legend concisely retold: ".. . That night Ruth
took a hot bath. As she soaked herself, the boil burst. Out poured a swarm of
tiny spiders from the eggs their mother had laid in her cheek." Gammell's ink-
and-wash are a horrifying blend of the literal and the suggestive. Blobs of ink,
gray washes, and sharp, spiky, or sinuous lines create a nightmare world peopled
by skulls, phantoms, and monsters that have a Francis Bacon-like intensity.
Truly scary stuff, and a worthy companion to the author and illustrator's Scary
Stories to Tell in the Dark (BCCB 6/82) and More Scary Stories to Tell in the
Dark (BCCB 2/85). RS
Schwartz, Howard, comp. and ad. The Diamond Tree: Jewish Tales from
Around the World; comp. and ad. by Howard Schwartz and Barbara Rush; illus.
by Uri Shulevitz. HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025243-X;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025239-1. 120p. Library ed. $16.89; Trade ed. $16.95.
[105]
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Fifteen Jewish tales, with an introduction and
exemplary notes that include sources and tale type numbers, are translated here
from materials in the Israel Folktale Archives. One of the most welcome
aspects of the collection is the predominance of Middle Eastern lore. Only five
of the selections are European; others hail from Iraq, Turkey, Yemen, Morocco,
Asia, or, historically, Babylon and Palestine. Storytellers will revel in finding
Jewish giants, goblins, witches, fools, heroes, heroines (even a thumbelina), and
other common motif variants, while young readers will enjoy the pithy
selections in this spacious format, with ten ebullient full-page watercolor
illustrations. From cumulative and riddle stories to fairy tales and fables,
Schwartz and Rush offer variety without sacrificing the fast action, often
humorous, that children universally enjoy in folklore. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Sherrow, Victoria. Challenges in Education. Messner, 1991. ISBN 0-671-
70556-3. 145p. illus. with photographs. $13.98.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
This is a balanced and broad survey of issues in
American education today, with chapters devoted to a range of topics including
specific academic areas of study; problems of homeless, hungry, substance-
abusing, or pregnant students; the challenge of attracting and keeping dedicated
and competent teachers; and some movements for reform. 
The Bush
administration's education goals are outlined, with supporters and rebutters given
space. Anecdotes and examples of individual students and programs appear
throughout (although there are no source citations, unfortunately), and some
comparisons to other countries are included where relevant. Evenhanded and
well-organized (if unattractively formatted), it's a good source for reports; a
selected bibliography and an index are provided. DS
Smith, Doris Buchanan. The Pennywhistle Tree. Putnam, 1991. ISBN 0-399-
21840-8. 144p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Jonathon and his three buddies enjoy sitting
peacefully on the branches of a large live oak tree, called the "pennywhistle tree"
because that's where Jonathon keeps the pennywhistle on which he practices
while awaiting a longed-for flute. Then the neighborhood amity is disturbed by
the advent of the George family, noisy and intrusive. Jonathon is especially
irritated by the oldest boy, Sanders, who turns up in the same sixth-grade
classroom. Feeling sorry for Sanders when he realizes how badly he and his
siblings are treated by their feckless father, Jonathon gives him the
pennywhistle. Only when the Georges move away does he understand that all
Sanders really wanted was a friend. In earlier books, Smith has explored with
sensitivity the nuances of peer relationships and problems; there is the same
understanding here but the narrative is slow paced, a tempo particularly
unfortunate because there is so little action to sustain reader interest. ZS
Stewart, Sarah. The Money Tree; illus. by David Small. Farrar, 1991. ISBN
0-374-35014-0. 32p. $14.95.
R* 
4-6 yrs. 
"In January, when Miss McGillicuddy was making a
quilt in front of the fire, she noticed an unusual shape outside her living-room
window." Viewers must turn the page to find out what it is, a strange sapling
[ 106]
that defies the snows of February to sprout oddly in March, shoot up in April,
and, in May, leaf out with "crisp green foliage"--bills of many denominations.
As neighbors and far-flung folk rush to harvest the cash through the rest of the
year, Miss McGillicuddy pays attention to nothing but her own gardening and
satisfying rural lifestyle, sensibly cutting down the tree for winter firewood in
December. The straight-faced textual wit and cunning reflection on values are
both elegantly extended in watercolors that emphasize the main character's
stringent simplicity with spare, graceful lines and subtle hues. 
Miss
McGillicuddy's nonplussed expressions are never cartooned or exaggerated, but
rather portrayed. Small's compositions suggest seasonal contrasts of detail, with
a stunning nighttime scene reminiscent but not imitative of Rackham's
silhouettes. Best of all, for young listeners, is the fact that they will be privy to
a joke that is never explained outright. A picture book for all seasons. BH
D.V. Money, acquisition and use
Sufrin, Mark. George Catlin: Painter of the Indian West. Atheneum, 1991.
ISBN 0-689-31608-9. 153p. illus. with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
George Catlin was a man sworn to adventure in the
form of painting a doomed people. This account of his extraordinary travels,
narrow escapes, and charismatic personality makes spicy reading, peppered as it
is with excerpts from Catlin's own writing and with reproductions of his art.
Although the latter lose considerably in black-and-white reproduction, they
communicate the direct intensity of his style. 
Sufrin has maintained
considerable integrity in two ways: in the personal portrayal of Catlin, by
acknowledging his total disregard of family; and in the social history, by steering
away from the kind of glorification of Native American cultures that Catlin-
who loved his Plains subjects as the warlike individuals they were--eschewed.
Perhaps the author is a bit too free with occasional uses of the word primitive,
since "civilized" history contains as many barbaric practices as the shocking list
of customs (including incest, torture, and self-mutilation) Catlin witnessed
among the Comanche, Blackfeet, Crow, Assiniboin, Arikara, and Cheyenne.
Yet Sufrin consistently emphasizes how "Catlin's Indian paintings denied that
stereotype of howling, bloodthirsty savages, killing for the sake of killing"
while at the same time pioneering ethnographic observation that never indulged
in a "glorified and romanticized" image of "the American Indian." Catlin's
conflict between hating materialism and struggling for fame and fortune makes
another vivid theme in a book exhibiting many neglected facets of nineteenth-
century American history. BH
C.U. Art appreciation; The West
Turner, Robyn Montana. Georgia O'Keeffe. Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-85649-
5. 32p. illus. with photographs. (Portraits of Women Artists for Children).
$15.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
In an oversize book, the large and amply-leaded print,
the wide margins, and the directness of the text combine to good effect for the
intended audience of the publisher's "Portraits of Women Artists for Children"
series Black-and-white photographs or sketches appear in some margins, while
the full-color reproductions of O'Keeffe's paintings are full-page and captioned.
Experienced in art education, Turner is restrained in both the amount of
[107 ]
information she gives and in her style, so that the biography is well-suited to
middle-grade readers. ZS
C.U. Art
Walker, Alice. Finding the Green Stone; illus. by Catherine Deeter. Harcourt,
1991. ISBN 0-15-227538-X. 40p. $16.95.
M 
5-8 yrs. 
Alice Walker's first book for children, To Hell with
Dying (BCCB 4/88) was an adult short story in picture book form; this second
collaboration between Walker and Deeter is all too plainly a book intended for
children. Johnny and his sister Katie have special green stones they like to play
with, "taking them out of their pockets and holding them up to the sun, putting
them in the clear water of the seaside among the rocks and plucking them out
again, and so on." But one day Johnny loses his stone and eventually learns that
he can't get it back until he apologizes for all the mean things he's said to his
sister, his parents, and the old man who lives down the way, whom Johnny has
called a "bad name." This moral is far too didactically pointed, and it's not the
only one: when Johnny apologizes to his father for being "ashamed of him for
being the driver of a stupid pulpwood truck," Mr. Oaks replies, "I knew you
only said it because you hate what pulpwooding does to the trees. I hate it too."
Ecological destruction is the only social reality in Johnny's community, which
is otherwise a squeaky clean pastoral fantasy. The whole town turns out to help
Johnny find his stone (it is revealed halfway through the book that everyone in
this town has a green stone) and he finally does-when he cries over how bad
he's been, and how much he is loved nonetheless. Deeter's illustration of
Johnny's recovery of the stone is confusing: he's supposed to be holding it in
his hand, but it appears to fall from his eye. The paintings are warmer and less
glossy than those in To Hell with Dying, but the coloring is lurid and the facial
expressions are excessive. Like many talented writers for adults, Walker is at
less than her best when attempting to write for an equally demanding, but
different, audience. RS
D.V. Community life; Kindness
Waters, John F. Watching Whales. Cobblehill, 1991. ISBN 0-525-65072-5.
42p. illus. with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Although young readers can choose from an array of
excellent books about whales, this one focuses on whale-watching, an ecological
pastime that offers closeup glimpses of the giant mammals. After a bit of
background on the thriving Provincetown Harbor business, Waters follows a
fifth-grade class on their ocean field trip, from preparation research to
observations of a humpback breaching and the foul smell of blow vapor. The
continuous (but indexed) text is punctuated by section headings and pictures.
The writing style is commonplace, but there are occasional twists to wake up a
lulled reader. Descended from whale hunters, the founder and director of research
at the Center of Coastal Studies rescued a whale named Mallard in 1990, about
which Waters remarks, "Dr. Mayo's ancestors used to kill Mallard's ancestors."
The full-color photographs display enough dramatic angles to keep from
becoming repetitive sea-sky-and-fluke shots, and an appendix briefly describes
whale watching in other areas, along with lists of addresses for whale adoption.
BH
C.U. Nature study
[ 108 ]
Whipple, Laura, comp. Eric Carle's Dragons Dragons & Other Creatures That
Never Were; illus. by Eric Carle. Philomel, 1991. ISBN 0-399-22105-0. 69p.
$18.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Acrylic paint is used in various ways (brushed,
spattered, splashed, etc.) on colored tissue paper to achieve the variety and
brilliance that distinguish Carle's collages of a dragon, a bunyip, a roc, etc.
Here they appear in full-page and double-page spreads (with one fold-out of four
pages) to illustrate a selection of poems of fine quality by Paul Fleischman
(whose name is misspelled), Karla Kuskin, and William Shakespeare, among
others. Some of the illustrations are poster-effective in their composition; a few
seem busily detailed. ZS
Whitelaw, Nancy. A Beautiful Pearl; illus. by Judith Friedman. Whitman,
1991. ISBN 0-8075-0599-4. 32p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
A simple, moving story brings Lisa and her mother
to visit Grandma, whose illness (Alzheimer's disease) now requires her to have a
caretaker. It is Lisa's birthday, and she tells the story of the visit; it includes
many of the symptoms Grandma evinces (memory loss, confusion, at times not
recognizing family members or knowing where she is), but they do have a
birthday cake and Grandma does remember the traditional present (a pearl each
year, so that Lisa will later have a necklace). What makes the book touching is
the love and patience Lisa and her mother feel, and it's effective because
Whitelaw doesn't just tell that to the reader, but shows it. A full-page framed
painting, in quiet colors, faces each page of text. ZS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Willard, Nancy. Pish, Posh, Said Hieronymus Bosch; illus. by the Dillons.
Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-262210-1. 32p. $18.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Anyone who has enjoyed reading aloud poems from
Willard's A Visit to William Blake's Inn (BCCB 12/81) will recognize the
rhythmic melodies of this nonsensical text, which is in fact a sort of romance
between the medieval painter Hieronymus Bosch and his housekeeper. Fed up
with the bizarre creatures that inhabit Bosch's house ("feeding them, weeding
them, walking them, stalking them, calming them, combing them, scrubbing
and tucking in all of them"), she runs away only to wake up and find her
peaceful retreat invaded by "a mole in a habit, a thistledown rabbit, a troop of
jackdaws, a three-legged dish, the pickle-winged fish, and a head wearing claws."
The Dillons have unleashed a riot of surrealistic creatures within each gilt-framed
illustration. It's hard to resist poring over these topsy-turvy mutants claiming
imaginative kinship with Bosch's own strange creatures. 
Although each
composition is crawling with activity and is further complicated by gold figures
decorating the frames, there's a largesse of creamy space that rests the eye, and
the surfaces within the pictures are kept purposefully smooth and untextured to
relieve the compression of shapes. Not every child will be able to figure out
what's going on here, but then, not every child is literal enough to care-those
who love Alice in Wonderland (and they're a select lot) will catch the drift
enough to enjoy the wild energy of Dillon sights and Willard sounds. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
[109]
Wormser, Richard. Lifers': Learn the Truth at the Expense of Our Sorrow;
written and illus. with photographs by Richard Wormser. Messner, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-671-72548-3; Paper ed. ISBN 0-671-72549-1. 
207p.
Library ed. $14.98; Paper ed. $8.95.
R 
Gr. 5-12. 
The melodramatic subtitle, gaudily scrawled across
the black-and-white cover photo of a teen getting a stern talking-to, is a tipoff to
the didactic thrust of this photodocumentary, but kids won't care. The book
focuses on the well-known "Scared Straight Project" of the Lifers' Group at
Rahway Prison in New Jersey. In this project, troubled kids are brought to the
prison, where they are verbally harassed by prisoners ("Let's get one thing
straight, you little mothers! When I'm talking, all eyes on me!") in an attempt
to shock the boys onto the straight and narrow. This is the well-publicized part
of the program; less known is the fact that this session is followed by quiet one-
on-one discussions between the "lifers" and the boys. Most of the book is in the
convicts' words, as they describe their commitment to the project, as well as
what life is like for them in prison, and their thoughts on what turned them to
crime in the first place. While there is some repetition, there's no self-pity, and
the brutal facts of prison life are conveyed with no sensationalism. 
The
photos-mostly portraits of the lifers and some of the kids-have a similar
direct honesty. A somewhat dated reading list and an index are appended. RS
C.U. Social studies
Wright, Betty Ren. The Scariest Night. Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-
0904-X. 166p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Erin and her three best friends had been looking
forward to a "Great Shake-and-Shiver Summer of Horrors," watching ghostly
videos, visiting the local haunted house, and basically looking for ways to scare
themselves to death. Instead, and much to her chagrin, Erin's family is spending
the summer in Milwaukee so that her adopted (and by Erin, detested) younger
brother Cowper can have advanced piano instruction. However, the rundown
apartment building they move into offers plenty of deliciously scary things
itself, including a talking stone lion on the stoop and a medium, Molly Panca,
who has a collection of dolls that talk, no strings or batteries needed. The
premise is appealing and the sibling rivalry, a strong central conflict that is
credibly resolved; but the supernatural effects are not convincingly tied into the
realistic matrix. Can the dolls really talk, or is Molly Panca a ventriloquist, as
Erin's dad suggests? Can Molly really contact the dead, or is she a benign fraud,
giving the other old residents of the building messages they need or want to
hear? We never know, and Wright doesn't do anything with the resulting
ambiguity: instead, Molly dies. As summer vacation stories go, this is a pretty
good one, but the hocus pocus is not Wright at her best. Confirmed fans,
however, may not care. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Yolen, Jane. Wings; illus. by Dennis Nolan. Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-
297850-X. 32p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Yolen's prolific career has encompassed a number of
vivid stories centered on the theme of flight, including another Greek tale in a
1974 picture book The Boy Who Had Wings, as well as The Girl Who Loved
the Wind (BCCB 3/73) and some high-flying dragons. The myth of Daedalus
[ 110]
and Icarus is therefore a natural choice for her adaptation, and it is done here with
a graceful style of fictional development that is respectful of the tale's basic
elements. 
Nolan has chosen to depict the characters in literal, slightly
glamorized portraits offset by cloud figures of the gods, who express anger at
human hubris-a choral motif at the end of every page of Yolen's text as well-
or anguish over human folly. The more impressionistic of these Olympian faces
are effective, whereas the several that exaggerate the gods' emotions seem
overdone. The illustration of the minotaur is vividly rendered, as is the scene of
Icarus' fall toward the sea. This is a haunting tale which, like Fisher's version
of the Cyclops (reviewed above) and most other Greek myths, has no happy
ending but uses metaphoric distance to soften its tragic effects. BH
Zalben, Jane Breskin. The Fortuneteller in 5B. Holt, 1991. ISBN 0-8050-
1537-X. 150p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Sixth-grader Allie, the narrator, is both intrigued and
frightened by Madame Van Dam, who's moved into the fifth-floor apartment
above the one Allie shares with her widowed mother. Can the flamboyant
Madame really foretell the future? Jenny, Allie's best friend, is convinced that
she can. Allie, as she learns more about her neighbor, begins to understand that
her own grief about bereavement is no less deep than that of the elderly
fortuneteller whose Gypsy family had all died in Nazi concentration camps.
Zalben does a very good job of blending this serious theme with lighter
treatment of other aspects of Allie's life: her crush on a seventh-grade boy, her
ambivalent feelings about starting menstruation, and her strong relationship with
her loving, supportive mother. ZS
D.V. Growing up; Mother-daughter relations; Older-younger generations