Adoff, Arnold. Flamboyan; illus. by Karen Barbour. Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-
15-228404-4. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Flamboyan is a Caribbean island child named after the
flaming blossoms of a tree, and this is the poetic narrative of a day in her life.
After braiding her long red hair, she feeds the chickens, gathers the eggs, helps
her mother at the market, and then, in "the hottest part of the summer day" when
everyone is napping, has a dream of flying through the "high blue skies....
She soars and glides the air currents with giant kingfisher, until she is higher
than warm whisper breezes and salt sea smells." There's no conflict here, but
the description is rhythmic and the illustrations project enough drama to
compensate for lack of story tension. Flat-dimensioned, primitive-styled
watercolors are brilliantly hued with contrasts that are sharp but seldom jarring
and shapes that echo the movement of the words. Stylized red flowers punctuate
the text to mark the verbal beat for reading aloud. A vivid visit. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers; Intercultural understanding
Alcock, Vivien. The Monster Garden. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-440-50053-2.
[144 p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Whether she writes realistic fiction like The Cuckoo
Sister, or more often-as here--fantasy, Alcock is a superb craftsman. Her
books have well-sustained pace and narrative flow, innovative plots, and strong
characters. Here the protagonist is the rather lonely daughter of a widowed
father, who pays as little attention to Frankie as do her older brothers. "My
father is a high-up scientist and a low-down male chauvinist pig." When she
discovers that one brother has stolen some "goo" from Dad's genetic engineering
[24 ]
lab, Frankie demands a share as the price of silence. And from that grayish lump
grows a living thing, a monster ("Monnie") who becomes more and more
responsive and whose existence must be kept a secret shared with few other
people. Eventually, for its own safety, Monnie has to leave, although it and a
mourning Frankie meet one last time after the monster has become a beautiful,
gleaming sea creature. ,The Monster Garden is a deft fantasy; it is also a story of
compassionate love and growing self-reliance. ZS
D.V. Father-daughter relations; Self-reliance
Apfel, Necia H. Nebulae: The Birth and Death of Stars. Lothrop, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07229-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07228-3. 48p. illus.
with photographs. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
The coauthor of two college textbooks on astronomy,
Apfel writes simply and clearly in an oversize book with large print and a
continuous text Although there are a few instances in which the arrangement of
material seems illogical ("One famous stellar nursery is the Rosette Nebula ... "
on the page after a first reference to that nebula, for example) the text is on the
whole sequential and authoritative. Apfel describes the way in which nebulae are
formed and their consistency and appearance at different times during their
dramatic life cycle. An index is provided, as is a brief list of books (ranging
broadly in reading level) for further reading. ZS
C.U. Astronomy
Ballard, Robert D. Exploring the Titanic. Scholastic, 1988. ISBN 0-590-
41953-6. 
[64p]. illus. by Ken Marschall and with photographs. 
$14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
Taking graphic advantage of historical and
contemporary underwater photographs, along with diagrams and art work, this
conducts a reader on the Titanic's route from shipyard to sinking-and
rediscovery by the author. Ballard doesn't always seem comfortable in his first-
person address to youngsters about his search for the ship, sometimes
overdramatizing ("Had the girl survived in one of the lifeboats? Or had she
clutched the doll tightly as she sank in the icy waters?") an already surcharged
story. However, the narrative naturalizes when focused on the Titanic's history,
told with more detail than appears in most other juvenile books on the subject.
Together with the new background information on diving for the ship, the
selection and layout of illustrations make this prime choice for a wide age range.
BH
Bang, Molly. Delphine; written and illus. by Molly Bang. Morrow, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-05637-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-05636-9. 26p. Library
ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Always a visual adventurer in style and medium,
Bang experiments here with the surrealistic graphic development of a realistic
theme. Delphine, giant in proportion to a tiny mailman, receives a message that
Gram has a present waiting for her at the Post Office. She sets out in her
symbolic baby buggy with her pet wolf and mountain lion to cross gorges, run
rapids, and risk lightning with aplomb, all the while expressing nervousness
about what she suspects will be a bicycle. Needless to say, she learns to stay
on, steer, and stop the bike in one double-page spread. The idea that children are
[25
more capable than they think emerges from the subtle interplay of Delphine's
stated doubts and her pictured prowess. There's a lot to see in these paintings,
which at first seem brightly traditional but appear more ingeniously composed
with careful looking. An ambitious undertaking for a small-size book, this will
be obscure to some children but speak expressly to others. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers
Barton, Byron. I Want to Be an Astronaut; written and illus. by Byron Barton.
Crowell, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04744-4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-694-
00261-5. 32p. Library ed. $12.89; Paper ed. $7.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
While there is some dissonance between the very
young format of this picture book and its subject matter, Barton has provided an
especially evocative early career book. The simple text (no more than a sentence
per double-spread) expresses the desire of a little girl to "fly on the shuttle into
outer space." Along with experiencing the joys of ready-to-eat meals and zero
gravity (a concept that will take some explaining) she wants to "help fix a
satellite and build a factory in orbit"--a welcome nod to the idea, often missing
in similar books, that work means work. The simple paintings place the
gleaming white shuttle and astronaut suits against deep-purple space, creating a
remarkable sense of actually seeing the earth from a distance, with perspectives
close to vertiginous. Adventurous and reassuring at once, this closes with the
shuttle landing with jaunty agility back on earth. RS
D.V. Industry
Bible. Noah and the Ark; illus. by Pauline Baynes. Holt, 1988. ISBN 0-8050-
0886-1. 30p. $14.95.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
In contrast to Arthur Geisert's The Ark (BCCB: 9/88)
with its minimal text and cleverly crabbed etchings, Baynes uses the full flowing
text of the Revised Standard Version, and accompanies it with appropriately
opulent illustrations. The story begins on the title page, which features a small
and delicate frieze of humankind doing terrible things to one another, a realistic
detail seen again later in a beautifully peaceful painting of the ark rolling on the
water while tiny bodies drown in the waves. Showing imaginatively blended
influences of Japanese woodcuts and Persian miniatures, almost every
illustration is composed in a sweeping curve-of the animals racing to the Ark,
of the waves-filled with echoing details of flicking tails, arching palms, and the
suave jump of a swordfish toward the flying dove. The paintings are variously
and cleverly framed: waves leap out of trompe l'oeil edges, animals crawl onto
the facing page, a volcano erupts into the margin. There is plenty here to hold
the eye, and the ear will be caught as well. " ... and every beast according to
its kind, and all the cattle according to their kinds, and every creeping thing that
creeps on earth according to its kind, and every bird according to its kind, every
bird of every sort." RS
C.U. Religious education
Bond, Nancy. Another Shore. Margaret K. McElderry, 1988. ISBN 0-689-
50463-2. [384p]. $16.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
There have recently been several novels that attempt
to give contemporary immediacy to historical event through the device of time
travel (see editorial, this issue) and Bond's is one of the best, both for its
[26]
immersion in historical detail and its thoughtful manipulation of the time-travel
theme. 
17-year-old Lyn has come to the reconstructed colonial town of
Louisbourg on Nova Scotia with her mother, who has gotten a commission to
photograph the settlement. Lyn gets a job as an "animator," a costumed guide
who pretends to be one of the 18th century residents, in Lyn's case, 17-year-old
Elisabeth Bernard. One day Lyn falls in the street, and awakens in the old
Louisbourg--as Elisabeth Bernard. Readers will here have to take some time to
sort out new characters and an alien setting; like Lyn, they must grope along to
comprehension. The language is not quite the French that Lyn understands, the
smells are horrendous, Elisabeth's family has no patience with her fumbling and
hysteria. Used to not paying her much attention, they do not even recognize that
Elisabeth is gone and a stranger in her place. This is a harder world than most
depicted in colonial historical fiction, with little cozy family warmth to keep off
the raging winter storms. There is humor here, especially in the character of the
inept Donald Stewart, another animator who finds himself in the past, but even
he becomes less funny and more pathetic, finally tragic, trying to find his way
home. Bond must be credited for the integrity of her ending-Lyn cannot come
back to the 1980's, and finally resolves to make a new life with the mercurial
(and sexy) Frenchman she has come to love. It is a passionate relationship, but
its happiness is shadowed by Lyn's loss of her own future, and by the reader's
strong suspicion that in the 1980's there now lives a very frightened and alone
Elisabeth Bernard. RS
Boughton, Simon, comp. 
Great Lives. Doubleday, 1988. ISBN 0-385-
24283-2. 279p. illus. and with photographs. $17.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
Brief biographical entries in double columns of print
are broken by illustrations (some in color, some black and white) in a book with
limited reference use. As is inevitable in such a compilation, individual users
may find inclusions or exclusions capricious: 
Louisa May Alcott but not
Horatio Alger, Joe DiMaggio but not Willie Mays; they may also find relatively
unfamiliar names (Georges Cuvier, Benjamin Constant, Richard Trevithick) in
the alphabetical entries that cover men and women in political life, the arts and
sciences, sports and entertainment, technology, exploration, the Bible, etc.
(David, yes; Noah, no). 
Coverage and style are adequate; at times the
alphabetization is interrupted by a brief round-up article; for example, the entry
for Alexander the Great is broken by a double-page spread entitled "Man on the
Moon" that begins with a heading for Neil Armstrong, a heading which is
repeated, with a cross-reference, in its alphabetical slot. Entries are given in a
chronological table at the start of the book, and a subject index and brief glossary
are provided at the back. ZS
Bradman, Tony. Wait and See; illus. by Eileen Browne. Oxford, 1988. ISBN
0-19-520644-4. 28p. $10.95.
M 
Gr. K-2. 
First published in England, this is the story of a child
in an interracial family (black/white) that lives in a heterogeneous neighborhood.
Small Jo, with her savings, goes shopping with Mom; each friendly storekeeper
has something alluring, but Jo decides to "wait and see." When Mom discovers
she's left her money at home, Jo offers to lend what she has so that Mom can
mail a present to Grandma. On the return trip home, Mom tells each storekeeper
what Jo did, and each gives the child a gift. (Why did they go back to the stores
[ 27]
with no money?) Laden with a fish, some apples, and some cakes, the two
return home to be told by Dad that the dog has eaten their dinner. "Whatever
shall we have to eat?" "You'll have to wait and see!" they laugh. End of a story
that is useful for sociological reasons, but limp and purposive as a narrative,
although children will enjoy the dovetailing of events. The illustrations are
adequately composed but poorly drawn wash and line. ZS
D.V. Community life; Unselfishness
Brandenberg, Franz. 
Leo and Emily's Zoo; illus. by Yossi Abolafia.
Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07458-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
07457-X. 32p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Pleasant, if undistinguished, line-and-wash pictures
illustrate a picture story book about two enterprising children who, since they
can't afford to get to the zoo, decided to create their own. The writing is simple
and direct, the plot is simple and dull: child visitors want their money back
because they've been cheated-no animals. Their parents and a grandmother
emerge in hastily whipped-up costumes, and this seems to satisfy the audience.
At any rate, the admissions money eventually takes Leo and Emily to a real zoo.
ZS
D.V. Imaginative powers; Parent-child relations
Bunting, Eve. Is Anybody There? Lippincott, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-397-
32303-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32302-6. [176p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr.5-8. 
Thirteen-year-old Marcus has been a resourceful
latchkey kid since he was eight, when his father died. Now Marcus believes that
someone has been coming into the house where he and his mother live: his
housekey is taken, food seems to be missing, Mom's alarm clock is gone.
Marcus is convinced the intruder is Nick, the handsome boarder who lives in the
upstairs apartment, and who seems to be developing a romance with Mom. The
mystery and problem novel aspects of the novel are well integrated, and Marcus'
suspicious treatment of Nick changes gradually and plausibly. While the
mystery is more puzzling than suspenseful, and the denouement improbable, the
ending is emotionally satisfying. RS
D.V. Mother-son relations
Carrick, Carol. The Elephant in the Dark; illus. by Donald Carrick. Clarion,
1988. ISBN 0-89919-757-4. [102p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Based on a real event, the exhibiting of an elephant
by a man who walked her from Maine to Virginia, this focuses on twelve-year-
old Will. The setting is New England in the early 1800's, and Will is a shy boy
who lives alone with his ill mother. Grateful to earn money taking care of Mr.
Peacock's elephant Toong, Will learns to love the beast rather than fear her.
Will's mother dies, and the kindly owners of Toong's barn take the boy in-but
when the new owner of the elephant shows up, Will realizes that he'd rather
travel the roads with Toong than live a more sheltered life. The new owner says
no, but Will tags along and is eventually accepted after he proves that only he
can handle Toong when she is dangerously upset. The situation of the book is
credible, but the development seems contrived, and the ending is weak.
[28]
Characterization is shallow but adequate; the idea of the small boy whose
affection is returned by the huge beast will surely appeal to readers. ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Cleaver, Vera. Belle Pruitt. Lippincott, 1988. 
Library ed. ISBN 0-397-
32305-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32304-2. [176p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
When eleven-year-old Belle's baby brother dies of
pneumonia, "well-meaning" Aunt George moves into the house to help her
withdrawn sister-in-law. But Belle's mother seems beyond comfort, unable to
find her way out of her grief, a state that Aunt George seems intent on
maintaining. Solid, literal Belle (who when she looks at a cloud, sees a cloud,
that's all) experiences epiphany when she hears a tree talking to her, a creative
leap that allows Belle to begin accepting little Darwin's death. 
This
occasionally elliptical (and occasionally overwritten) story probably has a few
too many characters and incidents to be adequately convincing, but it also
contains some lovely understatement of character, allowing space for readers to
make up their own minds about the various dreams and ambitions, realized and
thwarted, that enlarge the story beyond its simple premise. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Imaginative powers
Collier, James Lincoln. The Winchesters. Macmillan, 1988. ISBN 0-02-
722831-2. [170p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
For generations, the Winchester family has virtually
owned the factory town of Everidge, and now 14-year-old Chris is feeling pulled
in two directions. While he and his mother live at the family estate, they're in
the gatehouse, not the mansioti: Chris' late father was a bit of a black sheep,
joining the Peace Corps instead assuming his proper place in the business. A
trifling incident in which Chris and his cousin Ernest (the heir apparent) throw
some town kids off Winchester property is both emblem and exacerbating
catalyst for increasing resentment and violence on the parts of both family and
town. Steadily, if slowly, told, the story admits complications on both sides,
although stereotypes (land barons v. sweated workers) remain essentially intact.
The closing scene, where Chris bargains with his grandfather for the freedom of
some town boys who have been framed by the family, is coldly effective: "All
right, let's do what you often have to do in these situations. We'll split the
difference." Less effective, and almost comically lurid, is a scene where Chris'
girlfriend, the town girl Marie, tries to bargain for the same thing with her
virginal charms. RS
Conrad, Pam. Staying Nine; illus. by Mike Wimmer. Harper, 1988. Library
ed. ISBN 0-06-021320-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021319-1. [80p]. Library ed.
$11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Heather doesn't want a birthday. "No party. No
candles. No presents. No singing. No ten years old. I'm staying nine." She
decides to wear the same clothes for her fifth grade picture as she did for her
fourth, despite the fact that she promised Dorelle they'd dress like twins, and
despite the uncomfortable feeling of too-short sleeves and a too-tight waistband.
But an unbirthday party, as Mom suggests? Well, maybe, especially if Uncle
Lou's wonderful and crazy girlfriend Rosa Rita comes along. In this warm
[29]
family story, Conrad explores a girl's fear of change with gentle humor,
economical writing, and accessible, unforced metaphor. Tribute is paid to both
those things that should remain the same, like moon cookies and lemonade cake
as annual birthday fare, and those that change, like being nine. It's Rosa Rita
who convinces Heather that growing up is worth it, because "Rosa Rita was just
the kind of grownup that Heather wanted to be." RS
D.V. Growing up
Cooney, Barbara. Island Boy; written and illus. by Barbara Cooney. Viking,
1988. ISBN 0-670-81749-X. [34p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Like Cooney's Miss Rumphius, this picture book
tells a life story against a landscape of the New England coast. Tibbetts Island is
named after the man who settled it, and the text describes the homesteader's
arrival, the farm he established with his wife and twelve children, and their son
Matthias' return after several years as a seaman. Eventually Matthias' children
leave the island and urge him to sell it to developers, but a grandson comes back
to continue the family traditions before old Matthias drowns in a storm. The
island is really the main character here, a small, rounded, green shape set into
horizontals of sea blue or gray. Against this backdrop, the people, the gulls, the
animals, and even the starkly rectangular white houses appear small and distant
except for a few interior close-ups of family activity. Like the endpapers that
map a craggy coast, the watercolor paintings trace the ways of people whose
lives were hard but who clung stubbornly to the rocks ringing their birthplace.
BH
Cresswell, Helen. Trouble; illus. by Margaret Chamberlain. Dutton, 1988.
ISBN 0-525-44396-7. 28p. $10.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Line and wash pictures, slightly cartoonish and more
commendable for their action and humor than for composition or nuance,
illustrate a three-generation story that should have universal appeal for the read-
aloud audience. Obstreperous Emma is always being scolded for getting in
trouble, but when Grandma comes for a visit, she overrules her daughter Lizzie
each time Lizzie says, chiding her daughter, "When I was a little girl..." she
did nothing but good. "When you were a little girl, Lizzie ... " Grandma says
tartly, there was nothing but trouble. Emma, of course, is delighted by these
revelations; she and Grandma beam at each other, and no doubt listeners,
vicariously triumphant, will beam too. ZS
D.V. Grandmother-child relations
Dahl, Roald. Matilda; illus. by Quentin Blake. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-
82439-9. [240p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
Viola Swamp, eat my dust. When it comes to the
ingenious torture of small schoolchildren, James Marshall's evil Swamp hasn't
got a patch on Dahl's Miss Trunchbull, school principal: "What a bunch of
nauseating little warts you are ... It makes me vomit to think that I am going
to have to put up with a load of garbage like you in my school for the next six
years." Super-bright Matilda, who read Great Expectations at age four, just bides
her time, until she discovers Miss Trunchbull's evil control over the beloved
first-grade teacher, Miss Honey. Time for action. Reading Dahl can be a bit
like being held by the neck and shrieked at in the face, but here, as in his best
[30]
books, the rude humor is tempered with a poignant understanding of outsiders
like Miss Honey and Matilda, a determined heroine not above some nasty tricks
of her own, delivered upon the entirely deserving, like her parents. "To tell the
truth, I doubt they would have noticed had she crawled into the house with a
broken leg." Sweet Miss Honey probably wouldn't, but you ought to try
reading this aloud, that is, if your local Trunchbull is safely out of earshot. RS
de Regniers, Beatrice Schenk and others, comp. Sing a Song of Popcorn: Every
Child's Book of Poems. Scholastic, 1988. ISBN 0-590-40645-0. 
[142p]
illus. $16.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-5. 
The purpose of the original title, Poems Children
Will Sit Still For (1969), was the provision of material for classroom teachers,
and contained selections that were for reading aloud as as well as those that could
be enjoyed by independent readers. For the present, oversized edition, 22 new
poems have been added to the 106 of the original. The selections are grouped
under nine headings (usually subject or genre), and each section is illustrated by a
winner of the Caldecott Medal. Suffice it to say that Marcia Brown, Leo and
Diane Dillon, Richard Egielski, Trina Schart Hyman, Arnold Lobel, Maurice
Sendak, Marc Simont, and Margot Zemach have done work that is varied,
polished, often funny, or beautiful. 
A pleasant book, still a useful if
conservative anthology, this has title, author, and first line indexes, and brief
notes on the illustrators. ZS
DeClements, Barthe. The Fourth Grade Wizards. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-
82290-6. 144p. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-6. 
A prequel to the author's popular Nothing's Fair in
Fifth Grade, etc., this one focuses on quiet Marianne, whose mother has died in a
plane crash. Both Marianne and Jack (see the other books) want to be "Wizards,"
students extended special privileges, but Jack must learn to behave, and Marianne
has to bring up her grades. The school story--more subdued than is usual from
this author-is meshed with Marianne's adjustment to her mother's death, her
move to a new home, getting a puppy (a wolf-dog hybrid) and growing to love
Dad's new girlfriend. This is a resolutely ordinary story, told in forthrightly
commonplace prose without a hint of nuance or complexity. Middle-graders
love DeClements' books, perhaps for their easy-reading plainness and
unsophisticated humor, but also for the author's unmistakable respect for her
audience and its concerns. Her perceptions are not deep or unusual, but they
honestly reflect common denominators that any kid will recognize: classroom
pranks, moving from gold to brown in the SRA box, the heartache of searching
for a lost pet. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Father-daughter relations
Delton, Judy. 
No Time for Christmas; illus. by Anastasia Mitchell.
Carolrhoda, 1988. ISBN 0-87614327-3. 48p. $8.95.
M 
3-5 yrs. 
This is in the Frog and Toad tradition but lacks the
several charms-textual and visual--of that innovative modem classic. Line
drawings, some black and white and some in color, show the protagonists to be
two bears, and the story (five short chapters, large print, flat writing) tells about
how Bear and Brimhall, cousins and housemates, are so busy working (at
different hours) to buy each other a special Christmas present that they never see
[31]
each other and have no time to prepare for the holiday. They decide to give their
jobs to friends and to spend Christmas Eve baking cookies, making wreaths, and
trimming the tree. New Christmas stories are always in demand, so it is
disappointing that this is equally pedestrian in story and pictures. ZS
Disch, Thomas M. The Brave Little Toaster Goes to Mars. Doubleday, 1988.
ISBN 0-385-24162-3. 72p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Alerted to the fact that a Martian colony of
supermachines plans to invade and control Earth, the brave little toaster and other
appliances in his home decide to fly to Mars to forestall disaster for the human
race that uses them so appreciatively. The vehicle is a laundry basket, the
energy source a macaroni and cheese dinner zapped by electromagnetic waves
from the microwave oven. The crew reaches Mars, overcomes its foes via the
democratic process of an election, and returns home just before their beloved
Madame comes back from her vacation. 
This has humor, action, bits of
scientific lore embedded in the fantasy, and a bevy of anthropomorphic machines
just this side of being Totally Precious. There's no question that the book has
many appealing elements, but-aside from the cuteness-it is weakened by the
fact that much of the vocabulary, and some of the concepts, are rather heavy for
children young enough to like stories about talking toasters and blankets, to say
nothing of a bilingual hearing aid. ZS
Downie, Jill. Alphabet Puzzle; written and illus. by Jill Downie. Lothrop,
1988. ISBN 0-688-08044-8. [52p]. $16.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
5-7 yrs. 
Responding to the apparently insatiable bookstore
demand for ever-more complicated alphabet books, this is another that is
attractive and inventive, but won't mean much to the usual alphabet book
audience. The letters are presented in pairs that are separated by a framed-hole
page that teases the reader to guess the defining word of the recto pictured letter.
Thus, "I is for icicles" (illustrated by a cave mouth topped with hanging icicles)
faces "J is for?" with the cutout revealing some icicle-like objects that (turn the
page) are teeth in the Jaws of a crocodile. Each pair is similarly tied through
visual wit or narrative connection. Kite, for example, faces Ladder-for when
the kite lands in a tree. The design and lettering are clean, and the crisp colored-
pencil drawings are filled with visual puns and details that echo the facing letter.
The trickiness, while fun, will confuse young alphabet learners, and some of the
words will be unfamiliar: garland (yes, it looks like a wreath to me, too), reeds
(framing a river, gotcha again), nightingale (a beautiful picture, but N is for
bird?). Attractive, ingenious, but really a coffee-table book for adults. RS
Drimmer, Frederick. Born Different: The Amazing Stories of Some Very
Special People. Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31360-8. 132p. illus. and with
photographs. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
A collective biography of seven people (six accounts,
since one includes Chang and Eng, Siamese twins) whose anatomical anomalies
made them prominent; among them are the midget known as Tom Thumb,
Robert Wadlow (the tallest man who ever lived, according to medical records) and
the tragic "elephant man." The subject of human oddities has a macabre interest
for many readers, and these accounts are also a testament to the resilience and
[32 ]
courage of severely handicapped men and women. Unfortunately, the author's
writing style is banal, and the text is sprinkled with generalizations and such
fatuous remarks as (in referring to Queen Victoria) "No one loved children more
than the queen, who had three small ones of her own." ZS
D.V. Courage; Handicaps, adjustment to
Edwards, Pat. Little John and Plutie. Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-48223-2.
[180p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
In a story set in the rural South in 1897, Little John
(age ten) moves, with his angry mother, to town to live with Gran. Daddy had
gotten drunk and lost all the money he'd taken to Memphis so he could buy
mules. That was how Little John met Plutie, two years older and black and
bright, Little John's first real friend. The stories of the friendship and of John's
family are smoothly fused, and Edwards writes perceptively of racial conflict, of
prejudice on both sides, and of the integrity and compassion that could, at times,
supersede prejudice, even in the South, even in 1897. The characterization is
strong, shaped by dialogue as well as exposition, the ending credible: Plutie
gets in trouble, Daddy lends a hand, John loves them both. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Interracial understanding
Eisenberg, Lisa. Mystery at Bluff Point Dunes. Dial, 1988. ISBN 0-8037-
0527-1. [160p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr.5-8. 
Teen sleuth Kate Clancy (Mystery at Snowshoe
Mountain Lodge) is back in a junior version of the English house-party weekend
mystery. Nobody gets murdered here, but from the day Kate and her friend
Bonnie arrive at Bonnie's grandparents' "cottage" (a Cape Cod mansion) small
items, some valuable, begin disappearing. And reappearing. Kate's watch is
taken (by the menacing handyman?) and she sees Bonnie's cousin Marilyn
pocket a valuable figurine. But then she catches another cousin prowling the
house at night. A conspiracy? 
Coverup? All the clues and most of the
misdeeds are in plain sight, a frustrating effrontery that adds piquant suspense.
Kate is no detecting whiz; a big part of her charm lies in her rueful determination
to enjoy her vacation despite the mystery, which is logically played out and
resolved. RS
Fisher, Leonard Everett, ad. Theseus and the Minotaur; ad. and illus. by Leonard
Everett Fisher. Holiday House, 1988. ISBN 0-8234-0703-9. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Fisher's paintings, 
styled 
in monumental
proportions, somber colors, and simple compositions, are well suited to a Greek
tale of heroic deeds and death. A map traces Theseus' journeys from Troezen to
Athens to Knossos to Naxos and back, after which each double spread focuses on
a crucial scene. Suspense is built by shadowy textures glinting with occasional
flashes of thick white light: Theseus' sword, Aegus' beard, the bones of the
Minotaur's victims, the monster's horns, the moon above the ship. Fisher has
also done a careful job of selecting and consolidating various versions, for which
he cites sources in the beginning. An impressive meeting of myth and picture
book. BH
[33]
Forest, Heather. The Baker's Dozen: A Colonial American Tale; illus. by
Susan Gaber. Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-15-200412-2. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A seventeenth-century legend describes the rise and
fall of a prosperous baker whose famous St. Nicholas cookies bring him a
booming business until he begins to cheat his customers. 
Even then his
reputation draws crowds, but a mysterious old woman curses him for his greed,
and thereafter everything goes wrong. Only on her return visit, when he adds an
extra cookie to her dozen, does good fortune return-thus the custom of giving
thirteen to a dozen. This is eminently tellable without pictures, but Gaber's
watercolor and pastel art is eyefilling, with softly blended hues and characters
vaguely resembling cookie-cutter shapes. The goodies make an appealing
graphic motif that eases the overt moralistic tone (though Van Amsterdam seems
to respond more to threat than conscience). The historical background, touched
on in a brief author's note, also adds some depth to the book as holiday fare. BH
C.U. Christmas-stories
Fosburgh, Liza. Cruise Control. Bantam, 1988. ISBN 0-553-05491-0. 2 17p.
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 7-10. 
Gussie (Augustus) is sixteen, his brother Jimbo a
precocious ten. Their sister Annie has reacted to Mom's alcoholism by bloating
herself with food; Dad is usually gentle with Mom although Gussie knows he
sometimes spends time with an attractive woman colleague. The family has
been visited (in a rather contrived situation) by a waif who calls herself Flame
(n6e Ethel) who later appeals to Gussie to rescue her; the two of them and Jimbo
take off in Mom's car and head south (financed primarily by money Jimbo has
made through gambling) and they are all welcomed by Gussie's aunt and uncle.
This unconvincing plot ends with Mom having a breakdown and being
hospitalized, Gussie and Jimbo returning home to a more loving Dad, and Flame
being offered a job by hospitable Miss Baby, Gussie's aunt. This gives a
convincing depiction of an alcoholic and of the ways in which members of her
family react to the strain of living with her, but there is little depth in
characterization and the book is further weakened by the convenient excesses of
the plot. ZS
Freedman, Russell. Buffalo Hunt. Holiday House, 1988. ISBN 0-8234-
0702-0. 52p. illus. with photographs. $16.95.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
After an introduction to the role of the buffalo in
Native American lore and life-style, the author describes preparations for a Plains
Indian hunt, techniques for approaching and attacking a herd, and the women's
work of using everything "from the brains to the tail." Finally, he discusses the
appearance of repeating rifles, bounty hunting, and railroad sports shooting as
death knells. "The days of the buffalo hunters had faded like a dream," to be kept
alive in legend alone. Freedman has hit his stride in terms of selection, style,
and illustration: the color reproductions of historical art work form a stunning
complement to the carefully researched, graceful presentation of information.
The paintings of George Catlin, Charles Russell, Karl Bodmer, and others,
including a robe by a Crow artist, speak in moving visual terms of a lost culture
and the environment upon which it was based. A book brilliantly designed in all
aspects. BH
C.U. Indians of North America (unit)
[34]
French, Michael. Circle of Revenge. Bantam, 1988. ISBN 0-553-05495-3.
[176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Informing a barely credible (but engrossing) story of
mind control and terrorism with some tough moral questions, French has written
a solid thriller. Sixteen-year-old Robbie is intrigued that someone would pay
him fifteen dollars an hour to be a subject for a psychology experiment. The
pay is better than Burger King, and all that attention isn't bad for the ego, either.
Little could he have known the ties between Dr. Salazar and Robbie's new friend
Carlos, a rich kid whose Central American parents try to keep securely protected
in their Beverly Hills mansion. Protected from what? From Robbie, it turns
out, but not before all kinds of twists along the way. Good guy/bad guy
questions are thrown too obviously, but the book does present the beginnings of
a sophistication that will ready readers for more complex political fiction. RS
Galvin, Matthew. Otto Learns about His Medicine: A Story about Medication
for Hyperactive Children; illus. by Sandra Ferraro. Magination Press, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-945354-04-5; Paper ed. ISBN 0-945354-03-7. 32p. Library
ed. $14.95; Paper ed. $4.95.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
Otto is a young car, in this purposive story in which
anthropomorphism reigns supreme. Hyperactive, Otto has trouble at school
(short attention span, too much talking) and has to see a mechanic who
prescribes medication, explaining what the medicine does and what the side
effects may be. While it is true that many children like animate-machine stories,
this is an unfortunate combination of read-aloud format and independent-reader
vocabulary, and, to some extent, concepts. It is didactic, and it is illustrated in
pedestrian style. The prefatory note by the author (an M.D.) indicates that the
ideas have been used successfully in therapeutic practice; unfortunately, the
translation into print is less successful. ZS
Garfield, Leon. The Empty Sleeve. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-440-50049-4.
[216p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
A master of plotting and style, Garfield uses a
combination of ingredients that will be familiar to his fans: Dickensian
dialogue, settings that are reminiscent of Thomas Hardy's openings, and a heady
mixture of suspense, danger, and adventure in a structure that has intricate shifts
and turns. The title refers to a spectre that haunts one of a pair of twins, Peter,
who has been sent to London as an apprentice. Peter has been troublesome, his
twin Paul angelic to a fault. Garfield makes it clear just what that fault is, in a
picaresque story of the 18th century that has a judicious balance of realism and
fantasy. ZS
Gibbons, Gail. Sunken Treasure; written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. Crowell,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-04736-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04734-7. [32p].
Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
With wash drawings that avoid some of the glitzier
cartoon effects in her prodigiously serial nonfiction picturebooks, Gibbons
shows the fate of the Spanish galleon Atocha and its epic moder-day recovery.
This is a story that has been well told with photographs in George Sullivan's
Treasure Hunt (BCCB: 1/88), but the challenge of condensing and illustrating
[35
the facts in a briefer format is well met here. The hardship and tragedy that
dogged Mel Fisher's enterprise, including his son's death, have been omitted for
an outline of the techniques of searching and raising the treasure. Similarly, the
archeological preservation of the wreck is indicated without reference to the
conflicts that still surround the artifacts. For youngsters eager to investigate
tales of hidden treasure, this is as good an introduction as any available for the
age group. BH
Gilman, Michael. Matthew Henson: Explorer. Chelsea House, 1988. ISBN
1-55546-590-0. 
110p. 
illus. with photographs. 
(Black Americans of
Achievement). $16.95.
R 
Gr.5-9. 
Despite stylistic lapses and some slow-moving
passages, this is a life story that has enough drama, danger, and information to
appeal, deservedly, to readers who are interested in explorers or distinguished
figures in black history--or both. The details of the Arctic expeditions of
Henson and Peary are fascinating, the shabby treatment of Henson after (and
occasionally during) his voyages a reminder of the bias he later, at least publicly,
overlooked. The one serious weakness of the book is not attributable to the
biographer but to the editorial decision to use (apparently) what photographs
were on hand. Thus there is a shot of the public buildings around a Brooklyn
square with the caption, "While Henson was recovering from an eye injury he
had suffered in the Arctic, he stayed in Brooklyn, New York (shown here) at the
home of the sister of Dr. Frederick Cook." A chronology, a bibliography, and
an index are appended. ZS
Greene, Constance. Monday I Love You. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-022205-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022183-6. 170p. Library ed. $11.89;
Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
This is a problem novel with a capital D-38D.
That's the bra size Grace Schmitt has worn ever since she matured into a
voluptuous object of ridicule at school. Contributing to her low self-esteem are
low-income, lower-class parents who seem to alternate abandoning the family.
Memories of a happy, un-selfconscious childhood are interspersed with tense
scenes of torment, one in a washroom where several girls rip off Grace's blouse
and another in a trailer home invaded by a criminal while Grace is babysitting.
Past and present intersect when Grace realizes that the criminal who has spared
her life may be a boy with whom she had sworn eternal friendship at age six.
This encounter proves a turning point after which, with the help of a
sympathetic gym teacher, she begins to value her own courage and build
confidence (here one could wish she had shown a trace of anger at having her life
threatened, as well as gratitude that it was spared). Considering how much is
crammed into this novel, including the single gym teacher's two adopted Korean
children, the stereotyped nastiness of every popular or attractive peer, and an
unlikely central coincidence, the first-person narrative holds together surprisingly
well. Grace has, despite her self-pity, an appealing and intense vulnerability.
Unfortunate side notes include a bland cover and a single paragraph where Grace
suddenly starts swearing, which she does nowhere else in the book. However,
the vivid portrayal of a teenager tormented by insecurity more than makes up for
these distractions. BH
D.V. Group acceptance; Self-confidence
[36]
Hall, Lynn. A Killing Freeze. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07867-2. [128p].
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Adolescent Clarie, the narrator, is perfectly happy
with her quiet life in a small Minnesota town and with her loving friendship
with Dad, who'd raised her from infancy when her mother decamped. The big
event of the year for them is a winter carnival that Dad runs and that makes a big
difference in his snowmobile business. The carnival and the community are
drastically affected by the murder of an elderly woman who has been Clarie's
close friend. Then, second shock, a prime suspect is murdered; only when his
killer is identified does it become clear that the first "murder" was a freak
accident. This has the plausible structure and suspense that are touchstones for
good mystery writing, and the well-defined characterizations and relationships
give it substance. Because it is written with directness and simplicity, it should
appeal to reluctant readers. ZS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Hamilton, Virginia, ad. In the Beginning: Creation Stories from Around the
World; illus. by Barry Moser. Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-15-238740-4. [176p].
$18.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
The adaptation of 25 diverse creation myths is an
ambitious undertaking, and this book succeeds in that it brings the stories
together for comparative reading and suggests powerful metaphors, both in
printed and graphical statements. Hamilton has ranged across African, Asian,
South and North American, Mediterannean, Australian, and European cultures for
source material and rendered the retellings with her customary intelligence,
though not with the rhythmic familiarity that characterized The People Could
Fly. There remain two problems. First, the brief notes after each tale are often
descriptive recaps that do not include specific titles of origin, except, ironically,
for the Biblical stories that most young readers will know. Second, those stories
with which the adapter seems most familiar get the most extensive treatment, as
in the near fictionalization of Pandora. A few drawbacks are inherent in the
format. Many of these tales belong to longer cycles, and here involvement is
frustratingly limited: twice we get hints of Prometheus' fate, for instance, but
never learn what it is. Several of the tales are confusing out of context of
cultural annotation, as in the Aboriginal "Bandicoots Come From His Body:
Karora the Creator," but that is a problem beyond the scope of this collection.
An afterword explains some of the basic types of creation myth and includes a
three-page bibliography. Moser's paintings are powerful, in some cases relying
on suggestion, as in the mystical blue oval for "Bursting from the Hen's Egg:
Phan Ku the Creator" and in others fostering the comedy of strict detail, as in the
profile of Warm Dog, duped by the Russian Altaic devil Ulgen. There are few
juvenile collections against which to measure this-Penelope Farmer's
Beginnings: Creation Myths of the World (BCCB: 11/79) is out of print; the
book is badly needed and handsomely done. BH
Handford, Martin. Find Waldo Now; written and illus. by Martin Handford.
Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-34292-0. 27p. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
Once around the world was not, apparently, enough
for Waldo (see Where's Waldo); now he's on a trip through time, "lost for
thousands of years!" says the cover, and even more accurately, "hidden among
[37]
thousands of people!" The object of this game book is to find the tiny figure of
Waldo, a sort of Jughead Jones in a stocking cap, in the enormously populated
double-page spreads of various historical periods. Unlike Anno's books, of
which this seems almost a parody, Waldo's journey has zero historical value,
peopled as it is with a milk-lapping Sphinx, a gold-rushing cactus, and an ocean
full of forever bumbling pirates ("Once there were lots of pirates, but they died
out in the end because too many of them were men.") To call the pictures busy
would be a drastic understatement, but this large-format picture book is just the
sort of thing to keep a table of middle-schoolers (relatively) quiet and looking for
at least fifteen minutes. RS
Haskins, James. The 60s Reader; by James Haskins and Kathleen Benson.
Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-80674-9. 244p. illus. with photographs. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
With a survey approach and simple prose, the authors
report on the political, cultural, and religious movements of the decade that made
"it possible for people to ask questions-about their lives, their values, their
society-and to challenge the things they did not like." 
The technique of
synthesizing background information as a context for primary materials has been
capably handled, with the result that young readers will have easy access to
letters, song lyrics, and speech and article excerpts by leaders from Ron Karenga
to the Berrigans. 
The selections are well balanced in scope, if primarily
sympathetic to the liberal cause. The Scalapino-Morgenthau National Teach-In
debate gives both sides of the Vietnam controversy, and there's a consistent
effort at objective summary ("Depending on one's point of view, the bloody
confrontations that took place on the streets of Chicago during the 1968
Democratic convention were either a 'police riot' or a 'radicals riot.'"). There are
a few quotes that don't seem specifically documented-an interview with Joan
Baez, for instance, doesn't appear in the bibliography. However, for junior high
and high school student researching the subject, this provides an overview that
can lead to more complex analyses in adult literature. With black-and-white
news photos. BH
C.U. History-U.S.-Modern
Herlihy, Dirlie. Ludie's Song. Dial, 1988. ISBN 0-8037-0533-6. [224p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
During the first week of a visit to her Uncle Ray and
Aunt Letta's house in rural Georgia, thirteen-year-old Martha befriends a
disfigured, artistically gifted black girl who was once impregnated by Martha's
uncle Lonnie and almost burned to death as a consequence of his violent rage. In
the course of a few mornings' meetings, Martha talks with Ludie's brother
Chili, as well. The next day, several white boys beat Chili and kidnap him and
Martha, whom they accuse of being a "nigger lover," threatening to rape her and
hang Chili. With Ludie's help, both youngsters escape, and Martha convinces
the townspeople that Chili is innocent by confronting the villains and tricking
one into a confession. Uncle Ray is even moved to help get Chili to a doctor
and buy Ludie art lessons. Although the situation is not entirely unlikely in the
period just before Eisenhower was elected president, the premise that Martha's
epiphany about racial equality could emerge based on a few mornings spent with
Ludie seems unconvincing. Had less time been spent on Martha's sudden
philosophical transformation and more been spent in developing the scenes
[38 ]
between the two girls that motivated her insight, the book would have seemed
less purposive. However, such a tangled plot and large cast would challenge
even an experienced writer, and Herlihy has managed to inject a good deal of
intensity into her first novel despite some stylistic awkwardness and lack of
control. The theme is ambitiously conceived and the setting vivid. BH
D.V. Interracial understanding
Hinton, S. E. Taming the Star Runner. Delacorte, 1988. 
ISBN 0-440-
50058-3. 16 6 p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
After a brief stay in a juvenile hall, sixteen-year-old
Travis is sent to stay on his uncle Ken's ranch. Ken is preoccupied with his
impending divorce and how it will affect his relationship with his small son, but
he's kind to Travis. Certainly it's better than being at home with his mother
and his abusive stepfather. Hinton, whose perceptive interpretation of the young
person who is isolated has brought deserved recognition, here uses two aspects of
Travis' life to show his interests and his ambivalence: one is the fact that his
manuscript for a novel has been accepted, a work in which he is articulate in a
way that he is not in person; second, his relationship with the people who work
or ride at a riding school run by Casey, whom he comes to love and whom he
admires because of her courage and her independence. There's a lot about horses
here (Star Runner is Casey's horse), and the book will probably appeal most to
those readers who are also horse lovers, but Hinton's fans are legion, and this is
far from a formula horse story; it has depth, pattern, perception, and a
communicable empathy for its protagonist. ZS
D.V. Uncle-nephew relations
Hiscock, Bruce. 
The Big Rock; written and illus. by Bruce Hiscock.
Atheneum, 1988. ISBN 0-689-31402-7. 32p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
The big rock is a granite boulder that the artist/author
traces from its formation a billion years ago through its upheaval to a
mountaintop, its erosion, its movement by glacial flow, and its cracking apart in
the winters of a New York state forest. All this is accompanied with brief
comments about botanical and biological evolution and set into watercolor
spreads that are competently informative, though stiffly drafted. Those most
resembling diagrams are better drawn than those that aspire to landscapes or
human figures. What the book does well is help children imagine the eons of
time and amazing geological transformations that have shaped objects they regard
as part of common, everyday surroundings. BH
C.U. Geology
Hoban, Tana. Look! Look! Look!; illus. with photographs by Tana Hoban.
Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07240-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
07239-9. 22p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Tana Hoban's color photographs are, as usual, both
technically distinctive and visually attractive. Here the background of the pages
is an effective black, while the format-square cut-outs on the first of each trio
of pages-will be familiar to Hoban fans. There are two patterns in this
wordless book; in both, the square shows a detail of the masked picture, while
the second view either is a photograph of a part or shows the whole object. For
example, a square of hair is followed by the dog whose hair had been glimpsed
[39]
through the cut-out, while the third picture is another view of the same dog.
However, the next sequence shows some spikes, then some unidentified
structural detail is revealed but not until the third photograph does the viewer see
a ferris wheel. Like Hoban's other books, this is handsome, and it is useful for
encouraging powers of observation. In its lack of theme and in the discrepant
treatment, it may not be quite as useful as some of its predecessors. ZS
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
Hooks, William H. A Flight of Dazzle Angels. Macmillan, 1988. ISBN 0-02-
744430-9. [170p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Fifteen-year-old Annie Earle Roland is beset with
problems: her father is dead, her mother an invalid, her brother a "feebleminded"
epileptic, and she herself impeded by a club foot that places her outside the pale
of their small-town Southern society of 1908. Moreover, her aunt is vicious,
avaricious, and ambitious to take over the Roland wealth; a local bully who
harasses her family is supported by his father, the sheriff. Annie Earle's only
friends are the old black housekeeper and her granddaughter Queen Esther, but of
course the other characters are racist, dismissing or actively persecuting the
"niggers," as they are called by those not well-enough disposed to call them
"colored." A visit to a root woman for a conjure bag and a sexual encounter
with a traveling logger during a storm complete the picture in this southern
Gothic romance (a steady young lawyer is waiting in the wings). The plot is
overloaded, as is the style ("The broken, vine-covered walls were the remnants of
the remembered layrinth of neatly stacked rows of new-made bricks through
which she had wandered with her father a childhood ago"). However, there are
some vivid scenes and lots of atmosphere, with the protagonist's determination
developed in contrast to the stock cast. BH
D.V. Handicaps, overcoming
Hotze, Sollace. A Circle Unbroken. Clarion, 1988. ISBN 0-89919-733-7.
[224p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Rachel Porter, seventeen, had been living happily in
the Sioux community to which she had been brought as a captive in 1838; now,
in 1845, she is forcibly taken back to her widowed father and finds it hard to
adjust to another life-style and its strictures. In this first novel, Hotze makes a
convincing case for Rachel's decision to go back to her Sioux family and the
way of life she had enjoyed; the reluctant agreement of her stern father is less
convincing, given his bias against the "heathen" who had taken three members
of his family. The writing style is adequate, as is the structure of the book and
the characterization; the narrative is weakened by its slow pace. ZS
D.V. Interracial understanding
Houston, Gloria. The Year of the Perfect Christmas Tree; illus. by Barbara
Cooney. Dial, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0300-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-
0299-X. [32p]. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
One spring, Ruthie's father shows her the balsam tree
he plans to contribute to their Appalachian village for Christmas, when she will
dress as an angel. But Papa is called to fight in World War I, and Ruthie and her
mother struggle through the summer and fall without him. Even after the letter
comes saying he will be home for Christmas, he does not appear. With the
[40]
determination of faith, Ruthie's mother cuts up her own wedding gown for
Ruthie's angel dress, makes a midnight trek with her to cut the tree, and after the
service, finds Papa standing on the church steps. The story has a quiet drama
that is reinforced by Cooney's paintings. Each composition gives a sense of the
spacious solitude of the setting, the patient loneliness of waiting, the strength of
the hills and those who inhabit them. The colors are muted, the textures
unobtrusively effective. A strong seasonal selection for family sharing. BH
C.U. Christmas-stories
D.V. Faith
Hurmence, Belinda. The Nightwalker. Clarion, 1988. ISBN 0-89919-732-9.
$12.95. [144p]. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Twelve-year-old Savannah understands her father's
disapproval of summer residents on the inner banks of the North Carolina coast.
Yet she also feels a kinship with the daughter of the wealthy doctor who has
bought the house next door. 
The conflict comes to a head when local
fishermen's shacks are burned in response to environmentalists' proposals to
make a national seashore out of traditional fishing grounds. Savvy is afraid her
little brother Pocosin is a sleepwalking arsonist, inspired or even inhabited by
the nightwalker whom Indian legend says stalks the area. This seems pretty
unlikely, as does the denouement when Savvy finds herself sleepwalking in the
doctor's house and confronts a real arsonist her own age. This incident is
unrelated to the other fires, however; it turns out the fishermen have been setting
their own shacks on fire in protest against the Park Service, Feds, etc.. There's
suspense here and some socio-personal issues, but they're not clearly defined.
While Savvy's sleepwalking is resolved-the doctor intimates she is
"outgrowing" it-the larger questions are left unaddressed. The unusual setting
and protagonist, however, redeem a confused plot. BH
D.V. Adaptability
Irwin, Hadley. So Long at the Fair. Margaret K. McElderry, 1988. ISBN
0-689-50454-3. [180p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-12. 
"Ashley had left without telling me why," and now
Joel Wendell Logan III wants to be just Joe, a country kid wandering through the
state fair. He spends a week there, working odd jobs, sleeping in the pig barn,
telling no one he's a mixed-up rich kid who has lost his best friend. In the next
flashbacked section readers meet Ashley, a vibrant, unconventional girl who
loves old Beatles records, won't dissect a frog, the smartest kid in the Talented
and Gifted class who flunks a math test for the fun of it. "What's so great about
being smart? Why can't they let us live?" When Ashley gets a glowing write-
up in the local paper for her work with underprivileged school dropouts, she kills
herself. While there's a sentimental opposition here between the hardworking
farm folk and the empty lives of the affluent that intimates that suicide is a rich
kids' disease, this is less didactic than most teen suicide novels. Outside of their
affluence, neither Joel nor Ashley are typecast, and what emerges is not a case
study of an at-risk teenager but a portrait of a real, complicated friendship that
ends for a reason that the survivor can never understand. RS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Friendship values
[41]
Johnston, Norma. Return to Morocco. Four Winds, 1988. ISBN 0-02-
747712-6. [171p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Seventeen-year-old Tory doesn't want a coming-out
party, so she thinks Grandma is doing her a big favor by inviting Kate along on
a cruise to Morooco. As in the Richard Peck book reviewed last month, Tory
finds that her grandmother is someone with her own life and past: prior to
becoming Mrs. Henry McCausland Clay, she was Nance O'Neill, WWII
photographer. And, as Toby gradually discovers through murder and mayhem,
Nannie was also a spy for the OSS and has returned to Morocco on long-
unfinished business. While the plot has all the ingredients of a Helen Maclnnes
movel, it depends too much on obvious contrivance and coincidence, straining
credulity. In one scene, for example, Tory charms a cobra that has reared out of
her makeup drawer by singing "Happy Birthday to You," quite a trick,
considering that snakes are deaf to airborne sound. The relationship between
Nannie and Tory is drawn with more subtlety and realistic complications. "It
wasn't just that Nannie had kept secrets, that she'd had a whole other life. She'd
lied to me ... I'd only been her cover. She'd been using me." Despite the
general implausibility, readers will enjoy the spy-novel trappings (Nannie
demonstrates how to stab a man with a rolled-up magazine) and exotic setting.
RS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Kessler, Leonard. Old Turtle's Soccer Team; written and illus. by Leonard
Kessler. Greenwillow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07158-9; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-07157-0. 48p. Library ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 1-2. 
Beginning independent readers of both sexes should
welcome a story about a unisex sport that has become increasingly popular. The
characters are animals (appealing) who make silly mistakes (very appealing) but
who win their first game against another team (also v.a.). 
Cartoon-style
illustrations are bright and not too busy, the division of the text into five
"chapters" flatters readers who like their books to have the same structure as
those for older children, and there's just enough information about the game to
be appropriate for the audience. 
Print is large, leading is adequate, and
vocabulary is controlled but not stilted. ZS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Kimmel, Eric A. Anansi and the Moss-Covered Rock; illus. by Janet Stevens.
Holiday House, 1988. ISBN 0-8234-0689. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Exuding humor from every printed pore, this
combines Stevens' knack for drawing funny animals with Kimmel's sense of
rhythmic storytelling. Anansi finds a magic rock that puts to sleep anyone
nearby who happens to remark, "isn't this a strange moss-covered rock." After
falling unconscious several times himself ("KPOM!"), Anansi uses the rock to
knock out the other animals, raiding their carefully hoarded food stores. Finally
the trickster gets a taste of his own medicine when Little Bush Deer, who has
been spying on the whole scenario, turns the tables on Anansi. Stevens has
cleverly avoided cartooning the spider's face and opted instead for emphasizing
his very expressive set of eight black legs. The stylized exaggeration of words
and pictures is just wry enough to avoid cuteness and maintain the mischief of a
true trickster tale. BH
[42]
King-Smith, Dick. The Fox Busters; illus. by Jon Miller. Delacorte, 1988.
ISBN 0-440-50064-8. [117p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr.5-7. 
In a saga of Chanticleerian proportions with a
feminist twist, this relates the defeat of some determined foxes by three heroic
pullets. With characteristically witty dispatch, King-Smith establishes the world
of the barnyard and individualizes the principal animals in the heat of action.
The opening scene is an ambush of chicks by a fox hidden in the water trough,
and the pace mounts from there as Ransome, Sims, and Jefferies (named for a
plow) are hatched, develop their genetically enhanced flying and scheming
powers, and fend off fox raids forever. Their heat tolerance training in an
abandoned greenhouse for the purpose of dropping hardboiled eggs-laid mid-air
at terrific speeds and aimed with the skill of constant target practice-on
attackers' heads is only one detail of an inventive arsenal. This is life-or-death
stuff, with feathers flying and even a moment of poignancy as the courageous
but somewhat slow-witted cock Massey-Harris (after the tractor) meets a noble
end. Imaginative fare for reading aloud with Chaucer's tale and other chicken-fox
fables. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Klein, Norma. No More Saturday Nights. Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN
0-394-91944-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-81944-6. [246p]. Library ed. $13.99;
Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 8-10. 
Tim, seventeen, is the narrator. His mother is dead,
his stiff and undemonstrative father still mourns his wife but cannot unbend
toward his son. Looking forward to leaving their small town and going to
college in New York, Tim makes a decision that will affect every part of his life:
he goes to court to win custody of the child his girlfriend is carrying, a child she
has agreed to give up (for cash) to a childless couple. Tim wins custody and
takes his son, Mason, to Columbia with him; indeed, there are no more Saturday
nights. Among the adjustments Tim makes are a more realistic approach to a
heavy course-load, an understanding of the three girls whose apartment he shares
(one becomes his lover) and an acceptance of the fact that his father dotes on the
baby as he had never doted on Tim, and that Dad has a woman in his life. Klein
poses an interesting situation and deals with it perceptively and candidly; the
first-person voice is convincing, the writing smooth and nicely paced. ZS
D.V. Father-son relations; Responsibility
Knudson, R. R. Julie Brown: Racing Against the World; illus. by J. Brian
Pinkney. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-81487-3. 64p. (Women of Our Time).
$10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Knudson profiles a runner whose career spanned a
period when women were beginning to compete more steadily in both speed and
cross-country track events. Although the author is an experienced runner herself
and has smoothly presented a cross-section of information about the subject,
Julie Brown remains a distant figure throughout the book. The triumphs,
injuries, and losses (including a poor showing in the first women's Olympic
marathon, where she ran in spite of mononucleosis) are blended behind Brown's
heroic silence, broken only by eventual conflict with a hard-driving coach.
Indeed, readers may wonder how such stoicism emerged from a youngster so
concerned about "looking good" that "if the part wasn't straight and her brown
[43]
pigtails not braided perfectly, Julie tossed herself sobbing onto the floor." It is
truly amazing to find out that Brown's weight of 107 was only 6% fat, her
maximum oxygen uptake factor 76 (Frank Shorter tested at 71), and her muscles
83% slow-twitch fiber; but one wants to know more about the heart of this
"running machine." BH
C.U. Physical education
D.V. Perseverance
Kozodoy, Ruth. Isadora Duncan. Chelsea House, 1988. ISBN 1-55546-650-8.
112p. illus. with photographs. (American Women of Achievement). $16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Although the text slips occasionally into an
excessively adulatory mood, it is for the most part objective; certainly it is
candid about a dance pioneer whose costume and performance as well as her
personal life evoked condemnation as well as kudos. Duncan's life was dramatic,
touched at times by tragedy, swept by passion, and-always-devoted to her art.
The two-column format contributes a stodgy-series look to the pages, but the
many historical photographs add interest. The writing style is adequate albeit
often effusive. A bibliography, a chronology, and an index add usefulness to a
biography that is flawed but that provides a good deal of information about an
unusual artist. ZS
Kroll, Stephen. Looking for Daniela; illus. by Anita Lobel. Holiday House,
1988. ISBN 0-8234-0695-4. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Oversize pages afford Lobel space for inventive
composition in paintings that are notable for their action, restrained use of color,
and decorative details that embellish but do not crowd the pages. The story lacks
spontaneity, being a boy-saves-girl standard plot that is adequately told but that
has little humor or suspense to lighten the narrative. 
A juggler, tightrope
walker, and magician, Antonio is a street performer of old; it's hard to tell the
period. When his friend Daniela is kidnapped by bandits who sail off with her,
Antonio follows their ship in a small boat. He rescues Daniela and, after a few
attempts at recapture, restores her to her grateful parents, who reward him with
gold. "But for Antonio," the story ends, "the best part came the next day. As he
walked toward the piazza to perform, Daniela waved to him from her window."
ZS
Kudlinski, Kathleen V. Juliette Gordon Low: America's First Girl Scout; illus.
by Sheila Hamanaka. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-82208-6. 64p. (Women of
Our Time). $10.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Although there are traces of adulatory writing, the
author has-as she did in her biography of Rachel Carson (BCCB: 2/88)--done a
good job of pulling together facts about her subject, providing information about
Low's role as founder of the Girl Scout movement as well as giving a picture of
her as a person, and noting, in the closing pages, how the research was done.
The author's note is as simply written as the book itself, and is equally brief and
clear. Kudlinski shows how a child of wealth became a post-Civil War Southern
belle, a socialite who was expected to be nothing but decorative and gentle, then
a childless widow whose energy and affection for children led her to establish an
organization that gave girls the freedom to be active and the chance to be
responsible, both unusual opportunities. ZS
[ 44 ]
Kuklin, Susan. Taking My Dog to the Vet; written and illus. with photographs
by Susan Kuklin. Bradbury, 1988. ISBN 0-02-751234-7. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-3. 
Large print and uncrowded pages, plus the age of the
narrator as indicated in the photographs, make this seem more appropriate for the
independent reader than for the preschool child indicated (in the review slip) as
the intended audience. Minal and her mother take their cairn terrier, Silver, to
the vet's for a checkup; it is Minal who stands by and helps during the
examination, as Dr. Kuhlman explains each procedure and its resultant
information. Useful for pet owners, but static in tone, this is clearly written;
the color photographs, while clear, tend to become repetitive. ZS
D.V. Pets, care of
Langley, Andrew. The World of Sharks. ISBN 0-531-18211-8. Rowland-
Entwistle, Theodore. 
Guns. 
ISBN 0-531-18209-6. 
Both books:
Bookwright/Watts, 1988. 32p. illus. with photographs. $11.90.
Ad 
Gr. 3-6. 
Both of these entries have a wide and grisly appeal
that extends beyond the usual my-report-is-due-tomorrow audience for series
nonfiction. While Guns closes with an admonition to never point a gun "loaded
or not" at anybody, moral niceties are for the most part slighted in favor of the
history of the development of firearms and how they work, including an
enticing, bound-to-be-traced diagram of a Luger. Conversely, Sharks begins by
telling us that most are "harmless," and then goes on to belie its claim with
numerous and delectable photos of pointed teeth: one picture of the "gaping
jaws" of a great white is labeled "The smile of death." Both books are heavily
illustrated and are well-organized, with glossary, bibliography, and index. Buy
for the thrill. RS
Lester, Julius, ad. More Tales of Uncle Remus: Further Adventures of Brer
Rabbit, His Friends, Enemies, and Others; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. Dial, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0420-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0419-4. 
143p.
Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $15.00.
R* 
Gr. 5-. 
Of the several recent collections that have included
Brer Rabbit stories-The People Could Fly by Virginia Hamilton, Jump! by
Van Dyke Parks, and Tales of Uncle Remus by Lester himself (BCCB: 7/87)-
Lester's collections have proved the most complete, well documented, and best
adapted. This second volume has an introduction quoting two of the trickster
archetype's most eloquent scholars, Roger Abrahams and Kdroly Ker6nyi.
Although Lester's style is charged with contemporary wit, his interpretation of
Brer Rabbit as a universal element of personality ("Whether we are black or
white, slave or free, child or adult, Brer Rabbit is us") lends a fine-edged
perspective to his narrative. The 37 selections here, together with the 48 in the
last volume, represent an enormous storytelling accomplishment-only 15 Brer
Rabbit stories of Joel Chandler Harris' collections have been omitted. As in the
last volume, the important motifs have been respected: "Brer Alligator Learns
about Trouble," for instance even reflects the same pace and rhythm of "Why the
Alligator's Back Is Rough" without the impediments of the Gullah dialect
(Hamilton's version adds a story element and retains some of the dialect). It
would have been handy for folklore students to know the original name or
number of the Harris tales for comparison, but that's a quibble of convenience.
The two books as they stand, with Pinkney's black-and-white drawings and
[ 45]
watercolor paintings in the second volume even more skillfully developed than
in the first, are a significant contribution to children's literature. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Lewis, Richard, ad. In the Night, Still Dark; illus. by Ed Young. Atheneum,
1988. ISBN 0-689-31310-1. 32p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
The poetic text is an abridgement of a Hawaiian
creation chant. It moves from the void of nothingness ("Darkness of the sun,
darkness of the night, nothing but night") through the birth of plant and animal
forms to the emergence of the first people. "Here on the ocean's edge, Here in
the damp forest, Here in the cold mountains, People spread over the land.
People were here, And so it was: DAY." All of the pages have minimal text
and, against dark backgrounds, swirling impressionistic forms of living things.
When people come, the dark night is broken by a rosy light on the horizon. The
last double-page spread shows the dawn. A lovely fragment for reader alone,
reader-aloud, or storyteller, this will surely appeal to a larger audience than the
grades 2-4 for whom the combination of format and vocabulary makes it most
appropriate; it can be read aloud to younger children and studied by adults
interested in comparative mythology. A closing note from Lewis indicates that
the book was based on a shorter version of the whole chant (The Kumulipo) that
appeared in Maria Leach's In the Beginning: Creation Myths Around the World.
ZS
C.U. Reading aloud; Storytelling
Livingston, Myra Cohn. There Was a Place and Other Poems. Margaret K.
McElderry, 1988. ISBN 0-689-50464-0. 
[40p]. $9.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Thirty-two poems expand on the theme of families
faced with death, divorce, or remarriage. The viewpoint is consistently that of
the child, which is the strength of the collection. The poetics are as simple as
the voice, fleeting rhymed narratives of changing houses, conflicts between
mothers and fathers, empty places at the table, the occasional triumph of a kind
new stepparent, yearning for better times past or future. A few poems project
more complex form and imagery; indeed, the underlying meaning of "Mt. St.
Helens," as it fits into the emotional context of the collection, may escape
readers entirely. In general, however, this reads like a cadenced collective diary of
contemporary children saddened by loss. BH
D.V. Broken homes, adjustment to
Lowry, Lois. All About Sam; illus. by Diane deGroat. Houghton, 1988.
ISBN 0-395-48662-9. [144p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Given what we've seen of Sam in Lowry's Anastasia
Krupnik books, it should come as no surprise that Sam, from birth, has given
new meaning to the word precocious. When the Krupniks first bring him home
to his pantry-nursery, Sam thinks "Pan-tree. Rock-a-bye baby in the pan tree.
Okay. Whatever it means I'm all for it, because she said 'sleep.' 
And I am
very, very sleepy." Roughly paralleling the time span from Anastasia Krupnik
to Sam first learning to "flash" (see Anastasia Again!), this is a good mix of
fabled moments from the other books (Sam, at four months, saying "thank you"
to strained apricots) and new material, such as Sam bringing Myron's pipe to
[46
nursery school show-and-tell. (One might not have thought it possible to score
some wicked points off nursery school mores, but Lowry does, right here.) The
conceit grows thin every once in a while, and there isn't much of a plot, but
Anastasia's fans will find here a welcome and enlightening subtext. RS
MacDonald, George. 
Little Daylight; ad. and illus. by Erick Ingraham.
Morrow, 1988. 
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06301-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
06300-4. [40p]. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Although the picture book format of this edition of
MacDonald's romantic fairy tale seems inappropriate for the reader whose skills
can make the vocabulary and sometimes-dense writing style comprehensible, the
illustrations are in themselves handsome as well as appropriate for the mood of
the story. Hand-brushed acrylics against an air-brushed background achieve soft,
flowing lines; the paintings are effectively composed, and the artist has been
wily in using warm or cool colors to help tell the story of the princess who,
cursed at birth by a malevolent fairy, is brought to normal life and to happiness
(by the kiss of a prince, naturally) after years of sleeping by day and changing
with the waxing and waning of the moon. ZS
Mahy, Margaret. The Birthday Burglar & A Very Wicked Headmistress; illus.
by Margaret Chamberlain. 
Godine, 1988. 
ISBN 0-87923-720-1. 
137p.
$12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Like The Great Piratical Rumbustification & The
Librarian and the Robbers (BCCB: 1/87) this indulges the reader in two episodes
of fantastically absurd proportions. In the first, a boy named Bassington burgles
birthdays until an intrepid old lady with her young friends come to reclaim them
and befriend him and his butler. 
The tongue-twisting aspect seems a bit
numbing after a while, but children will enjoy the extended gimmick more than
adults. The second and funnier tale is a school story of the most far-fetched
invention. A villainous headmistress schemes to marry young Tancred's uncle,
a farmer who's been visited by an odd bit of fortune in the form of volcanic
eruption. "The milk ran into the sugarbeet and the free-range eggs, and the
volcano has mixed them all together, and cooked them into the biggest caramel
custard in the world." The custard is lumpy with diamonds, it turns out, a most
attractive ingredient. Tancred only barely rescues his uncle from marriage and
the students from an explosive fate. This is not Mahy at her best, but the
slapstick is fun, especially for light moments of reading aloud. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
McKenna, Colleen O'Shaughnessy. Too Many Murphys. Scholastic, 1988.
ISBN 0-590-41731-2. [144p]. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-4. 
"Just because she was the oldest, she was expected to
be some sort of a midget mother." While blessed with a good heart, third-grader
Collette does get a little tired of the younger Murphy children (Jeff, Laura, and
Stevie), and often longs to be an only child like her friends Marsha and Sarah.
The humor, much of it of the disaster variety, casually exposes the family
dynamics, and Collette's feelings towards her siblings realistically range from
the protective to the exasperated. The younger children, too, show moments of
finer feeling-when Collette and Mom make a mess of the cookies intended for
the school bake sale, four-year-old Laura offers comfort: "It tastes good,
[47 ]
Collette. Your cookies are like pretty little rocks." The school scenes are
equally well-observed, with a specificity of character (especially Marsha, the
stinker) that lifts this first novel a few notches above many a similar story. RS
McMillan, Bruce. Growing Colors; written and illus. with photographs by
Bruce McMillan. Lothrop, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07845-1; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-688-07844-3. 32p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
1-3 yrs. 
A luscious-looking book that will help children
identify colors and possibly even develop a taste for vitamins in their natural
state. Fruits and vegetables appear dewy fresh in the color photographs that fill
the recto; a facing page features a smaller illustration of the plant above the word
for the color. The word is in huge print matching the color named, and it's up
to the child to say what food is pictured-raspberries, peas, corn, cantaloupe, etc.
A balance of common and unusual items is considered, and several colors appear
twice to enhance the guessing game. A concluding double spread gives (and
shows) the answers for children learning to read on their own. Consistently well
designed, with a background note on the picture-taking, this is notably a treat for
kids and an example of photography as an art form in picture books. BH
Merriam, Eve. You Be Good & I'll Be Night: Jump-on-the-Bed Poems; illus.
by Karen Lee Schmidt. Morrow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06743-3; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-688-06742-5. 40p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
A romping collection of twenty-eight poems features
mostly jump-rope rhythms and chanting rhymes. Many of the verses turn
everyday activities into play: "You'll be saucer, / I'll be cup, / piggyback,
piggyback, / pick me up. / You be tree, / I'll be pears, / carry me, carry me / up
the stairs. / You be Good, / I'll be Night, / tuck me in, tuck me in / nice and
tight." Each poem is accompanied with bouncy watercolor scenes, often
including comically incongruous animals-an alligator swinging from the moon
("Swing me till summer, swing me through fall, / I promise I'll never get tired
at all") or a rat on the telephone ("Hello, hello, / will you spell your name? / It's
R.A.T. / and yours is the same"). Some are quite funny, including the one
about Harriet, who "by magic force, / turned herself into a horse." A few are too
jingly, but on the whole this is nonsense with flair. BH
Moore, Emily. Whose Side Are You On? Farrar, 1988. ISBN 0-374-38409-6.
134p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Barbra knows she needs tutoring to pass sixth grade
math, but why did Mrs. Stone have to assign T. J. Brodie the task? "'You and
Anthony have been in the same class since first grade.' 'And I've always hated
it. Please, Mrs. Stone.'" Of course Barbra likes T. J. more than she suspects,
something she discovers when T. J. disappears. This pre-teen school story
distinguishes itself from the pack in many ways: a warm, affectionate tone
convincingly voiced in Barbra's narration; a good balance of classroom antics and
more serious scenes; a black middle-class urban setting. Too often these slice-
of-life stories turn into predictable series, but Barbra, T. J., and friends are an
appealing cast who deserve at least one more book. RS
Neale, J. M. Good King Wenceslas; illus. by Jamichael Henterly. Dutton,
1988. ISBN 0-525-44420-3. 24p. $11.95.
[48]
R 
5-8 yrs. 
This is an especially apt song for a picture book
because of its story strength-the visual dimension clarifies a folktale that must
often be lost on children, so compressed are the words into the music. The
pictures' medieval setting is idyllic without becoming static, casting a glow of
distance over castle and woods as good King Wenceslas and his page follow a
poor peasant through the snow with food and gifts. Henterly's style, which
might appear too studied for some kinds of stories, is well suited for catching a
tale out of time; the figures seem poised on the verge of movement. There's
also an active contrast of colors, blues and grays chilling the outdoor scenes,
ruddy browns warming the indoor. Ideal for a musical interlude in story hours or
lapsitting sessions. BH
C.U. 
Christmas
Neville, Emily Cheney. The Bridge; illus. by Ronald Himler. Harper, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024385-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024386-4. 
[40p].
Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
4-8 yrs. 
Little Ben and his parents love the way the planks on
the wooden bridge tell them when someone is coming to visit ("Rattle-rattle-
rattle! Here they come!") so it's a real problem when the old bridge breaks under
the strain of an oil truck (no explosion, injury, or lawsuit, just excitement).
The rest of this picture book is devoted to the building of a new no-rattle bridge,
and Ben and Mom's construction of a new welcoming noisemaker, a contraption
both unlikely and unsafe: They attach a bell to a plank, and bury the plank
under the surface of the new bridge, which appears to be made of dirt. The
detailed observations, in both words and pictures, of road machines at work will
enthrall many children, but the text is too long and overly peppered with
exclamation points. "'It's the culvert!' said Ben's mother." Himler's large and
literal paintings are imaginatively sprawled across the pages, but readers-aloud
may wish to accompany them with paraphrase, rather than reciting the flat and
lengthy text. RS
Opie, lona, comp. Tail Feathers from Mother Goose; comp. by lona and Peter
Opie. Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-65081-1. 126p. illus. $19.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
Many adults will be as interested as the very young
children for whom this unusual compilation has primary appeal. The authority
on nursery rhymes, lona Opie explains in her preface that the rhymes in this
collection, few of which have been previously published, have been collected by
the Opies (or sent to them); some are little-known variants of more familiar
verses ("Ride a cock-horse to Coventry Cross/ To see what Emma can buy ..
."). Each verse is illustrated by a different artist (usually in a double-page spread)
so that the book has visual variety; among the illustrators are several winners of
the Greenaway Award. Most of the artists are British, but the cover art is by
Maurice Sendak-who probably can be considered an artist-citizen of the world
of children's books. Not all the verses are memorable, but the book is. ZS
Pfeffer, Susan Beth. Rewind to Yesterday; illus. by Andrew Glass. Delacorte,
1988. ISBN 0-440-50048-6. [144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr.5-8. 
Eleven-year-old twins Kelly and Scott are thrilled
when Dad brings home a VCR, especially when Kelly discovers that it enables
her to go back up to twenty-four hours in time. An appealing premise, although
[49
readers may be disappointed that the twins and Kelly's friend Miri spend less
time using the machine than they do talking about it. The story does get
exciting, however, when Miri attempts to change history after her grandfather is
shot in a robbery. The ending dangles in an I've-got-a-series kind of way;
perhaps mercenary (but nice) Scott may yet realize his plan to sell the VCR to
the Pentagon; perhaps Kelly ("She could only hope it would be used for the
power of good") will manage to stop him first. RS
Pike, Christopher. Gimme a Kiss. Archway/Pocket, 1988. Paper ed. ISBN
0-671-65876-X. 
152p. Paper ed. $2.75.
M 
Gr. 9-12. 
It's important to take an occasional look at what
teenagers are reading despite adult intervention, and this shocker by a popular
author is a good example. Jane Retton is driven to revenge when a copy of a
page from her diary is circulated through school. The entry-detailing a sexual
encounter between Jane and her boyfriend-is fictitious wishful thinking on
Jane's part, but when Kirk tells everyone it's true, Jane decides to fake her own
death at the hands of Kirk and Patty, this trampy cheerleader whom Jane suspects
of copying her diary. The plot is wildly implausible, with piled on catastrophe,
and the comically lurid denoument reveals what really triggered two murders and
a fire: Kirk gave Jane's friend Alice herpes (with a kiss). As Alice says, "When
you're our age, there's nothing worse than being humiliated." 
Stringing
together all the good parts of everybody's favorite problem novels, this makes
no apologies for its straightforward lowmindedness, and readers will probably
appreciate the opportunity to revel in their most paranoid fantasies without
having to swallow redeeming social value at the same time. The closest this
gets to a moral is when Jane, while waiting to chloroform Alice ("Sweet dreams,
bitch"), reflects that "had she been a little less worried about her goddamn
reputation she would still have a boyfriend and a best friend." Well, maybe so.
RS
Pople, Maureen. The Other Side of the Family. Holt, 1988. ISBN 0-8050-
0758-X. 167p. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Kate, the fifteen-year-old narrator, had been sent to
Australia to stay with her mother's parents because she would thus escape the
bombing in England during World War II. 
Because there are Japanese
submarines in Sydney harbor, the grandparents decide Kate would be safer living
inland with her other grandmother. Kate is apprehensive, having heard that
Grandmother Tucker is a dour, taciturn woman who is wealthy and who wants
nothing to do with her son or his family. This is a story of personal growth and
adjustment, so that it has universal qualities in addition to the highly personal
account of Kate's maturation as she learns not to judge others by reputation or
appearances. Grandma proves to be a feisty woman who does housecleaning for
others, not rich at all, and she and Kate become fast friends. The writing style is
light and polished, the characters and relationships are drawn with depth and
firmness, and the setting is nicely established-as are period details and issues-
without being punched. ZS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Prince, Alison. How's Business. Four Winds, 1988. ISBN 0-02-775202-X.
[176p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
[50 ]
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
In a story set in Lincolnshire during World War II,
Howard has come to stay with his aunt and uncle because of the bombing in
London. The local gang makes it hard for him, jeering because he is an evacuee;
they are especially vindictive because he makes friends with Anna, a girl whose
mother is German. There's just a bit of gilding in the all-problems-solved
ending (Dad says he and Mum will come to Lincolnshire to go into business
with Uncle Jack when the war's over; How is accepted by the gang; Anna is
accepted by the gang) but the period details, wartime atmosphere, and writing
style are effective, and the way in which How (a most engaging protagonist)
uses his wits to get back to London when he suspects Mum's in trouble (she's
in the hospital, but recovering, after being bombed out) is exciting and credible.
ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Consideration of others
Rabe, Berniece. Where's Chimpy?; illus. with photographs by Diane Schmidt.
Whitman, 1988. 
ISBN 0-8075-8928-4. 
[32p]. 
$11.25. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Color photographs are nicely integrated with a text
that describes, through small Misty's efforts to find the stuffed monkey she's
mislaid, the way she and her Daddy spent the day. (No mother, no explanation
of why not.) The read-aloud audience will probably enjoy the bedtime hunt and
its dependence on Misty's memories of the day's activities. The text, simply
and directly written, becomes a bit patterned, as Misty fails to find Chimpy but
does find another lost object time and again. It is doubtful that all children will
be able to tell from the story or pictures that Misty is a child with Down
syndrome, which is a pity, since it seems to be a message of the book that
Misty has the same interests and pursues the same activities as other children.
The imprint information and a last-page note about the author mention the
handicap, but it is left to the person reading the book aloud to introduce its
subject. ZS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Rogers, Jean. Dinosaurs Are 568; illus. by Marylin Hafner. Greenwillow,
1988. ISBN 0-688-07931-8. [80p]. $10.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Overbright Raymond, not too thrilled with his look-
around at kindergarten ("Raymond watched the turtles for awhile. They didn't
move") decides to stay home. First grade is a bit more difficult to get out of,
but in any case, Raymond stays, won over by Dewey Decimal 568, dinosaurs.
Raymond finds other passions (knights, whales) throughout the school year, as
well as an unaccustomed rivalry with new student Kim. Written in a dry,
occasionally arch, style, this has plenty of appealing first-grade incidents, but the
low-keyed wit that delivers the humor will limit the audience to older readers.
Not necessarily a problem, (witness the success of Ramona the Pest) since
Raymond himself is old for his years (would you let a first-grader play with a
staple gun?) having, at heart, the world-weary sensibility of a third-grader. RS
Roth, Susan L., ad. Fire Came to the Earth People: A Dahomean Folktale;
ISBN 0-312-01723-5. 
Kanahkna: A Cherokee Story; ISBN 0-312-01722-7.
Both books: ad. and illus. by Susan L. Roth. St. Martin's, 1988. 32p. $9.95.
[51]
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Two folktales have been adapted for simple textual
effect and more complex visual reflection of the originating group's graphic
traditions. The Dahomean tale, for instance, recounts Tortoise's capture of fire
from Moon-God Mawu for the use of earth creatures. The collage illustrations
with their angular shapes and dramatic color contrasts on black backgrounds
emulate the effects of Dahomean appliqu6 art. The Cherokee story of Terrapin's
tricking the wolves into punishing him by drowning echoes Brer Rabbit getting
himself thrown into the briar patch. Here, the pictures depend on the textual
variations of leaves, wood, and other organic materials. (A recipe for Knahena,
or cornmeal mush, is appended.) Cited are titles but not sources of the stories
from which these were adapted. Both tales have storytelling appeal as well as
striking pictorial effects., although these are occasionally repetitive in design and
not always graceful. BH
Rowland-Entwistle, Theodore. Guns. See Langley, above.
Rubinstein, Gillian. Space Demons. Dial, 1988. ISBN 0-8037-0534-4. 198p.
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
"The latest breakthrough from the high-tech Orient,"
said Andrew's Dad when he handed over the new computer game. There were no
instructions, but Andrew's efforts soon made it clear that the game was exciting,
demanding, and sophisticated. What Andrew didn't expect was that he would be
drawn into the space world of the game; with three other young people who
joined him, he found that the pace of the space battle increased with the increase
of human hostility, and eventually it became a battle between the space demons
and the children to see if altruism could defeat the former and return the children
to the real world. This is structurally flawed, especially in the failure to adhere
to a logic within the fantasy boundaries. It should however, appeal to readers
because of the suspense and danger of the situation, and it is well paced and
smoothly written, especially for a first novel. ZS
Schertle, Alice. Gus Wanders Off; illus. by Cheryl Harness. Lothrop, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-04985-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-04984-2. 32p. Library
ed. $11.88; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Paintings that are stiff but colorful illustrate a story
that touches on a contingency feared by some children, getting lost after
wandering away from home. This happens to Gus when his mother goes
indoors to answer the telephone and he walks over to greet the friendly dog he
recognizes as his teacher's. By the time they meet the teacher, hunting her dog,
Gus is lost. He remembers his house number but not the street. The teacher is
patient, asking Gus to remember places or people he passed, and they do indeed
arrive on the street where Gus lives and worried Mama is waiting with a hug.
Not too didactic, but there is a soft impeachment here; there's also a message
about using your memory to help solve the problem. The paintings show a
pleasant middle-class interracial neighborhood. ZS
Scott, Elaine. Ramona: Behind the Scenes of a Television Show; illus. with
photographs by Margaret Miller. Morrow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-
06819-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06818-9. 88p. Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed.
$13.95.
[ 52]
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
How could this fail to beguile readers? A favorite
author, her beloved character Ramona, and all the alluring details of how a
television show is planned and put together. The text, liberally illustrated with
photographs of people and procedures, is direct, clear, sequential, and
informative; it covers everything from choosing and adapting the material to the
cutting and editing of the final product, in this case ten episodes based on
Beverly Cleary's stories of Ramona when she was eight. It's all there:
auditioning, casting, budgeting, the making of sets and costumes, the filming,
the responsibilities of actors, directors, and members of the large crew. ZS
C.U. Industries (unit)
Sebestyen, Ouida. The Girl in the Box. Joy Street/Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-
31316-5. [165p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 8-12. 
Through letters, diary entries ("TTM's-Talking to
myself") and an intermittent short story, Jackie ponders on her life and beliefs,
and, particularly, on her close and now broken friendship with April and Zack.
Nothing unusual, you might say, for a young adult novel, except for the fact
that Jackie is writing in a windowless cement basement, put there by a ski-
masked kidnapper. She has a jug of water, some packages of pastries, and ... a
ream of typing paper and a typewriter that she was carrying when abducted. It's
an absolutely ludicrous premise, but a sensational appeal. No light (she touch-
types), no sounds, no rescue; Jackie apparently dies in the end. While Sebestyen
occasionally uses the premise to telling effect, for example, when Jackie finds a
note in the coat she and April have shared and has no way of telling what's in it
or which one of them wrote it, the melodrama of the situation smothers the
human drama Jackie is writing about. And, truth be told, hapless Jackie gets a
touch longwinded, thus vitiating the suspense. Teen introspection has been done
better elsewhere, and for a good non-fiction girl-in-the-box story send readers to
Barbara Mackle's true-crime memoir 83 Hours Until Dawn. RS
Sesame Street. The Sesame Street ABC Book of Words, Featuring Jim
Henson's Sesame Street Muppets; illus. by Harry McNaught. Random House,
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-98880-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-88880-4. 42p. Library
ed. $9.99; Trade ed. $8.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Pictures of Sesame Street characters appear on almost
every page of a book that is alphabetically arranged and shows objects for
identification. The print includes upper and lower case letters and the names of
most (but not all) items on each page, including the names of some (but not all)
of the characters. The familiarity of the latter will be the book's major appeal,
despite the fact that it is weakened by inconsistency of treatment, inclusion of
some less familiar words ("bathhouse," "gravy boat," or "trombone," for
example) and mediocre illustration. ZS
Seuling, Barbara. It Is Illegal to Quack Like a Duck & Other Freaky Laws;
illus. by Gwenn Seuling. Lodestar, 1988. Trade ed. ISBN 0-525-67250-8;
Paper ed. ISBN 0-525-67257-5. [80p]. Trade ed. $11.95; Paper ed. $5.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Like her earlier compendium of kooky ordinances,
You Can't Eat Peanuts in Church & Other Little-Known Laws, this is organized
thematically, including sections on animals, marriage, money, property, etc.
[53]
The historical range is broad, to say the least: the examples in "Shave and a
Haircut, Two Bits" features laws from contemporary Michigan, 17th- century
New Haven, 18th-century Spain, Elizabethan England, 4th-century Alexandrian
Empire, and old China. Although in most cases Seuling has indicated the
approximate era, there are many in which she has not, and no distinction is made
between case law (precedent) and legislation (statute). Some of the entries are
sad ("Until 1814, it was perfectly legal in England to sell your child to
beggars"), but the majority are funny ("Donald Duck comic books were banned
from libraries in Finland because authorities felt that it wasn't good to show
children a hero who ran around without pants on"). Dates and source notes
would have given the book historical value as well as exotic appeal. To be
illustrated with pen-and-ink drawings. BH
Shepherd, Elizabeth. No Bones: A Key to Bugs and Slugs, Worms and Ticks,
Spiders and Centipedes, and Other Creepy Crawlies; illus. by Ippy Paterson.
Macmillan, 1988. ISBN 0-02-782880-8. 90p. $13.95.
R 
Gr.3-6. 
This choose-your-own 
adventure guide to
invertebrates combines facts with conceptual game playing. The actual text is
organized into informational sections on snails and slugs, earthworms, isopods,
centipedes, millipedes, scorpions, daddy longlegs, mites, spiders, insects,
maggots and grubs, and caterpillars. A "key" introducing the text, however,
offers an alternative to straight reading: "The animal has legs. Go to 2. ...
Animal has ten or more legs. Go to 3.... Animal has exactly 14 legs. Turn
to page 21 for its story." The idea of groups characterized by certain features is
thus reinforced by reader action as well as authorial description. Precisely
stippled or hatched black ink drawings add considerably to an easy-to-read text.
There's a brief bibliography and an index indicating page numbers where an
animal appears in print or picture, along with its range of measurements in
millimeters and inches. A science unit bonanza. BH
C.U. Zoology
Simon, Seymour. Volcanoes. Morrow, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-
07412-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07411-1. 
32p. 
illus. with photographs.
Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
In the same format as the author's The Sun, Glaciers,
etc., this handsome volume is for younger readers than is Patricia Lauber's
Volcano (BCCB: 9/86). Simon clearly describes how volcanoes are formed and
how they erupt, using well-known examples like Mt. Saint Helens and Mauna
Loa. The photographs are large, informative, and spectacular, reproduced in
brilliant color. Aside from one confusing map of the earth's tectonic plates, this
is a solid introduction. RS
C.U. 
Geology
Steig, Jeanne. Consider the Lemming; illus. by William Steig. Farrar, 1988.
ISBN 0-374-31536-1. 48p. $6.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
How nice to have an adept, amusing illustrator around
the house! William Steig's wonderfully scrabbly cartoon figures illustrate a
book of poems about animals real (including people) and mythical. Jeanne
Steig's verses are punctilious in rhyme and scansion, they have wit and humor,
and a lilting quality that makes them enjoyable to read alone or aloud, taking
[ 54]
some light-hearted digs at the foibles of individual species. Examples: the title
poem, "The Lemming," begins, "Consider the lemming: / No hawing or
hemming / No dilly or dally / No shilly or shally / The whole lemming nation /
In one wild migration / Is off to the sea," or-in its entirety--"Big Snakes."
"It doesn't pay to get too fonda / Your python or your anaconda." This should
have a wide audience from read-aloud listeners to readers-aloud. ZS
C.U. Reading aloud
Stolz, Mary. Pangur Ban. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025862-4;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-0258616. [224p]. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
SpR 
Gr. 7-9. 
Stolz has centered a historical novel on Cormac,
writer of a medieval Irish poem about a cat named Pangur Ban. The book is
divided into three parts: Cormac's youth, during which his father-horrified by
his son's dreamy preoccupations-deposits him as an oblate at a nearby abbey;
Cormac's development as an artist in the scriptorium and his hiding of a
manuscript before a Viking raid; and finally, the discovery of the manuscript by
another monk centuries later. This is slowly but surely developed; the text
sometimes too explanatory of the times but true to the character Stolz has
attributed to Cormac. The philosophical questions by which he's obsessed are
less vivid than his attachment to the cat, and his family's dynamics more detailed
than his work on the manuscript. Still, the ninth-century world projected here is
strong enough to leave readers saddened by its destruction; the brief, twelfth-
century section pales by comparison. An unusual book that will be most likely
to appeal to students of religious or medieval history. BH
D.V. Aesthetic discrimination; Individuality, expressing
Tejima. Swan Sky; written and illus. by Tejima. Philomel, 1988. ISBN
0-399-21547-6. 40p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
As much a story about nature's way of accepting
death as about the behavioral characteristics of swans, this is a stunning picture
book with strong elements of linear design. The text is a simple one: a family
of swans waits for one that is sick, flies away, and then recircles back to stay
with her till she dies. As he did in Fox's Dream, Tejima comes dangerously
close to anthropomorphism here; the family is "saddened" but later in the "the
morning light . .
thinks of the little swan." Of course, this will only deepen
children's empathy with a situation already dramatized by vivid graphics. The
play of turquoise, blue, and black with sudden spurts of orange is arresting. So
are the shapes, patterned for contrast and repetition, tension and resolution,
across the double spreads. The rhythmic cycle of life and death is clearly
projected for young listeners to think or talk about. BH
Thomson, Peggy. Keepers and Creatures at the National Zoo; illus. with
photographs by Paul S. Conklin. Crowell, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-690-
04712-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04710-X. 198p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
In an informal, enthusiastic style, Thomson describes
the work of the National Zoo keepers, with plenty of anecdotes drawn from
interviews and observations. Few juvenile books on zoos have given the kind of
details included here, from various menus, which may involve frozen mouse, to
[ 55]
selective breeding decisions and habitat maintainance. Nursing bats, guarding
against affection for animals that may become too dependent, and persuading a
tense tiger to transfer into its indoor cage are all part of a day's work for the
keepers portrayed here. Plenty of photographs with informative, often witty
captions enliven the text and tone. A realistic, yet optimistic book for young
people interested in a career working with animals, this gives insight into
numerous species as well as the humans responsible for preserving them. BH
Tolstoy, Leo. The Lion and the Puppy and Other Stories for Children; tr. by
James Riordan; illus. by Claus Sievert. Seaver/Holt, 1988. ISBN 0-8050-
0735-0. 62p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Twenty-five stories selected from Tolstoy's Primer
(1872) range from folktales to brief incidents relating to his own boyhood.
Most are only a page or two long and have the pithy, moralistic quality of a
fable. What may be appealing about them for contemporary children is their no-
nonsense tone in dealing with life and death. The first story, "The Lion and the
Puppy," tells of a stray, brought in as meat for the zoo, becoming the constant
companion of a lion, which eventually dies of grief shortly after the dog does.
The strongest theme is nature, both human and wild; several stories address
cruelty to animals---"Escape of a Dancing Bear," "The Little Bird." An odd and
intriguing legacy, the collection is introduced by a description of Tolstoy's
interest in educating poor village children, the school he started for them, and the
writing he did to replace didactic texts of the time (which is further explained in
the translator's note). 
The pen-and-wash illustrations are uneven, some
handsome and others awkwardly drafted. BH
Trivas, Irene. Emma's Christmas: An Old Song Re-sung & Pictured; written
and illus. by Irene Trivas. Orchard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08380-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05780-1. 32p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Those twelve days of Christmas add up to three-
hundred-and-sixty-four gifts, as finds a very weary Emma. The prince wants to
marry her, and at the first partridge in a pear tree, "Emma was pleasantly
surprised," but no, no castle life for her. And with the two turtle doves and a
second partridge "Emma was charmed," but still.. . The three French hens,
etc., bring a sardonic mutter from Emma's mother: "He's overdoing it."
Combining the appeals of Christmas, fairy tale romance, and large, cumulating
numbers, Trivas gives a fresh look at a favorite carol and a happy new way to
remember which comes first-the drummers drumming or the leaping lords.
While there's no way the paintings could be anything but busy, both line and
color are gentle, leaving freneticism to the imaginations of viewers-and
singers. RS
Waber, Bernard. Ira Says Goodbye; written and illus. by Bernard Waber.
Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-48315-8. 
[40p]. $13.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
A few years older than when he worried about taking
his teddy to Reggie's house in Ira Sleeps Over (BCCB: 2/73), Ira has just found
out that Reggie is moving away. The news is delivered by Ira's sister, who is
just as entertainingly obnoxious as she was in the first book: "Far, far away.
[ 56]
Oh, I would hate it to pieces if my best friend were moving away. What will
you do when your best friend in the whole wide world moves away?
Hmmmmmm?" Reggie himself is more excited about the move than is seemly
("Reggie just went on talking about Greendale, as if he had never heard about
best friends"), and doesn't even blink when Ira pointedly tells him to take both
their pet turtles, rather than split up Felix and Oscar, friends "who are used to
being together." Friendship does win in the end, but in the meantime Waber
again demonstrates a keen ability to score psychological points through funny
and natural dialogue. The illustrations have an offhand air that is similar to the
first book, but more spare of line and in full color. The cover art neatly mirrors
the first book as well, with a bigger Ira going up the stairs (to pack for a visit to
Reggie's). RS
Walter, Mildred Pitts. Mariah Loves Rock. Bradbury, 1988. ISBN 0-02-
792511-0. [118p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Mariah loves Sheik, anyway, adorning her bedroom
and person with images of her favorite pop star. Sophisticated older sister Lynn
prefers reggae, and, much to Mariah's embarrassment, shops in thrift stores for
her new-wave outfits. The two girls also disagree on something more essential:
their father's daughter by a previous relationship is coming to live with them,
and while Lynn thinks it might be fun to have an older sister, Mariah is jealous.
"'She's not our sister,' Mariah said with quiet force. 'She's Daddy's daughter.'"
The up-and-down sibling tensions are convincingly portrayed, as is Mariah's
mother's own ambivalence towards her husband's daughter. The writing is
sometimes awkward and choppy, but the story of a young black girl's celebrity
crush (yes, she meets him) has enough appeal to carry readers through some
abrupt transitions. RS
D.V. 
Sisters
Watanabe, Shigeo. It's My Birthday!; illus. by Yasuo Ohtomo. Philomel,
1988. ISBN 0-399-21492-5. 
[32p]. (I Love Special Days Books). $10.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
For all their emphasis on action and achievement (I
Can Take a Walk, etc.) Watanabe's gentle stories about Bear and his family
make soothing bedtime reading. Ohtomo's pictures are soft and brushed and
quiet, the texts approving and reassuring. On his birthday, Bear's grandparents
give him a photo album filled with pictures of Bear as a baby and toddler,
allowing the birthday boy to contemplate his tiny triumphs: learning to take a
bath, to dress, to walk. The last space in the album is blank--the perfect place,
it turns out, for a shot of Bear's surprise party-picnic down by the river. "What
a wonderful birthday!" RS
Weiss, Ann E. Lies, Deception and Truth. Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-
40486-X. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Taking on a broader topic than is usual in social issue
books for young adults, Weiss examines an equally broad spectrum of ethical
behavior, from personal (should you tell a child that a shot "won't hurt a bit"?)
through political and religious dilemmas. Her discussion is often repetitive, and
sometimes hard to follow: what, for example, is a discourse on deceptive
advertising doing in a chapter called "Lies in a Good Cause"? However, this
[57]
does show the complexities of lying and truthtelling, particularly when Weiss
shows the deceptive tactics even the "good guys" (environmentalists, missing
children advocates) resort to. The book is seriously weakened by the lack of
citations, espcially because Weiss is capable of making some very dicey
statements herself: "Harvard [business school] officials have never offered tenure
to anyone qualified to teach business ethics," or "The legal profession is
generally regarded as harboring a considerable percentage of the dishonest and
sleazy." But most of Weiss' examples are wonderfully thorny, and although the
unrelieved essay format will put off casual readers, this should find a place in
high school social issues classes. RS
C.U. Social studies D.V. Honesty
Wells, Rosemary. Forest of Dreams; illus. by Susan Jeffers. Dial, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0570-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0569-7. 18p. Library
ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
M 
4-7 yrs. 
"God gave me eyes / To see the woods and all who
live within it. / To watch the winter sun last / Every evening one more minute."
Devotional poetry is certainly something different from the dry-humored
Rosemary Wells, and unfortunately, it does not seem to be her metier. The
scansion is occasionally forced (see above) and so are some of the images: "God
made me small / Just like the fawn that sleeps inside the doe." Jeffers' paintings
of a child walking through the woods have a softer line than is usual for her, and
while some of the snow scenes are evocatively frosty, the compositions are
crowded and rely, like the text, on sentimental effects. Unlike, for example
Rachel Field's simple and memorable Prayer for a Child, this oversized, over-
colored picture book has an extravagance that overwhelms its devoutness. RS
D.V. Religious understanding
White, Ruth. Sweet Creek Holler. Farrar, 1988. ISBN 0-374-37360-4. 2 15p.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
A first novel of aspiring proportions, this telescopes
several years' experience of a young girl after her father is murdered in a western
Virginia coal mining camp and her mother is forced to move her and her sisters
to a shack in Sweet Creek Holler. For the most part, White's development of
the Appalachian community is patient, allowing individuals' good and bad
qualities to emerge from a realistic plot that includes a grandfather who loves his
family but can't face their tragedy, a neighbor who drinks until his embittered
wife drives their daughter mad, and children who support each other through the
vicissitudes of poverty. The villain of the piece is a local gossip whose slander
does irreparable damage, one of her victims being the protagonist, Ginny Shortt.
The conclusion tries to encompass too much: an unwed mother's suicide and the
Shortts' triumphant escape to Pennsylvania. Mrs. Shortt's friendship with the
mine owner's mother and, eventually, romance with the mineowner himself
seems somewhat unbelievable. Nevertheless, this is a haunting story, well
written. Some of its scenes linger with the clarity of mountain air. BH
D.V. Community life; Family relations
Winthrop, Elizabeth. Bear and Mrs. Duck; illus. by Patience Brewster. Holiday
House, 1988. ISBN 0-8234-0687-3. 32p. $13.95.
[58]
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Idealized paintings showcase cleverly camouflaged
bibliotherapy in which a stuffed bear, left behind by his mistress Nora while she
goes to the store with her mother, adjusts to a babysitter. Mrs. Duck is patient
with all Bear's ploys ("'We don't have any crayons,' said Bear.. .. 'Look, I
brought some with me,' said Mrs. Duck"). They pass the time playfully while
Bear "waits" for Nora's return, reassuring her, when she does appear, that Mrs.
Duck is "not the same as you" even if "she can fly. . . . And she's a good
swimmer." 
The toy world within pristine, color-coordinated interiors is
meticulously rendered, including lines, patterns, and compositions of an elegant
restraint that keeps the total effect from becoming too prettified. A gentle
reassurance for contemporary children dependent on the good graces of their
"significant other." BH
Wood, Audrey. The Horrible Holidays; illus. by Rosekrans Hoffman. Dial,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0546-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0544-1. 48p.
Library ed. $9.89; Trade ed. $9.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
A listing of the three stories set in easy-to-read format
here gives an idea of the book's unconventional tone: "The No-Thanksgiving,
The Crummy Christmas, and The Unhappy New Year." Alf is the anti-hero of
three celebratory occasions when his relatives, especially cousin Mert, beleaguer
him. Mert prays until the food is cold (Alf is sent to his room for over-
reacting); she ruins his Christmas surprises by telling him what's in each
present (Alf is sent to his room for getting even); she pursues him when he tries
to retreat from the New Year's party (Alf is already in his room, and this time he
gets revenge in peace). Wood's somehat cynical text is more than matched by
Hoffman's quirky animal characters, whose slightly distorted expressions suit the
Scrooge effect. Children tipped over the edge of excitement into grouchiness
may well appreciate a look at the holidays' downside. BH
C.U. Christmas-stories
D.V. Family relations