Amos, Berthe. The Mockingbird Song. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020062-6;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020061-8. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Eleven-year-old Lindy is still mourning for her mother, who
deserted her and her father, Dan, but she takes her grief out on Dan's new wife
Millie. Millie is hardly more than a simpering child herself, and when she
becomes pregnant, the family conflict erupts with such force that Dan arranges to
send Lindy to stay with a detested aunt. Lindy instead chooses to live with an
aristocratic neighbor, Miss Ellie, whose lonely existence convinces Lindy to learn
how to love her new step-sister. This is a big cast and plot for such a brief novel,
and some of the elements get shortchanged. The character of Millie, for instance,
is exaggerated to the point of stereotype. Why does she have a heavy southern
accent when no one else does (the novel is set in the South during the 1930s)?
The relationship between Lindy and Miss Ellie's black servant Maybelle deserves a
book all by itself. On the other hand, Lindy's pain is vividly rendered in a number
of well-developed scenes. Her jealousy and the other characters' flaws are clearly
enough focused to fetch sympathy from a reader who feels injustice in her own
situation and wants to make sure Lindy's turns out right. BH
D.V. 
Baby, adjustment to; Stepparent-child relations
Asimov, Isaac. How Did We Find Out About the Brain? illus. by Erika W. Kors. Walker,
1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6737-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6736-2. 
5 2p.
(How Did We Find Out). Library ed. $11.85; Trade ed. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Adhering to the customary phonetic guides for unfamiliar words
("... Leonardo da Vinci [da-VEEN-chee, 1452-1519]") this addition to the "How
Did We Find Out Series" has some minor flaws, but is both clear and informative.
Asimov describes both the accrual of a body of knowledge about the human brain,
citing the contributions of scientists of the past and present, and the structure and
function of the brain and nervous system. His facts are accurate, but his coverage
is far from comprehensive. 
There is no mention of brain malfunction in
Alzheimer's disease, although epilepsy is discussed, no reference to what may be
learned from PET or MIR tests. "Sleep" is cited in the index, but not "Memory."
Too, the illustrations are not carefully labelled; for example, the diagram labelled
"Corpus callosum" shows a drawing of the brain with the corpus callosum
identified as on one small area in which the bundle of nerve fibers connect the
hemispheres of the brain. ZS
C.U. Biology
[109
Auch, Mary Jane. Cry Uncle! Holiday House, 1987. ISBN 0-8234-0660-1. 
2 10p.
$12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Davey, the narrator, is eleven and is not finding it easy to adjust
to farm life (his mother's idea) and is especially bothered by two bullying
neighbors. What he doesn't need is to have to relinquish his bedroom to an
intermittently senile great-uncle and to share his room with a surly older brother.
Despite Uncle Will's times of thinking he's a child, there is a growing affection
between him and Davey. In the end, Will gets lost and is saved from commitment
to a nursing home when the friendly neighborhood school bus driver proposes to
him and is accepted. The book has a worthy purpose, some moments of humor,
and a weak ending to a plot that's stretched; however, it has sympathetic characters
and sturdy writing style in a first novel that shows potential for a better successor.
ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Uncle-nephew relations
Bauer, Caroline Feller. Midnight Snowman; illus. by Catherine Stock. Atheneum, 1987.
ISBN 0-689-31294-6. 28p. $13.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
A pleasant incident narrated by a girl remembering her first
snowfall in a part of the country where "it rains a lot" but rarely snows. She and a
friend go out in the night to build a snowman but, as the whole neighborhood
turns out to help, end up with a gigantic "snow thing." There's no real plot here,
though the accrual of helpers reflects the enlargement of the snowball as it rolls
along; and like the snow creature, the story melts away at the end. The art work
lends momentum, however. Blue-toned watercolors create playful shadows with
washes on white ground and white snowflakes against dreamy color. 
An
atmospheric seasonal read-aloud. BH
Belden, Wilanne Schneider. Mind-Find. Harcourt, 1987. ISBN 0-15-254270-1. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 6-8. 
While her mother is on a second-marriage honeymoon, thirteen-
year-old Laurel goes to a rural cabin to join her father for the summer. Daddy is
working on a book dealing with parapsychological phenomena, and Laurel doesn't
want him to know that she has the ability to find things through extrasensory
perception. She is instantly angry (albeit not logically) because she suspects that
Daddy wants her there to do housework so that he'll be free to write; she runs away
and is taken in by a sympathetic neighbor whose children also have psychic
powers. Unlike the Hoobler book reviewed below, the plethora of psychic
characters here is gratuitous. As the summer progresses, Laurel enjoys her new
friends, is helped by them to accept her ability as a finder, is pleased when that
ability is used to help people in danger, and comes to understand that her father
loves her and that he accepts her paranormal powers. The writing style is adequate,
the appeal of the parapsychological may attract readers, and the pace of the story is
well-handled; the characterization is not strong, however, nor is the plot. ZS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Bennett, Jill, comp. Noisy Poems; illus. by Nick Sharratt. Oxford/Merrimack, 1987.
ISBN 0-19-276063-7. 24p. $8.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
It's hard to resist a picture book of 12 solidly noisy poems by
the likes of James Reeves ("The Ceremonial Band"), David McCord ("Song of the
[ 110 ]
Train"), Elizabeth Coatsworth ("Rhyme"), and Jack Prelutsky ("The Yak"). The
sound effects alone are tempting enough, from swush ("Fishes' Evening Song" by
Dahlov Ipcar) to bash ("Jazz-Man" by Eleanor Farjeon). Most of the verses have a
lively beat and brash imagery. Even the illustrations seem raucous, with loud
colors, bold shapes, and wildly varied book design. It's all internally consistent,
however, with the ludicrous logic of nonsense. Family or classroom sharing will
surely provoke response. Cover your ears. BH
C.U. Reading aloud
Bennett, Paul. Follow the River. Orchard, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08314-4; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-531-05714-3. 178p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
M 
Gr. 7-9. 
In a first novel set in a small Ohio town in the 1930s, the
protagonist is ninth-grader Harry Lee, and he is instantly smitten when a new girl,
Nancy, walks into his classroom. The connections between the two families
(Nancy's is rich, Harry's is poor enough to do the hand laundry for Nancy's father)
is so deliberate as to seem contrived: Nancy's alcoholic mother has an affair with
Harry's older brother and eventually shoots him and herself. Harry sustains damage
when he saves Nancy from a sledding accident, and Nancy's father is so grateful
that he offers to pay Harry's college tuition. The story is uneven in pace,
occasionally obtrusive in writing style "... those offhand, clownish movements
that preserve personality when seven children and their parents cram a three
bedroom house." The characterization is of variable quality. Not a bad first novel,
but it has a concocted quality. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Family relations
Bjork, Christina. Linnea in Monet's Garden; tr. by Joan Sandin; illus. by Lena Anderson.
R & S/Farrar, 1987. ISBN 92-29-58314-4. 46p. $10.95.
SpC 
Gr. 4-6. 
An odd book that is not without its charm, this yields an
unexpected amount of information on Monet once it gets to the point. The
narrator is a young girl who loves flowers so much that she inspires her neighbor,
a retired gardener, to take her for a visit to the garden of Claude Monet, whose art
she admires. The text describes their trip, with sidelights about the painter's
development and complicated family life. Meanwhile, the illustrator's watercolors
sit fairly comfortably alongside reproductions of Monet's work and photographs of
him and his family and beloved garden. These are too many elements to
incorporate into one short book, but there's a flavor that redeems the shaky
structure and an honesty about the subject's eccentric and sometimes autocratic
behavior that often does not appear in juvenile biography. Though it's not for a
picture book audience, this will be most useful shared by an adult; it will also
appeal to the artistically gifted child and find ready use in juvenile art collections.
BH
C.U. Art appreciation
Bolognese, Don. Printmaking; by Don Bolognese and Elaine Raphael. Watts, 1987.
ISBN 0-531-10316-1. 58p. illus. (Illustrator's Library). $9.90.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Part of an excellent series that has included books on pen-and-ink
and pencil (reviewed in the July/August issue, 1986), this explores art techniques
of monoprint, stencil, woodcut, and linoleum-block printing. The text describes
the materials used, the processes, and the effects, while black-and-white
[ 111 ]
illustrations on almost every page give graphic samples of each point (these are
not always as clear and vivid as in earlier volumes, but they are sufficient). 
The
authors acknowledge that more complicated methods, including etching, engraving,
lithography, and silk-screening, require a hands-on introduction with experienced
supervision, but the suggestions here are clear enough to follow independently. A
staple for art collections in classroom or library. BH
C.U. Art-study and teaching
Brett, Jan, ad. Goldilocks and the Three Bears; ad. and illus. by Jan Brett. Dodd, 1987.
ISBN 0-396-08925-9. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Although the retelling of a favorite nursery tale has some
passages that are flat, the text is adequate. The illustrations are stunning in the
romantic fairytale tradition: framed pictures that are equally notable for their lavish
ornamental detail, their use of space and color, and their textual quality.
Architectural details, artifacts, and clothing are ornate, but they escape being
obtrusive because they are so deftly balanced and fused. ZS
Brown, Marc Tolon, comp. Play Rhymes; comp. and illus. by Marc Brown. Dutton,
1987. ISBN 0-525-44336-3. 32p. $11.95.
R 
2-4 yrs. 
A companion to Brown's Hand Rhymes (reviewed in the
December, 1985 issue), this includes a dozen play rhymes illustrated with
handsome, full-color, double-page spreads that are inset with miniature diagrams
of motions to accompany each line (the latter should have been larger). Several are
old favories: "Teddy Bear," "Wheels on the Bus," "I'm a Little Teapot," and "Do
Your Ears Hang Low?" are mostly there for the pictures and to jog a parent's
memory. Others, such as "Animals," are not so commonly in vogue and will
serve as good controlled activity for groups: "Can you hop like a rabbit?/ Can you
jump like a frog?/ Can you walk like a duck?/ Can you run like a dog?/ Can you
fly like a bird?/ Can you swim like a fish?/ And be still like a good child-/ As
still as this?" It's doubtful, but it'll be fun to try. BH
C.U. Nursery Schools
Cassedy, Sylvia. Roomrimes; illus. by Michele Chessare. Crowell, 1987. Library ed.
ISBN 0-690-04467-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04466-6. 72p. Library ed. $12.89;
Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
From "Attic" ("Along the wall/ the shadows stand/ like flowers
pressed/ against the page") to "Zoo" ("For comfort and pleasure/ where troubles are
few/ there's nothing to rival/ a room at the zoo"), Cassedy's poems take us on an
alphabetical tour through rooms of all kinds: a greenhouse, jungle gym, parlor,
widow's walk. Most of the poems have many lines (sometimes too many) of just
a few words each, and if Cassedy occasionally displays an overfondness for easy
alliteration, her best verse combines strong rhythms with metrical (and
metaphorical) surprise. In "Imaginary Room," for example, she asks us to clasp
our hands "hollow to hollowJ as though/ you were holding/ a bird-" and then to
"let him go./ Don't follow his flight;/ it's the space left behind/ that we want."
Most of the poems are illustrated, not badly, but unnecessarily--Cassedy's own
humor and descriptive powers stand better on their own. RS
C.U. Poetry (unit); Reading aloud
[ 112]
Chang, Heidi. Elaine, Mary Lewis, and the Frogs; written and illus. by Heidi Chang.
Crown, 1988. ISBN 0-517-56752-0. $8.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Elaine Chow has just moved to Iowa from San Francisco and is
feeling very much a stranger, especially when a girl in the class laughs at her tin
lunch container of fried rice. It's not long, however, before another girl, Mary
Lewis, invites her to catch frogs in the creek, and the two become friends when
Elaine's father helps them make a frog-shaped kite for a class project. There's not
much of a story here, since Elaine wins her way so quickly and painlessly, and one
never finds out quite why Mary Lewis is so fascinated by frogs. However, the
teacher is refreshingly sympathetic and the girls' friendship will win attention from
readers who can manage the brief, easy text without strain. Illustrated with black-
and-white drawings. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Chew, Ruth. Do-It-Yourself Magic; written and illus. by Ruth Chew. Hastings House,
1987. ISBN 0-8038-9299-3. $9.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
The concept of a kit from which children can build things that
become real is enticing. The magic object of a "sizer," a two-headed hammer that
taps things larger or smaller, is ingenious. Unfortunately, the episodes of Scott
and Rachel's adventure are distractingly disparate. In the first, they change a stock
car racer (and driver Scott) from a model to life-size to match-box size, an incident
that involves a neighbor and the police. In the second, they suprise a burglar and
miniaturize him. And in the third, they go with him into a model castle complete
with Medieval society. Any one of these would have made an outsize story, but as
is, Chew just skims the surface of the action. Children who need practice on
books the next step up from easy reader will appreciate the simple sentences and
vocabulary, however, and enjoy projecting themselves into the game aspect of
these forays. BH
Clements, Bruce. The Treasure of Plunderell Manor. Farrar, 1987. ISBN 0-374-37746-4.
178p. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Since his first novel in 1974, I Tell a Lie Every So Often,
Clements has always given us a good read, but this is plot plus. Fourteen-year-old
Laurel Bybank, named after the riverside shrub where she was abandoned in mid-
nineteenth-century England, has found a "place" as servant to orphaned Mistress
Alice, whose aunt and uncle would love to dispose of her before she turns eighteen
and comes into her fortune. The suspense is taut, the cast irresistible; but it is wit
that sets the book apart. Much of the dialogue goes beyond the function of action
and characterization to play with parody. Alice constantly refers to her Intended,
for instance, when it is Laurel who consistently rescues her. The girls' friendship
is the central relationship of the book, and ultimately, despite their society's
sexism, religious prejudice, and class snobbery, they both value each other above
all. Laurel's being almost smothered during her "rebirth" into a lady's dress
presages her ultimate choice to abandon the wealth and position she has so
rightfully earned for further adventure to America-any reader will yearn to follow
her after this revel of crafty humor. BH
D.V. Resourcefulness; Sex roles
[ 113]
Climo, Shirley. King of the Birds; illus. by Ruth Heller. Crowell, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-690-04623-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04621-9. 32p. Library ed. $12.89;
Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Although the paintings of birds are not always color-true (purple
predominates over black in the raven's feathers) they are correct more often than
not, and they are certainly handsome. Climo does a nice job of retelling the
traditional story of how the small wren was chosen king of the birds "Long ago,
when the oceans were only half filled with water and just a few stars lit the
sky... ." This is also a pourquoi story, explaining how the wren got its color.
The small bird used his brain when all the birds were in a race (literally) for title;
he piggy-backed on the eagle and flew upward when the eagle tired, so that he was
the last to return to the earth, scorched brown and gray by the sun. The story is
retold with good pace and flow and with good balance of dialogue and exposition.
ZS
De Veaux, Alexis. An Enchanted Hair Tale; illus. by Cheryl Hanna. Harper, 1987.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021624-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021623-9. 34p. Library
ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
M 
Gr. K-2. 
Black-and-white drawings, many of which seem crowded with
details that vitiate their basic strength as compositions, illustrate a story with a
strong message: be proud if you are different, there are others like you. Here the
unhappy boy, Sudan, is teased because of his hair, which "giggled when he talked
and roared when he walked and often sprouted wings." (The drawings show hair that
looks like spaghetti). He runs into a street circus where all the performers have
hair like his, and thereafter he's happy about it. The text is poetic (wandering in
and out of rhyme) but not convincing either as realistic narrative or as borderline
fantasy. ZS
Deaver, Julie Reece. Say Goodnight, Gracie. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
021419-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-02148-X. 224p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed.
$12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Morgan, the narrator, and Jimmy are seventeen; their families are
close and they've been friends since they were babies. Best friends. It's Jimmy
who helps Morgan get over her shame at being struck dumb while on stage, just as
she has helped him over a failed dance audition. When Jimmy is killed in an
automobile accident, Morgan goes through the classic cycles of grief, feeling
guilty, angry, stunned, and denying the reality of her loss. For a first novel, this
is impressive in style (particularly dialogue) and narrative flow; while the pace is
uneven and the focus narrow, the characters are strongly drawn and the protagonist
is convincing and sympathetic. ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Friendship values
Demi. A Chinese Zoo: Fables and Proverbs; illus. by Demi. Harcourt, 1987. ISBN 0-
15-217510-5. 28p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Set against a background of impressive but gracefully restrained
paintings, these fables have been smoothly abbreviated with morals written in
Chinese calligraphy beside the English. The dominant image is a fan-shaped frame
arching the double-page spreads, each in a different hue, where delicately stylized
animals dramatize the stories. Some will be familiar, as in the tale of the blind
[ 114]
mice who feel different parts of the elephant and so arrive at different conclusions
about his total appearance. Others will be less so-the struggle between a crane
and a clam that are both captured by a fisherman because neither will let the other
go ("In the face of disaster, don't waste time arguing"). Although the effect of
both art and proverb is quiet and has a mature appeal, each selection is brief enough
to hold younger children though a read-aloud/discussion session of several stories at
one time. Even middle-grade children who are studying fables can be drawn into
this picture book if they are challenged to consider the textual variants here and the
graphic concepts of Oriental art represented by Demi's studied work. BH
C.U. Language Arts
Drescher, Henrik. Whose Furry Nose? Australian Animals You's Like to Meet. Library
ed. ISBN 0-397-32243-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32236-4. 29p.
Whose Scaly Tale? African Animals You'd Like to Meet. Library ed. ISBN 0-
397-32237-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32244-5. 32p.
Both books written and illus. by Henrik Drescher. Lippincott, 1987. Library ed.
$11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
Ad 
3-6 yrs. 
There's a funny pink nose poking out of a bush: "Whose tubby
snout?" Turning the page reveals the rest of the aardvark, and so on, as noses and
toes and quills and tails reveal themselves as appendages to mostly familiar
(excepting the pangolin) African animals. Not new, but young children love this
kind of guessing game, and Drescher's illustrations of a young boy moving from
animal to animal (hoisted up a tree by an elephant only to encounter a giraffe) are
brightly colored and imaginatively composed. The same boy appears in the
companion volume, Whose Furry Nose, a similar guide to Australian aniamls.
The animals here-spotted cuscus, numbat, koala and kangaroo-are less likely to
be known to children, and some of the clues ("whose bright eyes?") are too
amorphous to allow a reasonable chance of recognition. 
Both books have facts
appended about the animals. RS
D.V. Perceptual acuteness
Drescher, Henrik, illus. The Yellow Umbrella. Bradbury, 1987. ISBN 0-02-733240-3.
40p. $9.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Black, white, and yellow, the scratchy and lively pictures in this
small book have more substance than does the story they tell. This doesn't quite
achieve what a wordless book should, since the pictures tell a story that requires
more knowledge (visual signs for wind currents and a conventional depiction of
bends in a river) than most young children have. Two monkeys use an umbrella,
dropped by a zoo visitor, to sail into the sky, float in the ocean, and finally reach a
colony of their species in a tropical forest ZS
Fleischman, Paul. Joyful Noise: Poems for Two Voices; illus. by Eric Beddows. Harper,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021853-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021852-5. 44p.
Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A companion volume to I Am Phoenix, this includes 14 poems
for two voices. All of the poems focus on insects, their movements, voices,
appearance, and metaphoric significance. One of the best is "Digger Wasp,"
narrated by the female as she digs a protective nest for the young she will never see
(my young will/ know me well./ When they care/ for their own children"). There's
lots of humor: a book louse begins, "I was born in a / fine old edition of
[ 115 ]
Schiller." 
"Whirligig Beetles" has the same frenetic quality as the bugs'
movements, which are also captured by pencil drawings swirling around the page.
Some of the poems make better use of two voices than others; in "Honeybees," for
instance, there is an amusing back-and-forth between a worker and a queen which
ends in a simultaneous chant, "Truly, a bee's is the/ worst (best)/ of all lives."
The poems are of necessity simple on the page, but the sound effects are playful
and the dual voice form is a natural for sociable children who want to share the
joyful noise of reading aloud. BH
C.U. Choral speaking
Furlong, Monica. Wise Child. Knopf, 1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-99105-2; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-394-89105-8. 2 28p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 6-8. 
Set in Britain in "very early Christian times," according to jacket
copy, this is a long effective meshing of reality and fantasy, as told by a nine-year-
old waif (called Wise Child) who is nine when she begins her story. Deserted by
her mother, longing for her seafaring father, Wise Child is taken in by a woman
who is an outcast, Juniper. A sorceress and healer, Juniper is tolerated in their
Scottish village-until bad times bring accusations of her evildoing. By the time
Wise Child is old enough to know and love Juniper, her vicious mother tries to
take her daughter away from the one person who has loved and protected her. This
is the author's first novel for children; her readers will surely hope it is not her
last. First published in England, the story is impressive both for its style and its
structure, and the characterizations and relationships are as capably handled as the
period details. The jacket art, by Leo and Diane Dillon, is a gravely beautiful
painting in medieval mood. ZS
Gardner, Beau. Can You Imagine ... ? A Counting Book; written and illus. by Beau
Gardner. Dodd, 1987. ISBN 0-396-09001-X. 28p. $10.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
It would be hard to go wrong with this one. Can you imagine,
the text begins, one whale wearing a veil, two ducks driving trucks, three giraffes
taking photographs? The double-page spreads go to 12 and the book concludes
with a pictorial recapitulation, handsome and effective. 
Can you imagine a
counting book that has colorful pictures, animal subjects, the appeals of rhyme and
nonsense, and the digits (large scale) followed by the word in lower case? ZS
Giff, Patricia Reilly. Tootsie Tanner, Why Don't You Talk? illus. by Anthony Kramer.
Delacorte, 1987. ISBN 0-385-29579-0. 119p. $13.95.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Like the last book in this series about Abby Jones, (Loretta P.
Sweeny, Where Are You? reviewed in the November, 1983 issue), this has the
junior detective leaping to the wrong conclusions and tripping over the right ones
by accident. Here Abby is trying to find a sinister spy she reads about in the
newspaper but locates instead the runaway girl her police friend, Garcia, has been
tracing. The "spy" turns out to be innocent (Abby finds the missing classified
film in his baby's crib mattress), and the plot turns out to be concocted rather than
developed. Abby's sidekick Pottsy is always stumbling behind with something of
the same mystification readers may feel as the story jumps from one incident to
another. This has some humorous dialogue that may appeal to mystery fans, but
it's frenetically contrived. BH
[ 116 ]
Greene, Carol. The Jenny Summer; illus. by Ellen Eagle. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-022209-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022208-5. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed.
$11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
A more cohesive and believable plot than its prequel, Robin
Hill, this recounts Robin's summer friendship with a new neighbor, Jenny. The
two girls exchange books, gifts, and messages in their Basket Express, but Jenny's
troubled home life steadily deteriorates until her parents' decision to divorce and to
farm her out to distant grandparents. This is shown in marked contrast to Robin's
very proper family, which has a 1950s formality of behavior codes. A subplot of
Robin's estrangement from another girl seems obvious and unnecessary, but the
didactic tone is offset by a real warmth in the episodes that develop the two main
characters' relationship. Easy transitional reading. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Grifalconi, Ann. Darkness and the Butterfly; written and illus. by Ann Grifalconi. Little,
1987. ISBN 0-316-32863-4. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
What child has not "been afraid of the dark? Of being alone in
the night when strange things float by that seem to follow you... ?" Osa,
bright and brave in the sunlight, is terrified at night. One day she gets lost and
stumbles onto the house of the Wise Woman. There she falls asleep and dreams
that she's "floating up through the air like the butterfly, flying along with the
moon high in the night sky over her village!" From that perspective she sees that
the night is not dark at all but filled with the light of stars and moon. With the
same graphic grace that distinguished The Village of Round and Square Houses,
Grifalconi elaborates an African setting with swirling lines, rounded shapes, and
intense hues of gold, blue, and green. The cradling of the child by the loving
female figures is, in itself, a reassuring aspect in a book that projects comfort. BH
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Hadithi, Mwenye. Crafty Chameleon; illus. by Adrienne Kennaway. Little, 1987. ISBN
0-316-33723-4. 30p. $12.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
A tale that may be familiar to storytellers as "How Brother
Rabbit Fooled the Whale and the Elephant" is played out here with a different set
of characters. The trickster is a chameleon, and the bullies are a leopard and a
crocodile. The latter torments Chameleon until he challenges them to a tug of war
and fools them into pulling against each other instead of him. The vividly hued,
strongly patterned paintings offer close perspectives from which the animals seem
to leap out at the viewer against their African landscapes. A striking selection for
group presentations. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Hirschi. What Is a Bird? Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6721-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6720-6.
31p
Where Do Birds Live? Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6723-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-
6722-2. 32p.
Both books illus. with photographs by Galen Burrell. Walker, 1987. Library ed.
$11.85; Trade ed. $10.95.
R 
3-5 yrs. 
Two filmic, fast-moving photodocumentaries qualify as
introductions to bird life for the younger listener. With a poetic text of a few
[ 117]
words per page, the double-spread color photographs, sometimes inset with smaller
contrasting photos, capture sensuous impressions of feathers, flight, or floating.
In a few cases, the images interfere with the information: "Birds are eggs, waiting,"
for instance, may have to be explained or rephrased to avoid confusion. If the
books err on the side of aesthetic appeal, however, they still give the audience a
better sense of bird life than a volume of prosaic detail. The photographs are vivid
and arranged for arresting contrasts, as in the pictures showing Dark-eyed Juncos
and Northern Pintail ducks against snowy backgrounds, followed by a Curve-billed
Thrasher in a summer desert setting. For each book, an afterword identifies the
birds in every picture, including, in the second title, descriptive notes. BH
C.U. Nature study
Holmes, Barbara Ware. Charlotte the Starlet; illus. by John Himmelman. Harper, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022608-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022589-0. Library ed.
$11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
In a sequel to Charlotte Cheatham: Master of Disaster (reviewed
in the January, 1986 issue) Charlotte has decided that she is no longer going to
tell lies and get into trouble because of them. 
Her solution is to use her
imagination in a more constructive way, by writing a book. Episodes of this
crisis-a-minute thriller are read aloud to her classmates, who are enthralled-but
Charlotte becomes unhappily aware that she's writing junk just to be popular, and
that a domineering classmate is trying to take over. Her wooing of others also
causes a breech with her best friend, and Charlotte finally decides to quit and throws
the manuscript away. And plans to write a play. This has an affectionate humor,
it deals with interests and activities that are nicely gauged for a middle-grades
audience, and the writing style is light and smooth. Minor chracters tend to be
stereotypical and Charlotte's acceptance of their interference is not quite credible,
but Charlotte herself is well drawn, and the interpolated episodes of her manuscript
are sure to amuse. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Hoobler, Thomas. Dr. Chill's Project. Putnam, 1987. ISBN 0-399-21480-1. 
188p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Fifteen, Allie has known all her life that her psychic powers
have made her unwanted at home and unliked at the institution where she has been
imprisoned. Now she must adjust to Dr. Chill's home (where she is one of a
small group of children with parapsychological abilities) and to his evident delight
in her telekinetic and telepathic prowess. Hoobler creates a believable setting for a
story in which the various abilities of the children are used to help each other when
danger threatens. As a novel about Psi phenomena, this is successful, with good
momentum and style, with interesting characters and an element of suspense;
unfortunately, it is weakened by the lurid and improbable plot developments at the
end of the story. ZS
D.V. Friendship values
Howe, James. I Wish I Were a Butterfly; illus. by Ed Young. Harcourt, 1987. ISBN 0-
15-200470-X. 30p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
From the first dark pages (a cricket's "tunnel-dark" home) to the
vibrant explosion of light and shimmering colors, Ed Young's paintings dominate
[ 118 ]
and outshine the text. The pictures are romantic, the story both saccharine and
trite, as a small cricket, convinced he is ugly, finally believes a friend who says he
is beautiful in his own special way. So the cricket stops wishing he were a
butterfly. It may not affect the read-aloud audience, but those who read to them
will note that on some pages the background colors make the print difficult to read.
ZS
D.V. Self-confidence
Jensen, Helen Zane. Uncle Ivan's Magic Box; written and illus. by Helen Zane Jensen.
Dial, 1987. ISBN 0-8037-0095-4. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
In a fanciful dovetailing of text and pictures, Jensen illustrates
the weightless journey of a boy and his uncle through a magic box with free-
floating, surrealistic art. The story is sometimes precious and secondary to the
meticulously crafted bookmaking. The plum-colored endpapers etched with exotic
birds herald pages of text framed in richly designed borders and enlivened with the
antics of the magician's white rabbit that stays outside the box. The images in the
illustrations facing the text are collaged shapes of objects freed from their
gravitational pull-water from its pitcher, fruit from its bowl, a cat from its
cushion, parts of the boy floating with a rocking chair and clock, the uncle upside
down with his gaily patterned clothes. The texturing is done with minute lines and
dots, the colors and shapes molded to appear sculptural-effects that make the
fantastical seem tangible. BH
Kamerman, Sylvia E., ed. Plays from Favorite Folk Tales: 25 One-Act Dramatizations of
Stories Children Love. Plays, Inc., 1987. ISBN 0-8238-0280-9. 293p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Most of the twenty-four plays here are based on commonly
known folklore figures such as Rapunzel, Robin Hood, The Musicians of Bremen
Town, King Midas, Aladdin, and Finn McCool. The dialogue is not bad, though
the stories seem to have been sterilized for child consumption: Rumpelstiltskin is
a lonely little creature who fits right into castle life once he finds playmates other
than the queen's baby; Little Red Riding Hood is only sent into the woods after a
safety-conscious conversation between her parents, who rescue her before she's
eaten ("Don't be afraid. Your father will deal with the wolf"). Some of the
selections are much stronger than others. "Hearts, Tarts, and Valentines" is
trumped up and silly, while "King John and the Abbot of Canterbury" has a clever
riddle twist. Children familiar with "Stone Soup" and other folk tales might create
more imaginative versions, but then again, they might not. For the producer in
need of quick scripts. BH
C.U. Dramatics
Kolodny, Nancy J. When Food's a Foe: How to Confront and Conquer Eating Disorders.
Little, 1987. ISBN 0-316-50167-0. 143p. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
This not only describes anorexia and bulimia but also aspires to
guide young people who have both diseases. That's a tall order, and the book
sometimes assumes an irritating self-promotional note along with its self-help
program. However, the information is extensive and invaluable for teenagers,
including discussions of self-image, body image, signs of eating disorders, ways to
get help, and advice on helping others (victims of eating disorders often become
self-centered bullies). The format is broken up by cartoons, quotes from teenagers,
questionnaires for the reader, lists of symptomatic behavior, and lots of section
[ 119]
headings for readers who wish to browse. A one-page bibliography suggests books
for further reading, plus four medical titles. Appendices list referral sources by
state, facts about nutrition (with an analysis of fast foods), and a final author's note
on discussing eating problems with a therapist. BH
C.U. Psychology
D.V. Self-evaluation
Kudlinski, Kathleen V. Rachel Carson: Pioneer of Ecology; illus. by Ted Lewin. Viking
Kestrel, 1988. ISBN 0-670-81488-1. (Women of Our Time). $10.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
When different authors contribute to a series of uniform
excellence, some credit surely belongs to the series editor. Most, of course, to the
author, and here Kudlinski has provided a model of brief biography. The tone is
appreciative rather than reverential, the balance between Carson's personal and
professional lives is nicely maintained, amd the writing is clear, direct, and
informative. A pioneer environmentalist, Carson was also an elegant writer, and
her biographer informs readers of both those facts as well as of the subject's
integrity. 
An appended note provides information on Kudlinski's research
methods. ZS
Lauber, Patricia. Snakes Are Hunters; illus. by Holly Keller. Crowell, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-690-04630-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-690-04628-6. 32p. (Let's Read and Find
Out Science Book). Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
Directing young readers to the zoo for observation, Lauber
introduces them to some basic facts about the anatomical structure and hunting
patterns of snakes. The selection and organization of material are excellent, and the
style is clear except in one case: the statement that "Snakes die if temperatures are
below freezing" is not true unless readers deduce that she means outside of the "safe
shelters for winter" that are described. The full-color illustrations are attractive but
cartoonish: one snake looks like an eel and several hatching from their eggs look
like worms happily esconced in cotton balls. The book is nonetheless valuable for
the information it provides and for the friendly presentation of a subject that
frightens many children. BH
C.U. Zoology
Levinson, Nancy Smiler. Clara and the Bookwagon; illus. by Carolyn Croll. Harper,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023838-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023837-2. 64p. (I
Can Read). Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $9.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
This is one of those books you want to put in every six-year-
old's hands-personable, easy-to-read historical fiction about a period when books
were hard to get and reading was a privilege. The oldest of three children, Clara
works alongside her parents. "There were no schools for farm children" (here a date
would have been helpful, though it's provided in the afterword as 1905). On a rare
trip to town, she looks longingly at the general store's "book station" but is
forbidden by her father: "Books are for rich people. Farm people like us do not
have time to read." Finally he is persuaded otherwise by a pioneer librarian in the
first travelling bookwagon, and Clara gets her chance at learning to read. The story
builds naturally in several episodes, and the style is contained without becoming
contrived. The full-color illustrations are somewhat doll-like, with the flavor more
[ 120]
of a Pennsylvania Dutch than a Maryland setting, but the rounded shapes and
blended tones are comfortable to look at. A good follow-up to Carol Purdy's Least
of All, reviewed in the March 1987 issue. BH
D.V. Education, valuing and seeking
Levoy, Myron. The Magic Hat of Mortimer Wintergreen; illus. by Andrew Glass. Harper,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023842-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023841-0. Library
ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
Since their parents had died, Joshua and Amy (13 and 11) had
been living with their punitive, nasty Aunt Vooch. Handcuffed, they escape,
hoping to find the grandparents who live in Manhattan and whom they have never
met. They join forces with a magician, Mortimer Wintergreen, who has a
capricious magic hat that (when in the mood) helps the three evade the relentlessly
pursuing Aunt Vooch. Wintergreen (who seems part Micawber, part W.C. Fields)
is tediously loquacious and the trio's adventures are frenetic as Aunt V. gives
chase. There are some comic moments, but for the most part this is a fantasy so
contrived and banal that it's hard to believe it is by the author of books as sensitive
as Alan and Naomi and Three Friends. ZS
Linn, Margot. A Trip to the Dentist; illus. by Catherine Siracusa. Harper, 1988. Library
ed. ISBN 0-06-025834-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025829-2. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Clean, simply drawn illustrations show a calm and happy child
whose mother stays with her except during the x-ray procedure. Much of the time
the assistant as well as the dentist is on hand, as Annie is examined, has her teeth
cleaned and x-rayed, gets a fluoride treatment, and demonstrates how thoroughly she
uses a toothbrush. The format seems artificial in those parts of the story that are
broken by sets of questions; for example, "Who is going to brush her teeth?
Annie. What will she use? See if you can guess," and the pictures show a
hairbrush, a paintbrush, and a toothbrush. It's nice to sooth a prospective patient,
but just a hint of the fact that there is such a thing as a cavity would not have been
amiss. ZS
,jLisle, Janet Taylor. The Great Dimpole Oak; illus. by Stephen Gammell. Orchard/Watts,
1987. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08316-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05716-X. Library
ed. $11.99; Trade ed. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Two boys want to square things with a bully; an old man
wonders who will give him a birthday party; shy lovers long to speak; and an
Indian swami hears a call... from the Great Dimpole Oak, "hundreds of feet tall,
tens of feet thick, with roots as big as fire hoses coiled around its base." The tree
is the answer to many wishes in this gently satiric contemporary fable, bringing
together hopes and rewards in the unlikeliest of ways, all the while instilling a
faith in community. The townspeople, for example, rally around the tree to
protect it from the farmer upon whose land it grows; that lonely man believes the
demonstration is his birthday party, and so it becomes. While the novel could use
a bit of tightening (the swami is really from another story), it generally manages
to blend high and low comedy to a resonating end. RS
D.V. Community life; Friendship values
[ 121 ]
Mango, Karin N. Somewhere Green. Four Winds, 1987. ISBN 0-02-762270-3. 202p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Bryony (called Brian) is 16, and she detests Brooklyn, to which
her family has just moved. 
It's dirty, it's dangerous, and it lacks the green
expanses she'd loved in their old home in the country. By slight contrivance
(father away, mother called to join him, sitter quitting), the three children are left
alone and decide to keep the fact a secret and to cope. By the time their parents
return, Brian and her two siblings have learned to keep house, have even renovated
a room as a Christmas present for Mom and Dad, and have learned that there are
some nice facets to their new neighborhood. Brian, especially, has had a change of
heart, and it's in large part due to learning to know and love the Puerto Rican boy
next door. This is adequately written, but it is formulaic in structure, a message-
bearing variant on the familiar themes of adaptability and learning to live without
supervision. ZS
D.V. Adaptability; Self-reliance
Moore, Robert. Living in Sydney. Silver Burdett, 1987. ISBN 0-382-09385-2. 40p.
illus. with photographs. (City Life). $13.96.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
First published in England, this and the Sproule book reviewed
below follow a series format, with oversize pages printed in three columns (two
wide, one narrow and with smaller print) and broken by irregular and unattractive
use of color photographs-many of which are attractive or informative in
themselves. The rigidity of the arrangement is evident in the assignment of
exactly two pages for every topic. There is an index and there is a map, albeit of
poor quality; the text is only adequately written, giving facts but colored by an
advertising brochure approach. ZS
C.U. Social studies
Parish, Peggy. Scruffy; illus. by Kelly Oechsli. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
024660-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024659-6. 64p. (I Can Read). Library ed.
$10.89; Trade ed. $9.95.
R 
Gr. 1-2. 
In a modest way, this is an exemplary story for the beginning
independent reader: vocabulary controlled (but not rigidly), story line sturdy, plot
not taxing, subject appealing, print large, and pages uncluttered. It also gives
some information about getting and caring for a pet, it advocates consideration for
animals, and it tells the story of a child who gets just what he's wanted for his
birthday, a kitten. Line and wash drawings are a bit repetitive, but they have
vitality and humor, and they're nicely integrated with the text on almost every
page. ZS
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Pets, care of
Petersen, P. J. The Freshman Detective Blues. Delacorte, 1987. ISBN 0-385-29586-3.
205p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
"On an ordinary Monday... I suddenly found myself (1) in
love, (2) in the detective business, and (3) confused about both these things."
Eddie's pursuit of his beloved, whose family won't sanction dating, is intermittent
and is not really integrated into the forward movement of the plot, which has to do
with the investigations of Eddie and his buddy Jack into an old mystery. The clue
[ 122]
is uncovered (literally) when drought lowers the lake level and exposes a human
skeleton. 
Clues (some misleading) point to friends and family members.
Eventually all is made more or less clear, but the suspicions, red herrings, and
repeated musings about who did what to whom, and why, make the whole,
although adequately written, less than convincing. ZS
Pilling, Ann. Henry's Leg; illus. by Rowan Clifford. Viking Kestrel, 1985. ISBN 0-670-
80720-6. 153p. $10.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
First published in England and winner of the Guardian Award for
children's fiction, this is a lively and well-structured suspense story. His father had
left them, and Henry was living alone with his mother in a large, rambling house,
in which Henry's room was a junk museum. A new item in his collection is the
leg of a fashion mannequin, which it soon becomes clear is desperately wanted by
some local thugs, who eventually steal it. Henry's sure it is related to a jewelry
store robbery, but it takes the help of an adult cousin and the right combination of
persistence and luck for the mystery to besolved, not without danger to Henry,
This has good pace, strong characters and dialogue, and a believably happy ending.
ZS
Rappaport, Doreen. The Boston Coffee Party; illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. Harper,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024825-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024824-6. $10.89.
Reviewed from galleys.
The following review is rerun from last month's issue because two lines were
deleted in typesetting.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
A small segment of Revolutionary War history (cited, in an
author's note, is an excerpt from a letter written by Abigail Adams) is used as the
basis for a simply written piece of fiction for beginning independent readers. A
greedy Boston merchant, hoarding coffee so he can raise the price, is set upon by a
group of angry women who force him to surrender his keys and then help
themselves to coffee beans. The author begins by focusing on two small sisters
who report the merchant's behavior and set off the spark for the women's action.
This is just right for the intended audience, since it's easy to read, has action,
punishes avarice, and doesn't give more historical background than a young child
can absorb. ZS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Robinson, Nancy K. Veronica Knows Best. Scholastic, 1987. ISBN 0-590-40509-8.
156p. $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
In this third book about Veronica Schmidt, the protagonist, who
knows she has a reputation as a show-off, decides to give up a chance to have the
lead in a school musical and to coach pretty, popular Kimberly. Unfortunately,
Kimberly sings in a monotone. Also unfortunately, Veronica doesn't have the
piano needed for the secret coaching lessons she's promised. Second plot: in
response to a letter from her father (divorced), Veronica, with unconvincing
stupidity, decides that he has invited her and a friend for Christmas. She does visit
him, breaks up a relationship that he has with a calculating woman, makes a new
friend, and comes home to a pleasant reunion with friends. This is pleasantly
light, often amusing, nicely written but weak in plot and characterization. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Father-daughter relations
[ 123 ]
Roos, Stephen. Thirteenth Summer; illus. by Dee deRosa. Atheneum, 1987. ISBN 0-
689-31299-7. 103p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
A sequel to Fair-Weather Friends (reviewed in the May 1987
issue) focuses on Pink, the boy jilted by one of the main characters in the first
book. Readers will need to be familiar with that episode to really appreciate the
intensity of Pink's reactions against what he perceives as summer vacationers'
snobbery toward Plymouth Islanders. At stake is his friendship with wealthy
Mackie Cunningham and his attendance of a private school to which Mr.
Cunningham awards scholarships. The blow-up between the boys' fathers, who
had been friends before a similar conflict alienated them, underscores the theme of
social-class barriers. The plot is somewhat mechanical and the style occasionally
stiff, but the situation seems genuine, as do the protagonist's efforts to recognize
his motives more honestly. BH
D.V. Economic differences, understanding; Friendship values
Shamir, Ilana, ed. The Young Reader's Encyclopedia of Jewish History; ed. and illus. by
Ilana Shamir and Shlomo Shavit. Viking Kestrel, 1987. ISBN 0-670-81738-4.
illus. and with photographs. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
An oversize volume that's liberally illustrated without becoming
cluttered, this is organized into 28 chapters. Each is about four pages long, from a
discussion of early nomadic tribes to an assessment of contemporary international
Jewry. Examples of other topics include the Babylonian exile, Jewish life in early
Christian Europe and in the Ottoman Empire, Messianism during the Middle Ages,
the rise of Zionism, the Holocaust, the Sinai Campaign and Yom Kippur War, and
problems of Jews in the Eastern Bloc. Necessarily generalized, these quick-surveys
will nevertheless serve to introduce students to important people, incidents,
movements, and issues of religious and political change, with clarifying maps,
diagrams, time line charts, and good reproductions of historic art works and
photographs. The advantage of this volume over a standard Jewish encyclopedia in
a school or public library is its chronological sequence and readability as a
browsing item; the book can function either for reference or for home/classroom
study. BH
C.U. History
Sis, Peter. Rainbow Rhino; written and illus. by Peter Sis. Knopf, 1987. ISBN 0-394-
89004-4. 30p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
In the first picture book he has written as well as illustrated, Sis
shows that his artistic proficiency is not matched by his literary prowess. The
bare, thin plot is that a rhino's three friends (a red, a blue, and a yellow bird) leave
him when each is attracted by something of their color (a blue lake, bunches of
yellow bananas, a field of "red" poppies that are bright pink) and then rejoin the
rhino when threatened by a predator of matching color. Interesting compositions
have a strong sense of color and design, but they are used to impose the story
rather than illustrate or even complement it. ZS
Skipper, David. Runners. Viking Kestrel, 1988. 
ISBN 0-670-81994-8. 
$11.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 7-9. 
Orphaned and living with his grandmother, adolescent Jim Taylor
(the narrator) is trapped into danger and flight after he has by chance picked up a
[124]
computer disk that's the property of a criminal band in an English town. Meeting
the boy who lost the disk, a waif named Casey, Jim realizes they are both being
followed by vindicative gang members. What ensues is a chase-and-escape story
that is often exciting but not alway convincing. It has good pace, adequate style, a
weak plot, lots of violence and some rough language, and some consideration of
the ethical concepts Jim feels but Casey does not. This isn't an impressive first
novel, but it does show potential. ZS
Smith, Janice Lee. The Show-and-Tell War: and Other Stories About Adam Joshua; illus.
by Dick Gackenbach. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025815-2; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-06-025814-4. Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
The third in a series about Adam Joshua (The Kid Next Door and
Other Headaches: Stories About Adam Joshua was reviewed in the June, 1984
issue), this relates five episodes centered on school. In the first, Adam Joshua
moves all around the room before he finally settles on the seat in which he started
out; in the second, he resolves his jealousy of his baby sister getting his dog's
attention while he's at school; in the third, he steals and returns a library book he
loves; the fourth is a Halloween scenario, and the fifth is the title show-and-tell
struggle between him and his enemy, a show-off named Elliot. The stories depend
heavily on running jokes about various members of the class. These can get a
little wearing and, like all classes, occasionally frenetic. But Smith has an ear for
children's dialogue and obsessions, and readers will find here a laughable
microcosm of school room reactions. BH
Smith, L. J. The Night of the Solstice. Macmillan, 1987. ISBN 0-02-785840-5. 
23lp.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Claudia, youngest of four siblings, is the first to meet the vixen
that has the power of human speech, and it is at the vixen's behest that she brings
the other three to a deserted house to hear the animal's urgent plea. It is the
mirrors of the house that provide entry into another world; it is the vixen's
mistress, the sorceress Morgana, who is being held captive in that world and who
must be rescued if her evil captor is not to pursue a plan that will endanger
humankind. As is true of so many first novels of fantasy, this is heavy with
magical devices and with dangerous confrontations. It has adequate pace and
writing style, some fairly consistent and substantial characterization, but an
overwrought plot and an unconvincing duping of oblivious parents. ZS
Sproule, Anne. Living in London. Silver Burdett, 1987. ISBN 0-382-09386-0. 
40p.
illus. with photographs. (City Life). $13.96.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Reprinted from a series published in London, this has a cluttered
format (see Moore review above) and a space control (two pages per topic) that
militates against giving more attention to major topics that deserve fuller
treatment. 
As in other books in the series, the text gives some attention to
historical and geographical information, but focuses on daily life in city and
suburbs. Since each of the two-page assignments is half taken by photographs,
the coverage is, if accurate, superficial. The index is adequate, the map is not. ZS
C.U. Social studies
[ 125 ]
Stolz, Mary Slattery. Storm in the Night; illus. by Pat Cummings. 
Harper, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025913-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025912-4. Library ed.
$12.89; Trade ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Effective paintings in dark, vivid colors show a small black boy
and his grandfather who go out on the porch during a storm-caused blackout.
Thomas discovers that smells and sounds seem more clear in the dark, he comforts
his frightened cat, and he has a discussion with Grandfather that leads to an
anecdote about another night, another storm, another frightened pet. Gently, in a
story told (deftly, smoothly, subtly) primarily in dialogue, Grandfather makes it
possible for Thomas to admit his own fear, previously denied, because Grandfather
had once been a child frightened by a storm. This doesn't have a lot of action, but
it abounds in nuance and should have a lot of impact. ZS
D.V. Fears, overcoming; Grandparent-child relations
Swallow, Pamela Curtis. Leave it to Christy. Putnam, 1987. ISBN 0-399-21482-8.
153p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Christy Swan, the narrator, is adjusting to her first year in
middle school, her first crush (Jeff), her acrimonious older sister Sarah, and her first
experience as a star in a children's musical-she's Peter in Peter Pan. The story
flows cheerily along, with Christy acquiring a science project, establishing a nice
relationship with Jeff, fracturing a wrist but keeping her lead role in the play, and
helping to solve the dilemma of a classmate whose temporarily upset home life
has affected his performance at school. The writing style is fairly smooth, the
characterization is adequate but lacks depth, and the whole is diminished by a lack
of focus or impact. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Friendship values
Tafuri, Nancy. In a Red House. ISBN 0-688-07185-6.
My Friends. ISBN 0-688-07187-2.
Where We Sleep. ISBN 0-688-07189-9.
All three books written and illus. by Nancy Tafuri. Greenwillow, 1987. 10p.
$3.95.
Ad 
1-3 yrs. 
Small, square board books have minimal text and bright, clear
pictures set off by plenty of clean space. Each presents a concept: My Friends
shows baby animals like a colt, chicks, a puppy, a fawn; In a Red House
introduces colors, using objects as familiar as a ball and a chair and blocks; Where
We Sleep begins, "Bunnies have burrows/ fawns have thickets/ puppies have
beds..." The book is sturdy and attractive, but some of the terms (thickets, for
example) seem inappropriate for the very young child, and the material is hardly
innovative in concept or execution. ZS
Tapp, Kathy Kennedy. Flight of the Moth-Kin; illus. by Michele Chessare. Margaret K.
McElderry, 1987. ISBN 0-689-50401-2. 118p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
A sequel to Moth-Kin Magic (reviewed in the January 1984
issue) details the return of Ripple, her mother Fern, Uncle Kane, Pan, Crick, and
Lissa to the clan's beloved river. There's a new character, Old Ivy, introduced here,
but the emphasis is on narrow escapes from the "giants" that once captured the tiny
folk in a bottle. Simply getting across a playground and over a wall involves a
[ 126 ]
series of life-threatening situations, and these become repetitious in pace though
they're varied in incident. The writing here is not as sensitive and skilled as in
Tapp's realistic novel, Smoke from the Chimney, but young fantasy buffs will
enjoy the adventurous dimension, the diminutive perspective on a human world,
and the magic Ripple feels with her first wings. BH
Ure, Jean. The Other Side of the Fence. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-385-2967-4. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
In another mature and sensitive novel, Ure begins with the older
of two adolescents, Richard, who has just had a violent quarrel with his father and
has been told to get out of the house. Aimlessly drifting about the English
countryside, he gives a lift to another teenager, Bonny. Richard's a university
student, Bonny a shrewd drifter, uneducated and amoral, whose tough lover, Jake,
has left her. This is not a romance; in fact, it becomes increasingly clear as the
story goes on that Richard is gay. Bonny does not know until, at the end of the
book, he tells her. She's disappointed, but she likes Richard and is aware that he
has encouraged her to get an education and have a more satisfying life than that of a
grocery clerk. And Bonny has been good for Richard: in the time they have spent
together, he has absorbed some of her resiliency and courage. This is a mature and
candid story, told with both momentum and nuance; minor as well as major
characters have depth, and they are skillfully developed through dialogue as well as
exposition. ZS
D.V. Friendship values; Self-confidence
Weiss, Nicki, comp. If You're Happy and You Know It: Eighteen Story Songs Set to
Pictures; illus. by Monica J. Weiss; music arranged by John Krumich.
Greenwillow, 1987. ISBN 0-688-06444-2. 39p. $13.00.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
The melodic line-sometimes broken and used as a separate
caption for the pictures-is provided for each of the "story songs" in this
collection. The pictures are drawn in jaunty cartoon style, the colors are light, not-
too-bright pastels, with most of the illustrations in frames or strips on
unfortunately crowded, busy pages. ZS
C.U. Recreation
White, Larry. Razzle Dazzle! Magic Tricks for You; by Larry White and Ray Broekel;
illus. by Meyer Seltzer. Whitman, 1987. ISBN 0-8075-6857-0. 64p. $10.25.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
The authors describe twenty tricks involving cards, string, paper,
glue and other easily acquired or prepared materials. A brief introduction lays out
the principles of illusion: sleight of hand, misdirection, patter, gimmicks, timing,
and, most of all, practice. Although none of the tricks are too difficult, a few may
require adult guidance, depending on the reading capabilities or dexterity of the
child. 
Several involve numbers and left/right-handed maneuvers (without
mentioning reversals for left-handed children) and some are merely jokes ("the
vanishing cracker" is a pretty crumby trick). The text itself has the bantering tone
of a magic show, and the cartoon drawings, though they limit the audience to
younger childen, include helpful diagrams. BH
[ 127 1
Wright, Betty Ren. A Ghost in the Window. Holiday House, 1987. ISBN 0-8234-0661-
X. 150p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Meg learns, after having just landed her first lead role in a play,
that she'll miss the chance because her divorced mother's shipping her off for a
summer visit to her father. Adding to her misery are warning dreams (which have
proved prophetic in the past) and, once she's with her father, the realization that
he's on the verge of a new marriage with his landlady. This woman's husband was
killed in a car accident after being accused of theft, and his son is haunted by the
unsolved crime. It's Meg's dreams that lead to the recovery of valuables from the
bank embezzlement. The plot is formulaic mystery, but the protagonist's fears and
insecurities lend some depth, as does the conclusion, in which both adolescents
have to recognize their parents' flaws and their own separate identities. BH
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Divorce, adjustment to; Stepparent-child relations
Wright, David. The Facts on File Children's Atlas; by David and Jill Wright. Facts on
File, 1987. ISBN 0-8160-1745-X. 96p. illus. and with photographs. $12.95.
M 
Gr. 3-5. 
Format and game-appeal embellishments weaken the reference
function of an oversize book that has adequate organization, good maps, and a full
index of names that includes map coordinates. The format is tarted up, alas, with
puzzles, quizzes, activity suggestions, and games, on pages that are either in two
or three columns, with photographs, drawings and boxed inserts. Perhaps the most
serious weakness of the book is in the arbitrary treatment; for example, color
pictures of flags for India, the U.K. and the U.S. but not for China, Japan, or
France. Boxed material ranges from Spanish coins, a mnemonic for the Great
Lakes (under "Canada"), a stamp showing the earth from the moon (under "Eastern
USA") and labels from Italian food exports. Some browsing interest here, and
some facts supplied, but this doesn't substitute for a good atlas. ZS
C.U. Geography
Yolen, Jane. A Sending of Dragons; illus. by Tom McKeveny. Delacorte, 1987. ISBN 0-
385-29587-1. 186p. (Pit Dragons: Book #3). $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Third in a science fantasy trilogy (Dragon's Blood was reviewed
in the July, 1982 issue, Heart's Blood in the June, 1984 issue) is the story of the
runaways, Jakkin and Akki, who are in hiding with their telepathic dragons. The
setting is a mythical planet geared to the breeding of fighting dragons, and Yolen
does a very good job (again) of making the bonds between human and dragon
credible. Jakkin and Akki are trapped in the underground refuge of a throwback
community, so the story has danger and suspense in addition to the intriguing and
well-realized conception of a vigorous if violent future society. ZS