Alexander, Sally Hobart. Maggie's Whopper; illus. by Deborah Kogan Ray.
Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-02-700201-2. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
In this story of a child spending a weekend at an
isolated lake with her great-uncle, the "whopper" is a large fish that Maggie
finally catches, but then tosses to an old, marauding bear so that the animal
won't come near Uncle Ezra, dozing in his chair. Her heroic intervention serves
to resolve both her fear of the bear and a parallel fear of her beloved uncle's
advancing age. Colored pencil and wash art, often hazy except for the intensely
hued foreground figures, echo the quiet mood of the text. ZS
D.V. Animals, kindness to; Uncle-niece relations
Armstrong, Jennifer. Steal Away. Jackson/Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-
531-08583-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05983-9. [224 p]. Library ed. $14.99;
Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Mary, thirteen, begins the story (and is subsequently
heard from intermittently) by describing her trip from New York to Toronto with
her grandmother in 1896. They are going to visit Gran's old friend Bethlehem
Reid, who is ill. Gran and Bethlehem, in turn, tell the story of their meeting,
their flight north from Virginia, and the events that made them loving friends.
This inner narrative, set in 1855, is forceful and dramatic; Gran, newly orphaned,
had been sent to live with an uncle in Virginia and Beth was one of his slaves
who couldn't bring herself to trust a white girl, even one who appeared to hate
slavery. By the time Gran and Beth's journey as runaways was over, their trust
and love for each other were profound. Armstrong's novel has pace and
suspense, characterization that is solid and consistent, and a crescendo that builds
to a logical yet dramatic climax. The story of Gran and Beth is deftly folded into
the quieter but effective framing narrative. ZS
D.V. Courage; Friendship values; Interracial understanding
Baillie, Allan. Little Brother, illus. by Elizabeth Honey. Viking, 1992. ISBN
0-670-84381-4. 
144p. $14.00.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Vithy and his older brother Mang have escaped from
the "Big Paddy," a collective forced-labor farm set up by the Khmer Rouge after
their victory in Cambodia. But Mang soon disappears, and Vithy, remembering
his brother's injunction to "head for the lines," heads alone for the Thai border,
always hoping to find his brother. Vithy's journey is a perilous balance between
[173 ]
adventure and escape, as he constructs a bicycle out of abandoned parts, visits
Angkor Wat, and seems safely on his way only to have the bike taken from him
by a woman with a knife. Vithy does make it to the border and a refugee camp,
and here the novel veers off from its exciting realism to something more cozy.
In the camp, Vithy is befriended by an Australian doctor, Betty, who helps him
look for Mang, and, that failing, takes Vithy back with her to Sydney. Guess
who's waiting at the airport? Readers may enjoy the reunion even as they
distrust its unforecasted optimism. RS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Brothers
Balducci, Carolyn Feleppa. Margaret Fuller: A Life of Passion and Defiance.
Bantam, 1991. Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-35148-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-553-08123-3.
210p. illus. with photographs. (The Barnard Biography Series). Paper ed.
$6.00; Trade ed. $16.50.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
It's a pity that the cover illustration, from a painting
done during her lifetime, depicts Margaret Fuller as a turquoise-eyed and -clad
dumpling, giving no hint that this woman was probably the most important
female American intellectual of the nineteenth century. Balducci chronicles
Fuller's life with meticulous diligence, beginning with her studious childhood,
through her professional writing career and involvement with the
Transcendentalists, to her days of love and defiance in Rome during the
Revolution of 1848-9. The problem with a life so crammed with incident is that
it can make dull reading if treated completely, and this book, although
informative, is pretty heavy going, with an assumption of a sophisticated reader
(there's not much background given for the American and Italian politics
discussed) that may not be warranted. The style sometimes becomes turgid
("President Adams's early exit seemed an omen of the sudden evaporation of the
political power of his fellow Jeffersonians over the issue of slavery which
Democratic-Republicans like Fuller opposed") or sentimental ("His gentle, dark
eyes and his aristocratic, almost delicate features assured Margaret that he was
trustworthy"), but it's really just that Fuller knew too many people, and the
continual listing of names slows the pace. Still, this account of the life of a
proper Bostonian feminist who had an illegitimate child with an Italian
revolutionary and died at sea is worth reading-if not for the presentation, then
for the fascinating facts. DS
C.U. American Literature
Beattie, Owen. Buried in Ice; by Owen Beattie and John Geiger with Shelley
Tanaka; illus. by Janet Wilson and with photographs. Scholastic/Madison
Press, 1992. ISBN 0-590-43848-4. [64p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-7. 
In 1845 Sir John Franklin led an Arctic expedition to
search for the Northwest Passage; none of its members ever returned. Over the
years bits of information, some early graves and remains, and a journal have
turned up, making it clear that the men all perished but still leaving many
questions unanswered. Owen Beattie's anthropological work on the buried
bodies of early expedition casualties (documented also in Beattie and Geiger's
adult book Frozen in Time and a Nova program) found lead poisoning, which
would have caused the weakness and irrationality that eventually led to the crew's
deaths in the frozen north. This account is somewhat strangely organized--
[174]
Beattie starts out by telling you what he found, but it's not until chapter 6 that
he really describes what was lost. Yet the story of science and tragedy is still
gripping. Less interesting than the historical and scientific detective work, the
chapters devoted to a fictional account of a young lad aboard one of the doomed
ships nevertheless give a sense of the explorers' place, time, and dilemma. This
fictionalization also seems a tad ghoulish, since the young lad's good friend
appears alive in the story, text, and illustrations on one page and then is clearly
very, very dead in a contemporary photograph a few pages later. Some
illustrations are impressive, including reproductions of evocative period art and
haunting photographs of Canadian landscape and anthropological work in
progress (grisly exhumed corpses, not for the faint of heart); the modern-day
illustrations, unfortunately, are stiff in comparison. The Beattie discovery is a
great story, as good as any fictional mystery, and it demonstrates how absorbing
applied science can be; a glossary, chronology, and bibliography are appended.
DS
C.U. Anthropology; Science
Bober, Natalie S. Marc Chagall: Painter of Dreams; illus. by Vera Rosenberry
and with photographs. Jewish Publication Society, 1991. ISBN 0-8276-0379-
7. 142p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-7. 
Marc Chagall is not only one of the most important
artists of the twentieth century, but also one whose glowing colors and
dreamlike visions make him particularly attractive to the young. In this
biography of Chagall's long life, Bober chronicles the artist's Russian Jewish
roots and upbringing, his war-enforced and chosen wanderings after leaving the
country of his birth, and his gradual attainment of artistic recognition. Chagall's
first wife, Bella, is depicted rightly as his great love and inspiration, although
the portrait of his second wife seems less than sympathetic. Chagall's closeness
to his Jewish roots and use of them in his art is a particular focus; unfortunately,
only four small color reproductions are included, so the reader has little sense of
Chagall's art. The writing style tends to be pedestrian ("How happy he was
when his uncle agreed to take him along in his jolting cart") with occasional
oddities ("his strange, doe-shaped eyes"), but overall this is a competent and
easy-to-read biography of an important artistic figure. A glossary of artistic
terms, a chronology, and an index are included; occasional black-and-white pencil
drawings are jarringly coy rather than Chagallian in nature. DS
C.U. Art appreciation
Brillhart, Julie. Story Hour--Starring Megan!; written and illus. by Julie
Brillhart. Whitman, 1992. ISBN 0-8075-7628-X. [32p]. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
Megan's Mom is the town librarian, a situation
Megan likes, especially when the sitter can't come and she and her baby brother
get to go to work with Mom. Megan likes to help out at the library, picking up
the toys, watering the plants, "putting away the children's books." You might
find the last activity rather alarming, since the focus of the story is the fact that
Megan does not yet know how to read. It isn't clear how old Megan is, but she
does go to school, and is patiently waiting for the day when all her reading effort
pays off. It does when, one frantic day at the library, baby Nathan pitches a fit
during story hour and Mom has to comfort him-leaving Megan in charge.
[ 175]
And, despite a few hitches, she reads her favorite book, Fly up High, to a
spellbound audience. The story may raise questions-and eyebrows-among
librarians who've never enjoyed this particular variety of day care, but struggling
beginning readers will savor Megan's triumph despite the all-of-a-suddenness of
the victory. Line and watercolor illustrations of the library are sunny and
sometimes crowded, jiggling with a clutter that is familiar and endearing. RS
C.U. 
Story hours
Brooks, Jerome. Knee Holes. Jackson/Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-
08594-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05994-4. [144p]. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed.
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
The title refers to the jeans worn by the narrator,
fifteen-year-old Hope, who is plump, usually inarticulate, and totally lacking in
the self-confidence shown by her older sister Heather. Since she has a crush on
Dr. Rogers, the teacher who has had enough faith in her to place her in an
honors program, Hope really works at participation, and she's doubly a
beneficiary because of it. First, she makes friends and even has enough courage
to ask one boy, Tuy Nguyen, to a dance; second-and even more gratifying-she
gains self-confidence to the point where she is articulate and excited about
learning and gains insight that helps her to understand the intricacy of other
people's problems and to be more compassionate about them. This is a fine
rites-of-passage story, intelligent in its insight and observations, leavened by the
convincing voice-often tremulous, often excited-of a teenage girl. ZS
D.V. Self-reliance; Teacher-student relations
Buchanan, Dawna Lisa. The Falcon's Wing. Jackson/Orchard, 1992. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-08586-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05986-3. [144p]. Library ed.
$13.99; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
After the death of her mother, twelve-year-old Bryn
moves with her father to a tiny town in Ontario, where her mother's sister has a
farm. Bryn, angry and hurt, doesn't know what to make of her gruff aunt Pearl
or her cousin Winnie, who has Down's syndrome. While Bryn struggles with
her new schoolmates' cruelty to her and Winnie, she begins to feel at home on
Pearl's farm and gradually begins to accept her mother's death. Characterization
is uneven, but Bryn, her father, and Pearl are credible as people in stages of grief
and adjustment, with Bryn's occasional nastiness to Winnie offputtingly
authentic. The writing tends to be artful at the expense of clarity (it's difficult to
tell what actually has happened in a scene where a little girl falls into a river) and
occasionally miscalculated in its effects ("Thoughts bounced off me like dead
flies"), but is generally evocative of the changes of rural and emotional seasons.
Despite the flaws, this is a truthful and quietly told story of the forming of a
family in the wake of tragedy. DS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Family relations
Bunting, Eve. Summer Wheels; illus. by Thomas B. Allen. Harcourt, 1992.
ISBN 0-15-207000-1. 48p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
This brief novel is convincingly told by Lawrence
(half of a tight interracial friendship) and is direct, simple, and deeply touching
without being sentimental. An elderly man in a Los Angeles neighborhood
fixes bicycles and encourages boys and girls to sign them out for the day. Free.
[ 176]
Lawrence has a favorite bike and is indignant when a newcomer (who signs out
as "Abrehem Lincoln") takes that bike and doesn't return it. 
When Lawrence and
his buddy force the new boy to return the bike, they realize what the Bicycle
Man has known all along: what "Abrehem" (actually, Leon) is doing is looking
for attention from male peers and adults, since he is without a father-or a
grandfather. Quiet, subtly shaded pastel and charcoal drawings have fidelity of
details, balance of mass, and sage placement in composition. ZS
D.V. Ethical concepts; Older-younger generations
Byars, Betsy. The Moon and I. Messner, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-671-
74165-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-74166-7. 96p. illus. with photographs. Library
ed. $14.98; Trade ed. $12.95.
R* 
Gr. 4-8. 
Betsy Byars could no more resist telling a good story
than fly-well, actually, she flies, too, as we learn in this inventive
autobiography. Weaving back and forth between her recent experiences with
snake-watching and her childhood and career, Byars eschews the usual chronology
in favor of a more freely associated sequence of episodes that all bear, ultimately,
on her writing. Early on, we get a plot summary in one of the book's many
lists: "1. The writer, Betsy Byars, comes to know a snake, Moon, and blah ...
blah .. . blah . .. blah." The process of writing itself comes under close
scrutiny, as in this calculation: 'Walk to refrigerator ... 
11 seconds. Take
Miniature Snickers from freezer . . . 3 seconds. 
Warm Snicker in
microwave... 16 seconds. Return eating Snicker . .. 11 seconds. Total
elapsed time ... 41 seconds." Other lists, such as the one inserted into an
hysterical story about a childhood project gone awry, cast light on the past:
"Here's what went into the First Skateboard in the History of the World: One
board. Forty-two assorted nails. One roller skate." (Added up, a prescription for
disaster.) Byars uses the element of surprise, injects it with humor, and blends
in information at the same time. With an informal, even colloquial, style that
will recruit young readers into an immediate I-thou relationship, she serves up
characters and incidents here with all the aplomb of fiction, including dialogue
and dramatic details. The book itself is imaginatively designed, and a gallery of
black-and-white photographs documents the inviolable truth of it all. Betsy
Byars really does have her pilot's license. BH
C.U. Writing for children
D.V. Creativity
Clifford, Eth. Will Somebody Please Marry My Sister?; illus. by Ellen Eagle.
Houghton, 1992. ISBN 0-395-58037-4. 
[128p]. $13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Set in Brooklyn in the 1920s, this is the story of a
boy (Abel, an orphan who lives with his sisters and grandmother) who aches to
have his sister move out so that he will have his own room. Grandma, a
stereotypical bossy/sexist tyrant, says the older sister has to marry first, that it's
a rule; the older sister is a doctor who doesn't particularly want to marry but is
pleasant enough to the suitors who call. What suitors? The three that Abel's
friend Hilda has found in the files of her father, a matchmaker. A repetitive
sitcom, this caricatures rather than characterizes its cast (except the doctor/sister)
and relies on Grandma and her stubborn ways for its humor. Mildly amusing,
but not Clifford's best. ZS
[ 177]
Coles, William E., Jr. Funnybone; by William E. Coles, Jr. and Stephen
Schwandt. 
Atheneum, 1992. 
ISBN 0-689-31666-6. 
[208p]. 
$14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 7-10. 
"Funnybone" is the name Christine gives to the
mischievous, "trickster" part of her imagination, and Funnybone comes up with
many pranks designed to wreak revenge upon Christine's enemies. He prompts
her, for example, to send a forged love note from a disliked teacher to Christine's
brother Walt's girlfriend (also disliked). 
In tandem, Christine sends an
anonymous note to her brother telling him where to find the love note. The
schemes are all devious and meanspirited, sometimes stretching credulity but
usually entertaining. (It's different, too, to see a girl perpetrating such trouble.)
Unfortunately, the novel, which has, plotwise, suspensefully revolved around
Walt's disappearance, becomes an oppressively didactic sermon about addiction
and recovery, as Christine finds out about Walt's drug problem and realizes her
own reliance on Funnybone to solve her problems. A teacher, a friend, a private
detective, a recovering alcoholic--all deliver lengthy speeches designed to show
the reader, as much as Christine, the light. The angry parts of the book are
genuinely fierce; the redemption isn't nearly so compelling. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Dodds, Dayle Ann. The Color Box; illus,by Giles Laroche. Little, 1992.
ISBN 0-316-18820-4. 29p. $12.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
In a sequence of crafty cut-paper collages, Alexander
the monkey escapes from his desolately monochromatic jungle into a world of
colors, one at a time. Beginning with yellow, each double spread features a
landscape of colored objects ("Yellow daisies/ Yellow beesJ Yellow bananas up
in trees") set off by shades and shadows from the colored background. Each
spread also includes a die-cut hole through which Alexander and readers get a
peep at the next color: orange, blue, red, green, purple, white, and finally a full-
colored manage revealed in the last spread. Dodds' casually rhyming text invites
chanting along ("Blue sky/ Blue sea/ Blue dolphins, 1, 2, 3"), although the
reiterated "everywhere" ("Purple, purple, everywhere") is often belied by the
pictures, which accent the focus color with hues that rightfully belong on other
pages (plus, the "black black" page is actually brown brown). Kids, however,
will enjoy pointing all this out. RS
Epler, Doris M. The Berlin Wall: How It Rose and Why It Fell. Millbrook,
1992. ISBN 1-56294-114-3. 128p. illus. with photographs. $15.90.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
These days, current events often strain at the confines
of a hardcover book; think of the several biographies of Nelson Mandela that
appeared just before his release from prison. However, the Berlin Wall is down,
a fact that will remain significant no matter what happens next. Epler's tidy
history of the Wall ends with German reunification; it begins with the economic
and political disruption of the Weimar Republic that led to Nazism, World War
II, and the subsequent determination by the Allies that Germany would never
again be a threat. Clearly outlining the postwar tensions which led to the
building of the Wall, as well as those exacerbated by the wall itself, Epler
provides a comprehensive context for the Wall's destruction. The writing style
is efficient and accessible; photos (some particularly exciting escape shots) add
[ 178 ]
drama and witness; notes, chronology, index, bibliography and reading list round
out an impeccable research resource. RS
C.U. Social studies
Fleischman, Sid. Jim Ugly. 
Greenwillow, 1992. 
ISBN 0-688-10886-5.
[144p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 4-7. 
Twelve-year-old Jake is the narrator, and he begins his
story just after his father's burial; the setting is the Old West, the plot is a
romping spoof of the adventure tale, and the characters range from early Douglas
Fairbanks and Mary Pickford to Mae West and W. C. Fields. Jim Ugly is Dad's
dog (it takes the whole book for him to become Jake's dog), and he contributes
to the action when Jim follows a trail that leads him to a chase by villains, the
discovery that Dad is alive, the answer to the mystery of some missing
diamonds, and a snippet of love interest: Dad and the lovely actress Wilhelmina
Marlybone-Jenkins. Lively, clever, and humorous, this must have been as much
fun to write as it is to read. ZS
D.V. Father-son relations
Gibbons, Gail. The Great St. Lawrence Seaway; written and illus. by Gail
Gibbons. Morrow, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06985-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
688-06984-3. 
[32p]. Library ed. $14.93; Trade ed. $15.00. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
The Seaway and its attendant system of locks are an
excellent choice of subject for Gibbon's schematic style, which is here enlivened
by bubbly waters and a gently rolling landscape; the maps and diagrams have a
light, casual touch that does not belie their clarity or accuracy. 
Gibbons'
account of the Seaway begins in 1535 with the French explorations; she goes on
to show the early canals, settlements, and the first lock, built in 1779. The
four-panel demonstration of how this lock works is a good introduction to the
more intricate (if essentially the same) operations of the system today, shown
through the experience of one large "laker" as it progresses from the Atlantic,
through the fifteen locks of the Seaway, to Gary, Indiana. The progression is
neat, as are the visual and textual explanations. RS
C.U. Transportation
Greenfield, Eloise. Koya DeLaney and the Good Girl Blues. Scholastic, 1992.
ISBN 0-590-43300-8. [17 6p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Koya's sister Loritha, and Dawn, friend to both
sisters, have quarreled, and Koya's caught in the middle. This tale of sixth-grade
feuding is enlivened by a frisky protagonist: Koya mugs and makes jokes and is
constantly exasperating her friends and families with her desire to keep everyone
happy, even at the expense of her true feelings. Loritha says, "You make me
sick. You always have to be so ... so good. Miss Good Girl." The fight
between the sisters is complicated not only by the double-dutch jump-rope
tournament that started the whole thing, but also by the fact that the girls'
cousin Del, a pop star, is coming to visit. Although the theme of Koya's denial
of anger seems imposed upon the story rather than growing out of it, the book is
a good mix of exciting and ordinary events, and the happy-if rushed-
conclusion will appeal to genre fans. Along with Emily Moore's Whose Side
[ 179]
Are You On? (BCCB 10/88), this is one of too few school-and-family stories to
feature a black cast and community. RS
D.V. Friendship values; Sisters
Greenspun, Adele Aron. Daddies; written and illus. with photographs by Adele
Aron Greenspun. Philomel, 1992. ISBN 0-399-22259-6. 48p. $15.95.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
A preface in which the author/photographer mourns
her loss, at age eleven, of her own father is written at a much more sophisticated
level than the book proper, which is a simple litany of the wonderful things that
daddies do and are and have: "Daddies have shoulders to stand on, bellies to sit
on, backs to climb on, hands to hold." The sentiment is admirable, the black-
and-white photos are affectionate, but the book is more a coffee-table catalog for
daddies needing a pat on the back than it is a picture book for children. RS
D.V. Father-child relations
Guy, Rosa. The Music of Summer. Delacorte, 1992. ISBN 0-385-30599-0.
[192p]. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
Sarah and Cathy, like their mothers, had been best
friends. Now Sarah's mother won't speak to Mrs. Johnson, and Cathy, eighteen
like Sarah, runs with a fast crowd that has no room for Sarah, a serious student
at Julliard. Despite these conflicts, Mrs. Johnson invites Sarah to join her,
Cathy, and Cathy's friends for a few weeks on Cape Cod in the lovely old home
of Mrs. Johnson's mother-in-law. This is a look at middle-class black culture
that's rare in YA books, and, equally rare, Guy confronts the painful
discrimination sometimes visited upon darker-skinned blacks (Sarah and her
mother Lottie) by those who are lighter (Cathy and company). 
Cathy's
viciousness is convincing but entirely unrelieved, in the end dipping the novel
into Lois Duncan territory; Cathy's grandmother even offers a "bad seed" theory
for the girl's murderous disposition. The break between the girls' mothers is
more subtly conveyed: while readers at first will give all their sympathies to
Mrs. Johnson, events will show that appearances can be deceiving.
Unfortunately, the story is often confusing, particularly whenever characters
relate past events that have bearing on the present; it's hard to figure out, for
example, exactly how Sarah's sexy love interest Jean Pierre got into the picture.
With the exception of the girls' mothers, characterization is oversimplified,
something that cannot be said about the prose, which is often gawky ("Fog
smothered the rays of the soon-to-be-setting sun with the wispiness of
multicolored chiffon that made the air hazy") and occasionally unintelligible
("Sarah wondered what Lottie had said to Mrs. Johnson when she had gone to see
her and had told her of her daughter's near-tragic end?"). Still, all the emotions
are fierce, and Sarah's outside status is intensely rendered. RS
D.V. Self-acceptance
Hautzig, Esther. On the Air: Behind the Scenes at a TV Newscast, illus. with
photographs by David Hautzig. Macmillan, 1991. ISBN 0-02-743361-7. 48p.
$15.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Illustrated with black-and-white photographs, this is a
detailed description of a typical day in a busy newsroom. The Hautzigs' research
was done at WRGB in Schenectady, New York--the first television station and
home of the first TV national newscast. Although the photos don't have
[ 180
captions, the design of the book coordinates prose and illustrations nicely. There
is no glossary, but the textual definitions of equipment and personnel are easy to
understand. There is an exception-at one point it is difficult to determine
whether a scanner is an instrument or a person ("Scanners provide information
about local events"). Familiar analogies (a conductor and orchestra, or pilots in
a cockpit) help to describe how the studio employees manipulate equipment in
order to produce a perfectly-timed newscast. For young non-fiction readers who
"just want a good book," this is a likely candidate. KPJ
C.U. Journalism
Hayashi, Nancy. The Fantastic Stay-Home-From-School Day, written and illus.
by Nancy Hayashi. Dutton, 1992. ISBN 0-525-44864-0. 106p. $12.00.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Leona and Eddie, her next-door best friend, have
planned to pretend illness, have a wonderful day eating what they like, and work
on their rock collections. Nothing works as planned. Eddie's mother drives him
to school (he hasn't been able-as Leona has-to drive his temperature up
because the night light bulb had burned out) and Leona is stranded. She does get
into Eddie's house via tree branches but is almost caught by Eddie's mother
when she returns. And that's just the beginning of a long day for both children,
each of whom gets into one difficulty after another. While the story has the kind
of disaster humor dear to primary grades readers, it has so much of it, and so
little else, that the piled-on incidents seem increasingly thin. ZS
Hazen, Barbara Shook. Mommy's Office; illus. by David Soman. Atheneum,
1992. ISBN 0-689-31601-1. 32p. $13.95.
M 
4-6 yrs. 
Emily begins, "Today Mommy's taking me to her
office, instead of where I go, which is sort of like my office." Describing each
small activity of the day, she compares Mommy's office and her own, but lets
the pictures show that her own office is school. The idea that school is a child's
"job" is nicely introduced, but the sedately paced story may have little appeal for
the read-aloud audience. They may also feel patronized by Emily's cutely literal
misunderstandings: "Next we go to Mommy's coffee break .... Nobody breaks
anything and everybody is very polite." Watercolor pictures have adequate figure
painting but are awkward in the depiction of faces; the use of the same figures on
the bus en route to Mommy's office in the morning and on the bus at the end of
the day seems contrived. ZS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations; Occupational orientation
Henry, Maeve. A Gift for a Gift: A Ghost Story. Delacorte, 1992. ISBN 0-
385-30562-1. [112p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
Fifteen-year-old Fran Kelly is tempted by a magical
offer to escape from her harsh life. After fleeing one night from her filthy home
and dysfunctional family, she wanders until "the world threatened to dissolve and
Fran with it." Near exhaustion, she finds herself strangely drawn to a small
house and enters through an unlocked French window. Inside, she meets
Michael, who seems to be an odd middle-aged magician, and Hilary, the old
woman who owns the house. As she gets to know him, Fran discovers that
Michael is not at all as he first appears, he isn't even human-a creature from
"the gap between the worlds." The tale takes on a Tamlin flavor when Michael
promises to make all Fran's wishes come true in exchange for her eternal
[181 ]
companionship. On her deathbed, Hilary tries to warn Fran about Michael's
bargains---"It's a kind of addiction, life with Michael. The pleasure gets smaller
and smaller, and you can see the time of payment approaching, but still you
can't get free!" Fran's ultimate decision, based on a vision of heaven, lacks the
powerful emotion that rescued Tamlin from the fairies, but Fran has no Janet to
save her, only her own strength. A good story, poetically crafted. KPJ
Hest, Amy. The Go-Between; illus. by DyAnne DiSalvo-Ryan. Four Winds,
1992. ISBN 0-02-743632-2. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Tidy, busy (but not cluttered), colorful watercolor
paintings include some interiors but primarily show the passing scene on New
York streets. Lexi, who tells the story, loves to get up early and look out on
Broadway, especially at her friend Mr. Singer's newsstand. Gram, who shares
Lexi's room, has known Mr. Singer since they were children playing street
baseball together. Lexi begins carrying notes back and forth, acting as go-
between, and it will probably not surprise readers when Gram becomes Mrs.
Singer. The tone is light, affectionate but not sentimentalized; the plot is
structurally solid and moves at a brisk pace. ZS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Howe, Norma. Shoot for the Moon. Crown, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-
58151-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-58150-7. [224p]. Library ed. $15.00; Trade ed.
$15.99. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Flippant and garrulous, adolescent Gina describes her
adventures and misadventures when she is on a trip to Italy, traveling with a
woman working for the yo-yo firm that sponsored the contest Gina had won.
She had learned many tricks ("Shoot for the moon" is one) from her deceased,
beloved grandfather. She has promised her grandmother that she will go to a
certain place in a certain town on a certain day-but she doesn't know what
she'll find there. The plot is labored, its development often dependent on
contrivance or coincidence, but there's some suspense in the story, a romantic
interest, and plenty of activity and light banter. ZS
Jacques, Brian. Mariel of Redwall; illus. by Gary Chalk. Philomel, 1992.
ISBN 0-399-22144-1. [400p]. $17.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Jacques has completed the fourth of six projected
books in his fantasy series set in Redwall Abbey, a medieval society of mice,
squirrels, and porcupines. Chronologically preceding Redwall (BCCB 7/87) and
Mattimeo (BCCB 4/90), Mariel of Redwall provides the history of how the
legendary Joseph Bell first came to the abbey. As the master-mouse bellmaker
and his daughter, Mariel, escort the bell by sea on its way to its new owner,
their ship is captured by searats. All the searats are evil and violent, but their
king, Gabool, is the worst of the lot. He chops off the head of one of his
captains as an example to the others, throws a couple more of into a scorpion
pit, and tries to drown both Mariel and her father. The dialects in this series are
distinctive, including the moles' cockney ("Burrhoohurr! B'ain't nothen loik
music to soften a hanimal's 'eart"), the imperialist military banter of the Hare
Patrol ("Top-hole! See y' later. Face front now, don't turn y' back on the bally
enemy, old chap. They'll shoot you in the behind, wot!"), and the pirate jargon
of the rats ("Vermin after me own dark heart. Haharrhahaharr!"). By now, the
[ 182 ]
growing ranks of Redwall fans are experts at deciphering the lingo, and they'll
absorb every word in this new book as Mariel risks danger and conquers evil.
KPJ
Joyce, William. 
Bently and egg; written and illus. by William Joyce.
Geringer/HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020386-2; Trade ed. ISBN
0-06-020385-4. [32p]. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $15.00. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Bently the frog would do anything for his best friend,
Kack Kack the duck--even take care of her silly egg when she goes off on a
visit. From boredom, Bently paints the egg beautifully, and it is immediately
snatched by a horrid boy who mistakes it for an Easter egg. So Bently must go
on a daring rescue mission to the nearby house. 
The pale, close-focus
watercolors all center on an animated Bently-the best is of Bently cradling the
egg on the brim of a lady's straw hat while giving the wearer an upside-down,
toothy grin. Bently's simple, frogged determination makes this story charming,
and the number of new friends he finds in his selfless rescue of the egg contains
a subtle message. KPJ
D.V. Friendship values
Kimmel, Eric A., ad. Boots and His Brothers: A Norwegian Tale; illus. by
Kimberly Bulcken Root. Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0886-8. [32p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
Young listeners will forever identify with Boots, the
youngest and most benevolent of three brothers who set out to seek their
fortunes. Boots listens to the advice of an old woman whom the others spurn
and thus finds three magic objects to help him cut down a giant oak, dig a well,
fill it with water ... and inherit a kingdom. For several reasons, this is a case
of folklore fulfilled in picture book format. First, the selection involves a tale
of soul-satisfying simplicity and symmetry. Second, the art projects the drama
of a new variant without overwhelming the text. And third, the adaptation is
cadenced for reading aloud, with changes logical to the spirit of Asbj0msen's
source: it's a minor extension to miniaturize the magic ax and shovel when a
mere nut has been the source of gushing waters; and it's not quite so terrible-
but terrible enough-to have dogs set upon the evil brothers instead of having
their heads (or sometimes ears) cut off. In a clever twist of Kimmel's own
devising, the older brothers get exactly what's coming to them--"They can be
dogkeepers." The addition of the wise old woman and the deletion of a princess
as part of the reward package seem to be a balanced update. Root's pictures build
suspense with shadowy figures, streaky light, and eerie landscapes dominated by
the green that precedes a tornado. The linework is delicate but confident, and the
pictures are cleverly framed in the kind of twigs and vines scattered when the
brothers cast the old woman aside. An old story newly, and truly, cast. BH
D.V. Kindness
Lagerlof, Selma. The Changeling; tr. from the Swedish by Susanna Stevens;
illus. by Jeanette Winter. Knopf, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91035-2; Trade
ed. ISBN 0-679-81035-8. 42p. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-9 yrs. 
When a troll kidnaps a farm couple's beautiful baby,
she leaves behind her own, "big and ugly, with bristle-like hair, teeth as sharp as
[183]
nails, and a claw on its little finger." Despite the mockery of the servants, and
despite the farmer's many efforts to lose or kill the changeling, his wife holds
onto it with maternal protectiveness, feeding it rats and spiders when it refuses
delicacies. 
"The truth was that the more she suffered for the sake of the
changeling, the more protective of him she became." And when the farmer's
wife loses everything-house, husband, almost her sanity-her own child is
returned. The happy ending is welcome but almost pallid in contrast to the
suffering that has gone on before. Winter does not avoid the cruel incidents, but,
through rhythmic, quilt-like patterns and naive coloring, she clearly places the
story within a folkloric landscape that allows distance. The forest is Christmas-
treed and -green with salmon accents; the fire-set by the husband?-in which
wife and troll almost die has the literal stylization of an icon. Kids won't be
fooled by the cartooned quality of the characters' expressions and gestures;
instead, they'll recognize the figures as actors, the setting as scenery, both
comforting masks for a scary story. While the text is long, it is smoothly
translated for reading aloud. RS
D.V. Mother-child relations
Lasky, Kathryn. Think Like An Eagle: At Work with a Wildlife Photographer;
illus. with photographs by Christopher G. Knight and Jack Swedberg. Joy
Street/Little, 1992. ISBN 0-316-51519-1. 
[48p]. $15.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
From the wintry woods of New England to the
swamps of Florida and back north to the Alaskan coast, this photodocumentary
stalks one of the most elusive animals of all, a human at work photographing
animals. Ex-hunter Jack Swedberg is a veteran wildlife photographer of 30
years, a past master at hiding in blinds, floats, and other devices that allow him
to wait and watch for the right moment. Several such moments are captured in
both pictures and text as Swedberg photographs two eagles fighting over a deer
carcass, another eagle diving for fish, alligators in conflict, a beaver smacking
the water, a turtle considering the fly that has settled on its eye, a series of
elegant water birds, a bear, a whale, and a deer. Although Lasky's prose has
characteristically lyrical moments, she has tightened it for a you-are-there quality
and has maintained concentration on the subject rather than on information about
the various creatures and their habitats. In fact, one of the more vivid moments
is Swedberg's human error of forgetting the condensation that would form on his
lenses in transferring them from an air-conditioned van to a muggy lagoon.
Faced with the stunning combination of Swedberg's nature shots and Knight's
location shots-all in full, well-reproduced color-kids can pursue the all-
important question: who needs a gun? BH
C.U. Nature study
D.V. Occupational orientation
Leedy, Loreen. The Monster Money Book; written and illus. by Loreen Leedy.
Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0922-8. 
32p. $14.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
6-9 yrs. 
Kids love money, and Leedy's goofy glut of monster
characters (and their human friend, Sarah) makes an appealing cast for a
discussion of such topics as allowances, savings, budgets, banks, and interest.
Unlike the author/illustrator's previous introductions to letter-writing (BCCB
[ 184]
12/91) and newspaper production (BCCB 5/90), this financial how-to doesn't
offer much in the way of projects unless, as in the case of the Monster Club,
readers are faced with the delicious agony of deciding what to do with $54.00.
(And while Sarah gives the monsters tips on how to "save, spend, and give"
their money, we never quite find out what they decide to do). Although the
concepts are sound and the cartoons eccentrically appealing, there's a bit too
much information for the younger kids (interest rates?) and not enough for those
actually old enough to open a bank account or have a cash card, both
possibilities mentioned in the text. RS
C.U. Money-acquisition and use
Mahy, Margaret. Underrunners. Viking, 1992. ISBN 0-670-84179-X. [192p].
$14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
With her uncanny sense of metaphor and experienced
capability for supporting images with ordinary detail, Mahy centers a
psychological thriller on the tunnels, or underrunners, created by the earth's
seasonal expansion and contraction. Seeking escape underground are Tris, a boy
still troubled by his mother's long-ago desertion, and Winola, a girl hiding from
her abusive father. The children's friendship is based partly on a shared fantasy
game and partly on what turns out to be, for Tris, a very real memory. The New
Zealand seaside setting is vivid, but what's most impressive about the writing is
Mahy's ability to build characters into plot (too many children's book writers
reverse the process). She does so here with natural momentum and a literary
tunneling that does credit to the central idea: "wherever you look there are
tunnels running through everything,... crabs in sand and codlin caterpillars in
apples." And sadness in dangerous men, and courage in quiet boys, and shadows
of the past in present situations-and, not least of all, sharp fox teeth in
Winola's piggybank smile. In fact, Tris' nickname of "Ratty" is part of a subtle
but telling series of references to The Wind in the Willows. Although it's never
made explicit, Winola has a lot in common with Ratty's friend Mole, whose
instinct was to go to ground for safety. Yet when Winola returns to her
abandoned home, in a parallel to Grahame's famous "Dulce Domum," she finds
the greatest peril of all. Distinctive without becoming didactic, the theme is one
that critics can enjoy analyzing while children absorb it through the cracking
good story. BH
D.V. Friendship values; Imaginative powers
Marshall, James. The Cut-Ups Crack Up; written and illus. by James Marshall.
Viking, 1992. ISBN 0-670-84486-1. 
[32p]. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Spud and Joe are playing car crash ("Scrunch! Clank!
Ker-pow!") when the dreadful Charles Andrew Frothingham comes along and
calls them immature. Naturally, Spud and Joe have to defend themselves with a
small fib ("It so happens our real car is in the shop!"), which eventually
backfires into their illicit acquisition of Principal Lamar J. Spurgle's new sports
car ('"Don't even breathe on it,' said Spurgle"). Events escalate to a climax that
involves the entire Board of Education and a just denouement for all. The Cut-
Ups are always good for a little nonstop action, as well as some spontaneous
throwaway profiles. When Spud and Joe leave the house with a video camera,
Mom asks them why they need it. "It's for a school project," says Joe. "Oh,
[ 185]
sure," says Mom. Marshall's uninhibited watercolors exaggerate the drama in
high-cartoon tradition. Rate this series capital K for kid appeal. BH
Martin, Jacqueline Briggs. Good Times on Grandfather Mountain; illus. by
Susan Gaber. Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08577-5; Trade ed. ISBN
0-531-05977-4. 32p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R* 
4-6 yrs. 
"Old Washburn always looked at the bright side of
life on Grandfather Mountain. He never worried and he never complained. 'As
long as I have a sharp pocket knife, I can whittle my way out of any trouble ...
.'" That's just what he does, too, when his cow, pig, and chickens run away,
grasshoppers eat his bean crop, raccoons consume his corn, and a storm destroys
his house. As a result of each catastrophe, Old Washburn whittles musical
instruments that eventually lure the neighbors to rebuild his place ("he could
whittle . . . a party out of a blown-down cabin"). 
Martin's effects are
cumulative, her writing itself is whittled to a smooth conclusion, and her breezy
tone serves to open up Gaber's style of illustration. The funky colors, free-
wheeling lines, down-home setting, and startling closeups of the cast
significantly heighten an already tall tale and make it one of the best story hour
readalouds for young children to come down the pike lately. BH
C.U. 
Story hour
McKenzie, Ellen Kindt. The King, the Princess, and the Tinker; illus. by
William Low. Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-8050-1773-9. 70p. (A Redfeather Book).
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
King John has become so vain that he forbids his
subjects, and even his wife, to look at him. "Whoever chances to look at me
will be beheaded." Somehow, though, the Queen manages to bear six handsome
sons and one curious daughter, Sweet Rosilla, who peeks every year when her
father conducts his annual inspection of his children and pats her on the head.
That pat indicates a warm heart somewhere inside the selfish king, and sure
enough, it's found out, with the aid of his daughter, before the end of the story.
This benign variant of "Like Meat Loves Salt" is occasionally a touch too coy
in its styling, but on the whole it is a pleasantly spun out, just-complicated-
enough story that should appeal to those children old enough to prefer their fairy
tales funny and a bit fractured. Manageable chapters will encourage practicing
readers, and the generally felicitous prose has the balance of action and
conversation that makes for a good readaloud as well. William Low's pencil
portraits and vignettes offer both vigorous suggestion and visual relief. RS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
McMillan, Bruce. Beach Ball-Left, Right; written and illus. with photographs
by Bruce McMillan. 
Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0946-5. 
32p.
$14.95.
R 
3-6 yrs. 
A beach ball takes one big bounce-off the beach, up
in the air, past some truly amazed people and animals, and finally back into the
arms of its bouncer. No, not much of a story, but the real goal here is to
illustrate the difference between left and right, a distinction far more perplexing
than the laws of gravity. Each double page spread is centered by a big color
photo straddling the gutter; each of the pages is labelled "left" or "right"; the
beach ball is always on one side or the other. It's a bit repetitive, but
[186 ]
reinforcing as well. As McMillan notes in a brief afterword, "in addition to
determining which side of the photo the beach ball is on, children will learn that
their left hand is holding the left page of the book, and their right hand is
holding the right page of the book." That is, if the child is holding the book
right-side up ... but that's another story. Over to you, Bruce. RS
Merino, Jos6 Maria. The Gold of Dreams; tr. from the Spanish by Helen Lane.
Farrar, 1992. ISBN 0-374-32692-4. 217p. $15.00.
NR 
Gr. 7-12. 
Miguel is fifteen, and his godfather says "it is the
right age for him to be initiated into the life that is fitting and proper for a son
of such a noble soldier and discoverer." This is a story, from the point of view
of a boy with a Spanish Conquistador father (lost on an expedition) and an Indian
mother, of part of the Spanish conquest of Mexico. 
Miguel has many
adventures with an expedition that searches in vain for a city of gold: he takes
part in battle, he is captured by hostile Indians, he and a cabin-boy friend find a
treasure, he discovers the cabin boy is a cabin girl, he encounters his father
living with Indians in the forest, and he finally returns with the treasure. The
book is so episodic that all this adventure is completely unexciting, particularly
since the time and historical background are never really explained. There are
hints of moral questions, with Spaniards plundering and betraying Indians and
one another, but the writing (or translating) style here makes the story dated and
interminably tortuous. Digressions into dreams, tedious personal histories, and
fragments of romantic but uninteresting poetry resound-in long, rambling
sentences-with language that is at times merely stilted ("I stood there looking
down at him for a long time, till I perceived in his total motionlessness the
image of death," says the young cabin boy-turned-girl) and at times downright
confusing ("The voices of the two men, with the accent of the lands where the
sun rises so harsh to the ear. . ."). This book's pacing, style, and form will
prevent young readers from finishing, let alone enjoying, the story. DS
Milton, Nancy. The Giraffe That Walked to Paris; illus. by Roger Roth.
Crown, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-58133-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-58132-9.
[32p]. Library ed. $15.99; Trade ed. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
A closing historical note gives the facts on which
this true story is based and to which it adheres quite faithfully. In a light,
pleasant narrative style, Milton describes the decision to send a giraffe as a gift
to the King of France; it came from an Egyptian Pasha who hoped that his
present would alleviate the tension that existed between the two countries. The
king fretted at the wait: first the voyage, then detention in the south of France
because of weather, then the long walk of La Girafe to Paris (1826) where
Charles X and his family were, at last, delighted. Action and humor in the
illustrations (cartoon line and subdued colors) add to the appeal of the book. ZS
Morey, Janet Nomura. Famous Asian Americans; by Janet Nomura Morey and
Wendy Dunn. Cobblehill, 1992. ISBN 0-525-65080-6. 
170p. illus. with
photographs. $15.00.
M 
Gr. 6-9. 
"All the subjects, or their designated aides, have
approved the material in their own chapter." Grammatical considerations aside,
this statement from the preface to this biographical collection amounts to a
warning of the adulatory tone to come. All of the celebrities profiled here are
[ 187
proud to be Asian, proud to be Americans, believe in the value of hard work, and
are famous (including tennis player Michael Chang, who is redundantly referred
to as a "well-known celebrity"). While each of the fourteen profiles included
here do contain facts about their subjects, none contains any ambiguity or
mention of less than perfect happiness (after the overcoming of Great Odds).
Maxine Hong Kingston's novels, for example, powerfully convey the difficulties
of a bicultural heritage, but one wonders if her profilers have read any of them:
"Utilizing her words [sic], Ms. Kingston will continue to write stories that
communicate her values and ideas toward accomplishing world peace."
(Similarly, the authors say of the rock group Hiroshima that their name "reflects
pride in their Asian-American heritage and serves as a reminder in support of
world peace.") The writing here is sometimes glib (Connie Chung and Maury
Povich "accumulated many air miles to be with each other"), and repetitive
(physicist Samuel Ting's "first year was especially difficult when he started
college"). 
Nonsequiturs are sometimes perplexing: 
"[Ting] says that
scientists... cannot hesitate to ask questions, even when their view may be
unpopular. 
Still remembering his college days, Dr. Ting says, 'At the
University of Michigan, I went to all the football games. I still go back.'"
Others profiled include Jose Aruego, Daniel Inouye, Haing Ngor and An Wang;
black-and-white photos are publicity shots (including a peculiar pose of
economist Wendy Gramm and family with a dead deer). A bibliography and
index are appended. RS
Moulton, Deborah. Summer Girl. Dial, 1992. ISBN 0-8037-1153-0. [144p].
$15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Tommy's mother has terminal cancer, and Mom's
tyrannical sister (a nurse) has decided that Tommy, a thirteen-year-old girl, is too
young to stay home. Tommy is sent to Maine to stay with Jud, the father she's
never seen since her parents' divorce when she was three. This is the story of
Tommy's learning to know and love Jud, to understand more about her parents
via letters from Mom, and to accept the fact that she will be living with Jud after
Mom dies. 
The correspondence, in which Mom gives her life story in
installments, is not quite believable as the communication of mother and
daughter after years of close contact. Otherwise, the developing relationship
between father and daughter and Tommy's integration into a new lifestyle are
credible. The book is weakened by the improbable sentimentality of the final
episode, in which Tommy and Jud go back to see Mom and there is a tender
three-way bedside reunion. ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Father-daughter relations
Muller, Gerda. The Garden in the City; written and illus. by Gerda Muller.
Dutton, 1992. ISBN 0-525-44697-4. 40p. $13.50.
R* 
Gr. 2-4. 
First published in Germany in 1988, this book
describes in detail the evolution of a garden in a neglected back yard. It
concentrates on Ben's flower garden and Caroline's vegetable garden, both small
tidy plots within the large garden of the urban house into which the family has
just moved. This has no limits of place or period; casually conveying values of
family solidarity, neighborliness, and persistence, the book focuses on the year's
cycle and its rota of activities: preparing the soil, deciding on what to grow
where, planting seeds or seedlings, and the seasonal or continual care needed by
[ 188 ]
gardens. The paintings and the black-and-white diagrams are tidy, explicit, and
adequately captioned. Although the formats differ, as does the type of garden, the
book is reminiscent, in its tidiness and in the completeness of its coverage, of
Christina BjOrk's Linnea's Windowsill Garden (BCCB 12/88). A sensible book
for the beginning gardener, this has a pleasant fictional framework and
illustrations that are both attractive and informative. ZS
C.U. 
Hobbies
Namioka, Lensey. Coming of the Bear. HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-020289-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020288-2. 
[2 4 0p]. Library ed.
$13.89; Trade ed. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-9. 
In this latest installment of their adventures
(following Island of Ogres, BCCB 2/89), medieval samurais Zenta and Matsuzo
find themselves among the Ainu, a racially distinct group of people who lived
(and still do) on Japan's northernmost island of Ezo (now Hokkaido). Weary and
wounded from their long sea journey, Zenta and Matsuzo are taken prisoner,
albeit benignly treated: there is a Japanese settlement near the Ainu village and
relationships between the two groups have become uneasy. There's a lot here
about Ainu traditions, particularly a bear cult, but the facts always inform the
fast-moving plot. 
While Zenta and Matsuzo together make a strong,
sympathetic focus, there is plenty of difference-and outright disagreement-
between them, as older and wiser Zenta adapts to and learns from the Ainu ways
while Matsuzo is horrified by their un-Japanese hygiene and un-Buddhist animal
sacrifice. Both men, in very different ways, try to mend the breach between the
Ainu and the settlers; series fans will be glad that there's plenty of intrigue,
treachery, and swordsmanship along the way. New and old fans alike will
appreciate the ending, in which all signs point to a sequel. RS
Nixon, Joan Lowery. The Weekend Was Murder. Delacorte, 1992. ISBN 0-
385-30531-1. [208p]. $15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
A special murder mystery weekend is taking place at
the plush Ridley Hotel, and sixteen-year-old Liz (heroine of The Dark and Deadly
Pool, BCCB 12/87), summer employee of the hotel's health club, is asked to
play one of the scripted roles. She'd be happier if the ostensible murder site
wasn't the suite where she'd just encountered a ghost, and things go from tense
to tenser when she discovers a real dead body just where the fictional corpse
should be. Does his death have anything to do with the Federal witness
sequestered on the same floor? Or the uncanny resemblance between the real
victim and one of the actors in the mystery weekend? And what about the
incriminating conversation that Liz and her boyfriend overhear regarding the
hotel manager? Nixon keeps the diverse plot ingredients fizzing while adding a
generous helping of farce; she makes the most of the clever murder mystery
setting, with amateur sleuths growing increasingly confused ("You are a lovely
red herring," says one of a pair of charming Snoop Sisters to Liz) as Roberta
Kingston Duffy, the mystery weekend's author, keeps rewriting her mystery to
jibe with the actual events. Eventually the murder is solved, but only after the
ghost offers some helpful eyewitness testimony. Mrs. Duffy says "That's why
people read mystery novels, to get misled and confused"; true, but they also read
them to have a good time, which this one delivers faithfully. DS
[ 189]
Olson, Arielle North. Noah's Cats and the Devil's Fire; illus. by Barry Moser.
Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08584-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05984-
7. [30p]. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
Adapted from a Rumanian folktale published in 1915,
this assumes a friendly, informal tone in launching the story of Noah after he's
built the ark: "And the minute he finished, guess what happened? The devil
himself came striding up the gangplank." It's a face-off that Noah thinks he's
won until he notices that there are three mice instead of two, and one of them-
the one with the red eyes, fangs, claws, etc.-is chewing a hole in the hull. At
this point, Noah's cats take over, but the devil-mouse is too hot to digest.
When kitty spits him overboard, he swims off in the form of a viper fish. This
is a pourquoi tale that will suspend listeners' disbelief ("Ever after, her fur made
sparks when Noah petted her--and her eyes gleamed in the dark") and rivet their
attention on Moser's ominous paintings, which alternate or combine gloomy
wet greens with scary flickering reds. One look at the teeth on that fish, and
you'll hope that Noah lands on a dry mountaintop with all due speed. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Oppenheim, Shulamith Levey. The Lily Cupboard; illus. by Ronald Himler.
Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024670-7; Trade ed. ISBN
0-06-024669-3. 32p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Only the fact that it will be easier for her parents to
take care of themselves reconciles Miriam to staying with a farm family when
the Nazis invade Holland during World War II. And only the company of a black
rabbit whom she has named after her father provides comfort when she must run
to the secret cupboard to hide from soldiers. In her determination to protect him,
Miriam is almost too late. 
The suspense in the story is inherent, but
Oppenheim has wisely chosen to develop the relationship between the
protagonist and her "foster brother" for a realistically childlike focus. Miriam's
sense of responsibility for the difficulties around her rings true, as well. These
dynamics are kept to a simple minimum that is convincingly, if sparingly,
detailed. 
Himler's paintings reflect the same bare detail with spacious
landscapes, homely interiors, and portraits that suggest as much as they
delineate. This is a heroes' tale; none of the villains ever appear, but their
presence is felt through both text and art-the cupboard scene contrasts darkly
with the idyllic views before and after. History is telescoped through a specific
situation as author and artist together create a picture book simultaneously gentle
and sharp in its perspective on the Holocaust. BH
C.U. History-World War II
Peck, Richard. Anonymously Yours. Messner, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-671-
74161-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-74162-4. 122p. illus. with photographs. (In
My Own Words). Library ed. $14.98; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
In an autobiographical reminiscence that is more
literary than personal, Peck writes with wit and clarity, and with an occasional
aphorism that punctuates the conversational flow of his memoir. His fans will
probably enjoy particularly those disclosures of people and places Peck has
used--and where he has used them-in his books. His passionately meticulous
use of language, his acuity in character assessment and depiction, and his humor
[190]
are vividly conveyed, and if readers don't get an intimate picture of the man, they
get a close encounter with the writer as a creative artist. ZS
C.U. Writing for children
Rand, Gloria. Prince William; illus. by Ted Rand. Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-8050-
1841-7. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Not the Prince William, nor, exactly, that Prince
William, this Prince William is a seal pup rescued by young Denny from the oil
spill that swept Prince William Sound in 1989. Denny, a little girl, finds the
oil-soaked pup on the beach and takes him to the rescue center where he is
cleaned, fed, and, eventually, retrained for his return to the sea. The Rands' focus
on a single heroine and victim of the spill will engage kids' empathies, but the
story is never sentimentalized. Instead, both Denny and readers (unobtrusively)
learn a great deal about the oil spill and the various ways that the water and its
dependents were afflicted and cared for. Ted Rand's double-spread illustrations are
literal and comprehensive, with some nice fingerpainted effects, but are
occasionally too cute in portraying faces both human and otherwise. Neither
text nor illustrations, however, soften or deny the scope of the disaster, rendered
dramatically against the impressive backgrounds of Alaskan sky and mountains.
RS
D.V. Ecological awareness
Rockwell, Anne. 
Our Yard Is Full of Birds; illus. by Lizzy Rockwell.
Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-02-777273-X. 
[32p]. $13.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
A static text consists of brief, choppy descriptive
sentences that identify and describe (minimally) a number of bird species.
Sample: "The robin begins to sing. A yellow warbler, a purple finch and a red-
winged blackbird start to sing their songs. Mockingbirds and catbirds can
imitate the songs that other birds sing." The book will have limited use for
identification, since the colors of some of the birds are over-accented (a raven
described as black, but with every feather outlined in blue; swallows that are
bright blue and orange), although the drawing is always graceful and accurate.
ZS
C.U. Nature study
Root, Phyllis. The Listening Silence. HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-025093-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025092-5. 
[128p]. Library ed. $13.89;
Trade ed. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
When Kiri's father doesn't come back from a hunting
trip, her mother goes to look for him. Two village hunters find five-year-old
Kiri alone in her tent, waiting for her parents' return. The strangers take her to
the village, where Kiri's empathic gifts are revealed. Because of her ability to
"go inside" the consciousness of animals and people, she becomes the apprentice
and foster child of the village healer. The world created for this quiet fantasy has
a Native American flavor, and Root provides a glossary to define the imaginary
animals, herbs, and tools in the culture. As Kiri searches for her identity, the
tale becomes so introspective that it loses momentum. When Kiri's path is
finally revealed to her during her solitary Vision Quest, there is little conflict and
there are no surprises. Nevertheless, the fantasy culture Root has created is
[ 191 ]
orderly and compelling and may inspire young creative writing students who
need a more modest fantasy-world model than Tolkien. KPJ
Rylant, Cynthia. Missing May. Jackson/Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-
531-08596-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05996-0. [9 6p]. Library ed. $12.99; Trade
ed. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-8. 
One of Rylant's most smoothly concentrated works,
this is the story of orphaned twelve-year-old Summer's journey through a grief
that possesses her and her uncle after her aunt dies. An individualistic classmate
rounds out the small cast; while secondary characters are effectively sketched, the
novel stays sharply focused on Summer and old Ob, bony, arthritic, and
mourning so powerfully that he can hardly see his way to keep a child in their
rusting trailer. The West Virginia mountain setting is a low-key presence
throughout the book. While selective details such as Ob's hand-carved
whirligigs pick up a symbolic dimension in addition to their functional
significance, the tone is spare without becoming self-conscious. If the deceased
May seems over-idealized, readers can attribute it to the narrator's need and to
May's having answered that need with a warm home that is eventually reaffirmed
through Ob's emotional courage. Strong nuances of despair and hope create a
suspense that forcefully replaces action and that will touch readers to tears. BH
D.V. Death, adjustment to
San Souci, Robert D. Sukey and the Mermaid; illus. by Brian Pinkney. Four
Winds, 1992. ISBN 0-02-778141-0. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
An organic blend of fantasy and South Carolina island
folklore, this exemplifies the best ongoing tradition of storytelling in picture
book format. The heroine is young Sukey, who, to escape from her oppressive
stepfather, goes daily to the seashore for a visit with a brown-skinned mermaid:
"Thee, thee, down below] Come to me, Mama Jo." After trying to capture the
mermaid with Sukey's summons, the angry stepfather works the girl nearly to
death. She escapes underwater and returns with a dowry of gold, only to have her
true love struck down; twice more the mermaid intervenes, once to revive
Sukey's betrothed and once to drown the villain. It's a long story, but one
supported with strong writing and some of Brian Pinkney's most expansive
illustration. His compositions are broadly conceived, his white hatch over dark
colors richly textured, and his characters skillfully drawn in both face and figure.
From her black eyes to her deep-green tail, the mermaid is a natural extension of
the wild seascapes. However tenuous the narrative connection with West African
sources-and San Souci cites some research in a brief author's note-the
language and art together take on rich African-American hues in this newly
imagined version. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Scheller, Melanie. 
My Grandfather's Hat; illus. by Keiko Narahashi.
McElderry, 1992. ISBN 0-689-50540-X. 24p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
A small boy remembers his grandfather: they way
he'd lift his hat, nod once to neighbors, and say "Mornin'" and the way he'd put
the old hat on Jason's head to get it back in shape after Jason had, by chance,
squashed it. This isn't a story marred by sadness or sentimentality, but a fond
reminiscence of a beloved grandfather who had tolerance, a sense of humor, and a
[ 192]
genial manner. The crayon illustrations seem a bit overcolored, but they are
nevertheless effective because of the simplicity of their composition. ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Grandparent-child relations
Schlein, Miriam. Squirrel Watching; illus. with photographs by Marjorie
Pillar. HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022754-0; Trade ed. ISBN
0-06-022753-2. 64p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $15.00.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
In a neatly compact format, Schlein and Pillar bring
the same close attention to squirrels as they did to Pigeons (BCCB 9/89). As
the title indicates, the emphasis here is on the kind of observation--"Look at a
squirrel"--that encourages readers to participate in the investigation. And for
those leery of looking "at a squirrel face, close up," Pillar's black-and-white
photographs, clean and clearly placed, provide a reasonable verisimilitude. While
most of the book is devoted to the gray squirrel, Schlein briefly surveys other
species, including flying squirrels, chipmunks, and prairie dogs. The tone is
conversational, with short sentences that are easy to read and occasionally funny:
"The nuts a squirrel finds may not be the ones he himself buried. Most likely
they were buried by some other squirrels. It doesn't matter. He finds theirs.
They find his." A bibliography and an index are appended. RS
C.U. Nature study
Schwartz, Henry. 
Albert Goes Hollywood; illus. by Amy Schwartz.
Jackson/Orchard, 1992. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08580-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05980-4. 32p. Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Liz's pet dinosaur Albert, brought to Los Angeles in
How I Captured a Dinosaur (BCCB 2/89), is getting too expensive to keep: 100
pounds of chicken wings a day; 250 hamburgers, hold the relish. So Liz decides
that Albert needs a job, and after "Dino Rides," "Kite Rescue," and lifeguarding
fail to pan out, Liz takes Albert to a Hollywood drugstore, presumably
Schwab's, where he is discovered by a director looking for the "strong silent
type." The story is even sillier than the first book's, but fans and friends of
Albert will enjoy his ascent to stardom. And little Lizzes will appreciate the
part she plays in the drama; in fact, she costars in Albert's movie, titled, of
course, How I Captured a Dinosaur. Big blue Albert is a generous focus for
Amy Schwartz' dipsy-doodle line-and-watercolor paintings; his bulk provides a
smooth relief from the eccentric detailing of the California landscape. RS
Shepard, Aaron. Savitri: A Tale of Ancient India; illus. by Vera Rosenberry.
Whitman, 1992. 
ISBN 0-8075-7251-9. 
[40p]. 
$15.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Although Savitri is a radiantly beautiful princess, it
is through her virtue, strength, and wit that she wins back the husband,
Satyavan, whom she has chosen and who is claimed, after only a year of
marriage, by Yama, the god of death. Following Yama to the very threshold of
his kingdom, Savitra is offered three boons ("anything but the life of your
husband"), whereupon she requests that her father-in-law's kingdom be restored,
that her father be blessed with more children, and that she herself bear many of
Satyavan's babies-thus forcing Yama to give Satyavan back to her. A popular
Hindu myth from the Mahabharata, this is delicately rendered in both adaptation
and illustration. The full-page paintings that face each page of text reflect visual
[193 ]
elements of Indian art without imitating or demeaning the classical tradition.
Modulated colors are enhanced by formal frames that border each composition,
and the figures effect graceful, ritualistic postures. This is a book that will open
children's eyes and ears to an unfamiliar lore and that will provide rich contrast
to Western parallels such as Orpheus and Eurydice. BH
D.V. Loyalty
Sonnenmark, Laura. 
The Lie. Scholastic, 1992. 
ISBN 0-590-44740-8.
[17 6p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
Norrie has a crush on Mark, but it soon becomes
evident that he's interested in girls his own age (several years older than Norrie);
it's frustrating to be working for him (as a tourist photographer) and have him
be no more than polite and helpful. When she realizes that Mark thinks she's in
love with a married man but doesn't know he's married, Norrie lets Mark
comfort her, lets comforting blossom into dating. What Mark doesn't know is
that the married man is a cousin-by-marriage and that their only dates are tennis
games. As time goes by, Norrie finds it increasingly difficult to tell Mark the
truth, and she is heartbroken when he does find out and breaks off their
relationship. This is a somewhat overextended tangled-web tale, believable but
uneven in pace; fortunately it rises above the illogical happy ending of so many
teenage problem novels. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Truthfulness
Stevens, Carla. 
Lily and Miss Liberty; illus. by Deborah Kogan Ray.
Scholastic, 1992. ISBN 0-590-44919-2. 
[80p]. 
$12.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
The year is 1885, the place Manhattan, and the
protagonist (Lily) anxious to find a way to contribute to the class fund that will
be sent to help pay for the pedestal for the soon-to-arrive statue of Miss Liberty.
Papa and Grandma approve, but Mama thinks money is better used to help poor
people. However, Mama is helpful when Lily does think of a product she can
make and sell: crowns of stiff yellow paper. The details of Lily's industry and
her sales, the kindness of her sharing her proceeds with another child so that
Lena won't be the only person in class who hasn't done her share, and the
satisfaction of seeing the French ship come into harbor strike just the right level
of historic detail and child participation, all of it in clear, casually written prose,
creating a good primary grades story about the past. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
Talbert, Marc. The Purple Heart. Perlman/HarperCollins, 1992. Library ed.
ISBN 0-06-020429-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020428-1. 
[144p]. Library ed.
$13.89; Trade ed. $14.00. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Luke had secretly imagined that his father, fighting in
Vietnam, was a hero; now he's come home wounded, and his Purple Heart seems
to Luke proof of valor. Moody and quiet, Dad won't talk about the war, and he's
angry when he discovers that Luke has taken his medal and dropped it while
playing a prank on an elderly neighbor. Made by his parents to do chores for the
neighbor, Mrs. Pederson, Luke learns that her deceased husband had also received
a Purple Heart, and that war was not the glory that Luke had perceived it to be:
"he did his duty and he defended his country by risking his life. I only know that
[194]
he didn't enjoy it . .. it brought him no joy, the killing." The novel's
patterning is predictable and the theme told as much as shown, but the tone is
plain and pared, allowing readers to appreciate but not sentimentalize the
developing understanding between father and son. Luke learns that the occasion
of his father's injury was scary and pathetic, not heroic, perhaps making him all
the more deserving of a medal. And in the end, for his bravery during a tornado,
Luke earns the medal for himself. RS
D.V. Father-son relations
Tryon, Leslie. Albert's Play; written and illus. by Leslie Tryon. Atheneum,
1992. ISBN 0-689-31525-2. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
In a diverting look at amateur dramatics, Tryon
presents an all-animal cast as they audition for, rehearse, and mount a school
play, Edward Lear's The Owl and the Pussy-cat. No type-casting here, as the
star roles are awarded to a pig and a rabbit. The text is (more or less) in the
same metric form as Lear's poem, and both the text and pictured scenes of busy
preparation lead nicely to the performance, bridged by a surprisingly effective
double-page spread of the closed front curtain. The costumes and masks are
ingenious, the perspective changes, and the use of stippling and fine parallel
lines gives texture to the boldly-composed paintings. ZS
Uchida, Yoshiko. The Invisible Thread. Messner, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-
671-74163-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-671-74164-0. 136p. illus. with photographs.
(In My Own Words). Library ed. $14.98; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Photographs of the author and her family are included
in the moving autobiography of a child who was born in this country, treated
like an enemy during World War II, and only slowly-as maturity has lent
perspective-able to accept the values of the Japanese culture that was her
heritage, the culture to which she is tied by so many invisible threads. Many
readers will be familiar with the horrors of relocation camps through reading
Journey to Topaz (BCCB 12/71) and its sequels. Here is a sharper focus on
those horrors and on the emotional anguish that accompanied physical stress and
deprivation. Uchida is open about her feelings in a way that will make admirers
feel they are friends; as always, she writes with mastery of style and an implicit
respect for her readers. A list of Uchida's published works is provided. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
D.V. Courage; Patriotism
Westall, Robert. Yaxley's Cat. Scholastic, 1992. ISBN 0-590-45175-8.
[144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 7-12. 
"Who said Dead? Sepp's been gone this seven year.
But I didn't say Dead," says Mr. Gotobed, the local handyman, about the
previous inhabitant of Rose's rented seaside cottage. Rose and her two children,
Timothy and Jane, are mystified by the local people's unwillingness to set foot
inside the house. The little Norfolk village grows increasingly suspicious of
Rose and the children as the family grows increasingly more concerned with
questions surrounding Sepp Yaxley's disappearance. Why did he leave a small
fortune in gold sovereigns and cash in the house, and what does his odd
handwritten book say? What is Mr. Gotobed fortifying the garden against, and
why is he laying snares? And from whence comes the huge and silent cat?
[195]
Westall has concocted a superb story, blending evil atmosphere, the supernatural,
and human brutality, where the horror lies less in the otherworldly than in
people's fear of it. The kids have significant roles, but the viewpoint, including
Rose's seeing just how frightening her children can be, is interestingly adult
without sacrificing appeal for young readers. Subtle and richly menacing, this
will reel in fans of both Barbara Michaels' atmospheric spookiness and Shirley
Jackson's implacability. DS
Young, Ed . Seven Blind Mice; written and illus. by Ed Young. Philomel,
1992. ISBN 0-399-22261-8. [40p]. $16.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
2-6 yrs. 
Endpapers textured to look like rice paper set the
stage for a fastidiously designed book that uses contrasts of white or bright hues
on a black background for stunning effects. The cumulative story shares some
elements with Eric Carle's The Very Hungry Caterpillar, as seven blind mice,
whose variously colored tails are the only objects visible on the first spread,
discover a strange Something and scamper away wondering what it is. "On
Monday, Red Mouse went first to find out. 'It's a pillar,' he said. No one
believed him. On Tuesday, Green Mouse set out. He was the second to go.
'It's a snake,' he said." Each one conjectures, by feeling a different body part,
what every viewer has already guessed: it's an elephant, of course, but the play
between words and images is imaginatively suspenseful (the trunk depicted as a
snake is downright startling). For counting, identifying colors, naming days of
the week, or just catching up on a favorite old Indian fable, this will reach a
broad age-range of read-aloud audiences, who will find the graphics clearly visible
even from a distance. BH
D.V. Perceptual acuteness