Alexander, Lloyd. The Remarkable Journey of Prince Jen. Dutton, 1991.
ISBN 0-525-44826-8. [288p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Young lord Prince Jen of T'ang leaves his elderly
father to seek T'ien-kuo, a kingdom that is legendary for its contented subjects.
In order to gain an audience with the king of T'ien-kuo, Jen is advised to bring
along six magic gifts. Jen is distracted fro his destination by a series of
disasters, first forfeiting the magic saddle and then being robbed of the magic
sword. As he searches for the friends he has found and lost again on his journey,
Jen gives the rest of the gifts to the people he meets who need them most. True
to folklore tradition, Jen's friends reappear to help him with the gifts when he
gets into trouble. Alexander's masterful prose works beautifully in the Chinese
setting, in passages that are both witty ("The Nose of Thoughtful Inhalations
sniffed it instantly") and serious ("Somewhere in his mind, a little frightened
animal began to scurry back and forth. Its name was panic"). As usual,
Alexander's characters are lively, funny, and eccentric, adding depth to the fast-
moving story. Unfortunately, readers will be momentarily distracted at the end
of each chapter by arch authorial comments encouraging them to continue
reading C(.. . How reliable is Master Shu? These questions require time to find
their answers, so it will be necessary to go on to the next chapter").
Unnecessary--one can't help but follow Jen on his journey as he changes from
pampered prince to outlaw and beggar, a journey that teaches him how to be a
man and a king. KPJ
Baylis-White, Mary. Sheltering Rebecca. Lodestar, 1991. ISBN 0-525-67349-
0. [112p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Framed by a contemporary Australian setting where
Clarissa asks her grandmother to help with a family history project for Grade
Six, this story is actually set in England during the years 1938-1945. Sally
(Grandmother) tells the story of the shy German-Jewish refugee, Rebecca, who
becomes her friend and-years later--her sister-in-law. Rebecca, who has lost
track of all her family, is a poignant figure as she tries to adjust to life in
England and worries about her parents and her brother Helmut (Clarissa's
grandfather). Believable dialogue and smooth exposition are nicely blended.
Having the story told from Sally's viewpoint gives an intimate and immediate
perspective on Rebecca's problems. ZS
C.U. History-Europe
D.V. Intercultural understanding
[55]
Beatty, Patricia. Jayhawker. Morrow, 1991. ISBN 0-688-09850-9. 214p.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
As Beatty's appended notes explain, conflict about the
issue of slavery had been going on at the Kansas-Missouri border for some time
even before the Civil War began officially. The protagonist here is adolescent
Lije, a Kansas "Jayhawker," whose father had been killed in a raid in Missouri.
Lije, under an assumed name, goes to Missouri as a spy amidst the pro-slavery
"Bushwhackers"; there he gathers information, is exposed to military action and
is wounded before finding his mother and sweetheart in Kansas. This
posthumous publication is one of the author's best historical novels. It has
good pace, well-sustained suspense and action, and a smooth integration of
fiction and fact. Although the Northern viewpoint is dominant, Beatty makes it
clear that neither North nor South lacked heroes or villains. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
Bible. The Story of Christmas; ISBN 0-525-44768-7; La Historia de Navidad.
ISBN 0-525-44830-6. Each book: illus. by Jane Ray. Dutton, 1991. 32p.
$15.95.
R* 
4-8 yrs. 
While Nativity books may already crowd the shelves,
there is surely a place for this one, which features Joseph and Mary portrayed
with authentically Semitic features and coloring, and an equally authentic
springtime setting. Like the illustrator's Noah's Ark (BCCB 11/90), The Story
of Christmas has an abundance of folk-like patterns, here touched with gold
accents that are warming rather than glitzy. The angels' clothes are inscribed
with vernal symbols, their wings made of leaves and feathers; the Wise Men
wear maps and letters and music; birds and beasts are everywhere. A portrait of
Mary suckling the baby is a rich blend of fabrics, skin, and hair, with the baby's
tiny feet emerging from a background of flowers and stars. The excerpted King
James text may require some amplification, especially for children accustomed to
later translations, but it is well worth the effort, and children will have plenty to
gaze upon while you find the words. 
A Spanish-language edition is also
available; see above for imprint information. RS
C.U. Christmas
Bowen, Betsy. Antler, Bear, Canoe: A Northwoods Alphabet Year; written and
illus. by Betsy Bowen. Joy Street/Little, 1991. ISBN 0-316-10376-4. 32p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 1-3. 
Like many otherwise intriguing alphabet books,
Bowen's will be of most interest to children already conversant with their abc's.
"This is a book of the things I see around me where I live," says the author-
illustrator in her introduction, and so from Antler (discarded by a moose, now
serving as a bird feeder) to Zero (a winter night's temperature), she shows us life
in the north woods of Minnesota, seasonally as well as alphabetically.
Watercolored woodcuts illustrate each letter, contrasting washes and slashes of
color with the dramatic outline of the cutting. Minnows are abstracted bits of
color in a black lake; Pond and Quiet share a double-spread of beavers at work
building a dam. Each letter is accompanied by an informative caption, and the
page design has a folksy quality that serves both the pictures of outdoor life and
those that show the cozy winters inside the (purple!) house. Endpapers show a
blackboarded recap. RS
[56
Brighton, Catherine. Dearest Grandmama; written and illus. by Catherine
Brighton. Doubleday, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-385-41844-2; Trade ed. ISBN
0-385-41843-4. 28p. $13.95.
R 
6-8 yrs. 
Formally posed and shaded paintings confer an eerie
sense of reality on this tale of a shipboard ghost. At sea with her naturalist
father in 1830, Maudie-Ann writes to her Grandmama about a new friend she's
made aboard the Meralda. Her friend appears one night, climbing out of a small
boat and onto the ship: "What kind of boy is it, Grandmama, who comes from
nowhere and does not eat or speak?" And why doesn't he cast a shadow, or show
a reflection in the mirror? What does the note in his pocket mean, the one that
states he is a passenger on the Marie Celeste, forty years in the future?
Respecting the old motif of the lost mariner (and The Secret Sharer), Brighton
constructs an elegant ghost story visually embellished with atmospheric
shipboard riggings. Maudie-Ann's father's specimens-bones, birds, potted
palms, and crocodiles-add to the exotic allure. An elegant companion to Chris
Van Allsburg's shipboard fantasy reviewed below. RS
Brittain, Bill. Wings. HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020649-7;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020648-9. 135p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Although no one can explain why Ian Carras has
grown wings, no one can deny them, either-nor adjust to their huge, leathery,
batlike appearance. Dad, who's consumed with running for mayor, is the most
hostile, disregarding Ian's pain and heightening the boy's loneliness with an
enforced isolation to keep voters from finding out that Ian is a "freak." Mom
calls his wings "ghastly," and sister Diane finds them "gross"-no sympathy
there. With a family like this, Ian should be relieved when a six-fingered
classmate, Anita Pickens, takes him home to hide from reporters, scientists, and
other tormenters. Life in the Pickens' mountain cabin provides Ian with the
strength to fly and the love to survive his ultimate decision to have the wings
surgically removed. There's a potential sharpness of conflict here, starting with
convincing descriptions of Ian's physical transformation; but his parents'
emotional cruelty is neither credibly developed nor adequately explained by
Mom's concluding confession (Diane was a delicate preemie, so they resented
Ian's good health as an intrusion). Still, the protagonist is worth getting to
know, and his situation is one that has intrigued both children and storytellers
from the days of Icarus. Readers who enjoyed Zilpha Keatley Snyder's Black and
Blue Magic (BCCB 11/66) and, more recently, Susan Green's Self-Portrait with
Wings (BCCB 7/89), might like to include this in their flight pattern. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Brown, Ruth. Alphabet Times Four: An International ABC; written and illus.
by Ruth Brown. 
Dutton, 1991. 
ISBN 0-525-44831-4. 
30p. 
$13.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
3-8 yrs. 
Between capital and small letters in the top corers of
the page and cognates in English, Spanish, French, and German juxtaposed
across the bottom, Brown has painted rich but unpretentious scenes of an ark,
ball, chameleon, dragon, elephant, etc. Each scene suggests a larger context but
is modestly confined within arching frames, with plenty of white space for the
letters. The design is carefully and inventively employed; the first stormy ark
illustration for A, framed in ships' beams, is eventually balanced by the last
[57]
illustration of the ark unloading on a zigzag path for Z, framed in a crayoned
rainbow. The X for xylophone shows eerie, x-rayed hands playing the
instrument. There's unflinching mystery and cross-cultural appeal in word
choices such as serpent, volcano, and yeti, as well as coordinated variety in the
art: a cutout silhouette for quartet, for instance, faces a painting of a carving for
pyramid. The scenes suggest stories, as in the pictures where a witch flies over
a ruined castle (magic), or a girl sits in the middle of a labyrinth.
Pronunciations attend each word, and a final page gives the entire text, along
with notes on common roots and language differences. "Yeti first came from the
Tibetan language, and kiwi is a Maori word from New Guinea." Young children
can identify the objects or creatures; older ones can learn the words in other
languages. Teachers, librarians, and parents will find this a long-term, broad-
based aesthetic investment. BH
C.U. Language arts
Browne, Anthony. Willy and Hugh; written and illus. by Anthony Browne.
Knopf, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91446-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-81446-9.
26p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $13.00.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
A young chimpanzee, neat and small, Willy stayed
out of the way of bigger, tougher primates until the day he collided with a hefty
jogger. To Willy's surprise, Hugh was polite and friendly. They went to the
zoo together (a human family is in a cage) and when they went to the library,
Willy read stories to Hugh. Each helped the other; the last two pictures show
Willy's small paw in Hugh's large one, and their next meeting, Hugh wearing a
sweater just like Willy's. As with all Browne books, this has clean, well-
defined paintings that gain impact because of exaggeration and that appeal
visually because of effective use of white space to set off color. The elements of
friendship and role reversal should appeal to children. ZS
D.V. Friendship values
Burleigh, Robert. Flight; illus. by Mike Wimmer. Philomel, 1991. ISBN 0-
399-22272-3. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
6-9 yrs. 
The transcontinental flight of Lindbergh and The
Spirit of Saint Louis here gets epic treatment in a present-tense narrative
partnered by a sequence of double-page spreads that capture all the drama of the
flight. Basing his text on Lindbergh's memoir, The Spirit of Saint Louis,
Burleigh takes readers through the flight, enhancing detail with drama: "He has
five chicken sandwiches with him. That is all the food he has brought. But he
eats nothing. It is easier to stay awake on an empty stomach. His body cries
for sleep. He loses track of time. The night is endless." The writing is a little
choppy but appropriately tense, and is a good foil for Wimmer's painterly
illustrations. 
Whether inside the plane or on the wing, the you-are-there
perspectives are immediate, even claustrophobic, as in a painting of Lindbergh in
the tiny cabin, facing his panel of instruments Exterior views of clouds and rain
and night are vividly wind-tossed, and the evening lights of Paris provide a
green-glowing welcome to the hero. The last painting shows him sprawled on a
bed, asleep at last, a copy of Le Figaro dangling from his hand. Kids-may we
say boys?-will appreciate this chance to fly. RS
D.V. Perseverance
[58]
Caseley, Judith. Hurricane Harry. Greenwillow, 1991. ISBN 0-688-10027-9.
[112p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Harry Kane-"Hurricane"-is just about to start
kindergarten when his parents decide to move. Harry's upset, as are his two
older sisters, and while the move itself is curiously offstage, the three children
soon make a happy adjustment to their new home and school. The drama is
realistic and on target, as when Harry is horrified to find that his fellow
kindergartners already know how to read-nope, he was put in a second-grade
class by mistake. There are (mis)adventures with a pet turtle, a visit to Grandma
in the hospital, and a funny episode in which Harry goes into business, selling
"Harry Kane's Unisex Smells-Good Perfume or Aftershave Cologne." This is
pleasantly low-key readaloud fare, with each of the eight chapters self-contained
and brief enough to allow satisfying entertainment for almost two week's worth
of juice-and-cookies time. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Moving, adjustment to; School, adjustment to
Cech, John. My Grandmother's Journey; illus. by Sharon McGinley-Nally.
Bradbury, 1991. ISBN 0-02-718135-9. 32p. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
"'Feet,' she said. 'Where haven't you been? What
haven't we been through together?'" 
Gramma's account of surviving the
Russian revolution and World War II combines narrative ease with concise
intensity of action as she recalls her village childhood and later hardships. This
is a tale within a tale, beginning with grandchild Korie's bedtime story vigil.
Both the historical context and the art work are complex, but not too much so
for young listeners, who will recognize fairy tale justice when they hear it:
Gramma's childhood kindness to some Gypsies one wintry night is returned
many years later as she and her infant are sheltered from the snow by another
family. 
Cech's refugees will live in memory alongside the heroic characters of
Christobel Mattingley's Angel with a Mouth Organ (BCCB 3/86) and other
testimonial picture books. 
Although McGinley-Nally's compositions are
sometimes crowded with contrasting colors, her highly patterned illustrations
combine graphic folk motifs with stylized figures that underscore the timeless
quality of a timely story. BH
C.U. History-World War II
D.V. Kindness; Perseverance
Collier, James. Duke Ellington. Macmillan, 1991. ISBN 0-02-722985-8.
144p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Composer, pianist, band conductor, Duke Ellington
was a stellar figure in the entertainment world, a charismatic crowd-pleaser, and a
self-taught musician (he had just a little training) who became internationally
known. Ellington refused to perform as a "comedy black," and one of the
outstanding qualities of this candid biography is that Collier shows how
Ellington contributed to the history of music as well as making his mark as an
individual and a black artist. Background information, life history, and authorial
analysis are smoothly blended. Preceding the index is a brief list of suggested
books and records for all that jazz. ZS
C.U. Music; Social studies
[59]
Cowcher, Helen. Tigress; written and illus. by Helen Cowcher. Farrar, 1991.
ISBN 0-374-37567-4. 34p. $14.95.
R 
6-8 yrs. 
A tiger's eye stares out from the cover of this picture
book, daring readers to open it. When they do, they see a tigress leaving her
wildlife sanctuary in search of food for her cubs. Warned by the cries of the
monkeys, a herdsman gathers his flock. Too late-the tigress has killed a
bullock (while the herdsman watches, apparently; an unlikely situation).
Together with a ranger from the sanctuary, the herdsmen make a plan to drive the
tigress back into the sanctuary: when she returns with her cubs to eat a camel
she has killed, the men frighten the animals with firecrackers, forcing them to
retreat to their home. The brief text is stark, tersely captioning the drama in
Cowcher's double-spread paintings. Painted in rich tones of brown and orange,
marked with bold black stripes, Cowcher's tigers are stylized with no loss to
their fierceness--one close-up of the tigress' face, teeth at the ready, jumps from
the page. The calling monkeys are vividly depicted, and portraits of the tigers
rushing and resting are fluidly poised against the sky and landscape. A ferocious
complement to Ted Lewin's more delicate Tiger Trek (BCCB 3/90). RS
Crews, Donald. Bigmama's; written and illus. by Donald Crews. Greenwillow,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09951-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09950-5. 32p.
Library ed. $13.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R* 
4-7 yrs. 
'"Next station stop, Cottondale,' yelled the conductor
to the nearly empty train. 'Don't leave no babies on this train.' He made the
same joke year after year." It's summer in a time when railroad cars still had
segregated cars identified by the sign "COLORED." That doesn't keep the
narrator and his sisters and brother from relishing every detail (well, maybe not
the outhouse at night) of their grandmother's farm, including Sunday dinners that
are here depicted in irresistibly warm shades of brown and burnt orange. In fact,
each of these double-spread watercolor paintings is inviting, but the last two
make an especially memorable contrast: in one, a country night radiates white
stars around a close family circle; and in the next, the grown narrator lifts his
face to a city skyline as he recollects Bigmama's. Except for a too-neat white
house, these scenes have a down-home quality with comfortable details in a
primitive style quite different from Crews' designerly Caldecott Honor books
Freight Train (BCCB 2/79) and Truck (BCCB 4/80). The action here is literal
rather than stylized and the feelings forceful. If Crews is nostalgic about his lost
childhood, he's certainly preserved the memory of it in glowing images for a
new generation. BH
Cutler, Jane. Family Dinner; illus. by Philip Caswell. Farrar, 1991. ISBN 0-
374-32267-8. [126p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
It's the writing style-smooth flow, believable
dialogue-that is the strong point of Cutler's first book for children. The book
is less impressive in plot, slight in conception and a bit awkward in tying sub-
plots to the "family dinner" main plot. Rachel is the youngest of three children
in the family that Great-Uncle Benson comes to visit. She agrees with him that
it would be nice to have the family dine together every night; after much
planning, such a meal is arranged-and it's a minor disaster. Both Uncle Benson
and Rachel concede that the do-it-yourself meals have produced less discord, and
that they do belong to a happy family even if they don't happily eat together
[60]
each evening. Characterization is uneven (the housekeeper who is given to Mrs.
Malaprop-type errata is tiresome), but each character is drawn with consistency.
ZS
D.V. Family relations; Uncle-niece relations
Dahl, Roald. The Minpins; illus. by Patrick Benson. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-
670-84168-4. 48p. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
This posthumous publication reveals Dahl in a
mellower mood than usual. Little Billy meets the Minpins when he goes,
despite explicit warnings from his mother, into the seductive Forest of Sin. And
while the fabled Whangdoodles and Homswogglers and Snozzwanglers and
Vermicious Knids that supposedly inhabit the forest turn out to be fiction, there
is a Red-Hot Smoke-Belching Gruncher who eats the kindly Minpins, a race of
tiny people who live in treehouses, safe from the Gruncher's clutches. While
adults may find the story and sound effects (Woomph-woomph goes the
Gruncher) just the other side of cute, kids will respond to the fast action and
brave exploits of Little Billy, who---of course-kills the Gruncher, allowing the
Minpins once again to roam through the forest safely. Benson's line-and-
watercolor paintings are cozily crosshatched in their depiction of the Minpins and
their little homes, fierce and flaming in the scenes of Billy luring the Gruncher
to its death. The Gruncher itself is never entirely seen, adding to its menacing
power. In a touching ending, Billy is rewarded with a ride on the back of a
swan, who takes him to see the angels. Long for a picture book, this is an
evocative read or read-aloud for those still susceptible to the charms of little
people. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
Davis, Jenny. Checking on the Moon. Jackson/Orchard, 1991. Library ed.
ISBN 0-531-08560-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05960-X. 
208p. Library ed.
$14.99; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
When her mother goes off to honeymoon in Europe
with her new husband, Cab (so named for her place of birth) and her older brother
Bill spend the summer with their grandmother, who runs a restaurant in an old
and rundown neighborhood of Pittsburgh. Cab, thirteen, is a friendly, curious
narrator, prone to self-examination ("Face facts") but interested enough in the
world and people around her to make this a story of a cozy circle of friends.
Together, the friends and neighbors work to make Washco a safer place to live.
Given the dangerous facts of life in the neighborhood (robbery, assault, rape), the
tone is sometimes a little too cozy, and the happy, tidy ending seems like
wishful thinking. But as heart-warmers go, this one's snug and steady. RS
C.U. Community life
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Grandparent-child relations
Day, Alexandra. Carl's Afternoon in the Park; written and illus. by Alexandra
Day. Farrar, 1991. ISBN 0-374-31109-9. 32p. $11.95.
Ad 
4-6 yrs. 
Strong, silent Carl (see also BCCB 1/90 and 10/90)
has a companion this time around, a fellow Rottweiler (puppy) who serves as
sturdy playmate for the baby while Mom has tea: "Carl can take care of the
baby and the puppy." The three go to the park, riding the carousel and romping
in the lavish gardens, eating ice cream and joining in the fun at the petting zoo.
[61]
One of the more clever (for adults, anyway) spreads shows Carl and the baby
posing for an art class where they get, variously, the Picasso, Van Gogh,
Mondrian, and Chagall treatment. The picture in which Carl, looking through a
pair of binoculars, catches sight of the baby's mother, overreaches the boundaries
of the fantasy, as does another picture of the puppy being hoisted away by a
helium balloon. 
Still, series fans will enjoy Day's lavish oil paintings,
particularly elegant in their treatment of the flora of the park. After four books,
the conceit is wearing thin, although Carl as noble babysitter remains appealing.
RS
Estern, Anne Graham. Letters from Philippa. Bantam, 1991. ISBN 0-553-
15941-0. [160p]. Paper ed. $3.50. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
After the death of their father, Sam and Sarah
Bingham (fourteen and twelve respectively) help their mother turn their New
England house into a bed-and-breakfast. While cleaning out the attic, Sarah
discovers letters, dating from the mid-nineteenth century, from a Philippa
Bingham to her sister Evangeline. Sarah begins to see evidence of Philippa
everywhere: her portrait hangs in the house, her old clothes are stored in their
attic, her initials are etched in the windows. Philippa's letters tell how she went
to England to work as a governess and was then disappointed in love: they also
include a coded message telling her sister where she "put something away for
emergencies." The children can't get the code but do get to visit their English
cousins, finding more pieces of Philippa's story. Finally they return to the
States, solve the code and-ta da!--dig up the jewels Philippa's love had given
her, which will provide financial safety for the contemporary Binghams and lay
to rest Philippa's ghost, which has been (benignly) appearing to Sarah. The
book is so sweetly detached from reality that the occasional ludicrousness of plot
hardly matters. It's an undemanding and unintimidating step up from Nancy
Drew, with sufficient plot and atmosphere (if not depth of either) to appeal to
less-willing readers; it's also an entertaining quick read for more advanced readers
looking for a break. DS
Fakih, Kimberly Olson, comp. Of Cabbages and KingsTM 1991: The Year's
Best Magazine Writings for Kids. Bowker, 1991. ISBN 0-8352-3072-4. 237p.
illus. and with photographs. $29.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-6. 
A few stories, folk tales, and poems are interspersed
among seventy brief informational articles culled from children's magazines such
as Cricket, Cobblestone, Ranger Rick, and Highlights. The topics--dolls,
animals, fireworks, computers-generally have lots of child appeal, but the level
of the writing is generally undistinguished and encyclopedia-like: "Within a few
centuries parchment, not papyrus, had become the preferred paper of the ancient
world." Some of the articles seem excerpted; for example, a two-paragraph piece
on Norman Rockwell begins "After all the hard work that went into creating the
'Four Freedoms' illustrations ... " without explaining what those illustrations
are. Each entry includes a brief, rather unneccesary, annotation; illustrations are
black-and-white; the double-column design is stodgy, as is a ubiquitous yellow
colophon that appears, in varying sizes, on every page. First in a projected
series of annuals, this collection also includes a subject index and directory of
periodicals. RS
[62
Fleischman, Paul. Time Train; illus. by Claire Ewart. Zolotow/HarperCollins,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021710-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021709-X. 32p.
Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
A field trip to the Dinosaur National Monument
becomes more than a blast from the past when the railroad ticket seller steers
Miss Pym and her class onto the Rocky Mountain Unlimited, which takes the
children not only out West but also back in time. "By the time we reached
Philadelphia, we knew we were in for an unusual trip"-as they see horse-and-
buggies go by outside the train windows. Ohio brings them into buffalo
country, and soon it is snowing and woolly mammoths are about. At the park,
the dinos are alive and well-and mischievous, as when one walks away with
Miss Pym's suitcase in its mouth. 
The children retaliate by cooking a
monumental scrambled egg for breakfast. The watercolor illustrations are bright
and literal and use the size of the dinos to good effect, as when the tail of a half-
seen brontosaurus curves out of the picture into the white space beyond the
frame. This you-are-there fantasy is a dream come true. RS
Greenburg, Dan. Young Santa; illus. by Warren Miller. Viking, 1991. ISBN
0-670-83905-1. 74p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Well, it appears Santa was actually born in Sioux
City, Iowa, to Sophie and Milton Claus-and named in recollection of a lovely
vacation in ... Santa Fe. And so it goes, dumb but fun, with Milton Claus
being transferred to the North Pole, where little Santa discovers a penchant for
red, giving away his Christmas presents and laughing at his father's lame jokes:
"Ho, ho, ho!" Santa's career path is a little rocky. His first sleigh is pulled by
eight tiny walruses, and the initial plan to have kids sit on his lap and tell him
what they had for breakfast isn't very popular. But soon he's up on the roof:
"From within the house, he heard people stirring. Then somebody flew to the
window, tore open the shutters, and threw up the sash. A man stuck his head
out and looked around. 'Who's out there?' yelled the man." For kids too old to
be true believers but young enough to still appreciate the myth, this is a funny
sitcom take on an old friend. Sixteen brief chapters add up to an offbeat pre-
holiday readaloud. RS
C.U. Christmas; Reading aloud
Hawkins, Laura. Figment, Your Dog, Speaking. Houghton, 1991. Trade ed.
ISBN 0-395-57032-8; Paper ed. ISBN 0-395-60473-7. 
[160p]. Trade ed.
$13.95; Paper ed. $4.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
The unlikely candidate for hero here is a talking dog
that seems to comfort children on a perennial twilight-zone basis. In her neatly
notched plot, Hawkins stacks several stories into one sturdy structure: ten-year-
old Marcella Starbuckle is lonely for her career-driven parents and outcast from a
mean clique of schoolmates; Benny is her retarded neighbor, still afraid that the
police will take him away for something he did long ago; Judge Scott is an old
woman afraid that she'll die with a guilty secret; and Marcella's pediatrician
offers the clue to his unhappy childhood friend, James, who lost a talking dog 30
years previously. It is that same dog that consoles Marcella, worries Benny,
weighs on Judge Scott's conscience, and, at the end of the book, appears at the
side of a sickly boy after helping Marcella win friends and influence her parents.
The mystery aspects will appease dog-lovers impatient to see a bit more of
[ 63]
Figment, who doesn't appear till page 24. A few of the character dynamics (Mr.
Starbuckle's business-trip gifts, for instance) are overstated, but enough scenes
are vividly odd (Mrs. Starbuckle caught in a lie) and unexpectedly involving
(Judge Scott's death) to make up for the occasional flat note. And it's refreshing
to have the fantastical creature visible to everyone, including adults; in their own
ambiguous way, they even acknowledge its power. BH
Hodges, Margaret, ad. Brother Francis and the Friendly Beasts; illus. by Ted
Lewin. Scribner's, 1991. ISBN 0-684-19173-3. 32p. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
As in her retelling of the legend of St. Jerome (BCCB
9/91), Hodges' adaptation here (from unnamed sources) is graceful and smooth,
quietly recalling the gentle wisdom of St. Francis. Born the son of a rich
merchant, Francis left his carefree life to wander as a poor monk, soon gathering
other young men as followers of his creed: "As you travel, take no food or
money with you, and give whatever you have to anyone who asks for help."
And, most appealing to children, Francis also helped the animals, sharing with
them the Word of God as well as more practical gifts, such as wine and honey to
keep the bees alive through winter. Lewin's watercolor portraits of Francis
among the animals are sunny and realistic, more sophisticated in their effect than
Tomie DePaola's version of the story (BCCB 4/82). Some of Lewin's human
figures are rather operatically posed, and children will wonder why Francis ages,
suddenly and dramatically, in the pictures, when there is no sense of time
passing in the text. The farm animals and their surroundings are richly
conveyed: sheep in the blue moonlight; a Christmas stable of oxen, hay, and
peasants. 
The story closes with Francis' own "Canticle of the Sun," an
ecological primer: "Praised be my Lord for Mother Earth, who feeds us and
protects us and brings forth grass and many fruits and flowers of all colors." RS
C.U. Religious education
D.V. Animals, love for
Holmes, Martha. Deadly Animals; illus. by Mike Vaughan. Atheneum, 1991.
ISBN 0-689-31737-9. 26p. $13.95.
M 
Gr. 2-3. 
The choice of animals which are included here-harpy
eagle, spotted hyena, electric eel, for example-seems arbitrary, and the
implication that predacity is evil ("The tiger is a killing machine of enormous
power") is unfortunate. Dramatic paintings in dark/bright colors are visually
effective, but most of the paintings are not adequate for identification because of
cluttered detail or because only part of the animal (the cobra, for example) is
shown. Each double-page spread carries a brief, boxed text in which the author
uses a contrived narrative style. The concluding pages, which comprise panels
of facts (size, habitat, food, family life, etc.) give more information. ZS
Hooks, William H. Mr. Baseball; illus. by Paul Meisel. Preiss/Bantam, 1991.
Library ed. ISBN 0-553-07315-X; Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-35303-9. 48p. (Bank
Street Ready-to-Read). Library ed. $9.99; Paper ed. $3.50.
Ad 
Gr. 1-3. 
The speaker is the exasperated older brother of Eli,
age five, who's baseball-crazy, insists he's going to belong to Little League (for
which he's too young), and has been dubbed "Mr. Baseball" to his delight As a
"level 3" book in the publisher's structured reading series, this is designed for
beginning independent readers and functions well for that purpose; it is divided
[64]
into episodes, the sentences are short, the vocabulary is appropriate, the print is
large. The narration is more choppy than that in many other books for
beginning readers, primarily because of less skillful handling of reinforcing
repetition. The illustrations, cartoon-style line-and-wash in bright, strong
colors, are artistically undistinguished but have the appeals of an interracial cast,
plenty of action, and some humor. ZS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Hopper, Nancy. The Queen of Put-Down. Four Winds, 1991. ISBN 0-02-
744411-2. [144p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Cassie Ryan needs a summer friend, and when new
girl Sabrina Evans appears in May, Cassie befriends her. Sabrina is pretty
(although clearly not rich) and smart... and waspish: "It's too bad this year's
play isn't Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," she says to the diminutive Cassie
one lunchtime. "There'd be lots of parts for you." Cassie perseveres, with
encouragement from her family but resistance from her best friend Emily ("If
you want to be my best friend, Cassie Ryan," Emily says, "you won't hang
around with Sabrina Evans!"). She finally realizes that Sabrina's put-downs
come from her insecurity and begins to help her two friends get along together.
It's all rather purposive and predictable, even to the end when Sabrina's self-
esteem is bucked up by helping Cassie with her brother's asthma attack, which
gives her the courage to save the class's other troubled terror from his own
mischief during the class play. There's humor here, along with some insights
into the dynamics of friendship, but for less marshmallow and more honesty on
the subject, try Ilene Cooper's Mean Streak (BCCB 4/91). DS
Humphreys, Martha. Until Whatever. Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-395-58022-6.
150p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Karen had briefly been friends with Connie Tibbs
some years back, when, in a happenstance encounter, Connie had comforted
Karen about her parents' divorce. And now, as the two girls begin their junior
year of high school, Karen learns that Connie has AIDS and that the two girls
have been assigned as lab partners in biology class. 
Despite the callous
warnings of best friend Rae ("Karen, she's a walking time bomb") and the anger
of boyfriend Todd, Karen befriends Connie, breaching the gap that had grown
between them. While in some ways an old-fashioned problem novel, this never
gets hysterical, melodramatic, or fact-packed with information about its problem.
The controversy surrounding Connie's school attendance is harsh but believable;
most painful is a scene where a weakened Connie has fallen in a school hallway,
and is surrounded by students who won't help her stand up. "People back away
from you like you've got some horrible disease. Which, of course, you do."
Karen's present-tense narration is crisp, immediate, and honest: when Connie
accidentally cuts herself in class, Karen finds herself frozen, unable to help. And
Connie is no Little Eva; she's suspicious, a little tough, and resentful. The
ending is blunt ("She'll come out [of the hospital], but eventually she'll go in
again. And again. And again. And finally one time, that'll be it") but
reconciling, with Karen, Connie, and a boy who likes her gathered over a board
game in Connie's hospital room. RS
C.U. Social studies
D.V. Friendship values
[65]
Johnston, Janet. Ellie Brader Hates Mr. G. Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-395-58195-
8. [144 p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
"We have a man teacher and no one likes him,"
announces narrator Ellie to her family the day Mr. Garrett replaces her adored
Ms. Simpson as the fifth-grade teacher. Ellie thinks Mr. Garrett is "unfair and
mean," and he is certainly strict, so much so that his refusal to believe a
student's sincere mid-test plea for the bathroom results in a humiliating accident.
Eventually, however, his fair-mindedness and sensitivity win Ellie's respect and
affection ("He doesn't treat us like babies"), particularly when the death of the
beloved class rabbit elicits Mr. Garrett's own story of personal loss. Johnston
has a light touch and a gift for nuance and important detail: Ellie's parents
always fixate on the wrong part of any complaint, and her eighth-grade brother
considers "That's so dumb" the appropriate response to any statement but is still
thrilled about Ellie's chance to keep the class rabbit. This is a book of genuine,
lively sweetness from a fresh new voice in middle-grade fiction. DS
D.V. Teacher-student relations
Kinsey-Warnock, Natalie. 
The Night the Bells Rang; illus. by Leslie W.
Bowman. Cobblehill, 1991. ISBN 0-525-65074-1. [80p]. $12.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Set in Vermont just as the year 1918 begins, this is a
book that deals, albeit briefly, with the problem of an older bully, Aden, whose
persecution so upsets the protagonist, fifth-grader Mason, that he in turn is nasty
to his baby brother. What gives the story impact is the fact that Aden has done,
on one occasion, an act so kind that Mason learns something from it: first,
when World War in ends, Mason finds he is sad that the bully (who had enlisted
in the army) is dead, and-second-he realizes that he must be more kind to
little Ira. This is capably written, if occasionally purposive, but it seems more a
short story than a novel; shorter than the usual middle-grades book but too
dependent on nuance for younger readers, it doesn't quite fit either audience. ZS
D.V. Kindness
Kuklin, Susan. What Do I Do Now? Talking About Teenage Pregnancy;
written and illus. with photographs by Susan Kuklin. Putnam, 1991. Trade ed.
ISBN 0-399-21843-2; Paper ed. ISBN 0-399-22043-7. 179p. Trade ed. $15.95;
Paper ed. $7.95.
R* 
Gr. 7-12. 
Pregnant adolescents (23.9 percent of U.S. teenage
girls have been pregnant by the time they're eighteen) come from a wide
spectrum of ethnic and socio-economic backgrounds, a fact to which Kuklin has
paid careful attention in her interviews here. White, black, Hispanic, rich, poor,
educated, or ignorant, these subjects have an overwhelming problem in common
and are often articulate in voicing it. They also vary in their reactions and
decisions, from the uncertain 13-year-old who is pregnant with her second child
to the decisive 18-year-old having her second abortion or the 17-year-old who
insists on personally handing over her baby to adoptive parents. The experiences
these girls describe are more informative than a factual compendium and
manifestly convincing of the need for birth control education. Kuklin has
balanced background information with the subjects' own words in a natural flow
to ease young readers through a series of stories that may help prevent them
from becoming a statistic. Names have been changed for confidentiality, but
[66]
clear black-and-white photographs portray several of the teens who kept their
babies. BH
C.U. Health; Sex education
Lawson, Jack. Andro, This Is Crazy; illus. by B. Perry White. Avon, 1991.
Paper ed. ISBN 0-380-76234-X. 86p. (A Young Camelot Book). Paper ed.
$2.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Jefferson, nicknamed "Bean" for his complete failure
as a ball player, is walking home from school one day when he meets Andro, an
alien who has come to Earth to learn about its inhabitants. Andro can fly,
disappear, help Bean with school tests, and make mischief for Hennerly, Bean's
nemesis. With a plot and characters much like those that kids make up for
themselves, there's nothing in the story that's new, but it's a good example of
that popular but elusive genre: 
fast-paced, easy-to-read books for boys.
Although it lacks the wit of Etra and Spinner's Aliens for Breakfast (BCCB
12/88), this is a friendly blend of school story and E. T., and features in Bean a
likable, ordinary protagonist. Occasional pen-and-ink illustrations are a little
geeky but true to type. RS
C.U. Reading, reluctant
Lee, Tanith. Black Unicorn. Preiss/Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-689-31575-9.
[144p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-. 
Fifteen-year-old Tanaquil longs to leave the enchanted
desert castle where her mother, sorceress Jaive, holds sway. Tanaquil's rite of
passage begins with a pet Peeve's (!) digging up some magical bones, which
Tanaquil strings together into the skeleton of a unicorn-her one great talent is
mending things. The unicorn's coming to life sets into motion a journey to a
city by the sea, where Tanaquil discovers her sister, her father, and most of all,
herself. The fantasy mechanics are brilliant, which is especially significant in
light of the protagonist's mechanical magic. Lee's otherworld descriptions are
luxurious without becoming self-indulgent, and she spices the traditional plot
with dashes of satirical humor and generously realized characters. There is, very
occasionally, the barest touch of self-consciousness, nowhere more apparent than
in the conclusion, but fans of the genre will relish the rich details and
supersmooth prose too much to mind. The mother-daughter conflict adds depth,
and the quest for a perfect world is skillfully played. Offer this one as a chaser to
Robin McKinley's heroic series. BH
D.V. Ingenuity; Parent-child relations
Leonard, Laura. Finding Papa. Karl/Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-689-31526-0.
[192p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Set in 1905, a sequel to Saving Damaris (BCCB
9/89) continues the Edwards family's story, with Abigail, the youngest of three
children, as the narrator. What Damaris had been saved from was a marriage of
economic convenience. Now the two girls and their brother, motherless, are
going to San Francisco to join Papa, who has said that he'll be able to make a
home for them because he's marrying a Mrs. MacKay. As it turns out, after a
good bit of cheerful if insubstantial shifting in the family plans, Papa marries
someone else, and they go off to Nevada; Damaris and brother Joel stay behind,
[67]
and Abby gets a chance to go to Hawaii as a mother's helper. Affable,
meandering, and mildly entertaining. ZS
D.V. Family relations
Lipsyte, Robert. The Brave. Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN
0-06-023916-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023915-8. 
195p. Library ed. $14.89;
Trade ed. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
With a Moscondaga mother who has left him for long
periods with his uncle Jake on their reservation, and a white father who was
killed in Vietnam, Sonny cannot contain the rage that makes him lose control,
both in the boxing ring and outside of it. On the run in New York City, he
meets the protagonist of an earlier Lipsyte novel The Contender (BCCB 5/68),
to which this is the sequel. Alfred Brooks has become a police officer, and he
tries to redirect Sonny's energy from a path of sure self-destruction to one of
self-respect. Robert Lipsyte has an unfailing gift for portraying troubled teenage
boys, and seventeen-year-old Sonny Bear, an outcast from two worlds, is no
exception. Middle-aged Brooks seems flat by comparison, as do the prostitute
and dope-dealing pimp who threaten to seal Sonny's fate. Jake's voice is more
distinctive in representing Native American traditions, which are endangered as
much by the commercialism Sonny's mother espouses as by the trouble Sonny
finds on the street. While this doesn't have quite the charismatic development of
the first book, it has enough tough action and sports appeal to hook readers. BH
C.U. Physical education
D.V. Perseverance; Pride in background and heritage
Lorenz, Lee. A Weekend in the City; written and illus. by Lee Lorenz. Pippin,
1991. ISBN 0-945912-15-3. 32p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
In a companion volume to A Weekend in the Country
(BCCB 4/85), Lorenz again uses bright wash drawings and the brisk free line
that have made him an eminent cartoonist. Here Duck and Pig describe to their
friend Moose the urban delights he'll enjoy if he accepts their invitation for a
birthday visit: 
a revolving restaurant, the space museum, etc. Moose, a
garrulous tall tale teller, responds to each suggestion with an account of his own
rural exploits ("Let me tell you about moonrocks")-but he does, in the end,
hastily accept his friends' offer. Light humor, but there are a few barbs here and
there to add substance. ZS
Lourie, Peter. Amazon: A Young Reader's Look at the Last Frontier; illus.
with photographs by Marcos Santilli. Caroline House, 1991. ISBN 1-878093-
00-2. 48p. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A you-are-there immediacy pervades this photoessay
on the Amazon, which makes clear ecological points without harping; rather, the
many color photographs of both the beauty and devastation of the river speak for
themselves. Traveling in the western Brazilian state of Rond6nia, the author and
photographer encounter rubber tapping, gold diving, and a curious kind of
fishing in which poisonous liana vines are used to stun fish and send them to the
surface. They also see "The Devil's Railroad," a spooky relic of an engineering
project that collapsed when the Brazilian rubber boom ended in 1912, the year
the railroad was completed. The facts of colonization and subsequent rain forest
burning are made clear, and the author draws a telling parallel with the U.S.:
[68]
"When the West was settled, railroads were built, buffalo were killed, and the
prairies were cultivated." Page design is open, with several photos dramatically
laid across two-thirds of the double-page spreads. RS
D.V. Ecological awareness
Martin, Claire. The Race of the Golden Apples; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon.
Dial, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0249-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0248-5.
32p. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
A glossy production of the Atalanta myth begins
with the goddess Diana saving an abandoned baby girl from attacking wolves.
This and Atalanta's childhood encounter with her eventual husband Hippomenes
(or Melanion, as he is more often called) seem to have been fabricated here for
heightened drama and romance. Traditionally, the backbone elements of the
myth-Atalanta's mothering by a bear, her conflict with the cruel father who
abandoned her as an infant because he wanted a son, and her losing the footrace-
are not romantic but are charged with bitter male-female tensions. (These are
often heightened by the story's association with the another incident about
Atalanta, the hunt for the Calydonian boar, which is not included here.)
Martin's ending resolves those tensions without any ambiguity, as Atalanta
deliberately lets her rival win ("she pictured Hippomenes being led to his death,
and her anger vanished. She made her choice"). The Dillons' deep-toned
illustrations feature ornate patterning, an artistic context in which the heroine
looks startlingly like Barbie. Both words and images, while striking in impact,
suffer some tonal dissonance with the myth-because of overexplanation, in the
case of the text, and glamorization, in the case of the art. Though the story cries
out for simpler treatment, it still wields a certain power even within this format
of brittle beauty. BH
C.U. 
Mythology
Mathis, Sharon Bell. Red Dog/Blue Fly: Football Poems; illus. by Jan Spivey
Gilchrist. Viking, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83623-0. 
[32p]. $13.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Paintings by Gilchrist have color and vitality but-
given the binding theme of the poems-are somewhat repetitive. The poems are
written from a participant's viewpoint, with the scorer speaking in
"Touchdown," an injured player describing reactions of others in "Leg Broken,"
and the title poem expressing a player's problems in learning complex signals.
While the poems seem less polished than Mathis' prose, the combination of
some vivid phrases (the thrust of "Something in my head/ lights up/ kicks in/
and fires/ the engine I have to be .. ." in "Quarterback") and the excitement of
the game itself should appeal to all children as much as football has captured the
African-American characters pictured here. ZS
C.U. Physical education
Medearis, Angela Shelf. Dancing with the Indians; illus. by Samuel Byrd.
Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-0893-0. 32p. $14.95.
M 
Gr. K-3. 
The author's great-grandfather, an escaped slave, was
taken in by an Oklahoma Seminole tribe and many of his descendants come to
the Seminole dancing that is still held each year. This is the story of that
celebration and of the link between a black family and a tribe that was expelled
[69]
from its Florida home. The rhyming text is often forced in scansion as well as
rhyme; it begins "Mama's packed our supper/ the sheep are in their pens/ it's
time to go and visit/ the Seminole Indians." Another example: "They sing of
ancient battles/ gloriously fought and won/ of shaggy buffalo/ and brave deeds
they have done... ." There is some historical background given, but most of
the text describes the dancing. The paintings are bright and vigorous, sometimes
crowded, often awkward in the delineation of faces. Colorful but stretched, a tale
well worth telling but not, in this case, well adapted to the literary form chosen.
ZS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Millay, Edna St. Vincent. The Ballad of the Harp-Weaver; illus. by Beth Peck.
Philomel, 1991. 
ISBN 0-399-21611-1. 
[32p]. 
$14.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
SpR 
Gr. 3-5. 
Edna St. Vincent Millay's poem about a mother who
sacrifices her life so that her young son will live is sentimental but effective;
Beth Peck's somber portraits of the family are equally poignant-but who is this
book for? The poem recalls one cold and desolate Christmastime: "There's
nothing in the house/ But a loaf-end of rye, And a harp with a woman's head/
Nobody will buy." But on Christmas Eve, the mother sits down at the harp
while her son sleeps, and weaves an assortment of fine clothing: "She wove a
red cloak/ So regal to seeJ 'She's made it for a king's son,'/ I said, 'and not for
me.'/ But I knew it was for me." It seems a dream, but when the boy wakes, the
clothes are piled high and his mother is at the harp, "her hands in the harp-
strings/ Frozen dead." Magical but morbid, the poem might find an audience
among older kids and romantic teenagers, but they will probably be put off by
the format and illustrations, fine as they are. The book has too much integrity
to end up on the coffee table, but will require a listener ready for the poem's
Christmastime sadness. RS
C.U. Literature
D.V. Mother-son relations
Miller, Mary Beth. Handtalk School; by Mary Beth Miller and George Ancona;
illus. with photographs by George Ancona. Four Winds, 1991. ISBN 0-02-
700912-2. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. K-4. 
Color photographs of good quality show the smiling
faces of an interracial group of children using American Sign Language to tell
readers how they, as residential students at a school for deaf children, spend a
school day. 
There are regular classes, but the feature of the day is a
Thanksgiving play. A lively companion book to Handtalk (BCCB 5/74) and
Handtalk Zoo (BCCB 1/90), this concludes with a list of residential schools for
the deaf. ZS
C.U. Thanksgiving
D.V. Handicaps, overcoming
Nelson, Drew. Wild Voices; illus. by John Schoenherr. 
Philomel, 1991.
ISBN 0-399-21798-3. 95p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
Seven vivid short stories describe events of crisis in
the lives of a fox, lynx, horse, puma, wolf, mountain goat, and dog. The
subjects are inherently dramatic and, in half the cases, tragic, as old age,
[70 ]
predators, or humans take inevitable toll on the animals' existence. Nelson has
respected behavior patterns with much the same integrity as Parnall in Marsh
Cat (reviewed below), though an occasional description borders on
anthropomorphism (The fox "kept trying to think of other ways she could have
thrown Jim [a dog] off her track. When she couldn't think of any more, she lay
quietly and worried"). 
Similarly, the style sometimes bogs down ("The
insufficiencies in their genes had died with them under the merciless stroke of
fang and claw or the lonely inevitability of time"), but for the most part,
Nelson's writing is clean and the action starkly focused. The death of the lynx is
a heartbreaker, and dog-lovers will dissolve over the last chapter. Schoenherr's
handsome cover painting and pen-and-ink hatch drawings add to the appeal of a
spacious format on thick, cream-colored paper. A natural for reading aloud or
alone. BH
C.U. Nature study
Parnall, Peter. Marsh Cat; written and illus. by Peter Parnall. Macmillan,
1991. ISBN 0-02-770120-4. 128p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
It's eerie to think how intensely the author must
identify with felines to have developed this hundred-page narrative without a hint
of anthropomorphism. Each animal is a distinct character without assuming
human characteristics; in fact, none of the wild animals have names, but are
simply called Cat, Frog, Crow, Homed Owl, and so on in generic but sharply
etched descriptions of their behavior. The action is shaped into plot form by
Cat's winter occupation of a barn, his slowly established relationship with a girl
there, his entrapment and nearly fatal battle with a fisher, and his return to the
wild. The writing style is not easy, but it has an elegant, chiseled quality
broken only occasionally by the girl's point of view ("Yuk" is her favorite
expression, believable but somewhat intrusive here). This is a minor quibble,
though, about a book that will capture naturalists by its keen observation of and
respect for the battle to survive. In fact, it's a rare read-aloud that satisfies both
fiction and science lovers. Parnall has projected into words the same clean
strength with which he so often invests illustration. Integrity is the word that
comes to mind. 
BH
C.U. Nature study
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. A Family Goes Hunting; illus. with photographs by
William Mufloz. 
Clarion, 1991. 
ISBN 0-395-52004-5. 
[64p]. 
$14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-7. 
There's something quite daring about a cover
photograph that shows Mom and kids (and dog) striding across the plains, guns
in hand. Patent opens this photodocumentary with a careful defense of hunting,
and explains that this is not a book about controversy: "I have not discussed the
controversial aspects of hunting here ... 
Here I have focused on hunting as a
healthy family activity." The Coxes (parents Roger and Carla, children Leif and
Heidi) live in Montana, where, depending on the season, they hunt deer,
pheasant, and geese. The text includes Roger's clear instructions and directions
about gun safety and use, and Muftoz' excellent black-and-white photographs
show the preparation for a hunt, game stalking, flushing, shooting, skinning,
and eating. Text and captions are candid ("Roger shows the children blood on
some pine needles") if occasionally too sanguine ("In a few yards, they catch up
[71]
with the buck, lying peacefully on the ground, dead"). NRA critics won't be
happy, but the book is engaging and informative about a popular activity that is
under-represented (or overdramatized) in books for children. RS
C.U. Social studies
Perrault, Charles. Little Red Riding Hood; ad. and illus. by Beni Montresor.
Doubleday, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-385-41213-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-
41212-6. 32p. Library ed. $16.99; Trade ed. $16.00.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Luciano Pavarotti, who introduces this version of
Little Red Riding Hood, may love it, and scholars who recognize several
compositions lifted from Gustav Dor6 (minus his elegant lines) will certainly be
intrigued by it. Children might be a bit more nonplussed by the combination of
Perrault's text, which ends with the wolf devouring Little Red Riding Hood, and
a subsequent wordless illustration for the Grimm brothers' conclusion, which
profiles a hunter as backdrop to a doll-like girl floating embryonically in the
wolf's red belly. (What happened to Grandmother-is she digested already?)
One way or the other, it will be interesting to see if Montresor's version, with
its sinister portrait of the wolf biting off LRRH's head, will be as controversial
as Trina Schart Hyman's version (BCCB 3/83), which has been banned for
Grandmother's receiving, courtesy of the Grimms, a bottle of wine to better her
health; the Perrault/Montresor version restricts Grandmother to cake and a pot of
butter. (Which would you rather have to revive your spirits after a turn in the
wolf's belly?) This is a scary, slightly surrealistic picture book that will
probably rope older kids into an intriguing discussion of the fairy tale. It's too
bad that, considering the sophistication of the art, Perrault's moral on "gentle
wolves" of a different sort has not been included for the benefit of such
discussions. The style of heavily black-hatched pastels is somewhat reminiscent
of Montresor's Caldecott-winning May I Bring a Friend. The tone, prepare
yourself, is different. BH
D.V. Obedience
Pevsner, Stella. The Night the Whole Class Slept Over. Clarion, 1991. ISBN
0-89919-983-6. 162p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Dan's free-spirited artist-parents are planning to move
again-this time to an isolated cabin in northern Wisconsin. Their visit with
Dan's grandparents is meant to be temporary, just until they find the perfect
place to live. Dan intends to make the stopover a permanent one-he can't
imagine a worse fate than living in the woods with his parents as teachers and
his horrible two-year-old sister as his only companion. The more friends he
makes in his sixth-grade class, the harder it is for Dan to think about leaving
town. The book's climax comes during a school sleepover at the public library,
a stormy winter night when Dan finds himself in charge of his sick little sister
while his parents try to drive back from the isolated north. The predictable
ending-they're staying-is comforting, especially since Dan's anxiety about
leaving has run through the whole story. The subplots-Dan's crush on a cute
girl, little sister Martha's treachery, and a mystery about a half-brother and
sister-are diverting in this lightly handled book about contemporary life in a
small midwestern town. KPJ
D.V. Moving, adjustment to
[72 ]
Radin, Ruth Yaffe. All Joseph Wanted; illus. by Deborah Kogan Ray.
Macmillan, 1991. ISBN 0-02-775641-6. 
[80p]. $12.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
As the oldest child in his family, eleven-year-old
Joseph has inherited the job of helping his mother, whose inability to read
confines her close to home and keeps her reliant on him for help with written
directions, prescriptions, forms, and so on. Her failure at finding work to relieve
her husband's carrying two jobs finally convinces her to overcome her illiteracy,
though she's reluctant to go to classes until Joseph finally refuses to teach her
any longer. Considering its brevity, the story is ambitious, including a theme
of the economic differences that determine-often limit-children's choices
(Joseph has been included in a Target enrichment program for poor children). As
a result, the book is somewhat purposive, but only in plot; the characters are
well-delineated and likable. This is a warm picture of a working class family,
with especially vivid dynamics between mother and son. The direction may be
obvious, but the unpretentious style and low-key tone make the book an
appealing one. Ray's black-and-white drawings have a wistful quality especially
appropriate to the protagonist's yearning for a life with more options than his
parents have had. BH
D.V. Education, valuing and seeking
Reynolds, Jan. Himalaya; Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-234465-9; Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-
234466-7. Sahara; Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-269959-7; Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-
269958-9.32p. 
Each book: 
written and illus. with photographs by Jan
Reynolds. Harcourt, 1991. (Vanishing Cultures). Trade ed. $16.95; Paper ed.
$8.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Unlike many countries-of-the-world series that are
little more than encyclopedia articles thinly spread, these two volumes focus on
families, using photographs that are immediate and personal, rather than stock
footage of famous sites. Himalaya is seen through the daily life of Yangshi, a
little Sherpa girl in Nepal, and her family. Yangshi and her sister help with
chores, visit the monastery, and have a ride on their favorite yak. In Sahara,
young Manda of the Tuareg people helps his father on a caravan to the camel
festival. Both books show cultural context while remaining child-centered in
regard to subject and audience; the photographs, all-color and all stunning, seem
to be the true raison d'etre of the whole project. The large photos and spacious
layout give the books a visual appeal that is not betrayed by superficial content;
rather, these are solid introductions to two cultures unknown to most Western
children. 
Each book includes a map and anecdotal afterword by the
author/photographer. RS
C.U. Geography; Social studies
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Rocklin, Joanne. Discovering Martha. Macmillan, 1991. ISBN 0-02-777444-
9. [128p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
"I am blessed with an appreciation for the drama of
life!" shouts Martha Green, echoing the talent scout who discovered her and got
her roles in two commercials. That, however, was when she was four; Martha
has been a has-been for seven years, hoping for rediscovery, slimness, and
acceptance by the popular sixth-graders. When a trial-offer purple guitar ("cheap
[73 ]
junk" to her mother, but glorious to Martha) arrives at her apartment, she begins
secretly learning to play and finds her life transformed as if by magic. Now her
parents dance together instead of bickering exhaustedly, and the popular girls
invite her to join them in donning the color of the day ("We're all wearing
orange tomorrow!"). The ups are followed by downs when the guitar must be
returned and all the magic seems to disappear, but Martha finally realizes the
gains are her own. The plot occasionally seems forced, but the characters,
particularly Winston, the dorky but loyal boy upstairs, are appealingly credible.
The book is an easy and enjoyable read, with a believable underdog worth
rooting for. DS
D.V. Individuality, expressing
Ross, Tony. Don't Do That!; written and illus. by Tony Ross. Crown, 1991.
ISBN 0-517-58575-8. 26p. $12.00.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Nellie's nose is so pretty it wins competitions, but
woe betides her when, appearing in the school Christmas pageant, she puts her
finger in it: "'It won't come out,' said Nellie. 'It's stuck."' The doctor, the
police, the magician, the farmer, the fireman ... while each has an elaborate
scenario for detaching Nellie's finger from her nose, nothing works, not even
when the scientist "built a rocket, and tied it to Nellie's arm. Then he tied
Nellie's leg to the park bench." And all along, Nellie's friend Henry says "I can
get it out," innocently brandishing a hammer, wrench, pitchfork, pliers. In a
somewhat deflated ending, Henry does get it out-by tickling Nellie. The text is
brief and deadpan, leaving the humor to Ross' brash, manic, and scraggly
watercolors, each one spiced with goofy details. A prime pick for a cautionary
tale. RS
D.V. Ingenuity
Service, Pamela F. Being of Two Minds. Karl/Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-689-
31524-4. 169p. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
Tricky title: does it mean undecided or does it mean a
split personality? No, it means the merging of the minds of two people.
Readers who accept this version of extrasensory perception will find that all else
follows logically from the premise that a teenage girl in the United States and a
teenage boy in the mythical kingdom of Thulgaria have dizzying periods of
shared experience. What Prince Rudy hears and sees, Connie hears and sees, and
vice-versa. Therefore she speaks Thulgarian German as well as he, while his
English is as colloquial as hers. All this is very useful when Rudy is kidnapped
and Connie comes to Thulgaria to help find him. Service builds the situation
logically, so that the rescue is believable, and the incorporation of minor
characters into the plot of dastardly usurpation is smooth. Good suspense, good
momentum. ZS
Shetterly, Will. Elsewhere. Yolen/Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-200731-8.
[224p]. $16.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 9- 
Elsewhere is a bookstore in Bordertown, the city that
borders the land of Faerie and the real world. It is the only place on earth where
elves and humans live together--sometimes peacefully but more often in
segregated gangs. In a search for his lost brother Tony, smart-mouth Ron runs
away to Bordertown. He gets a job at Elsewhere, a place to live at the Castle
[ 74
Pup commune, and a new best friend in Mooner, a tough halfie (half elf, half
human). Despite its fantastic setting, this is a biting street story, complete with
gangs, bikers, prejudice, and fictional drugs. Ron is a realistic teenager-partly
innocent, marveling at the daily use of magic around him, and partly cynic,
learning to trust no one for long. The dialogue reads like a script in short, often
half, sentences. It takes the same kind of involvement on the reader's part that
reading a play does, and the book is the better for it, engaging the reader totally.
Because of the reader's active role in the story, the twists at the end-Ron's
magical transformation and what really happened to Tony-are shocking. This
new kind of street gang story is certain to raise controversy-and the high school
kids will love it. KPJ
Simpson, Gretchen Dow. Gretchen's abc; illus. by Gretchen Dow Simpson.
Geringer/HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025656-X; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-06-025645-1. 32p. Library ed. $16.89; Trade ed. $16.95.
SpR 
4-7 yrs. 
Although each full spread would make a decorative
wall poster, this alphabet book has some depictions too clever by half. A lower-
case letter appears at the right bottom corer of every page, but the objects are
not identified till the end, where children can find a list, from awning to zippers.
More specifically, they can check d and find dance shoes, which nobody will
guess from a picture of overlapping leather straps; p for photograph, which in
reality looks like paint globs; q for quilt, which looks like a satin bedspread; and
v for vine which looks like winter branches. The spare paintings are undeniably
intriguing, and older kids will enjoy the guessing-game aspects; younger kids
may get frustrated, while their grouchy adults could find the project just a little
too... well, adult. BH
Sinykin, Sheri Cooper. The Buddy Trap. Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-689-
31674-7. 129p. $12.95.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
Cam's parents insisted he come to Camp Rainbow
Lake instead of Interlochen; he had wanted to work on his flute-playing while
they felt he needed fun and games with other boys. This is the background for a
story in which the author makes a strong statement about competition and
violence. It's an appealing statement, but it overwhelms the story, which rather
laboriously recounts the details of a war game, "Spoils of War," set up by the
camp director. Cam (adopted Korean, serious musician, small for his age) is the
protagonist who is called "gook" by a bully; he becomes a double agent as the
game gains momentum, and he sounds the alarm when mischief-bordering-on-
vengeance leads to a fire. Sinykin tends to stereotypical characterization; for
example, the bully's father arrives on Visitors Day and proves to be a blustering,
abusive alcoholic. Despite the validity of the message, this is a tedious and
slow-moving book. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations
Soto, Gary. Taking Sides. Harcourt, 1991. ISBN 0-15-284076-1. 
[160p].
$14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Lincoln Mendoza is suffering from new-kidness and
culture shock: he and his mother have moved from the Mission District barrio
in San Francisco to the affluent, mostly-white suburb of Sycamore after their
apartment was burglarized. Lincoln is a "star basketball player, tall but not
[75]
thin.... His stomach was muscle, his legs were muscle," and he's troubled
by the thought of playing for his new school against his old friends. Although
the writing is understated to the point of dryness, there are some nice moments,
such as Lincoln's "date" with Monica (a one-on-one Sunday basketball game),
and the day-to-day junior-high life rings true: "She's real cute. Do you have any
more Corn Nuts?" Complications such as Linc's mother's white boyfriend, the
new coach's racism, and the burglary attempt on the Mendozas' new house, are
smoothly incorporated. This also provides an interesting look at youngsters one
generation beyond bitter poverty, with both Lincoln and Monica recalling their
parents' "boring" stories of agricultural work. As a basketball-and-life story it's
less powerful than Moves Make the Man, but it's an easily readable story of an
individual and likable boy adjusting to new ground. DS
Southey, Robert. The Cataract of Lodore; illus. by Mordicai Gerstein. Dial,
1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1026-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1025-9. 32p.
Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
It all starts sedately enough. The well-dressed poet,
complete with laurel wreath on head (Southey was Poet Laureate and a friend of
Wordsworth's) and quill pen in hand as he sits in his library, bends his head
indulgently to the query of his paper-hatted little boy: "How does the Water/
Come down at Lodore?" While the text of the poem merely has dutiful dad
describing the course of the river and waterfall ("'Twas in my vocation/ For their
recreation/ That I should sing;/ Because I was laureate/ To them and the King"),
Gerstein's pleasing papa actually walks-well, at first-with his son and two
daughters (and the family cat) down the river. As the route grows steeper the
travelers begin to tumble, till the double-page spreads, text as well as pictures,
go lengthwise down both pages like a waterfall centerfold, and Gerstein's
spattered white spray douses the explorers as they open up umbrellas for
parachutes (much to the shock of the salmon leaping past them in the other
direction). The poem hasn't much story, really, and some of the words are
unfamiliar to audiences of all ages (a glossary, as well as an explanation of Poet
Laureateship, is included). There are also a few scansion traps for the unwary
reader-aloud, but the sound effects could be glorious ("And whizzing and
hissing./ And dripping and skipping/ And hitting and splitting," and so forth for
several pages). Gerstein's drolly dignified watercolors of the poet and his family
provide the real life here, and alert lookers-on will revel in finding where the
wreath and the quill pen have been blown in each illustration, until finally they
are all whooshed back into papa's big library chair after their poetic
peregrination. DS
C.U. Reading aloud
Springer, Nancy. Colt. Dial, 1991. ISBN 0-8037-1022-4. [128p]. $14.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 5-8. 
As part of the physical therapy for his spina bifida,
Colt (his nickname from birth) is enrolled in a horseback riding program for the
disabled. At first he is frightened by Liverwurst, the big Appaloosa he rides, but
he begins to revel in the sense of physical capability that riding gives him.
Characterization is sketchy, with even Colt's brattiness seeming scripted, and
although the author presents some aspects of spina bifida fairly, she is delicate to
the point of unclearness on others ("He wore protection so that he would not
[76 ]
have to worry about his wayward personal functions"). It is nice to see a new
stepfamily that's happy-the step-sibs are the most interesting people in this
book- and the disabled riding program makes for an unusual story setting. The
plot, however, remains predictable, and the ending is too saccharine and unlikely
(Colt rides to the rescue and then everybody in the family gets a horse) for even
undemanding horse-book buffs. And why is Colt, who uses a wheelchair or
walks with crutches only with great labor, standing unaided on the cover? DS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Stoehr, Shelley. Crosses. Delacorte, 1991. ISBN 0-385-30451-X. [160p].
$15.00. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
Gr. 9-12. 
"That was my hobby, reading books about teens in
trouble." But the teens in those books haven't a patch on Nancy's own
problems, a veritable smorgasbord of self-destructive impulses. First among
them-and described in lurid detail-is Nancy's (and best friend Katie's)
compulsion for "cutting," engraving slashes and design into their skins with
pins, bottle caps, and shards of glass: "Shit, this sucks. This really sucks. I
grew reckless with the glass. I wasn't even looking at my arm, so it was a few
minutes before I noticed what I'd done. Scratches from forearm to wrist,
crisscrossing, cutting straight lines, crooked lines, oozing small drops of blood
everywhere. Pretty." Additionally, Nancy and Katie get drunk, smoke dope,
take uppers and downers, and skip school. In the space of two paragraphs, Nancy
reveals both her bulimia and her shoplifting habit. Later, she also gets raped.
While Nancy talks tough ("if I'm taken to dinner and bought a bottle of wine and
permitted to smoke in the car on the way home, only then will I give a blow
job. Guys get what they pay for") she loves her straight-arrow boyfriend Mike,
whose return affections are a bit puzzling, as is the fact that he doesn't seem to
notice all the cuts and scars on Nancy's body. Nancy's first-person narration is
believably angry and self-absorbed, but the book is superficial, lacking any
distance or perspective on her problems that would allow them more effect than
the thrill of titillation. The ending, in which Katie dies after jumping or falling
from a window while hallucinating, is entirely gratuitous and perversely prim in
its there-but-for-the-grace-of-God finger-wagging. Two decades notwithstanding,
you can still Ask Alice-she's back. RS
Talbott, Hudson, ad. King Arthur: The Sword in the Stone; ad. and illus. by
Hudson Talbott. Morrow, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09404-1; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-688-09403-1. 48p. Library ed. $14.88; Trade ed. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Busy crowd scenes in bright watercolors dominate
this picture book. Young Arthur leaning from his horse to pluck the sword
from the stone, Sir Kay leading the melee at the tournament, and the queue of
nobility waiting to pull out the sword are the best of the lively illustrations.
The retelling is somewhat long and sophisticated for a picture book audience
("Pursuing one's goals with integrity is all that matters"; "He was already
winning accolades as he wheeled his charger around to aid a fellow Red"). For
older students, this serves as an introduction to the stories of King Arthur. The
same age group can read more of the tales in The Legend of King Arthur by
Robin Lister (BCCB 9/90) or Merlin Dreams by Peter Dickinson (BCCB 2/88).
Talbott's Arthur, pictured as a gentle boy who tames wild animals, seems more
influenced by Disney than Malory, but he takes command of his kingdom
[77]
believably in the scene where he raises his sword before the cheering crowd.
KPJ
Van Allsburg, Chris. The Wretched Stone; written and illus. by Chris Van
Allsburg. Houghton, 1991. ISBN 0-395-53307-4. [32p]. $17.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
This month's second spooky shipboard mystery (see
Brighton, above) concerns a large "rock" found on an island where the crew of
the Rita Anne has gone to find food. The sailors, who become mesmerized by
the strangely glowing stone, forsake their work and previous recreations to stare
into it, and eventually turn into monkeys. The parable is lightly worn, with the
picture of the apes mindlessly grinning in an unseen TV's glow far funnier and
truer than the didactic excess of Van Allsburg's ecological turn, Just a Dream
(BCCB 11/90). Sails and sky, waves and water, give the illustrator plenty of
space for his moody pastels, which add a menacing tone to the plainspoken
narrative, the ship's log as written by the captain, Randall Ethan Hope.
Librarians will appreciate the captain's cure (reading aloud) even though the
moral gets a little pushy: "It seems that those who knew how to read recovered
most quickly." RS
Wells, Rosemary. Fritz and the Mess Fairy; written and illus. by Rosemary
Wells. Dial, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0983-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-
0981-1. 32p. Library ed. $13.89; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
One reason Rosemary Wells is popular with the read-
aloud audience is that she is funny; another reason is that she knows just how to
time the denouement of a situation that awakens a recognition reflex in listeners.
What child doesn't understand familial reaction to making messes? Having
irritated the other three members of his family by being messy and using their
belongings, furry Fritz is changed by the excesses of the Mess Fairy (a pig who
is even more untidy than he) and resolves to clean the whole house. Very
pleased with himself, he prepares separate breakfasts-in-bed for his sister and for
each of his parents. Smirking with pride, he carries off a loaded tray. Children
will probably enjoy the last page most, as our hero goes off, saying "It's the
new Fritz," and leaving behind an incredible old-Fritz mess on every horizontal
surface in the kitchen. Wells' animal characters have their ususal panache and
her domestic scenes, their ususal cozy dishevelment-slightly more disheveled
than usual, in this case. ZS
D.V. Social behavior
Windsor, Patricia. The Christmas Killer. Scholastic, 1991. ISBN 0-590-
43311-3. [192p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
The police realize they are dealing with a serial killer
of adolescent girls; a psychologist suspects that the killer had some holiday
trauma that makes him violent in the Christmas season. It is Rose, however,
who is most upset: 
she worries about her teenage friends, she becomes
increasingly suspicious that she is going to be a victim, and she becomes
involved because her extrasensory powers (through messages from one of the
dead victims) tell her where the police can find the missing girls. Windsor does
an excellent job of building tension, creating suspense, and disposing of red
herrings; the story is kept in emotional balance by the inclusion of other
[78
interests: Rose's ambitions for a career in dance, the changes in her relationship
with a twin brother. While properly prepared, the revelation of the killer is
somewhat lame, but the ending nevertheless provides an agreeablefrisson. ZS
Winter, Jonah. Diego; Spanish text by by Amy Prince; illus. by Jeanette
Winter. Knopf, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91987-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-
81987-8. 38p. Library ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.00.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
With no more than a few sentences per page, this
nevertheless makes a rich picture book biography of Diego Rivera because of
three things: the subject himself had such an unusual life and creative vitality;
the text, printed in both English and Spanish, is never condescending; and the
miniature paintings are involving and reflective of Rivera's own work. Jeanette
Winter's flat perspectives acquire depth through the use of intense colors that are
contrasting but carefully controlled, with open white space to balance the tightly
packed images. The scenes are naive in tone, with softly rounded shapes
depicting the elements of an action-packed story: the death of Rivera's twin, the
cure of his childhood illness by an Indian healer, his dedication to workers
fighting for a better life, and his vast murals that "made people proud to be
Mexican." BH
C.U. Art appreciation
D.V. Devotion to a cause
Wisniewski, David. Rain Player; written and illus. by David Wisniewski.
Clarion, 1991. ISBN 0-395-55112-9. 32p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Elements of Mayan legend have been combined to tell
the story of a boy hero; while the tale is original, the author has used mythic
elements to describe the way in which Pik, a young pok-a-tok player, challenges
and bests the powerful rain god, Chac. With the help of Quetzal, Jaguar, and
Cenote (all representing birthgifts), Pik saves his land from drought. Intricate
and colorful cut-paper pictures are, if at times crowded, remarkable for their
design, their vitality, and their incorporation of details of Mayan art. The
author's note describes briefly the complex technique used for the illustrations; it
also gives information on cultural details used in the story. ZS
Wright, Betty Ren. A Ghost in the House. Scholastic, 1991. ISBN 0-590-
43606-6. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Sarah is definitely not happy that her Great-aunt
Margaret, ailing and difficult, is moving in with Sarah's family, who live in
Margaret's childhood home. Particularly galling is the fact the Aunt Margaret
will be staying in Sarah's, formerly Margaret's, wonderful bedroom, with Sarah
herself relegated to a hastily converted storeroom. But resentment turns to
terror-and eventual alliance-when Sarah, and Aunt Margaret, begin to hear
footsteps and singing, and Aunt Margaret's medicine disappears from her bedside.
Wright is an expert at haunted-house effects, and this book rivals The Dollhouse
Murders for its spooky and unsettling atmosphere. The haunting (by the
abusive father of one of Aunt Margaret's childhood friends) convincingly
escalates, climaxing with a scary materialization and confrontation. The cover
painting of a lamp-wielding Sarah is a bit Nancy Drewish, but genre fans will be
pleased to discover more than they bargained for. RS
D.V. Aunt-niece relations
[79 ]
Yep, Laurence. Tongues of Jade; illus. by David Wiesner. HarperCollins,
1991. 
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022471-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022470-3.
[192 p]. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Like Yep's The Rainbow People (BCCB 4/89), these
Chinese-American folktales are vividly retold from a 1930s WPA collection and
are introduced in sections that set the stories into cultural context. And, like its
companion volume, this is full of electrifying demons and ghosts, as well as
humans of memorable strength or frailty. Striking images-cats' eyes of yellow
jade placed over the eyes of a corpse, for instance-enrich the crisp action. The
tonal range is generous: from scary to humorous (or both, as when a scholar's
ghost returns for the ending of a rhyme he can't remember); from explanatory
("The Tiger Cat" is a pourquoi tale) to moral (justice is served in spades to the
greedy rich). These will not only enliven a study of immigrant history or ethnic
minorities in the U.S., but will also serve as a dynamic source for storytellers
seeking material for older elementary, junior high, and high school audiences.
To be illustrated with seventeen black-and-white drawings. BH
C.U. Minority groups
Yorinks, Arthur. 
Christmas in July; illus. by Richard Egielski.
DiCapua/HarperCollins, 1991. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020257-2; Trade ed.
ISBN 0-06-020256-4. [32p]. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R* 
4-8 yrs. 
Santa's lost his pants! The farce begins when Emo's
French Dry Cleaning loses Santa's big red pants, which find their way to a New
Yorker named Rich Rump (the entendre is Trump-triple). Santa finds his way to
the city as well, where he is thrown in the pokey for six months for loitering.
"What about Christmas?" cries Santa. "What about Christmas. It came but
Santa didn't. No presents were piled under trees. Stockings, hung by the fire,
hung empty. And Santa? Santa was sayonara." The humor is dry and sly, and
altogether unsuccessful in disguising the fact that this book is an old-fashioned
Christmas heartwarmer--even if the holiday does take place in July, when Santa
is freed and finds a now destitute Rump, whose "icy heart was finally melting"
("Here. Take my pants. Please") This is the cue for the reindeer, who arrive,
Rudolph at the lead, to take Santa on his appointed rounds. Campy but not
crass, the illustrations echo deco and Disney, expressive and imaginative in their
combinations of full-bleed paintings and off-to-the-side entrances and exits, as
when Santa (in his green polka-dot shorts) is escorted from the sidewalks of New
York into a police car. The ending may be wishful, but it's well worth wishing:
"Everyone in the world had food to eat, a place to sleep, and a nice pair of
pants." Like the author and illustrator's Ugh (BCCB 11/90), this is a book that
adults will find funny, but never at the expense of its intended audience. Grab
this for an off-the-cuff contrast to The Polar Express. RS
C.U. Christmas