Adler, C. S. Eddie's Blue-Winged Dragon. Putnam, 1988. ISBN 0-399-
21535-2. [144p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Eddie hoped his little sister would like the dragon,
elegantly crafted of brass and with transparent blue glass wings. Mina didn't like
it at all; she said it was alive and it was watching her-but then Mina was only
six. It soon becomes clear to the reader as it does to Eddie, that the dragon does
come to life, and that it acts as an instrument of vengeance against those who are
unpleasant to Eddie. The fantasy element is nicely incorporated into a story that
has perceptive treatment of familial and peer relationships, of Eddie's growing
self-confidence in dealing with a bully and overcoming shyness, and of the
delicate balance of classroom life, especially for a child with cerebral palsy.
Well done. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Handicaps, adjustment to; Shyness, overcoming
Aragon, Jane Chelsea. Winter Harvest; illus. by Leslie Baker. Little, 1989.
ISBN 0-316-04937-9. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
The young narrator describes a snowy night when she
and Papa observe their custom of feeding the deer. After scattering grain, corn,
and apples around the salt lick, they watch two fawns cavort in the drifts. The
text is brief and clear, with no pretense to poetic rapture but with a distinctively
voiced respect for the natural setting. Baker's watercolors, like those in her
acclaimed picture book The Third-Story Cat (BCCB 11/87), are soft-edged,
spaciously composed, and filtered with blue and white tints that seem to light up
the rural scenery. 
A book that raises environmental consciousness by
emphasizing the aesthetic rather than the didactic. BH
C.U. Nature study
D.V. Animals, kindness to
Arnold, Tim. 
The Winter Mittens; written and illus. by Tim Arnold.
McElderry, 1988. ISBN 0-689-50449-7. 32p. $12.95.
M 
Gr. 3-4. 
Crisp, finely detailed paintings do little to redeem a
thin, rather precious story. One day, walking home from school, Addie spys a
mysterious box in an alley. The box contains mittens-magic ones, it turns
out-that cause snow to fall whenever Addie puts them on. After causing
[89 ]
pleasant, innocuous snowfalls for a few days, Addie decides to conjure up a
blizzard for Christmas . .. and finds she can't get the mittens off again. Why
not? There's no clue. Anyway, "suddenly" the wind unravels the mittens and
the snow stops. The fantasy has the appeal of Christmas magic, but it lacks
consistency and direction. RS
Baehr, Patricia. Louisa Eclipsed. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07682-3. 140p.
$11.95.
M 
Gr. 6-8. 
Artistic Louisa knows she can count on certain
things: on her own brilliance, on a perfect summer with her grandfather, on
"things that never changed. Like the sun and the stars and the farm and Tat." Of
course, readers know immediately that things will change-and should, as far as
Louisa's personality goes. She alternates between cranky and vituperative, but
never deviates from selfish obsession with her own importance. Although this
may be an accurate portrait, it gets rather wearing, with various symbols-a
gravestone, an eclipse, and representative incidents or characters (especially
Louisa's nasty Aunt Ruth)-insistently asserting the theme. By the time the
local boy has fallen for Louisa's sweet sister Meg and the farm has been sold,
one is almost relieved to hear Tat's concluding sermon, where even the symbols
are explained: "'Things change. That's what life is about.' 
Now Tat was
saying it, too: change. He was saying that the grave she had seen as a symbol
of permanence really represented the fact that things had to change. ... 
'We've
got to be brave enough to go on.'" Occasional stylistic lapses include some
truly unfortunate misplaced modifiers ("With Lee overalls, a blue work shirt, and
a blue-visored cap over his sleek, midnight black hair that stayed on whether he
was indoors or out .. ."). There's a real sense of setting here, as well as a
diligently structured concept, but the development is labored and didactic. BH
D.V. Family relations; Self-evaluation
Bailey, Jill. Naturescapes: A Three-Dimensional Field Guide to Woods,
Forests, Meadows & Marshes; illus. by Shirley Felts. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-
670-82038-5. 17p. $15.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-6. 
Unlike Bradman's and Moseley's pop-up books
reviewed below, this is more a display item than a picture book. Eight double
spreads alternate pop-out wooded scenes with close-ups of leaf clusters captioned
for identification. A diagrammatic numbered inset will help readers put tree and
leaf together, and a panel of text describes the type of environment depicted:
deciduous, coniferous, grassland, or pond and marsh. While the four landscapes
are arresting and do show the shapes of the trees, there's no real reason why they
should be paper-engineered three dimensionally. The scale, proportions, and
perspective could been projected just as easily--and more durably--on one plane.
In addition to playing an integral part in fictional plots, mechanical devices can
serve a function in non-fiction, witness science pop-ups that can be dialed to
demonstrate seasonal change or manipulated to show how inventions work.
This one is shelf art. BH
C.U. Nature study
[901
Behrens, Michael. At the Edge. Avon, 1988. ISBN 0-380-75610-2. 201p.
Paper ed. $2.50.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
"The hard glint of her eyes is not entirely rational,
but I'm past caring. 
She is more than a girl; she is something else, so
compelling it chokes me." Well, that's Terri, a blonde on the edge; and Dan, an
alienated high school senior, is irresistibly drawn to her. This winner of the
publisher's contest for new teen writers is an essentially well-structured novel,
with some subtleties of character development, but it badly needs editing. Every
event prompts another childhood memory from Dan; some of these are telling,
most are extraneous. Dan is second-best on the school swim team, a situation
nicely paralleled with Terri's status as a failed dancer, but here again there is too
much detail of irrelevant sports action. Despite the problem novel trappings
(Terri turns out to be manic-depressive) this is the old story of la belle dame sans
merci who loves and breaks and leaves her tortured man, who is bereft of all but
her memory. A formula, yes, but it's nice to have a smouldering alternative to
the mild-mannered teen romance. RS
Berger, Melvin. If You Lived on Mars. Lodestar, 1988. ISBN 0-525-67260-5.
[80p]. illus. with photographs. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
Gr. 4-7. 
Written in the present tense about the future, this
combines known facts about Mars with speculation about its future
colonialization. An appealing premise, but readers will be hard put to separate
fact from future. "Iron is the most abundant metal on this planet." True
enough. "If you lived on Mars, your house would be in a five-story underground
building." Not true, at least not yet, and why five stories? "Phobos and Deimos
are natural satellites. But there are also about twenty artificial satellites in orbit
around Mars." To add to the confusion, the last chapter, "The Future of Mars,"
creates a further hypothetical future following the one already under discussion.
The facts within the conceit are occasionally underexplained or contradictory.
Berger says that the polar ice caps "almost disappear" in the summer; he does not
explain how they grow again, given the lack of precipitation. In one place he
states that the Martian year lasts 687 Earth days; in another that "there are
actually three Earth months in one Martian day!" RS
Billings, Charlene W. The Loon: Voice of the Wilderness. Dodd/Putnam,
1988. ISBN 0-396-09244-6. 48p. illus. with photographs. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
Organized by phases of the loon's life cycle, Billings'
text describes the spring arrival of the birds at their breeding grounds, their
nesting, raising chicks, winter migration to the ocean, and loss to environmental
threats such as power boats and oil slicks. Color photographs are of uneven
quality, some striking and others unclear or even lost in the gutter. On balance,
however, the book provides the kind of straightforward information that could
supplement more inspiring presentations-films such as The Loon's Necklace,
for instance-which vividly project the eerie call and characteristics that have
given the bird mythological significance among Native Americans. BH
C.U. Nature study
[91 ]
BjOrk, Christina. Linnea's Windowsill Garden; tr by Joan Sandin; illus. by
Lena Anderson. R&S/Farrar, 1988. ISBN 91-29-59064-7. 59p. $11.95.
R* 
Gr. 4-6. 
The young plant lover of Linnea in Monet's Garden
(BCCB 2/88) gives information about every aspect of indoor gardening:
choosing, planting, pruning, fertilizing, spraying, adjusting light and water.
The writing is light and crisp; somehow Bj6rk manages to be amusing without
ever becoming cute. This is informative, accurate, comprehensive, clear and
well-organized; the illustrations are helpful and are carefully placed in relation to
textual references. What more could the beginning gardener or old green-
thumbed hand expect from any horticultural how-to-do-it book? ZS
C.U. Botany; Hobbies
Boholm-Olsson, Eva. Tuan; tr. by Dianne Jonasson; illus by Pham van Don.
R&S/Farrar, 1988. ISBN 91-2958766-2. 24p. $11.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Tuan is a Vietnamese boy who barely remembers his
father, a soldier who died of a fever. On the morning of the story, Tuan begs to
stay with his grandmother in the rice fields instead of going to the day care center
while his mother works at her rug factory job. After playing with his cousin's
water buffalo, Tuan is bitten by a rabid dog and saved only because the doctor is
able to procure more of the rare vaccine needed to cure him. Although somewhat
contrived to inject a "typical" situation with a dramatic incident, the story avoids
sounding too forced and does sustain a modicum of realistic suspense. The
watercolor paintings have a velvety pastel quality; they are strikingly effective in
the double spread landscapes but stiffer when the focus is on human figures. The
strongly projected setting is an unusual one in picture books, however, and
compensates for the book's flaws. BH
D.V. Mother-son relations
Bradman, Tony. Look Out, He's Behind You!; illus. by Margaret Chamberlain.
Putnam, 1988. ISBN 0-399-21485-2. 20p. $11.95.
R 
4-7yrs. 
Like other good examples of the toy-book genre (see
The Ghosts of Creepy Castle, reviewed below), this uses a graphic gimmick in
service of the text. Here a dopey-looking Little Red Riding Hood is warned
about the wolf, which hides behind every flap, by various animals as she makes
her way to Grandmother's house. "Look out, he's behind you!" they call, to
which LRRH says "Where?" Of course the young viewer can tell her by lifting
the flap. There's a funny twist at the end when Grandma's parrot echoes, "Look
out, Mr. Wolf, he's behind you," upon which the woodcutter leaps out to save
everybody (this is the chauvinistic version). The humorous cartoon gags and
reader participation will lighten up the effects of what still strikes many children
as a very scary story. BH
Bylinsky, Tatyana. Before the Wildflowers Bloom. Crown, 1989. ISBN 0-
517-570521. [80p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
A brief first-person account (fictional) of life in a
coal-mining community in 1916, when the narrator, Carmela, was eight. The
writing style is choppy, the story episodic, with Papa's death in a mine
[92]
explosion the one major event. While the writing style is not impressive and
the characterization and plotting are minimal, the book gives a convincing
picture of the company town and of a loving Italian-American family surrounded
by aunts, uncles, cousins, and eventually the grandfather who appears after
Papa's funeral to take the widow and her five children to live with him on his
ranch. ZS
D.V. Death, adjustment to; Family relations
Cameron, Ann. Julian, Secret Agent; illus. by Diane Allison. Random, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-91949-1; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-81949-7. 
64p.
(Stepping Stone Books). Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $1.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
After seeing the "Wanted" posters in the post office,
Julian, his best friend Gloria, and his little brother Huey decide to spend the
summer catching criminals ... well, they do save a dog locked in a hot car, and
they rescue a baby from a fountain, but that funny cook who seems to be
Eugene "the Great Imitator" Johnson, turns out to be the police chiefs son. Not
as focused as Julian's Glorious Summer (BCCB 12/87), and more than a trifle
trumped-up (as when the kids sneak into the hospital to find criminals who
might be undergoing plastic surgery), but the humor is effective and the action
non-stop. RS
Cohen, Caron Lee, ad. The Mud Pony; illus. by Shonto Begay. Scholastic,
1988. ISBN 0-590-41525-5. 32p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
A Skidi Pawnee tale is retold in a style that is at
times choppy, at times flat, but that preserves the folkloric quality of the oral
tradition in its cadence. The same quality is present in the soft-colored pictures
by a Navajo artist, whose first book illustrations are strong in design and in
textual integrity; some of the pages have backgrounds that make the print less
easily legible. Envying the other boys their ponies, "a poor boy in an Indian
camp" made a pony out of mud and clay. The pony came to life and took the
boy to his people, from whom he had been separated; the boy never forgot what
the pony had told him: "Now cover me with a blanket to protect me from the
rain, for I am part of Mother Earth." Years later, when the boy has become a
great warrior and a chief, he again obeys the pony, and takes the blanket away.
The next day, the rain has washed the pony away, but the chief hears its voice.
"I am here, your Mother Earth. You are not alone!" The story is neither as
dramatic nor as minatory as are many Native American tales, but it speaks
strongly to the American Indian belief in the unity of human beings and the
natural world. ZS
Cooper, Kay. Where Did You Get Those Eyes?: A Guide to Discovering Your
Family History; illus. by Anthony Accardo. Walker, 1988. Library ed. ISBN
0-8027-6803-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6802-4. 80p. Library ed. $14.85; Trade
ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 4-7. 
This beginner's guide to genealogy inauspiciously
leads off with the grammatically startling question "Has anyone ever told you
that your eyes are the same color as one of your parent's eyes?". While padded
with a few projects like making a "time line" of one's own life or "Writing your
[ 93]
own epitaph," most of the text is straightforward how-to, including information
on talking and writing to relatives, using libraries and government records, and
finding genealogical clues in photos and cemeteries. Occasional genetic claims
for personality traits are dubious, and a suggestion that researchers record eye-
color is forgotten halfway through. 
Some of the record-keeping seems
superfluous, keeping the same information in several places, but perhaps that is
part of the appeal: genealogical research is as much for kids into obsessive
cataloging as it is for those interested in family history. There are a couple of
examples of blank charts; a few more of these would have been more helpful
than the pointless black and white drawings. RS
Cosner, Shaaron. War Nurses. Walker, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6828-
8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6826-1. 106p. illus. with photographs. Library ed.
$17.85; Trade ed. $16.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
A sometimes tragic but always fascinating subject
receives competent summary coverage here with chapters on the role of nurses in
the Civil War, the Crimean War, the Spanish-American War, World Wars I and
II, Korea, and Vietnam. The text is factual but not dry; the black-and-white
photographs, many historical, are revealing. Background information is livened
by quotes from letters (no sources cited) and occasionally fictionalized stories
about individuals who pioneered the field, from Clara Barton and Florence
Nightingale to contemporary women who have crusaded for recognition of
nurses' status as veterans. The history of war weapons, of medical developments
in dealing with them, and of women's determination to help heal the wounds
inflicted on male battlefields all suggest further areas for study and issues for
discussion. 
Unfortunately, there's no bibliography. 
The index will help
students doing reports, while browsers will get caught up in the herstory. BH
C.U. History-Moder; Medicine (unit)
DeArmond, Dale, ad. The Seal Oil Lamp; ad. and illus. by Dale DeArmond.
Sierra Club/Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-17786-5. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr.2-5. 
Beautifully designed and illustrated, this is the
moving story of seven-year-old Allugua, who must be left to die, according to
the laws of his people, because his blindness would make him a burden to the
village. The kindness he has shown to a freezing mouse saves him, however,
because Mouse Woman comes with bits of food and water, while the seal oil
lamp his mother has left behind miraculously continues to burn till his people
return. By that time, Allugua has learned stories and a powerful hunting song
from Mouse Woman, and he is accepted back into the village after he kills his
first whale. The life-and-death struggle, the meeting of real and mythical realms,
and the strong but unintrusive narrative voice make this traditional tale a
gripping one. Moreover, the bookmaking, which includes thick white paper,
blue-gray print, and starkly forceful black-and-white woodcuts, has been carefully
considered to support a strong text. It's too bad there are no source notes,
although there is a brief glossary. The respect for nature emphasized here will
make the book ideal for reading aloud in conjunction with environmental
awareness discussions or study units focusing on native Alaskan groups. BH
D.V. Animals, kindness to
[94]
Delaney, Ned. Cosmic Chickens; written and illus. by Ned Delaney. Harper,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021584-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021583-6. 48p.
Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Delaney's tall tale updates an old-fashioned, who'll-
save-the-farm soap opera with slapstick science fiction. Hank's "barn had
collapsed. His well had run dry. His mule had arthritis and his chickens had
insomnia." Now Mr. Sneezle gives Hank 24 hours to pay back the $1,951.12
he borrowed-or else see the farm turned into a video games factory. The
situation looks hopeless until three chickens from the planet Koog arrive with a
plan to help out. Even so, it's Hank who finally does the job. Somewhat
reminiscent of Daniel Pinkwater's chicken popularia, this is pretty predictable,
but it has a farfetched lunacy that is served up with linear verve and lots of
mauve coloring in the cartoon art. The whole package will appeal mightily to
kids. BH
Denton, Terry. 
Felix & Alexander; written and illus. by Terry Denton.
Houghton, 1988. 
ISBN 0-395-48661-0. 
[32p]. 
$13.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Alexander is a boy who's not allowed to have a pet,
Felix is a toy dog, and this is a cleverly surrealistic picture book about an
adventurous rescue in the city streets. Felix sets out to find Alexander when the
boy doesn't return home from his daily walk. As the houses seem to grow
taller, Felix feels scareder and smaller until suddenly he sees Alexander "in the
grip of a fearsome monster!" The monster, which is really a house, turns to
stone when Felix shines his flashlight on it, and Alexander finds the way home
by following the sparkling bits of stuffing that have come out of a tear in
Felix's side. The watercolor paintings project a child's perspective on inanimate
objects as sentient, whether they be toys or buildings. 
The colors and
compositions are freshly imagined and handsomely framed on pages ranging
from gold to blue to rose, depending on the mood of the action. These two
characters will project young listeners into a spell of alternate reality. BH
D.V. Imaginative powers
Deuker, Carl. On the Devil's Court. Joy Street/Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-
13147-1. [253p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
The summer before his senior year, 17-year-old Joe
Faust moves to Seattle because of his father's scientific work. Hoping to enter a
public school with a good basketball team, Joe gets into trouble with one of the
players and is sent to a private school, where he seems to lose his touch during
team tryouts. While practicing on a deserted court one night after a class
discussion on Dr. Faustus, Joe thinks he would give anything for a full season
of powerful playing. Eerily, he has it. Everything that was going wrong starts
to go right-games, grades, friendships. But his troubled relationship with his
father seems to be the price, and when Dr. Faust has a heart attack, Joe is
haunted by the idea that he has indeed sold his soul to the devil. This is a rare
sports novel, with complex plot and characterization as well as gripping game
play. Deuker is careful not to use easy outs: the local bully is as unpredictably
moral in a game as he is immoral on the street; Joe's father works to change his
[95 i
workaholic ways but still can't resist pushing Joe toward Stanford instead of a
smaller college where he's been offered a basketball scholarship. 
Their
confrontations are realistic but never overdone, and Joe's mother is well played as
the mediator who determinedly maintains her identity as an artist. BH
D.V. Father-son relations; Self-confidence
Dickinson, Peter. Merlin Dreams; illus. by Alan Lee. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN
0-440-50067-2. 167p. $19.95.
Ad 
Gr.5-9. 
Titled primarily with Arthurian motifs ("Sword,"
"King," "Enchantress") these nine stories are linked as Merlin's dreams while the
great wizard sleeps through his enchantment. The stories are not themselves
Arthurian, but are magical tales with medieval settings. It's all here, in rather
overwhelming diversion (unicorns, knights, dragons, damsels) and most have
great drama, appropriately gruesome detail, and, occasionally, humor. Merlin's
transitional soliloquies brush up against some genuine Arthurian material, but
are rather vague (excepting the first, a powerful account of his spell-induced
sleep) and not particularly necessary. The many accompanying drawings and
paintings are over-literal and vulgarize the stories, but they will probably have
appeal for the Dungeons and Dragons crowd. RS
Etra, Jonathan. Aliens for Breakfast; by Jonathan Etra and Stephanie Spinner;
illus. by Steve BjOrkman. Random House, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-
92093-7; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-82093-2. 
64p. (Stepping Stone Books).
Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $1.95.
R* 
Gr. 3-5. 
Perfect, smiling Dorf "was cool." But what the rest
of the class, excepting Richard Bickerstaff, doesn't know is that Dorf is an alien,
specifically, a Drane. "Space trash. Mean. Very mean. When the Dranes see a
planet they like they move in. Before the natives know it, their minds are
mush." Richard knows all this because Aric, a Ganoobian member of the
Interspace Brigade ("Our goal: to wipe out cosmic trouble-makers") has popped
up one morning in Richard's bowl of Alien Crisp. This appears to have been
written by people who spent more Saturday mornings in front of the TV than
was really good for them, but the book is a thoroughly off-the-wall delight,
crammed with one-liners ("bye-bye, biosphere") and pseudo-sick humor. It
features a spectacular demise for Dorf: "'I hate to lose! I hope you flunk math
and history! I hope you fail science and art and social studies and English and
gym!' Then he blew up." Few transitional readers have such wit to exploit the
comic potential of the short sentence; material and delivery both have enormous
appeal. Bjorkman's nutty and plentiful sketches are a definite plus. RS
Faville, Barry. The Keeper. Oxford, 1988. ISBN 0-19-558146-6. 
160 p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
In a post-apocalyptic New Zealand, 17-year-old
Michael is a scribe, copying the books that survived the blast. (Why they need
to be copied is not made clear). Excepting his teacher and a few others, the
villagers are uneasy around Michael, both for his scholarly bent and for
[96 ]
something secret that has to do with his long-dead parents. Even when Michael
and some friends track and kill a man-eating tiger (the descendant of escaped zoo
animals) the villagers' fear and distrust deepens. Faville's future primitive
society is not as wholly realized as have been others in this genre, and the story
jerks along at an unsteady pace. The basic premise of a small group of young
outsiders will appeal, and while the plot is predictable (and capped by a
convenient volcanic eruption) there is plenty of adventure. RS
Greenfield, Eloise. Under the Sunday Tree; illus. by Amos Ferguson. Harper,
1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022257-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022254-9. 39p.
Library ed. $12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 2-5. 
A more symbiotic collaboration than most picture
poetry books, this makes it hard to tell where poem leaves off and picture
begins. Greenfield gives voice to portraits: "pineapples, pumpkins, chickens,
we/ carry more than the things you see/ we also carry history." Through cool
planes of green and blue, Ferguson creates a peaceful ocean shore that makes
visible Greenfield's "place I know/ where children go to find/ their deepest
feelings." Sometimes contemplative, often funny ("It takes more than a wish/
to catch a fish") the poems glide and bounce with rhythmic effects echoed in the
bold paintings, which are naively drawn and iconographic, and formally patterned
with two-dimensional perspectives. For "The Brave Ones" ("We hear the bell
clanging/ we come in a hurry/ we come with our ladders and hoses/ our hoses")
Ferguson paints a stylized house afire, its straight lines surrounded by bomb-like
blobs of smoke and a wreath of flame around the chimney, all capturing the
danger and excitement of the poem. "The Sailboat Race" sounds and looks ready
to rush off the page. The last poem is a marvelously festive toast from both
poet and illustrator: "let's lift our punch/ to the bunch/ (that's us)... this toast
we'll repeat/ each time we meet/ and now, my friends-/ let's eat". Crisply
designed, with poem and painting on facing pages, the collection is supposed to
be "an affectionate portrait of life in the Bahamas," but given the breadth of
vision contained herein, the book extends far beyond the Caribbean. RS
C.U. Reading aloud
Hansen, Joyce. Out From This Place. Walker, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-
8027-6817-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6816-4. 135p. Library ed. $14.85; Trade
ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
In a sequel to Which Way Freedom? (BCCB 7/86)
Hansen focuses on Easter, the girl that Obi (black hero of the first book) left
behind him. Like Obi, Easter is determined, after her escape from bondage, to
find and keep freedom. A tenacious and resourceful adolescent, she joins those
recently emancipated Sea Islands workers who rebel when the government denies
them promised land. Always hunting for Obi, Easter at last decides she will
leave the South, go North to train as a teacher, and hope that her path and Obi's
will cross. At the close, there is a strong hint, in an epilogue, that that may
happen: "No matter how long it took, he would find her." ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
D.V. Courage
[97 ]
Hawkes, Nigel. Gun Control. Gloucester/Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-17111-6.
32p. illus. with photographs. (Issues). $11.90.
NR 
Gr.5-7. 
Simply written information on gun control is
desperately needed, a fact that makes this title all the more disappointing. The
text is full of meaningless generalities ("but poverty does not explain the rise of
organized crime, like the Mafia"); nonsequiturs ("Switzerland, however, has a
very high compulsory gun ownership rate for defense reasons. But laws will not
stop determined people from obtaining guns"); inaccuracies ("New York City has
very tough gun laws but anyone wanting to buy a gun goes south");
undocumented statistics (in the U.S. "almost 16,000 people between 15 and 34
dies from gunfire every year, compared with 28,500 from road accidents and only
7,400 from cancer"); and just plain grammatical confusion ("In Britain anyone
who shoots another person has to prove that they were acting in self-defense and
that they used reasonable force in order to be found not guilty"). Three experts
are cited out of the blue with no reference to their identity or publications: "But
unfortunately the availability of guns can lead to accidents, when a family
argument gets out of hand. Professors Wright, Rossi and Daly estimate that
there are about 250,000 gun injuries a year." From family arguments? The
format is cluttered with photographic insets, too many typefaces, and unecessary
blocks of brightly colored patterns. For target practice only. BH
Herman, Charlotte. 
Millie Cooper, Take a Chance; illus. by Helen
Cogancherry. Dutton, 1988. ISBN 0-525-4444-2. [96p]. $11.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Millie, afraid that she won't receive enough
valentines from her classmates, tells them she doesn't want any, thereby hoping
to avoid hurt and embarrassment. "I told everyone not to send me any so I
would have an excuse but I didn't want them to listen to me but they did." Who
could not learn from Millie's lesson, and it's just one pithy episode in this
sequel to Millie Cooper, 3B (BCCB 6/85). While period details (the book is set
in 1947) are not as smoothly woven in as they are in Miriam Chaikin's Molly
series, Millie's schemes to get her first bicycle, and her agony/ecstasy over
reading her favorite poem to the class give narrative direction and suspense to a
warm school-and-family story. RS
D.V. Self-confidence
Heyer, Marilee. The Forbidden Door; written and illus. by Marilee Heyer.
Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-81740-6. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Meticulously detailed, ornately romantic paintings,
impressive in their composition and their use of color, illustrate (on oversize
pages that are filled but not crowded) a fantasy that is traditional in concept but
pedestrian in writing style. Last of her race, a lovely child in an underground
home escapes to the Outside and does battle with the evil monster who has
captured her ancestors. Lovely little Reena is helped by many of the fantastic
creatures who share her fear of the evil Okira and who help her solve the mystery
of the Okira's power. ZS
[98
Hilleary, Jane Kopper. Fletcher and the Great Big Dog; illus. by Richard
Brown. Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-46761-6. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
A contemporary urban cumulative tale with as sure a
rhythmic pace as the old-fashioned folk variety. "Fletcher was cruising along the
sidewalk on his Big Wheel when he met a dog.... Fletcher decided to cruise
down the other way." Wherever Fletcher goes, the dog follows him. Whenever
Fletcher speeds up, the dog speeds up. Their confrontation comes with a rumble
of thunder and Fletcher's realization that he is lost. When he stops and faces the
big red dog, it licks him on the face and eventually, by refusing to follow
Fletcher farther, leads him back the way they came. The story addresses
children's fears in the most basic chase plot possible, and the classy cartoon art
walks a fine line between supporting the suspense and reassuring young listeners
who may share Fletcher's apprehension (the dog is quite a bit bigger than
Fletcher-this is a low-down perspective). A perfect step up from the Clifford
books, this is a big red dog of more personable distinction. BH
D.V. Fear, overcoming
Hilts, Len. Timmy O'Dowd and the Big Ditch: A Story of the Glory Days on
the Old Erie Canal. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-15-200606-0. 91p.
$13.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Although Hilts relies rather heavily on dialogue as a
vehicle for information, the information is given logically, through the device of
having a newcomer to whom facts must be explained. The visitor is Dennis
O'Dowd, who comes to stay with his kin and whose urban sophistication is
resented by his cousin Timmy. The time is 1845, the setting is the banks of the
new, bustling Erie Canal, and Timmy (son of a section superintendent) is set on
becoming a captain of a passenger packet. In the depiction of travel on the canal
and discussions of its upkeep, in moving toward a friendship between the boys,
and in the description of a crisis caused by heavy rains, the story has credibility,
and-if not depth-suspense, good pace, and carefully-researched historical
details. A glossary and a divided bibliography are provided. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Hoff, Syd. Mrs. Brice's Mice; written and illus. by Syd Hoff. Harper, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022452-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022451-7. 
[32p].
Library ed. $9.89; Trade ed. $8.95 check this. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
4-6yrs. 
Mrs. Brice has twenty-four mice; well, twenty-five,
but the last, "one very small mouse," is always intent on distinguishing himself
from the rest. Twenty-four mice sleep on the bed with Mrs. Brice (in an
arrangement reminiscent of Madeline); one very small mouse sleeps on the alarm
clock "in case he wanted to know what time it was." His distinction comes in
handy when, while on a walk, the mice meet a cat, and while twelve run this
way and twelve that way, the one little mouse runs this way and that, wearing
out the cat and saving them all. The simple, gracefully repetitive text and bright
cartoon drawings will make a preschool hero of the clever little mouse. RS
D.V. Individuality, expressing
[99]
Hooks, William H. Pioneer Cat; illus. by Charles Robinson. Random, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-92038-4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-394-82038-X. 
64p.
(Stepping Stone Books). Library ed. $5.99; Paper ed. $1.95.
M 
Gr. 2-4. 
As a story about a girl who secretly adopts a stray
cat, this is acceptable practice material for transitional readers. As historical
fiction, however, it misrepresents both the conflicts and speech patterns of the
setting, a nineteenth-century wagon trek to Oregon. The first-person narrator,
Kate, seems prescient of moder slang ("I was one big mess") and unaware of the
parental authority that governed children of her age, as in the response to her
mother's suggestion that she'll make new acquaintances on the wagon train:
"'No thanks,' I told her. 
'I was perfectly happy with my old friends.'"
Protecting feline Snuggs is the main plot device, but there's an obligatory
confrontation with Indians, a river crossing in which Kate and her brother are
saved from drowning by a new friend, a crisis with a broken wagon wheel, and of
course the acceptance of Snuggs (with her predictable batch of kittens) as a
valuable member of the expedition. The tone is one of bright, happily-ever-after
promise through which one never senses any real discomfort. Easy-to-read
books can be simple in style without sacrifice of authenticity; this one has
compromised a basic concept. The problems and pace, however, will probably
snag sympathy from struggling readers. BH
C.U. History-U.S.-frontier and pioneer life
Jacques, Brian. Mossflower; illus. by Gary Chalk. Philomel, 1988. ISBN 0-
399-21549-2. [432p]. $15.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
A prequel to Redwall (BCCB 7/87) recounts the
woodland animals' ancestral fight against Queen Tsarmina, an evil wildcat who
has murdered her father and become ruler of Kotir Castle. Martin the warrior
mouse is the hero here, with stout allies among the otters, squirrels, badgers,
hedgehogs, and hares. The enemy includes foxes, weasels, stoats, ferrets, and
rats, a villainous crew with few claims to brains. The style has been drycleaned
of the excessive verbiage that characterized Jacques' earlier book. The length is
rather due to two distinct plot lines: Martin's quest for help from distant
Salamandstron and the battles on the forest front. Although these actions
eventually converge, they aren't entirely necessary to each other and at times
seem distractingly divergent. (There's also the niggling question in any reader's
mind: could a mouse really defeat a maddened wildcat?) However, despite
moments when the book seems a sendup of high fantasy conventions, the
weight of such a completely imagined world, the colorful characters, and the
high action will hold their fair share of good readers. BH
D.V. Courage
Landau, Elaine. Teenagers Talk about School. Messner, 1989. ISBN 0-671-
64568-4. [160p]. $9.79. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
Gr. 7-12. 
While billed in the introduction as a book of
interviews, this is actually a collection of twenty-three monologues by teens
about school. The overall picture--of teachers, parents, other students-is
pretty grim and, despite the vaguely claimed diversity of interviewees, the voices
sound the same. 
Given the lack of documentation or explanation of
[ 100]
methodology, it is difficult to know how much editorializing has occurred, but
these are certainly not raw transcripts, and some of the events recounted appear
so aptly paradigmatic that they are not convincing, for example, a Go Ask Alice-
like drunk-driving story. The narratives express concerns most teens share, but
the problems, which are genuine, deserve better attention than the superficial
treatment they get here. RS
Larsen, Rebecca. Oppenheimer and the Atomic Bomb. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-
531-10607-1. 192p. illus. with photographs. $13.90.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
While never quite capturing the personality and
motivations of an extremely complicated man, this biography does a good job of
explaining Oppenheimer's contributions and his place in the Cold War context.
Larsen balances information about the scientific development of the bomb with
the concurrent political atmosphere, clearly showing how a wartime hero could
later be denied a security clearance to do further research. Her account of the
rivalry between Oppenheimer and Edward Teller is sketchy, but then so are the
available facts, a limitation the author acknowledges. Feldbaum and Bee's
Looking the Tiger in the Eye (BCCB 9/88) has broader coverage of early atomic
research, but Larsen's book gives a more detailed picture of the Los Alamos
community and experiments. There is little on Oppenheimer's post-war research
(excepting a couple of curious references to Oppenheimer's fight "for peaceful
uses of the bomb") but the book provides an enlightening perspective for those
students who date Cold War tensions from the 1950's. RS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Lawlor, Laurie. Daniel Boone; illus. by Bert Dodson and with photographs.
Whitman, 1989. ISBN 0-8075-1462-4. 
[160p]. 
$10.50. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
R* 
Gr. 5-9. 
Relying mainly on primary sources such as the letters
and documents collected by nineteenth-century Boone scholar Lyman Draper,
Lawlor has written a riveting account of an American folk hero. This is a case
in which the real story is more interesting than the cultural myth, and the author
has taken advantage of the adventure in Boone's life to detail a vivid
characterization. Lawlor is so enthusiastic about her subject that she often
extends an account with footnotes, which are thoughtfully included at the bottom
of each page for impatient young readers and which often include intriguing
historical vignettes (the tale behind the term "Quaker," for instance) as well as
explanations of terms and sources. The cruelty of the war between settlers and
Indians is unflinchingly exposed. Boone's first son was tortured to death by
Shawnee, as witnessed by a slave who escaped the attack; another son was killed
in battle, a daughter kidnapped, and Boone himself often captured or nearly
killed. The author takes care to remind readers of concurrent atrocities committed
by whites against Indians. In fact, the text begins by openly addressing the
problem: "Daniel Boone would not wish to be remembered as a rip-roaring
Indian fighter. Upon reading a particularly bloody acount of his life, he once
complained, 'This book represents me as a wonderful man who killed a lot of
Indians. I don't believe the one has much to do with the other."' 
Financially
plagued with bad luck, self-destructively restless, affectionate but often neglectful
[ 101 ]
of his long-suffering wife (she bore one child to Boone's brother, who took care
of her during one of Boone's twenty-month absences), Boone nevertheless
emerges, on balance, as a man whose physical and moral stature, augmented by
an irrepressible sense of humor, made him memorable in the eyes of Indians as
well as whites. 
With a chronology, bibliography, index, and gallery of
historical pictures along with black-and-white drawings throughout the book,
this is as solidly researched and dynamic as children's biography should be. BH
History-U.S.-frontier and pioneer life
Leonard, Alison. Tina's Chance. Viking, 1988. ISBN 0-670-82430-5. 187p.
$11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
First published in Great Britain under the title of
Tinker's Career, this is the sobering narrative of a fifteen-year-old's quest into
family history. Why, Tina has wondered, will nobody tell her anything about
her mother, who died when Tina was two? Tina makes her way, after finding
some family documents and photographs, to the home of an aunt she can't
remember. Since she arrives with a sore throat and a fever (Aunt Louise and her
lover, Diana, are both nurses), Tina stays with them and in the course of time
learns that she-like Louise-may have inherited the disease that killed her
mother, Huntington's Chorea. What Tina goes through is harrowing, and
Leonard depicts it with sad believability. Less believable are the vagaries of the
plot that lead to the knowledge that there is a fifty-fifty chance (therefore the
title) that the disease will manifest itself. The way in which Tina finds Louise,
the illness that makes it convenient to have her stay instead of going home, the
labored turmoil of the adjustment period, all weaken the story, which is told
partly in third person, partly in first (by Louise). The format, too, presents a
problem of tiny type. Still, the elements of suspense and the interest, for some
readers, in a medical problem give the book appeal. ZS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Levy, Elizabeth. Cold as Ice. Morrow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-06579-1. 
167p.
$11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Kelly Ross is the adolescent narrator, a shy girl
whose mother (once a police officer) is head of security for a Manhattan sports
complex. Kelly comes to the rescue of a teenage boy being attacked in an alley
outside The Dome, and later learns that he's one of the two ice-skating stars,
Andre and Ken. When a series of accidents seems to threaten the two young
men, Ken and Kelly try to solve the mystery. Who is the attacker who has
endangered the skaters' lives? Although there is plenty of action, and some
suspense, the identity of the attacker seems fairly obvious. 
The plot is
adequately structured, and the writing style is competent, but the characterization
is weak, with a couple of minor characters (a nasty, wealthy woman and a
Swedish-born coach who's given to quaint use of language) who are less than
believable. ZS
Martin, Ann M. Yours Turly, Shirley. Holiday House, 1988. ISBN 0-8234-
0719-5. 133p. $12.95.
[102 ]
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Shirley, starting fourth grade, is apprehensive about
what her performance will be; she has dyslexia and is given to clowning to cover
her feelings of inadequacy. The teacher, Mr. Bradley, assures her that they will
work together, and Shirley does show improvement until Jackie catches up.
Jackie, Shirley's newly adopted sister, is eight, a Vietnamese child who thrives
on Shirley's love and help. Shirley, too, thrives and gains confidence from
being needed and being so successful as a big sister-and also from her new
status as the unanimously-elected class artist. There's a rift with Jackie, due to
Shirley's jealousy, and a rapprochement; there are several amusing incidents and
a rather sugary ending. Not much nuance here, but its a story that pleasantly
combines light humor, a sympathetic treatment of a learning disability, and
warm family relationships. ZS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
McKinley, Robin. The Outlaws of Sherwood. Greenwillow, 1988. ISBN 0-
688-07178-3. 282p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-10. 
Once again, as she did in Beauty, McKinley takes a
fresh look at a classic, changing some of the events or deviating from standard
characterization to gain new dimensions. Her afterword explains her artistic
compromise with myth and history, her wish to write a version that is
"historically unembarrassing." 
With a few exceptions, she has done that
admirably, creating a story that has pace and substance and style, and that is
given nuance and depth by the characterization. The exceptions are in the use of
dialogue-occasionally-that sounds too modem: "Her father bought it.. ." (in
the sense of believing a lie), or too sophisticated for an unschooled outlaw of the
period. Historians may find the concept of Richard the Lionheart offering
Marian the post of sheriff of Nottingham odd, but most readers will enjoy the
novelty of a Robin whose Sherwood Forest enclave is conceived by others,
whose prowess at archery is inferior to that of Marian's, and who reluctantly
accepts the sobriquet "Robin of the Hood." ZS
McKissack, Patricia C. Mirandy and Brother Wind; illus. by Jerry Pinkney.
Knopf, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-98765-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-88765-4.
32p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
One of the surest new storytelling voices in picture
books has followed up Flossie and the Fox with another winner, also drawn
from memories of Patricia McKissack's family. Here, Mirandy is sure that
she'll win the cake walk if she can catch Brother Wind for her partner, but he
eludes all the tricks her friends advise. When she finally does catch him with her
own quick wits, she ends up wishing instead for her boyfriend Ezel to overcome
his clumsiness. Sure enough, the two children finish first in high style. "When
Grandmama Beasley had seen Mirandy and Ezel turning and spinning, moving
like shadows in the flickering candlelight, she'd thrown back her head, laughed,
and said, 'Them chullin' is dancing with the Wind!"' This narrative gets a high
score, too, for plot, pace, and characterization. Mirandy sparkles with energy and
determination, while the action dances with its own rhythm. Pinkney's
watercolors are splashed with multi-hued, overlapping shapes that fill the pages
with patterned ferment, occasionally threatening to overwhelm the story but
[ 103 ]
never quite doing so. The translucent blue, larger-than-life figure of Brother
Wind is clothed in the same historical costume as the rest of the southern black
cast. Occasionally the portraits seem studied, but the rural settings are lush with
laurel and wisteria, aflutter with chickens, and evocative of country communities
at their best. A treat to pass on to new generations. BH
D.V. 
Community life
Meltzer, Milton. Benjamin Franklin: The New American. Watts, 1988. ISBN
0-531-10582-2. 288p. illus. $14.90.
R* 
Gr. 6-. 
Even from so distinguished a social historian as
Milton Meltzer, one would not have expected so familiar a subject of
biographies as Franklin to enthrall anew. It does; this is certainly one of the
author's best biographies, and certainly the best about Franklin written for
young people since Thomas Fleming's in 1973 (BCCB 12/73). Meltzer has
used source material (cited in great detail at the close of the text) in a smooth
incorporation into exposition and dialogue, themselves nicely balanced. The
biography gives adequate attention to background information without obscuring
the personality of the biographee or the respectful record of his many interests
and achievements. Indexed. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
D.V. 
Patriotism
Meyers, Odette. 
The Enchanted Umbrella; illus. by Margot Zemach.
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1988. ISBN 0-15-200448-3. 32p. $13.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Just before the old umbrella maker dies, he tells his
lazy, selfish nephew that his worldly goods are to be shared with Patou, the
umbrella maker's young assistant. But the nephew throws Patou out, giving
him only a battered umbrella which, as it turns out, is magic and can fly. The
jacket copy states that the story is based on a French folktale but no source note
is provided. The story ends satisfactorily with Patou, after a few turns of fate,
being crowned king of a hitherto umbrella-less country. Zemach's bright and
fluid watercolors add interest to a slight tale; particularly well done are the
pratfalls and graceful flying escapes occasioned by the benevolent umbrella. A
few pages of vague (and undocumented) history of the umbrella follow the story.
RS
Mohun, Janet. Drugs, Steroids and Sports. Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10626-
8. 62p. illus. with photographs. (Understanding Drugs). $11.90.
M 
Gr. 5-7. 
Most followers of sports events, and particularly the
much publicized contests of the 1988 Olympiad, will find the information in
this book interesting. Unfortunately, it is so repetitive and so bland in writing
style, and so filled with meaningless pictures (not all, but many) and
unattributed remarks as to almost vitiate that interest. No information is
provided about the author; in a plodding text she discusses the various kinds of
drugs and steroids used by athletes (both those in competition and those who
wish to increase prowess or change appearance for personal reasons) and describes
the harm done by these substances. On many pages a red-framed remark is
included, some being as puerile as "The judges looked at his eyes. That was the
[104]
giveaway." No explanation of why it was "the giveaway" is provided. The
book closes with a plea for clean, honest competition; an index, a glossary, a
chart of drug profiles, and a list of sources of help are appended. ZS
C.U. Health and hygiene; Physical education
Morgan, Ellen. Another Winter's Tale. Heinemann/David & Charles, 1988.
ISBN 0-434-95166-8. 179p. $17.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
Rory, thirteen, has been sent to stay with his aunt
and uncle in the English countryside; his father, a British career army officer
stationed in Florida, has decided that Rory's latest escapade as part of a gang
(thrill-driving, with Rory a passenger in a car that hit a post) means he needs
punishment. The Yorkshire winter seems bleak and cold; so do Aunt Miriam
and Uncle Arthur. Rory makes some friends, becomes fond of a girl, wins a
modicum of approbation. When his parents are posted to a nearby village, Rory
is happy at the reunion and happy because he'll still be able to see his new friend
Samantha. This is a story that seems unfocused and transitory; it should appeal
to readers, nevertheless, because the characterization is firm (the protagonist
changes his attitude believably) and the setting well-established; the style-in
both exposition and dialogue-is strong. Only the structure is weak. ZS
D.V. Adaptability
Moseley, Keith, illus. The Ghosts of Creepy Castle. ISBN 0-448-09290-5.
The Things in Mouldy Manor; illus. by Keith Moseley and Andy Evritt-Stewart.
ISBN 0-448-09289-1. Both books: Grosset, 1988. 10p. $7.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
There won't be any question as to the popularity of
these two horror-comedy pop-up books, but they do offer an interesting contrast
in terms of evaluating the genre. The paper engineering in Ghosts is part of the
plot, as each of five tourists is gagged, gobbled, or grabbed from behind during a
walk through Creepy Castle. Even the innocent-looking guide turns out
(literally) to have a sinister persona. Things is just a catalogue of Mouldy
Manor's grosser features; rather than any sustained line of action, there's a series
of separate little scenarios; we watch, for instance, as chef Hugo, who "uses only
the finest ingredients to prepare his delicious meals," drops a dead rat into the
cauldron. Both books are clever and generous in their art--each page sports
several devices to pull, push, or open, with moving effects. These will wear out
fast but attract lots of attention. BH
C.U. Halloween
Myers, Walter Dean. Me, Mop, and the Moondance Kid; illus. by Rodney Pate.
Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-440-50065-6. 
(128p]. 
$13.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Walter Dean Myers is great at offhand dialogue, and
that's what this book is: an easy-going, first-person narrative that describes two
adopted brothers' little league triumph and their best friend's adoption by the
female coach. There are some really funny lines, as in the description of a
ferocious cat ("There was as much of him missing as there was there"); some
rough transitions, such as an abrupt switch from the protagonist's apprehension
about getting beaten up to a description of his grandmother's church; and lots of
[ 105
game play, which bogs down the middle of the book but builds a lot of suspense
at the end. Even the secondary characters are solidly developed here-a likeable
crew who make the plot well worth meandering through. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Nixon, Joan Lowery. Secret, Silent Screams. Delacorte, 1988. ISBN 0-440-
50059-1. 180p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Mourning the death of her friend Barry, Marti is
convinced that the verdict (suicide, the latest of a number of suicides of high
school students) is wrong. Several clues do tend to support the idea that Barry
took his own life, but Marti is sure she knew him well enough to know it was
unlikely; too, the gun had been in Barry's right hand-but he was left-handed.
The only adult authority who takes Marti seriously is a young police officer,
Karen. Nixon is an old and polished hand at creating suspense and building
logical clues into the structure of her stories. The solution is, therefore,
achieved credibly while maintaining dramatic impact including Marti's dangerous
confrontation with Barry's murderer. Nixon also incorporates information about
adolescent suicide without disturbing the story's narrative flow. ZS
Nuwer, Hank. Strategies of the Great Baseball Managers. Watts, 1988. ISBN
0-531-10601-2. 160p. illus. with photographs. $13.90.
M 
Gr. 6-9. 
To the baseball fan, almost any book about stellar
personalities of the past or present is interesting. Here, in profiles of the dozen
managers he deems great, Nuwer writes in prose that is dense, often cute or
slangy, and periodically prone to hyperbole, generalization, or syntactical
peculiarities. This does give facts about managerial stars from Cap Anson to
Whitey Herzog, but it does so in the worst tradition, stylistically, of sports
journalism. Notes and bibliographic information on sources are included, as is
an index. ZS
Robinson, Barbara. My Brother Louis Measures Worms; and other Louis
Stories. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025083-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
025082-8. 149p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Mary Elizabeth Lawson, age eleven, is the narrator of
a series of short stories about her family, particularly her precocious (believably
precocious) younger brother, her perennially-flustered mother, and her
perennially-baffled father, who knows that all his wife's relatives are peculiar and
expects the worst. And the worst occurs, in amusing tales that are told in high
style; the bland matter-of-fact comments by the narrator are a fine contrast to the
more sophisticated dialogue and to the excesses of Mother's clan. Well, there's
also Father's sister.... It's a romp, it's a great family story, it's a good choice
for reading aloud as well as alone. ZS
C.U. Reading aloud
D.V. Family relations
Rogers, Paul. Rain & Shine; illus. by Chris Burke. Orchard/Watts, 1988.
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08371-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06771-2. 85p. Library
ed. $12.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
[106]
R 
Gr. 3-4. 
Seven brief stories of small adventures and discoveries
are delivered with low-key humor and confidingly direct prose. "Ned is seven.
His sister Nina is four and a half. And their little brother Joshy is just two."
The three of them pretend to be pirates, build a dam on the stream, go to a
Halloween party, make a snowman, etc. While occasionally precious, the
stories have the appeal of everyday life, and little Joshy is a good foil for the
cute-toddler humor that older kids like, as when Joshy plays "hiding squeak" by
covering his eyes and believing himself invisible. "And since everyone enjoyed
playing along with it, and leaped with shock or cried, 'There he is!' when he
opened his eyes again, it was hardly surprising that he continued to believe it."
Cozy pencil sketches are scattered throughout the spacious pages. RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters
Rosenberg, Maxine B. Finding a Way: Living with Exceptional Brothers and
Sisters; illus. with photographs by George Ancona. Lothrop, 1988. Library ed.
ISBN 0-688-06874-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06873-1. 48p. Library ed. $11.88;
Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
In this companion volume to My Friend Leslie: The
Story of a Handicapped Child (BCCB 4/83), photographs of good quality show
the children of three families in which one child (in one case, two) in the family
suffers from a chronic illness or an orthopedic handicap. With a calm tone, in a
clear and direct style, and with the authority of professional experience,
Rosenberg writes about what it is like to be the brother or sister of a child who
has a special physical problem; covered here are diabetes, asthma, and spina
bifida. What is most valuable in her writing is the objectivity with which she
approaches the fact that the sibling who is not disabled also has problems of
acceptance and adjustment; a second strength is the recurrent emphasis on the
positive, both in the coverage of sibling relationships and in the demonstration
of the fact that, disabled or not, children have similar needs and interests. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Handicaps, adjustment to
Ryan, Mary C. Who Says I Can't? Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-76374-8.
[159p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 7-9. 
Tessa's mother is glamorous, dynamic and always
busy: "I think the very first sentence I ever spoke was 'Bye-bye Momma.'" But
when Tessa decides to go after handsome Rodney (and get rid off annoying Alan)
she takes her cue from Mom, power-brokering her way into directing the school
talent show in which both Rodney and Alan badly want to participate. Rodney
turns out to be a (vividly rendered) vacuous jerk, Alan, a sensitive songwriter,
and Tessa discovers that power corrupts. None of these revelations will come as
a surprise to the reader. The story is far too neatly tied up in the last two
chapters. Mom lightens up, Dad, after a convenient absence from the rest of the
book, comes home, Laura (Tessa's sister, also a latecomer) decides not to go to
Baja with her boyfriend and gets engaged instead. Alan is the star of the show.
Too much. RS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
[ 107
Schwartz, David M. The Hidden Life of the Forest. ISBN 0-517-570580. The
Hidden Life of the Pond. ISBN 0-517-570602. The Hidden Life of the Meadow.
ISBN 0-517-570599. All books: illus. with photographs by Dwight Kuhn.
Crown, 1988. 
40p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
"Cold, quiet, and draped with snow, the forest in
winter appears still and lifeless. But is it?" Directly above the question appears
a captivating close-up of a bear cub curled against its mother's nose; in Meadow,
a mouse peeks out from a hole in a stump; and in Pond, a frog thrusts its head
up into the rain. All three books showcase outstanding color photographs that
depict seasonal changes in their respective habitats, with textual commentary
describing the flora and fauna common to the area. Unfortunately, the area is
never specified, though climactic and environmental conditions suggest a cold
zone of North America. While there's no formal organization, the pictures and
text form a smooth, continuous blend in leading a reader from one observation to
another-from seeds to plants to trees to the birds that nest in them to the
insects upon which the birds feed, etc. The closeups are remarkable for their
color reproduction, composition, and clarity, whether the subject is an owl in
flight or a microscopic amoeba. The effect is one of walking, invisibly cloaked,
through the environment for a look at the shyest and smallest of creatures, an
exercise well worth the sacrifice of more systematically categorized information.
BH
C.U. Nature study
Silverstein, Herma. Spies among Us: The Truth about Modern Espionage.
Watts, 1988. ISBN 0-531-10600-4. 144p. illus. with photographs. $12.90.
M 
Gr. 7-12. 
While somewhat unorganized and written in a choppy
style, this contains many intriguing stories and anecdotes of post-war spying,
from Kim Philby and Gary Powers to contemporary CIA scandals involving the
Walker family and the "falcon and the snowman." 
Silverstein slights
information about the FBI, a significant player in the domestic spy scene, and,
while sources are given for quotes, there is little documentation for her many
controversial statements. For example, she lists countries in which the CIA "is
believed" to have illegally interfered, and asserts that "Today, under the direction
of Viktor Chebrikov, the KGB is employing strong-arm tactics that have not
been seen since Stalin's days." Some of her information is simply incorrect, as
when she states that the intelligence services of Albania and Yugoslavia are
managed by the KGB. However, there is little on the subject written for young
adults, and the overview is comprehensive. One of Silverstein's admirable
objectives seems to be the de-romanticization of the spy trade; if she doesn't
quite succeed, the fault probably lies not with the author but with the basic and
alluring appeal of dangerous secrets. RS
Simmie, Lois. 
Auntie's Knitting a Baby; illus. by Anne Simmie.
Ochard/Watts, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08362-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-
05762-3. 70p. Library ed. $11.99 ; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
From the land of Dennis Lee comes another fresh,
funny poetic voice. This collection includes lots of nonsense themes that seem
to weave in and out of the narrative and lyrical verses for a total effect that's not
[108]
so nonsensical after all. The Auntie poems (#1-11) pop up periodically with
variations on the following: "Auntie's knitting a baby bonnet/ That looks like
an airport wind sock;/ If Auntie's baby fits that hat/ She's in for a terrible
shock." The baby about which the narrator is so concerned turns out to be
humanly proportioned after all, but many of the poems spotlight the kind of
worried vulnerability that adults learn to mask with humor. In "Haunted," for
instance, a young insomniac regrets his accidental slaying of a snake, whose
"thin little ghost comes each night to my bed./ He comes every night and he
gives me no rest/ He curls on my pillow, he lies on my chest;/ He wails in his
little snake voice, so pathetic/ His little snake sobbings so soft and poetic ... "
In another poem, a child denies, with poignant protests, that his dog is getting
old. Many of the selections, however, are simply rhyming high jinks along the
lines of "Vampire Poem": "If you think/ Mosquito bites pain ya,/ Be glad you
don't live/ In Transylvania." 
The spare, pen-and-ink sketches are not as
confident as the poems; some are cleverly cartooned and others amateurishly
drafted, especially in facial expression. The book as a whole, though, is a jolly
good investment. BH
Steig, William. Spinky Sulks; written and illus. by William Steig. Farrar,
1988. ISBN 0-374-38321-9. 32p. $13.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
With an offhand, humorous flair characteristic of his
best stories, Steig presents us with an all-too-human protagonist. Spinky has
been offended by his family's outrageous behavior. Though his sister begs
forgiveness for calling him Stinky, though his brother concedes that
Philadelphia is the capital of Belgium, though his mother brings him a lunch
tray, though his friends whisper goofy things in his ear and swing the hammock
to which he's retreated, though his father assures him that he is one of the most
popular of the three children, though his grandmother brings him his favorite
candy, though a clown is hired to pull a triple-dip ice-cream cone out of his
pocket, though the whole family covers him with a tarpaulin and beach umbrella
when it starts raining ... still Spinky sulks. Actually he begins to reconsider,
but he has to figure out how to give in and still keep his self-respect. That's
exactly what this book will do for sulky children-give them a chance to laugh
at themselves and reconsider their behavior at the same time. Steig cartoons a
green suburban setting with straight walks, straight fences, straight trees in
straight lawns ... all with a straight face. Hank's family itself is a bit square,
though they do learn to be "much more careful about his feelings. Too bad they
couldn't keep it up forever." Fortunately for us, Steig seems to be able to. BH
D.V. Family relations; Self-expression
Stevenson, James. The Supreme Souvenir Factory; written and illus. by James
Stevenson. Greenwillow, 1988. ISBN 0-688-07782-X. 56p. $11.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Stevenson's pictures, lively despite the sober brown
of the line and wash, echo the text's bland acceptance of the ridiculous as they
picture the adventures of Chester. 
Chester is a small dog, but he's the
quintessence of the little guy, modest and affable, who achieves heroic
proportions. He is aided in restoring workers' jobs by a friend (Wendy, a bat)
and overcomes the evil machinations of the factory manager (a weasel) who tries
[ 109]
to use crabots (robots with many pincer-like arms) to take over all jobs.
Lightweight fun, but like so many of Stevenson's picture books, this has some
veiled comments on human behavior. ZS
Sutton, Jane. Definitely Not Sexy. 
Little, 1988. ISBN 0-316-82325-2.
[160p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Underneath the tough-talking exterior of this funny
novel beats the heart of a formula teen romance, but it's a pretty good one.
Diana Pushkin, Honor Society student (much to her embarrassment) considers
herself "Definitely Not Sexy," as opposed to, say, fellow student Paula Proomer,
Definitely Sexy, whose "breasts may not be the largest in the ninth grade, but
they're definitely the pointiest." Diana decides to work on a sexy image, going
after the school's new bad boy, Jimmy. "Right away I flashed to this hoody
movie I had seen, called Young and Angry. He and I were the passionate,
rebellious, teenage-lover stars. I was Rhonda. He was Chet." Unfortunately,
Jimmy's not as bad as he seems, but after one semi-steamy petting session, he
and Diana become just-friends, and she gets a sense of perspective and prospects
of a respectable boyfriend. The teen patois gets a little wearing, but it is
realistic, as is the author's refreshingly relaxed just-say-no-thank you attitude
toward adolescent sex and pot smoking. Diana, speaking of her first joint: "I
agreed to try it because I wanted to see what it was like, I wanted to think of
myself as a person who had tried it, and I wanted other people to think of me as
a person who had tried it." She adds, "But between you and me, I didn't like it at
all." RS
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Tompert, Ann. 
Will You Come Back for Me?; illus. by Robin Kramer.
Whitman, 1988. ISBN 0-8075-9112-2. 32p. $11.95.
Ad 
3-5 yrs. 
Drawings in soft, bright colors are uncrowded but
have a casual, slightly scruffy look that actually fits the modest scope of the
story well. The artist uses framed, smaller pictures to separate the real from the
imaginary, as a small child who is in the throes of separation anxiety copes by
projecting her own role as that of the "mother" who always comes back to
nursery school to pick up her "child," a toy bear. Suki's mother handles the
whole situation with sympathy and patience; Suki is eventually convinced that
her mother will return and she joins in the playroom activities. This isn't as
effective as the publisher's You Go Away, by Dorothy Corey (BCCB 9/76) but
it's an adequately told if less effectively structured homily on the dependability of
a loving parental presence. ZS
D.V. Fear, overcoming; Mother-child relations
Van Allsburg, Chris. Two Bad Ants; written and illus. by Chris Van Allsburg.
Houghton, 1988. ISBN 0-395-48668-8. 
[32p]. 
$15.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. K-3. 
Van Allsburg's precise drawings, in soft dulled colors
and geometric details, are unusual in their perspective, using the word in both a
literal and in a figurative sense. His story of the two ants who, having climbed
tortuously into a "sea of crystals" (bowl of sugar) decide to stay on when their
[ 110]
fellow-ants trudge off, is interesting as an exercise in the viewpoint of ants. As
a story it is less interesting, being an extension of one gag: the description of
surroundings as they appear to the ants, like the sea of crystals or the
"mountain" (wall) they climb to reach it or the "giant silver scoop" (spoon) that
drops ants and crystals into a "boiling brown lake" (coffee). Some of the
vocabulary ("she deemed it ...") seems difficult for the young listener but the
book seems too young, in the appeal of the format, for older children. However,
the striking deco design and the suspense of small creatures at the mercy of large
forces will appeal to both groups. ZS
Walker, Barbara, ad. A Treasury of Turkish Folktales for Children. Linnet
Books/Shoestring, 1988. ISBN 0-208-02206-6. 155p. $17.50.
R* 
Gr. 4-. 
A bounteous collection combines the appeal of
familiar motifs with the surprise of unusual settings and language patterns.
"The Courage of Karazan," for instance, will be recognizable as "The Brave
Little Tailor," but it features a twist of ironic humor in that Karazan is really
lazy and it is his laziness that leads him to victory. The storytelling devices are
traditionally graceful, from beginning ("Once there was and once there wasn't,
when the flea was a porter and the camel a barber") to end ("In time, Kazan
married the sultan's beautiful daughter, in a wedding that lasted forty days and
forty nights, and all their wishes were fulfilled. May we have a bit of their good
fortune"). There are riddles interspersed among the stories: "I looked in the
evening and there were many; I got up in the morning and there were not any.
(Stars)" The 34 stories are organized into sections on animals, fables, Keloglan
tales, Nasreddin Hoca tales, witch/giant/jinn/dragon tales, trickster tales, tales of
fate, and stories of wish fulfillment. The tonal range offers great variety for
storytelling, reading aloud, or just plain entertainment among children fond of
folktales, though the format is formidable for young readers. The guide to
Turkish pronunciation that opens the book is helpful, as is the concluding
glossary, and folklorists will appreciate the introductory note on how the tales
were collected by the curator of the archive of Turkish Oral Narrative at Texas
Tech University. BH
C.U. Storytelling
Wersba, Barbara. Just Be Gorgeous. Harper, 1988. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-
026360-1; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026359-8. 156p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed.
$11.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Heidi Rosenbloom, the sixteen-year-old narrator, has
little self-esteem and little hope of changing this. Her divorced mother wants
Heidi to wear pretty clothes. Heidi prefers shopping in second-hand clothing
stores. She's a miserable loner-until she meets a homeless street performer,
Jeffrey; he's dancing, hoping to be "discovered" and to break into show business.
Heidi falls deeply, generously in love; unfortunately, although Jeffrey returns her
affection, he is gay. She accepts this, still loving him. By the time Jeffrey
moves on, however, he has given Heidi some appreciation of her own worth as a
human being. This is a nicely structured story, and there is depth in the
characterization and compassion that never becomes sticky and is, indeed,
occasionally lightened by touches of humor in the badinage between the
[ 111 ]
protagonists. There are some minor weaknesses in plot details (would Heidi's
mother really fail to realize that when she went off for weekends Jeffrey moved
in, for an unspecified period?) but they detract little from the bittersweet quality
of the story. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Mother-daughter relations
Willis, Ted. 
A Problem for Mother Christmas; illus. by Jill Bennett.
Gollancz/David & Charles, 1988. ISBN 0-575-03884-5. 160p. $15.95.
NR 
Gr.3-6. 
Ho-ho-ho. 
When the regular postman usually
assigned to the chore retires, it's up to Fred (of the Post Office Department for
Wonky Letters) to deliver all those thank-you notes to Father Christmas in
Lapland, via helicopter. He takes along his poetaster daughter Beth and their dog
Battersea, hooks up with an English-mangling female helicopter pilot, and gets
the letters to Lapland only to discover that Father Christmas has disappeared.
While the book has a lot of action this is a contrivance-ridden and very silly
story, written with an archness that's in the worst tradition of English children's
fiction. Beth's poetry: "We're all going to Lapland, / Going across the sea /
Taking letters to Father Christmas, / Battersea, father and me." "She wanted to
make up some more, but she found it very hard to think of a word to rhyme with
helicopter." RS
Wolff, Virginia Euwer. Probably Still Nick Swansen. Holt, 1988. ISBN 0-
8050-0701-6. 144p. $13.95.
R* 
Gr. 6-10. 
When kids leave the special ed. program in Room 19
to become mainstreamed in the regular classrooms, the commencement is called
"Going Up." "Where is Up?" asks 16-year-old Nick, left behind when pretty
Shana leaves the class. He asks her to the prom anyway, saves his money,
learns to dance, gets Shana a corsage to match the dress she plans to wear-and
then she stands him up. Because the narration is so closely tied to Nick's
perceptions, we never quite understand what's wrong with him, except that he
has trouble reading and writing, and works out his thoughts literally, slowly, and
sometimes over-logically, as when he assumes (as do readers) that Shana stood
him up because she didn't want to be associated with the "droolers" anymore.
Not at all, instead, Shana has distracting new problems of her own: "I've figured
out where Up is. It's where you flunk tests all the time, and everybody wants
you to be so smart all the time, it's so much faster.. ." This is less a narrative
than a character study, but few characters have been more intensively realized in
recent YA fiction than Nick. The unsentimental narration follows his thoughts
rather than his speech or actions, vividly conveying Nick's pride in his talents,
his stubborn love and need for a long-dead older sister, and his frustrations in
communicating with others. "What do you mean, Nick? Inside his brain was a
terrible asking voice, almost yelling at him: what do you mean?" RS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Handicaps, adjustment to
Wright, Betty Ren. The Pike River Phantom. Holiday House, 1988. ISBN 0-
8234-0721-7. 153p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
Betty Ren Wright can always be depended upon for an
appealing ghost story, and here, as usual, she fills out the frights with believable
[112]
human relations and complications. Twelve-year-old Charlie has moved to a
small Wisconsin town to live with his grandparents, cousin, and father, who has
just recently been freed after five years in prison. Charlie is embarrassed by his
father, hot-tempered, impulsive, childlike; but he becomes disappointed in his
grandparents as well when they refuse to believe Charlie's story about the
strange woman who lives in an old, decaying house. The woman is a ghost, set
upon revenge for a long-past event that involves both Charlie's grandmother and
his cousin Rachel. Suspenseful and fast-moving, this offers an ending that is
both hair-raising and heartwarming, as Charlie discovers something new and
valuable about his dad. RS
D.V. Father-son relations
Wright, David K., ed. Bhutan; ed by David K. Wright and others; illus. by
Yoshio Kamatsu. ISBN 1-55532-867-9. Thailand; illus. with photographs by
Kei Orihara. ISBN 1-555-32223-9. Both books: Gareth Stevens, 1988. 64p.
(Children of the World). $12.45.
Ad 
Gr. 3-6. 
This series is clearly intended for social studies
assignments. The formats are identical-47 pages of a color-photo essay
introducing readers to a family and their activities, plus 13 encyclopedic pages
covering history, politics, language, religion, geography, etc., with a glossary,
section of suggested research projects or activities, and index. Like all such
books, these suffer from generalization and sometimes contradiction, as in the
statements claiming that all Thai public school students learn English, on one
page, and that not many students learn English before coming to the U.S., on
another. What's valuable is the exposure, through photographic image and
textual description at a manageable reading level, to cultures that are totally
different from America's, especially in emphasis on community cooperation, on
spiritual rather than materialistic values, and on profoundly different social
structures such as the matriarchal household. In the case of countries that have
had little written about them-Bhutan, for instance-the books can be useful as
supplementary report sources despite their flaws. BH
C.U. Social studies
D.V. International understanding
Yorinks, Arthur. Bravo Minski; illus. by Richard Egielski. Farrar, 1988.
ISBN 0-374-30951-5. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
You name it, and Minski either discovered it,
invented it, or did it better than anyone else. 
There's a touch, in this
entertaining picture book, of the child Mozart being shown off by his crafty
papa, as little Minski ("the greatest scientist known to man") takes continental
audiences by storm. His greatest talent? Singing. A few of his inventions?
Oh, the automobile, the airplane, the toaster, eyeglasses. Aspirin. All this is
made funnier by the crisp writing style, and by the glowing extravagances of
full-color illustrations that show elaborate costumes (mixed vintage) on the
gaping, adoring spectators of all ranks. ZS