Adler, David A. A Picture Book of Martin Luther King, Jr.; illus. by Robert
Casilla. Holiday House, 1989. ISBN 0-8234-0770-5. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-8 yrs. 
A brief biography of the famous civil rights leader,
Adler's account covers the basic events of King's life and also provides some
background information on the history of the civil rights movement. King's
boyhood encounter with racism is put in the broader context of segregation, as
his mother explains to him that "there were still some people who did not treat
black people fairly." 
The simple text is enlivened by quotations, from the
famous "I have a dream" speech to King's comment during the Montgomery bus
boycott: "There comes a time when people get tired of being kicked about."
The chronology contains a factual error: the Kings were married in Marion,
Georgia, not Marion, Alabama. The biggest appeal of this biography is its
plentiful watercolor illustrations. Some portraits, like that of young Martin
singing in the choir, are awkwardly drawn. Others are very dramatic: especially
so is the depiction of King's assassination, with his entourage pointing accusing
fingers at the murderer. King's boyhood home is exactly reproduced, and,
[ 128]
throughout, Casilla shows a penchant for detail which gives the illustrations a
photographic quality. Suitable both for storytelling and beginning readers, this
slim volume will meet the information needs of primary graders and spark their
desire to know more about King. RAS
C.U. History-U.S.; Social studies
Aesop. Aesop's Fables; illus. by Lisbeth Zwerger. Picture Book Studio, 1989.
ISBN 0-88708-108-8. 26p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Lisbeth Zwerger's delicate line and economical
composition, her restraint in use of color, and the humor in the animals' faces
make this edition of the fables a pleasure to look at. 
Zwerger has chosen a
dozen fables to illustrate, some as popular as "The Fox and the Grapes," others
("The Man and the Satyr") less well known. The retellings and the moral tags
may be more fully comprehensible to the reader in the middle grades, but this
can also be used for reading aloud to younger children. ZS
Alcock, Vivien. The Trial of Anna Cotman. Delacorte, 1990. ISBN 0-385-
29981-8. [160p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
"'You're my best friend,' she told Anna firmly,
making it sound like an order. Or a prison sentence." New girl Anna is pleased
when Lindy Miller invites her to be the only other girl in the Society of Masks,
even when it turns out that Libby uses her status as "the Silver Lady" to push
Anna, a lowly "Companion," around. Like Stephen Bowkett's Gameplayers
(BCCB 2/89) and Gillian Cross' A Map of Nowhere (BCCB 6/89), this is a
story of secret games gone awry and frightening. 
The Society of Masks
becomes controlled by the Yellow Lord, an older boy whom Libby and Anna
have never seen unmasked, and whose purposes seem far more evil than the petty
rituals previously practiced by the group. While Anna, set firmly on the angels'
side, is not a complex heroine, her eventual scapegoating and "trial" by the
Society is a convincing and satisfying martyrdom. Rough-edged Libby is more
complicated, but she makes a last-minute transformation that has not been fully
prepared by the author. This, on the whole, seems a hastier work than we are
accustomed to from Alcock, with too many loose ends, abrupt leaps of time and
perspective, and a thematic diffusion of the interesting into the obvious,
particularly in the just-say-no finale. But the appeals are many and mighty, led
by the straight-ahead suspense. RS
Alexander, Martha. My Outrageous Friend Charlie; written and illus. by Martha
Alexander. Dial, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0588-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
8037-0587-5. 32p. Library ed. $10.89; Trade ed. $10.95.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
Charlie can do anything, including dive off the high
board and "pick up pennies from the bottom of the pool." Jessie Mae idolizes
him, but young Charlie wisely tells her, "'I don't want to be your hero. I'm
your friend.'" After Charlie gives Jessie Mae a magic kit for her birthday, Jessie
Mae finds she can conjure herself into outrageous situations of her own, like
walking on the ceiling or taking a balloon trip around the world. What Jessie
Mae has learned about herself is not clear, but the matter-of-fact blend of realism
and fantasy provides a satisfying sense of wishes granted. While not as
[ 129
effectively focused as the author's Blackboard Bear stories (BCCB 9/69), the
child's-eye viewpoint is sympathetic. 
Pragmatic pencil and watercolor
illustrations have a tidy appeal. KP
D.V. Age-mate relations; Self-confidence
Baer, Gene. 
Thump, Thump, Rat-a-Tat-Tat; illus. by Lois Ehlert.
Zolotow/Harper, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020362-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-
020361-7. 32p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
Ad 
3-6 yrs. 
Inexorably marching closer, the marching band
becomes both bigger and louder: "Big as ants/ Loud as crickets . .. Big as
crickets/ Loud as birds . .. Big as birds/ Loud as lions/ THUMP, THUMP/
THUMP, THUMP." The poem is infectiously if unvaryingly rhythmic, with a
steady marching beat ("Rat-a-tat-tat/ Rat-a-tat-tat") that underscores readily
remembered variations on a few simple words. Ehlert's marchers look a bit like
schematized gingerbread boys, each a symmetrical array of colored circles,
squares, and rectangles. Their march has a similarly jaunty precision, with
patterns and perspectives that are attractive but overly calculated. Chanted aloud
and marched about, this would make a boisterous story-hour finale. RS
Baker, Keith. The Magic Fan; written and illus. by Keith Baker. Harcourt,
1989. ISBN 0-15-250750-7. 32p. $14.95.
Ad 
5-8 yrs. 
Yoshi loves to build things, but he has run out of
ideas. "Then Yoshi saw something floating toward him." The water brings
Yoshi a magic fan which reveals visions of great new projects: a moon-chasing
boat, a kite that will fly with the clouds, an enormous bamboo bridge, which, it
turns out, saves the people of Yoshi's town during a tsunami. The story is
contrived and inconclusive, with the fan a convenient device, and the boat and
kite unnecessary clutter. 
In any case, the real focus of the book is its
illustrations framed within a fan shape across each double-page spread. The recto
side of each fan is also a half-page that turns, John Goodall-style, to reveal the
fan's next vision. While the fan-shape tends to circumscribe the pictures,
making them less illustrative than decorative, the patterns are carefully
controlled, with a dramatic mixture of glowing tones over a black underlay.
Handsome and harmless. RS
Bergman, Thomas. Finding a Common Language: Children Living with
Deafness; ISBN 1-55532-916-0. On Our Own Terms: Children Living with
Physical Disabilities; ISBN 1-55532-942-X. One Day at a Time: Children
Living with Leukemia; ISBN 1-55532-913-6. 
Seeing in Special Ways:
Children Living with Blindness; ISBN 1-55532-915-2. We Laugh, We Love,
We Cry: Children Living with Mental Retardation; ISBN 1-55532-914-4. Each
book: written and illus. with photographs by Thomas Bergman. 
Gareth
Stevens, 1989. 48p. (Don't Turn Away). $9.95.
R* 
Gr. 2-6. 
An exemplary series on deafness, physical
disabilities, leukemia, blindness, and mental retardation features straightforward
but sensitive texts along with frank, spontaneous, black-and-white photographs.
Bergman has tailored each volume to its particular subject: the blind children are
interviewed rather than described to reflect how they take in the world through
[ 130
hearing; other books convey information through narrative, always underpinning
medical fact with emotional reality. The children here suffer pain, frustration,
and fear with courage and patience, though anger and sadness are also clear from
some of their reactions. One boy, born without arms or legs but ingenious in
the ways he invented to cope, died before the books were finished, a fact the
author is honest about acknowledging ("sometimes the weaknesses of a child's
body go beyond what you can see in a picture. ... Ronny died from an infection
that his body could not fight"). On the other hand, the benefits of therapy-
revealed by detailed shots of special procedures-are apparent, and prognoses
often hopeful. The tone of all the books is humane but dignified, with no
cuteness, evasion, or sentimentality. 
Appended sections give valuable
information to help readers generalize from the specific children depicted,
answering common questions and suggesting things to do and think about,
places to write for further information, and relevant children's fiction and
nonfiction for further reading. Each book also has a glossary and index. This
valuable Swedish import, smoothly translated and adapted for American
audiences, is something to which all children should have access: for staring at,
considering, and discussing. BH
C.U. 
Social studies
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Bryan, Ashley. Turtle Knows Your Name; written and illus. by Ashley Bryan.
Karl/Atheneum, 1989. ISBN 0-689-31578-3. 32p. $12.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Bryan is not only a born storyteller but an
experienced one, and his rhythmic, musically patterned rendition of this West
Indies tale will have children chiming in whenever the main characters' names
appear. Upsilimana Tumpalerado lives with his grandmother, who insists that
he learn and use his full name ("Remember, your name is long, but it's not the
longest"). None of his friends or the animals he meets can remember it, and he's
a little discouraged until Granny challenges him to discover her name, which is
finally divulged by Turtle, the namekeeper of the sea. Granny's name is
Mapaseedo Jackalindy Eye Pie Tackarindy! The pictures dance right along with
the action in a sunny, swirling rush, though sometimes they seem too busily
colored. Liberally laced with onomatopoeia and animal noises and as well as
sound-effective names, this will make a happy contribution to story hours. BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Calabro, Marian. Operation Grizzly Bear. Four Winds, 1989. ISBN 0-02-
716241-9. 118p. illus. with photographs. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Calabro's account of the grizzly bear research done by
Frank and John Craighead is an involving synthesis of bear lore and field
narrative. The Craigheads (identical twin brothers of children's book author Jean
Craighead George) came to Yellowstone Park in 1959 and continued their
research until 1971. They examined grizzly feeding, mating, and hibernating
patterns, tracked their territorial ranges, and observed cub-rearing practices.
Much of their research involved the use of radio collars, allowing the brothers to
track the bears through the wilderness and to their winter dens. Information
about the bears, their habitat, and the research is smoothly incorporated, with
several dramas (bear v. man, bear v. wilderness, bear v. bureaucracy) that provide
[ 131 ]
suspense. 
Photographs, a map, index, reading list, and an extensive
bibliography are included. RS
C.U. Zoology
D.V. Ecological awareness
Castiglia, Julie. Margaret Mead. Silver Burdett, 1989. ISBN 0-382-09525-1.
136p. illus. with photographs. $11.98.
M 
Gr. 7-10. 
For an older audience than Susan Saunders' Margaret
Mead (BCCB 4/87), this provides a better balance of personal details and
professional accomplishments, but suffers from choppy writing and confusing
explanations of Mead's projects and beliefs. While the lack of documentation
makes it hard to distinguish between the opinions of the author and those of
Mead, some of the anthropological analysis seems callous: "It turned out that
the five hundred villagers suffered from hypothyroidism... This hypothyroidism
slowed down the pace of living. That did make it easier for the anthropologists
to get the information they needed"; or again, "This trancelike way of life was
normal for the Balinese." Transitions are awkward: "It was common to see the
bodies of small children floating unwashed and unwanted down the river. There
were intense coeducational sports competitions in which the emotions of small
children were exploited." To her credit, Castiglia conveys the charged and
controversial nature of her subject, who comes across as challenging if
sometimes querulous, admirable rather than likable. Appended are a bibliography
(but no notes), index, and chronology; the book defines "difficult" words within
quoted material in a way that seems both silly and patronizing: "'Colleagues
[fellow workers] as scholars will correct her errors, the perspective of time
[viewpoint in the future] establish her scientific worth.'" RS
Cobb, Vicki. 
For Your Own Protection: Stories Science Photos Tell.
Lothrop, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08788-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08787-
6. 32p. illus. with photographs. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $12.95.
R* 
Gr. 4-. 
This dynamic combination of health information and
SEMs (scanning electron micrographs) has an appeal both scientific and
sensational, particularly the photograph, magnified 551 times, of a house mite
chomping away on skin cells. "The average double bed may contain two
million of them." A blood clot resembles multiple sunsets, before and after
photos illustrate no-more-ring-around-the-collar, a comparison of clothing fibers
shows just why polyester feels so plastic. A photo of the many fibers of a
single thread passing through the eye of a needle makes the proverbial camel's
attempt seem easy. Cobb's text wisely defers to the photographs, but it is still
a smoothly organized narrative of the ways the body protects itself against
threats from within and without, comfortably encompassing both sneezing ("A
sneeze exiting a nose has been clocked at slightly more than a hundred miles an
hour") and Velcro, so named because "one side of the tape is constructed the
same way velvet is, and the other is similar to crochet." Explanations of how
the photos were taken are included; the format is open and clear. This is bound
to be pored and pawed over; refusals to "go wash your hands" should be met with
a peek at page fourteen. RS
C.U. Health
[ 132]
Conover, Chris, ad. Mother Goose and the Sly Fox; ad. and illus. by Chris
Conover. Farrar, 1989. ISBN 0-374-35072-8. 32p. $13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Storytellers will be familiar with this as "The Wolf
and the Seven Little Kids" from the Grimms or, in another variant, as "The
Cock, the Mouse, and the Little Red Hen," which was illustrated in picture-book
format by Lorinda B. Cauley. In Conover's version, Mother Goose's seven
goslings, along with a resident mouse, grumble and groan all morning before
she sets out to market. Then a hungry fox weasels his way in by softening his
voice with flour ("That sounds like Mother!"), concealing his paws with dough
and red shoes ("That looks like mother"), and promising presents if they open
the door ("Oh, that's ... mother, all right... No problem"). Mother Goose
then rescues her swallowed brood by sewing stones into the sleeping fox's game
bag, which pulls him into the stream when he tries to take a drink. The art is
ornate, with sophisticated double spreads alternating a self-satisfied fox with a
self-righteous goose. The endpapers, featuring folktale characters for young
viewers to identify, suggest a self-conscious re-creation, which this is, complete
with lace doilies decorating the opening pages. The drafting is elegant, if
slightly static, and the book design handsome. Elaborately detailed with
traditional Dutch graphic motifs, this is a benevolently tamed version of that
irrepressible theme, "don't let strangers in the house." BH
C.U. 
Storytelling
Cooney, Caroline. The Face on the Milk Carton. Bantam, 1990. ISBN 0-553-
05853-3. [192p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Jane Johnson is feeling bored and ordinary when she
discovers that the missing-child pictured on her milk carton is herself. This is
the kind of paranoid premise that junior high melodrams find highly enjoyable,
and Cooney doesn't let them down, filling her story with suspenseful twists.
While the plot is appealing and well-paced, the writing is often excessive,
abruptly shifting gears between the satiric and the sentimental, and is populated
with unlikely imagery: "Energy spilled out of her like oil from a smashed
tanker." 
Although this is no match for the similarly situated Taking Terri
Mueller by Mazer (BCCB 6/83) or Amy Ehrlich's Where It Stops, Nobody
Knows (BCCB 1/89), it's still an involving story. RS
Coville, Bruce, comp. Herds of Thunder, Manes of Gold; illus. by Ted Lewin.
Doubleday, 1989. ISBN 0-385-24642-0. 176p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
An appealing anthology to hand to horse lovers, this
balances old standbys from Marguerite Henry, Carl Sandburg, Mary O'Hara,
Anna Sewell, and Nathaniel Hawthorne with contemporary stories by Marian
Bray, Peter Roop, Nancy Springer, Mary Stanton, Anne Eliot Crompton, and
Jennifer Roberson. The story backdrops are broadly varied, from Spanish and
Native American to Scythian and prehistoric. Coville himself retells a myth,
the taming of Bucephalus, as well as the folktale of Dapplegrim. Tone ranges
from humor to romance, but every selection features a solid plot with plenty of
excitement to hold interest for reading aloud or alone. The introduction involves
an accessible story from Coville's pony-riding days, and each author is briefly
[ 133]
introduced in italics at the beginning of his or her piece. A few poems are also
included, along with Lewin's vivid watercolor illustrations. BH
Cross, Gilbert B. A Witch Across Time. Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-
31602-X. [192p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 6-10. 
If Hila Feil's Blue Moon, reviewed last month,
wedded atmospheric writing to a bland plot, this junior gothic perhaps does the
reverse-bland writing to atmospheric plot. Hannah, who is fifteen and fresh
out of an institution (where she was sent for depression and anorexia, both
conditions brought on by the car-crash death of her mother and the subsequent
remarriage of her father to his secretary) has come to recuperate with a wealthy
and eccentric great-aunt who lives on Martha's Vineyard. There she becomes
haunted, perhaps possessed, by the ghost of a girl who was unfairly hanged for
witchcraft in the 17th century. 
While there are some clumsy shifts of
perspective, this is enthusiastically plotted and paced, with cliff-hanging chapter
endings ("She realized, with blinding certainty, she was not alone!") that keep
things going. Although it never really evokes the white nightgown/dark moor
chill of the gothic, this has enough of the traditional motifs to satisfy those Lois
Duncan readers looking for something just a little different. RS
Danziger, Paula. Everybody Else's Parents Said Yes. Delacorte, 1989. ISBN
0-385-29805-6. 115p. $13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Incapable, apparently, of writing a book that isn't
funny and lively, Danziger has produced her first story for readers younger than
her usual teenage audience. Matthew, planning his eleventh birthday and then
having it (that's the story line) squabbles with his best friend and makes up,
argues almost all the time with his older sister, and wages rather nastily prankish
war against all the girls in his sixth-grade classroom. It's almost as good as her
other books but not quite-partly because the story line seems stretched, partly
because all the many juvenile characters are unpleasant (which is believable but
tedious) and partly because the present-tense narration is occasionally awkward.
ZS
Dolan, Edward F. America After Vietnam: Legacies of a Hated War. Watts,
1989. ISBN 0-531-10793-0. 160p. illus. with photographs. $12.90.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
"Most legacies of war are dreadful to behold... But
some legacies of war, though born in horror, must be seen as beneficial."
Dolan's opening statement is typical of his sometimes irritating look-on-the-
bright-side approach. 
Of the five "legacies" examined (which include
immigration, the alienation of returning veterans, their psychological scars, the
physical side-effects of Agent Orange, and the MIAs) only one, the immigration
of Indochinese refugees to the U.S., could really be "seen as beneficial." While
the account reads at times like a textbook, it is carefully footnoted and uses case
histories to supplement occasional statistics. The personal accounts, especially
in the chapters on Agent Orange and on the Indochinese refugees, are very
effective. Unfortunately, Dolan fails to mention that the plight of the "boat
people" remains unresolved: thousands face forced repatriation from Hong Kong
[ 134 ]
back to Vietnam, while others in Thailand and Malaysia remain in political
limbo. Focusing instead on those who have made it to America, Dolan
describes both the success stories and the problems of racism and discrimination.
Here and elsewhere, this provides enough historical background to orient readers
unfamiliar with Vietnam but is primarily concerned with problems of the
present. Readers looking for more information on the war itself should consult
Don Lawson's The War in Vietnam (BCCB 12/81) and An Album of the
Vietnam War (BCCB 7/86). RAS
C.U. Social studies
Dunnahoo, Terry. The Lost Parrots of America. Crestwood House, 1989.
ISBN 0-89686-461-8. 48p. illus. and with photographs. 
(Gone Forever).
$10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
In a series lugubriously entitled "Gone Forever," in
which each 48-page volume is devoted to one creature that is now extinct, there
are photographs and drawings, many of which are uninformative, since they are
often of other, currently observable species. Here the color photographs are
handsome but only a few represent parrots or parakeets that were indigenous to
this continent but no longer exist. The writing style is simple, choppy, and
pedestrian albeit accurate in the facts presented. Like other books in the series,
this has a combined glossary and index; the page headed "For More Information"
gives one resource, the National Audubon Society. See also the Horn review,
below, for another book in the series. ZS
Esbensen, Barbara Juster, ad. Ladder to the Sky: How the Gift of Healing Came
to the Ojibway Nation; illus. by Helen K. Davie. Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-
24952-1. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs.. 
A fascinating pourquoi tale to compare with the
Judeo-Christian story of the Garden of Eden, this relates how humans lose their
immortal lives of perfect contentment when an old woman disobeys Gitchi
Manitou's prohibition against climbing a magic vine between the earth and stars
(a metaphorical parallel to the Tree of Life). The woman is trying to retrieve her
grandson, whom spirit beings have whisked up to the sky-kingdom beyond reach
of jealous villagers who have persecuted him. After the vine falls under the old
woman's weight, all people begin to experience disease, pain, and eventually
death, although the spirits promise them some relief through healing plants in
the hands of Mi-di-wi-win, or "Grand Medicine People." Bordered with stylized
illustrations of these plants, the full-color pictures use free-floating perspectives
with strong colors sometimes overlaid by shadowy images. A few of the
compositions are too crowded, but most pattern central shapes harmoniously.
Esbensen cites her source as Ojibway chief Kah-ge-ga-gah-bowh, who wrote a
book in 1850 under the name George Copway, to preserve his people's legends.
BH
C.U. Indians of North America
D.V. Obedience
[ 135 ]
Gowar, Mick. A Hard Day's Work; illus. by Margaret Chamberlain. Delacorte,
1989. ISBN 0-385-29763-7. 27p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. K-2. 
Animated ink-and-wash drawings show the frenzied
activity of the little girl whose monologue is a restrained contrast to the
satisfying havoc she creates as shown by the pictures of her hard day's work at
Dad's office. Samples of the contrast: "Then I drew some pictures on some
other paper and colored those," accompanies a stack of ruined business letters,
and "There were lots of things to play with in the closet" shows chaos in the
office supply closet. This is the sort of disaster humor young children enjoy,
but when it serves for the entire plot it becomes a bit thin; too, there's a trace of
an isn't-that-cute-of-the-kiddy tone that may be more amusing to adults than to
children. ZS
Griest, Virginia. In Between; illus. by Monica Wellington. Dutton, 1989.
ISBN 0-525-44521-8. [32p]. $11.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
2-5 yrs. 
Familiar settings and objects, a minimal use of
words, and a repetition that reinforces the concept of being "in between," aided
by very simple and uncluttered (if wooden) paintings, present one aspect of
location. Moderately successful, this has some pages that are less than clear.
The format uses two pages to orient the audience (one page for front door, for
example, and the next for back door) and then a double-page spread to illustrate
what's "in between," in this case, "my house." Therefore it may confuse a child
to say that the grass is here, the sky is there, and the clouds are in between,
when the clouds are in rather than below the pictured sky. Also not clear: a
dog is standing behind a tree with head visible at one side and tail at another, but
it is hardly accurate to say "my dog is in between" as though head and tail were
not an integral part of the dog. ZS
Gross, Ruth Belov. What's on My Plate?; illus. by Isadore Seltzer. Macmillan,
1990. Paper ed. ISBN 0-02-737000-3. [32p]. Paper ed. $12.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
Ad 
3-6 yrs. 
Dedicated by the illustrator to "tomatoes, potatoes,
chickens, and cows," this where-did-it-come-from guide to food is a palatable
introduction. Using a question-and-answer format ("What's in my dish?"), the
origins of kid-appealing foods (jam, juice, hamburgers, tuna fish) are identified:
"It's chocolate pudding! Where did it come from? The chocolate in chocolate
pudding comes from beans that grow on cocoa trees. Chocolate pudding has
milk and sugar in it too." Stylized but recognizable mixed-media illustrations
generally but not consistently show both the food and its origins; an illustration
of a tomato "growing in the sun" has the fruit floating unattached in mid-air.
And in this book, anyway, the egg comes before the chicken, which is pictured
both feathered and fried. The pages could use some reshuffling, and while the
artistic effects are individually attractive, the whole is an overly diverse melange
of tones and styles. Still, an appealing lunchtime reference. RS
D.V. Everyday life concepts
[ 136]
Gurasich, Marj. Letters to Oma: A Young German Girl's Account of Her First
Year in Texas, 1847; illus. by Barbara Mathews Whitehead. Texas Christian
University Press, 1989. ISBN 0-87565-037-6. 
161p. (A Chaparral Book).
$9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-9. 
Christina's family emigrates to Texas because her
father's political views (he was a "free-thinker") endangered him in Germany.
Some of the story is told from Tina's point of view; letters to her grandmother
in Germany are interpolated and italicized. Although the story has historical
interest and the characterization is adequate (stiff but credible) the book is marred
by a pedestrian writing style in general and a poor use of bilingual address in
particular; the latter is exemplified repeatedly by Tina's use of German words
interspersed within her letters (written in German, presumably, and translated by
convention into English): "What if you have brought us to this place that God
has forsaken for nichts?" ZS
Harrison, Michael, comp. Peace and War: A Collection of Poems; comp. by
Michael Harrison and Christopher Stuart-Clark. Oxford, 1989. ISBN 0-19-
276069-6. 208p. $17.95.
R 
Gr. 9-. 
With notes on neither the poets nor poems, this is an
ascetic collection of approximately two hundred poems on the subjects of peace
and war. Unobtrusively grouped by themes, the poems are arranged in a
thoughtful progression from peacetime ("And all the summer through the water
saunters"-Auden), through preparation for war ("I could not love thee, dear, so
much,/ Loved I not honour more"-Lovelace), its generals and foot soldiers, the
families left behind ("and still I don't know/ where my father/ flying home/ took
a wrong turning"-Libby Houston) and, finally, peace, the collection closing
with Sara Teasdale's "There Will Come Soft Rains." The majority of the poems
are English and modem, but there are representations of many times and cultures.
While perhaps daunting for individual perusal, this is a powerful complement for
classroom use, bringing meditative perspective to battle dates and places, and
thoughtful countermand to simplistic rhetoric. RS
C.U. History; Literature; Social studies
D.V. Peace
Hauff, Wilhelm. The Tale of Caliph Stork; ad. by Lenny Hort; illus. by Friso
Henstra. Dial, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0526-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-
0525-5. 32p. Library ed. $12.98; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
With straight-faced wit, Henstra's pen-and-wash
illustrations elaborate Wilhelm Hauff's story about a Caliph of Baghdad who
tricks a trickster. The Caliph's treacherous cousin Kaschnur disguises himself as
a peddler and beguiles the Caliph and Grand Vizier into swallowing some
powerful magic powder that can turn them into any animal they choose. Then
laughter makes them forget the word that reverses the spell, and they are stuck as
storks until they meet a princess who has been turned into an owl by the same
sorcerer. She helps them resume their true form on condition that the Caliph
will transform her by a promise of marriage. Royalty ridicules nature here, but
the last laugh is on humans, whom the artist catches in their most pompous
[137]
poses and most foolish expressions-the story is fun to tell and the art large and
clear for group sharing. BH
Hayes, Sarah, ad. Robin Hood; ad. and illus. by Sarah Hayes. Holt, 1989.
ISBN 0-8050-1206-0. 76p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Dramatic scratchboard illustrations are reminiscent of
Leonard Everett Fisher's work, and are nicely placed in relation to an abbreviated
adaptation of a classic tale. Hayes has included most of the familiar incidents
and the characters of the longer version, shortening the text by omitting details
and embellishments, so that it is useful for slow older readers as well as those in
the middle grades. While the pruning has resulted in a staccato style of writing,
the story is cleanly adapted and easy to read. ZS
Hermes, Patricia. Be Still My Heart. Putnam, 1989. ISBN 0-399-21917-X.
144p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
This is primarily a formula girl-gets-boy story, but
it's better than most because the writing style has momentum and vitality and
the author has an ear for dialogue that sounds natural. Characterization is
adequate and consistent if not deep, and Hermes has done a smooth job of
patching a serious problem into the matrix of a high school romance. Allison, a
sophomore and the narrator, has a crush on handsome classmate David, and they
are both involved in a school project that is set up to combat prejudice. The
prejudice is directed against a favorite teacher whose husband has AIDS; he is
invited to school for a day so that people can meet and talk to him. The project
is successful, teacher and husband are pleased, and-to the probable expectation
of most readers-girl does get boy. ZS
D.V. Boy-girl relations; Teacher-pupil relations
Hirsch, E. D., Jr., ed. A First Dictionary of Cultural Literacy: What Our
Children Need to Know. Houghton, 1989. ISBN 0-395-51040-6. 271p. illus.
and with photographs. $14.95.
Gr. 3-8. 
See editorial, this issue. BH
Hodges, Margaret, ad. The Arrow and the Lamp: The Story of Psyche; illus. by
Donna Diamond. Little, 1989. ISBN 0-316-36790-7. 32p. $14.95.
M 
5-8 yrs. 
Sent by his jealous mother, the love goddess
Aphrodite, to punish Psyche for her beauty, Eros instead falls in love with the
mortal and visits her nightly in a magic palace. Only when Psyche is prompted
by her sisters to try and look at her lover does Eros fly away, after which Psyche
must endure a series of trials to recover him. Although this is a haunting myth
well adapted by an experienced storyteller, it has been sentimentalized here
through a visual projection of glamorous characters, dramatic poses, and
perennial sunsets. 
The shading and drafting of Donna Diamond's clean
pointillist graphics in black and white, which distinguished Rumplestiltskin,
Swan Lake, and other works, get lost in highly romanticized colors and in stage
settings that seem to come from Greece via Hollywood. The most arresting
picture is Psyche with a knife in one hand, holding her lamp in the other to look
at Eros; the bones of this picture are strong, with gold concentrating the central
[ 138 1
figures against a dark purple background. Unfortunately, the bedraggled feathers
hanging down from the bottom corers of the picture are more distracting than
symbolic of Eros' wings. Other images have a flowery, touched-up-photograph
effect, inadvertently reminding us of how important it is not to dilute the power
of mythology in making it attractive to children. BH
Hoover, H. M. Away Is a Strange Place to Be. Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-525-
44505-6. [160p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
The year is 2349, and twelve-year-old Abby wakes
from a drugged sleep to find she has been kidnapped and, along with many other
children, taken to a newly-built space habitat where they form a slave labor
corps. Bryan, who is Abby's age but far less mature than she, has been her
responsibility on Earth (as a guest at the inn run by Abby's uncle) and she feels
that she must include him in her escape plans. They do escape and, once home,
effect the rescue of the other children by convincing the authorities that those
running the habitat are really in contravention of child labor laws. Hoover does
a good job of creating a believable future world. While the structure and style
are substantial, however, there is little characterization save for the contrast
between Abby and Bryan: she is perspicacious, industrious, and deeply
concerned about other people while Bryan is selfish, rash and manipulative.
Credible but not subtle. ZS
D.V. Age-mate relations; Courage; Resourcefulness
Horn, Gabriel. Steller's Sea Cow. Crestwood House, 1989. ISBN 0-89686-
460-X. 48p. illus. and with photographs. (Gone Forever). $10.95.
M 
Gr. 4-6. 
In the same series and the same format as the
Dunnahoo book reviewed above, this is more flowery and repetitious in its
writing style. Horn begins with a two-page fictional scene that has a minatory
tone; he then waxes eloquent about manatees and dugongs (Steller's sea cow is
an extinct species of dugong) telling the reader, on the first page of description,
that the Sirenia was a "gentle order of giants," that " ... manatees and dugongs
are very gentle," and that "They do not have any aggressive tendencies" all on
one page. Other books in the series are about the Atlantic gray whale, the dodo,
the great auk, the passenger pigeon, the sabertooth cat, and the woolly
mammoth. ZS
Hurwitz, Johanna. Astrid Lindgren: Storyteller to the World; illus. by Michael
Dooling. Viking, 1989. ISBN 0-670-82207-8. 54p. (Women of Our Time).
$10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Like other books in the "Women of Our Time"
series, this is written at a level that is appropriate for its intended audience, being
direct and simple (if sometimes awkwardly phrased) but not so simple that older
readers who feel nostalgic about Pippi Longstocking can't enjoy it. Hurwitz
shows how aspects of Astrid Lindgren's life have been incorporated into her
writing, and she shows-without adulatory comments about the author as a
person or as a creative artist-why she is so appealing and successful in both
capacities. ZS
[139]
Johnson, Neil. All in a Day's Work: Twelve Americans Talk about Their Jobs;
written and illus. with photos by Neil Johnson. Joy Street/Little, 1989. ISBN
0-31646957-2. 89p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Working in jobs as diverse as newscasting, farming,
social work and computer programming, the twelve people profiled here share a
convincing dedication to their chosen work. The first-person format is inviting,
with a balance of work details ("When we get information on a suspect, we have
to get up and move right then. So I could be in a drainage ditch in the next ten
minutes, or under a house, or in a vacant warehouse with big rats running all
around") and job satisfactions: 
"When a suspect that I know is guilty is
convicted, it makes me appreciate the method to the madness and it makes me
see that my job is really, really worthwhile." 
The many black-and-white
photographs show the subjects in action: detective Rhonda Hall on a stakeout,
Elias Sifuentes cooking in his restaurant, Jeff Franklin at the controls of a KC-
10 Air Force cargo plane. While the photos are too gray, this upbeat and
personable resource is attractively formatted and easy to read. RS
C.U. Vocational guidance
Kehret, Peg. Sisters, Long Ago. 
Cobblehill/Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-
65021-0. [176p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
NR 
Gr. 5-7. 
Thirteen-year-old Willow has been making notes, on
waking, about her dreams ever since she began dreaming of Kalos, who lived in
a past Willow can't identify. A vivid experience of being Kalos when Willow
almost drowns leads her to believe that Kalos is herself in a previous
incarnation. There are other facets to the book: the death of a sister (leukemia)
and the confrontation with a best friend who, as a devout Christian, is horrified
by Willow's beliefs. Through hypnosis and thought transference, Willow
finally realizes that the stranger who saved her from drowning was her sister,
long ago in Egypt. When her present-life sister dies, Willow finds that her soul
is present---or was present-as another Egyptian sister, new-born. The writing
style is pedestrian, the characterization shallow, and the plot unconvincing, in
part because the combination of former and present lives is so awkwardly
contrived, and partly because it seems improbable that Willow has such
difficulty, given the clues (the god Amun-Ra, the "ram-headed sphinxes,"
Egyptian clothing) in identifying the land where she, as Kalos, had lived. ZS
Kelleher, Victor. Baily's Bones. Dial, 1989. ISBN 0-8037-0662-6. 182p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-10. 
Like Susan Gates' The Burnhope Wheel, (BCCB
12/89), this is a ghost-time fantasy in which contemporary young people find
themselves reliving the sins of the unquiet dead. When Dee and her brothers
accompany their mother on one of her historical investigations in an isolated
valley in Australia's Northern Territory, they don't expect to find secrets, terror,
and ghosts. The owner of the property is angry and inquisitive, and his elderly
mother is almost too friendly. Kenny, the oldest brother, a retarded seventeen-
year-old, becomes possessed by the ghost of Baily, who seeks to reenact a
terrible tragedy committed over a century before. At the heart of the history is
[ 140]
the cruel treatment of the Aborigines by the white settlers, a theme that is
vividly developed but that eventually gives way to more conventional (and rather
confusing) ghost story trappings. Too much of the story's suspense is meant to
be generated by some secret papers the teenagers find and read in contrivedly
piecemeal fashion; more effectively terrifying are the scenes in which gentle
Kenny becomes a raging, dangerous memory that still seeks vengeance. RS
Kramer, Alan. How to Make a Chemical Volcano and Other Mysterious
Experiments; illus. by Paul Harvey and Kathie Kelleher. Watts, 1989. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-10771-X; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-15120-4. lllp. Library ed.
$11.90; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
This book has so many points in its favor that it's
easy to overlook the cookbook approach and lack of formal hypothesis testing.
Kids will enjoy identifying with 13-year-old Alan Kramer, who has been
dabbling in chemistry since fourth grade. 
Most of the twenty-nine
"experiments" are actually demonstrations, set up as solutions to the mysteries
which Alan has solved in Encyclopedia Brown fashion, using his knowledge of
chemistry. In "The Mysterious Chameleon Rice," for example, Alan explains to
a distraught Chinese restaurant owner why his rice has turned blue: someone
spilled iodine on it. He then invites the reader to reproduce his results: "This is
the experiment I did for Mr. Lee. 
After you do it, you might want to try
detecting the presence of starch in other foods." This hands-on approach is hard
to resist. All but one of the experiments can be done using common household
materials, and the several that we tested worked as promised. The easy-to-
follow, clearly illustrated instructions include CAUTION warnings for steps
which suggest adult supervision (lighting a match, using a stove). Kramer's
low-key enthusiasm makes this ideal for the reluctant scientist RAS
C.U. Science-experiments
Larsen, Rebecca. Paul Robeson: Hero Before His Time. Watts, 1989. Library
ed. ISBN 0-531-10779-5; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-15117-4. 
158p. illus. with
photographs. Library ed. $13.90; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 7-10. 
Although Paul Robeson is known primarily because
of his distinction as an actor and singer, he had given evidence of unusual ability
even before his theatrical career: All-American football player, Phi Beta Kappa,
valedictorian of his class at Rutgers, graduate of Columbia University law
school-for a black man born in 1898, an unusual career. Larsen does a good
job of integrating facts about Robeson's personal life, his professional career,
and his long record as a political activist; she gives good coverage, the biography
is balanced and admiring rather than effusive, and it is forthright about
Robeson's esteem for the USSR. This is not as well written as the biography
by Virginia Hamilton (BCCB 4/75), especially in the use of awkward or
stylistically suspect phraseology, but it is full and detailed. Chapter notes, a
divided bibliography, and an index are appended, but there is no discography. ZS
C.U. History-U.S.
[ 141
Macourek, Milos. Max and Sally and the Phenomenal Phone; tr. by Dagmar
Herrmann; illus. by Adolf Born. Wellington, 1989. ISBN 0-922984-00-X.
84p. $16.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Four zany stories tell how two third graders get hold
of a magic phone that grants wishes, how they convince their neighbor that her
dog Jonathan is the best in the world (after turning him into a human on a field
trip), how they save their friend Charlie from strep throat by reducing themselves
to microscopic size and fighting off his germs, and how they help the zoo
animals speak their mind about children who feed them against the rules and
make them sick. The Czech text is witty, if occasionally self-conscious, and
translated with accessibly colloquial Americanisms. The large-scale watercolor
illustrations are rollicking and fast-paced, with slapstick appeal in scenes such as
the dripping dog-boy Jonathan licking the teacher by way of greeting or
retrieving a bare-bottomed bully from the lake. The writing style is a bit
breathless for young readers, so this will be read aloud to best advantage. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Marrin, Albert. Inca and Spaniard: Pizarro and the Conquest of Peru.
Atheneum, 1989. 
ISBN 0-689-31481-7. 
211p. illus. with photographs.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
With his characteristically involving style, Marrin
describes the devastation of the powerful Inca empire by a handful of Spaniards.
The atrocities committed by both cultures during the sixteenth-century conquest
produced enough blood and gore to fascinate the most reluctant history student
("After an enemy leader had been flayed alive, his skin was stuffed with straw and
his stomach made into a drum. The thin, dangling arms were used to pound
upon his belly ... ."). 
Conscientiously, the author shows that the Spaniards
and Incas matched each other, horror for horror, until the Spaniards got the upper
hand and enslaved the Inca people. This readable text could be useful to interest
a student and/or provide a quick overview on the subject, but it is not solidly
documented. A map misspells Colombia; there are virtually no footnotes, with
sources for quotes mentioned less than a dozen times in 197 pages. It is
impossible to tell where research ends and legend or fiction begins (as Pizarro
dies by assassination, he gasps "'Jesu,' tracing a cross on the floor with his own
blood.") Choosing to write with the flair of a novelist rather than with the
objectivity of a historian, Marrin has limited the research value of his book, but
has probably enhanced its appeal. KP
C.U. History-Central America
Martin, Ann M. Ma and Pa Dracula; illus. by Dirk Zimmer. Holiday House,
1989. ISBN 0-8234-0781-0. 122p. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Jonathan, age nine, had noticed that he and his tutor
didn't have fangs and claws the way Ma and Pa did, but it didn't bother him. He
also accepted the fact that since his parents worked at the blood bank at night, he
too should sleep during the day and have his tutoring at night. One day Jonathan
can't sleep, goes outdoors in the afternoon, and meets a girl his age. That's the
beginning of his Age of Enlightenment. 
There really are telephones and
television, which Ma and Pa have said were just make-believe in the books he
[ 142]
read. One thing leads to another, and Jonathan finally adjusts to the fact that he
is the adopted son of vampires. The story is funny, it's a nice mesh of realism
and fantasy, and it has suspense up to the very end about what choice of life-
style Jonathan will make. ZS
Meek, James. The Land and People of Scotland. Lippincott, 1989. Library ed.
ISBN 0-397-32333-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32332-8. 
[192p.] illus. with
photographs. Library ed. $14.89; Trade ed. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 7-10. 
Not well organized, but adequately written, this is an
overview of Scottish history and of life in Scotland today. It begins with
general information (geography, climate, wildlife, natural resources) and moves
to history, then examines aspects of Scotland's culture with chapters on such
topics as "Progress and the People," "Art and Culture," and "Scotland's Place
Today." The bibliography is divided (more or less by chapters) and includes such
subheadings as "Discography" and "Filmography," which are not extensive. ZS
Meyer, Carolyn. Wild Rover. McElderry, 1989. ISBN 0-689-50475-6. 201p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 8-12. 
When her father, an escaped murderer, turns up at her
music camp, fifteen-year-old Andy takes it in stride. She still remembers his
midnight visits from two earlier escape attempts. But Jimmy Chavez hasn't
seen his daughter for six years and is in for a shock. His "Prettiest Princess" has
turned into an adolescent punk. Andy, too, soon becomes disillusioned with her
father, who not only criticizes her appearance but also seems lost in the past.
As the pair travel through the wilderness, they come to accept each other and are
able to share secrets. Andy's account of her abortion ("I missed a couple days of
school, that was all") and Jimmy's graphic description of how he smuggled
drugs into prison show these two a a matched pair. Though a shifting point of
view gives Jimmy and Andy equal time, we learn more about the father through
frequent flashbacks. The reader is left caring much more about the fate of the
convict than that of his daughter. RAS
D.V. Father-daughter relations
Mother Goose. Songs from Mother Goose with the Traditional Melody for
Each; illus. by Robin Spowart; comp. by Nancy Larrick. 
Harper, 1989.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023714-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023713-9. 70p. Library
ed. $16.89; Trade ed. $16.95.
Ad 
4-7 yrs. 
Fifty-six nursery rhymes have been set to traditional
18th and 19th-century melodies in a wide book designed for lap or piano use.
Each nursery rhyme is presented in large print on the same page as its musical
notation and a full-color chalk drawing. The postmodern-fairyland illustrations
are unusually colored, occasionally funny (in "Mary Had a Little Lamb," the red-
nosed school teacher threatens Mary and her lamb with a ruler) and sometimes
stiffly drawn. While the pictures have a more sophisticated tenor than those in
Wendy Watson's edition, they aren't as witty or as clean-lined. Larrick gives
some interesting historical tidbits in two pages at the back---"More About
Mother Goose," but her notes on "Selected Nursery Rhymes" are mostly filler.
Some give a brief history, some advice ("Don't let children worry about the fate
[143 ]
of the pig" in "Tom, Tom the Piper's Son"), some give personal reminiscences,
and some give instructions on game-playing. This edition is not as appealing or
as wide-ranging as Watson's; it is an adequate song book, providing the melody
lines only, with no chord symbols or harmony notated. KP
Mother Goose. Wendy Watson's Mother Goose; comp. and illus. by Wendy
Watson. Lothrop, 1989. ISBN 0-688-05708-X. [160p]. $19.95. Reviewed
from galleys.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Impish children, plump old ladies, and expressive
animals are depicted in the watercolor illustrations of this extensive new Mother
Goose. Watson has drawn on seven sources for her collection and has filled a
160-page book with familiar (some only represented by their first verses) and
not-so-familiar nursery rhymes. Most of the pictures are tiny, but several verses
are illustrated by a two-page spread of some bucolic village activity; older
children will enjoy searching the picture for the detail described by the rhyme.
Other details will keep children looking through the pages repeatedly-who
could notice the first time through that Old Mother Hubbard is racing by as Jack
and Jill take a tumble, or that she returns with a bone just as they are picking
themselves up? Two indices, one of first lines and a useful one of subjects
("Advice," "Clothing," "Feeling Good") complete the book. With its gently
pointed humor, Watson's appealing collection will take its place with the other
fine editions listed in her bibliography. KP
Newman, Lesl6a. Heather Has Two Mommies; illus. by Diana Souza. In Other
Words/Inland, 1989. Paper ed. ISBN 0-9622789-0-4. 40p. Paper ed. $6.95.
NR 
4-7 yrs. 
The title might lead one to think this is an
adjustment to divorce or adoption story; instead, Heather is the daughter of a
lesbian couple, conceived via artificial insemination. While books on all kinds
of non-traditional families are needed, this one badly falters in the sentimentality
of its approach. Jane and Kate had everything: a dog, a cat, a little white house,
each other. "They were all very happy except for one thing." So Jane goes to a
doctor, who "put some sperm into Jane's vagina." No mention is made of the
fact that the sperm comes from a man, Heather's biological father. Later, when
an upset Heather asks her daycare provider why she doesn't have a father, Molly
is no more enlightening: 
"Not everyone has a daddy . . . You have two
mommies." Some listeners might also question how Jane and Kate knew "their"
baby was a girl before the birth: "Kate put her hands on Jane's belly to feel the
baby kick. 'She's strong,' Kate said." The world of children's books learned
long ago not to fudge on the biological details of birth, nor on the explanations
of parental absence; this book may concern a "new" subject, but it has an old-
fashioned avoidance of the uncomfortable, inexpedient, or ideologically incorrect.
On the other hand, this is a positive, if idealized, portrait of a loving lesbian
family, and it preaches a respect for all kinds of families: "The most important
thing about a family is that all the people in it love each other." Black-and-
white illustrations are saccharine and stiffly drawn. RS
D.V. Parent-child relations
[ 144]
Pluckrose, Henry. Cut It! ISBN 0-531-10849-X. Join It!; ISBN 0-531-10730-
2. Each book: illus. with photographs by Chris Fairclough. Watts, 1989.
30p. (Ways To ... Books). $10.40.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
With the eyecatching appeal of an upscale housewares
catalog, this pair of concept books is as much an introduction to crisp design as
it is to the technologies of joining and cutting. Simpler than Horvatic's Simple
Machines (BCCB 5/89), these books encourage children to find everyday
examples of the concepts; in this respect Join It!, with its pictures of tape,
shoelaces and paper clips, stays closer to the ground than Cut It! which features
lots of don't-touch examples: knives, drills, chainsaws. As is usually true with
this author and illustrator, the concepts are logically introduced and developed,
and the color photos are big, clear, and handsomely arranged. RS
D.V. Everyday life concepts
Quackenbush, Robert. Pass the Quill, I'll Write a Draft: A Story of Thomas
Jefferson; written and illus. by Robert Quackenbush. Pippin, 1989. ISBN 0-
945912-07-2. 36p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
Scratchy-lined drawings washed with shades of brown
and gray face each page of text; at the bottom of the latter are cartoons. All of
the cartoons show two boys playing; in each case one asks "Did you know ... "
and the other answers with a quip. Example: "Did you know that Thomas
Jefferson started the first American political party?" "Did he serve cake and ice
cream?" 
Since the text is serious and direct, at times reminiscent of an
encyclopedia article, the effect is jarring. The facts given in the text are accurate,
but they are densely packed into long paragraphs, the pages unbroken by
headings or other separating devices. ZS
C.U. 
History-U.S.
Raber, Thomas. Joe Montana: Comeback Quarterback. Lerner, 1990. ISBN 0-
8225-0486-3. 6 4p. illus. with photographs. (The Achievers). $8.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Black-and-white photographs, including some action
shots, illustrate a moderately adulatory sports biography. As do most such
books, this starts with a game sequence, in this case the come-from-behind
victory of the 49ers (led by Montana) in the 1989 Super Bowl. The text then
goes back to Joe's boyhood and on through his career in high school, college,
and professional football. The coverage is adequate; the writing is marred by
such awkward phrases as "He also was selected to the Pro Bowl . . ." and
"Although Joe sat out from the first 'replacement' game ... " and is choppy.
This will probably not daunt Montana's admirers. ZS
Rosenberg, Jane, ad. Sing Me a Story: The Metropolitan Opera's Book of
Opera Stories for Children; ad. and illus. by Jane Rosenberg. Thames and
Hudson, 1989. ISBN 0-500-01467-1. 158p. $24.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-9. 
These present-tense libretto-like retellings of fifteen
popular operas are a bit on the dry side, with a lack of natural story-spinning that
might recommend the collection for its own sake. However, the adaptations are
faithful and straightforward, with smoothly incorporated references to major
arias: "But when she sings of the lilies and roses she creates, Mimi reveals
[ 145 1
herself to be more than a seamstress: 
she, too, is a poet." The criteria for
inclusion seem to be a combination of supposed child appeal (Amahl and the
Night Visitors, L'Enfant et les Sortileges, Hansel and Gretel) and production
frequency (Aida, Carmen, Pagliacci); the most obvious omission is Where the
Wild Things Are, the most peculiar inclusion is Die Meistersinger. Full-page
watercolor illustrations, one or two per opera, depict familiar tableaux that are
stiffly peopled but appealingly detailed. RS
C.U. 
Music
Rosenberg, Maxine B. Growing Up Adopted. Bradbury, 1989. ISBN 0-02-
777912-2. 107p. illus. with photographs. $12.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Based on interviews with adopted children and adults,
Rosenberg's text gives background and, when necessary, explanatory exposition,
but most of the fourteen accounts consist of remarks by the adoptees, whose
ages range from eight to forty-eight. Some are unhappy about the fact that they
learned late in life, or from sources other than their adoptive parents, that they
had been adopted; there are differences of opinion about the desirability of trying
to find birth parents, although all the speakers are curious about their birth
heritage. The diversity of individual situations makes it all the more impressive
that there is almost unanimity about the happy relationships with adoptive
parents. The diversity also makes the book interesting as well as informative.
Appended are a relative index, a divided bibliography, a list of sources of help,
and an afterword about current adoption practice and philosophy by the editor of
Adopted Child, a newsletter. ZS
Ross, Tony, illus. The Pop-Up Book of Nonsense Verse; designed by David A.
Carter and Roger Culbertson; illus. by Tony Ross. Random House, 1989.
ISBN 0-394-84964-7. 12p. $12.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
Twenty-one short silly poems, ranging from jump-
rope rhymes through Edward Lear to Oliver Wendell Holmes, lend themselves
beautifully to the pop-up treatment. As in many pop-up books the mechanics
are occasionally an end rather than a means, but the absurdity of a poem
frequently finds its logical three-dimensional expression, as with the poor
distracted centipede who can be made to dance frenziedly under the eye of her
smug tormentor, the frog. Some effects are simple: 
a bite-shaped chunk
removed from the page-edge accompanied by the couplet "Oh, this page of
whitey-white--/ It looked so good, I took a bite." Ross' vivid cast of nonsense
characters, bursting with quirky expression and high-speed life, seem ready to
leap up from the page of their own accord. David Carter, author of sterling pop-
up What's in My Pocket? (BCCB 10/89), gets a major design credit. Readers
who relished Alvin Schwartz's I Saw You in the Bathtub (BCCB 4/89) will find
this an enjoyable step up. DS
Sachs, Marilyn. Just Like a Friend. Dutton, 1989. ISBN 0-525-44524-2.
154p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 6-9. 
Fourteen-year-old Patti's best friend is her pretty (and
silly) mother; only thirty-one, Vi is often taken for Patti's sister. It is only
when Dad, who is much older, has a heart attack and Vi continues to act helpless
[ 146]
and foolish, that Patti realizes how superficial and self-indulgent her mother is.
Grandmother helps, but it takes a while for Patti to become mature enough to
cope with the situation and to understand and forgive Vi. There isn't a forceful
plot here, but Sachs-as she has in other books-explores a situation, a
problem, and a complex of relationships with insight and nuance. ZS
D.V. Mother-daughter relations
Sanford, William R. The English Springer Spaniel; ISBN 0-89686-453-7. The
Shih Tzu; ISBN 0-89686-448-0. Each book: by William R. Sanford and Carl
R. Green. Crestwood House, 1989. 48p. illus. with photographs. (Top Dog).
$10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
This series, which includes the Dalmatian, Doberman
pinscher, Old English sheepdog, greyhound, American pit bull terrier, and
Samoyed as well as the spaniel and the Shih Tzu, has a standardized format of
sections on each breed's history, physical characteristics, training, showing, and
other information helpful to dog owners. Where the writing is straightforward,
the facts are clearly presented and interesting, but the fictionalized conversations
that open every book and sometimes intrude later are distracting and even
patronizing. However, the color photographs are appealing, the texts maintain a
low reading level, and there's a glossary/index included in each volume, making
these useful for young readers who want a short introduction to a specific breed.
BH
C.U. Pets, care of
Schmidt, Diane. 
I Am a Jesse White Tumbler; written and illus. with
photographs by Diane Schmidt. Whitman, 1990. ISBN 0-8075-3444-7. [40p].
$13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
In an honest and unaffected narrative, Kenyon Conner
tells how he practices and performs for the famous Jesse White Tumblers, most
of whom come from the Cabrini-Green housing projects and who substitute hard
work for the trouble they might otherwise get into. "You can't drink, smoke,
swear, take drugs, or have anything to do with gangs.... On some weekends
we do 7 shows in a day. I'm really tired after 7 shows; I feel like I don't have
legs anymore, and I can barely walk. I just want to go to sleep. ... Last year
we did 570 shows and went to twenty different states." Unlike many glamorous
photodocumentaries, this does not gloss over the discipline of performing on the
hot streets during a street fair or a freezing field during the intermission of a
football game. Kenyon's life is not pampered, but his grandmother and relatives
are supportive despite some family trouble ("I guess my mother didn't want me
to stay with her") and he's been been honored as a representative of his team as
far away as Japan. Schmidt has edited the text for a smooth but natural tone; the
organization is unobtrusively self-structured; the color photographs are
spontaneous and action-packed. Kenyon will win readers from the pages of this
book as surely as he wins fans when he "flies" over his teammates on the mat.
BH
C.U. Vocational guidance
D.V. Teamwork
[ 147
Shalant, Phyllis. The Rock Star, the Rooster, and Me, the Reporter; illus. by
Charles Robinson. Dutton, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44527-7. 169p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
This entertaining first novel shows a sure touch with
kids and their school environment. Amanda Simon is the fifth-grade narrator,
and her (mostly) goodhearted efforts at reporting on the class farm project and at
winning several contests (picking the most beautiful apple, decorating holiday
windows, and drawing for requests at a rock concert) sometimes land her in
trouble. The plot develops in well-shaped scenes without becoming episodic,
and the tone is funny without being flip. The relationships that emerge between
Mandy and her best friend Lisa, troubled by her parents' recent divorce, and
between Mandy and obnoxious-rival-soon-to-become-boyfriend Jonathan, ring
true. With a headstrong, likable protagonist who will cry over a fetal chick
spilled from a broken egg or brave a Doberman's attack to save a half-grown
rooster, who knows where a sequel might go? Perhaps to Japan, where both
Amanda and Lisa seem headed for summer vacation at the end of the book.
Whether or not we meet them again, it's comforting to have read about the solid
Simon family, the inspired elementary-school teacher named Mr. Potter, and a
bunch of highly imperfect but basically level-headed ten-year-olds. Amanda may
feed her oatmeal to the cat and sneak Oreos for breakfast, but she reads, as well,
and titles crop up naturally throughout the book, from Anne of Green Gables to
The Pinballs. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Silverman, Martin. Where Babies Come From: Stories to Help Parents Answer
Preschoolers' Questions about Sex; by Martin Silverman and Harriet Ziefert;
illus. by Claire Schumacher. Random House, 1989. Library ed. ISBN 0-394-
92716-8; Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-82716-3. 57p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed.
$12.95.
M 
3-5 yrs. 
Crudely drawn line and wash pictures illustrate a first
sex education book in anecdotal form and with animal characters. Conversations
between Mother Elephant and Little Elephant clarify some of the answers to
questions often asked by young children, or address their conceptions and
misconceptions about sex and reproduction (with a small dash of anti-
dethronement preventive therapy). Patient Mother Elephant copes with her
child's questions, false concepts, anger, fear, and limited ability to assimilate
and/or remember facts. This is adequate, if a bit sugary, but it doesn't do as well
as Joanna Cole's How You Were Born (BCCB 2/85), for the same age group.
The latter, of course, does not use animal characters, which Silverman and
Ziefert feel helps "children maintain the emotional distance that is necessary for
gaining understanding." They offer an appended section headed "Questions
Children Ask and Answers Parents Might Give." ZS
Smith, Doris Buchanan. 
Voyages. Viking, 1989. 
ISBN 0-670-80739-7.
170p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
Janessa, twelve, is in traction in the hospital;
traumatized by the terror of her experience (snatched by a criminal and then
thrown from a moving car) and immobilized because of a broken back, she
rejects most contacts, clinging primarily to her parents and her psychiatrist.
[ 148 ]
Through the device of an unfolding origami boat, Janessa is repeatedly
transported to the world of Norse legendry, where her encounters with the gods
and others lead her toward a resolution of her fears and toward acceptance of her
experiences. Good characters here, and a good narrative style; the psychological
problems and solutions are credible and are vividly drawn. 
The fantasy
elements, also, have pace and color-but they don't quite mesh, so that the
visits to Asgard, interesting in themselves, seem to have little relevance to the
physically and emotionally injured child in a hospital. ZS
D.V. Doctor-patient relations
Solomon, Chuck. Moving Up: From Kindergarten to First Grade; written and
illus. with photographs by Chuck Solomon. Crown, 1989. 
ISBN 0-517-
57286-9. 32p. $12.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
One of the members of a kindergarten class narrates
this photodocumentary-style story, concluding with the graduation ceremony on
the last day of school; there are brief references to summer and then, in
September, the children start first grade with the usual combination of
anticipation and trepidation. The rest (and major part) of the book shows what
goes on in first grade. There are many books about starting nursery school or
kindergarten but very few about that enormous leap from kindergarten to first
grade. This is not unduly rhapsodic, but it is a cheerful, positive introduction to
group learning, and the first person voice adds credibility. 
The color
photographs of an interracial class seem posed at times, but are nevertheless
attractive. ZS
Thompson, Julian. Herb Seasoning. Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-590-43023-8.
[272p]. $12.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 9-12. 
"I know I'm expected to make something of myself,"
says senior Herb Hertzman to his school guidance counselor, "but I don't know
exactly what that is." His eccentric counselor sends Herb to Castles in the Air, a
mysterious place where each spin of a huge wheel allows him to ride the
Upwardlimobile into fantastical career adventures ("It's really on the cutting edge
of space-slash-time vocational technology," explains the woman who operates
the service). Herb explores three possible careers: Crime (Organized or not),
Public Service, and Health Care, each comprising a self-contained story with its
own internal logic and absurdities; each also offers progressively more promising
contact with various incarnations of his ideal woman until finally (in his Health
Care tour, appropriately enough) he explores the mysteries of sex and love.
Although the style is buoyant and exuberant, it is marred by self-consciously
colloquial language and extensive pop-culture allusions; characterization is thin,
but readers with a taste for offbeat action will enjoy the book nonetheless. DS
C.U. Vocational guidance
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Walsh, Jill Paton. Birdy and the Ghosties; illus. by Alan Marks. Farrar, 1989.
ISBN 0-374-30716-4. 46p. $9.95.
R* 
Gr. 2-4. 
Birdy's father is a ferryman, sometimes crossing the
river, sometimes ferrying people across dangerous open water to an offshore
[149
island. Does Birdy really have second sight, as an old woman had told her?
Perhaps she does, for she sees the three "ghosties" on an island trip, and they are
sitting in a seat that had, at first sight, looked empty. And, as often happens in
the best of fairy tales, it's Birdy's tact and kindness that bring fortune to her
family. This is a wholly satisfying short fantasy in the same way that Sarah,
Plain and Tall is a wholly satisfying short realistic story.: The style is graceful
despite its simplicity, the plot is a firm meshing of the fanciful element and the
matrix of its realistic frame; the pace and momentum of the story seem to evolve
rather than to have been imposed. Add good characterization and dialogue to a
colorful setting, and one has-or rather, Jill Paton Walsh has produced-a story
that is a pleasure to read alone or aloud. The story partly depends upon the
British usage of the word "strand"; American children will need it explained to
them. Wash drawings, some in color, have an Ardizzone-like economy of line
and composition. ZS
D.V. Kindness
Widerberg, Siv. The Big Sister; tr. by Birgitta SjOquist; illus. by Cecilia
Torudd. R & S Books/Farrar, 1989. ISBN 91-29-59186-4. 36p. $9.95.
Ad 
3-6 yrs. 
Every younger sibling knows what it's like to have
someone who does everything better and stays up later and has the biggest scabs,
the most interesting secrets, and-always-the biggest piece of cake.
Widerberg's simple text, a phrase a page, is accompanied by a series of comic,
exaggerated line drawings. This may be one running gag with a punch line, but
the punch line will be as appealing to big sisters who read it aloud as it is to the
younger sister, for the litany of envy concludes, "... and always tallest, and
always strongest, and who could cry, cry, cry because she wasn't the youngest in
the family." Unfortunately the authorial voice (the younger sister) is not
established early enough in the story to make the situation clear from the
beginning. ZS
D.V. Everyday life concepts
Wright, Betty Ren. Rosie and the Dance of the Dinosaurs. Holiday House,
1989. ISBN 0-8234-0782-9. 136p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
Apprehensive about her upcoming piano recital,
Rosie convinces herself that her having only nine fingers is the reason she can't
play the closing run of "Dance of the Dinosaurs." Maybe, however, it's because
her Dad has moved to Milwaukee for his job, or perhaps it has to do with the
mysterious intruder who ransacked Rosie's bedroom. The tonal shifts are
confusing: Mom's depression over the prospect of moving to Milwaukee is
affectingly rendered but is set uncomfortably close to slapstick scenes involving
the obnoxious little brother of one of Rosie's fellow piano students. There's no
doubt that this plot is overstuffed, and it's a credit to Wright's practiced
storytelling skills that she manages to keep everything more or less on track.
RS
D.V. Fear, overcoming; Handicaps, adjustment to