Ashabranner, Brent. Crazy about German Shepherds; illus. with photographs by
Jennifer Ashabranner. Cobblehill, 1990. ISBN 0-525-65032-6. 86p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 4-8. 
This picture of a rough and tumble life with four
German shepherds (plus puppies) must have been a refreshing assignment for
Ashabranner pdre etfille. Raising dogs in Virginia's Blue Ridge mountains,
Peggy O'Callaghan has just the life she aimed for: "a rural place with enough
room to raise German shepherds, a place close enough to affluent centers for me
to build a grooming business, teach classes in obedience training, and, in time,
raise and sell puppies." The text is by Peggy as told to the author, and it has an
appealing combination of facts about shepherds, information about training and
grooming, and-most important for kids-lots of dog anecdotes, including two
first-rate snake stories: "As I carefully lowered the flashlight, Zoe suddenly
rushed toward me, snarling ferociously. I looked down and there, only a few
inches from my hand, was another copperhead, coiled and ready to strike."
Vocational portraits are rarely as comprehensive or as involving as this one,
which will convince both dog-lovers and -haters that they made the right
decision. The many photos are of varying quality: some clear and informative,
others fuzzy or gray and poorly placed in relation to the text. An index and
suggested reading list are included. RS
C.U. Vocational guidance
Boegehold, Betty D. A Horse Called Starfire; illus. by Neil Waldman.
Preiss/Bantam, 1990. Trade ed. ISBN 0-553-05861-4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-
34853-1. 48p. (Bank Street Ready-to-Read). Trade ed. $9.99; Paper ed. $3.50.
R 
Gr. 2-3. 
The horse Estrella has come to the New World with
the Spanish and is left alone when her master falls ill and dies: "Estrella stayed
by her man all day and all night. But he did not move. Somehow the horse
knew he would never move again." Found by Wolf Cub, a young Indian boy
who has never seen a horse before, Estrella gets a new master and a new name
when Wolf Cub rechristens her Starfire after the beautiful mark on her forehead.
This is unusual material for an easy-reader, and the simple style has a
seriousness in keeping with the story. "When Estrella saw Wolf Cub walking
[2] 3zwatr;i.
tic~r<~ hQ ttw^imv~c
·ot^wOJ) 
·casrUl f
toward her, she came to meet him. The boy and the golden horse stood side by
side for a long time." Waldman's paintings are lushly colored and dramatic,
posing the horse and human figures against stylized vistas of buttes and clouds.
The illustrations are a little slick, but they have a romantic dignity rarely found
in the genre-it's good to have an easy-reader that's on the solemn side. RS
C.U. Reading, beginning
Brimmer, Larry Dane. Cory Coleman, Grade 2; illus. by Karen Ritz. Holt,
1990. ISBN 0-8050-1312-1. 66p. (Redfeather Books). $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
That "grade 2" in the title is unfortunate: not many
second-graders will be able to read this school-bully story on their own, and
third-graders might feel patronized. Cory doesn't want to invite Delphinius-
called Dumbphinius by Cory-to his birthday skating party, but his mom says
everyone or no one. "And although he wasn't good at arithmetic, there was one
thing Cory knew for sure: Dumb-phinius + party = trouble." Cory is also
troubled because, goaded on by best friend Baltimore, he has secretly opened his
forthcoming birthday present from his mother. Both problems are simply and
satisfactorily resolved in this realistic if overfamiliar story. Pencil illustrations
are stiff but pleasant, and the book has an attractively spacious format. The
story's easy immediacy may overcome third grade pretensions--or for the
second-graders, how about a slice-of-life readaloud? RS
Brown, Ken. Why Can't I Fly?; written and illus. by Ken Brown. Doubleday,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-385-41209-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-41208-8. 30p.
Library ed. $14.99; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
It can't be his long neck, for flamingoes can fly. It
can't be his long legs, for storks can fly. "Why can't I fly?" asks Ostrich, who
(after the failures of a running start and a high jump), constructs an Orville-and-
Wilbur contraption that... doesn't work either. It's friendship that eventually
gives him flight, as all the other birds band together to give him a lift. This is a
cute story, rhythmically patterned and conversationally told. 
Lyrically
naturalistic watercolors provide a delicate foil to the whimsy, allowing Ostrich's
ambitions to be poignantly funny rather than slapstick-silly. Unfortunately, the
last double-spread of the triumphant flight is printed on the inside backcover,
partly hidden by the flap of the handsome jacket. Cheep. RS
Callahan, Dorothy. Julie Krone: A Winning Jockey. Dillon, 1990. ISBN 0-
87518-425-1. 64p. illus. with photographs. (Taking Part Books). $9.95.
R 
Gr. 3-6. 
"I don't want to be the best female jockey in the
world. . . . I want to be the best jockey." Horse-crazy girls will find this
satisfying on two counts: first, the realistic background detail about winning a
place in the racing world; and second, a woman's view of breaking barriers in a
sport that has been reserved for men. The author is honest about Krone's
career-her problems with school, her injuries, and the gypsy lifestyle involved
in constantly moving to the next racetrack. The jockey's determination (nearly
obsession) shows through all the stronger with a glimpse at the price of success.
The text is straightforward, the color photos lively-this will be a popular pick
among the easy biographies. BH
C.U. Vocational guidance
D.V. Perseverance; Sex roles; Occupational orientation
[3]
Chetwin, Grace. Box and Cox;, illus. by David Small. Bradbury, 1990. ISBN
0-02-718314-9. 32p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
The story of Mr. Box and Mr. Cox is based on a mid-
19th century farce by John Morton. David Small's lively paintings have humor
and contribute, through their action and their placement, to the development of
the plot, which is incorrigibly slapstick without being heavy-handed. One of the
men works at night, the other during the day; both are unaware that they share
the same room, a ploy that entails a great deal of frantic moving of the
possessions of each by their landlady. Chetwin carries out the pattern by
replication within exposition ("Box rents a room, second floor rear, in Mrs.
Bouncer's house on Third Street. Cox rents a room, second floor rear, in Mrs.
Bouncer's house on Third Street') so that it's a logical extension when each man
proposes to the landlady and is accepted (in the same words, of course). And
then ... Cox gets the day off, finds Box in his bed, and learns of the double rent
and double engagement. They leave; Mrs. Bouncer is upset at first, but then
hangs out a sign: SINGLE ROOM TO RENT. This is the kind of sitcom
humor and simple variety that should appeal to primary-grades readers. ZS
Cohen, Daniel. The Ghosts of War. Putnam, 1990. ISBN 0-399-22200-6.
95p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 5-8. 
Starting with his usual apologia, "The Reader is
Warned (Again)," Cohen launches his first chapter with several random examples
of haunted British battlefields before settling into a pattern of one story per
chapter. These include ghosts of 12th-century Samurai, World War I, the
American Revolution, early 19th-century U.S.-British naval conflicts, the War
of 1812, the Civil War, and World War II, from which most of the tales are
drawn. The best of the tales are tightly shaped and haunting; in one, an RAF
mechanic shares a beer, during a North African desert sandstorm, with a German
tank driver whom the British soldier later discovers to have been dead for a
month. Occasionally, however, the narrative is anticlimactic, as in the case of
some taped voices that provide " . . . just another interesting bit of evidence
about ghosts that has been collected. It's the sort of thing that keeps you
wondering." More or less chronologically arranged, this suffers from a few
organizational lapses, with a World War I story sandwiched between Samurai and
1776, but the title alone will make sure the book circulates among even the
most reluctant readers, who can savor the blend of legend and history. BH
Cooper, Ilene. Choosing Sides. Morrow, 1990. ISBN 0-688-07934-2. 218p.
(The Kids from Kennedy Middle School). $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
Jonathan's tall for a sixth-grader, and he's eager to try
out for the middle school basketball team. Even as his abilities improve,
Jonathan slowly realizes he doesn't enjoy basketball, while at the same time he
struggles with a topic for an English assignment-a paper on a moral dilemma.
Of course, the reader recognizes Jonathan's dilemma immediately, but Cooper
makes certain there's no easy solution. She gradually adds more and more layers
to the problem-pressure from Jonathan's athletic and macho father, Jonathan's
frustration at not having time to read, his embarrassment at a newly discovered
interest in classical music. Meanwhile, Jonathan goes to his first dance, steals a
dirty magazine from a barber shop, and teeters between confidence and
mortification in several funny scenes. During a dance lesson from Robin, his
[4]
romantic interest, Jonathan suddenly remembers the mole next to his ear: "he
started imagining how the mole must look from close up. Big and brown, like a
mud pie. It was probably making Robin sick." Deftly combining the humor
and pain of early adolescence, this book does just what a series book should-
makes you want to read the next one. KP
D.V. Growing up
Cooper, Kay. Where in the World Are You?; illus. by Justin Novak. Walker,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-6913-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-6912-8. [80p].
Library ed. $14.85; Trade ed. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
M 
Gr. 4-7. 
A disorganized collage of facts, jokes, types of
reference sources, determinedly cute humor, and bits of information designed
(apparently) to establish concepts of location and orientation, this does not
achieve what may be assumed to be its goal: helping readers understand how to
find a place and why it is necessary to do so. Interpolated through the text are
"Just for fun" sections, such as finding out routes of bird migration or, "just for
fun,... ask your parents to list 'likes' and 'dislikes' and then try to figure out
where they'd like to live." There are some facts buried in the book, so that it
may be of some minimal use despite its weaknesses of organization and writing
style. It's odd that a book devoted to geography and map-reading skills contains
no maps, and the author's suggestion that the terrains of Mongolia and
Wyoming are so similar because of their shared latitude demonstrates some rather
fuzzy thinking. A glossary includes some terms that may be unfamiliar, and
some as common as "island" or "lake." ZS
C.U. Geography
Corbett, Pie, comp. The Playtime Treasury; illus. by Moira and Colin
Maclean. Doubleday, 1990. ISBN 0-385-26448-8. 125p. $16.95.
R 
5-10 yrs. 
While advice to "try singing this one" is a bit
meaningless without the provision of music, Corbett's collection of traditional
games and rhymes is otherwise a handy manual for bored children and their
minders. The six brightly illustrated and spaciously designed sections include
"action rhymes and singing games"; "dancing rings and games"; "hand-clapping
rhymes"; "dipping and counting-out rhymes"; "skipping and ball-bouncing";
"hiding, guessing, tickling, and chasing." The familiar ("You put your right
arm in ... ") and the near-familiar ("This little pig had a rub-a-dub. This little
pig had a scrub-a-scrub") comfortably rub shoulders with the not-so-familiar
("Criss-cross applesauce. Spiders climbing up your back. Cool breeze, tight
squeeze, and now you've got the shivers"). That last is a "tickler" and, like
many of the games included, will appeal to a wide age range. While the lack of
melody lines for the songs is a problem, title and subject indexes ("Boisterous
games," "Quiet games,") are included. RS
C.U. Recreation, family
Crew, Linda. Someday I'll Laugh about This. Delacorte, 1990. ISBN 0-385-
30083-2. [17 6p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
Shelby is twelve, and disturbed about the changes she
sees in her thirteen-year-old cousin Kirsten. The cousins used to enjoy the same
things during their families' annual vacation together, but all Kirsten seems to
care about now is boys and makeup. She's even made a friend of sophisticated
[5]
Tanya, whose father is building a big new house that obstructs the ocean view
and the road. Tanya is a Sweet Valley stereotype of a spoiled girl who has
everything but love, and her opposite number, an elderly neighbor who dispenses
wisdom and cookies, betrays similar mass-market roots. Not quite the follow-up
one would expect to the author's tough first novel, Children of the River (BCCB
2/89), perhaps, but this is an efficiently engaging summer story. Kirsten,
Shelby, and their extended family are a good-natured group, with comic relief
provided by little Brandon, who manages to be precocious without being cute.
A book for the beach. RS
D.V. Cousins
Dorros, Arthur. Rain Forest Secrets; written and illus. by Arthur Dorros.
Scholastic, 1990. ISBN 0-590-43369-5. 
[40p]. 
$13.95. 
Reviewed from
galleys.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
A continuous text is adequately organized,
competently written, accurate in providing facts, and fairly broad in its scope.
The details, alas, are weak in the many representations of fauna in this threatened
type of ecosystem. Some of the animal forms are awkwardly drawn, and the
accuracy of comparative sizes seems dubious. The bright colors of jungle flora
are attractive; save for one formal border, plants are not identified. Dorros
describes the layers of growth, refrains from rhapsodizing about tropical beauty,
and discusses-with a restraint that gives the text dignity for readers in the
primary grades-life cycles within the ecosystem, the current rate of rain forest
destruction, the greenhouse effect, and other damage to the environment when
forests go. A directory of rain forest organizations is included. ZS
C.U. Nature study
Ehrlich, Amy, ad. Pome and Peel: A Venetian Tale; illus. by Liszl6 Gil.
Dial, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0288-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0287-6.
32p. Library ed. $11.89; Trade ed. $11.95.
R 
5-8 yrs. 
This adaptation of a Venetian fairy tale revolves
around the motif of loyal brothers who love the same girl. Conceived when a
lady and her servant eat a magic apple, the boys, raised as twins, are devoted to
each other even after Pome wins the heart of a wizard's daughter whom they both
adore. It is Peel who sacrifices himself to save the girl from the wizard's curse
by cutting off the heads of a beautiful but treacherous horse and dog, and later, of
a monster that appears in the bridal bedroom-all three creatures, from even a
remotely psychological viewpoint, representing jealousy. The ending here is a
happy one; the wizard, who has turned Peel into marble, relents and brings him
back to life. Gil's elaborate, full-color illustrations give plenty of scope to the
story's inherent drama. Though occasionally stiff, the drafting is decisive and
the compositions warmly developed, with strong architectural detail as backdrop
to the gracefully costumed cast. The total effect is sophisticated enough to
appeal beyond the older picture book crowd to romantic fairy tale readers. The
bronze horse used by the boys to approach and court the sequestered girl may
ring a few cultural literacy bells, too. BH
D.V. Loyalty
[6]
Facklam, Margery. And Then There Was One: The Mysteries of Extinction;
illus. by Pamela Johnson. 
Sierra Club/Little, 1990. ISBN 0-316-25984-5.
56p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
A smoothly logical text presents the case of species
that have disappeared throughout centuries of history and prehistory, a
perspective missing in many such books. After a poignant introduction to
"Lonesome George," a Galipagos Island tortoise that is the last of its kind,
Facklam explains various reasons for extinction-over-hunting, displacement by
"immigrants" such as rats or starlings, pollution, habitat destruction, etc.-with
strong, sometimes startling, supporting evidence. Her examples build an urgent
sense of commitment to endangered species' survival, though there is not
enough emphasis on their importance to our own survival-ecological awareness
is more a matter of necessity than of charitable interest. That caveat aside, the
book is a tour de force in arguing for ecological balance. The fine-honed pencil
drawings, spacious format, and creamy paper contribute to a handsomely
designed volume. BH
D.V. Ecological awareness
Feuer, Elizabeth. Paper Doll. Farrar, 1990. ISBN 0-374-35736-6. 
186p.
$13.95.
Ad 
Gr. 7-12. 
Leslie lost her legs in an accident when she was
seven, but now, as a senior in high school, her biggest problem (shared with her
troubled older brother Steve) is her parents. Her father is loving but demanding;
her mother is overprotective: "When I get cut, my mother bleeds." Leslie finds
refuge from them in her violin-playing, but even that becomes a weapon when
her father tries to force her to practice. Like many other first-person YA novels,
this one is over-expository, with conversation and psychological analysis
substituting for story. "Because of the way my father talked yesterday-talked
about both of us-I began to see what Steve meant. That it is easy for me and
hard for him. To do the right thing. Somehow, I got a taste of what he must
feel, and I knew it must be true that Steve can't change. Because he wouldn't
suffer like that if he could help it." While some readers will enjoy the pop-
psychologizing he-said-I-meant-she-feels pattern, they will probably feel cheated
that most of the drama (Leslie introducing her boyfriend to her parents, for
example) is offstage, only brought on later as a topic of conversation. The
romance between Leslie and Jeff, a boy who has cerebral palsy, is sweet, and
occasions some tenderly discreet lovemaking scenes. Both teens' disabilities are
matter-of-factly handled by the author, treated with the same honesty that
informs the central family portrait. RS
D.V. Handicaps, adjustment to
Fowler, Zinita. The Last Innocent Summer. Texas Christian University, 1990.
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87565-045-7. 145p. (Chaparral Books). Paper ed. $11.95.
R* 
Gr. 6-9. 
Skeeter, the ten-year-old narrator, tells the story of a
murder that rocked the small Texas town in which she lived, and of how her
family's involvement changed their lives in that troubled summer of 1931. The
suspected killer is a prostitute, and the victims her two young daughters.
Arsenic poisoning is suspected, and Skeeter's father, a chemist, is asked to help
with the autopsy. From this sad situation, Skeeter learns that lawyers can be
dishonest, that mothers can fail to love their children, and that children don't
[7]
always love their mothers. Fowler's deftly crafted story has depth and pace and a
picture of a community that may remind some readers of Harper Lee's To Kill a
Mockingbird. ZS
D.V. Ethical concepts; Family relations
Front, Sheila. Never Say Macbeth; illus. by Charles Front. Doubleday, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-41290-8; Paper ed. ISBN 0-38541289-4. 32p. Library
ed. $13.99; Paper ed. $6.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-4. 
First published in England, this has the appearance of
a picture book, but both the vocabulary and the concepts make it more
appropriate for independent readers. The clothing indicates an Edwardian setting
for a story about stage-struck Jem, who, despite his lack of experience, gets a
job with the great actor-manager Sir Montague Worthington-Browne. As a
menial stagehand, Jem is impressed by the world of the theater; he is warned
about various theatrical superstitions, one of which is saying "Macbeth" aloud.
He forgets, he says it, and a farcical scene follows in which Jem crawls onstage
chasing a cat that is chasing a mouse, with minor disasters to follow.
Moderately amusing but burdened by trite turns of plot, this is better illustrated
than told, with nicely composed paintings that have humor and drama and that
show color and light effectively. ZS
Gallo, Donald, comp. Speaking for Ourselves: Autobiographical Sketches by
Notable Authors of Books for Young Adults. National Council of Teachers of
English, 1990. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8141-4625-2. 2 31p. illus. with photographs.
Paper ed. $12.95 (NCTE Members $9.95).
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
Behind the professional-book look of the cover is a
readable collection of eighty-seven autobiographical sketches by popular YA
novelists. Each two- or three-page entry is accompanied by a photo (or, in the
cases of Betancourt and Platt, a caricature) and a (variously complete) list of the
author's books. The paperback format has more YA appeal than the over-
inclusive Something about the Author, and the essays are good-natured,
anecdotal, and generally informative as to family background and writing
influences. Virtually all the writers remember voracious childhood reading
habits; many also recall the pleasure of being read aloud to by parents. Useful
for author reports, and, for teachers and librarians, a handy source for booktalk
anecdotes (as well as Robert Newton Peck's phone number). RS
C.U. American literature
Gregory, Kristiana. The Legend of Jimmy Spoon. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1990.
ISBN 0-15-200506-4. 164p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-7. 
A bibliography indicates that the details of Shoshoni
life in the mid-nineteenth century are based on careful research. Certainly, they
are carefully and consistently incorporated into the story, a novel that describes a
twelve-year-old white boy's happy assimilation into a Shoshoni tribe. Jimmy
Spoon had ridden to the camp with two Indian boys but hadn't realized he was
meant to stay. For a combination of reasons-and despite intermittent pangs
about his real mother-Jimmy is not unwilling to adopt the Shoshoni way of
life as the tribe's chief and his old mother have adopted Jimmy. Eventually,
Jimmy must decide whether to stay with the people he has come to love or to
return to his white family. Learning that his father has threatened to start a war
[8]
if Jimmy is not returned, the boy makes the decision: he will return to his
family, in part because of his mother and in part to preserve the peace for his
adoptive Indian family. The motivation for Jimmy's original decision to remain
seems weak, but the setting of the Indian community and the events that happen
during Jimmy's stay there are vividly real, while the writing is smooth if not
powerful. 
ZS
D.V. Intercultural understanding
Hall, Lynn. Murder in a Pig's Eye. Harcourt, 1990. ISBN 0-15-256268-0.
116p. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Did Henry Siler kill his overbearing wife, Bella?
Things look suspicious to Bodie Tureen, his little sister Gracie, and his friend
Zach. Not only has Henry sliced up his arm with his old chain saw, but Bella
has mysteriously disappeared, and Henry won't say where she's gone. Is she in
the compost pile? Or down the cistern? Or has she been eaten by Henry's prize
pig? The characters each have understated quirks that give the story flavor-
Henry loves red licorice whips, Bodie's mom secretly wants to be a stand-up
comic, Bodie is an unnaturally tidy teenager ("Sometimes if he was expecting
friends, he unmade the bed and threw clothes around, so that he wouldn't be
suspected of being a neat-freak"). The down-home feeling is reminiscent of
Betsy Byars' Blossom family books. Keeping the reader in amused suspense as
Bodie tries to uncover the body time after time, Hall reveals as ready a hand at
farce as at dog and horse stories. KP
Hendry, Frances Mary. Quest for a Maid. Farrar, 1990. ISBN 0-374-36162-2.
[288p]. $13.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 6-9. 
In a deft blending of fantasy and historical fiction,
Hendry tells the story of Meg, who begins with "When I was nine years old, I
hid under a table and heard my sister kill a king." This is loosely based on the
violent events that followed the death of Alexander III of Scotland near the end of
the 13th century. Meg suspects a much-loved older sister of using sorcery to
achieve regicide, and she is torn between that love and loyalty to the crown in
the person of the young Norwegian princess who is the rightful heir. Fast-
paced, dramatic, colorful in its historical details, and written with control of style
and characterization, this strong story is preceded by an author's note that draws a
distinction between the fact and the fiction that follows. ZS
D.V. 
Sisters
Hoban, Russell. Monsters; illus. by Quentin Blake. Scholastic, 1990. ISBN
0-590-43422-5. 28p. $12.95.
R 
6-8 yrs. 
John likes to draw monsters, especially violent ones.
His latest sketch has the makings of a very nasty creature: even though John
has only drawn its tail, "it's such a serious-looking tail... whatever's on the
other end of it is going to be so very big." Mom and Dad are understandably
worried about his obsession, but John's art teacher, Mr. Splodge, reassures
them: "I shouldn't worry about it if I were you ... Boys are naturally a little
monstrous." When Dr. Plunger asks John to finish his drawing, he willingly
complies, with startling results. At last John has gotten this monster business
out of his system. 
"No more monster drawings?" asks Mom hopefully.
"'Drawings?' said John as the door behind him slowly opened. 'Who needs
[9]
drawings?'" Quentin Blake's scratchy watercolors are cleverly matched with
convincing reproductions of John's magic marker drawings on assorted scraps of
paper. His monsters are a zany assortment of frightful creatures. A good choice
for graduates of Where the Wild Things Are. RAS
D.V. Imaginative powers
King-Smith, Dick. The Jenius; illus. by Peter Firmin. Gollancz/Trafalgar
Square/David & Charles, 1990. ISBN 0-575-04083-1. 44p. $13.95.
R 
Gr. 2-4. 
Line-and-wash drawings, animated and humorous,
reflect the ebullience of a story that adroitly mixes fantasy and realism.
Certainly realistic are Judy's determination to train the single offspring of her pet
guinea-pigs and the ho-hum boredom of her parents when she boasts about the
remarkably clever baby she has named "Jenius." There is dialogue between the
animals but it's not overdone, and it echoes in amusing fashion the parent-child
relationship of Judy and her parents. Judy's misspellings in her "Diary, Privit,"
are a bit wearing, but the entries give contrast to the narrative. Jenius does learn
an amazing number of tricks-but Judy's boasting in school leads to disaster
when a frightened Jenius goes rigid. On the other hand, he gives a stellar
performance for Judy's skeptical father. ZS
D.V. Pets, love for
Klause, Annette Curtis. The Silver Kiss. Delacorte, 1990. ISBN 0-385-30160-
X. [208p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R 
Gr. 7-12. 
To blend a story of a girl whose mother is dying of
cancer with a story of an eternally-teenaged vampire is certainly audacious;
what's more, this first novel is sexy, scary, and moving. Zoe feels deserted: by
her dying mother; by her father, who tries too hard to shield Zoe from what's
happening; by her self-centered best friend Lorraine, who moans about moving
to Oregon and refuses to let Zot talk about her mother. "'Listen,' said Lorraine,
'you don't really feel like talking now."' Simon's mother has been dead for
centuries, her blood sucked dry by Simon's evil brother, Christopher. Locked in
a struggle for supremacy and revenge, the two vampire brothers chase each other
across time and space, right to Zod's town, where Christopher is on a murderous
spree. The gruesome bits are viscerally effective, all the more so for their well-
spaced restraint and for the controlled discretion which surrounds them. Neither
is the love story between Simon and Zoe for the faint of heart: "The fangs slid
from their sheaths. 'Believe this,' he whispered, and kissed her neck softly.
'And this, and this.'" Joining the mysteries of sex and death, the vampire myth
is darkly erotic, a passion this novel evokes without over-the-top exploitation.
It's just a kiss. RS
Koralek, Jenny. Hanukkah: The Festival of Lights; illus. by Juan Wijngaard.
Lothrop, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09330-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09329-
9. 30p. Library ed. $12.88; Trade ed. $13.95.
R 
4-6 yrs. 
"Long, long ago a wicked king called Antiochus
marched into the city of Jerusalem with many soldiers." The tone of this
simplified text is almost folkloric, rendering it more suitable to youngest
listeners than some of the other recent fine picture books about Hanukkah (see
Amy Ehrlich, The Story of Hanukkah, BCCB 12/89). Facing each page of text
is a formal, full-page illustration (framed, ironically, between marbled
[ 10 ]
Corinthian columns) depicting a scene from the story with distant elegance. The
style is dark and sometimes heavy, but the effect, for the intended audience, is
one of a safe framework without compromise to a fierce story. BH
C.U. Holidays
Kroll, Steven. Gone Fishing; illus. by Harvey Stevenson. Crown, 1990.
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-57590-6; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-57589-2. 48p. Library
ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
R 
5-7 yrs. 
Eight brief episodes-each of about two pages of
print per story facing full-page wash drawings-recount Willie's release from
school, departure for the family beach house, preparation of the boat, and all-day
fishing trip. This is an idyllic venture, including a dog named Boris and a father
who calls his son Sport and hugs him when they lose the catch of the day. It's
not total wish fulfillment, because they never do hook the big porgy Willy
hopes for, but there's always tomorrow, and young listeners will fantasize
themselves right alongside Willie on the bay. The full-color illustrations are
well drafted, especially striking in the scene where a flashlight outlines a deer at
night. This is low-key vacation fare that will appeal especially to the pole-and-
bait set, for whom not enough picture books are tailored. BH
D.V. Father-son relations
Lauber, Patricia. Seeing Earth from Space. Orchard, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-
531-08502-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05902-2. 80p. illus. with photographs.
Library ed. $19.99; Trade ed. $19.95.
Ad 
Gr. 5-8. 
"Trying to see the earth from its surface is like
looking at a large painting while standing up against it. We see only details.
To see the picture, we must back off." These finely reproduced, generously
sized, full-color photos of the earth from space do inspire a subtle kind of
paradigm shift, allowing us to see ourselves in a whole new way. The book
opens with a randomly arranged gallery of gorgeous pictures that are sometimes
vaguely or incompletely captioned. "The dark area shows the volcanoes of the
Tademait Plateau and a region that has been thrust upward" captions a photo in
which no volcanoes are visible, and in which "upward" is an awkward reference
in describing a 2-D, bird's-eye photograph. Subsequent discussion of the various
kinds and methods of space photography (infrared film, weather satellites, radar,
astronaut photos) is more clear, although some of the references to details within
the pictures remain indefinite. Pointers or accompanying maps would have
helped viewers locate particular land forms discussed in the text but not
definitively locatable in the photographs. North-south orientation for the
photographs would also have been useful, allowing readers to match a map-seen
site with the real thing. While its limitations are sometimes frustrating, this is
a handsome, browsable eye-opener. Photography buffs will miss technical notes
on the pictures, but a glossary, index, and reading list are included. RS
D.V. Ecological awareness
Lingard, Joan. Tug of War. Lodestar, 1990. ISBN 0-525-67306-7. 
194p.
$14.95.
R 
Gr. 7-9. 
In a World War II story that begins in Latvia in 1944,
the Petersons family decides to flee to safety and to go first to Leipzig, where an
old friend will take them in. While they are travelling through Poland, fourteen-
[11]
year-old Hugo becomes separated from the others, who have no choice but to go
on. Lingard builds suspense by moving back and forth from Hugo's story to
that of his twin sister, Astra, and in so doing she gives a harrowing picture of
Germany during the war and in the difficult years that follow. Eventually, Astra
and Hugo meet by chance in Hamburg, where he has been living for several
years with a kind German family and where the rest of the Petersons are stopping
briefly before emigrating to Canada. While the story has moments of danger or
dramatic tension, it moves deliberately to create-convincingly-the mood of a
displaced population that must take each slow, difficult day as it comes.
Characterization is not deep, but it is consistent; historical details are smoothly
incorporated into a narrative of fear and courage. ZS
D.V. Brothers-sisters; Courage
Lister, Robin, ad. 
The Legend of King Arthur; illus. by Alan Baker.
Doubleday, 1990. ISBN 0-385-26369-4. 96p. $15.95.
R 
Gr. 5-7. 
"My name is Merlin, a name to conjure with," and
this restrained first-person narrative does indeed summon afresh the story of
Arthur from the magician's point of view. The lives, deaths, and loves of legend
take on the kind of fictional immediacy, for young readers, that adults have long
enjoyed in the form of The Mists of Avalon and other novels. Beginning with
Merlin's triumph over the treacherous Vortigern and alliance with Uther, Lister
devotes each chapter to an episode in the Arthurian cycle, ending at the battle
with Mordred that demolishes or disperses the last knights of the Round Table.
Full-color illustrations, while indulging in the elaborate glamor of
commercialized fantasy, show skill in drafting, variety of design (from dramatic
double spreads to miniature silhouettes), and occasional depth of portraiture, as
in a small, haunting picture of Igrayne. All in all, this is a vivid introduction
for young readers and a sure hook for the Dungeons and Dragons set. BH
C.U. English literature
D.V. Loyalty
Magee, Doug. All Aboard ABC; by Doug Magee and Robert Newman.
Cobblehill, 1990. 
ISBN 0-525-65036-9. 
49p. illus. with photographs.
$13.95.
R 
4-7 yrs. 
Color photographs of good quality fill, or on some
pages almost fill, the space but leave room for easy-to-read block type; upper and
lower case letters are introduced, and where there is explanatory text, it is brief
and uses red for the word that begins with the letter being stressed. Occasionally
the author/photographers have stretched: after freight car, grade crossing, and
horn, for example, the "i" is illustrated by "Inside, looking out, this is what the
engineer sees." Still, the lure of vehicles and transportation for young children
will undoubtedly make them oblivious to such a small weakness. Not a great
alphabet book but a very good train book. ZS
Markle, Sandra. The Young Scientist's Guide to Successful Science Projects;
illus. by Marti Shohet. Lothrop, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07217-8; Paper
ed. ISBN 0-688-09137-7. 112p. Library ed. $12.88; Paper ed. $6.95.
NR 
Gr. 5-8. 
While many kids who want a "science fair book" are
happy with instructions for a baking soda volcano, this book is for those
needing to design their own projects from the beginning. Unfortunately, the
[ 12 ]
book fails to take its own advice: "Before you start writing, you need to
organize your material." It defines, for example, controlled variables and
manipulated variables before getting around to hypothesis. At the end, it brings
up something else called purpose, which seems to be the hypothesis rephrased as
a question. Occasionally, manipulated variables are here called, for no apparent
reason, manipulating variables, and the author once uses effect for affect.
Sample experiments are confusingly designed, and one which involves ice
formation in salt water has a misstated hypothesis and is (again for no apparent
reason) printed in two different chapters. One experiment on electromagnetism
is inaccurately illustrated, and a reference to accompanying "photographs" is odd,
since the book is illustrated with drawings. RS
C.U. Science-Experiments
Marshall, James. Fox Be Nimble; written and illus. by James Marshall. Dial,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0671-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0760-6. 48p.
Library ed. $9.89; Trade ed. $9.95.
R 
Gr. K-3. 
Fox be nimble, Fox be quick-but not quick enough
to keep from falling over his feet. He does make the TV news by playing rock
star (while the kids he's supposed to be babysitting float away on balloons) and
he tries to follow them (and gets stranded on a high-diving board). He even
absorbs a little bravery from his sister and, best of all, proves himself capable of
showing off in style with a cheerleading baton. He is, as usual, one of the
liveliest leaders of the easy-to-read pack, and near enough to the foibles of all of
us to appeal doubly to children too often confronted with placid little animals at
this stage of the reading game. Marshall's full-color illustrations keep up with
his characters, an appealingly off-the-cuff cast. BH
C.U. Reading, beginning
Moore, Robin. The Bread Sister of Sinking Creek. Lippincott, 1990. Library
ed. ISBN 0-397-32419-7; Trade ed. ISBN 0-397-32418-9. 154p. Library ed.
$12.89; Trade ed. $12.95.
NR 
Gr. 5-7. 
Maggie Callahan, fourteen, rides to the Pennsylvania
frontier in 1776, planning to find and live with Aunt Franny. Maggie finds the
log cabin abandoned; she goes to work for a local family and also makes bread to
use in trade. Like Aunt Franny, Maggie uses the family recipe to make bread so
good that she, too ,comes to be called "the bread sister." "Maggie began to see
that there was a great deal more to being the Bread Sister than simply baking
bread." Moore seems so intent on showing Maggie's resourcefulness, courage,
and diligence that he loses perspective on realistic behavior, with Maggie again
and again winning against all odds. Dialect is used inconsistently, and there are
such awkward phrases as "Since there was no coin money to be had .. ." The
end of a too-busy tale (a flood, a blizzard, a fire) is followed by a recipe for
making sourdough bread. ZS
Oneal, Zibby. A Long Way to Go; illus. by Michael Dooling. Viking, 1990.
ISBN 0-670-82532-8. 54p. (Once Upon America). $11.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
This is the kind of story that can make a period in
history or a cause more real than extensive descriptions of events or issues. The
time is 1917, the place Manhattan, and the protagonist eight-year-old Lila, who
is impressed by her grandmother's participation in the suffragist movement and
[ 13 ]
secretly resentful about her father's strong disapproval of his mother's activism.
While visiting a servant's family, Lila proves that she can do what's considered a
boy's job: sell newspapers. This reinforces her feeling about circumscribed
roles, and she achieves a major victory when some spirited remarks to her father
win his permission for her to march in a Fifth Avenue parade for women's right
to vote. Nicely structured, with succinct plot and a smooth narrative flow, this
has as much message and as much characterization as its brevity permits. ZS
D.V. Grandparent-child relations
Orden, Hannah. In Real Life. Viking, 1990. ISBN 0-670-82679-0. 
181p.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 9-12. 
Every day, 15-year-old Marty rollerskates through the
park, partly from a restless urge to keep moving and partly from a desire to
contact a handsome young baseball player she's been watching. When she
finally gets up the nerve to talk to Rob, she encounters his charismatic best
friend, Brent, as well. Brent is as much a troublemaker as Rob is a straight
arrow, and Marty finds herself locked into a love triangle that's sure to hurt all
three of them. There's nothing new here plot-wise, but the dilemmas and
dynamics of the characters are involving, even compelling, as each claims the
reader's sympathy and holds on to it through a shifting balance of relationships.
Even the families of the three teenagers, as well as Marty's friend Annie and a
high school math teacher, lend a strong presence without distracting from the
book's strong focus. The likable narrator is genuine in her growing sexual
awareness and torn loyalties, giving this first novel a voice sure to claim YA
attention. BH
D.V. Boy-girl relations
Park, Barbara. Maxie, Rosie, and Earl-Partners in Grime; illus. by Alexander
Strogart. Knopf, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90212-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-
679-80212-6. 118p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 4-6. 
"Fifth grade wasn't fun. Not when you were a new
kid. Not when you had no friends." Earl is the new kid, he's not happy, and
he's sent to the principal's office for refusing to read aloud. On the office bench,
near Earl, is Rosie, who's been sent down for tattling (repeatedly) on her
classmates. For taking revenge against a bully, Maxie (class brain) joins the
other two on the bench. Their decision to play hooky together, when they've
been dismissed, results in a series of amusing contretemps, and they at one point
hide by climbing into the school Dumpster. Light-hearted, not quite believable
(because of contrivance or coincidence) but quite enjoyable, this story of the
accidental meeting of three loners bounces along amicably to reach a conclusion
most readers will expect: a triangular friendship. ZS
D.V. Friendship values
Paterson, Katherine. The Tale of the Mandarin Ducks; illus. by Leo and Diane
Dillon. Lodestar, 1990. ISBN 0-525-67283-4. 40p. $14.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
Great artists keep growing. The Dillons show more
depth of line, color, and style than ever before in this original blending of
Japanese art (ukiyo-e), art deco, and picture book illustration. Watercolor and
pastel paintings envelop, without overwhelming, the text of a story about a pair
of mandarin ducks, whose separation ultimately leads to a happy ending. A cruel
[14]
lord captures the male for its plumage and then punishes the samurai whom he
believes to be responsible for releasing the bird to return to its mate. The
samurai refuses to betray the kitchen maid who really opened the cage and,
reduced to the status of servant, falls in love with the kindhearted woman. The
two are saved from a death sentence by the magical intercession of two imperial
messengers, who lead the lovers to a snug hut in the woods before turning into a
pair of mandarin ducks. Paterson's adaptation of a Japanese folktale (no sources
given) is as graceful as the figures so skillfully drawn by the Dillons. The life-
and-death drama is concluded with an unobtrusive moral: 
"Yasuko and
Shozo ... had many children who gave them much happiness-and a little
trouble. But as they had learned years before, trouble can always be borne when
it is shared." The Dillons' loving visual development of these two characters,
curved together with flowing outlines, says even more than words can. BH
C.U. Storytelling
D.V. Animals, kindness to; Loyalty
Rounds, Glen. I Know An Old Lady Who Swallowed a Fly; illus. by Glen
Rounds. Holiday House, 1990. ISBN 0-8234-0814-0. 32p. $14.95.
R* 
3-7 yrs. 
Like his inimitable Old MacDonald (BCCB 4/89), the
old lady who swallowed a fly encounters a slew of oddball animals who are as
distinctly unappetizing as they're supposed to be in order to gross out the
primary audience. The fly looks like a cross between a World War II fighter
plane and a guerilla helicopter, the spider projects phantasmagoric proportions,
the bird resembles a plucked chicken with clipped wings, the cat is something
you wouldn't want to meet in any alley, the dog is alarmingly angular, the goat
has red eyes, the horse is reminiscent of a German tank, and the old lady
effectively lays to rest any unnerved sympathy youngsters might have as to her
bizarre plight. These humorously head-on images are all contained within heavy
black lines filled with colored chalk, set against plenty of white space, and
accompanied by large black print for sing-along sessions. The whole tone
heartily offsets a current trend of glamorized folklore. No music, but who needs
it? BH
C.U. 
Music
Say, Allen. El Chino; written and illus. by Allen Say. Houghton, 1990.
ISBN 0-395-52023-1. [32p]. $14.95. Reviewed from galleys.
R* 
Gr. 1-4. 
See editorial, this issue. RS
D.V. Individuality, expressing; Pride in background and heritage
Shalev, Meir. My Father Always Embarrasses Me; tr. from the Hebrew by
Dagmar Herrmann; illus. by Yossi Abolafia. Wellington, 1990. ISBN 0-
922984-02-6. 32p. $13.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
While Mortimer Dunne's mother is a neat,
conventional television reporter, his father is an individualist who wears shorts
to weddings, snores at PTA meetings, sings loudly while biking his son to
school (kissing him publicly when they arrive, always late), hides his head
during scary movies, writes stories at night, and-worst of all-promises to
make a cake for the baking contest. When the other kids' mothers line up with
their delicacies-apple strudel, pink-frosted cupcakes, flaky puffs, chocolate roll,
and gingerbread tower- Mortimer's father presents a confection "the size and
[15]
color of an automobile tire." However, the cake has surprising properties that
ultimately redeem Mortimer's father, who confesses to having been embarrassed
by his own father, the baker who invented the miraculous cake. A picture book
that could have bogged down in bibliotherapy is instead buoyed by witty
narrative and watercolor illustrations featuring Abolafia's funniest details.
Mortimer's estimation of his father is born out by the goodhearted klutz
pictorially developed in each scene. Translated from the Hebrew of the original
Israeli edition into American idiom, this crosses international boundaries with
ease. It's carefree in tone but right on target for Everychild who knows the
agonies of embarrassing parents. BH
D.V. Father-son relations
Solomon, Chuck. Playing Hockey. Crown, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-
57415-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-57414-4. 40p. illus. with photographs. Library
ed. $10.99; Trade ed. $9.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-5. 
Color photographs show boys playing ice hockey in
the country and in the city; the text describes rural patterns first (although it is
not specific about location) with remarks like "We play without protective
equipment.. ." or, "As more people come to the pond they join in." Abruptly,
the scene changes to a city street and the text reads "Kids in the city love to play
hockey too." The text does not give information about rules or penalties, but
makes references to practice sessions and gives general advice: "Hockey players
have to learn how to skate backward, especially when we're on defense," or
"Goaltenders have to react quickly to stop a speeding puck." This gives some
facts about the game, but with no index or glossary or provision of rules, it has
limited use. ZS
C.U. Physical education
Spinelli, Jerry. The Bathwater Gang; illus. by Meredith Johnson. Little, 1990.
ISBN 0-316-80720-6. 60p. (Springboard). $10.95.
Ad 
Gr. 3-4. 
Jerry Spinelli's books portray an idyllic world in
which plain speaking ("Boogie breath") and running amuck (literally, here, when
it rains) comfortably coexist with cozy grandmas who clean up the mess. Bertie
is bored, she starts a gang, havoc ensues. While the story is improbably plotted
(it seems unlikely that no one would recognize Granny when she's covered with
mud), it has enough action and arguments to ensure appeal. RS
D.V. Friendship values
Super, Gretchen. Drugs and Our World; ISBN 0-941477-88-6. What Are
Drugs?; ISBN 0-941477-87-8. You Can Say "No" to Drugs!; ISBN 0-941477-
89-4. Each book: illus. by Blanche Sims. Twenty-First Century, 1990. 48p.
(Drug-Free Kids Books). $14.95.
NR 
Gr. 2-3. 
As far as actual information about drugs and drug use
goes, there's barely enough in this set to fill one book. Padding is a part of the
problem: 
"You are part of your family. 
Your family is a part of a
neighborhood. Your neighborhood is a part of a city. Your city is a part of a
state. Your state is a part of a country. Your country is a part of our world."
Repetition is a part of the problem: "People who use drugs don't help to keep
our world safe. People who use drugs cause many accidents. They make the
world unsafe for everyone." Exhortatory incantation is also a part of the
[16]
problem: "You want to be happy. You want to be healthy. You want to be
safe. You want to be smart. You want to be proud of yourself. You want to be
the best you can be. The best you is a drug-free you. Be proud to be a drug-free
kid." While the three books have supposedly distinct slants, material is repeated
among them, most of it mind-numbing variations on just-say-no. Breezy color
cartoon illustrations are attractive, but sometimes tonally at odds with the
subject. RS
Tchudi, Stephen. Probing the Unknown: From Myth to Science. Scribner's,
1990. ISBN 0-684-19086-9. 14 6p. illus. with photographs. $14.95.
R 
Gr. 5-9. 
Probing the Unknown examines the various ways
human beings have tried to explain and understand the mysteries that surround
them. Tchudi presents his subject in a logical and chronological fashion,
looking first at the history of prescientific beliefs (myth, legend, supernatural
explanations, folkways and magic) and concluding with chapters on reason/logic
and science. Tchudi provides enough information in each chapter to be of use to
students doing units on any of these topics. Resisting the temptation to
ridicule, he shows that primitive beliefs were the only means available to
understand a threatening and unknown world. In "Probing on Your Own"
sections Tchudi encourages activities that test the validity of each paradigm:
"Study your own horoscope and see what you think. Clip the horoscope column
from the daily paper for a week or more, and each day jot down facts in your life
that do or do not fit the prophecy. What do you conclude?" Tchudi does a
credible job of explaining such logical concepts as syllogisms and paradoxes,
always encouraging readers to "use the old noodle" to solve problems. His
definition of science is somewhat idealized: "Science means using one's brains
to solve problems for the betterment of humanity, no holds barred," but Tchudi
apparently feels the need to instill a sense of ethics into young scientists
("Science should be used to help people live better lives"). Generally, his
enthusiasm is infectious, assuring readers that "No question is a silly one."
Includes an index and a bibliography for each chapter. RAS
C.U. Science
Tolan, Stephanie S. Plague Year. Morrow, 1990. ISBN 0-688-08801-5.
198p. $12.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-9. 
With his long hair, odd clothes, and earring, Bran
Slocum meets harassment on his first day at Ridgewood High. "We don't have a
faggot table yet, Fruitful. Why don't you start one?" The gay slurs stop,
however, when the school bullies get hold of something even better: Bran has
come to live with his aunt and uncle in Ridgewood because his father is an
alleged mass-murderer of children. David (narrator of the novel) is a reluctant
hero, wanting to stay away from Bran but goaded into helping him by his
conscience and by Molly, David's best friend. The storytelling is swift and
suspenseful, but too often interrupted by staged debate on peer pressure,
criminals' rights, and the First Amendment. It is puzzling that, although
presumed innocence is a major theme of the novel, Bran (to no ironic or other
telling effect) admits to a tabloid reporter that he knows his father is guilty.
When a psychologist stands up at an emergency school board meeting to
propound a "bad seed" theory of murderous disposition, both theme and story go
into overdrive, including a mawkish scene where Bran explains how hard it was
for him to put an injured baby bird out of its misery. The unsettling ending is
[ 17]
sure to provoke interesting debate; in fact, while the story is melodramatic and
didactic, it may be just those qualities that get readers thinking and talking about
the issues raised. RS
D.V. Ethical concepts
Van Leeuwen, Jean. Oliver Pig at School; illus. by Ann Schweninger. Dial,
1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0813-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0812-2. 48p.
Library ed. $9.89; Trade ed. $9.95.
R 
Gr. K-2. 
Oliver Pig's excitement about his first day of school
turns into another feeling once he gets on the school bus: "Suddenly his eyes
felt funny, like they wanted to cry. What was the matter with them?" Oliver
finds reassurance in his grandmotherly teacher, Miss Jessie Pig; he and scary
Bernard (who kicks Oliver during story hour and smashes into Alexander on the
slide) finally make friends over their toy dinosaurs; and even without a noodle
and cereal necklace (hungry Oliver was unable to resist devouring the
components) he can return happily home. 
Schweninger's matter-of-fact
illustrations retain their usual sturdy charm as Oliver's expressive ears telegraph
his every emotion. Realistic about first-day fears but reassuring about their
resolution, this is a good summer sharer to prepare for an impending autumn
departure. DS
C.U. Reading, beginning
D.V. Self-confidence
Walker, Sally M. Glaciers: Ice on the Move. Carolrhoda, 1990. ISBN 0-
87614-373-7. 48p. illus. with photographs. (Earth Watch Books). $12.95.
R 
Gr. 4-6. 
For slightly older readers than the audience for
Seymour Simon's excellent book (BCCB 3/87) on the subject, this is equally
impressive. 
Walker's book, too, has color photographs that are clear,
informative, and carefully placed; in addition, it provides captions. The coverage
is similarly good, the text explaining how glaciers are formed, how they move,
how they terminate, and how they have changed the surface and shape of the
terrain over which they have moved. Walker discusses the possibilities of
tapping glaciers as possible sources of clean water and of energy. A glossary
defines unusual words (cirques, drumlins) that have been boldfaced in the
continuous and well-written text An index is provided. ZS
C.U. Geology
Weiss, Ellen. The Adventures of Ratman; by Ellen Weiss and Mel Friedman;
illus. by Dirk Zimmer. Random House, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90531-
6; Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-80531-1. 64p. (Stepping Stone Books). Library ed.
$6.99; Paper ed. $1.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
Tod Watson is not the most energetic of eight-year-
olds: "I decided to go up to my room and loll around." Tod's plans for a lazy
summer are, however, dashed when he responds ("Well, what the heck") to the
mysterious ad in a comic book: "Send away now for the adventure of your life.
You can be a hero. This is no joke." His "Ratman" costume appears in the
mail half-an-hour later, and a hero is born. The story is silly but a lot of fun to
read, as Ratman defeats bullies, gets the fire chief out of a locked bathroom, and
[18]
clears a fire-threatened cinema: "'Everything is under control,' I lied." In a brief
and touching episode, he tries to find a sidekick. The style has an easygoing
swing, there's plenty of action, and Zimmer's pen-and-ink illustrations are weird,
sophisticated, and funny. A boys-don't-read antidote. RS
Wells, Rosemary , ad. The Little Lame Prince; based on a story by Dinah Maria
Mulock Craik; ad. and illus. by Rosemary Wells. Dial, 1990. Library ed. ISBN
0-8037-0789-4; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0788-6. 32p. Library ed. $12.89; Trade
ed. $12.95.
R* 
5-8 yrs. 
Rosemary Wells has benefited children's literature
with a versatility ranging from toddler board books to YA novels. Whether
funny or serious, her style is original, and this adaptation of Dinah Craik's
British classic (1874) celebrates a dramatic plot wrung free of sentimentality by
twists of wildly imaginative illustration. For starters, the cast has been recast as
animals, a choice that displays Wells' drafting to best advantage and that also
allows her to play with visual satire-the royal family are pigs. When the
plump but ailing queen dies and the king wastes away, an evilly militaristic
brother of the king banishes Prince Francisco to a faraway tower. There,
Francisco's fairy godmother, who always appears with the sound of popcorn,
bestows on him a patched magic cape that helps him recover the suffering
kingdom. Quite apart from Wells' artful abridgement of a Victorian soap opera,
the narrative graphics expand from self-contained domestic scenes characteristic
of her past work to a larger canvas including landscapes and complex changes of
detail, expression, and composition. The villains "Osvaldo, his porky wife,
Isabella, and their seven wild and whiney sons" are a richly portrayed set of bad
actors. The hero himself, while occasionally reminiscent of Wells' endearing
Max and company, expands considerably on their repertoire of reactions.
Ambitiously colorful, slyly funny-a real porker! BH
D.V. Handicaps, overcoming
Wiewandt, Thomas. The Hidden Life of the Desert; written and illus. with
photographs by Thomas Wiewandt. Crown, 1990. Library ed. ISBN 0-517-
57356-3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-57355-5. 40p. Library ed. $13.99; Trade ed.
$12.95.
R 
Gr. 3-5. 
With color photographs lending the immediacy of a
film, this introduces the flora and fauna of the northern Sonoran Desert through a
cycle of five seasons, including the dry and wet periods of summer. Examples
are vividly incorporated into explanations, as in the case of cold-blooded reptiles
regulating their temperatures: "an overheated collared lizard on a hot rock lifts his
toes to keep from burning them." The extremes of desert life are inherently
intriguing ("a large saguaro cactus weighs about six tons, more than a big
elephant"), and the author uses transitions, such as facing pages presenting a
saguaro skeleton and the insects that survive in cactus skeletons, to establish the
facts of synergistic survival among plants and animals. A brief conclusion sets
the specifics into a context of background information on other deserts and
environmental hazards. BH
C.U. Nature study
D.V. Ecological awareness
[19]
Winthrop, Elizabeth. Luke's Bully; illus. by Pat Grant Porter. Viking, 1990.
ISBN 0-670-83103-4. 60p. $11.95.
Ad 
Gr. 2-4. 
When Arthur, "the fattest, meanest kid in the third
grade," threatens Luke for not surrendering his lunchbox cupcake, Luke's best
friend Jane offers to bop Arthur in the nose. But somehow Luke knows this
won't solve the problem. He continues to hide behind his hair and books until
hitting on a plan that gives Arthur the attention he craves-and leads to the
discovery that Arthur needs glasses. This last bit seems gratuitously contrived,
but it's nice to see a bully humanized for a happy ending, and the Thanksgiving
play in which Arthur is cast as a horse-with blinders, to mask the new
glasses-lends humor to a familiar occasion. Easygoing, and easy to read. BH
D.V. Friendship values
Wisler, G. Clifton. Piper's Ferry: A Tale of the Texas Revolution. Lodestar,
1990. ISBN 0-525-67303-2. 130p. $14.95.
Ad 
Gr. 6-8. 
In a story told by fourteen-year-old Tim Piper, Wisler
gives a clear picture of the dissension between those Americans who called
themselves "Texicans" and the Mexican military leaders whose rule the new
Texas settlers were protesting. The historical details and figures are carefully
introduced, but the story is weakened by colloquialism in the dialogue and the
shift from a narrative by and about a boy who sees the panorama of events, to a
laborious description of the war and its leaders in which the personal narrative is
all but submerged. ZS