T  
B       
  C  C’ B
Published for the University of Illinois
School of Information Sciences
by Johns Hopkins University Press
December 2021
Vol. 75   No. 4
75 
YEARS
o
f
 
d
e
d
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
 
t
o
 
y
o
u
t
h
 
l
i
t
e
r
a
t
u
r
e
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
TO ORDER
CALL: 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987   FAX: 410.516.3866
E-mail: jrnlcirc@jh.edu 
or visit us online at
Kate Quealy-Gainer / Editor 
univerSity of iLLinoiS at urBana-chaMPaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s 
Books provides concise summaries and 
critical evaluations of current children’s 
books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-
evolving children’s literature field. Reviews 
give an in-depth look at a selected book’s 
content, reading level, strengths and 
weaknesses, and quality of the format, as 
well as suggestions for curricular use.
Published 11 times per year monthly except 
August. 
Volume 75 (2022). 
P-ISSN: 0008-9036; E-ISSN: 1558-6766.
Annual Individual 
Subscriptions
$55.00 (print); 
$65.00 (online)
Annual Institutional 
Subscriptions
$125.00 (print);
$140.00 (online); 
$175.00 (print & online)
International postage fees apply.
FOUNTAIN OF YOUTH
the Bulletin of the center
for children’s Books
A Look Inside
T h e B u l l e t i n
of the Center for Children’s Books 
December 2021
Vol. 75 No. 4
115  The Big Picture
 
 Calvin written by JR and Vanessa Ford; illus. by Kayla Harren
116  New Books for Children and Young People
 
 Reviewed titles include
118 •  Slug in Love written by Rachel Bright; illus. by Nadia Shireen
122 •  Edgewood by Kristen Ciccarelli
124 •  Rima’s Rebellion: Courage in a Time of Tyranny by Margarita Engle
134 •  The Spectacular Suit written by Kat Patrick; illus. by Hayley Wells
139 •  When Winter Robeson Came by Brenda Woods
141  Subject and Use Index
Explanation of code symbols used with reviews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
 Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
© 2021 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois School of Information Sciences by Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218-4363, USA. Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, 
MD 21233-9651, and at additional mailing ofﬁces. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363.
Reviewing Staff
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Editor (KQG) 
Quinita Balderson, Reviewer (QB) 
Natalie Berglind, Reviewer (NB) 
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB) 
Fiona Hartley-Kroeger, Reviewer (FHK) 
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM) 
Adam McConville, Reviewer (AMM) 
Kiri Palm, Reviewer (KP) 
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS) 
Deborah Stevenson, Reviewer (DS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
Office Staff
Anna Wiegand, Editorial Assistant
Subscription rates
For up-to-date pricing information, please visit the journal webpage at: http://www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/subscribe. Subscription checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. 
All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising. Or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Kate Quealy-Gainer, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.ischool.illinois.edu
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Kayla Harren, from Calvin copyright © 2021, used by permission of G. P. 
Putnam’s Sons.
December 2021 • 115
The Big Picture
Calvin
by JR and Vanessa Ford; illus. by Kayla Harren
Activists and authors have put forth no small amount of effort to bring represen-
tation of trans children to both kids and YA books, and young readers are now 
fortunate enough to enjoy the fruits of that labor in stories like I Am Jazz (BCCB 
10/14) and Call Me Tree/Llámame Árbol by Maya Christina Gonzalez. This month’s 
Big Picture celebrates the continued push for inclusivity in trans narratives, high-
lighting the ways affirmation and familial support can make a world of difference 
for trans children. Drawing on their own experience as parents to a trans child, JR 
and Vanessa Ford teamed up with artist Kayla Harren to give face (and an adorable 
one at that, as seen in this month’s cover) to Calvin, a young trans boy of color.
The eponymous Calvin knows what his parents and friends don’t: he’s a 
boy, “a boy in my heart and in my brain.” While nervous to tell his family, espe-
cially because he doesn’t know anyone else who is trans, he’s met with immediate 
acceptance and affirmation upon coming out. His parents promise that they love 
him, “if you are a girl, boy, neither, or both.” Calvin’s father reintroduces him to 
his grandparents, using his new name. Swim trunks are purchased, hair is cut, and 
Calvin even begins a new year of school with his teachers, principal, and friends 
using his correct name and pronouns. His revelation is never questioned and often 
treated as a new detail of his life, as if he returned from summer vacation with a 
new haircut or a cool bike. Especially lovely are Calvin’s moments of quiet advocacy, 
such as when his friend, Violet, says that her mom told her “you’re a boy now” and 
Calvin replies that he’s “always been a boy inside.” 
This sweet and simple slice-of-life picture book is geared as much toward 
caregivers as it is for littles, serving as an exemplar of what can happen when a 
trans child is immediately supported by the adults in their life. The Fords openly 
offer up some of their own wisdom for this primer, providing some details of their 
family’s journey and sources for grown-ups in an authors’ note.
Harren’s digital art cleverly plays with composition, often dimming the 
background to pull characters and events into focus, and the soft, retro palette and 
colored pencil-esque linework are reminiscent of Leo and Diane Dillon. One par-
ticularly resonant spread contrasts Calvin sitting on his bed, unable to sleep despite 
the support of his ever-present stuffed lion and the family’s loving cat, as clouds of 
translucent worries about the coming school day swirl around him.
The character design gives the book a cheerful energy; Calvin is impos-
sibly adorable, with a button nose, dimpled cheeks, and wildly curly hair, and his 
multi-racial family would ﬁt perfectly in the work of a modern Norman Rockwell. 
116 • The Bulletin
New Books for Children and Young People
AlexAnder, ClAire The Think-Ups; written and illus. by Claire Alexander. Can-
dlewick, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536220124 $15.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
It’s raining outside and pals Kiki and Anna are stuck inside looking for something 
to do when Kiki suggests playing the “Think-Ups” and starts the game thinking 
up “not just one bunny, but lots of bunnies,” causing a whole herd of rabbits to 
appear and bounce their way through the room. Anna goes big in size rather than 
number and thinks up a giant moose, who is soon lumbering through the doorway. 
Things get increasingly frenzied with the arrival of octopuses and then koala bears, 
but it gets utterly chaotic when the imaginary (or not so imaginary) animals ﬁnd 
the kitchen. The premise of an imagination run amok is a tried-and-true storytime 
winner, and this hits all the right notes from the lively pace to the familiar context 
to the toylike animals. The digital illustrations have a cozy combination of dappled 
pastels and grainy dark lines, and the plump, curvy animal ﬁgures are undeniably 
cute, even when they’re tearing apart cushions or dumping ice cream cones onto 
the floor. Rambunctious youngsters will appreciate the cheerful energy here, but 
they’ll be quite envious of the girls’ ability to easily think their mess away with a 
simple “All Gone!”  KQG
Anderson, John dAvid 
Riley’s Ghost. Walden Pond/HarperCollins, 
2022 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062985972 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062985996 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7
Riley Flynn’s temper is legendary—just ask Jordan Walker and the pencil she stabbed 
The intentionally diverse cast includes various body types, physical disabilities, and 
even freckles and vitiligo, making this an excellent addition alongside Kyle Lukoff’s 
When Aiden Became a Brother to bring more inclusivity to Trans Day of Visibility 
and Pride displays. (See p. 126 for publication information.)
Kiri Palm, Reviewer
December 2021 • 117
in his hand—and her tendencies toward things like conscientiously (and annoyingly) 
objecting to frog dissection in her seventh-grade science class haven’t been kind to 
her reputation. It’s hardly a surprise when bully and volleyballer Grace retaliates 
against Riley, whose classroom disruption got Grace’s friend suspended, and locks 
her in a closet at Northridge Middle School. Spending the night in a tiny room 
with a bunch of dead frogs is bad enough, but her unwanted sleepover takes a truly 
scary turn when the door mysteriously unlocks and strange specters start lurking in 
the abandoned halls. For horror fans, Riley’s haunted adventure provides plenty of 
ambiance, as the transformation of the normally lively, well-lit school into an empty 
and inky wasteland creates a visceral creepiness, and flickering lights, enucleated 
toys, and writing on mirrors are keyed up for extra thrills. The narrative structure 
is a bit wobbly, unfortunately, with sudden time skips into Riley’s past interrupting 
the creeping dread, and our titular ghost is also ill-deﬁned. Northridge is occupied 
not only by the traditional phantom of tragically-perished-before-her-time Heather 
but also by Max, a former student and middle-aged man who’s chosen an anato-
mized amphibian as his temporary vessel. Max’s role seems more convenient than 
needed, and Riley’s promise to keep Heather’s memory alive may cause some eye 
rolls among more seasoned spook aﬁcionados. For those new to or curious about 
the genre, though  this will make a pleasingly spine-tingling introduction and serve 
as a vault for readers almost ready for Mary Downing Hahn.  KP
Arnold, elAnA K. Just Harriet. Walden Pond/HarperCollins, 2022 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063092044 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063092105 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr 3-5
Mom needs bed rest and Dad needs to work, so Harriet is shipped off to spend 
the summer after third grade with her grandmother, who owns a small B&B on 
an island off the California coast. Harriet is not one for change and this certainly 
wasn’t how she saw her summer going, but she tries to make the best of it by helping 
around the B&B. While cleaning out the shed, she ﬁnds an ancient looking key and 
wonders if it has anything to do with the treasure her father teasingly mentioned 
on their way to the island. This is light on action but heavy on emotion, as Har-
riet’s narration moves through anger at her parents, frustration with her situation, 
and wonder at the key’s mystery, all with a kid-centered and kid-relatable tone. 
The slow pace meanders into a sleepy lull, however, and the lack of tension leaves 
characters adrift in one-dimensional roles; the grumpy ornithologist especially feels 
like a missed opportunity to spark banter with the equally grumpy Harriet. Still, 
plenty of readers, much like Harriet, appreciate a steady, low-stakes drama, and the 
gentle tone and witty narrator make this an easy pick for a family readaloud.  KQG
BArKer, KAthryn Waking Romeo. Flatiron, 2022 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250174109 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250174116 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
2083 London is pretty bleak, with a small human population living behind a wall 
of trash and subsisting mostly on canned food and each other’s generosity, both in 
limited supply. Life feels particularly rough for Juliet, though, who is grieving her 
now comatose Romeo and still recovering from her own suicide attempt. Meanwhile, 
118 • The Bulletin
in some out of time place called the Wasteland, time traveler Ellis has been tasked 
by Frogs, Ellis’ AI boss, to ﬁnd Romeo in the timeline and wake him to save the 
world from certain doom. Juliet is suspicious upon Ellis’ arrival (especially given 
that time traveling essentially ruined the world), but the importance of the mission 
soon becomes abundantly clear. The concept and consequences of time travel are 
handled brilliantly here, supplying readers with just enough information to make 
it plausible, and the brisk pace keeps any serious interrogation at bay. It’s clear early 
on that Romeo wasn’t that great of a guy—readers may spot his true villainy in 
some early scenes—but Juliet’s revision of their romance as something tragic and 
beautiful feels entirely believable given the state of her life. Her transformation, 
then, into a badass scientist who saves the world across multiple timelines is espe-
cially gratifying, and her refreshing romance with Ellis prioritizes her newfound 
agency over playing nice. Literary references (not only to Shakespeare) abound 
here, making this a sure-ﬁre hit with readers as comfortable in lit class as they are 
in the science ﬁction shelves.  KQG
Bright, rAChel Slug in Love; illus. by Nadia Shireen.Wiseman/Simon, 
2021 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781665900461 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781665900478 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Doug the slug craves to be hugged: “But who wants to hug a slug called Doug?” 
Various bugs, worms, and arachnids point out the qualities that make Doug simply 
unhuggable; from being “grimy” to “squelchy” to “mucky” to “sticky,” it seems 
Doug’s prospects for getting a hug are looking bleak. When Doug meets Gail the 
snail, who sports a leopard print shell and sassy red glasses and who suffers from 
the same textural issues he does, he thinks he’s found the one. The two go on car 
rides and candlelit dates: “A snail like Gail? It cannot fail!” His plan to hug Gail 
falls through, however, and poor Doug gives up hope completely, until a ladybug 
flies by and ﬁnally delivers the hug (and love) that Doug desires. Shireen’s digital art 
utilizes saturated colors that pop from each page, and adorably cartoonish Doug is 
blue, literally and ﬁguratively, with forlorn eyeballs and a sympathetic frown. The 
rhyming cadence of the text and the wealth of giggle-inducing adjectives makes this 
a satisfying choice for a Valentine’s Day storytime—and kids lacking their own Val-
entine will appreciate the message that there are many ﬁsh (or bugs) in the sea.  NB
Brown, indiA hill The Girl in the Lake. Scholastic, 2022 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781338678888 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781338678901 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Celeste and her brother, Owen, are headed to their grandparents’ idyllic lake house 
for a summer of swimming, hiking, and spending time with cousins Capri and 
Daisy. There are a few hitches, however: Celeste just flunked her swimming lessons, 
Owen is afraid of hiking, Capri hates Celeste, and Daisy’s just . . . Daisy. Strange 
sounds and flickering lights add to the unease, and then an evening spent with the 
family photo album reveals something even stranger: Grandma’s late sister, Celestine 
(called Ellie), looks exactly like Celeste and she drowned in the very lake that’s right 
December 2021 • 119
outside their window. Brown’s (The Forgotten Girl BCCB 12/19) sophomore novel 
leans into the themes of familial bonds, vengeful dead girls, and the intergenerational 
trauma wrought by racism. Swimming and its racialized history are integral to the 
plot: Grandad was a lifeguard in his time, and Ellie’s drowning was the result of 
her not being able to receive swimming lessons at the segregated pool. Celeste and 
her family still face casual racism at the private pool where her grandparents are 
members, and her ability to stand up against the bigots of the world may garner 
some audible cheering. Unfortunately, much of the charm of Brown’s debut is lost 
here, as Celeste’s narration teeters toward self-pitying, and the insular community 
of the Cooper family lacks the mysterious allure of Iris’ North Carolina neighbors. 
Still, the slow burn reveal of Ellie’s true intentions (and enticing descriptions of 
Grandma’s signature lake ﬁsh) make for a fun, quick, and satisfyingly eerie read.  KP
BryAnt, elise One True Loves. Balzer + Bray, 2022 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062982865 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062982889 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Seventeen-year-old Lenore has graduated with honors from a prestigious arts high 
school and was accepted to NYU, but she still feels inadequate in her high achieving 
Black family. They’re about to embark on a Mediterranean cruise together, but it’s 
no pleasure trip for Lenore: her parents have set an ultimatum that she must decide 
on her major and her future before the they return home. If that wasn’t enough, 
shared table assignments put her in the path of half-Black, half-Korean Alex, who 
has all the focused ambition she lacks, and the immediate bonding of their par-
ents means she’s stuck with him on board and on land. Surprisingly, however, as 
they tour the sites of Italy and Greece, the two open up about dreams, pressures, 
fears, and failures, and an unexpected friendship turns the cruise ship to a love 
boat—until the specter of Lenore’s self-doubts threatens to shipwreck it all. The 
book follows the usual romcom route, but the narrative does so much more than 
tick the enemies-to-lovers box. Lenore shines as a compelling female lead searching 
as much for a sense of self as for a soul mate, and her broader family story gives a 
depth and sensitivity to her struggles. Alex, meanwhile, as handsome and charming 
as a leading man should be, is likewise flawed, honest, and supportive. Thoughtful 
commentary on race throughout stands as an essential part of the story, as Lenore 
reflects on how being Black affects her decisions, her friendships, her love life, and 
the future she thinks she should have. A companion novel to Bryant’s previous 
Happily Ever Afters, this novel will delight earlier fans and garner new ones.  AM
Burton, Jessie Medusa; illus. by Olivia Lomenech Gill. Bloomsbury, 
2022 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781547607594 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781547607600 $13.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-12
Assaulted by one god and cursed by another, Medusa has spent the last four years 
on an isolated island, with only the company of her immortal sisters and the writh-
ing snakes that now crown her head, a “gift” from a furious Athena. It’s no wonder 
that when Perseus washes up on her island’s shores, she’s drawn to the handsome 
120 • The Bulletin
warrior boy but still keeps her distance, talking to him from inside a darkened cave. 
The two grow close, with Medusa convinced she might even love him; of course, 
eventually it’s revealed that he has been sent to kill her, and she must decide who 
will be the hero and who will be the villain of her story. This Medusa is neither a 
monstrous creature from Greek mythology nor a feminist revision of the scorned 
woman archetype, but rather a traumatized girl processing the fallout of a brutal 
attack, buoyed by the persistent resilience of adolescence but similarly limited by its 
myopic focus on immediate desires. It is therefore understandable that she quickly 
believes that Perseus’ love will both validate her experience and soothe her pain, and 
that she gives him more grace than he earns; fortunately, the perceptive snakes pull 
her back with more intuition than she has yet and eventually save her. The dappled 
colors and sketchy lines of Gill’s illustrations anchor the story with brilliant images 
of coiled snakes, wheeling birds, and undulating waves, with a creamy, yellowing 
background reminiscent of an ancient text. While a few anachronisms interrupt 
Medusa’s fluid, poetic narration, they often work in her favor, giving readers a 
relatable girl over a vaunted myth. Hand this to teens looking for new layers of 
complexity in familiar ﬁgures.  KQG
CABA, gAstón Churro the Magician; written and illus. by Caba Gaston. Etch/
Clarion, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780358467731 $14.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780358467755 $7.99
E-book ed. IBSN 9780358469308 $5.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
In a world inhabited anthropomorphic rabbits, chaos runs amok when Churro, 
aspiring performer, ends up with a magician’s wand and goes about town transform-
ing everyday objects into animate beings: trains become caterpillars, buildings turn 
into spaceships, and clouds are suddenly sailboats. As news reporters broadcast the 
bedlam, the wand’s original owner spies both Churro and his missing wand; he 
quickly sets things right, even returning Churro to school—before letting Churro’s 
entire class ride the cloud sailboat, of course. This 2018 Spanish import is a word-
less graphic novel full of wonder and imagination that emulates the creativity of 
kids, especially those who can look at a car next to a streetlight and see a dinosaur. 
Caba’s digital art perfectly suits the hijinks of its main character, with clean blue 
lines, crisply deﬁned panels, and a subdued color palette. The delight and horror 
of the inhabitants of Churro’s world are hilariously depicted through easily recog-
nizable body language and expressions that are sure to elicit laughs from viewers, 
even those who can’t read strongly on their own.  NB
CAJoleAs, Jimmy Gussy. Quill Tree/HarperCollins, 2021 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063008779 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063008793 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
It doesn’t really matter that no one in Gussy’s town quite knows what the Great 
Doom is—it’s enough to understand that it is terrible, it is supernatural, and it 
can only be stopped if the right rituals are performed in the right way by the right 
person. Gussy is not at all certain that she’s ready to be that right person solo, but 
when Grandpa Widow is called away, she must step in. Unfortunately, on her very 
December 2021 • 121
ﬁrst day, Gussy breaks a key rule and lets a stranger in after the town gates have 
already been closed for the night. Now she’s hiding a mysterious girl, things are go-
ing wrong with the Rites, and it appears someone is sabotaging Gussy’s best efforts. 
The novel takes a bit to get rolling, but once it does, it’s a speedy pace to the cozy, 
tidy conclusion. Gussy’s colloquial narrative voice is compelling, highlighting her 
deep sense of justice and responsibility for her community. Younger fantasy fans 
will appreciate the world building that slowly reveals details suggesting a foreboding 
Wild West setting. Readers cans be assured that Gussy’s principles and willingness 
to ask for help will sustain her long after her initial flailing attempts to ﬁll the role 
of Protector.  AS
CAstAldo, nAnCy F. When the World Runs Dry: Earth’s Water in Crisis. Algon-
quin, 2022 [208p] illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 9781616209711 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 9781643752273 $15.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
“There are many things we could live without, but water isn’t one of them”; it’s hard 
to be more terse and candid than Castaldo’s observation, which directs readers to 
realize that regardless of their locale and regional water issues, clean and plentiful 
running water today is no guarantee of clean and plentiful water tomorrow. Draw-
ing most examples from the United States, while contextualizing them as part of a 
global challenge, Castaldo examines the many points at which potable, irrigation, 
and industrial water can and do fall apart. Some are headline-grabbing, such as 
contaminated tap water in Flint, Michigan and other communities; others are less 
often acknowledged beyond an immediate region, such as exhausted aquifers. Like-
wise, the troubling outcomes command varying attention, depending on a reader’s 
home base—many will recognize that plenty of Western citizens have lost homes 
to drought-driven wildﬁres, but far fewer will realize that the Mississippi Delta is 
producing climate refugees who’ve lost their communities to rising water levels. 
Explanations are concise, and topical organization supports both individual reader 
investigation and curricular use. Castaldo has little to offer in terms of de rigueur 
how-you-can-help suggestions—shorter showers, fewer water bottles, don’t flush 
meds—leaving kids feeling their hands are effectively tied, at least for the present. 
A hard look at reality, however, is a necessary place to start addressing a problem, 
and the comprehensive view this book offers is fundamental to global citizenship. 
Resources, citations, a glossary, and an index are included.  EB
CAstrovillA, selene Seeking Freedom: The Untold Story of Fortress Monroe and the 
Ending of Slavery in America; illus. by E. B. Lewis. Calkins Creek, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781635925821 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781635925647 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 7-10 yrs
George Scott had escaped from his enslaver and had been hiding out in the woods 
for two years when Southern states began to secede. Scott knew slave hunters 
would be out in force to recapture Black runaways for Confederate labor, but 
rumor and stealthy observation of the Union fort near Hampton, Virginia, gave 
him hope: escapees were entering the fort, and they weren’t being forced to leave. 
Scott chanced seeking refuge there himself, and found that the commander, Major 
122 • The Bulletin
General Benjamin Butler, needed reliable reconnaissance on enemy soldiers. Scott 
volunteered to scour the area he already knew well; his information led to a bloody 
skirmish, but also to Confederate retreat. Scott, in turn, asked for legal freedom. 
Although the outcome of his personal petition is not known, history credits Butler 
with articulating the legal gambit that claimed Black refugees were enemy contra-
band that could be conﬁscated and thereby protected by Union forces, laying the 
groundwork for two wartime Conﬁscation Acts and the Emancipation Proclama-
tion. Castrovilla keeps the Scott/Butler story focused and taut, relegating historical 
context and legalese to well-organized end matter that also includes biographical 
sketches of the two protagonists. Lewis’ atmospheric watercolors ably convey the 
tenebrous forest and battle settings in which Scott risked his life, highlighting the 
heroism of a man who slipped out of and then back into history’s shadow.  EB
CiCCArelli, Kristen Edgewood. Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 2022 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250821522 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250821539 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12 
Emeline’s grandfather raised her on stories of the Wood King and his court of 
shiftlings, but at nineteen, she has left that all behind, moving from Edgewood 
to Montreal to fulﬁll her dreams of becoming a singer. When Emeline gets a call 
from a former neighbor that her grandfather has been taken as a tithe to the Wood 
King, Emeline will do anything to get him back—even offer to be a minstrel to 
the king’s court in exchange for her grandfather’s freedom. Her new position has a 
historically high mortality rate, though, and if Emeline can’t learn the Song Mage’s 
songs before time runs out, she’ll be executed, her grandfather will be stuck at court 
with his dementia forever, and the Stain spreading rot and madness in the woods 
will change the shiftlings into their animal forms permanently. Dark fairy mischief 
abounds here, with Emeline befriending and bargaining with mythical creatures just 
as likely to help her as betray her, and readers get to indulge in the sweet buildup 
of her romance with Hawthorne, another human at the court who helps her learn 
her songs. Emeline is an appealing mix of moxie and vulnerability, and her struggle 
to reconcile her desires for a future of her own with her obligations to others is 
likely one teens will recognize. Precise in construction and style, with an elegant 
and eerie music motif, this easily earns a place on Stiefvater fans’ TBR lists.  NB
ClArK, ZACK lorAn The Lock-Eater. Dial, 2022 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781984816887 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781984816894 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 4-7
Melanie has always felt that her talent of unlocking and opening things with just 
a touch could be a gift rather than an odd ability she mostly keeps under wraps. 
Traveler, an automaton who arrives at Melanie’s orphanage asking for a foundling 
who can go live with and assist a witch, offers the perfect opportunity for her 
to see what else life can offer. However, Melanie quickly discovers that there is 
no witch and Traveler is far from an automaton—he is a thinking, independent 
being who needs her help. Thus begins an epic quest that features Melanie’s ﬁrst 
romantic crush, a motley crew of magical beings, a fair amount of deception, and 
a startlingly deep contemplation on what being alive means. In fact, this novel 
December 2021 • 123
offers remarkable morsels of philosophical perspectives while maintaining its swift 
pace, as the characters live through events that challenge their assumptions about 
violence, morality, and mortality. Long after Melanie and Traveler, both worthy 
protagonists, have faded from memory, those ethical questions may still percolate 
with young readers.  AS
diPuCChio, Kelly Oona and the Shark; illus. by Raissa Figueroa. Tegen/
HarperCollins, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063071421 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
Younger viewers might remember from Oona (BCCB 12/20) that our little afroed 
mermaid is quite the inventor, and as good as Oona is at making things, she’s even 
better at making friends—with the exception of Stanley the hammerhead shark. 
She gifts him with a hat, a horn, a unicorn water floatie; she tries to show him her 
latest creations (the Beach Ball Juggler, the Sandcastle Maker, etc.); she even throws 
him a party, but he still prefers his seashell collection over her company. In a huff, 
she swims to the quiet of the ocean floor to think, and in a lightbulb moment, she 
realizes that perhaps her inventions need to ﬁt Stanley’s speed and style more than 
her own. DiPucchio returns here with ebullient Oona and a lesson in respecting 
differences that is light on the preachiness and heavy on the charm, and the book 
exudes a playful cheer that respects friendships of all kinds. Extroverts will see 
themselves in Oona’s quick ability to chat up just about anyone she meets, intro-
verts will appreciate the tender portrayal of Stanley’s need for solitude, and aspiring 
inventors will be delighted by Oona’s various contraptions. Generous swoops and 
swirls of radiant color give the oceanic setting a sense of constant movement, and 
expressive Oona emotes dramatically in body language, from tearing at her hair in 
exasperation to smoothly swimming along her new pal Stanley. Fans of the previous 
title will be grateful to return to Oona’s diverse underwater world, and listeners 
looking for some guidance in making friends will ﬁnd it here.  KQG
egAn, CAtherine Sneaks. Knopf, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593306406 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593306420 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Ben already thinks sixth grade is going to be awful—his best friend left town 
and he doesn’t know his place in school without that support, and now he’s be-
ing grouped in with a social outcast, Charlotte, and a brash new girl, Akemi, for 
an odd project. Oh, and he just saw a watch meander across a classroom on its 
own, so things are not off to the best start. When the trio goes to interview what 
they think is a kindly old woman about local history, they learns she’s an expert 
on Sneaks that are “interdimensionally evolving mischief-makers.” Suddenly, the 
three classmates need to solve codes, ﬁght off Sneak-possessed household objects, 
and save their universe. The action comes early and doesn’t let up, and Egan deftly 
handles the setup, hinting at good and bad guys while not giving anything away 
too early. Unfortunately, character development is dodgy and lopsided, and the 
book takes an oddly unsympathetic tone toward Charlotte. In addition, the world 
building is overly complex with multiple universes and their various denizens, and 
conversations feel more like exposition than actual dialogue. Nevertheless, this is a 
124 • The Bulletin
thrilling, speedy adventure where the positive ending is assured but the path there 
is not so easily predicted.  AS
engle, mArgAritA Rima’s Rebellion: Courage in a Time of Tyranny. Atheneum, 
2022 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534486935 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534486959 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
As Engle’s absorbing verse novel opens in Cuba, 1923, narrator Rima is growing 
up in a household of three strong women. Abuela is a farrier, running her own 
blacksmith shop; Mamá is a lacemaker, abandoned by the wealthy landowner who 
left her pregnant with Rima; Rima herself is becoming proﬁcient at both her elders’ 
trades, as she regularly faces down bullies who revile her as a “bastarda.” All three 
are “mambisas,” adept horsewomen with ties to Cuban wars for independence, so 
it’s no surprise that they also advocate for women’s suffrage, and an end to both the 
brutal Adultery Law and legal discrimination against illegitimate children. Poems 
grouped into ﬁve sections ﬁrst introduce Rima at age twelve, attending her ﬁrst 
voting club congress and witnessing the social caste system that divides women on 
sensitive issues and undermines their unity. As Rima matures, a mix of progressivism 
and pragmatism help her develop the courage to protect her privileged half-sister, 
Violeta, from their common father’s violence, and to disseminate the cleverly coded 
writing of resistance poets. Engle smoothly inserts enough historical context to 
demonstrate how grievously the political/social/Church deck was stacked against 
Cuban women’s progress, and if the novel’s jubilant but abrupt conclusion—women 
ﬁrst casting votes in the 1936 election—seems over-orchestrated, readers will un-
derstand just how steep the protagonists’ uphill battle was. An historical note and 
timeline are included.  EB
FAdugBA, Femi The Upper World. HarperTeen, 2021 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063078598 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063078611 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Esso exists in 2020 while Rhia is a teen in 2035, but their lives intersect when Esso 
is hit by a car in his time and is thrown into an in-between world where he can see 
both the past and the future. When he realizes he could intervene in the tragedy 
that took Rhia’s mom from her, he tries to do so—but even with good intentions, 
traversing the space-time continuum is never without consequences. The action 
is breathtakingly fast, especially in Esso’s time, highlighting the bewildering series 
of events and minor errors that all compounded to lead to his accident. Narration 
jumps between the two protagonists, and the tone and pace are individualized to 
each character: Rhia’s chapters are contemplative and sardonic while Esso bounces 
between a cagey restlessness and determined energy. On occasion, the physics les-
sons are a bit too dense and frequent, pulling focus from the sci-ﬁ coolness and 
the ethical ambiguity of Esso’s choices, but the world building is cinematic, and 
the characters are diverse and inclined to dramatic, emotionally charged actions. 
The book is already slated to be a Netflix movie starring Daniel Kaluuya, so this 
will likely be in high demand.  AS
December 2021 • 125
FArrell, mAry CronK Close-up on War: The Story of Pioneering Photojournalist 
Catherine Leroy in Vietnam. Amulet/Abrams, 2022 [320p] illus. with pho-
tographs
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419746611 $22.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781683359685 $18.65
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 6-10
In 1966, twenty-one year old Catherine Leroy bought herself a very good Leica 
camera that she barely knew how to operate, left her home in France, and headed 
off to Vietnam to become a photojournalist. And, remarkably, she did. Farrell as-
sembles a picture of an improbable rising star, following Leroy’s struggle to learn the 
ropes as she bummed money and hitched transport into hot zones while managing 
cameras and ﬁeld gear half her eighty-ﬁve-pound weight. As her skills and camera 
collection accrued, she rapidly developed a signature style—close-up personaliza-
tion of suffering soldiers, war-strained Vietnamese civilians, even abused enemy 
prisoners—and her freelance sales took off. Excerpts from letters to her parents 
asking them to forward dresses and bikinis suggest cheeky insouciance tinged with 
overconﬁdence, but the heart-breaking sensitivity of Leroy’s photographs and the 
testimony of soldiers who knew her belie the breezy tone. Background on the course 
of the war during Leroy’s three years there is provided, and the inclusion of a raft 
of Leroy’s photographs ably convey information beyond history texts. Glossary, 
timeline, end notes, selected bibliography, and index are included.  EB
FArrey, BriAn The Counterclockwise Heart. Algonquin, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781616205065 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 9781643752259 $15.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
On the very day an enormous stone statue of a woman appears in the town of 
Somber End, Empress Sabine ﬁnds a baby boy with a clock for a heart in a hidden 
room of the palace, and she and her wife adopt the child, naming him Alphon-
sus. Meanwhile, young Guntram Steinherz spends his days talking to the statue, 
dubbed the Onyx Maiden; years pass, and when Guntram becomes a royal advisor, 
Alphonsus takes his place as statue-whisperer. Alphonsus and the statue develop a 
miraculous bond, and Guntram’s jealousy sends Alphonsus and the statue fleeing 
into the Hinterlands on a collision course with Esme, a magic wielder on a mission 
to kill the evil Nachtfrau whose curse imprisons her people. Alphonsus and Esme’s 
journeys intersect in unexpected ways long before they actually meet, and readers 
will be intrigued by many of the set pieces such as a mysterious creature that both 
kills and heals, and a half-flesh, half-glass huntress. The voice of the narrator and 
the vaguely German setting give the novel a storybook or Märchen quality. While 
the ending relies too much into adult exposition that puts an abrupt stop to the 
children’s search for knowledge, Farrey nonetheless delivers a pleasing mix of fantasy 
and mystery with compassion at its (ticking) heart.  FHK
126 • The Bulletin
Ford, Jr Calvin; by JR and Vanessa Ford; illus. by Kayla Harren. Putnam, 
2021 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593108673 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593108680 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 115, for review.
Forsythe, mAtthew Mina; written and illus. by Matthew Forsythe. Wiseman/
Simon, 2022 [68p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781481480413 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781481480420 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 1-3
Mina the mouse is used to her eccentric father bringing home random items from 
the outside world, from tin cans to amplify his jokes, to stamps to cover their walls, 
to book-loving stick bugs (who unfortunately turn out to be book-stealing stick 
bugs). She is, however, a bit concerned when he brings home what is clearly a cat, 
though her father insists that it’s a squirrel and invites the furry feline to stay. De-
spite Mina’s misgivings, the ﬁrst few days goes surprisingly well—until Dad decides 
that the cat seems sad and needs some company. Needless to say, there’s power in 
numbers, and soon Mina, her father, and a mouse doctor they wrangled into the 
situation are on the run from three hungry kitties. Amusingly dry storytelling gives 
a wispy plot some edge, and there’s humor too in the book’s acknowledgement that 
dreamy Mina and her love for books isn’t so different from her distracted, quirky 
father. The art really steals the show, especially the sly-eyed, oversized cat who looms 
over the pages with razor sharp claws and an expression that moves too comfortably 
between feigned innocence and determined menace. Varied geometric patterns 
keep the watercolor and pencil illustrations lively but never overly busy, and the 
flattened style echoes the tale’s folkloric feel. Simple dialogue and stealthy repeti-
tion will boost a budding reader while some of the more sophisticated vocabulary 
will stretch their skills, and a surprise savior provides an opportunity for dramatic 
interpretation during a humorous read aloud.  KQG
FoulKes, Alex Rules for Vampires. Aladdin, 2021 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534498358 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534498372 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
As far as vampires go, Eleonora (who prefers to be called Leo), has an unusual 
amount of sympathy and warmth, and she has always felt stifled under the shadow 
of her formidable and powerful mother. One hundred years after her transforma-
tion at age eleven, a trepidatious Leo must perform an important rite of passage 
and kill her own prey, solo, for the ﬁrst time. It doesn’t go well and results in a ﬁre 
in an orphanage, multiple deaths, and the release of a terrifying spirit called the 
Orphanmaster. Leo’s in way over her head, but she has an unexpected ally in the 
ghost of one of the orphan girls, Minna, who doesn’t hold Leo totally responsible 
for her death, an admirable inclination toward forgiveness—likely driven by the 
imminent threat to all of them (ghosts, vampires, and human alike) if the Or-
phanmaster achieves full power. The character development is terriﬁc, with even 
December 2021 • 127
minor characters given enough depth to be memorable, and the world building is 
effective, painting a world of supernatural creatures who are magical and spooky 
but also bicker and hold council meetings just like the living. Leo’s well-earned 
conﬁdence and sense of individual identity by the end of the novel make this a 
gratifying coming of age story that young readers will likely relate to—despite their 
lack of fangs or supernatural abilities.  AS
glAdden, yolAndA When the Schools Shut Down: A Young Girl’s Story of Vir-
ginia’s “Lost Generation” and the Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka Decision; by 
Yolanda Gladden with Dr. Tamara Pizzoli; illus. by Keisha Morris. HarperCol-
lins, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063011168 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
The 1954 Brown v. Board Supreme Court decision made it clear that school segre-
gation was now illegal, but the time frame for integration remained vague, leaving 
recalcitrant municipalities a large gray space in which to prevaricate and stall. For 
little Yolanda Gladden, born in 1954, there was initially no public school for her to 
go to at all when she came of school age: her home county, Prince Edward, Virginia, 
had decided to close all its public schools rather than to admit Black children into 
classrooms alongside white peers. While many white children were hastily enrolled 
in private segregated academies, and other children—white and Black—remained 
unschooled, Yolanda began her education in a community-run church school where 
she beneﬁted from a curriculum rich in Black history and culture, taught by elders 
unencumbered by traditional lesson plans and scant materials. The core of Glad-
den’s reported experience is a celebration of a community stepping up to educate its 
children, and a message that learning takes place in many venues other than schools. 
It’s a valuable insight, and one that suggests kids self-evaluate just how much they 
are constantly learning and recognize the many adults who guide them. However, 
coordination between dates of public and personal events occasionally stumbles, 
and even Morris’ engaging paper and digital collages, which neatly capture the little 
girl’s mild bewilderment over her ad hoc schooling, can fall prey to anachronism. 
End notes and a timeline set some matters straight, but adult readers will need to 
be prepared to extend explanations beyond delivery of the text.  EB
heAth, CArly The Reckless Kind. Soho Teen, 2021 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781641292818 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781641292825 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 8-12
It’s 1904 in Muskox Hollow, Hestaland, and Asta Hedstrom’s best friend Gunnar 
Fuglestad has recently suffered a horse accident that severed his forearm and a 
spinal injury inflicted by Asta’s jealous betrothed, Nils. Asta has an unconventional 
appearance and an unhearing ear which make her an outcast; though her family is 
pleased with her impending marriage to Nils, she calls it off. Meanwhile Gunnar 
strikes up a romance with Erlend Fournier, the son of a wealthy French family, and 
Erlend purchases the trio a small building (seter) where they can live unburdened 
by societal expectations. With Gunnar’s family about to lose their farm, though, 
Asta must help Gunnar’s brother train an unruly horse to win the Christmas Race 
and its prize to keep their land. This novel has a lot of moving parts that work 
128 • The Bulletin
extremely well together, from its equine elements to the deep character studies of 
its complex cast to its depiction of disability and sexuality. Gunnar is depressed 
from his chronic pain, often lashing out at Erlend, and Asta is on a quest to keep 
her friends happy and ﬁnd direction for her life that doesn’t involve marriage. Teens 
who fantasize about the living with the queer found-family of their dreams get to 
indulge in that here, even if the novel is too optimistic for its time period about the 
trio’s dynamic. A note at the end includes information about Asta’s Waardenburg 
syndrome and asexuality, Erlend’s anxiety, Gunnar’s spinal injury, and the limits 
of using historical language.  NB
KeAne, dAve J. The Treasure Box; illus. by Rahele Jomepour Bell. Putnam, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781984813183 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781984813190 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys 
 R 4-9 yrs
A young girl adores visits from her grandparents, especially when she and her grand-
father head outside to ﬁnd everyday treasures, which she keeps in a special box. 
When Grandpa becomes ill and can no longer come to see her, she’s understandably 
upset, and when he doesn’t get better, she can’t bring herself to open their shared 
box of special things after his death. Grammy visits soon, however, and gives the 
girl her grandfather’s special magnifying glass and blue treasure-hunting cap: “He 
told me you would know what to do with them.” This is a forthright, genuinely 
kid-centered look not just at the death of a loved one but also the pain of watch-
ing them becoming increasingly ill. The girl’s simple, observant narration strips 
the artiﬁce and platitudes from the experience (“I go with Mommy and Daddy to 
Grandpa’s memorial, which is a sad party you have when someone dies”), a welcome 
reprieve to grieving youngsters tired of adults’ euphemisms about death and sadness. 
The digital and collage illustrations have the depth and solidity of stamped art, and 
while the ﬁgures can be somewhat stiff, the multitude of details, from the scaliness 
of a found snakeskin to the delicate geometry of a lace handkerchief, provide plenty 
to look at. Paired with Higginbotham’s Death is Stupid (BCCB 6/16) or James’ The 
Funeral (BCCB 6/18), this would make a compassionate acknowledgement of a 
child’s grief that foregoes sugarcoating for honesty.  KQG
KormAn, gordon Operation Do-Over. Balzer + Bray, 2022 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063032743 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063032767 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Seventh graders and proud nerds Mason and Ty share identical interests, which 
makes a great foundation for a friendship but causes serious trouble when they’re 
both crushing on the new girl, Ava. Despite making a “non-Ava” treaty with Ty, 
Mason ends up kissing Ava, destroying his relationship with Ty (and eventually 
Ava). Fast forward ﬁve years: Ty and Mason still don’t talk to one another, even 
as high schoolers, but Mason gets a chance to set things right when a car accident 
somehow sends him back in time into the body of his twelve-year-old self. If he 
can prevent the fateful kiss, then Mason can save their friendship—but how will 
the other choices he makes in this “do-over” affect the rest of his life? Korman 
proves yet again to have a keen ear for middle grade dynamics, especially how 
December 2021 • 129
new arrivals shift old relationships and how jokey humor can only do so much to 
soothe wounded hearts. This is also a thoughtfully constructed portrait of a people-
pleasing kid whose tendency toward peacemaking often has the unintended result 
of taking away other people’s agency. The ending falls flat, as Mason basically gets 
everything he wanted with little consequence for some of his more questionable 
actions, but Korman’s signature blend of comedy, drama, and middle grade angst 
will leave readers with a warm fuzzy feeling, if not an examination of the ethics of 
Mason’s time travel.  KQG
lAthAm, irene African Town; by Irene Latham and Charles Waters. Putnam, 
2022 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593322888 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593322895 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-12
Different poetic forms are assigned to various historical ﬁgures in this verse novel 
that tracks the journey of the last Africans brought illegally to the U.S. in 1860, 
through their kidnapping, their enslavement, and ﬁnally their founding of Africa 
Town near Mobile, Alabama. Two of the major voices are Kossola, a young African 
on the verge of being initiated to oro (the governing group of men) in his village 
Bantè, and William Foster, the captain of the slave-trading ship Clotilda. Other 
characters step forward to give context, including King Glèlè, who orders the raid 
on Kossola’s village, shipping baron Timothy Meaher, who funds the trip, and 
Clotilda herself, who is horriﬁed by the tragedy of her cargo. Unfortunately, these 
voices meld together with no real distinction in the middle of the novel, and the 
pain of the enslaved people and villainy of those responsible are mostly blunted; 
it’s not until the ﬁnal section, which focuses on the development and building 
of community in Africa Town, that the individual narratives crystalize. At that 
point, however, we see a rich blossoming of characters and a thoughtful portrait of 
how trauma informs and inhibits identity making. The end matter is a wealth of 
fascinating information, from the author’s note that details Waters and Lathams’ 
research process, to a list that elaborates on the characters’ lives, to an account of 
what modern day Africatown (formerly Africa Town) looks like; further resources 
are also provided for young researchers.  KQG 
leigh, KyrA It Will End Like This. Delacorte, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593375525 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593375556 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Sisters Charlotte and Maddi are beginning to think their mother’s death six months 
ago was not as natural as they’ve been told. Their father has moved his mistress—their 
mother’s former personal assistant—into the house and even proposed to her with 
his dead wife’s ring, and Maddi ﬁnds a highly toxic pesticide hidden in the kitchen 
pantry, a poison with effects much like the mysterious ailments their mother suffered 
before she died. Meanwhile, Lana, a new girl at school, claims to have letters from 
their mother to her mom, who was apparently a childhood friend and conﬁdant 
and who knows all about their father’s philandering. The book is inspired by the 
Lizzie Borden murders, so readers will likely see the gruesome ending coming, but 
the dual narration between the sisters drives the tension absolutely sky high here 
130 • The Bulletin
as it becomes clear that neither is especially reliable. Whether they’re hiding the 
truth from the reader or are unable to see it themselves remains the question, and 
while they are certainly narcissistic enablers of one another, they’re also sympathetic 
in their grief, both over their mother and the life they once had. Leigh effectively 
draws on some key historic details, so paired with Miller’s nonﬁction account of 
the crime in The Borden Murders: Lizzie Borden & the Trial of the Century (BCCB 
12/15), this could make an interesting look at true crime and poetic license.  KQG
long, meg Cold the Night, Fast the Wolves. Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 
2022 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250785060 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250785084 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
The annual race across the icy planet of Tundar attracts greedy corporate outsiders 
to dig for a resource called exocarbon, and seventeen-year-old Sena has a particular 
hatred for the contest that led to her mothers’ deaths. When Sena ﬁnds herself in-
debted to a syndicate boss, she has to help him heal one of his genetically-modiﬁed 
ﬁghting vonenwolves; the girl and animal form a bond and the two soon run away. 
Sena joins a group of researchers with purer motives than most racers and ends up 
participating in the competition, but it won’t be without a body count—or without 
digging up her past trauma. Readers used to intricate world-building in their sci-ﬁ 
will be confused by the vagueness of many of this novel’s premises—exocarbon’s 
uses are ill-deﬁned and the characters discover new properties for it as the novel 
progresses, so it’s unclear why it is so in demand in the ﬁrst place. The conflict 
between the Corporate Assembly planets and the anti-capitalist “scavvers” barely 
goes beyond a very basic, decontextualized criticism of capitalism. Still, the winter 
survival aspects of the race are intense and heart-pounding, and animal lovers will 
appreciate Sena’s bond with vonenwolf Iska.  NB
mCCAll, guAdAluPe gArCíA The Keeper. HarperCollins, 2022 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063076921 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063076945 $7.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Upset over his family’s move from Texas to Oregon, twelve-year-old James doesn’t 
understand the appeal of his new town or why the neighbors seem so insistent that 
he and his family settle in quickly. Soon, he begins receiving strange letters from the 
Keeper, someone claiming to be Guardian of his house. While the identity of the 
letter sender is uncertain, some things are clear: they are being watched, the Blood 
Moon indicates danger, and despite the town’s reputation as an idyllic home, far 
too many tragic occurrences involving children have been documented over the 
years. The siblings’ suspicions of their neighbors are conﬁrmed when a sweet old 
lady locks James and Ava in a cage with plans to offer them up as blood sacriﬁces. 
McCall’s novel, which takes inspiration from true crime events, promises to send 
shivers down the spines of middle grade fright fans. While the reason behind the 
ritual sacriﬁce makes little sense, the combination of superstition and desperation 
is credible enough for readers to understand what might drive a town to commit 
heinous acts to save their homes. The chills are paired with believable family drama, 
and knowledge shared by their now deceased grandmother assists the two Mexican 
December 2021 • 131
American siblings as they navigate the mysteries of Brentville, where diversity isn’t 
exactly prevalent (or existent until their arrival). This appears to be a standalone 
novel, but the author would be remiss to deprive young readers of such vividly 
haunting stories.  QB
moore, KAtrinA Teeny Houdini #1: The Disappearing Act; illus. by Zoe Si. Te-
gen/HarperCollins, 2022 [112p] (Teeny Houdini)
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063004610 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780063004627 $5.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063004634 $5.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 1-3
Bessie Lee is the littlest person at home and in her ﬁrst-grade classroom. What she 
lacks in inches she makes up for in assertiveness, and the announcement of a school 
talent contest is just the vehicle she needs to prove she’s a force to be reckoned 
with. Her ﬁrst challenge is to identify a talent, and a semi-snarky comment from 
her older sister, Bailey—that she should disappear—inspires her to follow in Harry 
Houdini’s footsteps. Now it’s time to master some magic, but her initial efforts only 
result in trouble with her father when unappetizing bits of dinner disappear into 
his slipper, and with her teacher and schoolmates when the class hamster escapes 
from its cage. The pressure increases as her class nemesis piles on the scorn, and 
just when it seems that her carefully practiced act will collapse onstage at the talent 
show, Bailey comes to the rescue and teeny Bessie is a big hit. Bessie debuts here 
with the flair of Junie B. Jones, playing the precocity card at every turn, while Si’s 
generous line illustrations glory in the physical mess and tested nerves that trail 
in Bessie’s wake. There’s reassuring warmth in the support Bessie receives from a 
gracious classmate, her self-involved sister, and her Chinese-speaking grandmother 
exactly when she needs it most. Carefully curated vocabulary and repetition make 
this early chapter book an accessible step-up from easy readers; expect sequels to 
be in demand.  EB
murrAy, struAn Orphans of the Tide. HarperCollins, 2021 [368p] (Or-
phans of the Tide)
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063043114 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063043138 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
In the City—the last City in the world, after the god known as the Enemy drowned 
the other gods and the world—thirteen-year-old Ellie takes a keen interest in a boy 
who had to be cut out of the inside of a whale. There’s immediate panic that the 
boy, dubbed Seth by friends Ellie and Anna, is the Vessel, the human the Enemy 
chooses every few decades to mooch energy off of until it can emerge from their 
body. Using the diary of the last Vessel, who documented his experience, Ellie tries 
to prove Seth’s innocence despite his strange magic that controls the sea—but she 
has dark secrets of her own. This UK import sweeps readers right into a compli-
cated world that revolves around religious panic and executes common fantasy 
tropes well and interestingly. Murray expertly parses out pieces of world building 
alongside foreshadowing for his multiple story-shattering plot twists, making this 
one hard to put down.  NB
132 • The Bulletin
niJKAmP, mArieKe At the End of Everything. Sourcebooks Fire, 2022 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781492673156 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN: 9781492673163 $18.99 
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
The teens at the Hope Juvenile Treatment Center are well aware how little the 
guards and administration care for them, but they’re nonetheless surprised when 
the adults bail completely, leaving the kids to fend for themselves while a plague 
ravages the world. After an initial panic, longtime resident Grace becomes de 
facto leader, delegating essential tasks to her companions and trying to maintain 
a sense of helpful camaraderie, but any effort toward stability is tested when kids 
start falling ill and food becomes scarce. No one goes full Lord of the Flies here, 
but the teens still must negotiate how to manage resources and how to deal with 
disruptors, i.e., food thieves and bullies. Those ethical questions are made deeply 
personal as narration shifts among several of the teens, who are all still grappling 
with the traumatic circumstances that led them to Hope: Grace was punished for 
stopping a sexual assault; Emerson was kicked out of their home after coming out 
as nonbinary; sisters Leah and Logan were on the streets after their grandfather 
died. Transcripts of phone calls with family members and former guardians are 
interspersed throughout, making it heartbreakingly clear that many of these kids’ 
personal worlds were destroyed long before the larger world fell. The tightly con-
structed book keeps the setting mostly constrained to the Hope facility, forcing 
the kids into the roles of authority they once fought so hard against and tasking 
them with making their small community more equitable than the society they 
came up in. The ending answers that with a well-earned optimism, but readers will 
be left wondering how long hope can hold up against desperation as the plague 
continues.  KQG
otheguy, emmA Sofía Acosta Makes a Scene. Knopf, 2022 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593372647 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593372630 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593372654 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
This is the year that everything should fall into place for Sofía Acosta and her ballet-
obsessed family. Her parents, former dancers themselves, will see all three of their 
children with roles in the annual Nutcracker production: thirteen-year-old Regina 
is in a featured role, and with a real shot at a Summer Intensive with the American 
Ballet Theater; ﬁfth-grader Sofía is dancing in the Party Scene; and third-grader 
Manuel is ﬁnally advancing well beyond the flowers and mice. To make things 
perfect, Mrs. Acosta’s best friend from her own ballet career in Cuba is coming to 
town with her seventeen-year-old son Álvaro, a rising star with the Ballet Nacional 
de Cuba who will be dancing in a joint production with the ABT. Sofía, however, 
is wondering if she’s a massive disappointment to her family: she knows her tal-
ent doesn’t rise to that of her siblings and she’s far more interested and skilled at 
costuming than dancing. If Sofía feels at fault for the fracturing of her family, she 
has only to watch Álvaro break his mother’s heart with his decision to defect and 
join the ABT, leaving her to return to Cuba alone, with little opportunity to see 
him again. Otheguy further connects the family drama to a challenging but acces-
December 2021 • 133
sible exploration of immigration, particularly how shifting geopolitical tides can 
ease or restrict entry of particular groups into the United States. This is ﬁne fare 
indeed for balletomanes and a keenly felt examination of competing desires and 
familial expectations.  EB 
PAlmer, ChArly The Legend of Gravity: A Tall Basketball Tale; written and illus. 
by Charly Palmer. Farrar, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780374313289 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-8 yrs
The kid showed up from out of nowhere—as legends so often do—and just in time 
to insinuate himself among ﬁve ballers in need of a sixth for a game of three-on-
three. To say he could play would be the understatement of the century as he easily 
passed his ad hoc audition as he “leaped gracefully into the air over Sky High . . . 
flipped the ball behind his own back, through his legs, and kept going.” Promptly 
dubbed Gravity for the phenomenon he deﬁed, he was designated the Eagles’ ticket 
to victory in Best of the Best, “Milwaukee’s biggest and baddest pickup basketball 
tournament.” Awesome as Gravity was, their tourney rivals, the East Side Flyers, 
held them in check until Gravity unleashed his greatest talent—convincing the 
Eagles to play as a team. The message is simple, and perhaps even predictable, 
especially for kids who catch the number 23 on Gravity’s jersey and relate it to a 
well-oiled Bulls team in Michael Jordan’s heyday. Palmer’s visual storytelling adds 
a breathless wonder that’s much harder to deliver than a concluding moral, as the 
solid weight of the thickly brushed players goes effortlessly airborne, and the glow-
ing ball seems weightless as a paper lantern in Gravity’s broad, dark hands. At the 
conclusion, the narrative voice of an Eagles player reveals that this is an event from 
twenty-ﬁve years ago, a subtle twist that enhances the mystery. Is this a tall tale? 
Or is it the burnished memory of a garrulous grown up? Palmer’s author note on 
streetball legend leaves that door ajar, just as his stunning artwork carries the heft 
of certainty but with a little blur around the edges.  EB
PAnitCh, AmAndA The Two Wrong Halves of Ruby Taylor. Roaring Brook, 
2022 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250245137 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250245144 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7
Sarah is one of those cousins—the perfect one, beloved of a common grandmother 
who makes little effort to conceal her favoritism—and since Ruby can’t avoid 
Sarah at either public or Hebrew school, she has hit the breaking point. Down in 
Grandma Yvette’s basement, Ruby strafes Sarah with an angry barrage of reasons 
why she’s sick of her, and during the outrage, she accidentally knocks open an off-
limits chest that Grandma has cryptically warned contains a dybbuk. Suddenly, 
Sarah’s not so sweet anymore, and the family is alarmed by her new behavior, which 
includes setting off a school ﬁre alarm, penning a vicious letter to the new female 
rabbi, and commiting acts of vandalism. Initially skeptical of Grandma Yvette’s 
superstitions, Ruby consults confusing and contradictory online resources but 
concludes correctly that Sarah is indeed possessed by a malevolent force pursuing 
its own agenda. The realistic domestic drama often shares its space uncomfort-
ably with the supernatural storyline, and the underlying cause of Ruby’s storm of 
134 • The Bulletin
resentment—she’s regarded by Grandma Yvette as less Jewish than Sarah, due to 
patrilineal lineage—is often authorially handled through stretches of exposition 
rather than action. Nonetheless, the dybbuk adds interest to a familiar theme, and 
readers who privately seethe over their own “second best” status will feel Ruby’s 
pain and approve her reconciliation.  EB
PAtriCK, KAt The Spectacular Suit; illus. by Hayley Wells. Scribble, 2021 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781950354696 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-5 yrs
Frankie’s ﬁrst party is just around the corner, and everything is going to be perfect. 
Her mom borrowed a tent and decorations, her sister designed the invitations, and 
Frankie’s brother even bought extra-crunchy pickles. The only problem? Frankie 
has nothing to wear. None of the dresses her mom picked out feel right, and she 
doesn’t want to wear something as ordinary as a sweater to the big event. No, 
Frankie wants to wear a suit, “a suit that would take you places—marvelous places. 
Something with lightning bolts and stars and style.” Frankie goes to bed dejected, 
knowing she’ll never ﬁnd her perfect suit, but maybe Frankie is underestimating how 
much her family wants the party to be perfect, too. This is a sweet story of family 
support, self-expression, and truly impressive fashion. Wells’ digital art, rendered 
predominantly in shades of red, yellow, and blue, is a retro delight, accompanying 
simple, charming character designs, warm domestic scenes, and nods to the glam 
rock stylings of David Bowie. This is sure to be a storytime hit with the future of 
haute couture, and parents and teachers will love the new vocabulary and potential 
for family craft inspiration.  KP
PAulsen, gAry Northwind. Farrar, 2022 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780374314200 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780374314217 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Orphaned before he could form a memory of his parents, Leif was raised aboard 
a hunting ship, held virtually captive, and tasked with the ﬁlthiest of duties. Now 
he and a handful of expendable crew members are dropped ashore to catch and 
dry salmon; their mother ship, however, never returns for them, and before the old 
men and young boys can build boats to leave their encampment, stragglers from a 
passing plague ship infect them. Seaman Old Carl expends his waning energy to 
launch Leif and a younger boy out to sea in a sturdy canoe, but only Leif recovers. 
Supplied with some basic gear and guided by Old Carl’s directive to go north, Leif 
joins the ranks of many other ﬁctional adolescents (including previous Paulsen 
characters) who test their mettle against nature. As he hugs the coast of an unspeci-
ﬁed but Norse-inspired region, he encounters, as expected in survival stories, forces 
ranging from whirlpools and calving icebergs to bears, dolphins, orcas, and massive 
whales. Unlike other young heroes, however, Leif doesn’t ﬁght against the elements 
but observes and learns from them, slowly recognizing himself as one small bit of 
nature with the will to live another day. Precise in episodic details but contemplative 
in tone, Paulsen’s narration keeps Leif at emotional arm’s length, developing him as 
a sort of boy hero in a time-honored saga but one who triumphs by joining nature 
rather than conquering it. Here returning to civilization is completely beside the 
point: “You lived or you died. And in between the two, if you kept you mind open 
and aware and listened and smelled and watched . . . In between you learned.”  EB
December 2021 • 135
PinKwAter, dAniel Kat Hats; illus. by Aaron Renier. Abrams, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419751943 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781647004941 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-8 yrs
In the old city of Pretzelburg lives Matt Katz, owner and proprietor of Kat Hats. 
One might assume that Kat Hats would sell cat-sized headwear (“That would be 
adorable”) or human-sized chapeaus that look like cats (“This would be delightful 
and also fashionable”). However, Kat Hats provides something far more impressive: 
Matt Katz is the greatest cat trainer in the world and has taught his specially selected 
clowder to fashion themselves into the warmest, softest hats in the world, perfect 
for the noggins of “mountain climbers, adventurers, Arctic explorers, and people 
living in Chicago.” The playful absurdity increases when townsperson Thirdbeard 
bursts onto the scene, begging Matt Katz and his family to save his lost mother who’s 
likely suffering brain freeze. The rescue mission begins with feline hero Thermal 
Herman 67/8ths, “the pride and joy of Kat Hats and the warmest cat ever known,” 
and viewers are treated to costume changes, random giraffes, and a moose using his 
antlers as a hat rack. Tongue-twisting text, odd and lovable characters, and Renier’s 
vibrant, gouache, mixed-media-esque illustrations make a delightful fever dream 
that will please both the grown-up reading the books and the kiddos listening. A 
diverse cast includes the multi-racial Katz family and wheelchair-using son Pocket-
mouse, who Renier seamlessly incorporates into the ongoings with green-skinned 
Thirdbeard and his mother. This is Pinkwater at his best, clever, charming, and 
weird in the best possible ways.  KP
Polydoros, Aden The City Beautiful. Inkyard, 2021 [480p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781335402509 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780369702821 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
It’s the late 1800s, and Alter, a young Jewish immigrant from Romania, is trying to 
earn enough money to get his mother and sisters to Chicago while he investigates 
the deaths of several young men in his neighborhood. Unfortunately, a series of 
events lead to his possession by a dybbuk, intensifying the need to solve the mystery 
of the deaths to put the hateful spirit to rest before it kills him. Alter’s adherence 
to his faith, his narration, and the anguish he feels over being gay in a world that 
barely accepts his culture, let alone his sexuality, render him a sympathetic and 
compelling protagonist even before the supernatural comes into play. The revela-
tion of the villains is only a small part of this lengthy story—far more attention is 
given to Alter’s slow, painful growth into a young man conﬁdent enough to speak 
his mind, to create space for himself in a world content to keep him invisible, and, 
most poignantly, to risk his life to help those he loves. Alter endures signiﬁcant 
anti-Semitism, and those moments of small cruelties and harmful assumptions 
are much more compelling than the bad guys, as they won’t end after a dramatic 
standoff but rather will remain a thread woven into his whole life. A glossary and 
extensive author’s note provide context; neither is necessary to experience the novel 
in powerful ways but they add more flavor and background.  AS 
136 • The Bulletin
rhodes, morgAn Echoes and Empires. Razorbill, 2022 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593351659 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593351680 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
While she’s known in the Empire of Regara to be a celebrity with a fondness for 
drink and gossip, Josslyn Drake is also the daughter of the Prime Minister who was 
assassinated at last year’s Queen’s Gala. When Josslyn accidentally absorbs memory 
magic of the universally hated Lord Banyon, she’s kidnapped by the handsome 
thief who set out to steal it—Jericho, a boy with dark magic that could potentially 
lead to his execution. The two get themselves into the Queen’s Keep, a self-run 
community of prisoners and exiles, to ﬁnd the warlock with the power to remove 
Joss’ new magic and restore her life to normal. Unfortunately, however, the mission 
is complicated by dramatic revelations about the beloved Queen, Josslyn’s father’s 
assassination, and the misunderstood Lord Banyon. Rhodes’ world is an intriguing 
blend of fantasy elements and real-world technology, as cars and phones coexist 
comfortably with curses and elemental magic, and Regara’s pervasive celebrity 
culture will be recognizable to teen readers. Pages of banter between Josslyn and 
Jericho will please fans of enemies-to-lovers romances, and the pair’s relationship 
forms organically through their shared hardships. Similar to her Falling Kingdoms 
(BCCB 1/13) series, Rhodes creates complex and nuanced main characters who go 
through extreme growth by the end of the story. Though the formulaic structure 
makes some of the plot reveals predictable, excellent pacing keeps the pages turn-
ing, and readers will likely want to return for the sequel.  NB
roBinson, FionA Out of the Shadows: How Lotte Reiniger Made the First Animated 
Fairytale Movie; written and illus. by Fiona Robinson. Abrams, 2022 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419740855 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781647003159 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 3-5
Alive with invention, early twentieth-century Berlin was an ideal place to come of 
age for Lotte Reiniger, a little girl besotted with fairy tales. Her family had the time, 
money, and inclination to indulge her hunger for books of folklore, so once Lotte 
was introduced to the wizardry of Georges Méliès, she set her sight on bringing 
fairy tales to ﬁlm. Chinese paper shadow puppetry and German Scherenschnitte 
morphed into her signature stop-motion animation and her ticket to professional 
advancement. Shortly after her marriage to fellow animator Carl Koch, she was 
commissioned to produce the ﬁrst full-length fairy tale ﬁlm, The Adventures of 
Prince Achmed, and invented technologies such as the prototype multiplane camera 
as expediency required. Robinson concentrates on Reiniger’s early career, culmi-
nating in Prince Achmed’s triumphant premier, and she spins the tale with once-
upon-a-time panache. Illustrations handily deal with technical explanations, but 
Robinson’s own cut-paper work both explicates and celebrates Reiniger’s technique. 
End matter comprises notes on Reiniger’s later career, suggested Reiniger ﬁlms for 
children’s viewing, observations on adult or insensitive themes in her oeuvre, and 
credits to original resources that inspired Robinson’s illustrations. Pair this with 
Mara Rockliff’s Lights! Camera! Alice! on pioneering ﬁlmmaker Alice Guy-Blaché 
(BCCB 11/18) to thrill a new generation of aspiring auteurs.  EB
December 2021 • 137
sAnCheZ, Jenny torres With Lots of Love; illus. by André Ceolin. Viking, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593205006 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593464953 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Rocio and her family have recently moved to the U.S., and she desperately misses 
both Abuela and Abuela’s grocery store, where her grandmother sold pan dulce and 
coconut cream ice pops and made beautiful piñatas ﬁlled with treats. Rocio regrets 
not asking for a piñata to decorate her new room, so she’s thrilled when a package 
arrives for her birthday, containing not just a piñata but also Abuela’s delicious 
tortillas and a picture of the extended family. It’s a simple but wholly immersive 
tale, with poetic language infused with sensorial delights: Rocio misses the smell 
of spicy peppers and burnt sugar from her grandmother’s shop, the pretty song 
of her language, and the star-sprinkled sky of her homeland. Stylized illustrations 
exude energy, and tightly composed scenes balance the steady geometry of patterned 
clothing and piñatas with a more sweeping whimsy of moonlit skies and wafting 
curls from sweet coffee and tortillas. Like last month’s Friends are Friends, Forever 
by Dane Liu (BCCB 11/21), this reminds readers of the physical and emotional 
richness of everyday experiences and how those experiences can be drawn upon to 
build a new life in a new home.  KQG
sChwArtZ, dAnA Anatomy: A Love Story. Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250774156 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250774163 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
There’s little opportunity for a young woman of good breeding to become a surgeon 
in 1817 Edinburgh, but that doesn’t stop seventeen-year-old Hazel from trying. 
She ﬁrst dresses up as a boy to attend lectures by Dr. Beecham, a famous doctor 
doing (quite literally) cutting edge work in the ﬁeld, but when her ruse is revealed, 
she ﬁnds another way to prepare for the medical exams with the help of Jack, a 
resurrection man desperate enough for cash that he’ll bring bodies to her manor 
for dissection. There’s something strange afoot in Edinburgh’s streets, however, as 
resurrection men begin to disappear and the corpses Jack digs up are increasingly 
disﬁgured or maimed. Hazel’s a standard plucky heroine and Jack the predictably 
broody love interest, but their romance is still sweet and steamy, and further drama 
is added by Hazel’s handsy ﬁancé, who walks the line between a privileged man 
of his times and a lecherous fool with a compelling sort of glee. The true villain, 
however, is an unmitigated sadist, and while his chilling lack of compassion truly 
leaves one’s skin crawling, he also challenges readerly assumptions about the ethics 
of past and modern medicine. A third act twist pushes that interrogation further, 
and paired with Herman’s The Corpse Queen (BCCB 9/21), this would make an 
intimate look at how society decides who is worth healing and who is worth ex-
ploiting in the name of science.  KQG
138 • The Bulletin
seArle, sArAh winiFred The Greatest Thing; written and illus. by Sarah Winifred 
Searle. First Second, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250297228 $25.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9781250297235 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
It’s 2002, and Winifred is unmoored without her two best friends, who have 
both moved away the summer before tenth grade. Unfortunately, her anxieties, 
depression, and self-loathing almost keep her from spotting any new attempts at 
friendships, but people are persistent, especially classmates April and Oscar who 
adopt her in spite of her early guarded nature, helping her gain conﬁdence in her 
artistic abilities. Win is relying on positive feedback from a beloved teacher and 
daily reinforcements from her friends to boost her, however, and eventually she’s 
got to ﬁnd her own way, which is the hard-won struggle at the core of this melan-
choly but ultimately hopeful graphic novel. An author’s note explains the balance 
of memoir and ﬁction, and the personal elements certainly render Winifred as a 
painfully realistic, relatable, and memorable character. Wordless panels carry the 
story, conveying despair or ebullience with gestures, tinting, and shadows. As the 
novel offers no perfectly wrapped up happy ending, readers will have to trust that 
the trio will all land softly after they separate, growing into their various LGBTQIA+ 
identities with tools to cope, adapt, and grow.  AS
sterling, isABel The Coldest Touch. Razorbill, 2021 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593350430 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593350447 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Sixteen-year-old Elise is still coping with the aftermath of her older brother’s death, 
which is particularly difficult since her ability to see how people die with a mere 
touch means she saw his drowning coming. Meanwhile, vampire Claire is working 
for the Veil, a group of  ancient beings who aim to ﬁnd the new Death Oracle to be 
their next tool of destruction against the misbehaving supernatural. When Claire 
approaches Elise with the promise of controlling her powers, the offer sounds too 
good to be true; unfortunately, it is, because Elise will be “unraveling” supernatural 
beings—essentially draining them of their powers and life—at the Veil’s whims and 
losing connections to her mortal life. Things are further complicated when Claire 
discovers Elise might have the power to make her human again. Similar in tone 
to Sterlings’ These Witches Don’t Burn (BCCB 5/19), this cleverly subverts genre 
expectations with sardonic humor and quippy snark. Elise and Claire are both well-
developed characters with sympathetic but conflicting agendas, and Elise coming 
to terms with the fact that she might not be straight is a route that will be familiar 
for many queer readers. Those craving more vampire ﬁction in high school settings 
with a romantic twist have found their next read.  NB
tAmAKi, mAriKo Cold. Roaring Brook, 2022 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781626722736 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781626722743 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Todd is dead. He acknowledges that even while his new existence as a ghost keeps 
him tethered to the same area where he lived before he was killed and left naked in 
December 2021 • 139
a park. Georgia didn’t know Todd, but she is drawn to his story, especially once she 
realizes they were both on the outer edges of their social power rankings and her 
own brother starts being sketchy. There are mean girls and bullies, detectives and 
investigations, and a gay teacher who is unjustly thrown up as a potential killer—all 
key elements of the plot, but not really the main ingredients. The real story here 
comes from Todd letting go and Georgia learning to grab at life rather than hide from 
it. Tamaki is so gifted at creating vulnerable, damaged, and compelling characters 
(regardless of where they fall on a morality spectrum) that they easily compensate for 
the slowly unfolding mystery that stretches patience on occasion. Todd’s realization 
about the essence of life—that everyone is just spilling out their pain, trauma, and 
privilege all over you and the only thing you can control is how you respond—is 
certainly not rosy, but sometimes knowing the truth is balm enough.  AS
woods, BrendA When Winter Robeson Came. Paulsen/Penguin, 2022 [176p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781524741587 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781524741594 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 4-7
It’s summer of 1965 when thirteen-year-old Winter travels from Mississippi to visit 
his twelve-year-old cousin Eden in California, but he isn’t in town for a typical sight-
seeing vacation—he’s on a mission to ﬁnd his father, who has been presumed dead 
for ten years. Eden wants to help how she can, but as she guides Winter through her 
neighborhood, she must also come to terms with the fact that California is hardly 
as welcoming to Black people as her family thought when they moved there years 
ago; as racial tensions mount and then explode into the Watts riots, the reality of 
continued bigotry is laid bare. Author Brenda Woods offers this heartfelt piece of 
historical ﬁction as she recalls witnessing the Watts Rebellion in 1965. Eden is an 
aspiring songwriter, and the book cleverly uses music terminology to convey Eden’s 
and Winter’s shifting emotions during the six days of unrest and to mark the pac-
ing of the plot. The free verse makes some of the more complex themes accessible, 
and this could easily spark a thoughtful discussion on how a history of Jim Crow 
laws, police brutality, and housing inequality plays into current social unrest.  QB
wyAtt, edwinA Sometimes Cake; illus. by Tamsin Ainslie. Candlewick, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536217810 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
When Audrey encounters Lion, who is holding a balloon, Audrey asks if it’s his 
birthday—to which he responds, “Sometimes. But not today.” The duo celebrate 
anyway, and thus the pattern of question, answer, and party begins. One day Lion 
is making a cake “For Tuesdays. Also coconuts,” and the next he is wearing a party 
hat for “Orange mostly. Also yellow,” and later purple at Audrey’s request. When 
Lion isn’t celebrating anything one day, citing that today is an “ordinary day,” 
Audrey puts up banners and makes confetti for him, to honor ordinary days and 
“also lions.” The call-and-response between Audrey’s questions and Lion’s seem-
ingly nonsensical answers make this 2020 Australian import suitable for an adult 
reader and child viewer to pick up right before bedtime, with its gently whimsical 
premise furthered by Ainslie’s dreamy, soft watercolors and scratchy pencil lines. 
The underlying message about celebrating and appreciating the ordinary is just the 
right level of sweetness, the icing on the proverbial cake. NB
140 • The Bulletin
ZePKA, BriAn The Temperature of Me and You. Disney Hyperion, 2022 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781368064712 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
It’s tough to have dreams of perfect love when you are a jaded, gay, sixteen-year-old 
spending your evenings working at a Dairy Queen in Philly. Dylan has all but given 
up on happiness when in walks adorable and mysterious Jordan, uprooting Dylan’s 
life in excellent and alarming ways. The sci-ﬁ aspect of this romance is introduced 
quickly: Jordan’s body temperature is 110 degrees due to an accident (perhaps) 
that occurred at the hands of HydroPro, a company that is every bit as villainous 
as one might imagine. Unfortunately, it doesn’t seem like Jordan is going to live 
long, and he’s being followed by obvious baddies who don’t want Jordan telling 
anyone about his condition, so when Dylan starts exhibiting similar symptoms, 
things get even more tricky. The action is zippy, the science is plausible enough 
for a quick glance, and the side characters are excellent foils for Dylan’s growth. 
Ultimately, however, this is most successful as a romance. Dylan and Jordan are 
immediately attracted to one another, and even without impossible body temps, 
their connection is steamy. Dylan’s assumptions about what makes perfect love are 
upended, and his reckoning with the idea that flawed, fumbling, hopeful love is 
far superior to any over-idealized version he had imagined makes him a deeper and 
more likable character. Readers who appreciate a well-told love at ﬁrst sight story 
are the likeliest fans for this novel.  AS
December 2021 • 141
ADVENTURE: Paulsen
Animals—stories: Alexander
Aunts—stories: Sanchez
Ballet—fiction: Otheguy
Basketball—stories: Palmer
BIOGRAPHIES: Robinson
Black people—fiction: Brown; Bryant; 
Woods
Black people—stories: DiPucchio
Black people: Castrovilla; Latham
Cats—stories: Pinkwater; Forsythe
Chinese Americans—fiction: Moore
Civil rights—fiction: Woods
Civil War: Castrovilla
Climate change: Castaldo
Clothing—stories: Patrick
Conservation: Castaldo
Cousins—fiction: Panitch; Woods
Crime and criminals—fiction: 
Schwartz
Cuban Americans—fiction: Otheguy
Cuban people: Engle
Current events: Castaldo
Dance and dancers—fiction: Otheguy
Death—stories: Keane
Disabilities—fiction: Heath
Ethics and values: Clark; Fadugba; 
Long; Nijkamp
Families—fiction: Brown; Leigh; 
Otheguy
Families—stories: Ford; Patrick
Families: Engle
FANTASY: Ciccarelli; Cajoleas; Clark; 
Farrey; Murray; Rhodes
Films and filmmaking: Robinson
FOLKLIKE TALES: Ciccarelli
Food and eating—stories: Wyatt
Friends—fiction: Anderson; Egan; 
Heath; Korman; Searle
Friends—stories: Alexander; DiPuc-
chio; Wyatt
Gender—stories: Ford
Ghosts—fiction: Anderson; Brown; 
Tamaki
Gods and goddesses—fiction: Burton; 
Murray
Grandparents—stories: Keane
GRAPHIC NOVELS: Caba; Searle
Grief—fiction: Long; Keane
Hats—stories: Pinkwater
HISTORICAL FICTION: Heath; 
Schwartz
History, U.S.: Castrovilla; Gladden; 
Latham; Woods
HORROR: Leigh
HUMOR: Alexander; Bright; Caba; 
Moore; Pinkwater
Identity—fiction: Bryant; Paulsen
Identity—stories: Ford
Imagination—stories: Alexander
Immigrants—fiction: Polydoros
Immigrants—stories: Sanchez
Jewish people—fiction: Panitch; 
Polydoros
Journalism: Farrell
Latinx people—stories: Sanchez
Legends—stories: Palmer
LGBTQIA+ people—fiction: 
Sterling; Heath; Nijkamp; 
Polydoros;Tamaki; Zepka
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
142 • The Bulletin
LGBTQIA+ people—stories: Ford
Lions—stories: Wyatt
Literature, English: Barker 
Magic—fiction: Cajoleas; Farrey; 
Murray; Rhodes
Magic—stories: Caba
Magicians—fiction: Moore
Medicine—fiction: Schwartz
Mental illness—fiction: Searle
Mermaids—stories: DiPucchio
Mice—stories: Forsythe
Multiverses—fiction: Egan
Music—fiction: Ciccarelli
MYSTERIES: Arnold; Farrey; Tamaki
Mythology, Greek: Burton
Orphans—fiction: Clark; Foulkes
Pandemics—fiction: Nijkamp
Parents—fiction: Arnold
Parties—stories: Patrick; Wyatt
Performers—fiction: Moore
Photography—fiction: Searle
Photography: Farrell
POETRY: Latham
Rabbits—stories: Caba
Races—fiction: Long
Racism: Gladden
Reading, aloud: Forsythe
Reading, easy: Moore
Relationships—fiction: Heath; Leigh; 
Nijkamp; Zepka
Religion—fiction: Murray
Robots—fiction: Clark
Romance—fiction: Barker; Bry-
ant; Burton; Ciccarelli; Rhodes; 
Schwartz; Sterling; Zepka
Romance—stories: Bright
Sacrifice—fiction: McCall
School—fiction: Anderson; Egan; 
Korman
Schools: Gladden
SCIENCE FICTION: Barker; Egan; 
Fadugba; Long; Zepka
Secrets—fiction: Arnold; Cajoleas; 
Leigh; McCall
Segregation: Gladden
Sexual assault—fiction: Burton
Ships and sailing—fiction: Paulsen
Siblings—fiction: McCall
Sisters—fiction: Leigh
Slavery: Latham
Slugs—stories: Bright
Spies and espionage: Castrovilla
Sports—stories: Palmer
Statues—fiction: Farrey
Storytime: Bright; DiPucchio; Patrick; 
Pinkwater
SUPERNATURAL STORIES: 
Brown; Foulkes; Panitch; Polydo-
ros; Sterling
SURVIVAL STORIES: Paulsen
SUSPENSE: Anderson; McCall
Time travel—fiction: Barker; Fadugba; 
Korman
Treasures—fiction: Arnold
Vampires—fiction: Sterling; Foulkes
VERSE NOVELS: Engle
Vietnam War: Farrell
Voyages and travel—fiction: Bryant
Water: Castaldo
Women’s studies: Engle; Farrell; 
Robinson
WORDLESS BOOKS: Caba
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Bookbird:
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
The Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books
Children’s Literature
Children’s Literature 
Association Quarterly
Journal of the History of 
Childhood and Youth
The Lion and the Unicorn
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP,
MANAGEMENT, AND CIRCULATION, 10/1/21
Title: Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books. Pub. No. 0008-9036. Frequency: Monthly 
(except August). Eleven issues published annually. Subscription price: $125.00 institutions. 
Location of office of publication: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, MD 21218. Headquarters of publisher: Same. Publisher: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218. Editor: Deborah Stevenson, University of 
Illinois, 501 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Owner: University of Illinois, 501 E. 
Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820-6601. The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this 
organization and the exempt status for Federal Income tax purposes have not changed during the 
preceding 12 months.
Extent and nature of circulation 
Av. no. copies 
Actual no. copies
 
each issue 
single issue pub.
 
preceding 12 months nearest to filing date
A. Total no. copies printed 
644 
630
B. Paid circulation, mail subscriptions 
441 
433
C. Total paid distribution 
461 
452
D. Free distribution 
20 
20
F. Total distribution 
481 
472
G. Copies not distributed 
163 
158
H. Total 
644 
630
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete. William M. Breichner,
Journals Publisher.
