ILLINOI S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
*"Colorful, graphic language makes Cowboys, Indians, and Gunfighters an excit-
ing account of the old West. Detailed descriptions of Comanche vengeance, buf-
falo hunts, and frontier law and lawlessness capture the period vividly....Marrin
includes minority viewpoints and details the contributions of African American
and Mexican cowboys and soldiers. Prints by such notable artists as Frederic
Remington and Charles M. Russell, as well as poignant period photographs
bring the era to life." -Starred, 
School Lrry Journa
"Debunking the romantic images, [Marrini clarifies who cowboys were, what
they did, and how they viewed their lives...Marrin's inclusion of concrete details
and his engaging writing style make this an exceedingly readable account of a
unique and turbulent period in American history." -Booklist
$22.95 SBE/-689-31774-3/Ages 10 up
SBE indicates a reiforced hardover edition
A ATHENEUM
An imprint of the Macmillan Children's Book Group
866 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
October 1993
Vol.47 No. 2
A LOOK INSIDE
35 
THE BIG PICTURE
36 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
44 
* Eleanor Roosevelt written by Russell Freedman
49 
* Speaking Out by Susan Kuklin
55 
* Seven Candles for Kwanzaa by Andrea Davis Pinkney; illus. by Brian
Pinkney
56 
* We Are All in the Dumps with Jack and Guy ad. and illus. by Maurice
Sendak
58 
* The Happy Hocky Family! written and illus. by Lane Smith
62 
* Scooter written and illus. by Vera B. Williams
64 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
66 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1993 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Will Hillenbrand, from Owl in Love ©1993 by Will Hillenbrand and used by
permission of Houghton Mifflin Company.
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 35
THE BIG PICTURE
Owl in Love
by Patrice Kindl
The title, believe it or not, is self-explanatory. Our protagonist, Owl, has a terrible
crush on her science teacher; it's a particular problem for her because she's a
wereowl-attending school during the day and transforming at will to hunt prey
at night-so that her seemingly adolescent longing for Mr. Lindstrom is actually
the foundation of the owl's mating-bond for life. Owl is fortunate in her family,
town eccentrics cozily familiar with the avian tendency in their genes ("There are
birds of prey in my family going back hundreds of years, one every two or three
generations"), who enjoy the juicy rabbits she sometimes brings back for their
dinner and are shocked that Owl's love might not be returned, or even legal.
Owl gradually falls into a comradeship with Dawn, a chatty, sunny schoolmate
to whom she turns for help when her nightly vigils at Mr. Lindstrom's house reveal
an unstable boy hiding in the backyard. Owl thinks the boy, whom she names
Houle, is a wereowl like her, and she determines to keep him warm and safe in
Dawn's garage. Houle proves to be Mr. Lindstrom's son, considered disturbed
because of his natural wereowl tendency to eat rodents raw, and Owl's crush on
the father turns out to be a foreshadowing of her enduring owl bond with the son,
now liberated by the knowledge of his true barn-owl self.
Owl's narration is austere and disdainful; her matter-of-factness about preda-
tion, unfamiliarity with average human ways, and anxiety about her inner turmoil
are extremely funny (she nearly makes a dreadful faux pas by eating, rather than
petting, Dawn's proffered hamster on her first visit to her friend's house). Her
owl-world of night and flight is also harsh, beautiful, and mystical. Fantasies so
often carry the weight of their own making, forcing readers to acknowledge bril-
liant architecture rather than taking them to another world. In Owl in Love, the
fantasy world is depicted so that the reader experiences what the narrator does;
Kindl's fiction creates a convincing impression of an existence we would otherwise
never know. It's good to see "what if" taken to the extreme while still being treated
with respect. The author, a superb writer, combines the diverse strands well; even
the initially confusing narrative shifts to Houle's anguished point of view become
clear. Owl struggles with conflicting needs as owl and human, child and adult,
while asking questions ("How does one detect malice behind a smooth, smiling,
pink face?") not unique to wereowls and familiar to any reader trying to negotiate
the complex human world. Her relationship with loyal, smarter-than-she-seems
Dawn is quite touching, as Dawn clearly understands more about Owl than Owl
realizes and meets her more than halfway in a friendship Owl is only beginning to
understand.
36 
* THE BULLETIN
So for Halloween, try a fantasy rich and strange, haunting and humorous, with
the same solid roots in human dynamics that make The Changeover so plausible.
Light up the jack o' lanterns at twilight, watch the night birds swoop, and enjoy
Owl in Love out loud with the local thirteen-year-olds.
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANDERSON, JOAN 
Twins on Toes: A Ballet Debut; illus. with photographs by George
Ancona. 
Lodestar, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-525-67415-2 
$14.99 
R Gr. 4-7
Behind the frilly pink mystique of ballet lies another harder mystique of broken
bones, blisters, and obsession, and it is that vision of ballet that this book presents.
Amy and Laurel are identical twins who have been dancing for ten years; they're
studying at the School of American Ballet, hoping for an offer from a professional
ballet company, and dancing their hearts and limbs out in the meantime. This
isn't A Very Young Dancer-there's no glossary, and explanation of unfamiliar terms
is rare. It is, however, an absorbing look at two girls, professionals consecrated to
their art, and at the hard work of endless classes and endless hopes. The photo-
graphs are splendid and varied, with the twins sometimes fairy princesses in per-
formance, sometimes elaborate shapes cleanly curving in practice room space, and
sometimes teenagers seemingly knitted together from strain and bones; one play-
ful but moody picture shows the twins, looking more Audrey Hepburn-ish than
ever, peering into a mirror as they apply makeup before a performance: it takes a
moment to figure out which of the four girls are reflections. The overall picture is
alluring, beautiful, and a little scary (the twins and their mentors casually drop
utterances such as "We live to dance," "Always dance as if it were the last thing you
were going to do," "You have to listen, you have to want it. Be starving") in a way
that makes ballet all the more magnetic. Amy and Laurel are rewarded with a
contract with the Miami Ballet; young novitiates who hope to follow them, if only
from their armchairs, will find this book rewarding as well. DS
ANTLE, NANCY 
Tough Choices: A Story of the Vietnam War; illus. by Michele
Laporte. 
Viking, 1993 
[64p] 
(Once Upon America)
ISBN 0-670-84879-4 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Samantha has been worried about her oldest brother Mitch, who's coming home
after more than a year's duty in Vietnam. But now that he's home, and different
somehow, Sam is upset because her other brother Emmett has become a fervent
anti-war activist and can't seem to keep from baiting Mitch. Although the debate
is rarely subtle ("Baby killer!" shouts one protestor at Mitch; "You're nothing but
a bunch of dirty hippies," replies his mom), the book is an efficient vehicle for the
OCTOBER 1993 
* 37
discussion of U.S. involvement in Vietnam. However, there's not enough fic-
tional development. We have no idea, for example, of where Sam and her family
live, and her statement that "my dad died before I was born" begs further elucida-
tion, but that's it for any mention of Dad. Still, there's little for this reading level
about the war, and kids will also empathize with the family tensions brought home
by headlines. RS
ASHABRANNER, BRENT 
Still a Nation of Immigrants; illus. with photographs by
Jennifer Ashabranner and others. 
Cobblehill, 1993 
131p
ISBN 0-525-65130-6 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Ashabranner updates his excellent series of books about immigration (The New
Americans, etc.) with this look at the issue, and the people it affects, in the late '80s
and into the '90s. While he acknowledges problems (although saying that the
presence of Vietnamese fishermen in the Gulf of Mexico "caused tension is a few
places at first" seems a bit understated), particularly in regard to illegal immigra-
tion, the book is governed by the argument that immigration is a good thing for
the country. The text is peppered with success stories of immigrants who have
made successful lives for themselves and enriched the communities they live in.
These stories add anecdotal interest to the argument (as do black-and-white pho-
tos of variable quality), and well-documented statistics drawn from census data
and surveys add evidential weight. A bibliography and index are included. RS
Avi 
City of Light, City of Dark; illus. by Brian Floca. Jackson/Orchard,
1993 
192p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08650-X 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06800-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Ever the experimenter, Avi, along with artist collaborator Brian Floca, here uses a
comic-book format to tell a comic-book tale about the forces of good and evil
battling above, below, and upon the island of Manhattan. Long ago, a strange race
called the Kurbs leased Manhattan to humans, on the condition that each year a
ritual of finding the POWER and returning it to a place designated by the Kurbs
be carried out. Otherwise, "the Kurbs will take their Island back." The "Ritual
Cycle of Acknowledgment" is carried out by a matrilineal line of women, but the
cycle has been foiled by the evil designs of Thor Underton, who plots to steal the
POWER (currently residing in an ordinary-looking subway token) from its cur-
rent keeper, a meter maid named Asterel. While the story has plenty of derring-do
and complications, it's over-prolonged and unmenacing. Unlike the classic Man-
hattan comic Batman, there's little genuine darkness here, and the black-and-white
cartoons are often blandly illustrative, with too many panels, and only occasionally
provide the dramatic sweep the words need. There's a healthy dose of feminism
and a multicultural cast to give a fresh slant, but the newsstand originals have the
real power. RS
BANKS, LYNNE REID 
The Magic Hare; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Morrow,
1993 
49p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10896-2 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10895-4 
$15.00 
R Gr. 3-5
Although the hare is a folkloric trickster figure, these ten short stories are original
38 
* 
THE BULLETIN
and contemporary, if fabular, in their morals: "'Well, I don't know much about
queens, but personally I don't like talking to anyone who doesn't say please. And
thank you,' said the hare very reasonably." The hare's encounter with the spoiled
queen (rendered realistically repulsive in Moser's portrait of her) is followed by his
confrontation with or transformation of a shy flower (a romantic blue, tipped with
moonlight), an orphan (glamorously depicted), two giants (grotesque), a vampire
(scary), a prince with hiccups (foolish), a dragon (brilliantly hued but stupid), a
witch who defines good magic as black (she's black herself), a penurious king (Moser
himself, parodied), and the hare's own magic powers, which don't seem to work
on the moon (hare-ish astronaut in spacesuit). The stories vary in cleverness of
plot, but the didactics are consistently balanced by offhand twists of humor. With
an occasional pause for showing Moser's illustrations, these will make a ready se-
quence of readalouds to spur kids on with their own creative writing. BH
BERNHARD, EMERY, ad. 
How Snowshoe Hare Rescued the Sun: A Tale from the
Arctic; illus. by Durga Bernhard. 
Holiday House, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1043-9 
$15.95 
R 5-8 yrs.
A simpler picture book, both narratively and visually, than the Bernhards' Spotted
Eagle and Black Crow (BCCB 6/93), this is a Siberian Yuit tale (adapted from a
collection by James Riordan) about the trickster hero Snowshoe Hare, who re-
trieves the sun from greedy demons that have stolen it. While Bear gets distracted
by food and Wolf by a warm den, Hare fulfills Snowy Owl's prediction by travel-
ing steadily, slipping into the demons' cave, kicking over the cauldron holding the
sun, rolling it along the snow, and finally kicking it up into the sky, where it makes
the sun, moon, and Milky Way stars. The highly patterned plot and illustrations
are well suited to each other, with rounded organic shapes and cool earth tones
dominating each scene of the unfolding drama. The demons are stylized with
humor and the animals toylike without becoming cute. Color-contrasting borders
are sometimes a bit much for the symmetrically restrained gouache compositions,
but overall this will make an impressive companion for tales such as Gerald
McDermott's Raven (BCCB 6/93) in storytelling sessions with younger children.
BH
BIAL, RAYMOND 
Frontier Home; written and illus. with photographs by Raymond
Bial. 
Houghton, 1993 
[40p]
ISBN 0-395-64046-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Precise full-color photographs of pioneer implements, livestock, and homes ac-
company a description of the life of the American setder. Missing from the book
is a glossary of terms, and unfortunately there are plenty of unfamiliar words to
confuse the reader. For example, one is instructed to "imagine traveling in a
Conestoga wagon"; settlers "would have a'raisin' ' to stack heavy timbers"; and the
tools used for building a cabin are mentioned in the text but not identified in a
nearby photograph. The lack of captions for the photos occasionally poses a prob-
lem when several unknown implements are shown together. On the other hand,
this is a well-written portrait of pioneer life ("If they weren't making or mending
clothes, women were busy scrubbing them with homemade soap"). Frontier Home
will be useful as a readaloud for a class that is studying pioneers and has already
been introduced to the period. KJ
OCTOBER 1993 
* 
39
BLUME, JUDY 
Here's to You, Rachel Robinson. Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
196p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08651-8 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06801-3 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-8
This companion to Just As Long As We're Together (BCCB 9/87) is narrated by
Rachel (best friend to the heroine in the previous book) whose seventh-grade tra-
vails range from worrying about keeping her friends and having a crush on an
older man, to, most seriously, dealing with the return home of her troubled older
brother Charles, who's been expelled from boarding school. This is no ordinary
sibling rivalry: Charles is aggressively, verbally cruel to both his sisters and his
parents, eventually landing the whole family into therapy. Blume is honest and
fair about contemporary family life, passing out neither blame nor sermons. She's
realistic, too, about what kids can get away with, whether it's Rachel's older sister
Jessica illicitly borrowing Mom's slinky black dress for the prom or Charles smok-
ing pot in his room. Junior-high school stories are a dime a dozen these days, but
Blume remains one of the best practitioners of the genre-thoughtful, gently funny,
and empathetic. RS
BOSSE, MALCOLM 
Deep Dream ofthe Rain Forest. Farrar, 1993 
179p
ISBN 0-374-31757-7 
$15.00 
R Gr. 7-12
An ambitious adventure story from the author of Captives of Time (BCCB 1/88) is
set in a Borneo jungle during the 1920s, when east and west come face to face in
the form of two strong men and a lame young woman with spiritual vision. Harry
Windsor is the orphaned son of brave British colonials who have traditionally
explored, fought, and died for their country. Bayang is a young Iban warrior who
has had a great dream, which, if he follows it, will give him power to lead his
people. Appearing in the dream and helping him interpret it in real life is Duck
Foot, ostracized because of a birth defect but wise in the ways of Iban tradition.
The fate of these three characters becomes intertwined when a warring group of
headhunters attacks Harry's uncle's expedition. The setting up of the situation
takes some time and exposition, but once the central characters begin their danger-
ous journey toward understanding the dream and each other, the action is nonstop
and compelling. Although Harry needn't have been such a stock prototype and
his conversion so predictable, both the Iban characters are less representative and
more individualized, centering the book fictionally and layering the story's con-
ventional plot and exotic setting. BH
BRETT, JAN 
Christmas Trolls;written and illus. byJan Brett. 
Putnam, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22507-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Treva's got more Trouble with Trolls (BCCB 12/92); this time, it's a pair of naughty
young ones who've enlisted a hedgehog to steal the Christmas ornaments and
treats from Treva's house so they can experience Christmas for themselves. Track-
ing them down to their treehouse, Treva teaches the trolls the true meaning of
Christmas, even though it means giving up her treasured toy horse in the process.
It's a sweet story, but kids will be more interested in the myriad details found in
Brett's paintings of Treva's Scandinavian home and the trolls' little house. The
drawing and coloring is a bit relentless, with a flatness of perspective that makes
the pictures crowded and busy; still, the seasonal mood is omnipresent, with snow
and evergreens providing Christmassy contrast with the cozy interiors. RS
40 
* THE BULLETIN
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH 
Fox Song; illus. by Paul Morin. 
Philomel, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22346-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs.
Jamie lies in bed remembering her Abenaki great-grandmother, who spent time in
the woods showing her the ways of wildlife, telling her stories, and teaching her
traditions of Native American craft and reverence for nature. With the potential
for becoming nostalgic, this is instead carried by the weight of emotional intensity
and action once-removed, as Jamie comes full circle to see the fox her grandmother
had promised would appear to remind her of their time together. Morin's woods
scenes are painted with the same concentration of color with which Bruchac writes,
though the human figures seem photographically stiff compared with the fluidity
in the drafting of flora and fauna. Story and art together, however, make a rich
combination that will move the adults reading this aloud as much as it does the
children who hear it. Mourning, as Jamie's parents realize, is a very private expe-
rience, and it will be important to leave listeners some time and space with their
own reactions to the book. BH
BRYAN, ASHLEY, ad. 
The Story of Lightning and Thunder; adapted and illus. by
Ashley Bryan. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-31836-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
"A long time ago, I mean a long, long time ago," Thunder was a black ewe (richly
patterned with organically rounded designs in Bryan's illustrations) and Lightning
was her white lamb (a ram that looks like he just stepped out of the Zodiac). "Ma
Sheep Thunder and her son lived in the hut where he was born .... You could
stop for a chat or to pat or just wave as you walked on by. They watched the flow,
the come and the go, of the people from the country, the people from the town.
When they tired of looking one way, they could always turn around." With prac-
ticed rhythms and internal rhyme that flows unobtrusively with his prose retelling
of this Nigerian tale, Bryan applies his rainbow paints to an effervescent depiction
of the ram's mischief, which causes him and his mother to be moved farther and
farther out from the village center till they're banished to the sky, where he still
causes trouble from time to time. "I know somebody like that too, uh-huh, I do,
but I'm not saying who." Every young listener who's been tempted to "biff, bam,
butt" his way out of trouble will know who, too, and you won't have to say an-
other word. Just read the story over again. BH
BUTLER, BEVERLY 
Witch's Fire. Cobblehill, 1993 
135p
ISBN 0-525-65132-2 
$14.99 
R Gr. 5-7
Two years ago, Kirsty's mother and sister were killed in the car accident that re-
stricted her to a wheelchair; now her father has remarried and feels that he can
make a home again for his daughter, who had been staying with relatives. Kirsty
misses her mother and sister and resents her father's refusal to discuss them, and
she hates his attention to her little stepsister Pam. And there's something creepy
about their new old house: the cat is oddly skittish of parts of it, strange sights are
reflected in the window, and neighborhood kids keep describing the previous owner,
an old lady now in a nursing home, as a witch. The neighborhood kids are right,
and the witch wreaks havoc in the new family as she tries to lure the young girls she
needs to sustain her. The story is well-controlled and unthreateningly spooky, and
OCTOBER 1993 
* 
41
it avoids sentimentalizing Kirsty's disability and her unhappiness. The book is
dedicated to Betty Ren Wright, whose fans are likely to enjoy this book with its
briskly moving plot and tough heroine. DS
BYARS, BETSY 
McMummy. 
Viking, 1993 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-670-84995-2 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
The quirky characters here-elfin-faced Mozie Mozer, his friend Batty Batson, a
small-time beauty contestant named Valvoline, and a plant mutant that seems to
have human and perhaps dangerous propensities-are signature Byars, though the
plot seems more of a spoof than a successor to her characteristically fine-tuned
seriocomic fiction. Mozie has been put in charge of a greenhouse full of travelling
Professor Orloffs experimental "wegetables," one of which compels Mozie's pres-
ence with a magnetic attraction that terrifies him. The plant, in turn, seems at-
tracted to Valvoline, who inadvertently gives it a hug during one of Mozie's visits
to turn on the sprinkler system. A classic storm destroys the greenhouse; the bean
pod escapes, disrupts the beauty pageant to bring Valvoline her lost lucky mus-
tard-seed necklace, and then disintegrates into luminous scraps of green, leaving
Mozie with a chance to grieve over this father's death for the first time and with
two seed pods from the plant, just like Jack and the Beanstalk. There are lots of
story elements here, including Mozie's friendship with Batty, his budding crush
on Valvoline, his difficulties with a boy for whom he babysits, his anxiety to please
Professor Orloff, his affection for a cat that fell out of an airplane into his yard, his
loneliness for his father, and his rapport with his mother. Unfortunately, the
fantasy creates an overload and the novel becomes fragmented, though kids will
love the individual scenes, which are goodnatured and goofy to the point of slap-
stick. Little Shop of Horrors gets an allusion; The BFG's "human beans" do not.
BH
CARRICK, CAROL 
Two Very Little Sisters; illus. by Erika Weihs. 
Clarion,
1993 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-60927-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
A slice of turn-of-the-century Americana tells the story of two sisters from Martha's
Vineyard who never grew above four feet tall. Carrick keeps the tone calm and
matter-of-fact, explaining that Lucy and Sarah "had never thought of leaving home,
but when Barnum asked them to join his troupe, the circus sounded exciting," so
they went. Disliking the staring crowds and the term "midget" they encountered
with Barnum, they performed for awhile in Wild West shows until that life too
grew tiring, so they returned to Martha's Vineyard and ran a teashop there for the
rest of their lives. There's no spectacle here: Carrick has wisely depicted Lucy and
Sarah as everyday people with family bonds and the need to earn a living rather
than as phenomena, which reduces the story's dramatic impact although raising its
integrity. Weihs' art, scratchily textured pigments on canvas, gives the scenes lots
of freedom-white space as well as a slightly flattened and distant quality. The
sisters' diminutive status is not always readily apparent in the illustrations, but
Weihs depicts their journey and aging respectfully, making it clear that the sisters
have become grown women, not old children. This is a quiet and nicely offbeat
read, and there's a historical note appended. DS
42 
* 
THE BULLETIN
CUTLER, JANE 
Darcy and Gran Don't Like Babies; illus. by Susannah
Ryan. 
Scholastic, 1993 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-590-44587-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Everybody loves Darcy's brand-new baby brother-her parents, the neighbors,
even the dog ignores her in favor of the new little bundle. Darcy does not much
care for the kid, and "when someone asked her how she liked the baby, she told
them. Pretty soon, no one asked." Darcy is relieved when her Gran states straight-
forwardly and with supporting points that she doesn't like babies either ("I don't
much like their smell and I don't much like their looks. ... 
I don't like all the
work they make for everyone"). Darcy and Gran duck out to the park, playing on
the swings and slides and teeter-totters where there are no babies as they discuss
their attitudes-that Darcy and Gran will like the baby better later on, that deep
down both Darcy and Gran probably like the baby now, and that it's okay if they
don't enjoy him immediately. This is a crisp and cheering new-baby book: the
writing is stylish with some strategic and enjoyable repetition, and the story takes
some of the displacement heat off the older sib by making it clear that many re-
spectable people aren't overly fond of infants. Susannah Ryan's line-and-water-
color art is soft and warm with a slightly cartoonish edge that both enlivens and
lightens Darcy's scowling face without detracting from the dignity of Gran's bare
feet or her splendiferous trip down the slide. Lots of kids are mystified at the fuss
about the squalling new creature; this book, particularly if shared with a flinty
grandparent, will both justify and reassure them. DS
DUFFEY, BETSY 
How to Be Coolin the Third Grade; illus. by Janet Wilson. 
Viking,
1993 
[80p]
ISBN 0-670-84798-4 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-3
"Coolness was the key to survival in the third grade," and Robbie York has made a
list of all the things he needs to be cool; step one, "Get rid of the name Robbie."
As his first day progresses, he discovers some other essentials for coolness, such as
getting his mother to buy him jeans and to stop walking him to the bus stop, and
after an unfortunate peek by class bully Bo in the boys' bathroom, Robbie's deter-
mined to get rid of his superheroes underwear in favor of plain white briefs. The
tone is lightly ironic, with word and sentence repetition serving to further the
humor as well as making things easier for struggling new readers, who will cer-
tainly identify with Robbie's challenge-and Bo's: in a pat but satisfying conclu-
sion, the boys become friends when Robbie, er, Rob is assigned to be a Book Buddy
for Bo, er, Clyde Elmer. RS
EMBERLEY, MICHAEL 
Welcome Back Sun; written and illus. by Michael
Emberley. 
Little, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-316-23647-0 
$14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
"When I came home from school, it was dark. When I went to school, it was dark.
It has been this way for months." The sunless Norwegian winter has seemed
endless, and a little girl longs to see the sun. Commemorating an old tale about a
girl who crossed the mountains to find the lost sun, this little girl, her family, and
the other villagers climb Mount Gausta for a first glimpse of springtime on the
OCTOBER 1993 
* 
43
other side. The book could be an interesting twist for bedtime, when children can
be anxious about the interminable night, and Emberley's pictures glow with the
sympathetic light of candles as well as the cool gray-blues of the night. The draw-
ing is fluid with the cozy rounded shapes of the villagers (dressed in folk costumes,
but the story could easily be contemporary) and the sinuous lines of the birch
trees. The first appearance of the sun, reflected in the glowing faces of the basking
villagers, may not have the drama of Shulevitz's Dawn, but it seems a lot warmer,
and there's a terrific painting of the girl zipping down the stairs to greet the light
that at long last arrives in the valley. RS
EPHRON, DELIA 
The Girl Who Changed the World. Ticknor, 1993 
[16 0p]
ISBN 0-395-66139-0 
413.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Violet is ten, and her teenage brother Simon tortures her mercilessly; after he
squashes a fly on her head in the middle of her piano recital, she issues a call to
arms, and all the younger siblings in the neighborhood band together under Violet's
command. Solidarity makes it possible for previously cowed siblings to fight the
villainous olders with strategy (mimicking), words (the dreaded "Duh"), props
(strategically trained or placed animals, ranging from cats to lizards), and finally
with a kidnap plot that subdues Simon and forces the olders to apologize. This is
mostly an archly written fantasy of revenge with little basis in reality, but although
some of the vengeance is entertaining it's neither fast enough (the beginning is
especially slow) nor funny enough for farce, and the characteristics are too broad
for much else. Ephron has tapped into a core of rage in younger children, how-
ever, and she conveys it in a cheerfully brutal story that they may enjoy. DS
EVANS, SANFORD 
Naomi's Geese. 
Simon, 1993 
179p
ISBN 0-671-75623-0 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Naomi's initially unimpressed with her family's summer cabin-she misses New
York, her ballet lessons, and her friend Judith. The rural quiet begins to appeal to
her, however, especially after she finds a pair of Canada geese nesting by the house
and forms a connection with them. Interspersed chapters depict the relationship
from the geese's point of view as Naomi changes in their eyes from a frightening
threat to a familiar source of treats. Although he sometimes strays into anthropo-
morphism, Evans effectively creates a different world when he depicts the geese's
point of view. The story is told quietly and well, with the final environmental
twist unexpected but nonetheless logical (the following spring, Naomi must frighten
the only surviving bird away from the now-toxic pond) in light of Naomi's subtle
maturation. This is a thoughtful summery read with human as well as ornitho-
logical appeal. DS
Fox, MEM 
Time for Bed; illus. by Jane Dyer. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-15-288183-2 
$13.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
Large, delicate watercolor double spreads illustrate Mem Fox's simple chant of
baby animals being soothed to sleep by their parents: "It's time for bed, little
mouse, little mouse,/ Darkness is falling all over the house." Each spread illus-
trates a variation on the couplet ("It's time for bed, little calf, little calf.. .") and
while the overall effect is sweet, it's not sticky, and the rhyming has some nice
44 
* 
THE BULLETIN
surprises: "it's time for bed, little goose, little goose,/ The stars are out and on the
loose." The paintings are dramatically designed with a flair that recalls Nancy
Tafuri's work, but Dyer's pictures are warmer and engagingly detailed in their
attention to the silky blonde hair on a dog and pup, or the hazy trees in the gloaming
behind a mare and foal. The twinkly little five-point stars in the night are a cliched
touch, but the parent-and-baby pairs, closing with a human mother and child, are
attentively focused in what could easily become a popular "last call" bedtime book.
RS
FREDMAN, RUSSELL 
Eleanor Roosevelt: A Lifeof Discovery. Clarion, 1993 
198p
ISBN 0-89919-862-7 
$17.95 
illus. with photographs 
R* 
Gr. 6-12
To many, Eleanor Roosevelt embodied the spiritual stature of a saint, or, more
accurately, of someone like Mahatma Gandhi. "No one seeing her could fail to be
moved," said an observer. "She gave off light, I cannot explain it better." This
seems to have been such a commonly shared sentiment that it cannot fail to domi-
nate Freedman's latest biography (see his earlier Franklin Delano Roosevelt BCCB
12/90), though he does a meticulous job of grounding her slowly acquired strength
in the facts of her childhood insecurity and does not neglect the anger she inspired
in politicians who considered her a meddling do-gooder. Especially well balanced
here are the parallel stories of Eleanor's political development and her personal
relationships (including the bitter blow of Franklin's affairs), except that Freed-
man does not mention the recent controversy about her alleged lesbian attach-
ments. Emerging most clearly is the sustained strength of her nurturant vision,
beginning with her concern for women's rights and extending to tireless activity
on behalf of those oppressed by poverty or prejudice everywhere. That her nearly
superhuman efforts must have generated in part from her own oppression as an
orphaned child and circumscribed woman gives credence to both her humility and
her energy, readably described in Freedman's engaging narrative and carefully cho-
sen, generously distributed black-and-white historical photographs. A bibliographic
essay (and an index) will prove more helpful to researching students than the usual
list of books for further reading. BH
GORDON, JOHN 
The Burning Baby and Other Ghosts. 
Candlewick,
1993 
[112p]
ISBN 1-56402-067-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Revenge seems to be the strongest motive for the ghosts in this British collection of
five original stories. Oh, sure, the boy-ghost in "Death Wish" merely frightens his
prospective girlfriend, and one could argue that the ghost of the hanging victim
kills the intruder merely out of territorial prerogative in "The Key," but the three
best stories in this collection-"The Eels," "Under the Ice," and most of all the
title tale-are succulent accounts of ghosts returning to punish those who sent
them into the void too early. Gordon is skilled at spare but meaningful character-
ization as well as the occasional doomsday sentence ("Rosemary was ten when she
was smothered by Aunt Jenny and fed to the eels"). Despite some pretty extreme
ghostly and human mayhem, the effects, despite the young age of many of the
victims, are creepy rather than visceral or livid, so kids will be spooked rather than
panicked. Big print and a simple style make this easier reading than Robert Westall,
so it's is a good offering for older ghost hounds whose tastes are more sophisticated
than their reading level. DS
OCTOBER 1993 
* 
45
GORDON, RUTH, comp. 
Peeling the Onion: An Anthology ofPoems. Zolotow/
HarperCollins, 1993 
94 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021728-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021727-8 
$15.00 
R Gr. 7 up
This anthology of sixty-five primarily twentieth-century poems shows more unerr-
ing taste than it does binding rationale. Dipping into some of the best work by
Octavio Paz, Kenneth Rexroth, Dona Luongo Stein, and others, Gordon casts a
cooler tone here than in her first two volumes (BCCB 10/87 and 6/91). There are
exceptions, among them Melech Ravitch's gut-wrenching Yiddish poem "Horses,"
but young adults will find themselves challenged to cross some distance, frequently
at a conceptual level rather than an emotional one. A few of the selections are
relatively well known (Kenneth Patchen's "The Magical Mouse," for instance) but
most of them-including Dilys Laing's poignant "Lost, Stolen, Stayed," Judith
Hemschemeyer's humorous recollection "The Dirty-Billed Freeze Footy," Adrienne
Rich's ironic "Aunt Jennifer's Tigers," and a number of translations-will prob-
ably be new discoveries for the target audience. And that's reason enough, whether
or not you can figure out a thematic connection, to recommend this for private
consumption or sharing out loud. BH
GREENE, CONSTANCE C. 
Nora: Maybe a Ghost Story. 
Browndeer/Harcourt,
1993 
202p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-277696-6 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-276895-5 
$3.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Nora's father is thinking of remarrying, and Nora and her ebullient sister Patsy
can't stand "The Tooth," as they call his girlfriend. Quiet Nora, the elder of the
sisters by eleven months, desperately misses her late mother, but her pain goes
unnoticed in the face of Patsy's loud demands for attention. As Nora struggles
with her self-definition, becoming friendly with a boy who, Patsy wrongly thinks,
has designs on Patsy, she becomes aware of movement and sensation in the house
that feel to her like her mother's spirit. The ghost question is never really resolved,
but whether Nora's mother comes back or not, the book isn't a ghost story but a
human one. The character drama between the two sisters is vividly realized, with
Nora's narration touching in its bewilderment, longing, and fear of change. The
book is pleasantly open-ended, with no epiphanic acceptance of either loss or a
new stepmother, but some of Nora's uncertainty has given way to confidence.
The sisterly fireworks provide enough action to keep the thoughtful plot moving
right along in this sensitive portrayal of adjustment. DS
HENKES, KEVIN 
Owen; written and illus. by Kevin Henkes. 
Greenwillow,
1993 
[24p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11450-4 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11449-0 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
Owen, another one of Henkes' endearing little mouse-guys, loves his blanket.
"Fuzzy goes where I go," says Owen, but snoopy neighbor Mrs. Tweezers has to
put her two cents in: "Isn't he getting a little old for that thing?" She offers his
parents three schemes-the blanket fairy, the vinegar trick, and just saying no--
but Owen is obdurate in his attachment to his fuzzy favorite friend. The ink and
watercolor sketches are funny (Owen playing Captain Plunger with Fuzzy), tender
46 
* 
THE BULLETIN
(Owen hugging Fuzzy in his sleep), and triumphant (Owen parading through the
yard after rescuing Fuzzy from the vinegar trick), and in the end Owen's mother
provides an ingenious solution to what Henkes has all along assured us was never
really a problem. RS
HEST, AMY 
Nana's Birthday Party; illus. byAmy Schwartz. 
Morrow, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07498-7 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07497-9 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Maggie, the narrator, is excited about her traditional birthday visit to Nana's Man-
hattan apartment, where she and her cousin Brette stay the night in preparation
for Nana's birthday celebration the next day. Nana's place is wonderful, with
"dark wood floors .. so shiny you can skim and glide like a skater when you're
wearing just socks," and Nana's birthday is a thrill, but Maggie worries that her
presents-Maggie-authored stories-are always overshadowed by Brette's artwork.
The two girls are inspired to create a project together, depicting a slice of Nana's
past, and the book ends with them happy in their accomplishment, anticipating
Nana's receiving her present the next day. As usual, Hest's writing is pithy and
descriptive, conveying in understandable terms a world mysterious to many child
readers (Nana's ceilings, for instance, are "so high you can jump away on any bed
and never ever hit your head"), and the extended family is bossy and happy. Kids
may, however, find the ending, which doesn't describe Nana's getting her present,
somewhat of a cliffhanger. Schwartz's illustrations are particularly joyous, with
crazy-quilt blends of pattern lightened by watercolor, restrained by borders, or
anchored by smooth expanses of solid colors; the effect is simultaneously exciting
and cozy. This is another lively offering in the tradition of The Purple Coat (BCCB
2/87). DS
HILL, ELIZABETH STARR 
The Banjo Player. Viking, 1993 
196p
ISBN 0-670-84967-7 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
A prequel to The Street Dancers (BCCB 7/91) and Broadway Chances (6/92), this is
Grandfather's story, which begins here in the late 1880s with his trip from New
York to Mississippi on one of the Orphan Trains. Twelve-year-old Jonathan and
an unrelated eight-year-old girl, Eugenie, are adopted by an honest tenant farming
couple who treats them well despite the heavy work load. Yet Jonathan yearns to
swap places with a boy who's been picked by a New Orleans couple to help with
their restaurant. His wish comes about rather too neatly, leading to Jonathan's
ultimately fulfilling his dream of becoming a banjo player and performer with a
traveling Mississippi river boat troupe. Despite a predictable plot that telescopes
in the end to cover a lot of time very quickly-and a considerable amount of
historical information that's explained into the fiction-this does have dramatic
moments that emphasize characters' development through action rather than ex-
position. One of these is the understated conversation in which Ma comforts
Jonathan: "'You went in the garden today. You met a rattler. Now you're sittin'
here eatin' honeyed grits.' She sipped her coffee. 'Remember that.'" Jonathan's
concluding decision, too, has an unexpected twist that compensates for some of
the more obvious narrative devices. All in all, kids really will learn a lot from this
(the derivation of limelight, among other things) and will enjoy it, as well, espe-
cially those who've read the first two books. BH
OCTOBER 1993 
* 47
HODGES, 
MARGARET, 
ad. 
The Hero of Bremen; illus. by Charles
Mikolaycak. 
Holiday House, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-0934-1 
$15.95 
R 5-8 yrs.
Based on an old legend written down in the nineteenth century, this is the story of
a crippled cobbler, Hans, who never tires of telling children about the famous
knight Roland. When the town becomes too crowded within its walls, a local
landowner tricks the citizens with a bargain: they can have as much land as a man
can walk around from one city gate to the other-but he chooses Hans to do the
walking. Undaunted, Hans sets out at dawn, struggling to do his best until the
miraculous intervention of Roland helps him complete the entire route. The end
is touching, for though Hans survives the ordeal, he eventually dies and is carried
away by Roland "to where the heroes live." Mikolaycak has kept the art strong and
simple, with the figure of Roland a ghostly absence of color contrasted to humans
in green, brown, and orange. Roland's features, too, seem to reflect Hans' own for
the effect of a double, and children will be well served by an alternative to the
usually handsome fairy tale protagonist. "Heroes come in all shapes and sizes, and
there are many kinds of battle," says Roland in a message that will help young
listeners more than do most paeans to luck, skill, or beauty. Hodges has made a
smooth job of narrating here, avoiding sentimentality for a more matter-of-fact
tone that will have children chanting "knuckles and knees, knuckles and knees"
throughout Hans' hard journey. BH
HONEYCUTT, NATALIE 
Whistle Home; illus. by Annie Cannon. 
Jackson/Orchard,
1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08640-2 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05490-X 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Narrated in the present tense by a girl whose mother is leaving their rural home for
the day, this follows the girl, her Aunt Whistle, and her dog Dooley through a day
of apple picking and an early evening of mildly anxious anticipation. "'You need
to whistle up Mama,' I say. 'She's not coming back.'" But Aunt Whistle-who
"can whistle a groundhog right out of his burrow, ... a pig from his wallow and a
sheep in from clover," a dog from chasing rabbits, a husband from Kansas, and
skunks she wished she hadn't-knows Mama will come back on her own. Mama
does, "bringing hugs and pats and kisses for us, and extras for me." It's a reassuring
story for kids suffering from inevitable separation anxiety, but it doesn't turn into
bibliotherapy and there's enough drama in the sweeping, action-packed acrylic
paintings to sustain a slice-of-life story. The red pickup truck, the fall colors curv-
ing horizontally across impressionistic spreads, the blue of rolling hillsides and
figures outlined, and the red zigzag representing the whistle all set the book into
motion and keep it rolling along to its gentle end. Babysitters will appreciate this
one as bedtime fare, kindergarten teachers would be well advised to crack it out on
the first day of fall term, and childcare workers can make of it a special offering for
new arrivals. BH
HORENSTEIN, HENRY How Are Sneakers Made?; ISBN 0-671-77747-5; How Is a
Bicycle Made?; ISBN 0-671-77749-1. 
Each book: written and illus. with photo-
graphs by Henry Horenstein. 
Simon, 1993 
32p 
$9.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Two kid-appealing topics are examined in this pair ofphotodocumentaries. Sneakers
depicts the making of canvas sneakers from the molding of the rubber sole through
48 
* THE BULLETIN
stitching the uppers to packing and shipping; Bicycles similarly tracks bikes from
factory creation to bike store assembly. Visually the books are a treat, with vivid
color and textural contrasts in the photos of rainbows of sneakers and a panoply of
exciting machines, as the attractively formatted text floats amid generous white
space. Unfortunately the books are much less successful in their explanatory mis-
sion: many complicated terms are left unexplained ("extruded" and "hydraulic",
for instance) and the pictures, while entertaining, are not easily understood, a par-
ticular problem since the text is not sufficiently explanatory alone. In Sneakers,
why does the rubber, blue in one photo, appear as white in another? What's the
extra layer over the fabric uppers as they get cut? When does the fabric get hemmed?
Nor is it always clear from the uncaptioned photographs which of the procedures
described in the adjoining text is taking place within a particular picture. Overall,
these are pretty, if not always helpful, introductions to a couple of manufacturing
processes particularly suitable to the young audience. DS
ISAACSON, PHILIP M. 
A Short Walk Around the Pyramids and Through the World
ofArt. Knopf, 1993 
122p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91523-0 
$20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-81523-6 
$20.00 
R* 
Gr. 5-9
The author of Round Buildings, Square Buildings, and Buildings that Wiggle Like a
Fish (BCCB 11/88) here opens up an even broader vista. Lavishly reproduced
illustrations are coordinated with a text that is organized into seven chapters: A
Simple Form, Sculpture, Color, Images, Photographs, Useful Things, and Towns
and Cities. As in the previous book, Isaacson makes no effort at historical se-
quence, but rather takes conscious leaps across time and place for the sake of dra-
matic contrast or comparison-an ancient Greek marble sculpture followed by a
West African funerary figure, for instance. And again, his perception is acute, his
writing fluent, as in the description of April Gornik's work: "The light gives the
painting an air of emptiness, as though no one has ever walked in this lonely place."
What Isaacson shows us is that creative artistry requires creative analysis. That in
itself is a gift to any young reader, who will learn to look more closely, observe the
elements of art, and enjoy the possibilities of being one who walks in beauty. BH
JOYCE, WILLIAM 
Santa Calls; written and illus. by William Joyce. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1993 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021134-2 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021133-4 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
When Art Aimesworth, his best friend Spaulding Littlefeets, and Art's little sister
Esther receive a fancy pre-Christmas gift of a flying machine from Santa, they
follow the enclosed directive to "Come NORTH," the boys taking Esther along
only reluctantly. Joyce's vision of the North Pole and Toyland is a celebration of
Winsor McCay's Little Nemo in Slumberland and Victor Fleming's Wizard ofOz;
you can almost hear the Munchkins sing as the children enter the "vast, glorious,
and glittering city." But there's trouble in Toyland: "Seize them," screams the
Dark Queen (a la Margaret Hamilton) who with her "dark horde" of greedy Elves
is determined to capture Esther. Why? no one knows, just as Art can't figure out
why Santa called for the children in the first place. It's a Christmas mystery, but
maybe the solution can be found in the two letters pasted into the last pages of the
book, which is as big and lavish as the story. While the colors are sometimes dim,
OCTOBER 1993 
* 49
the drawing and the details are generous, and the '40s retro look gives the story a
nostalgic Christmas flair. Less sentimental and more exciting than The Polar Ex-
press, the book is an extravagant homage to Hollywood as much as to the holidays.
RS
KINDL, PATRICE 
Owl in Love. 
Houghton, 1993 
[2 08p]
ISBN 0-395-66162-5 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 35.
KUKLIN, SUSAN 
Speaking Out: Teenagers Take on Race, Sex, and Identity; written
and illus. with photographs by Susan Kuklin. 
Putnam, 1993 
165p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-399-22343-6 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-399-22532-3 
$8.95 
R* 
Gr. 9-12
As Kuklin notes in her introduction, Bayard Rustin High School for the Humani-
ties in New York is the perfect place to find kids to talk about the importance of
race, class, gender and self-identity in their lives. The student body at Humanities
is a fourth each white, Latino, African American and Asian American, and the
school has a conscious commitment to help students bridge ethnic and other bor-
ders. Through a variety of first-person portraits and wide-shots of classes and
clubs in action, Kuklin demonstrates the effects that the multiple "isms" have in
kids' daily lives. "This has to be more than a conversation about sweet and sour
pork," cautions one Chinese American student, and the issues debated here-
having a boy/girl friend of a different race, confronting prejudice in friends and
teachers, interracial violence, balancing immigrant family expectations with Ameri-
can customs-have real bite. As in her Fighting Back (BCCB 3/89) or What Do I
Do Now? (11/91, Kuklin allows her subjects to speak for themselves, even when
it's a white boy explaining why he joined The National Association for the Ad-
vancement of White People, or a gay kid saying that he wished he was a girl: "Girls
get more attention. Girls can be sexy and flirty." Voices we don't think of as
"minority"-a fat girl, a stutterer-also speak their pieces and will widen readers'
understanding of what being "different" can mean. Black-and-white portraits of
the interviewees have a candor and immediacy missing in yearbook pictures, and
many teens will see themselves within these pages. RS
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Searchingfor Laura Ingalls: A Reader's Journey; written by Kathryn
Lasky and Meribah Knight; illus. with photographs by Christopher G.
Knight. 
Macmillan, 1993 
4 8p
ISBN 0-02-751666-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Lasky and Knight have collaborated to create a book about their daughter, Meribah,
and her love for the "Little House" series by Laura Ingalls Wilder. The narration
and photographs take the reader along on Meribah's journey to historic Ingalls
sites in Wisconsin, Minnesota, and South Dakota. An unfortunate omission from
the book is the lack of a map to show the family's travels; since not all the locations
of the historic sites are fully described or mapped, any reader interested in making
a similar trip will have to reproduce the research. Combining Lasky's narration
and excerpts from Meribah's trip diary, the tone of the book is somewhat studied
and self-conscious, with even the excellent photos of Meribah on the journey hav-
ing a somber mood: Meribah takes Laura Ingalls Wilder very seriously, and her
50 
* 
THE BULLETIN
face reflects her feelings. Or maybe it's just that the prairie was sometimes more
hot and boring than Laura let on. KJ
LEMIEUX, A. C. 
The TV Guidance Counselor. Tambourine, 1993 
[2 4 0p]
ISBN 0-688-12402-X 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
When the book opens, Michael, from the safety of a teen psychiatric hospital, is
remembering his suicide attempt and the events beginning with his parents' di-
vorce that led up to it. He and his mother and sister were forced to move to a tiny
run-down house while his father, a nautical photographer, took off on yet another
glamorous trip across the ocean with a yacht race. This is standard, even old-
fashioned, problem-novel fare; what gives the book its distinction is the authentic-
ity of Michael's pained narration of his emotional free-fall, where even moments
of epiphany, such as his discovery of his own gift for photography, or his empathy
for a sad mentally-ill woman (the TV guidance counselor of the title), can't fore-
stall his despair. His is a fresh voice, but the other characters-thoughtless father,
bitter mother, understanding girlfriend-seem two-dimensional in contrast. Some
preaching is personified in Michael's girlfriend, his photography teacher, and his
boss at the grocery store where Michael works; and the overlay of therapeutic in-
terludes from the hospital exacerbates the sense that character and events are over-
whelmed by theme. Still, the conversations are sharp, and when the author lets the
characters loose from the messages, as in the funny but poignant depiction of
Michael's best friend Ricky, there's some real spark. RS
LERNER, CAROL 
Plants That Make You Sniffle and Sneeze; written and illus. by
Carol Lerner. 
Morrow, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11490-3 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11489-X 
$15.00 
R Gr. 4-7
Like all of Lerner's plant books (see Cactus, BCCB 10/92), this one is clean, clear,
and well organized, with beautifully rendered full-color or black-and-white bo-
tanical drawings balancing a somewhat dry text. The integrating theme here will
prove particularly important to students afflicted with or researching allergies, as
Lerner explains the role of plant pollens in hay fever, shows the functions of pollens
in plant reproduction, and describes pollen sources-including various trees, bushes,
grasses, and weeds-and the conditions that trigger pollen release. Some tips on
avoiding hay fever pollen, annotations for two books on hay fever plants, and an
index conclude the book, which will prove to be first-class preparation for field
trips and science projects. BH
LEVERT, SUZANNE 
Teens Face to Face with Chronic Illness. Messner, 1993 
129p
Library ed. ISBN 0-671-74540-9 
$13.98
Paper ed. ISBN 0-671-74541-7 
$7.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Based on extensive interviews with kids who face longterm physical problems, this
book is divided into four sections: Understanding Chronic Illness, which de-
scribes the medical aspects of maladies such as AIDS, arthritis, epilepsy, diabetes,
and cancer; Living Day by Day, which addresses the effects that such illnesses,
with their physical and emotional cost, can have on everyday activities such as
school and play; Relating to Others, which explores support from and problems
with family members and friends platonic and romantic; and Looking at the World,
OCTOBER 1993 
* 
51
which discusses self-image and worldview. The voices of the teens are strong,
honest, and smoothly integrated into the well-organized text. Sad truths--distant
or destructive parents, rejecting friends, hospital buddies who didn't make it-
appear, but the emphasis is on the positive, with most of the subjects adjusted to
their state and its implications and sometimes demonstrating a useful sense of
humor: Carl, whose joints are misshapen from arthritis, puts sharp-tongued strang-
ers in their place by responding "Oh, sure, pick on the crippled kid." This is an
absorbing and meaningful book likely to assist kids, most of whom know someone
who faces the obstacle of illness, in understanding their peers and themselves; the
organization by topic rather than by interviewee makes it a useful and more pointed
companion to Krementz' How It Feels to Live with a Physical Disability. A glossary,
index, and list of resources (medical associations, etc.) are included. DS
LITTLEFIELD, BILL 
Champions; illus. by Bernie Fuchs. 
Little, 1993 
132p
ISBN 0-316-52805-6 
$21.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Ten famous sports champions (five men, five women) are the subjects of lively
mini-biographies that, if always admiring, are never adulatory. Each of the sub-
jects, whether jockey Julie Krone, soccer star Pele, one-legged skier Diana Golden,
or baseball legend Roberto Clemente, has achieved some kind of"first" or "best,"
and Littlefield, a sports commentator for National Public Radio, is at his best
when recreating the record- or ground-breaking moments that will forever define
each athlete. ("At my funeral, nobody's going to talk about me. They're all just
going to stand up and tell each other where they were on the night I beat Bobby
Riggs"-Billie Jean King.) The prose is fresh and colloquial without descending
into the sports-page lingo that may be endearing to fans but is incomprehensible
to the uninitiated. At times, though, it's not clear whether or not Littlefield has
fictionalized conversations, as in a scene where Tiny Archibald receives a gruff pep
talk from a high school basketball coach. Romantically light-dappled paintings,
one or two per subject, add drama (Susan Butcher dogsledding the Iditarod) and
inspiration (Joan Benoit's victory lap at the 1984 Olympics). A reading list and
index are appended. RS
MCPHAIL, DAVID 
Santa's Book of Names; written and illus. by David
McPhail. 
Little, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-316-56335-8 
$14.95 
R 4-6 yrs
On Christmas Eve, Edward helps out Santa when he gets in a tight spot, and we
don't mean the chimney. Edward cannot yet read, but "he almost could. Almost
... but not quite." Santa takes Edward along as his book-holding sinecure, and he
triumphs when Santa loses his glasses and Edward has to sound out who-gets-
what. The book's too gentle to be didactic, and yet it acknowledges the epiphany
of reading, the moment when the symbols make sense. The paintings are gentle as
well, realistic in their homely, comfy light of Edward's home and Christmassy in
the blues and moonlight snow of Edward's pilgrimage to print. RS
MATHERS, PETRA 
Victor and Christabel; written and illus. by Petra
Mathers. 
Knopf, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-93060-4 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-83060-X 
$15.00 
R 
5-9 yrs
Christabel is a shy and retiring young reptile whose destiny is altered when her evil
52 
* 
THE BULLETIN
cousin puts a spell on her that turns her into a painting. Victor, an attractive green
'gator, is an art museum guard who falls in love with the image of Cousin Christabel
on Her Sickbed. Victor's devotion (and presumably his cup of tea, to go with
Christabel's motto "A cup of tea will wake you up") rouses Christabel from her
spell, and the two patient lovers are finally united. It's a charming and original
story with traditional roots, and if the plot doesn't always move along as smoothly
as it might it's still a cohesive yarn with some wryly humorous notes (Christabel
"always did as she was told. Knowing this, she had long ago decided to live alone").
Mathers' art is terrific, with luminous but determined color bound firmly by crisp
line, and it fills the pages with creatures of great character in interesting surround-
ings. Youngsters may never look at paintings in quite the same way, and they'll
relish the unusual love story. DS
MAZER, ANNE 
The Oxboy. 
Knopf, 1993 
109p
ISBN 0-679-84191-1 
$13.00 
Ad Gr. 4-7
The son of a woman once married to an ox narrates this fable, which is set in a time
when the "blue hunters" (men with their faces painted blue) track down those who
lack papers proving their ancestry, and children must learn in school to chant a
sacred code: "We are human. We are nothing but human ... Pure blood of the
human race!" Betrayed by an informer, the narrator's father must flee from their
isolated retreat, and Oxboy's mother marries again to protect her son. Since the
boy looks entirely human and his stepfather is rigidly doctrinaire, Oxboy must
struggle to conceal his animal characteristics of loving the woods and fields, but he
cannot resist befriending a mixed-blood otter with human intelligence. Eventu-
ally they are caught, the otter is killed, and Oxboy is imprisoned for a year's term,
after which he goes home and finds the tracks of his father, come to rescue him for
a life as refugees searching through the forest "for the lost animals." Both the plot
and writing style are allegorically stark, with the suspense of what will happen to
the narrator played off against a tone of inevitable disaster. The moral, which is
the story's raison d'etre, does get fuzzy here and there; while the hero throws back
any fish he finds with human characteristics, for instance, he has no compunction
about killing and gutting "pure" fish, which seems to contradict the point of re-
specting differences. In another instance, a merciless mixed-blood eagle that has
diverted a stream in order to destroy the otter's family and has just tried to kill
both the otter and Oxboy ("Die!" ... "Human waste!"), is itself shot by humans,
whereupon the otter turns to Oxboy with the charge, "Yours is not a kind race."
Despite some occasional confusion, however, the parallels with Nazi theories of
pure Aryan ancestry, with police states that perpetrate "ethnic cleansing," and with
society's more subtle forms of discrimination are clear-insistently clear, and stu-
dents will find this a challenging book for discussion of prejudice in general. BH
MILLER, MARGARET 
Can You Guess?; written and illus. with photographs by
Margaret Miller. 
Greenwillow, 1993 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11181-5 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11180-7 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-4 yrs
"What do you comb in the morning? A blouse? Your face? Your leg? A bar of
soap?" No, silly-"Your hair!" Miller's latest concept book is styled similarly to
her exuberant Where Does It Go? (BCCB 10/92), although the subject is not as
OCTOBER 1993 
* 
53
firmly focused. Each question ("What do you pack in a suitcase," "What do put
on your head?") is faced by four incongruous possibilities, made all the funnier by
Miller's sobersided photographs, such as a picture of a pizza floating in suds as a
response to "What do you wash in the sink?" The correct answer ("Dishes!")
appears on the next-page-turn, and a facing photo shows a child busily and trium-
phantly right. Just like the rest of us, kids love to be right, and they'll also love
feeling one-up on the book all the way through while at the same time giggling at
the book's "mistakes." RS
MILLER, MARY JANE 
Fast Forward. Viking, 1993 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-670-84339-3 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Kayla and her best friend Margy have eagerly anticipated their entry into sixth-
grade, junior high for them, but both are dismayed to learn that Margy will be
moving away to a nearby city. Kayla feels abandoned by Margy, who seems to
have moved even farther emotionally than physically-she acquires a new friend
with whom she shares special secrets and tries new things. Kayla's jealousy and
loneliness make school even harder for her than usual, leading her to copy one of
Margy's old papers for science class, but eventually things, including the possibil-
ity of a first boyfriend, are worked out amiably. The girl-pink cover of the book
tells you what to expect: this is a well-done, heavy-duty if not deep, pre-teen girl
book with heartaches, soap operas onscreen and off, makeovers, and The Nut-
cracker. Miller captures the milieu and fears well, and even though the plot wraps
up a little too neatly, Kayla's narration is convincing and credible. DS
MONROE, LUCY 
Creepy Cuisine: Revolting Recipes That Look Disgusting but Taste
Divine; illus. by Dianne O'Quinn Burke. 
Random House, 1993 
80p 
Paper
ed. ISBN 0-679-844002-3 
$4.99 
R 
Gr. 4-7
"Whether you're preparing Chuckie's Upchuck for a potluck supper," the intro-
duction begins, "Phlegm Brulee for a festive party, or Pus Pockets as a quick after-
school snack, the recipes in Creepy Cuisineare designed to unleash the grisly gourmet
buried in everyone." And this happily revolting guide to gross goodies will ei-
ther-or perhaps simultaneously-charm or repel its reader, even as its sound
culinary advice gets them interested in the kitchen. After notes on safety, cooking
terms, measurements, and cleanup, the book is divided into sections: "Horror
D'Oeuvres," "Slimy Soups and Scary Salads," Main Corpses," "Putrid Potions,"
"Dead-zerts and Sickening Snacks." There are quite a few monstrous and disgust-
ing recipe ideas; some examples are "Bloody Eyeballs on the Rocks," "Ear Wax
Wieners on Cotton Swabs," and "Poached Skull and Crossbones." Each recipe
contains a list of ingredients and equipment (all pretty straightforward, if heavily
dependent on olives) and simple clear instructions, plus information as to how
many the dish serves (Phlegm Brilde, for instance, serves "4 mucus maniacs"),
plus a serving suggestion (for Bleeding Gums Gumbo, "chew a plaque-disclosing
tablet before serving soup!"). The accompanying black-and-white illustrations
have flair but are simple enough to serve as diagrams for the recipes. The dishes are
not only relatively simple and reasonably appalling, they also keep to enough basic
rules of cuisine to be completely edible. With its upbeat and slightly conspiratorial
tone, the book is entertaining enough simply to read, but kids who wish to go
beyond that may actually find themselves learning to cook. As Halloween ap-
proaches, this freaky Fannie Farmer deserves a prominent place. DS
54 
* 
THE BULLETIN
MYERS, 
WALTER DEAN 
Brown Angels: 
An Album of Pictures and
Verse. 
HarperCollins, 1993 
40p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022918-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022917-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Old photographs of African-American children illustrate a collection of sweet, of-
ten naive verse by YA novelist Myers. The poetry is bland, conveying a generalized
vision of childhood innocence through rhymes often forced in meter or sense:
"Birds peeping/ Old men sleeping/ Lazy days, daisies lay/ Beaming and dream-
ing. ... " The photographs, many from the author's collection, are much better-
mostly formal, sepia-toned portraits of children in their Sunday best that will give
gazers a view of times gone by. The book is elegantly, if sentimentally, designed,
and while it has an adult-appealing gift-book look, children might enjoy the cozy
lap-sitting reminiscences it seems to encourage. RS
PECK, RICHARD 
Bel-Air Bambi and the Mall Rats. Delacorte, 1993 
[192p]
ISBN 
0-385-30823-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-9
After the bankruptcy of the family horror-film business, Buffie Babcock, her older
sister Bambi, and her little brother Brick are horrified to be transplanted to Dad's
tiny hometown of Hickory Forks. As if transplantation from Bel-Air weren't
enough, the siblings run smack into trouble at school: Dad's wholesome birth-
place has turned into a teen-gang-dominated hellhole, with highschoolers keeping
the adults too frightened to fight back even as the havoc wrecks the local mall, the
town's only hope for economic survival. Bambi organizes a comeuppance, com-
plete with use of the family's professional horror-show past, which turns the tables
on the bad guys, restores order to Hickory Forks, and sells as a screenplay, thus
enabling the family to return to Bel-Air. It's hard to know how to take much of
this: Peck satirizes the Babcocks ("We're from Bel-Air. We don't have gangs. We
have fund-raisers") and the Hickory Fork hicks (the opposing schools for the foot-
ball season are "Toad Suck, Oil Trough, Possum Trot, Natural Steps, Viny Grove,
and Booger Holler") with equal unsubtlety and lack of affection, leaving a reader
with no characters to root for. The table-turning trick (a staged haunting) is pretty
feeble, and Buffle's supposedly sixth-grade narration unconvincing. The whole
has a slick made-for-TV air, however, that, coupled with the comedic teen-run
campaign for law 'n' order, may make this book appeal to those readers who don't
think they're in it. DS
PILKEY, DAV 
Dragon's Halloween: Dragon's Fifth Tale; written and illus. by Dav
Pilkey. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08590-2 
$12.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05990-1 
$12.95 
R Gr. K-2
Few easy-reader heroes are as endearingly hapless as Pilkey's big blue Dragon, who
here finds out that six small jack-o'-lanterns can be even scarier than the one big
one he really wanted. That's the first of three Halloween adventures; the others
feature Dragon's attempt at a costume (he goes to a party as a witch, vampire, and
mummy) and his scary walk home through the woods. The eccentrically colored
pencil-and-watercolor paintings provide some zippy punchlines and a spooky/silly
evocation of the Halloween mood, as in a picture of the blue beast yelping for help
under a huge lemon-lime moon. RS
OCTOBER 1993 
* 
55
PINKNEY, ANDREA DAVIS 
Seven Candles for Kwanzaa; illus. by Brian
Pinkney. 
Dial, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1293-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1292-8 
$14.99 
R 
5-9 yrs
Books about the African-American holiday Kwanzaa are many in this era of"mul-
ticultural" publishing; like A. P. Porter's Kwanzaa (BCCB 12/91), the Pinkneys' is
a simple introduction to the rituals, objects, and meanings of this "first fruits"
festival that runs from December 26 through New Year's Day. The book explains
the seven principles (including their Swahili names and pronunciation) of Kwanzaa,
the menorah-like kinara with its black, red, and green candles, and other ceremo-
nial objects and greetings. Spaciously laid out and illustrated with Pinkney's fa-
miliar scratchboard and oil pastel art, the text is easier and clearer than Porter's,
and the glosses on the Kwanzaa principles speak to a child's experience: "Sculpt-
ing mounds of clay or reciting a favorite rhyme are also ways to express kuumba
[creativity]. 
So is planting seedlings on the windowsill and nurturing them to
sprout." A friendly introduction to what may still be a "new" holiday to both
children and adults. RS
POMERANTZ, 
CHARLOTTE 
The 
Outside Dog; 
illus. 
by Jennifer
Plecas. 
HarperCollins, 1993 
6 4p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024783-5 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024782-7 
$14.00 
R* Gr. 1-3
The four chapters in this beginning-to-read book give away the plot: Marisol
Wants a Dog; A Collar for Pancho; The Search; and Pancho Saves the Day. But
what makes the story work are the convincing bits of dialogue and the details with
which Pomerantz develops a Puerto Rican setting and cast of characters, all with
minimal use of vocabulary. "I don't know why I love such a foolish little girl," says
Grandfather. "I don't know why I love such a foolish old grandpa," says Marisol.
But love there plainly is, enough even to encompass the mutt Grandfather so inef-
fectively resists. The scratchy pen-and-wash cartoons are as plain and down-to-
earth friendly as the text. A list of nine Spanish words follows the list of contents,
which will be fun for kids who don't know the language and reinforcing for kids
who do-be prepared for Vete (Scram) to become a byword among young readers.
BH
PORTER, CONNIE 
Meet Addy: An American Girl; illus. by Melodye
Rosales. 
Pleasant Company, 1993 
[69p] 
(American Girls)
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56247-076-0 
$12.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-56247-075-2 
$5.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Addy, the latest heroine in the American Girls Collection (see review of Valerie
Tripp's Meet Felicity, BCCB 10/91), is an African-American slave who, in this first
installment in the series, escapes to freedom with her mother. While Addy pos-
sesses few character traits beyond being brave and good, the picture of slavery is
honest, as in a scene where Addy is forced to eat the worms she was supposed to
have picked from the tobacco plants: "Addy gagged as the worms' juicy bodies
burst in her mouth." Otherwise, the writing is competent but bland, although the
escape by moonlight is inherently exciting, especially when Addy, disguised as a
boy, accidentally stumbles into a camp of Confederate soldiers. While the book
56 
* THE BULLETIN
necessarily lacks the cozy comfort of most of the American Girls titles, series fans
may be lured by the attractive format and easy reading into a sobering consider-
ation of some of the less picturesque aspects of American history. Full-color paint-
ings add drama; an afterword gives some historical context to the story. RS
RATTIGAN, JAMA KIM 
Dumpling Soup; illus. by Lillian Hsu-Flanders. 
Little,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-316-73445-4 
$15.95 
R* 
5-8yrs
Two classic components, food and love, form the basis of this story of a joyous
family celebration. Marisa is seven, and she's finally old enough to help make
dumplings for the family gathering at Grandma's, where the family members ("Most
of them are Korean, but some are Japanese, Chinese, Hawaiian, or haole ...
Grandma calls our family 'chop suey,' which means 'all mixed up' in pidgin")
meet to cook and conviviate. The subject here is really the pleasure of together-
ness, with Marisa's dumpling trouble-hers look terrible but eventually prove quite
tasty-serving as a flavorful seasoning instead of an entree. Rattigan has a gift for
the kind of specifics that make a book come alive: the warm kitchen filled with
female relatives cooking up a storm and the front step covered with people's slip-
pers and shoes will appeal to a range of kids more than your basic Anytown USA
setting and cast. The illustrations, light-hearted pencil and watercolor, are remi-
niscent of Catherine Stock's, with a nice homely graininess and tell-tale detail (the
watermelon-slice-pattern playsuit is a particular winner) all their own. This lus-
cious refutation of the melting-pot metaphor begs for gustatory aids. DS
REISER, LYNN 
Margaret and Margarita/Margarita y Margaret; written and illus.
by Lynn Reiser. 
Greenwillow, 1993 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12240-X 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12239-6 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Margaret does not want to go to the park ... .y Margarita no quiere ir alparque.
Neither little girl, one English-speaking, one speaking Spanish, wants to go the
park because there is nobody to play with. But then they meet, discover an affin-
ity, have a party/fiesta with their stuffed animals and a nap/siesta with same, and
resolve to meet again tomorrow/manana. The English text is printed in pink and
the Spanish in blue, and while the text is generally parallel, there is some variation,
as when the two girls bless their napping toys: "Sweet Dreams/ Que Suefen con los
Angelitos." Monolinguists, both kids and adults, should be able to figure out the
other language via cues in the simple but lively line-and-watercolor pictures, and
the words in both languages are easy enough that while phoneticization might
have been nice, it may not be necessary. This is not an exceptionally eventful
picture book, but the friendship is sweet and the bicultural/lingual message has a
pleasant flavor as well. RS
SENDAK, MAURICE, ad. 
We Are All in the Dumps with Jack and Guy: Two Nursery
Rhymes with Pictures; ad. and illus. by Maurice Sendak. 
DiCapua/HarperCollins,
1993 
56p
ISBN 0-06-205014-1 
$20.00 
R 
5-7 yrs
These lesser-known Mother Goose rhymes have as much resonance as any classic
Opie find; the story, as played out in Sendak's artwork and dialogue, is somewhat
OCTOBER 1993 
* 
57
more complicated. Jack and Guy, two street urchins, witness the kidnapping of a
child and some kittens by evil humanized rats; when the urchins lose to the rats in
a card game, the "poor little kid" and the kittens are spirited away to St. Paul's
Bakery and Orphanage, but the waxing moon transports Jack and Guy to the little
kid and then routs the villainous rodents. Underlying the story is a struggle be-
tween the haves and the have nots, with the kid and kits taken from a Hooverville
where the kittens are literally falling through the cracks and the rats dressed as
cards-hearts and diamonds ("For diamonds are trumps," says the rhyme, and the
illustrations make a specific reference to Trump Tower). Although fused into one
story, the two rhymes get different stylistic treatments, which affects their impact.
"We are all in the dumps" is visually and verbally overcrowded-perhaps inten-
tionally, but still distractingly-as urban blight chokes the scene and yellow speech
balloons display a dispensable, Sendak-authored rhyme commenting on the pic-
tured plot (good luck to readers-aloud in figuring out which to read). The second
rhyme, where Jack and Guy and the moon rescue the small child, quickens into a
haunting evocation of human frailty and need. While the mix of politics and
poetry compounds the disarray in the first half, the lunar majesty and restrained
sadness of the second allows the story to embrace its social concerns rather than
battle with them. Overall, it's an absorbing tale of danger and rescue, with the
shantytown given a rough charm by the moonlit landscape, sprightly kittens, and
towering skyscrapers, and the gloomy orphanage grounds simultaneously suggest-
ing a vacant urban lot and a rye-filled world of old rhymes. Even at its most
complicated, the book generates enough magic to be involving as one attempts to
understand it-or asks a child to. DS
SEYMOUR, TRES 
Hunting the White Cow; illus. by Wendy Anderson
Halperin. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08646-1 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05496-9 
$15.95 
R 
4-7 yrs.
"Somewhere north of Priceville there's a white cow nobody can catch. She used to
be ours, but she went wild." The narrator, depicted in meticulously drafted, clay-
toned rural landscapes, watches as her farm family's menfolk cumulatively set out
to catch the white cow, each with a refrain (punctuated by Mama's skeptical com-
ments) that gains momentum for rhythmic reading aloud. Even Papaw's southern
Kentucky cow call ("SOUK! SOUK! SOUK! SOUK-EF! WHEEEEOO!
SOUK!") fails, but after several months the narrator finds the white cow in the
woods and falls asleep with her arm tied to the cow, which won't follow her and
manages to wrap the rope around a tree and break it off before her father finds and
wakes her up. Text and illustrations offer an especially integrated complement
here, both understated but right on target tonally and both incorporated into a
large, comfortably balanced page design. After a couple of worthwhile rereadings,
young listeners will chant right along with the narrator, who ends the tale deter-
mined to learn cow-calling from her grandfather. "Watch out, white cow. Watch
out." BH
SIMON, SEYMOUR 
Weather. Morrow, 1993 
32p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10547-5 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10546-7 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Gorgeous full-page color photos, helped by a few cogent diagrams, illustrate Simon's
outline of how weather works. He explains why the poles are colder than the
58 
* 
THE BULLETIN
equator, why that temperature difference causes weather changes, and how clouds
and precipitation form, ending with a warning about the dangers of smog and
global warming. He does not go into exciting phenomena such as thunder, light-
ning and tornadoes; for that, readers should turn to the author's Storms (BCCB 3/
89). The organization is clear and logical, and while the information is available in
any number of other books and encyclopedias, the photos, such as a Skylab view of
cloud formations, add a dramatic dimension. RS
SMITH, LANE 
The Happy Hocky Family!; written and illus. by Lane
Smith. 
Viking, 1993 
61p
ISBN 0-670-85206-6 
$13.99 
SpR 
Gr. 3-5
Pity the happy, hapless, Hocky family: Baby Hocky's balloon pops; Holly Hocky's
boat won't float until, with a dose of Little Engine determination, it floats ...
away; Henry Hocky, tired after a day of tormenting Holly with a dead spider, can't
get any quality nap time when Holly decides to serenade her also napping dolly
with a tuba. Expectations dashed over and over, the Hocky family still often man-
ages to regroup, as when Baby Hocky's balloon ("I have a balloon. Do you have a
balloon?") bursts ("I have a string. Do you have a string?"). Deriding the social
and linguistic banalities of old primers, the book as a whole depends upon an
adult, camp sensibility for its effects, but older kids, especially those primed by
Scieszka and Smith's Stinky Cheese Man or The True Story of the Three Little Pigs,
may appreciate some of the takeoffs. They won't get the Joke but they may get
the jokes. The three-color, dumb-dumb dot, circle, and line illustrations, flash
back to the '50s and will have a sardonic appeal for nostalgic grownups while the
kids are engrossed in James Marshall's Stupids books, a series with a truly child's-
eye view of family absurdities. RS
SNEVE, VIRGINIA DRIVING HAWK 
The Navajos; ISBN 0-8234-1039-0; The Sioux;
ISBN 0-8234-1017-X. 
Each book: 
illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Holiday House,
1993 
32p 
(First American Books) 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-6
Each of these two volumes begins with a simplified retelling of the respective Na-
tive American group's creation myth and then goes on to a brief coverage of its
history, traditions, social structure, and contemporary life. Although formatted as
picture books, the pair's factual texts and naturalistic paintings broaden the audi-
ence to include independent readers as well as interested younger listeners. Sneve's
tone is matter-of-fact, but she has punctuated her overview with poetic quotes.
The very commitment of each book to a particular people will help dispel the
amorphous lumping together of "Indians" that tends to dominate elementary-
school units on U.S. history; reading the two books together makes tribal differ-
ences obvious despite common spiritual values such as reverence for the land. The
books could have used a bibliography for students who wanted to read further,
and the maps are too sketchy--one looks in vain for the locations of Fort Defiance
and Fort Sumner, between which soldiers forced thousands of surrendering Nava-
jos to march on the killing "Long Walk" in 1863-64. Reducing so much informa-
tion for such selective presentation has inherent hazards, but it's an important
process for subjects that have been far more oversimplified in the mass media than
they are here. Himler's art work balances the aesthetic with the instructive, the
past with the present, in compositions that are steeped in plains or desert hues and
are vibrant with action. BH
OCTOBER 1993 
* 
59
SOTO, GARY 
Too Many Tamales; illus. by Ed Martinez. 
Putnam, 1993 
32 p
ISBN 0-399-22146-8 
$14.95 
R 
4 -7 yrs.
A Christmas story, Latino story, and child-appealing story all rolled into one starts
with Maria and her mother preparing for a family gathering by making tamales
together: "Maria happily kneaded the masa. She felt grown-up, wearing her
mother's apron. Her mom had even let her wear lipstick and perfume. If only I
could wear Mom's ring, she thought to herself." A classic setup! When Mom
leaves the room, Maria tries the ring on, kneads the dough, forgets the ring, and
remembers too late-after the tamales are cooked and the ring is missing from her
finger. The only solution is to gather all the cousins and make them eat every
tamale. What they get is not the ring, but stomachaches all around. When Maria
confesses, she sees the ring gleaming securely on the hand of her mother, who had
rescued it from the dough, and is gently teased out of her chagrin by Aunt Rosa,
who starts another batch of tamales. This is a mini-drama rendered so acutely that
everyone who has lost something precious will respond, from young viewers to
erstwhile children now reading the story aloud to their own charges. The deeply
colored paintings, though somewhat posed, intensify the emotional tenor with
realistic portraits and thickly textured domestic interiors that serve as dark back-
drop to the expressive central character. Soto inflects the narrative with details
that incline unpretentiously toward the lyrical without interrupting or overextending
the story (as Maria kneads the second batch of dough, "a leftover tear fell from her
eyelashes into the bowl and for just a second rested on her finger, sparkling like a
jewel"). Vividly traditional but more subtle than the overused pifiata scenario, this
Christmas crowd-pleaser will serve up a nice balance for Anglo holiday lore. BH
STOCK, CATHERINE 
Where Are You Going, Manyoni?; written and illus. by
Catherine Stock. 
Morrow, 1993 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10353-7 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10352-9 
$15.00 
R 4-6 yrs
Manyoni is a little girl who lives near the Limpopo River in Zimbabwe, and on
this fine morning she's off to ... where? That's the closest thing to a story offered
here, as we watch Manyoni cross the ridge above the dry river bed, wander by the
wild fig trees and malala palms, and otherwise serve as our guide to her part of the
world. As was true of Rachel Isadora's Over the Green Hills (BCCB 7/92), Stock's
story is mainly a frame to introduce the landscape and its flora and fauna, with the
real focus of the book being Stock's double-spread watercolor paintings. However,
both story and pictures are more specific than Isadora's expressionistic landscapes,
and there's some suspense as Manyoni gets ever closer to her destination: school.
The pictures employ a spectrum of greens and dusty brown, with each one pre-
senting a scene filled with life and possibilities for you-are-there imagining. Kids
will enjoy finding Manyoni-sometimes foregrounded, sometimes a tiny figure in
the background-in each picture, and there's plenty of wildlife to be counted and
named. A picture glossary of the animals is included, as well as a glossary and
pronunciation guide to foreign words. RS
ToLAN, STEPHANIE S. 
Save Halloween! Morrow, 1993 
[176p]
ISBN 0-688-12168-3 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
While her family's strict fundamentalist faith forbids it, sixth-grader Johanna has
60 
* THE BULLETIN
always (surreptitiously) participated in her school's Halloween activities, and she
doesn't want this year to be any exception. This year, she's been put in charge of
writing the script for the Halloween pageant; unfortunately, this is also the year
her charismatic preacher uncle has come to visit and is embarking on an anti-
Halloween crusade. It's a hot-button topic, and Tolan easily manages to surround
the issue with some real drama. While characterization is somewhat rudimentary,
it isn't stereotyped. Johanna's father is also a minister, but one who lacks the fiery
oratorical-and fund-raising-skills of his brother; Uncle T. T. has his slick side,
but he also has a sense of humor and comes to respect Johanna's decision to stick
up for herself when peer and family values conflict. The portrait of fundamental-
ism is fair and unsensationalized, and Johanna's contemplations on the mysteries
of prayer, faith, and death should evoke a sympathetic chord in readers of varying
religious backgrounds. RS
TRYON, LESLIE 
Albert's Field Trip;written and illus. by Leslie Tryon. 
Atheneum,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31821-9 
$14.95 
Ad 4-6 yrs
In the third of a series of stories about Albert, the duck teacher, and his young class
(see Albert's Play, BCCB 3/92), the group visits "George and Gracie's Apple Farm."
Resourceful Albert drives the school bus full of his animal students and a few adult
chaperones (a kangaroo and pig). The first-person narration will sometimes puzzle
the listener because it is not clear who the narrator is, but the full-color scenes of
androgynous animals at an orchard have a cuteness that preschoolers will enjoy.
The unknown narrator, who could be the skunk assigned to write a story of their
trip, finishes each description of what they did at the orchard with "but that wasn't
the best part. ... " The "best part" that concludes the story will probably appeal
more to adults reading aloud than to their audience-the best part is getting tucked
in bed by their parents after they get home. This is a sweet, mild book that can be
used with very young children before either a field trip or bedtime. KJ
TUNNELL, 
MICHAEL O. 
The Joke's on George; illus. 
by Kathy
Osborn. 
Tambourine, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11759-7 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11758-9 
$14.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
The George of the title is George Washington, and the joke in question was played
by early American collector and painter Charles Willson Peale. 
Peale's son
Rembrandt narrates the story, setting the scene by describing his father's eccentric
individualism and George Washington's legendary courtesy to all, then telling how
the first president was fooled by a trompe-l'oeil painting of two Peale children on
a stairway, to which he bowed politely. It's a slender plot, more of an anecdote,
but it's still an entertaining tale that shows Washington in a different light. It
could also prompt some interesting artistic discussions-trompe-l'oeil is a highly
kid-appealing kind of art, and there are enticing examples around, making it easy
to move beyond this book. The illustrations are highly and entertainingly stylized:
they're flat, with little perspective, and there's a carved look to the figures that
makes George look more wooden than his teeth; but the pictures are livened up
with interesting detail and planes of bright color that help make this a cheery
interlude for an art or history unit. DS
OCTOBER 1993 
* 61
UPDIKE, DAVID 
The Sounds ofSummer; illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. 
Pippin,
1993 
40p
ISBN 0-945912-20-X 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Like A Spring Story (BCCB 3/90) and the other two seasonal tales in this series, the
last involves a boy named Homer and a dog named Sophocles, but this time they
have come to a parting of ways. Homer worries about how much Soph is slowing
down with age, and sure enough, the dog can't keep up with him and his friend
Henry as they run home through a storm following a boat trip with old Mr. Birch.
When they look for him, he's gone, but Homer pursues the search all through the
night, finally finding Sophocles lying ill in the marsh. The next several pages are a
painful goodbye that will leave no eyes dry, so although this text was born to be
read aloud, be forewarned that you may not be able to finish it without choking
up. Kids will love it, identify with it, and grieve with Homer as he listens to the
approaching sounds of fall, "the first time in his life he had spent it without
Sophocles." The text is long for a picture book format, but beautifully written
except for occasional grammatical glitches ("Henry wrapped Sophocles back in the
blanket and lay him down in the boat"). Updike has shown wisdom in revealing
adults as being sometimes falsely reassuring and in showing a child's first mourn-
ing as painfully inevitable. Parker's full-page pen-and-watercolor illustrations, which
are sophisticated in a loose, unstudied style devoid of self-consciousness, will take
the book well into an age group that can read it independently and appreciate it all
the more in private. BH
USPENSKY, EDUARD 
Uncle Fedya, His Dog, and His Cat; tr. from the Russian by
Michael Henry Heim; illus. by Vladimir Shpitalnik. 
Knopf, 1993 
136p
ISBN 0-679-82064-7 
$14.00 
R Gr. 3-5
This translation of a Russian children's fantasy is the tale of a little boy named
Fedya who is so serious that his parents have nicknamed him "Uncle." His mother
won't let him keep any pets, even after he finds a talking cat. In order to stay with
his cat, Uncle Fedya runs away to the country. There, he and his cat find an empty
house and a talking dog (who learned to speak from the same professor who taught
the cat). This cousin to Pippi Longstocking has the same foreign flavor and fan-
tasy of independence-Uncle Fedya's house is nice and cozy, and when he needs
money, he easily finds a buried treasure. While his parents search for their lost
boy, Uncle Fedya's household grows to include a happy-go-lucky tractor, a mean-
tempered cow, and a thieving jackdaw named Jack Grabbit. The comical charac-
ter of Pechkin the Postmaster, who is always being outsmarted by the animals, is
the one who finally locates Uncle Fedya for his parents. Folksy black-and-white
illustrations add to the humor of the story. The translation is in short, simple
sentences that are often funny-near the book's end, the cow says her first word,
"Disgraceful!" The cat asks "Why haven't you talked until now?" She responds
"To you? What for?" KJ
WESLEY, MARY 
Haphazard House. Overlook, 1993 
144p
ISBN 0-87951-470-1 
R Gr. 7-10
"Haphazard" is the house in the countryside that painter Andrew Fuller buys with
his Derby winnings; he, his wife, their daughter Lisa (the narrator) and son Josh
are thrilled to get out of London, especially when the realtor threatens--or prom-
62 
* THE BULLETIN
ises-that Haphazard House is haunted. Taking with them Grandpa, a few young
people from the city, a couple of pets, and what seems to be a magic Panama hat,
the family settles happily into Haphazard, where the house readies itself for them,
an invisible gardener brings in vegetables, people seem to grow younger, and a
ghostly figure-wearing the Panama hat-waves at them from a window. Unlike
most ghost stories, which are about getting "them" to rest and ending the phe-
nomena, this one is about "us" becoming "them" and the dislocation going on
forever as the Fullers realize that their lives and destiny are intertwined with that of
the ghosts/former residents and that "time is askew," so the past and future pop up
randomly and simultaneously. Wesley creates a terrific sense of atmosphere all
through the book, ranging from the cheerfully eccentric family that takes along a
toad-loving traffic warden to their new home, to the alluring creepiness of
Haphazard's mysteries and its village stuck in-or outside of-time. Some plot
points remain a little murky-it's not clear what exactly the timeslip is, or why the
village couple is so opposed to the climactic installation of a glass stairway in the
house-but the ambiguities are part of the misty tone. Reminiscent of Playing
Beatie Bow (although Haphazard House has a more unusual ending), this will ap-
peal to Anglophiles and spooky-story aficionados. DS
WILLIAMS, DAVID 
Grandma Essie's Covered Wagon; illus. by Wiktor
Sadowski. 
Knopf, 1993 
41p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90253-8 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80253-3 
$16.00 
R 5-8 yrs.
Following a note on the author's source is a first-person narrative describing
Grandma Essie's birth in a Missouri log cabin "almost ninety years ago" and her
family's travels, first in a covered wagon to western Kansas, then driven south by
drought to Oklahoma, and finally back to a farm in Missouri. From a historical
point of view, this is rich in the very commonness of the experience, allowing kids
a glimpse into the past of those who suffered more than they succeeded in their
dreams of westward expansion. As a picture-book story, it meanders descriptively
rather than delivering a story with beginning, middle, and end. The art itself has
a still quality of scenes frozen in time, due partly to the thick textures of the paint-
ing and partly to figures that seem formally posed in each monochromatic compo-
sition. Though this may not play successfully as preschool entertainment, it will
provide solid support for primary-grades exploration of U.S. history and family
roots. BH
WILLIAMS, VA B. 
Scooter; written and illus. by Vera B. Williams. 
Greenwillow,
1993 
150p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09377-9 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09376-0 
$15.00 
R* Gr. 3-5
Elana Rose Rosen loves her scooter, even when she falls over the handlebars while
riding it in front of her new apartment in the Melon Hill Houses, a housing project
that, as the summer spins on, reveals itself as a good place for great times. Elana
misses her cousin and best friend Nanette, but she soon makes friends in her new
home, particularly attracting a little boy named Petey, whom everyone is con-
vinced can't talk. Elana learns differently, though, and it's just one terrific discov-
ery in a summer filled with them. She's an impulsive, eager-beaver narrator, and
the small and large dramas of the Melon Hill families find their way
unselfconsciously into her story. The voice is totally authentic, and Williams pep-
OCTOBER 1993 
* 
63
pers the pages with ink drawings that have an equally authentic childlike zest,
nowhere better expressed than in the acrostics Elana likes to compose and illus-
trate: "Everyday she rides her scooter. Loves to dance and loves music. Admits
she acts stupid and stuck up sometimes. Now she has friends at Melon Hill Houses.
And Nanette is coming." The book is vigorous, innocent (not a television in sight)
but not naive, and immensely refreshing in its low-tech style and attention to
things kids find important. RS
WITTLINGER, ELLEN 
Lombardo's Law. 
Houghton, 1993 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-65969-8 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-9
Fifteen-year-old Justine Trainor and her parents are still newcomers to their Bos-
ton suburb when the Lombardo family moves in next door. Because Justine is a
loner, her mother hopes she will make friends with Heather Lombardo. Not a
chance. Heather is gorgeous and superficial, and she soon fits into sophomore
high-society, leaving a grateful Justine alone. Justine is surprised to learn that she
shares a love of movies with Heather's eighth-grade brother, Mike. They become
friends and combine their interests to write, produce, and star in a take-off of
2001. Their friendship gets more complex when Justine starts dating a boy in her
grade, Mike finds a girlfriend, and they both try to hide their jealousy even as
Justine struggles with her attraction to Mike: "It wasn't fair. I wanted to be crazy
about someone who'd get a driver's license before I did." This first young adult
novel by Wittlinger not only strikes at a real dating issue for teenagers, but also has
a plot that is satisfying and not too crowded. The movie project is interesting; the
romance is innocent and lightly suspenseful. KJ
YEP, LAURENCE, ad. 
The Shell Woman e6 the King: A Chinese Folktale; illus. by
Yang Ming-Yi. 
Dial, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1395-9 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1394-0 
$13.99 
R 
5-8 yrs.
When likable Uncle Wu marries a magical wonin from the sea, he's proud enough
to boast of her accomplishments, which quickly reach the ears of a greedy king.
Shell must then fulfill three seemingly impossible requests or lose her beloved Wu
and become the king's wife: first, she must provide the hair of a toad; second, the
arm of a ghost; and third, a bushel of luck. Each of these Shell accomplishes, but
the king has not stipulated what kind of luck she must provide. Needless to say,
what he gets is not what he wanted. With the practiced confidence that made The
Rainbow People (BCCB 4/89) such a successful collection, Yep narrates this eigh-
teenth-century tale without diluting its life-and-death elements or intruding on its
inherently strong form. Yang Ming-Yi's illustrations move gracefully from a shell-
pink motif to a fiery red that finally consumes the villain; similarly, his composi-
tions include both serene seascapes and the amputation of a clawed arm. It's a
mark of respect for folklore when re-creators encompass both its beauty and its
terror, something this author-artist team has accomplished with finesse. BH
64 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: WHERE DOES THE LIBRARIAN FIT IN THE "WHOLE" PICTURE?
"Whole language," "literature-based curriculum," "resource-based teaching," "in-
tegrated language arts instruction"-what do they mean to you? Sampling various
educators' definitions and opinions of these terms reveals numerous--often con-
flicting-theories, but there's a common focus on connections: connections to
literature, connections to and among students, connections between teachers and
librarians, connections across disciplines.
The tenets most widely accepted as part of the whole language philoso-
phy include: child-centered focus in instruction/interaction; individualized in-
struction; integrated instruction across disciplines; student self-selection of literature
to read; and journal writing. While the first two components are certainly of
concern and interest to the librarian, the latter three are directly related to books
and libraries. Integrated or thematic instruction is fertile ground for collaboration
between teachers and librarians. Working together to develop an integrated unit
provides both with the opportunity to articulate clearly the central ideas, content/
skill goals and outcomes, and instructional and informational roles each person
will take in the implementation of the unit. While librarians typically gather ma-
terials and develop bibliographies for such units, cooperative planning can further
enhance what the librarian and teacher do as instructional partners.
Librarians continually assess the curriculum and the collection; making
available a wide range of literature, factual and fictional, is essential to support
resource-based teaching. The more recent challenge, as schools move toward a
whole language philosophy, is to work with teachers in assisting them to select a
range of appropriate materials for their classroom collections. The need for in-
service training in this area is growing as teachers seek to become more knowledge-
able of the criteria for selecting good books, as well as keeping current in the field
of children's literature. Librarians are uniquely qualified to provide this staff de-
velopment in workshops and to individuals on a day-to-day basis.
Writing, particularly response journal writing, is dependent upon expe-
rience with and exposure to a wide range of literature. Students' appreciation of
the writing of others increases as they listen to fine stories and read widely them-
selves. Teachers and librarians can assist students in understanding the structure
of literature, insuring that such understanding does not interfere with enjoying a
story for its own merit. Librarians working in collaboration with teachers can take
an active part in providing students with a framework for responding to literature
through helping them become aware of genres, literary elements, literary devices,
and visual literacy. Sharing these concepts gives children more insight into the
reading and writing process. Collaboration may take the form of directly working
with students to develop literary awareness or working with the teacher to assist
him/her in enriching reading and writing instruction.
A fifth-grade teacher at Leal School integrated new components into her
reading/writing workshops this year using clear, simple picture book stories as
examples of the use of literary elements and devices. She found that students
developed an increased awareness of genres and techniques in their reading as well
as incorporating them into their response journal writing and their own creative
writing. Experience with literary elements in picture books helped the students to
recognize them in more complex books as well as to articulate in class discussions
how authors used them in their writing. All this was accomplished without violat-
OCTOBER 1993 
* 65
ing the precept that "knowledge about literature should be secondary to children's
wide experiencing of literature" (Huck, p. 709).
Librarians can and should be part of the "whole" picture. Professional
journals and books can serve as springboards to and resources for enriching the
language experiences of teachers and students. The possibilities for new connec-
tions and partnerships are limited only by our creativity and imagination.
Canavan, Diane D. & Sanborn, LaVonne H. Using Children's Books in
Reading/Language Arts Programs. (Neal-Schuman, 1992. 206p.; ISBN 1-55570-
101-9, paper $29.95). This "how-to-do-it" manual for school and public librar-
ians is designed to serve as an aid to locating children's books that illustrate reading,
language, and literary instructional concepts in kindergarten through eighth grade.
Carletti, Silvana, Girard, Suzanne & Willing, Kathlene. The Library/
Classroom Connection. (Heineman, 1991. 128p.; ISBN 0-435-08711-8, paper
$13.50). Carletti, Girard, and Willing present a Canadian perspective on collabo-
rative strategies which connect libraries, teachers, and librarians.
Hall, Susan. Using Picture Storybooks to Teach Literary Devices: Recom-
mended Books for Children and YoungAdults. (Oryx, 1990. 176p., ISBN 0-89774-
582-5, paper $29.95). Hall discusses how picture storybooks can be used to teach
literary devices and provides an extensive source list categorized by device.
Huck, Charlotte, Hepler, Susan & Hickman, Janet. Children's Litera-
ture in the Elementary School. (Harcourt, Fifth Edition, 1993. 775 p.: ISBN 0-03-
047528-7, $46.00). Huck draws on her extensive knowledge and experience in
children's literature to provide a rationale and suggestions to teachers for planning
and evaluating a literature-based curriculum.
Lamme, Linda Leonard & Ledbetter, Linda. (1990) "Libraries: The Heart
of Whole Language," Language Arts 67 (7), 735-741. Lamme and Ledbetter pro-
vide examples from Florida schools to show what happens when librarians and
teachers collaborate in language arts curriculum and instruction.
Lukens, Rebecca. A Critical Handbook of Children's Literature. (Scott,
Foresman/Little, Brown, Fourth Edition, 1990. 309 p.; ISBN 0-673-38773-9,
paper $20.50). This handbook provides a framework for examining children's
books in terms of criteria, genres, and literary elements.
Marantz, Sylvia S. Picture Books for Looking and Learning: Awakening
Visual Perceptions Through theArt of Children's Books. (Oryx, 1992. 208 p.; ISBN
0-89774-716-X, paper $24.50). Marantz helps teachers and librarians gain some
of the information and confidence needed to share visual experiences with their
students through the use of picture books.
Routman, Regie. Invitations: Changing as Teachers and Learners K-12.
(Heineman, 1991. 672 p.; ISBN 0-435-08593-X, $37.50, ISBN 0-435-08578-6,
paper $25.00). Routman offers specific strategies for putting whole language theory
into practice.
Sutherland, Zena & Arbuthnot, May Hill. Children and Books.
(HarperCollins, Eighth Edition, 1991. 768 p.; ISBN 0-673-46357-5, $45.00).
This text is designed for classes in children's literature with emphases on children
and their needs, on criteria and types of literature, and on artists and authors.
Van Vliet, Lucille W. Approaches to Literature Through Genre. (Oryx,
1992. 288 p.; ISBN 0-89774-773-9, paper $29.95). Van Vliet emphasizes group-
ing literature by genre to focus on the pattern or structure of fiction. Literary
elements and critical thinking skills are explored within the genre framework
Janie Schomberg Leal Elementary School/ Urbana, IL.
66 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this new index, which
will appear in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this rather
idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books that could fill
a particular gap in a collection, to help teachers and librarians find books that
might be useful in various school or recreational settings, and to help in those
requests for a "love story" or a "scary story." In the case of subject headings, the
subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those
books intended for independent reading.
African Americans-fiction: Porter
African Americans-poetry: Myers
Art history: Isaacson; Tunnell
Asian Americans-stories: Rattigan
Aunts-stories: Honeycutt
Babies-stories: Cutler
Ballet: Anderson
BEDTIME STORIES: Emberley;
Fox; Honeycutt; Tryon
BIOGRAPHIES: Carrick; Freed-
man
Birds-fiction: Evans; Kindl
Birthdays-stories: Hest
Blankets-stories: Henkes
Books and reading-stories: McPhail
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Blume;
Ephron
Brothers and sisters-stories: Joyce
Bullies-fiction: Duffey
Chess-fiction: Sutcliff
China-stories: Yep
Christmas-stories: 
Brett; Joyce;
McPhail; Soto
City life-fiction: Williams, V.
CONCEPT BOOKS: Miller, Mar-
garet
COOKBOOKS: Monroe
Cows-stories: Seymour
Dance and dancers: Anderson
Death-fiction: Byars; Greene
Death-stories: Bruchac; Updike
Disabilities: LeVert
Disabilities-fiction: Butler
Divorce-fiction: LeMieux
Dogs-fiction: Pomerantz
Dogs-stories: Updike
Ethics and values: Mazer; Sendak;
Tolan
FABLES: Banks
Family life-fiction: Blume
FANTASY: Avi; Byars; Kindl; Ma-
zer; Sutdiff; Uspensky
Farm life: Williams, D.
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Bernhard; Hodges; Yep
Food and eating-stories: Rattigan;
Soto
Friends-fiction: Miller, M. J.
Gangs-fiction: Peck
GHOST STORIES: Gordon, J.;
Wesley
Grandfathers-fiction: Pomerantz
Grandmothers-stories: 
Bruchac;
Cutler; Hest
Guidance: Kuklin; LeVert
Halloween-fiction: Tolan
Halloween-stories: Pilkey
Health: Lerner; LeVert
HISTORICAL FICTION: Hill;
Porter
History, U.S.: Antle; Bial; Carrick;
Freedman; Lasky; Porter; Sneve;
Tunnell; Williams, D.
Homelessness-stories: Sendak
Immigration: Ashabranner
Kwanzaa: Pinkney
OCTOBER 1993 
* 
67
Latinos-fiction: Pomerantz
Latinos-stories: Reiser; Soto
Literature, children's: Lasky
LOVE STORIES: Wittlinger
Manufacturing: Horenstein
Museums-stories: Mathers; Tunnell
Music and musicians-fiction: Hill
Native Americans: Sneve
Native Americans-stories: Bruchac
Nature study: Lerner
New York City-fiction: Avi
Nigeria-folklore: Bryan
Norway-stories: Emberley
NURSERY RHYMES: Sendak
Photography-fiction: LeMieux
Pioneer life: Bial; Lasky
POETRY: Gordon, R.; Myers
Prejudice-fiction: Mazer
Puerto Rico-fiction: Pomerantz
Rabbits-stories: Banks
Reading aloud: Banks; Uspensky
Reading, 
beginning: 
Pilkey;
Pomerantz
Reading, easy: Duffey; Porter;
Updike
Reading, family: Bruchac; Cutler;
Henkes; Miller, Margaret.;
Myers; Pinkney; Rattigan; Soto
Reading, reluctant: Avi; Gordon, J.;
Monroe
Religious education: Tolan
Russia-fiction: Uspensky
Russia-stories: Bernhard
SCARY STORIES: Butler; Gordon,
J.
SCHOOL STORIES: Duffey
School-stories: Stock; Tryon
SHORT STORIES: Gordon, J.
Sisters-fiction: Greene
Slavery-fiction: Porter
Social studies: Ashabranner; Kuklin
Sports: Littlefield
Story hour: Brett; Bryan; Cutler;
Emberley; Fox; Henkes; Hest;
Hodges; Honeycutt; Joyce;
Mathers; McPhail; Seymour;
Soto; Stock; Tryon; Yep
Storytelling: Bernhard
Suicide-fiction: LeMieux
Summer-fiction: Evans; Williams,
V.
Vietnam War-fiction: Antle
Weather: Simon
Witches-fiction: Butler
Women's studies: Freedman
Zimbabwe-stories: Stock
M. E. Kerr's books cited for the
Margaret A. Edwards Award
CKER 
ME ME ME ME ME
MACKI 
Not a Novel
89 (023151-3) 
Ages 12 up. $16.89 (023193-9)
aner ed 
9 Q5* (447006n-7 
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
GENTLEHANDS
Ages 12 up. $16.98
t (023177-7)
Harper Trophy paper ed $3.95* (447067-9)
An Ursula Nordstrom Book
NIGHT KITES
Ages 12 up. $14891 (023254-4)
Harper Trophy paper ed. $3.95' (447035-0)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
DINKY HO(
SHOOTS S
Ages 12 up. $15.
Har'rr Tmnhv nh
POWERFUL ECOLOGICAL TALES
Written by Judy Allen and illustrated by Tudor Humphries
*"Fine storytelling; effective plea."
Kirkus Reviews (pointer) on Tiger
"[This] high-powered picture
book... offers... the triple
attraction of animal tale, Asian
backdrop, and nature lesson."
-The 
Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books (R)
"[This] striking book concludes
with factual information about
the ways [to] save the tiger from
extinction."
-Booklist
S"[A] compelling story ....
For those moved by the
poignant message, there's a fact
sheet and the address for 'Save
the Whales.'"
-Kirkus 
Reviews (pointer)
"An ecological fable framed as
fiction."
-The 
Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books
i
SStarred in
EELI
THI
VNLTTC
"IN L&
An Antholi
of Poems
Selected by
Ruth Gordoi
"Sixty-six poems that invite young adults to read,
ponder, and reread as they unpeel layers of meaning.
A particularly useful collection for [those] taking time
to look at poetry that is challenging."
-School Library Journal
"We all have lonely places where private memories
tremble and slip away. That uncertainty, that elusive-
ness is the mood of this fine anthology in which
poets [including Octavio Paz, Kenneth Rexroth, and
Nancy Willard] from all over the world capture the
echoing quiet 'when the game has ended.'"
-Booklist
Ages 10 up. $15.00* (021727-8); $14.89t (021728-6)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
Other Ruth Gordon Anthologies
UNDER ALL SILENCES 
TIME IS THE
Shades of Love 
LONGEST DISTANCE
Best Books of 1987 (SLJ) 
Ages 12 up. $13.95* (022297-2)
Best of the '80s (Booklist) 
$13.89t (022424-X)
Ages 12 up. $13.00* (022154-2) 
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
HarperColins ISBN prefix: 0-06. Trade
ed. tLibrary ed. Publisher's prices onlyp 
eClli 
n 
e 
'sBooks
and in no way reflect the price at whicharperCollsChildrensBooks
available from any other source. 
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
I 
, 
_ 
,
~9·-· 
C·~P"';l~ad~s
BOOW pdrJe
·rz ~F7,14~s-~-~
p~se5~oo' 
\u~_ 
~9-8~
~I~L84~SJPBF~ 
;
~~~dpla
e~·,~_~,,\otte
PI""'~
ZO\OtO\L~
~Bo·k
Edited by Geraldine DeLuca and Roni Natov, Brooklyn College
Volume 15, Number 2 presents various aspects of gen-
derissuesinchildren'sliterature. Contents include: Two
Newbery Medal Winners and the Feminine Mystique *
Missing in Action: Confederate Females in Civil War
Novels * Searching for Great-Great-Grandmother: Pow-
erful Women in George MacDonald's Fantasies * The
Miracle of the Web: Community, Desire, and Narrativity
in Charlotte's Web/ * The Cult of Peter Rabbit: A Barthes-
ian Analysis* Return to the Island of Mist * 'A humble
Spirit under Correction': Tracts, Hymns, and the Ideol-
ogy of Evangelical Fiction for Children, 1780-1820 * plus
Q&A with Russell Hoban, a discussion of children's
books about Hiroshima, and reviews of Awakened by the
Moon by Leonard Marcus; Caught by Jane Schwartz; and
Literacy con Carino by Curtis Hayes, Robert Baruth, and
Carolyn Kessler.
Published two times a year in June and December
Send orders to: Journals Division
THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
701 W. 40th Street, Suite 275
Baltimore, MD 21211-2190
Please enter my subscription to The Lion and the Unicorn.
U $18.00 individuals 
U $32.00 institutions
Please send me 
copies of Vol. 15#2 only.
O $10.00 individuals 
U $17.50 institutions
0 Check or money order enclosed made payable to JHUP
* Bill Visa 
U Bill MasterCard 
Exp. Date
Acct #
Signature
Name
Address
City/State/Zip+4
Prepayment required. MD residents please add 5% sales tax. Add $2.50
postage for Canada and Mexico; $4.40 outside N. America. Credit card
orders call toll-free 1-800-537-JHUP or fax 1-410-516-6998. 
EA2
BEYOND
SEXISM
GENDER
ISSUES
BEYOND
SEXISM
GENDER
ISSUES
BEYOND
SEXISM
GENDER
ISSUES
_ 
__
:BOOKS
Theater Scripts
Stories on
' Stage
Squality literature. Compiled
itic art form for children that lets
nce-the pleasures of reading
ol in literature-based curricula.
eader's theater builds on children's
en word and read the books from
ience-other cultures through
gh school students. Multicultural
rawn from:
r * Fntasy
Everything You Need to Put on a Play
The beginning of each script provides:
* Genre * Culture of origin or setting *
Theme * Grade-level recommendation for
readers * Number of roles * Approximate
reading time * Pronunciation of names,
and/or staging.
Stories on Stage
* 
Scripts for Reader's Theater
* 
By Aaron Shepard
162pp. 1993 ISBNO-8242-0851-X
* 
$40 U.S. and Canada. $45 other countries.
*0l 011 
0 0 
0 
00 
0 0 0 00 
00000 
D 
00
A Guide to Successful Performances
Stories on Stage offers useful tips on:
* Preparing introductions to the plays
* Positioning characters
* Acting out or miming movements
described in the story
SEasy stage scenery and props.
To Order Call Toll-Free
800-367-6770.
Outside of the U.S. and Canada
call 718-588-8400.
Fax 718-590-1617.
l THE HW. WILSON COMPANY Sharing Knowledge Since 1898
University of Illinois Press 
SECOND CLss
54 East Gregory Drive 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAiGN, IL
RETuRN POSTAGE GUARNTEED
