T h e
B u l l e t i n
of the Center for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
School of Information Sciences
by Johns Hopkins University Press
September 2021
Vol. 75   No. 1
75 
YEARS
o
f
 
d
e
d
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
 
t
o
 
y
o
u
t
h
 
l
i
t
e
r
a
t
u
r
e
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Bookbird:
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
The Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books
Children’s Literature
Children’s Literature 
Association Quarterly
Journal of the History of 
Childhood and Youth
The Lion and the Unicorn
A Look Inside
T h e B u l l e t i n
of the Center for Children’s Books 
September 2021
Vol. 75 No. 1
3 
 Announcement
4 
 The Big Picture
 
 Soul Food Sunday  by Winsome Bingham; illus. by C. G. Esperanza
5 
 New Books for Children and Young People
 
 Reviewed titles include:
9 
• The Beatryce Prophecy  by Kate DiCamillo; illus. by Sophie Blackall
12 •  The Little Wooden Robot and the Log Princess written and illus. by Tom 
Gauld
20 • A Snake Falls to Earth  by Darcie Little Badger
22 •  Revolution in Our Time: The Black Panther Party’s Promise to the People  by 
Kekla Magoon
33 •  Fallout: Spies, Superbombs, and the Ultimate Cold War Showdown  by Steve 
Sheinkin
40  Subject and Use Index
Explanation of code symbols used with reviews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
 Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
© 2021 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois School of Information Sciences by Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218-4363, USA. Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, 
MD 21233-9651, and at additional mailing ofﬁces. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363.
Reviewing Staff
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Quinita Balderson, Reviewer (QB)
Natalie Berglind, Reviewer (NB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fiona Hartley-Kroeger, Reviewer (FHK)
Adam McConville, Reviewer (AMM)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Kiri Palm, Reviewer (KP)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
Office Staff
Anna Wiegand, Editorial Assistant
Subscription rates
For up-to-date pricing information, please visit the journal webpage at: http://www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/subscribe. Subscription checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. 
All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising. Or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.ischool.illinois.edu
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration © C. G. Esperanza, from Soul Food Sunday. Used by permission of Abrams Books 
for Young Readers.
September 2021 • 3
It is with complicated emotions that I announce my retirement as editor of the 
Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books as of this issue. I will be handing the reins 
over to my supremely capable colleague, Kate Quealy-Gainer, who will serve as 
interim editor.
I began working at the Bulletin in 1989, becoming editor in 2001. A 
recent estimate suggested I have reviewed approximately 6500 books in that time 
and read some or all of 10,000 new books for young people, handling and viewing 
close to 100,000 books in total. Throughout, it has been a joy and a privilege to 
work in this field, to daily encounter works of passion and beauty and hilarity, and 
to contribute in my own way to both supporting frontline librarians who make a 
difference every day and enriching young people whose lives are so often changed 
and shaped by books. I have also had the immense good fortune of working for and 
with editors and writers whose talents never cease to amaze me and who have made 
my thirty-two years at the Bulletin an era of constant growth and enlightenment.
My departure coincides with our celebration of the 75th volume year of 
the Bulletin, which is being commemorated in a digital timeline exhibit at https://
ccb.ischool.illinois.edu/ccb75/. As the Bulletin prepares to move into its future, take 
a look at its past, in glorious black and white and on bleed-through onionskin 
paper. Yet even there the mission and commitment to the value of assessing books 
for young people are strong and palpable. Long may that commitment continue, 
and thanks to all of you for reading.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Announcement
4 • The Bulletin
The Big Picture
Soul Food Sunday
by Winsome Bingham; illustrated by C. G. Esperanza
We all missed a lot of family in 2020, so 2021 has seen us hungry for the emotional 
and physical nourishment of a big, traditional get-together. That kind of gathering, 
with enough joy to make it worth the year’s wait, is exactly what Bingham and 
Esperanza deliver in this book where Sunday means “Everyone gathers at Granny’s 
for soul food.” Amid the piles of cousins and aunts and uncles arriving at Granny’s, 
the narrator has a signal honor: today he gets to help Granny prepare the feast in the 
kitchen. First he grates the cheese for the mac ’n’ cheese (“Unless mac ‘n’ cheese is 
on the table, it’s not Soul Food Sunday”), then he cleans and tears the greens, then 
he skins and preps the meat. It’s then time for Granny to take a break as Roscoe Ray 
the Grill Master works his magic, but the narrator is fired with culinary enthusiasm 
and decides to make one more creation all his own: a big jug of lemony sweet tea.
Debut author Bingham hits all the right tasty notes here, right from the 
sound effects of everyone’s arrival (“Car horns BEEP! Car doors SLAM!”). There’s 
clear habit and familiarity in the way kids scatter to predictable places and fam-
ily members take their known roles, and her buoyant prose precisely catches the 
sweet rhythm of a loving grandmother’s patient teaching (“Good job, baby. That’s 
the best grated cheese I’ve seen in all my life”). The inherent repetition of cooking 
cleverly grounds enticing textual repetition as our young cook fights his way through 
various dishes (“My hand hurt. My arm aches. But I don’t quit” as he labors over 
every task), building energy to the ebullient culminating celebration. The clever 
hook here is our hero’s competence—he’s doing key work that really matters in 
the feast preparation, and while his learning curve may be a tad optimistically 
compressed his contributions are age-reasonable. It’s therefore not just a celebration 
of everyone’s presence but of his growing ability to support the family occasion 
(in his grandfather’s old chef’s jacket to boot), moving from following Granny’s 
directions to realizing all on his own what a proper Soul Food Sunday still needs. 
As Granny says, “Baby, every food we make is special. Soul Food Sunday is about 
coming together. It’s about us being family, working together, a team!”
Esperanza’s stunning oils have a muralistic vibrancy with their saturated 
hues and deeply outlined figures; colors are, like a good family gathering, loud 
yet harmonious, with sunny yellow predominating. There’s energy aplenty in the 
skewed, sometimes fisheye perspectives and lively portraiture: sinewy Granny with 
her violet cornrow braids, Roscoe Ray huggably cool in flip-up sunglasses, and 
the narrator sporting a gold-tipped high-top head of hair that shines like a crown. 
There are also authentic small visual details, like the little kid dancing for attention 
from the big kids trying to play video games, Roscoe Ray’s collegial salute to the 
September 2021 • 5
New Books for Children and Young People
narrator through the window as they’re working, and even the way our young chef 
absolutely swims in the oversized white jacket, a tacit reminder of the man he’s 
following and the man he’ll one day be.
It’s a delicious, bouncy love song to family, tradition, and the passing on 
of family legacies, and viewers will yearn for a seat at the table. An author’s note 
talks about cooking with her own grandmother, and a reasonably kid-friendly mac 
’n’ cheese recipe is appended. (See p. 6 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Appert, Anne Blob; written and illus. by Anne Appert. HarperCollins, 
2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063036123 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
Our protagonist is a little white blob that can transform into anything—“a giraffe, 
a unicorn, an elephant, and an octopus too.” The unseen narrator persists in calling 
the protagonist “Bob,” but Blob pushes back, correcting their name and painting 
an “L” into the “Bob” on each page: “My name is Blob. With an L. BLOB.” Blob 
experiments with other identities, from a rock to a haystack to a scuba diver but 
eventually decides that just being Blob is enough. With a minimal color palette in 
soothing shades of pink, blue, yellow, and purple, this is a friendly, calming read, 
and Blob is absolutely adorable as a little white gumdrop with yellow fur. Though 
the “be yourself” message isn’t unique, Blob will come as a comfort to any kids 
who struggle with the “what I want to be when I grow up” assignments. Our hero’s 
insistence on their right name additionally models useful behavior for kids who 
often have their names mispronounced.  NB
ApplegAte, KAtherine Willodeen. Feiwel, 2021 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250147400 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250147417 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Since losing her parents and brother to a wildfire, eleven-year-old Willodeen is all 
too familiar with grief, and she suffers one more loss when the last of the screech-
ers—animals beloved by her and her pa—is killed. The residents of her small town 
6 • The Bulletin
Perchance, however, are happy that the stinky and smelly vermin are no longer 
around to disrupt the tourist season, which revolves around the migration of the 
adorable hummingbears and their stunning nests. This year, though, only a few 
hummingbears arrive, and while others might think it’s the heat, or the droughts, or 
the fires keeping them away, Willodeen is pretty sure their small numbers might be 
connected to the screechers. The folksy charm here never becomes treacly, just as the 
environmental message never becomes preachy; the screechers and hummingbears 
clearly mark Perchance with a bit of fantasy, but the town feels both timeless (no 
phones, no technology) and timely, a microcosm of a larger world dealing with 
shifting resources and a changing climate while attempting to plan for the uncertain 
future. Willodeen is scrappy and sympathetic, posturing toughness but narrating 
with a painfully raw simplicity as she grieves her family and fears any further con-
nection: “That building and dreaming. Gone in a flash, in a frenzy of flames. What 
was the point in making things, if they only came to ashes?” Applegate is honest 
enough with her young readers to give a realistically untidy ending, but it’s still a 
satisfying one; pair this with Gold’s The Last Bear (BCCB 1/21) for a thoughtful 
look at the way personal loss can spur community action.  KQG
BecKer, elAyne Audrey Forestborn. Tor Teen, 2021 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250752161 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250752260 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Rora and her brother Helos are shifters, but only Rora is welcome in the Telyan 
court. Tensions are high between those with magic and those without, with the 
Eradain king up north proposing ultimatums to surrounding kingdoms about their 
allowance of magic and a magic sickness sweeping over nonmagical people. When 
the youngest prince of Telyan begins to show symptoms, Rora, Helos, and older 
prince Weslyn are sent to the Vale, the dangerous, magic-infused place Rora and 
Helos left as children, to barter for stardust to heal the ill. Between Weslyn’s seeming 
hatred and mistrust of the shifters, childhood traumas resurfacing, and the presence 
of magical and human threats, the three may be forever changed—if they make it 
out alive. Becker’s writing shines in her complex characters and their relationships 
to one another; Weslyn and Rora’s transition from reluctant allies to maybe lovers 
is just as interesting a plotline for readers as the magical peril, and Rora and Helos’ 
realizations that they’ve kept secrets from each other heartbreakingly drive them 
apart. Fantasy fans looking for high stakes adventure with a budding romance are 
sure to devour this one, and the ending will have readers anxious for a sequel.  NB
BinghAm, Winsome Soul Food Sunday; illus. by C. G. Esperanza. Abrams, 
2021 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419747717 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781647000424 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-8 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 4, for review.
September 2021 • 7
cAmpBell, mArcy Something Good; illus. by Corinna Luyken. 
Little, 
2021 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780759557420 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
Something really horrible has been written on a wall in the girls’ bathroom, and 
now the school is responding. In a meeting with the principal, the girls all wonder, 
“What is the bad-something? Who did it? And what will happen next?” A few girls 
barge into the now off-limits space to find unquoted but clearly hateful words, 
and soon the information spreads (to parents as well as to students) and everyone 
starts suspecting their classmates. Then the school pushes back with a collection of 
positivity initiatives, including having the students all repaint the bathroom with a 
mural of their own design: though the bad-something was still there, “We changed 
it when we covered that wall with our good-somethings.” Listeners may wonder 
exactly what the bad-something was, but it seems clear from the response that it 
fell into the category of hate speech, and the narrative will therefore map onto a 
variety of situations, including those where kids never do know exactly what was 
wrong. The first-person narration has an effective immediacy as the girls process 
the experience, and the changes in class behavior capably illustrate the way group 
dynamics can be affected for ill and also for good. Gouache, colored pencil, and 
ink illustrations have a soft, dappled quality punctuated by the sketchy yet totally 
individualized figures of the multicultural group of girls; mood is signaled by 
dominant hues, with red as the class turns to meanness and sunny yellow as the 
bathroom undergoes its transformation. It’s a vivid evocation of a believable event, 
which is helpfully coupled with an empowering response that gives kids an action 
to take. An author’s note describes being inspired by events that have happened at 
her children’s schools and offers resources for facilitating tolerance.  DS
clipstone, lyndAll Lakesedge. Holt, 2021 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250753397 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250753403 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Seventeen-year-old Violeta has a rough life: her adoptive mother beats her and her 
younger brother, Arien, because Arien has shadow magic. When the monstrous lord 
rumored to have murdered his entire family notices Arien’s powers, the siblings are 
taken away from their village to Lakesedge Estate, where the Corruption spreads 
over the land. Lord Rowan intends to use Arien’s power combined with alchemy to 
eliminate the Corruption, and as Violeta and Rowan grow closer, Violeta realizes 
he’s not the monster he seems to be. When repressed memories from her childhood 
resurface, Violeta remembers that the best way to get rid of the Corruption is to 
bargain with the Lord Under—if she has anything worth offering. This fantasy will 
please readers looking for a shadowy ambience, between blood tithes, nightmares, 
underworlds, and doomed deals with deities. Though Rowan is clearly set up to be 
Violeta’s lover, Clipstone makes the process of untangling his somber secrets and 
getting to the heart of gold under his broody exterior intriguing. Darkling fans will 
latch swiftly onto Rowan, and mood readers and aficionados of Faizal’s We Hunt 
the Flame (BCCB 4/19) will appreciate the consistently dark tone.  NB
8 • The Bulletin
currie, lindsAy What Lives in the Woods. Sourcebooks, 2021 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781728209753 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9781728245720 $7.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781728209760 $7.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Ginny and her family move to Saugatuck, Michigan so her dad 
can restore rundown Woodmoor Manor. Already spooked by the legend of the 
Hitchhikers, mutant creatures roaming the woods surrounding the manor, Ginny’s 
additionally unnerved by hearing the distant, ominous tick-tocking of a clock from 
everywhere in the house, getting trapped in the dark with a faceless mannequin 
that seems to move, and seeing the ghostly face of a woman in the mirror—not 
to mention the appearance of a typewriter with a note that says GET OUT. New 
friend Will, who has a connection to the manor, warns Ginny of an even more 
sinister threat than the Hitchhikers: the Shadow People. Currie (Scritch Scratch, 
BCCB 9/20) returns with another chilling outing informed by real history. Agatha 
Christie superfan and future mystery writer Ginny revels in the spotlight, and the 
eerie atmosphere without overly gruesome imagery makes this a perfect middle-
grade horror selection. Though there are hints of a possible followup, they may just 
be clever misdirection that will tickle Christie fans, and the novel holds its own as 
a shivery standalone.  QB
demetrios, heAther Code Name Badass: The True Story of Virginia Hall. Ath-
eneum, 2021 [384p] illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534431874 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534431898 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Serving as a spy during World War II, American-born Virginia Hall navigated Vichy 
France on a wooden leg and aluminum foot after an accident necessitated the partial 
amputation of her left leg. Steadfast and independent, Hall confounded the Nazis 
time and again for both the Britain Special Operations Executive and American 
Office of Strategic Services, amassing vast information networks, transmitting 
wireless messages, and even organizing armed rebellion. Author Demetrios (Dear 
Heartbreak, BCCB 12/18; I’ll Meet You There, BCCB 2/15) openly admires the 
spy, whom she regularly calls by her childhood nickname Dindy, and that personal 
connection results in a conversational recounting of Hall’s heroism. Frequent first-
person asides and ample pop culture references make even the more mundane details 
highly readable, while enabling Demetrios to call out the sexism and ableism Hall 
experienced both during the war and later at the CIA. Though readers not keen 
on the #girlboss characterization of Hall may turn to Don Mitchell’s The Lady Is 
a Spy (BCCB 12/19), Demetrios provides a thoroughly researched history of “La 
dame qui boite,” and those just discovering Dindy will be convinced that she was, 
in fact, a badass. Black and white photos appear throughout; extensive back matter 
maintains Demetrios’ tone and includes descriptions of other “Espionage Sheros,” 
an author’s note on research, a bibliography, an index, and surprisingly readable 
endnotes.  AMM
September 2021 • 9
dicAmillo, KAte The Beatryce Prophecy; illus. by Sophie Blackall. Candlewick, 
2021 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536213614 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781536220858 $19.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 4-7
Brother Edik spends his days illuminating The Chronicles of Sorrowing, the 
manuscript his Order is charged with maintaining. He’s not at all prepared to deal 
with the ragged little girl he finds curled up in the barn with Answelica, the most 
ornery of goats, who is clearly protective of the child. Initially uncommunicative, 
Beatryce (the name she will reclaim) is clearly repressing some traumatic memories, 
so Brother Edik convinces his superior to let the Order shelter the girl, disguising 
her as a young monk. This is an act of bravery as well as kindness, since the girl 
can read and write (which is unheard of! dangerously unnatural!), and she seems 
to Brother Edik to be connected to a prophecy in the Chronicle that foretells a girl 
who will unseat a king. There is, in fact, a king that needs unseating, having been 
elevated to the throne through the machinations of an evil counselor; counselor and 
king inevitably become aware of Beatryce’s survival, and they relentlessly hunt her. 
DiCamillo pitches her original tale to an audience sufficiently steeped in folklore to 
be appreciative of her elegant recrafting of time-honored tropes and attuned to her 
wryly humorous formality of prose; Blackall’s monochrome drawings nudge read-
ers to wistfully recall a time when their favorite fairy tales came with illustrations. 
The deeply satisfying conclusion finds villains properly vanquished, the prophecy 
fulfilled with a clever spin, and happily-ever-afters grounded on friendships and 
strong ethics all round.  EB
doBBs, AldA p. Barefoot Dreams of Petra Luna. Sourcebooks, 2021 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781728234656 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781728234663 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Petra has just enough time to flee her home with her abuelita and 
younger siblings before the Federales carry out a lethal attack. With her mother dead 
and father conscripted at gunpoint into the Federales troops, it’s up to Petra and her 
grandmother to navigate a course to safety in 1913 Mexico, where the revolution 
has rendered safety seemingly impossible to secure. A church in the hills to the 
north provides temporary shelter until the Federales catch up; a female “captain” in 
Pancho Villa’s forces offers Petra a place in their ranks and accommodation for her 
family among the camp followers, but Petra declines since it may put her relatives in 
even greater danger. Making a run for the northern border at the Rio Bravo seems 
the best course of action, but by the time they arrive, with the Revolucionarios in 
retreat and the Federales ready to attack, the United States extortionately raises the 
toll on the bridge and then closes it altogether, abandoning refugees to inevitable 
slaughter. A last-second decision to open the metal gate and clear the bridge gives 
Petra and her family enough time to storm across and a path forward into a more 
secure life. Petra’s adult narration reassures readers that she survives the harrowing 
journey, but Dobbs keeps them in suspense as to whether Abuelita and the younger 
children will share her fortune. Enough detail on the revolution’s opposing factions 
and leaders is inserted at need-to-know points throughout the novel to supply read-
10 • The Bulletin
ers with necessary context, but it’s the plight of the migrants and their desperate 
dependence on the ethics and mercy of their Northern neighbors that eclipses the 
history lesson and makes Dobbs’ title viscerally relevant to contemporary readers. 
An author’s note and timeline are included.  EB
durhAm, dAvid Anthony The Shadow Prince. Tu/Lee & Low, 2021 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781643794280 $21.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
In an alternate ancient Egypt, just-turned-twelve Ash has a choice: remain the 
poor, bullied outsider in his desert village, or travel to the capital in pursuit of a 
great destiny as shadow to the Pharaoh’s son. To earn his place, he must compete 
in a series of challenges set up by the gods themselves: defeating demons, battling 
metallic vultures, and dueling with magicians. Along the way, Ash makes his first 
real friends and uncovers an unexpected gift for magic. Which is just as well, be-
cause Lord Set is determined to prove his power by secretly killing the candidates 
and undermining the throne, unless Ash and company can stop him. Durham 
offers up an action-packed, magic-filled adventure made all the more fun by its 
evocative world building—full of sun-powered vehicles, giant insects, and animal-
headed gods—and many fast-paced fight scenes tempered by a notable lack of gore 
(defeated monsters simply vanish in a puff of putrid smoke). The narrative employs 
a lot of well-worn fantasy tropes, but they’re in service to a compelling story that 
pits fraternal jealousy and desire for power against true friendship and generosity 
of spirit. Ash’s narrative voice is distinctly contemporary, full of endearing snark 
and self-deprecating wit, and readers will appreciate both his happy ending and the 
unresolved mysteries that leave the door open for sequels. A solid introduction to 
Egyptian mythology, including a brief glossary of the gods, this may lead readers 
to explore more. Put this in the hands of Rick Riordan Presents fans to further 
broaden their myth-based reading.  AM
engle, mArgAritA A Song of Frutas; illus. by Sara Palacios. Atheneum, 
2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534444898 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534444904 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
High among the charms of visiting her abuelo in Cuba is the young narrator’s 
opportunity to accompany him to work. He is a street vendor, luring customers 
to purchase his fruits with a signature song and sometimes even hoisting goods 
up to balconies via a simple but ingenious basket and pulley system. He tunefully 
competes for attention not only with fruit sellers but also with a chorus of other 
vendors—the viandero with sweet potatoes, the manisero with paper cones of 
roasted peanuts, and the narrator’s favorite, “la dulcera,/ a woman with the voice/ 
of an angel, who croons so sweetly/ in praise of los carmelos.” If the visit falls on 
the new year, there’s the much anticipated ritual of making wishes on each of 
twelve grapes—Abuelo’s grapes, of course. Visits always come to a bittersweet end, 
though, when the narrator returns to the United States and has to rely on the mail 
to exchange abrazos with her “querido abuelito.” That note of separation marks the 
apt and poignant segue to Engle’s historical and cultural notes on street vending 
(at one time outlawed as private enterprise) and on “travel restrictions imposed 
September 2021 • 11
by authorities in both countries, who care more about politics than people.” The 
sun-soaked colors and invitingly tactile texturing of Palacios’ digital artwork will 
draw readers to the joyful visit, while Engle supplies a reality check on the current 
limitations to Cuban/American family reunions.  EB
FAruqi, sAAdiA Yusuf Azeem Is Not a Hero. Quill Tree/HarperCollins, 
2021 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062943255 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062943248 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Over the two decades since the September 11th attacks, the Muslim and non-Mus-
lim residents of the small town of Frey, Texas have coexisted in apparent cordiality. 
On this twentieth anniversary of the tragedy, though, rabid bigot Trevor Grant is 
organizing a group of Patriot Sons to use the town’s “Never Forget” commemora-
tion theme to kindle enough hatred to run the Muslim population out of town. It’s 
a lot for middle-schooler Yusuf Azeem to process; all he wants is to lay low when 
parents enlist their kids to help with construction of their new mosque, to avoid 
being bullied at school by Grant’s son, and to organize a team that will win an 
award at the Texas Robotics Competition. As the Frey atmosphere grows steadily 
more toxic, though, it’s clear that an event that merely registers as ancient history 
to Yusuf is very much a raw wound for adults. His uncle helps him understand 
what his family and Muslim neighbors endured in 2001, why they are now divided 
on how to handle a resurgence of bigotry, and why he may actually need to stand 
up alongside fellow Muslims and their community allies to neutralize the Patriot 
Sons’ vitriol. Although conversations are sometimes stilted, Faruqi effectively probes 
complexities of radical activism vs. peaceful accommodation as Muslim response 
to prejudice, as well as the non-Muslim community’s deep discomfort in stepping 
beyond a bystander role in defense of their neighbors. An author note discusses a 
2015 incident that served as inspiration for Yusuf’s story.  EB
FrAsier, crystAl Cheer Up: Love and Pompoms; illus. by Val Wise; lettering by 
Oscar O. Jupiter. Oni, 2021 [128p]
Paper ed. ISBN 9781620109557 $14.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9 up
Brash, mouthy, and uninterested in toeing the line, Annie is risking potential college 
admissions, despite being on top of her class academically, with her lack of clubs 
and extracurriculars. Beatrice Diaz is the soon-to-be head cheerleader and the nicest, 
most hardworking girl in school, but she’s struggling to convince her fellow students 
that she really is a girl; ten months into her transition, Bebe faces misgendering from 
friends and strangers alike, harassment from mega-creeps in the hallways, and the 
hovering of overprotective parents. Formerly best friends, Annie and Bebe drifted 
since Bebe became popular, but Annie promises her mom she’ll give cheerleading 
(and peers) a chance, and the girls rekindle their friendship—and even more. Fans 
of Frasier’s webcomic Venus Envy and her advocacy work are sure to glom on to her 
debut graphic novel, a sugary romance packed with diverse characters, hard lessons, 
and loads of queerness. Annie’s roughneck approach may have isolated her from her 
classmates, but readers will delight in her clever confrontations, history nerd-outs, 
and punk rock ways. Bebe, meanwhile, is the best friend a kid could ask for, but 
12 • The Bulletin
Frasier doesn’t allow her talents to overshadow her insecurities and real fears about 
life as a trans girl. Wise’s digital art is perfectly matched, with clean, expressive line 
work reminiscent of Lynn Johnston; a softly hued palette and minimal backgrounds 
keep visuals crisp. While the story is somewhat light on plot, the characters and 
their growth shine, with Annie gaining new friends, Bebe learning to stand up for 
herself, and the two girls finding love and comfort in each other. This is a perfect 
pick for fans of Ukazu’s Check Please! (BCCB 9/18), Lumberjanes, cheerleading, 
and fluffy romance between all varieties of misfits.  KP
gArBer, stephAnie Once upon a Broken Heart. Flatiron, 2021 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250268396 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250268389 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Evangeline is horrified to learn that her secret beau is set to marry her stepsister, so 
she makes a bargain with the Prince of Hearts to stop the wedding. As the tricky 
Fate is wont to do, however, the Prince hardly plays fair, halting the marriage but 
destroying any chance Evangeline has with her former lover. Even worse, he ensnares 
her in a dangerous plot that brings her to the Magnificent North, where she’s to 
betray that kingdom’s prince and open the Valory Arch, releasing only the Fates 
know what into the world. In this story set just after the events of Finale (BCCB 
6/19), Garber expands her world, introducing a new realm but still building the 
mythology established in the original series. The new atmosphere is rife with in-
trigue and betrayal, but Evangeline herself is a bit of sop, and her constant focus 
on finding someone to marry eclipses the more compelling plot machinations. The 
Prince reprises his role as the aloof but alluring bad boy and lends some needed 
heat to scenes, but the pair’s chemistry never totally sparks. Further details about 
the Valory Arch and a prophecy involving Evangeline put some steel into her spine, 
however, and the sequel promises a feisty heroine bent on revenge.  KQG
gAuld, tom The Little Wooden Robot and the Log Princess; written and illus. by 
Tom Gauld. Porter/Holiday House, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823446988 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780823450671 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 4-8 yrs
The king and queen of “a pleasant land” want a child, so they reach out to a in-
ventor and witch, respectively, to get one. The inventor provides a little wooden 
robot son, and the witch provides a log princess, who turns into a log when she 
falls asleep and must be woken by a magical phrase. The siblings are inseparable, 
so when a maid throws out the log she finds in the princess’s bed and it’s swept 
up by a goblin, the robot travels to the icy North to get her back. The robot’s 
adventures leave him stiff and wind him down, so he wakes the princess up, but 
her adventures leave her tired and she falls asleep and turns back into a log, after 
which they’re both rescued by woodland creatures and taken to the witch, who 
returns them to their family. This modern fairy tale invokes its predecessors well; 
Gauld’s art is particularly striking, with pen lines that combine the aesthetics of a 
classic cartoonish look and traditional woodcut art, divided frequently into comic 
book panels. Humor runs throughout the story (the little wooden robot and the 
log princess each get six panels about the unexplained but hilariously implied “too 
September 2021 • 13
many adventures to recount here”), but it maintains that classic fairy tale feel that 
has captivated audiences for centuries. Viewers will find plenty of hidden details 
in the cluttered homes of the inventor and witch upon reread, and this will likely 
be an instant bedtime staple.  NB
greenField, Amy Butler The Woman All Spies Fear: Code Breaker Elizebeth Smith 
Friedman and Her Hidden Life. Random House Studio, 2021 [336p] illus. 
with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 9780593127209 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593127193 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593127216 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 6-12
Dissatisfied with her first teaching experience but beholden to her father for his 
college tuition loan, Elizebeth Smith left small-town Indiana for big city Chicago 
in search of work. A chance exchange about Shakespeare with an employee at the 
Newberry Library swept her into contact with George Fabyan, eccentric—and soon 
to prove sinister—owner of an estate at which he advanced the research of scholars 
who shared his interests and tolerated his oddities. Smith was set to work culling 
through a Shakespeare First Folio to ferret out what was believed to be the Francis 
Bacon cipher and, through it, evidence that he was the true author of famously 
miscredited work. The project was a dud, but the cipher work opened the door to 
Smith’s future career; together with fellow Fabyan employee William Friedman, 
whom she married, she became a valued asset to the United States government on 
the brink of entering World War I, and the pair established themselves in parallel 
careers of service as cryptanalysts for military and federal civilian government orga-
nizations well beyond World War II. Friedman’s story reads like a gripping novel, 
with true blue romance, a Machiavellian employer, glass ceilings and uncredited 
labor, a brilliant husband battling mental illness, and a series of career assignments 
cracking communications of wartime spies and Prohibition-era bootleggers and 
gangsters, which often put her life in danger. Greenfield delivers the tale with 
enthusiasm and narrative flair, including lots of photos of her photogenic subject 
and fascinating “Code Break” insets in cryptography. A bibliography and source 
notes are included.  EB
hArtl, soniA The Lost Girls: A Vampire Revenge Story. Page Street, 2021 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781645673149 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781645673156 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Betrayed and abandoned by gorgeous vampire Elton, who promised immortality 
and eternal love, Holly has found herself trapped at age sixteen for the past thirty 
years, complete with regrettable, unchangeable fashion choices from the ’80s. 
Now she’s learned that she wasn’t even the first girl he turned, and he’s already set 
his sights on his next victim. She and Elton’s other exes, ’20s-era Ida and ’50s-era 
Rose, set out together to protect eighteen-year-old Parker from a fate worse than 
death and to free themselves by killing their maker. Unexpectedly, the scheme also 
gives Holly the chance to make peace with a long-abandoned friend and to find a 
love for the future. Just as success seems within their cold, dead grasp, things get 
complicated by Holly’s growing feelings for Parker, who may just have unvoiced 
14 • The Bulletin
plans of her own. With its fresh reinvention of vampire lore, this casually gory 
novel offers a unique take on the feminist revenge narrative. A story of girl power 
triumphant, it finds its core strength in female friendship, especially the unlikely 
bond between Holly, Ida, and Rose, and the forgiveness found with old friend 
Stacey. Though not completely blood-soaked, the text is still rife with nonchalant 
references to torn-off limbs, ripped-out throats, and negligently dumped bodies. 
This is a quick, entertaining romp, with an all-white cast, for readers looking for 
character-driven horror that recognizes how much being a teenager sucks.  AM
hAughton, chris Maybe . . . ; written and illus. by Chris Haughton. Candle-
wick, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536220247 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 2-4 yrs
“Whatever you do,” says the departing monkey parent to the trio of little monkeys, 
“do NOT go down to the mango tree. There are tigers down there.” Immediately, 
of course, the unattended kids start to muse on how much they love juicy mangoes 
and to consider “maybe we could just look at the mangoes. That’d be okay, right?” 
That’s the thin edge of the wedge, and soon the trio have swung their way down the 
tree to the mangoes and then ground level (“If there were tigers around, we’d have 
seen them by now”) to gorge themselves. When tigers do appear, a frantic chase 
ensues, but the monklets eventually scramble back up high enough to be safe—at 
least for now, since a new plot seems to be hatching around some tempting bananas. 
This funny folkloric tale will cue audiences immediately with its traditional open-
ing prohibition, and the humorous tension as the monkeys inevitably rationalize 
themselves closer to the literally forbidden fruit contrasts effectively with the high-
speed escape measures punctuated by exclamations. There’s electrical contrast in 
the collage-style digital art, with the blue monkeys popping against red, magenta, 
and orange backdrops that will easily make images visible at a distance in a lively 
storytime. Viewers may, like the monkeys, not immediately notice the tigers lurking 
purply in the understory shadows, so there are great reread opportunities; ambitious 
practitioners could also easily convert this high-action, dialogue-only text to a play 
and celebrate with fruit for everyone, even tigers.  DS
herrmAn, heAther m. The Corpse Queen. Putnam, 2021 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781984816702 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781984816719 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
When a long-lost aunt sends for her, seventeen-year-old Molly is happy to leave her 
impoverished orphanage for the wealth and luxury now offered by her new rela-
tive, but she’s also suspicious. Rightfully so, as it turns out, since Aunt Ava requests 
Molly’s help in her expansive grave-robbing operation, which supplies medical 
students in 1850s Philadelphia with fresh bodies. Molly agrees, partly because she 
has nowhere else to go and partly because her nighttime forays into the seedier 
side of town begin to turn up information about the Knifeman, who she believes 
killed her best friend Kitty. She’s also finding she’s got a knack for science and 
anatomy, and her aunt even allows her to take lessons under a well-known doctor, 
but soon she realizes these upper elites might be the wrong sort of company. This is 
a wonderfully macabre thriller that mines considerable tension and chills from the 
September 2021 • 15
grotesqueries and disturbing lack of ethics in nineteenth-century medical inquiry, 
leaning as much on various characters’ utter lack of compassion as on blood and 
guts for its horror. Molly is appealing in her complexity even if she’s not always 
likable; she’s as taken by new science as any clever girl would be and she’s almost 
willing to put aside her principles and empathy until she realizes that the doctor’s 
thirst for information might be getting people killed. The third-person narration 
is occasionally interrupted by malevolent first-person musings about an unknown 
tragedy, adding to the book’s intrigue. This is a winner for fans of Bray’s Diviner 
series or Zdrok’s Spectacle (BCCB 1/19).  KQG
holloWell, sArAh A Dark and Starless Forest. Clarion, 2021 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780358424413 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780358424963 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Derry loves her eight siblings, even though they are dangerous, and she knows they 
need to stay under the protection of Frank, a strict but caring man who has been 
developing their alchemy. Frank keeps them isolated, relying on a lack of outside 
exposure (the siblings literally only see a bribed doctor once a year for physicals and 
have no other access to the modern world) to keep them stuck out of time, afraid to 
leave, and focused on their magical training. When her siblings start disappearing, 
Derry has to push herself out of her comfort zone to become the hero they need 
and try to save them, whether from Frank (whose seeming benevolence masks evil), 
or from the menacingly magical forest that surrounds them. The book offers an 
intentionally diverse cast, with representation across the LGBTQIA+ spectrum and 
racial and ethnic identities; for the most part, this is an enhancement even if a few 
of the lesser explored siblings are more representatives than fully fleshed characters. 
Hollowell successfully straddles the line between horror and fantasy, running a 
thread of suspense that pulls from both and keeping both Derry and the reader in 
the dark as Derry slowly comes to understand the true nature of Frank, the secrets 
the forest holds, and the foreboding power within herself.  AS
hutchinson, shAun dAvid Before We Disappear. HarperTeen, 2021 [512p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063025226 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063025257 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
The 1909 Alaska-Pacific-Yukon Exhibition in Seattle offers a heady mix of grandeur 
and entertainment for Jack Nevin, a sixteen-year-old magician’s assistant. Taken in 
from the streets by a self-serving woman known as The Enchantress, he’s traveled 
the world, helping to confound audiences—and oftentimes the law—with dazzling 
illusions and sleights of hand. Jack can’t explain the mystifying performances of 
competing illusionist Laszlo, however, and while burgling their rival’s dwelling, he 
discovers the shocking source of Laszlo’s magic: sixteen-year-old Wilhelm Gessler, 
kidnapped and imprisoned because of his ability to instantly transport people and 
objects between places. Jack is determined to free Wil, setting up a summer of stolen 
moments and daring escapes that evolve into unconditional love. Hutchinson (A 
Complicated Love Story Set in Space, BCCB 1/21) acknowledges in an author’s note 
that the novel’s fantasy elements go beyond magic, as characters exist in a Seattle 
devoid of homophobia. Though that enticing premise allows for two genuine 
16 • The Bulletin
LGBTQ+ romances, it often finds itself at odds with the novel’s other elements, 
and the parallels of magical and queer identities undercut the concept’s execution. 
Fantasy romance fans willing to accept these shortcomings may nonetheless be 
swept up in a seedy world of deception and illusions, as Hutchinson’s evocative 
writing carries his protagonists to a well-deserved happy ending that delights in 
the reality of found families.  AMM
isler, emily BArth AfterMath. Carolrhoda, 2021 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781541599116 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
After the death of Lucy’s younger brother from a heart condition, Lucy and her 
family move to a new town for a new start as Lucy begins seventh grade. However, 
Lucy’s school comes with its own terrible grief: four years ago, a school shooter 
opened fire on the third graders who are now Lucy’s classmates, so every introduc-
tion includes information about that student’s experience of the shooting and lost 
friends, and Lucy’s new bedroom formerly belonged to one of the shooter’s victims. 
With her parents still focused on their own loss, Lucy is left largely on her own 
to negotiate the circumstances, and gradually she begins to find connections, first 
befriending Avery, a girl who’s ostracized because she’s related to the shooter, and 
then joining an afterschool mime group, where being freed from the burden of 
speech eases her communication. Isler sets up a fascinating and poignant situation 
as two experiences of loss collide, with Lucy feeling her grief not even worthy of 
mention in the face of her classmates’ tragedy (“in this town where everyone—ev-
eryone—carries death with them so my pain doesn’t compare”), even as her mother 
was drawn to the town because of the commonality. Also painfully believable is 
Lucy’s isolation in her own family as her parents’ mourning erodes their energy 
for their surviving child, and her friendship with Avery is a sensitive exploration 
of two kids dealing with immense challenges on top of familiar tween limitations. 
It’s an honest and surprisingly hopeful story about the way love and joy can return 
to lives that grief has shaped.  DS
Justus, roB Death & Sparkles; written and illus. by Rob Justus. Chronicle, 
2021 [368p] (Death & Sparkles)
Trade ed. ISBN 9781797206356 $22.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9781797206363 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Due to his fatal touch, Death has resigned himself to a life of loneliness, with only 
the occasional chat with the IT department when his computer acts up; meanwhile, 
Sparkles, the last unicorn and epic social media star, is predictably awash in popular-
ity and followers. Fandoms don’t matter when Death comes calling, though, and 
when Sparkles falls from a building in a publicity stunt gone wrong, Death gets to 
tick off one more box on his claims list. However, a giant dragon (apparently upper 
management) guarding paradise sends Sparkles back to unlock his true potential 
and earn an enormous cupcake, but his first task is getting his horn out of Death’s 
butt so he can redeem his soul and potentially compete in a reality show challenge 
with Death against the latest bunch of influencers. This graphic novel gleefully goes 
off the rails with Sparkles’ fatal descent and never lets up on the absurdity; there are 
plenty of easy laughs in the physical comedy (“You sneeze. I toot. Comedy gold,” 
September 2021 • 17
Sparkles tells Death, with his horn still firmly lodged in Death’s backside), but the 
portrayal of Death as a depressed middle man and Sparkles as an insecure media 
darling makes for more sophisticated humor as well. Boxy figures and sharp angles 
are softened with subdued tones, though candy colors of the now familiar unicorn 
palette of teals, pinks, and purples still pop with energy. Like Pastis’ Trubble Town: 
Squirrel Do Bad (BCCB 7/21), it’s best to avoid too much questioning here and 
simply enjoy the weirdness.  KQG
Kemmerer, Brigid Defy the Night. Bloomsbury, 2021 [496p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781547604661 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781547604678 $13.29
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
A plague has ravaged the kingdom of Kandala in the last decade and its cure is 
predictably hoarded by the wealthy, so eighteen-year-old Tessa has spent the last 
two years stealing the required ingredients from the Royal Sector to make and 
distribute the elixir among the poor with the help of her partner in crime, Wes. 
Meanwhile, ever since his parents were assassinated, Prince Corrick has kept order 
for his brother the king by fear and violence, maintaining a tight control on the 
production of the medicine and who gets it. When Wes is apparently captured 
and executed for smuggling, Tessa manages to sneak into the castle with the intent 
to kill the prince and the king—but instead finds herself tasked by Corrick with 
convincing the king and the other nobles there’s a better way to keep the people 
safe. As with her previous titles, Kemmerer employs dual narration with a deft hand, 
giving a full picture of Corrick’s and Tessa’s perspectives while still leaving room 
for surprises. Corrick’s complexity is particularly well served by the structure: he is 
a bad guy who has done bad things, but his inner turmoil and painful reckoning 
with grief and guilt make him compelling, if not redeemable. The larger political 
and ethical dilemmas play out more with Tessa, as her idealistic beliefs in equality 
and altruism meet with the harsh reality of limited resources and the human drive 
to survive, others be damned. Contemplations on morality couple with a sweet 
romance, and the added thrill of a kingdom on the brink of revolution makes this 
stand-alone fantasy a page-turning read.  KQG
KhAn, nAAz Room for Everyone; illus. by Mercè López. Dlouhy/Atheneum, 
2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534431393 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534431409 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 3-6 yrs
In this sprightly rhyming story, Musa and his older sister hop the daladala (a jitney-
type bus) for a trip to the beach on their Zanzibar island. Along the way, the daladala 
picks up additional passengers from “one old man and his bike with no seat” to a 
herder with “two little goats” and up to “ten divers” who are “ready to go.” Though 
Musa initially resists the new additions to the increasingly crowded space (“This is 
outrageous. We can’t let them in./ We’re already smushed like sardines in a tin!”), 
he eventually goes with the flow and joins the other passengers who “wiggled and 
giggled galore” each time there’s a need to make room, and eventually the whole 
crowd decants itself in reverse order at the “blue crystal waters of Nungwi Beach.” 
The zippy anapestical rhymes are laced with dramatic emphasis (playfully signaled 
18 • The Bulletin
by the font) and touches of repetition as well as the entertaining cumulation, and 
there are enough details of sticky fruit juice and fish smell to make Musa’s reserva-
tions reasonable, if doomed. Mixed-media illustrations (combining acrylics, inks, 
graphite, and digital elements) beam with sundrenched cheer in saturated tones; 
portraiture is brisk yet delicate, with white linework against dark skin, and the 
comic streamlining of the animal draftsmanship balances with intricate patterns 
in clothing. This may make veteran librarians recall Sorche Nic Leodhas’ Always 
Room for One More (BCCB 11/65), but it’s a fresh and gorgeous outing all its own, 
eminently suitable to get giggles from kids doing their own complaining about 
close quarters. A glossary explains key terms (including Dada, unglossed in the 
text as meaning “older sister”), and the author notes the story’s inspiration of her 
own travel in Zanzibar.  DS
Khor, shing yin The Legend of Auntie Po; written and illus. by Shing Yin 
Khor. Kokila/Penguin, 2021 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780525554882 $22.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780525554899 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780525554905 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Chinese immigrant Ah Hao is head cook at the Sierra Nevada logging camp, where 
he feeds both the white workers who receive board as part of their compensation 
and also the Chinese workers who do not; his daughter, Mei, assists him, baking 
pies so delicious they function in the camp as tokens of goodwill. When she’s off 
kitchen duty, Mei passes time with Bee Andersen, the manager’s daughter, planning 
how they’ll spend their adult lives together—Mei dreaming of a life as a couple, 
and Bee picturing Mei (single) joining her and a vaguely imagined husband who 
would generally be out of town on lucrative business trips. In the meantime, life 
in the 1885 American West presents more immediate challenges: a surge of anti-
Chinese aggression forces Mr. Andersen to lay off Hao, and an accident on a log 
drive leaves the Andersen family grieving the loss of a brother and son. To cope 
with societal and occupational threats, Mei spins original tales of Auntie Po, a Paul 
Bunyan-esque Chinese giantess who (assisted by a blue water buffalo) runs a log-
ging camp. At times of maximum stress, Auntie Po actually appears as a guardian 
to Mei and children of color within their camp, but never to Bee—an unwelcome 
reminder that despite their friendship and plans, their futures are bound to diverge. 
Oversized frames, often backgrounded by single and double spread camp scenes, 
make this particularly accessible to readers unaccustomed to graphic novels and 
allow Khor to balance content of the logging industry with interpersonal drama. A 
bibliography is included, and an author’s note provides welcome acknowledgement 
of the Indigenous peoples—loggers among them—on whose traditional lands this 
work of historical fiction takes place.  EB
lAurin, ninA The Last Beautiful Girl. Sourcebooks Fire, 2021 [352p]
Paper ed. ISBN 9781728229089 $10.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781728229096 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Isa is a theater star at her Brooklyn high school, which makes her impending move 
to the small town of Amory—and subsequent handing over of the lead role to her 
September 2021 • 19
BFF—devastating. Amory has its quirks, between its oddly preppy student body 
and Isa’s new home, a rundown four-story Edwardian house that once belonged to 
socialite and artists’ muse Isabella Granger. Paintings of Isabella adorn every wall, and 
Isa is inspired to start a new fashion Instagram with the help of her goth classmate 
Alexa, an overbearing photographer. The pictures are surreally beautiful, and any 
photos taken in the house seem to naturally Photoshop out any flaws; Isa goes viral, 
and when she starts losing herself to popularity and calling herself “Isabella,” her 
friends know something’s up. Horror fans will know the direction the book intends 
the moment the house and its history of mysterious deaths are introduced, but the 
novel unfortunately takes until nearly the end to introduce any real terror. Though 
Laurin handles the social media side realistically, other implausible elements may 
be too much for readers (the flimsy excuse for why Isa gets to live in the house, the 
100-year-old clothes that are still in wearable condition). Fans looking for another 
Picture of Dorian Gray–inspired horror with a social media twist may want to turn 
to Heard’s She’s Too Pretty to Burn (BCCB 2/21), but those who can gobble up any 
haunted house story may still find enjoyable material here.  NB
lee, michelle Between the Lighthouse and You. Farrar, 2021 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780374314507 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780374314514 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Alice Jones is convinced her mother is alive, despite six years 
passing since Mom sailed into a storm on the Florida coast and disappeared. After 
all, Mom studied death for a living—specifically, how to communicate with the 
deceased—and the remote island where she vanished has a peculiar tradition that 
allows its residents to do just that. Twelve-year-old Leo Mercury takes this tradition, 
called the tidings, very seriously; he and his family are keepers of both the island’s 
lighthouse and the messages from the dead that wash ashore each year for island 
residents. While Leo doesn’t appreciate Alice’s snooping when she and her family 
arrive on a vacation, an unprecedented tiding from his grandfather brings the two 
together as they attempt to contact their lost loved ones. Debut author Lee switches 
between her protagonists’ perspectives in this slow-to-start story, which eventually 
crests in a heartfelt exploration of grief and familial love. Plot-minded readers will 
leave Aviles Island with unanswered questions about the liminally spiritual tidings 
tradition, as well as the island’s continued isolation in the internet era. However, 
kids processing their own loss who are willing to accept the unexplained may enjoy 
Alice and Leo’s quest to communicate both with those who have passed on and 
those who remain behind.  AMM
levithAn, dAvid Take Me With You When You Go; by David Levithan and Jen-
nifer Niven. Knopf, 2021 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780525581000 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780525580997 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780525581017 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
When his older sister Bea takes off, fifteen-year-old Ezra isn’t entirely surprised 
but he is hurt—he always thought if she left their abusive mother and stepfather, 
she’d take him along. Bea, for her part, does leave an email address and the two 
20 • The Bulletin
exchange messages, with Bea explaining that she was going to find someone who 
could help them both. Her plans, however, go wildly off course when she learns a 
devastating secret, and the siblings are left figuring out where and with whom they 
can find safety. The book comprises emails mostly between Bea and Ezra, portraying 
their bond with depth and emotional nuance; the dual voices make clear their love 
for each other but also reveal how differently they see their relationship and how 
their codependency was formed out of the suffocating isolation that comes with 
surviving abuse. Unfortunately, the detailed emails begin to lose their authenticity 
as they recount extended paragraphs of dialogue; Bea’s telling of her relationship 
with a sage college student is particularly bogged down and clichéd. Still, there’s 
absorption in this story about two siblings breaking away from the adults who have 
failed them and finding their individual agency.  KQG
little BAdger, dArcie A Snake Falls to Earth. Levine Querido, 2021 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781646140923 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When Nina’s great-great-grandmother dies, she passes on a story that the translator 
app on Nina’s phone can’t interpret. Since Nina has grown up compiling diction-
aries of indigenous languages, she has the skill to piece the tale together, and she 
realizes it’s about the animal people. Concurrently, in the Reflecting World, Oli is 
a cottonmouth person on his own for the first time, swept up in the antics of an 
alligator woman, a bounty hunter bear, and two mischievous yet friendly coyote 
sisters. Because the animal people are connected to their species on Earth, when 
Oli’s toad friend Ami gets sick, it indicates the extinction of his Earth species, so 
Oli travels to Earth to seek help, finding understanding in Nina and her family. As 
in the case with Little Badger’s debut Elatsoe (BCCB 9/20), main character Nina 
is, like the author herself, Lipan Apache. The climate change happening in Texas 
in the novel, with its hurricanes, flash floods, and tornadoes, will be a close subject 
to those who have recently experienced drastic temperature change and flooding 
in their own lives; Little Badger maintains an effective balance between the magic 
of the animal people’s holding a tornado at bay and the futility of undoing years 
of damage to the planet. The take on technology is interesting and modern, with 
Nina attempting to win beaucoup bucks from a video-based app with a staged bear 
attack and using her translator app to crack a dying language. The baddie is a little 
predictable, but it’s made up for by a more realistic ending that exhorts people with 
the millions to influence climate change and turn the tide.  NB
mAcK, JeFF Art Is Everywhere: A Book about Andy Warhol; written and illus. by 
Jeff Mack. Holt, 2021 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250777157 $19.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 2-5
In this stealthily sophisticated picture book, the fictionalized voice of Andy Warhol 
(intriguingly posthumous in his reference to work in the past tense) directly addresses 
readers in a breathless monologue. He knows you already know him and spares 
no time on tedious biography, confining his remarks to discourse on why he does/
did what he does/did, and craftily defending himself against critics who question 
whether what he does/did amounts to art. The structure and tone of the narrative 
bespeaks a hyperactive preteen, but the actual pace of the text (a readaloud as well 
September 2021 • 21
as a readalone dream) depends on the reader. Speed it up to milk the humor? “My 
movie was eight hours long. You could just sit and watch the Empire State Build-
ing for eight hours. All night long. Empire State Building. Empire State Building. 
Empire State Building. Empire State Building. Empire State Building. Empire State 
Building. Empire State Building. It was very pretty.” Or slow it down to follow the 
logic? “Some people said it wasn’t a real movie. They said it over and over again. 
The more they talked about it, the more famous my art became. The more famous 
my art became, the more famous I became.” Regardless, the real magic will hap-
pen upon rereading, when the dizziness has worn off and readers and listeners can 
ponder the powerful themes that resist narrative trampling: “Why should artists 
have to make everything themselves?”; “I think art is about liking things. . . . Seeing 
them as pretty”; “What does it mean to be famous? . . . If everyone were famous, 
who would really be famous?” Mack’s loose-lined, affectionately wacky tribute to 
Warhol’s pop art and media oeuvres is a vibrant visual hook, but it’s the provocative 
discussion starters that bring this title ebulliently to life.  EB
mAdAn, viKrAm We Love Bubbles!; illus. by Nicola Slater. Random House, 
2021 [72p] (Bobo and Pup-Pup)
Library ed. ISBN 9780593120668 $12.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593120651 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593120675 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. K-2
    Let’s Make a Cake!; illus. by Nicola Slater. Random House, 2021 [72p] 
(Bobo and Pup-Pup)
Library ed. ISBN 9780593120699 $12.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593120682 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593120705 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. K-2
In these two spirited beginning readers, pals Bobo the monkey and Pup-Pup the 
dog learn that cake making is more complicated than it looks and bubble blowing 
(and popping) sometimes calls for friendship negotiations. In Cake, the animal duo 
decides to bake up a yummy treat but discover they don’t have the right ingredients. 
Bobo’s happy to improvise, replacing the sugar with salt, flour with a flower, and 
eggs with a picture of eggs. As for their lack of an oven? Well, a hat and a hot sun 
will have to do. In Bubbles, Pup-Pup is hard at work blowing a skyful of bubbles 
until Bobo shows up and gleefully pops them all; undeterred, Pup-Pup whips up 
some super bubble mix that will resist any and all attempts at popping—but might 
swallow up a friend in the meantime. While Cake is more successful, with a Mac 
Barnett level of absurdity, the clever humor in both calls readers to predict what 
might happen and then upends their expectations, making for engagingly funny 
and savvy early readers that build on comprehension skills. Simple dialogue, stealthy 
repetition, and amusing sound effects emphasize phonics without overtly drawing 
them out, and the sheer joy had by the two friends give the stories zingy appeal. 
The slick digital art has a retro flair in both palette and textures, and goofball Bobo 
bounds through the pages with unrestrained cheer while Pup-Pup’s ears have a tre-
mendous emotional range. For readers who’ve battered the spines of their Elephant 
& Piggie books, Bobo and Pup-Pup are their next best pals.  KQG
22 • The Bulletin
mAgoon, KeKlA Revolution in Our Time: The Black Panther Party’s Promise to the 
People. Candlewick, 2021 [400p] illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536214185 $24.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781536223422 $24.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 6-12
The Black Panthers are too often a footnote in the whitewashed retelling of the civil 
rights movement, but fortunately Magoon, writing with clarity and accessibility, 
gives a full picture of an organization based in Black power, how it came to be, 
and how it has been purposely misrepresented in history books for decades. The 
book opens with the morning of May 2, 1967, when thirty members of the Black 
Panther Party for Self-Defense, including its chairman Bobby Seale, arrived armed 
at the California statehouse to read out a statement condemning police brutality 
and demanding equal treatment for Black Americans. From there, Magoon zooms 
out, devoting her first section to tracking the Black experience from slavery through 
the Civil War to the ’60s, and then getting into the specifics of the formation of 
the Black Panthers, the group’s larger goals and day-to-day organizing, their com-
munity work, and the movement’s eventual dispersal. Particularly effective here is 
Magoon’s emphasis on the entirety of the party itself, keeping the Panthers’ ob-
jectives at the forefront and highlighting how their direct actions were guided by 
their mission—and how those actions were pushed back against, often violently, by 
systematic oppression from police and law enforcement. It’s a compelling portrait, 
too, of how complex a social movement can be, as readers see how progressive and 
intersectional politics bring in competing views that all adhere to the Panthers’ 
ideals but eventually strain the organization to the breaking point. Readers attuned 
to the news will certainly see the similarities to the BLM movement, particularly 
in both groups’ organizing around police brutality, and young social activists will 
find a model to make big change with local action. Back matter includes a list of 
key people, a timeline, glossary, further reading, source notes, and a compelling 
author’s note about building on history for a more equitable future.  KQG
mAhin, michAel Gizmos, Gadgets, and Guitars: The Story of Leo Fender; illus. by 
Steven Salerno. Ottaviano/Holt, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250251862 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250849649 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
Here’s a STEM storytime contender—Country/Western and rock music meet engi-
neering. When steel guitar was played horizontally, Hawai’ian style, and electronic 
amplification was in its toddlerhood, half-blind master tinkerer Leo Fender was 
determined to finally break free of other people’s expectations and devote himself 
to entrepreneurial pursuits in the music industry. Despite the fact that he didn’t 
play an instrument, he could observe and closely interview musicians and their 
needs, and he could deconstruct a sub-par instrument and untangle its schematics, 
and he could doggedly improve on his own improvements. His durable contribu-
tions secured his spot in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and are known (if not 
recognized) by pretty much anybody who listens to music—solid body electric 
guitars (once reviled as a “toilet seat with strings”) and the amps that blast out 
their sound. Mahin writes with verve, balancing process with human interest, and 
emphasizing Fender’s persistence through multiple failures of product and business 
September 2021 • 23
plan. Salerno’s digitally finished mixed-media illustrations add comic dash to retro 
scenes of audiences cringing from deafening feedback and critics mocking Fender’s 
innovation. End matter comprising an author’s note, glossary, and bibliography 
unites the interests of kids whose dreams run toward lucrative startups and kids 
whose fingers twitch the whammy bar on their air guitars.  EB
mArKs, JAnAe A Soft Place to Land. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2021 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062875877 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062875907 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
When Joy’s father was laid off, the family sold their house and downsized to an 
apartment; the move of twelve-year-old Joy into a smaller bedroom with her younger 
sister is challenging, and parental bickering has accelerated into what both parents 
assure their daughters is a temporary separation. Fortunately, the community is 
supportive, the tweens in the building get along well, and Nora, neighbor and 
classmate, rapidly turns into a friend. Joy concocts a plan to make money to con-
tinue her suspended piano lessons (an absolute must for a girl aspiring to become 
a film score composer) through a joint dog-walking enterprise with Nora. Her 
steady ascent toward a new normal goes into a tailspin when she is cornered into 
revealing the location of the kids’ secret hideout in the building basement, which 
results in the loss of her new friends—including Nora—and even worse, the loss 
of a neighbor’s pooch that escapes from Joy during a thunderstorm. There’s some 
front-loaded authorial orchestration here, but the domino cascade of interrelated 
mishaps is fully credible, as is the patient rebuilding of trust Joy must undertake 
with family, friends, and neighbors to pull back on track. Marks has a keen eye 
and ear for the telling particulars of the family’s struggle to forge ahead in a new 
setting, and the book is sensitive to everyone’s need for a space to be alone from 
time to time: kids who need a private, safe place to hang out, and parents who 
need a respite from perpetual discussion of their shared responsibilities and anxiet-
ies. Although the stakes may be lower than those in Marks’ debut From the Desk 
of Zoe Washington (BCCB 12/19), fans will welcome her introduction to another 
determined and resilient Black tween heroine.  EB
mcAnulty, stAcy Brains!: Not Just a Zombie Snack; illus. by Matthew Ri-
vera. Holt, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250304049 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
“Human brains used to be my favorite food. (About 75 percent water. 100 percent 
delicious),” the reformed zombie narrator reassures her audience. She’s now directing 
her efforts toward education, and with her intimate knowledge of brains of various 
tastes—er, types—she’s pretty good at organizing basic information for a primary 
grades audience. Here kids get the scoop on the relatively stable number of neurons 
throughout life, the pathways they form, the parts of the brain and their functions, 
and the importance of brain folds over size in determining overall smarts. A running 
gag has the narrator reverting to her old cravings: “Mouse and bunny brains have 
hardly any wrinkles and hardly any flavor. Blech!” The contrivance may wear thin 
with older listeners, but it’s a clever enough device for keeping the audience on alert 
for humor breaks. McAnulty and illustrator Rivera demonstrate a well-coordinated 
24 • The Bulletin
approach, with cartoony diagrams smoothly and logically integrated into the text 
and a bile-green narrator, complete with facial scar and patched clothing that suggest 
participation in a recent apocalypse—friendly, but with just enough edge to carry 
off references to her, well, cerebral tastes. Science teachers will want to consider 
this as an entertaining unit kickoff. “Brain Facts” and sources are included.  EB
mills, clAudiA The Lost Language. Ferguson/Holiday House, 2021 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823450381 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780823450695 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 4-7
Sixth-graders Betsy (Bumble) and Liz (Lizard) have been best friends for years, 
despite Betsy’s mother’s reservations about audacious Lizard’s influence on mild-
mannered Betsy, who’s under pressure from her mother to “bloom.” As Betsy’s 
demanding mother battles with work challenges—she’s a linguistics professor who 
studies dying languages—Lizard gets a thrilling idea: she and Betsy will learn one 
of those dying languages and help its survival, assisting Betsy’s mom and proving 
the value of her project. The girls dive into basic Guernésiais (the old language of 
the France-adjacent UK isle of Guernsey), but there’s more going on with Betsy’s 
mother than just work frustrations, and when the family situation erupts it leaves 
the girls divided and Betsy stunned. Mills writes in free verse here rather than her 
familiar prose, but her keen insight into dynamics and character remains evident, 
and the compact, accessible phraseology deftly distills the portrayals. Narrator Betsy 
is particularly well delineated as somebody who has her own strengths, not always 
visible to her mother, despite her willingness to let Lizard take the lead, and there’s 
some gentle illumination of Lizard’s limitations alongside respect for her. Betsy’s 
family situation is also authentic, with its push-pull dynamic between her easygoing 
dad and hard-driving mother, and it’s believable that her father’s mishandling of 
her mother’s suicide attempt—initially lying to Betsy about what happened and 
then letting the information leak so that Betsy’s classmates know the truth before 
she does—rocks Betsy almost as much as the incident itself. Ultimately, though, 
it’s satisfying to see Betsy weather adversity and prove her own strength: “I’m the 
one who gets to decide/ what blooming means to me.” The author includes an 
extensive note about dying languages.  DS
morAles, yuyi Bright Star; written and illus. by Yuyi Morales. Porter/Holiday 
House, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823443284 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780823448937 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad 5-8 yrs
“Child, you are awake!” says the text as a white-tailed fawn opens its eyes. “¡Mira! 
Some things you can see. Others you must find.” The fawn and its family begin to 
journey, but “No matter where you are, you are a bright star inside our hearts.” The 
direct address in English and Spanish continues as the fawn is stopped in its tracks 
by a towering, barbed-wire-decked wall, but nature and the narrator soothe it. A 
page turn then transforms the fawn to a girl, sitting amid the desert flora in “the 
most beautiful world,” and she’s joined by a cast of other people to be “a bright star 
inside our hearts.” The encouraging prose and the symbolism are lovely, but there’s 
more exhortation than engaging action, and the wishes are frustratingly abstract. 
September 2021 • 25
The illustrations, however, are arrestingly gorgeous; Morales captures the flora and 
fauna of the Sonoran desert with tender fidelity, depicting a delicate Southwestern 
Eden teeming with life from peccaries to bats to flowering cactus and ruptured by 
the harshly looming wall. Touchable textures, including wool embroidery for some 
words, increase the fascination of the glowing scenes, and the final tableau of a half 
dozen people, perhaps a family, looking off intently as they wait, is hypnotic. The 
text alone will be a conceptual reach for most youngsters, but skilled prompting 
could get them to consider the implications of the visual journey, and they’ll hap-
pily lose themselves in the art. An extensive note describes Morales’ impetus for 
creating the book and her research on the desert ecosystem.  DS
neil, AliyA King Keep Your Head Up; illus. by Charly Palmer. Millner/Simon, 
2021 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534480407 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534480414 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 5-9 yrs
It looks like D. is having one of those days, starting with oversleeping and with 
missing toothpaste (D.’s sister took it to make slime), then at school realizing “I’m 
supposed to have on my gym uniform.” Things go downhill and D. starts getting 
“scrunchy” and distracted, and despite the principal’s exhortation to “keep your 
head up,” the D. train eventually pulls in to Meltdown City: “A meltdown is when 
you want to keep your head up, but it won’t stay.” After being picked up by parents 
from school, D. plaintively asks “So, this day won’t get any better?”, to which D.’s 
loving mother points out that sometimes days don’t, but you can still try to keep 
your head up. There are echoes of Viorst’s classic Alexander and the Terrible, Hor-
rible, No Good, Very Bad Day (BCCB 12/72) in D.’s doomed-from-the-start experi-
ence; while some details suggest that D. may be dealing with particular challenges 
of neurodiversity, the cavalcade of setbacks will speak to all kinds of youngsters. 
Palmer’s vigorous painterly strokes give the acrylic illustrations compelling power 
(D.’s “‘Bad Day’ face” is poignantly on-target), and kids will be intrigued by the 
device of the rain cloud that hovers over poor D.’s head all day. There’s a lot of 
love for D. throughout, including from the kind and understanding principal at 
what looks to be a majority Black school, and it’s blended with wise realism about 
the fact that sometimes bad days stay bad, but you just have to try your best to get 
through them anyway.  DS
nelson, s. d. Crazy Horse and Custer: Born Enemies; written and illus. by S. D. 
Nelson and with photographs. Abrams, 2021 [144p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419731938 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781647004927 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
“The two youths were taught that personal glory could be won through violent 
conflict. It was this fatal teaching that would form their destiny and bring a dark 
end.” So, in this deftly organized presentation, does Nelson examine the run-up to 
the Battle of the Little Bighorn through the lens of its two epic adversaries—George 
Armstrong Custer and Tasunke Witco, or Crazy Horse—and the cultural expecta-
tions that led each to the historic confrontation and, ultimately, to their personal 
undoing. Nelson follows their upbringing and battlefield careers through short  
26 • The Bulletin
chapters that reveal rather than belabor the similarities of training and personal 
leadership style: Lakota and West Point values of confirming manhood through 
battle; a tribalist world view, quick to see Other as Enemy; charismatic leadership 
coupled with a tendency to act independently of command; humiliating experience 
of demotion; and personal success and status that made enemies within their own 
ranks. Historical context is tightly woven throughout the trim text, and the rapid 
toggling between Custer and Crazy Horse, and between Lakota and U.S. Army 
campaigns, builds narrative tension that keeps the pages flying. Captioned and 
credited period reproductions supplement Nelson’s own noteworthy ledgerbook-
style artwork, in which “the Indian’s images seem to float atop the lined paper of the 
‘white man.’ Sadly, and in the most compelling way, the two cultures never seem 
to connect.” In a closing note Nelson remarks on how his Norse/Lakota ancestry 
connects to the nineteenth-century white/Indigenous conflicts; a timeline, chapter 
notes, selected bibliography, and index are also included.  EB
oshiro, mArK The Insiders. HarperCollins, 2021 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063008106 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063008120 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Orangevale is nothing like his old neighborhood in San Francisco, but Héctor 
Muñoz is determined to make a good impression at his new school. Unfortunately, 
Héctor proves too dramatic, too gay, too different for his new classmates, espe-
cially Mike and his awful Minions, experts in bullying kids and getting away with 
it. Héctor starts hiding in a janitor’s closet to avoid Mike, and one day when he 
runs into the closet he discovers a room full of video games, a soft bed, and even 
a pitcher of his abuela’s horchata. Things take an even stranger turn when Héctor 
walks in on Juliana, a musical maven from Nashville with a secret, and nonbinary 
Sal, shunned by their classmates. All three kids have stumbled into the Room at 
their own moments of crisis, each finding the quiet and comfort that they needed 
while struggling at their respective schools. This is a departure from Oshiro’s previous 
outing (Each of Us a Desert, BCCB 10/20), but this literary left turn exemplifies the 
author’s talent across genres and styles. Colloquial, quippy third-person narration 
gets a lift from Héctor’s dry sense of humor and a multitude of Spanish conversa-
tions thrown in. Along with Héctor’s bilingual family, the full cast is refreshingly 
and effortlessly diverse, with Black teachers, Muslim new friends, and biracial main 
characters (Juliana and Sal are Black/Chinese and white/Filipino respectively). With 
its modern dialogue, engaging cast, and painfully real depictions of bullying, this 
middle-grade debut is written with an expert hand. Pair with Weeks’ Save Me a 
Seat (BCCB 4/16) for further discussion of bullying and racism or Grehan’s The 
Deepest Breath (BCCB 3/21) to round out conversations on queerness, anxiety, 
and familial support.  KP
pAlAcio, r. J. Pony. Knopf, 2021 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780553508123 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780553508116 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780553508130 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
It’s 1860, and Silas lives an isolated life in rural Ohio with his photographer father 
September 2021 • 27
and the company of a devoted ghost, Mittenwool. Their peace is shattered when a 
gang of criminals turns up, insisting that Silas’ father is key to their counterfeiting 
operation and kidnapping him. Twelve-year-old Silas mounts up on one of their lost 
horses, a beautiful bald-faced Arabian he calls Pony, and rides after the men to save 
his father, first joining forces with a cantankerous federal marshal he meets along 
the way, then enlisting the help of a sheriff and deputy in a nearby town. Will Silas 
manage to save his father, and will he learn the truth about family secrets? There’s 
an element of Curtis’ Journey of Little Charlie (BCCB 1/18) and Timberlake’s One 
Came Home (BCCB 2/13) in this story of a nineteenth-century kid who’s suddenly 
thrust into seeing more of the world than he’s known, and there’s plenty of plausible 
period detail about Silas and his dad’s rich autodidactic reading and explorations 
in chemistry and technology. The mystical elements of his lifelong friendship with 
Mittenwool, his ability to see other ghosts, and his connection with elegant Pony 
add an otherworldly sheen; while Mittenwool is sometimes a too-convenient device 
for rendering Silas nearly omniscient, he’s also a continued bridge to the other 
side in a narrative wherein the dead feature as strongly as the living. Readers will 
especially appreciate the following of a variety of threads to satisfying conclusions 
and Silas’ linking of the past to a promising future. The author’s note gives more 
information and resources about relevant history.  DS
pAnin, cylA Stalking Shadows. Amulet/Abrams, 2021 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419752650 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781647002121 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Once a month, when her younger sister, Ama, turns into a literal beast, Marie scent-
marks an inconspicuous victim for her sister to kill and eat: after all, nobody will 
pay much attention to a missing vagrant or drunkard in their eighteenth-century 
French town. Still, Ama’s bloodthirsty transformations endanger the townsfolk’s 
lives and her family’s reputation, and when a local child is killed, Marie fears that 
Ama is losing herself to the beast. Certain that the explanation and cure for Ama’s 
curse lies within the local manor house, where Ama went to work off their father’s 
debts and came back with a beastly form and appetite, Marie volunteers her knowl-
edge of herbs to help the young lord’s sickly little brother and proceeds to snoop. 
The mystery falls flat as Marie’s snooping doesn’t yield any useful answers; most of 
her assumptions conveniently turn out to be correct, while neglected plot threads 
dangle for long stretches of time. Things gain some oomph at the end, though, as 
unsuspected dimensions of the curse come to light and enable Marie to expose the 
true instigator behind the murders. The premise is a diverting twist on beastly fairy 
tales, and though the descriptive prose and distracted pacing sometimes hinder the 
action, readers looking for sisterly bonds, big spooky houses, and girls with inner 
(and outer) beasts will find them here.  FHK
pAulsen, gAry How to Train Your Dad. Farrar, 2021 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780374314170 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780374314187 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Carl realizes he’s blessed with a really good single father—attentive, ethical, engaged 
in his community, and in his way a solid and reliable provider even though what 
28 • The Bulletin
he provides is a trailer set in an industrial zone, food either homegrown or salvaged 
from dumpsters, and clothing sourced from garage sales or deep discount bulk buys. 
Dad’s commitment to cheap is based on firm philosophical belief that barter is the 
best form of commerce, and Carl respects that. As a boy on the cusp of his teens 
hoping to catch the approving eye of classmate Peg, though, Carl knows that rid-
ing a homemade recumbent bike to school and wearing secondhand pink overalls 
embroidered with cute sayings isn’t going to get the job done. Inspired by a puppy-
training pamphlet in a bag of kibble, Carl decides that a system of gentle negative 
and subtle positive reinforcement will steer his dad away from the dumpster and 
garage sale circuit and into the world of cash transactions and middle-school-worthy 
goods. Carl’s recount of the training program, its fallout on his best friend Pooder 
and skunk-shredding pet pit bull Carol, and its satisfying if unpredicted conclusion 
are relayed here in often hilarious detail via episodes that ring like updated Jean 
Shepherd. Breezy and light, with a grounding touch of tenderness, this is both an 
entertaining solo read and a solid suggestion for family sharing.  EB
pett, mArK I Eat Poop: A Dung Beetle Story; written and illus. by Mark 
Pett. Roaring Brook, 2021 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250785633 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
“It’s hard being the only dung beetle in the entire school,” says Dougie, who heads 
off to school (after a tasty breakfast of Poop Tarts) with a poop sandwich that he 
has to hide to avoid teasing from his surprisingly judgy creepy-crawly classmates. 
He gets messages of dung beetle pride at home, but “All I know is, I go through 
more mouthwash than any kid should.” Dougie’s ball-rolling skills bring him to 
the attention of the popular kids when he saves a rollaway Ronald Roly-Poly, but 
what will he do when they push him to bully his old friend Herman Housefly? 
Fortunately, what he does is come clean—well, the opposite of clean—about his 
poop eating, inspiring some comic candor from his schoolmates (“So? My mom ate 
my dad,” says a praying mantis). While the social dynamics don’t bear too much 
thinking about, Dougie’s school is a refreshing change from cuddly mammal-
focused academies, and kids with a taste for grossout humor will adore the details 
of his lunch and his classmates’ biologically accurate revelations. Digital art has 
the softness of watercolor and colored pencil, which contrasts effectively with the 
visual cacophony and tempting detail of a schoolful of weird creatures. Overall, 
it’s a cheerfully irreverent intro to enjoyably extreme biology that may serve kids 
not yet ready for Davies’ Poop (BCCB 11/04). There are no factual notes, but the 
endpaper class pictures have truthful, breezily stated captions that may entice view-
ers to dig deeper into the entomology.  DS
phelAn, mAtt Sweater Weather; written and illus. by Matt Phelan. Greenwil-
low, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062934147 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 2-5 yrs
The autumn colors are here and Papa Bear wants to take his cadre of cubs out to 
enjoy the crisp weather. Since sweaters are a must, he sends the group upstairs to 
get dressed, but soon he hears thuds and thumps from above, clear signs the little 
ones are doing anything but prepping to head outside. The chaos has only begun, 
September 2021 • 29
though: several cubs don’t like the color of their sweaters; one has managed to tie 
the sleeves together with head firmly stuck inside; another needs to sneeze; and the 
littlest one is trailing along with a sweater that is quickly unraveling. By the time 
Papa Bear has them all ready to go, it’s nighttime. Thankfully, a shooting star makes 
the efforts worth it . . . but now it’s time to head back in and get into pajamas. 
Caretakers will ruefully recognize the helter-skelter lawlessness that marks nearly all 
attempts to get a group of kiddos ready to go somewhere, and youngsters too will 
recognize the mischievous mayhem that they most certainly enjoy more than their 
grownups. Phelan’s scribbly linework and fluid figures are perfect for the dynamic 
disarray; the contained opening scenes are anchored by Papa Bear’s oversized solid 
presence but soon are overtaken by the little cubs’ constant motion. The “Sweaters 
on!” refrain makes this a delight for a call and response storytime, so be sure to 
have it on hand as soon as the leaves start falling and sweater weather arrives.  KQG
rhodes, JeWell pArKer Paradise on Fire. Little, 2021 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316493833 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780316493840 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
After her parents’ death in an apartment fire, Adaugo, known as Addy, is hypervigi-
lant about mapping her surroundings and identifying escape routes (“No matter 
what: Escape. Survive”). Now she’s thousands of miles away from her Bronx home 
in a summer program called Wilderness Adventures, which allows Addy’s group of 
urban Black kids to experience the California wild. Addy takes to the wilderness 
like a duck to water, reveling in exploring her surroundings and cartographically 
comprehending the untamed country around her. When a group camping trip turns 
into a frenzied flight from a wildfire, will Addy’s skills save her and her new friends? 
Rhodes has a knack for disaster stories with real-life implications, and Addy is an 
original character whose focus on control is plausible and plausibly advantageous 
in this very different milieu. The kids are a reasonably individuated bunch, and 
it’s a nice touch that Addy’s abilities are respected by most of the group when the 
time comes. The escape itself is harrowing, and the book doesn’t pull any punches 
about the price and fury of wildfires. Addy’s (and the author’s) clear love of the 
natural world shines throughout, balancing the pounding adventure with respect 
and appreciation. Readers may not want to race a wildfire, but they’ll definitely 
long to hit the hills with Addy. Rhodes appends a detailed note about wildfires, 
climate change, and systemic racism’s effects on minority access to nature.  DS
riverA, lilliAm We Light Up the Sky. Bloomsbury, 2021 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781547603763 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781547603770 $12.59
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Return to normal life in post-pandemic Los Angeles is still a struggle for Latinx 
high schoolers Pedro, Luna, and Rafa. Pedro is using ebullience and his growing 
Instagram following to mask deep anger and resentment; Luna’s struggling to keep 
ties with popular friends after the loss of a favorite cousin to the virus; and Rafa, 
friendless, homeless, and hungry, is just trying to keep things together. When a 
Visitor from another world—taking the form of Luna’s dead cousin Tasha—sets the 
stage for a humanity-ending invasion, these three near-strangers quickly become 
30 • The Bulletin
fast friends and more as they fight to survive while the Visitor wreaks havoc with 
earthquakes, dirt storms, and monstrous wild animals that rip victims into pieces. 
Third-person narration keeps the focus on the action, shifting at random between 
the three main characters, minor bit players, occasional victims of violence, and an 
omniscient narrator who hints at events to come. More than just a riveting alien-
invasion story, though, this novel deftly weaves commentary on colonialism, police 
violence, and racial injustice into the chaos, leaving the main characters to wonder 
if the only people worth saving may be one another. Early threads of friendship, 
meanwhile, bind the story, ultimately becoming the trio’s salvation. The novel’s end 
chooses hope and a moment of calm over easy human victory and aliens routed, 
so hand this to readers who value action-packed yet thought-provoking books that 
leave them to imagine what happens next.  AM
ross, Joel Alley & Rex; illus. by Nicole Miles. Atheneum, 2021 [144p] (Al-
ley & Rex)
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534495432 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534495463 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Alex Katz, inevitably nicknamed Alley at school, is an infamous prankster, but as 
his sixth-grade year commences, his parents and the school principal have warned 
him that his antics have come to an end, or else he will be transferred to the 
dreaded Steggles Academy. Alley’s one chance to demonstrate requisite character 
improvement is to get an A on the upcoming science assessment, and to help him 
accomplish this first-in-a-lifetime feat, he’s been assigned a HOST (Helping Other 
Students Thrive) peer mentor. It’s hard to see Rexinald Wrigley as a peer, however, 
given that he’s a fourth grader who wears a bunny suit to school, carries a briefcase, 
and never uses a monosyllabic word when a longer term’s available. Determined to 
fulfill his assignment, however, Rex covers for Alley when he pursues his alternate 
plan to ace science class by tracking down the legendary answer key rumored to be 
locked down in a faculty cabinet. Ross marks time en route to the satisfactory but 
completely predictable ending with Alley’s grousing and not-so-humble bragging, 
while Miles delivers comic book–style vignettes that serve as welcome placeholders 
for kids breaking in to longer novels. This lacks the punch and structural cleverness 
of Barrows’ The Best of Iggy (BCCB 12/19), but it will elicit plenty of chuckles, and 
it all but promises a Rex-focused sequel.  EB
russo, mArisABinA Why Is Everybody Yelling?: Growing Up in My Immigrant Fam-
ily; written and illus. by Marisabina Russo. Farrar, 2021 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780374303839 $19.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 6-10
Families are, admittedly, complicated, but in this graphic novel account of her youth 
from First Communion to the start of college, Russo reveals just how confusing 
family can be for a child whose relatives keep peeling back layers of history and 
relationships that make her uncertain of her own identity. Her first shock arrives 
when, as a devoutly Catholic child, who in 1957 confidently spouts catechism 
and plans to become a nun (or possibly a saint, maybe both), she learns that her 
mother is a convert from Judaism, which, by tradition, makes Marisabina Jewish 
too. This, she learns over the years, is connected to her mother’s experience in World 
September 2021 • 31
War II Europe, when she fled to supposed safety in Italy with her fiancé, had two 
children, served in the Resistance, lost her husband, was shot by Nazis, and made 
her way to America where she reunited with family who survived death camps. 
That begins to explain the tensions between her mother and aunts, her mother’s 
amorous visits with old European “friends,” and the competing roles Christianity 
and Judaism play in the household. What about Marisabina’s own father, who lives 
in Switzerland and exhorts her to be a model child, but otherwise pays her little 
heed? Readers may need a scorecard to sort the tangled domestic strands, and that, 
of course, is very much the point; it’s ably conveyed through the many frames that 
capture heated, hurtful exchanges, delivered with practiced nonchalance at family 
gatherings, by adults who will not, or cannot, abandon their dysfunctional com-
munication. As readers observe Russo’s ten-year journey to young adulthood, they 
may admire her love for her querulous mother, but they’ll be mighty glad to see 
her finally move out and on.  EB
sAlA, lAurenne Mi Casa Is My Home; illus. by Zara González Hoang. Candle-
wick, 2021 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536209433 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781536225600 $16.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
“Bienvenidos a mi casa,” says narrator Lucía to viewers. “I live here with my big, 
loud, beautiful familia. I’m going to show you around.” Almost all of the tour 
couches locations in terms of family—the door is where “mis primos” and “los 
primos de mis primos” enter, the living room is where she builds forts to keep out 
her brothers and beats her father at cards, the kitchen is where her mother makes 
miracles and her grandfather creates holiday feasts. Finally she shows her own room 
and bed, where she’s tucked in at night with her stuffed animals by her loving par-
ents. While the text is more list than story, there’s energy enough in the events in 
different parts of the house and yard to create interest, and the friendly Spanglish 
(either understandable to or reasonably guessable by non-Spanish speakers) has an 
inviting immediacy. The colored-pencil and watercolor art (touched with “digital 
magic”) is naïve and childlike in drafting, with lots of warmth in the family’s faces 
and details of daily life and an authentic variety of skin tones among them. Use this 
to prompt discussion among listeners about their own homes, or alongside Bing-
ham’s Soul Food Sunday (reviewed above) as a celebration of home and family.  DS
schmidt, g. z. The Dreamweavers. Holiday House, 2021 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823444236 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780823450251 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
During the Ming Dynasty, twelve-year-old twins Mei and Yun live with their 
grandfather in a small Chinese village. When the prince hears word of Grandpa’s 
delicious mooncakes, he visits for the Mid-Autumn festival; alarmingly, the 
mooncakes’ “secret ingredient” has everyone choking, and Mei and Yun’s guard-
ian is taken away to the imperial city to be tried. When the village is struck by an 
unseasonable snowstorm that kills its livestock and leaves its residents isolated, Mei 
and Yun set out to the City of Ashes, a place cursed by a woman named Lotus, 
whose lover was framed for treason by the Noble General. There they make a deal 
32 • The Bulletin
with the woman to clear her lover’s name and reputation in exchange for the lift-
ing of the curse, and the Jade Rabbit tells them they’re dreamweavers (the secret 
ingredient in the mooncakes is accidentally a nightmare) and transports them to 
the palace, where they pretend to be servants and plan to clear the name of their 
grandfather. Schmidt creates a beautifully folkloric atmosphere imbued with ele-
ments of Chinese culture and myth. Mei, with her gut instinct and fighting skills, 
and Yun, with his nearsightedness and quick intelligence, make for a compelling 
lead duo, with plenty of opportunity for comedy and plot-propelling revelations. 
An author’s note explains cultural references and folkloric icons, such as the Jade 
Rabbit and Monkey King.  NB
schneider, roByn The Other Merlin. Viking, 2021 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593351024 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593351048 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When Emry Merlin’s twin brother is summoned to Camelot’s court, she goes in his 
stead; she has superior magic and he has knocked himself out with a misfired spell. 
Meanwhile, bookish nineteen-year-old Arthur Pendragon, the barely legitimate son 
of the king, is still adjusting to the responsibilities of one day being the king to unite 
England (“A united kingdom? The thought, although far-fetched, was intriguing”) 
after pulling the sword from the stone on a dare. Emry must maintain her disguise 
as her brother as she navigates court politics, researches why her father, the previous 
wizard apprentice, went missing years ago, and possibly falls head-over-heels for the 
once and future king. Schneider’s take on Arthurian legend is full of hijinks and 
cheesily indulgent moments (Emry gets to dress feminine for a dance and impress 
everyone with her hotness), and the sense of humor running throughout the novel 
is reminiscent of BBC’s Merlin. A delightfully normalized queer cast will appeal 
to many—Lancelot likes men, Emry likes people regardless of gender, and Arthur 
likes Emry dressed as a boy—and the anachronistic attitude toward characters, 
references, and events culminates in an excitingly unpredictable hodgepodge of 
the Matter of Britain. Newcomers to Arthurian lore have no obligation to learn 
precedents here, but established readers will find in this a light-hearted take on the 
legend with a heart-pounding romance.  NB
selznicK, BriAn Kaleidoscope; written and illus. by Brian Selznick. Scholastic, 
2021 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781338777246 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781338777253 $19.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
The impressive Selznick returns with this poignant novel about two people who 
are connected across time and space, through loss of each other and beyond. The 
vague description mirrors the intentionally obscure text—there’s a clear sense here 
that it’s up to the reader to decide exactly what the stories are meant to be, whether 
taken separately or together, whether interpreted literally or as symbolic gestures, 
and whether they are ultimately hopeful or tragic. Selznick’s signature mix of 
blended storytelling, in which text and illustrations work sometimes in solidarity 
and sometimes in sequence to move the story forward, is used to brilliant effect 
here, as slices of a whole are doled out as if one is slowly turning a kaleidoscope: 
September 2021 • 33
elements come together in different ways as they are shaken up and re-viewed. It’s 
an intriguingly challenging experience, but thoughtful readers, particularly those 
who have experienced the feeling of hollowness when someone beloved is suddenly 
gone, will find themselves remembering and reinterpreting this collection long 
after they finish it.  AS
sheinKin, steve Fallout: Spies, Superbombs, and the Ultimate Cold War Show-
down. Roaring Brook, 2021 [352p] illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250149015 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250149022 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 6-12
“Of course, a species that is smart enough to pack the power of the stars inside a 
bomb is also smart enough to avoid fighting a war with such weapons. Right?” 
Readers may think carefully before answering Sheinkin’s rhetorical query after rac-
ing—yes, “racing” describes the likely pace of perusal for this title—through this 
chilling account of events that nearly precluded young adult readers’ very existence. 
The post–World War II nuclear arms race, the alignment of Cuba and the Soviet 
Union, the humiliating (at least for the U.S.) Bay of Pigs invasion, and the Cuban 
Missile Crisis are made vivid and immediate here, with attention to the political 
machinations that were deftly hidden from view of an American public still high 
on U.S. superpower status and naïvely trustful that drills and backyard bunkers 
could manage any brief inconveniences from nuclear attack. Sheinkin reprises his 
role as masterful, ever-so-wry storyteller, winking his audience into complicity in his 
critique of boneheaded brinksmanship: “In 1962, most non-scientists knew nothing 
of the possibility of nuclear winter. But that really didn’t matter. The dinosaurs had 
never heard of asteroids, either.” History buffs will recognize many old friends (and 
enemies) here in spies and scientists and suits who appeared in Sheinkin’s Bomb 
(BCCB 10/12) and laid the groundwork for coming crises. However, it’s hubris 
and ignorance and blunders, which Sheinkin polishes to narrative perfection, that 
drive this tale of humans’ darkest hour and whisper the insidious suggestion that 
we don’t know much about what goes on behind the scene in this moment. Source 
notes, extensive bibliographies, and an index are included.  EB
stroud, JonAthAn The Outlaws Scarlett and Browne. Knopf, 2021 [432p] 
(Scarlett and Browne)
Library ed. IBSN 9780593430378 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593430361 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593430385 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 6-10
When Scarlett McCain robs a bank, she easily outruns the lawmen who hesitate to 
follow her into the wilds, where the Tainted indulge their craving for human flesh. 
This time, they’re after her in hotter than normal pursuit, and she’s encumbered by 
Albert Browne, a dreamy, clumsy naïf she reluctantly rescued from an overturned 
bus. It’s not Scarlett they’re after this time, though; it’s Albert, who has escaped 
from the Stonemoor, where evil Dr. Calloway conducts torturous experiments 
on youngsters with unusual powers ripe for exploiting. Thus begins a twelve-day 
odyssey, much of it spent on a raft piloted by an unamiable but nonetheless protec-
tive old man and his mute young granddaughter, as Scarlett and Albert head for 
34 • The Bulletin
the safety of the Free Isles, where all outcasts are reputedly welcome. Thrills and 
wisecrackery run neck and neck as Stroud establishes a sturdy cast of characters 
and lays the foundation of a post-apocalyptic British world in preparation for what 
promises to be a rousing series. Scarlett has street smarts and physicality, Albert has 
poorly controlled explosive power, and what’s left of Britain is variously overgrown, 
sunken, lawless, beset by cannibals, or repressed by Faith Houses that enforce social 
order—just the kind of setting where adventure fantasy thrives. Add the razor-sharp 
banter that delights readers of the Bartimaeus series (The Amulet of Samarkand, 
BCCB 2/11, et al), and you can lay the smart money on another Stroud winner.  EB
sWiFt, BellA The Pug Who Wanted to Be a Unicorn. Aladdin, 2021 [160p] 
illus. (The Pug Who Wanted to Be)
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534486799 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9781534486782 $7.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534486805 $7.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Peggy the pug puppy doesn’t fare well in her first home and ends up at a shelter, 
where a family agrees to foster the pup over the Christmas holiday to give the 
shelter—and Peggy—a little relief. Peggy quickly falls in love with the family, 
and the family, especially oldest daughter Chloe, seems similarly enraptured, but 
Peggy’s hopes of a forever home are dashed when she realizes that Chloe doesn’t 
really want a dog but a unicorn, like the one in her favorite television show. Peggy 
tries everything she can think of to transform into the majestic creature, but she’s 
still just a little pug. Will her wish to Santa (and the snow-unicorn she helps the 
children build) come true? This UK import is the first in a series, following Peggy 
and her (spoiler alert) new family as she hopes to be a reindeer, pumpkin, bunny, 
you name it. Originally published in 2018, Peggy’s adventures will have anglophiles, 
dog lovers, graduates of Curious George, and fans of Mercy Watson begging for the 
rest of the series. Interspersed with tooth-achingly sweet doodles, Swift’s prose goes 
down easy, with enough new vocabulary (and British idioms) to challenge readers 
and spark mini-language arts lessons. Add this to your chapter book collection for 
a fresh, new face in the good-but-flawed pet genre.  KP
tAmAKi, mAriKo I Am Not Starfire; illus. by Yoshi Yoshitani. DC Comics, 
2021 [184p]
Paper ed. ISBN 9781779501264 $16.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 8-10
Mandy has a lot to say in this graphic novel about what it’s like to grow up under 
the radiant, mega-girly, hyper-glow shadow of her superhero mom, Starfire, most 
of which can be summed up into one phrase: it sucks. Her mom’s gone a lot, 
people are nice to Mandy just to get access, and Mandy doesn’t even have powers 
of her own. She rebels in very human ways to distinguish herself from her alien 
mother, embracing goth colors, refusing to try anything new so that she never has 
to fail at anything, and isolating herself from others. Fans of DC comics’ Starfire 
character will likely be particularly excited for the brief glimpses of the other Titans 
(it is especially fun to peer at the illustrations and wonder whether the unnamed 
biological father is one of them), though newbies will also appreciate this stand-
alone reimagining of her life. Of course there are dramatic scenarios, battles, and 
September 2021 • 35
comic book–style revelations, and those are all terrific, but the core of this graphic 
novel is about a mom and daughter who used to be closer than close but now find 
themselves longing for each other across a gulf of adolescence, insecurities, and 
the complications of fame. Yoshitani’s illustrations are lush and vibrant, contrast-
ing the resplendence of Starfire’s costume (and whole self) with the goth palette 
that Mandy has chosen. Body posture, glances, and carefully drawn out silences 
enhance the text, a credit to Yoshitani’s masterful choices on how to best capture 
the vibe. A confection of a budding romance with a super cute and genuinely nice 
girl, cool superhero references, and relatable family drama: what’s not to love?  AS
todd, trAci n. Nina: A Story of Nina Simone; illus. by Christian Robinson. Put-
nam, 2021 [56p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781524737283 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781524737290 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 7-10 yrs
Eunice Kathleen Waymon was a musical prodigy, playing Daddy’s “good-time jazz” 
on the old upright, then switching seamlessly to church music when her mother, a 
minister, came through the door. Such a talent couldn’t be ignored, even in 1930s 
North Carolina; although Mama’s white employer wouldn’t allow her son to play 
with a little Black girl, she nonetheless arranged for Eunice’s lessons, and by the 
end of high school Eunice, enraptured by Bach, was on her way to Juilliard. After 
rejection by the Curtis Institute, likely due to racial bias, a discouraged Eunice 
took her music down a new path—playing in noisy clubs, changing her name to 
Nina Simone to keep Mama from discovering her night job, and discovering her 
voice as a potent instrument for razor-edged social critique. Todd moves effortlessly 
between silky narration marked by subtle wordplay (“But fame was still new to 
Nina. She worked so hard to keep that spotlight lit, and she was exhausted. How 
could she join a movement when she could barely move?”), and pointed references 
to Simone’s musical activism (“But Nina was done being polite. As far as she could 
tell, politeness had gotten her people nothing”). Robinson’s collage compositions 
convey critical civil rights context in scenes playing out atop Simone’s grand piano 
strings, often fiery images that contrast with the pictures of Simone’s childhood 
origin story and her front-stage panache. Several shoutouts to specific songs are 
embedded in the text, but the generous endnotes that supplement the biography 
do not supply titles or recordings. That’s a missed opportunity, but nothing that 
will stop kids from pawing through grandparents’ LPs to hear the real deal.  EB
toKudA-hAll, mAggie Squad; illus. by Lisa Sterle. Greenwillow, 2021 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062943156 $21.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780062943149 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062943163 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Becca’s first day as a junior at Piedmont High goes surprisingly well after golden 
girl Marley invites her to sit with the popular girls. Soon she’s going shopping and 
partying with Marley, Arianna, and Amanda, but she doesn’t feel like one of the 
pack—until some creepster dude tries to assault her and the girls show up, turn into 
wolves, tear him to pieces, and invite Becca to become one of them. Hunting and 
violently killing predator guys is intoxicating, and Becca is quickly drunk on power, 
36 • The Bulletin
but the girls get too cocky and leave behind some messes that can directly tie them 
to the victims. Now they’re trying to evade the authorities, find their next meal, 
and contend with an alpha female from another pack. This feminist vigilante tale is 
made especially entertaining by the graphic novel’s contrast of bubbly, Barbie-esque 
illustrations with nightmarish scenes of blood and guts, and the transformations of 
the girls’ naked, model-thin bodies and picture-perfect faces into snarling, sinewy 
monsters is a compelling visual metaphor for female rage. Becca’s bland character 
is less interesting than that of the complicated pack leader, Arianna, but a group of 
teen girls serving up justice to bad guys is perennially satisfying, and the love story 
between Becca and Marley might be sweet enough to carry even the squeamish 
through the carnage.  KQG
venKAtrAmAn, pAdmA Born Behind Bars. Paulsen/Penguin, 2021 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593112472 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593112489 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7
Nine-year-old Kabir has only known life in a Chennai jail cell; his low-caste Hindu 
mother was pregnant by Kabir’s Muslim father when she was sent to the women’s 
prison after being blamed for a theft in the home where she worked. Now Kabir 
has aged out of his stay, and he’s released into the care of his father’s cousin; when 
it turns out the man is no relative but an opportunist selling Kabir into labor, the 
boy flees. He fortunately makes a friend of Rani, an independent young Kurava 
(Roma) girl who escaped an arranged marriage, and the two decide to journey to 
the city of Bengaluru in hope of finding his father’s family there. Venkatraman, 
in a story based on a real child, illuminates some harsh realities of life in an India 
where the lower-caste are oppressed with impunity and where sectarian hatred and 
violence can make life dangerous. Her characterization is solid, especially of the 
women in the jail cell and of bold Rani, but also of Kabir’s newly found grandpar-
ents, softened after severity that drove away their now-late son. Kabir’s and Rani’s 
sweeping good luck, however, seems to insulate them from the threats around them, 
and the bountiful good outcomes for just about everybody undercut the realism 
with a fairy-tale gloss. It’s still a readable tale of two plucky kids battling against 
the odds, though, and justice-minded youngsters will especially rejoice in Kabir’s 
putting wrongs to rights. Venkatraman includes a note about her research.  DS
vitAlis, JessicA The Wolf’s Curse. Greenwillow, 2021 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063067417 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063067431 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Gauge has spent the last five years hidden from his fellow villagers, 
because the Lord Mayor Vulpine convinced the residents that the boy is a Voyant, 
who can compel an invisible wolf to kill (the explanation for his wife’s curious 
death). The Great White Wolf is in fact real; she’s invisible to all but Gauge; her 
duty, into which she was tricked centuries ago, is to collect dead souls; and she’s 
searching for someone to take her place. A rare encounter with a sensible family 
in the panic-stricken village provides Gauge with new companion in Roux, whose 
father is soon collected by the wolf, and together the two work to prove Gauge’s 
innocence. This extraordinary fantasy debut is told from the perspective of the 
September 2021 • 37
Wolf herself, a woman who became the soul courier after the devastating loss of her 
daughter, and while Gauge is a sympathetic hero, the narrator steals the show with 
her witty and prickly sidebar commentary. The story is an emotional rollercoaster 
with all the feels, and Gauge is surrounded by characters who cling to superstitions 
tighter than morals (and there’s a tasty revelation waiting about the Lord Mayor). 
Readers will be relieved that order is eventually restored and there is a glimpse 
into the future where the wolf’s curse transforms into a beautiful, selfless gift.  QB
WAde, Jess Nano: The Spectacular Science of the Very (Very) Small; illus. by Melissa 
Castrillón. Candlewick, 2021 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536217667 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 5-8 yrs
In this exceptionally well-organized and smoothly narrated discussion, Wade 
proceeds from familiar around-the-house scale, down to the molecular level, and 
then to the mind-bending ultrathin molecular level of nanomaterials, all in terms 
elementary schoolers can understand and in conceptual steps they can follow. A 
house cutaway highlights familiar possessions, the materials they’re made of, and 
properties of those materials. A paper book is light and flexible, whereas a stone 
book would be too heavy, a glass book too delicate, and a chocolate book too, well, 
prone to melt. Scientists, she explains, learn about these properties by studying 
how atoms (identified as elements) connect to form molecules. Then, by focusing 
on carbon and its ability to be peeled down to single-atom thick layers, materials 
with amazing properties can be manipulated into existence in a lab. Finally comes a 
litany of engineering wonders from nanomaterial: lighter-weight aircraft that reduce 
pollution, self-cleaning windows, thinner phones with brighter color displays, ac-
curate delivery of medicines within a human body, and perhaps in the near future, 
a sieve with nano-sized holes that can filter seawater to make it drinkable. Castril-
lón’s digitally colored pencil work sets scientific discovery into a visual world of 
imaginative fantasy-scapes and visual metaphors, with graphic insets harmoniously 
integrated into the compositions. With end matter including information about 
scientists who help develop nanomaterials and the research tools they use, as well 
as an index, this title will be a treasure of a group read for teachers and students 
with minds wide open.  EB
Wells, rosemAry The Welcome Chair; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. Wiseman/Simon, 
2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534429772 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534429789 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
In the early nineteenth century, Sam Seigbert, Rosemary Wells’ great-great-
grandfather, leaves Bavaria for New York, finding a solid job there as carpenter and 
bookkeeper there for the Hinzler family housewright business. When Mrs. Hinzler 
has a baby, Sam crafts a beautiful wooden rocking chair. The chair goes with Sam 
and the Hinzlers to the Midwest, where Sam meets and marries Ruth, and where 
the chair rocks her and their children. It goes back east when Sam’s daughter mar-
ries, and then it’s given to the Irish seamstress of the household. Eventually it’s 
donated to the Salvation Army, where it’s found and renovated by nuns escaping 
the Dominican Republic under Trujillo. After them, the chair goes to a few more 
38 • The Bulletin
American families, each time adding a new line to the many-languaged words of 
welcome carved on its back. There’s a folkloric flavor to this tale of an object that 
welcomes a sequence of North American newbies; while the chair’s trajectory is a 
contrivance, it works as a metaphor for the commonality of immigrant experience 
and needs. Pinkney’s familiar character-rich line and watercolor art moves easily 
through the decades and from city to country; the deep tan of the chair, often set 
off against slightly paler backgrounds, makes it easy to spot for kids following the 
visual thread. This could be a great prompt for kids to ask at home about their 
own family heirlooms or to create stories about the reclaimed objects in their lives. 
A note from the author about her family story and support of immigration and a 
note from the artist about his process are included.  DS
Wilder, dericK The Longest Letsgoboy; illus. by Cátia Chien. Chronicle, 
2021 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781452177168 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781797201139 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 5-8 yrs
In Joycean narration, an old dog describes a glorious woodsy outing with his “Little,” 
wherein “I am an awwwpuppy again . . . runjumping and tailchasing, yipyapping 
constantly at branchjumpers, leglifting endlessly on tallsticks.” At the end of the 
long, happily eventful day, the pooch curls up for the last time, knowing Little 
“will be okay, and I am ready.” Then he’s looking down on Little and “her pack 
of twopaws,” watching the seasons go by until spring, when Little emerges from 
the house on a letsgoboy with a bouncy new awwwpuppy; she looks up at the sky 
and “gives me a happyface. I wigglewag. She is my foreverfriend.” This is a perfect 
storm of tearjerk, with its supple poetry, canine narration, and picture of loss, but 
there’s a reassuring message about what we love remaining a part of us forever that 
youngsters may find nearly as bolstering as the possibility of a new puppy. Chien’s 
mixed-media illustrations incorporate scratchy, childlike strokes in colored-pencil 
textures; while there’s still plenty of energy in the portraiture, the gentle haze tact-
fully distances the events, and an emphasis on sunny tones keeps the mood upbeat 
even amid the sadness. This will be a spiritual complement to the more concrete 
take on pet succession of Hest’s My Old Pal, Oscar (BCCB 6/16).  DS
yoon, helen Off-Limits; written and illus. by Helen Yoon. Candlewick, 
2021 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536207316 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-7 yrs
When Dad posts the “Off-Limits” sign on his office door, it naturally motivates 
our pigtailed protagonist to check the place out. She starts off innocently with just 
one little peek, but the tape is there, just waiting to be unrolled; the paper clips 
are prime material for chain making; the legal pads would be far better as banners; 
and the sticky notes—oh, the colors. Soon our resourceful crafter has transformed 
the drab office into a wonder world of office supplies made anew, but it’s change 
that won’t be easily hidden from Dad. Yoon’s digital art is a riot of movement and 
color as the sturdy lines of an orderly desk give way to arcs, circles, and curlicues, 
but interestingly the final makeover of the room still holds a fair amount of angled 
geometry and balance, making the little girl’s final product a work of art and not 
September 2021 • 39
just a mess to be tidied. Perspective is also cleverly utilized, as a bird’s-eye view of 
our spinning kiddo lends joyful verve to her exclamations, “Paper clips and binder 
clips! Binder clips and paper clips!” After some short, one-sided discussion with 
familiar office accoutrements (“Why, hello, Mr. Lamp!”), the text is rather mini-
mal, relying on the dynamic illustrations to convey emotion—which they do with 
aplomb. For many families, the home office/classroom has become a staple in the 
house this past year, and this is a lovely reminder that it doesn’t have to always be 
used for work and no play.  KQG
40 • The Bulletin
Abuse–fiction: Levithan
Activism: Todd
Activism–stories: Campbell
ADVENTURE: Becker; Durham; 
Garber; Palacio; Rhodes; Schmidt; 
Africa–stories: Khan
African Americans: Magoon; Todd
African Americans–fiction: Rhodes
African Americans–stories: Neil
Aliens–fiction: Rivera
Animals–fiction: Little Badger
Art and artists: Mack
Asian Americans–fiction: Khor
Bears–stories: Phelan
Behavior–stories: Neil
Bigotry–fiction: Faruqi
BIOGRAPHIES: Demetrios; Green-
field; Mack; Mahin; Nelson; Russo; 
Todd
Biology: McAnulty
Black people–stories: Khan
Bullies–fiction: Oshiro
Camps and camping–fiction: Rhodes
Chemistry: Wade
Christmas–fiction: Swift
Climate change–fiction: Little Badger
Clothing–stories: Phelan
Codes: Greenfield
Cold War: Sheinkin
Counseling: Campbell
Crime and criminals–fiction: Garber; 
Herrman; Kemmerer; Palacio; 
Panin; Stroud; Tokuda-Hall
Cuba–stories: Engle
Current events: Campbell
Death–fiction: Justus; Lee
Death–stories: Wilder
Deserts–stories: Morales
Disasters–fiction: Rhodes
Dogs–fiction: Swift
Dogs–stories: Wilder
Emotions: Neil
Engineering: Wade
Environmental studies: Applegate
Ethics and values: Appert; Campbell; 
Clipstone; Faruqi; Kemmerer; 
Little Badger; Marks; Rivera; Ven-
katraman
Families: Russo
Families–fiction: Isler; Marks; Mills; 
Bingham; Sala
FANTASY: Applegate; Becker; Clip-
stone; DiCamillo; Durham; Gar-
ber; Hartl; Hollowell; Hutchinson; 
Justus; Kemmerer; Little Badger; 
Oshiro; Panin; Schmidt; Schneider; 
Tamaki; Tokuda-Hall; Vitalis
Fates–fiction: Garber
Fathers–fiction: Paulsen
Fire–fiction: Rhodes
FOLK-LIKE TALES: Gauld; Haugh-
ton
Folklore, Chinese: Schmidt
Food and eating–stories: Bingham; 
Haughton
Friends–fiction: Hartl; Madan; Marks; 
Mills; Venkatraman
Ghosts–fiction: Currie; Palacio
Grandparents–stories: Engle
GRAPHIC NOVELS: Frasier; Justus; 
Khor; Tamaki; Tokuda-Hall
Grief–fiction: Isler; Lee
Grief–stories: Wilder
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
September 2021 • 41
HISTORICAL FICTION: Dobbs; 
Herrman; Khor; Palacio;Wells
History, U.S.: Magoon; Nelson
History, world: Sheinkin
HORROR: Currie; Herrman; Hol-
lowell; Laurin; Panin; Stroud; 
Tokuda-Hall
Horses–fiction: Palacio
Houses–stories: Sala
HUMOR: Haughton; Justus; Khan; 
Madan; McAnulty; Paulsen; Pett; 
Phelan; Ross; Swift; Vitalis; Yoon
Identity: Russo
Identity–stories: Appert
Illness–fiction: Kemmerer
Immigrants: Russo
Immigrants–stories: Wells
India–fiction: Venkatraman
Insects–stories: Pett
Inventors: Mahin
Jews: Russo
Languages–fiction: Mills
Latinx people–fiction: Oshiro; Rivera
Latinx people–stories: Engle; Sala
Legend, Arthurian: Schneider
LGBTQIA people–fiction: Frasier; 
Hartl; Hutchinson; Khor; Oshiro; 
Schneider; Tokuda-Hall
Love–fiction: Selznick
Magic–fiction: Becker; Clipstone; 
Hollowell; Hutchinson; Schmidt
Magic–stories: Gauld
Mexican Revolution–fiction: Dobbs
Mexico–fiction: Dobbs
Migrants–stories: Morales
Military studies: Nelson; Sheinkin
Monkeys–stories: Haughton
Mothers–fiction: Lee; Tamaki
Music and musicians: Mahin; Todd
Muslims–fiction: Faruqi
MYSTERIES: Selznick
Mythology, Egyptian: Durham
Native Americans: Nelson
Native Americans–fiction: Little 
Badger
Nature study: Morales
Orphans–fiction: Applegate;  
DiCamillo
Photography–fiction: Lauren
Physics: Wade
Play–stories: Yoon
Prejudice–fiction: Venkatraman
Prophesies–fiction: DiCamillo
Protests: Magoon
Racism–fiction: Khor
Reading aloud: Paulsen
Reading, beginning: Madan
Reading, easy: Ross; Swift
Relationships–fiction: Selznick
Revenge–fiction: Tokuda-Hall
RHYMING STORIES: Engle; Khan
Romance–fiction: Clipstone; Frasier; 
Hutchinson; Schneider
Royalty–fiction: Kemmerer
Royalty–stories: Gauld
Runaways–fiction: Levithan
School–fiction: Ross
School–stories: Campbell; Pett
School shootings–fiction: Isler
Science: Mahin; McAnulty; Wade
SCIENCE FICTION: Rivera
Siblings–fiction: Clipstone; Hollowell; 
Isler; Levithan
Siblings–stories: Gauld
Social media–fiction: Lauren
Spies and espionage: Demetrios; 
Sheinkin
Storytime: Haughton; Mahin; Phelan
Superheroes–fiction: Tamaki
SUPERNATURAL STORIES: Cur-
rie; Lauren; Lee
TALL TALES: Khor
Tradition–stories: Bingham
Trans people–fiction: Frasier
Transformations–fiction: Panin
Twins–fiction: Schmidt
Unicorns–fiction: Justus
Vampires: Hartl
VERSE NOVELS: Mills
Voyages and travel–fiction: Becker; 
Venkatraman
Voyages and travel–stories: Khan
Wolves–fiction: Vitalis
Women’s studies: Demetrios; Green-
field
World War II: Demetrios
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
TO ORDER
CALL: 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987   FAX: 410.516.3866
E-mail: jrnlcirc@jh.edu; 
or visit us online at
Deborah Stevenson, Editor  
University of illinois at Urbana-Champaign  
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books 
provides concise summaries and critical 
evaluations of current children’s books. 
This invaluable resource assists readers 
with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an 
in-depth look at a selected book’s content, 
reading level, strengths and weaknesses, and 
quality of the format, as well as suggestions for 
curricular use. 
Published monthly except August.  
Volume 74 (2021).  
P-ISSN: 0008-9036; E-ISSN: 1558-6766.
Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books
Annual Individual 
Subscriptions 
$55.00 (print);  
$65.00 (online)
Annual Institutional 
Subscriptions 
$125.00 (print);  
$140.00 (online);  
$175.00 (print & online)
FOUNTAIN  
OF YOUTH
