T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
June 2016
Vol. 69   No. 10
New perspectives  
that are anything 
but elementary.
JHU Press scholarly journal offerings in  
Children’s Literature:
Bookbird: A Journal of International Children’s Literature
ISSN: 0006-7377 / E-ISSN: 1918-6983
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books  
ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Children’s Literature ISSN: 0092-8208 / E-ISSN: 1543-3374
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly ISSN: 0885-0429 / E-ISSN: 1553-1201
The Lion and the Unicorn ISSN: 0147-2593 / E-ISSN: 1080-6563
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
June 2016
Vol. 69 No. 10
503  the BIg PICture
 
 Frank and Lucky Get Schooled   written and illus. by Lynne Rae Perkins
504  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
505 •  Thunder Boy Jr.  by Sherman Alexie; illus. by Yuyi Morales
506 •  Finding Wonders: Three Girls Who Changed Science  by Jeannine Atkins
509 •  Sabotage: The Mission to Destroy Hitler’s Atomic Bomb by Neal Bascomb
513 •  The Airport Book  written and illus. by Lisa Brown
541 •  As Brave as You by Jason Reynolds
554  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
555  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
For up-to-date pricing information, please visit the journal webpage at: http://www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/bulletin_of_the_center_for_childrens_books/pricing.html. Volumes available in microfilm 
from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in micro-
fiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should 
be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2016 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Frank and Lucky Get Schooled ⓒ 2016 by Lynne Rae Perkins and used by permis-
sion of Greenwillow Books/HarperCollins.
June 2016 • 503
the BIg PICture
Frank and Lucky Get Schooled
written and illustrated by Lynne Rae Perkins
Some books fit neatly into molds, so audiences know immediately how to categorize 
them; with others, readers who leap ahead into assumptions will miss the joy of an 
original book. Lynne Rae Perkins’ Frank and Lucky Get Schooled fits into the latter 
category; though it initially looks like a simple picture-book story of a boy and a 
dog, it’s much, much more.
Frank the boy and Lucky the dog know they’re meant for each other from 
the minute they meet at the animal shelter, but “they had a lot to learn,” and learn 
they do in this witty overview of a dog-and-boy friendship framed in terms of 
school subjects. Lucky may only go to school ten times to Frank’s thousands, but 
there are still plenty of opportunities for joint education. Lucky helps Frank learn 
about botany (as the boy pulls burs from the pup’s coat) and entomology (same 
with ticks). They learn about doing experiments (“Experiments are when you ask 
a question and then you try to find out the answer”) as Frank and his mom try 
various products to wash skunk smell out of Lucky’s fur (hearing from his mom 
that smell is made of “smell molecules,” Frank asks ruefully, “What would change 
them into not-so-smelly molecules?”). The text cleverly segues from subject to 
subject: for instance: History dives into an overview of the domestication of dogs 
and a few famous dogs immortalized in statuary, which progresses to a discussion 
of Art. Lucky even leads Frank to a nice friendship with a bilingual girl, Ana—all 
under the topic of Foreign Languages, of course.
Meanwhile, Perkins’ line and watercolor illustrations, replete with speech 
balloons (and thought balloons from Lucky and occasionally the cat), idiosyncratic 
maps, and diagrammatic thumbnails, take the concept and gallop with it. A panel 
sequence with Frank’s bed subdivided by dotted lines in different fractional con-
figurations tells the changing story of “how much of the bed is Lucky’s, and how 
much is Frank’s”; an art lesson explains “every picture can be better with a dog in it. 
Or a cat.” Layout ranges from panel sequences to full-spread scenes, with Perkins, 
master of visual pacing, carefully meting out the rhythm as boy and dog move 
from frenzied activity to quiet contemplation. Lucky is an eager canine presence, 
a black Lab-type pooch bursting with goofy excitement, while Frank is a quieter 
red-haired figure who acts mainly as Lucky’s visual straight man. 
On the face of it, the book is an endearing riff on life with a dog and a 
humorous take on early education. There’s more to the title than that, though: it’s 
making a clever point that these basic experiences of life really do fit into school 
subjects that sometimes seem removed from kids’ lives. It also encourages the in-
nocent curiosity (in both boy and dog) and perception of genuine relevance that is 
504 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
the spur to good learning in elementary-schoolers and Nobel Prize–winners alike, 
making epistemology compelling and appealing. The text’s homey lyricism explains 
topics clearly and originally (“Science is when you wonder about something, so 
you observe it and ask questions about it and try to understand it”; “A map can 
explain how to get from here to there. A map can tell how here is different from 
there”) while letting the pictures do the concrete work. The breadth and easy local 
applicability make this perfect for homeschoolers, but the combination of humor 
and gentle wonder will perk up any classroom—or young mind. (See p. 537 for 
publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Agee, Jon Lion Lessons; written and illus. by Jon Agee. Dial, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3908-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Who knew that the path to becoming the biggest of the big cats took only seven 
easy steps? Our little boy hero, clad in full lion gear, mane and all, tells his audience 
how he followed those steps and earned his “Lion Diploma” from a pro—a lion, 
obviously—but not without a few setbacks. His roar rated only a “quiet” on the 
lion’s roar meter, the boy asked for spaghetti when choosing his lion diet, and his 
attempt to pounce on an old lady resulted merely in her cooing over his cuteness. 
So how was he dubbed an official lion? When he spotted a kitten being chased by a 
dog—the nemesis of all cats, big or small—he put all his skills to the test, bared his 
claws, shook his mane, and sprang on the poor canine, sending it skittering away 
in fear. The ending fizzles out—the neighborhood cats won’t leave their guardian 
“lion” alone—but the tale’s kookiness and the humorously earnest narrator more 
than make up for that flaw. The seven-step notion gives structure to the clear, direct 
text, and Lion’s deadpan delivery of instruction adds sly humor. The boy’s costume 
is small nod to Sendak’s wolfish Max, and his expressions teeter between joyful 
enthusiasm and serious doubt; meanwhile, the lion is all business, side-eying his 
charge in disappointment or rolling his eyes at the boy’s failures. Soft but sturdy 
dark lines shape Agee’s simple figures, which sometimes appear as vignettes against 
white backgrounds and sometimes romp in full-page or full-spread landscapes. The 
lion’s instructions make this storytime ready, so get your claws out and your roars 
ready for a lively, noisy program.  KQG
June 2016 • 505
Ahern, CeCeliA Flawed. Feiwel, 2016 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-07411-9 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-08024-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Raised in a country that literally brands people as Flawed when they break moral 
rules, biracial seventeen-year-old Celestine North has always supported the discrimi-
natory system and the Guild that oversees it. When a single act of kindness leads to 
her being marked as Flawed, though, she loses everything, including her devoted 
boyfriend, and becomes the victim of ostracism and violent bullying. Celestine 
refuses to repent, and her victimhood quickly morphs into unwanted celebrity. 
Soon she’s the poster child for (and pawn of) an underground revolution, and she 
eventually joins those she used to despise. The book doesn’t really bring anything 
new to the dystopian genre’s well-covered table when it comes to plot and premise. 
It is successful, however, at achieving emotional impact; during moments focus-
ing on the Guild’s injustice and society’s bigotry, the terror is palpable. Celestine, 
meanwhile, starts as the ultimate insider, which makes her psychological descent 
into reluctant rebellion intriguing to follow. Unfortunately, the narration opts too 
often for telling over showing, and Celestine spends a lot of time describing her 
thoughts and feelings (and oddly the emotions of others) in wearying detail. Still, 
for readers who aren’t over the dystopian trend, particularly fans of Healey’s When 
We Wake (BCCB 4/13), there’s enough to hear to make it worth a read. The story 
ends on the brink of impending action, so expect sequels.  AM 
Alexie, ShermAn Thunder Boy Jr.; illus. by Yuyi Morales. Little, 2016 34p
ISBN 978-0-316-01372-7 $17.99   
R* 4-7 yrs
“Thunder Boy is not a normal name,” says our distressed narrator, who is his father’s 
namesake. The moniker doesn’t work for Thunder Boy Jr., though: “People call me 
Little Thunder. That nickname makes me sound like a burp or a fart.” Much as he 
loves his dad, he wants his own name, and he dreams of various possibilities. He 
is therefore thrilled when his father understands his son’s dilemma and gives him a 
new name, Lightning (“My dad and I will light up the sky”). Alexie demonstrates 
his familiar gift for storytelling, using seemingly uncomplicated language to tell a 
layered and emotional story that retains tension despite being full of love. A note 
explains the inspirations for Morales’ digital line and color illustrations; the smooth 
lines are softly organic in their curves, while the deft use of textures gives depth to 
the earthtoned elements. Even with the boy’s complaint, this is a joyous portrait 
of a family, with the visual motifs of a big red ball and a colorful painted guitar 
running through the spreads, and both Mom and Dad have some flair (Mom rides 
a motorcycle, for instance) as well as thoroughly enjoying their children. Plenty of 
kids will recognize the shared-name dilemma, and even those free of the anxiety 
of name influence will recognize Lightning’s jubilance at being recognized and 
understood by his father: “My dad read my mind! My dad read my heart!”  DS
506 • The BulleTin
AltebrAndo, tArA The Leaving. Bloomsbury, 2016 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-803-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-804-4 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Six children disappear from their kindergarten a few weeks after a shooting at 
their school, and the only clue comes from Scarlett, who had told her mother the 
night before that she was going on a trip to “the leaving.” Eleven years later, five 
teenagers emerge from the back of a van, not knowing how they are, how they got 
there, or where they have been. They have maps in their pockets, though, so they 
find their way to their homes, promising to meet up the next night to try to figure 
out what is going on. The story follows three characters—Scarlett, who feels spacy 
and disoriented; Lucas, whose father is so startled by the return of his son that he 
falls from a ladder and dies; and Avery, the sister of Max, the one boy who remains 
missing. Scarlett and Lucas are drawn to each other, but Avery is also drawn to 
Lucas, whom she remembers from her childhood. The mystery deepens when Lucas 
finds a paperback novel called The Leaving about a scientist who, believing there is 
no such thing as a happy childhood, tries to find a way to erase all memories. The 
puzzle becomes even weirder when Lucas realizes that he knows how to load a gun, 
and a dead body is found. Lucas being arrested on suspicion for both his father’s 
accidental death and a bona fide murder is a bit much as a red herring, but the 
mystery is still compelling. Font manipulation and alternating focalization capture 
the bits and pieces of lives torn apart by a supposed remedy that turned out to be 
worse than what it sought to heal. With a bit of romance, a bit of pathos, a bit of 
science fiction, and a bit of ripped-from-the-headlines trauma, this will appeal to 
fans of mystery mixed with weird if vague science.  KC
AtkinS, JeAnnine Finding Wonders: Three Girls Who Changed Science. Atheneum, 
2016 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-6565-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-6567-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
In the scramble for STEM curricular materials that celebrate the contributions of 
women scientists, Atkins’ offering of three extended free-verse biographical poems is 
distinguished for both content and elegance. Maria Sibylla Merian, of seventeenth-
century Germany, not only discovered through close and secret observation the 
life cycle of the moth but made her discovery public through artwork, despite the 
guilds’ ban on women as professional painters. Mary Anning, of nineteenth-century 
England, took up her injured father’s avocation of fossil hunting, becoming a family 
breadwinner upon his death and the first to discover and excavate an ichthyosaur 
and plesiosaur. Maria Mitchell, of nineteenth- century Massachusetts, learned from 
her father mathematics and astronomical calculations used by mariners. She was 
skilled at chronometer repair by the age of thirteen, won a Danish prize for the 
discovery of a comet, and became a professor of astronomy at Vassar. Readers are 
lured in by strong openings and vivid storytelling. Maria Merian knows that girls 
displaying unusual curiosity may be suspected of witchcraft; Mary Anning chips 
away at perilously slippery cliffsides in the rain with her father; Maria Mitchell 
watches her close-knit family fracture when her brother goes off to sea against 
June 2016 • 507
their father’s wishes. Presenting this trio side by side allows readers to compare not 
only the inroads women have made in science but also how scientific thought has 
matured over the decades, shedding superstition, adopting rigorous observation, 
and gradually winning public acceptance of its methods and discoveries. With each 
chaptered poem a gem in its own right, this collection will appeal to poetry lovers 
as well as awakening scientists. Selected bibliographies are included.  EB
Avery, tom Not As We Know It. Schwartz & Wade, 2016 [176p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53510-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53509-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53511-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Twins Ned and Jamie are nearing twelve, and Ned’s cystic fibrosis is only getting 
worse. He still insists going about his life as normally as possible, which includes 
going with Jamie to search for treasure—glass bottles, fishermen’s nets, etc.—along 
the coast of the English Channel after a storm blows through their small town. 
Their latest hunt turns up something strange: a small fishlike humanoid with 
gills and piercing eyes. Their grandfather’s stories about life on the sea leads the 
boys to believe that Leonard—their name for the creature—is a merman. Jamie 
finds hope in the old sea yarns, thinking that the merman will cure Ned, but Ned 
interprets the stories and Leonard’s presence differently: he knows, in fact, that 
the merman is here to usher him to death with comfort and compassion and at a 
time of Ned’s choosing. The scene near the book’s conclusion in which Ned and 
Leonard make their final dive into the sea is absolutely heartbreaking, made more 
so by the panicked efforts of Jamie and his father to find Ned. Jamie’s narration is 
straightforward and direct throughout the book, acknowledging Ned’s illness as a 
fact of life but holding out hope that Leonard must be the miracle cure. Ned and 
Jamie’s relationship is one of deep connection, filled with shared secrets and desires, 
so Jamie’s utter devastation at losing the person he considers to be half of himself 
is keenly palpable. There’s a quiet beauty in Jamie’s ultimate acceptance of Ned’s 
choice, but both he—and the reader—are left with a haunting sense of loss.  KQG
bArrettA, gene Lincoln and Kennedy: A Pair to Compare; written and illus. by 
Gene Barretta. Ottaviano/Holt, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9945-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-5
Separated as they are by a hundred years, and representing rival political parties, 
Lincoln and Kennedy don’t immediately lend themselves easily to a side-by-side 
picture-book analysis. Kudos to Barretta, then, who is stunningly successful at 
creating such a book by pausing at key moments of each man’s life to see what he’s 
facing and enriching the biography of both by comparison. Boy Lincoln, scrubbing 
down in a tin bathtub while a bear hovers near his shoulder, “had a passion for 
learning and borrowed books whenever he could.” On the facing page, boy Kennedy 
soaks in a footed tub, with a teddy bear perched on the radiator: “He showed little 
interest in his studies.” A picture shows Lincoln wooing Mary Todd at a dance, in 
true meet-cute fashion, while the scene below depicts Jacqueline Bouvier sneak-
ing a sidelong glance at Kennedy as he holds forth at a dinner party. Both men, 
pictured in somber silhouette, experienced the loss of a child and suffered from 
508 • The BulleTin
depression or pain. Each made a stand for civil rights; each faced military defeat. 
And, of course, both fell to an assassin’s bullet. Cartoon illustrations are respectful 
but at times humorous, and the career of each man is recapped with a double-page 
spread that includes presidential accomplishments, trivia, and five memorable 
quotations. With a glossary and list of sources, this will obviously catch the eye of 
social-studies teachers, but the lively illustrations and inviting approach will entice 
independent readers as well.  EB
bArton, byron My House; written and illus. by Byron Barton. Greenwillow, 
2016 40p
ISBN 978-0-06-233703-0 $16.99   
R 2-4 yrs
An orange cat named Jim takes readers on a brief tour of the house in which he 
lives with his owner, Jane. The tour covers exterior features (roof, door, windows) 
and interior areas, including Jim’s bed (a human bed which Jim claims by reclin-
ing across it) and his (clean) litter box. Jim has an amiable and kid-friendly voice, 
and his narration is informative but also amusingly feline-centric (“Jane makes my 
dinner. I like Jane”). The very short sentences and simple vocabulary make this 
perfect for a toddler or preschool audience but also accessible to beginning readers. 
The bold, blocky illustrations, created in Adobe Photoshop, are childlike in their 
rendering, and the vivid hues of purple, red, orange, yellow, and green could have 
come straight out of a box of Crayola crayons. Stripey orange Jim is a fetching 
guide to these gentle proceedings, and cat-loving kiddos will find this installment 
in Barton’s oeuvre especially attractive. Share this as part of a house-themed story 
hour, use it along with other Barton titles (My Bus, BCCB 6/14, etc.) in a preschool 
author study, or enjoy it as a precursor to a house-building session with Legos or 
blocks—accompanying cat is optional but recommended.  JH
bArton, ChriS Whoosh!: Lonnie Johnson’s Super-Soaking Stream of Inventions; illus. 
by Don Tate. Charlesbridge, 2016 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-297-1 $16.95   
Ad 4-8 yrs
What do a computer memory power backup system and a squirt gun on steroids 
have in common? Inventor Lonnie Johnson. An avid tinkerer since childhood, 
Johnson had become the only black high school student by 1968 to advance to 
the science-fair competition held at the University of Alabama, where his robot 
Linex took first place. After graduating from Tuskegee, he worked for NASA on the 
backup power system for the Galileo mission to Jupiter, and then went solo as an 
inventor. While working on a component for a refrigeration system, he serendipi-
tously fashioned the power blaster that would, years later, become the Super Soaker. 
While that popular toy has become the public pinnacle of his career, Johnson is still 
very much in the invention game, currently developing an advanced solar-energy 
system. Johnson’s story is both delightful and inspiring, featuring a long-suffering 
family that tolerated his destructive, even explosive, experiments; the financial ups 
and downs of an entrepreneur; and his solo work and team work. Endpapers point 
toward a portfolio of inventions that range from “Seriously?” (a musical diaper) to 
“Wow!” (Johnson Thermoelectric Energy Converter). The text and author’s note, 
however, offer little more than an enthusiastic outline of a long career, with plenty 
of research holes left to fill. Why he left NASA to be self-employed, how he survived 
the financially rough years, and how his green technology work is coming along are 
June 2016 • 509
all issues about which kids may reasonably ask. Digital artwork is serviceable and 
should stand up well for a group readaloud. Barton refers to a personal interview 
with Johnson, but no further source notes are included.  EB
bASComb, neAl Sabotage: The Mission to Destroy Hitler’s Atomic Bomb. Levine/
Scholastic, 2016 [320p] illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-73243-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-73533-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-12
When the right atoms under the right circumstances collide and split, enormous 
energy is released. The implications of this discovery had barely been addressed 
before it was coopted by the Axis and Allied governments in World War II, and 
the race was on for the development of an atomic bomb that would turn the tide 
of war for its deployer. A key element for controlling the chain reaction was the 
moderator heavy water, which had been produced in small amounts at a plant in 
Vemork, Norway. Already a target for its location on the North Sea, Norway was 
swiftly occupied by German Nazis and the plant was recommissioned to produce 
heavy water. Here Bascomb relates the heroic efforts of Norwegian resistance fight-
ers, under command of the British SOE, to sabotage the plant and delay German 
development of the bomb. The book shines a floodlight on this less recognized 
part of the war, focusing on the teams of infiltrators and the unforgiving condi-
tions of the snowpacked, blizzard-prone Norwegian Vidda into which they skied or 
airdropped to prepare for their raids. War-story fans would be hard pressed to find 
a more innately thrilling episode, with the players in constant peril from capture 
and torture, or injury, freezing, and starvation. Even as readers cheer the victors, 
though, they are confronted with the collateral damage wrought on the innocent 
Norwegians who suffered punitive Nazi reprisals and imprecise Allied bombing. 
An index, source notes, and extensive bibliography are included, but as Bascomb 
notes, “the lion’s share of this story” was drawn from primary sources, which ac-
counts for its vivid immediacy. Teens who followed Bascomb’s post-war The Nazi 
Hunters (BCCB 10/13) will be engrossed by this title as well.  EB
blACk, JennA Nightstruck. Tor Teen, 2016 302p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7653-8004-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-7176-2 $9.99   
R Gr. 8-10
Becket is innocently walking her dog when she encounters a malevolent force that 
uses her to open a portal to a nightmarish other realm. Suddenly, Philadelphia is a 
terrifying place to be at night, with sinister transformations of the city’s infrastruc-
ture, which is willfully attacking humans. Becket’s dad, the police commissioner, 
is now gone for incredibly long shifts, but she’s got a hunky neighbor to help pass 
the time and some vague plans about how to save her best friend (who has become 
vicious and manipulative after being Nightstruck). The book moves quickly from 
spooky to horrific, and protagonists and peripheral characters alike face danger and 
occasionally gruesome ends. There’s a bit of a disconnect on occasion where too 
many things are reported via Becket’s dad but not seen, but those moments provide 
some creepy context to the scenes that play out with Becket herself whenever she 
breaks the citywide curfew. An absurd cliffhanger end will, if it doesn’t make readers 
too mad, easily pull them back to see what happens to Becket next.  AS
510 • The BulleTin
blAke, AShley herring 
Suffer Love. 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2016 [360p]
ISBN 978-0-544-59632-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Though Hadley’s parents are still together after her father’s affair, the family is 
flailing. Meanwhile, Sam Bennett and his sister, Livy, have been displaced by 
the infidelity of their mother, who blames her family’s disintegration on Sam for 
exposing the affair. Hadley doesn’t know the identity of her father’s mistress, but 
when the two meet, Sam quickly figures out their connection. Thinking at first 
that he will just use Hadley to punish his mother, he soon finds himself falling for 
her; similarly, Hadley discovers that she wants something more from Sam than 
meaningless makeout sessions. Their developing relationship is sweet but doomed, 
since Sam can’t bring himself to tell Hadley the truth. The main themes here may 
be taking responsibility, granting forgiveness, and moving on, but to Blake’s credit, 
none of the reconciliations come too easily nor too dramatically; instead there is a 
solid recognition that both adults and teens make bad choices that radiate out in 
emotional shrapnel that scars everyone involved. Sam’s and Hadley’s best friends 
bring both comic relief and external consciences to the mix, and Sam’s relation-
ship with Livy, as well as his understanding of a bone-headed friend, help craft 
him as a good guy whose anger is righteous but not all-consuming. Hadley, on the 
other hand, has no such foils, but her first-person narration, which alternates with 
Sam’s, gives enough insight into her feelings to keep her sympathetic even when 
she withdraws, deflects, and lashes out. No important character gets shortchanged 
or caricatured in this book, and even the happy ending recognizes that the effects 
of extramarital affairs far exceed their expiration date.  KC 
blAnkmAn, Anne Traitor Angels. Balzer + Bray, 2016 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227887-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227889-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
To outward appearances, sixteen-year-old Elizabeth Milton might seem to be a 
model Puritan girl, meek, obedient, and drab as she assists her blind father, poet 
John Milton, in writing out his new epic poem, Paradise Lost; in reality she is well 
educated and proficient with swords, thanks to her father’s insistence on such 
training. These skills come in handy when the king’s henchmen come to imprison 
and execute her father per the orders of King Charles II. After escaping, Elizabeth 
realizes that her father has placed clues in his poetry to lead her to an object that 
threatens the king—and she’s got to find it before the king’s men do. With the help 
of the swoonworthy Antonio, Elizabeth embarks on a quest to find a vial of some 
mysterious substance (discovered by Galileo) that is rumored to have the power to 
revive the dead, a discovery that has the potential to upend not only the monarchy 
but also Christianity. Blankman covers a lot of ground here, too much at times, 
and the resultant cast of characters and intricate plot threads become unwieldy, 
especially for those with no knowledge of Restoration England. The writing can be 
overwrought, and the romantic subplot with Antonio is pleasant but is too perfect 
to be true. Still, the treasure hunt thrills, political intrigue, and historical details are 
absorbing and the brisk pace will push readers onward. History buffs may especially 
appreciate the lengthy author’s note and thorough bibliography.  JH
June 2016 • 511
bower, tAmArA The Mummy Makers of Egypt; written and illus. by Tamara 
Bower. Triangle Square/Seven Stories, 2016 40p
ISBN 978-1-60980-600-2 $17.95   
R Gr. 4-7
In this gorgeously illustrated picture book, Bower reconstructs the funerary rituals 
of Yuya, the father-in-law of pharaoh Amenhotep III (and, as many young readers 
will want to know, forebear to Tutankhamen). The wealth of nuanced informa-
tion here adds considerably to that offered by the usual cadre of mummy books, 
and it particularly reflects more recent scholarship concerning the lives of those 
who worked in the Valley of the Kings. The excellent condition of Yuya’s mummy 
and grave also allows for a more specific treatment of the funerary rites and tomb 
inscriptions. As embalmer Paneb instructs his son Ipy in the family trade, readers 
learn details of organ removal and the layout of the preparation site (“The bodies 
were dried in natron outdoors, so that the sun would help with the drying. Care 
had to be taken so that wild dogs and jackals did not steal parts of the body”) and 
preparation of grave goods such as mummified food (“a simpler process . . . as 
the meat had already been cleaned of the moist organs”). A substantial endnote 
comments on the discovery of Yuya’s tomb in 1905, an event reported to involve 
episodes of fainting, hysterics, and a chair endangered by the august Empress 
Eugénie of France. It’s light on contextual references and terms that could assist 
readers in their desk-bound explorations, but the story of Yuya’s final rites and the 
archaeological excavation of his remains is so intriguing that many readers will be 
willing to take the extra steps to undertake their own fact-finding expedition.  EB
boyne, John The Boy at the Top of the Mountain. Holt, 2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62779-030-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62779-542-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-10
Too young to comprehend the political situation in 1930s Paris, young Pierrot is 
sorely troubled that his friends, the Bronsteins, cannot permanently care for him 
after his parents die. After a short stay in an orphanage, he is claimed by Aunt Beat-
rix, who warmly welcomes him to the grand estate in which she is the housekeeper. 
It’s a lovely place, on the mountain above the German town of Berchtesgaden, and 
while Beatrix’s employer isn’t often in residence, when he is home he lavishes young 
Pierrot (now taking the name Peter at the insistence of his aunt) with the kind of 
attention the little guy craves. Soon Peter is strutting in a kid-sized uniform, aban-
doning all correspondence with his old friend Anshel Bronstein, barking orders to 
the staff, reveling in the nationalistic and anti-Semitic propaganda that imbues the 
household, and ultimately sending his kind aunt and her lover—both members 
of the Resistance—to their deaths. Readers will figure out that Peter’s aunt works 
for Adolph Hitler, but the reveal isn’t the point; the book’s tone, symbolism, and 
foreshadowing cast Peter as the archetype of a war-battered and seethingly resentful 
people, both a bully writ large and a pitiful victim of demagoguery. With the simple 
structure and conversational vocabulary that reflect the point of view of an inno-
cent—especially one on the cusp of disillusionment—this is similar in accessibility 
and challenge to Yelchin’s Breaking Stalin’s Nose (BCCB 11/11); expect this to be 
valued by independent readers as well as their history and literature teachers.  EB
512 • The BulleTin
brAllier, mAx The Wiener Strikes Back; illus. by Rachel Maguire and Nichole 
Kelley. Aladdin, 2016 [288p] (Galactic Hot Dogs)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2496-7 $13.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2497-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Cosmoe and Humphree return for more hot dog selling and evil vanquishing in 
this worthy sequel to Galactic Hot Dogs: Cosmoe’s Wiener Getaway (BCCB 9/15). 
They’ve got Princess Dagger in the mix now, who is still battling her upbringing 
as a villain (in stressful moments, her go-to solutions are often dark) but who adds 
good chemistry. In this outing, Cosmoe, Humphree, and Dagger join up with a 
circus to sell their wares (circus-hating Cosmoe is against this plan from the start) 
but wind up discovering, and fighting against, a secret plan to use mind control 
to turn animals into an army. This is a wisecracking, butt-referencing, silly fest 
of a series, but there are also moments of genuine vulnerability around Cosmoe’s 
parentlessness and his dislike of the circus. Luckily, he’s got two spectacular friends 
who are his family now, and the bond between the trio is further cemented in this 
novel. The joyfully chaotic mix of text, illustrated panels, and full-page illustra-
tions with speech bubbles will be old hat to readers who now have a wealth of 
these sorts of hybrids to explore, but Brallier and Maguire are among the best at 
this mixed approach to storytelling. Cosmoe’s the perfect narrator, bluffing when 
necessary and supremely confident in the right things (his friends, for example), 
and the illustrations brilliantly reinforce for the reader the extent of his bluster as 
clear moments of unease on his face only show up in the pictures. This subtlety will 
likely resonate with kids who know all too well that how one seems is not always 
how one feels. Final art not seen.  AS
brindle, i. J. Balthazar Fabuloso in the Lair of the Humbugs; illus. by Sholto 
Walker. Holiday House, 2016 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8234-3577-7 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-8234-3582-1 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Balthazar is fed up with the routine of family magic shows where he is the only one 
who can’t do real magic, and he makes the fabled mistake of wishing his supernatu-
rally gifted, busy, noisy, chaotic, self-involved family would just be normal—right 
before they all disappear, leaving him missing them exactly how they were. Suspicion 
falls upon a rival stage family, who have been heckling the Fabulosos, but it’s soon 
clear that this family was not responsible for the disappearances when they vanish 
as well. Now it’s on Balthazar and Pagan (a quippy, magical girl from the rival fam-
ily) to make peace with each other, join forces, and save their families from villains 
who want to suck the magic from their bodies. While Pagan’s occasional journal 
entries between chapters interrupt the flow, they give important insight into the 
rivalry between the families and on the feeling of isolation amid a family full of huge 
personalities. It’s a nice touch that the kids don’t actually bond all that much, or at 
least not beyond the rescue—it’s more intriguing to see how an alliance looks and 
feels than a more predictable friendship. Balthazar is an effective everykid, unsure 
that he’s somebody who can save his family but managing anyway. It’s ultimately 
on the slight side, but there’s still plenty of humor, a zippy pace, and lots of magic 
to keep readers entertained. Final illustrations not seen.  AS
June 2016 • 513
brown, liSA The Airport Book; written and illus. by Lisa Brown. Porter/Roar-
ing Brook, 2016 34p
ISBN 978-1-62672-091-6 $17.99   
R* 4-8 yrs
Air travel may be routine for many adults, but it’s new and fascinating to kids, 
and this book documents the process from packing to arrival at the destination. 
Simple explanatory text provides basic information with occasional touches of wry 
humor (“Inside the airport you stand in lines”) while the illustrations document the 
progress of a family of four amid the teeming bustle of their fellow travelers. The 
book’s direct address (“You buckle your seatbelt tight across your lap”) gives it a 
you-are-there flavor that focuses on the experience rather than the whys and hows; 
the prose manages a pleasing storytelling rhythm even as it conveys information 
(“Outside there are clouds and clouds and clouds”). The line and watercolor art, 
however, is the real draw here; airport scenes feature a realistically diverse array of 
humans (the family is interracial; people of all colors, dress, and ability appear in 
the airport) and burst with stories large and small. Most significantly, the young 
girl misses her stuffed monkey, who’s been mistakenly packed into the family’s 
checked bag (the monkey’s trailing tail identifies the bag on its progress through 
the system), but there’s also a woman who won’t get off her phone except for 
something special, a dog traveling in the hold, a mysterious huge package, and a 
few other stories. Adults will also notice a few sly jokes, such as the guy at arrivals 
with a sign indicating he’s waiting for “Earhart” (presumably for the woman in 
the aviator helmet and goggles), or the mother’s use of the traditional pub-closing 
phrase “Hurry up, please, it’s time” to get her family on the road. Whether kids 
are readying for their first plane trip, wondering where parents go after they’re 
dropped off at the terminal, or just looking for some imagined travel, this will set 
them on the runway.  DS
bruChAC, JoSeph The Long Run. 7th Generation, 2016 114p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-93905-309-1 $9.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Seventeen-year-old Native American Travis Hawk can’t take his father’s drunken, 
abusive behavior any more, so he decides to flee the homeless shelter they’re living 
in in Seattle and make his way to his grandparents’ house in Maine. The journey is 
obviously a long one, but he manages to safely cross the country fairly easily with 
the help of a few good-hearted strangers. Lawrence Diggs, a cheerful poet, offers 
comfort, food, and money on the bus Travis takes to Spokane; an Arab police of-
ficer in Sioux Falls takes Travis to his former senator uncle who gives Travis a ride 
to Wisconsin—in a limo; and finally, fearless, compassionate truck driver Mimi 
lets him tag along on her rig until Maine. This is an eminently hopeful story that 
deftly manages to avoid an overload of sentiment or sappiness. The book spends 
little time on the setup, so readers dive headlong with Travis into his trek, but his 
grief at leaving behind someone he truly loves is revealed in the small snippets of 
his past that he offers each stranger. The characters he meets along the way aren’t 
particularly deep, but they offer Travis insight, both to his internal turmoil and 
the larger spiritual concepts he find himself grappling with; the book’s description 
of natural landmarks along the way vividly conveys the beauty of the landscape. 
Bruchac provides an appealing, accessible story with a slim page count and direct, 
straightforward third-person narration that will likely serve reluctant readers  
well.  KQG
514 • The BulleTin
butler, dAve The Kidnap Plot. Knopf, 2016 [304p] (The Extraordinary 
Journeys of Clockwork Charlie)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51296-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51295-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51297-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Charlie knows that he is special because his dad tells him so all the time, but the 
Punjabi-English boy still has big dreams of leaving his father’s clock shop behind 
and finding some true adventures. Adventure doesn’t always come as you wish, 
however, and when his inventor father is kidnapped, suddenly an unprepared 
Charlie must step into the role of hero that he has long read about. Fortunately, 
he is able to quickly round up a motley crew of allies, including a pixie, a troll, 
and a couple of human chimney sweeps, and together this group challenges the 
mysterious Anti-Human League who have their eyes on Queen Victoria. Buried 
in among the adventures, chases, and glorious small victories are some important 
lessons about xenophobia, clearly present in this steampunk version of nineteenth-
century England, and sharp readers will easily spot parallels with today. Comparisons 
to Pinocchio are inevitable after Charlie’s big secret is revealed, but Charlie’s not 
spending much time worrying about what he is or isn’t; he just wants to save his dad 
and prove himself. It’s a strong start to a new series—the characters are diverse, the 
pace is solid, and Butler creates a smoky, grimy, harsh England that is almost a living 
character in itself. Readers will happily keep an eye out for the next volume.  AS
CArter, CAelA Tumbling. Viking, 2016 [432p]
ISBN 978-0-451-47300-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
It’s the Olympic Trials for gymnastics, and the book follows five different girls as 
they work toward their dream: Grace, driven by her coach father to anorexia; Leigh, 
worried about her comparatively large size and her closeted sexuality; Wilhelmina, 
bucking the visual trends as a black girl and the training trends in her competition 
plans; Monica, a wallflower starting to come into her gymnastics own; and Cammie, 
a former star seeking a comeback. As the competition unfolds, the girls excel and 
fail, surprise themselves in good and bad ways, and consider the hugely subjective 
selection process and their commitment to the sport. The story is as formulaic as 
the description suggests, with writing that dips frequently into the schlocky and 
sometimes into the turgid, and characterization that’s wafer-thin. However, there’s 
a reason writers return to the formula: a group of young athletes striving toward a 
rarefied goal while dealing with one another is a naturally dramatic situation. Carter 
includes lots of intense detail about gymnastics such as leotard wedgies, competition 
strategies, and the sound of the beam as you land on it, adding alluring veracity 
to the account. The book is too long for readers looking for a quick Olympic-year 
thrill, but devoted armchair gymnasts may find the you-are-there details enough 
to keep them interested.  DS
June 2016 • 515
Child, lAuren Absolutely One Thing: Featuring Charlie and Lola; written and 
illus. by Lauren Child. Candlewick, 2016 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-8728-1 $17.99   
R 5-8 yrs
A trip to the store means getting to pick out one thing each for Charlie and his 
little sister, Lola—but first they have to get there. This means Charlie’s getting ready 
(“It takes me THREE minutes to brush my teeth, ONE minute to remember that 
I have forgotten to eat breakfast . . . and EIGHT minutes to find Lola’s left shoe”) 
and addressing the myriad of distractions and questions presented by Lola along 
the way. These interactions involve lots of counting (“‘Look at all those singing 
birds—there are one, two, five, seven, twenty, sixteen, eleventeen, nine birds sing-
ing.’ And I say, ‘No, Lola, there are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.’ ‘That’s what I said,’ she 
says”) and playful discussions of number sense concepts. Once at the store, Lola 
tries to negotiate the number of things she’s allowed to buy (“And Lola says, ‘Three 
things.’ And Mom says, ‘ONE thing.’ And Lola says, ‘Two things.’ And Mom says, 
‘How about NO things?’”), but she (eventually) settles on a pack of stickers, while 
Charlie chooses a package of decorative pins. Charlie’s droll narration alternates 
between exasperation and indulgence, and kids with younger siblings will find it 
particularly entertaining. The animated text provides plenty of opportunities to 
practice counting and calculating simple operations, while corresponding numeric 
labels and number sentences make explicit the tallying and calculations. Child’s 
cozy, collage-style art is casual yet controlled, and she wisely leaves plenty of un-
cluttered space to allow the text and numbers equal billing with the art; pops of 
red and yellow enliven the grays, browns, and greens of the interiors and outdoor 
scenes. Use this as a springboard into a math lesson or simply share and enjoy with 
Charlie and Lola fans.  JH
CoSimAno, elle Holding Smoke. Hyperion, 2016 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-4847-2597-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Smoke has had a grueling life, and his existence at a youth offender rehabilitation 
center hasn’t improved things. However, there he can sometimes earn small favors 
with his unusual ability—he can leave his sleeping body and travel as a spirit to see 
how things are going in the outside world. It’s a limited ability because he travels 
at real speed and he can’t actually do anything as a ghost, but it does let him check 
up on people and, he hopes, to solve the mystery around who actually committed 
the murder for which he was imprisoned. Enter a sardonic, beautiful waitress who 
can see him on his spirit journeys (no one else can), and suddenly Smoke’s actually 
got someone on his side, a rarity in his life. Pink’s got her own problems, but the 
two bond quickly, finding comfort and strength in each other as they unravel the 
worst parts of their lives together. Cosimano ably adds plot twists and surprises, 
keeping Smoke as the center while also weaving a complex story of shady guards, 
honorable bad guys, romance, and the foibles and limitations of the justice system. 
The quick pace and cool premise may be enough to coax reluctant readers who 
might otherwise be daunted by the sturdy size of this book.  AS
516 • The BulleTin
CuShmAn, kAren Grayling’s Song. Clarion, 2016 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-544-30180-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Grayling is content to be background to her effusive mother, the local wise woman 
and healer, until her mother is literally rooted to the ground by some evil force 
that is slowly turning her into a tree. Off Grayling goes, with great reluctance and 
armed with only a small store of potions that are quickly eaten by a mouse, into the 
wider world to find magical folk who can fix her mother. At least the now-magical 
mouse tags along as company, and Grayling’s gathering song works to gain her a 
few more allies. The group works well as a whole, but Cushman also effectively 
makes them stand out as individuals, and readers will likely care deeply about all of 
them by the end. The language gives the book the atmospheric flavor of historical 
fiction, and the land itself is wild and mysterious, exactly the type of place where 
magic could happen, children could wander around trying to fix the world, and 
tiny mice could shapeshift into mighty protectors if fed the right potion. Cushman 
offers a complete story with clear resolutions, a memorably complex villain, and 
a sweet protagonist who becomes far more than background by the end; fantasy 
buffs and Cushman fans alike will be well pleased.  AS
doerrfeld, Cori Believe Your Eyes; illus. by Tyler Page and Cori Doer-
rfeld. Graphic Universe, 2016 48p (Cici: A Fairy’s Tale)
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-6152-9 $26.65
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-9571-5 $7.99   
R Gr. 2-3
Cici’s turning ten, but her birthday won’t be the same since her dad’s recent move 
out of the family home. However, that’s not the weirdest part of the day: it turns out 
that Cici is actually a fairy, or hada, and she suddenly develops wings and magical 
sight that lets her see people as they truly are (the mean girls are chickens following 
their leader, her mother is an octopus juggling far too many things). Her abuela 
explains that she has a day to decide if she wants to go back to being an ordinary 
kid or keep her powers, as if Cici didn’t have enough on her plate with the divorce 
and the changing dynamic of the friendship she relies on most. For such a short 
book, Doerrfeld and Page fit in a lot, and both the realistic concerns Cici faces 
and the magical elements get their due. Candy pinks, purples, and blues dominate 
the pages, and round-headed, big-eyed (winged) Cici is visually appealing. The 
illustrations skew a bit younger than the protagonist, but for younger readers, this 
confectionery graphic novel will give them both whimsy and the chance to consider 
about they might be seen as their true selves.  AS 
eShbAugh, Julie Ivory and Bone. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2016 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239925-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239927-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Kol’s tribe is understandably worried about their dwindling numbers, as there are no 
girls in the current crop of young people. They are thrilled when a neighboring tribe 
with whom they have old bad blood seems ready to reconnect, as they have a handful 
of girls, including the disdainful yet compelling Mya, to whom seventeen-year-old 
Kol is instantly drawn. The situation is not as it seems, however, and vengeance 
June 2016 • 517
may still wreck both small tribes before they figure out how to coexist peacefully. 
While there are some significant liberties taken with this Neolithic culture (a gay 
relationship is not an issue at all, and gender roles are remarkably fluid), there is also 
clear authenticity in the descriptions, and they evoke the desperation, loyalty, and 
determination that a small group like this would have likely felt as a tribe lacking 
reproductive possibilities. Almost the whole novel is told as if Kol is talking to Mya 
(it’s explained that she has an injury and he is telling her a story to keep her alert), 
a choice that sometimes steps on the plot a little, but the story itself compensates. 
The probably small group of readers who are drawn to both ice age fantasy and 
Pride and Prejudice may spot some similarities, but there aren’t enough overlaps to 
specifically point Austen fans to this title, and fantasy buffs won’t have to catch the 
echoes to enjoy the story of friction becoming friendship.  AS
feuti, norm The King of Kazoo; written and illus. by Norm Feuti. Graphix/
Scholastic, 2016 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-77088-0 $22.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-77089-7 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-77090-3 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
In this graphic novel, Cornelius is worried about his legacy as king: aside from 
raising his daughter Bing, who is clever, resourceful, and kindhearted, he mostly 
just borrows ideas from others and exaggerates his own achievements. Feuti care-
fully doles out the life lessons for the king from various sources, so Cornelius gets 
a chance to authentically grow over time and understand two key concepts: col-
laboration isn’t a sign of weakness and true memorability is built out of triumph 
over real adversity. Kids will likely appreciate the bumbling grownup; they’ll also 
be relieved that he changes as the novel progresses, giving his delight of a daughter 
much more credit. The crisis he encounters is contrived, but it provides opportu-
nity for villainous pronouncements of doom, mind control, and an explosion, so it 
does the trick in terms of amping up excitement. Art depicts the cast as rabbit-like 
creatures that live in a land with “gonks” instead of horses, and it’s a nice touch that 
readers are immediately presented with a completely fictional world but one that 
still has correlational details in the illustrations hinting at our own (the gonkless 
carriage invention is an early model car). Loose panel sizing allows for moments 
of emphasis, with occasional dramatic moments grabbing most of a page. Offer 
this to graphic novel fans, but also those who appreciate role reversal plots where 
the kid is filling in for a clueless adult à la Inspector Gadget.  AS
fleming, deniSe Maggie and Michael Get Dressed; written and illus. by Denise 
Fleming. Holt, 2016 40p
ISBN 978-0-8050-8794-9 $17.99   
R 2-4 yrs
When his mom tells him to get dressed, Michael puts his clothes on . . . the dog, 
Maggie. He starts with a pair of yellow socks (“Socks go on your feet, Maggie, not 
in your mouth,” he cheerfully chides the playful pup), then continues to dress his 
compliant canine in an orange-striped green shirt and blue pants (while the family 
cat observes in horror). Shoes and a hat follow before Michael realizes that he’s left 
out a crucial item: “We forgot underwear, Maggie!” he chortles, and soon Mag-
gie prances around with the underwear on her head. A reminder from his mom  
518 • The BulleTin
finally kicks Michael into gear (and into his gear), and he finally heads out of the 
house, but he returns later to find Maggie still playing with one of his shirts and a 
stray boot. The very end loses a bit of steam, but the interactions between Michael 
and Maggie are a delight, and the inclusion of color descriptors (printed in type 
of the relevant color) for the articles of clothing adds to the book’s instructional 
potential. The spare text, all dialogue, is printed in a large, dark font which, when 
coupled with the bold, simple compositions (all the action takes place against the 
same yellow-striped walls and lime-green flooring), makes this a superb selection 
for large-group sharing. Fleming’s textured pulp-painting technique is employed to 
fine effect here, and grinning, light-brown-skinned Michael and perky-eared, black 
and white Maggie are an attractive and lively duo. Although this may prompt some 
time-consuming imitation in pet-owning homes, parents, teachers, and librarians 
alike will want to have a copy of this vivacious volume at the ready.  JH
gAlAnte, CeCiliA The World from Up Here. Scholastic, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-84845-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-84854-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
It’s a classic setup: a misunderstood, reclusive woman is cast as a witch by local 
schoolchildren, until one girl brave enough to learn the truth forms an unlikely 
connection with her. The premise gains depth here because the brave girl, twelve-
year-old Wren, suffers from crippling anxiety, much of it learned from her depres-
sive mother; she is scared of everything: horses, airplanes, and of course, Witch 
Weatherly, who lives on a mountain on the outskirts of their Pennsylvania town. 
Wren is in awe of her cousin Silver, who just arrived from Florida (to the delight of 
the sixth-grade boys) and who seems fearless. When Silver heads up the mountain 
to interview Witch Weatherly for a school project, Wren finds she can’t let her go 
it alone, and ultimately she must turn to the witch for help when injury befalls her 
cousin. This is a story about looking beyond the surface of people, not only with 
Witch Weatherly but also with Silver (whose popularity is both unsolicited and 
unwanted), and it has a well-drawn narrator in Wren, who regularly shows strength 
and bravery despite her fears, whether in dealing with her younger brother, who 
has Asperger’s, or standing up to her catty “friends.” The slow-to-start friendship 
between Wren and Silver feels natural and satisfying, as does Wren’s gradual progress 
in overcoming her largely acquired fears. Though it’s a novel ideal for readers who 
could let go of a few fears, even those who don’t relate to Wren’s anxiety or family 
struggles will warm under Galante’s obvious sympathy for the middle-school set.  AA
gephArt, donnA Lily and Dunkin. Delacorte, 2016 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53675-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53674-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53676-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Rising eighth-graders Lily and Norbert become friends, with Lily dubbing Norbert 
Dunkin after the Dunkin’ Donuts they both love. They’re both keeping secrets, 
though: Norbert takes meds to battle the same bipolar illness that his dad suffered 
from; Lily is a girl but was designated male at birth, and she has not yet publicly 
transitioned to life as a girl, so Dunkin knows her only as his new pal Tim. When 
June 2016 • 519
school arrives, Dunkin is so desperate to make the basketball team that he bails on 
Lily and begins to hang out with the basketball team, who bullies Lily; meanwhile, 
Lily deals with a father who refuses to accept her as she is. As the narration alternates 
between the protagonists, it paints strong and sympathetic portraits of both Lily 
and Dunkin, and their stories are simultaneously heart-rending and empowering, 
ending on a hopeful note. Gephart tackles a lot in this title and she manages to pull 
it off with great tenderness and credibility (an extensive author’s note describes her 
lengthy research into both topics and her personal experience via her son with bipolar 
illness). Even if middle-schoolers don’t have personal experience with transgender 
identities or mental illness, the longing for belonging and the frustration and fear 
connected with bullying will be relatable entry points to this affirming and useful 
title. A list of helpful resources is included.  JH 
gilmore, Jennifer We Were Never Here. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239360-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239362-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Lizzie is sixteen when horrible gastrointestinal pain and debility puts her into a 
hospital. As she waits for treatment to quell what turns out to be a huge flare of 
ulcerative colitis, she meets Connor, a handsome young guy who visits patients 
with his therapy dog, and they forge a bond. After weeks of suffering, Hannah 
eventually undergoes a temporary colostomy, which enables her to go home and 
heal; it also means that her relationship with Connor becomes a real love affair—and 
that she learns about his troubled past and difficult present. Gilmore gives Lizzie’s 
narration a coltish wit (in a self-conscious moment, she says, “I feel my face do 
the thing where half of it mocks the other half of it”), and while a few details of 
her medical experience are unclear or unlikely, her struggle with her body and her 
identity after life-changing illness is depicted with sympathetic intimacy. Connor 
may initially seem like a formulaic romance hero, but the relationship doesn’t follow 
the predictable pattern, and his sharing of his secret with Lizzie (he was driving 
drunk when his car hit and killed a little girl, an accident he initially claims only to 
have witnessed) offers insight into his complicated unreliability but doesn’t repair 
what’s still a deeply troubled guy. The result is a poignant romance that’s about the 
joys that are unsustainable but still worthwhile.  DS
grove, S. e. The Crimson Skew. Viking, 2016 [432p] (Mapmakers)
ISBN 978-0-670-78504-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
 In this conclusion to a sharply creative, engrossing trilogy (The Glass Sentence BCCB 
9/14, The Golden Specific, BCCB 10/15), Sophia is still seeking her parents, war 
is brewing because of the new prime minister, and mysterious borders continue 
to elude all since the Great Disruption, when the world splintered into different 
eras. For a significant portion of the novel, the three main protagonists, Sophia, 
her loyal friend Theo, and Sophia’s brilliant uncle, Shadrack, are separated, each 
dealing with their own enemies and internal demons. The most urgent matter is 
stopping the upcoming war between New Occident and the territories banding 
against it, but that’s a nearly impossible task, even for this remarkably resourceful 
520 • The BulleTin
trio. Grove’s imaginative world building continues to dazzle in this third entry; 
readers who have been carefully compiling a sense of this complex world will 
receive several key pieces of information in this volume. There is also impressive 
complexity in even minor characters—it’s clear that the bad guys have been pushed 
to become who they are and the good guys have plenty of weaknesses. There’s no 
getting around the fact that new readers shouldn’t start with this volume—they’d 
miss both backstory and important emotional moments that make these events 
so powerful—but it’s an easy sell to suggest they start at the beginning. Returning 
fans, however, will likely find this an enormously satisfying wrap-up that handily 
resolves all major issues from the trilogy.  AS 
hAle, bruCe 
The Curse of the Were-Hyena. 
Disney Hyperion, 
2016 [224p] (Monstertown Mysteries)
ISBN 978-1-4847-1325-9 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Your favorite teacher slowly transforming into a highly dangerous, flesh-eating 
monster is a pretty disappointing middle-school experience. Carlos and his best pal 
Benny are therefore determined to stop the process in its tracks after they realize 
that the usually awesome Mr. Chu is exhibiting classic “were-like” behavior, such 
as stinking like a wet dog, sprouting a thick mane of hair on his usually bald head, 
and nearly decapitating a chicken with his teeth. The owner of the local comic-
book store educates the boys on further shapeshifting lore, including the fact that 
weres come in all different animals: were-sharks, were-panthers, and were-hyenas, 
which is what Mr. Chu, with his suddenly developed high-pitched laugh, seems to 
be. The kids have to find a way to tag the were-hyena that bit Mr. Chu, but there’s 
a host of suspects: the visiting lecturer from the local museum who knows a bit 
too much about shape shifters; the big, smelly guy the boys meet on the street one 
night; and basically anyone who has a gruff, angry demeanor. The boys zip from 
dangerous encounter to dangerous encounter, but their search is more chipper than 
chilling, making this an adventurous romp through the supernatural. Narrator 
Carlos’ worrywart persona makes an excellent foil to Benny’s carefree, risk-taking 
ways, and the rest of the characters—who are mainly there just to give the boys 
pertinent information—are eccentric and particularly diverse. This will appeal to 
readers looking for less creepy alternatives to R. L. Stine or a diverting take on more 
serious scary stories.  KQG 
hArrington, kAren Mayday. Little, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-29801-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-29800-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Wayne Kovok has always covered his anxieties with a nervous tic, spewing random 
facts dredged from his bottomless repertoire of all-occasion trivia. Now, however, 
his motormouth fails him when he needs it most. His favorite uncle, a soldier, has 
been killed overseas, and when Wayne and his family travel home from his funeral, 
the plane crashes. Wayne and his mother are among the few survivors, but inju-
ries to his head and neck leave Wayne literally speechless. Recovery is tough: his 
absentee dad is too busy with his new family to be of any support, and Grandpa, 
who has temporarily moved in to help, is more prone to bark orders than to render 
June 2016 • 521
assistance. As Wayne slowly adjusts to his new life after these pivotal events, some 
pleasant surprises creep over the new horizon: genuine interest from his middle-
school classmate, Sandy; friendship with Denny Rosenblatt, a stutterer he meets in 
speech therapy, who copes by singing; and fresh insight into what makes Grandpa 
tick, as he and Wayne take on a mission to locate the flag that draped Wayne’s 
uncle’s coffin and subsequently flew out of the plummeting airplane. Wayne is a 
relatable kid and an entertaining narrator, and the year-in-the-life time frame is 
the perfect span to capture the shock of his newly rocked world and his realistic 
rally, both physical and emotional. Even with one last bittersweet trial to confront, 
Wayne’s going to be okay, and heading off with a big smile and a thumbs-up.  EB
hArriSon, mArgot The Killer in Me. Hyperion, 2016 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-4847-2799-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
“My first memory of him is also my first memory of me,” says Nina about the 
anonymous boy she has dreamed about since she was four. At fourteen she saw, 
through the boy’s eyes, his killing of an old man, and since then the murders 
have only gotten worse. Now seventeen, Nina’s in a place to stop him—she’s got 
a name and location, and she manages to convince her friend Warren to take her 
on a cross-country road trip to the deserts of New Mexico. The serial killer she’s 
experienced in her sleep, however, is nothing like the man she confronts: a solid, 
decent guy looking after his girlfriend and kid. Dylan Shadwell also has a surpris-
ing connection to Nina herself: he’s adoptee Nina’s biological brother. in light of 
this new information, Nina wonders if she’s somehow the killer—or is she just 
nuts? Nina’s desperation is particularly authentic—she cares less about the truth 
than just getting an answer, since years of watching gruesome deaths is taking its 
toll. There’s still some evidence pointing towards Dylan, and Warren is growing 
increasingly wary of him even as Nina begins to believe that Dylan, the brother 
she never knew she had, is the brother she wants. The plot twists and turns like a 
sidewinding rattlesnake through the scorching heat of the desert setting; even savvy 
readers won’t be able to trust their instincts until all the clues line up, just before 
a startling ending brings painful emotional impact for Nina and Warren.  KQG
hArtinger, brent Three Truths and a Lie. Simon Pulse, 2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4960-1 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4962-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Rob wants to be accepted by his boyfriend Liam’s friend Maia and her boyfriend, 
Galen, but he’s not sure he really likes them. In fact, he’s not sure Liam really likes 
them either, but after a plan to get matching tattoos is interrupted by thugs chasing 
Galen for some reason, the four decide they should go to Maia’s family cabin in 
the remote temperate rain forest of Washington state to let things cool down for 
Galen. Rob starts getting the creeps even before they arrive at the remote cabin, 
and by the time the satellite phone goes missing and someone punctures the gas 
tank of their car, readers will definitely know what kind of story they are in. As 
horror goes it’s pretty formulaic, with the usual obligatory steamy sex scenes and 
predictable tropes. The book does gain excitement from a surprising twist, which 
plays out in a really interesting way, until the very last line of the book where it 
522 • The BulleTin
crashes and, well, fizzles rather than burns. Diehard lovers of suspenseful horror 
may still enjoy the ride and appreciate some innovative details that help bring life 
to the generic formula.  KC
hAttrup, kAren Frannie and Tru. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-241020-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-241021-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Fifteen-year-old Frannie is excited to hear that her cousin is coming to stay for the 
summer; seventeen-year-old Tru is kind of exotic in her eyes—smart, sophisticated, 
rich, and, as she overhears from her parents, gay. Anxious to appear cool to him, 
she steps out of her comfort zone, sneaking out to a bar with him his first week 
there, and they become as close as Tru allows her to be. Tru makes her feel bolder, 
and through a friend of his, Frannie meets some public school guys and enjoys her 
first kiss. She also learns things about Tru that unsettle her, causing her to question 
who she is and how she feels about herself and her family. These epiphanic mo-
ments are the real payoff for this coming-of-age story; Tru is mostly just a catalyst 
forcing Frannie to consider what integrity means in relationships and to confront 
some uncomfortable truths about herself and her friends as she embarks on a new 
chapter in her life. These truths have mostly to do with class, race, and the nagging 
sense that her family is somehow second best. She also learns, however, how to play 
Tru’s game of self-protective glibness that, while it goes against her constitutional 
honesty, adds one more dimension to her. Fans of Lockhart’s The Disreputable His-
tory of Frankie Landau-Banks (BCCB 3/08) will appreciate the probing complexity 
of a working-class white girl finding her feet and her courage.  KC
heidiCker, ChriStiAn mCkAy Cure for the Common Universe. Simon, 
2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5027-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5029-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
When overweight, antisocial sixteen-year-old Jaxon’s predilection for video games 
finally gets on his father’s last nerve, Jaxon is sent to a video game rehab center in 
the Utah desert. Now he earns points not with a controller but by exercising, eating 
healthy, and attending group therapy. There are plenty of like-minded gamers to 
bond with, but Jaxon’s not here to make friends. He has one goal: earn enough points 
to win his freedom, hopefully in time to make a date with the seeming girl of his 
dreams. Soon his crazy antics damage the progress of those around him, but a foray 
into the desert finally puts him on the right path, just in time to maybe set things 
right. As a game-versus-life story, this novel is reminiscent of Vizzini’s The Other 
Normals (BCCB 11/12) or Yang’s Level Up (BCCB 6/11). Notably (and happily), 
however, it avoids the typical game-blaming and recognizes excessive time online 
as the symptom, not the cause, of these kids’ problems. Jaxon is on the jerky side, 
so he’ll appeal most to those who love antiheroes, while the adults are cheerfully 
overdrawn as Luddites whose only response to video games is moral panic. Truly 
likable, however, are Jaxon’s co-rehabbers and the single gamer-counselor, who are 
more balanced than Jaxon and who wonderfully call him out for his privileged, 
often misogynist, self-pitying. Gamer readers will flock to this novel and fall in 
June 2016 • 523
love with its insider jokes, game-allusions, and snarky attitude. They’re also likely 
to identify with Jaxon’s frustrations, root for him to win, and appreciate seeing him 
learn a (very) little something in the end.  AM
heSt, Amy My Old Pal, Oscar; illus. by Amy Bates. Abrams, 2016 32p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1901-1 $16.95   
R* 4-7 yrs
One gray day, a puppy alone on the beach meets a boy. The boy initially resists 
the pup (“I know what you want. You want to be pals. Well, we can’t be pals”) but 
relents enough to walk with the little pooch along the beach. As they walk, the boy 
talks a little about Oscar, his beloved dog who died, and whose memory still looms 
too large for the boy to fall easily for another dog. When gray clouds turn into 
thunder, though, the boy finally embraces his new pal, scoops him up, and runs in 
the rain to the boy’s—and now also the puppy’s—home. It’s hard to resist a classic 
puppy-finds-home story, and this one gains extra poignancy and dimension from 
addressing the aftermath of loss. The first-person narration is essentially one-sided 
dialogue rather than a formal narrative, giving immediacy to the proceedings. Pencil 
and watercolor art balances the adorableness of the small, fluffy, button-nosed dog 
with the gloomy leaden skies; skilled compositions shift from puppy-level to kid 
level, from vignettes to double-page spreads, and cleverly use the geometry of the 
empty pier and its support posts. Kids who’ve lost pets will especially appreciate 
the message of missing your old pet while welcoming the new, and dog lovers will 
heave a sigh of relief at the pup’s happy ending.  DS
higginbothAm, AnAStASiA Death Is Stupid; written and illus. by Anastasia Hig-
ginbotham. The Feminist Press, 2016 64p
ISBN 978-155861-925-8 $16.95   
R 6-10 yrs
This original little overview of bereavement follows a young boy in the aftermath of 
his grandmother’s death. Main text counterpoints speech bubbles as the boy inter-
rogates the rampant platitudes (“She’s in a better place.” “Would I be in a better 
place if I died?”; “She can rest.” “Why can’t she rest HERE with me and still be 
alive?”). The main text goes on to talk accessibly about responses to grief, grief for 
pets, and ways of remembering the dead while the boy negotiates his loss in art and 
dialogue, eventually finding joy in tending his grandmother’s garden and learning 
her recipes. The iconoclastic approach will draw in kids who are grieving but are 
frustrated by other people’s clichéd (though well intentioned) attempts at support. 
While the writing has occasional awkward moments, it walks solidly through key 
experiences of death and bereavement; the focus on the legitimacy of grief for a 
lost pet is particularly useful. There’s a theatrical component to the collage artwork, 
which blends drawn faces and fabric scraps to make our somberly dressed brown-
skinned protagonist and then adds photo elements and speech balloons on cut paper; 
the effect is a robustness that’s a refreshing contrast to condolence-card gauziness. 
The book ends with a section focusing on activities, which provide useful outlets 
and library-vexing invitations to write and paste in the book. It’s useful to have a 
picture-book-age volume that approaches death with some grit and irreverence, 
and this is a solid advance on the familiar gentle tales of pet loss.  DS
524 • The BulleTin
holm, Jennifer l. Full of Beans. Random House, 2016 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51037-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51036-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51039-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
The Great Depression has laid much of the country low, and Key West residents 
are no exception. Beans and his kid brother Kermit make a few cents turning in old 
bottles (even though the shop owner is a cheat) but soon discover a more profitable 
gig, helping a rum runner sneak his hooch off the pier in the dead of night. Beans 
understands full well what he’s gotten into, but between his helping the family 
while his dad looks for work and reveling in the thrill of diverting the community’s 
attention by pulling the fire alarm when the boss’s ship come in, there’s no question 
it’s worth it. Of course every action has its consequence, and when firefighters later 
fail to hustle to the scene of a residential fire thinking it’s another prank, Beans’ best 
friend loses his house. Beans is a thoroughly likable kid, and middle-grade readers 
will readily see how he gets drawn into trouble, particularly since the pay is good 
and his criminal boss actually treats him more fairly that the guy who buys his 
empty bottles. Beans’ serio-comic life of crime plays out against everyday episodes 
of kid shenanigans, and also within the context of a New Deal program to spruce 
up Key West and turn it into the tourist have it is now. Author notes offer some 
historical background and comment on some of the cultural references and lingo 
scattered throughout the text. Kids who enjoyed visiting Depression-era Alaska in 
Dagg’s Sweet Home Alaska (BCCB 3/16) will be entertained by a look at the same 
period in the opposite corner of the country.  EB
holm, mAtthew Marvin and the Moths; by Matthew Holm and Jonathan Follett; 
illus. by Matthew Holm. Scholastic, 2016 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-87674-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-87677-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Marvin knows middle school can be tough, but he wasn’t prepared for being grouped 
with the outcasts and insulted by giant, talking moths. It’s not as bad as it seems, 
though, because the other two outcasts are actually terrific friend material, and the 
moths even come in handy when a giant, Shakespeare-quoting, murderous spider 
threatens the town. It’s a loopy plot that switches with wild abandon between 
middle-school woes (first dances, bullies) and bloodsucking arachnids. The spider 
obsessed with the Bard is actually quite a memorable villain, so it’s almost a shame 
that he meets his end, but it’s just as well given his homicidal tendencies and he 
gets plenty of page time before then. Full-page black and white illustrations break 
up the text and add a bit of humor. Holm fans may be expecting more illustra-
tions, but the text feels right in line with his other books—there is an underdog 
main character, offbeat humor, and a clear narrative arc that resolves cleanly. Final 
art not seen.  AS
June 2016 • 525
JenkinS, Steve Flying Frogs and Walking Fish: Leaping Lemurs, Tumbling Toads, 
Jet-Propelled Jellyfish, and More Surprising Ways That Animals Move; by Steve Jenkins 
and Robin Page; illus. by Steve Jenkins. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 34p
ISBN 978-0-544-63090-1 $17.99   
R Gr. 2-4
In their ongoing exploration of the natural world, Jenkins and Page have addressed a 
variety of subjects, and here they turn to animal motion and some critters who move 
through the world in surprising ways. Each section starts with a featured example 
and then explores a gallery of practitioners—the walking section, for example, goes 
from an octopus (which walks on two of its tentacles) to bats, millipedes, kanga-
roos (which use their tails as a fifth leg), etc. The book also catalogues leapers (the 
legendary leaping lizard jumps several times its own body length), swimmers (Asian 
elephants swim “using their trunks as snorkels”), climbers (coconut crabs can climb 
trees), gliders (a flying snake can sail from tree to tree), rollers (pangolins can roll 
away from a threat), and jetters (“A frogfish . . . surges forward by expelling water 
from its gills”). The movements aren’t always clearly conveyed (vignettes floating 
against white backgrounds make it hard to envision the environmental interaction), 
but otherwise the featured animals are well chosen for diversity and interest, and the 
locomotion methods are startling and intriguing. This is therefore a useful addition 
to the ever-expanding Jenkins/Page nature study shelves. A two-page overview of 
the featured animals is appended.  DS
Jiménez, Joe Bloodline. Piñata, 2016 [128p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55885-828-2 $11.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
With three in-school fights by Thanksgiving, seventeen-year-old Abraham has 
pushed his school past tolerance and his grandmother, who takes care of him, to 
desperation. Determined that Abraham needs a male presence in the house to guide 
him, she invites Abraham’s shady uncle Claudio back into her home. Uncle Clau-
dio’s crudeness is offputting, but Abraham begins to enjoy his uncle’s willingness to 
teach his nephew weightlifting and take him to the gym. Soon, though, Abraham 
becomes uneasy with his uncle’s desire to monetize the boy’s combativeness in the 
boxing ring, but Abraham’s taste for battle and his desire to find out about his late 
father, Claudio’s brother, keep him entangled. The intensity, second-person nar-
ration, and stylistic embrace of lyrical and figurative language make this novella 
read like a short story. Though the style renders the prose convoluted at times, 
this is an absorbing tale, and Jiménez vividly draws Abraham as a teen boy on the 
cusp of adulthood who’s trying to figure out what manhood is and whether he’s 
cursed never to obtain it. The descriptions of his impulse to fight and how fighting 
feels to him are convincing and compelling, and his gentle romance with Ophelia 
gives him added dimension. The story’s clear modeling on Hamlet adds interest, 
but readers don’t need to recognize the allusions to appreciate the story (though 
they may help make sense of an otherwise startling end). While this would make 
an obvious pairing with a reading of the play, it could draw reluctant readers with 
good skills but low interest.  DS
526 • The BulleTin
keplinger, kody Run. Scholastic, 2016 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-83113-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-83115-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Bo Dickinson is the daughter of ne’er-do-well parents, with her 
family tawdrily infamous in their small town. Her friend Agnes is the legally blind 
daughter of upstanding, churchgoing parents, who isn’t allowed to do anything 
that her parents aren’t absolutely sure is safe. Both girls chafe at their existences, so 
when Bo’s mother gets arrested for dealing meth, the girls take off together so that 
Bo can avoid foster care and Agnes can escape her overprotective parents. Bo tells 
the story in the present, while Agnes fills in the history of their unlikely friendship, 
which features Bo and her helping each other with homework, Bo and her cousin 
Colt taking Agnes to parties, and Bo becoming a fixture at Agnes’s dinner table. 
While the girls’ friendship is understandable and authentically portrayed, Agnes’ 
level of blindness, explained as Leber’s congenital amaurosis, is less easy to credit 
from a narrative standpoint, since it seems to restrict her mostly to a narratively 
useful but educationally implausible level. Additionally, Bo’s bisexuality and her 
negative experiences with foster care feel like a box-tick for a predictable contem-
porary YA. That said, however, Keplinger crafts voices for her two narrators that 
readers familiar with the demographic of small southern towns will recognize as 
true to life. Agnes’s naïveté is credibly contrasted with Bo’s craftiness as they each 
use the other in their plans to escape; readers might sometimes lose patience with 
both of them, but Agnes’s nuanced understanding of Bo ensures that they will 
never lose sympathy.  KC
keSSler, liz Read Me Like a Book. Candlewick, 2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-8131-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
British teen Ashleigh is under a lot of stress: she’s got exams coming up, her parents 
are splitting up, she and her best friend are on the outs, and when she finally does 
decide to have sex, she suffers a pregnancy scare. The only good thing in her life is 
her new English teacher, who seems to really listen to her when she talks, encourages 
her to join a debating club, and helps her prepare for her exams. Ashleigh gradually 
finds herself thinking about Miss Murray all the time, but when she confesses her 
feelings, Miss Murray immediately balks and withdraws from her teaching posi-
tion, leaving Ashleigh to work out her confusion on her own. Unlike the newer 
trend of LGBT books that feature characters who have always known their sexual 
orientation, Ashleigh takes a slow walk toward self-awareness through a swamp of 
contemporary relationship problems that tangle her emotions in knots. It’s therefore 
a little implausible that everybody she comes out to seems to have known before 
she did, but it’s good that when she’s finally certain, she’s both really certain and 
supported; she also sees her teacher for at least part of who she was—a helpful step 
along the way rather than a destination in herself. Readers who are weary of hyper-
bolic, joke-a-minute identity quests on the one hand and full-blown melodramatic 
angst on the other will appreciate the patient searching depicted here.  KC 
June 2016 • 527
lACour, ninA You Know Me Well; by Nina LaCour and David Levithan. St. 
Martin’s Griffin, 2016  [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-09864-1 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-09866-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 10-12
Mark is openly gay, but his boyfriend Ryan isn’t. Still, the two high school juniors 
are going to San Francisco’s Pride Week, where Mark hopes to get some kind of 
clarity on their relationship. Kate is headed to a party, where her best friend has 
set up a meeting with her cousin, Violet, but she panics at the last minute and 
ends up at the bar where Mark is having his heart broken as Ryan starts flirting 
with someone else. Though they go to the same school, Mark and Kate have never 
really talked, but it’s clear that they are kindred spirits, so they head off together to 
a party that changes their lives forever. The rest of the week evolves into a whirl-
wind of fantasy and heartbreak that provokes copious amounts of soul-searching 
and results in romantic dreams realized for Kate and hopelessly dashed for Mark. 
Kate and Violet’s relationship careens through its rollercoaster climbs and drops 
way too quickly for realism, embodying the lesbian stereotype of marriage after 
the first date that Kate herself points out as false, while both Mark and Ryan turn 
into clichéd puddles of bedridden teen heartbreak. Generally speaking, however, 
these are some emotionally astute and articulate teens, parsing the philosophical 
distinctions between friendship and romantic love with poetic fervor (including 
some actual poems that are quite good), and nobly biting their quivering lips while 
they sacrifice their own feelings to support their friends. LaCour and Levithan are 
both dab hands at utopian romance, of course, so if there is nothing but love, grace, 
and glitter for everyone in the end, well, fans will have expected nothing less.  KC 
lAidlAw, S. J. Fifteen Lanes. Tundra, 2016 300p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-101-91780-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-101-91782-4 $10.99   
R Gr. 10-12
Noor is a devadasi—a young woman destined to follow her mother into sex work 
in the red-light district of Mumbai when she comes of age. Until then, though, 
she is taken care of by the women of the brothel, and she in turn cares for her 
younger sister and baby brother, who was born after her mother became HIV 
positive. Grace is the wealthy white daughter of a CEO who also lives in Mumbai, 
and after she’s seduced into sexting a naked picture of herself that goes viral in her 
school, she signs up for community service with an NGO that helps the daughters 
of sex workers. It’s through that NGO that she meets Noor and her siblings, and 
she and a friend manage to rescue them as danger escalates. It helps to know that a 
reasonably happy, though violently hard-won, outcome for fourteen-year-old Noor 
is possible given the raw, crushing sadness and unflinching honesty of Laidlaw’s 
account of life in the sex trade. Most people, even in this story, don’t escape, and 
Laidlaw pulls no punches about the rapes, drugs, squalor, and abuse the sex workers 
and their children suffer at the hands of ruthless bosses and young boys who feel 
entitled to take on the roles of abusers as soon as they are able. Noor is book-smart, 
but even that ends up putting her in danger just when she thought it was going to 
be her way out. If help is going to come to these children, the book suggests, it has 
to come from outside, and books like these, which effectively encourage empathy 
528 • The BulleTin
and incite hope while painting realistic portraits, are an important part of raising 
awareness and inspiring response.  KC
lAm, mAple My Little Sister and Me; written and illus. by Maple Lam. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2016 34p
ISBN 978-0-06-239697-6 $17.99   
R 3-5 yrs
It’s our young hero’s first time walking his little sister home from the bus stop by 
himself, a job he takes very seriously. As the two walk along, the boy worries about 
her boldness (“She chases after a big dog five times her size”) and redirects her when 
she needs the bathroom (“Can you wait until we get home?”). When little sister 
bolts from a thunderclap and falls down in a puddle, big brother is there to help 
her up and cheer her up, and they arrive home safely to their proud mother. This 
is gently told yet sharply focused, with both the narrator and his charge teetering 
authentically between anxiety and desire for independence, and the details and the 
dialogue will ring true to any older sib who’s tried to travel with a younger one. 
Colored pencil and watercolor illustrations are clean and uncluttered yet cozy, 
with subtle facial details that suggest the family may be Asian American; there’s a 
Peanuts echo in the big-headed, wide-mouthed kids as they travel through white 
space or pause on a minimally depicted town street. Little sister is the high-energy 
center of most scenes, with motion lines testament to her speed as big brother tries 
to keep up. Homey where Portis’ Wait (BCCB 10/15) was contemplative, this will 
provide both preparation and recognition for older and younger sibs alike.  DS
lArSon, hope Compass South; illus. by Rebecca Mock. Ferguson/Farrar, 
2016 224p (Four Points)
ISBN 978-0-374-30043-2 $17.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Two sets of red-headed twins—Alexander and Cleopatra Dodge, and Silas and 
Edwin Clement—are focused on bettering their parentless situations by claiming 
to be the long-lost children of well-to-do San Franciscan Jacob Kimball. Obviously 
there can only be hope for two of the four duplicitous claimants, and as they head 
westward from New York in 1860, the rival pairs collide and reconfigure, with Alex 
and Edwin shanghaied as crewmen and rounding the Horn aboard the Anita, and 
Cleo (now passing as a boy named Patrick) and Silas stowing away on a steamer 
connecting with ground transportation across the Isthmus of Panama. That’s just 
for starters. The Dodges are being pursued by Luther, youthful head of the Black 
Hook Gang, who wants the kids’ watch and pocket knife, which combine as a pirate 
treasure map. And then there are pirates. And a miraculous rescue by the mystical 
wife of a first mate. And a puma attack in the jungle. And kissing. And somehow 
Larson and Mock pull it all off, greatly aided by the graphic-novel format that al-
lows viewers to track characters by their consistent clothing, and that also confers 
the license for over-the-top adventure. Rather than stranding her characters with a 
cliffhanger, Larson awards them a bit of respite, with a couple of loose ends tied up 
and the possibility of family stability that all four kids covet. This is just a brief lull, 
though, and the upcoming sequel, Knife’s Edge, will keep the adventure rolling.  EB
June 2016 • 529
lAwSon, JeSSiCA Waiting for Augusta. Simon, 2016 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4839-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4841-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6 
Never tell anyone the whole truth. Don’t talk to people you shouldn’t be talking to, 
or your wandering time will be up. When it’s time to leave, leave. Benjamin Put-
ter learns these rules for wanderers (really runaways) from the bold and enigmatic 
Noni as the two eleven-year olds make their way from Ben’s tiny Alabama town to 
Augusta, Georgia. Though the two at first make uneasy companions, Noni embold-
ens the cautious, sensitive Ben, and the two soon are hopping trains, “borrowing” 
pickup trucks, and relying on the kindness of strangers to achieve their missions: 
Ben believes his late father’s voice is telling him to spread his dad’s ashes on famous 
course at the Augusta National Golf Club, and Noni seeks a miracle regarding the 
father she lost. Noni doesn’t doubt that Ben’s father is talking to him from the 
beyond, urging him on to Augusta and reminding him that golf and barbecue are 
microcosms of life—a sore spot given that his daddy always wanted him to be a 
golfer or take over the family barbecue business, dismissing Ben’s artistic talents in 
the process. Lawson makes skillful and powerful use of magical realism to approach 
a host of topics, from father-son relationships to the racial dynamics of the early 
1970s Deep South, with plenty of golf wisdom and trivia thrown in. The journey 
to Augusta and its accompanying perils will keep readers turning the pages, while 
Ben’s inner journey to making peace with his father packs an emotional wallop and 
Noni’s backstory—revealed with an effective twist—is poignant and memorable. 
The only thing missing is an author’s note about the golfers and the hallowed course 
treated so lovingly here—even golf naysayers will want to know more. Insightful, 
humorous, and deeply moving, this novel is one for a kiddo needing a miracle, or 
just a really meaningful read.  AA
lee, J. m. Shadows of the Dark Crystal; illus. by Cory Godbey. Grosset & 
Dunlap, 2016 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-448-48289-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
In this first volume of a planned four-book series set in the world of Jim Henson’s 
The Dark Crystal, the events take place years before the film and focus on a Gelfling 
girl, Naia. Naia leaves her cozy, loving home to find out what happened to her 
twin brother, who has been accused of treason against the Skeksis overlords. As 
she travels, terrifying secrets emerge about the land as a whole and the true intent 
of the Skeksis. The lush forests, unusual creatures, and creative social structures 
are all reminiscent of the film, but this is more than just an homage to Henson’s 
work. The plot is sharp and clever, and the pace is realistically variable; readers will 
feel as though they are soaking in details with Naia as she travels, and then they’ll 
be appropriately startled by the abrupt change when things suddenly become an 
emergency. While young readers probably won’t have seen the film, the books might 
lead them to it; even if they don’t have that point of reference, Henson’s world is 
richly imagined here, and it will be well worth the projected four books to explore 
the landscape, characters, and storylines. Full-bleed pages of digital art resemble 
movie stills; an appendix and glossary offer a bit of background.  AS
530 • The BulleTin
lee, StACey Outrun the Moon. Putnam, 2016 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17541-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Mercy is not going to settle for what is expected of her in the Chinese community 
in early twentieth century San Francisco, which is to be happy with little education, 
an arranged marriage, and never leaving Chinatown. She brazenly makes a deal with 
the director of an elite school, managing to gain admittance, and even though it’s 
not what she first imagined (it’s far less academically rigorous than she would like), 
it’s still a path to a better life for her and her family. She’s barely settled in, however, 
when the 1906 earthquake hits, and suddenly, all of Mercy’s leadership skills will 
be put to the test as she must negotiate the the complete collapse of the school 
and manage fancy schoolmates who don’t know how to survive without hired help. 
Mercy is a splendid narrator; her grit and humor makes the steady flow of racism 
she encounters even more jarring. Historical fiction fans are in for a real treat, and 
an author’s note (actually two, a short one that gives the basics and a longer one for 
those more interested) details which parts are drawn right from history. For readers 
unfamiliar with the startlingly hostility toward Chinese immigrants in the United 
States around the turn of the century, this may be a surprise, but unfortunately 
there are plenty of modern examples of racism that they’ll be able to link this to.  AS
long, SuSAn hill The Magic Mirror: Concerning a Lonely Princess, a Foundling 
Girl, a Scheming King, and a Pickpocket Squirrel. Knopf, 2016 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51135-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51134-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51136-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Margaret and her guardian Minka have barely scraped by for years, and while Minka 
clearly loves Margaret, she seems to have decided that the way to help the girl exist 
in this cold, medieval world is to toughen her up through meanness. When Mar-
garet glimpses something in a magic mirror, she convinces herself that she should 
journey to find what she saw, and off she goes, even with her long-injured leg and 
penniless state. Margaret’s pure heart leads her astray on occasion, as she is too wont 
to believe in others, but she’s so earnest and charming that it’s impossible not to 
root for her as she learns she may be a princess long believed dead. Unfortunately, 
many moments are conveniently resolved through overheard conversations or the 
appearance of the right person, and there’s consequently little tension. In addition, 
there are so many characters that it’s hard to sort them all out, particularly given the 
zippy pace clearly meant to keep things moving. Despite the book’s issues, though, 
Minka is a gem of a character—all irascible bluster and slowly warming heart—and 
her evolution makes her much more worthy of Margaret, who deserves a lot better 
than life has given her.  AS
luurtSemA, nAt Goldfish. Feiwel, 2016 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-08918-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-08919-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
“My name’s Lou and I’m a fifteen-year-old ex-swimmer,” says our protagonist sadly 
after her dismal race results get her kicked off the team that had been her whole 
June 2016 • 531
life. Respite from her misery comes in the form of three guys (two of them her 
schoolmates) and their goofy plan to make themselves famous on a TV talent show 
with an underwater swimming routine, and Lou finds herself agreeing to coach 
them. Before she realizes it, she’s invested in the odd trio’s odd plan, even when 
their attempts to find a practice tank lead them to break the law by swimming in 
the aquarium (resulting in a video that goes viral). She develops an unexpected 
friendship with the boys that keeps her invested in the effort through setbacks—
and the revelation that they’re competing against Lou’s old teammates. Though 
the book overdoes the quippy silliness at times, it’s mostly an effective blend of 
genuine emotion and daffy humor, and there’s terrific originality in the plot. British 
comedy writer Luurtsema skillfully blends the believable folly of three young guys 
who just want to be on TV with the genuine artistic possibilities of their routine, 
just as she combines Lou’s authentic shock at losing a key part of her life (and her 
drifting from her swim star best friend just as that friend most needs her) with 
satiric commentary and broad family humor. Fans of Limb’s Girl, 15: Charming 
but Insane (BCCB 10/04) and Nicolson’s Angus, Thongs, and Full Frontal Snogging 
(BCCB 5/00) will find this deeply enjoyable as well as being a thematically ap-
propriate poolside read.  DS
mAberry, JonAthAn, ed. Scary Out There. Simon, 2016 [512p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5070-6 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5072-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-12
In this collection of horror stories, the motifs range from the usual run of guts and 
blood to the suspenseful what’s-around-the-corner premise to, and perhaps most 
interestingly, the monster in the human. Twenty-one authors offer up their vision of 
fright, and their success at doing so varies wildly. Brenna Yovanoff (The Replacement, 
BCCB 9/10, etc.) opens up the collection with chilling reference to GamerGate, 
in a female protagonist who realizes that no matter how much armor she puts on 
or how many weapons she has in both the virtual world and the real world, she 
will always be hunted. “Chlorine-Damaged Hair, and Other Pool Hazards,” by 
Kendare Blake (Anna Dressed in Blood, BCCB 12/11) is a gruesome tale of inventive 
revenge, slick with blood and told by a coolly calculating murderer. Many of the 
stories, however, read like condensed problem novels with generic horror tropes 
(cutting, suicides, and eating disorders are deployed next to ghosts in the computer, 
demons, etc.), and others are drab retreads of urban myths. Humor raises some to 
well-crafted dark comedies—or comedic darkness—with Death portrayed as the 
afterlife’s droll middleman with a soft spot for Twinkies in the aptly titled “Death 
and Twinkies,” and the narrator of “Make It Right” is appealingly cheerful even as 
she holds a murder weapon. As uneven as it is, this may still score a thrill among 
horror fans and be a boon to storytellers as well.  KQG
mAbry, SAmAnthA A Fierce and Subtle Poison. Algonquin, 2016 279p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61620-521-8 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61620-588-1 $10.99   
R* Gr. 8-12
Despite being the gringo son of the gringo racketeer who’s turning Old San Juan 
into multiple resorts, sixteen-year-old Luke is mostly tolerated by the town’s citizens. 
He’s also a bit of a player, though, so when the dead body of his latest romantic 
532 • The BulleTin
conquest washes ashore and the girl’s little sister goes missing, tolerance quickly 
becomes suspicion. Luke’s got suspicions of his own, however, particularly about 
the supposed curse wrought upon a nearby boarded-up house. He’s the only one 
who knows the truth about its residents: Isabel, a teenage girl whose touch kills 
like a venomous plant, and her botanist father, who is desperately searching for a 
cure. It’s never made clear if Isa’s condition is a curse or a biological anomaly, so 
she acts as either the clash or collusion between the spiritual and the scientific for 
Luke, who’s teetering between hesitant faith and reluctant realism. His sympathy 
for her meets with his own tendency toward self-pity and self-destruction, a perfect 
storm that creates his attraction to her. There is also a painful contrast for him, as 
he watches Isa’s father risk everything—even his morality—to save his daughter 
while it’s quite clear Luke’s own father has little love for his son. Mabry weaves in 
elements of Caribbean folklore and mythology along with instances of real events 
in Puerto Rico’s recent past, shaking the solid ground of fiction just enough to 
disorient even the most supernatural-resistant reader. Thematically similar to Madi-
son’s September Girls (BCCB 7/13) and Moskowitz’s Teeth (BCCB 2/13), this is a 
coming-of-age story set against the mystic and the tragic, and it will likely leave a 
mark on readers for days.  KQG
mASon, JAne b. Without Annette. Scholastic, 2016 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-81995-4 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-81996-1 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Josie thinks that her plan to get into a boarding school in Connecticut and bring 
her girlfriend, Annette, along with her is perfect: it gets Annette out of her abusive 
household, and it gets both of them out of their tiny Minnesota town. The two 
have been sexually active and closer than close for years, so narrator Josie expects 
more of the same at school. However, the two aren’t paired as roommates, and 
their mutual pact to not come out immediately means that Josie feels closeted 
and lonely, so she wonders if she made the best choice. It’s a nice twist, and still a 
relatively rare one, that a book featuring GLBTQ characters isn’t about discovery 
and coming out but rather about a romance that is well established and two girls 
who may not know who they heck they are as teens but who both feel pretty secure 
in their queer identities. The book does run shallow at times, surrounding the 
girls with problems of wondering who will steal the next bottle of booze or how 
to sneak into the indoor pool at night, but that’s not unenviable. The authentic, 
passionate, newly complicated romance between Annette and Josie is one to savor, 
even if readers roll their eyes on occasion at the complaints of the rich and lucky 
who surround the two girls.  AS
mASon, Simon Running Girl. Fickling/Scholastic, 2016 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-338-03642-8 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-338-03643-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old genius slacker Garvie Smith has never felt the inclination to make 
an effort about anything. Then Chloe Dow, a beautiful fifteen-year-old classmate 
and Garvie’s former girlfriend, is brutally killed, and Garvie can’t resist trying to 
solve her murder. Soon he’s skipping school, tracking clues through the seedier 
June 2016 • 533
parts of town, and questioning friends and locals alike. Meanwhile the ambitious 
Inspector Singh, who worries he’s about to be shown up by a kid, wants Garvie to 
mind his own business, while Garvie’s hardworking single mother just wants him 
back at school. Interfering grownups are the least of Garvie’s problems, though; 
uncovering the truth about Chloe might just expose other crimes people will kill 
to keep secret, and cracking the case might cost Garvie everything. This riveting 
mystery offers plenty of action along with a smart, intricate puzzle where even the 
red herrings contribute to the final solution. Garvie, meanwhile, succeeds as the 
disaffected smartass—part classic, sardonic British detective, part cynical hard-
boiled PI—and readers will enjoy watching him effortlessly stay two steps ahead 
of the professionals. A memorable if two-dimensional cast of social outcasts and 
ne’er-do-wells populates the noir-ish cityscape, while Singh emerges as a likably 
reluctant ally who learns to appreciate playing Lestrade to Garvie’s Sherlock. In 
fact, hand this to fans of BBC’s Sherlock for a sure-fire hit or to readers looking for 
a boy-detective alternative to the recent spate of girl-centered YA mysteries.  AM
mASon-blACk, Jennifer Devil and the Bluebird. Amulet, 2016 327p
ISBN 978-1-4197-2000-0 $17.95   
R Gr. 8-10
Since Blue’s beloved mother died, her only family is her wandering sister, Cass. After 
Cass fails to call when promised to, Blue makes a rash deal at a crossroads with a 
woman in a red dress. In the bargain, she loses her voice but gets a limited amount 
of time to win it back and find her sister—not a terrific deal in exchange for the 
promise of her soul, but Blue’s desperate. On her way with a guitar, a notebook, and 
magical boots that tell her if she’s headed in the right direction to find her sibling, 
she quickly discovers that deals made with supernatural forces are never as simple 
as they appear. Not only do the rules keep shifting, so does her understanding of 
who she actually made her deal with (and what other beings, good and evil, are out 
there). There’s intense poignancy in this story, as Blue learns about her mother, her 
mother’s lesbian partner who she believed abandoned them years before, and herself, 
suddenly silent while also newly brimming with questions and stories. Old-school 
Weetzie Bat fans will be enthralled with this musical, meandering book brimming 
with magical realism and all sorts of ways to find and give love.  AS
mAy, elizAbeth The Vanishing Throne. Chronicle, 2016 [456p] (The 
Falconer Trilogy)
ISBN 978-1-4521-2882-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Despite her best efforts, Lady Aileana Kameron failed to hold the seal that would 
prevent faeries from entering the mortal world and wreaking destruction (in The 
Falconer, BCCB 6/14). Now she is held captive and is being tortured in the faery 
realm by Lonnrach, a power-hungry fae certain that Aileana, the final Falconer and 
last guardian of the human race, is the secret weapon he needs to secure dominance 
over both worlds. Aileana’s rescue comes in the form of Aithinne, the fae sister of 
Kiaran, Aileana’s beloved. Aileana returns to Edinburgh to find it a ruin of ash and 
death, but she knows there will only be more violence if Lonnrach is able to find 
her so she must risk her life yet again to stop him. We don’t often see a YA heroine 
not succeed in her task of saving the world, and here readers witness the aftermath 
of that failure, a devastation that is portrayed not just in the wrecked buildings and 
534 • The BulleTin
ruined houses but also in the scarred faces and dead expressions of the humans who 
have survived. Aileana may not have become the hero she hoped but she’s certainly 
a survivor, and she’s able to put aside her trauma to focus on the upcoming battle. 
May’s vivid descriptions lend a thrilling gracefulness to the epic fight scenes between 
Aileana’s team and the pursuing faeries, while an appropriately quiet, subdued tone 
settles over the interactions between characters, including the romance between 
Aileana and Kiaran. An ever-expanding mythology and a cliffhanger ending ensures 
that readers will follow Aileana to very end of this trilogy.  KQG 
meSSner, kAte The Seventh Wish. Bloomsbury, 2016 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-376-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-377-3 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6 
Charlie’s plan is simple: do a little ice fishing with her best friend and bring some 
cash to help cover the cost of a solo dress for her upcoming Irish dance competition. 
When a magical fish keeps winding up on the wrong end of her fishing pole, granting 
her wishes in exchange for its release, life becomes more complicated. Though she 
tries to use her wishes to get her friend on the basketball team, her mom a new job, 
and her sister, Abby—whom Charlie deeply admires but who has been increasingly 
distant since going away to college—home more often, the wishes come at a cost. 
Despite the occasional humor, Messner mostly steers the book’s whimsical premise 
into darker, less traveled territory, using Charlie’s backfired wishes to reveal fissures 
in her happy family in the form of her sister’s heroin addiction. In an authentic 
and earnest twelve-year old’s voice, Charlie struggles to reconcile the bright, high-
achieving Abby with the image of drug users painted for her in school, as well 
as to understand how her sister, who pledged not to do drugs, could make such 
choices. Messner uses her particular brand of magical realism to face some tough 
but necessary stuff—as her author’s note observes, the largest growth in heroin use 
is among eighteen to twenty-five-year-olds, and purveyors don’t necessarily live in 
the dirty tenement halls that Charlie, and likely many readers, think. In addition 
to providing a relatable protagonist battling the realistic ripple effects of a family 
member’s addiction, where everyone else’s needs fall by the wayside in an effort 
to help the addict, Messner offers a list of resources for readers wanting support 
or further information. While an obvious fit for the kids facing similar struggles, 
this makes an enjoyable and informative story for the wishing crowd as well.  AA
millS, ClAudiA Cody Harmon, King of Pets; illus. by Rob Shepperson. Ferguson/
Farrar, 2016 [144p] (Franklin School Friends)
ISBN 978-0-374-30223-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Since Cody loves animals more than anything, he’s thrilled when his school an-
nounces an upcoming pet show. Even good things bring complications, though: 
Cody needs to muster entry fees for each pet he enters, money he doesn’t have, so 
he allows a few petless classmates to borrow from his nine pets (two dogs, two cats, 
one pig, one rooster, and three chickens) for the show to ensure that each animal 
gets a chance to shine. He’s torn between his desire to show his pets off and his 
concern about their safety with his classmates, though, especially with his pal Tobit, 
who doesn’t have the best track record with animals. Like the other titles in the 
June 2016 • 535
Franklin School Friends series, this outing exudes believability and readability, with 
Cody a generally easygoing guy who’d rather spend time with his beloved pig than 
write his overdue report. Mills also tackles a highly sensitive and age-appropriate 
ethical dilemma as Cody worries about negotiating his friendship with Tobit, who 
angrily threw a rock at a squirrel; the book clearly backs Cody in his concern but 
also avoids demonizing Tobit, who acts mostly out of thoughtlessness and comes 
around after some sage principal intervention. The theme makes this entry in the 
series particularly suitable for discussion as well as particularly inviting to pet lov-
ers. Shepperson’s black and white illustrations evince lively linework and a gift for 
depicting the casual disarray of young-kid life.  DS
miyAreS, dAniel Bring Me a Rock!; written and illus. by Daniel Miyares. Si-
mon, 2016 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4602-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4603-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-5 yrs
With a crown atop his head, a despotic grasshopper utters the titular command 
to a beleaguered quintet of his insect subjects. They obey as he looks on, or looks 
up from his book, with dismissiveness or downright scorn, asking a mantis if 
that’s the best he’s got and belittling a wee beetle for his offering of a puny pebble. 
Megalomaniacal to the core, the grasshopper is satisfied only when perched atop 
the resulting tower of rocks, where he looms over the land, sipping a drink with 
an umbrella—until the tower starts to teeter. Just as it seems to be curtains for this 
green giant, the beetle realizes that that puny pebble might be useful after all. This 
tale of egalitarianism and the worth of even the smallest contribution emerges in 
staccato dialogue, almost all the grasshopper’s pronouncements. A great deal of the 
story is therefore carried by the lavish watercolor and digital illustrations, which 
fill double-page spreads with engagingly rendered insects, bright in their reds, 
blues, and greens against the lush tones of their earthy habitat. Subtle laughs and 
the enveloping illustrations—not to mention the triumph of the tiny—make this 
a good lap read for li’l bugs.  AA
montgomery, Sy The Great White Shark Scientist; illus. with photographs by 
Keith Ellenbogen. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 [80p]
ISBN 978-0-544-35298-8 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Many young shark enthusiasts will agree that Gregory Skomal has the dream job: 
cruising around the eastern shore of Cape Cod and into Nantucket Sound in sci-
entific pursuit of the great white sharks. The sharks have been feasting on a recent 
bumper crop of gray seals and generating lots of debate within the Cape’s human 
communities about whether that’s a good thing. Skomal is bringing scientific fact 
to that debate with his research, identifying and video recording individual sharks 
(some of which are already known to be repeat visitors) in the hope of estimating 
the population and getting a better handle on their territorial range. As in most 
Scientists in the Field books, a tricky methodology here is thoughtfully presented 
with focus and accessibility in a way that makes the science easy to understand 
without turning it into a textbook snooze. Skomal and associates aboard the Aleutian 
536 • The BulleTin
Dream coordinate with a pilot, who is generally better able to spot the torpedo-
shaped fish from the air, and from there it’s a race to the scene, a patient wait for 
the shark to swim close enough to be filmed, and the hope that the jury-rigged 
equipment will be up to the job. Montgomery and Ellenbogen are along for much 
of the ride, supplying scientific background, color commentary, and a gallery of 
photographs. Montgomery goes to great, and often humorous, lengths to put the 
actual danger of shark-on-human attack into perspective (annual average number of 
people killed by sharks—11; of sharks killed by people—100,000,000), but when 
dealing with fish prone to devour their unborn siblings, there’s still ample delight 
for thrill seekers. A selected bibliography and list of web resources are included.  EB
myrACle, lAuren Wishing Day. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2016 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-234206-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-234208-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Natasha is about to turn thirteen, the magic age when girls in her town get to make 
three wishes: one impossible wish, one wish that she herself can make come true, 
and “the deepest wish of her secret heart.” Natasha wishes that her long-absent 
mother will return, that a boy will kiss her, and that she—the dependable older 
sister of one popular, beautiful sister and one effervescent, adorable one—will 
be “someone’s favorite.” While she dismisses her first wish, the second and third 
wishes seem possible when golden boy Benton throws some attention her way and 
she begins to receive anonymous affirming notes. A mysterious Bird Lady keeps 
popping up at odd moments, though, with cryptic statements about Natasha’s 
mother and someone named Emily, causing Natasha both annoyance and feelings 
of uncertainty about her wishes. While it’s refreshing that a romantic relationship 
with a boy is not the be all and end all here (neither Benton nor his best friend 
Stanley, who likes Natasha and does actually kiss her, end up being Mr. Right), 
there’s still little resolution to the other plot threads. Natasha’s mother is appar-
ently the one magically sending the notes but the possibility of her return remains 
vague, and who or what Emily is left ambiguous. While the Bird Lady’s frustratingly 
incomprehensible and condescending comments make her a tedious character, 
three-dimensional Natasha is sympathetic and her relationships with her sisters 
are handled with sensitivity and skill. Despite some flaws, this still may appeal to 
readers fascinated by the possibility of magical wishes and to kids who struggle 
with sisterly bonds or absent parents.  JH
pAnitCh, AmAndA Never Missing Never Found. Random House, 2016 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50766-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50764-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50765-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
At eight years old, Scarlett was kidnapped and forced into cleaning work by a harsh 
woman running a brothel; her only solace came when she told her captor that she 
wished for a sister, and the captor obliged by kidnapping and enslaving another 
girl named Pixie. Scarlett escaped, rejoined her family, and attempted to rebuild 
her life. Now seventeen, she’s working concessions at a local amusement park, and 
when a co-worker named Katharina drops hints that she knows about Scarlett’s 
June 2016 • 537
ordeal, Scarlett is disturbed; Katharina knows things only Pixie would know, but 
Scarlett’s always been sure Pixie was killed trying to escape. Katharina’s presence and 
the disappearance of another woman at the park bring Scarlett’s memories to the 
fore as she tries to figure out whether Katharina is a threat to her; additionally, she’s 
wondering whether she has a chance for a relationship with a cute manager who 
seems to like her but who has his own baggage. Panitch’s perfect timing in doling 
out the pieces of the mystery ratchet up the tension to a fevered pace that is well 
met in a stunning conclusion. Scarlett’s feelings of guilt over Pixie’s death are raw 
even as they conflict with her desire to be happy and her understanding of her own 
victimization. Just when readers think that Scarlett has crossed a line from which 
there is no coming back, the plot twists sharply, and Panitch manages a mangled 
sense of justice that will have two effects—one, a desire to immediately reread for 
clues one might have missed, and two, a nagging sense that there may be more to 
the real-life news stories and grocery store posters of missing kids than meets the 
eye. Don’t start the last fifty pages without time to finish this absorbing thriller.  KC
peACoCk, ShAne The Dark Missions of Edgar Brim. Tundra, 2016 339p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-77049-698-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-77049-700-9 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Fear has always been a part of Edgar Brim’s life: his novelist father read to him the 
frightening works of Mary Shelley, Edgar Allan Poe, and Robert Louis Stevenson 
throughout Edgar’s Victorian childhood, leaving the young boy with horrific night 
terrors. Edgar’s nervousness and sensitivity makes him a target for the bullies and 
sadistic teachers of the College on the Moors for Boys in Scotland, but finally, at 
sixteen, Edgar gains some gumption after reading the journals of his now-deceased 
father. His newly found courage comes in handy when a professor seeks his help, 
telling Edgar that the monsters of horror stories are real, they are targeting Edgar, 
and one or more is on school grounds. Peacock calls up the ghostly, haunting atmo-
sphere of the moors with graceful prose and quiet but vivid imagery. Unfortunately, 
the plot is handled with less deftness, stumbling its way from Edgar’s childhood 
and his father’s obsession with the actor Henry Irving, to Edgar’s terrible experi-
ences at school, to Edgar’s hunt for monsters and his abrupt journey to the Lyceum 
Theatre in London to confront Irving and the demon that inhabits him. Still, the 
portrayal of Edgar as a frightened, anxious boy and his growth into someone who 
acknowledges fear but doesn’t give in to it makes him an appealing hero, and his 
triumph over evil is sure to garner applause. The final chapter ensures there are 
more monsters to be caught and more books to come.  KQG
perkinS, lynne rAe Frank and Lucky Get Schooled; written and illus. by Lynne 
Rae Perkins. Greenwillow, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-06-237345-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 2-4
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 503, for review.
538 • The BulleTin
pitCher, AnnAbel Silence Is Goldfish. Little, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-37075-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-37074-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
When fifteen-year-old Tess accidentally discovers that her affectionate but demand-
ing father is not actually her biological father, she’s so devastated that she stops 
speaking. Her sudden, unexpected mutism shocks her family, who don’t know the 
cause, and it quickly wreaks havoc on the rest of her life. Since she’s already the 
target of bullies for her weight, Tess’ silence gives classmates leave to be crueler 
than usual, and well-meaning teachers do little more than patronize. Her only ally 
is Mr. Goldfish, a child’s toy flashlight, whose acerbic magical commentary only 
Tess can hear. Eventually Tess finds strength in her own willful reticence, but her 
desperation to find her real father soon leads to trouble she’s not ready to handle, 
and she’ll have to decide: stay a quiet victim or speak up for the truth and herself. 
The strength of this emotionally wrought, introspective novel lies in the charac-
ter of Tess, the clarity of her voice, and the odd but wonderful relationship she 
has with the Jiminy Cricket–like Mr. Goldfish. Their spirited dialogue gives the 
novel a feeling of action and interaction and pulls readers into the turmoil of her 
emotional journey. With her obstinate naïveté, Tess herself at times reads younger 
than her fifteen years; her imaginary friend/alter ego reveals this to be a coping 
mechanism, though, and the book effectively shows Tess learning to incorporate 
his resilient voice into her personality. Secondary characters are equally nuanced, 
able to escape the stereotypes of dorky friend, mean girls, supportive teachers, and 
clueless parents with slowly revealed complexities. An engrossing character study 
of a girl in crisis, this novel is perfect for readers who appreciate realistic heroines 
who solve their own problems.  AM
pizzoli, greg Good Night Owl; written and illus. by Greg Pizzoli. Disney 
Hyperion, 2016 [48p]
ISBN 978-1-4847-1275-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
When a recurring squeaky noise prevents Owl from sleeping, he grows increasingly 
agitated as he searches for the source of the sound. He checks the front door and 
clears off the shelves of his cupboard before succumbing to utter frustration as he 
pulls up floorboards, removes the roof, and knocks down his walls in an attempt 
to get to the bottom of the matter. It is only then that Owl notices what the viewer 
has been privy to all along—the source of the noise is a squeaking mouse: “Owl 
smiled. He said, ‘Good night, noise.’ And they went to sleep.” The pithy and 
accessible writing and the story’s amusing absurdity make this read like a classic 
Arnold Lobel story, and Owl certainly bears a resemblance in personality, if not 
appearance, to Lobel’s lovable curmudgeon, Toad. While the attractive illustrations 
and possibilities for dramatic delivery lend this to reading aloud, the clear sans 
serif font and simple vocabulary give it read-alone potential as well, especially for 
readers who are one step up from Mo Willems’ Elephant and Piggie series. Pizzoli’s 
artwork, rendered in candy pastel and neutral tones with retro detailing, is tidily 
and thoughtfully composed. Pale turquoise Owl in his bubblegum-pink bathrobe 
cuts a comical figure as his increasing discombobulation sends his feathers flying 
June 2016 • 539
and his eyebrows slanting in anger. The little gray mouse is a cutie, and kids will 
enjoy spotting it on each page. Share this as part of a unit or storytime devoted to 
Pizzoli, as part of an owl-, mouse-, or noise-themed storytime, or enjoy it on its 
own goofy terms.  JH
ponti, JAmeS Framed! Aladdin, 2016 [304p] (A T.O.A.S.T. Mystery)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3630-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3632-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Florian Bates has whirled around the globe in his twelve years due to his parents’ 
occupations—mom’s an art conservator, dad a security specialist. He’s an affable guy, 
reasonably adept at making acquaintances, but his knack for Holmesian observa-
tion, deduction, and commentary can seem a bit show-offish and hobble nascent 
friendships. Fortunately, the girl down the block, Margaret, is wowed rather than 
distanced by Florian’s skill and throws herself wholeheartedly into its mastery as 
well. Good thing, too, since their recreational surveillance of a man at the National 
Gallery in Washington, D.C. turns up a valuable lead that they give to investiga-
tors, and Florian’s mad hot deductive skills (which Florian calls his Theory of All 
Small Things) earn him a berth as consultant to the FBI. That’s not a bad gig for 
a twelve-year-old, but his failure to follow protocol lands him, Margaret, and his 
FBI mentors in real peril from the Romanian mob. This is clearly a setup for an 
ongoing series, and character development takes a back seat to cast introductions 
and plot, but appropriately so, and the story is still enjoyable. The implications 
Florian draws from focusing on minute details are lots of fun, and if upon reflec-
tion readers realize that Ponti is in authorial control of Florian’s brilliance, well . . .  
it worked for Arthur Conan Doyle, too.  EB
poSkitt, kJArtAn Agatha Parrot and the Odd Street School Ghost; illus. by Wes 
Hargis. Clarion, 2016 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-544-50672-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-4
The old clock tower on Odd Street won’t stop ringing during the night, which 
doesn’t particularly bother young Agatha Parrot (they live on Odd Street, after all). 
When Agatha’s pal Ellie wonders if it’s the work of a ghost and gets teased by school 
mean girl Gwendoline, however, Agatha gets riled up. After some spooky noises at 
the school and a few ghost sightings, Ellie’s far from the only one believing that the 
bells’ tolls might be a spirit’s doing, but some investigative work by Agatha and her 
pals reveal the culprits to be a bumbling janitor and some glow-in-the-dark breakfast 
food. Agatha’s narration vibrates with the incessant, energetic, out-of-breath tone 
of a kid just dying to tell a story, and though that tone certainly gives this British 
import enthusiasm and cheer, the pell-mell approach muddles the focus and makes 
for jarring plot transitions. The quirky cast of secondary characters adds humor, but 
there are so many players in motion that none of them stands out as truly comedic. 
Hargis’ black and white art lends the characters more distinction, giving frizzy verve 
to Agatha, sharp-eyed snark to Gwendoline, and bumbling goofiness to the janitor. 
Despite the story’s unevenness, Agatha’s pretty hard to resist as a protagonist, and 
readers will likely return for another jaunt down Odd Street.  KQG
540 • The BulleTin
potter, giSelle This Is My Dollhouse; written and illus. by Giselle Pot-
ter. Schwartz & Wade, 2016 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52154-2 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52153-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
An unnamed little girl delights in her homemade dollhouse and its inhabitants, but 
she fears her visiting friend Sophie will find her DIY version inferior to Sophie’s 
slick store-bought dollhouse. Sophie is enchanted by the girl’s handcrafted house, 
however, reveling in its possibilities for imaginative play, and the girl’s pride in her 
creation is renewed. Potter excels at capturing childhood moments with authentic-
ity and thoughtful detail, and kids who make their own fun either by choice or by 
necessity will enjoy seeing their efforts validated here. The palette of translucent, 
pale tones of blue, green, and brown, accented with pink and red, and Potter’s 
customary naïvely stylized figures and objects give the watercolor and ink artwork 
an attractive timelessness. The creativity of the brunette, braid-wearing little girl 
clearly spills over into her fashion choices of patterned dresses and socks and mul-
tiple jewelry and hair accessories. Kids who love dollhouses and tiny worlds will 
adore this, as will teachers looking to inspire some creative classroom activity and 
librarians looking for fodder for makerspace programs. The interior of the book’s 
dust jacket gives brief hints and illustrated instructions for constructing a house 
from a box and furnishing it with found and recycled items.   JH
rAvenSwood, AmiCuS The Fearsome Foursome; illus. by Kelley Jones. Disney, 
2016 [240p] (Tales from the Haunted Mansion)
ISBN 978-1-4847-1329-7 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Middle-graders Willa, Tim, Noah, and Steve, the titular Fearsome Foursome, 
share a love of scary stories, so when they receive a mysterious invitation to meet 
in a haunted mansion on the other side of town, there’s no doubt that the friends 
will be going. The house is a little unnerving, sure, with ravens cawing overhead, a 
gothic façade, even a pet cemetery to complete the picture, but the kids shrug off 
the obvious and most likely manufactured forbidding atmosphere; inside, they’re 
mostly skeptical and only slightly frightened when they meet the house’s skeletal-like 
librarian. After betting him that he can’t possibly come up with a story that actually 
scares the group, they grow increasingly terrified as he tells the story of each kid’s 
demise. But of course, it’s all fun and games, right? Right? The librarian acts as the 
book’s cheeky (and creepy) narrator, inserting humorous asides that poke fun at 
typical horror-story tropes. These get old pretty quickly, but the stories themselves 
are scary on an R. L. Stine level, with just the right number of chills and the right 
amount of gore, and the episodic nature of the tales makes the book accessible as 
well as appealing. This is right up the alley of reluctant readers who like a good thrill 
but not a hefty page count, and it’s certainly fodder for campfire storytelling.  KQG
reviS, beth A World Without You. Razorbill, 2016 [384p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-715-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
When Sofia commits suicide at a residential school for troubled kids, her seventeen-
year-old boyfriend, Bo, is convinced she isn’t really dead and that he has merely sent 
June 2016 • 541
her back in time. With her dark skin and her ability to disappear at will, however, 
he fears for her safety, since he took her back to seventeenth-century New England 
where she is likely to be condemned as a witch. This is an elaborate delusion, though; 
while Bo believes the school is for teens with special powers, his classmates actually 
suffer from pyromania, rage disorders, schizophrenia, and depression. Bo’s questions 
regarding his abilities and his explanations of time travel become attenuated as he 
tries to find a way to rescue Sofia, especially as nothing really happens other than 
his delusions becoming stronger over time. His sister, Phoebe, on the other hand, 
is solidly in touch with the reality of her brother’s mental illness and occasional 
violence, a reality she would like to escape. The book provides illuminating looks 
at both her mental state and Bo’s, and the premise is an intriguing one. However, 
the novel is essentially an extended description without a plot arc or payoff until 
the end, when everyone, including the doctor who had hoped to help the teens 
under his care, admits that they all need more intense treatment than he can give. 
This therefore lacks the finesse of the author’s Across the Universe series, but readers 
who are interested in depictions of how mental illness might feel from the inside 
and how it might affect a family may find this engaging.  KC
reynoldS, JASon As Brave as You. Dlouhy/Atheneum, 2016 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1590-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1592-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
While their parents figure out the future of their marriage, Brooklynite brothers 
Genie and Ernie will be spending the summer with their paternal grandparents 
in Virginia. There’s some bad blood between Dad and Grandpop, which has kept 
them apart for years, but Genie and Ernie don’t see the problem—Grandpop 
seems pretty great. In fact, older bro Ernie, who wears sunglasses for cool affect, is 
pleased to see Grandpop sports the same gear, and younger bro Genie is surprised 
to find that Grandpop, alone among the adults he knows, is actually willing to 
answer Genie’s endless questions. It turns out Grandpop isn’t being cool; glaucoma 
is close to totally claiming his vision. He’s mostly confined to home, but now his 
newly established rapport with Genie gives him incentive to tackle the outdoors. 
Unfortunately, false confidence outstrips ability and good sense as Grandpop insists 
on carrying out a coming-of-age tradition—teaching Ernie how to shoot—with 
disastrous results. There’s much here to remind readers of Curtis’s The Watsons Go 
to Birmingham—1963 (BCCB 1/96) with the city kids’ humorous adjustment to 
rural life, underpinned with a serious subplot that steadily rises in importance. 
Ernie and Genie actually get along well, and although Ernie is certainly striding 
into his teens in a way that baffles Genie, he’s a levelheaded kid whose summer 
romance with a neighbor is solid and sweet. Genie’s blundering helpfulness leads 
to a string of adventures and provides plenty of entertainment, and the mending 
of rifts in this African-American family delivers the warm and proper ending the 
cast has richly earned.  EB
rogerS, meghAn Crossing the Line. Philomel, 2016 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17617-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Kidnapped at age eight, then trained and tortured into the ultimate super-spy, 
Jocelyn Steely has spent the last ten years as a deadly underage operative for a North 
542 • The BulleTin
Korean agency, KATO. Now eighteen, she’s escaped and made her way to KATO’s 
American equivalent, the IDA, where she hopes to become a double agent and take 
down her former handlers. Earning the trust of agents she’s nearly killed in the field 
turns out to be even harder than she expected, though, especially when she’s part-
nered with Travis Elton, aka Scorpion, her long-time nemesis. Then a new mission 
sends her back into the heart of the agency that created her, and Jocelyn must find 
a way to work with a team to take KATO down. This engrossing spy adventure 
hits the target with its edge-of-your-seat espionage and heartfelt emotion. Action 
lovers will enjoy the movie-worthy close-combat scenes, tension-building rescues, 
and narrow escapes, while those who like their spy stories with psychological heft 
will appreciate the careful portrait of Jocelyn as a trauma survivor. Readers hoping 
for a romance with Scorpion to develop may have to wait for planned sequels, 
but it’s still interesting to watch him evolve from vindictive to supportive without 
becoming coddling or patronizing. Perfect for readers who grew up with Carter’s 
Gallagher Girls series and are ready for the next level, this could also pair with 
Stohl’s Black Widow: Forever Red (BCCB 11/15) for a high-octane, girl-powered 
double feature.  AM
rhodeS, Jewell pArker Towers Falling. Little, 2016 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-26222-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-26223-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Dèja senses that she should be relieved by her new situation: the shelter she and 
her family have moved into is a step up from living in their car, her new school is 
adequately funded and diverse (“In my old neighborhood, everybody was black”), 
her fifth-grade teacher is sensitive and welcoming, and her classmates are pretty nice. 
This, however, does nothing to change the fact that Mom is still overworked and 
underpaid, Dad is still sick in body and mind, and care of two younger siblings still 
falls largely into Dèja’s hands. She arrives at Brooklyn Collective Elementary just 
as they launch a whole-school curricular unit on the September 11, 2001 attacks, 
marking the fifteenth anniversary of the tragedy. It’s a challenging undertaking for 
the teaching staff, who must confront their own raw memories of the attacks, and 
it’s equally difficult to establish the event’s relevance to a generation of students who 
regard it as “ancient history,” and many of whose parents refuse to discuss the details 
with their children. Dèja and her friends Ben and Sabeen, however, become curious 
about the event that so devastated New York and after they sneak information on 
the sly (Dèja and Ben even play hooky to visit the memorial), Dèja uncovers the 
connection between the Twin Towers’ collapse and her father’s disabilities. Plotting 
is stiffly choreographed and programmatic, but Dèja is so fully credible a narra-
tor—prickly, skeptical, often combative, yet yearning to open her mind and heart 
to new experiences—that following her social awakening is nonetheless a joy. In 
connecting a nation-changing event to the lives of today’s middle-graders, Rhodes 
makes a valuable contribution to the 9/11 canon.  EB
June 2016 • 543
SAuer, tAmmi I Love Cake!: Starring Rabbit, Porcupine, and Moose; illus. by Angie 
Rozelaar. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2016 34p
ISBN 978-0-06-227894-4 $17.99   
R 5-7 yrs
Rabbit invites best buds Porcupine and Moose to her birthday party for fun, games, 
and—Moose’s favorite—cake. While Rabbit and Porcupine play a rousing game 
of “Pin the Tail on the Chipmunk,” Moose slips out of view; when Rabbit and 
Porcupine head for refreshments they find, suspiciously, both Moose and the cake 
missing. Moose, when discovered, has telltale crumbs and cake breath, so he fesses 
up, first rationalizing his gluttony (“Is it my fault my mouth’s so big that the whole 
cake kind of fell right in?”) and finally apologizing. His pals are still mad, though, 
and it’s not until Moose bakes and brings them a replacement cake that the three 
make up and Moose realizes that you can have your cake and eat it, too—as long 
as you share with your friends. Sauer skillfully incorporates a bit of pattern and 
repetition into the text to add structure, and that foundation mixed with the humor 
and the kid-friendly conflict are blended into a sweet little snack of a story. Moose’s 
goofy jokes, crazy patterned sweater, and page-long bluster about his guilt make 
him the comical center, and kids will giggle at him even as they sympathize with 
both Moose’s cake-lust and Rabbit’s disappointment and anger. Rozelaar’s warm, 
painterly illustrations (created with a brush, India ink, and Photoshop) emphasize 
both the comedy of the text and the cuteness of the pop-eyed critters. The animals’ 
milieu is a cozy one, with red-capped mushrooms and birch trees punctuating the 
landscape, while vases of flowers, subtly patterned wallpaper and a multihued stand 
mixer enhance the interiors. Share this with any number of cake- or critter-themed 
titles or, better yet, serve it up with a slice of something sweet.  JH
ShuStermAn, neAl Hawking’s Hallway; by Neal Shusterman and Eric Elf-
man. Disney Hyperion, 2016 362p (The Accelerati Trilogy)
ISBN 978-1-4231-4805-0 $16.99   
R* Gr. 5-8
The concluding volume of the Accelerati Trilogy (Tesla’s Attic, BCCB 2/13, Edison’s 
Alley, BCCB 5/15) finds Nick Slate and his buddies scrambling to find the scat-
tered pieces of Tesla’s junkyard invention that, when put together, will stop the 
Earth-orbiting Celestial Object Felicity Bonk from creating an electromagnetic 
force that will fry all life as we know it. Thomas Edison, battery supported and 
unable to walk without a wheelchair, and his Accelerati cronies are bent on saving 
Earth only so they can control it, and Nick is coerced into complicity by Edison’s 
threats against his father and brother. As the final pieces of Tesla’s invention come 
together, Nikola Tesla makes cameo appearances via a time-shifting telephone 
system and, even more mind-bogglingly, via Nick himself. And Stephen Hawk-
ing? His indirect, theoretical contribution to this edge-of-seat mayhem is a critical 
series of underground passages that conduct a split Nick into seven different ages 
of his past and future life and ultimately dissipate the overflow of Felicity Bonk’s 
destructive energy. The smart, sassy prose that has characterized this series from 
the start is on full display, and the punishment-fits-the-crime comeuppance for a 
host of bad guys is all the funnier couched in snarky narration. It is, of course, a tad 
disappointing that the Earth survives, since it means the Accelerati series doesn’t. 
However, as Nick reunites with his family and his friends have their own kinds of 
544 • The BulleTin
happy endings, readers are left with “a rusty cube covered with gears and dials— 
and . . . two words: ‘Enrico Fermi.’” New adventure? One can always hope.  EB
Sirowy, AlexAndrA The Telling. Simon, 2016 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1889-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1891-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Grief over her beloved stepbrother’s mysterious death drives rising senior Lana to 
take new risks in order to live up to the bold Lana the Brave, the fictional character 
that Ben created for her in the dark but thrilling fairy tales he used to tell her. The 
stories, however, start to leak into Lana’s reality when a rash of murders upsets her 
idyllic, wealthy town, murders that parallel the most disturbing of Ben’s stories. 
When the evidence points to Lana as the possible killer, she realizes she’s got to begin 
her own investigation if she is going to exonerate herself and perhaps get revenge 
for Ben’s death. The main plot here, Lana’s search for the killer, is edge-of-your-seat 
stuff, and the flashbacks to her time with Ben and their developing relationship 
lend depth to her character as well as another layer of creepiness. Unfortunately, 
that spine-tingling eeriness is drowned out by multiple subplots, including Lana’s 
sudden acceptance into the cool crowd at her school, her connection to the queen 
bee through her mother’s death, and a red herring that ends up being more of an 
aimless blind alley. Still, Lana’s got a steely edge to her narration, even in her most 
vulnerable moments, and her confident determination that she’s going to figure 
out what is going on may inspire plenty of readers to follow her.  KQG
Smiley, JAne Twenty Yawns; illus. by Lauren Castillo. Two Lions, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-4778-2635-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 2-4 yrs
Little Lucy spends a long, lovely day on the beach with her parents, until every-
one is tuckered out: “Lucy YAWNED. Mom YAWNED. Dad YAWNED. Mom 
said, ‘Early bedtime!’” After returning home, the trio gets ready for bed but, after 
another big yawn, Lucy notices that Mom has fallen asleep while reading aloud to 
Lucy, and Dad’s asleep in the living room. The moonlight stirs Lucy to get up and 
she goes in search of her stuffed bear, “but the other toys were looking at her, even 
Leonard, the baby kangaroo. They seemed lonely.” Lucy hauls them all off to bed 
with her and her yawn sets off a chain of yawns among both her stuffed animals and 
the family members featured in the drawings above her bed. With one final yawn, 
Lucy settles into sleep herself. Smiley crafts a thoughtful and cozy picture book 
with spare and peaceful text, and she’s particularly deft at capturing the perspective 
of a young child. There’s a crayon-like graininess to the art, and thick outlines and 
painted textures give Castillo’s inviting illustrations a robust framework; increasingly 
muted tones and softened details enhance the quiet atmosphere of the text. Lucy, a 
biracial girl with a dark-skinned mom and light-skinned dad, is a charmer with her 
tousled black curls and joyful smile. Pair this with Jan Ormerod’s wordless classic 
Moonlight (BCCB 11/82) for some soothingly somnolent bedtime reading, or with 
Sally Symes’ Yawn board book (BCCB 1/12) to maximize the yawns per page.  JH
June 2016 • 545
Smith, lAne There Is a Tribe of Kids; written and illus. by Lane Smith. Roaring 
Brook, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-056-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
A boy clad only in leaves makes friends, sequentially, with a colony of penguins, 
a pod of whales, a smack of jellyfish, and other collective nouns as he travels. 
After a contemplative night under a family of stars and an ocean of blue, he finds 
a trail of shells, which leads him to a tribe of kids, who embrace him and eagerly 
participate as he acts out the story of his journey. The text, which is a sequence of 
expletive constructions (“There was a parade of elephants. There was a troop of 
monkeys”), becomes stale with excessive repetition, and the collective nouns vary 
muddlingly from technical to artistic. The story really lies in the art, though, as 
the mixed-media illustrations, often divided into panels, show our hero joining up 
with various animal groups and then departing from them; mottled textures and 
a subdued earthtoned palette provide an organic feel as the kid wanders the globe. 
There are comic touches in the boy’s relationship with his temporary pals (even 
on hands and knees he speeds past the turtles; his musical troop of monkeys gets 
faced down by an imperious band of gorillas) and some moments of wonder as the 
boy faces the wide world on his own. While it doesn’t hang together as well as it 
might, audiences may enjoy decoding the story in the art and the final celebratory 
kid collective.  DS
SpinAle, wendy Everland. Scholastic, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-83694-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-83695-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
In this Peter Pan–inspired post-apocalyptic novel, Hook has accidentally released a 
plague, the adults of London are dead, and Pete’s trying to protect the city’s kids in a 
secret location. Gwen has kept her siblings safe for a long time, but when her sister 
is caught, she must venture out of their ruined home and try to save her. Hook, a 
boy damaged by his mother’s cruelty, knows he can’t leave the London he ruined 
without a cure, so he’s stuck, and Pete won’t let go of his responsibility to his dying 
friend Bella and the littles, so he’s equally stuck. As a rare healthy young female, 
Gwen becomes the object of desire for all, whether for her beauty, her mothering 
skills, or her possibly immune blood. It’s a stretch on occasion to make the Peter 
Pan elements fit (Bella’s steampunk-inspired wings and pixie dust are a hard sell), 
but for the most part, the story follows a successful comparative arc. Unfortunately, 
there are unbearably long points of exposition masked as (unlikely) conversation 
between teens. In addition, the romance between Gwen and Pete is forced, and it 
distracts from rather than adds to the central drama of the plague that continues 
to kill. Even so, there’s plenty in this trilogy opener to keep readers curious about 
what will happen to these iconic characters reimagined in a dark, dismal world 
where mere survival is all one can hope for.  AS
546 • The BulleTin
StAmpler, Ann rediSCh How to Disappear. Simon Pulse, 2016 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4393-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4395-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Five weeks ago, sixteen-year-old Nicolette took off from her previously comfy 
home in Ohio after hearing her (up until this point, very loving) stepdad tell his 
associates that he’d kill her—and she has already watched him bury a girl’s dead 
body. In Nevada, straitlaced Jack, a year away from college, has been ordered by 
his Mafia-involved older brother to take Nicolette out, or else Jack’s mother will 
be killed. Cue the cat-and-mouse chase across the country, though in this case the 
cat and mouse have a meet-cute, share some witty banter, engage in some mind-
blowing sex, discover each other’s true identities and motivations, and figure out 
they’re merely prey for some much bigger and more violent predators. Despite the 
whole “I’m gonna sleep with the girl I might have to kill” element to Jack, he’s 
otherwise a stand-up guy, and his part of the narration is the solid, steady anchor, 
buoying an occasionally flailing plot. Nicolette’s voice is more erratic; she’s either 
an inconsistent character or she’s crazy like a fox, the latter theory supported by her 
ultimate reveal of a shocking twist that gives her way more agency than readers were 
led to believe. Though the pace is uneven, readers will likely be willing to remain 
patient during slower parts to get the rush when events speed up, and they’ll be 
floored by an ending they didn’t see coming.  KQG 
Strohmeyer, SArAh This Is My Brain on Boys. Balzer + Bray, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-225962-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-225963-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Super-brainy Addie feels at home in her posh New England boarding school, or at 
least she did until a few students staged a vicious attack on her lab over a mostly 
misguided notion that she was abusing animals in her experiments. Determined 
to win a prestigious scholarship so that she can attend college, she turns her atten-
tion to human subjects: Addie hypothesizes that the release of certain hormones 
in life-threatening situations can, under the right circumstances, spark enough at-
traction to lead to more lasting feelings. She tries it on her best friend, putting her 
in a dangerous situation and having a competent boy come rescue her, and voilà, it 
works! At first, it seems like she has stumbled into her own trap when she and Kris, 
one of the boys who helped vandalize the lab, endure a harrowing plane ride back 
to school for the summer session, but as the plot unfolds, it thickens, rescuing the 
romance plot from the cliché of the smart girl who falls apart under the attentions 
of a cute boy. While the narration remains in third person throughout, focalization 
head-hops in alternate chapters so that readers can understand both Addie and Kris 
as they work through the chemistry of a crush. Addie is intent upon analyzing what 
her brain is doing as she feels different emotions, while Kris is just trying to make 
amends and get to know this confusing girl. What makes the whole novel work is 
the geeky humor; both the omniscient narrator and Addie herself play her tendency 
to view everything through the lens of brain chemistry for laugh-out-loud quips 
and more subtle dramatic and verbal irony. Falling somewhere between Bones and 
The Big Bang Theory, this will produce dopamine release in both science-smart and 
snark-attuned brains.  KC
June 2016 • 547
Sun, AmAndA Heir to the Sky. Harlequin Teen, 2016 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-373-21191-3 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Kallima has grown up the sheltered heir to the throne of Ashra, 
a floating continent hovering above the surface of a monster-ridden earth. Eaves-
dropping on the wrong conversation leads her to uncover a secret rebellion, and 
soon after, a seeming accident sends her tumbling over the edge to the world below. 
She’s quickly saved from certain death by handsome monster-hunter Griffin, under 
whose tutelage she learns to survive. Kali soon finds herself falling for the somber 
young fighter, and she begins to question everything she’s been taught, until a 
shocking revelation forces her to realize that only by returning home can she save 
her kingdom and her chance at love. Monster fight scenes infuse this otherwise 
predictable romantic adventure with an exciting survival subplot. As the typical 
pampered princess confronting her own naïveté, Kali is likable enough, but as a 
heroine she is lackluster, stumbling from one accidental feat to another; meanwhile 
Griffin is an affable hero who never emerges as more than a patient, supportive 
romantic ideal. The world building and plotting are intriguing yet thin, and the 
clearly telegraphed reveals are likely only surprising to Kali. Still, the monster-ridden 
landscape, its terrifying inhabitants, and the scenes of battle with them are crafted 
with fantastic detail, and should be more than enough to carry readers through. 
DeStefano’s Internment series (Perfect Ruin, BCCB 12/13, etc.) builds on a similar 
premise with stronger world building and more extraordinary characters, but this 
novel could still please readers who like their quest narratives harrowing and their 
romantic leads garbed in leather and animal fur.  AM
SwAnSon, Jennifer Super Gear: Nanotechnology and Sports Team Up. Charles-
bridge, 2016 72p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-720-4 $17.95   
R Gr. 4-6
The quest for improving sports performance shifts from locker room to lab as 
myriad ways of incorporating microscopic fibers and particles into sports clothing 
and equipment are invented. Swanson begins with a little fundamental math, in-
troducing the term nano (used here as one billionth of a meter) and then launches 
into an overview of molecular bonds in general and the breakthrough discovery 
of carbon nano formations and their peculiar traits, particularly strength. Put-
ting the basics astern, she focuses the remaining four chapters on swimsuits that 
cut down drag for swimmers; nanoparticles that strengthen baseball bats, tennis 
rackets, and golf clubs, while making them lighter; foam and spikes made from 
nano materials that may improve runners’ and sprinters’ shoes; and finally, the 
possibility that the fundamental challenge of human performance may actually be 
threatened by advanced nano technologies. The opening chapter on nano science 
is a trifle textbookish in tone, but it lays out the groundwork clearly for a middle 
grades audience; moreover, concepts are reinforced throughout the book by easy 
experiments presented in sidebars. In her closing notes, Swanson remarks on how 
sporting goods companies’ protection of intellectual property rights forced her to 
rely on public information for her research, a fact which may account for several 
awkward distinctions between how this miracle technology is purported to work, 
yet sometimes doesn’t. Glossary, source notes, and index are included, as well as 
548 • The BulleTin
a selected bibliography of articles available online, many of which may be within 
the grasp of interested readers.  EB
toten, tereSA Beware That Girl. Delacorte, 2016 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50791-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50790-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50792-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Kate is on a mission to get into Yale at any cost. That means succeeding at the Wa-
verly School, the most recent in a string of schools that she attends on scholarship 
after finally escaping her troubled past. Savvy to the point of manipulation, she 
targets Olivia as a girl vulnerable enough and rich enough to meet Kate’s needs of 
a place to live and an entry into elite society; to her surprise, Olivia even becomes a 
good friend. When devastatingly charming Mark joins the staff of the school, both 
Olivia and Kate are struck by his infectious charisma and good looks, but while 
Olivia is naïve enough to think she can have him for her own, Kate recognizes him 
for the dangerous predator he is. Both girls have something significant to hide, 
however, and Mark knows just which buttons to push to gain a sadistic hold over 
them, up to and including verbal and physical abuse. The twist at the end, which 
is foreshadowed by a scene at the beginning where one girl is unconscious in the 
hospital and the other is being questioned by the police, leaves some unresolved 
ambiguity that leaves it up in the air who was playing whom all along. This is a 
solid page-turner with two compelling main characters, though Kate is the more 
complex, on the one hand sympathetic because of a horrific backstory, while on the 
other hand operating on shaky moral ground in her treatment of Olivia. Readers 
will be absorbed by this gripping, sometimes disturbing drama.  KC 
tullet, hervé Let’s Play!; tr. from the French by Christopher Franceschelli; writ-
ten and illus. by Hervé Tullet. Handprint/Chronicle, 2016 68p
ISBN 978-1-4521-5477-0 $15.99   
R* 2-4 yrs
If the interactive color romp Mix It Up! (BCCB 11/14) was fun, Tullet’s latest title 
is (with apology for mangled grammar) even funner. A bored yellow dot perched 
on a spidery black line invites kids to “press the top corner to get me started.” This 
magical touch is enough to launch the dot to the top right corner of the next spread, 
as evidenced by the page turn. A couple more touches, and the dot is all warmed 
up (“Feels good to be getting a bit of exercise!”) and ready to roll. As the audience 
traces the black line with a finger, yellow dot joyously twists, turns, multiplies, 
and changes colors. Expect some change-ups, though: there’s a brief adventure 
past comic-creepy eyeballs in a darkened tunnel (“We better leave on tiptoe,” dot 
says as it makes its way over a dotted line), and a surreal mind-bender in a field 
of black ink splotches (“I really don’t like this page”). Getting dot over a big red 
bump takes several tries, and a stoplight slows things down for a few seconds, but 
it’s all in the service of masterful pacing. This is silliness at its most effective, and 
the innate drollery of playing with a two-dimensional dot will provide adult readers 
with almost as much entertainment as the little tyke audience. Expect the library 
copy to be perpetually smudged with fingerprints. And that’s a good thing.  EB
June 2016 • 549
urbAn, lindA Weekends with Max and His Dad; illus. by Katie Kath. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-544-59817-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 2-4
Transitions can be tricky, and that’s certainly the case for third-grader Max, as he 
embarks on his first weekend visits to his dad (newly divorced from Max’s mom) 
at his dad’s new apartment. Over the course of three weekends (each treated in 
five brief chapters), Max gradually begins to get comfortable with both the idea 
and the reality of having two homes, as he helps his dad furnish the apartment, 
explores the neighborhood, meets the neighbors, and starts incorporating pieces 
of his old home life (having a friend sleep over, working on homework) into his 
new environment. Urban excels at credibly presenting this situation from Max’s 
third-grade point of view. When his dad wants to show him around the neighbor-
hood, Max insists on spending the time practicing “spy skills,” allowing him to 
tentatively explore while still keeping actual acceptance of his new milieu at arm’s 
length. When Max sees his new bedroom he’s disappointed (“It’s very blue”) but 
won’t share his feelings with his dad for fear of hurting him. Urban’s writing is both 
crisply specific (a basset hound “sniffed as she walked through puddles, dragging 
her ears like flat-bottomed boats”) and simple enough to be accessible. Fans of 
Karen English and Claudia Mills may especially appreciate Max’s story, as might 
middle-graders facing a similar situation. Final artwork unseen.  JH
vAught, SuSAn Things Too Huge to Fix by Saying Sorry. Wiseman/Simon, 
2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2279-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2281-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Any hope of a relationship between rising high-schoolers Mac Richardson and Dani 
Bean is overshadowed by the feud that tore apart their grandmothers’ friendship 
years ago. Acclaimed white novelist Avadelle Richardson was once best friends with 
esteemed black historian Ruth Beans, but that was back in the 1960s, before their 
famed falling out, known among the Oxford, Mississippi and national press as the 
“Magnolia Feud.” Neither woman would speak about it publicly, and now that 
Ruth is dying, her mind shattered by Alzheimer’s, and Avadelle is a pugnacious 
alcoholic, it’s unlikely that the truth will be known. However, in a spell of clear-
mindedness, Ruth entrusts Dani with papers and a key stashed away in her purse, 
tacitly charging her to solve the mystery of the women’s estrangement, which had 
its roots in the civil rights movement and the riots that shook Oxford when James 
Meredith was admitted to the University of Mississippi. Vaught deftly balances fam-
ily story and mystery, and the racial attitudes and experiences of biracial Dani and 
white Mac contrast starkly with those of their elders but cannot fully insulate them 
from the families’ strained histories. The awaited revelation of the reason for the 
Magnolia Feud—Avadelle’s appropriation of Ruth’s civil rights experiences, which 
she fictionalized into a novel—is definitely dramatic. Perhaps more importantly, 
it’s challenging, forcing the reader to consider such thorny issues as who has the 
right to tell a story and how does the legacy of segregation continue to affect kids 
generations removed from its legal demise. A lengthy note explains how Vaught, 
550 • The BulleTin
a white woman from Mississippi, grappled with these issues and the idea of white 
privilege in her writing process.  EB
vegAS, peter Pyramid Hunters: The Iron Tomb. Aladdin, 2016 [304p] illus.
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4578-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4580-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
When thirteen-year-old orphan Sam Force arrives in Cairo for his annual sum-
mer visit with his archaeologist uncle Jasper, everything quickly goes awry. First 
he’s quizzed by police about uncle’s disappearance; then he’s nearly kidnapped by 
mysterious men ransacking his uncle’s flat. Now, with nothing more than obscure 
hieroglyphic clues and the able assistance of two new young friends, Sam must elude 
villains and track his uncle across the Egyptian desert in hopes of reaching a buried 
World War II ship and the ancient treasure in its hold before anyone else. As he 
gets closer to the prize, Sam learns that success means more than saving his uncle 
and solving a Biblical mystery, because there’s an international conspiracy at work 
and the truth may just lead Sam back to his parents. With its archaeological bent, 
Middle Eastern setting, and search for the Ark, this adventure novel reads like an 
Indiana Jones movie; Sam is certainly serviceable as a young wannabe Indy, preter-
naturally calm in the face of danger, improbably capable at performing stunts and 
foiling bad guys, yet petulant about having to do any of it. Secondary characters are 
stock, and the heavily accented locals and shadowy European villains read as dated 
stereotypes. Still, readers will come for the plot, and here the novel succeeds with 
its strong pacing that moves along at a speedy clip to an exciting final showdown 
and rescue. Readers looking for a more unique and enlightened take on a similar 
premise might consider Brumbach’s The Eye of Midnight (BCCB 3/16) instead, but 
there’s excitement to be had here for those wanting for a high-octane if boilerplate 
adventure. An unresolved ending and late-novel reveal set up planned sequels.  AM
venditti, robert Rise of the Robot Army; illus. by Dusty Higgins. Simon, 
2016 [304p] (Miles Taylor and the Golden Cape)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0557-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0559-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
It’s tough when you’ve got the goods to be a nonstop hero, and your dad just wants 
you to go to school like a normal eighth-grader. In this sequel to The Attack of 
the Alien Horde (BCCB 9/15), Miles has mastered the use of the golden cape he 
was given, and he’s spent the whole summer zipping around fixing emergencies, 
little and big, as Gilded, the world’s only superhero. His transition back to normal 
kidhood is rocky, as Miles shows poor judgment in donning the cape for non-
emergencies during school hours, but before he can hit a good balance, Miles and 
his best friend are kidnapped by a power-starved Army general, who wants the cape 
and will kill children to get to it. There’s quite a bit of genuine family relationship 
content in this outing, as Miles and his dad negotiate boundaries, consequences, 
and the addition of his dad’s new love interest (Miles’ mom left the family), and 
Venditti elegantly balances action with thoughtful realistic relationship quandaries. 
Occasional comic book–style pages carry the story in illustrated form, breaking 
up the text and adding some visual spice. While readers may miss the odd alien 
June 2016 • 551
foes from the first novel (an Army dude and his robots just can’t compete), they’ll 
likely appreciate the fact that Miles is an evolving character who is growing into 
the responsibilities and awesome privileges of the cape.  AS
voSkuil, hAnnAh Horus and the Curse of Everlasting Regret. Knopf, 
2016 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93334-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93333-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93335-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
It’s 1934, Peter is desperate to get away from his abusive older stepbrothers for the 
summer, and he sees a way out in a robotics camp, but he needs to come up with 
two hundred bucks to pay for it. Tunie is taking care of her ailing father and trying 
to gather the cash to get him the medicine he needs. When information about a 
kidnapped girl hits the news, both kids fix on the $1000 reward for finding her, and 
when they accidentally meet in the basement of the museum of where the girl was 
last seen, they decide to pool their efforts and share the money. They also discover 
someone who gives them a one-up on anyone else searching: Horus, the ancient 
mummy of a ten-year-old boy, who’s cursed for eternity to wander only at night 
and who has several clues that will help track down the kidnapping fiends. This is 
a cozy mystery with a little bit of adventure and two witty, clever, and eminently 
likeable protagonists. There’s no historical context offered for Horus, but he offers 
a plenty of humor, with the goofy joy he finds in reading newspapers, and heart, 
with his pondering of how to make up for past misdeeds. Add an adorable bat and 
a helpful robot as sidekicks for our heroes, some perfectly sneaky and corrupt bad 
guys, a maritime race to save Tunie and Peter, and a well-deserved happy ending for 
all (except the villains), and you’ve got yourself a story complete with undeniable 
charm and exciting escapades.  KQG
womACh, dArryl Tales of Westerford: Dragons, Knights and Kings. Elevate Fic-
tion, 2016 [232p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-9434-2529-7 $10.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Sometimes you just want to hear some good campfire-style stories of heroism, 
dragons, and true love. This trim collection delivers with a series of interrelated tales 
about a young boy who falls in love with a royal girl and spends years training so 
that he (and his best friend, who is a dragon) can complete difficult tasks and win 
her hand. Luckily, she returns his interest, and the remaining portion of the book 
features the married two, having adventures and saving their land together. There is 
little true tension in the stories, as our narrator is clearly an old-school hero, loyal, 
steadfast, and guaranteed to be victorious, but there are a couple of small twists 
thrown in, including one involving a gender surprise that readers may spot but 
that they’ll still likely find a satisfying reveal. The stories themselves beg to be read 
aloud—they flow one into another and feature a chatty, confident narrative voice 
from a speaker who clearly knows that his adventures are worth telling. There’s not 
a lot of nuance here, but sometimes a daring story well told is plenty, and in this 
case, fans of dragons, knights, and princesses who take agency in their own lives 
will find this collection is indeed worth the telling. AS
552 • The BulleTin
wynne-JoneS, tim Secret Agent Man Goes Shopping for Shoes; illus. by Brian 
Won. Candlewick, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7119-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Any successful mission to save the world requires excellent footwear, so when K. 
(short for Kay, also known as our protagonist’s mother) suggests to S.A.M. (short 
for Secret Agent Man) that they go shopping for new shoes, S.A.M. happily obliges, 
wondering if he’ll be able to choose between “rocket shoes or vanishing shoes.” 
Shoe Store Man looks a little shady, but when he presents S.A.M. with tiger-striped 
kicks, S.A.M. knows he has found what’s he’s looking for. Another day of keeping 
the Plans for World Domination out of evil hands ensues, and the tiger shoes give 
S.A.M. just enough speed to rescue K. (and the laundry she’s hanging outside) 
from a thunderstorm. The rather irksome task of shoe shopping gets the golden 
Bond touch here, as our young 007 takes both the tasks of finding new beaters 
and protecting the world with equal seriousness, resulting in an entertaining mix 
of satire and gentle humor. The spy scenes are rendered in blue, blacks and whites, 
with sharp, angular lines shaping the setting and figures, and blue shadows envelop-
ing the characters. In contrast, warm tones, dappled textures, and K.’s perpetually 
smiling face bring coziness to the IRL spreads—though darker colors occasionally 
linger on certain pages, hinting at S.A.M.’s next move. His Team of Expert Spies 
(three of his stuffed animals) and his code names for various locations in the house 
(the bathroom is the “Holding Cell of Despair,” while the piano bench is the 
“Torture Chamber”) are sure to elicit chuckles from viewers. Don’t be surprised if 
a few kids show up at the next storytime clad in black, flashlight in hand, and, of 
course, wearing some super-sweet sneakers.  KQG
yoon, SAlinA Duck, Duck, Porcupine!; written and illus. by Salina Yoon. Blooms-
bury, 2016 [64p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-723-8 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-812-9 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. K-1
In the three short chapters of this beginning reader, friends Big Duck, Little Duck, 
and Porcupine enjoy a picnic (despite some rain), celebrate Porcupine’s birthday, 
and go camping (sort of). Little Duck, the smallest and seemingly youngest char-
acter, is an optimistic problem solver and saves the day on all three occasions. He 
demonstrates that rain puddles can be fun for splashing, helps forgetful Big Duck 
remember Porcupine’s birthday, and overrides Big Duck’s control-freak tendencies 
(she wants to take way too much gear on the camping trip) to cut right to the gooey 
heart of the camping experience: the marshmallow roasting, which they proceed 
to do right in their own backyard. While the first chapter ends rather flatly and 
covers familiar easy-reader ground, the two subsequent stories are amusing and 
engaging enough to make up for it. Novice readers will find success here thanks to 
the age-appropriate vocabulary (mostly simple sight words and decodable words), 
the clarity of the bold, black font printed in large, white dialogue bubbles, and the 
visual cues provided by the illustrations. Yoon’s crisp, clean art has a coloring-book-
like simplicity that will appeal to youngsters, with thick, black outlines highlighting 
the sunny colors of the figures and backgrounds and slight shading replicating the 
June 2016 • 553
ever-so-smudgy stroke of a crayon. Simple touches personalize each character: purple 
Porcupine sports a polka-dotted bow tie, Big Duck wears a daisy in her white feath-
ers, and adorable yellow Little Duck wears a snappy, royal blue ball cap. Kids (and 
the adults who work with them) can never have too many attractive, well-written 
beginning readers, and this trio of cuties is a welcome addition to the genre.  JH
zuill, AndreA Wolf Camp; written and illus. by Andrea Zuill. Schwartz & 
Wade, 2016 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50913-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50912-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50914-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Summer camp: it’s both alluring in its promises and daunting in its reality, and 
so it proves for our narrator, Homer the dog. Homer yearns to be wolflike and 
eventually convinces his people to send him off to Wolf Camp. At first, camp is 
scary and weird (“Dinner tasted unusual”) and he sends a lonely letter home, but 
soon Homer and his pals have settled in. At camp’s end, Homer returns home, 
proud of his Honorary Wolf certificate and happily wolf-howling into the suburban 
night. There’s plenty of comedy in the dog-camp notion, with the text employing 
wide-eyed sincerity while the illustrations reveal the truth (Homer’s “I am very 
wolfish” statement captions his attack on a tiny pink plush moose). Jittery lines 
and amusing distortion bring humor to the digitally enhanced line and watercolor 
art, along with frequent doggy speech or thought bubbles. This will be a natural 
for kids considering camp as well as for dog lovers, while the book’s sophisticated 
flair will amuse adults without excluding children.  DS
CorreCTion:
In our April review of Lori Haskins Houran’s Next to You, we mistakenly attributed 
the illustrations to the author instead of the illustrator, Sydney Hanson. We regret 
the error.
554 • The BulleTin
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
reCenTly reCeived:
rAy, JAne, comp. The Lion and the Unicorn and Other Hairy Tales; comp. and 
illus. by Jane Ray. Boxer Books, 2015 176p 
ISBN 978-1-910126-38-7 $19.95
Following previous similarly styled collections, The Little Mermaid and Other Fishy 
Tails and The Emperor’s Nightingale and Other Feathery Tales, Ray shifts her focus 
from the from sea and sky to land, centering this collection of stories, poems, and 
song lyrics on tales from beasts. Eleven entries are coupled with illustrations that 
are a huge departure from her famous gilded colors; monochromic or dicrhomatic 
etchings vary in texture and design, sometimes echoing medieval woodblocks, 
sometimes creating understated contemporary comedy. This offers material story-
tellers can mine, and it might also make a stylish gift book.  KQG
June 2016 • 555
Accidents–fiction: Harrington
Actors and acting–fiction: Peacock
Adventure: Blankman; Bral-
lier; Brindle; Butler; Larson; Lee; 
rogers; Shusterman; venditti; 
voskuil; Womach
African Americans–fiction: Carter; 
reynolds; rhodes
African Americans: Barton, C.
Airplanes–stories: Brown
Animals: Jenkins
Animals–fiction: Yoon
Animals–stories: Sauer; Smith
Archeology: Bower
Asian Americans–fiction: Lee
Bedtime StorieS: Smiley
BiogrAPHieS: Atkins; Barretta; 
Barton, C.
Biology: Jenkins; montgomery
Biracial people–fiction: Ahern; 
vaught
Birthdays–fiction: doerrfeld
Boarding school–fiction: mason
Brothers–fiction: Avery
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Harri-
son; Lee; revis
Brothers and sisters–stories: Child; 
Lam
Bullies–fiction: gephart
Camps and camping–stories: Zuill
Cats–stories: Barton, B.
Circuses–fiction: Brallier
Class–fiction: Hattrup
Clothing–stories: Fleming; Wynne-
Jones
ConCePt BookS: Child; tullet
Cousins–fiction: Hattrup
Crafts: Potter
Crime and criminals–fiction: 
Brindle; Butler; Harrison; Holm, 
J.; mabry; mason, S.; Panitch; 
Ponti; Sirowy; Stampler; toten; 
venditti; voskuil
Current events: Laidlaw
death–fiction: Avery
death–stories: Higginbotham
depression, the–fiction: Holm, J.
deteCtive StorieS: mason, 
S.; Ponti
detention–fiction: Cosimano
disabilities–fiction: keplinger; 
reynolds
disappearances–fiction: Altebrando
disasters–fiction: Lee
divorce–fiction: urban
dogs–fiction: Perkins
dogs–stories: Fleming; Hest; Zuill
dolls–stories: Potter
dragons–fiction: Womach
drug abuse–fiction: messner
dystopias–fiction: Ahern; Spinale
eating disorders–fiction: Carter
Ecology: montgomery
egypt: Bower
egypt–fiction: venditti
Ethics and values: Ahern; Blake; 
miyares
Fairies–fiction: may
Subject and uSe Index
keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
556 • The BulleTin
Families–fiction: Blake; Harrington; 
Jiménez; myracle; Pitcher; rhodes; 
vaught; venditti
Families–stories: Brown; Smiley
FAntASY: Avery; Cushman; doerr- 
feld; grove; Lee; Long; mason-
Black; may; Sun; Womach 
Fathers–fiction: Bruchac; Feuti; ur-
ban; venditti
Fathers–stories: Alexie
Fears–fiction: galante
Food and eating–stories: Sauer
Friends–fiction: galante; gephart; 
keplinger; LaCour; Luurtsema; 
mills; Ponti; toten; Yoon
Friends–stories: miyares
gLBtQ people–fiction: Carter; 
gephart; Hartinger; Hattrup; 
keplinger; LaCour; mason
grandparents–fiction: reynolds
grandparents–stories: Higginbotham
grAPHiC noveLS: doerrfeld; 
Feuti; Larson
grief–fiction: Harrington
grief–stories: Hest; Higginbotham
gymnastics–fiction: Carter
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: Blank-
man; Boyne; eshbaugh; Holm, J.; 
Larson; Lawson; Lee, S.
History, European: Boyne
History, U.S.: Barretta; rhodes; 
vaught
History, world: Bascomb; Bower
Homelessness–fiction: Bruchac
Horror: Black; Hale; Hartinger; 
maberry; Peacock; ravenswood
Houses–stories: Barton, B.
Humor: Agee; Feuti; Fleming; Hale; 
Holm, m.; Lam; Luurtsema; mills; 
miyares; Perkins; Pizzoli; Poskitt; 
Smith; Strohmeyer; tullet; Wynne-
Jones; Yoon; Zuill
illness–fiction: Avery; gilmore; 
Spinale
imagination–stories: Potter; Wynne-
Jones
india–fiction: Laidlaw
indians–fiction: Butler
insects–stories: miyares
inventors and inventing: Barton, C.
inventors and inventing–fiction: 
Shusterman
kidnapping–fiction: Panitch
Language arts: Smith
Latinos–fiction: doerrfeld; Jiménez
Lions–stories: Agee
Literature, English: Blankman; Jimé-
nez; Spinale
magic–fiction: Brindle; Cushman; 
Long; myracle
mAgiCAL reALiSm:  mason-Black; 
Lawson; mabry; messner
maps–fiction: grove
mathematics: Child
mental illness–fiction: gephart; revis
monsters–fiction: Peacock
mummies: Bower
music and musicians–fiction: mason-
Black
mutism–fiction: Pitcher
mYSterieS: Altebrando; Cosimano; 
Harrison; mabry; mason, S.; Ponti; 
Sirowy; voskuil
names–stories: Alexie
native Americans–fiction: Bruchac
native Americans–stories: Alexie
Nature study: Jenkins
night–fiction: Black
orphans–fiction: Boyne
owls–stories: Pizzoli
Parties–stories: Sauer
Pets–fiction: mills; Perkins
Pets–stories: Hest
Play–stories: tullet
PoetrY: Atkins
Presidents: Barretta
Prostitution–fiction: Laidlaw
Puerto rico–fiction: mabry
racism–fiction: Butler; vaught
Reading aloud: Barretta; Barton, C.; 
Pizzoli; Womach
Reading, beginning: Barton, B.; 
Pizzoli
Reading, easy: Brallier; doerrfeld; 
Feuti; mills; Poskitt; urban; Yoon
Reading, reluctant: Bruchac; Cosi-
mano; Jiménez; ravenswood
rehabilitation–fiction: Heidicker
June 2016 • 557
relationships–fiction: Blake; Carter; 
Cosimano; eshbaugh; Heidicker; 
mason
revolution–fiction: Ahern
romance–fiction: gilmore; LaCour; 
Stampler; Strohmeyer; Sun
royalty–fiction: Feuti; Long; Sun; 
Womach
runaways–fiction: keplinger; Lawson
School–fiction: Hale; Holm, m.; 
keplinger; Lee, J.; Perkins; Poskitt; 
toten
Science: Atkins; Bascomb; montgom-
ery; Swanson
Science and scientists–fiction: Stroh-
meyer
SCienCe FiCtion: Altebrando; 
Holm, m.
Secrets–fiction: Blake; gilmore; 
myracle; Pitcher; rhodes; Sirowy; 
Stampler; vaught
Sharks: montgomery
SHort StorieS: maberry
Sisters–fiction: mason-Black; messner
Social studies: Barretta
Space travel–fiction: Brallier
Speech–fiction: Harrington
Spiders–fiction: Holm, m.
Spies and espionage–fiction: rogers; 
Wynne-Jones
Sports: Swanson
SPortS StorieS: Carter; Luurtse-
ma
SteAmPunk: Butler; Spinale
Stepfamilies–fiction: Sirowy
Storytelling: maberry; ravenswood
Storytime: Alexie; Barton, B.; Flem-
ing; Lam; miyares; Sauer; Smiley; 
Smith
Suicide–fiction: revis
Summer–fiction: Hattrup
Superheroes–fiction: venditti
SuPernAturAL StorieS: Black; 
Cosimano; Hale; maberry; Pea-
cock; voskuil
SuSPenSe: Hartinger; Panitch; rog-
ers; toten
Swimming–fiction: Luurtsema
teachers–fiction: keplinger
technology: Barton, C.; Swanson
time travel–fiction: Shusterman
toys–stories: Potter
transgender people–fiction: gephart
twins–fiction: Avery; Larson
video games–fiction: Heidicker
voyages and travel–fiction: Bruchac; 
Cushman; grove; Lawson; Long; 
mason-Black
voyages and travel–stories: Brown
War–fiction: may
Wishes–fiction: messner
Women’s studies: Atkins
World War ii: Bascomb
World War ii–fiction: Boyne
Writers and writing–fiction: Blankman
Library and Information Science:
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Library Trends ISSN: 0024-2594 / E-ISSN: 1559-0682
Portal: Libraries and the Academy ISSN: 1531-2542 / E-ISSN: 1530-7131
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
To us, the role of libraries and the 
future of information science clicks.
Disseminate. Innovate. Collaborate.
JHU Press Scholarly Journals
Scholarly journals, or collections of new ideas and scholarly 
research, are brought to light by authors, editors, reviewers, 
professional associations, librarians, readers, and university presses 
like the Johns Hopkins University Press. These intrepid heroes 
work together to do what no one person can do alone: transform 
research into volumes of scholarly works that can ultimately 
change the world. 
www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
ONLINE REFERENCE RESOURCES
Five outstanding online references from the Johns Hopkins University Press  
deliver seminal works and cutting-edge scholarship to students and researchers.
press.jhu.edu/references
• Flexible search options, powerful results.  Results are ranked and sorted by relevance   
 
or date, with direct links to documents and related materials.
• Intuitive browsing.  Wander through entire volumes without getting lost.
• Reliable usage statistics. COUNTER-compliant usage reports let you track activity  
 
 
according to the most current standard available. Statistics are compiled and ready to  
 
 
download once a month. 
• Always available. Our collections are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week from any   
 
IP-authenticated address. No special hardware or software is required. And we offer full   
 
technical and customer support.
The Early Republic
Critical Editions on the  
Founding of the United States
Primary material documenting the 
actions, debates, and thoughts of the  
First Federal Congress (1789–1791) and 
its members. 
earlyrepublic.press.jhu.edu
Encyclopedia of  
American Studies
Edited by Simon Bronner
Interdisciplinary articles from  
hundreds of scholars cover the history 
and cultures of the United States from  
pre-colonial days to the present.
eas-ref.press.jhu.edu
The Johns Hopkins  
Guide to Literary  
Theory & Criticisim
Edited by Michael Groden,  
Martin Kreiswirth, and Imre Szeman
A comprehensive historical survey of the 
field’s most important figures, schools, 
and movements.
litguide.press.jhu.edu
The Papers of Dwight 
David Eisenhower 
Edited by Louis Galambos, Alfred D.  
Chandler Jr., Daun van Ee, et. al.
Combines the full text of all 21 
volumes—over 14,000 pages—with 
a powerful search engine and 
user-friendly interface.
eisenhower.press.jhu.edu
The World Shakespeare 
Bibliography ONLINE
Edited by Laura Estill and an  
international committee of correspondents
The single largest Shakespeare  
database in the world. 
www.worldshakesbib.org
