ILLI 
NI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
:rl 
r 
..
:· .CI· 
i 
5~1 
~··"1~:-; 
; ;: ···:1~
.-r· -
i
-i 
?, 
s~; 
r
*A 
light, breezy, feel-good book.*
A1terand 
trBad
Witen and lklstmted by Lese Tryn
ginative and charming gouache
ons complement the froliking verse
t 
rtst 
spring training without it
d review. School Lbray Journal
as the
offer-
ng should have a life on the she
s
lv
us Reviews
The fine-line drawings brightened
with colorful washes make the most
of the comic possibitles in the
lilting, rhymed verses...'
-Booklhst
Alberts Ballgrne
0-689-80874- $16.00 1U/21.50 CAN
ATHENEUM BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
1230 Avenue of the Americs * New York, NY 10020
; '··
I·
i ·
i
I
· ; I:·
I
"I :
· 1·, I .
i 
I-
; .i . ·
I 1 ..;
I ,
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
July/August 1996
Vol.49 No. 11
A LOOK INSIDE
363 THE BIG PICTURE
Grandmother Bryant's Pocket written by Jacqueline Briggs Martin;
illus. by Petra Mathers
364 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
370 * BuriedAlive: The Elements ofLove written by Ralph Fletcher; illus. with
photographs by Andrew Moore
372 * The Life and Death of Crazy Horse written by Russell Freedman; illus. by
Amos Bad Heart Bull
378 * Sam and the Tigers: A New Telling ofLittle Black Sambo written by
Julius Lester; illus. by Jerry Pinkney
381 * The Inner City Mother Goose by Eve Merriam; illus. by David Diaz
381 * Zel by Donna Jo Napoli
392 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
394 ANNUAL AUTHOR AND TITLE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Acting Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan S. Verner, Reviewer (SSV)
Roger Sutton, Reviewer (RS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Tara L. Rivera, Editorial Assistant (TLR)
Amy E. Brandt, Graduate Research Assistant (AEB)
Lisa Mahoney, Graduate Research Assistant (LM)
Pat Mathews, Graduate Research Assistant (PM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Deborah Stevenson, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center,
51 Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1996 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Petra Mathers, from Grandmother Bryant's Pocket ©1996 and used by
permission of Houghton Mifflin Company.
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 363
THE BIG PICTURE
Grandmother Bryant's Pocket
written by Jacqueline Briggs Martin; illustrated by Petra Mathers
"Sarah Bryant was eight years old in 1787. She lived on a farm in Maine and had
a spotted dog called Patches." It's a matter-of-fact, unassuming beginning to what
seems at first to be a cheerful account of quotidian matters ("Every day Patches
waited while Sarah churned butter, gathered the eggs, or fed the pig"). But soon
tragedy strikes when Patches perishes in a barn fire, and an inconsolable Sarah is
sent to stay with her grandparents for comfort and recuperation. There she tends
the garden with her herbalist grandmother, finding strength in wearing Grand-
mother Bryant's pocket which, in the convention of the time, was a separate cloth
pouch tied around the waist. Then the pocket disappears, and Sarah must face the
fears that have plagued her since the loss of her beloved companion in order to get
it back.
Rather than doing one big thing spectacularly, the book excels by combining
many fine small components very well indeed. Martin, who demonstrated her
capacity for humor in Good Times on Grandfather Mountain (BCCB 3/92), here
returns to the fluid and musing prose she employed in The Finest Horse in Town
(BCCB 7/92). The storytelling folds other little stories ("He told of his mother-
such a good knitter, she knitted a mitten underwater the day she fell off the Kennebec
ferryboat") smoothly into the larger plot without ever rambling or losing focus.
The text's gravity and poetic tone (the ragged right margins enhance the free-verse
resemblance) may initially distance it from some young readers, but many will
find its evocation of an earlier time reminiscent of the Little House stories. And
while its telling use of detail effectively creates a world very far away from now, its
respectful and understanding treatment of Sarah's fear ("She had no Patches to
make her brave and she dared not go outside by herself") and of her enduring grief
("Some nights she called in her sleep for Patches and woke up weeping") adds a
timeless touch.
The book's appreciation of detail doesn't end with the text. Its small trim size
bucks the bigger-is-better trend and emphasizes the tight focus of the story. The
discreetly decorative design emphasizes white space, breaking the text up into short
verse paragraphs and giving every spread its own chapter title. Petra Mathers'
watercolors have a vigor that keeps them from becoming precious despite their
petite size; the wonder of the ordinary (a wooden carved clown, the neighbor's
pigs, the verdant garden) is their specialty. The illustrations rely on spot art and
half-page landscapes, which keeps the small pages from becoming overcrowded,
until Sarah finally goes home in a double-spread field of flowering mullein (which
couldn't wait for the spread but began creeping in the page before) with butterflies
overhead and her new comrade the cat dancing about her.
364 
* THE BULLETIN
An unusual little book, cozy but controlled, this demonstrates that diminutive
need not mean precious or cloying. And not only is it that all-too-rare item, a
historical account that will appeal to very early readers, it also contains a rhythmi-
cal cadence that would make it an effective intimate readaloud. The story's verisi-
militude leads one to suspect a basis in reality, but no note explains, so it remains
poised on the line between imagination and fact. A brief guide to Grandmother
Bryant's herbs is appended. (Imprint information appears on p. 381.)
Deborah Stevenson, Acting Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ASHABRANNER, BRENT 
A Strange and Distant Shore: Indians ofthe Great Plains in
Exile. 
Cobblehill, 1996 
54 p
ISBN 0-525-65201-9 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
This is an account of the strange interlude in which seventy-two Indians of the
Great Plains were sent as prisoners to St. Augustine, Florida, for three years.
Ashabranner explains the Red River War of 1875 that occasioned this punitive
response and also examines the role of Captain Richard Henry Pratt, whose un-
usual respect for the imprisoned Indians changed the nature of their incarceration
and led eventually to their freedom, but whose insistence on Indian assimilation
exacted its own eventual cost. The book reads slowly, bogged down in a multitude
of dates, incidents, and persons, before it gets to the drama of exile, and the chronicle
of those three years is over quite quickly. And while the disparate elements-the
Red River War, Pratt's role, the art painted by the prisoners-would merit further
examination, they fail to cohere into a single larger picture here. It's still a compel-
ling piece of history, and the description of the captives' containment and self-
government in Florida is both memorable and poignant; the color inserts of
prisoners' (and other Indians') paintings are worth examination as well. There are
no notes, but a bibliography and an index are included. DS
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH 
Children of the Longhouse. 
Dial, 1996 
150p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1794-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1793-8 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The Mohawks' long-standing peace with the neighboring Amen:taks is threatened
by a small band of Mohawk adolescents who plot to raid their neighbors' village
and, thereby, earn glory as warriors; eleven-year-old Ohkwa'ri overhears their plans
and informs his clan's council. The older boys, led by a sullen bully named Grab-
ber, seek vengeance against Ohkwa'ri, who can delay but not avoid a violent con-
frontation. Soon a brutal game of Tekwaarathon (forerunner of lacrosse) finds the
boys on opposite sides, with Ohkwa'ri competing for his very life. The detailed
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 
365
portrayal of village life, from communal sleeping arrangements to matrilineal clan
hierarchy, reflects Bruchac's customary zeal for accuracy, and if the antagonists are
depicted as remarkably unsubtle in stalking Ohkwa'ri, the delicate assistance and
protection of the vulnerable boy by his family and neighbors is credibly drawn.
Though they provide cultural context, the multitude of legends to which Ohkwa'ri
and his twin sister Otsi:stia continually refer for guidance tend to slow the pace of
the vengeance tale, and Otsi:stia's unfaltering patience and wisdom dull the glow
of Ohkwa'ri's inevitable victory. Still, the Tekwaarathon game provides a rousing
climax which should satisfy readers on the lookout for action. EB
BUCK, NOLA 
Sid and Sam; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
HarperCollins,
1996 
32p 
(My First I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025372-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025371-1 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 1-2
What begins as an innocent encounter between two friends ends as a singing match
with Sid outdoing Sam. This could have easily been a contrived primer, but it is
actually a light and amusing tale about friends who converse in alliterative dia-
logue ("'Please sing,' said Sid. 'Sing a song, Sam") and rhyme ("'Sure thing,' said
Sam. 'I will sing"'). Buck's phonetic friskiness is useful as well as fun, and the
repetition that makes the text easy to read is, cleverly, the point of the joke here
("Sid sang, and sang, and sang"). Karas' expressively angular pencil-and-water-
color art shows Sid and Sam as a happy and diverse pairing. Beginning readers will
find the tongue-teasing sibilance simple but solidly entertaining. TLR
BYARS, BETSY 
Dead Letter: A Herculeah Jones Mystery. 
Viking, 1996 
[128p]
ISBN 0-670-86860-4 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
"It began on a day too beautiful for murder. The sky was blue. The wind from the
west smelled of spring. The sun overhead was the kind drawn by kindergartners."
It is with this electric-blue opening (to match the color of the thrift-store coat that
kindles the plot) that Byars jump-starts her best Herculeah Jones mystery yet. In
this third book about the middle-school sleuth and her habitually hesitant Watson,
Meat, Herculeah discovers a mysterious letter hidden in the lining of her "new"
coat. The woman who authored the note was definitely in danger and may have
been murdered; soon the murderers recognize Herculeah, and the chase is on.
Suspense builds as Herculeah explores the abandoned house where the woman
lived, narrowly escapes being run over by the black car (driven by the villain's
thug), returns to the stable where the woman was murdered, and confronts the
villain with his crime. He rewards her crackerjack detective work by locking her in
the stable with a Doberman trained to attack if she moves a muscle. (Turning the
page won't cut her chances, will it?) Byars' storytelling is convincing because her
characters are convincing. Herculeah's parents (appropriately enough, a police
detective and a private investigator) leak clues and tell her to keep-out-of-what-
doesn't-concern-her all in the same breath. Though reluctant to participate in
Herculeah's "labors" (each book in the series is loosely based on one of Hercules'
twelve tasks), Meat, with his tendency to free-associate when he talks, is indispens-
able as well as entertaining. Herculeah closes the case (of the Augean stables) with
a premonition about her next one, something about a bull, a Cretan bull? 
AEB
366 
* THE BULLETIN
CARNES, JIM 
Us and Them: A History oflntolerance in America; illus. by Herbert
Tauss and with photographs. 
Oxford, 1996 
[13 2 p]
ISBN 0-19-510378-5 
$22.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Working chronologically, this history examines the prejudice against and persecu-
tion of various groups since the English colonies were established in America. Each
of the fourteen chapters focuses on a specific incident-Mary Dyer's harassment
and banishment for her Quaker faith, the Florida riots that destroyed the African-
American town of Rosewood, the drowning of a gay man in Maine-and includes
first-person accounts and relevant official documents. This is an interesting ap-
proach to an important subject, and the breadth makes its own tacit point. Unfor-
tunately, the flat writing fails to do justice to the tales of hatred and tragedy, with
some of the accounts completely lacking in pace and overstuffed with detail and
proper names. There's little attempt to link the chapters to one another, and the
format, with its tiny print and confusing boxes strewn about the pages, gives the
book a hyperactive look that may lure browsers but resists sustained reading. More
impressive are the historical photographs that fill the book and the dramatic oil
paintings that lead off each chapter. Despite the book's impedance of its own
mission, it addresses the phenomenon of intolerance in a manner likely to be use-
ful for provocation of thought and discussion. There are no notes, but a reading
list is included, as is an index. DS
CARRIER, LARK 
A Tree's Tale; written and illus. by Lark Carrier. 
Dial, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1203-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1202-0 
$14.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The concurrent development of an oak tree and the region surrounding it offer a
lesson in arboreal and human ecology for the picture book audience. Grown from
acorn to sapling to supple young tree in a dense forest, the oak is bent by two
Indians to be a pathmarker to the inland West. Years later, colonial settlers clear-
ing the forest for farmland spare the path-tree as a support for their children's
swing. A hundred years later, shipbuilders pass up the bent tree, leaving it as
lookout post; yet another century finds the oak shading cows in an otherwise open
pasture. Finally, in the present, construction equipment threatens the tree until "a
man who had heard tales of the region shouted for them to stop," and his commu-
nity joins together that summer to imagine the oak's history and, presumably,
preserve the path-tree. Carrier's flowery prose romanticizes her subject ("As if in
celebration, the sapling's leafy boughs and neighboring tree limbs rustled in the
wind, bringing music to the hill," yet stops short of anthropomorphizing. Water-
color paintings in muted grays and greens present a prettified, hazy landscape peopled
with waxy figures, self-consciously posed around the path-tree. Viewers will prob-
ably enjoy searching some of the densely detailed forest pictures for the developing
oak, but they'll discover a fair amount of hokum there too. EB
CHA, DIA 
Dia's Story Cloth: The Hmong People's Journey of Freedom; illus. with
embroidery by Chue and Nhia Thao Cha. 
Lee & Low/Denver Museum of Natural
History, 1996 
[24 p]
ISBN 1-880000-34-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-6
A lavishly embroidered pa'ndau cloth, fashioned by the author's uncle and aunt
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 367
during their stay in a refugee camp in Thailand, provides the illustrations for Cha's
brief history of Hmong migration from ancient China, through Laos and Cambo-
dia, across the Mekong River into Thailand to escape the Communist invasions
throughout Southeast Asia, and finally, to asylum in America. In a book reminis-
cent of Pegi Deitz Shea's The Whispering Cloth (BCCB 3/95), which was aimed at
a younger audience, the author personalizes history with anecdotes of her own
family's flight and tells of her own experiences that coincide closely with events
chronicled on the pa'ndau. Close-ups of sections of the cloth coordinate well with
the text, and a double-page spread of the entire panel unifies the eras in Hmong
history. Although young audiences will connect with some of the more personal
aspects of the story, the frequent changes in geography and politics, while integral
to the Hmong story, may be more difficult to follow. Further information about
pa 'ndau cloths and other aspects of Hmong culture is included in a closing discus-
sion by a curator of the Denver Museum of Natural History; densely typed and
lengthier than the main text, this material (fascinating in its own right) is appar-
ently directed to an adult audience. EB
DOYLE, BRIAN 
Spud in Winter; ISBN 0-88899-261-0. 
Spud Sweetgrass; ISBN
0-88899-164-9.
Each book: Groundwood, 1996 
140p 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
In this likable imported pair from Canada, we meet John "Spud" Sweetgrass, an
ordinary sixteen-year-old of Ottawa. Spud is coming to terms with his father's
death, grappling with his problems in school, and getting better acquainted with
the lovely Connie Pan; he's also stumbling upon-and solving-a few crimes. In
the first book, Spud Sweetgrass, Spud follows the slippery trail of a man whose
grease-disposal business (Spud works at a French-fry stand, hence his nickname)
apparently consists of illegally dumping the stuff into the city sewer. In the second
book, Spud witnesses a killing and, after initial reluctance to identify the killer,
hunts him down and brings him to justice. What really makes these books sparkle
is Doyle's writing: initially light and unassuming, Spud's narration lends itself
well to grief, humor (often entertainingly crude), and romance. The pan-ethnic
Canadian milieu (and, in the second book, the frigid Canadian winter) is vividly
depicted, and the books abound in spontaneous and memorable inventions, such
as a hotly contested volleyball game with an imaginary ball and net and a chase
scene that is also a game of ice-skating follow-the-leader. Some of the characters
are a bit flat, but Spud is an amiable and engaging protagonist, and elegant and
determined Connie could be one of the great fictional girlfriends. Reminiscent of
Jack Gantos' recent work (Heads or Tails, BCCB 7194, Jack's New Power, 12/94),
but less intense and seasoned with some Paul Jennings-style humor, these will
offer readers some literary northern light. DS
DUNCAN, Lois, comp. ed. 
Night Terrors: Stories ofShadow and Substance. 
Simon,
1996 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-689-80346-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Duncan certainly has earned her credentials when it comes to spinning a spooky
yarn; here she collects skeins from eleven other writers. There's an appealing vari-
ety of tone and approach here: stories range from the reality-based to the super-
naturally driven, and a few initially seem to be one but turn out to be the other.
368 
* THE BULLETIN
The best stories, such as Chris Lynch's "Bearing Paul" and Richard Peck's "The
Girl at the Window," possess the intensity of longer works and unfold their spooky
secrets without contrivance. More often, however, the selections' machinery domi-
nates their atmosphere, so that the creak of the plot is as loud as the scary noises
themselves. Spooks, however, don't get many outings in short stories for kids, and
young readers will find a few entries to satisfactorily raise the hair on the backs of
their necks. DS
DUSSLING, JENNIFER 
Creep Show; illus. by Jeff Spackman. 
Grosset,
1996 
48p 
(Eek! Stories to Make You Shriek)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-041272-1 
$3.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
HERMAN, GAIL 
The Haunted Bike; illus. by Blanche Sims. 
Grosset,
1996 
48p 
(Eek! Stories to Make You Shriek)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-41269-1 
$3.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
O'CONNOR, JANE 
The Bad-Luck Penny; illus. by Horatio Elena. 
Grosset,
1996 
48p 
(Eek! Stories to Make You Shriek)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-41254-3 
$3.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
SPEREGEN, DEVRA 
The Wax Museum; illus. by Donald Cook. 
Grosset,
1996 
48p 
(Eek! Stories to Make You Shriek)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-41273-X 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
What with Goosebumps proving that the appetite for spooks starts at an early age,
and with the easy-reader genre badly in need of an alternative to the blandly in-
nocuous, this series of early chillers is likely to pique many a young reader's inter-
est. Each title tells a single story: Creep Show relates the open-ended tale of a boy
lured into danger by his local movie theater; The Bad Luck Penny tells of a good-
luck token that brings nothing but trouble; in The Haunted Bike, a lonely little girl
acquires a bicycle that comes with a mysterious friend; and The Wax Museum,
filled with threatening figures, frightens a lost young girl. Each title has a different
author and illustrator, which allows for some variation in tone and threat level but
also results in uneven quality. Creep Show and The Haunted Bike deliver compact
and well-paced accounts, whereas The Bad-Luck Penny leaves too many plot holes
and The Wax Museum's stilted language and stiff illustrations mar its intriguing
premise. These don't quite have the dark economy of Alvin Schwartz' scary tales,
but they generally deliver what they promise; new readers will appreciate a chance
to exercise their literary muscles in these appealingly creepy surroundings. DS
ERDRICH, LOUISE 
Grandmother's Pigeon; illus. by Jim LaMarche. 
Hyperion,
1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2137-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0165-4 
$15.95 
M 
5-8 yrs
Grandmother, a mysterious character who has "trained kicking mules" and "skied
the Continental Divide," decides to take a porpoise ride to Greenland. After a
year, the family admits that she's gone for good and cleans out her room, where
Mother finds a nest with three eggs that immediately crack open and hatch while
a stuffed bird on the mantle looks smugly on. The hatchlings turn out to be
passenger pigeons (an ornithologist explains their extinction), and the scientific
world converges on the family and the birds. The narrator and her brother release
the birds (all male, so there's no hope of reestablishing the species), which fly with
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 369
messages to Grandmother, who promptly writes back and says she's had a wonder-
ful time in Greenland ("I had to change porpoises three times and catch a whale")
but is about to come back home. More mystical whimsy than credible fantasy, the
story seems especially puzzling in picture-book format, where the narrative devel-
opment is truncated despite a long, dense text. Erdrich's adult novels have a rich
inevitability, but here, arbitrary magic replaces the inner logic that drives convinc-
ing fiction. Real and surreal elements seem poorly mated. La Marche's paintings
are literal-the portraits handsomely expressive, the hues warmly blended, the
compositions and perspectives varied. His naturalistic art helps support, though it
can't completely fortify, a tenuous and disjointed plot. BH
FACKLAM, MARGERY 
Creepy, Crawly Caterpillars; illus. by Paul Facklam. 
Little,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-316-27391-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
The mother/son team who brought us The Big Bug Book are at it again. This time
the focus is on caterpillars, all gloriously displayed on double page spreads, glossily
painted to show every prickly hair. Facklam's brief introduction to Planet Cater-
pillar is serviceable (it includes the scientific names of various body parts), but it's
also full of fun facts (humans have only 670 muscles, caterpillars have 4,000) and
reassuring to boot (caterpillars never bite people). Then begins the parade of the
thirteen critters the Facklams have chosen to present up close and personal. These
range from the familiar (the banded woolly bear who's a speed demon at four feet
per minute) to the exotic (the green grappler who's a carnivorous predator). Not
all of these characters are native to North America (and a good thing, too: would
you want the puss moth caterpillar in your yard?), but most are local and several-
the monarch and swallowtail-are downright common. Each caterpillar is splen-
didly shown in its native habitat, with additional information conveyed in spot art
running along the bottom of the pages. The text is accessible and wryly humorous
(the swallowtail caterpillar, upon hatching from its egg, looks like a bird dropping
"and not even the hungriest animal wants to eat that"). This is an enticingly
handsome science book for the very young. A glossary is included. SSV
FARMER, PENELOPE 
Penelope: A Novel. 
McElderry, 1996 
184p
ISBN 0-689-80121-1 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Flora's mother died when she was quite young; since then Flora has lived with her
Aunt Jo, Uncle Frank, and cousins Alan and Louise. The older she gets the more
she is troubled by memories-memories not just of her life with her mother but of
a life before then, when she was called by her middle name, Penelope, and when
things happened to her that no one else seems to know about. Aunt Jo is con-
vinced that Flora is recalling an earlier incarnation, one perhaps of an ancestor,
and as the evidence piles up Flora begins to accept this as the truth of the situation
and to succumb more and more to the call of the past. The reincarnation motif
(which fondly recalls Audrey Rose) is an inviting one and Farmer handles it well,
intriguingly combining it with a story of present-day difficulties to examine the
question of identity in the here and now as well as across time. Additional interest
comes from plot threads about Flora's friendship with a dignified Indian girl, her
trouble with Louise and with Louise's bullying semi-friends, and her peripatetic
father's disappointing return. It's a packed plot, but it works well (save for an odd
extraneous twist at the end), and both the historically accurate evocation of Flora's
370 
* 
THE BULLETIN
eighteenth-century memories and her present-day London milieu are satisfyingly
atmospheric. This is a good, gently haunting yarn that will appeal to readers who
like a bit of high-class spookiness. DS
FISHER, LEONARD EVERETT 
Niagara Falls: Nature's Wonder. 
Holiday House,
1996 
6 4 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1240-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In the Iroquoian language "niagara" means "thunder of water," and anyone who
has seen and heard the falls will agree the name is apt. Parts of Niagara Falls,
straddling the border between the United States and Canada, are about as tall as a
sixteen-story building. While not the highest waterfalls in North America, they
are the widest, spanning almost half a mile across Horseshoe Falls. At their birth
12,000 years ago, the falls were some seven miles downstream from their present
location; they are currently moving upriver at the rate of four to six feet a year.
This is intrinsically interesting stuff, but Fisher falls short with this one: the writ-
ing, coupled with outdated fuzzy black-and-white photos, fails to project the ex-
citement and wonder which the subject deserves. Furthermore, there are some
organizational and chronological disjunctions that add confusion to the mix. Nev-
ertheless, there still are interesting tidbits to be found: biographical sketches of the
many daredevils who challenged the whirlpools and falls; an explanation of how
the falls stopped entirely one day; the story of the instant electrification of Buffalo
in 1896 thanks to hydropower. There is a brief index. SSV
FLEMING, CANDACE 
Women of the Lights; illus. by James Watling and with
photographs. 
Whitman, 1996 
79p
ISBN 0-8075-9165-3 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Fleming proves herself a scrupulous historian in this collective biography of five
American female lighthouse keepers (with a closing survey of others), resisting
fictionalization, employing only the most modest speculation, and eschewing false
heroics. The rescues are not actually the main interest: Ida Lewis, "the Heroine of
Lime Rock," became a celebrity for her rescues of several hapless Sunday sailors,
but her heroism is summarily reported; although Kate Walker "has been credited
with saving between fifty and seventy-five people," the only mission described
here is her saving of a little dog. What's intriguing is the glimpse into an unusual
way of life and the details of a solitary and vigilant existence. While the book isn't
as exciting as James Watling's tempest-tossed black-and-white watercolors (photo-
graphs of the keepers also appear) might lead you to believe, the details of light-
house workings can themselves provide a beacon for the imagination. A divided
list of sources and an index are appended. RS
FLETCHER, RALPH 
BuriedAlive: The Elements ofLove; illus. with photographs by
Andrew Moore. 
Atheneum, 1996 
[56 p]
ISBN 0-689-80593-4 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
Fletcher, author also of the masculine but tender love-poem collection IAm Wings
(BCCB 6/94), occupies a kind of YA middle ground between the collections of
contemporary adult poetry compiled by Paul Janeczko (Wherever Home Begins,
BCCB 11/95) and the simplistic poetic monologues of Mel Glenn (Class Dis-
missed, 2/87). The poems here are sometimes witty ("like all of a sudden I ain't so
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 371
bad/ since I seem more interested in/ his wheels than his daughter"), more often
yearning ("It's not fair/ that my two-year-old brother/ should get her for a
babysitter") and occasionally sensual ("This summer/ behind a weathered barn/ I
pick raspberries with you// Tiny torpedoes of pleasure"). The collection is divided
into four sections-Earth, Water, Air, Fire-and often follows a single speaker's
crush or love affair through its stages, so we hear of Brock's initial planting of
pumpkin seeds with his love ("I had big plans for us"), the subsequent break-up
("When you dump me/ I get an evil thought:/ our pumpkins must die"), and
acceptance ("I tried but could not hate them./ They weren't you or me:/ they had
grown beyond us"). One of the best and most touching sequences portrays Alexis,
a young lesbian who in her first poem tells of hearing a classmate snicker "'finger in
the dike'/ accidentally on purpose," then cries over a secret crush ("Know how
tulips protect themselves?/ When it rains their petals fold up// so they don't catch
too much water,/ don't get too heavy, snap their necks"), and then, perhaps, finds
love ("There is a place/ where we could go// to speak plainly/ into each other's
eyes"). Plainspeaking but lyrical, Fletcher makes poetry accessible while still keep-
ing it, well, poetry. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. RS
Fox, MEM 
Zoo-Looking; illus. by Candace Whitman. 
Mondo, 1996 
32p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-57255-010-4 
$14.95
Papered. ISBN 1-57255-011-2 
$4.95 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
What's Zoo-Looking about, you might ask? Why, looking (on the part of Flora,
one small girl with an enormously wide-brimmed purple hat) and looking back
(on the part of all the animals at the zoo). The zoological activities and rhymes are
repetitive ("She looked at the giraffe and the giraffe looked back"), although men-
tion of the animals' appearance or behavior adds some variety to Flora's watchful
curiosity ("She looked at the snake as it slithered through a crack"). It's also quite
anticlimactic when her tag-a-long dad finally breaks the looking cycle by smiling
back at Flora. That is not to say that the animals aren't jolly: the ostrich is bright-
eyed and jaunty, while the penguin is poised and ready to cop a break-dance move
or two. Though they work less successfully with the human figures, collages cre-
ated from torn pieces of watercolored paper give the animals a furry, felted look.
The bleeding watercolors give the panther's coat a sleek, silky sheen and blend the
giraffe's and zebra's markings naturally into their background coats. This cozy if
unexciting look at zoo animals may serve as a prelude to more descriptive field-trip
texts. 
AEB
FRANK, LucY 
Will You Be My Brussels Sprout? Holiday House, 1996 
152p
ISBN 0-8234-1220-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
In IAm an Artichoke (BCCB 6/95), Sarah got to know Emily Friedman, once her
charge and now her friend; Sarah has since fallen for Emily's older brother, David,
and life has gotten complicated. Sarah sees David on Saturdays, when she takes
the train into New York to study with her cello teacher: Emily is jealous, Sarah
wants to keep the news from Emily and David's interfering mother, and David
resents the increasing amount of time Sarah devotes to her music. This tale of first
love is as interested in the cost as in the gain: Sarah's self-esteem isn't the greatest,
and David's flaws are as subtle and realistic as his desirability is understandable.
Frank writes freshly about an old topic, keeping everybody's dynamics interesting
(fans of the first novel will notice Emily's growth) and smoothly harmonizing the
372 
* 
THE BULLETIN
musical theme with the rest of the plot. Readers who like their love stories to be
more than just sweet will appreciate this one. DS
FREEDMAN, RUSSELL 
The Life and Death of Crazy Horse; illus. by Amos Bad Heart
Bull. 
Holiday House, 1996 
16 6p
ISBN 0-8234-1219-9 
$19.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Freedman offers here a straightforward account of the intensely private Sioux war-
rior who was among the last American Indian leaders to "report" to a reservation
and surrender arms as resistance to the U.S. military's removal campaigns proved
futile. Ably blending historic background with known biographical detail, Freed-
man crafts a fast-moving, emotionally charged tale, geared to a slightly younger
audience than was Judith St. George's complementary Crazy Horse (BCCB 12/
94). Testimony of Crazy Horse's contemporaries, presumably drawn from 1930s
interviews conducted by Eleanor Hinman and Maria Sandoz (no specific citations
are given), shed light wherever possible on the warrior's personal habits: "He
hardly ever stayed in camp. People would find him out alone in the cold. . .. People
wondered if he ate anything at all." Black-and-white reproductions of drawings
made by Amos Bad Heart Bull, tribal historian during Crazy Horse's tenure as
leader, document peacetime activities such as courtship and moving camp and
provide an authentic Sioux perspective on intertribal raids and battles with en-
croaching whites. An opening list of the characters, although a thoughtful touch,
is rendered unnecessary by Freedman's clear in-text differentiations; notes on the
drawings, a chronology, an annotated bibliographic essay, and an index are in-
cluded. EB
GLEITZMAN, MORRIS 
Puppy Fat. Harcourt, 1996 
182p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200047-X 
$11.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200052-6 
$5.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Having failed to save his parents' marriage while the family was living in Australia
(see Misery Guts and Worry Warts, both BCCB 4/93), Keith, now back home in
London, decides to get them proper new mates. He's worried, however, that their
post-divorce appearance has made them unmarketable, and he desperately seeks
ways to make them spruce themselves up. When his schemes fail to work, Keith
learns to let them get on with their lives in their own ways while learning a thing or
two about himself. Gleitzman often burdens his young heroes with an unrealistic
degree of naivete (see also Two Weeks with the Queen, BCCB 4/91) in order to
squeeze out comedy and pathos to greatest effect; Keith's emotions are more con-
vincing than his machinations, entertaining as they are. The visit from Australia
of Keith's best friend Tracy (cursed with her own remaker in the form of looks-
obsessed Aunty Bev-"Puppy fat is not okay") bucks up both Keith and the story,
however, and it's good to see the boy work a few things out. RS
GLENN, MEL 
Who Killed Mr. Chippendale?: A Mystery in Poems. Lodestar,
1996 100p
ISBN 0-525-67530-2 
$14.99 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Average Mr. Chippendale, long-time high-school English teacher, is shot dead by
a sniper as he runs on the school track, and the school is in an uproar. 
In first-
person free-verse poems, each about a page long, Glenn depicts the responses of
Mr. Chippendale's students, his colleagues, the neighbors, the detective on the
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 
373
case, and others; the result is a cumulative picture of Mr. Chippendale and high-
school life that suggests things are more complicated than they appear and that
eventually leads to the revelation of the murderer's identity. It's an original ap-
proach, and there's plenty of drama and emotion in everybody's secret lives (Mr.
Chippendale and the guidance counselor had been in love, and Mr. Chippendale
was currently having an affair with a student, to say nothing of the battles with
alcohol, danger, and low self-esteem undergone by the students); the double-voice
poems, where a character's thoughts are contrasted with his or her words, are effec-
tive and intriguing. Other poems, however, often hammer relentlessly on a central
metaphor or image and rely on cheap irony, and the contrivances of the situation
and of its mystery impede the story. This has a certain dark but undemanding
appeal with its look inside everybody's secret souls, but kids really intrigued by the
plot line should turn to the classic teacher-murder tale, Lois Duncan's Killing Mr.
Griffin. DS
GOLSTON, SYDELE E. 
Changing Woman ofthe Apache: Women's Lives in Past and
Present. Watts, 1996 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs 
(American Indian
Experience)
ISBN 0-531-11255-1 
$22.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Golston has worked hard to meet the several challenges posed by this book: first,
that she is an outsider conveying inside information about an American Indian
group; second, that the traditional and the contemporary are both essential for a
true depiction of women's rituals and roles among the Apache people; and third,
that an informational account for young adults must include enough detail to be
substantive along with enough generalized background to serve as introduction for
the uninitiated. The author has been meticulous in footnoting facts and citing
sources. The chapter on the four-day Sunrise Dance, an all-important girl's matu-
ration rite, describes Jeanette Goseyun's preparation for and completion of the
event but also refers to older practices and includes historical photographs. Other
chapters on childhood, young womanhood, adulthood, and old age also balance
the old and new (including old and new photographs), though the last chapter is
brief and abruptly ended. The tone is more honest than adulatory about both
Indians ("After enemy warriors taken in battle had been interrogated, they were
surrounded and killed by the women with axes and spears") and whites ("The
great chiefs Cochise and Mangas Coloradas had perished, Mangas at the hands of
soldiers who decapitated him and boiled his head to obtain a 'clean' skull to send
east to the Smithsonian Institution"). This is a book that might be confusing to
dip into because it assembles a fairly complex picture, but anyone who reads it
through will find the experience rewarding, either for student research or as a
springboard to independent exploration. BH
GRAVELLE, KAREN 
The Period Book: Everything You Don't Want to Ask (but Need
to Know); written by Karen and Jennifer Gravelle; illus. by Debbie Palen. 
Walker,
1996 
118p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8420-8 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8027-7478-4 
$8.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Gravelle knows full well that middle-grade girls aren't always overcome with curi-
osity about ovaries, fallopian tubes, and other physiological hardware that's stowed
374 
* THE BULLETIN
away out of sight, and, therefore, out of mind. Their questions take a more prac-
tical turn-how much bleeding is too much bleeding, what do you do when your
period starts in class, how do you put a tampon in (and, even more important,
how do you get it back out)? This is more focused than Mavis Jukes' similar work,
reviewed below: although the usual tangential material familiar to health-class
alums is included, it's the frank, funny, and sometimes even creative answers to
thorny social dilemmas concerning menstruation that make this title valuable. If a
teacher won't let you out of class to get to the bathroom, leave anyway, report to
the school nurse, and let her handle the teacher; if you're caught without supplies,
"socks work pretty well"; practice using a tampon before "you're stuck in a strange
bathroom, trying to read a tiny direction sheet." Chatty, big-sisterly advice is
packaged in a classy little paperback format (which will appeal more than the du-
rable but less inviting hardcover library-bound edition) with new-wavey cartoon
illustrations and detailed anatomical diagrams. Put this in the hands of just one
reader, and you can bet it'll get passed around. EB
GREENBERG, JUDITH E. 
Newcomers to America: Stories of Today's Young
Immigrants. Watts, 1996 
[128p] 
illus. with photographs 
(In Their Own
Words)
ISBN 0-531-11256-X 
$22.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
With a more schematic organization than Brent Ashabranner's many titles for
young people about the immigrant experience, this book focuses upon fourteen
immigrants who came to the United States when young: Yetta arrived early in the
century from Poland, Maureen in the 1950s from Ireland, Nilou from Iran in the
'80s, at about the same time Anna fled the Liberian civil war. Each chapter out-
lines an aspect of the immigrant experience ("First Impressions of America and
My Neighborhood," "Double-Trouble Teen Years," "Holding onto My Cultural
Identity") and then asks each of the subjects to comment on the particular topic.
The book is well-organized if a little textbookish; readers who don't have the at-
tention span for Ashabranner's more continuous narratives can take things here a
bite at a time (the closing chapter includes a recipe from each subject's homeland,
which provides a slightly condescending make-and-do finale). Photos-though
not of the interviewees-are included, as are a reading list and an index. RS
HARRIS, ROBIE H. 
Happy Birth Day!; illus. by Michael Emberley. 
Candlewick,
1996 
[2 7p]
ISBN 1-56402-424-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
The author and illustrator of the groundbreaking sex ed book It's Perfectly Normal
(BCCB 10/94) here collaborate on a sweeter, slighter picture-book offering that
presents the miracle of birth with none of the mess: "Suddenly there you were-
a whole new person, our baby!" Telling the story of birth from the viewpoint of
the (incredibly mellow) new mother, Harris' tone sometimes comes too close to
cooing ("Everyone was so happy and so excited to meet you!"), and while there is
mention here of cutting the umbilical cord, nursing, peeing, and pooping, the
book is less concerned with the mechanics of birth than with evoking the wonder
of the first day of life. Emberley's soft charcoal and pastel illustrations are saved
from sweetsiness by their large-sometimes lifesized-and intense close-ups of the
baby feeding, wailing, and yawning, all pinky-beige in soft yellow swaddling. Less
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 375
an informational book than a keepsake book (the book opens with a fill-in-the-
blanks personal birth record) or bedtime story (it ends with the baby and her
parents falling fast asleep), this is a gentle rhapsody that provides an effective coun-
terpoint to such titles as Joanna Cole's How You Were Born (BCCB 2/85). RS
HASKINS, JIM 
The Harlem Renaissance. Millbrook, 1996 
192p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 1-56294-565-3 
$21.90 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Nikki Giovanni's Shimmy Shimmy Shimmy Like My Sister Kate, reviewed last month,
was an idiosyncratic, energetic, and very personal account of the Harlem Renais-
sance; Haskins' book is a more straightforward (and occasionally staid) overview
of the movement and of some of its main figures. The book gives some back-
ground both to the movement and to the area of Harlem, and it devotes a chapter
each to performing artists, writers, and fine artists. Several artists are biographized
within each chapter; where possible, samples of their work are included. The book
is informative but scattered, giving a multitude of superficial facts without ever
conveying, as did Giovanni's work, the interconnectedness of most of these fig-
ures. The writers (including Jean Toomer, Jessie Fauset, and Countee Cullen)
come off the best, since excerpts from their work give an idea of their style; the
painters and sculptors (such as Aaron Douglas, Palmer Hayden, and Augusta Sav-
age) are ill-served by black-and-white reproductions, and of course the performing
artists (Josephine Baker, Duke Ellington, Bill Robinson, and others) cannot be
captured in print. Most of the information here is available elsewhere, but it's
conveniently if not excitingly combined here; the breadth of subject will help fill
out the picture that Giovanni draws. Endnotes, a bibliography (though no discog-
raphy or filmography), and an index are included. DS
HERMAN, GAIL 
The Haunted Bike.
See review under Dussling, p. 368.
HIGH, LINDA OATMAN 
The Summer of the Great Divide. 
Holiday House,
1996 
177p
ISBN 0-8234-1228-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
It's the summer Neil Armstrong prepares to walk on the moon, and Wheezie's
(Louise) parents consider walking out of their marriage; while they decide, their
angry twelve-year-old daughter is sent to cool her heels at her uncle's farm. Wheezie
considers the farm an outpost of barbarians and her greasy-haired cousin, Slow
Roscoe, the worst possible companion for the summer. The slaughter of farm
animals, Roscoe's speech impediment, the arrival ofWheezie's first period, Roscoe's
make-believe space ship (a foil-covered outhouse), and news of the death of the
cousins' MIA uncle all prove too much for the homesick girl, who plots to run
away to regain her parents' attention and, hopefully, reunite them through their
common distress over her disappearance. Wheezie narrates her summer adventure
in brief episodes, which are tailor-made for breezy reading but somewhat choppy
and disjointed. Of course, her plans go awry; of course, she reconciles with her
cousin; of course, she comes to terms with her parents' probable split. And just in
case readers miss the significance of the book's title, Wheezie laboriously summa-
rizes the various "divisions" that mark her summer. Still, her trials ring true, and
376 
* THE BULLETIN
her exasperation with the whims of adults and her rebellion against her own vul-
nerability will strike a sympathetic chord with many readers. EB
JOHNSTON, TONY 
My Mexico-Mexico Mio; illus. by F. John Sierra. 
Putnam,
1996 
36p
ISBN 0-399-22275-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
An effort to reflect the essence of Mexico and its diverse culture is made in this
bilingual offering of poetry, where each entry appears in both English and Span-
ish. A collage of subjects and scenes from the past to the present include such
obvious ones as the tortilla ("Corn") and more generic ones such as "Trucks" and
"Walls." The collection, which offers the somber "Where Are They Now?" about
the Aztecs as well as more comedic entries such as la cucaracha's Aretha Franklin-
esque appeal for respect, is hampered by its tedious, unremarkable verse ("Just
look down the street!/ A blue house,/ an orange house,/ a yellow house,/ a green
house./ Like a bouquet of flowers./ The green one is ours!"-"Houses"). Pale
pastel pencil over watercolor art extends the cultural imagery in the double-page
spreads, but its bland, placid quality and occasionally awkward drafting can't res-
cue the lackluster rhythms in these brief stanzas. Teachers may be willing to over-
look the pedestrian writing due to the appeal of a dual-language text, but youngsters
will be mostly bored with this less than memorable trip to Mexico. A glossary and
pronunciation key are included. PM
JunE, MAVIS 
It's a Girl Thing: How to Stay Healthy, Safe, and In Charge; illus. by
Debbie Tilley. 
Knopf, 1996 
135p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-94325-0 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-87392-9 
$12.00 
Ad Gr. 4-8
Some of the subjects here are girl things all right: chapters include "Sex and Bras"
and "Introducing ... 
Your Period!"; some are general information with a girl
slant, such as "Boys and Puberty," "Crushes, Kisses, and Other Matters," and "More
about Sexually Transmitted Diseases, Including AIDS." The book covers material
that has generally been covered before (Robie Harris' It's Perfectly Normal, BCCB
10/94, or, more specifically, Karen Gravelle's The Period Book, reviewed above), if
not with this particular approach. What's good and unusual here is Jukes' been
there, done that matter-of-factness about aspects of female existence rarely dis-
cussed in literature: how to make it through a day of your period if you can't find
tampons or napkins, the fact that underwear getting spotted is a norm and not an
exception, the fact that for some people (including Jukes herself, she says) zits don't
go away after adolescence but keep blooming right through adulthood; the inclu-
sion of a great many hot-line numbers in vivid boxes on the relevant pages is a
good idea, too. Unfortunately, these benefits are marred by occasionally confus-
ing structure (the page on sexual orientation is dropped into the middle of the
"Crushes" chapter), by phraseologies or explanations often clear only to those who
already know the facts ("Anal sex generally refers to partners having sexual inter-
course by way of the anus"), and by a tendency for the author's comparisons to her
own childhood to interfere with the contemporary information. Nonetheless, the
text's comradely, nonjudgmental approach to a wide range of information makes
this a reassuring and useful factual alternative for kids still poring over Are You
There God? It's Me, Margaret for the technical information. Tilley's scribbly,
lighthearted vignettes accentuate the light tone of the text; a list of books for fur-
ther reading is included, as is an index. DS
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 
377
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
Count Silvernose: A Story from Italy; illus. by Omar
Rayyan. 
Holiday House, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1216-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Bluebeard strikes again, but this time his victim is ready for him and wins without
the help of any strong brothers galloping to the rescue. Adapted from Italo Calvino's
"Silver Nose," in which the villain is clearly the Devil and the forbidden room is
Hell, this version has a mysterious stranger luring two beautiful-but-restless daugh-
ters of a washerwoman to his castle. Each in turn is commanded to clean up the
laundry in twelve rooms but warned against opening the thirteenth door, which of
course they duly do while he's away-much to their regret. Then the
washerwoman's oldest daughter (ugly and strong here, but simply clever in Calvino's
variant) must find and free them, which she duly does. Kimmel's version gains
some in detail and loses some in style. The oldest daughter in Kimmel's picture
book has a glass eye to symbolize her uncanny vision, while Calvino's version
externalizes her powers of perception through action alone. Calvino has the sisters
reveal the consequences of their curiosity through the singed roses and carnations
they wear in their hair, while in Kimmel, they are betrayed simply by "the scent of
brimstone." It's an intriguing cultural re-balance, and Omar Rayyan's illustra-
tions develop a complex world of contemporized Italian Renaissance paintings.
The compositions are witty and the drafting highly skilled. Raw-sienna sketches
contrast dynamically with more fully detailed scenes of calm landscape or con-
trolled chaos. Both art and story are charged with energetic motion, which will
appeal to a wide age range including sophisticated elementary-school readers and
junior-high gothic fans. BH
KOSLOW, PHILIP 
Asante: The Gold Coast. 
Chelsea House, 1996 
64p 
illus.
with photographs 
(Kingdoms of Africa)
Library ed. ISBN 0-7910-3139-X 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7910-3140-3 
$7.95 
Ad 
Gr 4-6
In straightforward if pedestrian prose, Koslow gives the history of the West Afri-
can kingdom ofAsante, now Ghana. The Asante people lived along the west coast
of Africa for several thousand years. Skillful traders, they swapped their bountiful
gold with other African tribes until European traders offered iron, cutlery, glass-
ware, cloth, weapons, and slaves. The wealthy Asante kingdom further advanced
itself by slave labor; it was slaves who cleared the forests, farmed, and mined gold.
By the eighteenth century, the Asante's main city, Kumase, was the rival of any in
the world, and their government boasted a professional civil service. In the nine-
teenth century the Asante failed in their attempt to organize other African nations
into a union in order to stop European expansion; however, it was the modern
Asante in Ghana who led the fight to African independence. Report writers will
find a lot of useful information here, though the lackluster text resists reading for
pleasure. Black-and-white maps and photographs appear throughout (two "pic-
ture essays" contain color plates); there is a chronology, suggestions for further
reading, glossary, and an index. SSV
KRAUS, ROBERT 
Near Myths: Dug Up & Dusted Off, written and illus. by Robert
Kraus. 
Viking, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-670-85751-3 
$14.99 
M 
Gr. 3-5
We've had innumerable twists on fairy tales; now Robert Kraus offers some myths
378 * THE BULLETIN
manque. The book opens with a spread of Mount Olympus and some of its
denizens, then turns to five very brief stories, which range from minorly twisted
("The Madness of King Midas") to majorly altered ("Hercules Was a Ninety-Seven
Pound Weakling"). The blending of contemporary and mock-epic is sometimes
funny ("Prometheus Was a Firebug," with its poker-faced tag of "So sing the
muses," is the crispest). More often the jokes are limp and random, relying simply
on the contemporary tone rather than on the structure of the original myth or on
any particularly clever new conceit for their humor, and the pacing of the indi-
vidual stories is erratic. Scribbly line-and-marker cartoons emphasize the silliness
of the dramatis personae; they're amusing in a cutesy way, but they don't really
further the stories. Lacking the affection for or knowledge of myths that would
make parodies truly funny, this may please youngsters who find the idea of a send-
up sufficient for amusement. DS
LESTER, JULIUS 
Sam and the Tigers: A New Telling of Little Black Sambo; illus. by
Jerry Pinkney. 
Dial, 1996 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2029-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-2028-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
For living such a long and argufied life, Little Black Sambo sure looks fresh here-
new words coming out of his mouth, new mouth entirely, for that matter. Sam,
son of Sam and Sam, all residents of Sam-sam-sa-mara, picks out his own clothes
at the bazaar, thank you. "Uh-uh. That ain't me," he tells his mother, who's
holding up a conservative brown jacket and white shirt. So Sam proceeds to pick
out a wardrobe that only a tiger could love-a red coat, yellow shirt, silver shoes,
green umbrella, and purple trousers. There's a little hitch in the logic here, be-
cause this is a land "where the animals and the people lived and worked together
like they didn't know they weren't supposed to," but suddenly Sam meets five
tigers out to turn him into lunch. Piece by colorful piece, Sam trades his new duds
for his life; he gets them all back when the tigers turn into butter, as everybody
knows, and the ensuing pancakes make a happy meal for the more civilized crea-
tures, Brer Rabbit included (life is full of ironies). Helen Bannerman could ask for
no sharper successors than Julius Lester and Jerry Pinkney (each of whom provides
a note explaining his history with and interpretation of the story). These two
tricksters have delivered us with a politically correct but fully humorful version of
a story that has survived, on the strength of an airtight plot, many justified accusa-
tions of racism. Lester honors that plot, jazzes up the style, and gives the artist a
venue for roguishly tongue-in-cheek illustrations. Pinkney's tigers are perfectly
proportioned, and their expressive faces and postures outstripe an already colorful
cast. This is not quite as classically spare as the earliest version and those in be-
tween, but it sure is fun and you can use it in your library or classroom without a
quiver of unease. Finally. BH
LOVE, D. ANNE 
My Lone Star Summer. 
Holiday House, 1996 
187p
ISBN 0-8234-1235-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Jill loves coming back to her grandmother's Texas ranch in the summers, but this
summer is turning out differently than she'd hoped. Her best Texas pal, B.J., has
renamed herself Belinda, discovered makeup, and developed a crush on the new
boy in the neighborhood, leaving Jill behind in the developmental dust. Jill is
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 379
puzzled and hurt by her old friend's inconstancy, but she's begun to notice she
herself has a tendency to compete with B.J. as well as a new interest in her
grandmother's handsome young ranch hand. The story's a bit formulaic, but
Love has a deft hand with detail (such as Jill's defiant and totally illegal drive to the
local diner) and with tone: the narration is unforced, honest, and touching in its
examination of the gains and losses of growing up. The supporting characters-
B.J., capable Grandma, and Trey and Eb, the respective objects of the girls' de-
sire-are all strongly drawn without falling into cliche. Easy to read without being
shallow, this is a good summer book for kids beginning to understand the com-
plexities of maturation. DS
MCCAUGHREAN, GERALDINE, ad. 
The Golden Hoard: Myths and Legends of the
World; illus. by Bee Willey. 
McElderry, 1996 
130p
ISBN 0-689-80741-4 
$19.95 
Ad 
7-12 yrs
Although certainly accessible to middle-grade readers, this compendium of legend
and religious lore will probably see the most service as a source for readalouds. The
best-told tales, such as the Midas story "The Golden Wish," feature strong open-
ings to draw an audience in ("There was once a fool. Of course there have been far
more fools than one.... But this particular fool was a king, so his foolishness
mattered") and a casual intimacy that will be appreciated by reader and listener
alike. However, the stories vary wildly in less successful styles, from the flowery
contradictions of the Lorelei-"a heartbroken girl" whose "heart was a rock within
her, heavy and hard"-to an Anansi tale in jive jingle-"He sews him a glorious
rainbow suit:/ Feather pajamas, feather mask and boots." There is no discernible
order to the collection, even though some of the tales, such as the Polynesian
"Saving Time" and the Chinese "Shooting the Sun" have common themes that
lend themselves to tandem reading. More comprehensive notes than the slim
offerings at the end of the volume are sorely needed, not only to trace the pedigree
of McCaughrean's retellings ("John Barleycorn" is dubiously described as "an
American myth"), but also to distinguish authored "legend" (Lorelei) from his-
toric legend (El Cid) or religious myth. Willey's mixed media paintings and vi-
gnettes, with their jewel tones and Chagallian tipsiness, provide attractive
embellishment for each tale. Despite its flaws, this collection, if carefully mined,
will yield some gems. EB
McMuLLAN, KATE 
If You WereMy Bunny; illus. by David McPhail. 
Cartwheel/
Scholastic, 1996 
24p 
(Story Corner)
ISBN 0-590-52749-5 
$6.95 
Ad 2-4 yrs
"If you were my bunny," a mama says as she nudges her small one toward bed, "I'd
pick you out from all the other bunnies... and I'd sing you a bunny song." Carrot
tops, clover quilts, and dandelion tea comprise her cottontail lullaby, sung to the
tune of "Hush, Little Baby." With a rambly, run-on voice, the mother considers
what each bedtime ritual and song might be, were her child a bear cub, kitten,
duckling, puppy, or baby. Each animal-centered lyric can be hummed to the tune
of a traditional lullaby; titles, though not music, are provided at the book's end.
While parents may welcome variations on overly familiar croonings, the pairings
are not always harmonious; mama bear's rendition of "Sleep, Baby, Sleep" fits
awkwardly with the original tune, mama dog's version of "Lullaby and Good
Night" is less soothing for its crisp consonants ("No more yapping, no more yips,/
380 
* THE BULLETIN
No more snapping, no more nips"). 
McPhail's animals sometimes loom awk-
wardly in his night-time watercolors, alternately cartoonish, Tenniel-ish, or stuffed
toy-ish, although the dream-antics of a tiger-striped kitten give the cradle just
enough push in a feline "Rock-a-Bye, Baby." Unevenness aside, the coziness will
appeal to those not-quite-drowsy youngsters who plead for one more song, one
more song, before sinking into slumber. AEB
MACY, SUE 
Winning Ways: A Photohistory ofAmerican Women in Sports. 
Holt,
1996 
217p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-4147-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Beginning in the 1800s and culminating with the contemporary scene, Winning
Ways combines photographs and chronologically arranged narration to depict how
American women have struggled and-partially-triumphed in their quest to par-
ticipate in athletics. Macy's account fascinates most when she offers specific de-
tails revelatory of a particular era: "On October 26, 1827, American Farmer
magazine warned that women who exercised too much were likely to grow small
tumors on their ankle joints like those on the legs of young horses that were worked
too hard." Photographs help show the transition from a ladylike pursuit of sport
to unabashed athleticism and reveal changing modes of athletic dress, the increas-
ing acceptance of muscular physiques, the sort of concentration a sprinter such as
Evelyn Ashford puts into a race, and the exultation felt by a basketball player such
as Connecticut's Rebecca Lobo at winning a championship. Macy broadens her
discussion to show how changes in female education and attire, variations in the
mass media's depiction ofwomen, and events such as World War II affected women
as athletes. Macy also considers the double discrimination faced by African-Ameri-
can women as well as the role lesbianism-as a reality and as a stigma-has played
in the image of female athletes. Macy makes no claim that this is a comprehensive
history, and there are some information gaps: in the first chapter, for instance,
Macy notes that "women were deliberately left out of the first modern Olympic
Games," then doesn't mention the Olympics again until describing Gertrude Ederle
as a "three-time Olympic medalist." The chronology sometimes frustrates with
overly spare descriptions, but the list of resources serviceably describes additional
books, noting whether they are intended for YAs or adults. An index is included.
LM
MPARLE, SANDRA 
Outside and Inside Sharks. Atheneum, 1996 
4 0p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-689-80348-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
This, the latest addition to Markle's Outside and Inside series (see Outside and
Inside Birds, BCCB 11/94), treats a perennially kid-appealing topic. Like the other
volumes, the book gives a basic overview of the physiology of the species (includ-
ing the shark's senses, its digestive habits, and its reproduction), which is aided by
photographs not only of sharks but also bits of shark interiors, so that readers can
enjoy some literally gutsy closeups of internal organs and other relevant bits of
former sharks. Unfortunately, some obvious questions even within the narrow
focus remain unanswered: why does the hammerhead shark look like that? How
big do sharks get? How much do they eat? The information is sometimes disorga-
nized, and the pictures are often as confusing as they are alluringly gross. Readers
in it for the carnage or for an introduction won't necessarily be disappointed, but
those seeking a full explanation will need to go further. DS
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 
381
MARTIN, JACQUELINE BRIGGS 
Grandmother Bryant's Pocket; illus. by Petra
Mathers. 
Houghton, 1996 
48p
ISBN 0-395-68984-8 
$14.95 
R* Gr. 2-4
See this month's Big Picture, p. 363, for review.
MERRIAM, EVE 
The Inner City Mother Goose; illus. by David Diaz. 
Simon,
1996 
70p
ISBN 0-689-80677-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Originally released in 1969, then revised in 1982, Merriam's well-known-dare
one say infamous?-book of verse is out again, with new illustrations. Updates of
nursery rhymes deal with various unpleasant aspects of life for the urban disenfran-
chised, ranging from housing problems ("Diddle diddle dumpling, my son Juan/
Went to bed with his trousers on/ And with the rest of the family/ Sharing a single-
room occupancy") to the lure of violence ("Jack be nimble/ Jack be quick/ Snap
the blade/ And give it a flick... ") to questions of race ("Tom, Tom, Uncle Tom's
son/ It's getting harder/ To find one ... "). The satire here is superficial rather
than deep, the ironies are obvious and sometimes belabored, and a certain smug-
ness begins to pervade the tone; nor do the poems display the technical merit of
their originals. On the other hand, Merriam shows some flashes of humor ("I do
not like thee, Applicant Fell,/ The reason why I cannot tell/ Because I'm/ An equal
opportunity employer"), and the bitterness of the in-your-face rewrites is likely to
make them appealing to teens (some of whom may see the verses as akin to rap),
especially reluctant readers. Diaz's illustrations are darkly glowing portraits bounded
by thick black lines; the figures are contemporary, but there is something muralistic
about the compositions and palette that occasionally recalls Diego Rivera. In ad-
dition to intriguing readers who want some toughness in their poetry, this might
also provoke some useful class discussions. DS
NAPOLI, DONNA JO 
Zel. 
Dutton, 1996 
[152p]
ISBN 0-525-45612-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Reminiscent of Napoli's Magic Circle (BCCB 4/93) but narratively more complex,
this fictionalization of Rapunzel switches points of view-by chapter-between
the heroine, her witch/foster-mother (whom she knows only as Mother), and
Konrad, the prince who loves her. Although the dynamics of the relationship are
explored with modern sensibility, the setting itself is a remote, folkloric Swiss Al-
pine mountainside well suited to the magic that Mother wields over trees and
plant life, including the irresistible lettuce that once brought her a longed-for baby
girl. Soon the intensely happy mother-child relationship becomes a prison, first
figuratively and then literally, as Zel enters adolescence and discovers attractions-
especially Konrad, whom she meets during a rare visit to the closest village-that
threaten to lure her away. Napoli has done an admirable job of getting into the
heads of the main characters, all of whom at one time or another verge on mad-
ness: Mother because of her possessive jealousy, Zel because of her isolation in the
tower, and Konrad because of his obsessive search. The original Rapunzel can in
fact be seen as a story of child abuse, and Napoli renders that aspect with vivid
realism. The witch's redemption is ingeniously subtle (whereas her recollection of
acquiring Rapunzel seems too explanatory), and the conclusion of Konrad finding
his true love, complete with twins, and regaining his sight because of her healing
382 
* THE BULLETIN
tears is triumphant. The novel would make an eerie companion to Margaret Mahy's
gothic Rapunzel story The Other Side ofSilence (BCCB 1/96). BH
NIRGIOTIS, NICHOLAS 
Volcanoes: Mountains That Blow Their Tops; illus. by
Michael Radencich. 
Grosset, 1996 
4 8p 
(All Aboard Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 0-448-41144-X 
$13.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-41143-1 
$3.95 
R Gr. 1-2
"A red-hot cloud of ash bursts out. It burns the town in minutes. Just two people
get away. One is a girl. She knows a cave.. .. The other is a man. He is safe in
jail underground. This is a true story." Nirgiotis displays a keen sense of what the
youngest readers want to know about this hot topic and just how much they can
digest at a single sitting. He keeps the science sound but simple, and he spices
cogent explanations of vulcanism with liberal dashes of history, mythology, and
archeology. Although disaster is the draw for independent readers, beneficial ef-
fects of eruptions are also noted: "Over time, ash and lava turn into rich soil";
"Volcanoes also tell us about the past.... The ash [at Pompeii] preserved every-
thing-even the shapes of people." Cut-paper collage, rare in the beginning-reader
format, uses thickly textured surfaces to draw the viewer up close to clouds of ash
billowing down a Martinique street or shooting across a Mexican field; layers and
shadows also lend remarkable depth and clarity to diagrams and maps. Pre-pri-
mary teachers may also find this an enticing nonfiction selection for storytime. EB
NoLAN, HAN 
SendMe Down a Miracle. Harcourt, 1996 
250p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200979-5 
$12.00
Papered. ISBN 0-15-200978-7 
$6.00 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Preacher's daughter Charity is enthralled with the exotic new resident of her small
Alabama town: Adrienne Dabney, a famous painter, who has come back to Casper
to conduct an experiment in "sensory deprivation," locking herself up in her dark-
ened house to fast and meditate for a month. While this is boggling enough to the
townspeople, they really get a shock when at the end of her experiment Adrienne
announces that she had three visions ofJesus sitting in one of her chairs. The chair
instantly commands the power of a relic, Mad Joe Dunn announces that it has
cured his twin daughters of their sickle-cell anemia, Charity's father is scandalized
and believes that the devil has come to Casper. It's an original story, but Nolan,
author of the over-the-top IfI Should Die before I Wake (BCCB 4/94) has trouble
here with tone as well. Scenes that might have been funny-such as when Charity
accidently wears her socks that play "We Wish You a Merry Christmas" to church
one hot summer day-fall flat; eccentricity (an old lady attempting to put out the
fire in her sister's hair with an accordion) jostles uneasily with tragedy (the fate of
Mad Joe and his family), so the result is indecisive and mannered rather than
richly gothic. Some restraint and shading would have been welcome here, for at
the heart of the story is a moving portrait of the grief Charity and her father feel at
the abandonment of her mother (who took off for a birdcage-collectors' confer-
ence and is apparently not coming back) and the ways each tries to hide and handle
the loss. However, there are so many unconvincing goings-on in the novel and so
much arbitrary wackiness that readers, like Adrienne, will beat a hasty retreat. RS
O'CONNOR, JANE 
The Bad-Luck Penny.
See review under Dussling, p. 368.
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 383
PHILBRICK, RODMAN 
The Fire Pony. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1996 
175p
ISBN 0-590-55251-1 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 7-10
To Roy, his older half-brother Joe Dilly is the world: first he spirits Roy away
from his foster home, and then he finds work at various ranches, moving on ahead
of any authorities who take an interest in his shady past. The pair ends up at the
Bar None Ranch, where Joe's skills with horses and shoeing make them welcome.
Roy begins to consider the place home, becoming close to the kindly ranch owner
and discovering his own talent with horses as he trains a beautiful young filly. This
could be a pleasing, if romantic and cliched, horse tale, but Philbrick stretches
both plot and credibility by piling melodrama upon melodrama, with Roy's filly
surviving a mountain-lion attack and winning the big race at the state fair, and
with a climactic conflagration that prompts truly incredible deeds. The equine
and equestrian material seems to be grounded in sentimental legends or wishful
thinking rather than in fact, and it's often disappointingly inaccurate. Readers
who desire only Sturm, Drang, und horses may be entertained, but those who
demand believability as well should look elsewhere. DS
PoLAcco, PATRICIA 
Aunt Chip and the Great Triple Creek Dam Affair; written
and illus. by Patricia Polacco. 
Philomel, 1996 
40p
ISBN 0-399-22943-4 
$15.95 
M 
5-8 yrs
Television is life for the denizens of Triple Creek. Only young Eli's Aunt Char-
lotte (a.k.a. Aunt Chip), who retired to her bed fifty years ago, remains unaffected
by TV mania and prefers to tell stories rather than passively viewing them. When
Eli admits he cannot read (neither, for that matter, can anyone else in Triple Creek)
Aunt Chip leaps into action and claims Eli as her first convert to literacy: "Books
are a treasure. All you need is the key!... It's called readin'." Soon all the children
clamor to learn to read and, in their enthusiasm to tackle a copy of Moby Dick,
they pull down the wall of books that's damming the river. The dam explodes
(literally), the mayor explodes (figuratively), and Aunt Chip (really Dr. Charlotte
Huck, Triple Creek's displaced librarian) persuades the mayor to read, and the
town is saved. Subtle? Not! The text is broad and overwritten, and the frenetic
silliness of the Triple Creekers' plight is unlikely to convince hardcore TV viewers
to kick their habit and curl up with a copy of Moby Dick, and dropping the emi-
nent Charlotte Huck into the tale (no, Polacco does not offer a clue to the unen-
lightened) is not likely to recruit the truly reluctant into the reading camp. Although
viewers may enjoy searching the illustrations for the many uses Triple Creekers
have made of their abandoned tomes-stepstools, roof shingles, etc.-the mixed-
media compositions are longer on hyperactivity than humor. While most adults
will agree with Polacco's premise that a well-told story can lure children away from
the tube, this tale is not it. EB
PoPov, NIKOIAI 
Why?; illus. by Nikolai Popov. 
North-South, 1996 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-535-4 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-534-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This wordless picture-book fable begins with a green world in which a frog happily
sits on a rock sniffing his flower-until a mouse pushes him off. Froggie's friends
then descend on Mouse and pick all the flowers for themselves until a tank (actu-
ally a wheeled shoe) mounted with cannon brings a mouse counterattack, where-
upon the frogs sabotage a bridge, plunging their enemies underwater. Naturally,
384 
* THE BULLETIN
the mice now set a trap for the triumphant frogs, and soon the darkened fields are
covered with exploding vehicles. The very last scene shows a desolate burnt land-
scape with nothing in sight except the mouse and the frog, tattered, battered, and
torn. The only change? Frog now holds a broken umbrella that Mouse had first
used, in its better days, to burst above ground and seize Frog's place. Popov's
watercolors are spacious and simply composed, relaying the plot's development
with graphic clarity and making the moral obvious through gradations of color as
the animals' world deteriorates. Generally, however, this covers the same didactic
and oversimplified ground as other similarly themed fables. This is discussion
fodder for primary graders, who could write their own texts to accompany the art
or could simply compare the book to Dr. Seuss' Butter Battle Book (BCCB 4/94)
and similar anti-war picture books. BH
REISFELD, RANDI 
This Is the Sound: The Best of Alternative Rock. 
Aladdin,
1996 
14 4 p 
illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-80670-1 
$7.99 
R 
Gr. 5-12
From the busy MTV-like cover cartoons to the Internettish typeface to the breath-
less and occasionally raunchy fan-mag prose, this breezily written paperback about
nine of the most influential groups in alternative rock will lure teens. Chapters
describing each band consist of a list of the players, a discography, and an appeal-
ing anecdote about the origin or nature of their name. By focusing only on each
band's key player and his or her hardships (Pearl Jam's Eddie Vedder fought a
famous battle with Ticketmaster; the cranberries' Delores O'Riordan strives to
succeed despite an absence of female role models; Hole's Courtney Love still mourns
Kurt Cobain), Reisfeld gives this compilation a sense of drama. Although these
bands are diverse in style (the "sweet tart of alternative" to the "perverse of alterna-
tive") and in interpretation of music (the cranberries' O'Riordan wants people to
catch her message, but Belly's Tanya Donelly doesn't care), Reisfeld manages to
illustrate the commonalities. The metaphor-a-minute style of writing does occa-
sionally impede the readability of the text, and readers interested in other members
will be disappointed because no additional references or bibliography are provided.
However, tasty factoids, which include quotable quips, and snail- and e-mail ad-
dresses at the end of each chapter are suitable substitutes. There is no index, but
pages are chock-full of black-and-white photographs. Cool. TLR
RICHARDSON, JUDITH BENET 
First Came the Owl. Holt, 1996 
[16 0p]
ISBN 0-8050-4547-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Nita, a fifth-grader at Maushope Landing's elementary school, must negotiate her
way through a maze of challenges including a clinically depressed mother, the
starring role in the school play, and a mean fellow fifth-grader, Henry Sporoni.
The book weaves a cumbersome tapestry of circumstances for Nita, the biracial
daughter of an American father and a Thai mother, her Ma-jah. Nita's home, a
lighthouse located on the Massachusetts seacoast, is one of many symbols that
proliferate in this story. The rare appearance of a snowy owl provides not only the
book's title but another contrived connection ("'The owl didn't come because of
your dumb play', said Petrova sarcastically. 'You're having a play. The owl is on
the beach. It's called a coincidence'"). Tidbits of Thai culture run through the
story, as does the emotionally spare explanation of Ma-jah's illness. Realistic dia-
logue rescues the story from collapsing into a symbolic slump, however, and Nita's
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 
385
emotionally disparate reactions to her domestic upheaval are convincing even if
the tidy ending is less than credible. PM
ROTNER, SHELLEY 
Action Alphabet; written and illus. with photographs by Shelley
Rotner. 
Atheneum, 1996 
34p
ISBN 0-689-80086-X 
$16.00 
R 
3-6 yrs
Noun-centered alphabet books with pokey apples, bicycles, and cars are in danger
of being flattened by the volley of verbs delivered by twenty-six little bundles of
energy here. From "arching" backbends, through "kicking" soccer balls, to "yawn-
ing" at the end of a busy day, the multicultural cast of kids make their way through
the ABCs pursuing a host of outdoor activities on the most glorious days of each
season- 
"ice skating" in the winter, "napping" in autumn leaves, "undressing" for
a dip in the backyard pool. Even the elusive "X" joins in the fun as a cross on a
sidewalk-chalk game of tic-tac-toe. Color photos are crisp and close, emblazoned
with large white lettering, and if the featured children are relentlessly happy, they
clearly have reason to be. Here's a book whose success can be measured by whether
children won't sit still for it. EB
RYDER, JOANNE 
Earthdance; illus. by Norman Gorbaty. 
Holt, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-2678-9 
$16.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Earthdance uses poetic language and second-person address to draw the reader
more intensely into the story. "Imagine you are standing tall in an empty space.
Stretch your arms out wide and slowly spin around," Ryder suggests, urging the
reader to pretend to be the planet Earth. Children will enjoy the opportunity for
imitation and movement though occasionally unimaginative language (the pedes-
trian adjectives of "blue flowing seas, dark green woods, and deserts of golden
sand") and unclear images (why is the earth wearing a "quilt of bright colors"?)
undermine the text's effectiveness. On the other hand, Ryder's strong verbs ("You
are streaked with roads and bridges"), internal rhyme ("Your whisper is a breeze
murmuring through the reeds"), and alliteration ("a tiny wave lapping land") add
force and music to her poetry. Letters and words tilt, fall, and curve across the
pages; if such acrobatics sometimes seem gratuitous, a phrase like "icebergs crack-
ing," in which the word "cracking" rises sharply at its center like a huge floe of ice
splitting in half, shows such technique to good effect. Gorbaty's naively drawn
stars and use of black, blue, and purple shadings give a sense of the timeless im-
mensity of space; these effects contrast with the people and animals who fill Earth
and form a bright mosaic radiating warmth and friendliness. There are a few
visual miscalculations, but generally the illustrations mesh with the text to show
how Earth nurtures its denizens and how Earth, in turn, should be nurtured. LM
SHAKESPEARE, WILLIAM 
A Midsummer Night's Dream; ad. by Bruce Coville; illus.
by Dennis Nolan. 
Dial, 1996 
42p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1785-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1784-9 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Where Beneduce, below, condenses Shakespeare while trying to maintain his tone,
Coville simply retells this play's plot and subplots as a straight story. The result
diminishes the otherworldly atmosphere of the play somewhat but results in a
surprisingly clear and cohesive account of the two sets of lovers put into a tizzy by
fairy mistakes and pranks, the fairy queen's fight with her husband and induced
386 
* THE BULLETIN
affection for a donkey, and the attempts of the local craftsmen to put on a play for
their duke's wedding. The verbatim Shakespeare in the dialogue may sometimes
confuse kids ("I'll put a girdle round about the earth" is likelier to elicit giggles
than comprehension), but the lovers, both mortal and fairy, are clearly differenti-
ated, and the essential silliness of all the happenings made clear. The graphite-
and-watercolor illustrations don't offer much in the way of interpretation and
depend mainly on their woodsy palette for atmosphere; they focus instead on clari-
fying the action through the visuals (a thoughtful touch is the ID lineup on the
endpapers), and kids will find them of great assistance in keeping straight the who's
whos. It's probably not possible to translate a Shakespeare play into a superlative
picture book, but this version is better than most at keeping the story both under-
standable and well-paced. A note about the adaptation is included. DS
SHAKESPEARE, WILLuAM 
The Tempest; ad. by Ann Keay Beneduce; illus. by Gennady
Spirin. 
Philomel, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22764-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
An accomplished reteller of classic tales, Beneduce turns her hand here to the Bard
ofAvon. It's difficult to compress a Shakespeare play into thirty-two pages, but all
the high points are here: Prospero and Miranda's isolation on the island; the
engineered shipwreck of the vessel carrying the King of Naples, his son Ferdinand,
and Prospero's traitorous brother; Miranda and Ferdinand's romance; and the
restoration of order with the help of Prospero's magical minions. Unfortunately
the result loses much of the charm and ethereality of the play without gaining
greatly in comprehensibility. The plot summaries, already hampered by having to
describe that which is merely shown on stage, tend to use demotic speech even
when dealing with lofty matters ("Next, and most important of all, came Juno, the
wife of the great Roman god Jupiter, singing to the young couple. Ceres, too, sang
a song of good wishes. Then Iris called on her dancers"), whereas the copious
dialogue leans more towards close paraphrase ("'Have pity, sir!' Miranda begged
her father. 'I am sure this man is true and honorable!'"). The bookmaking is
elegant: in addition to Spirin's highly formal panels of delicately lined, fancifully
conceived images in muted tones, tiny peephole vignettes appear throughout the
text, and garlands circle the original Shakespeare songs retained. The effect, how-
ever, increases rather than diminishes the distance and stiffness, and it's sometimes
difficult to tell which characters the illustrations are depicting. The combination
of action, romance, and supernatural activity gives this play an appeal for young
readers that other Shakespeare might not have; though this particular retelling
isn't much more accessible than the original and seems more geared to adults, it's
an interesting vision and might help acquaint kids with the story before they go to
a performance. Notes about Shakespeare, the play, and this adaptation are in-
cluded. DS
SPEREGEN, DEVRA 
The Wax Museum
See review under Dussling, p. 368.
STANLEY, JERRY 
Big Annie of Calumet: A True Story of the Industrial Revolution.
Crown, 1996 
102p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-70098-0 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-70097-2 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
When copper miners of Michigan's Calumet and Hecla Mining Company struck
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 387
in 1913 for a shorter workday and safer conditions, their daily protest marches
were led by the six-foot-two Annie Clemenc, a miner's wife who cannily judged
that organizing wives and families as well as workers might be the key to a success-
ful labor action. The figure of flag-waving and broom-wielding Annie became a
potent media image hawked by contemporary reporters. Unfortunately, Annie
remains only an icon in Stanley's account of the strike, with a few paragraphs
summarizing all the reader will learn about her background and motivation. Sketchy
allusions to her affair with reporter Frank Shavs and her husband's subsequent
desertion, then a brief account of her marriage to Shavs, complete Annie's biogra-
phy. The strike itself is clearly, and often stirringly, described, with a particularly
heart-rending account of the deaths of scores of children in a stampede precipi-
tated, presumably, by C&H company supporters. However, the narrative is intro-
duced by an oversimplified discussion of the Industrial Revolution, which is
misleadingly presented as a uniquely American phenomenon, and it concludes
with a rambling tour through American labor history and miscellaneous tributes
to Clemenc. Period photos, a bibliographic essay, and index are included. This
title may satisfy report-writers in search of a fresh topic, but readers looking for
heroines of the labor movement will probably prefer Joan Dash's We Shall Not Be
Moved (BCCB 2/96). EB
STRETE, CRAIG KEE 
How the Indians Bought the Farm; written by Craig Kee Strete
and Michelle Netten Chacon; illus. by Francisco X. Mora. 
Greenwillow,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-68-14130-7 
$15.00 
R 5-8 yrs
An original trickster tale, illustrated with straightfaced paintings that support the
sly narrative humor with factual detail, relates the predicament of an American
Indian couple removed from their homeland to a farm-only to be told by a gov-
ernment agent that to keep the farm, they "must raise sheep and pigs and
cows. ... Lots of them." In lieu of domesticated animals or money with which to
buy them, the "great Indian chief" consults with his "great Indian wife" and then
sets out to collect substitutes: a moose, a beaver, and a bear that soon attract
friends and relations. When the government agent next appears with an ominous
stack of papers, he and his henchmen find very convincing reasons for leaving the
farm-and the couple-alone. The scene of the moonlit barn lit with gleaming
yellow eyes ("Ouch! ... Your pig bit me"), or of the bear capsizing the canoe and
then carrying it on his back, will heighten children's enjoyment of a suspenseful
buildup. The format is entertainingly varied, with action unfolding graphically in
illustrated strips or partial-page scenes rendered in pacific pastel hues. A natural
for reading aloud in classroom or family settings, this relies on strong storytelling
that's not burdened by self-conscious political correction. As every playground
veteran can attest, poking fun is more effective than preaching. BH
TERBAN, 
MARVIN 
Scholastic Dictionary of Idioms; illus. by John
Devore. 
Scholastic Reference, 1996 
24 5p
ISBN 0-590-27549-6 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Reference tools may be a dime a dozen in this dog-eat-dog world, but here's a
soup-to-nuts dictionary of colloquialisms that doesn't beat around the bush. En-
tries here are alphabetical, three per page; each starts with a sample usage of the
phrase ("Uncle Frank really had the gift of gab"), then offers a brief definition
("skill in talking, especially in an interesting and colorful way") and a longer para-
388 
* THE BULLETIN
graph describing or speculating on the phrase's origin. The examples tend to be
tinny and awkward, and the explanations of origins are often frustrating, giving no
source notes and rarely differentiating between the author's conjecture and any
actual research. The explanations, however, are generally clear, and the sheer vol-
ume of examples (as well as the cheesy but accessible two-color format) makes this
an appealing browse as well as a useful (and perhaps unique) resource for kids
baffled by the intricacies of the English language. An index of expressions and,
even more helpfully, an index of keywords are included. DS
THORNE-THOMSEN, KATHLEEN 
Shaker Children: Two Stories and Crafts *2 Biog-
raphies and 30 Activities. 
Chicago Review, 1996 
[128p] 
illus. with photo-
graphs
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55652-250-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Biographies of two Shaker children, Nicholas Briggs (a "Brother" beginning in
1852 at the age often years) and Anita Potter (a "Sister" for four years in the 1920s
beginning when she was nine), get about half the space here, with the remainder
given over to instructions for crafts, games, and Shaker cooking. Although refer-
ences in the bibliography indicate that Thorne-Thomsen has drawn on memoirs
for the two biographies, they seem heavily fictionalized and incorporate hefty and
unlikely doses of information into the dialogue: "'Shaker applesauce is like no
other,' Andrew told Nicholas. 'Dried pieces of apple are reconstituted in a lovely,
rich, thick syrup made from boiling Shaker-made apple cider until the volume is
greatly reduced.'" Potter's story has more interest in that it shows a rarer portrait
of twentieth-century Shaker life. Potter left the group when her widowed father
was remarried (to an ex-Shaker) and was again able to care for her, but Nicholas'
chapter ends abruptly, telling us that the man was "not content" during the forty-
two years he spent with the Shakers but not stating why he finally left. The some-
what busy format is less well-suited to the biographies than to the activities, which
include projects, such as making valentines and pressing wildflowers, found in
many other craft compendia. A glossary and list of Shaker museums are appended.
RS
WAKIN, 
EDWARD 
How TV Changed America's Mind. Lothrop,
1996 
24 8p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-688-13482-3 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
This book examines what might be termed nonfiction television-news and docu-
mentary reports-decade by decade from the '50s through the '90s, examining
ways in which the medium changed history or affected Americans' views of them-
selves. Every decade gets a section devoted to it; each section examines particular
aspects of that decade broken down by theme ("Heroes and Villains," "Eyeopeners,"
"War," for example) and focusing on particular events. While most of those events
are fairly obvious choices (the Kennedy assassination and the Rodney King beat-
ing) some, such as the Kefauver hearings, are less well-remembered. Wakin doesn't
go as deep as he might, and he takes much for granted, seeming to see television as
an ultimately salutary force but never acknowledging that viewpoint or its
controversiality; he does select good examples (though his section on the Simpson
case is more a retelling of the event than an expansion of his thesis) and brings in
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 389
important technical points without obscuring the social issues. This is a clear,
persuasive, and useful synthesis of the immense significance of television in recent
history. There are no notes, but a decade-by-decade list of further reading and an
index are included; black-and-white photos appear throughout. DS
WILDSMITH, 
BRIAN 
Saint Francis; written and illus. 
by Brian
Wildsmith. 
Eerdmans, 1996 
34 p
ISBN 0-8028-5123-1 
$20.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Rebellious son and gentle nature lover, suffering mystic and holy fool, the "poor
man of Assisi" is arguably the most magnetic of saints, and his riches-to-rags story
has appeal beyond religious circles. Tales of Francis' abandonment of class privi-
lege, his empathy with animals, even his painful stigmata have the potential to
rivet a young audience, while the medieval milieu offers Wildsmith a glorious
canvas for his signature artwork. Craggy countryside, teeming harbors, and lofty
church interiors are lavishly documented in finely inked line drawings washed
with mottled pastels or picked out in more vibrant tones. Wildsmith's ubiquitous
pied angel zealously dogs Francis' every step, sometimes boldly appearing in the
forefront but sometimes camouflaged amid the densely detailed scenes. Still, the
handsome illustrations never quite unify Francis' narration-snippets of legend
which have been loosely stitched together. As each double-page spread focuses on
a chapter in Francis' life, listeners can hardly absorb one tale before they're handed
another. In Francis' laconic voice, one experience sounds much like another: "The
prison was cold and damp. My fellow prisoners were sad"; "The sky was ablaze,
and a vision of wonder appeared.... I felt that the Gates of Paradise were opening
for me." This visual depiction of ilpoverello and his world may delight an audi-
ence, but the fleeting narrative treatment barely illuminates so rich a legend. EB
WOOD, AUDREY 
The Red Racer; written and illus. by Audrey Wood. 
Simon,
1996 
[34p]
ISBN 0-689-80553-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
This is a familiar cautionary tale on the eternal themes of greed and lust. Nona's
eye is taken with a shiny red bike in a shop window, and she sets out to sabotage
her trusty old bike. Try as she might (throwing it in the dump and tossing it off a
pier), the old bike boomerangs back. In the end, of course, Mom and Dad come
through with fresh, shiny parts to make her bike look better than new; the twist is
that Nona has now left her clunker on the railroad tracks, so she has to race to save
the bike she had previously been trying to destroy. Even the youngest readers
won't be surprised by the ending, but that's not the point. What we've got here is
great big gobs of satisfyingly repulsive impulses-fully illustrated-which over-
power our heroine and cause her evil behavior. Anyone who's ever felt the pull of
envy (and is there a kid alive who hasn't envied another's bike?) will recognize it in
the green monsters who strip Nona of her common sense. Garishly colored com-
puter art, drawn with a digital pen on a digital tablet, varies from lightly airbrushed
effects to thunderously heavy backgrounds; African-American Nona and her fam-
ily are cheerfully if generically depicted. While the backgrounds and borders can
be rather busy, there's plenty to keep wandering eyes fixed to the pages here. This
should work well with the read-aloud crowd. SSV
390 
* THE BULLETIN
WYETH, SHARON DENNIS 
Ginger Brown: Too Many Houses; illus. by Cornelius
Van Wright and Ying-Hwa Hu. 
Random House, 1996 
[8 0p] 
(First Step-
ping Stone Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-95437-6 
$9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-85437-1 
$3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 1-2
Ginger's parents are getting a divorce, and everything seems to be changing. She
and her mother move to her maternal grandparents' apartment, then Ginger goes
to stay for the summer with her other grandparents on their farm, then, finally,
Ginger and her mother get a place of their own. While the book acknowledges the
sadness a child feels when parents split up, it does so in a generic way ("Things
were going to be different. We wouldn't live with Daddy anymore") and burdens
the rambling story with too many details: Daddy is white, Mommy is black;
Mommy's parents live in the city, Daddy's in the country; Mommy's parents are
named Gray, Daddy's Brown. While Daddy does not come back home to live, he
does visit often, and when Ginger and Mommy get their own apartment (in the
suburbs) everybody-Gray, Brown, Daddy, and the cat that Ginger was forced to
leave behind in the beginning-comes to the housewarming. Family problems of
this magnitude are a relatively rare theme in easy-to-read books, and this account
is perhaps comforting if awfully idealized. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley.
RS
YOLEN, JANE 
Sacred Places; illus. by David Shannon. 
Harcourt, 1996 
40p
ISBN 0-15-269953-8 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Yolen's definition of sacred is broad enough to embrace sites of worship familiar
and arcane, from the Wailing Wall and the Ka'ba to the Oracle's cave at Delphi
and Uluru (Ayers Rock); whether man-made or earth-born, each place commemo-
rates a brush with divinity. Unlike Myra Cohn Livingston's Festivals, which de-
scribes many religious ceremonies, Yolen's poems try to identify the core of faith
that underlies the rites associated with each spot. Some poems boldly define a
site's significance ("The Wall weeps for us,/ for the destruction of the Temple,/ for
the destruction of the People"), while others, like "Stonehenge," pose questions
("Who worshipped here within the round?... The barrows bound and point/ To
worlds in worlds we scarcely know/ That rain and mist and sun anoint"). If the
related opening and closing entries, illustrated respectively by a burning and a cold
candle, are a bit breathily overdrawn ("This is a sacred place. Hush"), they direct
readers toward an understanding of sacredness: "Someone's God has stepped here,/
slept here ... / spoken here of life, of death,/ of holy things." The hazy moodiness
of Shannon's paintings capture the mystery Yolen explores in her text, while his
dense figures and literal interpretations of a passage from each poem draw Yolen's
mystical flights back down to solid ground. Appended notes offer historical infor-
mation on each sacred place. EB
YOON, JUNG-HUYN 
Popposites: A Lift, Pull and Pop Book of Opposites. DK,
1996 
14 p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7894-0576-8 
$14.95 
R 2-4 yrs
This nifty bit of paper engineering introduces toddlers and preschoolers to the
concept of opposites, which, as the cover notes, "is easier to show than to explain."
Fold the face of a "sad" tot to make him (her?) "happy"; "open" a "closed" enve-
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 
391
lope and remove a bright red sports car (and sorry, librarians, it is removable),
which features "front" and "back" views and a trunk that can be "closed" or "open."
With the pull of a tab, a "short" green pencil stub grows into a "long" variegated
pencil, or a bowl "full" of fruit is suddenly "empty." Color photos are bright and
uncomplicated and, with the exception of a "little" bug on a "big" face, appropri-
ate to each pair of opposites presented. Paper construction is about as rugged as it
comes, although the springy little girl who demonstrates "down" and "up" for the
grand finale is bound to get some wear and tear. If the sliding orange ("outside/
inside") proves too challenging for the littlest fingers to manipulate, the adult in
charge won't mind taking a turn at all. EB
ZALBEN, JANE BRESKIN 
Unfinished Dreams. Simon, 1996 
160p
ISBN 0-689-80033-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
With the constant encouragement of his beloved principal, Mr. Carr, Jason risks
nerdiness to focus on his music despite the taunts of bullies. Mr. Carr encourages
Jason to dream of studying at Juilliard one day and the eleven-year-old violin vir-
tuoso pursues his goal, waxing eloquent about makes of bows and violins and
diligently practicing. All is well with Jason until he learns that Mr. Carr has AIDS,
whereupon the ugliness of some of the townspeople shows. Jason defends him,
and when Jason's prized violin is smashed to smithereens (we never learn who
dunnit), he pays the price of taking an unpopular stand. Buoyed by his ebullient
family-chef parents, an obnoxious little brother, and loving grandmother-Ja-
son predictably realizes that he and Mr. Carr are both a little different from the
horde and that's okay. Despite a contrived and rather formulaic story, Zalben
writes with feeling and passion, winding up with a two-hankie ending in this some-
what preachy lesson about what really matters. SSV
392 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ACTIVITY BOOKS: Thorne-
Thomsen
Africa: Koslow
African Americans: Haskins
African Americans-stories: Wood
AIDS-fiction: Zalben
ALPHABET BOOKS: Rotner
American Indians: Ashabranner;
Freedman; Golston
American Indians-fiction: Bruchac
American Indians-stories: Strete
Animals-poetry: McMullan
Art: Cha; Haskins
Asian Americans: Cha
Asian Americans-fiction: Richard-
son
Aunts-stories: Polacco
Babies: Harris
BEDTIME STORIES: Harris;
McMullan
Bicycles-stories: Wood
BIOGRAPHIES: Freedman;
Stanley; Wildsmith
Birds-stories: Erdrich
Birthdays: Harris
Blacks-stories: Lester
Books and reading-stories:
Polacco
Brothers-fiction: Philbrick
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Bruchac
Bullies-fiction: Zalben
Canada-fiction: Doyle
Clothing-stories: Martin
CONCEPT BOOKS: Rotner;
Yoon
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Byars
Crime and criminals-poetry:
Glenn
Current events: Wakin
Death-stories: Martin
Divorce-fiction: High; Wyeth
Ecology-fiction: Carrier
Ecology: Fisher; Ryder
England-fiction: Farmer
Environmental studies: Fisher
Ethics and values: Carnes; Popov
Fairies-stories: Shakespeare
Midsummer
Fantasy: Erdrich; Farmer; Shakes-
peare Midsummer, Shakespeare
Tempest
Farm life-fiction: High
Farm life-stories: Strete
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Nolan; Wyeth
Fathers and daughters-stories: Fox
Fathers and sons-fiction:
Gleitzman
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Kimmel; Lester;
McCaughrean; Napoli
Friends-fiction: Buck; Gleitzman
Geography: Fisher; Nirgiotis
Grandmothers-fiction: Love
Grandmothers-stories: Erdrich
Grandparents-stories: Martin
Growing up-fiction: Love
Health: Gravelle; Jukes
HISTORICAL FICTION: High;
Martin
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 393
History, U.S.: Ashabranner;
Carnes; Fleming; Freedman;
Haskins; Stanley; Thorne-
Thomsen; Wakin
History, world: Cha; Koslow
Hmong: Cha
Horses-fiction: Philbrick
Immigration: Cha; Greenberg
Journalism: Wakin
Labor movement: Stanley
Language arts: Buck; Yoon
Literature, English: Shakespeare
Midsummer; Shakespeare
Tempest
Literature, American: Haskins
Love-fiction: Shakespeare
Midsummer
Love-poetry: Fletcher
LOVE STORIES: Frank
Marine life: Markle
Mental illness-fiction: Richardson
Mexico: Johnston
Mexico-poetry: Johnston
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Napoli; Richardson; Wyeth
Mothers and sons-fiction:
Gleitzman
Music: Haskins; Reisfeld
Music and musicians-fiction:
Frank; Zalben
MYSTERIES: Byars; Doyle;
Glenn
MYTHOLOGY: McCaughrean
Mythology-classical: Kraus
Nature study: Carrier; Facklam
New York City-fiction: Frank
Physical education: Macy
POETRY: Fletcher; Glenn;
McMullan; Merriam; Ryder;
Yolen
Ranch life-fiction: Philbrick
Reading aloud: Martin; Merriam;
Yolen
Reading, beginning: Buck;
Nirgiotis
Reading, easy: Dussling; Wyeth
Reading, reluctant: Reisfeld
Reincarnation-fiction: Farmer
Religion-fiction: Nolan
Religious education: Thorne-
Thomsen; Wildsmith; Yolen
School-poetry: Glenn
Science: Markle; Nirgiotis
Self-image: Gleitzman
Shipwrecks: Shakespeare Tempest
SHORT STORIES: Duncan;
Social studies: Carnes; Greenberg;
Merriam
South, the-fiction: Nolan
Story hour: Lester; McCaughrean
Summer-fiction: High; Love
Supernatural-fiction: Duncan;
Dussling; Farmer
Teachers-fiction: Zalben
Television: Wakin
Television-stories: Polacco
Texas-fiction: Love
Tigers-stories: Lester
Trees-stories: Carrier
Urban life-poetry: Merriam
War-stories: Popov
Women's studies: Fleming;
Golston; Macy; Stanley
Zoos-stories: Fox
394 
* THE BULLETIN
THE
B ULLET
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AUTHOR/TITLE INDEX, VOLUME 49
SEPTEMBER, 1995-JULY/AUGUST, 1996
13th Floor. Fleischman. 53.
A Is for Apple, W Is for Witch. Dexter. 189.
Aaseng. O. J. Simpson Trial. 218.
Abigail's Drum. Minahan. 198.
Absolutely Normal Chaos. Creech. 87.
Across the Plains in the Donner Party.
Murphy. 347.
Across the Wide Dark Sea. Van Leeuwen. 73.
Action Alphabet. Roter. 385.
Adler, C. Courtyard Cat. 4.
Adler, D. One Yellow Daffodil. 118.
. Young Cam Jansen and the Missing
Cookie. 291.
Adoff. Slow Dance Heart Break Blues. 44.
After the War. Matas. 271.
Ahlberg. Better Brown Stories. 182.
Aiken. Cold Shoulder Road. 255.
Air Down Here. Alicea. 45.
Alder. King's Shadow. 4.
Alexander, Who's Not (Do You Hear Me? I
Mean It!) Going to Move. Viorst. 74.
Alexander. House Gobbaleen. 118.
Alice in Lace. Naylor. 273.
Alicea. Air Down Here. 45.
All That Glitters. Ferris. 224.
Almost Famous Daisy! Kidd. 268.
Alphabet City. Johnson. 95.
Alphin. Bear for Miguel. 183.
Amazing Life of Moe Berg. Andryszewski.
255.
Amber Brown Goes Fourth. Danziger. 88.
American Eye. Greenberg. 127.
American Hero. Denenberg. 261.
Anastasia, Absolutely. Lowry. 20.
Anderson, J. Batboy. 219.
.Cowboys. 326.
Anderson, P. Fall of the Red Star. 206.
Andryszewski. Amazing Life of Moe Berg.
255.
Angel & the Donkey. Paterson. 275.
Angel's Gate. Crew. 11.
Animal Crackers. Dyer. 224.
Another Kind of Monday. Coles. 260.
Answer My Prayer. Hite. 16.
Antarctic Encounter. Poncet. 25.
Anzalduia. Prietita and the Ghost Woman.
255.
Appelt. Watermelon Day. 326.
Arabian Horses. Schrenk. 240.
Armadillo Rodeo. Brett. 47.
Armstrong. Black-Eyed Susan. 45.
. Patrick Doyle Is Full of Blarney. 256.
Arnold. Five Ugly Monsters. 45.
. No More Water in the Tub! 5.
Art Dog. Hurd. 191.
Art of Making Comic Books. Pellowski. 200.
Arthur Goes to School. Brown. 48.
Artist in Overalls. Duggleby. 331.
Asante. Koslow. 377.
Ashabranner. Our Beckoning Borders. 292.
. Strange and Distant Shore. 364.
Asher. But That's Another Story. 327.
Asteroids. Kraske. 96.
Asylum for Nightface. Brooks. 328.
Aunt Chip and the Great Triple Creek Dam
Affair. Polacco. 383.
Aunt Nancy and Old Man Trouble. Root.
240.
Avi. Beyond the Western Sea, Book One.
183.
.Poppy. 154.
Ayer. Parallel Journeys. 5.
Baby and Fly Pie. Burgess. 294.
Baby Be-Bop. Block. 46.
Bad Day at Riverbend. Van Allsburg. 32.
Bad Girls. Voigt. 280.
Bad-Luck Penny. O'Connor. 368.
Baer. This Is the Way We Eat Our Lunch. 6.
Bang. Chattanooga Sludge. 256.
Banyai. Re-zoom. 155.
Baronova. Stories from the Classical Ballet.
190.
IN
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 
395
Barred from the Bar. Garza. 300.
Barrel of Laughs, a Vale of Tears. Feiffer. 189.
Batboy. Anderson. 219.
Batman: The Joker's Apprentice. Dixon. 223.
Bats, Bugs, and Biodiversity. Goodman. 54.
Bauer. Sticks. 292.
Bawden. Granny the Pag. 218.
Be Well, Beware. Haas. 227.
Bear for Miguel. Alphin. 183.
Bearing Witness. Rochman. 66.
Bechard. Star Hatchling. 155.
Becoming Ballet. Toriseva. 107.
Beduins' Gazelle. Temple. 244.
Being Danny's Dog. Naylor. 166.
Bell. Christian Morgenstern. 23.
. Seven Ravens. 159.
. Six Servants. 335.
Belle Prater's Boy. White. 281.
Beller. To Hold This Ground. 119.
Beneduce. Tempest. 386.
Berry, J. Don't Leave an Elephant to Go and
Chase a Bird. 155.
Berry, L. China Garden. 257.
Besson. October 45. 184.
Best Bug Parade. Murphy. 310.
Best. Red Light, Green Light, Mama and Me.
6.
Better Brown Stories. Ahlberg. 182.
Between a Rock and a Hard Place. Carter.
122.
Beyond Providence. Schnur. 279.
Beyond the Western Sea, Book One. Avi.
183.
Bial. Portrait of a Farm Family. 46.
. With Needle and Thread. 184.
Big Bazoohley. Carey. 122.
Big Bike Race. Bledsoe. 119.
Big Idea. Schecter. 278.
Birchman. Raggly Scraggly No-Soap No-
Scrub Girl. 6.
Black Elephant with a Brown Ear (in
Alabama). Porte. 350.
Black Frontiers. Schlissel. 170.
Black Horses for the King. McCaffrey. 306.
Black Women of the Old West. Katz. 163.
Black-Eyed Susan. Armstrong. 45.
Blake. Clown. 327.
Bledsoe. Big Bike Race. 119.
Blegvad. Sound of Leaves. 292.
Block. Baby Be-Bop. 46.
Block. Hughes. 162.
Blood Relations. Lynch. 270.
Bloom. Disney's James and the Giant Peach.
331.
Blos. Nellie Bly's Monkey. 293.
Blow Away Soon. James. 18.
Blue Sky, Butterfly. Van Leeuwen. 207.
Blue. White House Kids. 7.
Boas. We Are Witnesses. 7.
Bobbin Girl. McCully. 235.
Bode. Hard Time. 293.
Bohlmeijer. Something Very Sorry. 219.
Bolotin. For Home and Country. 47.
Bomb. Taylor. 171.
Bone Detectives. Jackson. 267.
Book of Changes. Wynne-Jones. 75.
Book of Enchantments. Wrede. 319.
Borden. Paperboy. 232.
Bosse. Tusk and Stone. 120.
Both Sides of Time. Cooney. 50.
Bottle Imp. Stevenson. 206.
Bound for the Promised Land. Cooper. 124.
Bowen. Gathering. 84.
Bowler. Midget. 85.
Boys at Work. Soto. 30.
Bradby. More than Anything Else. 47.
Brainstorm! Tucker. 71.
Branch. Water Brought Us. 85.
Brassey. How to Speak Chimpanzee. 120.
Brave as a Mountain Lion. Scott. 202.
Bravest Thing. Napoli. 64.
Brenner. Chibi. 184.
Brer Tiger and the Big Wind. Faulkner. 89.
Brett. Armadillo Rodeo. 47.
Brian's Winter. Paulsen. 199.
Briggs. Man. 185.
Brooks, B. Asylum for Nightface. 328.
Brooks, P. Cleopatra. 120.
Brown, C. Tractor. 48.
Brown, L. When Dinosaurs Die. 220.
Brown, M. Arthur Goes to School. 48.
Bruchac. Children of the Longhouse. 364.
Bruises. de Vries. 262.
Bruno the Carpenter. Klinting. 342.
Bryant. Learning from the Dalai Lama. 199.
Buck. Sid and Sam. 365.
Buddha. Demi. 330.
Buddy Love: Now on Video. Cooper. 123.
Buffalo Sunrise. Swanson. 353.
Bunin. Dear Great American Writers School.
85.
Bunting. Cheyenne Again. 8.
. Dandelions. 8.
. Market Day. 294.
. SOS Titanic. 257.
.Train to Somewhere. 221.
Burgess. Baby and Fly Pie. 294.
Buried Alive. Fletcher. 370.
Burks. Runs With Horses. 121.
Burnt Stick. Hill. 16.
Busy at Day Care Head to Toe. Demuth.
330.
But Can the Phoenix Sing? Laird. 96.
But That's Another Story. Asher. 327.
Buz. Egielski. 51.
Byalick. It's a Matter of Trust. 155.
396 
* THE BULLETIN
Byars. Dead Letter. 365.
.Joy Boys. 328.
.My Brother, Ant. 185.
Bye, Bye, Bali Kai. Luger. 305.
Cabin 102. Garland. 127.
Cadnum. Taking It. 8.
Call of the Wild. London. 344.
Calling the Doves. Herrera. 129.
Cameron. Stories Huey Tells. 121.
Can't Sleep. Raschka. 65.
Carey. Big Bazoohley. 122.
Caribbean Counting Book. Charles. 295.
Carnes. Us and Them. 366.
Carousel. Rosenberg. 138.
Carr. Nature of the Beast. 258.
Carrier. Tree's Tale. 366.
Cart. My Father's Scar. 258.
Carter. Between a Rock and a Hard Place.
122.
Carving a Totem Pole. Jensen. 341.
Caseley. Slumber Party! 221.
Cat and Rat. Young. 111.
Cats and Robbers. Wahl. 74.
Caught in the Crossfire. Ousseimi. 102.
Cavanagh. Last Piper. 295.
Cha. Dia's Story Cloth. 366.
Chacon. How the Indians Bought the Farm.
387.
Chambers. Toll Bridge. 9.
Changing Woman of the Apache. Golston. 373.
Charbonneau. Honor to the Hills. 295.
Charles. Caribbean Counting Book. 295.
Chattanooga Sludge. Bang. 256.
Cherokees. Sneve. 315.
Cheyenne Again. Bunting. 8.
Chibi. Brenner. 184.
Chicago Blues. Deaver. 11.
Child of the Wolves. Hall. 228.
Children Just Like Me. Kindersley. 192.
Children Next Door. Ure. 317.
Children of the Longhouse. Bruchac. 364.
China Garden. Berry. 257.
Christelow. What Do Authors Do? 86.
Christian Morgenstern. Morgenstern. 23.
Christmas Visitor. Lussert. 98.
Chu. Going Home to Nicodemus. 48.
Chuck and Danielle. Dickinson. 189.
Clark, C. Nellie Bishop. 186.
Clark, M . International Association of Crime
Writers Presents Bad Behavior. 9.
Clean House. Haas. 227.
Cleary. My Own Two Feet. 10.
Clements. Temple Cat. 186.
._ Who Owns the Cow? 49.
Cleopatra. Brooks. 120.
Clifford. Family for Sale. 221.
Climo. Irish Cinderlad. 258.
Clown. Blake. 327.
Coast to Coast with Alice. Hyatt. 17.
Cochrane. Purely Rosie Pearl. 296.
Cody. Cowboy's Handbook. 221.
Cohen, B. David. 10.
Cohen, C. Where's the Fly? 259.
Cohen-Posey. How to Handle Bullies, Teasers
and Other Meanies. 122.
Cold Shoulder Road. Aiken. 255.
Cole. Magic School Bus Inside a Hurricane. 49.
. Riding Silver Star. 222.
Coleman. White Socks Only. 259.
Coles. Another Kind of Monday. 260.
Collier. King's Giraffe. 222.
Collington. Tooth Fairy. 86.
Coman. What Jamie Saw. 123.
Come Morning. Guccione. 159.
Coming to America. Maestro. 195.
Comus. Hodges. 266.
Conly. Trout Summer. 156.
Conrad. Our House. 123.
Coombs. Flush! 156.
Cooney. Both Sides of Time. 50.
SFlash Fire. 157.
. Out of Time. 296.
Cooper, H. Little Monster Did It! 297.
Cooper, I. Buddy Love: Now on Video. 123.
Cooper, M. Bound for the Promised Land.
124.
Count Silvernose. Kimmel. 377.
Country Angel Christmas. dePaola. 88.
Courtyard Cat. Adler. 4.
Cousin Ruth's Tooth. MacDonald. 344.
Cousins in the Castle. Wallace. 281.
Coville. Midsummer Night's Dream. 385.
Cowboy Charlie. Winter. 75.
Cowboy's Handbook. Cody. 221.
Cowboys of the Sky. Levi. 343.
Cowboys. Anderson. 326.
Cowley. Mouse Bride. 87.
Cox, B. Who Talks Funny? 10.
Cox, C. Mark Twain. 11.
Coyote Girl. Lehne. 60.
Coyote Goes Walking. Pohrt. 136.
Crampton. Fall-Out. 23.
Crash. Spinelli. 315.
Crawford. Damned Strong Love. 32.
Creech. Absolutely Normal Chaos. 87.
Creep Show. Dussling. 368.
Creepy, Crawly Caterpillars. Facklam. 369.
Crew, G. Angel's Gate. 11.
Crew, L. Fire on the Wind. 157.
Crews. I'll Catch the Moon. 297.
Crow's Journey. Cunningham. 329.
Crown of Dalemark. Jones. 130.
Cuckoo's Child. Freeman. 226.
Culebra Cut. Head. 128.
Cullen. Three Lives of Harris Harper. 260.
Cullinan. Jar of Tiny Stars. 186.
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 
397
Cummings. Talking with Artists: Volume
Two. 50.
Cunningham. Crow's Journey. 329.
Curtis Piperfield's Biggest Fan. Fiedler. 52.
Curtis. Watsons Go to Birmingham-1963.
157.
Custard the Dragon and the Wicked Knight.
Nash. 273.
Cuyler. Invisible in the Third Grade. 88.
Cyberstorm. Skurzynski. 29.
Daddy's Wedding. Willhoite. 356.
Dahl. James and the Giant Peach: The Book
and Movie Scrapbook. 329.
Damned Strong Love. Van Dijk. 32.
Dancing on the Bridge at Avignon. Vos. 172.
Dancing Pink Flamingos. Testa. 172.
Dandelions. Bunting. 8.
Danger Game. Lawson. 234.
Danger Zone. Klass. 195.
Dangerous Wishes. Sleator. 70.
Danziger. Amber Brown Goes Fourth. 88.
Daring to be Abigail. Vail. 207.
Dash. We Shall Not Be Moved. 187.
Dateline: Troy. Fleischman. 225.
David. Cohen. 10.
Davol. How Snake Got His Hiss. 261.
Day at Damp Camp. Lyon. 306.
Day Gogo Went to Vote. Sisulu. 242.
Day the Sky Split Apart. Gallant. 90.
Day. Sensational TV. 187.
Day. Violence in Schools. 329.
De Sena. Air Down Here. 45.
de Vries. Bruises. 262.
. My Elephant Can Do Almost
Anything. 330.
Dead Letter. Byars. 365.
Dear Great American Writers School. Bunin.
85.
Dear Oklahoma City, Get Well Soon. Ross.
351.
Deaver. Chicago Blues. 11.
Deem. How to Make a Mummy Talk. 50.
deGroat. Roses Are Pink, Your Feet Really
Stink. 187.
Demi. Buddha. 330.
Demuth. Busy at Day Care Head to Toe.
330.
Denenberg. American Hero. 261.
dePaola. Country Angel Christmas. 88.
. Mary. 89.
Deschamps. Spyglass. 12.
Dewey. Faces Only a Mother Could Love. 188.
. Stories on Stone. 262.
Dexter. A Is for Apple, W Is for Witch. 189.
Dia's Story Cloth. Cha. 366.
Dickinson. Chuck and Danielle. 189.
Dinah Forever. Mills. 100.
Dirty, Rotten, Dead? Emory. 298.
Disney's James and the Giant Peach. 331.
Dixon. Batman: The Joker's Apprentice. 223.
Do Angels Sing the Blues? LeMieux. 20.
Doctor Moledinky's Castle. Hausman. 128.
Dog Eat Dog. Lynch. 270.
Dog Friday. McKay. 62.
Dog Heaven. Rylant. 67.
Dogs. Gibbons. 301.
Doherty. Snake-Stone. 224.
Don't Leave an Elephant to Go and Chase a
Bird. Berry. 155.
Don't Think Twice. Pennebaker. 275.
Donkey Trouble. Young. 147.
Doom Stone. Zindel. 210.
Dove and Sword. Garden. 158.
Down the Road. Schertle. 139.
Doyle. Spud in Winter. 367.
Doyle. Spud Sweetgrass. 367.
Drowned. Levy. 131.
Duey. Sarah Anne Hartford. 297.
Duffey. Utterly Yours, Booker Jones. 51.
Duggleby. Artist in Overalls. 331.
Duncan. Magic of Spider Woman. 332.
. Night Terrors. 367.
. Psychic Connections. 13.
Dunlop. Tales of St. Patrick. 298.
Dussling. Creep Show. 368.
Dust for Dinner. Turner. 31.
Dybbuk. Prose. 276.
Dyer. Animal Crackers. 224.
Earth, Fire, Water, Air. Hoffman. 162.
Earthdance. Ryder. 385.
Earthquake Terror. Kehret. 231.
Ebony Sea. Smalls. 204.
Edelstein. Dancing on the Bridge at Avignon.
172.
Edward in Deep Water. Wells. 108.
Edward Unready for School. Wells. 108.
Edward's Overwhelming Overnight. Wells.
108.
Egielski. Buz. 51.
Ehlert. Snowballs. 89.
Ehrlich. When I Was Your Age. 263.
Electric Kid. Kilworth. 95.
Elena. Stanley. 243.
Elfsong. Turner. 141.
Eli and the Swamp Man. Sherman. 279.
Elisa in the Middle. Hurwitz. 59.
Eliza's Dog. Hearne. 229.
Ellen's Case. Metzger. 100.
Elsa, Star of the Shelter! Wilson. 209.
Emma & Mommy Talk to God. Williamson.
282.
Emory. Dirty, Rotten, Dead? 298.
Emperor Mage. Pierce. 25.
Empress and the Silkworm. Hong. 129.
Enderle. Nell Nugget and the Cow Caper. 299.
Engel. Ezra Jack Keats. 13.
398 
* THE BULLETIN
Erdrich. Grandmother's Pigeon. 368.
Erlbruch. Leonard. 51.
Ernst. Little Red Riding Hood. 52.
Esther's Story. Wolkstein. 209.
Even Break. Hite. 162.
Even Stephen. Hurwitz. 230.
Everyday Mysteries. Wexler. 33.
Eyes of a Stranger. Heisel. 337.
Ezra Jack Keats. Engel. 13.
Faces Only a Mother Could Love. Dewey. 188.
Facing the Music. Willey. 281.
Facklam. Creepy, Crawly Caterpillars. 369.
Fact or Fiction: Witches. Ross. 314.
Faithful Friend. San Souci. 28.
Falcon's Egg. Gray. 55.
Fall of the Red Star. Szablya. 206.
Fall-Out. Pausewang. 23.
Falling Up. Silverstein. 353.
Fallout. Lester. 305.
Family for Sale. Clifford. 221.
Farm Team. Weaver. 32.
Farmer. Penelope. 369.
Farrell. Marrying Malcolm Murgatroyd. 124.
Fate Totally Worse than Death. Fleischman.
126.
Faulkner. Brer Tiger and the Big Wind. 89.
Feather-Bed Journey. Feder. 125.
Feathers and Fools. Fox. 263.
Feder. Feather-Bed Journey. 125.
Feelings. Middle Passage. 125.
Feiffer. Barrel of Laughs, a Vale of Tears. 189.
Fence Away from Freedom. Levine. 98.
Ferris. All That Glitters. 224.
Festivals. Livingston. 305.
Fiedler. Curtis Piperfield's Biggest Fan. 52.
Fine. Step by Wicked Step. 299.
"Fire! Fire!" Said Mrs. McGuire. Martin. 271.
Fire in the Hills. Myers. 273.
Fire in the Wind. Levin. 165.
Fire on the Wind. Crew. 157.
Fire Pony. Philbrick. 383.
Fireworks. Kuklin. 232.
First Air Voyage in the United States.
Wallner. 318.
First Came the Owl. Richardson. 384.
First Children. Leiner. 235.
First Christmas. Hogrogian. 93.
First, Second. Kharms. 192.
Fisher. Niagara Falls. 370.
Five Ugly Monsters. Arnold. 45.
Flash Fire. Cooney. 157.
Flea in the Ear. Wyllie. 283.
Fleischman, P. Dateline: Troy. 225.
. Fate Totally Worse than Death. 126.
Fleischman, S. 13th Floor. 53.
Fleming, C. Women of the Lights. 370.
Fleming, D. Where Once There Was a
Wood. 300.
Fletcher. Buried Alive. 370.
Flint's Rock. Gilliland. 301.
Florian. On the Wing. 263.
Flournoy. Tanya's Reunion. 53.
Flowers on the Wall. Nerlove. 237.
Flush! Coombs. 156.
Flying Lessons. Semel. 105.
For Home and Country. Bolotin. 47.
Ford. Most Wonderful Movie in the World.
332.
Four Perfect Pebbles. Perl. 349.
Fox. Feathers and Fools. 263.
. Zoo-Looking. 371.
Fradin. "We Have Conquered Pain." 333.
Frank. Will You Be My Brussels Sprout? 371.
Franklin. Out of the Dump. 225.
Free Fall. Sweeney. 316.
Free to Dream. Osofsky. 348.
Freedman. Life and Death of Crazy Horse. 372.
Freeman. Cuckoo's Child. 226.
French. Once upon a Picnic. 264.
Friends Go Adventuring. Heine. 160.
Fritz. You Want Women to Vote, Lizzie
Stanton? 53.
Frog Who Wanted to Be a Singer. Goss. 265.
From Mustangs to Movie Stars. van der
Linde. 142.
Galax-Arena. Rubinstein. 67.
Gallant. Day the Sky Split Apart. 90.
Galli. Mona Lisa. 333.
Galloway. Truly Grim Tales. 158.
Ganeri. Out of the Ark. 264.
Gantos. Jack's New Power. 126.
Gaps in Stone Walls. Neufeld. 274.
Garcia. Spirit of the Maya. 126.
Garden. Dove and Sword. 158.
Garland, Sarah. Tex the Cowboy. 13.
Garland, Sherry. Cabin 102. 127.
Garza. Barred from the Bar. 300.
Gateway. Robinson. 277.
Gathering. Bowen. 84.
Gauthier. My Life Among the Aliens. 334.
Geisert, A. Roman Numerals I to MM. 226.
Geisert, B. Haystack. 54.
Gellman. God's Mailbox. 301.
Genie in the Jar. Giovanni. 302.
Gentleman Outlaw and Me-Eli. Hahn. 265.
Geoffrey Groundhog Predicts the Weather.
Koscielniak. 95.
Gerrard. Wagons West! 189.
Ghost Dance. McLerran. 100.
Ghost of Grania O'Malley. Morpurgo. 309.
Ghosts in the Family. Sachs. 138.
Gibbons. Dogs. 301.
. Planet Earth/Inside Out. 14.
SSea Turtles. 91.
Giblin. When Plague Strikes. 54.
Gideon's People. Meyer. 309.
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 399
Gilliland. Flint's Rock. 301.
Ginger Brown: Too Many Houses. Wyeth. 390.
Ginkgo and Moon. Mertins. 346.
Giovanni. Genie in the Jar. 302.
Giovanni. Shimmy Shimmy Shimmy Like My
Sister Kate. 334.
Girl, the Fish, and the Crown. Heyer. 15.
Give Me Half. Murphy. 310.
Gleitzman. Puppy Fat. 372.
Glenn. Who Killed Mr. Chippendale? 372.
Glorious Angels. Myers. 64.
Go West, Young Women! Karr. 192.
God's Mailbox. Gellman. 301.
Going Home to Nicodemus. Chu. 48.
Golden Aquarians. Hughes. 57.
Golden Compass. Pullman. 277.
Golden Flower. Jaffe. 340.
Golden Goose. Shulevitz. 171.
Golden Hoard. McCaughrean. 379.
Goldilocks and the Three Hares. Petach. 167.
Golston. Changing Woman of the Apache. 373.
Good Night, Dinosaurs. Sierra. 242.
Good Zap, Little Grog. Wilson. 144.
Goodman. Bats, Bugs, and Biodiversity. 54.
Gooseberry Park. Rylant. 201.
Gorog. When Nobody's Home. 264.
Goss. Frog Who Wanted to Be a Singer. 265.
. It's Kwanzaa Time. 90.
Gourley. Hunting Neptune's Giants. 158.
Grandfather's Christmas Camp.
McCutcheon. 98.
Grandfather's Trolley. McMillan. 133.
Grandmother Bryant's Pocket. Martin. 381.
Grandmother's Pigeon. Erdrich. 368.
Granny the Pag. Bawden. 218.
Grant. Mary Wolf. 90.
Gravelle. Period Book. 373.
Gray. Falcon's Egg. 55.
Great Midwest Flood. Vogel. 143.
Great-Uncle Alfred Forgets. Shecter. 203.
Greatest Show on Earth. Prater. 65.
Greenberg, Jan. American Eye. 127.
Greenberg, Judith. Letters From a World War
II G.I. 14.
. Newcomers to America. 374.
. Pioneer Woman's Memoir. 14.
Greenberg, K. Rodeo Clown. 15.
Greene. Owen Foote, Second Grade
Strongman. 227.
Greenstein. Mrs. Rose's Garden. 334.
Gregory. Stowaway. 55.
Grimm. Seven Ravens. 159.
. Six Servants. 335.
Guardian of the Hills. Strauss. 106.
Guccione. Come Morning. 159.
Guiberson. Lighthouses. 127.
Gulf. Westall. 208.
Gulls of the Edmund Fitzgerald. Seymour. 241.
Gutenberg's Gift. Willard. 109.
Gutman. Taking Flight. 107.
Haas. Be Well, Beware. 227.
. Clean House. 227.
Haddix. Running Out of Time. 90.
Hafner. Mommies Don't Get Sick! 90.
Hahn. Gentleman Outlaw and Me-Eli. 265.
Haley. Two Bad Boys. 335.
Hall, B. House Across the Cove. 160.
Hall, D. When Willard Met Babe Ruth. 336.
Hall, E. Child of the Wolves. 228.
Hallo-Wiener. Pilkey. 65.
Hamilton. Her Stories. 128.
_ When Birds Could Talk and Bats
Could Sing. 336.
Handful of Seeds. Hughes. 339.
Happy Birthday, Danny and the Dinosaur!
Hoff. 56.
Hard Time. Bode. 293.
Happy Birth Day! Harris. 374.
Harlem Renaissance. Haskins. 375.
Harris. Happy Birth Day! 374.
Hartnett. Sleeping Dogs. 160.
Haskins. Harlem Renaissance. 375.
Hatrick. Masks. 228.
Haunted Bike. Herman. 368.
Haunted Summer. Wright. 282.
Hausman. Doctor Moledinky's Castle. 128.
. Night Flight. 337.
Havill. Jamaica's Blue Marker. 55.
Hayes. Spoon for Every Bite. 266.
Haystack. Geisert. 54.
Head. Culebra Cut. 128.
Hearne. Eliza's Dog. 229.
Heart & Soul. Rosenberg. 313.
Heck. Parallel Journeys. 5.
Heckman. Waking Upside Down. 302.
Heide. Oh, Grow Up! 229.
Heine. Friends Go Adventuring. 160.
Heisel. Eyes of a Stranger. 337.
Heller. Untold Story of Snow White. 338.
Helpful Alphabet of Friendly Objects.
Updike. 142.
Her Stories. Hamilton. 128.
Herb. For Home and Country. 47.
Herman. Haunted Bike. 368.
Hermes. On Winter's Wind. 92.
Herrera. Calling the Doves. 129.
Hesse. Time of Angels. 160.
Hewett. Soulfire. 338.
Heyer. Girl, the Fish, and the Crown. 15.
Hidden Music. Kamen. 304.
High. Hound Heaven. 129.
. Summer of the Great Divide. 375.
Hill. Burnt Stick. 16.
Hines. When the Goblins Came Knocking.
16.
Hinton. Puppy Sister. 92.
400 
* THE BULLETIN
His Banner Over Me. Little. 194.
Hite. An Even Break. 162.
.Answer My Prayer. 16.
Ho. Hush! 266.
Hoban. Just Look. 339.
Hobbs. How Far Would You Have Gotten If
I Hadn't Called You Back? 56.
Hodges. Comus. 266.
Hoff. Happy Birthday, Danny and the
Dinosaur! 56.
Hoffman. Earth, Fire, Water, Air. 162.
Hog-Eye. Meddaugh. 63.
Hogrogian. First Christmas. 93.
Hokumen-Jones. Shin's Tricycle. 130.
Hold Your Horses! Meltzer. 134.
Holland. Promised Land. 267.
Hollyer. Stories from the Classical Ballet. 190.
Holtzman. Quarter from the Tooth Fairy.
190.
Home Lovely. Perkins. 24.
Hometown. Qualey. 137.
Hong. Empress and the Silkworm. 129.
Honor to the Hills. Charbonneau. 295.
Hoover. Winds of Mars. 16.
Hopper. What Happened in Mr. Fisher's
Room. 57.
Hostage. Myers. 198.
Hound Heaven. High. 129.
House Across the Cove. Hall. 160.
House Gobbaleen. Alexander. 118.
House in the Sky. San Souci. 201.
House that Drac Built. Sierra. 70.
How Far Would You Have Gotten If I
Hadn't Called You Back? Hobbs. 56.
How Mountains Are Made. Zoehfeld. 36.
How Mr. Monkey Saw the Whole World.
Myers. 348.
How Much Is That Guinea Pig in the
Window? Rocklin. 190.
How Snake Got His Hiss. Davol. 261.
How Sweet the Sound. Hudson. 93.
How the Indians Bought the Farm. Strete. 387.
How to Handle Bullies, Teasers and Other
Meanies. Cohen-Posey. 122.
How to Live Forever. Thompson. 354.
How to Make a Mummy Talk. Deem. 50.
How to Speak Chimpanzee. Brassey. 120.
How TV Changed America's Mind. Wakin.
388.
Howarth. Weather Eye. 93.
Hoyt-Goldsmith. Migrant Worker. 229.
Hru. Magic Moonberry Jump Ropes. 190.
Hubbard. My Crayons Talk. 302.
Hudson. How Sweet the Sound. 93.
Hughes, L. Block. 162.
Hughes, M. Golden Aquarians. 57.
__ 
. Handful of Seeds. 339.
Hughes, S. Rhymes for Annie Rose. 93.
Hughes, T. Iron Woman. 57.
Hunt. Leifs Saga. 230.
Hunter. Miss Piggy's Night Out. 58.
Hunting Neptune's Giants. Gourley. 158.
Hurd. Art Dog. 191.
Hurwins. Time for Dancing. 58.
Hurwitz. Elisa in the Middle. 59.
. Even Stephen. 230.
Hush! Ho. 266.
Hutton. Odysseus and the Cyclops. 94.
Hyatt. Coast to Coast with Alice. 17.
I Am a Home Schooler. Voetberg. 143.
I Feel a Little Jumpy Around You. Nye. 311.
I Had a Lot of Wishes. Stevenson. 71.
I Hate Superman! Simonson. 223.
I Was Dreaming to Come to America.
Lawlor. 19.
I'll Catch the Moon. Crews. 297.
Ice. Naylor. 101.
Iditarod Dream. Wood. 282.
If... Perry. 167.
If Daddy Only Knew Me. McGinnis. 132.
If You Please, President Lincoln. Robinet. 27.
If You Were My Bunny. McMullan. 379.
Igus. Two Mrs. Gibsons. 303.
In a Different Light. Meyer. 272.
In the Days of the Salem Witchcraft Trials.
Roach. 351.
In the Kaiser's Clutch. Karr. 163.
Ingenious Mr. Peale. Wilson. 356.
Inner City Mother Goose. Merriam. 381.
Inside-Out Grandma. Rothenberg. 104.
Instead of Three Wishes. Turner. 72.
International Association of Crime Writers
Presents Bad Behavior. Clark. 9.
Invisible in the Third Grade. Cuyler. 88.
Ippisch. Sky. 303.
Irish Cinderlad. Climo. 258.
Iron Woman. Hughes. 57.
It's a Girl Thing. Jukes. 376.
It's a Matter of Trust. Byalick. 155.
It's Kwanzaa Time. Goss. 90.
Jack's New Power. Gantos. 126.
Jackson, D. Bone Detectives. 267.
Jackson, E. Precious Gift. 339.
Jackson, I. Somebody's New Pajamas. 191.
Jacques. Outcast of Redwall. 230.
Jaffe. Golden Flower. 340.
. Older Brother, Younger Brother. 17.
Jakobsen. Meet Me in the Magic Kingdom.
94.
Jamaica's Blue Marker. Havill. 55.
James and the Giant Peach: The Book and
Movie Scrapbook. Dahl. 329.
James, B. Blow Away Soon. 18.
James, J. Alison. Midnight Rider. 67.
Janeczko. Wherever Home Begins. 94.
.I Feel a Little Jumpy Around You. 311.
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 401
Jar of Tiny Stars. Cullinan. 186.
Jaspersohn. Timber! 340.
Jazz, Pizzazz, and the Silver Threads.
Quattlebaum. 200.
Jensen. Carving a Totem Pole. 341.
Jicai. Let One Hundred Flowers Bloom. 303.
John Steinbeck. Reef. 239.
Johnson, P. Lost. 231.
Johnson, S. Alphabet City. 95.
Johnston. My Mexico-Mexico Mio. 376.
JoJo's Flying Side Kick. Pinkney. 136.
Jones. Crown of Dalemark. 130.
Joplin. Treemonisha. 196.
Jordan. American Eye. 127.
Journey of the Red Wolf. Smith. 205.
Journey Out. Pollack. 239.
Joy Boys. Byars. 328.
Juggler. Morressy. 272.
Jukes. It's a Girl Thing. 376.
Junebug. Mead. 133.
Jungle Book. Kipling. 341.
Junkyard Dog. Tamar. 31.
Just Look. Hoban. 339.
Kamen. Hidden Music. 304.
Karr. Go West, Young Women! 192.
. In the Kaiser's Clutch. 163.
Kate Shelley. San Souci. 139.
Katz. Black Women of the Old West. 163.
Keehn. Moon of Two Dark Horses. 59.
Keep Smiling Through. Rinaldi. 277.
Keeping the Good Light. Kirkpatrick. 164.
Kehret. Earthquake Terror. 231.
Kellogg. Sally Ann Thunder Ann Whirlwind
Crockett. 18.
Kenna. People Apart. 164.
Kermit and Robin's Scary Story. Muntean.
58.
Kharms. First, Second. 192.
Kid's Guide to Money. Otfinoski. 275.
Kidd. Almost Famous Daisy! 268.
Kidnapping of Suzie Q. Waddell. 208.
Kilworth. Electric Kid. 95.
Kimmel. Count Silvernose. 377.
. Onions and Garlic. 341.
Kindersley. Children Just Like Me. 192.
King Arthur and the Knights of the Round
Table. Williams. 247.
King's Giraffe. Collier. 222.
King's Shadow. Alder. 4.
King-Smith. Mr. Potter's Pet. 231.
. School Mouse. 165.
. Sophie's Lucky. 193.
Kipling. Jungle Book. 341.
Kirkpatrick, Karey. Disney's James and the
Giant Peach. 331.
Kirkpatrick, Katherine. Keeping the Good
Light. 164.
Kisses from Rosa. Mathers. 166.
Klass. Danger Zone. 195.
Klein. Sky in Silver Lace. 194.
Klinting. Bruno the Carpenter. 342.
Knecht. Bruises. 262.
Kodama. Shin's Tricycle. 130.
Koller. Place to Call Home. 59.
Koscielniak. Geoffrey Groundhog Predicts the
Weather. 95.
Koslow. Asante. 377.
Kraft. Mother Jones. 18.
Kramer. Theodoric's Rainbow. 194.
Kraske. Asteroids. 96.
Kraus. Near Myths. 377.
Krensky. Printer's Apprentice. 19.
Kroeger. Paperboy. 232.
Kroll, S. Pony Express! 268.
Kroll, V. Shelter Folks. 232.
Krull. Lives of the Artists. 96.
_ Wilma Unlimited. 269.
Krupp. Let's Go Traveling in Mexico. 304.
Kuklin. Fireworks. 232.
Kurtz. Miro in the Kingdom of the Sun. 269.
Kwanzaa Celebration Pop-Up Book.
Williams. 110.
La Boda. Van Laan. 318.
Laird. But Can the Phoenix Sing? 96.
Lamb. One April Morning. 342.
Langsen. When Someone in the Family
Drinks Too Much. 233.
Lanning. Christmas Visitor. 98.
Lassie Come-Home. Wells. 208.
Last Piper. Cavanagh. 295.
Lauture. Running the Road to ABC. 233.
Lavender. Snowbound. 343.
Lawlor, L. Real Johnny Appleseed. 97.
Lawlor, V. I Was Dreaming to Come to
America. 19.
Lawson. Danger Game. 234.
Lazan. Four Perfect Pebbles. 349.
Lear. Pelican Chorus. 19.
Learning from the Dalai Lama. Pandell. 199.
Lee. Song of Mu Lan. 164.
Lehne. Coyote Girl. 60.
Leifs Saga. Hunt. 230.
Leiner. First Children. 235.
LeMieux. Do Angels Sing the Blues? 20.
Leonard. Erlbruch. 51.
Lester, A. Yikes! 131.
Lester, Jim. Fallout. 305.
Lester, Julius. Sam and the Tigers. 378.
Let One Hundred Flowers Bloom. Jicai. 303.
Let's Go Traveling in Mexico. Krupp. 304.
Letters From a World War II G.I. Greenberg.
14.
Levi. Cowboys of the Sky. 343.
Levin. Fire in the Wind. 165.
Levine. Fence Away from Freedom. 98.
. Tree That Would Not Die. 60.
402 
* THE BULLETIN
Levy, E. Drowned. 131.
Levy, M. Run for Your Life. 235.
Lewis, C. Lost. 231.
Lewis, J. Patrick. Riddle-icious. 343.
Life and Death of Crazy Horse. Freedman. 372.
Life around the Lake. Presilla. 350.
Lighthouses. Guiberson. 127.
Like Sisters on the Homefront. Williams-
Garcia. 34.
Lincoln. Pirate's Handbook. 61.
Lipizzaner Horses. Schrenk. 240.
Lisle. Message from the Match Girl. 98.
Little Cat and the Greedy Old Woman.
Rankin. 137.
Little Monster Did It! Cooper. 297.
Little Red Riding Hood. Ernst. 52.
Little. His Banner Over Me. 194.
Lives of the Artists. Krull. 96.
Livingston. Festivals. 305.
Locks, Crocs, & Skeeters. Parker. 348.
London, Jack. Call of the Wild. 344.
London, Jonathan. Red Wolf Country. 344.
.Where's Home? 61.
Looking for Jamie Bridger. Springer. 31.
Lost in Cyberspace. Peck. 24.
Lost. Johnson. 231.
Love. My Lone Star Summer. 378.
Lowry. Anastasia, Absolutely. 20.
Loyal Cat. Namioka. 100.
Luger. Bye, Bye, Bali Kai. 305.
Lussert. Christmas Visitor. 98.
Lynch. Blood Relations. 270.
. Dog Eat Dog. 270.
. Mick. 270.
. Slot Machine. 61.
Lyon. Day at Damp Camp. 306.
Macaulay. Shortcut. 21.
Maccarone. Monster Math. 190.
MacDonald. Cousin Ruth's Tooth. 344.
. Spider Who Created the World. 307.
MacGregor. Prophecy Rock. 99.
Mack. Hard Time. 293.
MacLachlan. What You Know First. 132.
Macy. Winning Ways. 380.
Maestro. Coming to America. 195.
. Voice of the People. 307.
Magic Moonberry Jump Ropes. Hru. 190.
Magic of Mozart. Switzer. 107.
Magic of Spider Woman. Duncan. 332.
Magic School Bus Inside a Hurricane. Cole.
49.
Magic Shell. Mohr. 134.
Magid Fasts for Ramadan. Matthews. 196.
Magyar. Leonard. 51.
Mahy. Other Side of Silence. 165.
. Tingleberries, Tuckertubs and
Telephones. 236.
Maizlish. Ring. 308.
Major. Silk Route. 21.
Man. Briggs. 185.
Margolin. Native Ways. 236.
Marian Wright Edelman. Siegel. 29.
Mark Twain. Cox. 11.
Market Day. Bunting. 294.
Markle. Outside and Inside Sharks. 380.
.Pioneering Frozen Worlds. 196.
Marrin. Plains Warrior. 308.
Marrying Malcolm Murgatroyd. Farrell. 124.
Martin, B. "Fire! Fire!" Said Mrs. McGuire.
271.
Martin, Jacqueline. Grandmother Bryant's
Pocket. 381.
Martin, Jane. Now I Will Never Leave the
Dinner Table. 271.
Martin, T. Obee & Mungedeech. 308.
Martorell. Song of el Coquf. 22.
Marx. Now I Will Never Leave the Dinner
Table. 271.
Mary Wolf. Grant. 90.
Mary. dePaola. 89.
Masks. Hatrick. 228.
Masters. Summer Song. 133.
Matas. After the War. 271.
Math Curse. Scieszka. 68.
Mathers. Kisses from Rosa. 166.
Matthews. Magid Fasts for Ramadan. 196.
Mayo. Smithsonian Book of the First Ladies.
346.
McCaffrey. Black Horses for the King. 306.
McCampbell. Bearing Witness. 66.
McCants. Much Ado about Prom Night. 21.
McCaughrean. Golden Hoard. 379.
McColley. Sun Dance. 132.
McCully. Bobbin Girl. 235.
. Pirate Queen. 62.
McCutcheon. Grandfather's Christmas
Camp. 98.
McGinnis. If Daddy Only Knew Me. 132.
McGirr. Out of the Dump. 225.
McGraw. Moorchild. 345.
McGuire. What Goes Around Comes
Around. 99.
McKay. Dog Friday. 62.
McKeever. Letters From a World War II G.I.
14.
. Pioneer Woman's Memoir. 14.
McKissack. Rebels Against Slavery. 345.
. Red-Tail Angels. 195.
McLerran. Ghost Dance. 100.
. Year of the Ranch. 270.
McMillan. Grandfather's Trolley. 133.
McMullan. If You Were My Bunny. 379.
Mead. Junebug. 133.
Meddaugh. Hog-Eye. 63.
Medearis. Too Much Talk. 134.
. Treemonisha. 196.
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 403
Meet Me in the Magic Kingdom. Jakobsen.
94.
Melody for Nora. O'Sullivan. 101.
Meltzer. Hold Your Horses! 134.
Mennyms Under Siege. Waugh. 246.
Merbreier. Television. 197.
Merriam. Inner City Mother Goose. 381.
Mertins. Ginkgo and Moon. 346.
Message from the Match Girl. Lisle. 98.
Metzger. Ellen's Case. 100.
Meyer. In a Different Light. 272.
. Gideon's People. 309.
Miami Giant. Yorinks. 111.
Mick. Lynch. 270.
Middle Passage. Feelings. 125.
Midget. Bowler. 85.
Midnight Clear. Paterson. 102.
Midnight Rider. Ruepp. 67.
Midsummer Night's Dream. Shakespeare. 385.
Migrant Worker. Hoyt-Goldsmith. 229.
Miklowitz. Past Forgiving. 22.
Miller. Now I'm Big. 236.
Mills. Dinah Forever. 100.
Milton. Comus. 266.
Minahan. Abigail's Drum. 198.
Minty. Schroeder. 314.
Miro in the Kingdom of the Sun. Kurtz. 269.
Miss Piggy's Night Out. Hunter. 58.
Mohr. Magic Shell. 134.
. Song of el Coqui. 22.
Mommies Don't Get Sick! Hafner. 90.
Mona Lisa. Galli. 333.
Monday's Troll. Prelutsky. 239.
Monster Bugs. Penner. 313.
Monster Math. Maccarone. 190.
Montijo. Native Ways. 236.
Moon Dance. Rostkowski. 27.
Moon of Two Dark Horses. Keehn. 59.
Moorchild. McGraw. 345.
Moore. Under the Mermaid Angel. 135.
More Than a Name. Ransom. 26.
More than Anything Else. Bradby. 47.
Morgenstern. Christian Morgenstern. 23.
Mori. One Bird. 166.
Morpurgo. Ghost of Grania O'Malley. 309.
.Wreck of the Zanzibar. 135.
Morressy. Juggler. 272.
Morris. Shoes Shoes Shoes. 63.
.Weddings. 63.
Most Wonderful Movie in the World. Ford.
332.
Mother Jones. Kraft. 18.
Mouse Bride. Cowley. 87.
Mouse Chase. Sathre. 139.
Mr. Potter's Pet. King-Smith. 231.
Mrs. Rose's Garden. Greenstein. 334.
Much Ado about Prom Night. McCants. 21.
Muntean. Kermit and Robin's Scary Story. 58.
Murphy, J. Young Patriot. 347.
Murphy, S. Give Me Half. 310.
.Ready, Set, Hop! 311.
. Best Bug Parade. 310.
Murphy, V. Across the Plains in the Donner
Party. 347.
My Brother is from Outer Space. Ostrow.
312.
My Brother, Ant. Byars. 185.
My Crayons Talk. Hubbard. 302.
My Dream of Martin Luther King. Ringgold.
169.
My Elephant Can Do Almost Anything. de
Vries. 330.
My Father's Scar. Cart. 258.
My Fellow Americans. Provensen. 168.
My Life Among the Aliens. Gauthier. 334.
My Lone Star Summer. Love. 378.
My Mexico-Mexico Mfo. Johnston. 376.
My Own Two Feet. Cleary. 10.
Myers, A. Fire in the Hills. 273.
Myers, E. Hostage. 198.
Myers, P. Dear Oklahoma City, Get Well
Soon. 351.
Myers, W. Glorious Angels. 64.
. How Mr. Monkey Saw the Whole
World. 348.
. Shadow of the Red Moon. 135.
. Smiffy Blue. 310.
Naden. White House Kids. 7.
Namioka. Loyal Cat. 100.
Napoli. Bravest Thing. 64.
SZel. 381.
Naptime, Laptime. Spinelli. 171.
Nash. Custard the Dragon and the Wicked
Knight. 273.
Native Ways. Margolin. 236.
Nature of the Beast. Carr. 258.
Naylor. Alice in Lace. 273.
. Being Danny's Dog. 166.
. Ice. 101.
Near Myths. Kraus. 377.
Nell Nugget and the Cow Caper. Enderle.
299.
Nellie Bishop. Clark. 186.
Nellie Bly's Monkey. Blos. 293.
Nerlove. Flowers on the Wall. 237.
Ness. Ocean of Story. 311.
Neufeld. Gaps in Stone Walls. 274.
Newcome. Toddlerobics. 198.
Newcomers to America. Greenberg. 374.
Newt. Novak. 198.
Next Year in Jerusalem. Schwartz. 170.
Niagara Falls. Fisher. 370.
Nicholson. Mona Lisa. 333.
Night Flight. Hausman. 337.
Night Is Like an Animal. Whitman. 74.
Night Terrors. Duncan. 367.
404 
* THE BULLETIN
Night the Heads Came. Sleator. 243.
Night Thunder and the Queen of the Wild
Horses. Reiser. 168.
Night Visitors. Young. 173.
Nirgiotis. Volcanoes. 382.
No Friend of Mine. Turnbull. 72.
No More Water in the Tub! Arnold. 5.
Nolan. Send Me Down a Miracle. 382.
Noticing Paradise. Wittlinger. 145.
Novak. Newt. 198.
Now I Will Never Leave the Dinner Table.
Martin. 271.
Now I'm Big. Miller. 236.
Numbskulls. Taylor. 141.
Nursery Tales Around the World. Sierra. 204.
Nye. I Feel a Little Jumpy Around You. 311.
. Tree Is Older Than You Are. 100.
O. J. Simpson Trial. Aaseng. 218.
O'Connor. Bad-Luck Penny. 368.
O'Sullivan. Melody for Nora. 101.
Obee & Mungedeech. Martin. 308.
Ocean of Story. Ness. 311.
October 45. Besson. 184.
Odd Man Out. Radley. 26.
Odysseus and the Cyclops. Hutton. 94.
Officer Buckle and Gloria. Rathmann. 66.
Ogbo. Onyefulu. 274.
Oh, Grow Up! Heide. 229.
Old Bag of Bones. Stevens. 315.
Old Pig. Wild. 247.
Older Brother, Younger Brother. Jaffe. 17.
Oliver & Amanda and the Big Snow. Van
Leeuwen. 153.
On the Wing. Florian. 263.
On Winter's Wind. Hermes. 92.
Once on This Island. Whelan. 109.
Once upon a Picnic. French. 264.
One April Morning. Lamb. 342.
One Bird. Mori. 166.
One Yellow Daffodil. Adler. 118.
One-Eyed Giant. Rockwell. 278.
Onions and Garlic. Kimmel. 341.
Onyefulu. Ogbo. 274.
Orgel. Princess and the God. 199.
Ornament Tree. Thesman. 245.
Osofsky. Free to Dream. 348.
Ostrow. My Brother is from Outer Space.
312.
Otfinoski. Kid's Guide to Money. 275.
Other Side of Silence. Mahy. 165.
Our Beckoning Borders. Ashabranner. 292.
Our House. Conrad. 123.
Ousseimi. Caught in the Crossfire. 102.
Out of the Ark. Ganeri. 264.
Out of the Dump. Franklin. 225.
Out of Time. Cooney. 296.
Outcast of Redwall. Jacques. 230.
Outside and Inside Sharks. Markle. 380.
Owen Foote, Second Grade Strongman.
Greene. 227.
Pamela's First Musical. Wasserstein. 246.
Pandell. Learning from the Dalai Lama. 199.
Papa Gatto. Sanderson. 139.
Paperboy. Kroeger. 232.
Paperboy. Pilkey. 239.
Parallel Journeys. Ayer. 5.
Parker. Locks, Crocs, & Skeeters. 348.
Partners. Waggoner. 32.
Past Forgiving. Miklowitz. 22.
Patent. West by Covered Wagon. 102.
Paterson. Angel & the Donkey. 275.
.Midnight Clear. 102.
Patrick Doyle Is Full of Blarney. Armstrong.
256.
Paul. Seasons Sewn. 312.
Paulsen. Brian's Winter. 199.
.Rifle. 64.
Pausewang. Fall-Out. 23.
Paw. Prior. 25.
Paxton. Story of the Tooth Fairy. 237.
Peck. Lost in Cyberspace. 24.
Pelican Chorus. Lear. 19.
Pellowski. Art of Making Comic Books. 200.
Penelope. Farmer. 369.
Pennebaker. Don't Think Twice. 275.
Penner. Monster Bugs. 313.
People Apart. Kenna. 164.
Period Book. Gravelle. 373.
Perkins. Home Lovely. 24.
Perl. Four Perfect Pebbles. 349.
Perry. If... 167.
Petach. Goldilocks and the Three Hares. 167.
Pettit. Time to Fight Back. 238.
Pevear. First, Second. 192.
Pevsner. Would My Fortune Cookie Lie? 238.
Pfeffer. Sara Kate Saves the World. 24.
.Trouble with Wishes. 349.
Philbrick. Fire Pony. 383.
Phoenix, Upside Down. Scarboro. 352.
Pierce, R. Oh, Grow Up! 229.
Pierce, T. Emperor Mage. 25.
Pilkey. Hallo-Wiener. 65.
. Paperboy. 239.
Pinkney. JoJo's Flying Side Kick. 136.
Pioneer Woman's Memoir. Greenberg. 14.
Pioneering Frozen Worlds. Markle. 196.
Pirate Queen. McCully. 62.
Pirate's Handbook. Lincoln. 61.
Place to Call Home. Koller. 59.
Plains Warrior. Marrin. 308.
Planet Earth/Inside Out. Gibbons. 14.
Plummer. Unlikely Romance of Kate
Bjorkman. 103.
Pohrt. Coyote Goes Walking. 136.
Polacco. Aunt Chip and the Great Triple Creek
Dam Affair. 383.
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 405
Pollack. Journey Out. 239.
Pollock. Turkey Girl. 276.
Poncet. Antarctic Encounter. 25.
Pony Express! Kroll. 268.
Popov. Why? 383.
Popposites. Yoon. 390.
Poppy. Avi. 154.
Porte. Black Elephant with a Brown Ear (in
Alabama). 350.
Porter. Leonard. 51.
Portrait of a Farm Family. Bial. 46.
Prater. Greatest Show on Earth. 65.
Precious Gift. Jackson. 339.
Prelutsky. Monday's Troll. 239.
Presilla. Life Around the Lake. 350.
Prietita and the Ghost Woman. Anzalduia.
255.
Princess and the God. Orgel. 199.
Princess Nevermore. Regan. 103.
Printer's Apprentice. Krensky. 19.
Prior. Paw. 25.
Promised Land. Holland. 267.
Prophecy Rock. MacGregor. 99.
Prose. Dybbuk. 276.
Provensen. My Fellow Americans. 168.
Psychic Connections. Duncan. 13.
Pullman. Golden Compass. 277.
Puppy Fat. Gleitzman. 372.
Puppy Sister. Hinton. 92.
Purely Rosie Pearl. Cochrane. 296.
Qualey. Hometown. 137.
Quarter from the Tooth Fairy. Holtzman. 190.
Quattlebaum. Jazz, Pizzazz, and the Silver
Threads. 200.
Radley. Odd Man Out. 26.
Raggly Scraggly No-Soap No-Scrub Girl.
Birchman. 6.
Rainbow Bridge. Wood. 145.
Rankin. Little Cat and the Greedy Old
Woman. 137.
Ransom. More Than a Name. 26.
.When the Whippoorwill Calls. 137.
Raschka. Can't Sleep. 65.
Rathmann. Officer Buckle and Gloria. 66.
Rats Saw God. Thomas. 317.
Re-zoom. Banyai. 155.
Ready, Set, Hop! Murphy. 311.
Real Christmas This Year. Williams. 110.
Real Johnny Appleseed. Lawlor. 97.
Rebel. Schoenherr. 140.
Rebels Against Slavery. McKissack. 345.
Red Light, Green Light, Mama and Me. Best.
6.
Red Racer. Wood. 389.
Red Wolf Country. London. 344.
Red-Tail Angels. McKissack. 195.
Reed. Across the Plains in the Donner Party.
347.
Reef. John Steinbeck. 239.
Regan. Princess Nevermore. 103.
Reiser. Night Thunder and the Queen of the
Wild Horses. 168.
Reisfeld. This Is the Sound. 384.
Remembering Mog. Rodowsky. 201.
Rhymes for Annie Rose. Hughes. 93.
Ribbons. Yep. 210.
Rich. Leonard. 51.
Richardson. First Came the Owl. 384.
Riddle-icious. Lewis. 343.
Riding Silver Star. Cole. 222.
Rifle. Paulsen. 64.
Riley. Television. 197.
Rinaldi. Keep Smiling Through. 277.
. Secret of Sarah Revere. 168.
Ring. Maizlish. 308.
Ringgold. My Dream of Martin Luther King.
169.
Roach. In the Days of the Salem Witchcraft
Trials. 351.
Roberts. Disney's James and the Giant Peach.
331.
Robinet. If You Please, President Lincoln. 27.
Robinson. Gateway. 277.
Robot King. Selznick. 69.
Rochman. Bearing Witness. 66.
Rocklin. How Much Is That Guinea Pig in
the Window? 190.
Rockwell. One-Eyed Giant. 278.
Rodeo Clown. Greenberg. 15.
Rodowsky. Remembering Mog. 201.
Roll. Psychic Connections. 13.
Roman Numerals I to MM. Geisert. 226.
Room for a Stranger. Turnbull. 207.
Root. Aunt Nancy and Old Man Trouble.
240.
Rose Horse. Rose. 104.
Rose. Rose Horse. 104.
Rosen. School for Pompey Walker. 170.
Rosenberg. Carousel. 138.
Rosenberg. Heart & Soul. 313.
Roses Are Pink, Your Feet Really Stink.
deGroat. 187.
Ross, J. Dear Oklahoma City, Get Well Soon.
351.
Ross, S. Fact or Fiction: Witches. 314.
Rostkowski. Moon Dance. 27.
Rothenberg. Inside-Out Grandma. 104.
Rotner. Action Alphabet. 385.
Rubinstein. Galax-Arena. 67.
Ruepp. Midnight Rider. 67.
Run for Your Life. Levy. 235.
Running Out of Time. Haddix. 90.
Running the Road to ABC. Lauture. 233.
Runs With Horses. Burks. 121.
Ryan. Trouble With Perfect. 105.
Ryder. Earthdance. 385.
406 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Rylant. Dog Heaven. 67.
. Gooseberry Park. 201.
.Van Gogh Cafe. 28.
Sachs. Ghosts in the Family. 138.
Sacred Places. Yolen. 390.
Saint Francis. Wildsmith. 389.
Sally Ann Thunder Ann Whirlwind Crockett.
Kellogg. 18.
Sam and the Tigers. Lester. 378.
Samantha. Walsh. 355.
San Souci. Faithful Friend. 28.
. House in the Sky. 201.'
.Kate Shelley. 139.
Sanderson. Papa Gatto. 139.
Sara Kate Saves the World. Pfeffer. 24.
Sarah Anne Hartford. Duey. 297.
Sathre. Mouse Chase. 139.
Saul. Someplace Else. 68.
Say. Stranger in the Mirror. 105.
Scarboro. Phoenix, Upside Down. 352.
Schecter. Big Idea. 278.
Schertle. Down the Road. 139.
Schlissel. Black Frontiers. 170.
Schnur. Beyond Providence. 279.
.Tie Man's Miracle. 140.
Schoenherr. Rebel. 140.
Scholastic Dictionary of Idioms. Terban. 387.
School for Pompey Walker. Rosen. 170.
School Mouse. King-Smith. 165.
Schreiber. Slower Than a Snail. 190.
Schrenk. Arabian Horses. 240.
. Lipizzaner Horses. 240.
Schroeder. Minty. 314.
Schur. When I Left My Village. 202.
Schwartz, C. Journey Out. 239.
Schwartz, H. Next Year in Jerusalem. 170.
Scieszka. Math Curse. 68.
Scott. Brave as a Mountain Lion. 202.
Sea Monkey Summer. Ware. 245.
Sea Turtles. Gibbons. 91.
Sea Watch. Yolen. 357.
Seasons Sewn. Paul. 312.
Second Daughter. Walter. 319.
Secret of Sarah Revere. Rinaldi. 168.
Seibert. Toad Overload. 203.
Selznick. Robot King. 69.
Semel. Flying Lessons. 105.
Send Me Down a Miracle. Nolan. 382.
Sensational TV. Day. 187.
Seven Ravens. Grimm. 159.
Severance. Winston Churchill. 241.
Sewall. Thunder from the Clear Sky. 69.
Seymour. Gulls of the Edmund Fitzgerald.
241.
Shadow of the Red Moon. Myers. 135.
Shaker Children. Thorne-Thomsen. 388.
Shakespeare. Midsummer Night's Dream. 385.
. Tempest. 386.
Shannon. Tomorrow's Alphabet. 279.
Shaw. Going Home to Nicodemus. 48.
Shecter. Great-Uncle Alfred Forgets. 203.
Shelter Folks. Kroll. 232.
Sherman, C. Eli and the Swamp Man. 279.
Sherman, J. Trickster Tales. 352.
Shimmy Shimmy Shimmy Like My Sister
Kate. Giovanni. 334.
Shin's Tricycle. Kodama. 130.
Shoes Shoes Shoes. Morris. 63.
Shortcut. Macaulay. 21.
Shreve. Zoe and Columbo. 203.
Shulevitz. Golden Goose. 171.
Sid and Sam. Buck. 365.
Siegel. Marian Wright Edelman. 29.
Sierra. Good Night, Dinosaurs. 242.
.House that Drac Built. 70.
.Nursery Tales Around the World.
204.
.Wiley and the Hairy Man. 242.
Silk Route. Major. 21.
Silverstein. Falling Up. 353.
Simmons-Lynch. Tom. 245.
Simon. Topsy-Turvies. 280.
Simonson. I Hate Superman! 223.
Simple Signs. Wheeler. 144.
Sip of Aesop. Yolen. 77.
Sisulu. Day Gogo Went to Vote. 242.
Six Servants. Grimm. 335.
Skeleton Woman. Villoldo. 73.
Skinner. Wrecker. 29.
Skurzynski. Cyberstorm. 29.
Sky in Silver Lace. Klein. 194.
Sky. Ippisch. 303.
Sleator. Dangerous Wishes. 70.
.Night the Heads Came. 243.
Sleeping Dogs. Hartnett. 160.
Slot Machine. Lynch. 61.
Slow Dance Heart Break Blues. Adoff. 44.
Slower Than a Snail. Schreiber. 190.
Slumber Party! Caseley. 221.
Smalls. Ebony Sea. 204.
Smidt. Dancing on the Bridge at Avignon.
172.
Smiffy Blue. Myers. 310.
Smith, C. Let One Hundred Flowers Bloom.
303.
Smith, J. Wizard and Wart at Sea. 30.
Smith, R. Journey of the Red Wolf. 205.
Smithsonian Book of the First Ladies. Mayo.
346.
Snake-Stone. Doherty. 224.
Snedden. Yuck! 353.
Sneve. Cherokees. 315.
Snowballs. Ehlert. 89.
Snowbound. Lavender. 343.
Snyder. Trespassers. 70.
Somebody's New Pajamas. Jackson. 191.
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 407
Someplace Else. Saul. 68.
Someplace to Go. Testa. 244.
Something Very Sorry. Bohlmeijer. 219.
Song of el Coqui. Mohr. 22.
Song of Mu Lan. Lee. 164.
Sophie's Lucky. King-Smith. 193.
SOS Titanic. Bunting. 257.
Soto, Gary. Boys at Work. 30.
Soto, Gloria. Life Around the Lake. 350.
Soulfire. Hewett. 338.
Sound of Leaves. Blegvad. 292.
Speregen. Wax Museum. 368.
Spider Who Created the World. MacDonald.
307.
Spinelli, E. Naptime, Laptime. 171.
Spinelli, J. Crash. 315.
Spires. With One White Wing. 205.
Spirit of the Maya. Garcia. 126.
Spoon for Every Bite. Hayes. 266.
Springer. Looking for Jamie Bridger. 31.
Spud in Winter. Doyle. 367.
Spud Sweetgrass. Doyle. 367.
Spyglass. Deschamps. 12.
Stanley, D. Elena. 243.
. True Adventure of Daniel Hall. 106.
Stanley, J. Big Annie of Calumet. 386.
Star Hatchling. Bechard. 155.
Starfarer's Dozen. Stearns. 140.
Stearns. Starfarer's Dozen. 140.
Steig. Toy Brother. 205.
Step by Wicked Step. Fine. 299.
Stevens. Old Bag of Bones. 315.
Stevenson, J. I Had a Lot of Wishes. 71.
Stevenson, R. Bottle Imp. 206.
. Treasure Island. 341.
Sticks. Bauer. 292.
Stories from the Classical Ballet. Hollyer. 190.
Stories Huey Tells. Cameron. 121.
Stories on Stone. Dewey. 262.
Story of the Tooth Fairy. Paxton. 237.
Stowaway. Gregory. 55.
Strange and Distant Shore. Ashabranner. 364.
Stranger in the Mirror. Say. 105.
Strauss. Guardian of the Hills. 106.
Strete. How the Indians Bought the Farm. 387.
. World in Grandfather's Hands. 71.
Sturges. What's That Sound, Woolly Bear?
316.
Success of the Navajo Arts and Crafts
Enterprise. Trahant. 354.
Suitcase of Seaweed. Wong. 282.
Summer of the Great Divide. High. 375.
Summer Song. Masters. 133.
Sun Dance. McColley. 132.
Swanson. Buffalo Sunrise. 353.
Sweeney. Free Fall. 316.
Switzer. Magic of Mozart. 107.
Sykes. This and That. 244.
Szablya. Fall of the Red Star. 206.
Takaya. Chibi. 184.
Taking Flight. Van Meter. 107.
Taking It. Cadnum. 8.
Tales from the Brothers Grimm and the
Sisters Weird. Vande Velde. 73.
Tales of St. Patrick. Dunlop. 298.
Talking to Angels. Watson. 355.
Talking with Artists. Cummings. 50.
Tamar. Junkyard Dog. 31.
Tanya's Reunion. Flournoy. 53.
Tapenum's Day. Waters. 246.
Taylor, T. Bomb. 171.
Taylor, W. Numbskulls. 141.
Television. Merbreier. 197.
Tempest. Shakespeare. 386.
Temple Cat. Clements. 186.
Temple. Beduins' Gazelle. 244.
Terban. Scholastic Dictionary of Idioms. 387.
Tessler. Nell Nugget and the Cow Caper.
299.
Testa. Dancing Pink Flamingos. 172.
. Someplace to Go. 244.
Tex the Cowboy. Garland. 13.
Theodoric's Rainbow. Kramer. 194.
There's a Wolf in the Classroom! Weide. 144.
Thesman. Ornament Tree. 245.
Thief of Hearts. Yep. 34.
This and That. Sykes. 244.
This Is the Sound. Reisfeld. 384.
This Is the Way We Eat Our Lunch. Baer. 6.
Thomas. Rats Saw God. 317.
Thompson, C. How to Live Forever. 354.
Thompson, J. Trials of Molly Sheldon. 172.
Thorne-Thomsen. Shaker Children. 388.
Thread of Life. Vittorini. 108.
Three Lives of Harris Harper. Cullen. 260.
Thunder from the Clear Sky. Sewall. 69.
Tie Man's Miracle. Schnur. 140.
Timber! Jaspersohn. 340.
Time for Dancing. Hurwin. 58.
Time of Angels. Hesse. 160.
Time to Fight Back. Pettit. 238.
Tingleberries, Tuckertubs and Telephones.
Mahy. 236.
Titanic Crossing. Williams. 33.
To Hold This Ground. Beller. 119.
Toad Overload. Seibert. 203.
Toddlerobics. Newcome. 198.
Toll Bridge. Chambers. 9.
Tom. Torres. 245.
Tomorrow's Alphabet. Shannon. 279.
Too Much Talk. Medearis. 134.
Tooth Fairy. Collington. 86.
Topsy-Turvies. Simon. 280.
Toriseva. Becoming Ballet. 107.
Torres. Tom. 245.
Toy Brother. Steig. 205.
408 
* THE BULLETIN
Tractor. Brown. 48.
Trahant. Success of the Navajo Arts and
Crafts Enterprise. 354.
Train to Somewhere. Bunting. 221.
Treasure Island. Stevenson. 341.
Tree Is Older Than You Are. Nye. 100.
Tree That Would Not Die. Levine. 60.
Treemonisha. Medearis. 196.
Tree's Tale. Carrier. 366.
Trespassers. Snyder. 70.
Trials of Molly Sheldon. Thompson. 172.
Trickster Tales. Sherman. 352.
Trouble with Perfect. Ryan. 105.
Trouble with Wishes. Pfeffer. 349.
Trout Summer. Conly. 156.
True Adventure of Daniel Hall. Stanley.
106.
Truly Grim Tales. Galloway. 158.
Tuck in the Pool. Weston. 109.
Tucker, P. There's a Wolf in the Classroom!
144.
Tucker, T. Brainstorm! 71.
Turkey Girl. Pollock. 276.
Turnbull. No Friend of Mine. 72.
.Room for a Stranger. 207.
Turner, A. Dust for Dinner. 31.
.Elfsong. 141.
Turner, M. Instead of Three Wishes. 72.
Tusk and Stone. Bosse. 120.
Two Bad Boys. Haley. 335.
Two Mrs. Gibsons. Igus. 303.
Under the Mermaid Angel. Moore. 135.
Unfinished Dreams. Zalben. 391.
Unlikely Romance of Kate Bjorkman.
Plummer. 103.
Untold Story of Snow White. Heller. 338.
Updike. Helpful Alphabet of Friendly
Objects. 142.
Ure. Children Next Door. 317.
Us and Them. Carnes. 366.
Utterly Yours, Booker Jones. Duffey. 51.
Vail. Daring to be Abigail. 207.
Valgardson. Winter Rescue. 142.
Van Allsburg. Bad Day at Riverbend. 32.
van der Linde. From Mustangs to Movie
Stars. 142.
Van Dijk. Damned Strong Love. 32.
Van Gogh Cafe. Rylant. 28.
Van Laan. La Boda. 318.
Van Leeuwen. Across the Wide Dark Sea. 73.
_ .Blue Sky, Butterfly. 207.
.Oliver & Amanda and the Big Snow.
153.
Van Meter. Taking Flight. 107.
Vande Velde. Tales from the Brothers Grimm
and the Sisters Weird. 73.
Villoldo. Skeleton Woman. 73.
Violence in Schools. Day. 329.
Viorst. Alexander, Who's Not (Do You Hear
Me? I Mean It!) Going to Move. 74.
Vittorini. Thread of Life. 108.
Voetberg. I Am a Home Schooler. 143.
Vogel. Great Midwest Flood. 143.
Voice of the People. Maestro. 307.
Voigt. Bad Girls. 280.
Volcanoes. Nirgiotis. 382.
Volk. October 45. 184.
Vos. Dancing on the Bridge at Avignon. 172.
Waddell. Kidnapping of Suzie Q. 208.
Waggoner. Partners. 32.
Wagons West! Gerrard. 189.
Wahl. Cats and Robbers. 74.
Wakin. How TV Changed America's Mind.
388.
Waking Upside Down. Heckman. 302.
Wallace. Cousins in the Castle. 281.
Wallner. First Air Voyage in the United
States. 318.
Walsh. Samantha. 355.
Walter. Second Daughter. 319.
Walters. Flint's Rock. 301.
Ware. Sea Monkey Summer. 245.
Wasserstein. Pamela's First Musical. 246.
Water Brought Us. Branch. 85.
Waterford. Parallel Journeys. 5.
Watermelon Day. Appelt. 326.
Waters. Tapenum's Day. 246.
Watson. Talking to Angels. 355.
Watsons Go to Birmingham--1963. Curtis.
157.
Waugh. Mennyms Under Siege. 246.
Wax Museum. Speregen. 368.
We Are Witnesses. Boas. 7.
"We Have Conquered Pain." Fradin. 333.
We Shall Not Be Moved. Dash. 187.
Weather Eye. Howarth. 93.
Weaver. Farm Team. 32.
Weddings. Morris. 63.
Weide. There's a Wolf in the Classroom! 144.
Wells. Edward In Deep Water. 108.
. Edward Unready for School. 108.
. Edward's Overwhelming Overnight.
108.
.Lassie Come-Home. 208.
West by Covered Wagon. Patent. 102.
Westall. Gulf. 208.
Weston. Tuck in the Pool. 109.
Wexler. Everyday Mysteries. 33.
What Do Authors Do? Christelow. 86.
What Goes Around Comes Around.
McGuire. 99.
What Happened in Mr. Fisher's Room.
Hopper. 57.
What Jamie Saw. Coman. 123.
What You Know First. MacLachlan. 132.
What's Alive? Zoehfeld. 211.
JULY/AUGUST 1996 
* 
409
What's That Sound, Woolly Bear? Sturges.
316.
Wheeler. Simple Signs. 144.
Whelan. Once on This Island. 109.
When Birds Could Talk and Bats Could Sing.
Hamilton. 336.
When Dinosaurs Die. Brown. 220.
When I Left My Village. Schur. 202.
When I Was Your Age. Ehrlich. 263.
When Jane-Marie Told My Secret. Willner-
Pardo. 75.
When Nobody's Home. Gorog. 264.
When Pigs Fly. Wood. 110.
When Plague Strikes. Giblin. 54.
When Someone in the Family Drinks Too
Much. Langsen. 233.
When the Goblins Came Knocking. Hines.
16.
When the Whippoorwill Calls. Ransom. 137.
When the Wind Stops. Zolotow. 36.
When Willard Met Babe Ruth. Hall. 336.
Where Once There Was a Wood. Fleming.
300.
Where's Home? London. 61.
Where's the Fly? Cohen. 259.
Wherever Home Begins. Janeczko. 94.
White House Kids. Blue. 7.
White Socks Only. Coleman. 259.
White. Belle Prater's Boy. 281.
Whitman. Night Is Like an Animal. 74.
Who Killed Mr. Chippendale? Glenn. 372.
Who Owns the Cow? Clements. 49.
Who Talks Funny? Cox. 10.
Why? Popov. 383.
Wicked Jack. Wooldridge. 145.
Wild Hunt. Yolen. 35.
Wild. Old Pig. 247.
Wildsmith. Saint Francis. 389.
Wiley and the Hairy Man. Sierra. 242.
Will You Be My Brussels Sprout? Frank. 371.
Willard. Gutenberg's Gift. 109.
Willey. Facing the Music. 281.
Willhoite. Daddy's Wedding. 356.
Williams, B. Titanic Crossing. 33.
Williams, K. Real Christmas This Year. 110.
Williams, M. King Arthur and the Knights of
the Round Table. 247.
Williams, N. Kwanzaa Celebration Pop-Up
Book. 110.
Williams-Garcia. Like Sisters on the
Homefront. 34.
Williamson. Emma & Mommy Talk to God.
282.
Willner-Pardo. When Jane-Marie Told My
Secret. 75.
Wilma Unlimited. Krull. 269.
Wilson, Jacqueline. Elsa, Star of the Shelter!
209.
Wilson, Janet. Ingenious Mr. Peale. 356.
Wilson, S. Good Zap, Little Grog. 144.
Winds of Mars. Hoover. 16.
Winning Ways. Macy. 380.
Winston Churchill. Severance. 241.
Winter Rescue. Valgardson. 142.
Winter. Cowboy Charlie. 75.
With Needle and Thread. Bial. 184.
With One White Wing. Spires. 205.
Wittlinger. Noticing Paradise. 145.
Wizard and Wart at Sea. Smith. 30.
Wolkstein. Esther's Story. 209.
Women of the Lights. Fleming. 370.
Wong. Suitcase of Seaweed. 282.
Wood, A. Rainbow Bridge. 145.
. Red Racer. 389.
Wood, J. When Pigs Fly. 110.
Wood, T. Iditarod Dream. 282.
Wooldridge. Wicked Jack. 145.
World in Grandfather's Hands. Strete. 71.
Would My Fortune Cookie Lie? Pevsner. 238.
Wreck of the Zanzibar. Morpurgo. 135.
Wrecker. Skinner. 29.
Wrede. Book of Enchantments. 319.
Wright. Haunted Summer. 282.
Wyeth. Ginger Brown: Too Many Houses.
390.
Wyllie. Flea in the Ear. 283.
Wynne-Jones. Book of Changes. 75.
Year of the Ranch. McLerran. 270.
Yep. Ribbons. 210.
. Thief of Hearts. 34.
Yikes! Lester. 131.
Yolen. Sacred Places. 390.
SSea Watch. 357.
. Sip of Aesop. 77.
.Wild Hunt. 35.
Yoon. Popposites. 390.
Yorinks. Miami Giant. 111.
You Want Women to Vote, Lizzie Stanton?
Fritz. 53.
Young Cam Jansen and the Missing Cookie.
Adler. 291.
Young Patriot. Murphy. 347.
Young. Cat and Rat. 111.
. Donkey Trouble. 147.
. Night Visitors. 173.
Yuck! Snedden. 353.
Zalben. Unfinished Dreams. 391.
Zeinert. Across the Plains in the Donner
Party. 347.
Zel. Napoli. 381.
Zindel. Doom Stone. 210.
Zoe and Columbo. Shreve. 203.
Zoehfeld. How Mountains Are Made. 36.
._ What's Alive? 211.
Zolotow. When the Wind Stops. 36.
Zoo-Looking. Fox. 371.
, "Glitters with thte
intelligence and skill of
a gifted storyteller.,f*
by FRANCES TEMPLE
*"(The year is 1302 and Halima, the
gazelle of the title, is betrthe to her
cousin 
Atiyah. But their happinss is
postponed [whe] 
a powerful kins-
man sends Atiah to Fez [to] study
the Koran.... 
A lyrical final offering:
from a gifted writer."
-
Schoo Library Journzal, starred reviewl
* "The barren desert 'san sea' of th
Middle East lays backdrop to
romane, intrgue an advenur in
this sequl to The? Ramay Scallo."
- Pblishers Weelstadrred revie
* "Teml's evocatio of th Bedin 
-
a grand, geerusnation~s 
of poets
and storytllrs 
- is easily 
as vivid
as the storylne.
- Kiku Revew*,pointer reie
Ages 12 up
TR1.50531-09519- 
RLB $16.99 0531-086-
Orhad Bfooks
A roier Comi
Highlighted in ALA Booklist
Si 
alitd 
a 
i 
AL 
ad 
s
"An absolutely riveting story about family and the often
destructive bonds that link individuals to a community.
Fifteen-year-old Mick is increasingly repelled by [the values
of his working-class Irish neighborhood]...personified by
his alcoholic parents [and] his vicious, bigoted older brother...
[as] he gains grudging acceptance from Latino classmates.
With underpinnings of violence; edgy characters; and rough
street language, [tension is eased with] scenes that glow with
humor and [characters] that readers will miss. The trilogy will
practically sell itself in booktalks, with even reluctant readers
finding the volumes hard to put down." -Booklist
MICK (Book 1) 0-06-025397-5 LB; 0-06-447121-7 PB
BLOOD RELATIONS (Book 2) 0-06-025399-1 LB; 0-06-447122-5 PB
DOG EAT DOG (Book 3) 0-06-027210-4 LB; 0-06-447123-3 PB
Each: Ages 12 up. $13.89 LB; $4.50 PB
t HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
_E
:hool Library journal
SLEAVE E
1 A mul 
1
TAILL
S 
by Jane Reac
and Patri ci
illustrated by 1
"Patty Jane Pepper, heroine of
Now Everybody Really Hates /
is back with more amusing
stream-of-consciousness
rantings.This time, she is
confined to the dinner table,
accused by her baby-sitting c
Joy, of stuffing her spinach in
swallow a bit of the dreaded
excused. As she sits, determ
plots to rid herself and her ft
imagining] life without her sil
admits that Joy might be mis:
cartoonlike illustrations enha
by the text. Any child who h
dinner table will empathize v
Ages 4-8. $14.95 TR 0-06-024794-0;
Also by Jane Read
NOW EVERYBO
Full-color pi
Ages 4-8. $14.95 TR 0-06-
$4.95 I
* tHarperCollins
MA 
_ 
_ 
rz An 
,rp 
e 
^_J Ci.
UC 
£41U ~ JJIUl JL1CCtI LNCW 
[UIA(, 
IN I 
IUULL~c 
'
i44r' 
1"---
I
v
'Abigail is determined
to 'reinvent' herself
during summer camp
and become the bold,
brave girl she thinks
her father, whose
death still haunts her,
wanted her to be.·..
As in Wonder an Ever
After, Vil 
proe she
know aboutkids",
-
Booklist*
* ".The dialogue isa
fresh and genuine.:
Readers will be draw
to the novl's auten-
titcity and will find
themselves empatiz
ing with Abby ye
laughing at her
~escapades."' -- Scboo
L~ibrary Jurnal stre
* "what st~ars ou a
a very funny·
Danzigerequ 
camp
stor turns into an-
A
-*- 
School LibraryJournal star + Kirkus Reviews pointer
Story and full-color pictures by
William Steig
Yorick Bede, a budding Middle Ages alchemist, considers his
kid brother a "first-rate pain in the pants." But when Yorick
concocts a new potion-and ends up the size of a sausage-the
brother he disdains is the only one who can help him...
"A knee-slappingly funny book that will appeal to a broad
range of readers."-The Horn Book
"Readers will delight in Steig's droll expressions, both visual
and verbal, but the subtle lesson about brotherly love will not
hc Inet am i 
th rld 
t 
rm 
r 
" 
ntnra-n 
n 
-
__ Qr r
"Another [Steig] crowd
pleaser."-Kirkus Revie
"This book has enough
child appeal [for] any
storyhour audience."
-The Bulletin of 
'
the Center for
Children's Books
All ages.
$14.95 TR (0-06-205078-8)
$14.89 LB (0-06-205079-6)
Michael di Capua Books
HarperCollins Publishers
-" n exemplary reference which shouldn't be
hidden behind the reference desk, as it serves parents
(and their precocious offspring) quite as well as it
does librarians, teachers and administrators.'
-
Reference & Research Book News, April 1992,
(from a review of the previous edition)
Seventeenth Edition
Practical for book selection and purchasing, curriculum
support, readers advisory, and cataloging and classification
-
An annotated list of 6,000 select
titles for grades Pre-K
through six
-
Adds 500 new works in each of
four annual supplements
-
Indexed by author, title, subject,
and analytical entry for
composite works
-
Titles selected by experts for
quality, currency, and diversity
-
Directory of Publishers and
Distributors provides addresses,
phone numbers and ordering
instructions
-
A standard reference in libraries
for 87 years
Serves Your Library Through the Year 20001
orir
H.W. Wilson
: :
ndcmnes aliv
"'1 
.7n 
oe
J~rawing ne gi upoTnAthra
legend, Yolen has created a stirring·
taile witin a tale...M 
the wit arrstng
oil pasintns ~the drmatic 
narraiv and
rea 
-aod"- 
Schoo Librar Joucrna
'In thlis pictr bookr for oldler
eadie~rs...Yoe 
n's tex evkes bot
SI-thre enchanitment 
and wr humor
of thecr talre. While saisyng in
its ow riht this also enrchs
young redes unertading
f Arhra lore.~ 
"-Boeokis;
~:*Fulcolor. Age 7 up. 
;
ii~l~Fi0-525-65214-0. 
$16.99
Co
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Stree
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETRN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
T HE 
WWORI 
GAEI
United States) is a global game.ii 
io 
Sposee
"Spiced with colorful evidence and stories." -
I*u Cloth, $25.9
James Walvin, author of The People's Game:
The History of Football Revisited
t800/54p-4703
http://wAww.uiuc.edu/Droviders/uivress
0008-9036(199607/08)49:11';1-Q
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
I
4:-r 
--- 
ý 
W 
'"e4' 
Af'-
• 
n
