I LLINO I
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
S
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
r~
Ei~Ea·%
i- -_·:·r~
.i:
*4a";
"
C
:ý 
;
BCCB GOES ONLNE
The University of Illinois Press has produced an online version of the Bulletin of
the Centerfor Children's Books for you to download and evaluate. This is an experi-
mental supplement to-not a replacement for-the print Bulletin, and it is avail-
able at the Bulletin's new World Wide Web site. We expect to add other features
to this web site in the coming months; look for details on the home page and in
future issues of the print Bulletin.
The BCCB web site currently includes downloadable issues of Volume 48 (Sep-
tember 1994 through July/August 1995) of the Bulletin and is available without
charge.
You may download any or all of the online Bulletin issues from the following
World Wide Web site:
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/collections/bccb/BCCBhome.html
This web site contains the issues of the Bulletin in Adobe Acrobat (.pdf) format,
instructions for obtaining the Acrobat Reader software (available at no charge
online), and a set of evaluation questions your answers to which will help us in
determining ways, means, and advantages of electronic access to BCCB.
Questions concerning electronic access should be directed to: Michael Boudreau,
Electronic Publishing Specialist, University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak Street,
Champaign, IL 61820; email: boudreau@uxl.cso.uiuc.edu
Editorial questions should be directed to: Roger Sutton, Editor, Bulletin of the
Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51 Gerty Dr., Cham-
paign, IL 61820; email: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
'4
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
September 1995
Vol. 49 No. 1
A LOOK INSIDE
3 
THE BIG PICTURE
Bad Day at Riverbend written and illustrated by Chris Van Allsburg
4 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
8 
* Dandelions by Eve Bunting; illustrated by Greg Shed
10 
* My Own Two Feet by Beverly Cleary
21 
* Shortcut written and illustrated by David Macaulay
30 
* Boys at Work written by Gary Soto; illustrated by Robert Casilla
34 
* Like Sisters on the Homefront by Rita Williams-Garcia
37 
REVEW POLICY
38 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Editorial Assistant (HMW)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1995 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Chris Van Allsburg, from Bad Day at Riverbend ©1995 and used by permission
of Houghton Mifflin Company.
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 3
THE BIG PICTURE
Bad Day at Riverbend
written and illustrated by Chris Van Allsburg
It's a bad day at Riverbend indeed. The town is initially a placid place with "just a
couple dozen buildings alongside a dusty road that led nowhere," and where "one
day was just like all the rest." Sheriff Ned Hardy, however, soon finds himself
facing a mysterious malefaction-first the stagecoach and its driver, then a herd of
cattle, and finally the town itself is covered with greasy strings of slime. The sheriff
gathers a posse and hunts down the evildoer, who proves to be made of the same
stuff with which he brutalized the town; the sheriff and his pals prepare to round
the rogue up, but just as they ride in close the slime gets them too-or, to explain
it in terms beyond Riverbend's comprehension, a childish hand scribbles crayon
marks over the coloring-book page that is the posse's milieu.
It's a visual joke, difficult to translate into words, but it's swift, clever, and funny
on several levels. The book's cover shows Sheriff Hardy, himself a classic coloring-
book figure in sturdy and apparently unimaginative lines on not-quite-white pa-
per, recoiling in horror as purple, orange, and brown squiggles writhe behind him;
at first readers will just think some kid has gotten ahold of the book and colored it
up, but the joke becomes apparent when the first of the Crayola victims, the team
of horses, appears after pages of pristine coloring-book emptiness. The color
squiggles are masterfully ungainly and correct: the attacked coachman has cherry-
red lips, royal blue eyes and a fetching ensemble of blue hat and green shirt, and
the final stick-figure "enemy" is not only a hilarious surprise but also a classic of
the genre, possessing hat, boots, and holster (and a mouth that extends beyond the
outline of his face) but lacking other clothing, joints in his limbs, and a neck.
This isn't for those at the scribbling age but it's not necessarily adult, either; kids
old enough to have defended their books from younger crayon-wielders will ap-
preciate the idea and the humor. There are several different kinds of teasing going
on here, all of which are accessible to fans of The Stinky Cheese Man and its ilk.
Youngsters have always wondered, and many fictions have been built on, what
dolls, action heroes, or stuffed animals do when they're not being played with,
whether the elaborate and highly charged dramas simply disappear just because
the audience does. In Van Allsburg's Riverbend, nothing happens unless some-
body opens the book; the tree falling in the forest makes no sound when there's no
one there to hear, but that's okay because Riverbenders like things quiet.
The conceptual complications don't stop there, however. The "real" child shown
coloring the Riverbenders at the end isn't a real child after all, he or she is just
drawn in a different style and is just as confined to the page as the townsfolk
themselves. The irony of the ending is that there really is no twist-readers have
been reading a book all along, so the revelation isn't that they're reading a book,
4 
* 
THE BULLETIN
but that they're not reading the book they thought they were. The verisimilitude
of the scribbles may impel youngsters to add their own touches to the illustrations,
which means you'll not only have somebody reading a book about somebody read-
ing a book, you'll also have somebody drawing in a book about somebody drawing
in a book. The Riverbenders don't know they're a book and don't want to be
drawn on; librarians may feel similarly, but one can't help but feel philosophically
tickled by the prospect of levels going on forever.
As with Van Allsburg's The Wretched Stone (BCCB 1/92), the point is the
audience's understanding something the characters do not. In fact, for Ned Hardy
and the Riverbenders, the story's a tragedy, since they have lost to the crayon
squiggler and they're doomed to losing every time the book is read; it was their fate
as coloring-book characters and now it's their fate as picture-book characters. For
the reader, however, it's a continual comedy (as other people's tragedies often are),
one that remains as funny during rereading, when the joke is inevitable, as it is
when the joke is new. Van Allsburg could teach Ted Turner a thing or two about
colorization.
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, C. S. 
Courtyard Cat. Clarion, 1995 
[128p]
ISBN 0-395-71126-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Lindsay thinks her little brother's disfiguring accident was all her
fault, so she holds in her unhappiness at moving to a dingy city apartment (to be
nearer doctors for Garth). She's supposed to be taking care of Garth while her
parents are at work, but her guilt about his injury leads her to indulge him when
she should be disciplining him. The lure of a Siamese cat roaming the courtyard
brings out various inhabitants of the apartment building and also brings Lindsay
some new friends, who help her see how her self-blame is misplaced and how her
indulgence of Garth hurts him as well as her. The diverse group of building inhab-
itants banding together for the sake of an animal isn't a new idea, but Adler has a
knack for making situations and character dynamics credible. Lindsay's gnawing
guilt and anxiety provide the story with a tension that adds some prickly interest to
the sweeter story of finding friends in unexpected places. DS
ALDER, ELIZABETH 
The King's Shadow. 
Farrar, 1995 
2 59 p
ISBN 0-374-34182-6 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Young Evyn's life changes forever when most of his family is slaughtered by a
neighboring chieftain, his tongue is cut out, and he's sold in slavery to the Saxon
common-law wife of Earl Harold of Wessex. Evyn trains as a scribe and eventually
becomes a page and then foster son to Harold, now King Harold of England; the
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 5
boy fights by Harold's side in his last fateful battle, when he falls to William the
Conqueror in 1066. This is in many ways a very old-fashioned historical novel:
the good (Saxon) and bad (Norman) are overdrawn and oversimplified, fact is
altered to suit the story (Harold gets a different second wife here than in reality),
and the focus of it all is a young person in the confidence of the august and impor-
tant. It's still a stirring and romantic story, with noble ladies, questions of honor,
and bloody battles enough to keep the pace moving and the atmosphere chivalric.
This would make an interesting complement to Eloise MacGraw's The Striped
Ships (BCCB 10/91), and historical-fiction fans will enjoy filling out the famous
date of 1066 with some red-blooded adventure. DS
ARNOLD, TEDD 
No More Water in the Tub!; written and illus. by Tedd
Arnold. 
Dial, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1583-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1581-1 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
William's big brother Walter has the great idea of turning the tub faucet all the
way on when William is taking a bath, but the handle comes off in his hand and
"water blasted out of the fixture," setting in motion a wild ride through their
apartment building in a purple, clawfooted bathtub. The flood waters carry Wil-
liam out the front door as Dad is coming home, and a succession of neighbors get
swept along behind the tub in turn: "Down went Mabel on the table. Sue and
Vern clung to a fern. Uncle Nash sat in the trash." Kids will enjoy chiming in on
the funny rhymes (they are sure to find "Little Dottie sailed the potty" particularly
hilarious), and if they don't quite get the surprise twist at the end (Walter is telling
the story), that won't stop them from enjoying it. Arnold's colored-pencil and
watercolor illustrations capably catch the surreal tone of the story in a style remi-
niscent of two other artists with a penchant for the slightly bizarre, William Joyce
and Richard Egielski. The closing picture shows William sailing off down the
street in his tub as Walter begins a new story, one that story-hour groups may want
to continue for themselves. SDL
AYER, ELEANOR H. 
Parallel Journeys; written by Eleanor H. Ayer with Helen
Waterford and Alfons Heck. 
Atheneum, 1995 
[25 6p]
ISBN 0-689-31830-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
While today Helen Waterford and Alfons Heck share the lecture platform to in-
form people about the facts of the Holocaust, they did not know each other during
that terrible time-not surprising, since Helen was a young Jewish wife and mother
(although the cover makes her look like a preteen) who endured Auschwitz, and
Alfons was a high-ranking teenaged member of Hitler Youth. Ayer excerpts pas-
sages from their respective memoirs and fills out their stories with information
about the progress of Hitler's rise to power and the war to give a wide picture of
the era's events. It's an interesting juxtaposition of perspectives, but the organiza-
tion is somewhat unwieldy, shuttling between biographies, military campaigns,
and the stories of other victims and survivors. Ayer's writing is not as strong as that
of Waterford and Heck and her history is occasionally shaky: Untermenschen did
not mean "low-class citizens," and the book gives two substantially different fig-
ures for the number of German soldiers involved in Operation Barbarossa. But
6 
* THE BULLETIN
Heck's story, in particular, offers a point of view not much seen in Holocaust
books for young people, and both his Nazi fervor and subsequent awakening are
gripping and convincing. Notes and a bibliography of further reading (including
citations for Waterford's and Heck's autobiographies) are included. RS
BAER, EDITH 
This Is the Way We Eat Our Lunch: A Book about Children around
the World; illus. by Steve Bj6rkman. 
Scholastic, 1995 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-46887-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
In a followup to their jolly This Is the Way We Go to School (BCCB 10/90), Baer
and Bjirkman here look at lunchtime menus across the U.S., from Massachusetts
(clam chowder), to California (salad, natch), and then on to such countries as
Colombia (tamales), Morocco (couscous), England (bubble and squeak), and Ja-
pan: "Mayumi's tempura treat/ looks almost too lovely to eat." This isn't as
successful as the first book (which celebrated means of transportation), primarily
because Bj6rkman's pictures are often indistinct when it comes to the food in
focus: is the tempura the light brown squares or the brightly colored blobs in the
boxes? Why does the couscous look like tomato sauce? Other pictures are a little
too wide-angled to allow us to find the food. Notes at the end clear up most
mysteries, and a world map links foods and locales. RS
BEST, CARI 
RedLight, Green Light, Mama and Me; illus. by Niki Daly. 
Kroupa/
Orchard, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08752-2 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09452-9 
$14.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
When Grandma has the flu, Lizzie gets to spend the day at work with Mama.
They ride the subway train into the city, pick up some blueberry muffins, and walk
to the downtown library where Mama works: "My mama must be the most im-
portant person in the whole city." Lizzie meets Mama's "work family," and spends
a highly enjoyable day smelling new books, being the big bad wolf during storytime,
eating lunch on the library stairs (though one wonders who is running the library
as all the staff seem to be outside), and even helping a child select a book. Best
celebrates the everyday details of grownup life that seem so appealing to a small
child, while Daly's watercolors lovingly depict the bustling city and cozy library.
Particularly noteworthy are Daly's people, who represent the many ethnic groups
found in a large urban setting (Lizzie and her mother are African-American) and
who brim with life as Daly catches the nuances of their body language and facial
expressions. Like Barber's Saturday at the New You (BCCB 12/94), this presents
the world of work as something wonderful to grow into. SDL
BIRCHMAN, DAVID F. 
The Raggly Scraggly No-Soap No-Scrub Girl; illus. by Guy
Porfirio. 
Lothrop, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11061-4 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11060-6' $15.00 
R 4-8 yrs
While the eponymous whirlwind Girl only slams into the life of a peaceful family
for a bit of an evening, they're changed forever, and she's-been dunked in the
bath. Mother has quite a time getting that child into the tub; only after devouring
the family's dinner ("Watching that girl eat was a humbling experience"), painting
the dining room with the blackberry cobbler, and dancing up a dust storm, does
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 7
the Girl fall asleep, allowing Mother her chance ("I just can't let any child leave my
house looking as filthy as you do"). Home invasion has never been so much fun,
and younger listeners bemused or scared by the exploits of the Girl's big sisters
Swamp Angel (BCCB 11/94) or Sally Ann Thunder Ann Whirlwind Crockett
(see Kellogg, below) will be comfortable as well as thrilled. In his picture-book
debut, Porfirio places the story in an indeterminate twentieth-century past with
the forbearing parents looking like a slightly countrified Rob and Laura Petrie, the
delighted children like Norman Rockwell scamps, and the Girl herself like Shirley
Temple on a tear. There's some fine drawing and plenty of mess and motion in
the pencil-and-watercolor pictures; illustrations and text alike have a flamboyance
that salutes the pleasures of chaos. RS
BLUE, ROSE 
The White House Kids; written by Rose Blue and Corinne J.
Naden. 
Millbrook, 1995 
96p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-56294-447-9 
$17.90 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Beginning with the temperamental Susan Adams and concluding with current
resident Chelsea Clinton, the focus here is on the presidents' children and grand-
children who lived in the White House. The authors spice up their otherwise
bland historical information with personal tidbits wherever they can, and they
emphasize the difficulties of losing privacy (the "fishbowl" metaphor is used many
times) and of having extremely busy fathers-one presidential son, Hal Garfield,
wanted to consult his father about the woman he wished to marry, but he had to
wait a month for an appointment. The crisp, high-quality photographs and other
illustrations add greatly to the interest, but the same picture-ofJohn F. Kennedy
and John F. Kennedy, Jr.-is used both for the front and back covers where a
depiction of the White House itself (which isn't glimpsed at all until the discus-
sion of Gerald Ford's presidency) might have been more useful to young readers.
The list of families at the end leaves out some people who were mentioned in the
text, and the reading list is perfunctory, but overall this is a good way to humanize
the inhabitants of the White House. SDL
BOAS, JACOB, ed. 
WeAre Witnesses: The Diaries ofFive Teenagers Who Died in the
Holocaust. Holt, 1995 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-8050-3702-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 8-12
It's a sign of change in literature for young people that the subjects here-all vic-
tims of the Holocaust--do not offer the hope that many such books have offered
in the past, the hope of survival. We are privy to the thoughts of five adolescents
who wrote about, and then died because of, the Nazis' persecution of Jews. Be-
yond its riveting focus, this book of diary excerpts is distinguished by editorial
intelligence: a marked variation in the voices gives breadth, and meticulous autho-
rial notes and transitional background commentary provide context without over-
whelming the primary sources themselves. A twelve-year-old Polish villager named
David, a deeply religious fifteen-year-old named Moshe in Belgium, a thirteen-
year-old Lithuanian Communist named Yitzhak, a wealthy thirteen-year-old Hun-
garian named Eva, and a budding Dutch writer named Anne Frank are all
represented here in their efforts to understand and cope with what is happening
around them and to them. In each case, specific details personalize six million
statistics. BH
8 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BUNTING, EVE 
Cheyenne Again; illus. by Irving Toddy. 
Clarion, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-70364-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
8-10 yrs
Young Bull, aged ten, is taken from his Cheyenne tribe to live in an Indian board-
ing school, where his people are absent from the pages of history books, where he
learns to worship the White Man's God instead of the Great Spirit, and where wall
plaques remind students to "SPEAK ENGLISH." This is a piece of American
history most students won't know about, but the picture-book format seems young
for the material. Perhaps inevitably, it is a solemn, even dour, book, with a prose
poem text that is stilted and monotonous: "The bugle calls us in to dinner/ and to
work./ There's carpentry,/ so we who lived in teepees/ can repair/ the wooden
buildings where we sleep/ and shed our tears." The pictures, reminiscent of Ronald
Himler's work, are composed in appropriately moody tones but are as stiff and
glum as the text-no one cracks an expression, much less a smile. Do picture
books have to be fun? Of course not. But surely we can expect more of them than
this kind of ponderous preaching. RS
BUNTING, EVE 
Dandelions; illus. by Greg Shed. 
Harcourt, 1995 
[48p]
ISBN 0-15-200050-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-8 yrs
For Papa, the fulfilled promise of a fresh start on his own homestead is close to a
religious experience, which narrator Zoe and her younger sister are eager to share,
but Mama's quiet grief at leaving her parents' Illinois home for the solitude of the
prairie casts a pall on the family's optimistic spirit. To help reconcile her to their
new life, Papa and the girls plant two withering, maverick dandelions on the roof
of their sod house-flowers which, Mama remarks, may "just die of loneliness."
While there is no shortage of picture books about the settlement of the Great
Plains, this title addresses the isolation of the settlers, an issue usually left to older
readers' fiction. Expect understated but persistent heartstring tugging from start
("'See how the grass closes behind us?' Mama asked. 'It's as if we'd never been'")
to finish ("I hoped maybe one, just one, dandelion might lift its head for us. But
not even one did"). Shed's large gouache paintings are luminous with the parched
golds and wheats of the sun-seared landscape, and characters are meticulously posed
in the tradition of pioneer heroism. The closing spread supplies a reassuring visual
epilogue-wagon ruts lead to modest fields, a windmill, and the soddie roof bloom-
ing with dandelions. EB
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
Taking It. Viking, 1995 
[160p]
ISBN 0-670-86130-8 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Anna is cool, difficult, and distant; she enjoys playing control games with her
divorced parents, with her friend Maureen, and with department store security,
whom she "teases" by seeming to shoplift items. She's frightened when her con-
trol over herself starts slipping and she really does begin to steal, and she runs
away--drives away, really, in her Mustang-to her brother's house several hun-
dred miles away, then, finding no solace there, drives away again only to bring her
flight to a halt by crashing the car. Cadnum is a smooth and often clever writer,
but his oblique and dispassionate style distances Anna even further from the reader
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 9
than from her parents. Despite the first-person narration, we never quite credit
the turmoil inside of Anna or understand why it's in our interest to do so. The
characters are evanescent, so that Anna's revelation that she's in love with her
stepfather (which is presumably the cause of all the trouble) is uninteresting as well
as insufficient and anticlimactic. While the pressure-and-escape theme is an en-
joyable one, this book will leave bewildered readers wondering what Anna's prob-
lem really is and where exactly they've traveled with her. DS
CHAMBERS, AIDAN 
The Toll Bridge. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 1995 
26 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023599-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023598-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
The narrator (unnamed for quite a while; nicknamed after a few chapters) has
resolved to escape "the Glums" and put off post-schooling decisions by working as
a toll-collector at a little-used bridge, living in the picturesque if decaying tollhouse.
He is soon joined by another boy, Adam, who seems to have come from nowhere
and who confidently settles himself in over the protests of his host. Names are
dicey things in this novel: Adam's name isn't really Adam, the narrator is nick-
named "Jan," after Janus, by his boss' sexy daughter, who is in turn nicknamed
Tess. The whole has a self-referential, postmodern glossiness that gets in the way:
"Images of images, he thought now-now in this my now, now in your now, me
now not me then. Marks on paper. Bridge between subject and object. Outside
over there from inside under here." Under this pointlessly obfuscating layer, though,
is an intense story about four teens (add Gill, Jan's girlfriend) in emotional and
often sexual obsession with each other as they seek self-definition as well as ways to
connect. The novel concludes with a lame psychological device (a blow to the
head reveals hidden memories and Adam's tragic past) that seems at odds with the
literary sophistication shown thereto; teens though, will appreciate the melodra-
matic twist as well as the sudden clarity of the story. RS
CLARK, MARY HIGGINS, comp. 
The InternationalAssociation ofCrime Writers Pre-
sents Bad Behavior: Mystery Stories. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1995 
30 6p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200179-4 
$20.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200178-6 
$10.00 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Lying, cheating, and stealing are but the tip of this multifaceted iceberg of twenty-
two chilling tales of murder and mystery. The collection is large, the range im-
pressive, and the authors are colossal contributors to the genre-Sara Paretsky,
Eric Weiner, P. D. James, and Joyce Carol Oates are some of the more well-known
writers. Many of the selections (some of which were first published elsewhere) are
sharply developed suspense stories, with kick-in-the-head type endings: Samuel
Bias' "Revenge" explores the psychological wasteland of a bride who is raped on
her honeymoon; Lawrence Block's "Like a Bug on a Windshield" reveals a truck
driver's boredom turned deadly; and the disease of deceit attacks twin sisters in
Barbara Steiner's "Mother Always Loved You Best." What makes this collection
work for young adults is the depiction of upfront moral dilemmas of ordinary
people who easily slip into the underworld of crime. The manipulation of reader's
expectations is carefully calculated so that subtlety is sacrificed for the punch of
impact, but the stories will provide an adrenalin rush for teenagers who want their
mysteries to cut to the chase. HMW
10 
* THE BULLETIN
CLEARY, BEVERLY 
My Own Two Feet. Morrow, 1995 
26 1p 
illus. with pho-
tographs
ISBN 0-688-14267-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 7 up
Beverly Bunn leaves home for college in this sequel to the first volume of Cleary's
autobiography, A Girlfrom Yamhill (BCCB 3/88). Life in Southern California is
a blessed change for Beverly, free-mostly-from her mother's strictures and in-
terference, and as the title says, on her own two feet. With little financial assis-
tance from home, Beverly finds all kinds of jobs, such as babysitting, library work
and dress-shortening, to support her tenaciously sought education, which takes
her from Chaffey Junior College to Berkeley (where she meets Clarence Cleary)
and then to library school at the University of Washington: "Fortunately, memo-
ries of the Ontario Public Library reassured me that being a librarian was more
interesting than learning to be one." Along with its appeal as a portrait of a be-
loved author, the book is also a fine example of that thing that used to be called a
"college novel," which younger teens would read to look toward the future. There
is nothing sentimental about Cleary's memories, but there's plenty of clear-eyed
honesty and low-key wit that demonstrate one of this author's greatest gifts-to be
able to write for both an adult and juvenile audience without losing the respect or
attention of either. RS
COHEN, BARBARA 
David: A Biography. Clarion, 1995 
[128p]
ISBN 0-395-58702-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The king's biography, told from Cohen's "highly personal point of view," com-
bines a faithful, if somewhat slow-moving, paraphrase of the Scriptural story with
a judicious sprinkling of information on the military alliances and political
strategizing of the period. Cohen's narrative clings so closely to its original source
that readers who find the Bible to be a ponderous read will find this work hardly
less so. Major events in the Saul/David saga are well-covered-from Saul's erratic
attacks on David to David's blind devotion to Absalom-although, curiously, the
witch of Endor never makes an appearance. A list of references is included; the
handy "cast of characters" which heads the text is more comprehensive than the
appended index. EB
Cox, BRENDA S. 
Who Talks Funny?: A Book about Languages for Kids. 
Linnet,
1995 
2 11p
ISBN 0-208-02378-X 
$25.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Discussing matters such as linguistic variety, political implications of language,
linguistic sounds, rhythms, and tones, word formation, word borrowing, gram-
mar, and alphabets, Cox makes clear that language is a complex and culturally
laden issue, but it can also be a very entertaining topic. The book eschews some of
the incorrect but legendary language stories (such as the variety of words popularly
supposed to come from the local language's term for "I don't know") and turns
instead to some solid research from a variety of sources. The book is thick with
examples (although some are more illustrative than others, and pronunciation hints
don't always appear), drawn from a wide variety of languages ranging from Navajo
to Basque to Japanese, that will have readers testing tone and phraseology under
their breath. The writing is occasionally vague and non-specific and is inclined to
gush, which contrasts oddly with the sometimes highly technical discussion. Overall,
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 
11
however, this is a sound and readable-if pricey-introduction to linguistics. In-
cluded are appendices containing basic phrases in nearly thirty languages and de-
scribing different theories of language teaching and acquisition, a glossary of
linguistic terms, a list of books and tapes for further exploration of the subject, and
a sizeable bibliography. DS
Cox, CLINTON 
Mark Twain: America's Humorist, Dreamer, Prophet: A
Biography. Scholastic, 1995 
[224p]
ISBN 0-590-45642-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Cox, author of The Forgotten Heroes: The Story of the Buffalo Soldiers (BCCB 12/
93), here takes on another nineteenth-century topic: Mark Twain. The book
traces Twain's life from his youthful peregrinations to his life as a successful writer,
including a profusion of lively quotes from Twain and those who knew him. As
the book's prologue suggests, Twain was a complicated and sometimes self-contra-
dictory man, and this biography pays particular attention to his complex and shift-
ing attitudes towards race. Cox examines both Twain's literary works and his
personal actions (funding the college educations of several African-American stu-
dents, for instance) and demonstrates his change from accepting to challenging the
racial prejudices of his time; the author's epilogue argues for understanding and
appreciation of Twain as a writer and for the merit of Twain's sometimes contro-
versial Huckleberry Finn. While greater close-reading of Twain's texts would have
been welcome (as would source notes, especially for some of the more sweeping
statements), this is a timely, thoughtful, and readable approach to Twain that
accomplishes its specific task well; it would make a provocative companion to
Lyttle's more detailed bio (BCCB 2/95) or to Twain's books themselves. DS
CREW, GARY 
Angel's Gate. 
Simon, 1995 
[25 6 p]
ISBN 0-689-80166-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Children of the local doctor and nurse, Kimmy and his older sister Julia had met
the reclusive miner Mr. Flannagan before, when he'd injured his arm; now it ap-
pears that Flannagan has been murdered and his two "wild" children are on the
loose, as are plenty of rumors. When the older of the two children, Leena, is
"captured," she is sent to stay at the doctor's house, and Kimmy and Julia are
drawn into her secrets. Less cryptic (and less confusing) than Crews' previous
novels Strange Objects (BCCB 9/93) and No Such Country (BCCB 9/94), this book,
while somewhat unevenly paced, has several solid mysteries to keep readers going:
who killed Flannagan? why is Leena so frightened? where is her brother? Crew
builds a nice parallel between the pairs of siblings; Julia is especially well-drawn as
the big sister who alternately taunts and comforts her timid younger brother. The
plot is less surprising than involving, and the villain is too obvious, but there's
enough freshness in the theme and rural Australian setting to pull in readers. RS
DEAVER, JULIE REECE 
Chicago Blues. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
170p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024676-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024675-8 
$14.95 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Mom is in an alcoholic haze and Dad has long been out of the picture, so college
freshman Lissa carries her sixth-grade sister, Marnie, off to live with her in her tiny
12 
* THE BULLETIN
Chicago apartment. Resentful at first of Lissa's precipitous action, Marnie soon
thrives in the stable, if spartan, environment her sister provides; Lissa in turn finds
satisfaction in caring for Marnie, even though these new responsibilities impinge
on her school work and social life. The warm tale of sisters drawn together in
adversity is undermined by the improbability of its details. Seventeen-year-old
Lissa easily enrolls Marnie in a new school and is never questioned when she ap-
pears in lieu of a parent at school functions; even financially naive readers are
bound to wonder how the siblings make ends meet. Although Deaver carefully
establishes Lissa's skepticism that Mom could ever get on and stay on the wagon, a
rosy ending has Marnie rejoining Mom in a new apartment, with Lissa's approba-
tion: "I'm taking my little sister home to start a new life with our mother, and it
suddenly seems so right." EB
DESCHAMPS, HfLtNE 
Spyglass: An Autobiography. Holt, 1995 
308p
ISBN 0-8050-3536-2 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 10 up
Helene Deschamps was seventeen in 1940, which is the year she began to work for
the French Resistance as a courier and spy; she later spied under the aegis of the
American OSS. Her adventures included flirting to get information from various
enemy soldiers, using her clerical position in a Vichy official's office to alert under-
ground members of impending arrest, being imprisoned and then escaping, and
falling in love with a handsome American parachutist. This is exciting stuff; un-
fortunately Deschamps is a better spy than a writer. The style here is often that of
a paperback adult thriller ("She lay there petrified at the sight of the gun, her
lovely, firm breasts pointing at him"), acronyms and war details are rarely explained,
and many loose ends are left dangling, particularly the question of what actually
happened to the author's American lover. The book still has its involving aspects,
however, and it's clear, from the deaths of Deschamps' friends and beloved sister,
that her kind of work had a high price. This is a picture of the war that juvenile
literature rarely gives, but kids ready for this kind of adult adventure might be
better served by turning to the adult shelves. DS
DUNCAN, LOIS 
Psychic Connections: A Journey into the Mysterious World ofPsi; by
Lois Duncan and William Roll. 
Delacorte, 1995 
[288p] 
illus. with photo-
graphs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-385-32072-8 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-10
As most Duncan fans know, the author has spent the last few years trying to un-
ravel the mystery of her daughter's murder and has found the assistance of psychics
invaluable in her quest for answers. In this book she takes a broader look at the
subject of parapsychology, working with William Roll, project director of the
Psychical Research Foundation, to explain current parapsychological thinking on
ghosts, mediums, telepathy, precognition, psychokinesis, psychic detectives, and
other aspects of the "world of psi." Disappointingly, this is successful neither as a
collection of true mysterious tales nor as a science-based defense of a controversial
subject. While the book is larded with anecdotes, they are rarely sufficiently devel-
oped to get any narrative momentum and are never personalized enough to make
them weightier than fictional accounts would be. More importantly, they often
fail to demonstrate the points Duncan uses them to illustrate, and the book through-
out is similarly unsupported: there are no notes, so there is almost never docu-
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 
13
mentation for experiments discussed or the sources of quotes. While the book
discusses the existence of CSICOP-the Committee for the Scientific Investiga-
tion of Claims of the Paranormal-and skepticism in general, Duncan is clearly
the defense describing the prosecution's case, allowing Roll or the psychic detec-
tives she interviews to report skeptical investigators' actions rather than quoting
and refuting the skeptics themselves. The compelling moments in this book come
from glimpses of Duncan's yearning for answers about her daughter's death; this
story is told more fully in her adult book Who KilledMy Daughter?, and those who
wish to follow her search will want to turn there; those looking for good stories or
scientific fuel for arguments about the validity of parapsychology will probably
need to turn elsewhere as well. DS
ENGEL, DEAN 
Ezra Jack Keats: A Biography with Illustrations; written by Dean
Engel and Florence B. Freedman. 
Silver Moon, 1995 
81p 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 1-881889-65-3 
$17.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Attractive biographies for the younger grades are hard to come by, but here's a nice
one. Big-print text on picture-book-sized pages tells of Keats' life from his early
days as Jack Ezra Katz in Brooklyn to his Caldecott-medal-winning career in book
illustration; art, some from Keats' children's books, some from studio paintings,
appears as quasi-biographical illustration. The format may look a little babyish for
older readers in the age group, and there are no source notes or books listed for
further reading, but this is a pleasing introduction to a significant figure in children's
literature. Kids will particularly enjoy the emphasis on Keats' art-happy childhood
and his periodic discovery that art could deflect bullying and make him friends,
and Keats' luminous pictures liven up the pages here as well. A list of his books, a
note on the sources of the art used as illustrations here, and an index are included.
DS
GARLAND, SARAH 
Tex the Cowboy; written and illus. by Sarah Garland. 
Dutton,
1995 
28p
ISBN 0-525-45418-7 
$12.99 
R Gr. 2-4
Tex looks the part right enough, with his bandanna, boots, and drooping handle-
bar mustache, but as cowboys go, he's a weenie: "Go away, horrible bull!" Fortu-
nately he has the homely but gifted Gloria, a cowpony destined for legend. When
Tex's requisite evil nemesis, Bad Hank Bones, steals Tex's money, it's Gloria who
provides another source of income; when Tex enters the rodeo it's Gloria who
ropes the bull; when Bad Hank robs the stagecoach Tex is guarding it's Gloria who
saves the day. Six such stories of Gloria and Tex's triumphs appear here, all in the
form of comic-book panels with clearly printed text at the top complemented by
entertainingly dorky dialogue scrawled in the speech balloons. The line-and-wa-
tercolor artwork shows long-suffering Gloria as a rawboned and sympathetic plug
and Tex as pinkly hapless, both making their way through a landscape of lively and
unlikely shades of yellows and lavenders in addition to the more traditional browns
and grays. The stories are based on one formula so they tend to repeat themselves,
but there's enough humor in the premise and in the execution (kids will particu-
larly appreciate the low physical comedy) that readers won't mind. In fact, the
friendliness of the comic-book format, the appealing goofiness of the stories, and
14 
* 
THE BULLETIN
the succinctness of the adventures recommend the book particularly to youngsters
uneasy about reading or just looking for a break. DS
GIBBONS, GAIL 
Planet Earth/Inside Out; written and illus. by Gail
Gibbons. 
Morrow, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09681-6 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09680-8 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Simple but precise text and large, clearly labeled illustrations provide primary-grades
audiences with a smooth initiation into earth science. Earth's genesis, composi-
tion, and continuing morphology are covered, and theory ("Some scientists think
that at one time on Earth there was a single massive piece of land, which they call
Pangaea") is consistently distinguished from fact. Basic vocabulary related to tec-
tonism is introduced and concisely defined, but the real strength of this work lies
in adroitly describing complex processes in terms meaningful to the youngest lis-
teners: "When two plates press against each other, pressure begins to build....
Vibrations move through the Earth. Rocks slip and slide. Sometimes the Earth
buckles, or even breaks open." Gibbons shades and speckles her watercolor-and-
ink pictures, adding texture to diagrams which rely on streamlined composition
and minimal color schemes for clarity. Two double-page spreads, "Rocks of the
Earth's Crust" and "Earth Facts," append this attractive and useful title. EB
GREENBERG, JUDITH E., ed. 
A Pioneer Woman 's Memoir: Based on the Journal of
Arabella Clemens Fulton; ed. by Judith E. Greenberg and Helen Carey
McKeever. 
Watts, 1995 
160p 
illus. with photographs 
(In Their Own
Words)
ISBN 0-531-11211-X 
$13.93
Letters from a World War II GI; ed. by Judith E. Greenberg and Helen Carey
McKeever. 
Watts, 1995 
144p 
illus. with photographs 
(In Their Own
Words)
ISBN 0-531-11212-8 
$13.93 
R 
Gr. 7-12
These two volumes introduce a new series which presents primary source materials
related to a particular period or theme in American history. Arabella Fulton's
memoir of her journey on the Oregon Trail and settlement in Boise, Idaho is
remarkably fluent and readable, in part because it was conscientiously set to paper
some sixty years after the events occurred and was intended as family history. Al-
though this delay may make some of the journey's details suspect, Fulton's loyal
Southern opinions concerning the Civil War and her mistrust of the Indians sur-
vive the years, rendering her comments valuable examples of authentic attitudes
frequently expunged from textbook history. Likewise, Keith Winston's letters to
his wife during his tour of duty in World War II speak less to the war itself (his
letters were subject to self- and government censorship) than to an enlistee's atti-
tude toward the Army. Winston's correspondence reflects his emotionally turbu-
lent ride through Army life, driven by rumor, speculation, misinformation, and
changed orders that abounded across and up the ranks. In both volumes editorial
comments are interjected to clarify information or supply historical background;
both volumes offer a valuable first-person perspective on significant historical events.
Black-and-white stock photographs offer visual breaks in the text, but are other-
wise negligible. Thorough indexes and lists for further reading are included. EB
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 
15
GREENBERG, KEITH ELLIOT 
Rodeo Clown: Laughs and Danger in the Ring; illus.
with photographs by Bill Moyer. 
Blackbirch, 1995 
[32p] 
(Risky Business)
ISBN 1-56711-152-1 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Rodeo clowns lead a dangerous life, trying to distract a ton of angry bull so that
bullriders have a chance to get away unscathed from the animal they've just rid-
den. This book focuses on Jim Bob Feller, who in his thirty years of rodeo has
been both bullfighter (running to distract the bull) and barrel man (standing in a
barrel that provides cowboys with a shield and bulls with a relatively sturdy target).
The text offers some interesting insights into the clown's job, mentioning, for
instance, that Feller studies the bulls in their pens to get clues to their ring behav-
ior, and it discusses both the hard pace and its toll on family life. The overall
picture is a bit skimpy, however, since the book never makes clear some crucial
details (such as how many clowns have to be in the arena at once) and never states
whether the words of Feller and others are from interviews or from secondary
sources. Photographs are often grainy and sometimes misleadingly captioned (a
caption describing Feller studying the bulls and horses shows him in front of rop-
ing horses, which aren't a clown's concern), but they're full of clown color and
rodeo action. Despite its flaws, this is a vivid look at an exotic and kid-appealing
profession. DS
HEYER, MARILEE, ad. 
The Girl, the Fish, and the Crown: A Spanish Folktale; ad.
and illus. by Marilee Heyer. 
Viking, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-670-85409-3 
$14.99 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
It seems absurdly obvious that one shouldn't kill a talking fish, but the silly and
seriously spoiled young girl in this Spanish folktale can think only of herself: "I am
hungry, and if I don't have my dinner very soon, I shall be cross." Readers will
know better than the heroine of this story that if you pooh-pooh magic, you're
bound to get into trouble. She undergoes multifarious animal transformations
and performs her requisite tasks before she wins her prince and learns her manners.
The tale itself is formulaic and lengthy, but the illustrations are stuffed with intri-
cate details that are rendered in Heyer's precise style of fantasy calendar art. Bor-
der designs recall the splendor of frescoed palace walls, the costuming is lush, and
the giant's ragged fingernails are realistically gruesome. Heyer's extravagance is
not subtle, but for those children who like their folktales less, well, folksy, here is
an uppercrust version that evokes some Renaissance Fair-type pageantry. HMW
HILL, ANTHONY 
The Burnt Stick; illus. by Mark Sofilas. 
Houghton,
1995 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-395-73974-8 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Fictionalizing a slice of Australian history that echoes the U.S. experience with
Indian boarding schools (see Bunting, above), this profusely illustrated book blends
social realism with a folkloric trickster motif. As the brief historical note explains,
until the 1960s children of Aboriginal women and white men were often taken
away from their mothers and sent to foster care or boarding schools. In an attempt
to save him from the "Big Man from Welfare," five-year-old John Jagamarra's
mother covers his light skin with the soot of a burnt stick, making John the "color
of earth when a shadow falls on it." Two times the trick works, but the Big Man
16 
* THE BULLETIN
comes back by night and surprises the camp, wrenching the child from his mother's
arms and taking him away to the Pearl Bay Mission for Aboriginal Children. For
the first twenty pages, the book wavers uncertainly between John's life at the mis-
sion and his earlier life in the Aboriginal camp, and the melodrama makes the
history seem suspect: would the Big Man have been so gullible and/or would he
go to such lengths to get the boy? The charcoal illustrations give the book a
youngish-and dated-appearance and their relevance is not always clear; three
drawings of John's naked mother seem, given the harsh context, incongruously
alluring. RS
HINES, ANNA GROSSNICKLE 
When the Goblins Came Knocking; written and illus.
by Anna Grossnickle Hines. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
24 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13736-9 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13735-0 
$15.00 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
The chills and thrills of Halloween were a little too scary last year for the child
narrating this book: "When the ghoulies came prancing, smirking and grinning,
leaping and dancing, last Halloween ... 
I trembled inside." No princesses and
cowboys came to the door that night, but rather a parade of monsters, ghosts,
witches, vampires, skeletons, and other spooky creatures traipsed to the house for
candy while the small boy cowered inside. "This Halloween," he now vows, dressed
in his splendid dinosaur costume, "I'm the scariest one!" Hines, using colored
pencil on black paper, creates luminous nighttime pictures, with the trick-or-treat-
ers looking appropriately childlike and festive but still creepy. However, the pic-
tures succeed better than the words in conveying the message that the spookiness
of Halloween is part of the fun. The text simply fails to convey the tone of its child
narrator, sounding like the observations of an adult throughout: "I was tongue-
tied," and "I whined and I cried." The winning pictures, the true-to-life feelings,
and the triumphant conclusion may make this one to purchase anyway. SDL
HITE, SID 
Answer My Prayer. Holt, 1995 
182p
ISBN 0-8050-3406-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 8-12
Hite spins a featherweight fantasy here about intrigue, love, and angels, as the
young maiden Lydia sees fulfilled the prophecy of an itinerant fortune teller: "I see
a sleeping stranger. I see a stormy sea. I see the sovereign sighing. Behold! There
is a kiss beneath a jeefwood tree." Jeefwood is the sole export of Lydia's country,
Karosan, and up until now it has only been sold as finished, exquisite products.
The nasty regent Victor Bimm, however, is hatching a plot with foreign interests
to ship the wood as lumber, thus destroying the jeefwood forests along with the
nation's pride. That's one plot; the other concerns Lydia's falling in love with a
sensitive woodcarver, Aldersan Hale, at a festival. The angels get involved because
of Lydia's prayers, first for the health and love of Aldersan, then for the safety of
her country. While there's an occasional touch of archness in the tone and a little
too much meanwhiling, this is an agreeable spin on the pastoral tradition edged
with enough gentle irony to keep things from getting too sticky. RS
HOOVER, H. M. 
The Winds ofMars. Dutton, 1995 
18 1p
ISBN 0-525-45359-8 
$14.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Important people don't die on Mars. If they're lucky members of the elite class
their implanted mind-transfer chips (MTs) are copied and transferred to android
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 17
bodies when their human ones prove inadequate. Annalyn Court has spent her
entire life protected in a crystal-domed sanctuary far away from volatile class con-
flicts, common squalor, and the political terrorism of her own father-who wields
dictatorial control as President of the red planet. After training at the military
academy with her half-brother Ethan, she's shocked out of her complacency; nothing
is safe, no one is trustworthy, and her world is under attack from within. Tense,
robust adventure swerves into the realm of political intrigue and personal betrayal
as Annalyn recognizes that she must stand alone and make some agonizing moral
choices in order to save her people. Her only companion is a robot-Hector the
Protector-who has R2D2's charming demeanor and devotion, and Hoover care-
fully integrates Hector's technical details with the intricacies of Annalyn's very
human struggle to survive. It's a fast and gratifying trip to Mars for science fiction
fans who will be envious of Annalyn for getting her own robot and the presidency.
HMW
HYATT, 
PATRICIA 
RUSCH 
Coast to Coast with Alice. 
Carolrhoda,
1995 
72p 
illus. and with photographs
ISBN 0-87614-789-9 
$13.13 
R Gr. 4-8
The journal is fictional, but its writer, fifteen-year-old Minna Jahns, was very real
indeed-one of the four women who in 1909 bounced and jolted their way from
New York to San Francisco in a Maxwell touring car. Minna's older cousin Alice
Ramsey drove the entire two-month journey as a promotional stunt for the Max-
well Company at a time when paved roads were rare, service stations rarer, inter-
city road maps nonexistent, and an unchaperoned woman motorist unthinkable.
Minna's voice, that of a teenager newly sprung from parental constraints, conveys
the self-assured enthusiasm of the adventurers; all the details of the trip have been
drawn from primary sources, especially Alice's own memoirs. This title has the
makings of a terrific readaloud for Women's History Month or summer vacation
programs, with lively details that engage the interest of both genders-from refill-
ing the radiator from empty cologne bottles, to the women's detention during a
Nebraska murder investigation, to sampling that new confection, bubble gum.
Photos from the trip, bordered to look like snapshots, and (dorky-looking) pen-
sketch vignettes are meant to further simulate a travel journal; together they pro-
vide younger readers with plenty of visual rest stops. EB
JAFFE, NINA, ad. 
Older Brother, Younger Brother: A Korean Folktale; illus. by
Wenhai Ma. 
Viking, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-670-85645-2 
$14.99 
R 6-9yrs
Hungbu has always been dutiful and respectful, working his father's fields without
complaint while his indolent older brother Nolbu sits idly by. Evicted from the
family home upon his father's death, Hungbu ekes out a miserable living until he
nurses an injured swallow back to health; he is rewarded by the bird with seeds that
grow into golden gourds bursting with riches. Jealous Nolbu tries to replicate his
brother's success, but his malicious scheming is rewarded with gourds full of ma-
nure, scorpions, and howling demons. Chastised and humbled, Nolbu reconciles
with Hunbu and they reestablish a harmonious household. This traditional Ko-
rean morality tale is told with grace and gentle dignity. Characterizations are
remarkably particular: Nolbu's callousness as he breaks a swallow's wing in order
to heal it again is especially telling. Cool greens and blues ofWenhai Ma's peace-
18 
* THE BULLETIN
ful watercolor landscapes explode into reds and oranges as the magical gourds
release their treasures and terrors, matching textual climaxes with equal visual en-
ergy. Young listeners will easily follow the simple plot (reminiscent of the classic
"Diamonds and Toads"), while older listeners will wonder at the hero Hungbu's
unwavering deference to his elders. A source note and a pronunciation guide are
included. EB
JAMES, BETSY 
Blow Away Soon; illus. by Anna Vojtech. 
Putnam, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22648-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Nana assuages the young narrator's nighttime fear of the wind-"She's just doing
her work. That wind's a tough old lady, just like me"-and then takes Sophie out
for a next-morning walk to the top of a rocky mesa. There the two of them make
a "blow-away-soon" by piling stones up and giving the wind something each val-
ues, including grasses, a feather, sand, and a petrified shell. The subtext of Sophie's
real fear, losing her grandmother, becomes clear as Nana reassures her that some
things blow away soon and some things stay "for a good long time." This is a quiet
book, vaguely Native American in setting and strongly messaged. The smooth-
textured earth tones of Vojtech's art are modulated with few defining outlines so
that shapes seem to loom out of a flat surface. The book will work best in a one-
on-one situation, but small groups could enjoy it with active encouragement to
build their own blow-away-soons. BH
KELLOGG, STEVEN, ad. Sally Ann Thunder Ann Whirlwind Crockett: A Tall Tale;
ad. and illus. by Steven Kellogg. 
Morrow, 1995 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14043-2 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14042-4 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Isaacson's Swamp Angel (BCCB 11/94), Birchman's No-Soap Girl (see review
above), and their restless sisters better make way for their founding foremother,
Sally Ann Thunder Ann Whirlwind Crockett, Davy's wife and a match for any
bear, alligator, or macho man in the West. As retold (and scrupulously sourced)
by Kellogg, Sally Ann's early life outracing and outswimming her nine big broth-
ers and beating all comers at the state fair ("At four she flipped the strongest arm
wrestlers") is but a prelude to her flight to the frontier and subsequent rescue of
and marriage to Davy Crockett. Later duels with alligators and with Mike Fink
demonstrate that getting hitched does nothing to cramp this gal's style. Kellogg's
characteristically energetic paintings meet their match in this story's kinetic hyper-
bole; the fact that his Sally Ann and Davy look like rambunctious big kids will
only add to their story-hour appeal. RS
KRAFT, BETSY HARVEY 
Mother Jones: One Woman's Fight for Labor. Clarion,
1995 
116p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-67163-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-9
"I'm not a humanitarian," Mother Jones once said, "I'm a hell-raiser." Kraft traces
the hell-raiser's life from her early poverty-stricken days in Ireland and then as a
young wife and mother in Tennessee, describing how Jones blossomed into a spokes-
person and agitator for labor in the 1870s and continued as the scourge of man-
agement all over the country, from Colorado to Chicago to West Virginia, until
her death in 1930. The book is affectionate but not adulatory, admitting that
Jones sometimes hyperbolized to the point of lying and that she adored the lime-
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 19
light she often found herself in. A useful overview of some of the hottest labor
issues and most famous strikes in U.S. history, the book also makes it quite clear
how few actual gains the labor movement made despite Mother Jones' leadership.
While there's not a lot of sense of Mother Jones as a person here, kids reading this
will get a better understanding of the grinding and dangerous working conditions
that supported American prosperity. A few explanatory notes, a brief mention of
some sources, and an index are included; black-and-white period photographs,
engravings, and newspaper clippings are scattered throughout. DS
KRENSKY, STEPHEN 
The Printer's Apprentice; illus. by Madeline Sorel. 
Delacorte,
1995 
103p
ISBN 0-385-32095-7 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The 1734 arrest and trial of New York printer Peter Zenger, indicted for slander-
ing the colonial governor, is seen through the eyes of the fictional Gus Croft,
apprentice to a rival loyalist printer. Zenger's comments are critical but truthful,
and Gus questions why truth should be denied print; likewise, Gus objects to his
own master's refusal to cover the arrest-it is news, after all. The apprentice even-
tually takes a stand for his beliefs by aiding Zenger in securing the services of a
clever Philadelphia lawyer, whose novel argument on the nature of slander would
later become "a reference point for the idea of freedom of the press." Zenger is the
center of the novel's interest, and the apprentice's tangential role offers the reader
only an oblique view of the affair; strained efforts to incorporate details of colonial
life (the night watch, bloodletting, the newfangled pencil) are more distracting
than illuminating. Despite its fuzzy focus, however, the novel may present a more
cogent and palatable introduction to the free speech issue than is typically offered
in grade school textbooks. Busy, surprisingly comical black-and-white illustra-
tions add a light touch to the history. EB
LAWLOR, VERONICA, comp. 
I Was Dreaming to Come to America: Memories from
the Ellis Island Oral History Project; comp. and illus. by Veronica Lawlor. 
Viking,
1995 
40p
ISBN 0-670-86164-2 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4 up
Brief anecdotes selected from the Ellis Island Oral History Project are here illus-
trated by whimsical collages made from hand-painted paper. This book is a very
pretty thing, but somewhat ephemeral in its effect. The generally optimistic selec-
tions seem fragmentary-a memory of shoes worn all along the arduous journey
from home to here, the "kissing post" at Ellis Island where long-separated couples
would meet-and the delicacy of the art subdues rather than strengthens the rec-
ollections. Each memory and each image gives a glimpse of children coming through
the Golden Door, but as a whole this is more souvenir than book. RS
LEAR, EDWARD 
The Pelican Chorus and Other Nonsense; illus. by Fred
Marcellino. 
diCapua/HarperCollins, 1995 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205063-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205062-1 
$14.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
The chorus line of animals dancing in the glow of footlights across the cover gives
the first clue to the lively cast populating Marcellino's newest. Here he illustrates
three Lear nonsense poems, beginning with "The New Vestments," in which a
man exits from his tailor's shop wearing his new suit made of pancakes, cabbage
20 
* THE BULLETIN
leaves, pork chops, and other edibles topped off with a brown bread hat. By the
end of the poem an assortment of hungry animals and children have left him
running for home in only his birthday suit. Next Marcellino moves to the sea and
a familiar "pea-green boat," with a lovesick owl and pussycat on board. Though
many fine illustrators have devoted whole picture books to "The Owl and the
Pussycat," Marcellino creates it anew with animals who are remarkably expressive
without ever being cartoonish or anthropomorphized: 
the owl's wings remain
wings, but with a simple turn or angle they speak volumes. The last poem, "The
Pelican Chorus," is the least-known and for good reason, but Marcellino makes
the most of the somewhat obscure tale of the coming-out party of the daughter of
the Pelican King and Queen and her marriage to the King of the Cranes. Though
its story isn't the strongest, it has some ofLear's finest nonsensical phrasing. The
pictures throughout use lush, saturated color but plenty of white space, and the
story moves along in boxes and panels with the occasional full-page spread. With
new details to discover each time through, this is one picture book that will stand
up to many repetitions. SDL
LEMIEUX, A. C. 
Do Angels Sing the Blues? Tambourine, 1995 
[240p]
ISBN 0-688-13725-3 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Boog and Theo are longterm buddies and partners in their moderately successful
local band, Blues Thing, but their comfortable relationship is disrupted when Theo
falls in love with the new girl in town. Carey is a poetic loner, disturbed by her
father's alcoholism and her own feelings of inadequacy; her love for Theo doesn't
stop her increasingly self-destructive patterns of behavior. The story, told in flash-
back by Boog, tells of a senior year of increasing difficulty as troubles mount up
and are eventually dwarfed by a final foreshadowed tragedy. Unfortunately, the
characters and events seem calculated, with Carey's sensitive nature and Theo's
kindness more described than convincing. The story is often overdependent on
coincidence, and the subplot of Boog's mentor relationship with a troubled younger
teen doesn't get enough set-up to make its final significance credible. The teen
angst, however, is believable, the musical theme harmonizes nicely, and the melo-
dramatic plot, with its impending doom lurking over the entire story, makes for
enjoyable reading. DS
LOWRY, Lois 
Anastasia, Absolutely. 
Houghton, 1995 
[128p]
ISBN 0-395-74521-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Anastasia (of Anastasia at this Address, BCCB 3/91, etc.) is in eighth grade now,
and she's finally got the dog for which she's so long wished. In her attempt to be
a responsible dog owner, however, she accidentally makes a terrible mistake, slip-
ping the bag of doggie-do into the mailbox and throwing her mother's illustrations
into the trash-instead of the other way around. She's wracked with guilt, which
she examines through assignments for her Values class and discussions with her
father, who is currently serving on a jury. Eventually she confesses, and she finds
she's a heroine: a bomber had dropped a bomb in that mailbox and Anastasia's
misplaced package had kept the device from exploding. Anastasia's still funny, but
this is a shallow sitcom plot without a shred of plausibility to it; unlike her original
incarnation, Anastasia here is amusing not because she's believable but because she
does such stupid things, which both thins and cheapens the book. The class-
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 21
assigned values questions and the conversations with Mr. Krupnik are more stimu-
lating, but they don't blend well with the main story or provide it with any weight.
Fans will still enjoy the familial warmth and comforting goofiness of the Krupniks,
and they won't mind that this isn't one of their more notable outings. DS
MACAULAY, DAVID 
Shortcut; written and illus. by David Macaulay. 
Houghton,
1995 
[64p]
ISBN 0-395-52436-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
A frontispiece offers captioned pictures of the major players, and nine short chap-
ters and an epilogue describe the cast's eventful and intertwining day. First Albert
and his horse-and housemate-June take their melons to market via the short-
cut. Then Patty-a person-and Pearl-a pig-are separated when Pearl disap-
pears near the old railroad tracks; then Professor Tweet's hot-air balloon suddenly
breaks free of its tether; then the Darlington Cannonball heads down the old stretch
of railway; then Sybil races daredevilishly off to the market in her red roadster.
Within the book, however, these "thens" are fairly synchronous, with each story
connecting to or spurring on the plot of the others in large and small ways: the
rope Albert unties tethers Professor Tweet's balloon, for instance, and the ballast
Professor Tweet drops sinks Bob's boat (resulting in his fortunate discovery of a
treasure on the riverbed). There are details enough, some sly references to Macaulay's
other work, to keep all nine plot threads and their illustrations bubbling with life,
but the ultimate joke is how each strand plows on oblivious to the others, reminis-
cent of old two-reelers where the comedian remains innocent of the hazards in his
wake. Macaulay's line-and-watercolor art is straightforward without being bland:
viewpoints vary, compositions are imaginative, and the sturdy lines keep the whimsy
firmly anchored. Kids will enjoy catching all the components and putting the
stories together, and the stories' endings, including the reunion of Patty and Pearl,
the romantic good fortune of Professor Tweety, and the return to pleasing domes-
ticity of Albert and June, offer a satisfactorily happy wrap-up. DS
MCCANTS, WILLIAM D. 
Much Ado about Prom Night. Browndeer/Harcourt,
1995 
232p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200083-6 
$11.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200081-X 
$5.00 
Ad 
Gr. 8-10
Fans of McCants' first YA novel, Anything Can Happen in High School (and it
usually does) (BCCB 12/93) might swear this is a sequel, despite the fact that the
characters have different names. Again the setting is a California high school,
again there's a student controversy (student government in Anything Can Happen;
a peer counseling program in Much Ado), again there's a love/hate relationship
between representatives of opposing factions. In fact, it's pretty much the same
book, insubstantial but amiably written and fun to read. RS
MAJOR, JOHN S. The Silk Route: 7,000 Miles of History; illus. by Stephen
Fieser. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022926-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022924-1 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Tracing a trader's journey from Chang'an, China, to Byzantium, more than 6,000
miles away, Major and Fieser give a panorama of the Silk Road in A.D. 700. The
22 
* THE BULLETIN
history lesson doesn't seem quite comfortable in the picture-book format here; the
text often employs the present tense to, it seems, provide immediacy, but the writ-
ing is rather dry and textbookish. The watercolor and pencil illustrations dress
things up a bit with light-filled scenes and mottled textures, but they make the
book look like it's for younger students than the text speaks to. There is a good
map and a two-page appendix of more in-depth information. RS
MIKLOWITZ, GLORIA D. 
Past Forgiving. Simon, 1995 
[160p]
ISBN 0-671-88442-5 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Alexandra-Alex-is thrilled to be the girlfriend of handsome senior Cliff (and
her only a sophomore), thrilled to be in love, and thrilled to have the chance to
work with Cliff at the Ys summer camp. Cliff, however, is insecure, possessive,
and finally abusive; Alex had willingly given up the rest of her life to be at his beck
and call but realizes she's underestimated Cliffs pathology when he beats her and
rapes her. This is pretty much a classic 1970s problem novel, with everything in
the book geared towards explaining the problem: Cliff learned abusiveness from
his abusive father, he displays early signs of irrational possessiveness, his former
girlfriend warns Alex about him; Alex, on the other hand, comes from a family
that has clearly taught her to put up with anything from a man to make him
happy. It's still a credible (alas) and well-written story, although the abrupt drama
of the ending (Cliff pounding on Alex's front door while a police siren wails in the
background) may leave readers wondering what happened afterwards and perhaps
picturing a more satisfying conclusion than the law often provides. It's program-
matic, but the emotional dynamics of Alex's ambivalence will keep young readers
involved. DS
MOHR, NICHOLASA 
The Song of el Coqui and Other Tales ofPuerto Rico; written
and illus. by Nicholasa Mohr and Antonio Martorell. 
Viking, 1995 
42p
ISBN 0-674-85837-4 
$15.99
Spanish ed. ISBN 0-674-86296-7 
$15.99 
Ad Gr. 3-5
Each of these three original tales represents a significant Puerto Rican cultural
group: the title story metaphorically depicts the indigenous Taino population;
"La Guinea: The Stowaway Hen" symbolically tells of the enslaved Africans who
came to the island; and "La Mula: The Cimarron Mule" is a parable about the
Spanish conquest of and influence on Puerto Rico. The story of elcoqui, the little
frog who peeps his own name, is the best of the three, capturing as it does the tone
ofpourquoi tales and myths; the other two tales seem somewhat arbitrarily plotted
and finish abruptly. The addition of the metaphorical conceit enriches the tales
but complicates rather than clarifies, since the hard-driven mule, for instance, clearly
isn't a direct representative of the conquering Spaniards. Mohr and Martorell's
mixed-media art is simply stunning, however, with a carnival of colors sometimes
demonstrating Expressionist luminosity, sometimes a Chagallian dreaminess, and
sometimes a coolly delicate linework all its own. Despite its flaws, the book could
offer a rich way to introduce topics of culture and cultural identity. A note ex-
plains the meaning of many of the text's Spanish terms, although no help is offered
on pronunciation. DS
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 23
MORGENSTERN, CHRISTIAN 
Christian Morgenstern: Lullabies, Lyrics and Gallows
Songs; tr. by Anthea Bell; illus. by Lisbeth Zwerger. 
Neugebauer/North-South,
1995 
4 2p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-365-3 $16.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-364-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Christian Morgenstern, according to a combination of flap copy and mid-book
translator's note, was a turn-of-the-century German poet who wrote lyric verses
and nonsense poetry. The lullabies and lyrics are sweet but slender, generally more
pretty than resonant ("In Winter Time," about fish thinking a pebble atop the ice
is food, and "Lullaby," about a shorn and chilly sheep, are the most memorable).
The "Gallows Songs"-nonsense poems-have more zing to them, offering some
droll and dark turns on gentle childhood verse ("At dawn the moonsheep will be
dead/ its fleece all white, the sun all red"-"Dream of the Moonsheep"). While
translation of such things can be difficult (two of the poems in the "Gallows Songs"
section, in fact, are in their original untranslatable nonsense form) Bell does non-
sense proud in poems such as "Gruesong" ("The Flidderflopped gloameth/ through
igglywangled wole .. . ") and "Suggestions to Nature for New Species" ("The
Oxsparrow/ the Chameleoduck/ the Lionworm/ the Toadle ... 
"). Zwerger's
watercolors sometimes fill the square page and sometimes simply offer a decorative
comment on a poem, never overwhelming the poems but sometimes unwontedly
conventionalizing the gallows songs. While the book's merits sometimes seem to
lie more in attractive design than in poetic concept, and it's a pity that there's no
compact biographical note on Morgenstern in the book itself (and no explanation
of the piquant term "Gallows Songs"), it's still intriguing to see some poetry with
a difference. DS
PAUSEWANG, 
GUDRUN 
Fall-Out; tr. from the German by Patricia
Crampton. 
Viking, 1995 
172p
ISBN 0-670-86104-9 
$13.99 
R* 
Gr. 5-9
When the ABC alert siren begins to wail (on page one-this book does not mess
around), Janna goes home to her younger brother and tries to sort out what has
happened and what they should do. Radioactivity has been released from the
nearby Grafenrheinfeld nuclear reactor following an accident, and Janna's parents
and baby brother are out of town. A frantic phone call from their parents tells the
children to leave for safety with neighbors, but the neighbors have already left and
Janna and Uli are on their own. This is not an adventure story: Uli is killed in the
mad rush out of town; later, when Janna is suffering radiation sickness in a make-
shift hospital, she finds out that her parents and the baby and her grandmother are
all dead as well. Refusing to disguise her bald head with a wig or scarf, Janna
becomes a voice for the Hibakusha, the radiation victims, who have taken their
name from the survivors of Hiroshima. Janna-and the book-are unrelenting in
their message, but the hectoring tone is intense, raw, and convincing. Although
Janna's hair begins to grow back in as the story ends, there's no real hope, false or
otherwise; while Janna bears witness to those who think it won't happen again,
she-and we-remember Chernobyl. The contemporary German setting is im-
mediate and resists science-fictionalizing; Janna is not always the most endearing
of heroines, but kids will listen to her. RS
24 
* THE BULLETIN
PECK, RICHARD 
Lost in Cyberspace. Dial, 1995 
151p
ISBN 0-8037-1931-0 
$14.99 
Ad Gr. 5-7
Josh suffers through two awful au pairs, Fenella (too scary) and Feona (too horsey)
before the third, perfection herself, arrives. Phoebe is English, like the others, but
the trouble is that she's from the 1920s, brought into the frenetic present day of
New York City by Josh's friend Aaron, who's learned how to travel time via a
school computer. The time-travel premise is lazily conceived as some kind of
digital voodoo, but readers will have a good time bouncing between days and
centuries with Josh and Aaron. At the heart of this slight diversion is a better
book-maybe two-that might not be so funny. Phoebe, in her own time a gov-
erness with a fractious charge and in love with a young man "far above [her] sta-
tion," deserves more space then she gets here. So does Josh-he's a classic Peck's
Good Kid trying to deal with an ambitious mother, a trying sister, and a dad who's
moved to Chicago for a "trial separation": "I hadn't gotten around to mentioning
it to anybody. I didn't even like mentioning it to myself." We enjoy getting to
know both these characters, but they get a bit lost in the novel's mechanics. RS
PERKINS, LYNNE RAE 
Home Lovely; written and illus. by Lynne Rae
Perkins. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13688-5 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13687-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Through circumstances unnamed but certainly dismal, Tiffany and her mother,
Janelle, have to move into a trailer and Janelle has to go to work. To keep herself
amused while Janelle is away, Tiffany starts a garden from some seedlings she's
found; while she's at first disappointed when mailman Bob tells her she's growing
tomatoes, potatoes, and melons rather than the flowers she'd hoped for, the work
soon wins her over: "It was a big day when Tiffany picked the first red tomato
from the vine." Unlike too many picture books about a single-parent family, this
one is about something else too; instead of being a story of "adjustment," it's one
of, well, growth. Tiffany and Janelle (and generous Bob) are made vivid through
their particularities, also etched in the scratchy individuality of Perkins' watercolor
and pen-and-ink pictures with a taste for patterned and textured surfaces and com-
fortable people. When Tiffany ties up her tomato plants-with her socks- 
you
can see the intensity and determination in her bold blue eyes. RS
PFEFFER, SUSAN BETH 
Sara Kate Saves the World; illus. by Tony DeLuna. 
Holt,
1995 
58p 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-3148-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Sara Kate (of Sara Kate, Superkid, BCCB 1/95) is finding out that having super-
powers, particularly superpowers as random as hers, isn't all it's cracked up to be.
She can taunt her older brother with them, but she can't seem to use them to fend
off the third-grade bully and she never seems to achieve anything really heroic.
Eventually, however, with the help of her new friend, Ashley, and in spite of her
unhelpful otherworldly capabilities, she assists a lady who fell and hurt herself and
decides that perhaps heroism lies in smaller acts than she had realized. The plot
contrivances are pretty unlikely, both that of the convenient lady-in-distress and
Sara Kate's eventually successful use of her superpowers to thwart the bully (x-ray
vision allows her to see his teddy-bear underpants), but Sara Kate is still a sympa-
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 25
thetic and realistic junior heroine. Kids who feel like perennial underdogs will
appreciate her struggle for ordinary power as well as superpower. Squiggly and
cheerfully hasty line drawings appear throughout. DS
PIERCE, TAMORA 
EmperorMage: TheImmortals. Karl/Atheneum, 1995 
255p
ISBN 0-689-31989-4 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Daine is a blooming adolescent; one minute she sighs with resignation at her lack
of feminine curves, the next she flares into a temper over an injustice towards her
animal friends. This is her third adventure (see WildMagic, BCCB 2/93), and she
is as saucy as ever. Her unusual ability to commune with animals brings her to the
attention of the Carthakian Emperor Mage, who is a conundrumic blend of char-
ismatic statesman and evil sorcerer. Delegates from Tortall (Daine's home world)
are in sticky negotiations with Carthak and, of course, peace is doomed from the
start. Daine cures the emperor's birds of a mysterious ailment, but soon discovers
that she has been chosen as a vessel for a very obnoxious goddess who is angered by
the emperor's ambition; Daine stumbles into a Mount-Olympus-style battle as
humans, gods, and immortals all get mixed up in the conflict. The pieces are
somewhat difficult to sort out, and too often a '90s sensibility intrudes upon the
scene, creating disjointed and jarring dialogue: "'Back into that cake, buckos,' she
ordered, eyes glittering." Daine resolves issues of feminism, imperialism, vegetari-
anism, and Darwinism with unlikely ease, and her revenge-soaked rampage of
destruction at the end is slightly over the top. Still, Pierce has a flashy, jeweled
style of writing that enhances the courtly milieu and Daine is a heroine who, de-
spite all of her flaws, still manages to coax a tolerant chuckle out of fantasy readers.
HMW
PONCET, SALLY 
Antarctic Encounter: Destination South Georgia; illus. with pho-
tographs by Ben Osborne. 
Simon, 1995 
4 8p
ISBN 0-02-774905-3 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
What might sound like a special-interest geography book will probably have a
wider appeal in its chronicle of three boys and their scientist parents (Sally and
Jdr6me Poncet) who spend half the year on a sheep farm in the Falklands and the
other half cruising the Southern Ocean in a steel-framed yacht and researching the
local wildlife. Although she gives quite a bit of anecdotal information about the
animals of South Georgia and its environs, Poncet wisely surrounds and filters the
material through her kids' experiences at sea and on the islands they visit. South
Georgia could be a fantasy island for lots of kids, with a good balance of play,
home-schooling, and rudimentary scientific observation. Color photographs are
sometimes too dark, but there are plenty of them, each carefully labeled. Maps, a
photographic key to the birds and seals studied by the Poncets, and an index are
included. RS
PRIOR, NATALIE JANE 
The Paw; illus. by Terry Denton. 
Independent Publish-
ers/Allen & Unwin, 1995 
[32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 1-86373-412-0 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-86373-411-2 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
"Welcome to the adventures of the world's cheekiest cat-burglar" heralds the back
cover, which prepares readers for a tempting glimpse into the underworld of an
26 
* THE BULLETIN
Aussie with plenty of moxie: "During the day, Leonie was a schoolgirl. At night,
she was a cat-burglar. . . . Newspapers printed stories about her. They called
her ... THE PAW." Professionally outfitted in sneakers, super-suction pads, fanny
pack, and a rumply cat costume (whiskers and all), The Paw strikes a blow for
social justice: "She fed stolen caviar and turkey to starving cats, and left fifty-dollar
notes for orphans." Leonie is a cross between Sendak's Max and Fitzhugh's Harriet
the Spy as she slinks through her nocturnal outings boldly and mischievously (she
even temporarily purloins an old gentleman's false teeth "just to prove she could
do it"). Cascading type, close-up vignettes, and characters leaping across picture
frames all create a visual fluidity which livens up the sometimes stiff narrative style.
Denton's pictures are akin to Henrik Drescher's surreal, angled perspectives with
the added benefit of a tight focus and sharp, rich colors; for alert readers, sly jokes
invade every scene (although some of te hidden references are obscure-why, for
instance, is an alligator following Leonie around?). The Paw never wavers from
her commitment to her career, and when she has a cup of tea with one of her
wealthy victims, she blithely memorizes the combination of his safe for "next time."
Try Leonie as a Robin Hood alternative for story hour-Maid Marian she ain't.
HMW
RADLEY, GAL 
Odd Man Out. Macmillan, 1995 
131p
ISBN 0-02-775792-7 
$14.00 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Jordy and Kit are twin brother and sister, sixth-graders recently transplanted to a
small Missouri town that doesn't make it easy for outsiders. Kit takes under her
wing another outsider: Oakley Duster, a mentally retarded man who lives alone
and friendless, eking out a living doing odd jobs. Soon Jordy too befriends Oakley,
but then Kit's attention is diverted away from Oakley and from her twin to a
handsome boy who has, unbeknownst to Kit, been taunting Oakley. The tone
here is flat, so that much of the book seems like setup for a drama that never quite
comes, the story seems set in no particular time, and the characters never really
develop; several different recurring motifs (Jordy sometimes imagines himself an
Indian brave with a recalcitrant sister and sometimes pictures himself as the neu-
tral country of Switzerland, for instance) clutter the picture further. More success-
fully depicted is Jordy's jealousy of his twin's extrafamilial interests and Kit's shy
hopes of romance with the perfidious Davis (whose personality she eventually catches
on to). While the final wrap-up may satisfy some readers (Kit and Jordy proudly
walk with Oakley in the town parade, then discover that amid Oakley's wagon of
junk is an authentic Native American canoe perfect for the new local museum),
the finish is purposive and too tidy. DS
RANSOM, CANDICE F. 
More Than a Name. 
Macmillan, 1995 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-02-775795-1 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Cammie's mother has gotten married, and Cammie is trying desperately to fit in
with her new family and her new third-grade class. She doesn't remember her
father, who left when she was just a baby, and she hopes that her new stepfather
will adopt her, giving her the same name as the rest of the family. Cammie's fear
that she's not a good enough daughter for Mike to adopt and her gradual adjust-
ment to her new father and school provide the continuing threads through chapter
adventures about class picture day, Halloween, her teasing fourth-grade step-cousin
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 
27
William, and a birthday celebration that goes both wrong and right. Ransom's
presentation of a child working hard to make things good for everybody is solid
and authentic, and Cammie's uncertainty will be recognized by any kid who's
been in social limbo. The characterizations are quietly telling, with Mike a nice
guy who's also uncertain about his new family, Cammie's classmates realistically
leery of the newcomer but prepared to accept her, and bratty cousin William even-
tually proving to be an okay guy. While the story foregoes its honesty for a senti-
mental set-up at the end (Mike pledges to adopt Cammie and he gets her the
spaniel puppy of her dreams) it's still pleasing to see a nice kid get the joy she
deserves. DS
ROBINET, HARRIETTE GILLEM 
If You Please, President Lincoln. 
Karl/Atheneum,
1995 
14 9p
ISBN 0-689-31969-X 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Free land, free transportation, free tools, and cotton seed. It seems irresistible to
some four hundred recently emancipated blacks who don't recognize the offer for
what it really is-a plan to remove them to foreign soil, where they won't compete
with white American laborers. As they wait, unfed, aboard a cramped ship for the
promoters to negotiate fees and contracts, the hapless passengers realize this is only
a foretaste of the miseries that await them in their promised land of Isle a Vache,
Haiti. Moses of Father Fitzpatrick, a well-educated house slave who has run away
from his Jesuit master to avoid being sold South, organizes his fellow "colonists"
after they are virtually marooned on an island with barren soil and no fresh water.
The tale is based on an actual colonization scheme which Robinet discusses in a
concluding note; although details of island life cannot be verified, fictionalized
characters are well-developed and the imagined sequence of events from landing to
rescue is credibly delineated. Moses' lapses into platitude ("Hardships challenge
people to rise or to fall in the virtues of patience and industry and sharing") and
bursts of indignation ("How dare some people keep others as slaves? What injus-
tice!") interject a tone of preaching and pedantry that seriously undermines his
otherwise warmly personal narration. Still, Moses is a complex protagonist, whose
struggle to control his own arrogance toward his less gifted and educated comrades
lends insight into a legacy of slavery that threatened solidarity within new free
black communities. EB
ROSTKOWSKI, MARGARET I. 
Moon Dance. 
Browndeer/Harcourt, 1995 
180p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-276638-3 
$11.00
Papered. ISBN 0-15-200194-8 
$5.00 
R Gr. 6-10
Sixteen-year-old Miranda expected that she and her older sister Jenny would be
mere tag-alongs on cousin Emily's trek through the Utah canyons to document
cave paintings for her senior thesis, but Jenny proves to be as sharp-eyed as she is
complaining, and Mira is surprised by her own deep sensitivity to the stylized
Hitsatsinom images they encounter. Mira's imaginative interpretations of the re-
peated figures of an Indian woman and her affinity to the mysterious canyons win
the affections of Emily's cliff-scaling acquaintance Max, who accompanies them as
a sort of technical consultant. This is the first time a young man has passed over
femme fatale Jenny in favor of Mira, and when Mira marvels at his choice Max
explains, "It's not the looks. It's what's behind the eyes.... You've got it behind
the eyes, Miranda." Readers who have ever felt upstaged by a more glamorous
28 
* THE BULLETIN
sister or friend will especially enjoy this tender (if somewhat improbably contrived)
romance set in an exotic locale. And it doesn't hurt that Jenny graciously defers to
Mira's happiness, strengthening the bond between the sisters and providing a re-
freshing alternative to a beautiful-but-heartless-rival stock character. EB
RYIANT, CYNTHIA 
The Van Gogh Cafe. 
Harcourt, 1995 
53p
ISBN 0-15-200843-8 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Cafes are classic writer hang-outs, and here one writer (Rylant) writes about an-
other writer (unnamed) writing about the Van Gogh Cafe. The conceit is readily
apparent in the final story, but the preceding vignettes are told from the third-
person point-of-view of Clara, the cafe owner's daughter, who notices the un-
canny nature of the cafe: "Sometimes the magic wakes itself up, and people and
animals and things notice it... and pretty soon word spreads that there is a cafe .
. . that is wonderful, like a dream, like a mystery, like a painting." Florid images
praising community roots, neighborliness, and the odd quirks of ruraldom are
lyrically rendered, but the scenarios are not fleshed out and offer only brief, bu-
colic glimpses of the cafe's "magic" at work: a possum hanging outside inspires a
lonely widower to change his life; lightning sparks a fortune telling epidemic; and
magic muffins replicate themselves in order to feed a busload of snowbound chil-
dren. Changes in tense and artificial segues ("But the star will not be the last
wanderer making his way home by way of the Van Gogh Cafe. There will be
others. In fact, one is about to land on its roof. Magic is never wasted on a
wayward gull ... ") are distancing and create the feeling that readers are hovering
over the scene, rather than experiencing it with senses engaged. The smells, hustle
and bustle, and conversational tone that add texture to a cafe-or fiction-are
missing from these impressionistic sketches. The magical realism, however, adds a
dash or two of whimsy and generous servings of poetic prose for more contempla-
tive readers. HMW
SAN SoucI, ROBERT D., ad. 
The Faithful Friend; illus. by Brian Pinkney. 
Simon,
1995 
40p
ISBN 0-02-786131-7 
$16.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
Like Ehrlich's Italian variant Pome and Peel (BCCB 9/90), this celebrates a friend-
ship threatened by forces of evil: when the Caribbean plantation owner's son,
Clement, falls in love with beautiful Pauline, his white friend Hippolyte protects
them from her guardian's zombies, first by turning the couple away from poisoned
water and mangoes, then by hiding in their bridal chamber to kill a deadly serpent.
Alas, the snake disappears. Hippolyte is accused of planning to kill his friend out
of jealousy, and, just as the zombies have threatened, he turns to stone when he
explains the black magic. Fortunately, he's brought back to life by an old beggar
resurrected, just for this purpose, from the grave where Clement and Hippolyte
had paused in their travels to give him a decent burial. If it sounds complicated, it
is, but San Souci has a gift for adaptations that read smoothly without cheating
their folkloric sources. His informed note discusses the tale type, placing this West
Indian variant from Martinique in a broader cross-cultural context and describing
changes he's made along with the reasons for them. Older picture-book audiences
will relish the story's suspense, which is enhanced by Pinkney's brooding illustra-
tions. The tension of his sophisticated ghostly white linework against backgrounds
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 
29
of dark forest or dim interiors exposes a twilight side to characteristically brilliant
Caribbean colors. BH
SIEGEL, BEATRICE 
Marian Wright Edelman: The Making ofa Crusader. Simon,
1995 
159p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-02-782629-5 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Her gaze is compelling and warm, and she holds two children in an embrace con-
noting protection, strength, and character-and that's just the cover. Marian
Wright Edelman is a woman of many depths, and here Beatrice Siegel meticu-
lously traces her life from the 1940s and segregation, to the Civil Rights Move-
ment, through the optimistic fervor of the Great Society, and up to her well-known
children's crusade of the 1990s ("We have come a long way in the African-Ameri-
can community, but we now face the worst crisis since slavery"). She is driven and
impassioned about saving America's children, and Siegel's cadenced text blends so
easily with Edelman's own words that this biography is a swift, precise read. Simi-
larly to Siegel's The Year They Walked (BCCB 4/92) the book fuses relevant social
history, insider politics, and personal details into an honest and thorough account
of the woman who dedicated her life to "love and respect and protect" all children.
At points, this determined biography diverges into some weighty contextual expla-
nations, but the research is thorough and careful (index and bibliography are in-
cluded, although there are no specific source notes), the photos are generous, and
the focus is clear and poised. HMW
SKINNER, DAVID 
The Wrecker. 
Simon, 1995 
106p
ISBN 0-671-79771-9 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Michael is the new kid, the "Stupid New Kid Who Didn't Know Where to Go" at
Sherman Junior High, and he's unnerved when weird little Theo asks him to be
his "ally," if not his friend: "I don't need a friend. I can be your friend if you want.
Lots of people seem to need friends. Normal people. I'm not normal." No, Theo
isn't-he's a nightmare-genius, the geek most everyone steers clear of. Theo wants
Michael's help in his plan to "wreck" a bully who has been tormenting him: "I
don't want to ruin Jeffrey's day. I want him wrecked. Go for his mind. Go for his
soul." The pared style of Skinner's too-eccentric first novel, You Must Kiss a Whale
(BCCB 6/92) is here employed with considerable effect, nowhere better than in its
portrait of Theo, the gifted child from hell, who wanders through a junkpile wait-
ing for pieces to "pick" him and tell him how to put them together with amazing
results-a mechanical spider that frightens you while it ties your shoes, a thing
that flies and extracts water from the air, a "wrecker." The events are spooky, the
school setting authentic, the writing deceptively plain: "Once upon a time there
were two boys and a bully. The boys got together and struck the bully down." RS
SKURZYNSKI, GLORIA 
Cyberstorm. 
Macmillan, 1995 
137p
ISBN 0-02-782926-X 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Darcy is not going to let Baltimore County Animal Control take her precious dog,
Chip; while Dad tries to talk reason to the dogcatchers, Darcy and Chip take
refuge in her elderly neighbor's Rent-a-Memory unit until the crisis passes. At first
the images downloaded from Mrs. Galloway's pleasant memories ("From head to
hard drive, with no detours") are innocuous enough. Then Mrs. Galloway joins
30 
* THE BULLETIN
Darcy inside, the machine goes haywire, the door jams, the old woman becomes
suicidal, a cyclone appears . .. Darcy's sixth-grade buddy Erik rides to her rescue
on his solar-powered skateboard and shows the frantic adults who are trying to
open the jammed machine how to snatch Darcy from the jaws of certain death.
The futuristic, trapped-in-virtual-reality theme should be exciting (the raging cy-
clone does deliver some nail-gnawing moments), but most of Mrs. Galloway's
memories of her baby-buggy-pushing early years are too bland and underdevel-
oped to generate much reader empathy, and the gimmickry of the Rent-a-Memory
device is not convincingly explained. Young readers may enjoy this glimpse into
the year 2015, but those who want more of a jolt from their VR might check out
Gillian Cross's New World (BCCB 6/95). EB
SMITH, JANICE LEE 
Wizardand Wart at Sea; illus. by Paul Meisel. 
HarperCollins,
1995 
48p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024755-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024754-1 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-2
With a hocus and a pocus and a very loud "Poofl" Wizard transports himself and
his canine companion Wart to a perfect vacation spot-the beach. "'This is the
life,' Wizard said. 'Nothing to do but read.' 'And nothing to do but eat,' said
Wart." The two friends find themselves in the midst of gatherings of pansy pot-
ters, pickle packers, and plumbers, and the beach scenes are filled with funny jux-
tapositions of the unconventional conventioneers. When a flock of seagulls descends
upon the reclining Wart, everything runs amok (including some wayward goats
frolicking on the sand), and Wizard's bungled attempts at magic ruin everyone
else's vacation. There's no plot here, but Wizard's spoofed (and goofed) spells and
Wart's gluttony provide some wry humor for those family trips when nothing
seems to go right. HMW
SOTO, GARY 
Boys at Work; illus. by Robert Casilla. 
Delacorte, 1995 
134p
ISBN 0-385-32048-5 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Rudy's days are numbered when he accidentally smashes the Discman belonging
to tough-guy Slinky, so he and his loyal buddy, Alex, attempt to earn the replace-
ment cost before Slinky scrambles Rudy's brains in retribution ("He had just learned
division in school, and the thought of it being punched out of his head made him
sick"). The boys, whose fourth-grade finances are somewhat limited, try a variety
of money-making concerns--de-fleaing cats, cleaning out a garage, recycling cans,
fishing, sending out chain letters, and returning a lost cat, among other things-
and while they find that some jobs cost as much or more than they are worth, the
pair eventually manages to stave off the impending disaster. This kind of story is
usually written as frenetic slapstick, and Soto's dry, understated humor makes it
both funnier and fresher. The kids' dialogue is authentic, easy, and clever, and the
characters are quietly individualized and amusing without becoming caricatures.
The Spanish words are clear in context and help evoke the atmosphere of hot
summer days in Fresno. This is an immensely likable book about an engaging pair
of kids, and youngsters will both relish and envy Rudy and Alex's financial success.
Softly realistic black-and-white illustrations, which lack the text's sparkle, appear
throughout. DS
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 31
SPRINGER, NANCY 
LookingforJamie Bridger. Dial, 1995 
159p
ISBN 0-8037-1773-3 
$14.99 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Fourteen-year-old Jamie Bridger has led a sheltered life with her domineering grand-
father and loving but passive grandmother; her quest to know about her parentage
(a topic her grandparents refuse to discuss) becomes paramount when her grandfa-
ther dies, reducing her grandmother to a basket case and leaving Jamie in charge of
running the household. Working on dim memories and small hints about the
past, Jamie travels across Pennsylvania and New York to find the man she believes
to be her father. She does discover her grandparents' estranged son (they threw
him out when they discovered he was gay), also named Jamie Bridger, but she
eventually finds out that he is not her father but her brother, that she was in fact
the daughter of the people she knew as her grandparents. The soap-opera plot is
pleasurably dramatic but the twists, turns, and coincidences strain credibility past
reason and into farce (when Jamie arrives in New York, for instance, she is saved
from a vicious mugger by a pair of kind strangers-the other Jamie Bridger and his
boyfriend). The emotions are facile and the characters seem created to move the
plot along rather than possessing any internal humanity. Kids who are looking for
identity-hunting stories may appreciate the quick pace and readability here, but
they'd be better off with Lowry's Finda Stranger, Say Goodbye (BCCB 10/78). DS
TAMAR, ERIKA 
The unkyard Dog. 
Knopf, 1995 
155p
ISBN 0-679-87057-1 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
An abused dog, a new stepfather, trouble with the girls at school-eleven-year-old
Katie has plenty to handle. The dog, whom Katie names Lucky, is a miserable
creature guarding an urban junkyard; the stepfather is a rough man with a heart of
gold; the girls pick on Katie for her lack of interest in boys and makeup. Each of
the plot threads is assuredly formulaic, but equally assured to appeal. Katie be-
friends the dog; her stepfather befriends her via his help in building a doghouse for
Lucky; the boy whom all the girls like turns out to be a protector of the junkyard
dog as well. Despite the tough inner-city setting (Katie and her family live in a
housing project), this is an old-fashioned, cozy, and predictable story with happy
endings for all concerned. In an afterword, Tamar makes a plea for donations ("If
you would like to help her, please contact Chitra in care of her nonprofit tax-
exempt animal charity... ") that seems a trifle pushy. RS
TURNER, ANN 
Dust for Dinner; illus. by Robert Barrett. 
HarperCollins,
1995 
6 4p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023377-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023376-1 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Little kids lap up good disaster stories, and they should be delighted to find one
they can read themselves. Jake, a youngster from the wind-ravaged West of the
1930s, describes how his family is forced to auction off their desolate farm and
head to California in search of work. The spare, clipped text endemic to the easy
chapter-book format actually lends poignancy to this tale: "The wind blew dust
into the house, and into our faces. One night I said, 'We are having dust for
dinner!' but nobody laughed." Pen-and-watercolor illustrations adequately con-
vey a sense of place, and the grief and hope ofJake's family surface on their expres-
sively rendered countenances. Adults may zero in on the obvious social-studies
connection, but this could be an enticing addition to a weather unit as well. EB
32 
* THE BULLETIN
VAN ALLSBURG, CHRIS 
Bad Day at Riverbend; written and illus. by Chris Van
Allsburg. 
Houghton, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-67347-X 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
See this month's Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
VAN DIJK, LUTZ 
Damned Strong Love: The True Story of Willi G. and Stefan K;
tr. from the German by Elizabeth D. Crawford. 
Holt, 1995 
138p
ISBN 0-8050-3770-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Willi G. was a German soldier in World War II, Stefan K. a Polish student and
budding actor; this book is in many ways a tale of star-crossed lovers, its primary
interest lying in the fact that the lovers are both male. A masturbation session with
his older brother brings Stefan, sixteen, to the realization that he is a homosexual:
"Finally I knew what was different about me. And that was a good feeling." One
night, while walking from the theater where he is employed, Stefan meets Willi, a
member of the German occupying forces, and the two quickly become lovers,
meeting clandestinely, in danger from both Willi's superiors and Polish partisans
suspicious of collaboration with the enemy. The love affair and Stefan's narration
are sweet and naive; readers in search of moral complexity will need to look be-
yond his words. Although Stefan is a proud Pole and Willi an equally proud
German soldier determined to do his part to gain lebensraum for the Fatherland,
politics and war seem a side issue here, only popping up when they impede the
passionate romance. Willi is sent to the Russian front; Stefan, convicted (by evi-
dence of a letter he sent Willi) of committing unnatural acts, is sent to a bleak
incarceration from which he makes his escape as the war winds down. The view-
point is wide-eyed and somewhat self-centered-authentically adolescent and re-
sisting the heroics of much World War II fiction for young people. RS
WAGGONER, KAREN 
Partners; illus by Cat Bowman Smith. 
Simon, 1995 
95p
ISBN 0-671-86466-1 
$13.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Jamie is more than anxious to start raising a family of pet mice. His intense focus
never wavers from his goal as he struggles against a profiteering brother/partner, a
scathingly snotty sister with a mean (and too lean) cat, and, ultimately, his own
reluctance to stand up to his older brother. Jamie adores Gordon, even though
Gordon wants to sell the mice for snake food, and Jamie's clever and consistent
effort to win Gordon over eventually pays off in fuzzy mice babies, rather than in
dollars. Jamie has a puppy dog-like loyalty to big brother, but he grows-just a
little-in asserting his own independence. The breezy and upbeat text, with a
story similar to that in Havill's Saving Owen's Toad (BCCB 12/94), is accented
with lumpy, scribbled drawings that evoke some of the natural humor of the story.
The resolution is a bit contrived (math triumphs over wrath, as Jamie gains Gordon's
respect through a story problem) and the tension is diffused too abruptly (the cat is
no longer a threat after conveniently falling ill), but Jamie is an affable and encour-
aging character for small readers with big worries. HMW
WEAVER, WILL Farm Team. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
283p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023589-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023588-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Picking up right where Striking Out (BCCB 2/94) left off, this sequel begins with
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 33
Billy's father Abner exacting juicy revenge on the used-car dealer who sold his wife
a lemon. It's a fabulous, funny scene-Abner annihilates the car-dealer's stock
and office with a tractor. Unfortunately, it means that Abner has to spend some
time in jail, which in turn means that fourteen-year-old Billy has to spend his
whole summer working on the family farm, with no time left over for summer
baseball. Unlike the first book, which was flecked with humor but still fairly bleak
in its portrait of a hard, sad family, this one can't seem to make up its mind what
it wants to be, posing serious questions and answering them with sentimental solu-
tions. The county is thinking of remanding Billy to custodial care? Billy and his
mother hatch a plot in which a local autistic man poses as Billy's visiting uncle-
the fact that he exposes himself to a visiting social worker in the barn seems to take
care of the problem. Abner has to pay restitution for the destroyed property? He's
got thousands hidden in the attic and directs Billy to pay the man off-in dimes.
Billy can't play baseball? His mom helps him start a "farm league" of ragtag misfits
in one of their fields, and the team ends up beating the town team in a game won
when a hit batted by Billy's nemesis King Kenwood is neatly caught by Billy's dog.
Although those who read the first book might agree that Billy deserves a break
after all the hell he's been through, the sequel is hard to swallow if fun to read. It
may be that Weaver is setting us up for the third book-Billy's mother still doesn't
know about the hidden hoard-but it's going to be difficult to come back down
after getting so giddy. RS
WEXLER, JEROME 
Everyday Mysteries; written and illus. with photographs by Jerome
Wexler. 
Dutton, 1995 
40p
ISBN 0-525-45363-6 
$12.99 
R* Gr. 2-4
We've seen this idea before-photographs of the everyday made, by closeups, into
puzzling games-but rarely has it offered this level of ingenuity or even beauty. In
his introduction, Wexler says, "The photographs may allow you to see (and re-
member) details or shapes or patterns. The photographs can make you think."
They can indeed: who would have thought, for instance, that a cantaloupe's sur-
face would seem, up close, to teem with papery creatures, or that a ruffled potato
chip would become an object of glistening mystery when seen on-edge and stripped
of context? The photographs also use some original twists, such as showing their
subjects only in silhouette, and the glossy black pages add emphasis to the myster-
ies of line and shape within the images. The text is separated into sections, each
dealing with a certain kind of picture (Part of the Whole, Surfaces Close Up,
Cross Sections, and Silhouettes); there is some conceptual overlap between them
but the ideas are well-explained. Solutions appear at the end of each section (or on
the back cover, for the stumpers on the front). This would be a stimulating intro-
duction to art or photography, demonstrating the merits of looking closely and
thinking creatively when approaching what you see; it might also make a lively
read-aloud (show-aloud?) puzzle for small groups of younger kids, who will also be
intrigued with the intricate beauty of the most mundane pieces of our lives. DS
WILLIAMS, BARBARA 
Titanic Crossing. Dial, 1995 
16 7p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1791-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1790-3 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Albert is the only one in his family pleased to be leaving England for his
grandmother's home in Washington. His little sister Virginia is fretful about leav-
ing a beloved tutor behind; his widowed mother is resentful and leery of being
34 
* 
THE BULLETIN
under the thumb of her mother-in-law, who controls the purse strings and insists
upon the return of the family under the watchful eye of the devious and overbear-
ing Uncle Clay. But all Albert can excitedly think about is their passage-on the
maiden voyage of the celebrated Titanic, no less. Considering that readers will
know from the dramatic cover painting if not from popular history what the fate
of that voyage was to be, there's an awful lot of superfluous foreshadowing, as
when the cabin steward points out the life belts: "Nothing's going to happen
what's you'll need them, of course, but I have to show you anyways." While
suspenseful it isn't, the story does have grand adventure of an old-fashioned sort,
with Albert and a new friend curiously combing the ship and discovering, for one
thing, the paucity of lifeboats for third-class passengers, a lack that spells doom for
his mother when she is caught on that deck during the accident. Both kids survive
and recover nicely and with pluck, and it turns out Grandmother isn't such a bad
sort after all. RS
WILLIAMS-GARCIA, RITA 
Like Sisters on the Homefront. Lodestar, 1995 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-525-67465-9 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 8-12
Well, this may be about a city girl finding herself with country relatives, but it isn't
quite Understood Betsy: fourteen-year-old Gayle is an African-American inner-city
girl, mother of one young son already when she discovers she's pregnant again.
Her mother insists she get an abortion and then sends her and the little boy down
to relatives in Georgia, and Gayle initially hates the place. She's resentful of and
intimidated by her preacher uncle, she dislikes her aunt's cheerful requirement
that Gayle meet her standards of housekeeping and child care, and she despises her
religious same-age cousin, Cookie. Most of all she misses the companionship of
her boyfriend and her homegirls, whose language she comprehended and whose
understanding bolstered her. It's fairly predictable that Gayle takes a shine to the
feisty old family matriarch and, eventually, all her Georgia relatives, coming to
appreciate bonds of kinship in a way she hadn't before, but it's an engaging process
to watch. 
Painting Gayle as a hard-edged, high-spirited young woman clearly
headed for either trouble or triumph, Williams-Garcia breathes life into what could
have been a stereotypical portrait of a trash-talking, streetwise city teen, and while
its scales are tipped in favor of a responsible life, the book is honest enough to
acknowledge the pleasures of the other kind. The text successfully incorporates
some of Gayle's urban speech patterns into the third-person narration as well as
giving Gayle some salty, earthy, and very funny dialogue, such as when she's at-
tempting to ascertain just how much sexual experience her cousin has had ("Cookie,
look me dead in the eye and tell me you don't get hot in the box"). Gayle is a
tough, plausible, and atypical heroine; teens will appreciate the story of her matu-
ration. DS
YEP, LAURENCE 
ThiefofHearts. HarperCollins, 1995 
197p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025342-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025341-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Stacy is not pleased that she's been elected by her parents to show a new girl from
China around school, particularly when it turns out that Hong Ch'un is snotty
and difficult, even calling Stacy t'ung chung, "mixed seed." Stacy's mother (whose
story was told in Child of the Owl, BCCB 4/77) is of Chinese descent, and her
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 35
father Caucasian, and when Hong Ch'un is accused by the other kids of stealing,
Stacy feels torn between parental instruction, ethnic loyalty, and peer acceptance.
This bicultural dilemma is somewhat forced into a formulaic school-story (and is
ludicrously concluded via a mad-scientist prank Stacy's father cooks up to find out
the real thief), but in between set-up and denouement comes a marvelously ren-
dered plot sequence that takes Stacy, her mother, and great-grandmother ("Tai-
Paw") to San Francisco's Chinatown, where Hong Ch'un has run to escape her
torment and homesickness. There, Mom and Tai-Paw find remnants of family
and memories, and Stacy begins to see more of her own cultural and personal
history. As she did in Child ofthe Owl, Tai-Paw tells an old and resonant Chinese
story that gives the novel its title, but the relevance here of the Thief of Hearts
story to Stacy's various dilemmas is not readily apparent. While unevenly paced
and textured, the book at heart is a strong portrait of a child finding her present in
the past. RS
YOLEN, JANE 
The Wild Hunt; illus. by Francisco Mora. 
Harcourt, 1995 
138p
ISBN 0-15-200211-1 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
With each chapter divided into three layers (Chapter One, Chapter One-Sort
Of, Chapter One-Almost, et seq.) that measure the spaces between reader and
story, Yolen's latest novel is too artful for its own good. We see a boy named Jerold
and another named Gerund who live in the same house sort of/almost; there's a
mysterious cat who roams as she pleases, and the Wild Hunt that Jerold reads
about and Gerund seeks rides through all. The book is not easy to get into; readers
will need to be patient in settling into the contrapuntal narratives that, after a
while, create a structural tension that matches the suspense of the story itself. The
cat is actually the White Goddess; the leader of the Hunt, the Horned King, is her
husband, and the two are enacting a cyclical ritual in which she chooses a hero
(Jerold) whom her husband must name and capture. There is much power in
Yolen's writing ("the dog's howl filled the house, pushing every bit of silence into
the corners like dirt"), and there's enough pathos and humor to balance the essen-
tial solemnity of the tale. Still, you can't help thinking that the author would have
done better to tell her story straight out; the narrative play is interesting in a some-
what recursive way but gives the proceedings an abstract quality that keeps the
reader at a distance. RS
ZOEHFELD, KATHLEEN WEIDNER 
How Mountains Are Made; illus. by James Gra-
ham Hale. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p 
(Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024510-7 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024509-3 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-445128-3 
$4.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Zoehfeld offers her readers a large serving of plate tectonics, earth building, and
fossil analysis which, despite the chatty tone of her text, amounts to a lot of detail
to chew and digest in one sitting. Four amiable cartoon tykes take an unescorted
hike up their local mountain and discover the fossil of a sea creature upon the
crest. The discovery leads them to explain the similar developments of their moun-
tain (presumably in some U.S. locale) and of Mount Everest. Next they consider
four types of mountain formation-folded, fault block, dome, and volcanic-and
discuss geological dating of mountains, forces of erosion, and finally, major North
American ranges. Scales of size are conveyed more clearly than scales of time, and
36 
* THE BULLETIN
where the text refers to three layers of earth, the accompanying illustration shows a
dozen. Despite the series' promise of "hands-on activities," this title's single do-it-
yourself project involves crumpling a dishtowel to replicate folding. Nonetheless,
primary-grade teachers may find this cheery-looking work useful in a classroom
setting, where the overwhelming whole can be examined in manageable bits. See
also Gail Gibbons' Planet Earth/Inside Out, reviewed above. EB
ZOLOTOW, CHARLOTTE 
When the Wind Stops; illus. by Stefano Vitale. 
Rev. ed.
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025426-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025425-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
A little boy feels sorry when the day is over, but his mother explains that day is
beginning somewhere else, and that "Nothing ends ... It begins in another place
or in a different way." Zolotow's gently poetic text about what Lion King fans will
think of as "The Circle of Life" is on its third edition, this time with slight revi-
sions and with large color paintings replacing the small pencil sketches of the pre-
vious edition illustrated by Howard Knotts. 
Vitale's deliberately flat,
two-dimensional pictures contrast interestingly with the visible grain and texture
of the wood they are painted upon. Each of the pictures carries a certain fascina-
tion (the picture of a tree in all four seasons is one example) but the art undercuts
the story's effectiveness in two ways. The mother and child, with their flat, inex-
pressive faces, never seem real enough to be having a cozy bedtime chat-they are
also featured far less than in the previous edition. Additionally, the sweep, color,
and drama Vitale creates overpower the quiet story. With its showier illustrations,
this will be easier to see at story hour, but libraries who still have the last version of
this book will probably want to keep it. SDL
^'ifW
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 
37
REVIEW POLICY
While there is some evidence to suggest that the number of children's books pub-
lished each year is decreasing, there are still upwards of 5000 new books each year
that require selection decisions from librarians, teachers, parents, and children them-
selves. Here at the Bulletin, we review approximately 800 books annually, giving
critical attention to those titles we think our subscribers most want to know about.
Most Bulletin readers are school and public librarians; this fact is at the heart of our
selection and reviewing decisions.
We don't just review the best. We review the useful, the unusual, the crowd-
pleasers, the ambitious. (We also review the overblown, overhyped, and over-
heated.) An adjective that's easy to overuse in children's book reviewing, but one
that describes what we-reviewers and librarians-are most looking for is solid.
Solid books for solid collections. We want to bring to your attention the books
that deserve-or appear to deserve-a home in a library collection for children.
Maybe not your collection: one person's "star" is another's "NR," and while we
hope not to be wishy-washy, we do recognize that different collections require
differing criteria. Because we know this, we don't review from a checklist. Each
book presents its own rules.
A book review has obligations in two directions: to the book, and to the reader of
the review. We strive to represent each book fairly; we also strive to tell you what
you need to know in order to make a selection decision. Being fair to the book is
being fair to our subscribers: cheat one and you cheat both. Each book gets its
own hearing, and we are mindful that it is our readers who are doing the listening.
And if you ever feel like we're not listening to you, let us know.
You can write to the Bulletin at the Children's Research Center, 54 Gerty Drive,
Champaign, Illinois, 61820, and you can also reach us via email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu. 
For those enjoying the challenge of the World Wide
Web, the Bulletin is constructing its own home page. Right now we have archived
there all the issues from the 1994-95 volume, which can be downloaded and read
via Acrobat software (which is free and available online as a link from the home
page). We will be adding more features in the coming months, and are also con-
sidering the possibility of offering online subscriptions to the journal. For those of
you who find this an interesting proposition, our URL is http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/
collections/bccb/BCCBhome.html-see the inside front cover of this issue for more
information. There's a place on the home page where you can tell us what you
think, and we sincerely hope you do.
Roger Sutton, Editor
38 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans: Siegel
African Americans-fiction:
Robinet; Williams-Garcia
African Americans-stories: San
Souci
Alcoholism-fiction: Deaver,
LeMieux
American Indians-stories: Bunting
Cheyenne
Antarctica: Poncet
Archaelogy-fiction: Rostkowski
Art and artists: Engel
Asian Americans-fiction: Yep
Australia-fiction: Crew; Hill
Baseball-fiction: Weaver
Baths-stories: Arnold; Birchman
BEDTIME STORIES: Zolotow
BIBLE STORIES: Cohen
BIOGRAPHIES: Boas; Cleary;
Cox, C.; Deschamps; Engel;
Siegel
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Adler;
Crew; Radley; Springer;
Williams
Brothers-fiction: Waggoner
Brothers-stories: Arnold; Jaffe
Bullies-fiction: Skinner
California-fiction: McCants
Caribbean Islands-folklore: San
Souci
Cats-fiction: Adler
Censorship-fiction: Krensky
Chicago-fiction: Deaver
Clowns: Greenberg, K.
Colonial era-fiction: Krensky
CONCEPT BOOKS: Wexler;
Zolotow
Cousins-fiction: Williams-Garcia
Cowboys-fiction: Garland; Van
Allsburg
Crime and criminals-stories: Prior
Disasters-fiction: Pausewang;
Turner; Williams
Dogs-fiction: Lowry; Tamar
Dust Bowl-fiction: Turner
Earth science: Gibbons; Zoehfeld
Emotional problems-fiction:
Cadnum; Chambers; LeMieux
England-fiction: Alder; Chambers
ESP: Duncan
Ethics and values: Miklowitz
FANTASY: Hire; Pfeffer; Pierce;
Yolen
Fathers and sons-fiction: Weaver
Fear-stories: Hines
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Heyer; Jaffe;
Kellogg; San Souci
Food and eating-stories: Baer
Friends-fiction: Soto
FUNNY STORIES: Garland;
Lowry
Gardening-stories: Perkins
Geography: Poncet
Germany-fiction: Pausewang
Grandmothers-stories: James
Halloween-stories: Hines
HISTORICAL FICTION: Alder;
Krensky; Robinet; Turner;
Williams
History, U.S.: Blue; Bunting
Cheyenne; Bunting Dandelions,
Greenberg, J.; Hyatt; Kraft;
Krensky; Lawlor; Robinet;
Turner
SEPTEMBER 1995 
* 
39
History, world: Major
Holocaust: Ayer; Boas
Homosexuality-fiction: Springer;
Van Dijk
Horses-fiction: Garland
Identity-fiction: Springer
Immigration: Lawlor
Jews: Boas
Korea-folklore: Jaffe
Labor movement: Kraft
Language arts: Cox, B.
Latinos-fiction: Soto
Libraries-stories: Best
Literature, American: Cox, C.
Literature, children's: Cleary;
Engel
LOVE STORIES: Hite; LeMieux;
Miklowitz; Rostkowski
Missouri-fiction: Radley
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Yep
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Perkins
Mothers and sons-fiction: Hill
Mountains: Zoehfeld
MYSTERY STORIES: Clark;
Crew
Nature study: Poncet
New York City-fiction: Peck
Pets-fiction: Waggoner
Photography: Wexler
Pioneer life: Greenberg, J.
Pioneer life-stories: Bunting
Dandelions
POETRY: Lear; Morgenstern
Puerto Rico-fiction: Mohr
Reading, beginning: Smith;
Turner
Reading, easy: Pfeffer; Waggoner;
Zoehfeld
Reading, family: Hines; James;
Lawlor
Reading, reluctant: Clark;
Garland; Hoover; Peck; Soto;
Van Allsburg; Wexler
Religious education: Cohen
Rodeos: Greenberg
School-fiction: McCants; Skinner
SCIENCE FICTION: Hoover;
Peck; Skurzynski
Shipwrecks-fiction: Williams
SHORT STORIES: Clark; Rylant
Sisters-fiction: Deaver;
Rostkowski
Social issues: Siegel
Spain-folklore: Heyer
SPORTS STORIES: Weaver
Spies: Deschamps
Stepfamilies-fiction: Ransom;
Tamar
Story hour: Arnold; Baer; Best;
Birchman; Bunting Dandelions;
Heyer; Hines; Jaffe; James;
Kellogg; Lear; Macaulay; Mohr;
Perkins; Prior; San Souci; Van
Allsburg; Zolotow
Summer-stories: Smith
TALL TALES: Birchman; Kellogg
Time travel-fiction: Peck
Voyages and travels: Hyatt; Major;
Poncet
West, the-stories: Bunting
Dandelions
Wind-stories: James
Women's studies: Greenberg, J.;
Hyatt; Miklowitz
Work: Greenberg, K.
Work-fiction: Soto
Work-stories: Best
World War II: Ayer; Boas;
Deschamps; Greenberg, J.
World War II-fiction: Van Dijk
.i
Young readers will relish this fast-paced adventure story from the
author and illustrator of the Newbery Medal book, The Whipping Boy.
The 13th Floor has it all--an appealing hero, time-travel, ghosts,
pirates, witchcraft, and razzle-dazzle treasure. Once again Sid Fleischman
deftly combines language and laughter to cast an unforgettable spell.
Ages 8 up. 144 pp. RTE $14.00/0-688-1421 6-8
* "Dramatic."
-Booklist, 
starred review
* "Absorbing."
-Horn Book, starred review
i "Riveting."
-School Library Journa starred review
S"Enticing."
-The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, starred review
| * "Engrossing."
-Publishers Weekly, starred review
+ "Stunning.
-Kirkus 
Reviews. Dointer review
j::
m
SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS
S 
A
$ 
-'*'- Starred by ALA Booklist 
$
K
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
S
$
$$
$
$
$
$S
$
$
$
$
S
S
SS
S$
$
$
$ 
NANCY WINSLOW PARKER 
$
$ 
Full-color pictures by the author 
$
$ "There's a short course in American history in your wallet, and
$ Parker brings it to life by explaining what's on the front and back of 
$
$ U.S. paper currency, from $1 to $100,000. Parker provides original
$ art on almost every page, along with a tiny photo reproduction of 
$
$ the currency under discussion. Interesting facts about familiar 
$
$ 
individuals (Washington, Lincoln) as well as lesser-known ones 
$
$ 
(Salmon P Chase, Woodrow Wilson) abound, and costumes, 
$
$ 
culture [including counterfeiters], and architecture all become 
$
$ 
Parker's subjects.... This is an expansive review that will be great 
$
$ 
for history classes as well as useful in math and art." - Booklist 
$
$ 
Ages 7-12. $14.95 TR (0-06-023411-3); $14.89 LB (0-06-023412-1) 
$
$ 
$
$ 
Also by Nancy Winslow Parker 
$
$ 
THE PRESIDENT'S CABINET AND HOW IT GREW 
$
$ 
1991 Edition 
$
$ 
Full-color pictures by the author
Ages 7-12. $14.89 LB (0-06-021618-2) 
$
S 
S
$ 
t HarperCollins Children'sBooks 
$
$ 
10 East 53rd St., New York, NY 10022 
$
$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS$$
~4
"A wonderful concept book,
grounded in ordinary events
yet touched with magic ...
An auspicious debut!"
-Horn Book
"A simple story of a child's
everyday adventures ...
Clever, colorful photo-collage
illustrations feature a cheerful
SAfrican American girl in an
appealing urban landscape."
-School Library Journal
"A welcome new voice and
vision." -Kirkus Reviews
Ages 2 up. 24 pp.
TR $15.00/0-688-13393-2
LE $14.93/0-688-13394-0
• 
• -Greenwillow Books
cý• A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
r s' 
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
Full-color illustrations by the author
"Beginning with a history of the first words used to describe
black, white, and primary colors, Dewey [traces] the history of the
English names for [varied] hues... [with] much multicultural and
geographical information included." -School Library Journal
"Fun to look at, with each page splashed with lively watercolor
depictions of the color sources under discussion and with an index
that includes a color swatch for each color named."
-Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
"Dewey effectively links color with history, the natural sciences,
and technology.... An attractive volume" -Kirkus Reviews
Ages 7-10. $16.00TR (0-06-021291-8); $15.89LB (0-06-021292-6)
, HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
Retold by Brian Alderson 
Illustrated by Jerry Pinkney
Illustrated by Michael Foreman 
Afterword by Peter Glassman
All ages 192 pp. 
All ages 272 pp.
RTE $20.000-688-14219-2 
RTE $20.00/0-688-09979-3
6 ele/wratiy te/n yeafw et f 
nesi t ec/itions p/ft/e clacsss.
Books of Wonder
William Morrow and Company
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
;je^
tfagic 
and adventure for young and old alike fill the newest
volumes from Books of Wonder Classics. Renowned author
Brian Alderson retells Sheherezade's stories-"Aladdin,"
"Sindbad the Sailor," 'Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves,"
and twenty more- in a collection illuminated with
Michael Foreman's gilded watercolors. And Caldecott Honor
artist Jerry Pinkney captures the drama of Rudyard Kipling's
century-old tales of Mowgli, the lost boy raised by wolves,
in a gift edition to be treasured for generations.
I
The girl
from Yamhill
grows up.
BeverlyClear
continues ner story, describing her college years,
her marriage, her experiences as a librarian, and the
beginnings of her writing career. Told with candor, wit, and
insight, it's a lively look at the early years of a writer who
has been a favorite of young readers for three generations.
Ages 12 up 288pp. Black-and-white photographs 
RTE $15.00/0-688-14267-2
Morrow Junior Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
"A
match
made
in heaven"
-The Bulletin of the
rn- t- 
f-t P"hi'ri' 
0.4-W, 
P-
"A delightful view of a child coming to know and to love
a kitten... It's the fetching, often close-up photos and
the feelings they inspire that make this book special,
with the factual information adding just the right bit of
glue.... Difficult to resist." 
-ALA Booklist
"A simple, appealing documentary... A very satisfying
introduction to the family life of cats." 
-The Horn Book
Ages 3 up 40 pp. TR $15.00/0-688-12901-3; LE $14.93/0-688-12902-1
Morrow junior Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA
RETURN POSTAGE GUAANTEED
SECOND ClASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Empress
and the
Silkworm
by Lily Toy Hong
NEW
by the author/illustrator of
How the Ox Star
Fell fom Heaven
'Starred, Shool Libraryjournal
and
Two ofEverything
*Starred, Bookist
*Starred, ScbooLitraryJwrn
*Starred, The Horn Bo
Lily Toy Hong tells the Chinese legend of the discovery of silk by empress Si Ling-Chi,
A note about the legend and about silk accompanies the story.
Ages 4-8 * ISBN 0-8075-2009-8 * s16.95
Albert Whitman & Company
6340 Oakton Street * Morton Grove, Illinois 60053-2723
-IW 
k
_ .
.
' .
o 
.
i 
¸ 
-
n 
_ 
a 
l" ._ ...-
I ,ki: j 
i
•o 
6 
•iP • 
• 
• 
•
