T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
November 2007
Vol. 61   No. 3
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
November 2007
Vol. 61 No. 3
125  the BIg PICture
 
 The House of a Million Pets  by Ann Hodgman; illus. by Eugene Yelchin
126  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
127  • Race:  A History beyond Black and White  by Marc Aronson
134  • Good Enough to Eat  written and illus. by Brock Cole
138  • Glass Slipper, Gold Sandal:  A Worldwide Cinderella  ad. by Paul  
 
 Fleischman; illus. by Julie Paschkis
150  • What They Found:  Love on 145th Street  by Walter Dean Myers
156  • Knuffle Bunny Too:  A Case of Mistaken Identity  written and illus. by Mo  
 
 Willems
158  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
160  suBjeCt And use Index
124 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita (BH)
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $85.00; combined print & electronic $119.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $53.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $14.30 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.90. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2007 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Eugene Yelchin from The House of a Million Pets ©2007. Used by permission of 
Henry Holt and Company.
novemBer 2007 • 125
the BIg PICture
The House of a Million Pets
by Ann Hodgman; illustrated by Eugene Yelchin 
There’s a long and venerable tradition of nonfiction animal tales in literature for 
young people, from Ernest Thompson Seton’s more serious accounts to the humor 
of Farley Mowat’s Owls in the Family and Gerald Durrell’s My Family and Other 
Animals. The genre has ebbed in recent years, despite the continued proliferation 
of animal-loving youngsters, but now, with Hodgman’s pet-keeping chronicle, the 
critters would seem to be happily, gloriously back.
And what a splendid catalogue of critters: “Hedgehogs. Dogs. Prairie dogs. 
Cats. A baby owl. Dozens of canaries. A few parakeets. Regular mice. Baby wild 
mice whom I fed from an eyedropper. A family of African pygmy mice no bigger 
than a quarter. A family of seven rats who lived in a big cage on my kitchen table. 
Several turtles who lived in my bathtub. Ducklings who lived in a wading pool on 
my porch. A baby bat. A vole. Sugar gliders . . . .” And so on. While Hodgman seems 
to avoid animals larger than she is, that’s the only apparent limit to her enthusiasm, 
and even insect fans and amphibian aficionados will find representatives of their 
favorites in Hodgman’s menagerie.  Her affection shines through as she chronicles 
highs (the author’s enthusiasm for pet rats is palpable) and lows (one chapter offers 
a poignant overview of the experience of taking a pet to be put down), experiences 
absurd (going to her grandfather’s memorial service with a baby sugar glider snuggled 
in her bra) and tender (nursing a baby owl and returning him eventually to the 
care of his mother); permeating all the tales is a natural historian’s curiosity about 
animals and a family member’s affectionate pride in their doings.
The petkeeper herself does play a considerable role in this book, but 
that role is carefully managed: Hodgman’s part ranges from surrogate child figure 
(“Being old is way better than being young,” she tells young readers right up front, 
“because when you’re a grownup, no one can keep you from doing what you want”) 
to straight man for her charges both animal and human. Her tendency to directly 
address the reader (“Put down this book and go get yourself a pet rat!”) seems a result 
of her overflowing zeal for her subject and involves the audience further, as does 
her cheerful championing of the slightly antisocial side of pet ownership, whether 
it be the shock value of carrying a rat on your shoulder or the pleasures of keeping 
animal cages in the kitchen. There’s a touch of Betsy Byars in the rollicking humor, 
yet she’s disarmingly honest about her own mistakes and follies, making herself the 
butt of many situational jokes (the unexpected discovery that her nonsense songs 
to her dogs have been overheard is one of the book’s most hilarious moments). 
What’s more, she openly outlines times when her mistakes or misplaced eagerness 
126 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
have been detrimental to her animals, and she explicitly makes the point that most 
exotics and wild animals are far better off in their natural habitat. 
The witty and personable narrative gains additional utility from its easily 
snackable formatting. Yelchin’s inky animal vignettes are inviting, with a cheerful 
impudence in their scrawled lines that perfectly matches the text. Brief chapters, 
usually treating a particular species or an aspect of pet-ownership, offer some structure 
and useful reading units, as do more focused sidebars on topics ranging from “The 
Worst Things My Dogs Have Eaten” to “How to Cut a Rabbit’s Nails in Thirteen 
Impossible Steps.” Overall, though, this is a happily pell-mell account, as easy to 
read around in as it is to read straightforwardly, and it’ll be a gem for reading aloud 
to a broad range of age groups. (See p. 142 for publication information.)
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Ahlberg, AllAn Previously; illus. by Bruce Ingman. Candlewick, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3542-8 $16.99   
R 5-7 yrs
This multi-folktale sequence in rewind begins with a relieved Goldilocks arriving 
home from the bears’ house, where “previously she had been sleeping in somebody 
else’s bed, eating somebody else’s porridge, and breaking somebody else’s chair!” 
Prior to that she had bumped into a boy named Jack, who had escaped a giant he 
encountered by climbing a beanstalk and who had previously run into difficulty 
fetching water with his sister Jill; earlier the two of them had encountered a frog 
who had formerly been a prince, and so on. The sequential combined fairy tale 
isn’t a new idea, but the humorously terse style, backward spin, and participatorily 
inviting repetition of “Previously . . . ” give Ahlberg’s portmanteau plot its own 
peculiar charm. The book’s creative conclusion, which takes everybody back to 
their origins (the people “had all been little tiny babies,” while “all the buckets 
and chairs and ballroom floors were plants of wood”) has both gentle poetry and a 
symbolic truthfulness in its elemental interpretation of the beginning of tales, and 
the tenderness of the wind-down could make this contentedly quirky narrative an 
offbeat bedtime story. Ingman’s acrylic illustrations have a touch of set design to 
them; the childlike draftsmanship of the robust main figures contrasts with the 
passersby (human and otherwise) and landscape elements constructed solely out of 
black linework, an effect that underscores the mood of domestic fantasy. Youngsters 
will adore the inherent congratulation of the knowledgeable, and once they get the 
hang of the game, they’ll be riffing on it themselves.  DS
AlexAnder, elizAbeth Miss Crandall’s School for Young Ladies & Little Misses 
of Color; written by Elizabeth Alexander and Marilyn Nelson; illus. by Floyd 
Cooper. Wordsong/Boyds Mills, 2007 48p
ISBN 978-1-59078-456-3 $17.95  
 Ad Gr. 9 up
Two dozen sonnets in six sections offer a collection of poetic insights into Prudence 
novemBer 2007 • 127
Crandall’s controversial Connecticut school, which taught young African-American 
women from 1833-1834. Nelson, author of Carver (BCCB 9/01), and similarly 
renowned poet Alexander alternate authorship poem by poem, giving voice to the 
students, describing their thirst for learning, and chronicling their determined fight 
in the face of legal struggle and community violence and deprivation. There’s an 
adult edge to the project, and readers will likely need to turn to the explanatory 
introduction or Jurmain’s The Forbidden Schoolhouse (BCCB 11/05) in order to 
understand and appreciate the historical background; the sonnets’ tendency toward 
smooth formality also results in the girls’ sounding educated beyond the book’s 
readership already, undercutting the essential nature of their need. Nonetheless, 
the sonnets are generally deftly crafted, interweaving colloquial and lofty language; 
reading aloud will emphasize the sonorous strength of the language, while the 
individual perspectives suggest possibilities for reader’s theater. Cooper’s smoky 
pastels range from strong portraits to nineteenth-century landscapes to single-ele-
ment page decorations, and their reliance on warm earth tones and muted color 
adds vitality to the chronicle. A note from the authors describing their process and 
poetry is appended.  DS
Archer, lily The Poison Apples. Feiwel, 2007 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-312-36762-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Alice, Reena, and Molly are each cursed with evil stepmothers who, in one way 
or another, make family life so impossible that the girls find themselves, either by 
choice or coercion, in boarding school. As they negotiate the choppy waters of the 
popularity pool, they are wary of one another, until Parents Weekend reveals that 
they share the stepmother scourge. Reena proposes a private club called the Poison 
Apples, claiming that if their evil stepmothers are trying to poison their lives, the 
best defense is to claim the poison for themselves and turn it back to its source. 
Their revenge plots fizzle in various ways, and while each girl learns a lesson about 
love and tolerance, the potentially cathartic bite for readers with their own evil 
stepmothers turns decidedly mushy. First-person narration alternates between the 
three, starting with their individual backstories and taking them through their failed 
attempts to serve well-deserved comeuppances to their respective steps; although 
their voices are not distinctive, their situations are different enough for readers to 
be able to juggle three narrators. Despite the fact that the book fails to deliver on 
its tantalizing promise of malignant action, it serves as passable chick lit, as three 
girls from vastly different backgrounds learn the value of friendship and distancing 
themselves from their parents’ mistakes.  KC
Aronson, MArc Race: A History beyond Black and White. Seo/Atheneum, 
2007 [336p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-689-86554-1 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
In this thought-provoking essay Aronson attempts to define precisely the term 
“race” as it is commonly used today, to establish that our contemporary view of race 
is of relatively recent origin, and to discourage readers from conflating America’s 
peculiar institution of slavery with the spread of racism in general. This is an ambi-
tious agenda indeed, but by making his case patiently and following chronological 
developments in the Western view of societal differences and prejudices, he makes 
128 • The BulleTin
his arguments reasonably easy to follow. A meaty bibliography and informative, 
annotated source notes testify to the broad scope of current scholarship he has inves-
tigated for his study, and he is careful to note works that are regarded as particularly 
controversial. He clearly trusts his readers to be up to the challenge of weighing 
viewpoints critically, frequently citing materials and topics for pursuit by AP and 
IB students or their teachers. His focus is largely Western, and he admittedly picks 
his way selectively through other scholars’ work to arrive at the conclusion that 
racism in its familiar form did not fully emerge until the late eighteenth century; 
thoughtful readers are free to take exception to individual bits of evidence that he 
adopts. Even those who disagree with discrete points, however, will come away 
with respect for the malleability of cultural biases and the elusive nature of this 
pernicious changeling, Race.  EB 
Asher, JAy Thirteen Reasons Why. Razorbill, 2007 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-171-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Before Hannah Baker committed suicide, she recorded her story on seven tapes, 
dedicating one side of each tape to a person who was one of the reasons she chose 
to end her life. Now the tapes are circulating through the thirteen people, who must 
listen to them and pass them on, or else a second set of tapes will be released. Stunned 
classmate Clay Jensen pushes “play” on the dusty cassette tape player in his garage 
and thus begins a slow, agonizing journey through four increasingly unhappy years 
of living for Hannah and one tormented night of listening for Clay. As one tape 
after another spools out, the audience learns of Clay’s budding crush on Hannah, 
his confusion that kept him from helping her, and his anger at her choice to die; 
on the flip side, Hannah reveals her despair at being labeled a slut, her attempts to 
reach out for help, and the fear leading up to the clarity of her decision. Each tape 
unreels another emotional vignette contributing to Hannah’s depression, all equally 
painful, so that the first kiss that started the first rumor is just as devastating as the 
eventual unwanted sexual encounter. There is no fast-forwarding through Hannah’s 
story; the audience, like Clay, will both desire and dread to find out who comes 
next on her list and why, and more importantly, where Clay himself fits in. Asher 
writes strong, distinct voices for Clay and for Hannah, whose text is presented in 
italics and set off from Clay’s narrative by symbols for stop, play, rewind, and pause. 
Hannah’s failed struggle to keep up a positive self-image among those worst of crit-
ics, her judgmental peers, will resonate with high-schoolers who know all too well 
the hurtful grind of the rumor mill. The end, wherein Clay reaches out to another 
withdrawn girl, would seem cheaply convenient if the audience was not in such 
desperate need of a bit of closure and a glimmer of hope.  KB
bAnks, kAte Lenny’s Space. Foster/Farrar, 2007 151p
ISBN 978-0-374-34575-4 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 4-6
There’s no question that fourth-grader Lenny is a handful, with his social heedless-
ness, his difficulty sitting still, and his absence of internal filter that leads him to 
ask whatever’s on his mind regardless of what’s happening in the classroom. These 
characteristics also make it difficult for him to make friends, so he’s in fairly novel 
territory when he develops a friendship with Van, a kid he meets at the park. The 
fact that Van has leukemia arouses Lenny’s hitherto largely dormant empathy, but 
will Van’s loss be too much for Lenny to handle? Banks writes with a polished 
novemBer 2007 • 129
clarity that is coolly beautiful yet distancing, and the touches of sophisticated 
omniscient insight push the book out of reach of many of Lenny’s agemates; the 
pointed meaning of the story’s elements makes the book feel like a cross between a 
well-turned fable and a realistic novel. For all that, however, the story is gently told, 
its tendency toward understatement refreshing in a drama about death and sadness, 
and Lenny’s sessions with the school counselor are patiently revealing (Lenny has 
been cut off from his earlier feelings of loss rooted in his father’s departure) rather 
than forcefully overdramatic. Gantos’ Joey Pigza books are better portraits of a kid 
who can’t fit neatly into the schooling slot, but this is a thoughtful exploration of 
a kid getting back in touch with his own heart.  DS
berlin, eric The Puzzling World of Winston Breen. Putnam, 2007 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24693-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Puzzles are the joy of Winston’s existence, and he loves both inventing them and 
solving them. Even he’s stumped, though, by the messages hidden in a secret com-
partment in the keepsake box he buys as a present for his little sister, Katie. Soon, 
however, twelve-year-old Winston (along with Katie, since the message pieces 
technically belong to her) finds that the pieces are one of four sets created by the 
town’s founder as clues to his bequest and that he must join together with the town 
librarian, who is the founder’s only surviving offspring, and two treasure hunters, 
who got their pieces from the founder’s late sons, to solve the puzzle and find the 
treasure. From Balliett’s Chasing Vermeer (BCCB 7/04) to Raskin’s The Westing Game 
(BCCB 9/78), puzzle-driven plots have a certain fascination, and the sequential 
scavenger hunt here is no exception; Berlin further lards the story with what one 
might term ambient puzzling as the plot unfolds, with nearly a score of challenges 
and riddles (answers in back) tucked into the story. Readers will also appreciate 
the touches of character (Winston’s smartmouthed friend Malcolm is lucky to 
escape trouble) and human dynamics (Winston’s negotiations with stubborn Katie 
add a realistic note) that provide a little color. Mostly, though, the writing is flatly 
expository and the characters stock functionaries, and the action requires a certain 
amount of plausibility-damaging disregard for legalities and likelihood to proceed. 
The puzzle-prone may not care, though; they’ll just enjoy joining Winston and his 
associates as they outsmart the grownups.  DS
best, cAri What’s So Bad about Being an Only Child?; illus. by Sophie 
Blackall. Kroupa/Farrar, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-39943-6 $16.00  
 Ad 4-7 yrs
Though initially “the honey in their hive” to a buzzing flock of adoring relatives, 
only-child Rosemary grows to find the constant attention more than a bit wearing, 
and she’s envious of the everyday, bickering closeness her friends enjoy with their 
siblings. Fortunately, she begins to acquire pets, ending up with a turtle, a cat, a 
rabbit, and a dog, and then two birds, a spider (Charlotte), and a pig (Wilbur), 
that fill her formerly quiet life with adventure and confidantes. The story is wittily 
told (Rosemary thinks darkly, “This only child business has got to stop!”), and this 
is a subject to which lonely onlies will relate. The trajectory wavers, though, and 
the logic is suspect: Rosemary’s onliness problems are all over the map, and the pet 
conglomeration only solves some of them (in fact, the extended family disappears 
from the book soon anyway) and by depending to a certain amount on Rosemary’s 
130 • The BulleTin
imagination as much as before. In the illustrations, pert, roundheaded Rosemary 
has a vivid (and vividly dressed) physical presence in keeping with her strength of 
mind, and viewers will appreciate the way her house goes from pale good taste to 
strong-hued high action after the pets move in (though the parents look happier in 
the illustrations than they sound in the text about the animal expansion). Rylant’s 
Henry and Mudge (BCCB 4/87) is still the ultimate achievement on the subject of 
onlies getting pets, but audiences may still be glad for Rosemary’s final happy chaos, 
even as they wish their own siblings were turtles, birds, and pigs.  DS
birney, betty g. The Princess and the Peabodys. HarperCollins, 2007 249p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-084721-0 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-084720-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Eighth-grader Casey is not exactly a girly girl: she loves all sports, scorns the school 
queen bees, and ignores boys altogether. It is understandable, therefore, that she 
is particularly suspicious of the frilly, demanding princess who suddenly appears, 
bedecked in ribbons, jewels, and a tiara, in her living room. The princess, Eglan-
tine (Egg for short), had been trapped in a metal box for 700 years, until Casey’s 
grandmother bought the item at a yard sale and set her free. Although releasing 
the princess was actually quite straightforward, getting her back to her own era 
seems nearly impossible, although the young wizard Alaric (who comes from Egg’s 
kingdom and can time travel at will) is struggling mightily to find the right spell. In 
the meantime, Casey has a new roommate and her school has a very unusual new 
student. Eglantine and Casey, the middle-school odd couple, make terrific narra-
tive foils for each other, approaching almost every single situation with opposite 
perspectives. Their eventual warm and lasting friendship is all the more satisfying 
because it is so realistically hard-won. In addition, there is a well-developed balance 
of lessons here: Casey and Eglantine each have valuable experiences and wisdom 
to pass along to the other. With renegade cheerleading, a quick save involving a 
soccer ball as a weapon, and an aggressively perky and pink and purple cover, this 
novel will attract readers even without much selling.  AS
blAnk, JessicA Almost Home. Hyperion, 2007 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-0642-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
 R Gr. 9 up
When seventh-grader Elly flees schoolyard bullies, she finds herself under the pro-
tective wing of battle-scarred Tracy, who knows the best ways to get free food and 
safest locations to sleep. Now she’s renamed “Eeyore,” and she’s a Los Angeles street 
kid along with Tracy, Squid, Rusty, Critter, Scabius, and Laura, each of whom takes 
a turn narrating as the kids find solidarity, jockey for position, battle, sometimes 
savagely, among themselves, and fight or duck their own inner demons. Though the 
voices aren’t really differentiated, the writing is effectively taut, harsh, and imagistic 
(“There’s no place that’s safe, it’s all a fuckin’ illusion, and believing in it eats your 
life away till there’s nothing left but hollow walls and a hard ceiling”). Blank avoids 
easy sentimentality about kid loyalty, instead depicting a collective wherein anger 
and jealousy result in molestation, rape, and assault as well as allegiance, and where 
the abilities to fight, reject, and score and sell what’s needed are more admired than 
the ability to provide the nurturing these kids aren’t getting at home. The story’s 
linchpin is Eeyore, who’s escaping a sexually abusive stepbrother and a family in 
denial, but who is obviously out of the frying pan and into a fire she credibly 
novemBer 2007 • 131
misunderstands; Tracy’s intervention on her behalf, a self-redemption as well as a 
saving, is the only real hopefulness the book provides. The gritty authenticity and 
bitter despair put this miles ahead of other fictional explorations of homeless kids, 
making it a satisfyingly disturbing and provocative read.  DS
bloor, edwArd Taken. Knopf, 2007 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93636-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83636-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
 R Gr. 7-9
In 2035, kidnapping has become one of the largest growth industries in the United 
States since the growing divide between the rich and poor has pushed the latter 
to desperate measures. Charity is a carefully protected wealthy teen, but when she 
woozily awakes to see a countdown clock (parents only have twenty-four hours to 
submit ransom after a child is taken), she knows that her security system has broken 
down and she’s now another victim. Waiting out the time while tied to a chair, she 
recollects the events of her life; as time ticks by and she discovers the identity of her 
captors, she realizes that this is something very different from a typical kidnapping, 
that the lives of her whole family seem to be equally at risk, and that the status quo 
to which Charity had adjusted (fame-obsessed stepmother, distant and mysterious 
father, two apparently caring household staff) will never be the same again. The 
first-person narration effectively roots the reader in Charity’s confusion and halt-
ing detective work, heightening the tension as clues about the real kidnappers are 
slowly processed by the still naïve and terrified protagonist. Equally successful are 
the integrated flashbacks, which not only flesh out this grim future world where 
currency easily trumps lives and children are more commodities than individuals 
but also give glimpses into the motivations of the kidnappers. Bloor carefully avoids 
easily categorized characters: every individual in this book contains both good and 
evil, through ignorance and apathy if not direct actions. More than the riveting 
plot, it is this complexity and contemplative focus that will likely stay with readers, 
as they may find themselves sympathetic to the “wrong” characters.  AS
bonner, hAnnAh When Fish Got Feet, Sharks Got Teeth, and Bugs Began to Swarm: 
A Cartoon Prehistory of Life Long Before Dinosaurs; written and illus. by Hannah 
Bonner. National Geographic, 2007 46p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0079-0 $21.95
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0078-3 $16.95    
R Gr. 4-7
In this companion book to her When Bugs Were Big . . . , Bonner travels a couple 
of hundred million years (give or take) deeper into prehistory to survey the state of 
earthly affairs in the Silurian and Devonian periods when fish got feet and, well, you 
can guess the rest. The text may sport a friendly, informal tone, but the informa-
tion is science-class worthy, setting the development of floral and faunal life forms 
into the context of morphing landforms and changing seas. The emphasis is on 
the evolution of scrubby, slimy plant life into the forerunners of trees and the race 
among four types of jawed fish to populate the seas, and lighthearted watercolor 
pictures deftly chart the progress. Several full or partial bleeds offer conceptual-
ized panoramas of such familiar places as Pennsylvania, ca. 430 million years ago 
(a nearly plantless mountain range) and Racine, Wisconsin (a teeming reef in a 
shallow sea). Cartoon insets provide comic commentary that nails down each brief 
chapter (angry Silurian water plants chide their travel agent for their disappointing 
132 • The BulleTin
foray onto dry land; one holds up her shriveled scrap of a husband and complains, 
“It will take weeks of soaking to plump him back up!”). Charts and timelines, a 
pronunciation guide, glossary, index, and lots of sound advice on how to track 
down child-accessible material on the pre-dino ages are included.  EB
brooks, MArthA Mistik Lake. Kroupa/Farrar, 2007 209p
ISBN 978-0-374-34985-1 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Odella is fifteen when her mother leaves the family, running away to Iceland with 
a filmmaker. Before Odella and her sisters can forgive her, she dies in a tragic acci-
dent, leaving the family with haunted memories and unsettled emotions. As Odella 
struggles to find her way without her mother, and without her beloved great-aunt, 
who also seems to have distanced herself from the family at the time when they 
need her most, she finds herself making mistakes similar to the other women in 
her life: turning to sex when she needs love, and emotionally icing over. Jimmy, 
a boy with ties to her family’s past, helps her begin to thaw, and she eventually 
discovers the love she needs to put her ghosts to rest. Perspectives alternate among 
Odella, who narrates her own section, and Aunt Gloria and Jimmy, the focalizers 
of third-person narration, but the level of intimacy is inconsistent, with Jimmy’s 
sections noticeably less involving than the other two. An early balance between 
Odella’s coming of age and Aunt Gloria’s discovery of her own sexuality is broken 
as well, making this decidedly Odella’s story by the second section as Gloria all 
but disappears, and the stories ultimately aren’t effectively complementary. How-
ever, the intertwining of small-town lives and destinies is poetically conceived and 
thoughtfully rendered, as is the graceful acceptance that people show for “forbidden” 
loves: Gloria’s great-nieces accept her female lover without a blink, and the secrets 
of Odella’s mother’s various infidelities result in the expansion of her family rather 
than its destruction. Moranville’s The Snows (reviewed below) is a better look at 
intergenerational issues, legacies, and identity, but the themes of forgiveness and 
understanding as key elements for familial happiness may resonate strongly with 
many readers.  KC 
brown, don Dolley Madison Saves George Washington; written and illus. by Don 
Brown. Houghton, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-618-41199-3 $16.00   
R Gr. 2-4
Almost two centuries before Perle Mesta became Washington’s legendary “hostess 
with the mostes’,” Dolley Madison wrote the A-list for notables and wannabes in 
an upstart D.C. In Brown’s brief picture-book biography he portrays Madison as 
more than a fancy turban and a pretty face—she was a level-headed patriot who 
stood at her post in the President’s Mansion as her fellow citizens made a dash 
for safety during the British invasion of 1814, and who had the presence of mind 
to save some of the nation’s important documents and treasures, notably Gilbert 
Stuart’s portrait of George Washington. Brown has a keen sense of just how much 
historical background is wanted or needed to appreciate Madison’s story, and he 
cleverly reduces the genesis of the War of 1812 to a double-page spread that has 
an opulently clad king under an accusatory speech bubble (“‘You side with our 
enemies!’ England cried”) pointing a finger at a pigtailed, homespun Uncle Sam 
(“‘You kidnap our sailors!’ America roared” ) with fists raised for a fight. Historical 
figures, which come to life with a few spidery lines and generous dollops of trans-
lucent watercolor, contrast effectively with Brown’s near photorealistic rendering 
novemBer 2007 • 133
of the Stuart painting. A bibliography and notes on Gilbert Stuart and Dolley 
Madison’s early and later years round out the volume.  EB
bunting, eve The Man with the Red Bag. Cotler/HarperCollins, 
2007 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-081835-7 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-081828-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
“Right from the beginning I was suspicious of the man. Right from the minute he 
got on the bus.” The speaker is twelve-year-old Kevin, the bus is a tour bus taking 
a load of people, including Kevin and his grandmother, on a national parks tour of 
Wyoming and South Dakota, and the man arousing his suspicion is Charles Stav-
ros, a swarthy individual clutching a package he won’t let go. It’s barely six months 
after 9/11, and Kevin is convinced that Stavros is really a Middle Eastern terrorist 
planning a bombing, so he partners up with prickly Geneva, a thirteen-year-old 
taking the tour with her father; together they decide it’s their job to prevent their 
tourmate from committing a horrible crime. The kid-detectives plot is a classic one, 
and Kevin, an obsessed wannabe mystery writer who sees everything as fodder for 
fiction, is an amusing narrator as well as a credible engine for the plot. The book 
tips from helpfully undaunting into facile, however, with its breezy Stratemeyeresque 
treatment of kids whose bigotry and self-dramatization leads them to persecution 
and plotting that could well have ruined a man’s life (there’s some brief finger-wag-
ging on the topic, but the adventure considerably outweighs the remonstration), 
and contrivance rules both plot and characterization. Readers may still enjoy the 
pleasures of the mystery, however, and they might take the gentle point that the 
suspicion was all in the eye of the beholder.  DS
cArlton, susAn Lobster Land. Holt, 2007 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-8096-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
It’s Charlotte who keeps her family going; she takes care of her four-year-old 
and nine-month-old siblings and accommodates her high-powered and troubled 
mother’s whims as well as her practical needs. What’s more, she does this all while 
taking the ferry from their small Maine island into town for school every day, and 
while being Noah’s dutiful and loving girlfriend. Oh, and it’s also while she secretly 
plans escape in the form of departure for boarding school and frantically works on 
applications in her every spare moment. Carlton’s writing is rich yet elastic, thick 
with wordplay while retaining humorous energy in Charlotte’s voice. The strains 
underneath Charlotte’s surface are evident, however, and the book takes a more 
believable tack than most when Charlotte’s uncovering of parental secrets quickly 
spins out of hand (intending to uncover her father’s hippie activist past, she learns 
of his habitual adultery and her mother’s abortion) without becoming an official 
pivotal moment for the family. It’s the accumulation that makes Charlotte’s des-
peration understandable, even as she becomes more keenly aware of her genuine 
attachment to her family and to her island home; Carlton avoids defaulting to 
clichés about either the renewed embrace of home or the enactment of the flight 
plan by leaving Charlotte’s fate tantalizingly up in the air. The unresolved messiness 
and complicated unknowns pack a wallop of unusual authenticity, and readers will 
revel in Charlotte’s sharp, funny company.  DS
134 • The BulleTin
cArson, MAry kAy Emi and the Rhino Scientist; illus. with photographs by Tom 
Uhlman. Houghton, 2007 58p (Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 978-0-618-64639-5 $18.00   
R Gr. 5-9
The Emi of the title is a Sumatran rhinoceros, captured in the wild by conservation-
ists and brought, after a stop at the Los Angeles Zoo, to the Cincinnati Zoo; the 
rhino scientist is Terri Roth, director of the center for Conservation and Research 
of Endangered Wildlife, and an expert in reproduction who supervised Emi’s 
unprecedented two successful in-captivity pregnancies. This is less informative 
than previous titles in the Scientists in the Field series about the actual scientist, 
with little information on Roth’s study path or career preparation and not much 
detail about the fieldwork beyond her labors with Emi; ultimately, this is a book 
about Emi herself, with some background information about her species and the 
people around her. In that light, it’s an engaging text, with enough information 
about the plight of Emi’s species to add drama to her individual story. A generous 
supply of photographs allows viewers a good look at the Sumatran rhino, one of 
the stranger mammals; the wide whites of their eyes make them look fake, with the 
fuzzy baby, bedecked with dark fronds of hair, particularly suggesting a discarded 
George Lucas prototype rather than something that actually walks the world. Pair 
this with other animal titles on endangered species such as Montgomery’s Search 
for the Golden Moon Bear (BCCB 12/04), and make sure kids get a chance to view 
Emi real-time on the zoo’s webcam. Extensive end matter includes an update, a 
field guide to all five species of rhino, a glossary, a list of book and web resources, 
and an index.  DS
cole, brock Good Enough to Eat; written and illus. by Brock Cole. Farrar, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-32737-8 $16.00   
R 5-8 yrs
A poor orphan girl, known variously as Scraps-and-Smells, Skin-and-Bones, and 
Sweets-and-Treats (for the tidbits she sells to eke out a living), is despised by the 
townspeople, so when an ogre turns up looking for a bride, she’s the unanimous 
choice of the voters. When the ogre initially spurns the offering, the clever girl, 
who has identified herself truthfully if offputtingly as “Scraps-and-Smells,” tells 
the townspeople that he wants gold; after a second spurning of her as “Skin-and-
Bones,” she says he requires a sword. Finally he’s satisfied with the tasty sound of 
“Sweets-and-Treats” and gulps his new bride down, but she slices her way out and 
leaves town with the gold. The logic’s a little questionable in places, but the storytell-
ing is so filled with dash and verve that listeners won’t care in the slightest. Clever 
craftsmanship keeps the story moving smoothly, with elements such as the girl’s 
three names and the ogre’s responses reappearing neatly throughout the narrative 
in ways that make them nifty devices or punchlines as well as pleasing repetitions. 
Illustrations showcase Cole’s mastery of the line-and-watercolor medium; ink lines 
vary from delicate trickles to bold scrawls, their varying consistency conveying 
character and rustic vigor, as subtle shadings and dapplings of watercolor add depth 
and dimension to elements ranging from teeming townsfolk to rat-bedecked ogre 
to our sturdy and quietly cunning heroine. A spunky and self-contained folkloric 
heroine whose victory has nothing to do with getting the prince, our protagonist 
will be welcomed by many young listeners.  DS
novemBer 2007 • 135
couvillon, JAcques The Chicken Dance. Bloomsbury, 2007 326p
ISBN 978-1-59990-043-8 $16.95   
R Gr. 6-9
Chickens are Don’s best friends. He’s a little short of alternatives, since his self-
obsessed mother has affection only for her daughter, Dawn, who died at fifteen 
when eleven-year-old Don was just a baby, and whose dance trophy still has pride 
of place in the living room. Don’s knowledge of chickens (an important cultural 
component in life on Horse Island) begins to win him prizes and attention, but 
he becomes increasingly suspicious of his family story; based on a birth certificate, 
a phone call, and his own wild imagination, he decides that his parents are search-
ing for Don’s kidnapped twin brother, but he’s startled to discover they’re actually 
searching for Dawn, who is a very-much-alive runaway—and that’s just skimming 
the surface of the family secrets. Despite the problem-novel components, this is a 
wryly, rawly comedic tale, with Don, our clueless and wistful narrator, a matter-
of-fact tour guide through some mighty strange country. Laid-back caricature is 
the order of the day for characterization, but there’s still real bite to the portrait of 
Don’s rejecting, snobbish, and ultimately pitiable mother. The depiction of 1970s-
era Horse Island, an eccentric Louisiana community based loosely on real-life Cow 
Island, is affectionate but far from saccharine, and readers will understand both 
the locale’s charms and its claustrophobic effects. A family story that judiciously 
intermixes pain and laughter, this will handily suit devotees of Jack Gantos’ Joey 
Pigza and Chris Lynch’s Elvin.  DS
creech, shAron The Castle Corona; illus. by David Diaz. Cotler/HarperCol-
lins, 2007 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-084622-0 $19.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-084621-3 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Orphans Pia and Enzio assume that it is just chance, and maybe not happy chance 
at that, that lands a mysterious pouch at their feet, dropped by a “thief” pursued by 
the King’s Men. Intrigued, they keep their find to themselves. Meanwhile, the king 
is particularly agitated; a thief is a wholly new thing in his peaceable kingdom, and 
he is not quite sure what to do about it. Guided by his hermit and a storyteller who 
is friendly with the hermit, the king takes no decisive action regarding the thief, 
but he does employ the services of Pia and Enzio as tasters, for if there be thieves, 
there may be murderers afoot as well. Thus, through an admixture of suggestion 
and clever maneuvering, the hermit manages to reunite his family and place them 
in plummy positions in the royal household, using the evidence in the pouch to 
prove that Pia and Enzio are in fact his long-lost grandchildren. Not only that, he 
joins with the queen’s hermit to introduce a sense of unease in the king and queen 
and to get them to consider their position vis-à-vis their subjects, since the absence 
of evident conflict does not mean that the people are being treated fairly and well. 
Creech combines traditional fairy-tale elements and expectations with a decidedly 
light touch to create her subtle political fable. The story is breezy and light despite 
the book’s length; the author’s graceful language conjures a serene vision of life in 
her imagined kingdom while gently sending up fairy-tale stereotypes. Diaz’s static 
illustrations take the form of decorative illuminations at the start of chapters, en-
hancing the faintly medieval, Italianate atmosphere of the setting. With its leisurely 
pace, subtle humor, and slightly wry tone, this will be an easy sell to readers who 
enjoyed Ferris’ Once upon a Marigold (BCCB 2/03).  KC
136 • The BulleTin
dillon, leo Mother Goose Numbers on the Loose; written and illus. by Leo and 
Diane Dillon. Harcourt, 2007 52p
ISBN 978-0-15-205676-6 $17.00   
Ad 3-6 yrs
The veteran illustrating team has taken an unusual approach to nursery rhymes, 
collecting here a couple of dozen rhymes that feature numbers or counting, including 
familiar standards (“Baa Baa Black Sheep”) and verses from less-thumbed areas of 
the anthologies (“From Wibbleton to Wobbleton is 15 miles”). The collection isn’t 
all that thematically useful, since the numbers increase only vaguely and erratically 
as the book progresses, and the illustrations often skip opportunities for including 
countable items, a particularly odd omission in the old counting crows rhyme of “1 
for anger,/ 2 for mirth . . . ” Conceptual issues aside, the illustrations are a deliciously 
fantastical carnival, with processions of Carrollianly weird creatures marching across 
a benignly neutral beige backdrop. Theatrical fancy is suggested in the tendency 
toward masks and fake noses, but the animated condiment containers, people with 
zebra heads, and flock of four-and-twenty tiny human-footed blackbirds would 
be wonderfully weird even before wardrobe got to them. It’s that strange dreamy 
world of nursery-rhyme drama and strolling magical players that’s really arresting 
in this volume; focus on the vision rather than the numbers, and let the little ones 
count what they will as they pore over the exotically inhabited stage. Though an 
explanatory note describes the Dillons’ principles of selection and organization, 
there are unfortunately no source notes on the rhymes.  DS
doyle, roddy Wilderness. Levine/Scholastic, 2007 211p
ISBN 978-0-439-02356-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Johnny Griffin, age twelve, and his ten-year-old brother Tom are thrilled to be 
traveling with their mother to northern Finland for a dogsledding adventure holi-
day. Meanwhile, back in Dublin, their older half-sister, Gráinne, is negotiating her 
own maternal adventure as the mother who left her and her father years before is 
returning for a visit. Doyle alternates between these two narrative threads, creating 
an outdoorsy idyll for the boys as they learn about dogsledding and yearn for the 
woodcraft capability of their Finnish guides, while Gráinne, already an angry teen, 
struggles with her years’-worth of grief and resentment and her disappointment in 
the mother before her. The threads’ conceptual complementarity becomes clearer 
when the boys’ mother disappears in the wilderness, apparently having suffered an 
accident with her sled, and the kids take search and rescue into their own hands, 
sledding out on their own into the dark Scandinavian night. While the linkage 
between the two stories may be a bit subtle for some young readers, the boister-
ous rustic adventure is accessible, energetic, and humorous, and the book displays 
a keen understanding of kids’ yearning for attachment as well as autonomy and 
capability. This will be just right for readers who like their strenuous adventure 
with a thoughtful side.  DS
duggAn, MAtt The Royal Woods. Key Porter, 2007 218p
ISBN 978-1-55263-826-2 $16.95   
R Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Sydney and her nine-year-old brother, Turk, have happy memories 
of a summer spent at their aunt and uncle’s farm in Manitoba, back before their 
mother died and their father became too sad to care for them. Hence, hopping a 
train cross-country from their home in eastern Canada to the western prairies seems 
like a reasonable thing to do. When they get to the farm, though, they find it has 
novemBer 2007 • 137
grown posh houses and an upscale mall where the fields used to be, and their aunt 
and uncle are nowhere to be found. With the help of an eccentric homeless man 
named Shep and a sympathetic illegal immigrant named Kumar, the two resourceful 
kids manage to feed and shelter themselves and even make a little money caddy-
ing for the wealthy homeowners in the new development, until they run afoul of 
the Royal Woods Love, Friendship, and Improvement Committee, who don’t take 
kindly to eccentricities of any sort, much less of the sort that Shep drags along in 
his wake. Duggan fiddles around with tall tales, kid whoppers, and The Wizard of 
Oz to produce a light, comic tale peppered with just enough spunk and attitude to 
satisfy readers who might themselves occasionally feel the call of the road. Despite 
the familiarity of the setting and the realism embedded in the details, not much 
of the story is realistic; instead it’s the kind of adventure a young middle-schooler 
might wish to have, full of tempered risks and mild hyperboles, bullies who get 
their just deserts and good but wayward kids who don’t. Give this to kids who are 
allergic to demanding thematic content but are still itching for a well-paced story 
with likable characters.  KC
eAson, AletheA Hungry. Eos/HarperCollins, 2007 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-082555-3 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-082554-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-9
On the surface, Deborah Jones is a sixth-grade math whiz with a crush on her best 
friend, Willy. Underneath her Earth-skin, however, she is Dbkrrsh, a green and 
gloppy member of an alien species that eats humans, feeding on their essence of 
betrayal and fear. She and her parents must practice restraint as they maintain a 
post in Prattville, California, preparing the way for an invasion from the Home 
Planet. In the three months before her twelfth birthday, Deborah has a lot to 
contend with on an empty stomach, including the arrival of her domineering 
grandmother, the upcoming Math Champs contest, the imminent invasion, and 
FBI investigations of several unearthly murders for which she and her family are 
the prime suspects. As a member of the honorable House of Mpfld, she has a 
duty to uphold and a career to consider, not to mention an insatiable appetite, 
but she finds she does not relish the idea of eating her human friends and begins 
to question her people’s culinary conquests. The book dishes out some humorous 
tongue-in-cheek commentary on eating choices, while other snickerworthy mo-
ments surround Mom’s gambling habits and Deborah’s clandestine trips to Burger 
King. Deborah is an inconsistent character, switching from polite to snarky, shy to 
show-offy, pro-invasion to anti-invasion, and while this may be reflective of true 
middle school moodiness, it makes her hard to connect with. The text itself is also 
a bit disjointed, and there seems little guidance through the rules of the flat alien 
world. Nevertheless, Eason’s version of the junior high “freak” story falls on the 
funny side of gross, and it will likely entice some with the mention of tentacles, 
cloaking devices, and leftover body bits.  KB
eAston, kelly Hiroshima Dreams. Dutton, 2007 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-525-47821-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Lin is six when her Japanese grandmother first comes to stay with Lin’s family in 
America, and soon the shy girl has found her closest friend in Obaachan. As the 
138 • The BulleTin
years pass, Lin’s musicianship earns her a scholarship to a private school, where she 
begins to blossom; she also hears the story of Obaachan’s experiences in the bombing 
of Hiroshima and learns of her own family history, including the occasional flashes 
of precognition that she has inherited. Easton’s fluid prose makes Lin a sympathetic 
narrator, whose view of her changing world is contemplative and questioning; the 
portrait of her family is authentic and individual, with her mother’s desire to put 
her Japanese past behind her understandable in perspective, as is Lin’s connection 
with her grandmother. The narrative is shaped more like a memoir than a novel, 
though, with detailed evocation of pop culture and current events from 1996 to 
2006 tending to crowd rather than enrich Lin’s experiences; the trajectory of Lin’s 
decade, marked somewhat by Obaachan’s death but even more by her beginning to 
date the boy she’s always had a crush on, is too subtle for solid novelistic satisfac-
tion. Readers more interested in nuanced human portrayals than plot drama will 
still appreciate the warmth and spirituality of Lin’s bond with her grandmother, 
and they’ll recognize its importance in her growth.  DS
ephron, deliA Frannie in Pieces; illus. by Chad W. Beckerman. Geringer/
HarperTeen, 2007 [384p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-074717-6 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-074716-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
When Frannie’s beloved father suffers a sudden fatal heart attack, Frannie is 
devastated, pushing away her mother (long divorced from Frannie’s father and 
since remarried) and obsessing over the risks of everyday life. Her obsession soon 
focuses on a jigsaw puzzle, seemingly an early birthday present, that she secretly 
finds among her carpenter father’s things. As she pieces the puzzle together, she 
begins to slip magically into the past scene that the image painted by her father 
depicts, and she hangs her hope on the possibility of not only understanding more 
about this time in her father’s history but also of meeting him there to see him one 
last time. Ephron writes with easy agility, and Frannie’s voice retains rueful and 
rebellious humor even as she’s buried in mourning. The book lays out with crystal 
and painful clarity the specific gifts Frannie’s relationship with her father brought 
her and what she’s lost with him, while her conversion of grief into anger at those 
around her is psychologically credible but never overplayed or overexplained. The 
touch of fantasy fits in supportively, underscoring the psychological drama rather 
than becoming a theme in itself. Filled with authenticity in its complicated emo-
tions and accessibility in its appealing narrator, this is an exceptional story of loss 
and recovery.  DS
FleischMAn, pAul, ad. Glass Slipper, Gold Sandal: A Worldwide Cinderella; illus. 
by Julie Paschkis. Holt, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-8050-7953-1 $16.95   
R Gr. 2-4
Regional variations of the Cinderella story abound, casting the elements of the story 
in contexts specific to the culture in which they are set. Fleischman takes a differ-
ent approach here by setting his version of the tale in multiple contexts, shifting 
remarkably smoothly from one place to another, paragraph by paragraph, while 
preserving the cultural details of each. From page to page, and sometimes from 
frame to frame within a page, the narrative line remains intact while the setting and 
story details move among the cultures of Mexico, Korea, Iraq, Russia, Iran, India, 
novemBer 2007 • 139
Ireland, Zimbabwe, Germany, Appalachia, Laos, Indonesia, China, Japan, France, 
West Indies, and Poland. While the young protagonist would in fact look a bit ec-
centric if she really wore a sarong of gold from Indonesia, a cloak of feathers from 
China, and a red kimono from Japan all at the same time, the spirit of a magically 
provided, extravagantly beautiful gown is what is effectively evoked by Fleischman’s 
layers, leaving readers to skitter through their own imaginations for the perfect 
look. In fact, the various types of food, royal gatherings, and magics referred to, as 
well as the costuming, give the sense of connectedness across cultures rather than 
appropriation or confusion. Paschkis’ folk-art illustrations join Fleischman’s text in 
providing an array of imaginative options while maintaining the familiar elements 
of the Cinderella story, from frowning stepsisters to exotic footwear. Backgrounds 
that cheerily evoke textiles with ethnically inspired colors and motifs frame insets 
that carry the tale’s plot; the busy final illustration culminates the cultural fusion 
with a riotous marriage montage. Even for collections chock-full of Cinderella 
variants, this provides a new twist.  KC 
FreedMAn, russell Who Was First?: Discovering the Americas. Clarion, 
2007 [88p]  illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-618-66391-0 $19.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Kids who stay awake in social studies class know that—the celebratory October 
holiday notwithstanding—Columbus did not discover America, and neither, for that 
matter, did Lucky Leif Eriksson, whose fellow Norsemen were ultimately driven off 
by the land’s previous occupants. This logically prompts the question, “Then who 
did?” Here Freedman works his way back through time to consider groups who have 
been put forward as contenders for the title of First. After reviewing and dismiss-
ing the well-known claims of Columbus and the Vikings in the opening chapters, 
he considers those less frequently discussed for a child audience. There is Gavin 
Menzies’ controversial contention that Zheng He’s Chinese fleet touched ground 
in 1421, and dissenting scholarship that places a Chinese landing even centuries 
earlier than that. There’s the argument, now largely discredited, that Asiatic peoples 
crossed a Siberian land bridge to North America during the Ice Age, and another 
view that they arrived by sea in South America and made their way north. He also 
explores tantalizing evidence that Europeans may have checked in first after all. A 
variety of illustrations from maps and models to dioramas and paintings embellish 
the text; a bibliography, index, and specific sources for quotations are also included. 
Although Freedman offers no definite answer to the titular query, he ably argues that 
“discovery” may need to be pushed back some 50,000 years, and he brings young 
readers up to speed on several current anthropological mysteries.  EB 
gipi Notes for a War Story; written and illus. by Gipi; tr. by Spectrum. First 
Second/Roaring Brook, 2007 126p
ISBN 978-1-59643-261-1 $16.95   
R Gr. 9-12
Young adults who followed the comparatively tame aspirations of the quartet in 
Gipi’s Garage Band (BCCB 7/07) will find themselves in a drastically different 
milieu here in this imported graphic novel. Three teenage boys roam the bombed-
out villages of their nameless southern European nation in a nameless war, drawn 
together by convenience rather than friendship. In dire need of shelter and cash, 
they offer their services to crime boss Felix, and self-styled “Little Killer” Stefano 
140 • The BulleTin
shows real enthusiasm for the job, running contraband and then working his way 
up to collecting “debts” in Felix’s extortion operation. Stefano takes over as the trio’s 
de facto leader, reveling in his newfound power, while orphan Christian glories in 
camaraderie and wealth, and narrator Giuliano admits to embracing the thrills. 
Ultimately Felix has a grander plan for the boys, sending them off to fight with a 
militia; armed with assault weapons but no sense of mission, Giuliano comes to his 
senses and bails out. The conclusion finds him several years later, being interviewed 
by a movie crew (“It’s not a film, it’s a documentary. They’re two different things”) 
about his experiences in the recently past war; the former wartime exploiter is now 
being exploited by an arty type of profiteer. As the cameramen rush off to capture 
footage of fighters returning under protection of an amnesty agreement, Giuliano 
sees in their coat-shrouded figures the embodiment of his old nightmares, in which 
his headless comrades (no conscience? no plan? no identity?) upbraid him for being 
a soft, coddled boy with a family to which he can retreat whenever he chooses. The 
desolate villages and corrupt city are rendered in extraordinary detail and washed 
with an appropriately dreary, monotonous military green. The boys, whose solid 
bodies are crowned by faces dashed off in a few wiry lines, bear striking similarity 
to the Garage Band guys, and it’s clear that with just one cruel political flick of the 
wrist, those ordinary joes could share the same fate. Teens who have been moved 
to horror and compassion by Beah’s A Long Way Gone (BCCB 5/07) will find this 
work challenging and provocative.  EB
grAtz, AlAn Something Rotten: A Horatio Wilkes Mystery. Dial, 2007 207p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3216-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-12
As the title and subtitle hint, this mystery story is a revisioned Hamlet, here set 
in Denmark, Tennessee, the home of Horatio’s boarding-school friend Hamilton 
Prince. The sudden death of Hamilton’s father, owner of the lucrative Elsinore Paper 
Plant, and the swift remarriage of Hamilton’s mother to her former brother-in-law 
has Hamilton suspicious; it doesn’t help that he’s still hung up on townie Olivia, 
who’s the daughter of the Prince family lawyer and who’s convinced that Elsinore 
has been covering up its dangerous and illegal pollution of the Copenhagen River. 
The overlay of Raymond Chandler onto the contemporary Shakespeare plot adds 
unnecessary gimmickry, but it does make Horatio’s narration teen-appealingly 
snarky, and the rest of the story capably accentuates the elements likely to intrigue 
the YA audience: adult dishonesty, youthful disaffection, troubled romance. There’s 
a hint of Chinatown as well as Chandler in the industrial pollution plot, but Gratz 
deftly uses that story to energize his updated Hamlet, and his alterations (Hamilton 
wavers between feigned and real alcoholism rather than madness, while the final 
face-off is a public hearing rather than a duel) are adroit and effective. The snappy 
patter and friendship-centered drama make this readable in its own right, and it 
would serve multiple curricular purposes by giving readers a chance to discuss the 
reasons behind the variants (Gratz kindly provides his main characters with a more 
hopeful ending than Shakespeare) and to gain additional understanding from view-
ing the plot at a different angle. Readers will find this enjoyable as a pleasure read 
and surprisingly painless as a curricular entry, and if the subtitle suggests sequels 
rather than “The rest is silence,” can you really regret the continued crime-fighting 
adventures of Horatio and Hamlet?  DS
novemBer 2007 • 141
grove, vicki Rhiannon. Putnam, 2007 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-399-23633-4 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
On the wild and windy top of Clodaghcombe Bluff, fifteen-year-old Rhiannon 
lives with Mam and Granna, caring for invalids cast out from the town below and 
nurturing old Welsh traditions, superstitions, and stories. The unsettling changes 
brought by the Norman conquest of the Saxons reach their own town of Woethersly, 
England, however, in the form of a new stone church and a heedless young aris-
tocracy. When the murder of an anonymous wayfarer is pinned on one of Mam’s 
recovering patients, Rhia finds herself embroiled in efforts to clear his name. The 
local murder follows on the heels of the tragic sinking of the White Ship, aboard 
which the prince of England supposedly perished, and the two unfortunate events 
are not as unrelated as they might seem. Grove weaves in just the right amount of 
history and lore and plots carefully so that the individual threads of her story co-
here mightily, if a bit transparently. The good and bad are easily detected, but each 
character is realistically nuanced nonetheless; normally steady Mam faces a moment 
of disquietude, reckless friend Maddy has doubts about her heedless actions, young 
monk Thaddeus questions his faith. A hint of romance wraps around Thaddeus 
and Rhia’s relationship, the fate of a leper colony brings up questions of community 
responsibility and belonging, and evocative descriptions of the perilous bluffs and 
eerie forests further imbue the story with a sense of danger and suspense. Though 
she focuses more on storytelling than historical verisimilitude, Grove takes as her 
central event the actual drowning of Henry I of England’s son, an event described 
in an excerpt from Charles Dickens’ A Child’s History of England that prefaces the 
story and provides context. This would be a hit with fans of Hendry’s Quest for 
a Maid (BCCB 9/90) or anybody enthralled by romance, mystery, and political 
intrigue starring powerful kings and earls.  KB
hAMpton, wilborn War in the Middle East: A Reporter’s Story. Candlewick, 
2007 112p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-7636-2493-4 $19.99   
R* Gr. 5-9
As a young journalist employed by United Press International, Hampton had 
been assigned to cover the 1970 Palestinian plane hijackings that morphed into 
civil war in Jordan, and the Yom Kippur invasion of Israel by Egypt and Syria in 
1973. With an ace reporter’s talent for interjecting just the right amount of back-
ground information in just the right place, Hampton turns his own experiences 
into a compelling color piece that is accessible even to adolescents with limited 
knowledge of the conflicts. Readers travel back several decades to technologically 
simpler times to watch the press corps, holed up in their Amman hotel, lose their 
international land lines, their telex lines (yes, he does explain that now-quaint 
communication device), and their land-line connection to the embassy while stray 
bullets penetrate the hotel walls: “It is like trying to cover a football game from 
outside the stadium, trying to guess who is winning solely by the cheers of the 
crowd inside.” By contrast, Hampton reminisces about the relative ease of his daily 
commute from Tel Aviv to the war zone in Gaza three years later, slogging through 
traffic jams of heavy military equipment, and dropping off the main highway to 
interview anyone who happened to be around. An index is appended, and plenty 
of black-and-white photographs introduce the chief political players and convey 
the open, arid terrain on which the battles were fought; a closing chapter provides 
142 • The BulleTin
a crash course in Arab/Israeli relations after the period of Hampton’s assignments, 
making this a useful update to Mitch Frank’s excellent but dated Understanding 
the Holy Land (BCCB 5/05).  EB
hArtlAnd, Jessie Night Shift; written and illus. by Jessie Hartland. Bloomsbury, 
2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-59990-138-1 $17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59990-025-4 $16.95   
R 4-7 yrs
Just when you think the city is winding down for the night, out comes a host of 
workers just kicking off their day. There’s the street sweeper who “skillfully edges 
up against the curb” and pauses to watch the window dressers “with their team of 
trusty mannequins and their feathers, felt, and fluff.” They, in turn, are listening 
to the late-night radio DJ, who plays the request phoned in by the art museum 
security guard. Newspaper printers, zookeepers, bridge painters, freighter captains, 
truck drivers, doughnut bakers and more finally end their night “at the start of the 
day” with a hearty breakfast (or is it a 7 a.m. dinner?) at the all-night cafe. Dark 
skies take on a neon and fluorescent glow in Hartland’s gouache cityscape, and the 
jovial night workers pursue their very sensible careers in out-of-scale, slightly absurd 
surroundings reminiscent of a Maira Kalman neighborhood. Primary schoolers 
will enjoy this glimpse of the far side of bedtime, and a fair number may proudly 
remark, “My mom does that!”  EB 
higgins, F. e. The Black Book of Secrets. Feiwel, 2007 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-312-36844-9 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Mysterious Joe Zabbidou arrives in the nineteenth-century town of Pavus Pargus 
and immediately makes an enemy of Jeremiah Ratchett, the town’s wealthiest citizen, 
who has most of the locals in his debt. Not only does Zabbidou have what seems 
to be a bottomless fund of cash to keep him independent, he also sets up a strange 
business—a pawnshop for burdensome secrets, where townsfolk can relieve their 
consciences and collect gold coins for their secrets, coins which they then use to pay 
their way out of debt to Ratchett. Ludlow Fitch, a young runaway from an abusive 
home, becomes Zabbidou’s scribe, diligently recording the stories of how moments 
of weakness or desperation led the tellers into their devil’s deals with Ratchett. These 
tales alternate with Ludlow’s narration and Higgins’ own fictionalized “recreation” 
of events to disclose how Ratchett finally receives his just deserts and Ludlow, a 
onetime pickpocket, becomes apprentice to Zabbidou, training to be the next in 
a long line of Secret Pawnbrokers. The plotting is devious, the pacing quick, and 
the confessions intriguing; readers can hope that Higgins’ atmospheric debut novel 
is an omen of more good things to come.  EB
hodgMAn, Ann The House of a Million Pets; illus. by Eugene Yelchin. Holt, 
2007 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-7974-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-10
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 125, for review.
novemBer 2007 • 143
JAcobs, deborAh lynn Choices. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2007 189p
ISBN 978-1-59643-217-8 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Kathleen can’t stop blaming herself for her brother’s death: if she had learned to 
drive or skipped the party, she would have never had to call her brother, Nick, 
for a ride on the dangerously inclement night when he crashed his car. When her 
world begins shifting and her memories become unreliable, Kathleen is at first 
convinced that guilt is driving her crazy. However, a new friend, Luke, who mys-
teriously showed up at her brother’s funeral, explains it all: Kathleen is a shifter, 
and each time she makes significant choices, her life fragments into several dif-
ferent paths. Rejecting her best friend creates a timeline wherein she is Kate, an 
angry and rebellious girl quite unlike the docile Kathleen, and deciding to return 
to a time where her brother is alive creates a third iteration. Unfortunately, as this 
time/space is one where Luke, whom Kathleen adores, cannot follow, it seems as 
though she will have to choose between her brother and her new love. Sci-fi buffs 
will have no problem with the movie-ready concept of jumping timelines to find 
one that works best. Unfortunately, the book doesn’t effectively integrate this dip 
into science fiction with the realistic story about grief and risk, and the premise 
therefore feels jarring and out-of-place. In addition, the creepy Luke (who is actu-
ally Michael, the man whose sliding car caused the crash that killed Nick) inspires 
little sympathy or warmth, making Kathleen’s obsession with him confusing at best 
and disturbing at worst. Even so, some of the variations on the protagonist (the 
gritty Kay especially) are memorable and intriguing enough to help readers ride 
out the bumpy join between science fiction and realism, and they will likely cheer 
the eventual integration of many of the more interesting personality characteristics 
into the vanilla Kathleen.  AS
Jenkins, eMily What Happens on Wednesdays; illus. by Lauren Castillo. Foster/
Farrar, 2007 36p
ISBN 978-0-374-38303-9 $16.00   
Ad 4-7 yrs
Time is measured by what comes next, and space by personal geographical mark-
ers, or so it is as this New York preschooler maps her Wednesday. She starts with 
an early wake-up and private time with Mommy until they wake Daddy and he 
walks her to her preschool. She traces her daily journey in reference to the homes 
of friends, stores where she has bought things, and places she used to go when 
she was younger. She notes the routines of Wednesdays, and indicates what may 
vary, all the while reminding her parents, with impenetrable preschool logic, that 
“today is not a kissing day.” This is not a plotted piece but a recitation of ordinari-
ness, a sorting, if you will, of a full and busy life in a familiar neighborhood; as a 
consequence it’s more of a sequence than a story, so it’s somewhat flat despite the 
engaging details. Castillo’s mixed-media illustrations are not overly pretty (some of 
the drafting is actually rather stilted), but they are as homey and straightforward 
as the text, manipulating scale to make interiors large and roomy and city streets 
intimate, safe, and a bit fuzzed around the edges. For kids overwhelmed with the 
sheer busyness of their schedules, this offers a model of how they might map their 
own days and ways.  KC 
144 • The BulleTin
Jinks, cAtherine Eglantine: A Paranormal Adventure. Allen & Unwin, 
2007 140p (Allie’s Ghost Hunters)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-174114-658-5 $7.95   
R Gr. 4-7
Jinks kicks off the Allie’s Ghost Hunters series, introducing Alethea Gebhardt and 
her family, who have just moved into a new house and are up to their collective 
necks in supernatural turmoil. Younger brother Bethan has finally achieved his 
dream of a bedroom of his own, only to discover that it is covered with old-fash-
ioned writing that refuses to disappear when painted over. Worse, he’s been plagued 
with nightmares in which he chokes on some object that seems to be forced down 
his throat. Ridding the residence of its ghostly occupant is obviously job one, and 
ghost-story fans might predict they’ve heard this one before. The story gets a fresh 
spin, though, from Jinks, who imbues her tale with a gentle but unmistakable 
snarkiness that should delight her readers, as one expert after another steps up to 
the paranormal plate to take on the restless spirit of Eglantine Higgins. There’s 
Sylvia and her ghost-hunting society, whose meticulous investigational techniques 
are too time-consuming to be useful. There’s Mum’s New Age friend, Trish, who 
helps her conduct purification rites. There’s a feng shui master who mumbles inef-
fectually about aggressive thunder energy, and a motor-mouth psychic who does 
no better. In the end, it’s Allie’s dogged research and common sense that isolate the 
problem—Eglantine was a high-strung anorexic who died while writing a romantic 
fairy tale (Jinks offers a hilarious send up of her breathless purple prose) that simply 
needs a proper ending. Comedy and creepiness promise to be best buds in this 
Australian import series, and with four titles now available, fans can look forward 
to some delightful winter shivers.  EB 
Jones, pAtrick Chasing Tail Lights. Walker, 2007 294p
ISBN 978-0-8027-9628-8 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 10-12
Since her father’s death, Christy’s life has been mired in depression and despair. Her 
oldest brother is in prison, leaving Christy in charge of his preteen daughter, Bree; 
her next oldest brother, Ryan, is sexually abusing her; and her younger brother is 
fighting for his own survival, trying to stay out of trouble and work his way out of 
their life of poverty and crime. Christy has two real friends, or at least she thinks 
they really like her—despite the fact that they met when she became their dealer, 
selling her brother’s weed at her high school. She also has a supportive teacher who 
is trying to get her to open up through a selective program of extra reading that 
starts, aptly enough, with Laurie Halse Anderson’s Speak. When her crush rejects 
her at a party, she attempts suicide, introducing a counselor into the mix of hands 
reaching out to save her. Slowly, she begins to reach back, and pull herself away 
from her bleak circumstances into a chance at a brighter future. Despite the progress 
she makes, however, her lesson seems unfinished in the end: when Christy finally 
stands up to Ryan, having realized that her silent fear has been empowering him 
all along, he transfers his abuse from her to Bree. Instead of helping Bree learn 
the same life-saving lessons, however, she writes a letter to Bree’s father in prison, 
ensuring that Ryan will not survive the year he is sentenced to serve in the same 
facility. While there is emotional satisfaction in her revenge, her plan isn’t likely to 
help Bree escape the crippling depression Christy herself had to work so hard to 
overcome. Despite this unsettling conclusion, Jones tackles a lot of relevant issues 
here, and he writes with unflinching candor if not complete credibility. His look 
at teen rebellion and the misunderstandings it can engender is full of hard-to-face 
novemBer 2007 • 145
truths, and his ultimate faith in teens’ ability to survive tough circumstances may 
inspire readers.  KC 
keAney, briAn The Hollow People; illus. by Nicoletta Ceccoli. Knopf, 
2007 [240p] (The Promises of Dr. Sigmundus)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94332-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84332-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-9
Dante and Beatrice have never known life outside of Tarnegar, a sinister and 
harsh island where the teachings of the strict Dr. Sigmundus are law. Although 
class divisions are strictly enforced, Dante, an orphaned kitchen boy, and Bea, the 
daughter of two doctors at the island’s asylum, manage to become friends, joined 
by their mutual hatred of Ichor, a psychotropic drug given to all adults to make 
them sedate, obedient, and controllable. With Bea only weeks away from the com-
ing-of-age ceremony at which she will receive her first dose, her fate seems sealed 
until a mysterious new patient appears at the asylum. He is strong enough to resist 
the effects of electroshock therapy and Ichor, and he is bold enough to whisper 
messages of escape to Dante and Bea despite the risk. However, the world outside 
of Tarnegar is equally dangerous and grim, and the friends have little time to revel 
in their newfound freedom before a war between their old home and their new 
one threatens the lives of all of the refugees. Keaney’s concoction of science fiction, 
horror, and fantasy is remarkably effective, with such elements as futuristic mind 
control, tortured asylum patients, and characters who draw from the powers of the 
Earth to perform magic all coexisting comfortably. In addition, the never-seen and 
perhaps dead (or undead) Dr. Sigmundus is a worthy and memorable puppetmaster, 
a villain who will haunt readers even though he is only actually present in the final 
scene. As the first in a series, this is a promising start, and the cliffhanger ending 
all but guarantees return readers.  AS 
koJA, kAthe Kissing the Bee. Foster/Farrar, 2007 121p
ISBN 978-0-374-39938-2 $16.00   
R Gr. 8-12
Emil. Dana wants him; Avra, her closest friend, has him. Koja takes this desiccated 
theme in hand and gives it another shot at life, not by contriving a fresh gimmick 
or an exotic setting, but by tacitly acknowledging its pervasive force in high-school 
dynamics and treating its pain and promise with respect. Narrator Dana is no sniffly 
heroine, just an unassertive girl who settles too long for companionship when she 
really wants love. Avra is no witch, just a high-maintenance friend who’s too self-
absorbed to imagine that Dana could possibly be discontented with her role as fifth 
wheel in the trio. Emil is no cad, just a well-intentioned guy who can’t quite grasp 
that making a clean break with Avra will save them all a lot of heartache in the long 
run. Koja choreographs their change of partners with graceful simplicity, bringing 
Emil and Dana together—as it’s obvious to any self-respecting romance reader 
that they should be—with an unavoidable but manageable level of pain to Avra, 
and stages the pas de trois against a backdrop of mundane senior-year events: final 
projects, prom pressures, and post-graduation plans of the ambitious but ambiguous 
variety. Underscoring the universality of the dilemma are well-placed excerpts from 
Dana’s overdue biology report on the behavior of bees and the immutable rule of 
nature that allows for only one queen in the hive. Teens who have suffered their 
own stings will appreciate Koja’s honest and hopeful rendering.  EB
146 • The BulleTin
levin, betty The Unmaking of Duncan Veerick. Front Street, 2007 [204p]
ISBN 978-1-932425-96-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
It all starts when thirteen-year-old Duncan helps catch a loose dog. That dog, 
Mo, belongs to Duncan’s neighbor Astrid Valentine, whose bulk and increasing 
ill health make it hard for her to get around, so Duncan soon finds himself caring 
for Mo and helping around Astrid’s house. He’s then entangled in a contentious 
battle as strokes impede Astrid’s memory and a dispute erupts over the disposal 
of Astrid’s huge collection of salvage and antiques; when Astrid dies, Duncan is 
suddenly suspected of a series of crimes, including arson, involving her property. 
Though it takes some extensive manipulation to get Duncan to his position of vul-
nerability, the individual steps are plausible, so Duncan is a sympathetic character 
rather than just a clueless stooge. The book draws skillfully on the powerlessness 
of young people caught between underinformed adult authorities and bereft of the 
power to control situations themselves; Levin also creates credible characterization 
and human dynamics in Duncan’s sort-of-friendship with his classmate Tracy and 
with Duncan’s parents’ regretful suspicions about their own son. Readers will take 
Duncan’s part with righteous indignation, fully understanding his dilemma and 
cheering his attempts to exonerate himself.  DS
luper, eric Big Slick. Farrar, 2007 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30799-8 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Andrew Lang considers himself a sort of money-making mathema-
tician rather than an addicted gambler. His friend Scott and coworker Jasmine know 
better, though, particularly when they are drawn into Andrew’s desperate efforts 
to replace the $600 he lifted from the register at his father’s dry-cleaning business 
and subsequently lost at the poker table. After an abortive attempt to unload the 
crack cocaine he discovered in the pocket of a customer’s coat and a close shave with 
the drug dealer who runs the local underground game, Andrew settles on a plan 
to recoup his losses at a casino. Here the action shifts from ethics drama into the 
road-trip genre, with the three teens faking their way into the casino in purloined 
garments from the cleaners and having one heckuva night in which Andrew hits it 
big (using cash Scott steals from his father as seed money) and sexual opportunities 
are embraced. It looks like a happy ending on the horizon, with Andrew hooking 
up with Jasmine, returning the money, penitently achieving a rapprochement with 
his heretofore enraged father, and deciding that sex and sudoku are as satisfying as 
the poker table. Luper could be taken to task for establishing Andrew as true addict 
and then letting him weasel so easily out of his obsession. However, readers who pay 
close attention to the tail end of the saga will note that Andrew and Scott are now 
running a small stakes game (running it, not playing in it, mind you) for the high-
school set, and perhaps Andrew isn’t quite as willing or able to dodge temptation as 
he plans. While this lacks the dark intensity of Pete Hautman’s Denn Doyle books 
(Stone Cold, retitled No Limit, BCCB 11/98, All-In, 9/07), YAs willing to pony up 
a couple of hours reading time should be pleased with the payoff.  EB 
novemBer 2007 • 147
MAclAchlAn, pAtriciA Edward’s Eyes. Atheneum, 2007 [128p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-2743-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 4-6
Our narrator, Jake, is initially miffed when his parents bring home another baby, 
but he looks in Edward’s eyes and falls under his infant brother’s spell. As Edward 
grows, he’s the marvel of the family and its good friends, approaching life with a 
blend of fearlessness, faith, and quaint formality. It’s therefore a terrible grief to 
the family when Edward is killed in a bicycle accident, but Jake eventually finds 
his healing in tracing Edward’s final legacy: the gift of new sight to a minor-league 
player of Edward’s beloved game, baseball. MacLachlan’s style is polished and ef-
fective, and the death of a child is always a moving concept. Ultimately, though, 
this seems more like an elegant contrivance than a story of real messy people un-
dergoing real messy life and bereavement. The family’s idyllic particulars, including 
the unexplained constant inclusion of that hackneyed figure, a kindly black elder, 
are implausible; Edward himself is presented as a tender, prodigious angel (“Don’t 
ask me how he knows. He just knows,” breathes an adult reverently), and some 
of his ostensibly charming characteristics are actually annoying Fauntleroyesque 
affectations. Ultimately, this will likely follow Sarah, Plain and Tall into Hallmark 
TV territory and be at its best there, while readers looking for fresh literary ex-
plorations of the topic of sibling loss will fare much better with Yeomans’ Rubber 
Houses (BCCB 2/07).  DS
MAguire, gregory What-the-Dickens: The Story of a Rogue Tooth Fairy. Can-
dlewick, 2007 295p
ISBN 978-0-7636-2961-8 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-8
A power outage during a devastating storm sends Dinah’s mother and father on a 
quest for insulin, leaving Dinah, her brother, Zeke, and her little sister, Rebecca 
Ruth, in the care of their not very competent cousin, Gage. As the storm worsens, 
their food and water runs low, and Gage turns to story to keep their spirits strong and 
their minds occupied. He tells the tale of a tiny fellow who finds himself awakening 
to the world in a tuna-fish can. A series of eventually fortuitous misadventures leads 
the lad, who takes the name What-the-Dickens from the first human language that 
he hears, to discover that he is in fact a skibbereen, a form of sentient insect that, 
through a linguistic accident, has evolved into what humans know as tooth fair-
ies. Using subtle, indirect allusions, Maguire crafts an utterly original story out of 
snippets, parodies, and faint resemblances to other tales, and his constant shifting 
of registers from whimsically descriptive language to more stark phrasing creates 
a richly comic, if not laugh-out-loud, effect. What-the-Dickens is relentlessly ap-
pealing in his naïveté and stubbornness, and his lack of self-awareness combines 
with his ingenuity to make him a reluctant but effective rebel. The frame story 
lends power to the magic of Gage’s tale; both Dinah and Zeke find strength in 
different ways from their interpretations of What-the-Dickens’ adventures to face 
the uncertainty of their own situation, making this a masterful meditation on the 
importance of story to shape and uphold reality.  KC
Mckinley, robin Dragonhaven. Putnam, 2007 342p
ISBN 978-0-399-24675-3 $17.99   
R Gr. 8-10
Although Jake has lived at the Smokehill dragon preserve his whole life, he has 
never seen one of the preserve’s residents up close until a hike leads him to a dying 
148 • The BulleTin
dragon and her struggling newborns. Suddenly, Jake’s entire life revolves around 
the lone surviving dragonlet, whom he has named Lois, that he is now trying 
to raise. Since there’s not much information about rearing young dragons, Jake 
spends the next three years muddling through, relieved and pleased by Lois’ small 
successes and thriving health. Lois gives Jake an entrée into the private world of 
the Smokehill animals, where he discovers telepathic communication is possible 
between the dragons and humans. Whether this new discovery will be enough to 
save the preserve against mounting public distrust is unclear, though Jake knows he 
will risk everything to save Lois and the others. While Jake’s narration sometimes 
focuses more on Lois’ development than on the adventure, McKinley delivers an 
impeccably well-developed and haunting world of gritty isolation, populated by 
mysterious and majestic dragons and the self-sacrificing humans dedicated to saving 
them. Any animal lover will recognize the fierce dedication and appreciation Jake 
has for his animal neighbors, even if these particular friendly creatures are eighty 
feet long and they breathe fire.  AS
MeAd, richelle Vampire Academy. Razorbill, 2007 332p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59514-174-3 $8.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Lissa, a Moroi, and Rose, a Dhampir, are more than best friends, they are also 
bonded through their protective relationship: all Moroi, mortal vampires who draw 
on the earth’s magic to strengthen their abilities, receive Dhampir (human/vampire 
hybrids) guardians who spend their lives protecting their charge. The girls have also 
spent two years as runaways from St. Vladimir’s Academy, but now they’ve been 
caught. Back at the Academy, both girls chafe under the restrictions, class struggles, 
and high-school politics that led to their escape in the first place, though Rose is 
grateful that Lissa will have a structured space to develop her powers and extra 
guardians assigned to protect her from the Strigoi (evil immortal vampires) who are 
hell-bent on turning Lissa into one of them. Although the designations of humans, 
vampires, and various fusions of the two is complex, Mead’s lushly detailed set-
tings and intricately developed characters provide an intriguing foreground against 
which to sort out this alternative world. In addition, Lissa and Rose are so different 
as to become narrative foils, offering two concurrent perspectives throughout the 
novel (Lissa is warm, sympathetic, and naïve while Rose is snarky, outspoken, and 
mistrustful). Although schools for the “others” have become almost commonplace, 
St. Vladimir’s, animated through descriptions of bloodsucking rooms, overnight 
classes, and daring high-school recreational activities, is a standout academy in the 
bunch. The snappy pace, flirty romantic undertones, and BFF heroines balance 
nicely with the thoughtful philosophical explorations of the ways in which one’s 
status at birth preordains one’s destiny.  AS
MichAel, livi City of Dogs. Putnam, 2007 250p
ISBN 978-0-399-24356-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-8
Jenny’s just a little white dog, and she didn’t expect to be the catalyst for the end of 
multiple worlds: she only wanted to save her beloved master’s life, even if his death 
was fated. Unfortunately, the chain of events sparked by her disobedience ripples 
into nine different worlds, and it will have a devastating effect in the new world in 
which Jenny mysteriously awakens. Sam, a young boy surrounded by odd aunts 
and a mother who doesn’t like dogs, couldn’t be more thrilled when he is permit-
ted to keep Jenny, who suddenly appears near his home, and Jenny, her memory 
novemBer 2007 • 149
clouded, is perfectly content at first to just be loved. However, as she meets other 
neighborhood dogs, snippets of her destined mission return to memory; though she’s 
reluctant to put her new friends at risk, Jenny knows that the fate of the universe 
rests heavily on the shoulders of this six-member motley crew (from the intrepid 
Pico, a two-pound Chihuahua, to the retiring but brilliant Flo, a standard poodle). 
In an intriguing subplot, mythology plays a key role in Jenny’s ultimate repara-
tions, as the Fates, Cerberus, and Orion all aid in her epic quest. Fantasy readers 
seeking a thoughtful novel into which to sink their teeth will especially appreciate 
the unhurried pace, the frequently shifting perspectives (the friends must split up 
to accomplish tasks, and chapters switch between simultaneous adventures), and 
the offbeat but quite effective dogcentric narration.  AS
MorAnville, shArelle byArs The Snows. Holt, 2007 225p
ISBN 978-0-8050-7469-7 $16.95   
R* Gr. 7-10
There’s little that’s exceptional about the Snow family; out of five generations, only 
one member has attained anything close to national fame. But that doesn’t mean 
they haven’t had their share of domestic drama, and by studying “snapshots” of 
four relatives at sixteen, Moranville demonstrates that the crises of one generation 
mellow into the family lore of their descendants. The first section highlights Jim 
Snow in 1931, bucking his father’s whim to resettle from Iowa somewhere out in 
Colorado. Concerned about his younger sister’s welfare, Jim leaves his beloved Julia 
to protect Cathy from their parents’ benign neglect but forces the family’s return to 
Iowa when it becomes obvious the grass isn’t greener elsewhere. The second section 
jumps to Cathy’s story in 1942. Pregnant at sixteen by Julia’s younger brother Paul, 
Cathy is comforted to know that he intends to marry her as soon as he’s home on 
leave. When he’s killed in a military accident, Cathy is sent away to have the baby, 
Mary Suzanne, who is quietly adopted by Jim and Julia and passed off as their 
own. Jill, Jim’s birth daughter, is the focus of the third section. Affected by his sister 
Cathy’s pregnancy crisis, Jim is overprotective and critical of Jill, who admittedly 
has a wild streak, and he sends her off to stay with Mary Suzanne, who teaches at 
Kent State. It’s 1969, and the campus massacre jolts Jim and Jill into realizing how 
strong the father/daughter bond is. In the final section, relatives gather back in 
Iowa for the funeral of “Aunt Cathy,” where Jill’s daughter, Mona, reconnects with 
her Grandpa Jim and takes temporary leave of her mother’s workaholic lifestyle to 
reknit herself into the fabric of their sprawling family. Moranville makes her point 
with tender discretion: obstacles that loom so ominously at sixteen are little more 
than speedbumps in a long, loved and loving life. As teen readers trace the Snow 
family fortunes, they might pause to muse about their own legacies.  EB
Murphy, JiM The Real Benedict Arnold. Clarion, 2007 [272p] illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 978-0-395-77609-4 $20.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-10
In this biography of the Revolutionary War Patriot turned notorious traitor, Mur-
phy debunks many of the slanderous claims leveled at Arnold by contemporaries 
and historians and speculates on more credible reasons why the dedicated general 
would ultimately attempt to turn West Point over to the British. Examining Arnold’s 
distinguished military career in detail, Murphy paints a sympathetic portrait of a 
man, obsessed with family pride, who fell victim time and again to the jealousies 
150 • The BulleTin
of his rivals and the indifference of Congress. Even the patronage and friendship 
of George Washington was, in the end, not enough to offset a career marked by 
libels and slights, and Arnold’s decision to abandon the cause may have reflected 
his concern that the growing tyranny of a biased and ineffective Congress was no 
better than life under the rule of Mother England, who was now prepared to offer 
constitutional protections to preserve the union with her colony. Murphy assumes 
that his readers have some prior knowledge of Arnold’s infamy and that they will 
follow along as he patiently builds his case. This doesn’t really take advantage of 
the inherent drama of Arnold’s position, and kids with little more than a vague 
understanding that Arnold was a historical bad guy might have been better served 
by a more gripping narrative structure that starts with his dark deed and then illu-
minates the road that brought him to it. Nevertheless, this well-developed account 
will be valuable to Revolutionary War enthusiasts, and the index and bibliographic 
notes will assist report writers in junior high and beyond.  EB
Myers, wAlter deAn What They Found: Love on 145th Street. Lamb, 
2007 243p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-32138-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93709-5 $15.99   
R* Gr. 9-12
In this grippingly honest set of interconnected short stories, Myers explores the 
many faces of love among the inhabitants of Harlem. He starts with the story of 
a man who wants to organize his funeral around the grand opening of his wife’s 
dream salon, and many of the rest of the stories find their heart there, as they are 
told in and around the beauty shop. Indeed, Myers is at his best when he captures 
the voices of urban storytellers in their natural habitats—beauty parlors, roti shops, 
diners—telling their tales to listeners who interrupt and interject, who get off track 
and come back around. Exploring the love between couples, parents and children, 
and siblings, he moves across generation, economic class, and life circumstance, 
painting compelling pictures of people making good, bad, sometimes wrenching 
and sometimes downright hilarious decisions as they try to negotiate the most im-
portant and treacherous of all emotions. Many of the stories make great readalouds, 
and some will entice readers to return for a second go, just to make sure they really 
got the outrageous, head-whipping humor of the situation right. Myers lets small 
judgments pass through the lips of his characters, while he remains a steadfastly 
sympathetic observer of all of his imagined people, be they flawed or noble, wise 
or silly. Pair this with Sharon Flake’s Who Am I Without Him? (BCCB 7/04) for 
an extensive and multifaceted look at the culturally nuanced dynamics of finding, 
holding, and letting go of love.  KC 
neFF, henry h. The Hound of Rowan; written and illus. by Henry H. Neff. Ran-
dom House, 2007 414p (The Tapestry)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93894-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83894-1 $16.99    
Ad Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Max is understandably startled when he sees a tapestry suddenly 
coming to life. That, however, is just the beginning: this means he is a Potential, 
a suitable candidate for Rowan Academy, the school of magic and mysticism, and 
he has only a few days to decide whether to leave his father and dive headlong 
into this world about which he still knows little. Of course, he chooses adventure. 
Once at Rowan, Max and his peers learn that graduates are the last protection the 
novemBer 2007 • 151
world has against Astaroth, a brilliant and evil force that has been manipulating 
humans for centuries and that is now gearing up for an epic battle against good. In 
the meantime, Max has fighting lessons, mysticism training, and the minefields of 
friendships and crushes to negotiate. Max’s increasing empathy and appreciation for 
his earnest and vulnerable father, brought about through the struggles and priva-
tions Max himself must endure, is an endearing surprise in this lightning-paced, 
action-focused fantasy. Unfortunately, the special training school, the isolated but 
magically gifted boy, and the accompanying varied crew of stock fantasy creatures 
(from ogres to the apparently original but werewolfesque “vyes”) is all well-worn 
territory, and there is little to distinguish this new series. In addition, although one 
would expect more questions than answers from the first entry in a series, the plot 
is so complex and open-ended as to be frustratingly opaque rather than enticingly 
mysterious. Fantasy fans hungry for more good versus evil showdowns with clever 
boys at the helm may still find plenty to enjoy, however, and Max, flawed but ami-
able, is a worthy protagonist to try and save the world this time around.  AS
pArk, lindA sue Tap Dancing on the Roof: Sijo (Poems); illus. by Istvan 
Banyai. Clarion, 2007 44p
ISBN 978-0-618-23483-7 $16.00   
R Gr. 4-7
The sijo is a centuries-old style of Korean poem, similar to a haiku in its rules about 
syllabic stress and conceptual pith (though sijo are longer, they’re still compact), 
and Park offers twenty-eight of her own original verses to introduce readers to 
the form. Youngsters will appreciate the clever imaginings (in “Summer Storm,” 
lightning is a flash-laden photographer, while a personified thunder “hates having 
his picture taken, so he always gets there late”) and the fresh and creative conceits 
(“Tide Line” describes the elements with which Moon has “redecorated the beach”) 
as well as the appealing brevity of the verses. The book shines with careful design, 
with its small trim size and square shape suitable to the compressed verses, and 
the digital illustrations run to sharp graphic lines with touches of restrained color 
that are a provocative contrast to the usual poetically partnered artwork; Banyai’s 
visual games have a sophisticated narrative air that enhances the verses’ bang for 
the readerly buck. Explanations of sijo both open and close the work, and a list 
of reading sources and tips for writing your own sijo are included. This will nestle 
comfortably into a language arts curriculum, or it can just provide pleasure to fans 
of Valerie Worth and other image-focused poets.  DS
rAnsoM, cAndice Seeing Sky-Blue Pink. Carolrhoda, 2007 126p
ISBN 978-0-8225-7142-1 $16.95   
R Gr. 2-4
Moving to the country is a daunting prospect for eight-year-old Maddie, and it’s 
even more daunting that this move is happening because she and her mother are 
moving in with Sam, Maddie’s new stepfather. Sam seems to be a pretty nice guy, 
but is that enough to make up for the life alone with her mother she’s left behind, 
and can she really trust him? Like the author’s More Than a Name (BCCB 9/95), 
this is a gentle, unabashedly positive story of a nascent stepfather-stepdaughter 
relationship. The chapters are short and sweet, suitable for reading aloud or alone; 
though Sam is a little idealized, he’s awfully endearing, while Maddie’s unease about 
moving and her more subtextually indicated anxiety about trusting another father 
figure are respectfully depicted. Youngsters longing for some paternal attention of 
their own or looking for reassurance as they enter their own stepfamilies will find 
this an affectionate and bolstering chapter book.  DS
152 • The BulleTin
rubin, susAn goldMAn Edward Hopper: Painter of Light and Shadow. Abrams, 
2007 48p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8109-9347-1 $18.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Rubin traces the career of American realist Hopper, whose determination as a painter 
withstood years of stopgap printmaking and commercial illustration, and whose 
literal renderings of mundane scenes from American life weathered the storms of 
Cubism and Abstract Expressionism and retained a loyal following. Ably blending 
biography (though the discussion of his marriage is more perfunctory than meaty) 
and interpretation, the author offers well-chosen examples of his maturing style and 
recurrent themes, and she discusses Hopper’s own surprise at how frequently his 
images were viewed by the public as eerie or lonely. Tinted and ombre shaded back-
grounds often distract from the featured artwork, but the quality of reproductions 
themselves is excellent. References and resource notes are supplemented by welcome 
information on several fellow artists that figure prominently in the text.  EB
ruMFord, JAMes, ad. Beowulf: A Hero’s Tale Retold; written and illus. by James 
Rumford. Houghton, 2007 48p
ISBN 978-0-618-75637-7 $17.00   
R Gr. 4-10
A recent resurgence of interest has produced a number of Beowulf retellings for 
young readers in recent years. Rumford’s twist is that, with the exception of a few 
Old Norse words, he uses only words that can be traced to their Anglo-Saxon origins. 
The result is a stunningly strong and melodic text that begs to be read aloud in an 
unapologetically dramatic voice, preferably with a lot of bass in it. The Rackham- 
and Dulac-inspired illustrations complement the text in their boldness; sinuous 
line and expressive postures add fuel to a text that already breathes fire. Especially 
fearsome are the black silhouettes of birds with wolfish faces hidden Escher-like 
in their wings; at first glance they seem merely decorative background pieces, and 
yet their numbers increase as Beowulf plays his deadly endgame with the dragon 
so that they become our hero’s escorts to the land of his ancestors. Not as dark 
or gruesome as Gareth Hinds’ graphic-novel presentation (BCCB 7/07), this will 
still offer shivers aplenty for the middle-grade and older reader. An adapter’s note 
explains the epic’s history and his approach to adaptation.  KC
sAyre, April pulley Vulture View; illus. by Steve Jenkins. Holt, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-8050-7557-1 $16.95   
R 4-8 yrs
Who doesn’t love vultures? Well, okay, probably most people, but Sayre shows them 
that there’s nothing to fear from these slightly freaky avian figures. Her pared-down, 
unobtrusively rhyming text describes a basic vulture day of riding the thermals, 
hunting for carrion (“Vultures like a mess./ They land and dine,/ Rotten is fine”), 
and settling down into the trees with their fellow vultures when the air cools and 
night falls. A friendly introduction to a bird known mostly as a scary symbol, this 
rudimentary overview doesn’t sniff at the gross pleasures of carrion stench, but it 
also doesn’t look down on its subject for its habits, offering an amiable account of 
a useful scavenger. Jenkins’ collage illustrations are slightly flattering to the birds by 
emphasizing their dramatic striated wings rather than their unusually bald and livid 
heads; their landscapes are suitably dramatic, especially the sunset-backlit silhouette 
of the vulture tree. Use this as an engaging and offbeat entry in early biology or 
as a relevant but helpfully distracting tangent after a roadkill encounter. A closing 
novemBer 2007 • 153
“Get to Know Vultures” spread offers additional information, including a rather 
surprising number of vulture festivals for the vulture fan’s delectation.  DS
shAw, susAn Safe. Dutton, 2007 168p
ISBN 978-0-525-47829-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
On the last day of seventh grade, Tracy’s world changes: on her way home, she’s 
forced into a car by a young man, the older brother of a classmate, who then rapes 
and beats her. Now she’s confused and ashamed, convinced that her friends are only 
tolerating her out of pity; she’s particularly saddened that she’s lost the sensation 
of her late mother’s guardianship, which kept her feeling safe. Though the book’s 
evocation of Tracy’s longing for her mother becomes sentimental, the main focus 
of the story is her current dilemma and her absolute lack of tools to deal with it. 
The daily reality of facing a world where the rules have changed is keenly observed, 
and additional dimensions of Tracy’s struggle—her encounters with her attacker’s 
younger brother, her awareness that her experience is schoolwide news—are credible 
complications. It’s also believable that Tracy would draw away from her friends even 
as she yearns for comfort, and the book makes effective dramatic use of the social 
avoidance of hard truth (it’s a real shock when a counselor finally uses the word 
“rape”) by people with the best of intentions. Many YA books treat the criminal 
capture as the culmination; here’s one that vividly conveys the longer-term rear-
rangements of the victim’s mindscape.  DS
shinn, shAron General Winston’s Daughter. Viking, 2007 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-670-06248-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-9
Seventeen-year-old heiress Averie is accompanying her military father and her 
fiancé to Chiarrin, a recently occupied country in which the military is enforcing 
subjugation of the citizens. On the journey over, Averie befriends the handsome 
and mysterious Lieutenant Ket Du’Kai, who offers her a new perspective on the 
political and ethical ramifications of occupation. An enlightened sensibility is a 
hindrance rather than a benefit for a general’s daughter and the fiancée of a colo-
nel, and Averie finds herself spending more time with Ket and her new Chiarizzi 
friends. However, even if she does adore and respect the culture, her presence as 
part of the military encampment puts her as much at risk as the others against 
violent insurgents. In fact, Averie’s willingness to trust and her desire to be “among 
the people” actually guarantees the rebels’ success in regaining their country as 
she unwittingly offers them inside information. Although romance undergirds 
the story (yes, Averie dumps her stodgy if good-natured fiancé and ends up with 
the passionate Ket), this is more a novel of social justice, and readers will likely be 
challenged to evaluate their own assumptions about who the good and bad guys 
are, including the earnest but still largely oblivious Averie, as the plot unfolds. 
There are ample examples of occupation from which Shinn may have drawn; the 
author’s mastery at creating rich and carefully developed parallel worlds, however, 
keeps the novel from being restricted to representing any single historical situa-
tion. A strong, engaging political plot, an indomitable heroine who is all the more 
accessible in her imperfections, and, of course, a breathless romance all converge 
nicely in this thoughtful, emotional novel that transcends a single genre identifier, 
likely appealing to a wide swath of readers.  AS
154 • The BulleTin
sorrells, wAlter First Shot. Dutton, 2007 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-525-47801-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
“The Arsenal is designed to produce competitors, hard-asses, winners. Winners 
get hot showers, more food, warmer blankets. Losers get misery.” So says David 
Crandall, who is not only a student at the Arsenal but also the son of its self-con-
tained headmaster—who is largely believed to have murdered his wife, David’s 
mother, several years before. The one thing David clings to is his shooting ability, 
which will net him the honor of being First Shot at the Arsenal graduation, but 
even that pleasure looks to be denied to him when a self-confident new girl, Misty, 
proves to be a nationally competitive shooter. It’s with Misty, however, that David 
finds himself tracking down the truth of his mother’s death, a search that turns up 
hidden history, surprising truths, old friends, and unexpected enemies. Veteran 
author Sorrells has created a crackerjack mystery, with classic touches such as fam-
ily strains (“I wish Mom had shot you. Instead of the other way around,” David 
spits at his father) and loyal companions (between expert lawbreaker Misty and 
townie friend Leo, David is well supported). Much of the story depends on the 
effectively elusive character of David’s father, a man who corrects his son’s gram-
mar after informing him of his mother’s murder but whose love for his son runs 
deeper than David realizes; Misty, the carefully cosmeticked Southern belle who 
specializes in being underestimated, adds vitality and technical depth to the tale of 
youthful detectivating. With its blend of time-honored plot pleasures and genuine 
heart, this is one hotshot mystery.  DS
spinelli, Jerry Love, Stargirl. Knopf, 2007 274p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-91375-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-81375-7 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Stargirl (from Stargirl, BCCB 9/00) may have moved to Pennsylvania, but she’s left 
a goodly chunk of her heart in Arizona with Leo, the boyfriend who couldn’t stand 
up to her nonconformist ways. The thing is, they don’t seem so nonconformist when 
she doesn’t have a school of determinedly normal kids to rub up against. She and 
her pet rat, Cinnamon, befriend and have mild, personally meaningful adventures 
with a varied cast of characters: an obstreperous five-year-old, an agoraphobic, 
a disgruntled tomboy, a mentally troubled man, and an elderly gentleman who 
spends his days visiting his wife’s grave. She even has a minor fling with a studly 
juvenile delinquent that convinces her that her heart still belongs to Leo. Her ac-
count of her days in her new environs takes the form of a very long letter to Leo, 
where she describes her new friends and neighbors, and her quest to discover real 
time by marking the angle of light from the sunrise on a hill every week between 
the Summer and Winter Solstices. Stargirl will likely have a legion of loyal fans 
from her first outing, and many readers will enjoy seeing what she’s doing now. 
This sequel is focalized through Stargirl herself instead of Leo, though, and her 
character seems to be far less off-center than in the first novel. If anything, she is 
decidedly less quirky than her neighbors, with much of her spunk being transferred 
to Dootsie, the five-year-old, who is unfortunately as sweetsy as her name implies. 
Certain habits that Stargirl nurtured in Arizona, like the keeping of files on people 
and the blurring of lines between welcome intervention and invaded privacy, are 
lost as controversial elements of the way she approaches the world; instead, she has 
shifted into a twenty-first-century Pollyanna, making her easier for ordinary readers 
to relate to, but not as offbeat and fascinating as she once was.  KC 
novemBer 2007 • 155
vAron, sArA Robot Dreams; written and illus. by Sara Varon. First Second/Roar-
ing Brook, 2007 208p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-108-9 $16.95   
R Gr. 3-8
Dog constructs Robot from a mail-order kit, and he turns out to be about as perfect 
a friend as one could want, sharing the same taste in movies, enjoying a leisurely 
day at the beach. Metal men and water aren’t compatible, though, and when Ro-
bot rusts on his beach blanket, Dog leaves him behind to dream wishful dreams 
that his creator will come and reclaim him. Dog gets on with his life, reveling in 
several intense but all too brief friendships with characters who are only true for a 
season—ducks that migrate, a snowman that melts—and while Dog is suffering 
his own disappointments, Robot is literally torn apart by scavengers that find his 
hulk on the beach. But better days lie ahead for both: Robot is refashioned into 
a snappy dancing radio by a tinkerer racoon who truly appreciates him, and Dog 
builds himself a new robot best buddy that he tends with much more care. Stylized 
critters in soft, sandy pastels occupy chunky frames against generous white space; 
wavy frame borders signal segues from the real worlds of beach, home, and town, 
and the dream world of the patient, ever-hopeful Robot. This is one of those rare 
pieces that truly qualifies as an all-ages graphic novel, with a wordless story (save 
for occasional bits of signage, printed ephemera, and free-floating sound effects and 
exclamations) packed with enough droll events to engage primary-schoolers, and 
bittersweet observations on the mutable nature of friendships best understood by 
those who’ve been around long enough to win some and lose some. This should 
be a priority purchase for children’s graphic-novel collections, and it could be an 
especially welcome offering for English-language learners.  EB
wAtt, MélAnie Chester; written and illus. by Mélanie Watt. Kids Can, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-1-55453-140-0 $16.95   
R Gr. 2-4
Watt presents audiences with the story of a mouse—or she tries to, but her cat 
Chester has a red marker and his own idea about the subject of the story: himself. 
Cat owner and cat fight out the battle for narrative supremacy spread by spread, 
with Chester drawing cats over the mouse portraits in the illustrations, filling pages 
with songs of praise to himself, and scribbling satiric images of his mistress and the 
long-suffering fictional mouse. While the conclusion and some of the logic are a little 
weak, the notion is entertaining and its execution, which essentially characterizes 
Chester as a mischievous middle-grader, is frequently hilarious, hitting youngsters 
right on the funnybone of contention. Illustrations are wisely restrained, operat-
ing as a stage set for the front-of-house action (in fact, the mouse-story art and 
design are cunningly a little bit staid and sweetsy), and overstuffed Chester looms 
smugly across boundaries as he pleases. This entertains both as a cat story and as 
an entry-level metatextual narrative, suitable for youngsters not yet ready for Kevin 
O’Malley’s Once upon a Cool Motorcycle Dude (BCCB 5/05).  DS
wild, MArgAret Woolvs in the Sitee; illus. by Anne Spudvilas. Front Street/
Boyds Mills, 2007 40p
ISBN 978-1-59078-500-3 $17.95   
M 7-10 yrs
Ben, the narrator of this dystopic picture book, lives in fear of the evil that has 
befallen his world: beset by “woolvs,” and not the wild-animal kind, “the sitee is 
hush, the traffik long-ago gon,” and the people avoiding the streets. He’s humanly 
156 • The BulleTin
connected only to his neighbor, Mrs. Radinski, who encourages him and rescues 
and comforts him when he’s stranded, panic-stricken, outside; when he one day 
finds her apartment empty, he bravely goes out into the streets to search for her, 
deciding he “will no longer let the woolvs forse me to scrooch.” This is ultimately 
a fable more than a story, and its dark and desperate vision has a post-apocalyptic 
appeal. Unfortunately, it’s mostly confusing rather than mysterious (it initially seems 
as if this view of things is the boy’s delusion, and that Mrs. Radinski is encouraging 
him back toward reality); the “woolvs” are so nonspecific as to weaken the story’s 
point rather than make it broadly applicable, so that Ben’s final quest, in which the 
audience is invited to join, is too vague to be inspiring. The book’s creative spell-
ing is effective in suggesting disorder, but it makes the text a struggle for the kids 
likeliest to appreciate an entry-level dystopia, so the most effective sharing method 
would be to read it aloud and forego the orthographic impact. Mixed-media il-
lustrations combine harsh scrawls of charcoal, depicting the spiky, claustrophobic 
city, with washes of mood-altering color, especially fiery oranges and dingy ochres; 
upward perspectives add to the trapped feeling and contrast with the penultimate 
overhead view. While audiences may be intrigued by the enigmatic drama, this is 
ultimately more ambitious than successful, likely to leave audiences perplexed; for 
a picture book of foreboding and doom, turn instead to Gaiman’s The Wolves in 
the Walls (BCCB 9/03).  DS
willeMs, Mo I Am Invited to a Party!: An Elephant & Piggie Book; written and 
illus. by Mo Willems. Hyperion, 2007 58p
ISBN 978-1-4231-0687-6 $8.99   
R* Gr. K-1 
The ever-exuberant Piggie is invited to a party, but it is the more circumspect 
Gerald the elephant who knows his way around parties and insists that they must 
prepare. Under Gerald’s guidance, the pair dresses for a fancy party, a pool party, 
and a costume party cumulatively, layering their garb into truly eccentric fashion 
statements. Willems executes a fresh take on the cumulative tale in this fourth install-
ment in his easy reader series starring Piggie and Gerald, introducing an updated 
set of survival words and sentence structures for new readers, as well as stressing the 
importance of reading pictures as well as words for a more comprehensive approach 
to contemporary literacy. Humor emanates from Gerald’s calm assurance of his 
expertise (“I know parties,” the pachyderm proudly asserts) counterpoised against 
Piggie’s skepticism, which is expressed through wry glances and direct addresses to 
the reader. She’s merrily compliant, though, and the payoff is surprising and witty. 
These books will easily take their place alongside Seuss and Eastman as classics in 
the beginning-reader genre.  KC 
willeMs, Mo Knuffle Bunny Too: A Case of Mistaken Identity; written and illus. 
by Mo Willems. Hyperion, 2007 42p
ISBN 978-1-4231-0299-1 $16.99   
R* Gr. 1-3
It was inevitable: since those first words triggered by her joyful reunion with Knuffle 
Bunny (Knuffle Bunny, BCCB 10/04), Trixie has learned to talk . . . and talk, and 
talk, and talk. She’s eager to show her one-of-a-kind bunny to her classmates in 
preschool, until she sees that Sonja has her own, nearly identical Knuffle Bunny. 
The girls argue and get their best friends taken away by the teacher, and there’s a 
tragic mix-up upon their return at the end of the day. Unfortunately, while these 
girls can talk, they can’t tell time, and when they each discover the mistake in the 
November 2007 • 157
wee hours of the morning, their beleaguered fathers have no choice but to venture 
out into the New York night to make the exchange. Willems manages pitch-perfect 
humor with his usual dexterity as he moves up and down the scales here—this story 
is as funny for grownups as it is for the slightly older elementary students to whom 
it seems best suited, and yet it remains sympathetic to listeners who are Trixie’s age 
and have shared her predicament as well. The book mines humor from film noir 
conventions by casting a falsely sinister complexion over the mistaken identity and 
the nocturnal exchange, a tone that brings new significance to the black-and-white 
photographic backdrops behind the lively scrawled figures, while the epilogue 
brings viewers right back to bleary real life with the young and the feckless. Yet 
another layered and effective work from Willems, this joyously continues his string 
of uncontested successes.  KC 
158 • The BulleTin
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: reCentLY reCeIved
bAuMbAch, donnA J. Less Is More: A Practical Guide to Weeding School Library 
Collections; by Donna J. Baumbach and Linda L. Miller. ALA, 2006 194p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-9390-0919-1 $32.00
Nervous weeders will find support and assistance in this guide, which proceeds 
through Dewey categories to offer specific suggestions for deletion (though un-
fortunately listed only by title and publication date), as well as providing general 
rationales for purging and retention.  DS
cAdden, Mike Ursula K. Le Guin Beyond Genre: Fiction for Children and Adults. 
Routledge, 2005 203p
ISBN 0-415-97218-3 $100.00
Cadden’s scholarly exploration of Le Guin’s work, which concludes with an inter-
view with the author herself, asks questions about readership and childhood as it 
examines the relationships, similarities, and differences between her writing for 
young readers and for adults.  DS
hubert, JenniFer Reading Rants: A Guide to Books That Rock! Neal-Schuman, 
2007 264p (Teens@the Library Series)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55570-587-9 $49.95
Though the title is the edgiest thing about this otherwise traditional guide, Hubert 
provides useful annotations for 100 YA books in ten categories such as books with 
particular appeal to boys, books with particular appeal to girls, GLBTQ titles, books 
for tweens, and titles in various genres and formats; each annotation includes an 
extended plot summary and a description of the title’s virtues, appeals, and likely 
literary connections.  DS
vArdell, sylviA M. Poetry Aloud Here!: Sharing Poetry with Children in the 
Library. ALA, 2006 217p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8389-0916-7 $38.00
This lively guide, thick with sidebar commentary from practitioners and poets, 
offers a heartfelt championing of poetry and suggestions for its promotion and 
presentation; poems and helpful lists are scattered throughout, while end matter 
offers additional resources online as well as in libraries.  DS
novemBer 2007 • 159
vArdell, sylviA M. Poetry People: A Practical Guide to Children’s Poets.  Libraries 
Unlimited, 2007. 170p.
ISBN 978-1-59158-443-8 $50.00
Over sixty poets for young people are featured here, each receiving a brief bio and 
then an overview of his or her poetic career along with suggestions for curricular 
tie-ins to that writer’s poetry; end matter offers further resources and suggestions 
for using poetry with young people.  DS
wAlter, virginiA A. War & Peace: A Guide to Literature and New Media, Grades 
4-8. Greenwood, 2007 276p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59158-271-7 $40.00
Over 300 books, plus a selection of DVDs, websites, and even CDs, receive helpful 
annotations in thematically focused chapters; extensive indices assist with additional 
search needs.  DS
160  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Blank
Accidents–fiction: Jacobs
Adventure: doyle; duggan
African Americans: Alexander
African Americans–fiction: Myers
Aliens–fiction: eason
Animals: Carson; Hodgman
Art and artists: rubin
Asylums–fiction: Keaney
BedtiMe stories: Ahlberg
BiogrApHies: Brown; Murphy; 
rubin
Birds: sayre
Books and reading–fiction: Watt
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Berlin; 
Jinks; Jones
Brothers–fiction: MacLachlan
Cats–fiction: Watt
Cities–stories: Wild
Counting BooKs: dillon
Crime and criminals–fiction: Bloor; 
eason; Jones; Levin; shaw; sor-
rells
daily life–stories: Jenkins
death–fiction: Banks; Brooks; eph-
ron; Jacobs; MacLachlan
disasters–stories: Wild
dogs–fiction: doyle; Michael
dragons–fiction: McKinley
Ecology: Carson
epistoLAry fiCtion: spinelli
esp–fiction: easton; McKinley
Ethics and values: Aronson; Asher; 
Bloor; Bunting; eason; gipi; 
shinn
explorers and exploring: freedman
fairies–fiction: Maguire
families–fiction: Birney; Brooks; 
Carlton; Couvillon; Creech; 
easton; ephron; Moranville
families–stories: Best
fAntAsy: Creech; Maguire; 
McKinley; Mead; Michael; neff
fathers–fiction: neff; sorrells
fear–fiction: shaw
foLKtALes And fAiry tALes: 
Ahlberg; fleischman
friends–fiction: Banks; gratz; Ke-
aney; Koja; Luper; Mead; shaw; 
spinelli; varon; Willems I Am
future–fiction: Bloor
gambling–fiction: Luper
gHost stories: Jinks
grandmothers–fiction: easton
grApHiC noveLs: gipi; varon
grief–fiction: ephron; MacLachlan
HistoriCAL fiCtion: grove; 
Higgins; Moranville
History, British: grove
History, U.S.: Alexander; Brown; 
Murphy
History, world: Aronson; Bonner; 
freedman; Hampton
Homelessness–fiction: Blank
HuMor: Best; Carlton; Couvillon; 
eason; Hodgman; Jinks; Maguire; 
Watt; Willems I Am
islands–fiction: Carlton
Language arts: fleischman; park
Literature, English: gratz; rumford
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAps 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
November 2007 • 161
Love–fiction: Myers
Middle East: Hampton
Military occupation–fiction: Shinn
Mothers–fiction: Doyle
Moving–fiction: Ransom
MyStERiES: Berlin; Bunting; 
Gratz; Levin; Sorrells
Mythology, classical: Michael
Nature study: Sayre
Neighbors–fiction: Levin
Night–stories: Hartland
NuRSERy RHyMES: Dillon
Paleontology: Bonner
Parties–fiction: Willems I Am
Pets: Hodgman
Pets–stories: Best
PoEtRy: Alexander; Park
Prehistory: Bonner
Princesses–fiction: Birney
Puzzles–fiction: Berlin
Racism: Alexander; Aronson
Readers’ theater: Alexander
Reading aloud: Alexander; Hodg-
man; Myers; Ransom; Rumford
Reading, advanced: Hodgman
Reading, beginning: Willems I Am
Reading, reluctant: Watt
Relationships–fiction: Brooks; Koja; 
Shinn
Revenge–fiction: Archer
Revolutionary War: Murphy
Romance–fiction: Grove; Koja
Royalty–fiction: Creech
Runaways–fiction: Blank; Duggan
School: Alexander
School–fiction: Archer; Birney; 
Mead; Neff; Sorrells
SCiENCE fiCtioN: Eason; Ja-
cobs; Keaney
Secrets–fiction: Carlton; Couvillon; 
Higgins
Sexual abuse–fiction: Jones
SHoRt StoRiES: Myers
Stepfamilies–fiction: Ransom
Stepparents–fiction: Archer
Storytelling–fiction: Maguire
Suicide–fiction: Asher
SuRvivAL StoRiES: Duggan
SuSPENSE: Asher
time travel–fiction: Birney
treasure–fiction: Berlin
urban life–stories: Jenkins
vampires–fiction: Mead
voyages and travel–fiction: Bunting; 
Duggan; Luper
War: Hampton
War–fiction: Gipi
WoRDLESS BooKS: varon
Work–stories: Hartland
