T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
May 2014
Vol. 67   No. 9
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 67 (2014).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $60.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$100.00 (print); $110.00 (online);  
$140.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
May 2014
Vol. 67 No. 9
439  the BIg PICture
 
 Gravity  written and illus. by Jason Chin
440  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
443 •  Lost Girl Found  by Leah Bassoff and Laura DeLuca
459 • The Summer I Saved the World . . . in 65 Days  by Michele Weber Hurwitz
463 • How to Cheer Up Dad  written and illus. by Fred Koehler
481 •  House of Purple Cedar  by Tim Tingle
482 •  Babe Conquers the World: The Legendary Life of Babe Didrikson Zaharias  
by Rich Wallace and Sandra Neil Wallace
486  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
487  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer (TA)
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Kim Naples, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $100.00 or electronic $110.00; combined print & electronic $140.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00; students, $20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for 
postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available 
in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes avail-
able in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription 
checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin 
of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2014 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Gravity copyright ©2014 by Jason Chin and used by permission of Neal Porter 
Books/Roaring Brook. 
May 2014 • 439
the BIg PICture
Gravity
written and illustrated by Jason Chin
The handsome little guy who graces the cover of this month’s issue, tricked out in 
swim goggles and a space-motif superhero cape, is experiencing an extraordinary 
twist on the adage “It’s raining buckets.” Not only does this rain comprise a literal 
bucket—as well as a banana, beach ball, and toy rocket—but it’s all cascading 
upward. And behind this metaphysical havoc is, apparently, a metatextual agent. 
Allow me to explain.
As the boy plays at the seaside, a copy of Gravity (yes, the very same title 
under consideration here) lands in his possession. Whether this book affects the 
entire solar system or simply stokes the boy’s already space-obsessed imagination 
is best left for the child audience to debate. (And—Common Core ahoy!—textual 
evidence can be cited in support of either hypothesis.) The point is, things turn 
weird, as objects head off to outer space and readers get a peek at what could hap-
pen if gravity went on hiatus. Narration splays across the comically dramatized 
paintings in a few sentences of large, uppercase font: “Without gravity, everything 
would/ float away./ The moon/ would drift/ away from/ the earth./ The earth/ 
would drift/ away from/ the sun.” It’s a pretty scary thought, especially as the boy 
clings onto a boulder for dear life as the sand and water around him go airborne. 
Fortunately for squeamish primary-schoolers, Chin ex machina restores gravity and 
universal order, returning all the objects to Earth, but delivering them playfully 
into the hands of new owners, much to the astonishment of little girls who lost 
their lemonade stand and now have a bucket and a rocket, while the beach boy has 
a pitcher of lemonade and paper cups. 
So far this sounds like the sort of mind-bending fantasy that will appeal to 
fans of David Wiesner. And it is, but Chin is also a dab hand at blending imagination 
with information, and to readers who watched him blithely flood the New York 
Public Library to further a marine biology lesson in Coral Reefs (BCCB 12/11), it 
will come as no surprise that his universe-disturbing Gravity likewise delivers a solid 
science lesson. The youngest viewers will stretch their spatial sense as they follow 
the moon pulling away from Earth, and Earth pulling away from the sun. Kids 
ready for a more traditional scientific treatment can share with an adult reader the 
double-page spread of brief paragraphs that pursue the relationship between mass, 
distance, and gravitational force, as well as how weight becomes “the measure of 
Earth’s gravity pulling on objects.” Concise diagrams and tongue-in-cheek pictures 
that accompany the instruction are as entertaining as they are effective. An elephant 
and a mouse pose on scales to show that “elephants weigh more than mice because 
they have more mass”; a brawny weightlifter struggles with a box of bricks, while 
440 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
a toddler easily presses a much larger box of air over his head to demonstrate that 
“Mass Matters.” 
Hopefully, elementary language arts and science teachers will wage a tug-
o-war (and then share nicely) for this charming twofer. But they’d better be agile 
and quick, because plenty of kids will want to get their own hands on it just for 
fun. (See p. 447 for publication information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer 
Agosín, MArjorie I Lived on Butterfly Hill; tr. from the Spanish by E. M. 
O’Connor; illus. by Lee White. Atheneum, 2014 454p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-5344-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9476-3 $10.99   
R Gr. 5-9
Celeste lives a charmed life in the house on Butterfly Hill—one of many hills in 
the Chilean port city of Valparaíso—with her physician parents, doting nanny, 
and Jewish abuela, who came to Chile as a refugee years ago to escape Nazi rule 
in Austria. When a military coup wracks the country, Celeste’s socialist-leaning 
parents become public enemies, which requires them to go into hiding and the 
eleven-year-old to be sent to stay with her aunt in Maine. Celeste spends three years 
as an exile, learning English and making friends despite her ever-present sense of 
displacement, and when she’s able to return to Valparaíso, she continues journeys 
both external (going in search of her parents) and internal (finding how she can 
contribute to rebuilding her homeland). Agosín makes the interesting choice of 
rewriting Chilean history—the left-leaning president deposed is not Allende but a 
fictional Alarcón, and the Pinochet-inspired nameless dictator is ousted after a mere 
three years—a deviation from historical fact that connects younger readers with 
political crises and elicits empathy for the refugee. There are elements of magical 
realism in the way the setting of Valparaíso takes on a character of its own, and 
black and white mixed-media art with delicate sketchy lines and moody grayscale 
tones both breaks up text and enhances the setting’s evocation of a utopia marred. 
The poetic language is dazzling and insightful (“Sometimes remembering means 
to live a moment in the past again, and in that way survive the present”), making 
this a breathtaking read for audience up to the lengthy page count and emotionally 
driven narrative.  TA
May 2014 • 441
Auxier, jonAthAn The Night Gardener; illus. by Patrick Arrasmith. Amulet/
Abrams, 2014  [384p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-1144-2 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
The attempts of Molly’s family to escape nineteenth-century Ireland’s Great Famine 
result in tragedy when her parents are lost at sea and Molly and her little brother 
Kip are stuck in England. Knowing they need more than Molly’s splendid tales 
to keep them fed, clothed, and healthy, they quell their ominous feelings about 
their new position at a remote house with a creepy tree. The employers, a pale and 
haunted family of four, clearly have an unhealthy relationship with the tree, a vile 
magical entity tended by an undead man who steals the children’s souls drop by 
drop to feed the wish-granting plant. Molly realizes that the seductive gratifica-
tion of granted wishes is ultimately destructive, as it allows her to escape from the 
truth, and she resolves to save herself, her brother, and the family from the evil 
that is consuming them all. Molly is staunch and defiant, a sturdy protagonist who 
is loyal if not always wise in her efforts to protect those she cares for. As he did in 
Peter Nimble and His Fantastic Eyes (BCCB 10/11), Auxier achieves an ideal mix 
of adventure and horror, offering all of it in elegant, atmospheric language that 
forces the reader to slow down a bit and revel in both the high-quality plot and 
the storytelling itself. An informative author’s note offers a bit of background into 
the Great Famine in Ireland, and how kids like Kip and Molly might have found 
themselves as orphans in England at such young ages.  AS
BAity, CAM The First Book of Ore: The Foundry’s Edge; by Cam Baity and Benny 
Zelkowicz. Disney Hyperion, 2014 [464p] (The Book of Ore)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-6227-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-7917-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Phoebe enjoys her privilege, even taunting Micah, the servant’s son, about their 
different states; nonetheless, she misses her father when he travels for business, 
and even she would have to admit that her life has more comfort than meaning. A 
daring rescue attempt at saving her father after he is kidnapped leads to Phoebe’s 
finding horrors and depths behind the extravagant life she lives. She discovers that 
nearby Mehk is a place essentially pillaged for the gadgets, tools, and mechanics 
used in Phoebe’s life, and she and Micah, who travels with her, see that the world 
seems to be ravaged by people, damaged and polluted and threatened in ways 
that feel cruel, even while they acknowledge the potential benefit of the materials 
taken from there for humans. The animation background of both of the authors 
is apparent: readers may imagine how cool the world of Mehk would be in movie 
format, based on the lush, extravagant descriptions of the dying but still beautiful 
metal world. Less smooth is the shift of the protagonist from utterly loathsome 
to scrappy heroine in such a short amount of time that it stretches plausibility, as 
do the sudden dramatic shifts in other characters that squander carefully written 
personalities for plot-convenient transformations. Even so, there is potential in 
this anticipated trilogy, particularly for plot-driven readers who like machines and 
imagined worlds all mixed together.  AS
442 • The BulleTin
BArdhAn-QuAllen, sudiptA Tyrannosaurus Wrecks!; illus. by Zachariah 
OHora. Abrams, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1035-3 $14.95   
R 4-7 yrs
All of the dinosaurs in preschool get along swimmingly—until Tyrannosaurus 
bursts in with a shout, upsetting the block tower and shocking classmates. The 
other dinosaurs understandably send obstreperous Tyrannosaurus away to play 
on his own. Tyrannosaurus makes amends by tidying up and playing nicely, and 
despite a bump or two along the way, order in the prehistoric classroom is restored. 
The message in this rhyming story is cheery, and it’s enhanced by a bouncy rhythm 
well suited for reading aloud, while the set-up for a (possibly participatory) shout 
at the page turn adds some suspense (“Velociraptor glitters. Tyrannosaurus . . . / 
WRECKS!”). The shapely dinos, whose rough charcoal-style outlines and strong 
colors vividly contrast with the white or sometimes black backgrounds, are chunky 
and friendly in an eight-crayon-box color scheme and snazzy Peanuts-reminiscent 
outfits. Tyrannosaurus is particularly well captured as a non-threatening but 
mischievous reptile, with his orange skin, rounded teeth, bumpy tail, black cargo 
shorts, and green sneaker. Lower elementary classrooms will especially want to 
add this one to the ranks of Shea’s Dinosaur vs. Bedtime (BCCB 10/08) and Stein’s 
Dinosaur Kisses (BCCB 9/13) to help rein in the inevitable stomping and roaring 
those titles provide.  TA
BArdoe, Cheryl Behold the Beautiful Dung Beetle; illus. by Alan Marks. Charles-
bridge, 2014 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-554-5 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 2-3
“Somewhere in the world right now an animal is lightening its load,” begins this 
informative and self-aware introduction to one of nature’s unsung ecological 
heroes. Bardoe describes the energetic rush of dung beetles just after an elephant 
has, um, provided for them, outlining the difference between dwellers (who “dig 
right in”), rollers (who roll dung balls away), and tunnelers (who dig down below 
the pile). The book also covers reproduction and growth stages and briefly notes 
the Egyptian celebration of the insects as scarabs. The book could use some more 
detail (it never states how big dung beetles can get, for instance, or how long they 
live), and the simple main text and more informative secondary texts aren’t well 
differentiated. It’s still a useful and lively overview, though, and it’s enhanced by 
Marks’ watercolor and pencil illustrations, which imbue the dung beetles’ world 
with vitality and imagination: clever cutaways revealing the underground world 
of the tunnelers are set against the backdrop of grasslands populated by trundling 
elephants and graceful giraffes. End matter offers brief information about how to 
find dung beetles, some additional facts, a glossary, and a short bibliography.  DS
BArdos, MAgAli 100 Bears; written and illus. by Magali Bardos; tr. from the 
French by Flying Eye Books. Flying Eye, 2014 100p
ISBN 978-1-909263-15-4 $19.95   
R Gr. 1-3
In a landscape with “1 forest” and “2 mountains,” there are “3 bears on each moun-
tain.” Each page or spread reveals the next number in the sequence, and pretty 
soon “8 hunters” are after the bears; the adventures continue as the bears have a 
party, get sick, go to the theater, travel to exotic locales, and celebrate an elderly 
May 2014 • 443
bear’s birthday, all while the hunters continue searching for the obstreperous bears. 
The numbers tick by until “everyone makes peace with 91 slices of gingerbread 
and 92 sugar pearls,” and soon, “99 stones” help the bears find their way home 
to the “100 trees” found in the original forest. The narrative structured around 
the bears combines with a lighthearted tone to make this inventive take on the 
traditional counting book effective. Bardos’ stunning art—in fluorescent tones of 
red, orange, fuchsia, purple, and turquoise and highlighted by white, black, and 
brown—is reminiscent of retro graphic design, and the bold compositions allow 
for group sharing. Some numbers are merely included as numerals in the art rather 
than countable sets (“The most athletic one wears shirt number 98”), which gives 
kids an occasional breather as the numbers increase. Those examples that do entice 
kids to count require some focus for the higher number and busier spreads, but the 
items are all honestly visible. Between its usefulness and its inviting illustrations, 
this will be a helpful title.  JH 
BAssoff, leAh Lost Girl Found; by Leah Bassoff and Laura DeLuca. Ground-
wood, 2014 212p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-416-9 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-418-3 $14.95   
R Gr. 8-12
While the Lost Boys of Sudan have received public attention, very little has been 
paid to the girls who were caught in the crossfires and complexities of the Sudanese 
conflict. This novel follows the life of such a girl, Poni, a young Didinga girl living 
in southern Sudan. Even before the war, Poni’s life is filled with much strife, due 
in large part to her frustration with the limitations placed upon her by gender; she 
is determined to get an education and to avoid being forced into marriage, despite 
the expectations of her tribe. When her village is attacked, she escapes and walks 
for weeks, amid constant death and destruction, until she arrives at the Kakuma 
Refugee Camp in Kenya. After many months at the camp, she leaves Kakuma and 
travels to Nairobi, where she is taken in by Sister Hannah and promised an edu-
cation in exchange for hard work. The plot is both riveting and at times chilling 
(particularly the graphic depictions of violence and death), but it is Poni herself 
who carries the novel; there is a detached sadness to her narration that exudes both 
despair and depth, and the rich imagery and carefully crafted details further elevate 
the tone. As a note explains, Bassof, a writer, and DeLuca, an anthropologist, met at 
a conference about Sudan and decided to cowrite this novel to give a female voice 
to the story of Sudanese refugees, and Poni’s character is a composite of the many 
stories they heard in their research. This is girl power in its truest form, and Poni’s 
story is certain to profoundly impact all who take it in. An author’s note, timeline, 
list of further reading/viewing, and glossary are included.  HM
BlACkwood, gAry Curiosity. Dial, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3924-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Rufus Goodspeed has one chance to spring his father from debtors’ 
prison—to parlay his local reputation as a chess prodigy in 1835 Philadelphia into a 
job with Johann Maelzel, owner of the Turk, a chess-playing automaton that is the 
crown jewel in his exhibition. In doing so, Rufus becomes privy to the machine’s 
operation and Maelzel’s secret: Rufus is simply the latest in a line of the Turk’s 
444 • The BulleTin
operators, who sit inside and play endgames and full matches, and whose lives are 
threatened if they ever reveal the truth behind the machine’s success. Blackwood 
constructs a plot with appeal to several readerships: the gearheads who enjoy the 
mechanical workings of these robotic oddities, à la Selznick’s The Invention of Hugo 
Cabret (BCCB 4/07); those who shiver at the possibility of life force within the 
machine, à la Schlitz’s Splendors and Glooms (BCCB 10/12); those who gravitate 
toward plucky orphan stories; and of course, those who appreciate a solid historical 
fiction riff on a real-life invention, the Turk itself. Rufus’ self-effacing narration 
is thoroughly engaging; acknowledging that not all of his listeners will be equally 
intrigued with the game of chess, he handily brings the ignorant up to speed and 
then moves briskly along with the details of his precarious employment, and the 
bittersweet climax to his family drama. An afterword remarks on Maelzel and other 
featured historical characters.  EB
Boyer, CéCile Run, Dog!: written and illus. by Cécile Boyer; tr. from the French 
by Chronicle Books. Chronicle, 2014 28p
ISBN 978-1-4521-2708-8 $16.99    
Ad 5-8 yrs
A big red ball bounces across the landscape and through the pages, pursued by a 
cheerful yellow dog. The ball, followed by the dog, careens into various scenes—kids 
bouncing on a park trampoline, a family enjoying an al fresco meal, animals in a 
zoo—and each time somebody brings order by flinging the ball along elsewhere 
with a monosyllabic command to the dog, like “Run!” or “Fetch!” The book adds 
interest with a graduated series of liftable flaps on every other spread, so that the 
progression of the ball’s disruption is observed stage by stop-motion stage (the ball 
bounces toward the head of an oblivious pedestrian in one spread; a flap-lift changes 
the scene so it’s bouncing off his head; another flap lift reveals a third pedestrian 
catching the ball in front of the excited dog as the ball’s victim and neighbor begin 
to wordlessly argue). There’s no real plot or payoff here—the dog just winds up 
with his master, who’s been sitting in the park, and since his master wasn’t intro-
duced to the audience at the beginning, the end doesn’t even close a circle. The 
art and design are intriguing, though: highly graphic digital illustrations draw on 
playful candy colors (royal-blue tree trunks sport sugar-pink leafy heads) in crisply 
minimalist, often silhouetted figures. The sequential flaps seamlessly replace their 
predecessors, creating amusing reinterpretations of elements of the image (Dad’s 
casual enjoyment of the family dinner turns into Dad’s unwary heedlessness as the 
ball aims for his head). Browsing youngsters will enjoy the visuals, and they may 
be inspired to create their own creatively formatted narratives.  DS
Brown, don He Has Shot the President!: April 14, 1865: The Day John Wilkes 
Booth Killed President Lincoln; written and illus. by Don Brown. Roaring Brook, 
2014 [64p] (Actual Times)
ISBN 978-1-59643-224-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
This new entry in Brown’s Actual Times series revisits April 14, 1865, when actor 
John Wilkes Booth fired the bullet that killed Abraham Lincoln. The constraint 
of sixty-four heavily illustrated pages naturally means that the events surrounding 
the fatal shot are condensed, but Brown uses that compression to his advantage in 
capturing the urgency in which the frantic manhunt for Lincoln’s killer proceeded 
May 2014 • 445
alongside the solemnities of Lincoln’s funeral rites and how concurrent assassina-
tion plots against Vice-President Johnson and Secretary of State Seward played (or 
failed to play) out. As in other titles from this series, information unfolds in one 
continuous story, sans chapter breaks; fluent storytelling and copious illustration, 
with plenty of quotations and variety of sentence length, assist readers steadily 
through the text. Roughly sketched scenes with watercolor wash are equally suc-
cessful at conveying moments of high drama and profound sadness. Middle-graders 
who have discovered Brown’s series on pivotal episodes in American history will 
welcome this latest title.  EB
CABrerA, jAne, ad. Row, Row, Row Your Boat; ad. and illus. by Jane Cabrera. Hol-
iday House, 2014 26p
ISBN 978-0-8234-3050-5 $16.95   
R 2-4 yrs
The familiar lyrics of the titular tune expand with original verses as they follow a 
cat and dog paddling a wooden rowboat down a winding river. Each spread features 
a stanza with an animal theme and accompanying sound effect; e.g., “Row, row, 
row your boat./ Splish! and Splash! and Splatter!/ If you see the monkeys swing,/ 
Don’t forget to chatter./ OO, OO, AH, AH!” The gimmick generally works, with 
plenty of jaunty rhyming and storytime participation built into the verses and a 
jovial cast of animal characters to carry the tune along. Cabrera’s signature acrylic 
paintings—thick, broad strokes applied heavily to textured paper—are jam-packed 
from edge to edge without a trace of white space; the backdrop highlights the 
vibrant flora of a jungle setting over the course of a day while the aqua-hued river 
meanders through each scene. Though the animals’ expressions incline toward the 
cartoonishly cutesy, there is plenty of usability here and a whole lot of kid appeal, 
particularly with the combination of sound effects and large-scaled, boldly hued 
illustrations that work well on a storytime carpet. The endpapers, which show the 
boat’s entire route from start to finish, are particularly handy for encouraging young 
listeners to make predictions, and the more musically inclined will appreciate the 
notation at the end of the tale.  HM 
CAine, rAChel Prince of Shadows: A Novel of Romeo and Juliet. New American 
Library, 2014 351p
ISBN 978-0-451-41441-0 $17.99   
R* Gr. 9-12
Benvolio Montague takes center stage in this utterly irresistible reconceptualiza-
tion of Romeo and Juliet. Charged by the formidable she-dragon of the family 
with calming his cousin Romeo’s romantic excesses toward Rosaline, Benvolio 
draws on his talents earned in his avocation as the Prince of Shadows, a thief who 
steals from the unworthy citizens of Verona in order to expose their corruption. 
It is not Romeo but Mercutio, however, whose personal tragedy ultimately brings 
about the downfall of both Montague and Capulet; following the murder of his 
secret lover, Tomasso, Mercutio consorts with a witch to make his famed “plague 
o’ both your houses” into an effective, supernaturally enforced curse that explains 
the fierce and hasty attraction between Romeo and Juliet and threatens the more 
reserved Benvolio and Rosaline as well. Caine’s exquisite attention to detail in 
plot, scene-setting, character, and language make this a book-lover’s dream, cor-
recting in some ways the implausibilities of Romeo and Juliet’s sudden passion 
and Friar Lawrence’s stupidity, and replacing them with period superstitions and 
446 • The BulleTin
prejudices that seat more comfortably within contemporary readers’ expectations. 
Only occasionally quoting from the play, she nonetheless evokes her source text 
through clever references to the more famous passages; her prose integrates both 
direct quotations and paraphrases seamlessly while creating moments of stylistic 
pleasure. Even the many fight scenes possess an elegant narrative grace amid the 
gore, serving to ennoble and vilify character and motive by turns. Ah, but then 
there’s that ending, which romantic souls always hope will turn out differently; 
the book manages an uncompromised twist that, while predictable, is nonetheless 
completely sigh-worthy. An appropriate-mood-evoking playlist is included.  KC 
CAMpBell, sArAh C. Mysterious Patterns: Finding Fractals in Nature; illus. with 
photographs by Sarah C. Campbell and Richard P. Campbell. Boyds Mills, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-62091-627-8 $16.95   
Ad 5-9 yrs
Campbell, who introduced young audiences to Fibonacci number sequences in 
Growing Patterns (BCCB 5/10), returns with a similar approach to recognizing 
fractals in the natural world. She begins with an illustrated discussion of perfect 
shapes, such as a circle, cone, or cylinder, and demonstrates how objects in nature 
approximate these shapes. Then she moves toward Benoit Mandelbrot’s observation 
that natural shapes, although not perfect, often appear in a particular self-similar 
pattern, or, as Campbell puts it, “Every fractal shape has smaller parts that look 
like the whole shape,” using a leafless tree and a diagram of complex branching to 
demonstrate. The remainder of the text and images provide further examples, from 
broccoli to bronchioles, and a couple of examples of non-fractal patterns, such as 
pineapple husk and caterpillar markings. The definition of fractals is annoyingly late 
in arriving, though, and it is buried amid text that makes it easy to miss. Moreover, 
selected images vary in their efficacy for revealing fractal patterns: it’s far easier to 
recognize structural similarities in lung airways than in the aerial photo of the Colo-
rado River. A Make Your Own Fractal activity, with simple directions and diagrams 
for constructing a Sierpinski triangle, goes a long way in providing clarity, and Yale 
mathematician Michael Frame’s closing notes on Mandelbrot and the practicality 
of his observations extends the view of fractals beyond natural phenomenon.  EB
CArdi, Annie The Chance You Won’t Return. Candlewick, 2014 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6292-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7039-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Alex is stealing money from her mom’s purse, failing driver’s ed in a spectacularly 
public fashion, and finding herself attracted to the school’s bad boy, Jim. Soon, 
however, Alex realizes that she has bigger problems: her mother believes herself 
to be Amelia Earhart. As Alex’s mother’s delusion becomes more persistent, she 
is hospitalized, but Alex’s father’s insurance isn’t enough, and the family has to 
take care of her at home. Now, in addition to her problems at school and her 
growing relationship with Jim, Alex is plagued with the responsibility of keeping 
her household together while keeping her mother’s problem a secret. When she 
realizes that her mother is working on a timeline that will eventually lead to her 
May 2014 • 447
disappearance, she needs Jim’s help, and her confession closes the distance she has 
been maintaining between herself and her friends. Alex’s mom’s delusion works 
as both metaphor and real problem in this double-edged story of a girl coming of 
age. Character development through the rendering of small detail is strong here, 
particularly with respect to Alex’s younger siblings, Katy and Teddy, who emerge 
in realistic response to their mother’s withdrawal from their lives. The result is a 
solidly crafted family story that sensitively explores the ripple effects of the tem-
porary brokenness of one member.  KC 
Chin, jAson Gravity; written and illus. by Jason Chin. Porter/Roaring Brook, 
2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-717-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 4-7 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 439, for review.
ChoyCe, lesley Jeremy Stone. Red Deer, 2014 183p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-88995-504-2 $12.95   
R Gr. 10-12
After his grandfather died and his father moved out, Jeremy Stone gave up talking. 
His mother, struggling with addiction, took him to counselors and spirit guides, 
who decided he was ready to tackle school again. As the only Mi’kmaq student in 
his new place, he immediately becomes a target of Thomas, the school’s bully; a girl 
named Caitlan, who lost her old boyfriend, Jenson, to suicide because he couldn’t 
stand up to Thomas, steps up to protect Jeremy. Jeremy also has a gift that gives 
him a measure of strength apart from Caitlan’s support: he can see and talk to the 
spirits of the dead. At first it’s just Old Man, his grandfather, but soon he is visited 
by Jenson, and then Jimmy, a friend of his from his childhood on the reserve. They 
help him see that his task is not vengeance against Thomas but reform through 
friendship, and that his urgent task is saving Caitlan, who is seriously consider-
ing joining Jenson in the afterlife. The unique twist in this Canadian verse novel 
intriguingly blurs the lines between the imagination, the spirit world, and the here 
and now, while Choyce’s carefully constructed free-verse poems force a contempla-
tive pace. He relies on space and shape to orchestrate the reading, differentiating 
speakers through manipulating where the lines begin, and showing Jeremy’s hesita-
tions through staggered margins and breaks in the lines. The high interest comes, 
then, from a blend of familiar social situations—bullying and self-harm—with an 
innovative and refreshing remedy—the introduction of possible spirit guides from 
a real-world religious tradition rather than literary fantasy. Additionally, the poetry 
allows access for both strong and less adept readers by slowing things down and 
imposing, at times, an easily solved puzzle. Classrooms and collections looking for 
sensitively handled First Nations/Native American material will want to consider 
this. An interview with the author is included.  KC
448 • The BulleTin
Clough, lisA Petal and Poppy; illus. by Ed Briant. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2014 [32p] (Green Light Readers)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-544-11477-7 $12.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-544-11380-0 $3.99
E-book ISBN 978-0-544-30244-0 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 1-2
       Petal and Poppy and the Penguin; illus. by Ed Briant. Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt, 2014 32p (Green Light Readers)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-544-13770-7 $12.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-544-13330-3 $3.99
E-book ISBN 978-0-544-30228-0 $3.99   
Ad Gr. 1-2
Petal, a tuba-playing elephant, and her pal Poppy, a rhinoceros, live together in 
a lighthouse. In the first title, the more intrepid Poppy goes scuba diving, while 
“worrywart” Petal accompanies her in the boat because she is too nervous about 
Poppy to stay on shore. Petal brings along her tuba, as practicing will take her 
mind off her fears about Poppy; when fog drifts in Poppy is able to locate the boat 
thanks to Petal’s playing but not before Petal jumps overboard to rescue Poppy and 
in turn needs rescuing herself. In the second title, a storm brings an unexpected 
guest to the lighthouse: a penguin. After Poppy brings the little guy inside, the 
penguin quickly endears himself to both friends, fixing a meal, doing dishes, danc-
ing to Petal’s tuba music, and falling asleep in Petal’s lap, and the duo decides that 
he can stay. Smaller, comic-like panels alternate with larger illustrations in these 
graphic novel/easy reader mash-ups, and dialogue and sound effects, presented in 
speech bubbles, comprise the minimal text. The digital art, though cheery, is flat 
and sometimes overloud and busy compositions bury the all-important dialogue 
balloons. Kids who can tackle Willems’ Elephant and Piggie series may nonetheless 
embrace a new appealing easy-reader duo in Petal and Poppy.  JH
CoMBs, sArAh Breakfast Served Anytime. Candlewick, 2014 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6791-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7047-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Seventeen-year-old Gloria is off to a gifted and talented summer program, aka 
“Geek Camp,” that draws not only people from Louisville, like Gloria, but also 
those like her roommate—mining country natives and proud members of the Coal 
Coalition who nuance Gloria’s understanding of Kentucky and the larger world. 
There’s also Mason, who gets under her skin the moment she spies him and his 
ostentatious hat from her dorm room window; that annoyance turns to something 
else as the two find themselves in the same class, with only two other students to 
deflect the tension between them. The author clearly recalls her own adolescence, 
her memories translating into generosity with her characters—and her readers—as 
they stand at the edge of independence. Her sympathy emerges despite the uneven-
ness of the prose; the book’s observations remain kid-meaningful even when Gloria’s 
voice has more of the retrospective wisdom of adulthood than that of a teenager 
struggling to understand her emerging self. Indeed, facets of Gloria’s personality 
emerge awkwardly, with the narrative telling rather than showing (an epilogue tied 
into the book’s final scene is particularly contrived). Yet Combs’ language has mo-
May 2014 • 449
ments of poignancy, illustrating a sensitive understanding of the inner and outer 
worlds of gifted adolescents and ultimately providing more patient readers with 
a heartening message about leaving a home one loves and moving into the larger 
world of adulthood.  AA
Cook, eileen Year of Mistaken Discoveries. Simon, 2014 257p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4022-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4024-1 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Senior year is tough for Avery: first, she and her boyfriend break up; then she’s 
waitlisted by Duke, her dream school; then Nora, her childhood best friend, com-
mits suicide after a failed search for her biological mother. Like Nora, Avery is an 
adoptee, and she decides to honor her friend by letting Nora’s quest inspire her 
own; she embarks on a search for her own birth mother, making the task into her 
senior project in partnership with Nora’s friend, Brody. Brody has his doubts about 
the wisdom of the quest, but he clearly likes Avery, and Avery can’t help thinking 
that it’s just the kind of meaty project topic that will impress Duke. Cook pro-
vides her usual fluid prose, and the search story is generally credibly constructed, 
with the internet allowing for progress based on small bits of information; Avery’s 
mixed motivations for her search add complexity. The relationship and eventual 
romance with Brody are less successful, though, since Brody is a largely flat char-
acter, who’s mostly there to identify and fulfill Avery’s needs. Additionally, Avery’s 
journey toward self-realization dives into sentimental corniness (“In that moment 
I began to believe”) that undermines the significance of her growth. Even readers 
living with their birth families will understand Avery’s search for her own identity, 
though, and they’ll wish they could have Avery’s handsome loyal assistant as they 
define themselves.  DS
dAuvillier, loïC Hidden: A Child’s Story of the Holocaust; illus. by Marc Lizano; 
color by Greg Salsedo; tr. from the French by Alexis Siegel. First Second/Roaring 
Brook, 2014 76p
ISBN 978-1-59643-873-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 3-6
In this graphic novel imported from France, little Elsa gets out of bed in the middle 
of the night and hears Grandma crying. Assuming bad dreams have caused her 
grief, Elsa prompts her grandmother, “You know, when I have a nightmare, I tell 
Mommy about it and that makes me feel better.” And so Grandma, for the first 
time, revisits aloud her childhood experience during the Holocaust, from her 
misunderstanding of the “sheriff’s badge” sewn onto her clothes and her sudden 
segregation from school activities, to the night her father hid her in a wardrobe 
during a police raid, through her new life under a false identity, protected by kind 
neighbors who whisked her off to the relative security of a farm while awaiting 
news of her parents. The framing story is both affecting and effective, respecting 
Grandma’s silence over the years while quietly celebrating her triumph over the 
burden of memory. Dauvillier’s entire cast is portrayed as doll-like figures, childlike 
and unintimidating; although the style makes the mustached men and violent police 
seem incongruous in their round-headed, cartoon innocence, it ultimately shifts the 
reader out of Grandma’s perilously threatened point of view and into that of Elsa, 
who struggles to comprehend the unimaginable tale her beloved grandmother is 
telling. Tidy frames delineated by consistent white gutters make this accessible to 
450 • The BulleTin
GN newbies, and the dusky palette, which segues to warm golden tones as Grandma 
and Elsa snuggle together through the painful story, underscores the darkness of the 
period without sacrificing visual clarity. This study in the confrontation of memory 
will lay the groundwork for readers who will later grapple with Art Spiegelman’s 
gold standard of GN survivor stories, Maus.  EB
dAvies, niColA The Promise; illus. by Laura Carlin. Candlewick, 2014 44p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6633-0 $16.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
A young girl lives in a city that is crumbling, and she’s forced to resort to thievery 
to find food to eat and money to live on. One evening as she snatches the bag of 
an older woman, she’s caught; the woman demands that in exchange for the bag, 
the girl must plant whatever is in it. The girls concedes and when she discovers that 
the bag contains acorns, she becomes a modern-day Johnny Appleseed, spreading 
beauty and greenery throughout her city, and later throughout the world, only 
to pass the torch on at the story’s close to a new young pickpocket. The striking 
mixed-media illustrations complement the text nicely: Carlin’s work echoes Sweet’s 
in Bryant’s A Splash of Red (BCCB 1/13) in its use of interesting perspective, 
sketchy details layered on top of backgrounds, and hand-lettering throughout to 
evoke a child’s-eye view of the world. The drab grays, navies, and tans of the early 
city give way to rich greens and reds as the seeds burst into bloom, and the hazy 
charcoal backgrounds increase the dreamlike sense of the tale. Though the ideas 
of paying it forward and rejuvenating urban space are well intended, the allegory 
is unfortunately heavy-handed in its melodrama (“Nothing grew. Everything was 
broken. No one ever smiled”), and the text ends up preachy in its strongly purposive 
themes of patience, generosity, and eco-mindedness. Still, the book’s lyricism does 
mean it’s lovely when read aloud, making this a possible choice as a green-themed 
and sensitive bedtime story.  TA
de lint, ChArles Seven Wild Sisters: A Modern Fairy Tale; illus. by Charles 
Vess. Little, 2014 260p
ISBN 978-0-316-05356-3 $18.00   
R Gr. 4-6
In this cozy, smartly developed companion novel to The Cats of Tanglewood Forest 
(BCCB 4/13), many decades have passed, and Lillian, the then-young protagonist, 
is now a sharp old woman who befriends Sarah Jane, one of seven sisters who live 
on a farm nearby. Sarah Jane learns more than she expected from this wise new 
pal, particularly about the worlds that exist parallel to her own, after she stumbles 
upon an otherworldly creature and decides to help him; her efforts thrust Lillian, 
Sarah Jane, and ultimately Sarah Jane’s irascible sisters into a battle going on be-
tween two warring fairy groups. There is an elegance and thoughtfulness to both 
the text and accompanying illustrations that elevates the story; a careful reader will 
be well rewarded with a solid mystery on the traditional side of the world and a 
complex, intriguing storyline on the magical side. Lush, intricate drawings, some 
previously appearing in a prior limited edition printing of this book, reflect the 
richness and outside-of-time feeling of the story itself. Folktale and fairy tale fans 
who are seeking a longer adventure into which to settle will find this a perfect fit, 
and they’ll undoubtedly want to go back to Cats and see who Lillian was before 
she was a mysterious old woman with links to two worlds.  AS
May 2014 • 451
deMpsey, kristy A Dance Like Starlight: One Ballerina’s Dream; illus. by Floyd 
Cooper. Philomel, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25284-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Our young narrator wants to dance ballet, like the girls at the ballet school where 
her mother takes care of the costumes. The encouragement from the ballet master 
(who permits her to join the lessons, “even though I can’t perform onstage with white 
girls”) allows her to hope that she could break the stage’s color line and become a 
dancer. She’s utterly thrilled to find a role model in Janet Collins, an elegant African-
American ballerina performing for the first time at the Metropolitan Opera House, 
and when her mother manages to get them tickets, Collins’ artistry and success 
convince the girl that she too can have a future in ballet. The story is slow to start, 
focusing in abstract and sentimental terms on the narrator’s dreams for too long 
before articulating the problem; the conclusion also will leave audiences wondering 
whether the girl’s hope ever was fulfilled. More involving, however, is the girl’s keen 
love of ballet and her joy at discovering a pioneer who proves her dream possible, a 
joy enhanced by the glamour of a grownup night out at a magnificent performance. 
Cooper’s smoky mixed-media artwork has a subtle and appropriate echo of Degas 
in scenes of dancers on stage and smartly dressed 1950s audience members, and the 
protagonist is vividly realistic, a talented down-to-earth girl rather than an ethereal 
sylph. A note explains more about Collins, the first African-American performer 
at the Met (in 1951, four years before Marian Anderson), but more of her story 
would be welcome—a possibility for a new project, perhaps?  DS
despAin, Bree The Shadow Prince. Egmont, 2014 [512p] (Into the Dark)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-247-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-406-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
In this nod to the Greek myth of Persephone and Hades, a prince from the Un-
derrealm must somehow convince a modern girl to come with him willingly to 
the underworld. Enter teens Haden and Daphne, who can’t deny their immediate 
attraction, even while Haden tries to remember his mission and Daphne juggles 
a new school, a drunken rock-star dad (whom she only recently moved in with in 
order to attend a better music program), and her musical ambitions. Destinies, 
mysteries, and real and mythological difficulties all arise, but at the core this story 
is best when it is pure romance, even if it is a slightly unsettling one. The novel 
almost pulls off the elaborate plot, but ultimately, neither Daphne nor Haden feel 
like realistic individuals: Haden adapts almost instantly to contemporary life after 
spending his childhood as a disgraced prince in the Underworld, and Daphne is 
simply too perfect as an innately talented musical genius who never truly struggles 
for anything. In addition, their love story, while passionate, is rushed, and it’s more 
than a little creepy given the fact that he knows she is doomed in the underworld 
(like his own mother was) and she knows that he has her full name tattooed on 
his arm before he ever meets her. Even so, a smoking-hot romance and plenty of 
unresolved plot threads should be enough to keep readers looking out for the next 
installment.  AS
452 • The BulleTin
elvgren, jennifer The Whispering Town; illus. by Fabio Santomauro. Kar-Ben, 
2014 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1194-4 $19.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1196-8 $6.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 7-10 yrs
Set in 1943 in Nazi-occupied Denmark, this striking picture book tells the story 
of a community of townspeople who work together to aid Jews hiding from the 
Nazis. As the story opens, Anett’s mother informs Anett that there are “new friends 
in the cellar” and sends the girl down with breakfast for Carl and his mother, who 
will soon depart by boat. When Anett gathers supplies from likeminded villagers, 
the baker provides extra bread, the librarian provides extra books, and the farmer 
provides extra food (“‘Wish them well,’ he whispered back, giving me extra eggs”). 
Soldiers begin to search for hidden Jews in the village, and it looks like the dark of 
the moonless night will keep Carl and his mother from making it to the harbor; 
fortunately, Anett comes up with the idea of directing the pair through whispers, 
and the villagers stand on their doorsteps and whisper “This way” to guide the two 
to a waiting boat. Elvgren’s focused, unsentimentalized narrative is an ideal selection 
for introducing younger children to the many who stood up to do what was right 
during the Nazi regime. The spare storytelling style is perfectly matched with the 
sophisticated yet accessible illustrations, composed of black lines, fields of digital 
color, and scratchy pen details. A limited palette wherein grays and blues dominate 
plays to the mystery of the story while the contrasting splashes of dark red add 
interest. An author’s note provides background information and links the events of 
the story to an actual occurrence in the fishing village of Gilleleje. This is a notable 
early introduction to the Danish resistance that deserves wide readership.  HM
elyA, susAn Middleton, ad. Little Roja Riding Hood; illus. by Susan Gue-
vara. Putnam, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24767-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
This adaptation finds Little Red as a spunky Latina girl with cowboy boots on a 
four-wheeler on her way to take una canasta of soup to her ill grandmother. She 
runs into a wolf in the forest, who convinces her to pick flowers, while he snatches 
her distinctive red cape. The wolf shows up at Grandma’s bedside hooded in red, 
and the familiar observations of his big features (“‘¡Tus dientes!’ said Grandma./ ‘As 
pointy as daggers!’”) give way to Little Red bursting in to splash scalding soup on 
the wolf. The rhyming couplets of the text are peppered with a great deal of Spanish 
vocabulary—all translated in the introductory glossary—making this a boon for 
bilingual classrooms. Both text and illustrations give this retelling a modern flair, 
with Grandma’s stucco house topped with a satellite dish and the wolf’s intrusion 
causing Grandma to install a security system at the book’s end. Guevara’s watercolor 
and gouache illustrations, scratchily outlined in ink, cheerfully play with perspective 
and deftly utilize the medium to evoke texture—fine lines for the wolf’s hair and 
stippled watercolors for satiny blouses. The wolf is personified with the addition of 
details such as a bandana and skull pendant necklace, and the impressionistic land-
scapes of the forest contrast effectively with the close-up of Grandma’s horror as the 
wolf prepares to attack. In addition to its pedagogical possibilities, this would also 
work well for intimate sharing, for younger eyes to catch recurring details of other 
May 2014 • 453
fairy-tale mainstays—three blind mice and duendes (mischievous elves)—making 
this a multipurpose addition to a multicultural collection.  TA 
friesen, jonAthAn Mayday. Speak/Penguin, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-14-241229-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Charged by her now long-gone father with looking after her little sister, Addy, Crow 
has been consumed with doing just that. She gave up sleep to protect Addy from 
her pedophilic stepfather, and her final act was to protect Addy from a boy planning 
to violate her at prom; as she was driving him away from Addy, they were hit by a 
train. Now seventeen-year-old Crow is in a coma and finds herself with a second 
chance: she can take a loaner body and return to any point in her life, but she is 
told that her mission is not to attend to Addy’s needs as much as her own, as her 
total focus on threats to Addy has rendered her soul a twisted and deformed thing 
that needs to heal before she moves on. Stubborn as ever, though, she accepts the 
deal, thinking she can undo the mistakes she made and change history. While the 
premise is promising, the plotting is leggy and disjointed: Crow fails in her first 
return as a thirteen-year-old girl named Shane and is allowed yet another chance 
as a seventeen-year-old boy, also named Shane, and the other characters all too 
readily accept the sudden appearance, disappearance, and shape-shifting of these 
newcomer Shanes who are weirdly knowledgeable about everyone’s lives. Addy 
herself is unconvincingly naïve and untroubled, especially after she is assaulted 
by her stepfather. Crow, however, has a believably cynical disposition that is most 
evident in the harsh, angry tenor of her narration of past events. As she sees herself 
through the eyes of the Shanes, she confronts her damage with a gentleness she had 
previously reserved only for others; readers who are overly critical of themselves 
may find here a model for widening perspective.  KC 
gAlBrAith, kAthryn o. Two Bunny Buddies; illus. by Joe Cepeda. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-544-17652-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs
Two bunny buddies, one white and one brown, set off together with their backpacks 
on a long and winding road, but a spat at a fork in the road results in name-calling 
(“Stinky feet!”) and the bunnies’ going their separate ways. Each rabbit comes across 
a delicious treat down the path they have taken—one friend finds ripe berries, the 
other succulent clover—but with no one to share it with, they separately become 
downcast . . . until they pick their snack and hop back together again. Retro pas-
tels—orchid, lavender, and mint—provide a backdrop for thick and sharp outlines 
tempered with the feathering of gouache, creating simple illustrations that place the 
focus squarely on the bunnies and their interactions. The text is similarly minimal, 
using sparse sentences (“Jump, jump this way!”) to move the story along. Though 
the words aren’t always the most friendly for sounding out, the repeated, limited 
vocabulary would suggest that this has potential for emerging readers with a bit 
of guidance; young ones would also hop right to a spring storytime that pairs this 
with something like Nyeu’s Bunny Days (BCCB 2/10).  TA 
454 • The BulleTin
gAvin, rohAn Knightley & Son: Cracking the Code. Bloomsbury, 2014 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-153-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-154-0 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Since his gumshoe father fell into a coma four years ago, kid-genius Darkus Knight-
ley has been memorizing his dad’s files, learning as much about the skill of detection 
as possible, and it looks like those skills are about to be put to the test. A series of 
unexplained robberies plagues London, and a best-selling book is suddenly sending 
people into madness. Additionally, Darkus’ dad has just woken up, and he wants to 
take these cases on his own, convinced that they are linked to the Combination, a 
worldwide network of villains bent on world destruction. Unfortunately, an episode 
of narcolepsy puts Dad out of commission again, and it’s up to Darkus to finish 
the case. Darkus has the calculating mind, the cool attention to detail, and the 
abundance of tweed of a young Sherlock Holmes, and the characterizations, plot 
devices, and story arc combine in an amalgam of classic detective tropes boiled down 
for the middle-grade audience. The father-son relationship adds a bit of pathos to 
all the logic, with Darkus wondering if his father sees him as anything other than 
a useful detecting tool. The mystery is genuinely compelling, with the appropriate 
MacGuffins and red herrings, and the bad guys get their comeuppance (two of them 
quite gruesomely). A few hints at the conclusion, however, point toward a sequel, 
and readers can hope that Darkus’ snarky stepsister and gadget-loving teacher will 
play bigger parts in upcoming installments.  KQG
glAser, lindA, ad. Stone Soup with Matzoh Balls: A Passover Tale in Chelm; illus. 
by Maryam Tabatabaei. Whitman, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-8075-7620-5 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
The familiar “Stone Soup” story is set here in the fictional Jewish town of Chelm, 
a town known throughout Jewish folklore as a village of fools. A poor stranger 
arrives at Passover, expecting a meal in accordance with the Scripture’s “All who 
are hungry come and eat.” He is turned down until he produces from his pocket 
a stone, which he declares capable of making matzoh-ball soup—with a little help 
from the villagers. There is ample humor throughout the dialogue, as the stranger 
playfully challenges the villagers (“Here in Chelm, have you heard of garlic?”) who 
unsuspectingly reply (“You think we’re fools? Of course we’ve heard of garlic!”). 
When it is time to add the matzoh balls, the wise stranger plays the pride card, 
noting that his stone will produce matzoh balls “so big and heavy they’ll sit in 
your belly like rocks”; the womenfolk immediately rush home to produce matzoh 
balls “so light they can almost fly,” and soon the soup is complete. In the end, 
the villagers and the stranger gather together in the synagogue to share the Seder 
meal and to reflect on their good fortune. This gentle, community-centered tale is 
perfectly paired with Tabatabaei’s rosy-cheeked, round-faced, slightly cartoonish 
cast of townsfolk. The natural palette of soft greens, blues, and browns adds to the 
overall feeling of warmth in the smoothly modeled digital illustrations. An author’s 
note about Passover, about Chelm, and about the source folktale provides further 
information for listeners of this enjoyable retelling.  HM 
May 2014 • 455
grAvel, elise 
The Fly; written and illus. by Elise Gravel. Tundra, 
2014 32p (Disgusting Critters)
ISBN 978-1-77049-636-1 $12.99   
R Gr. 2-3 
      The Worm; written and illus. by Elise Gravel. Tundra, 2014 32p (Dis-
gusting Critters)
ISBN 978-1-77049-633-0 $12.99   
R Gr. 2-3 
Perhaps you’ve said to yourself, “Why aren’t there more easy reader titles about 
vermin?” Well, worry no more. Gravel’s new series nicely fills that particular niche, 
serving up nuggets of introductory information about “Disgusting Critters” with 
a heaping helping of humor. One key factual tidbit is crisply presented per page 
or per spread, while the comical accompanying illustrations feature cartoon-esque 
creatures joking, via dialogue bubbles, about the info. In The Fly, for example, the 
text stating “The housefly is gray, with black stripes on his back, and his body is 
covered with hair” is juxtaposed against a picture of a pop-eyed fly in mid-shave, 
exclaiming “That means a lot of shaving!” The earthworm featured in The Worm 
resents the authorial designation of its muscle tube as “slimy and disgusting,” 
until later, when the text’s cheerful assertion that “Fishermen use earthworms to 
catch fish, and some people even eat them and find them delicious!” prompts the 
worm to exclaim, “What? Delicious? No, no, no! I’m disgusting! I’m disgusting!” 
The amusing digital artwork, rendered appropriately in earth tones with pops of 
brighter reds or pink on matte pages, is modern, fresh, and funny. The steely blue 
housefly with his oversized eyes and protruding proboscis and the chipper, rosy-
hued earthworm who respectively star are cute enough to win over even the kids 
who normally run screaming from creepy crawlies. While some readers may need 
help to decode words like “muscidae” or “hermaphrodites” (defined within the 
text), the writing is generally quite accessible to older primary graders; reluctant 
older readers may find these titles appealing as well. Pair these with Cronin’s Diary 
of a Worm (BCCB 10/03) or with Miller’s This Is Your Life Cycle (BCCB 9/08) for 
a bounty of bantering bugs.  JH 
greenwAld, lisA Welcome to Dog Beach. Amulet/Abrams, 2014 [272p]
(Seagate Summers)
ISBN 978-1-4197-1018-6 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Without her beloved dog, Danish, summer on Seagate won’t be the same for eleven-
year-old Remy—and if she wants one thing, it’s for life on her beloved island to 
never change. Though Seagate holds many bittersweet memories of her deceased 
pooch, Remy finds plenty of pet substitutes, as she and longtime friends Micayla 
and Bennett have identified several fellow vacationers whose dogs need looking after. 
Micayla seems increasingly annoyed and distant, though, while Bennett wants to 
spend more time with island newbie Calvin, whose unpleasant twin sister, Claire, 
makes Remy’s skin crawl. As Remy navigates this unwelcome new territory, she 
learns that change may not be comfortable, but with the right perspective—and the 
therapeutic power of four-legged friends—it might not be so bad. Remy’s coming-
of-age dilemma captures the growing pains of the tween years, when friendship 
dynamics shift, making longtime besties surprisingly difficult to talk to and platonic 
pals puzzlingly attractive. Despite its accurate observations and on-point insights, 
456 • The BulleTin
this entrée into author Greenwald’s new Seagate series could stand to lighten up, as 
the plot is labored and Remy’s adherence to the way things have always been veers 
into tedium. Still, dog devotees and aspiring entrepreneurs will find a friend and 
mentor in Remy, who adroitly combines her puppy love with a knack for business. 
She’ll also make a good companion for those self-serious tween readers looking for 
a little sympathy on the perplexing and often unpleasant road to adolescence.  AA
hAhn, reBeCCA A Creature of Moonlight. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2014 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-544-10935-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-544-11009-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-10
Marni’s grandfather gave up his kingdom and his crown to save her infant life, and 
he and Marni have spent the last sixteen years in relative safety, tending flowers 
and eking out a meager existence at the edge of the living woods that surround the 
kingdom. The threat that the reigning king, Marni’s uncle and the murderer of 
her mother, would return to finish off Marni has nonetheless always loomed, and 
it’s brought into sharp focus when Gramps passes away, leaving Marni to fend for 
herself. Initially, she takes refuge with the fairy spirits in the nearby woods—she 
is, after all, half magical creature herself, the product of a tryst between her mother 
and a dragon in human form. Knowing, however, that she cannot hide forever, 
Marni makes her way to court, where she learns that the king indeed wants her 
dead, but also that her father, the dragon, is looking for her and sending an army of 
trees to choke out the land and claim what he sees as his. This is fairy-tale fantasy 
at its best, with evocative prose and simple storytelling deftly conveying a powerful 
emotional core that will haunt readers long after the pages end. The fairy forest 
has an appropriately ethereal feel while the royal court is full of sharp edges and 
shady people, but both places are dangerous for Marni, whose presence means an 
opportunity to grab power more than a chance to welcome kin home. Though 
mainly a character study of a girl divided by her heritage, it’s also a strong indict-
ment of the idea that love is the same thing as possession and an exploration of the 
way that such interpretations of love lead to destruction.  KQG
hArper, ChArise MeriCle Dreamer Wisher Liar. Balzer + Bray, 2014 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-202675-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220291-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
It was bad enough when Ashley discovered that her best friend, Lucy, is moving 
away at the end of summer. Now Ashley can’t even spend these last few months 
with her pal at camp because she’s expected to play babysitter to seven-year-old 
Claire, the daughter of Ashley’s mother’s childhood best friend. While hiding out 
from her charge in the basement, Ashley finds an old jar labeled “Wishes” and is 
transported back in time to witness the formation and ultimate dissolution of a 
friendship between two girls. Meanwhile, cheerful Claire and her list of things to 
do force the normally reserved Ashley to interact with people she’d usually shy away 
from and to discover the connections between the wishing jar and her own life. 
What at first appear to be very disparate plot elements (the wishing jar, a visit to a 
nursing home, a chance meeting with an author) coalesce into a pleasing mystery 
May 2014 • 457
à la Rebecca Stead, and the clues are scaffolded in a way that will allow young 
readers to triumphantly put the pieces together just before they’re revealed. Ash’s 
narration is poignantly direct at times (“Nighttime is the worst for sadness”), and 
her actions can be both well intentioned and ill advised, making her an eminently 
relatable protagonist, a slightly older version of Julie Sternberg’s Eleanor (Like Pickle 
Juice on a Cookie, BCCB 3/11, etc.). Middle-grade girls will particularly warm to 
Ashley’s story and find themselves wishing for a similarly magical summer.  KQG
hArper, ChArise MeriCle Sasquatch and Aliens: Alien Encounter; written and 
illus. by Charise Mericle Harper. Ottaviano/Holt, 2014 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9621-7 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
When Morgan meets Lewis, Lewis is hanging by his underwear from a tree in 
the woods and nine-year-old Morgan must cut him down. Despite this awkward 
introduction, the pair becomes fast friends, facilitated by quirky Lewis’ cool 
home in an until-recently abandoned motel outside of town. On an excursion in 
the woods the boys spot an enormous dark-eyed, wrinkly alien and, spurred by 
Morgan’s dad (a “believer”), they report their close encounter to the media. The 
discovery of what they really saw—a mysterious neighbor’s movie prop—encour-
ages them to change their public story to having seen Sasquatch, and then they 
need to use Morgan’s sister’s knitting to provide some “evidence” of Bigfoot in the 
wild to cover their story. The book really shines in its development of Morgan as a 
kid still figuring himself out in the context of a new relationship, and in its never-
missing-a-beat humor about subjects including terrible muffins, Lewis’ hippie 
mother, and Morgan’s sister’s imaginary boyfriend. This, of course, wouldn’t be 
Harper without plenty of doodles, and the most laugh-out-loud bits come from 
the talking lasagnas, pithy counterpoints, and straight-faced captions in the wonky 
hand drawings. Though less-over-the-top than Potter’s Otis Dooda: Strange but True 
(BCCB 9/13), its similar emphasis on zany new friendships will make this a solid 
readalike, and fans will be well set-up for more antics from Morgan and Lewis in 
the series’ future installments.  TA
hAtteMer, kAte The Vigilante Poets of Selwyn Academy. Knopf, 2014 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75379-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75378-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75380-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys    
R* Gr. 9-12
The competitive reality show For Art’s Sake descends on Selwyn Academy in 
Ethan’s junior year, allowing talented students at the specialized arts school a shot 
at screen time and a winning prize of a substantial scholarship. Ethan and his 
buddies—charismatic Luke, quiet techie Jackson, and Jackson’s artistic cousin 
Elizabeth—create an underground newspaper, the Contracantos, that pillories the 
school’s sellout to reality TV in a long poem reminiscent of Ezra Pound’s Cantos. 
However, the runners of the show delight in this development, embracing Luke 
as a gifted writer and adding him to their roster of contestants, and he succumbs 
immediately and entirely to fame’s lure. The other three redouble their efforts and 
begin a completely illicit investigation of the school’s relationship with the program, 
along the way finding out that very little, within reality TV or without, is what it 
458 • The BulleTin
seems. Crackling, witty narration, free roaming between hyperintellectual allusion 
(including Latinate plays on words) and shout-outs to Candyland and Mrs. Basil E. 
Frankweiler, will immediately grip fans of Frank Portman and John Green. Throw 
in reality TV, a spot of administrative criminality, and some good old-fashioned 
caper-film break-ins and the mix is pretty near irresistible. Characterization is cool 
and sharp yet sympathetic: Ethan is endearing as the nice guy who’s convinced he’s 
behind the curve, believes his friends are better than they are, and bonds poignantly 
with Jackson’s gerbil, Baconnaise; even his distant dream girl, ballerina Maura, turns 
out to be more interesting than both Ethan’s dreams and the TV show’s predictable 
portrayal of her. The tension between cynicism and naïveté, knowledge and in-
nocence in these brainy but still maturing kids is astutely evoked, and readers will 
be right there alongside them for every protest, misstep, and loss.  DS
hAutMAn, pete The Klaatu Terminus. Candlewick, 2014 [368p] (The 
Klaatu Diskos)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5405-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7025-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Readers who have followed Tucker Feye and Lah Lia in their bounces across time and 
space (The Obsidian Blade, BCCB 4/12, and The Cydonian Pyramid, BCCB 9/13) 
will be glad to see them return in this series finale, bringing the possibility of some 
answers about who is responsible for the time travel portals through which they’ve 
been traveling. Tucker’s uncle Kosh makes a strong reappearance as well, with much 
of this book devoted to the bittersweet story of his unrequited love for his brother’s 
fiancé, Emily. Other characters who have been important in the first two books are 
brought into the mix, and Hautman deftly manages to bring their stories together 
amidst more harrowing danger and intricately timed escapes. Readers will need to 
pay close attention to understand just when the individual scenes are taking place 
as the characters enter and exit portals and move between by-now-familiar parts of 
Wisconsin’s present, past, and future. Hautman closes the series the way a middle-
grade sci-fi series should be closed: all questions are answered, and the good guys 
survive, prosper, and eventually get married to the right people, while the bad guys 
get their throats ripped out by jaguars or suffocate in the unbreathable air on Mars. 
Those who have braved the inherent yet well-handled confusion of time travel in 
the first two books may want to refresh their memories before picking this up so 
that they can more fully experience the satisfying snick as the last portal closes.  KC 
herrerA, roBin Hope Is a Ferris Wheel. Amulet/Abrams, 2014 261p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1039-1 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 5-8
When ten-year-old Star naïvely lets it be known that she lives in a trailer park, 
her fate at her new school is sealed: no one wants to be her friend. Determined 
in spite of the setback, she starts a Trailer Park Club, hoping that it will attract 
people to her so that she can change their minds about the stigma of trailer park 
life. First Genny, a spunky fourth-grader, joins the club and brings her sullen older 
brother with her, and then the group becomes an Emily Dickinson club after Star 
is introduced to the poet by her teacher. The club’s new theme does attract some 
new members, but one of them, Eddie, is more poetry-savvy than Star, and she is 
threatened by his attempts to shift the attention to other poets. Her school drama 
May 2014 • 459
is outmatched by home drama, as she finds that her beloved older sister is pregnant, 
and the man she always thought was her father isn’t. There are a lot of loose ends 
and unanswered questions in the plot, and the school setting and diverse secondary 
characters lack credible solidity and organic connection; they seem to have been 
artificially assembled for the purposes of playing a supporting cast to a character and 
conveniently provide her with plot fodder. However, Star’s contemplation, through 
poetic metaphors and real-life relationships, of what really matters in her life is 
compelling. Additionally, the poetry angle offers food for thought for those just 
coming to understand the power and purpose of metaphor, and Star’s vocabulary 
assignments, occasionally interspersed between chapters, provide inspiration and 
entertainment for word-lovers.  KC 
holt, kiMBerly willis Dinner with the Highbrows; illus. by Kyrsten Brook-
er. Ottaviano/Holt, 2014 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-8088-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 4-7 yrs
“No talking with your mouth full.” “Elbows off the table.” “ Sit up straight.” Those 
are the mandates from the mother of Bernard Worrywart, who’s anxiously prepping 
her son with a heaping helping of dining etiquette for his upcoming dinner at the 
home of the Highbrows. He takes it all—the napkin placement, the compliments 
to the chef, and the offer to wash dishes—to heart, so imagine his surprise when the 
Highbrows take him to a fancy restaurant and he learns their table manners belie 
their last name. While Brooker’s expressive oil illustrations capture the Highbrows’ 
high spirits (and Bernard’s reserve) in depictions as generous and colorful as their 
manners, the frank but flat accompanying text is unfortunately unengaging. The 
book struggles to define its stance on etiquette, seeming to relish the Highbrows’ 
antic misbehavior while listing the basics of table manners in the endpapers. Still, 
the underlying caution against assumptions and encouragement of zesty enjoyment 
of life provide solid messages. This appreciation for joie de vivre and occasional 
moments of real humor (such as Bernard helping the restaurant’s perplexed but 
grateful dishwasher) make this an enjoyable readaloud for kids learning about 
manners—and wishing they could behave like the Highbrows.  AA
hurwitz, MiChele weBer The Summer I Saved the World . . . in 65 Days. Lamb, 
2014 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37107-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37106-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37108-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-9
“Two things I am not: a genius, and the kind of person who goes out of her way to 
help other people.” So confesses fourteen-year-old Nina, who decides to change her 
usual pattern and perform secret acts of kindness, one for each remaining day of the 
summer, for the residents of her cul-de-sac. Nina’s kindnesses alarm a few people 
initially, but her small gestures (leaving baked goods, getting kids’ lost balls out 
of the scary backyard, planting flowers) charm most of her neighbors and provide 
them with a point of connection. As the summer progresses, it becomes clear that 
it’s Nina who really longs for connection: her attorney parents are buried in a big 
legal case; she desperately misses her grandmother, who died the previous year; her 
460 • The BulleTin
best friend, Jorie, is determinedly leaping towards boys (especially Eli, the boy that 
Nina likes) and leaving Nina behind. The transition of adolescence is a common 
theme in realistic fiction, but Hurwitz is, like Frances O’Roarke Dowell, an author 
who can explore a familiar experience in ways that give it fresh energy and unusual 
nuance; her writing is impressively perceptive even as it’s engaging and accessible. 
The notion that somebody like Nina—and by extension, readers—has the power to 
become an agent of change, despite her limited authority and without ever leaving 
her home, is a striking and empowering one, and the book tackles its implications 
thoughtfully and unsentimentally. Readers, themselves often noticers, will appreciate 
the celebration of a girl whose skill lies in seeing what others don’t.  DS 
idle, Molly Camp Rex; written and illus. by Molly Idle. Viking, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78573-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Considering taking your T. rex camping? Author Idle has some words of wisdom 
in this gently fanciful exploration of all that can go awry, if not completely wrong, 
in exploring the great outdoors with one’s dino-friends (for instance, your T. rex 
may offer up an entire tree trunk for campfire kindling). Using the same guidebook 
style as in her Tea Rex, Idle’s winking prose makes the perfect foil to her demure but 
descriptive colored pencil drawings. These charming and dimensional illustrations 
reflect Idle’s experience as an animator, inviting readers’ careful consideration and 
quiet giggles and delivering generous and gentle humor in gorgeous full-bleed ren-
derings. Sweet and subtle with a liberal pinch of silly, this could provide a welcome 
quieter interlude in an otherwise rollicking story session.  AA
johnson, jAleigh The Mark of the Dragonfly. Delacorte, 2014 [400p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37645-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37615-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37646-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Piper, a thirteen-year-old in a bleak dystopic world, knows that she needs to get 
out of the salvage town in which she lives alone as an orphan, where folks only 
survive by picking up the strange treasures thrown out of the sky after violent me-
teor strikes. When she encounters Anna, who has near-total amnesia after barely 
surviving a meteor storm, and who sports a tattoo that marks her as protected by 
the king, Piper develops a risky plan: to take Anna to the authorities who might 
help the lost girl rediscover her identity, which involves boarding the 401, a train 
that can take them to the capital. They’re being chased by some dangerous people, 
but the folks who run this train, quirky outsiders who have found a sense of family 
crossing this desolate land together, wind up being formidable allies. A plot twist 
involving the true identity of one of the main characters may not surprise many 
readers, but it still packs an emotional wallop, as it will dramatically impact both 
Anna and Piper, who are both deeply likable characters in whom readers will be 
invested. Cool and intricately described machinery in a setting that actually is 
shaped by the evolution of mechanical objects, with a hint of innocent romance 
and a complex, impeccably developed plot—there is plenty to recommend this 
novel to adventure, fantasy, and steampunk fans.  AS
May 2014 • 461
kAntorovitz, sylvie The Very Tiny Baby; written and illus. by Sylvie Kantoro-
vitz. Charlesbridge, 2014 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-445-6 $14.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-635-7 $6.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Jacob’s parents are expecting a baby, but the usual older-sibling storyline takes on 
a more serious turn when the baby arrives much too early, ending up in the NICU 
and sending the family into a tailspin of anxiety and disruption. When Jacob’s 
parents turn all of their attention to the needs of the preemie, Jacob’s feelings of 
frustration rapidly evolve into feelings of anger (“I am thinking mean thoughts. 
I think the baby is ruining my life. I think we should give the baby away. I wish 
the baby would die”). Even when danger passes, the baby must stay in the hospi-
tal, requiring Jacob’s mother to pump breast milk (while Jacob covers his ears in 
frustration at the noise of the machine). Finally, the baby comes home, and while 
still a bit uncertain, Jacob appears mostly ready to welcome his tiny sibling. This 
is not a book to accidentally hand to an unsuspecting soon-to-be older sibling, 
but it’s a frank look at a common life situation not usually addressed for this age; 
Kantorovitz deals with Jacob’s very real and intense emotions with unusual honesty 
and a keen sense of child perspective. The pen, pencil, and gouache illustrations 
mimic a child’s drawing style, and they’re laid out with hand-lettered text captions 
in sequential bordered panels against contrasting backgrounds, as if they were in Ja-
cob’s scrapbook. Introduced in the right context and with the right amount of adult 
support, this could prove a useful story to families in a similar situation; consider 
purchasing this for your parent shelf rather than your picture-book collection.  HM
kiMMelMAn, leslie Sam and Charlie (and Sam Too) Return!; illus. by William 
Owl. Whitman, 2014 39p
ISBN 978-0-8075-7215-3 $13.99   
R Gr. 1-3
Neighbors and pals Sam (boy) and Charlie (girl) are back for more fun in this 
title, along with Charlie’s little sister, Sam Too. Several Jewish holidays—Passover, 
Hanukkah, and Tu B’Shevat—are quietly included as the background for three of 
the stories, while the other two focus on snow shoveling and playing in a treehouse. 
The three kids are likable individuals, and Kimmelman’s simple prose carries a 
gentle humor. The large font and short sentences combine with a lengthier text and 
occasionally challenging vocabulary to make this a useful last stop for kids just get-
ting ready to move into beginning chapter books. Owl’s lively color illustrations in 
slightly smoky, complex hues bring the characters’ features and personalities to the 
forefront; freckle-faced Sam Too, for example, perpetually wears her carroty hair in 
two long braids and is clearly attached to her bear-head hat, while Charlie’s darker 
reddish-brown curls are constantly going every which way. Fans of the first book 
will definitely want to check in with the trio here, and Jewish readers will likely to 
again find the casual treatment of the families’ faith refreshing.  JH
462 • The BulleTin
kirkpAtriCk, kAtherine Between Two Worlds. Lamb, 2014 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98947-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74047-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89924-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
In 1900, sixteen-year-old Eqariusaq has mixed feelings about the arrival at her 
Greenland village of the American ship carrying Mrs. Robert Peary and her daughter. 
On the one hand, Eqariusaq, who lived for a year with the Pearys (who call her 
“Billy Bah”), is pleased to see again the people who meant so much to her; on the 
other, she’s also aware of how much American wealth changes the way her people 
operate. And indeed it does: Eqariusaq’s amiable but lazy husband loves the ease 
of hunting with guns and bullets and accepts dangerous commissions from Mrs. 
Peary in order to earn more; he also follows the local custom of bartering his wife 
for intervals, leading to Eqariusaq’s complicated and affectionate relationship with 
Duncan, a sailor aboard the Pearys’ ship. Kirkpatrick has been a sensitive explorer 
of history in both fiction and nonfiction, previously treating the Arctic in The 
Snow Baby (BCCB 2/07); her fictional depiction of the real-life young woman who 
translated and sewed for Peary expeditions gives her an opportunity to explore some 
of the subtle complexities of this strange cultural intersection. Eqariusaq’s narration 
vividly immerses readers in the warm companionship and icy physical chill of her 
Inuit community, with her perplexing American experiences revealed in flashbacks; 
she is capable both of deeply admiring the statuesque Mrs. Peary and resenting 
the woman’s selfish privilege as she dismisses Inuit welfare in her zeal to find her 
husband. This would be a natural complement to Lerangis’ Smiler’s Bones (BCCB 
6/05), but it’s also a compelling counternarrative to exploration tales as Eqariusaq 
negotiates her way through intersectionality, remaining an active participant in 
her own fate. Fascinating end matter includes a glossary, a timeline, a substantial 
historical note; photographs will appear in the bound book.  DS
klise, jAMes The Art of Secrets. Algonquin, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-61620-195-1 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
It’s a tragedy for the Khan family when their apartment goes up in flames, destroying 
all they own, but fortunately people rally around them to help. The most generous 
help comes from the toney Highsmith School, where Saba Khan is on scholarship 
as a sophomore, and from Saba’s service-minded classmate, Kendra Spoon, who 
joins with her older brother to plan a charity auction to benefit Saba’s family. One of 
the items the Spoons acquire for the auction turns out to be an undiscovered work 
by outsider artist Henry Darger, with a value of half a million dollars; the excite-
ment this find brings to the auction turns to consternation when the manuscript 
disappears, raising suspicion and bitterness throughout the school. Klise weaves an 
intriguing story through various voices, such as Saba’s father (who fears his young 
son may have set the apartment fire), Saba’s schoolmates (including the senior class 
president, who briefly dates Saba as her misfortune makes her prominent), and 
Highsmith teachers and administration (the self-serving principal is delighted to 
use the charity auction to promote the school), with newspaper articles and letters 
filling in additional gaps. Particularly interesting here is the way different characters 
respond to the situation and how they’re affected by the Khans’ volatile fortunes and 
May 2014 • 463
the art mystery. The hairpin-turn twist ending will have surprised readers leafing 
back through the earlier parts of the book to search for foreshadowing, and it will 
provoke much discussion about who’s a good guy here and who’s a baddie. The 
acknowledgments include a further reference for reading about the fascinating art 
of Henry Darger.  DS
koehler, fred How to Cheer Up Dad; written and illus. by Fred Koehler. Dial, 
2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3922-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 4-7 yrs
Little Jumbo is baffled by his dad’s insistence on adding raisins to breakfast and 
his forgetting that Little Jumbo doesn’t like the brown overalls, and the little guy 
is further unclear as to why his then shooting the aforementioned raisins at the 
ceiling or running around the neighborhood sans pants causes Dad to be upset. 
After some thought about Dad’s “bad day,” Little Jumbo decides that taking his 
dad to play catch and share an ice cream cone will be a great solution—and it 
is, carrying the duo for the rest of the day until a bedtime snuggle. This spices 
up familiar father-and-son narratives with its reversal, giving kids a new slant on 
familiar experiences. The text’s understated comicality (“Little Jumbo suggested 
that Dad needed a time-out”) is matched with smartly designed illustrations in 
digitally assembled pencil and pen. Setting sturdily but scratchily outlined elephants 
against crisp white pages gives the book a dashing design that’s enhanced by chic 
architecture and interiors, as well as by primary color accents that pop against the 
elephants’ grey skins and drab overalls. Little Jumbo and Dad are comically drawn 
with rotund middles but boxy appendages, and Koehler uses all of the potential of 
the characters’ trunks, ears, and great big smiles to cover the full range of pachyderm 
expression. With its sparkle that’s accessible to both parents and kids, this is poised 
to join the ranks of Steptoe’s In Daddy’s Arms I Am Tall (BCCB 2/98), Mayer’s Just 
Me and My Dad, and Durand’s Mitchell’s License (BCCB 5/11) as a stellar book 
for father-and-son sharing.  TA
kuMin, MAxine Lizzie!; illus. by Elliott Gilbert. Seven Stories, 2014 [160p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60980-518-0 $21.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60980-519-7 $21.95
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 4-6
Two years ago, when Lizzie was nine, her life changed in an instant when a diving 
accident left her with a damaged spine, leaving her to need a wheelchair or a pair 
of canes to get around. She and her mother moved to Florida after Lizzie’s accident, 
near a roadside zoo where Lizzie enjoys tending the animals. Strange happenings are 
afoot at the zoo, though; the kindly owner is selling the land to a smooth-talking 
businessman, Jeb Blanco, and Lizzie begins to realize that Blanco may be up to 
no good when she finds a nearby building containing exotic monkeys, cared for 
by Blanco’s nephew. A concerned Lizzie involves Digger, a retired cop who’s her 
honorary grandfather; together they realize that the monkeys are illegally imported 
golden lion tamarins, and that Blanco may have figured out that Lizzie knows too 
much. Noted poet Kumin has produced work for young people before, but this 
middle-grades mystery is a departure from her usual picture-book-length outing. 
The animal aspect of the mystery has considerable appeal, and Lizzie’s uninflected 
464 • The BulleTin
candor about her disability and chatty openness make her narration accessible. The 
story, however, is muddy and undifferentiated, with too much thrown together 
and too little focus and momentum; the elements are unconvincing and often 
uninvolving, and the book loses track of its own characters at times (there’s no 
wrap-up with the kindly zoo owner, for instance, despite the fact that he was at 
the center of all of this). Readers may empathize with Lizzie and her concern for all 
critters, but Gibbs’ Belly Up (BCCB 6/10) or Hiaasen’s Chomp (BCCB 5/12) are 
better mysteries for animal lovers. Occasional illustrations, line drawings touched 
with yellow and orange, add some liveliness.  DS 
lAidlAw, s. j. The Voice inside My Head. Tundra, 2014 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-77049-565-4 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
With an alcoholic mother and an ineffectual father, siblings Pat and Luke have 
assumed fixed roles over the years: sister Pat is the responsible caregiver, and Luke 
the dependent little brother. It’s time for them to move on, though, and Pat takes 
an internship on an island off the coast of Honduras to study the sea life that she 
has always loved. When she is reported missing and presumed drowned, Luke 
doesn’t accept the official story. He goes to the island to investigate, and there he 
hears stories that don’t jibe with what he knows about his sister but do spur him 
to learn more about who she was becoming. While the mystery here is enough to 
keep the pages turning, it’s clumsily handled, with clichéd Central American island 
experiences (such as run-ins with drug dealers and voodoo hoaxes) providing the 
MacGuffins that delay the ultimate resolution; the emotional tenor of the book 
misses on multiple occasions, with secondary characters such as stoner Zach oddly 
comic amid the tragic story. Nonetheless, the pull of the setting, with its relaxed 
rules about underage drinking and hooking up as well as the lure of spending days 
swimming with benevolently beautiful wildlife, will appeal to armchair travelers. 
Additionally, Laidlaw goes some way to dispel stereotypes about native Hondurans, 
providing insight into their daily lives through Luke’s island love interest and her 
family’s unfavorable attitudes toward entitled and clueless tourists. Ultimately, even 
Pat’s sad story provides an affirmation that emerging out of an unhappy childhood 
to pursue one’s dreams is a journey worth taking.  KC 
lAkin, pAtriCiA Bruno & Lulu’s Playground Adventures; illus. by Kirstie Ed-
munds. Dial, 2014 [80p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3553-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 1-2
In “The Cake,” the first of two stories about squirrel buddies Bruno and Lulu, the 
friends ask a group of crabby cats at the park if the kitties will share their cupcakes. 
The cats refuse, so Lulu, who loves pretend play, makes a “cake” from sand: “Help 
me mix.” Bruno, however, is a realist: “We cannot eat this.” Lulu, still pretending, 
replies, “I know. It is not ready,” to which Bruno dryly responds, “. . . even when 
it is ready.” An enthusiastic tossing of some pebbles inadvertently sends the cats 
scattering, and Bruno and Lulu happily (if unethically) eat the left-behind cupcakes. 
In “Time-Out,” Lulu is stuck in time-out on a park bench and can’t play. Bruno 
joins her to wait it out, and the two pretend that the bench is a swing and a slide 
before seguing into a game of “Guess What I Am,” at which point Bruno tires of 
pretend play and asks Lulu’s mom for release. She assents, and guess where Lulu 
May 2014 • 465
wants to play? The bench. Brief sentences, simple vocabulary, and repetition of 
words and phrases (in a text that appears entirely in dialogue) lend support to kids 
ready for something a bit longer than Willems’ Elephant and Piggie series; Lulu’s 
and Bruno’s dialogue bubbles also alternate colors, helping readers easily distin-
guish who is speaking. Lakin writes skillfully for this audience, injecting humor 
and clever teachable moments (“‘How do you like that?’” “‘Not one bit.’” “‘Not 
one bite, either’”) into her accessible text. Edmunds’ plentiful digitally created art 
is cartoonishly fun, if occasionally a bit busy, and orangey Bruno, sporting blue 
spectacles, and tan Lulu, with her polka-dot hair bow, are a lively pair. Besides its 
obvious use as a first-class beginning reader, this might also make an entertaining 
readers theater performance piece.  JH
lettriCk, roBert Frenzy. Disney Hyperion, 2014 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8538-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8766-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Oh, Camp Harmony, could your name be any less suitable? Once the animals there 
all turn into slavering attack beasts desperate for human flesh, Heath and his little 
gang of close camper friends forget all about the usual camp activities and begin 
a harrowing journey out of the woods and toward a nearby town that, they hope, 
will represent safety. While the kids quickly learn that water is immediately fatal 
to the critters, this knowledge doesn’t provide as much security as they would like: 
even as they wade down the river they hit shallow spots, massive hordes of bats, 
and beavers who are the only infected mammals not killed by water. The back-
story on how the animals got infected doesn’t actually add much—this book is all 
about a group of memorable young kids trying to cope with a series of events that 
is completely outside the scope of their barely formed social, survival, and ethical 
toolkits. The death count is slightly startling for a book aimed at this age range, 
but it makes sense given the ferocity of the animals and the boys’ understandable 
lack of preparation for maddened woodland creatures. Offer this to adventure fans 
and budding horror buffs, sure, but realistic fiction fans may also find the effective 
character development and thoughtful pacing as worthwhile as the monstrous 
foaming-mouthed squirrels.  AS
liu-perkins, Christine At Home in Her Tomb: Lady Dai and the Ancient Chinese 
Treasures of Mawangdui; illus. by Sarah S. Brannen and with photographs. Charles-
bridge, 2014 80p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-370-1 $19.95   
R Gr. 5-9
Methane gas and a layer of white clay were tip-offs that laborers building an air raid 
shelter in 1971 Hunan Province had made a critical discovery. Formal excavations 
soon began which uncovered the two thousand year old tombs of the emperor-
appointed marquis Li Cang, his wife Xin Zhui, and one of their sons. All the 
tombs yielded priceless grave goods, but that of the wife, known by the honorific 
Lady Dai, also held her remarkably intact remains, so well-preserved that tissue 
was soft, joints somewhat flexible, and even stomach contents full of undigested 
melon seeds. Liu-Perkins is a knowledgeable and enthusiastic docent, leading read-
ers through the particulars of the excavation and reveling in the enormous amount 
of information the find revealed about the Qin and early Han periods, which had 
466 • The BulleTin
been presumed to be forever lost to object decay and human destruction. Books 
that scholars had only known from references in other works were unearthed, along 
with musical instruments still playable, silk maps still readable, game boards still 
playable (if only we knew all the rules), foods still aromatic, and equally important, 
a cadaver that could be fully autopsied. The author supports her neatly organized 
chapters with brief, conjectural musings on Lady Dai’s life, plenty of diagrams and 
photographs, a glossary with Chinese pronunciations, a dual timeline of Chinese 
and Changsha (Li Cang’s kingdom) history during the relevant period, quotation 
sources, bibliography, index, and a substantive history of Chinese unification un-
der the first emperors. This material will be a boon for archaeology fans who have 
exhausted standard library offerings on Middle Eastern and occidental mummies 
and excavations, as well as a vital resource for collections that are top-heavy on the 
Great Wall and the Terracotta Army.  EB
lloyd, nAtAlie A Snicker of Magic; illus. by Gilbert Ford. Scholastic, 
2014 311p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-55270-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-55272-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Sixth-grader Felicity Pickle and her little sister, Frannie, have high hopes that their 
move to their mother’s hometown of Midnight Gulch, Tennessee, will finally put 
a stop to Mama’s wanderings and prove to be a permanent home for the family. 
Although Felicity has a gift with words, both “seeing” them in the air around people 
and places and making up poems with them, she gets tongue-tied in public, making 
it difficult to form friendships. Jonah doesn’t mind, though, and the two become 
fast friends; their investigation into the rumored fanciful history of the town proves 
fruitful, revealing the legacy of the magically talented Threadbare Brothers who 
quarreled, parted ways, and were ever after cursed, thus leaving the town, once full 
of magic, with only a “snicker” of magic left. Can Felicity figure out how to break 
the curse, bring magic back to Midnight Gulch, and convince Mama to stay put 
there? Sure, there are so many coincidences here that you can’t swing a cat without 
hitting one, but this cozy fantasy reveals its secrets in a satisfyingly folkloric way and 
the particular manifestations of the town’s magic are intriguing. Language-loving 
middle-graders will also be enchanted by Felicity’s gift of being able to see words 
and may be inspired to begin their own “word collections.” The colorful characters 
and the town’s magical, memory-inducing ice cream will appeal to fans of Law’s 
Savvy (BCCB 9/08).  JH
long, ilAnA Ziggy’s Big Idea; illus. by Rasa Joni. Kar-Ben, 2014 [34p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-9053-4 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2428-9 $6.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Young Ziggy is full of original concepts and inventions, and he frequently shares 
these ideas with his father as they sell baked goods on the streets of their small 
shtetl. When Ziggy learns that Moise the baker is struggling to rework his recipe for 
boiled buns, which often remain undercooked on the inside, Ziggy comes up with 
the novel idea of shaping the buns into rings before boiling and baking them . . . 
and thus invents the first bagel. This is an amusing pourquoi tale, and bagel-familiar 
kids may figure out where the story is heading along the way and enjoy the journey. 
May 2014 • 467
The storyline itself is slim, though, and the punchline involving a connection with 
the Yiddish word for bracelet (“It’s a bracelet; a bagel . . . a perfect name”) falls flat 
because the connection is only made explicit in the author’s note. The artwork, 
a mixed-media hybrid of carefully outlined, comic-like pen and ink illustrations, 
touches of fabric collage, and digital paint, is uneven, with faces somewhat strained 
but backgrounds offering interesting textures and compositions. This is a clever spin 
on necessity being the mother of invention, and young bagel lovers may warm to 
Ziggy’s enthusiastic problem-solving approach. A recipe for bagels is included for 
those who may want to give it a go in their own kitchen.  HM 
MAnCeAu, édouArd The Race; written and illus. by Édouard Manceau; tr. from 
the French by Sarah Quinn. Owlkids, 2014 64p
ISBN 978-1-77147-055-1 $17.95   
R 6-9 yrs
The titular race “begins with a guy,” as they so often do, and soon, there are a 
bunch of animal “guys” (whose black knobby antlers suggest caribou or reindeer) 
eager to win the footrace that takes place in this French import. These guys are 
ruthless, though, and after some banana-peel slinging and truck-hopping, at least 
one entrant is ready to drop out and settle down. The race continues, and one 
contestant is declared the sole winner . . . but maybe that guy who got out and is 
now relaxing in a hammock is the real victor here. It’s a whimsy-filled ride with 
a straightforward message, and there’s real pleasure in watching these little dudes 
scheme their way to the finish line and in the celebration of a laid-back lifestyle 
(in the capping full-spread that features the “real” winner lounging in a field of 
flowers). Manceau’s signature paper collage is on full display in warm earth tones, 
with the guys in a snappy vermilion against an ivory background. The dinner-plate 
eyes, contorting antlers, and stick limbs of the racing figures convey a remarkable 
range of expression, and their half-moon muzzles add to the deadpan effect of the 
narration. After meeting these guys, one might expect kids to want to set up a race 
of their own, but it’s just as likely they’ll want to copy the loafing guy and stretch 
out in the sun.  TA
MAnn, jennifer k. Two Speckled Eggs; written and illus. by Jennifer K. 
Mann. Candlewick, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6168-7 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Oh, no! Ginger’s mother has told Ginger that she has to invite all the girls in her 
class to her birthday party, which means she must include weird Lyla Browning 
(“who brought a tarantula in a pickle jar for Show-and-Tell”). It’s the other girls, 
however, who wreck all the games and disdain Ginger’s beloved silver and gold cake, 
leaving Ginger tearful. She has a cheering and bonding moment with Lyla, though, 
which turns into a solid connection when Ginger is won over by Lyla’s present—a 
cleverly crafted faux-nest with malted-milk-ball eggs. The plotline is a bit forced, 
with Ginger’s repugnance for Lyla changing more out of convenience than character; 
the message that people are more interesting than their popularity is a good one, 
though, and Lyla’s comfort with being her offbeat self (she’s happily looking at a 
ladybug through her magnifying glass during much of the party) emphasizes the 
point that it’s Ginger, not Lyla, who’s missing out here. The illustrations, pencil and 
gouache with a few digital elements and collage-type layering, has a wide airiness, 
468 • The BulleTin
with even the full-bleed scenes gleaming with white space, and spare dot-and-
squiggle features turning big balloon kid heads into faces. Lyla gently stands out 
from the springily colored crowd in her more saturated brown outfit and glasses, 
underscoring the text’s championing of individuality. This will be superfluous for 
young Lylas, but young Gingers may benefit from a reminder that when it comes 
to inclusion, moms know what they’re talking about.  DS
MCCully, eMily Arnold Little Ducks Go; written and illus. by Emily Arnold 
McCully. Holiday House, 2014 32p (I Like to Read)
ISBN 978-0-8234-2941-7 $14.95   
R Gr. K-1
When a mother duck’s ducklings fall through a grate and into a storm sewer, she 
follows the sound of their cheeping from grate to grate her commotion alerts a 
human to her problem. The man opens a manhole cover and successfully retrieves 
the ducklings while a young girl watches; then the girl takes them to a nearby pond 
and releases the happily reunited birds. The minimal text of this beginning reader 
helpfully uses repetition of words and phrases, very short sentences (“Little ducks 
go. They go down”), and a large, clear sans serif font to support novice readers, 
especially those still at the sounding-out level. The story is more hinted at by the 
text than fluidly told, but the personable, detailed line and watercolor illustrations 
add interest to the restricted text. It’s hard to go wrong with ducklings in danger, 
and while this is not as stellar as Moore’s similarly themed Lucky Ducklings (BCCB 
3/13), it’s quite useful, and it would be a fitting selection for a beginning reading 
group to tackle after a readaloud session with Moore’s book.  JH
MCkAy, hilAry Lulu and the Rabbit Next Door; illus. by Priscilla Lamont. Whit-
man, 2014 91p
ISBN 978-0-8075-4816-5 $13.99   
R Gr. 2-3
The irrepressible, animal-loving Lulu (from Lulu and the Dog from the Sea, BCCB 
5/13) is back, and she’s got a new animal concern: George, the black and white 
rabbit belonging to the boy next door. Sullen Arthur, George’s owner, has just 
moved in, and he prefers his Xbox to the rabbit his grandfather gave him; Lulu, 
adoring owner of five rabbits, and her cousin Mellie watch in dismay as Arthur 
leaves George in his hutch all day and tends only his most basic needs. The girls 
concoct a cunning plan (letters and presents from one of Lulu’s rabbits to George) 
that encourages Arthur to coax George out of his shell and ends up bringing Arthur 
along with him. So far, McKay has impressively managed to maintain the animal 
focus while still giving each Lulu book its own individual plot, avoiding the re-
warmed feeling of many series titles. Lulu and Mellie’s grappling with the problem 
of Arthur’s undernurturing is believable (fierce Mellie keeps wanting to lock him 
in a shed to see how he likes it), while Arthur’s dawning realization of how much 
he actually enjoys his pet makes him a sympathetic character who just needed a bit 
of redemption (“We’ve tamed him,” says Mellie triumphantly). The Lulu stories 
continue to hit that sweet spot: rich with interest and humor, tasty to read aloud, 
rewarding to read alone. Lamont’s friendly black and white art is equally proficient 
at exuberant kids and nose-twitching bunnies.  DS
May 2014 • 469
MiChAlAk, jAMie Fetch! With Ruff Ruffman: Show’s Over. Candlewick, 
2014 41p illus.
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7278-2 $14.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6809-9 $4.99   
Ad Gr. 1-3
Ruff Ruffman, doggy star of the PBS Kids show Fetch!, jumps on to the early chapter 
book scene in these short adventures. First, his “fancy pants” go missing, and then 
he receives a fax stating that he’s been fired. Ruff assumes the “Ha Ha” signature 
on the fax belongs to Harriet Hackensack, the Australian entrepreneur who just 
bought the TV station that airs his show and who hates dogs. Alongside Blossom, his 
laconic feline show supervisor, Ruff constructs a green-energy submarine doghouse-
mobile to confront Hackensack, a plan that backfires until Blossom saves the day. 
Meanwhile, it turns out that the fancy pants were stolen by Ruff’s archenemy, so 
they are then remotely destructed to cause the now-pantsless archenemy maximum 
embarrassment. This hits the right marks with respect to chapter length, print size, 
and goofy appeal to make transitional readers comfortable, and the familiar media 
face is likely to snag a broad audience. However, the science content is overplayed, 
being limited in actuality to a couple of facts tossed out by Blossom and the nicely 
designed activity about buoyancy in the end matter, and plot points stray willy-nilly. 
The highly saturated digital illustrations that closely follow the TV show’s anima-
tion style are also uneven, with some of them evincing interesting dimensionality, 
but others disappointingly flat and repetitive. There are likely to be kids who find 
Ruff in a patched-up pink cat costume an attention-grabber, though, and there’s 
a dearth of comical science books for this level, so this might see some play as a 
springboard to more in-depth scientific sleuthing for students looking for diversion 
more than experimentation.  TA 
Mills, ClAudiA Annika Riz, Math Whiz; illus. by Rob Shepperson. Ferguson/
Farrar, 2014 [128p] (Franklin School Friends)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-374-30335-8 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-374-30336-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Though a good friend of bibliophile Kelsey (from Kelsey Green, Reading Queen, 
BCCB 9/13), third-grader Annika isn’t all that interested in books. What Annika 
loves is math, and she’s sad that Kelsey and their other friend Izzy don’t share her 
enthusiasm (“It was hard when your two best friends hated the thing in the world 
you loved the most”). She’s therefore thrilled to discover that the library is holding 
a citywide Sudoku contest; she’s determined to be the third-grade champ, and she’s 
hoping that a contest win will convince Kelsey and Izzy that math is more fun than 
they realize. As usual, Mills delivers with a felicitous blend of breezy accessibility 
and perceptive understanding. Annika, a not-particularly-nerdy math-loving girl 
(“She couldn’t bear to leave a math question unanswered”), is an excellent ambas-
sador for her passion, and the book’s gentle point about math’s popularity as a 
punching bag is effectively made. The subplot, the girls’ preparation for the class 
carnival, actually provides the majority of the action, so there’s plenty of daily-life 
friend interaction (and several failed batches of chocolate-chip cookies) to keep the 
interest of the mathphobic. This might inspire the uninitiated to try their hand at 
Sudoku, so have some puzzles ready for new math explorers.  DS
470 • The BulleTin
MontgoMery, sy Chasing Cheetahs: The Race to Save Africa’s Fastest Cats; illus. 
with photographs by Nic Bishop. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 77p (Sci-
entists in the Field)
ISBN 978-0-547-81549-7 $18.99   
R Gr. 4-7
The scientists are back in the field again, in another outing by the illustrious 
Montgomery and Bishop partnership. This time they’re in Namibia at the Afri-
can headquarters of the Cheetah Conservation Fund, where staff both study and 
advocate for cheetahs; their work includes reintegrating cheetahs into the wild, 
housing cheetahs unable to fend for themselves, researching wild cheetah habits, 
and partnering with farmers on ways to defend their flocks from cheetahs without 
harming them. The title focuses largely on the current mission of the CCF, im-
mersing readers, like Montgomery and Bishop, among the cheetahs and adding 
a touch of plot trajectory in the story of Hi-Fi, a wild cheetah who’s fascinated 
with the animals at the facility. Activist readers will be intrigued to hear about the 
American high-schoolers doing volunteer work on a class trip to Namibia, but there 
are plenty of other kinds of jobs woven into the process as well that will, in keeping 
with the series’ practice, offer some possibilities for scientific work that young people 
may not have realized. Bishop’s photographs can’t capture the cheetahs’ blinding 
speed, but the cats’ movie-star glamour is on prominent display, especially in a few 
breathtaking extreme closeups; pictures of other local wildlife—a nervy hornbill, 
a crowd of inquisitive mongoose—add atmosphere and convey the richness of the 
local ecosystem. Interspersed special features (“The Crucial Role of Predators”) 
and fact sheets (“Cheetahs by the Numbers”) provide crisply focused informative 
overviews, while those looking to see a cheetah run will be amused by the flip-
book art sequence in the book’s corner. End matter includes a short bibliography 
and info about the CCF’s website, including volunteer opportunities, as well as a 
(somewhat eccentric) index.  DS 
Moore, peter V Is for Villain. Hyperion, 2014 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-5749-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-7907-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Brad Baron has the alliterative name, the family history, and the education to be 
a great hero—he just doesn’t seem to have any superpowers. His awesome older 
brother does in spades, which makes Brad’s demotion to his elite school’s less pres-
tigious program even more embarrassing. Fortunately, the new program provides 
Brad with his first real friends, a group of renegades who see problems with their 
society’s hero worship—and who want to take it down, villain style. It turns out 
that Brad does have powers, illegal ones in the form of telepathy and mind con-
trol, and he just needed the right person (in this case, the gorgeous Layla) to help 
him develop them. Though the teens quickly get in over their heads by trying to 
impress one of the most dangerous bad guys of them all, they are a scrappy bunch, 
and they may actually shake up the status quo. The battle line scenes are effectively 
zippy, but it is actually the backstory of how some of the bad guys emerged that 
is most compelling in this novel—almost everyone is a pawn in someone else’s 
gene-splicing or population-control game, and no one group seems to have all of 
the information. Luckily for the reader, Brad, the intrepid narrator and budding 
supervillain, is brilliant and particularly adept at gathering the pieces, once he is 
May 2014 • 471
made aware that all is not as it seems in this world where the heroes are so jerky they 
may be more villainous than their foes. Comic-book buffs and fans of the similarly 
themed Sidekicks by Jack Ferraiolo (BCCB 4/11) will appreciate the mix of humor 
and action and the tweaking of expectations of what makes one good or evil.  AS
Mull, BrAndon Sky Raiders. Aladdin, 2014 421p (Five Kingdoms)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9700-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9702-3 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Sixth-grader Cole is initially mostly occupied with trying to figure out if he is 
too old for trick-or-treating, but he becomes an unlikely hero after his friends get 
kidnapped into another realm called the Outskirts. Cole enters voluntarily into 
this other place (with the admirable but not well-thought-out intention of rescu-
ing his pals), a fact that means he may have strong latent powers that will soon 
come into play. For now, though, his stubbornness and fierce sense of loyalty are 
his only tools to figure out the rules of this magical new world, stay alive after he is 
enslaved by sky raiders, and actually find his friends, who have been sent out over 
all the five kingdoms as slaves. There’s a significant amount of plot to absorb in 
this action-packed novel, but the gripping narrative is well worth the effort. Cole 
is amiable and determined, and the kids with whom he allies himself, all natives 
of the Outskirts, are carefully developed and intriguing, offering further glimpses 
into the politics, cultural expectations, and social dynamics of this complex other 
world. Readers will be eagerly anticipating the next installment, and while they 
wait they’ll have much to imagine about the fate of the Outskirts and how good 
might possibly triumph over the well-established evil that currently reigns.  AS
pAige, dAnielle Dorothy Must Die. Harper/HarperCollins, 2014 [464p]
ISBN 978-0-06-228067-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Seventeen-year-old Amy Gumm is definitely looking to leave her trailer-park home 
and addict mother behind, but getting swept up in a tornado and landing in Oz 
was not part of her plan. Amy’s presence in Oz is, however, part of the plan brewed 
up by the witches of the Revolutionary Order of the Wicked to defeat Dorothy, 
who has apparently been wreaking havoc after deposing Princess Ozma, declaring 
herself ruler, and unleashing the fury of her sadistic minions on anyone who defies 
her. What’s worse is that Dorothy is sapping Oz of its magic, which will eventu-
ally lead to its ruin. The Wicked witches are certain that Amy, as an outlander, 
has what it takes to defeat Dorothy—they just need to get her in fighting shape 
beforehand. A black-clad, tattooed munchkin welcomes Amy to Oz, but it’s that 
munchkin’s gruesome death at the hands of one of the Tin Soldiers that makes it 
very clear that this is no usual depiction of Over the Rainbow; Paige, in fact, plays 
fast and loose with the lives of several beloved characters, but she also mines the 
entirety of Baum’s fourteen-book Oz series for her plot, incorporating elements of 
the whole mythology of Oz rather than limiting herself to just the movie. Amy’s 
dry wit and snarky narration makes a nice counterbalance to the darker events, 
and she’s believably complex, especially as the daughter of an addict—sure, she’s 
angry at being asked to play savior yet again to someone else’s crisis, but she’s also 
looking to prove herself. This strikes a similar tone to Marisa Meyer’s Cinder series 
(BCCB 2/12, etc.), with its blend of fantasy, humor, and horror, and it will likely 
inspire fans of that series to make their way to the Emerald City.  KQG 
472 • The BulleTin
pArsons, MArk huntley Road Rash. Knopf, 2014 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75343-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75342-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
When high school junior and drummer Zach is dumped by his current band, he’s 
soon picked up by a group of older guys who are booked for a tour of the Rockies 
for the summer. Each stop on the tour opens Zach’s eyes to what it means to be in a 
real band, as the venues range from pretty sweet to rank dive, and the interpersonal 
relationships among the musicians ebb and flow. His enthusiasm for developing 
and playing the original music of the most talented member of the group, Glenn, 
fractures the ego of their front man and eventually gets Zach kicked out of a second 
band in a matter of months, but once again, what looks like tragedy turns out to be 
a prelude to better things. Zach is a thoroughly likable guy’s guy; kind and ethical 
in relationships, committed to what he feels are the best interests of the band, and 
diplomatic in his attempts to promote Glenn’s talent and smooth over the rifts he 
created while doing so. His anger is justified by intolerable circumstances, and he’s 
helped by a wise dad, who understands his son’s hot temper even while he chastises 
Zach and advises him on how to remain politic in difficult situations. The musical 
terminology gets thick on occasion, amping up the authenticity for readers in the 
know, but the play of relationships and the plot arc of dreams realized broadens 
the appeal beyond those with Guitar Hero dreams.  KC 
pAtriCk, denise lewis A Matter of Souls. Carolrhoda, 2014 186p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-9280-4 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2402-9 $12.95   
R Gr. 10-12
In this collection of eight gut-wrenching short stories, Patrick explores the hard-
ships endured by black men and women over two centuries of enslavement and 
oppression. Readers look through the eyes of a young woman whose mother’s life 
is endangered in the colored waiting room of a doctor’s office while the uninter-
ested white doctors and nurses eat a leisurely lunch, and they feel the indignity 
of a Catholic schoolroom where a little black girl is punished for daring to look 
her teacher in the eye. They see the loss of reality experienced by a mother who 
sees her beloved son maimed and lynched. They mark the difficulty of trying to 
transcend an intraracial prejudice as a beautiful young woman loses a kidney to 
mercury poisoning caused by a lightening cream. They share the sickening real-
ization with the accidental slaveholder that his seemingly benign business venture 
involves trafficking in human souls. They travel with a boy who witnesses his only 
male relatives shot to death on the steps of a library for demanding their right to 
vote, but who finds redemption after returning from Vietnam and realizing the 
strength of that legacy and the mandate it imposes on his future. Indeed, there 
is some measure of redemption in nearly every story, but it is almost always won 
through the shedding of blood. These are ugly truths exposed, brought to life with 
an immediacy that breaks through the gauzy filters of history. Teachers looking for 
a YA complement to Richard Wright will find the multiple characters’ stories here 
both useful and bracing.  KC 
May 2014 • 473
pelletier, CAthie The Summer Experiment. Sourcebooks, 2014 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-4022-8578-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
Even though it’s still summer, eleven-year-old Roberta has struck upon a surefire 
way to win her school’s upcoming science fair: she and her best friend Marilee will 
make contact with the UFOs spotted above their town of Allagash, Maine, in hopes 
of being abducted (and, of course, returned). It’s perhaps the most harebrained of 
Roberta’s many schemes, which she relays through frank and familiar narration, 
but it’s one worth the danger just to beat her arch nemesis, Henry Horton Harris 
Helmsby, aka “The 4Hs of the Apocalypse.” Before they can put their plan into 
action, Roberta suffers the loss of her beloved grandfather, Marilee runs away in 
protest of her father’s new girlfriend, and both girls must endure the (not completely 
unwelcome) teasing of Roberta’s older brother and his friend, all while Allagash 
goes topsy-turvy with talk of UFO sightings. The book uses a light but deft touch 
in melding the serious with the comic, creating in the spunky Roberta a balanced 
and believable heroine feeling the first pangs of encroaching adolescence. Pelletier 
takes familiar themes—friendship, sibling rivalries, grief—and interweaves them 
with an unusual but enjoyable plotline; after all, how often do middle-grade 
protagonists experience alien abduction? Readers will enjoy the originality and 
accessibility of this humorous hike through remote northern Maine—interest in 
UFOs not required.  AA
pett, MArk The Girl and the Bicycle; written and illus. by Mark Pett. Simon, 
2014 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8319-4 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8320-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
In this wordless picture book, a little girl spies a snazzy green bicycle in a shop 
window and immediately starts saving in order to buy it. A kindly older woman 
takes her up on her offer to rake leaves, and the girl continues to help the woman 
with other odd jobs as the seasons change until she finally has enough for the bike. 
Taken aback when she finds that the bike has been sold, she instead buys the tri-
cycle that was also in the window and gives it to her jubilant brother. The neighbor 
lady then surprises her with a gift: the coveted green bike, topped with a big bow. 
Pett’s sepia-toned ink illustrations against taupe backgrounds carry the thought-
ful narrative with an easy grace, and the story scrolls across the pages much like a 
silent movie, with carefully composed scenes and dynamically posed figures. The 
only touches of color are the forest green of the yearned-for bicycle and, in a hint 
of connection to Pett’s previous title The Boy and the Airplane, a red toy airplane 
in the elderly woman’s garage. Use this with kids to write their own text or as a 
springboard for a similar savings project.  JH
474 • The BulleTin
rAABe, eMily Lost Children of the Far Islands. Knopf, 2014 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97091-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87091-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97497-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Life is going along fine for twins Gus (a girl) and Leo (a boy) in their tiny coastal 
Maine town until their mother becomes ill, falling into a sudden coma that per-
plexes the doctors. Comments by their grieving father lead the twins to believe that 
Mom’s condition isn’t the result of natural causes, and when a strange man with 
the ability to shapeshift into a sea mink turns up at their house, the extent of their 
mother’s secrets becomes clear. The man/mink informs them that their mother 
is actually one of the Folk—specifically, a selkie—and that as her kids, Gus, Leo, 
and their little sister Ila are also magical creatures with the ability to transform into 
seals (and in Ila’s case, also a fox). An age-old evil now threatens the Folk and the 
three siblings must help their previously unknown grandmother defeat the threat 
if they are to save their mother. There are quiet echoes of Susan Cooper and C. S. 
Lewis here in both mythology and structure, and Raabe manages the difficult feat of 
balancing the family drama and the epic fantasy with surprising ease. The affection 
among the siblings is particularly well drawn; the third-person narration focalizes 
through Gus, who feels responsible for her more passive brother, and through little 
Ila, who struggles with feeling left out of the twins’ inherent bond. Vivid imagery 
makes the underwater scenes utterly captivating, as the siblings in seal form frolic 
with dolphins, battle off great white sharks, and, of course, eventually beat the bad 
guy. A cozy fantasy with a few deep-sea thrills, this would make a fine family or 
classroom readaloud as well.  KQG
roCkliff, MArA The Grudge Keeper; illus. by Eliza Wheeler. Peachtree, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-56145-729-8 $16.95   
R 5-8 yrs
Poor Cornelius. He’s the only Grudge Keeper in Bonnyripple, and the townspeople 
keep him plenty busy with their “ruffled feathers, petty snits, minor tiffs and major 
huffs, insults, umbrage, squabbles, dust-ups, and imbroglios,” all brought to him for 
safekeeping. Folks may give him their grudges, but they don’t forget them—that is, 
until a storm passes through town, burying Cornelius in the rubble of offenses. All 
the people who thought their complaints important enough to store with Cornelius 
now let them go, tossing aside grievances to free not only the Grudge Keeper but 
also themselves. Clever and on point, this picture-book tale captures the burden 
of grudge-holding with lighthearted humor and impressive verbal dexterity. As 
Rockliff’s Juster-esque gymnastics please with wordplay (“Low blows rested high 
up in the pile. High dudgeon had drifted down low. And the left-handed compli-
ments had landed on the right-hand side”). Wheeler’s pen and ink drawings capture 
the vaguely Victorian world of Bonnyripple with whimsy and warmth. Detailed 
but not overwhelming, these yellow and green-toned renderings make full use of 
the page, with full-bleed double-page spreads used particularly effectively in their 
depiction of both the number of grudges housed at Cornelius’ home and the space 
there for friendship after bygones have indeed gone. This is a smart, witty tale for 
those kids feeling slighted, or just slightly silly.  AA
May 2014 • 475
sChreiBer, joe Game Over, Pete Watson; illus. by Andy Rash. Houghton Mif-
flin Harcourt, 2014 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-544-15756-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
On the day Brawl-a-Thon 3000 XL, the hottest new video game, is slated for release, 
Pete Watson finds himself a bit light on cash and decides to hold an impromptu 
garage sale to make up the difference. After he sells a vintage console of his dad’s to 
the neighborhood exterminator, though, his dad gets kidnapped before his eyes. Pete 
discovers that his father is a CIA agent and is now trapped in the gaming system, 
which also doubles as a database for government secrets. Aided by his geeky ex-best 
friend Wesley and Wesley’s attractive older sister, Pete must stop the supervillain 
bent on releasing a virus into most of the world’s computer systems by going into 
the game himself. Wacky comedy carries the day, and the breathless pace, short 
chapters, and frequent spot art (sometimes cartoonish line drawing, sometimes 
figures inspired by video game graphics) make this novel zoom. However, the silli-
ness amps up to levels that will lead those playing along at home to incredulity by 
the end (a monetary amount that’s so large that the number will literally kill you 
without protection, for example), and the rushed conclusion gets lost in tired gags 
that even Pete’s conversational narration can’t surmount. Additionally, the characters 
remain as flat as their eight-bit counterparts in the game world. Nevertheless, the 
appeal to multimodality (Pete often refers to interactive features that a hypothetical 
“digital version of this book” will have) is going to have reluctant reader appeal, 
giving this a chance to see some play as a print followup to the success of films like 
Wreck-It Ralph and TRON: Legacy.  TA
sedgwiCk, MArCus She Is Not Invisible. Roaring Brook, 2014 [224p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-801-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-10
Laureth’s father, a successful fiction writer, has been having a rough patch in his 
career, ever since he abandoned his “funny” books to research the idea of coinci-
dences. Now he’s gone missing, and so, led by a mysterious emailer who claims 
to have found Dad’s missing notebook, Laureth swipes her mother’s credit card, 
packs up her younger brother Benjamin, and sets off across the Atlantic to track 
Dad down somewhere in New York. The trek is further complicated by that fact 
that Laureth is blind and Benjamin appears prone to the Pauli Effect, a propensity 
to wreck electronics just with his touch. Sedgwick takes the somewhat shopworn 
theme of siblings on a parent hunt to a fascinating new level as Laureth, who has 
always been skeptical of her father’s belief in meaning behind coincidence, begins 
to interpret obstacles along their path as evidence he may be right. Dad’s notebook 
and Laureth’s musings lead readers into a labyrinth of competing philosophies on 
coincidence, numinous experiences, and apophenia, or the tendency to discern 
patterns among random phenomena. Just when readers are thoroughly invested 
in the cerebral aspects of the pursuit, though, Sedgwick spirals back onto a more 
prosaic plane, with a pair of awkwardly drawn villains, an abrupt reappearance of 
Dad, marital reconciliation, and the abandonment of the entire philosophical plot 
line. The core of the mystery, bolstered by the siblings’ respective unusual traits, 
may be enough to keep many readers happy nonetheless, and even those disap-
476 • The BulleTin
pointed by the mundane turn of fictional events will have ingested some potent 
new vocabulary terms and a heckuva lot to think about.  EB
shArpe, tess Far from You. Hyperion, 2014 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8462-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8784-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
It doesn’t seem to matter that when Mina died, seventeen-year-old Sophie Winters, 
Mina’s best friend, had been clean for months or that it was Mina who dragged 
Sophie out to the woods in the middle of that fateful night. The cops have decided 
that the masked man who attacked Sophie and killed Mina was Sophie’s dealer, that 
it was all just a drug deal gone wrong, and that Sophie should feel lucky to have 
just been shipped off to rehab and not juvie. Sophie, however, is intent on finding 
the real murderer, following up on a lead aspiring journalist Mina was pursuing 
for a story. Along the way, Sophie must come to terms with the car accident that 
led to her reliance on Oxycontin and with the fact that she and Mina had moved 
from best friends to lovers, a development that Mina insisted on keeping secret. 
Between Sophie’s addiction, Mina’s death, and their hidden affair, this could have 
easily veered off into melodrama, but Sharpe instead wrings the hurt out of each of 
these elements in slow but deliberate strokes, creating a lacerating picture of grief 
and regret. Through flashbacks, readers come to see that Sophie’s addiction is not 
the result of one single moment but a series of decisions made in times of under-
standable pain, as unplanned as the romance the childhood friends find themselves 
falling into. Secondary characters are credibly nuanced, particularly Mina’s older 
brother, whose attraction to Sophie is tangled up in his guilt about causing the car 
crash that left her in chronic pain. The murder mystery is compelling (and, thank-
fully, unconnected to Mina’s sexuality), and its resolution serves as a reminder that 
love is irrevocably tied to loss and that few people get out of it unscathed.  KQG 
skilton, sArAh High & Dry. Amulet/Abrams, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-0929-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Senior Charlie Dixon is desperate to win back Ellie, the girl who dumped him, but 
he’s lately been distracted by the fact that he’s been framed for the LSD overdose 
of a school choir member, who is now hospitalized with severe hallucinations and 
a slim chance for full recovery. This isn’t the first time Charlie has been a target: 
his mother’s role as administrator of the high school’s turnaround restaffing, which 
chucked many locals out of their jobs, has resulted in life-threatening “accidents.” 
This time, though, the problem seems to be related to a missing flash drive that 
an oversexed ex, Bridget, and a whole lot of others want and suspect Charlie may 
be able to find. The result is a steamy mystery, with Charlie narrating in a Sam 
Spade–styled voice, and some subtly embedded jabs at an educational system that 
encourages larceny. Skilton pulls off some clever world building, creating a system 
at Palm Valley High that keeps bullying at bay by locking incoming students into 
a four-year activity—the kids are protected by upperclassmen within their groups 
and only allowed intra-activity contact by monitored pre-arrangement. Charlie’s 
ability to navigate the system is key to his investigation, and the high school social 
structure becomes nearly as involving as the flash-drive quandary. There’s a touch 
May 2014 • 477
of Tim Tharp’s The Spectacular Now (BCCB 2/09) to Charlie’s depression-induced 
drinking, and his self-defeating efforts to win back his dream girl will evoke both 
censure and sympathy. School drama, romance, and mystery make a heady mash-
up and an involving quick pick.  EB
sMith, jennifer e. The Geography of You and Me. Poppy/Little, 2014 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-25477-9 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-25474-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
The absence of her globetrotting parents means that Lucy is used to being on her 
own and navigating New York City solo. Owen is new to the city, and new to the 
experience of loneliness following the death of his mother; he and his dad have 
moved there to make a new start, but Owen isn’t feeling it. When Lucy and Owen 
end up stuck together in an elevator during a power outage, they bond over witty 
comments and a shared sense of something between restlessness and loss. When 
Lucy moves to Scotland and Owen’s father loses his job, they stay in touch the 
old-fashioned way, through postcards and inside jokes, as each moves on to more 
or less satisfactory sweethearts that don’t quite measure up to the magic they found 
in each other during the blackout. The romance is a fluffy bit of froth floating on 
top of a more substantive exploration of finding one’s literal and figurative place in 
the world; both Lucy and Owen have to adjust their ideas of home to include new 
configurations of family and their places therein. While Lucy loves the energy of 
cities, Owen longs for wide-open natural spaces; while Lucy has to adjust to living 
with her parents, Owen has to learn what it means to be without one of his. In 
the end, both come to realize that a sense of belonging is a marriage of the right 
landscapes and the right people. Readers on the verge of moving on to new ter-
ritories, emotionally or physically, will find new ways to think about anchors here, 
or maybe they’ll just indulge in the pleasures of a sweetly predictable love story.  KC 
sMith, lindsAy Sekret. Roaring Brook, 2014 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-892-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Yulia is a seventeen-year-old daughter of former high-ranking Communist Party 
members in the early 1960s, just trying to keep her mother and brother safe and 
fed. She is also increasingly aware of her burgeoning psychic power—as is the 
KGB, which kidnaps her and forces her to work on secret projects. Yulia’s parents 
turn out to be much more involved than she ever knew with this underground 
psychic program, and the implications of this revelation are as startling to Yulia as 
her own powers. For now, she’s just obsessed with escape, but it is clear that there 
is much for Yulia to unpack in terms of familial and governmental secrets in the 
future. Yulia and the other teens at the training facility where she is taken are ef-
fectively developed; they are all individuals clearly marked by the era and restrictive 
environment in which they were raised while also being shaped by their varying 
supernatural abilities. This is an intriguing novel set in an unusual (and intricately 
described) setting, and historical fiction fans are as likely to enjoy this as those 
selecting it for the ESP content.  AS
478 • The BulleTin
st. Crow, lili Wayfarer: A Tale of Beauty and Madness. Razorbill, 2014 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-607-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
After the death of Ellie’s father, her stepmother turns from reluctantly tolerating Ellie 
to outright abusing her, and she also forces the girl to charm beyond her abilities, 
draining Ellie’s burgeoning magic skills to make signature fashion pieces that her 
stepmother then sells as her own. Ellie considers taking off, but the streets of New 
Haven, prowled by dark creatures twisted by bad magic and shady charm dealers, 
are no place for an inexperienced girl. After one particularly bad night, however, 
Ellie flees into a nearby forest and finds what she believes to be refuge with an old 
woman in a cottage, until it becomes clear that “Auntie” is not what she seems 
and Ellie is trapped by yet another monster. The dark and magical world of this 
reworking of Cinderella was better established in St. Crow’s last fairy-tale revision, 
Nameless (BCCB 4/13), and readers unfamiliar with that title might be confused 
by New Haven and the threat presented by twisted magic. The realistic elements 
here are more successful than the fantasy ones, with Ellie’s behavior and motivations 
entirely believable for a child who has been so battered that she’s unable to trust 
anyone or see any way out of her abuse. Unfortunately, her hesitancy to act makes 
for an agonizingly slow first half, and her sudden ability to trust the mother of her 
love interest at the book’s conclusion seems more convenient than authentic. Still, 
the combination of dark magic, a vulnerable heroine, and a handsome hero is likely 
to please readers reluctant to let go of their copy of Twilight.  KQG 
stAMpler, Ann redisCh Afterparty. Simon Pulse, 2014 398p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2324-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2326-8 $10.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Emma’s mother’s fatal overdose casts a long shadow over Emma’s life, turning her 
father into a super-strict enforcer of rules aimed to keep Emma far away from unac-
ceptable behavior. Rejected by the mean girls in her posh new high school, Emma 
is lured to the wild side by Siobhan, a fellow outcast who embraces sneaking out, 
drinking, drugs, and sex as the way to a kind of desperate happiness. Siobhan’s 
apparent freedom is a powerful attractor for Emma, who fears it’s her resemblance 
to her troubled mother that causes her her father to hold her reins so tightly. Even 
when Siobhan starts sleeping with Dylan, the boy she knows Emma likes, Emma 
can’t help trying to appease Siobhan by following through on the latter’s reckless 
schemes. By the time Emma realizes that Siobhan is a sociopath, she’s in far too 
deep, but it’s her love for Siobhan, misguided as it is, that ultimately enables her 
to chart a path of her own through the self-recrimination of being her mother’s 
daughter. Emma’s narrative voice is characterized by sophisticated and lyrical 
self-reflection that deepens and contextualizes the girls-gone-wild plot arc; she’s 
particularly hard on herself, and the religious subtext of her father’s and her own 
ambivalent relationship to Judaism hovers over her understanding of a world in 
much need of repair. Even at her worst, she’s never that bad, enabling readers to 
stay firmly on her side through her bouts of self-loathing and to empathize with 
the complexity of her inner struggles.  KC 
May 2014 • 479
sternBerg, julie Like Carrot Juice on a Cupcake; illus. by Matthew Cordell. 
Amulet, 2014 183p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1033-9 $14.95   
R* Gr. 2-3
Now in fourth grade, Eleanor (from Like Pickle Juice on a Cookie, BCCB 3/11, and 
Like Bug Juice on a Burger, 3/13) finds herself out of her comfort zone again. This 
time it’s at school, where a new girl, Ainsley, seems to be taking Eleanor’s place 
with Eleanor’s long-term best friend, Pearl; additionally, Eleanor, the stage-averse, 
has been cast as a lead rabbit, complete with a song, in the class production of 
A Tale of Two Bunnies. The more Eleanor tries to fix things, the worse they seem 
to get, especially when she blurts out Ainsley’s secret crush to a taunting crowd. 
Sternberg again displays her talent at putting Eleanor on the horns of a common 
youthful dilemma in accessible prose, while her perceptive portrayal of the way a 
misstep can turn into a downward spiral (an already jealous Eleanor, for instance, 
disproportionately flips out when Ainsley passes on Pearl’s harmless joke about 
Eleanor’s dad) conveys a lifelong truth about the ways relationships start to deterio-
rate. There’s also some keen acknowledgment of the way other factors—Eleanor’s 
yearning for her beloved dog, who’s away at obedience training, and her nascent 
crush on a classmate—can heighten a central emotional quandary. Eleanor has a 
good heart and good counsel, fortunately, so she manages to repair her damaged 
friendship as well as overcome her theatrical fears; even kids who share Eleanor’s 
stage fright will see the former as the real victory here.  DS
stills, CAroline Mice Mischief: Math Facts in Action; illus. by Judith Ros-
sell. Holiday House, 2014 24p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2947-9 $16.95   
R 3-6 yrs
Ten energetic mice wake up in the morning with playtime on their minds. First, 
though, there are some morning chores to be done, from making the bed and the 
breakfast, to washing up the dishes and hanging out the laundry. As might be 
expected, not all the mice are enamored of housework, and one by one they peel 
off to play, leaving an ever smaller corps of mice to finish up the work. Embedded 
in the mouse antics is a math lesson in regrouping, with a line of simple text that 
counts the participants in each activity and offers the equation that expresses it 
mathematically: “8 mice cook./ 2 mice juggle./ 8 + 2 = 10.” You can’t get much 
more direct than that. The mice are adorable—so adorable, in fact, that kids may 
find it hard to keep their minds on math. The miniature world, replete with a 
converted juice-can stove, a teacup sink, thread-spool furnishings, pencil mops, 
and a birthday-candle chandelier, is fascinating, and the frantic energy of the mice 
provides a recess-like disguise to a curriculum-based lesson. It may take a few passes 
through the pages before the audience can focus on the main event, but even if they 
never get the complete math message earnest adults wish to impart, they’ll enjoy 
the simple counting and the raucous romp.  EB
suBrAMAniAM, MAnAsi, ad. The Fox and the Crow; illus. by Culpeo S. Fox. Karadi 
Tales, 2014 28p
ISBN 978-81-8190-303-7 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Crow spies a loaf of bread. After swiping it off the windowsill, he sneaks off to 
the woods to enjoy his contraband. There Fox spies him, and she tricks him into 
480 • The BulleTin
dropping the bread, then absconds with it into the night, leaving Crow with hunger 
unsatisfied. This streamlined retelling of Aesop’s fable “The Fox and the Crow” 
mixes spare prose with earthy, enveloping illustrations. Moody acrylics in full-bleed, 
double-page spreads exude a sense of menace, especially in the hungry, expressive 
features of the title characters. The adapter gives the tale some lyrical turns, but 
the sparseness of language and lack of connection leave the retelling disjointed, 
failing to gather momentum toward a more coherent overarching narrative. This 
sophisticated but knotty story is therefore probably best suited for reading alone and 
enhancement with some adult context, but the chilly atmosphere, moral ambiguity, 
and bleak honesty may give readers a taste of what makes such fables timeless.  AA
sutCliffe, jAne  Stone Giant: Michelangelo’s David and How He Came to Be; illus. 
by John Shelley. Charlesbridge, 2014 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-295-7 $16.95   
R 5-8 yrs
It seemed like a great idea—a massive statue of Biblical giant-slayer David that 
would grace fifteenth-century central Florence and symbolize her power among 
surrounding contentious kingdoms. Unfortunately nobody, not even the redoubt-
able Leonardo, could pull off the project initially, until finally twenty-six-year-old 
Michelangelo Buonarroti took on the challenge. Sutcliffe presents a streamlined but 
lively description of the artist’s work process, from building a workroom around 
the enormous slab of abandoned and eroding marble, to Michelangelo’s renowned 
method of chipping away all the “not-David” material until the figure emerged, to 
the onerous task of hauling and installing the creation in its presumably permanent 
location. At this point, knowledgeable prospective book purchasers are asking 
the obvious question: “So, just how much David is on view?” Well, ultimately, 
all of him. However, Shelley manages to keep the statue under wraps via strategi-
cally placed models and scaffolding until the glorious full-frontal reveal, thus also 
helping to keep the picture-book audience attentive and under control until they 
share with the Florentines themselves an inevitable gasp of amazement. Figures of 
Michelangelo and the Florentine citizens are touched with humor, while in contrast 
the statue retains its gravitas. Text boxes are encased in embellished framing and 
the city unfolds in the foreshortened perspective of medieval painting. An author’s 
note provides extra information about subsequent alterations to the statue and its 
eventual removal indoors; a bibliography of adult resources is also included. Every 
veteran librarian knows what happens when a child with a marker meets a book 
with a naked guy, so perhaps it’s wise to purchase an extra backup copy.  EB 
swinBurne, stephen r. Sea Turtle Scientist. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2014 65p illus. with photographs (Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 978-0-547-36755-2 $18.99   
R Gr. 5-9
The small Caribbean island of St. Kitts is home base for a population of endangered 
leatherback sea turtles, and for Dr. Kimberly Scott, the veterinarian who studies 
and advocates for them. As part of WIDECAST, the Wider Caribbean Sea Turtle 
Conservation Network, Scott works both with the turtles and the human inhabit-
ants of St. Kitts, creating awareness of the sea turtles with young Kittitians and 
forming alliances with the fishermen while promoting alternative income streams 
for those who had relied on sea turtle fishing for their livelihood. There’s plenty 
of information here about various sea turtles and the way they’re being affected 
May 2014 • 481
by environmental changes, and the “ridealong” descriptions of Scott and her 
companions’ attendance at egg-layings and hatchings are particularly involving. 
Readers familiar with Turner’s Project Seahorse (BCCB 9/10) will recognize many of 
the issues in preserving a marine species while economically preserving its human 
neighbors; the photos here are not overall as impressive as the sea horse gallery, 
but the occasional closeup of a venerable-looking turtle mother or a scuttling wee 
hatchling is still compelling. Neophytes to this classic series who thought science 
was always conducted in old buildings on lab benches will be delighted to find it 
can take place in an island paradise. End matter includes a glossary, information 
about “adopting” a sea turtle, lists of websites and books, and an index.  DS
tingle, tiM House of Purple Cedar. Cinco Puntos, 2014 326p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-69-6 $21.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-24-5 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-25-2 $16.95   
R Gr. 10 up
Rose, now an old Choctaw woman, begins telling this story by reflecting on a fire 
at her boarding school in the late 1800s that killed many of the girls in the village 
of Scullyville in Indian Territory (now Oklahoma). That horror sets the tone for 
the next few years, as the community is forced to confront ambient racism and at-
tempts to heal relations between the Choctaw and Nahullo (white settlers). When 
the Nahullo sheriff strikes Rose’s grandfather with a huge board in a drunken fit 
at the train station, that act of violence—and her amafo’s decision to respond 
with forgiveness—radiates outward like the spiderwebbed crack in his eyeglasses, 
touching every level of Scullyville society. The disgruntled shopkeeper’s assistant is 
inspired to jailbreak the misguided vagrant who robbed the local bank and elope 
with him, and the sheriff’s abused wife resolves to take action, all while young Rose 
grapples with the ways her world changes after the attack and, later, the death of 
her grandmother. As in all good epics, details are painstakingly crafted and slowly 
knit together; the alternation between a third-person narrator, Rose narrating as a 
child, and Rose narrating as an elder adds to the layering that draws to a thrilling, 
supernaturally-tinged conclusion. Tingle’s storytelling is both deeply poetic—the 
inclusion of Choctaw hymnal lyrics is affecting even for those who can’t read 
them—and gently spiced with dialect, making this a feast for gourmets of good 
storytelling, while the Christian themes of forgiveness and an afterlife are infused 
with a decidedly Indigenous slant. A sort of Our Town for an often-overlooked time 
and place, this is a testament to the sweeping grandeur that occurs in everyday lives, 
a deeply personal but strikingly cross-cultural novel.  TA
verniCk, Audrey Screaming at the Ump. Clarion, 2014 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-544-25208-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-544-30669-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Fortunately for new middle-schooler Casey Snowden, saddled with the first name 
of baseball’s high-profile poetic loser, he does not aspire to becoming a major league 
player. His sight is set on sports journalism and taking on the family business, an 
umpire academy in New Jersey. His plans to cover sports for his school newspaper 
are stonewalled by the unwritten rule that sixth-graders must pay their dues by 
selling ad space before they can become journalists. He stumbles across a big story, 
482 • The BulleTin
however, while helping out at the umpire academy and begins to investigate the 
mystery behind ump-in-training J-Mac, who retired from the big leagues after a 
drug scandal. Subplots involving Casey’s relationship with his divorced mother, 
and the irksome presence of an eight-year-old girl who tags along with Casey and 
his pal Zeke, are amiable, but it’s the peek into the world of professional umpire 
training that carries the interest here, culminating in the fictional but tantalizing 
event, You Suck, Ump! Day, in which students perform under intense pressure of a 
local crowd recruited to heckle them on the field. The briefest of notes on umpire 
academies is provided, but any kid who can find the way to the Major League 
Baseball website can begin to fill in the intriguing blanks.  EB 
wAllACe, riCh Babe Conquers the World: The Legendary Life of Babe Didrikson Za-
harias; by Rich Wallace and Sandra Neil Wallace. Calkins Creek, 2014 272p il-
lus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59078-981-0 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-9
In this biography of Olympic track and field champion and multi-sport paragon 
Babe Didrikson, the husband and wife Wallace team pay the necessary tribute 
to their subject’s acclaimed string of “women’s firsts” but concentrate even more 
effectively on the portrayal of a brash, driven gal who’s admirable but not all that 
likable. The warts-and-all depiction draws not only from Babe’s autobiography 
and contemporary media coverage, but also from interviews with sports colleagues 
and competitors who regarded her tendency to hog the ball, push aside teammates, 
and grab all the glory with bemusement or resentment. The book covers much the 
same ground as Russell Freedman’s Babe Didrikson Zaharias (BCCB 10/99), but 
the viewpoint of these sportswriter authors sets quite a different tone. Although 
the Wallaces do not pause to make direct comparisons with present-day sports, 
readers will nonetheless notice that many themes in Babe’s career mirror current 
issues, from censorious public comments by bested rivals, to acerbic sportswriters, 
to gaming the line between professional and amateur athletics. A dense gallery of 
black and white photographs is included, as well as insets that offer context and 
background. With source notes, index, an extensive bibliography, and even a FAQ 
section (that also briefly addresses speculation about Didrikson’s sexual orientation), 
this will be a winning suggestion for the obligatory biography report—a substantive 
book kids will actually have fun reading.  EB
wAlton, leslye j. The Strange & Beautiful Sorrows of Ava Lavender. Candle-
wick, 2014 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6566-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7034-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 10 up
Ava Lavender, born with the speckled brown wings of a bird, tells the history of 
her family, starting with her great-grandparents, who moved from a small French 
village to New York in 1912. Most family members met with tragic fates: one of 
her great-aunts transformed herself into a canary, another cut out her own heart 
after giving birth to her sister’s fiancé’s child, and her great-grandmother literally 
faded from view into a pile of blue ash. Ava’s grandmother, Emilienne, moved to 
Seattle, where she gave birth to Ava’s mother and earned a reputation as a witch. 
May 2014 • 483
This remarkable, magic-laced family history continues and spreads to other members 
of Ava’s Seattle neighborhood to produce a gauzy narrative of love and loss, heavily 
tipped toward loss as relationships flounder on the shoals of misunderstanding, 
greed, and obsession, with Ava herself ultimately suffering rape and mutilation. 
The ghosts of Emilienne’s brother and sisters, as well as the former inhabitant of 
their house, warn of a danger to Ava that is misunderstood until it’s too late, and 
Ava’s story draws to a highly ambiguous close. Sensibility overrides sense in this 
intentionally artful tale; though the ethereal nature of the storytelling is appeal-
ing, it occludes narrative clarity and cohesion, and the result is a mood without an 
object. Ava’s repeated insistence that she is just a girl despite her mystical history 
and physical anomaly is borne out by her vulnerability and her desire to be loved; 
sensitive readers may be able to draw their own threads of significance through 
her narration and the references to works such as Like Water for Chocolate and One 
Hundred Years of Solitude.  KC 
white, j. A. The Thickety: A Path Begins; illus. by Andrea Offerman. Tegen/
HarperCollins, 2014 [496p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-225724-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-225727-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Only six when her mother was killed for being a witch, Kara knows that when 
she shows signs of having powers as well that she should keep them hidden. Now 
twelve, Kara tries to keep her sick brother and distracted, grief-stricken father fed, 
clothed, and cared for, but that’s a lot for one person to manage, especially when 
the townsfolk around them range from indifferent to hostile. Nevertheless, Kara is 
tough, and she has one good friend, so she is managing fairly well until she stumbles 
on a magical book that carries hidden dangers. When the grimoire falls into the 
wrong hands, the whole town is at risk as spiteful young Grace wreaks havoc with 
the book. The town itself is a haunting, creepy presence in the novel, built around 
the superstitions of a man who teaches that the outside world is evil, violent, and 
full of magic that must be destroyed; poor Kara is clearly doomed in multiple ways 
in this place long before she can even make her own choices. Black and white line 
drawings, mostly eerie hints of what is to come next, accent the text. A startling 
plot twist at the end will have readers urgently waiting for a sequel, and it may even 
lead them right back into the book to see if they missed earlier clues. AS
woelfle, gretChen Mumbet’s Declaration of Independence; illus. by Alix Deli-
nois. Carolrhoda, 2014 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-6589-1 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2399-2 $12.95   
Ad 6-10 yrs
This nonfiction picture book tells the story of Mumbet, later Elizabeth Freeman, a 
Massachusetts slave who was inspired by the American fight for freedom to sue her 
owner, Colonel Ashley, for her freedom—and won. The book incorporates histori-
cal incident, such as Mumbet’s defense of her daughter against her mistress’ blows, 
while adding an artistic (if occasionally stilted) fictionalized touch in Mumbet’s 
recurring use of natural imagery; the story also foregrounds the inarguable contra-
diction between the growing discourse about liberty, especially the Massachusetts 
Constitution on which Mumbet bases her case, and the lot of the enslaved who 
484 • The BulleTin
labored for many ardent freedom fighters. The case is fascinating, emphasizing 
the destructive irony at the heart of the birth of America and making Mumbet 
an active and savvy architect of her own release, and this is likely to spur much 
discussion. Delinois’ thickly painted, expressionist illustrations suggest Gregory 
Christie at times in the faces; however, their saturated colors are often garish and 
poses frequently stiff. Additionally, the focus on sweeping planes of color leaves 
details sometimes unarticulated and makes period housing and clothes improbably 
dazzling and tidy. End matter considerably enriches the narrative, with details about 
Mumbet’s post-case life with her lawyer’s family, notes on things still unknown 
about Mumbet, and a telling paragraph about the changes over the years in tours 
at the Ashley House, which now prominently discuss Mumbet and her case, in 
addition to a bibliography and website list.  DS
wunder, wendy The Museum of Intangible Things. Razorbill, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-514-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Friends Hannah and Zoe would risk anything for each other, and they need that kind 
of friendship to survive their lives. Hannah is forever trying to keep her alcoholic 
father from destroying himself, while Zoe suffers from bipolar disorder. Hannah is 
grounded, almost too much so; Zoe courts sensation and adventure. Zoe is also an 
artist, creating multimedia metaphors in her basement to teach her autistic brother 
about intangible things such as pride and sloth. One night, however, something hap-
pens to Zoe at a party that she won’t talk about, and she retreats to her bed for days 
until finally Hannah agrees to come with her on a cross-country odyssey. Wunder 
proves that there’s life in the old road-trip story yet: with Hannah as a winsome 
narrator subject to sometimes thoughtful, sometimes amusing digressions, the two 
leave New Jersey to follow a cross-country path only Zoe understands. She claims 
that she is trying to teach Hannah her own set of intangible things, things that Zoe 
feels will liberate Hannah from her overblown sense of responsibility, even going 
so far as ensuring that Hannah hooks up with her crush Danny. As Zoe’s mania 
becomes more pronounced, however, it becomes clear that she has no intention of 
returning home. Zoe’s decline tracks alongside Hannah’s progressive epiphanies, 
and Hannah’s insights are well worth the narrative cost of losing a character to the 
intangibility she favored. By building an engrossing story with likable characters 
around a set of poetic, even philosophical, concepts, Wunder invites readers to 
consider the intangibles in their own lives.  KC 
yoon, sAlinA Found; written and illus. by Salina Yoon. Walker, 2014 [34p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3560-7 $15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3559-1 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-5 yrs
When young Bear finds a left-behind stuffed bunny in the woods, he tries to find 
its owner, putting up “FOUND” flyers and searching the area. While waiting for 
the bunny’s owner to turn up, Bear takes excellent care of the little rabbit, bringing 
it on picnics and bike rides and giving it its own little blanket at bedtime. Bear has 
mixed feelings, then, when Moose recognizes the bunny as his beloved Floppy. A 
tearful Bear prepares to give up the bunny, but Moose surprises him by being ready 
to pass his special toy on: “Will you take good care of Floppy for me?” While some 
May 2014 • 485
stuffed-animal lovers may not buy Moose’s willingness to part with his trusty plush 
pal, most kids will be relieved that Bear gets to keep Floppy after all. The simplicity 
of the storytelling and language is nicely matched by the large san serif font and 
the bright, blocky digital pictures. Heavy black outlines and flecks of black, accent 
the crayon-box hues of the art, and cinnamon-y brown Bear and white, patched, 
and aptly named “Floppy” are as cute as can be (Bear is particularly winning in his 
fire-engine-red bike helmet). Yoon also tucks in funny touches, as in the panoply 
of “LOST” posters on a bulletin board, which include the following pleas: “LOST: 
My marbles! Help!” and “Lost My Hat. I want it back” (which, with the conical 
red hat pictured, is a clear and clever nod to Klassen’s I Want My Hat Back, BCCB 
11/11). Pair this with Willems’ Knuffle Bunny Free: An Unexpected Diversion (BCCB 
12/10) for a look at stuffed toys graduating to new adventures, or simply snuggle 
up with a favorite stuffed pal for a cozy lap read.  JH
zApf, MArlenA Underpants Dance; illus. by Lynne Avril. Dial, 2014 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3539-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Poor Lily McBride! Her mother has just outlawed the Leaping-Down-the-Steps 
Underpants Dance, her teacher has banned her Top-of-the-Slide Underpants Dance, 
and now she must exchange her skirt—perfect for Underpants Dancing—for jeans. 
Good thing her love of her unmentionables is matched by her creativeness of spirit; 
soon her pink frilly underwear become fancy overpants in a fashion experiment 
that makes even prim and proper older sister Marigold laugh. With playful prose 
echoed in pink and yellow-hued gouache and line illustrations, nothing about this 
giggle-inducing readaloud takes itself too seriously. Characters’ joyful yet minimally 
drawn faces echo those of the Rugrats, formed enough to convey emotion but un-
defined enough to keep the focus on Lily’s escapades. Whatever adults may think 
of her antics, young audiences will delight in Lily’s silly, indomitable spirit and, of 
course, her beloved and very visible underpants.  AA
486 • The BulleTin
BeCkett, sAndrA l. Revisioning Red Riding Hood Around the World: An Anthology 
of International Retellings. Wayne State University Press, 2014 401p illus. 
with photographs 
ISBN 978-0-8143-3479-9 $34.95
As the title suggests, various interpretations and retellings of Little Red Riding 
Hood serve as the foundation for this anthology by noted critic and LRRH expert 
Beckett, but this scholarly exploration of the classic folktale also serves as a fasci-
nating primer in children’s literature published outside the U.S., both historically 
and currently. An introduction explains the book’s conceptual organization: rather 
than looking at the stories chronologically or geographically, Beckett groups the 
titles around seven themes, moving from the more traditional interpretation of the 
story as a cautionary tale about the vulnerability of children (specifically girls) to 
more exploratory retellings that address the perspective of the wolf or the agency 
of the child. The thematic structure emphasizes the intersectionality of the various 
tropes and motifs across geographical borders and points toward the universality of 
some of the story’s elements while respecting the influences of specific cultures. The 
full translated texts of the short stories or poems are reproduced here, while longer 
retellings are represented by substantive excerpts. The selected stories represent a 
good chunk of the globe, from Chile to France to Korea and much in between; 
not all of the revisions are specifically categorized as children’s literature (and a 
few are categorically adult), but Beckett makes the case that stories for “all ages” 
tend to be more common on the global stage. Each retelling is accompanied by an 
introduction to the author, an overview of some of their other works, their place 
in the international canon, along with a more scholarly examination of the specific 
tale. The result is an academic exercise that fulfills two significant purposes: it offers 
a critical lens through which to view the stories, and it provides an opportunity 
to engage with international works that a U.S. audience might otherwise not see. 
This has obvious value to children’s literature and folktale scholars, but the stories 
might also make for excellent storytelling fodder.  KQG 
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
May 2014 • 487
Abuse–fiction: St. Crow
Addiction–fiction: Sharpe
Adoption–fiction: Cook
Adventure: Baity; Hautman; 
Lettrick; Moore; Mull; Paige; 
Schreiber 
Africa–fiction: Bassoff
African Americans: Woelfle 
African Americans–fiction: Patrick
African Americans–stories: dempsey
Aliens––fiction: Harper Sasquatch; 
Pelletier
Animals: Montgomery; Swinburne
Animals–fiction: Clough; Kumin; 
Lakin; Lettrick
Animals–stories: Cabrera; Subrama-
niam
Archeology: Liu-Perkins
Arguments–stories: Galbraith
Art and artists: Sutcliffe
Art and artists–fiction: Klise
Athletes: Wallace
Babies–stories: Kantorovitz
Ballet–stories: dempsey
Baseball–fiction: vernick
Bears–stories: Bardos
Behavior–fiction: Hurwitz; Stampler
Behavior–stories: Bardhan-Quallen; 
Holt
BiLinGuAL BooKS: elya 
BioGrAPHieS: Sutcliffe; Wallace
Birds–stories: McCully
Boats–stories: Cabrera
Books and reading–fiction: Paige; 
White
Brothers–stories: Kantorovitz
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Auxier; 
Laidlaw; Sedgwick
Brothers and sisters–stories: Pett 
Bullying–fiction: Choyce
Camp and camping–fiction: Combs; 
Lettrick
Camp and camping–stories: idle
Chess–fiction: Blackwood
Chile–fiction: Agosin
China: Liu-Perkins
Choctaw–fiction: tingle
City life–stories: davies
Clothing–stories: Zapf
Clubs–fiction: Herrera
Contests–fiction: Mills
Contests–stories: Manceau
CountinG BooKS: Bardos; 
Stills
Crime and criminals: Brown 
Crime and criminals–fiction: Sharpe
Current events: Bassoff
dance and dancers–stories: 
dempsey; Zapf
death–fiction: Sharpe
deteCtive StorieS: Gavin
dinosaurs–stories: Bardhan-Quallen; 
idle
disabilities–fiction: Kumin; Sedg-
wick
dogs–fiction: Greenwald; Michalak
dogs–stories: Boyer
dragons–fiction: Hahn
ducks–stories: McCully
dystopias–fiction: Johnson
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
488 • The BulleTin
emotions–stories: Koehler; rockliff
Environmental studies: Montgom-
ery; Swinburne
eSP–fiction: Smith
Ethics and values: davies; Hurwitz; 
Mann; Moore; Subramaniam; 
Yoon
etiquette–stories: Holt
FABLeS: Subramaniam
Fairies–fiction: de Lint; Hahn
Families–fiction: Agosin; Lloyd; Pel-
letier; Walton
FAntASY: Friesen; Hahn; Lloyd; 
Mull; Paige; raabe; St. Crow; 
Walton
Fathers–fiction: Gavin; Parsons; 
Sedgwick
Fathers–stories: Koehler
Fears–fiction: Sternberg
Flies: Gravel 
FoLK-LiKe tALeS: Long; rockliff
FoLKtALeS And FAirY tALeS: 
elya; Glaser; St. Crow
Food and eating–stories: Glaser; 
Holt; Long
Fractals: Campbell
Friends–fiction: Choyce; Clough; 
Greenwald; Harper Dreamer; 
Harper Sasquatch; Hurwitz; Kim-
melman; Lakin; Mills; Pelletier; 
Stampler; Sternberg; vernick; 
Wunder
Friends–stories: Galbraith; Mann
Games and gaming–fiction: Schrei-
ber 
Gardens and gardening–stories: 
davies
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Sharpe
Grandparents–fiction: dauvillier
Gravity: Chin
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: Agosin; 
Blackwood; Caine; dauvillier; 
elvgren; Kirkpatrick; Patrick; 
Smith;tingle
History, U.S.: Brown; Woelfle 
History, world: Liu-Perkins 
Holidays–fiction: Kimmelman
Holocaust–fiction: dauvillier
Holocaust–stories: elvgren
Honduras–fiction: Laidlaw
Horror: Auxier; Lettrick
HuMor: Bardhan-Quallen; Boyer; 
Gravel; Harper Sasquatch; Holt; 
idle; Koehler; Manceau; rockliff; 
Zapf
identity–fiction: Cook; Hurwitz; 
Smith, J.
insects: Bardoe
inuit–fiction: Kirkpatrick
Jews–fiction: dauvillier; elvgren; 
Glaser; Kimmelman; Long
Journalism–fiction: vernick 
Kidnapping–fiction: Mull
Language arts: Herrera
Latinos–stories: elya
Literature, American: Hattemer 
Literature, children’s: Paige
Literature, English: Caine
Loneliness–fiction: Smith, J.
Lost and found–stories: Yoon
Magic–fiction: Auxier; Baity; de 
Lint; Lloyd; St. Crow
MAGiCAL reALiSM: Walton
Manners–stories: Holt
Marine life: Swinburne
Mathematics: Campbell; Mills; Stills
Mental illness–fiction: Cardi; Wun-
der
Mice–stories: Stills
Mothers–fiction: Cardi; Lloyd; 
Stampler; vernick
Music and musicians–fiction: de-
spain; Parsons
MYSterieS: de Lint; Gavin; 
Harper Dreamer; Klise; Kumin; 
Laidlaw; Michalak; Sedgwick; 
Sharpe; Skilton
Mythology, classical: despain
native Americans–fiction: Choyce; 
tingle
Nature study: Bardoe; Campbell; 
Gravel; Montgomery
neighbors–fiction: McKay
orphans–fiction: Blackwood
Parties–stories: Mann
Passover–stories: Glaser
Pets–fiction: McKay
Physical education: Wallace
May 2014 • 489
Physics: Chin
Poets and poetry–fiction: Hattemer; 
Herrera
Premature infants–stories: Kantorovitz
Presidents: Brown
rabbits–fiction: McKay
rabbits–stories: Galbraith
race relations–fiction: Kirkpatrick; 
tingle
race relations–stories: dempsey
Readers theater: Lakin
Reading aloud: de Lint; McKay; 
raabe
Reading, beginning: Galbraith; Mc-
Cully
Reading, easy: Clough; Kimmelman; 
Lakin; McKay; Michalak; Mills
Reading, reluctant: Gravel; Michalak; 
Schreiber
refugees–fiction: Agosin
relationships–fiction: Cardi; Combs; 
Hurwitz; Kirkpatrick; Skilton
rHYMinG StorieS: Bardhan-
Quallen; elya
robots–fiction: Blackwood
romance–fiction: Caine; Cook;  
despain; Smith, J.
royalty–fiction: Hahn
russia–fiction: Smith
School–fiction: Hattemer; Herrera; 
Klise; Skilton; Sternberg
Science: Bardoe; Campbell; Chin; 
Swinburne
Science fairs–fiction: Pelletier
SCienCe FiCtion: Hautman; 
Moore
Secrets–fiction: Johnson; Klise
Selkies–fiction: raabe
SHort StorieS: Patrick
Sisters–fiction: Friesen
Slavery: Woelfle
Slavery–fiction: Mull
SonGS: Cabrera
Spies and espionage–fiction: Schreiber; 
Smith
SPortS StorieS: Manceau
SteAMPunK: Baity; Blackwood; 
Johnson
Stepparents–fiction: St. Crow
Storytime: Cabrera
Summer–fiction: Greenwald
Superheroes–fiction: Moore
SuPernAturAL StorieS: 
Auxier; Choyce; White
SurvivAL StorieS: Lettrick
television–fiction: Hattemer
time travel–fiction: Friesen; Harper 
Dreamer; Hautman
toys–stories: Yoon 
tricksters–stories: Glaser
verSe noveLS: Choyce
voyages and travel–fiction: Baity; 
Johnson; Laidlaw; Parsons; Wunder
voyages and travel–stories: Cabrera
War–fiction: Bassoff
Witches–fiction: White
Women’s studies: Bassoff; Wallace; 
Woelfle 
WordLeSS BooKS: Pett
World War ii–stories: elvgren
Worms: Gravel
Writers and writing–fiction: Combs; 
Hattemer; Herrera
Disseminate. Innovate. Collaborate.
Charting a vibrant new course to bring the beneﬁ ts 
of discovery to our global academic community of 
authors, readers, and publishing partners.
 
To order or To Join
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
MeMbers get it.
Claudia Nelson, Editor  
Texas a&M UniversiTy
Anne Morey, Texas a&M UniversiTy and   
Sara K. Day, arkansas UniversiTy, Associate Editors
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly publishes 
first-rate scholarship in children’s literature studies. 
Each issue features an editorial introduction, juried 
articles about research and scholarship in children’s 
literature, and book reviews. The Quarterly is available 
to members of the Children’s Literature Association 
(ChLA) as a benefit of membership.  
Published quarterly in Spring, Summer, Fall, and Winter for 
the Children’s Literature Association (ChLA). Volume 39 (2014). 
ISSN 0885-0429; E-ISSN 1553-1201.
Children’s literature assoCiation Quarterly
Individual and institutional 
subscription is one of many benefits of 
membership to the ChLA.
annUal insTiTUTional sUbscripTions
$165.00 (print & online)
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Amanda Cockrell, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Claudia Nelson, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
