ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
* -- -- -
; -_ - -- 
--- 
--
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
" University of Illinois Press
---
"Two children play with a stray dog while on a family picnic. They
don't take him home, but the whole family thinks about him, and
the next Saturday they return to the same spot. [This time]
the children save Willy from the dogcatcher and adopt him,
to everyone's joy. [With] all the earmarks of a classic . . . this
Stray Dog should find a home in readers' hearts everywhere."
-Starred review / The Horn Book Magazine
~W "Simont continues his magic here ... a great tale."
-Starred review / School Library Journal
"Splendid artwork-something Caldecott Medalist Simont has
been noted for the past 60 years-sets this book skipping like a
stone on water." -Kirkus Reviews
' 
"A charmer." -Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly
Ages 4-8. $15.95 Tr (0-06-028933-3); $15.89 Lb (0-06-028934-1)
* HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
April 2001
Vol. 54 No. 8
A LOOK INSIDE
293 THE BIG PICTURE
Under New York by Linda Oatman High; illus. by Robert Rayevsky
294 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
300 * Whale Talk by Chris Crutcher
300 * The Tiger Rising by Kate DiCamillo
306 * Goose Chase by Patrice Kindl
308 * The Other Dog by Madeleine L'Engle; illus. by Christine Davenier
312 * The Greatest: MuhammadAli by Walter Dean Myers
316 * The Journey by Sarah Stewart; illus. by David Small
323 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
325 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
/-^6
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Jeannette Hulick
Melanie Kimball
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin
of the Centerfor Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. E-mail:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2001 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Robert Rayevsky from Under New York ©2001. Used by permission of
Holiday House.
APRIL 2001 
* 
293
THE BIG PICTURE
Under New York
by Linda Oatman High; illustrated by Robert Rayevsky
Picture books about famous cities sometimes have that in-crowd feeling, the sense
that they are aimed at an audience that is already familiar with the locale. Presum-
ably, this intended audience can recognize and appreciate the city's features and
their interpretation in words and pictures. Sometimes that inside-story feeling is
mitigated by an irresistible protagonist like Hilary Knight's Eloise, but titles that
feature the city itself as the main character, like this one, tend to err on the side of
the touristy, with postcard-pretty pictures of obvious choices.
Welcome to a tour of the Big Apple, above and below ground. High's
Under New York is neither touristy nor obvious. The opening lines limn the geol-
ogy below the city ("Under New York,/ below skyscrapers and moonshine and
sky,/ there are stones and sand, clay, and lots of big rocks/ made by glaciers, mil-
lions of years ago"); the text then segues into descriptions of assorted underground
activities. The author packs the book with the concrete details that children find
compelling, and her words, colored with childlike enthusiasm, depict the city as a
place worth exploring. The free verse is rhythmic and enthralling, with strong
imagery that imbues it with a certain urban intensity: "Under New York,/ below
taxicabs and tour buses and carriage horses,/ there are railroad tracks and trains
whizzing past,/ clattering fast,/ bringing visitors to the city and taking them home
again"; "Under New York,/ below sidewalks and manholes and streets,/ there are
roaring machines and open elevators,/ ladders and shafts and workers,/ making
new tunnels for water."
That sense of childlike enthusiasm comes through with commendable
clarity in Rayevsky's mixed-media (paint, photo-collage, ink) illustrations. Double-
spread bleeds on matte-finish paper feature thick, sans-serif type in ivory, black, or
white, depending on the background. The palette features primarily earthy hues
(lots of olive green and harvest gold) that contrast with the industrial strength
black and concrete gray used for architecture and infrastructure. The stylized
array of images range from energetic views of the city streets to surreal settings
featuring the seething activity going on beneath the city's surface.
The split perspective (each spread is divided by a horizontal line separat-
ing top and bottom) shows both above and below ground: above is the bustle of
busy streets, commerce, people, traffic; below is a different sort of bustle that in-
cludes shops, subways, sewers, "and once, an alligator,/ reported The New York
Times in 1935." On selected spreads the illustrative divisions between above and
below are thematically related to the text: piano keys divide a park above from the
jazz club below; directional signage provides the break between a busy "upside"
intersection and the subway beneath. The art captures a city both obvious and
mysterious; dynamic curves add energy and verve to compositions that present
specific details of the environment in free-flowing geometric shapes. Rough but
294 
* 
THE BULLETIN
effective caricatures in strokes of black highlighted with spots of color represent
the city's industrious citizens, the figures characterized by the graceful sweep of
their defining lines and dashes of facial features. The child-friendly endpapers
open with a kid's drawing of the city complete with crayon scrawls and stick fig-
ures and close with a New York City subway map with some fanciful decorations
(chugging train, parent and child).
A concluding addendum, "(Some) Notes from Underground," gives ad-
ditional specifics about the different types of activities that go on under New York-
ers' unsuspecting feet. High's words and Rayevsky's images invite children to
widen their horizons by showing them an alternative way of seeing. This is a
visually arresting, concept-stretching, imaginative introduction to life in the big
city that is certain to spark some archaeological leanings in listeners. (Imprint
information appears on p. 304.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
vYv
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
My Brother's Ghost. Viking, 2001 
87p
ISBN 0-670-88779-X 
$9.99 
R Gr. 4-8
Ahlberg's touching and eccentric supernatural novella may be a surprise to those
who know his work through Each Peach, Pear Plum (BCCB 7/79) and The Jolly
Postman, but ghost-story fans will appreciate the brief, almost documentary tale.
The narrator, Frances, is nine years old when her ten-year-old brother Tom dies in
an accident; their younger brother Harry is only three. Tom's accidental death (he
is hit by a milk truck when he runs into the street after his dog, Rufus) is a blow
that leaves his already orphaned siblings without their protector; his subsequent
appearance as a slightly confused ghost resuming his old role is actually less shock-
ing than his sudden demise. Frances relates Tom's arrival, his sojourn, and his
final departure in matter-of-fact language that gives this memory of childhood a
reliable authority sometimes missing from ghost tales. There is no flapping ghostly
raiment or rattling chains or horrific visions; just Tom, looking the way he always
did, leaning up against a tree, walking Frances to school, making sure Harry gets to
the bathroom at night so he won't wet the bed. Tom stays until Rufus grows old
and dies, and then he smilingly leads his (ghost) dog away. The point of view is a
bit adult, but this title still feels like a family story, slightly faded and fuzzy with
time, but real. You can't ask for more than that from a ghost story. Readers
seeking that elusive short chapter book will appreciate the small trim size and brief
but eloquent text. JMD
j
APRIL 2001 
* 
295
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
The Snail House; illus. by Gillian Tyler. 
Candlewick,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-0711-8 
$13.99 
Ad 4-7yrs
Grandma is minding the children, and as the day winds down she gathers her
charges to the porch for a story-an impromptu fantasy about three children (iden-
tical to the grandkids) who "all of a sudden got so very, very small that they could
leave that house of theirs by a crack under the door-and no one notice." They
move into a neatly furnished snail-shell house, and as its owner makes his sluggish
way through the garden, they have a series of adventures involving a falling apple,
a lost baby, and snail-eating thrush. Each tale is far too brief and gentle to stir
much excitement in older lap-sitters, frequent intrusions and asides will sully the
clarity of the stories for the youngest listeners, and Grandma's failure to explain
the shrinking magic will leave everyone befuddled. Tyler offers a pretty bit of
bookmaking, though, in her romantic line-and-watercolor scenes, which are quite
nearly capable of carrying the story without words. The snail house itself is a
charming fantasy, from the clothesline hung between the snail's antennae to the
maple "whirlybird" ceiling fan, and the prosaic fauna are aptly intimidating. Var-
ied layouts incorporating full bleeds, tiny vignettes, and Raymond Briggs-styled
boxes and strips keep the visuals lively when the storyline lags, and the perils and
delights lurking in the dense foliage may inspire imagined adventures beyond
Grandma's wildest dreams. EB
ALMOND, DAVID 
Heaven Eyes. 
Delacorte, 2001 
[240p]
ISBN 0-385-32770-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Three friends-Erin Law, January, and Mouse-run away from an orphanage and
raft downriver. They navigate the Black Middens, a mass of mud and industrial
muck surrounding the abandoned factory site where they find Heaven Eyes, a
strangely compelling little girl ("There were webs stretched between her fingers.
Her face was moon-pale. Her eyes were moon-round, watery blue. Her voice was
high and light and yearning") and Grampa, the unbalanced old man who cares for
her. Heaven Eyes believes Erin and her friends are the "treasure" she has been
waiting for: "'Here they is, Grampa!' she called. 'Didn't me tell you? Here is my
treasures come out of the black Black Middens.'" Grampa begs to differ, but the
uncanny little girl persuades him to let them stay. Heaven Eyes adopts Erin as her
sister, instantly loving her; Grampa takes on Mouse as his helper in plundering the
Middens. January slowly withdraws from his close camaraderie with Erin; he keeps
his distance from everyone, determined to find out what secrets the old man is
keeping. The voyage across the Black Middens is the transition from the mun-
dane to the magical, and Almond's language changes accordingly; his epic descrip-
tions give a sense of great portent that adds to the surreal, otherworldly atmosphere.
Unfortunately, the awkward incorporation of mystical elements mars the rising
action; there is so little context for the unexplained events that they are more in-
congruous than intriguing. The relationships among the children are dynamic,
however, and the details of Grampa's fanatical search of the Black Middens are
absorbing. By closely hewing to the traditions of the hero's journey (the children
set forth, enter a different world, encounter mystery and danger, exhibit bravery
and save the princess), the book maintains strong forward momentum. Recom-
mend this to readers who like their adventure with mystical overtones. JMD
296 
* THE BULLETIN
ALVAREZ, JULIA 
How Tia Lola Came to Visit Stay. 
Knopf, 2001 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90215-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80215-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Miguel is having a hard time. His parents are divorced, and he and his younger
sister, Juanita, have moved with Mami (their mother) from New York City to
Vermont, leaving their artist father behind. Miguel is adjusting to a school where
he is the only Latino, he's desperate to make the local Little League team, and he
misses his father. Mami is having a few adjustment problems of her own, so she
sends home to the Dominican Republic for a little tender loving care. Enter Tia
Lola, Mami's favorite aunt, come to rescue not only her niece but just about every-
one else she meets. Even Miguel has to admit that Tia Lola has "a voice impossible
to resist. Like three handfuls of chocolate chips from the package in the closet, a
can of Pringles, and his favorite SpaghettiOs, all to himself." Alvarez' characteriza-
tions are so distinct and she choreographs the players' interactions with each other
so gracefully that the plot becomes more archetypal than predictable. In the end
Tfa Lola wins over the town, a crusty landlord, and even Miguel, and if she's a bit
too good to be true it doesn't matter because by this point in the novel she has won
the reader over as well. Alvarez is an affectionate narrator, observing the behaviors
and feelings of all her characters, but especially Miguel, with whom she has a par-
ticularly delicate touch. Any Spanish words used in the text are defined immedi-
ately after, in context; the book includes a note about the specific idiosyncrasies of
the Spanish spoken in the Dominican Republic. JMD
ASHABRANNER, BRENT 
No Better Hope: What the Lincoln Memorial Means to
America; illus. with photographs by Jennifer Ashabranner and historical
photographs. 
Twenty-First Century, 2001 
6 4p 
(Great American Memori-
als)
ISBN 0-7613-1523-3 
$24.90 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Seven brief chapters review Lincoln's presidency, discuss preliminary plans for a
permanent memorial, describe the processes by which architect Henry Bacon and
sculptor Daniel French developed and executed their creation, and suggest how
the site has "become a symbol of the 'patient confidence' that Lincoln had in the
wisdom and courage of the common people." Ashabranner's obvious admiration
for Lincoln occasionally manifests itself in arguable claims and inflated language
(the Lincoln Memorial may not be "the nation's best-known symbol of unity and
greatness," nor is it entirely valid to claim that Lincoln died to preserve the nation).
Moreover, the actual construction of the memorial is not covered in the detail
young readers might desire, and only a few of the events staged at the memorial
(Marian Anderson's concert, Dr. King's "I Have a Dream" speech, and the millen-
nium celebration) are discussed in depth. Still, historical photos, a page of memo-
rial measurements and statistics, and a bibliography and index make this a serviceable
volume, and although this title doesn't offer much tourist appeal for children an-
ticipating a trip to the capital, report writers will find what they need. EB
ATWELL, DEBBY 
Pearl; written and illus. by Debby Atwell. 
Lorraine/Hough-
ton, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-395-88416-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
In the aftermath of her seventy-fifth wedding anniversary (circa 1960), nonagenar-
APRIL 2001 
* 
297
ian Pearl reflects on her family history and, concurrently, on the history of the
nation. Each double spread illuminates a family episode-from her grandfather's
memory of George Washington's inauguration, to the death of her brothers in the
Civil War, to her husband's proud ownership of the first television on the block.
Atwell manipulates Pearl's travels and domestic moves, one suspects, to make her
eyewitness to more Big Events than most humble citizens are privileged to en-
counter; Pearl sees the buffalo stampede through Fort Worth, meets the Wright
Brothers at Kitty Hawk, hears Dr. King preach in Alabama. Although Pearl's
narration adds homely commentary to each era ("Most all of the men lost their
jobs when the stock market crashed. I never understood what that meant. All I
understood was it was mighty tough to keep food on the table"), listeners will
certainly realize that beneath the veneer of fiction lies a social-studies lesson straight
from the textbook. Primitive full-page paintings adorn each recto, while cramped
text and a black-and-white vignette occupy the facing page. There's a lot of his-
tory here to digest at one sitting, but the engaging scenes may invite listeners to
drop in on Pearl's reminiscences. EB
BAKER, KEITH 
Little Green; written and illus. by Keith Baker. 
Harcourt,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-15-292859-6 
$16.00 
R 
2-5 yrs
A little boy sits in his window, drawing pad and paint brushes in hand, recording
the manic peregrinations of a hummingbird: "Stopping, starting, dashing, dart-
ing,/ Zigging, zagging everywhere." Baker keeps the boy's masterpiece hidden
from view until the final spread, which reveals not the detailed portrait of the bird
itself that the audience is led to expect, but a scrawly mishmash of multicolored
lines tracing its dizzying flight. It's a slight joke, but this upending of predictabil-
ity is pitched at just the right speed for youngsters whose own drawing skills may
not be much more advanced. Cut-paper collages feature tropical-hued flora against
a brilliant, broad blue sky, while Little Green's aerial antics are traced in a dashing,
grainy white line. Large shapes on generous spreads will travel well to the back
rows of the storytime crowd. This may be just the title for welcoming the return of
all things buzzing and blooming. EB
BERGER, MELVIN 
Mummies of the Pharaohs: Exploring the Valley of the Kings; by
Melvin and Gilda Berger. 
National Geographic, 2001 
64p 
illus. with pho-
tographs
ISBN 0-7922-7223-4 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Stunning photographs, superbly reproduced, are the true draw of this volume on
several of the notable cliff burials in the Valley of the Kings. The golden death
mask of Tutankhamun will be a familiar image, but no more powerful or memo-
rable than a black-and-white inset of his coffin being hoisted from its wooden shell
or the full-page closeup of the pharaoh's gold-sheathed, mummified toes. A pan-
oramic view of the interior of Seti I's tomb and an overhead shot of Hatshepsut's
cliff temple ably convey the settings in which the mummies and artifacts were
interred, and the curled fingers of Ramses II, raised against an ebony background,
should satisfy every mummy-hound's dream. Though workmanlike, the text doesn't
scale the heights of the illustrations. Organization appears haphazard, as the mum-
mies are not introduced in order of their reign or discovery. The mummification
process, presumably similar in all burials, is not discussed until the last pages, and
the well-known story of Howard Carter and Lord Carnarvon receives more atten-
298 
* THE BULLETIN
tion than the equally fascinating stories behind other discoveries. Visual learners
will probably brush these concerns aside, however, and children who simply "wanna
see the pictures" will find these well worth their perusal. EB
BLACKSTONE, STELLA 
There's a Cow in the Cabbage Patch; illus. by Clare
Beaton. 
Barefoot, 2001 
32p
ISBN 1-84148-333-8 
$14.99 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
Two farmers try to sort out a farmyard fiasco: "There's a cow in the cabbage
patch, moo, moo, moo!/ She should be in the dairy, what shall we do?" Though
the audience may have suggestions, they'll realize, as the tale unfurls with more
out-of-place animals, that the pandemonium will become worse before any solu-
tion can be found, and they will quickly take up guessing each new twist. The
story is long and the finish abrupt, but the conclusion is humorous as it sorts the
misplaced back to their proper locations. Beaton's appliqued felt scenes are some-
what static for such a lively story, but they lend a down-home feel to this farmyard
saga and create interest with varying stitches, buttons, and patterns in strong pri-
mary and secondary colors. This title begs for audience participation; pair it with
Sue Williams' I Went Walking (BCCB 12/90) for a moo-ving storytime experi-
ence. EAB
BORDEN, 
LOUISE 
The Day Eddie Met the Author; illus. by Adam
Gustavson. 
McElderry, 2001 
[36p]
ISBN 0-689-83405-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Excitement fills Eddie's school at the prospect of a visit from a real live author, and
Eddie's no exception: he's planning to ask the author a question about her writ-
ing. When the big day arrives, Eddie is rapt in the assembly, but when it comes
time for question and answer his query gets lost in a sea of eager kids. Fortunately,
the author singles him out after the assembly to respond to him, and an inspired
Eddie is on his way to becoming a writer himself. Eddie's (and the class') enthusi-
asm is realistic and carefully evoked, and the message of human connection through
literature (Eddie's question is "How do you write books that have parts meant for
me?") is an important one. It's over-reverently treated here, however, with every-
body sweet and understanding from start to finish, and the absence of tension
makes the long story even longer. Gustavson's watercolors are thickly textured
and his treatment serious; though the faces are sometimes vague and Eddie occa-
sionally looks too old for a third-grader, there's a creative use of perspective through-
out that enlivens the visuals. Though it lacks the high spirits ofPinkwater'sAuthor's
Day (BCCB 4/93) or Helen Lester's Author (4/97), this would be a useful prep for
an author visit. DS
CHILD, LAUREN 
Clarice Bean: Guess Who's Babysitting?; written and illus. by Lauren
Child. 
Candlewick, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7636-1373-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
In this sequel to Clarice Bean: That's Me, Clarice Bean's parents have to go out of
town, and they need a babysitter for their sons and daughters. With nowhere else
to turn, Mom is forced to ask her younger brother, Ted. Clarice Bean and her
Uncle Ted "get along like a house on fire," which is just what Mom is worried
APRIL 2001 
* 299
about. Uncle Ted's babysitting is fraught with incident: little brother Minal Cricket
lets Albert, Clarice Bean's class guinea pig, loose, Uncle Ted knocks Minal out
with a well-aimed soccer ball, they all drive "like 50 miles an hour" to the emer-
gency room, and Minal gets his head caught in a fence while chasing Albert. Mom
returns, and with a steely calm she yanks order out of chaos. Clarice Bean's hyper-
active storytelling relates the saga of loving but slightly inept and infinitely attrac-
tive Uncle Ted with great panache. Mixed-media illustrations feature a hyperkinetic
cast of characters, all sharp edges and angles and flying hair and expressive eyes.
The style is a combination of the compositional geometry of Maira Kalman, the
loosely flowing line of Chris Raschka, and the collage-and-photo technique of G.
Brian Karas, featuring a character that could be Hilary Knight's Eloise with a more
wholesome family background. Pulsating background colors-hot pink, sunshine
yellow-contrast with photo-images of brick and countryside. The literally mean-
dering text wanders over the pages, alternating fonts and sizes, over, under, and
around images, physically propelling the eye as the words propel the plot. Young
readers just about Clarice Bean's well-informed precocious age will revel in her
escapades. JMD
CLEARY, BRIAN P. 
To Root, to Toot, to Parachute: What is a Verb?; illus. by Jenya
Prosmitsky. 
Carolrhoda, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 1-57505-403-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
"Whether you scale a wall or a fish,/ make a design on a cup or a dish,/ take out the
garbage,/ or sharpen your knife-/ verbs are a part of your everyday life." Can't
argue with that, and when Cleary cites oodles of examples in infinitive form or
within the context of a phrase, he's on pretty solid ground. Soon his jingles dimin-
ish into simple rhymed wordlists, though, and many of the terms he offers do
double duty as nouns ("Punt or pass or shoot or score,/ swim or paddle, pitch or
pour"). The book makes the briefest of forays into forms of "be" and "have" and
tosses in a selection of "ing" endings without pointing out the helping verbs hid-
den in contractions ('leaves when they're falling and wind when it's blowing").
Prosmitsky supplies a lot of sprightly visual nonsense through the antics of her
lumpish, Kilroy-schnozzled critters who variously "disturb" sweethearts on a beach,
"whack" their buddies, and "slam" doors as friends try to "sleep." While this
doesn't approach the elegance or clarity of the Ruth Heller standard Kites Sail
High (BCCB 1/89), its appealing silliness and a bit of adult intervention might
drive the lesson home nonetheless. EB
COLLINS, PAT LOWERY Just Imagine. Houghton, 2001 
[24 4 p]
ISBN 0-618-05603-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Mary Francis is one of the fortunate Depression-era kids whose father has a steady,
decent-paying job. His comfortable salary still has to support two households-
the shabby apartment in an eastern mill town where he lives with Mary Francis
and his mother, and a home in Beverly Hills, where his wife aggressively promotes
the movie career of their adorable little son, Leland. Although these domestic
arrangements are meant to be temporary-just until Leland's star ascends-Mary
Francis is afraid the family will never reunite, and the alternate bickering and cold
silences among her parents and grandmother make her fears seem well founded.
300 
* THE BULLETIN
When the pressures of her life become overwhelming, Mary Francis calls upon the
family "gift" she believes she's inherited, the ability to separate spirit from body
and float above the turmoil. Again Collins treats the metaphysical imaginings of a
troubled adolescent with a rare blend of respect and humor (see Signs & Wonders,
BCCB 11/99), but in this case Mary Francis's spirit "flights" are not particularly
involving or, for that matter, even pertinent to the family drama. Nonetheless, the
hopes and hurts of this very credible family should engage readers' interest and
sympathies even without the fanciful plot line, and Mary Francis's fierce loyalty to
both flawed, loving parents is thoroughly convincing. EB
CRUTCHER, CHRIS 
Whale Talk. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
[224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029369-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-18019-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
T.J. (short for his given name of The Tao Jones) hates the jock worship at his high
school, which is why he's gone through nearly four years without playing on a
school team despite his considerable athletic talents. A mixed-race kid in a largely
white town (T.J. was adopted in early youth), he's gotten his share of hatred from
the jocks (and their recent-graduate ringleader, Rich Marshall), too. He nonethe-
less ends up as captain and driving force behind his high school's first swim team,
which comprises a broad sampling of misfits, and he takes particular pleasure in
using the swim team's likelihood of lettering to taunt the iiberjocks, so tensions are
running high. When Rich Marshall's sons and stepdaughter end up in foster care
with T.J.'s family, serious trouble seems inevitable. There's more than a sprin-
kling of sentimentality here, and the book doesn't avoid cliches about underdog
sports teams ("I have never coached a team with the guts this team has," the coach
predictably proclaims); it also seems to waver a bit on some of its moral stands
(physical threat seems to be variably acceptable). It nonetheless has a hard core of
smoldering anger that is almost palpable, which a lot of readers will appreciate:
T.J. is merciless in his disdain of the unjustly powerful in his world, and his victo-
ries over them provide a particularly sweet satisfaction. The book balances out the
pleasure of those victories with a painful price (Rich Marshall's revenge attempt
kills T.J.'s father), but there's pain throughout-what's emphasized are the hu-
man bonds that can surmount and heal human destruction. The emotional dy-
namics are the main point here, and they'll keep Crutcher fans-and other young
adults disturbed by daily injustice-absorbed throughout. DS
DICAMILLO, KATE 
The Tiger Rising. 
Candlewick, 2001 
[128p]
ISBN 0-7636-0911-0 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Since his mother's death, Rob and his father have been living in the Kentucky Star
Motel in rural Florida, where, in the woods behind the motel, Rob finds a beauti-
ful full-grown tiger in a cage. Rob has no friends at school until he meets Sistine,
a girl in a frilly pink dress who beats up anyone who teases her, and Rob finds
himself telling Sistine about his discovery. She asks to see the tiger for herself and
subsequently campaigns to convince Rob to help her free the big cat. Meanwhile,
the motel owner puts Rob in charge of feeding the animal, dropping raw meat by
his hotel room home twice a day and giving Rob the keys to the cage. Rob's
acceptance of his own painful emotions about his mother's death expands through
APRIL 2001 
* 301
his friendship with Sistine, and the two of them literally free the tiger from the
cage while symbolically freeing Rob's grief. DiCamillo's latest work is written
with the same flavor of magical realism that won her acclaim for Because ofWinn
Dixie (BCCB 6/00), with lyrical prose and deft descriptions that evoke inimitable
settings and main characters. Unfortunately, the supporting cast of characters
here are more stock than those in her previous novel, with Rob's father character-
ized mostly by his strong silence and a black maid at the motel functioning as a
"prophetess" to the two children. Nevertheless, DiCamillo's careful descriptions
spin threads of emotion that are both gossamer and bold, portraying Rob's isola-
tion and his slow recovery with honesty and sympathy. Young readers who en-
joyed DiCamillo's first novel won't be disappointed by her second. KM
DOYLE, MALACHY 
Hungry! Hungry! Hungry!; illus. by Paul Hess. 
Peachtree,
2001 
26p
ISBN 1-56145-241-6 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
A little boy and a "grisly, ghastly goblin" engage in a question-answer session, the
little boy posing such queries as "Why have you got such great big feet?" and "Why
have you got such skinny little thighs?" The goblin answers every other question
with "Hungry! Hungry! Hungry!", and it won't be long before listeners catch on
to the rhythmic refrains and understand where the plot is going. Doyle's text is a
retelling of the traditional English folktale "The Visitor," collected by Joseph Jacobs.
While Jacobs' version is obscured by arcane language, Doyle sets his retelling in
the here and now, with a modern little boy instead of an old woman and with a less
ambivalent conclusion. The illustrations show the boy meeting the goblin outside
the house, and then move inside, as the boy questions the ever-closer goblin about
himself and his gustatory goal (lunch). Doyle mitigates the standard "gotcha"
ending by having the boy offer the goblin a jelly bean, which he accepts as substi-
tute for a more, shall we say, robust meal. Hess' illustrations have a slick, Anthony
Browne finish; the colors are modern neon and the free-floating compositional
elements add a touch of the surreal. The goblin is a round-headed green mutant
figure that follows the boy relentlessly; the action takes place in a domestic house-
hold literally twisted by the arrival of this otherworldly being. Domestic details in
each illustration provide viewers with plenty of absorbing stuff to look at. This is
just scary enough for storytime, with a tone similar to O'Malley's Velcome (BCCB
11/97). JMD
EDWARDS, MICHELLE 
Zero Grandparents. Harcourt, 2001 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-15-202083-7 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Though Calliope James usually loves second grade at Jackson Magnet, Mrs.
Fennessey's announcement about upcoming Grandparents Day disrupts her world:
Calliope has no grandparent to bring. Her two best friends, Howie and Pa Lia,
offer to share their grandmas, and her mother and father offer to come instead, but
Calliope still isn't satisfied. Finding a picture of her grandmother Flory Sophia
Turnipseed in a family album, Calliope is bolstered by the similarities between her
and Flory (teeth, freckles, hands) and by the shawl her grandmother hand-knitted.
When Grandparents Day arrives, Calliope is armed with her treasures and ready to
tell their story. Calliope's schoolroom dilemma and her refusal to accept substi-
tutes will ring true for the audience. Short chapters and a large typeface will help
302 
* THE BULLETIN
to ease newly independent readers' transition to chapter books. The book is rich
with black-and-white illustrations in spot and full-page art, their solid lines and
homey flavor providing even more accessibility. Suggest this second entry in the
Jackson Friends series to kids who may enjoy a sweeter version of Horrible Harry.
EAB
EHLERT, Lois 
Waitingfor Wings; written and illus. by Lois Ehlert. 
Harcourt,
2001 
38p
ISBN 0-15-202608-8 
$17.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
Ehlert's splashy graphics are at their blooming best in this rhyming introduction
to the life cycle of butterflies: "Out in the fields, eggs are hidden from view,//
clinging to leaves with butterfly glue." 
In the first third, the pages run riot with
purple blossoms and dark green foliage among which the eggs hatch into caterpil-
lars; the caterpillars munch leaves, spin cocoons, and emerge as butterflies. Up
until this point the rhyming is simple but graceful. In the middle, wherein the
butterflies seek and find a butterfly garden, the text becomes awkward and forced
("They pump their wings, get ready to fly,// then hungry butterflies head for the
sky.// Looking for flowers with nectar to eat,// they catch a whiff of something
sweet") with a tendency toward imprecise language ("fragrant scent of perfume").
The conclusion (in which the butterflies feast in the garden and then return to the
fields to lay eggs) redeems the clumsy middle lines somewhat, and Ehlert's flowers
are just irresistible. Scads of golden marigolds, yellow black-eyed susans, purple
thistle, pink impatiens, and other blooms fill up the pages, colorfully clamoring
for viewers' attention. Butterflies float from page to page and flower to flower;
they can be matched with their names and pictures in the "Butterfly Identifica-
tion" section. (Ehlert also includes a page of butterfly information, a "Flower
Identification" page, and instructions for growing a butterfly garden.) Each spread
is an amazement of intensely-hued blossoms against stark white pages; the effect
makes the flowers pop off the page. Numerous uses, from storytimes to nature
crafts to curriculum connections, make this a rewarding choice. JMD
FARRELL, MAME And Sometimes Why. 
Farrar, 2001 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-374-32289-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
The summer after eighth grade, Jack starts noticing that his longterm best friend,
Chris, isn't just a great sports partner but also a very attractive girl. This discovery
unnerves Jack, and he's even more dismayed when he sees other boys realizing the
same thing. Chris, accustomed to being the overlooked outsider from the wrong
side of the tracks, is wary of the changes, but she's not above enjoying some of their
effects, including the attentions of country-club boys with status. Jack would like
inclusion in the in-crowd himself, so he breaks his friendly date with Chris for the
club cotillion to take a more popular girl-which leaves Chris free for a real date.
The blossoming of romantic possibilities is a standard plot, but this is an unusual
look at it: there's no inevitable progress from friendship to dating (Chris and Jack
don't end up with each other), and the complications of social ambition and genu-
inely confused emotions add dimension. The writing unfortunately doesn't take
great advantage of those dimensions, since the snobby unpopular kids' comeup-
pance comes from the genuine meanness of sympathetic characters (Jack and his
older sister), and Jack's emotions remain confusing to the reader as well-is he
APRIL 2001 
* 303
suppressing his romantic interest in Chris to keep their friendship, or was he really
just jealous? Subplots about Jack's and Chris' families aren't up to the main plot's
standard, either, and there are some awkward sit-commy components (Jack's pre-
cocious little brother and Chris' cold-cocking of Jack following his attempt to kiss
her). The protagonists (particularly Chris) and their situation are memorable,
however, and this may suit readers looking for something more offbeat than a
traditional romance. DS
FLORIAN, DOUGLAS 
Lizards, Frogs, and Polliwogs; written and illus. by Douglas
Florian. 
Harcourt, 2001 
48p
ISBN 0-15-202591-X 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Steadily and poetically marching through the animal kingdom, Florian now offers
a gallery of reptiles and amphibians in his familiar format. As usual, each spread
offers a critter portrait opposing a pithy poem, the format of which varies from
brisk couplets ("On Dad's back the eggs are toted./ To his kids he's toadally de-
voted"-"The Midwife Toad") to longer lyrics ("Brown with oval orange spots/
Crimson mottled black with blots./ Neon green with blue-black bands./ Tanger-
ine with lemon strands ... "-"The Poison-Dart Frogs"). There are also some
witty acknowledgments of reptilian predation ("The lump in the middle?/ You
don't want to know"-"The Diamondback Rattlesnake"; "... But did you know
that alligators/ Sometimes swallow second graders?"-"The Crocodile and the Al-
ligator") that will provide some gleeful chills, and several offerings have sonorous
wordplay or onomatopoeia that makes them beg to be read aloud ("The Bullfrog"
could well be arranged ia laoyfulNoise for choric reading). The watery watercolors
on brown paper are usefully aquatic for the amphibians, but the land-dwellers
come off pretty well too: the bug-eyed alligator looms over primary-schoolers
obliviously walking into his jaws, and a delicate tracery of brown demarcates the
cobra on his sandy ground. Green is appropriately dominant throughout (the
brown and yellow python fairly shimmers against his green background), and the
incorporation of the verses' imaginative conceits results in entertainingly bizarre
visuals such as the wood frog on a popsicle stick. Readers will relish this addition
to Florian's series of unnatural history. DS
GREGORY, KRISTIANA 
Five Smooth Stones: Hope's Diary, Philadelphia, Pennsylva-
nia, 1776. Scholastic, 2001 
[112p] 
(My America Books)
ISBN 0-439-14827-8 
$8.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
With the now-predictable combination of childlike interests and political acumen
shared by a host of fictional diarists, nine-year-old Hope Potter records her obser-
vations of the comings and goings of the fictitious and famous in Philadelphia at
the onset of Revolution. Father is off on a secret mission, Mother is running the
family bakery, brother Ethan is trying to decide whether he's Patriot or Tory, the
widowed Quaker neighbor is "read out" by her family, Ben Franklin and Thomas
Jefferson are buying tarts when they're not meeting in Congress, and Hope reads
Thomas Paine and commits portions of the Declaration of Independence to memory
when she's not helping in the shop. While this title features some weaknesses of
the recent spate of series historical fiction--especially a tendency to offer diary
notations that serve no purpose other than the reader's edification-it also shares a
commendable strength. Kid-pleasing, authentic details of everyday life abound-
304 
* THE BULLETIN
from harsh, often cruel, classroom discipline, to the simple problem of hiding a
quill pen from a predatory house cat, to the severe discomforts of life without
electricity and central heating. Gregory leaves readers with some cliffhangers and
the promise of a coming sequel. Historical notes (in which Betsy Ross is credited
with sewing the first American flag) are appended. EB
HIGH, LINDA OATMAN 
Under New York; illus. by Robert Rayevsky. 
Holiday
House, 2001 
30p
ISBN 0-8234-1551-1 
$16.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 293, for review.
HOBERMAN, MARY ANN, ad. 
There Once Was a Man Named Michael Finnegan;
illus. by Nadine Bernard Westcott. 
Tingley/Little, 2001 
30p
ISBN 0-316-36301-4 
$14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Hoberman extends the musical tale of Michael Finnegan, who "had whiskers on
his chin-igan,/ Shaved them off and they grew in-igan,/ Poor old Michael Finnegan,
begin-igan." In this version, Michael's propensity for performing bad music earns
him a kick in the "shin-igan," as well as a tin full of money (the neighbors pay to
keep him quiet), which he uses to buy a car to visit relatives. When even they make
fun of his violin playing, he is despondent until he finds the canine "Quinn-igan,"
who shares the same musical tastes. Hoberman effectively employs the four-line-
stanza form throughout the tale, ending each line with "igan" to continue the
silliness, and ending each stanza with "begin-igan," prompting more stanzaic shenan-
igans. Westcott joins in with her signature watercolor and ink illustrations, ex-
tending the humor of the text with double-page spreads bleeding off the pages. A
cotton-candy palette contributes to the lighthearted mood created by breezy lines.
Combine this with Iza Trapani's The Itsy Bitsy Spider for extended storytime ad-
venture as you dream up more (mis)adventures for these folkloric folk. Musical
notation is included. EAB
JANOWITZ, TAMA 
Hear That?; illus. by Tracy Dockray. 
SeaStar, 2001 
34 p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58717-074-4 
$15.95
Library ed. ISBN 1-58717-075-2 
$15.88 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Mom and her towheaded son, the narrator, hear a buzzing and wonder together
about the source of the sound. As they listen more closely, they hear more noises
("Hear THAT?") until they are wandering around the house, chasing noises and
imagining more and more outrageous sources ("'Maybe it's our wombat,' I said.
'Going through the smelly garbage in the kitchen'"). The illustrations show in-
creasingly frenetic scenes, including a kitchen full of kangaroos and a walrus spill-
ing out of the fridge. Finally, the noises all turn out to be Daddy, coming home on
a very rainy evening, and the final page shows him starting a renewed round of fun,
asking "Hear THAT?" The story here is inarguably slight, the Daddy solution
rather baffling (how would he be making those noises?), and some of the flights of
fancy seem more forced than others. The illustrations are invitingly silly, however,
with loosely cartoonish compositions that feature onomatopoeic words leading off
to the next page. The audience might consider the Daddy answer slightly unfair,
since it was Mom's first suggestion at the very beginning, but they may be willing
to suspend critical judgment in favor of an imaginative romp around the house,
playing their own games of "Hear THAT?" KM
APRIL 2001 
* 305
JUDES, MARIE-ODILE 
Max: The Stubborn Little Wolf; tr. by Joan Robins; illus. by
Martine Bourre. 
HarperCollins, 2001. 
32p
ISBN 0-06-029417-5 
$14.95 
R 4-6 yrs
Papa Wolf is determined to change Little Max's chosen vocation (florist): "Wolf
fathers and sons are hunters, have always been hunters, and always will be hunters.
You, my son, will follow the family tradition." His plans to make a hunter out of
Max go awry-instead of joining in, Max warns an approaching rabbit of his father's
dastardly plans: "Quick! Save yourself, little rabbit .... My papa wants to eat
you!" Other plans to alter Max's floral leaning also fail, forcing Papa Wolf to
honor his promise and eat his words in the form of a hat, a pillow, and the family
dishes, until Papa does change Max's mind-by accidentally convincing him to
become a perfume maker instead. Bourre's lively illustrations rely on earth colors
punctuated by occasional strong reds and greens, and the wolf parent and son are
amusingly expressive. Visual jokes abound, with pig, rabbit, and lamb motifs
hidden in the articles of daily life (curtains, bedspreads, toys). Though there may
be an unacknowledged message about gender roles hidden here, the wolf story is
funny in its own right, and Papa Wolf's omnivorous punishment and final sur-
prise disappointment will tickle the audience (they'll gleefully anticipate the final
page, where Papa Wolf chokes down the china). Bring this lupine romp out for
little ones who may not be ready for Scieszka's The True Story of the Three Little
Pigs by A. Wolf but who will appreciate a different wolfish perspective. EAB
JUSSIM, DANIEL 
Double Take: The Story of Twins. 
Viking, 2001 
[96p] 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-670-88452-9 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
It's probably appropriate that books about twins come in pairs, with Donna
Jackson's Twin Tales (BCCB 2/01) covering much the same ground as this title.
Like Jackson's book, Double Take discusses conjoined twins, twins separated at
birth, multiples beyond two, and the sometimes dark history of twins through the
ages, often discussing the same individual cases (the McCaughey septuplets, the
conjoined Hensel twins); it goes beyond the previous title in examining the greater
cost, healthwise and financially, of multiple birth. The writing is often lackluster,
however, and the large number of anecdotes slows the pacing, especially as many
are from adults. The book is also more doctrinaire, accepting the idea that indi-
vidual identity is requisite, while Jackson allows for the possibility that some twins
have found eminent satisfaction in a different kind of identity. The black-and-
white photographs are often small and dark, providing little contrast, so the result
is a sometimes stodgy look that fails to capitalize on the strong visuals of the book's
subject. Though this does touch on a few original areas, Jackson's book is the
better title; if you've got high demand for that one, you might want to extend your
twin family with this. Source notes, a list of additional resources, and an index will
be included in the bound book. DS
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
A Cloak for the Moon; illus. by Katya Krenina. 
Holiday
House, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1493-0 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Haskel, a young tailor, is enamored of the moon: "At night he climbed to the roof
of his house, where he lay for hours watching the moon. He never tired of looking
306 
* THE BULLETIN
at her." The moon, in the form of a beautiful woman, visits Haskel in a dream; she
complains of the cold, and the tailor vows to make her "a cloak of shining silver
thread." A friend tells him of a legendary garment made of light that adjusts to fit
the wearer; Haskel's quest to find this garment leads him to distant ports. In one
such port he locates the garment and, in attempting to discover how the garment
was made, finds the secret of weaving with moonlight. He returns home and sews
a cloak for the moon, "just as he had promised." Kimmel's adaptation is based on
one of the tales of Rabbi Nachman of Bratslav, an eighteenth-century Jewish mys-
tic. This is a sturdy enough retelling, but the action is subdued: Haskel does little
more than travel from city to city, port to port until he finds the garment he seeks.
The story lacks tension and there is little to hold readers or listeners. The palette
consists of muted, earthy reds, blues, and greens, which suits the moonlight motif,
but the gouache illustrations are a haphazard collection of culturally generic pan-
oramas and awkwardly drafted figures. While this doesn't have the excitement of
more event-driven plots, this may be just the ticket for those looking for a quiet
contemplative tale for reading aloud or storytelling. JMD
KINDL, PATRICE 
Goose Chase. 
Houghton, 2001 
[2 2 4p]
ISBN 0-618-03377-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Alexandria Aurora Fortunato had been living a perfectly satisfactory life as Goose
Girl, tending her beloved flock of a dozen geese, when without so much as a by-
your-leave an old hag granted her stunning beauty and a tendency to brush gold
dust from her hair and to weep diamonds. Now a marital prize, she's locked in a
tower until she chooses between the Prince of Dorloo (young and benign but also
clueless) and the King of Gilboa (old and malicious). Her geese come to her
rescue, but escape from the tower is not escape from her suitors. When the hapless
prince pursues her, she manages to save him from man-eating ogres and becomes
his unwilling comrade as they together attempt to elude the king's agents with the
help of Alexandria's fowl friends; while her disdain for the prince lessens as they
undergo trials of capture and escape, it looks like the king's great power means an
inevitably tragic end-or does it? Rather than a retelling of a folktale, this is a
confabulation of many tales' motifs, including the dropping of magical objects
that transform to impede evil pursuers, the enchantment of siblings as birds, the
royal child living as a commoner, as well as the obvious echoes in Alexandria's
position and gifts. The components synthesize amiably into their own fairy-tale-
flavored narrative; Kindl's wry and coolly challenging voice, however, brings
Alexandria's narration closer to the sharp-tongued adventure of The Princess Bride
than the retellings of Donna Jo Napoli or Robin McKinley, and at times there's a
picaresque mood to Alexandria's adventures. This is less conceptually original
than Kindl's other titles (Owl in Love, BCCB 10/93 and The Woman in the Wall,
3/97), but it may in consequence have broader appeal as well as satisfying readers
who recognize self-contained Alexandria as a worthy Kindl heroine. DS
KLISE, KATE 
Trial by fary Journal; illus. by M. Sarah Klise. 
HarperCollins,
2001 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029541-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-380-97880-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Klise romps through the criminal justice system with this tale of Lily Watson, the
APRIL 2001 
* 307
first juvenile juror in Missouri (more likely, in the world), which unfolds swiftly
through a collection of documents (not unlike Avi's NothingBut the Truth). Eleven-
year-old Perry Keet is presumed dead and, under a new law that requires a minor
to serve in any capital case involving a juvenile victim, sixth-grader Lily is sworn in
to help determine whether seedy, semiliterate Bob White is the nefarious perp or
an innocent dupe. The legalistic shenanigans that set up the story are mighty
difficult to choke down, from the illogical mandate of a juvenile juror as "peer" to
the victim rather than the accused; to the impanelment of persons who know the
victim and each other; to the ease with which sequestered jurors commune with
the outside world, with or without court permission. Clearly, though, Klise doesn't
expect for a minute to be taken seriously-shameless puns, outrageous ongoing
felonies by the true villain (who's a sly referent to the Wizard of Oz), and a wildly
satiric setting in a cross between Potterville and Disneyland make it clear we're not
in the real world here. Readers who lament that they can never figure out a mys-
tery by a novel's end will have happily fingered the criminal long before Lily solves
the crime and saves the day. EB
KOERTGE, RON 
The Brimstone Journals. Candlewick, 2001 
113p
ISBN 0-7636-1302-9 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
"Brimstone" is the unflattering nickname bestowed on Branston High School by
its students; in a collection of free-verse monologues, fifteen of those students offer
their individual views of their lives, lives that are on the verge of being changed
forever as a bitter and disaffected student joins a plan to amass weapons for massa-
cre of those named on his ever-growing list. The voices run the gamut from an
avid player of videogames through a militant African-American girl who derides
formal orthography as "jis another way/ 2 keep my black brotherz and sistahs/
down," to the thoughtful son of Vietnamese immigrant parents, as well as the
principal players in the drama: Boyd, preparing for destruction, and Lester, the
denigrated, who becomes a part of Boyd's plan but alerts the police in time to stop
it. The book intriguingly pulls students' private pain into the larger drama, some-
times directly (one girl borrows a gun from Boyd in order to threaten her sexually
aggressive stepfather, and another takes a weapon in order to kill herself) and some-
times indirectly (a shy anorexic's main relief, when the plot is averted, is that she
didn't end up in the hospital where they'd make her eat). Though the monologues
are more prosy than poetic, there's a keen and perceptive edge to many of the
voices, ranging from Boyd's harsh and impoverished language to Lester's sad deci-
sion to join Boyd ("Okay, fine. So I'll be an anarchist./ I'm nothing now but a fat
kid"); there are also some realistic loose ends left. The pieces are somewhat un-
even, however, and too much is dependent on implication, so the voices are often
more individually compelling than effective as a part of the whole. This is still an
insightful and sometimes touching story of youthful pain and despair, however,
and it offers an interesting counterbalance to Strasser's more intense and reporto-
rial Give a Boy a Gun (BCCB 10/00). DS
LAWSON, JULIE Destination Gold! Orca, 2001 [212p]
ISBN 1-55143-155-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Klondike gold is sure to be the financial salvation of Ned Turner, his widowed
mother, and his younger sister, Sarah, or so Ned thinks as he joins the throng of
prospectors headed to the frozen El Dorado in 1897. He's promptly fleeced by a
308 
* THE BULLETIN
scoundrel named "Montana" Jim Daley, but he manages to make his way to the
fields, where a seasoned miner takes him on as a wage laborer. On a parallel
course, sixteen-year-old Catherine flees to a new life in the Yukon, believing she's
murdered the brutish man who won her in a poker game. As the Muse of Melo-
drama would have it, both teens were victimized by the one and the same Mon-
tana Jim, and it takes near-miraculous interventions by Sarah Turner (who makes
her own way to the North), kindly miners, and scruffy but, of course, faithful dog
Nugget to secure the pair wealth, romance, and the expected happy-ever-after.
Catherine's story has been tidied up for a young audience (Montana won her be-
cause he "needed a servant"), and Ned's repeated gullibility is a bit of a stretch.
Even dastardly Montana Jim is little more than the parody of a villain: "'Montana,
you scum! Let her go!' 'Try 'n stop me, kid. Or why doncha sic that mutt on me?
Nothin' I'd like better than to finish it off.'" Still, even cliches are fresh on the first
encounter, and readers who only venture into the great outdoors in Mom's SUV
may find Ned and Catherine's odyssey an exciting adventure. EB
L'ENGLE, MADELEINE 
The Other Dog; illus. by Christine Davenier. 
SeaStar,
2001 
[4 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 1-58717-041-8 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58717-040-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
Touche is a happy and cherished poodle discomfited by her owners' decision to
get another dog. The new dog can't compete with Touche's considerable charms,
in Touche's eloquent opinion, since it lacks some basic attributes (hair and tail) as
well as some basic accomplishments (it's not housebroken). Eventually the poodle
resigns herself to the fact that little Jo "is just of an inferior breed called 'baby,'"
and she turns herself into Jo's protector and entertainer. There's a lot of text here
for such a youthfully slanted story, and Touche's change of heart isn't clearly enough
a result of time, so it seems sudden. The poodle's arch and self-centered narration
is very amusing, however, and the dog's-eye view of the new baby will be obliquely
soothing to novice older sibs who have a similarly jaundiced opinion. Cream
pages have a slightly retro look appropriate to the Duvoisin air of Davenier's illus-
trations, which feature ebullient washes of color and sinuous thready lines that use
varying thickness to energetic textural effect. Golden Touche has appropriate star
quality, with her corkscrew curls and winning smile fetchingly set off by her top-
knot; the spotlight of the spot art gives her maximum opportunity to gain audi-
ence attention. Charlotte Voake's Ginger (BCCB 4/97) offered a feline version of
dethronement; this is a lighthearted canine/interspecies counterpart. A detailed
author's note (too long for the book's audience) tells the story of L'Engle's poodle,
the real-life Touche. DS
LEWIS, J. PATRICK 
A Burst ofFirsts: Doers, Shakers, and Record Breakers; illus. by
Brian Ajhar. 
Dial, 2001 
[34p]
ISBN 0-8037-2108-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Twenty-two poems celebrate a variety of achievements, some lighthearted ("First
Parachute Wedding") and some serious and significant ("First Men on the Moon").
There's also a generous helping of athletics ("First Non-Japanese Sumo Wrestler,"
"First Man to Win the Heavyweight Boxing Title Three Times") and just general
APRIL 2001 
* 309
trivia ("First House of Cards with More than 500 Decks"). Though the theme is
piquant, it's rather stretched-some achievements are less firsts than mosts or onlies
("The Biggest Bubble-Gum Bubble Ever Blown"), fiction is admitted as well as
fact (the brontosaurus' tail is the first breaker of the sound barrier), and not all of
the facts are correct (Ruby Bridges wasn't the first child to integrate an all-white
school). The poems are also uneven: Lewis is at his best with tight rhyme, bouncy
rhythms, and soundplay, which serve some verses well ("First Man to Win Spring-
board- and Platform-Diving Gold Medals in Two Olympics") but undercut seri-
ous topics with their jingly effect. The line-and-watercolor illustrations have an
amiable exaggeration reminiscent of Kevin O'Malley's work; layouts and compo-
sitions are energetic and varied, and readers will enjoy hunting for the bubble-
gum-bubble blower, whose huge bubble lifts her up into the sky and floats her
through the rest of the spreads in the book. This doesn't quite have the zing that
one would like, but readers will be curious about the idea and may wish to add
their own versical firsts. DS
LIPP, FREDERICK 
The Caged Birds of Phnom Penh; illus. by Ronald
Himler. 
Holiday House, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1534-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Eight-year-old Ary contributes to the family income by selling flowers to tourists
on the streets of Phnom Penh, but she dreams of a better life in the "green world
outside the capital city." She gives her hard-earned coins to a cunning bird lady
near the temple steps and selects a bird from the cage that she can set free to carry
her wishes aloft; the bird, however, returns to its keeper, because it "had grown
accustomed to its prison." Ary's grandfather counsels her to choose a bird more
wisely, and on her next visit Ary selects a bird with memories of its freedom, whose
release is more gratifying: "The little bird grew smaller and smaller as it moved
into the east, where the sun was a yellow sliver, a lemon rind of dawn. Ary knew in
her heart somehow, in some way, her wishes would come true." Lipp's evocation
of a young girl's wish to escape urban poverty is earnest and heartfelt, but while
adults can readily infer the extent of Ary's need, young listeners will miss the con-
crete details to drive the point home. The fresh "yellow winds" of the countryside
seem to be Ary's dreamed alternative, but Lipp romanticizes away the arduous
labor and probable poverty of the rice farmers as well. Himler likewise offers such
hazy, prettified city scenes that the audience is unlikely to discern why Ary wants
to escape. The custom of sending wishes heavenward on birds' wings is appealing,
though, and listeners may want to compare Ary's dreams with those of the home-
less narrator in Bunting's Fly Away Home (BCCB 5/91). EB
MANNING, MICK 
Supermom; ISBN 0-8075-7666-2; Wash, Scrub, Brush; ISBN
0-8075-8668-4. 
Each book: written and illus. by Mick Manning and Brita
Granstr6m. 
Whitman, 2001 
[31p] 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
These two titles compare human habits of mothering and hygiene to similar habits
of creatures throughout the animal kingdom. Supermom is the weaker of the two
titles, drawing very loose connections between animal mothering (carrying babies
via mouth or piggyback style) and human mothering (carrying a baby on a scooter)
and possessing a distinctly anthropocentric sensibility. Line-and-watercolor illus-
trations add appeal, as in a spread showing moms on the verso and their babies on
310 
* THE BULLETIN
the recto, with the onomatopoeic sounds of each species connecting the mom and
baby. In Wash, Scrub, Brush, Manning explores all aspects of human bathroom
use, from hand washing to lice removal, including veiled references to flatulence
along the way ("Someone smells like they've laid a rotten egg. Phew!"). The
minimal explanations are likely to need adult interpretation, as in a spread on
worm prevention, showing a picture of a cat ("Kittens and puppies ... need to be
wormed by a vet") and an up-close picture of pinworms ("Pinworms ... make
your bottom itchy"). Nevertheless, the cheerful illustrations of happily hygienic
round-faced figures may facilitate some direct discussion of potentially uncom-
fortably private bathroom topics. Unfortunately, art in both books is composi-
tionally cluttered with animal examples that are occasionally irrelevant. Although
some families may use Wash, Scrub, Brush as a personal-hygiene conversation-
starter, most will want to look elsewhere for books showing mothering habits of
animals. KM
MAZER, NORMA Fox 
Girlhearts. HarperCollins, 2001 
[22 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06866-9 $15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13350-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
At thirteen, Sarabeth finds her life changing drastically when her mother suddenly
collapses and dies of a heart attack; this leaves Sarabeth, whose father died years
ago, completely alone. She moves in with her mother's best friend, Cynthia, which
proves a strain on everybody: Cynthia's husband resents the intrusion on their
privacy, new mother Cynthia finds it exhausting to drive Sarabeth across town to
school, and Sarabeth bitterly misses her own home. As it becomes harder for
Sarabeth to find a place for herself, she becomes interested in connecting with the
families her mother and father left behind in their small home town. Though the
story leaves quite a few loose ends (why was Sarabeth's mother in the park where
she died? What happens in Sarabeth's possibly-more-than-a-friendship with the
appealing James?), Sarabeth's narration is penetrating and poignant in its evoca-
tion of bereavement. Mazer is particularly perceptive in her depiction of Sarabeth's
keen need for her friends, which makes Cynthia's plan for her to transfer to a
nearby school unbearable; grief also realistically makes Sarabeth often out of step
with those same friends and even the realities of the situation as she struggles to
deal with the relentless barrage of change. Sarabeth's search for her place after
terrible loss makes a poignant story that will resonate with many readers. DS
MCEWAN, JAMIE 
The Heart of Cool; illus. by Sandra Boynton. 
Simon,
2001 
[4 8p] 
(Ready-to-Read Books)
ISBN 0-689-82177-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-3
Polar bear Bobby doesn't just aspire to be cool enough to survive at his new school,
he is determined to be as cool as humanly-or in his particular case, animally-
possible. Bobby idolizes Harry Haller, the celebrated "emperor of cool," and care-
fully copies his dress, mannerisms, and radical skateboard moves; he succeeds so
well that Bobby virtually freezes one day in class, and only Harry recognizes that
his proteg6 has, in fact, arrived "right at the center, right at the heart of cool." Of
course, schoolyard royalty never reigns unchallenged, and Siggy Sidewinder dares
Bobby to top his own skateboarding skills. Bobby gets so lost in the coolness of his
APRIL 2001 
* 
311
awesome flight that he boards right out of the half pipe and lands in a hedge. He's
lost his fans, but Harry seems to appreciate his experience: "You know, Bobby.
Many catch air. Only a few take flight." McEwan steers early-chapter-book read-
ers toward considering issues of peer pressure and self esteem, but the "cool is
internal" message is inexplicit enough that kids may not grasp it. Is Bobby cool
because he successfully emulates Harry? Is he cool because he finds his own psy-
chic center? Is he truly cool in spite of or because of his flight and fall? Weighty
matters, these, and the lengthy text doesn't have quite enough wit to sustain its
momentum. Boynton's deadpan cartoon menagerie offers congenial company,
however, and they and McEwan's wryly humorous tone may be enough to keep
kids reading. EB
MORA, PAT, ed. 
Love to Mamd: A Tribute to Mothers; illus. by Paula S. Barragin
M. 
Lee &Low, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 1-58430-019-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Thirteen poems by thirteen Latino authors (Francisco X. Alarc6n, Mora herself,
and others) provide a variety of views on mothers and mothering. The poems are
written, for the most part, from the points of view of the adult poets recalling the
specific loving women who influenced their lives. The mostly free-verse poems
focus on the domestic, with food figuring prominently as a source of love and
security. There is a wistfulness about some of the entries, especially when they
refer to the way a song or a story would remind the women about their old homes.
The quality of the poetry is uneven (and the inclusion of only one poem in Span-
ish is a curious decision), but overall the stronger poems carry the day. Computer-
enhanced mixed-media illustrations (pencil, cut paper, gouache) serve as busy visual
backdrops for the poetry. The opaque, saturated palette gives a poster-like flatness
to the compositions, but slightly askew geometric figures add additional energy.
Remember this for May displays and programming. JMD
MORRIS, GERALD 
Parsifal's Page. Houghton, 2001 
[240p]
ISBN 0-618-05509-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Morris returns with a new entry in his light retellings of Arthurian legends: the
quest of Parsifal, seen through the eyes of his inexperienced young page, Piers. The
boy's father is a skilled blacksmith who wants to pass on his trade, but his mother
is a former lady-in-waiting with a taste for grandeur, and she encourages him to
sign on with a passing knight. Piers' new master turns out to be both a traitor and
a fool, who meets a swift and deserved end at the hands of uncouth but honest
would-be knight Parsifal. The boy changes masters, and he journeys with the
unmannerly though potentially heroic Parsifal on his quest to do deeds worthy of
admission to the Round Table. Morris takes an irreverent tone toward Parsifal's
unswerving loyalty to the code of the Round Table and his to mother's advice, yet
he never loses sight of the goal-the successful completion of the quest-and to
that end, Parsifal grows into a true hero. The darker aspects of Arthurian lore are
precisely handled, and their presence provides the shadow necessary to balance the
lighter humor. Old friends from previous titles (The Squire's Tale, BCCB 7/98,
The Squire, His Knight and His Lady, 3/99) make small but critical appearances
that will be appreciated by fans. Morris includes a note with information on his
sources and interpretations. JMD
312 
* THE BULLETIN
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
The Greatest: Muhammad Ali. 
Scholastic,
2001 
172p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-54342-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
The public life of former boxing heavyweight champion Muhammad Ali is given
close scrutiny by Myers, who in his introduction states, "In his private life, Ali is
revealed to be a man of human faults and human weaknesses. I appreciate the
'normal' Muhammad Ali, but I choose to write about 'The Greatest."' Myers'
focus is Ali's boxing career and his place in the history of professional boxing in the
United States in the last half of the twentieth century. The book concentrates on
Ali's preparations for his battles both in the ring and out, paying particular atten-
tion to the psychological and physical endurance a boxer must have in order to be
a champion. Ali's boxing career is set against the influences of the rising civil rights
movement of the sixties and seventies. His willingness to stand by his beliefs
whatever the cost (they nearly cost him his boxing career when he converted to
Islam, changed his name from Cassius Clay to Muhammad Ali, and refused to be
drafted) is emphasized by Myers, who returns to it again and again. This is a
particularly good inside view of the organized sport of boxing. The text analyzes
Ali's career and moral choices in the context of the rapidly changing American
social and political landscape. Black-and-white photographs scattered throughout
give a sense of Ali's powerful physical presence. A chronology of Ali's fights, a
bibliography, and an index are included. JMD
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
Albert; illus. by Jim LaMarche. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201572-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Albert sticks his hand out his window every day to check the weather; if the weather
is "right, just right," he will put on his hat and take a walk. The problem is the
weather is never right, and Albert always stays inside. One morning Albert sticks
his hand out the window and a cardinal drops a twig in it; the dumbfounded
Albert watches as a cardinal couple builds a nest in his palm. The female cardinal
lays four eggs: "Albert scratched his head. If he pulled his arm in, twisting to get
it back through the grillwork, the nest would surely fall apart. So he stood there."
Albert stands at his window for weeks; he sleeps standing up and he starts growing
a beard. He watches cardinals care first for their eggs and then for their chicks.
Eventually all the fledglings but one fly away; with Albert's encouragement ("'Go
for it, Birdie,' said Albert. 'Fly'") the reluctant fledgling takes off, and so, finally,
does Albert. Napoli's premise requires a pretty willful suspension of disbelief, but,
once the premise is accepted, the progression is logical and Albert quite disarming.
LaMarche's colored-pencil illustrations make the redheaded Albert a finicky but
expressive Ichabod with disarming eccentricities, and the cardinals are cute as the
dickens, with inquiring shiny black eyes and expectant, considering tilts of their
heads. This is sentimental and contrived but not unappealing, and, as morals go,
learning how to take the good with the bad is not an unworthy lesson. JMD
PAULSEN, 
GARY 
Guts: The True Stories behind Hatchet and the Brian
Books. 
Delacorte, 2001 
148p
ISBN 0-385-32650-5 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Curious fans wanting to know how closely incidents in Paulsen's own life are
reflected in the life of Brian, hero of Hatchet, etc. sparked this somewhat haphaz-
APRIL2001 
* 313
ard but ultimately engrossing deconstruction. Paulsen divides his book into six
chapters with jazzy titles such as "Heart Attacks, Plane Crashes and Flying" and
"Eating Eyeballs and Guts or Starving: The Fine Art of Wilderness Nutrition,"
and takes the reader on a leisurely but interesting tour of his memorable wilderness
adventures. Each chapter opens with a quote from one of the "Brian books" that
mirrors some incident in Paulsen's own life; interspersed with the Brian-related
anecdotes are additional personal anecdotes about hunting and wilderness experi-
ences along with bits of survival lore. Here and there Paulsen has his tongue firmly
in cheek, especially when he recalls his own na'vete as a beginning woodsman. He
also acknowledges that not everyone approves of hunting, and he is well aware of
the conflict between his love of nature and his love of the sport. This title rambles
more than the also autobiographical Woodsong (BCCB 10/90), and it lacks the
cohesion provided by that title's organization around Paulsen's first Iditarod.
Paulsen's tone is as intimate as a conversation around a campfire, however, and his
fans will be content. JMD
RIVERS, KAREN 
Waiting to Dive. Orca, 2001 
[128p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55143-159-9 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Ten-year-old Carly loves the water, and she's excited when summer swimming
lessons reveal extra talent that leads her to diving lessons. There's a social side, too,
since she's joined at the pool by her best friend, Montana, and finds a new friend
in another budding diver, Samantha. She's therefore excited about a weekend at
the family cabin with her friends, but events take a devastating turn when Mon-
tana dives into the water, hits her head, and breaks her back. Carly is overwhelmed:
she's worried about her hospitalized friend and she misses Montana at school, and
she's lost her confidence in diving. Carly's voice is plainspoken and credible, which
makes her turmoil touching and accessible (when leaving Montana's hospital room,
she thinks, "But the funny thing is, until she suggested it, it didn't occur to me that
I should feel bad. And now I do"). The subplot about Carly's resentment of her
stepsiblings and longing for her late father is tactfully interwoven with the main
story, and even Montana's accident is handled without melodrama (she regains
mobility with time). This is a skillfully understated chronicle of a girl's growth in
the face of adversity. DS
ROBBINS, KEN 
Thunder on the Plains: The Story of the American Buffalo; written
and illus. with photographs by Ken Robbins. 
Atheneum, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83025-4 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
In a straightforward, kid-friendly text, Robbins reviews the bison's turbulent his-
tory on the North American continent: arriving via an Asian-American land bridge,
migrating across the mountains, thriving on the plains as the revered "Tatonka" of
the Lakota, and narrowly surviving decimation by habitat destruction and over-
hunting. A manageable amount of the continuous text is rationed onto each gen-
erously illustrated spread. Robbins' photographs-majestic shots of broad plains
and snowcapped mountains, and dramatic closeups of the buffalo--display his
signature color-enhancement; they blend harmoniously with intelligently selected
period paintings and engravings and museum artifacts in a tidy, spacious layout.
Succinct coverage and prose well-suited for a readaloud make this an excellent
classroom choice; just make certain students have an opportunity to examine the
pictures. EB
314 
* THE BULLETIN
ROTH, SUSAN L. 
Happy Birthday Mr. Kang; written and illus. by Susan L.
Roth. 
National Geographic, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-7922-7723-6 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Sam's grandpa, Chinese immigrant Mr. Kang, has three wishes for his retirement:
"I want to read the New York Times every day. I want to paint poems every day.
And I want a bird, a hua mei, of my own." Mr. Kang's wishes come true, and Sam
accompanies him on his sunrise trips to Sara Delano Roosevelt Park, where he and
other elderly Chinese immigrants bring their bird cages and revel together in
birdsong. But Sam is troubled by the sight of the caged birds and convinces his
grandfather the bird should be free. Against his wife's wishes, Mr. Kang releases
the bird, only to find him on the railing when they return home. Roth clearly
implies that keeping a hua mei is a tradition of great importance within Mr. Kang's
community, but she never explains just what the tradition entails. Likewise, Mr.
Kang's concluding poem on the bittersweet experience of emigration is too tenu-
ously connected to the bird's escape and return for most young listeners to follow.
Roth's mixed-media collages are visually arresting, however-fanciful construc-
tions of cut paper, photographs, silk brocades, Chinese restaurant menus, woven
wooden slats, newspaper clippings and corrugated cardboard that coexist in vi-
brant harmony with bordered blocks of text in a bold font suggestive of hand
lettering. Even if cultural gaps are not successfully bridged, many listeners will
enjoy their field trip to a pocket of grace and calm in the big, noisy city. EB
SCRIMGER, RICHARD 
Bun Bun's Birthday; illus. by Gillian Johnson. 
Tundra,
2001 
[2 4p]
ISBN 0-88776-520-3 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
The title is the problem, as far as young Winifred is concerned: she's sorted out
that she's out of the limelight for every other birthday party, and since the last
party was for her brother, Eugene, she's convinced it's her turn; unfortunately, her
elementary grasp of sharing didn't factor in baby Bun Bun, since this birthday will
be Bun Bun's first. Winifred is bitterly disappointed at ceding the center of atten-
tion, but she perks up when her mother mentions that "no one remembers their
first birthday: "So I will remember Bun Bun's first birthday, but she won't ....
So it is really my party today, more than Bun Bun's." Though the text is a bit
lengthy for its youthful subject (and this doesn't have quite the pizzazz of Look's
Henry's First-Moon Birthday, BCCB 2/01), it's also charmingly individual, with a
fresh turn of phrase, a generous helping of appealing family details, and an original
look at the continuing dilemma of dethronement. Johnson's line-and-watercolor
art has some of the spiky personality of Amy Hest's work, but there's also a softness
in the blurred lines that adds character; the lively party double-spread, overflowing
cake and balloons, displays authentically untidy festivity. Whether they're com-
peting with their siblings for the limelight or not, youngsters will want to join in
the celebration. DS
SIERRA, JUDY 
Preschool to the Rescue; illus. by Will Hillenbrand. 
Gulliver/Har-
court, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-202035-7 
$15.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
A hungry mud puddle deceives an unwary pizza van into its gloppy grasp, and
that's only the start of its triumphs: when a police car comes to help the pizza van,
APRIL 2001 
* 315
it gets stuck fast too; a tow truck, backhoe, and fire engine each in turn come to
help and find themselves joining the puddle's captives. Then it's "preschool to the
rescue!," and the children dive in with a will and with a diverse collection of imple-
ments ("shovels and sand, and rocks and bricks, and rubber bands and Popsicle
sticks"); they free the now obviously toy vehicles and then stay to play in the mud
themselves. There's a pleasing rhythm both to individual lines of the text (there
are plenty ofslurpy sound effects ripe for performance) and to the cumulation, but
the internal rhymes encourage an expectation of verse that makes the unrhymed
lines a letdown; while the preschool heroism is satisfying (and it's a nice touch that
they tame the mud puddle by turning it into "mud pies and mud cakes and mud
muffins and mud cookies and mud pizzas"), it comes out of nowhere. Hillenbrand's
mixed-media art personifies the mud puddle effectively, giving it a gleeful glower;
while the preschool animal kids are cute, they lack the mud puddle's force of char-
acter. The double-spread romp in the puddle is still inviting, however, and the
jelly-bean colors of clothes and landscape offer a vivid contrast to the chocolatey
mud. Despite the flaws, this could make an entertaining pre-recess read on a wet
spring day. DS
SINGER, MARILYN 
Didi and Daddy on the Promenade; illus. by Marie-Louise
Gay. 
Clarion, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-04640-2 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-5 yrs
Preschooler Didi jumps on Daddy's bed on Sunday morning and demands to go
out. Out they go; Daddy says "'Didi, go slow!' But Didi says, 'No!' She's in a
hurry to get to the best place on earth. She's in a hurry to get to the Promenade."
Father and daughter walk along the Promenade, a sheltered park and walkway in
Brooklyn with a famous view of the Manhattan skyline. Far from being an inside
look at New York City book with a limited audience, this is a buoyant look at a
family's typical Sunday outing. Didi and Daddy talk, observe, describe, and inter-
act fully with one another in simple but effective language ("'Puppy!' says Didi.
'Little yellow puppy.' 'Dog!' says Daddy. 'Big black dog'") that echoes real child-
adult conversation. Parent and child have a grand old time: they listen to street
musicians, bark at the dogs, play at the playground and, finally, when a sudden
thunderstorm surprises them, race home through the rain. Gay's watercolor and
ink illustrations feature friendly people taking the air in a well-groomed city park.
The compositions are a little less delicate than her illustrations for the Stella books
(Stella, Star of the Sea, BCCB 5/99, and Stella, Queen of the Snow, 1/01), but they
capture the glee of a beautiful day that just happens to be in Brooklyn. The ending
will make listeners want to run out and play in the puddles: "Away they fly,
laughing and splashing up the best place on earth. Up the skippy, drippy, sparkly,
parkly, perfect Promenade." JMD
SPRINGER, NANCY 
I Am Morgan le Fay: A Tale from Camelot. Philomel,
2001 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-399-23451-9 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
In IAm Mordred (BCCB 6/98) Springer took the arch-villain of Arthurian legend
and gave him a complicated but understandable humanity. Here she attempts to
redeem another questionable denizen of Camelot, the sorceress Morgan le Fay.
316 
* THE BULLETIN
Springer opens directly into a crucially important scenario: the fathering of Arthur
on Morgan's mother, Igraine, by Uther Pendragon. After the birth of the future
king and his disappearance with Merlin, political machinations make it necessary
for Morgan and her sister Morgause to go into hiding with their nurse, Ongwynn.
Ongwynn recognizes Morgan's potential for sorcery, and she trains the curious,
fearless child to the best of her knowledge and ability. Morgan's magical and
moral development are the crux of her journey, and her choices regarding both
have lasting (literary) impact. Springer's Mordred was an adolescent boy in futile
search of his father, a tragic figure tormented by his origins and cornered by fate;
Morgan is a spiteful child jealous of her baby brother's hold on their mother's
attention, and this reductive motivation somewhat dissipates the impact of her
determination to destroy Arthur and Camelot. Still, Morgan's is an involving,
intriguing voice, and while much of her story requires at least some background in
Arthurian legend, there is enough action, romance, and revenge here to hold even
reluctant readers. JMD
STEWART, SARAH 
The Journey; illus. by David Small. 
Farrar, 2001 
[38p]
ISBN 0-374-33905-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
Hannah's Aunt Clara has given her the perfect birthday gift-the opportunity for
the young Amish girl to leave her quiet village for the first time and visit the big
city, Chicago. In the company of her mother and her mother's friend Maggie,
Hannah takes in all the sights, viewing the bustle from a skyscraper observation
deck and a river cruiser, visiting a department store, poking around in the aquarium
and cathedral and art museum; at night she commits the day's adventure onto the
pages of her diary. Words, however, capture only a fraction of her observations,
and it is Small's watercolors that cleverly manifest how Hannah assesses each ex-
otic new experience. Each spread that documents her diary entry is followed by a
wordless spread comparing some aspect of city life with her Amish farm. The
horse carriage near Buckingham Fountain reminds her of learning to manage the
buggy back home; the view from Sears Tower toward the Indiana steel mills recalls
the view of spreading fields and pastures from Aunt Clara's porch. Good humor
abounds as haughty mannequins gaze down their plaster noses at the simply garbed
trio who giggle at the very thought of donning fashionable get-ups, and there's
tender reverence as the adults admire towering cathedral vaults while Hannah imag-
ines neighbors huddled peacefully in their meeting house. Although there's an
undeniable logic problem concerning the unexplained premise of Amish women
on a week's lark in the city, no judgment is passed here on which life is proper;
readers are simply allowed to share with Hannah a satisfying Town Mouse/Coun-
try Mouse peek at life down the other end of the road. EB
TAYLOR, ALASTAIR 
Swollobog; written and illus. by Alastair Taylor. 
Houghton,
2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-04348-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
"Swollobog" is the moniker of a voracious canine, bestowed upon her by her young
mistress, who narrates this story. It's clear that Swollobog has an unstoppable
appetite ("She also likes carrots, yogurt, pizza, toenail clippings, and door handles"),
so it's not surprising that she runs into trouble when her family takes her to the
APRIL 2001 
* 317
fair. The nature of the trouble is somewhat startling, however: she downs a huge
helium balloon and floats away over the sea. Frightened but inventive, the family
ties a piece of peanut brittle to the tail of a kite, and when the airborne Swollobog
predictably snarfs up the candy the balloons pop and sends her plummeting; though
at first she sinks below the waves, she leaps right out of the water in response to
thoughts of cheese. The narrative is rather wordy, but the chatty informality, with
its dry humor ("she was still our Swollobog, and we were reasonably pleased to
have her back") has a definite charm. The tall tale of appetite is whimsical without
being cloying, and the food focus is a tasty touch. Taylor's illustrations are deli-
cious: his gouache figures have some of the solidity of Dan Yaccarino's creations,
but with their own angularity and motion, and Swollobog herself is an endearing
yet maddening dachshundesque being with a torpedolike muzzle (the better to
shoot down fleeing cheese, presumably). Spot art in skewed rectangles, speech in
and out of balloons, and zingy colors that accent or happily clash with Swollobog's
rich orangey-gold keep the energy high. Kids will delight in this dog story with a
difference. DS
THOMPSON, 
LAUREN 
One Riddle, One Answer; illus. by Linda S.
Wingerter. 
Scholastic, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-31335-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 7-10 yrs
The learned princess Aziza persuades her loving father to allow her to pose a riddle
in order to choose the man she should marry. Aziza's riddle confounds suitor after
suitor ("men young and old tried to solve the riddle. But none had the answer").
Finally, a young farmer, a lover of numbers like the princess, offers the mathemati-
cal solution. The two embrace their joined fates: "With this answer, you have
won my hand," says Aziza; "With this riddle, you have won my heart," Ahmed
replies. Thompson shapes her story very like a traditional folktale and draws on
motifs and images that will resonate with readers and storytellers familiar with
wise princesses and their search for suitably enlightened or at least clever spouses.
The author sets her tale in Persia, making Aziza the daughter of an indulgent
sultan. The story is not linked to any specific source, although the author's con-
cluding note discusses the complex calculations of Aziza's riddle and explains the
origin of mathematics in ancient Persia. Thompson's storytelling is simple and
elegant; her language is graceful and understated, the focus always on Aziza's abil-
ity to rise to the occasion. Wingerter's paintings feature the delicate details of
Persian miniatures; tiny blossoms and ornamented garments, bejeweled saddles
and decorated carpets add intricate and intriguing details to the airy compositions.
The palette leans toward soft, dusky hues of violet, blue, and red, and the charac-
ters possess a graceful animation. The resultant volume is a genuine marriage of
art and text that skillfully delivers a subtle tale. JMD
VANCE, SUSANNA 
Sights. 
Delacorte, 2001 
[224p]
ISBN 0-385-32761-7 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Despite years of abuse from her father, Baby Girl has always believed in herself,
content with her gift to see the future. When she is thirteen, she and her mother
run away from the violence, settling in the town of Cot ("Where Boys are Athletes
and Girls are Apricots"); there Baby Girl's faith in her own specialness dies as she
318 
* 
THE BULLETIN
begins to see herself through high-school-colored glasses. She eventually comes to
terms with her sturdy body and her sexuality ("It was like a hobby, finding out
what things interested my body"), and here as elsewhere it is not her mystical
powers but her clear-sighted realism that will draw readers into Baby Girl's story.
Full of characters in every sense of the word, this engaging novel is lightly dated
(set in the late 1950s, when Elvis was in the army) and clearly in the tradition of
stories about adolescent outsiders forming sustaining alliances. Readers who iden-
tify with Selda, a muscular mixed-race teen vigilante, will wish that she was invited
to partake more fully in the novel's happy ending, but they will also appreciate her
complexity and the way the novel's comic-book sense of poetic justice allows the
reader some distance from its hyper-realistic events (attempted murders, rape, ani-
mal cruelty) without trivializing them. Though much of the novel's closure comes
in a familiar male guise (boyfriend, stepfather, rich white patron), readers are in a
position to see these girls shape their own futures. FK
VANDE VELDE, VIVIAN 
Alison, Who WentAway. 
Houghton, 2001 
[208p]
ISBN 0-618-04585-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Susan, who's renamed herself Sibyl, is trying to pursue a normal fourteen-year-
old's life despite the shadow over her family: her older sister disappeared three
years ago, never to be heard from again. It's a near-miracle that Sibyl manages to
elicit maternal permission to take part in an extracurricular play (Sibyl's friend
Connie is determined to get Sibyl some coed contact outside of their all-girls'
school), and it's clear that Sibyl has her own shadows, since she still avoids telling
the truth about Alison to friends and teachers. Sibyl's time in the spotlight does
succeed in broadening her world and in connecting her with a nice and compatible
boy, but familial closure may be harder to achieve. The book's amiable style makes
Sibyl's narration eminently readable, and Vande Velde has a knack for normality
that serves as an effective counterpoint to the haunting background. In fact, that
haunting gets pushed too far into the background, and Sibyl's secrecy asks a bit too
much of readers; the larger story is packed into the last few pages (Alison's disap-
pearance followed increasing wildness, including solicitation of sex for money, and
her family feels she may have been a victim of a serial killer of prostitutes), and the
resolution isn't well grounded. This lacks the impact of works such as Thesman's
Calling the Swan (BCCB 11/00) or Cadnum's Zero at the Bone (9/96), but it none-
theless offers a sympathetic treatment of a dilemma of sisterly influence writ large.
DS
VAUGELADE, ANAIS 
The War; written and illus. by Anais Vaugelade; tr. by Marie-
Christine Rouffiac and Tom Streissguth. 
Carolrhoda, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 1-57505-562-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
First published in France, this fable tells of the war between the Reds and the
Blues, which "had lasted for so long that no one could remember why it had
begun." The ardent young prince of the Reds challenges Fabien, the anti-war
prince of the Blues, to a war-settling duel, but the Red prince is killed in a fall from
his horse just before the duel starts, so even that solution eludes the countries.
Fabien then tricks the two kings into becoming allies by claiming that he will lead
APRIL2001 
* 319
the forces of the King of the Yellows against both of them, and he finds a satisfying
pacifist home with the King of the Yellows while the Reds' and the Blues' waiting
forces on the battlefield develop into a community. The story is well-meaning and
less awkward than many moral tales, but it's still contrived, and it ducks some
questions that young readers will raise: why doesn't the death of the Red prince
suffice to end the war, why doesn't the warlike alliance of the Reds and the Blues
attack the Yellows themselves, and what happens when the Reds and the Blues
figure out that the Yellows aren't coming? The illustrations, however, are often
effectively moody, with tight, solid lines balanced by delicate washes of color, and
there are some strong compositions, particularly in the spreads depicting the three
kings' throne rooms, all austere halls dominated by the appropriate color. While
you're probably better off with the clarity of Ferdinand the Bull or Dr. Seuss' "The
North-Going Zax and the South-Going Zax," this could serve as a philosophical
discussion starter. DS
WALLACE, JOSEPH 
Big and Noisy Simon; illus. by Kevin O'Malley. 
Hyperion,
2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2450-6 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0575-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Likable Simon happens to be big and noisy, and sometimes that can be a bit
overwhelming, for Simon himself as well as for those around him. On a trip to
Africa with his wildlife photographer parents, Simon is noisier and bigger than
ever, and as a result he is exiled from the daily expeditions. A band of elephants
inspires him to even greater noisy efforts, until the night he sees the herd in the
moonlight, and "the only sound was the whisper of the tall grass brushing against
the elephant's sides as they moved slowly past." Simon has an epiphany-he realizes
he can decide when he is going to be big and noisy and when he is going to be
quiet. The writing here is unforced and sometimes vivid, but the story is built
around a contrived premise that generates little tension. O'Malley's vigorous mixed-
media illustrations feature an ebullient Simon, mouth open in a wide grin, romping
through the savanna in compositions that feature a sunny blue sky and golden
grasslands. The elephants are substantially depicted, all twisting sinew and moonlit
majesty. While the plot is overly convenient, this may be just the trick for those
kids who see themselves-or their friends-in Simon. JMD
WALLNER, ALEXANDRA 
Abigail Adams; written and illus. by Alexandra
Wallner. 
Holiday House, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1442-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
In this beginner biography, Wallner makes a sporting attempt to portray Adams
not just as the nation's second First Lady, but as a forward-thinking character of
historical import in her own right. It's a weighty task and, given the need of
supplying significant amounts of historical context to youngsters relatively unfa-
miliar with colonial politics and women's status during that period, she is only
partially successful. Abigail witnesses the events at Bunker Hill, providing descrip-
tions of the battle for her absent husband and, ultimately, General Washington;
she participates in boycotts; she urges her husband to "include [women] in the
320 
* THE BULLETIN
laws he was helping to write." Unfortunately, anecdotes concerning her activism
are often tucked amid dryly presented observations of family life and lost in the
shuffle of standard biographical detail. Nor is Wallner always clear in demonstrat-
ing how Adams made herself a driving force in her husband's career: "Abigail
believed that helping her husband was her most important job. She gave wonder-
ful dinner parties and talked about politics. Later, John was made ambassador to
England." Although short, stocky John Adams is annoyingly depicted with a stat-
ure equal to or surpassing his peers, Wallner's naively styled watercolor pictures
ably convey the domestic and political spheres in which Adams moved. A short
concluding note addresses Adams' legacy and directs readers to extant historical
sites. EB
WALSH, ALICE 
Heroes of Isle aux Morts; illus. by Geoff Butler. 
Tundra,
2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-88776-501-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 6-9 yrs
In July of 1832, the ship Despatch went aground off the shore of Newfoundland;
Anne Harvey, her fisherman father, and their dog Hairy Man rowed out as far as
they could in the raging storm, but it was clear they would never reach the ship to
bring off the 163 passengers aboard. Hairy Man was a prodigious swimmer,
however, and he paddled to the Despatch with a rope between his teeth so that they
could rig their end of a "breeches buoy" line and convey everyone safely to shore
above the lapping waves. Walsh bases her tale on the true story of the Harveys,
and the poignant image of a heroic dog in peril (perhaps even more than the
Despatch's peril) should entrance young listeners. The denouement, however, seems
a bit abrupt and graceless after the chills of the rescue scene ("One day the supply
ship came, and took the visitors away"). Butler handily conjures the mud-dark
skies, the roiling, swollen seas, and the rocky, foam-lashed coast, but his figure
drawing (of both man and beast) doesn't begin to approach the power of the
seascapes; thick strokes render the faces weirdly strained and misshapen. Large
pencil-sketched motifs that partially border the text vie awkwardly with dense,
murky paintings on facing pages. Despite the uninspiring visuals, kids too young
for Harlow's novel Star in the Storm (BCCB 3/00) may appreciate this chance at a
Newfie rescue saga. EB
WILKERSON, J. L. 
American Illustrator: Rose O'Neill. Acorn Books,
2001 
11 8p 
illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-9664470-6-9 
$9.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Although O'Neill's name may not ring a bell with most young readers, her cheru-
bic, androgynous little potbellied Kewpies might be familiar. But as Wilkerson
demonstrates in this smoothly written biography, there was much more substance
to O'Neill and her art than that bit of highly successful commercial fluff might
suggest. Through short chapters accessible and engaging enough to span the el-
ementary/middle school grades, O'Neill emerges as a pioneer among nineteenth-
century professional women, a witty social critic, and an aggressive marketer of her
own talent. Although Wilkerson fudges slightly on reconstructed conversations,
her account is generally balanced and credible; O'Neill's two failed marriages and
the range of critical appraisal of her artwork are handled with particular honesty
and dignity. Samples of her work are plentiful and well chosen, but one could
APRIL 2001 
* 321
wish they were more cleanly reproduced here. When the 2001 Kewpie postage
stamp makes its appearance, have this title on hand to reintroduce O'Neill as a
household word. EB
WILSON, 
JACQUELINE 
The Story of Tracy Beaker; illus. by Nick
Sharratt. 
Delacorte, 2001 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-72919-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Tracy Beaker is writing what her social worker calls "her own special book about
you," which ten-year-old Tracy takes to with a vengeance. She fills the pages with
her bossy, vivacious, determinedly cheerful account of her life since her mother
gave her up, including her two failed foster placements and her current life in a
children's home. Her constant writing and taste for fiction (unkindly termed lies
by her less imaginative acquaintances) catch the eye of a visiting author, Cam
(short for Camilla) Lawson, and the two develop a friendship that Tracy hopes
may lead to her finally finding a suitable foster home. Though the end is some-
what of a letdown-Tracy softens towards her archenemy, and her fate with Cam
is left up in the air-Tracy's spirited narration and energetic pursuit of her own
way are personable and realistic. Wilson gives effective hints about Tracy's sadder
side (under duress she gets bouts of "hay fever" that explain her watery eyes and
her lies about her mother's glorious success and imminent arrival are clearly self-
protective); since there are no illusions about Tracy being merely picturesquely
spunky-she's definitely a troublemaker-the insight into her vulnerability adds
important balance. Kids looking for a home are an enduringly popular subject,
and Tracy's a creditable addition to the category. Sharratt's thick-lined, tightly
controlled sketches add interest while remaining credible as Tracy's own drawings.
DS
WOOD, TED 
Bear Dogs: Canines with a Mission; written and illus. with photo-
graphs by Ted Wood. 
Walker, 2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8759-2 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8758-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
We've got books about dogs with all manner of jobs, but this may be a first: these
Karelian Bear Dogs are employed as bear deterrents under the banner "Partners for
Life," working with their owner/handler to discourage bears from hanging around
human-inhabited areas before the inquisitive bruins become dangerous and must
be destroyed. Wood focuses on two of the group's bear interventions, one involv-
ing a family of black bears and one some errant grizzlies, in Montana; he also
discusses the group's public education labor, both spontaneous and planned, wherein
their handler teaches people about good human habits that will reduce the likeli-
hood of bears being tempted into dangerous behavior. Though there are some
gaps in the information provided (it's not clear if overall the dogs have made a
difference, for instance) and the layout is stodgy and unimaginative, this is a fasci-
nating and original subject. The prick-eared black-and-white dogs are definitely
photogenic, and there's plenty of action in the shots. Dog lovers will enjoy this
novel look at canine achievement. There are appended guidelines on "How to
Keep a Good Bear Good" and the foundation's postal address, email address, and
URL are included. DS
322 
* THE BULLETIN
WORMELL, MARY 
Bernard the Angry Rooster; written and illus. by Mary
Wormell. 
Farrar, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-374-30670-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Bernard certainly acts like an angry rooster; he charges the chickens, chases the cat,
and pecks the dog's tail. Fellow barnyard critters ask Bernard what is bothering
him, but Bernard remains silent. Then he leaps on the pony's back, which prompts
the pony to kick and thereby send Bernard flying to the roof, from where he climbs
a nearby tree and shouts, "Cock-a-doodle-doo, now I'm higher than you." His
barnyard companions exclaim, "So that's what's the matter with Bernard," but
many young viewers may require adult elucidation before they understand that
Bernard's seemingly angry affronts were in fact attempts to climb up high. The
story is therefore somewhat confusing, and it's also disappointingly slight. The
crisp woodcut illustrations are attractive, though, showing rustic barnyard scenes
printed on a background of cream-colored paper. Wormell's animal figures are
outlined in rough black lines, and Bernard's avian form is depicted in saturated
black with pink and blue undertones in the printed textures of his feathers. De-
spite narrative glitches, Wormell's detailed images of farm-animal antics will likely
attract some young browsers, who may enjoy making up their own stories about
these barnyard denizens. KM
YOUNG, ED 
Monkey King; written and illus. by Ed Young. 
HarperCollins,
2001 
[38p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027950-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027919-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 7-10 yrs
Monkey King is the hero of the Chinese epicJourney to the West, an adventure tale
on the surface, but underneath the story of pilgrims on a quest for Enlightenment.
This necessarily highly abbreviated retelling is a stunningly realized visual tour de
force. The physical and magical strengths of Monkey are evoked in the powerful
curves and lines of his twisting, leaping body; the mystical elements of the tale are
reinforced by an impressive foldout illustration of Monkey trapped in Buddha's
great hand. Young's mixed-media collages-intense planes of color created with
assorted textures of handmade and other paper-provide a continuity not easily
found in the text. The source for this retelling is itself a fragmented adventure rife
with the sudden appearances and disappearances of a huge cast of characters. Young
states that "this adaptation attempts only to introduce the very beginning of this
classic tale," but even this small piece of the complex epic is sometimes difficult to
follow. Nonetheless, scraps of bright paper in compositions of power and author-
ity provide a visual feast, and the plot is action-packed, which should be more than
enough to hold the attention of readers beginning their own journeys. JMD
APRIL 2001 
* 323
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Birch, Carol. The Whole Story Handbook: Using Imagery to Complete the Story
Experience. August House, 2000. Paper ed. ISBN 0-87483-566-6; $12.95. 128p.
Birch, an accomplished storyteller, librarian, workshop leader, and coach, brings
her expertise to bear on the use of images and attitudes to "provide an antidote to
recitation and other formal presentational modes" in storytelling. A detailed in-
troduction provides both a frame of reference for the reader and an explanation of
the author's rationale. Birch's goal here is to model concrete tools for storytellers
to use to "restore sound-life force, spontaneity, chi-to stories fixed in the silence
of print." To that end, succinct but informative sections on working with text,
developing character, and evoking setting are interspersed with "prompts," guided
imagery questions provided by the author to help the individual teller discover
more precise means of expression for individual stories. Birch's advice for effective
adaptation from text to oral story is based on her own wide experience, and she
exhibits both wit and common sense; anecdotes, suggestions, and cautions are
forthrightly communicated. The author has the gift of specificity, expertly incor-
porating theory within concrete examples from specific tales. For those seeking
further information, excellent chapter notes and an extensive bibliography are in-
cluded. JMD
Hegel, Claudette. Newbery and Caldecott Trivia and More for Every Day of the
Year. Libraries Unlimited, 2000. Paper ed. ISBN 1-56308-830-4; $26.00. 167p.
Trivia can provide an engaging approach to literature, and Hegel provides a pack
of it in calendar form, each day offering three or four entries. Newbery and Calde-
cott tidbits are rife, but the book takes a broadly literary scope, including factoids
about other popular writers for adults and children. The entries are variable: there
are some name problems (Ed Emberley's name is misspelled) and vagueness prob-
lems (what "list of the 100 most influential books" includes Little LordFauntleroy?),
and the factuality of some "facts" is arguable (there's no evidence to support the
existence of a pre-Newbery Mother Goose in Boston, for instance). Much of the
trivia is quite entertaining, however: Daniel Pinkwater likes to vote for fictional
candidates in elections, there's a kid-catchable continuity error in Karen Ackerman's
Song and Dance Man, and Chris Van Allsburg's wife posed for the monkeys in
Jumanji; there are also plenty of literary birthdays included. You might want to
vet the material, but this collection of tidbits offers a multitude of use possibilities
ranging from contests to literary celebrations. Included are appendices listing
Newbery and Caldecott medalists and honor books, a list of references, a name
index, and a title index. DS
324 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Post, Arden DeVries. Celebrating Children's Choices: 25 Years of Children's Favor-
ite Books; by Arden DeVries Post with Marilyn Scott and Michelle Theberge. In-
ternational Reading Association, 2000. Paper ed. ISBN 0-87207-276-2; $23.95.
238p.
The Children's Choices project, sponsored by the International Reading Associa-
tion and the Children's Book Council, has been going strong for a quarter of a
century now, selecting 100 titles a year. Post et al. aren't listing the 2500 books (in
fact, there aren't even the expected prominent instructions for ordering the lists or
viewing them on the web) but instead are encouraging, explicitly and implicitly,
classroom use of those books. The opening section describes the project and offers
a detailed and research-based argument for the educational importance of children's
literature; then three sections explore curricular possibilities for young readers,
middle readers, and older readers, respectively. Each of those sections goes for
depth rather than breadth, focusing on only seven or eight books (over a signifi-
cant range of time, genre, and subject ) from the Children's Choices lists and
offering a multitude of curricular possibilities for each in considerable detail (dia-
grams, sample forms, etc. are included); the middle readers section includes a spe-
cial focus on Cinderella books and the older readers section offers a similar
concentration on Jean Fritz' historical writing. Even if professionals don't wish to
use the exact projects included (and there are so many they're sure to find some-
thing they like), suggestions here will be easily modified to suit individual pur-
poses and they'll be sure to spark other ideas. Sections conclude with a bibliography
and additional suggested books; a references section and a detailed index are in-
cluded. DS
APRIL 2001 
* 325
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Morris
African Americans: Myers
Amish-stories: Stewart
Amphibians-poetry: Florian
Animals-poetry: Florian
Animals-stories: Ahlberg The Snail;
Blackstone; Wormell
Archaeology: Berger
Art and artists: Wilkerson
Art and artists-stories: Baker
Asia-stories: Lipp
Aunts-fiction: Alvarez
Babies-stories: L'Engle
Babysitting-fiction: Child
Balloons-stories: Taylor
Bears: Wood
BIOGRAPHIES: Myers; Wallner;
Wilkerson
Biology: Manning
Birds-stories: Lipp; Napoli; Roth
Birthdays-stories: Scrimger
Bison: Robbins
Boxing: Myers
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Ahlberg
My; Alvarez; Child
Bullies-fiction: Crutcher
Butterflies: Ehlert
Caterpillars: Ehlert
Child abuse-fiction: Vance
China-folklore: Young
Chinese Americans-stories: Roth
Cities-stories: High
Crime and criminals-fiction: Klise;
Lawson; Vande Velde
Dating-fiction: Farrell
Death and dying-fiction: Ahlberg
My; DiCamillo; Mazer; Vande
Velde
Depression, the-fiction: Collins
Divorce-fiction: Alvarez
Dogs: Walsh; Wood
Dogs-stories: L'Engle; Taylor
Ecology: Robbins
Egypt, ancient: Berger
Ethics and values: Crutcher; Klise;
Koertge; Stewart; Vaugelade
Families-fiction: Mazer
Families-stories: Janowitz
FANTASY: Morris; Springer
Farms-stories: Blackstone; Wormell
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Collins
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Singer
Fathers and sons-stories: Judes
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Kimmel; Kindl; Young
Food and eating-stories: Doyle
Foster care-fiction: Wilson
Friendship-fiction: DiCamillo;
Edwards; Farrell; Rivers
Genetics: Jussim
Ghosts-fiction: Ahlberg My
Goblins-stories: Doyle
Gold Rush-fiction: Lawson
Grandfathers-stories: Lipp; Roth
Grandmothers-stories: Ahlberg The
Snail
Grandparents-fiction: Edwards
Health: Manning
HISTORICAL FICTION: Collins;
Gregory; Lawson; Vance
History, U.S.: Ashabranner; Atwell;
Robbins; Wallner; Walsh
History, U.S.-fiction: Gregory
326 
* 
THE BULLETIN
History, world: Berger
Hygiene: Manning
Jews-folklore: Kimmel
Journals-fiction: Gregory; Wilson
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Morris; Springer
Language arts: Cleary
Latinos-fiction: Alvarez
Latinos-poetry: Mora
Legends-fiction: Springer
Magic-fiction: Kindl; Morris;
Springer
Mathematics-stories: Thompson
Monkeys-stories: Young
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Mazer; Springer; Vance
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Stewart
Mothers and sons-fiction: Lawson
Mothers and sons-stories: Janowitz
Mothers-fiction: Alvarez
Mothers-poetry: Mora
Mud-stories: Sierra
Mummies: Berger
Music and musicians-stories:
Hoberman
Nature study: Florian; Robbins
Noise-stories: Wallace
Orphans-fiction: Ahlberg My;
Almond; Mazer
Peer pressure-stories: McEwan
Persia-stories: Thompson
POETRY: Florian; Koertge; Lewis;
Mora
Poverty-stories: Lipp
Precognition-fiction: Vance
Presidents: Ashabranner
Princes-fiction: Kindl
Princes-stories: Vaugelade
Princesses-stories: Thompson
Puddles-stories: Sierra
Reading aloud: Alvarez; Florian;
Lewis; Mora
Reading, easy: Wallner; Walsh
Reading, reluctant: Paulsen
Reptiles-poetry: Florian
Revolutionary War-fiction: Gregory
RHYMING STORIES: Hoberman
Roosters-stories: Wormell
School-fiction: Borden; Crutcher;
Edwards; Koertge
School-poetry: Koertge
School-stories: McEwan
Science: Ehlert; Florian; Robbins
Siblings: Jussim
Sisters-fiction: Vande Velde
Sisters-stories: Scrimger
Skateboarding-stories: McEwan
Snails-stories: Ahlberg The Snail
Social studies: Atwell
South, the-fiction: DiCamillo
Sports: Myers; Rivers
Storytime: Baker; Blackstone; Doyle;
Ehlert; High; Hoberman;
Janowitz; Sierra; Singer; Taylor;
Wallace
Supernatural, the-fiction: Collins;
Vance
SURVIVAL STORIES: Paulsen
Swimming-fiction: Rivers
TALL TALES: Taylor
Tigers-fiction: DiCamillo
Trials-fiction: Klise
Trucks-stories: Sierra
Twins: Jussim
Uncles-fiction: Child
Urban life-stories: High
Violence-poetry: Koertge
Voyages and travel-stories: Stewart
Voyages and travel: Singer; Walsh
War-stories: Vaugelade
Weaving-stories: Kimmel
Wolves-stories: Judes
Women's studies: Wallner;
Wilkerson
Writers and writing-fiction: Borden;
Wilson
Yukon-fiction: Lawson
Als 
Avilbl 
frmh
ISBN 0-87845-105-6;
Number 39; 143 pages;
paper; $21.95*
STORY: FROM FIREPLACE TO CYBERSPACE
Connecting Children and Narrative
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE, JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINE JENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget that
children are not simply passive receptacles for whatever
treasure or trash the adult world throws at them but are
lively agents who are continually interacting with their
environment. Children actively create meaning as read-
ers, viewers, and listeners. The 3 9t' Allerton Park Insti-
tute papers emphasize the critical need to connect chil-
dren and narrative as a way to affect their development
as listeners, readers, viewers, and evaluators of litera-
ture-and information in all forms.
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin Storytelling Review contains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use
44~4 4
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages;
paper; $14.95*
S,, I ld ,)l (1(1 ý I (1: 
1, 1 S P t 11) 
11(-: 
11 i(,l I, 
t -t -I(C, R (,(ý] I I ',I ) 3M 1'.
('182(). 111-w ammil rctItIll,,dý \ i,:t, 
ýIld, 
Ind dl(dý,
pnlhk I() 111ý I 
(li
(o lm I-L]1)1w :ltiý)ilý (%Ill 1), (,I)I1IIIl`,(1 h \ 
1'' 1111 
.111
dIL- 
(w ('111 hL IcCL-,_d't1 I)III. \\101) yt,: 11111):
1,11(, j- , \ () I '" I(O t 
\\ (I'm III, ý "'I'd "' ,I ý III, 
tltl
ý I I'll t 10 1 
'Id ill''ll 
it 
III lilt 
III), 
-
I, I
I 
t
Keen un 
each~ing
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
/~""`~"···"~--------_~.___
"--~·~:
one-year, subscription
(8 issues) only $19.77*
7 
SPECTAL OFFER*
ýC)utside US add $10 
,stc9e.
Cov 
er pric e $4 50
Press
Samir
Yolinatanl
byI
~Danllar 
Carn
Yai 
Lo 
;tana
Age B 
10pae
0-3- 154 
$15~.95nts::-
The
FIVE OWLS
A publication for readers personally and professionally
involved in children's literature.
THE FIVE OWLS is a bimonthly
publication devoted to children's
literature, bringing together many
of today's finest books with writers
whose contributions are shaping the
future of children's books. A yearly
bscription is available for $35.00.
THE FIVE OWLS for Parents
Schools, libraries and other institutions that have a subscription
to the magazine can receive free quantities of THE FIVE OWLS for
Parents-it's short on advertising and long on book picks,
parenting information, and child development content that
is of real value to families.
For more information,
call 612-377-2004
or visit www.fiveowls.com
Multrtion by Hlary Knightfrom Eloie (Simon and Schuster, 
1955)
;L FANTAS
~DAVID 
CLIEM]EN
ate young
of careful rn
* "A
·Bx :;:·,·i~B
*a~~
Univers
1325 Sc
Champ
U.S.A.
~RN
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2000 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age, or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccbl
2. You will be asked for a username and password, both of which are set
as the four- or five-digit number printed in the upper left-hand corner
of the mailing label on your print copy. When entering, do not
include the letter at the end of this number sequence.
3. The first time you log in, you will be required to change your pass-
word to something other than your username.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only
individual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions. Look for
details later this year.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at our homepage: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
i~J~a~
Ls
NIL
You may now acces
and password.
7-he Bulletin Online i
1998-2000 voiume
The online version ;
database by author,
To access The Bullet
I. Go to http:llwm
2. You will be askec
as the four- or f
of the mailing la
include the le~
3. The first time ya
word to someth
Remember, The Bull
individual print subs
access, so please do
expand The Bulletin
electronic subscript
details later this yea
Non-subscribers ca
Children's Books at o
please e-mail any fec
0008-9036(200104)54:8; 1 -E
iividualized username
,ers, and includes the
they are published.
t issue or the entire
both of which are set
upper left-hand corner
!ntering, do not
er sequence.
I change your pass-
ubiic use; only
bers' staff are granted
'Ve are working to
,re create broader
nstitutions. Look for
ofthe Center for
Ic.edu/ouboff/bccb/
ilexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
,~·~5i"i ~:
j
