T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
September 2006
Vol. 60   No. 1
With this partnership, the Bulletin also becomes a part of Project Muse®, which
makes journals available electronically to their institutional subscribers.
Some Bulletin subscribers may already participate in Project Muse®; eli-
gible subscribers not currently participating in Muse may wish to investigate
one of their many collection packages or to acquire a single-title subscrip-
tion to the Bulletin for electronic-only or combined print-electronic edi-
tions. Complete information about Project Muse® subscriptions can be
found at their website, <http://muse.jhu.edu>.
In light of the Project Muse® participation, we will be phasing out the
Bulletin Online, which has been available free to all our print subscrib-
ers, after the 2005–2006 volume year. It is our hope that this may simply
be a temporary hiatus, since we would like very much to make a powerful
and easy-to-use database of past and present reviews available in the future
in addition to providing reviews through Project Muse®, and we are even
now discussing ways to support such an enterprise. In the meantime, sub-
scribers will be able to access the Bulletin electronically through our online
database with their current login and password until August 2006, or
through a subscription from Project Muse®.
Subscribers:
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books is
now produced in partnership with the Johns Hopkins
University Press.
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
September 2006
Vol. 60 No. 1
3 
 The Big PicTure
 
 Pirate Bob by Kathryn Lasky; illus. by David Clark
4 
 new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
6 
 • Jim Thorpe: Original All-American  by Joseph Bruchac
13  • Day of the Scarab  by Catherine Fisher
38  • Team Moon: How 400,000 People Landed Apollo 11 on the Moon by  
 
 Catherine Thimmesh
40  • Bad Girls, Bad Girls: Whatcha Gonna Do?  by Cynthia Voigt
44  • Flotsam  illus. by David Wiesner
47  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
48  suBjeCt And use Index
2 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Loretta Gaffney, Reviewer (LG)
Maggie Hommel, Reviewer (MH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann
Melissa Zilic
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each 
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add 
$12.10 per subscription for postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $8.25. Single copy rate: 
$5.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. 
Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 
06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All 
notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send 
address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University 
Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2006 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by David Clark from Pirate Bob ©2006. Used by permission of Charlesbridge 
Publishing, Inc..
SepTemBer 2006 • 3
the BIg PICture
Pirate Bob
by Kathryn Lasky; illustrated by David Clark
Isn’t piracy fun! Every ship’s a happy ship as it trolls for easy pickings. There’s loot 
to bury, hornpipes to dance, a wisecracking parrot for amusement, and a loyal mate 
to braid and tar your pigtail. By gosh, even the Roger is Jolly. At least, that’s the 
way it’s portrayed in picture books—from Long’s How I Became a Pirate (BCCB 
1/04) to McNaughton’s Captain Abdul’s Little Treasure (reviewed below)—and 
underscored in toyland from Legos to party gear. Pirates packaged for the primary 
set are bumptious ragamuffins who, together with Wild West gunslingers and 
black-visored medieval knights, are rarely accorded the gravitas due to outlaws who 
wield their weaponry with malicious intent. Lasky and Clark fully understand the 
comic allure of this oeuvre and join willingly in its traditions, but they also gently 
suggest that buccaneering may not play out in real life quite as merrily as it does 
in paper and plastic. 
Meet Pirate Bob, a seasoned hand aboard the Blackbird. More properly, 
meet Pirate Bob’s nose, a truly riveting entity that spans the width of the opening 
page and sports a scar that runs from tip to ear. That scar is the direct result of greed 
and was acquired at the edge of a Spanish cutlass; it itches to alert Bob when gold 
or treasure is nearby, but it also aches to remind him of the occupational hazards of 
his calling. Bob’s best friend, Yellow Jack, is a little worse for wear himself, having 
turned “the color of a very pale lemon” from scurvy. They’re as close as buddies can 
be, but “having a best friend on a pirate ship can be complicated”—since they’re 
both thieves, trust isn’t possible. Yellow Jack worries that Bob only likes him for 
his money, and Bob can’t help but wonder how soon Yellow Jack will succumb to 
his disease and leave his stash behind. When the British galleon Concordia crosses 
their path, Bob, Jack, and their crewmates terrify her, board her, and relieve her 
of her cargo, carrying our their specific tasks (Bob’s adept at slicing the steering 
cable; Yellow Jack’s an old hand at spiking cannon) with workmanlike precision. 
But when night closes over a good day’s labor and the crew revels in its ill-gotten 
booty, Pirate Bob is pricked with unease—not so much a guilty conscience as a 
vague sense that “he should feel happier.” Yellow Jack has more loot than he does, 
the trade itself is risky (“you could almost get your nose cut off,” and in the worst 
event, “you might be hunted down, captured, and hanged”). He brushes off these 
dark thoughts with a resolution to just acquire a few more pounds of loot and retire 
from the business. “Then, Bob tells himself, I’ll be happy . . . I think.”
While Pirate Bob privately muses over these practical concerns, no casual 
observer could discern his misgivings from the goofy game face he maintains in 
Clark’s rambunctious watercolor renderings. Bob, his diminutive captain (featured 
with parakeet Elaine on our cover), and the entire shipful of international zanies 
4 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
are everything cartoon pirates should be—comically bug- or shifty-eyed, raggedy, 
hirsute, and abounding in energy. Their victims aboard the Concordia are likewise 
as terrified and ineffectual as expected, with pasty-faced sailors huddling behind 
their pompous, bewigged captain, whose nose sits just inside the barrel of the 
Blackbird’s captain’s pistol, while Elaine-the-bird fixes him with an angry scowl. 
But alternating with the more vividly hued pandemonium of pirates in action are 
a pair of eerier spreads in which Blackbird sits stealthily with furled sails under a 
rogue’s moon, awaiting its hapless quarry, and then, with patched sails straining, 
bird-of-prey figurehead threatening, and cannon poised to fire a warning shot over 
the bow, swoops down upon the slower Concordia. Nobody wants to be on the 
receiving end of this crew’s grappling hooks, cartoonish though they may be.
Lasky and Clark leave their giggling listeners with license—even bless-
ing—to continue playing pirate. But just beneath the vaudevillian swordplay and 
carousing lurks the notion that there’s hard work and skill involved in taking a 
ship, and the gnawing suggestion that imperiling your health, sacrificing friend-
ship, and dodging the law might be a price too high to pay for a disappointing 
box of bling. Clash those plastic cutlasses, by all means, but if a listing appears for 
employment under the black flag, perhaps you should consult with your career 
counselor, lawyer, and Mom and Dad before signing the Articles. (See review, p. 
22, for publication information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer 
ABrAhAms, PeTer Behind the Curtain: An Echo Falls Mystery. Geringer/Harp-
erCollins, 2006  346p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-073705-0 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-073704-2 $15.99 
R* Gr. 6-9
After her involvement in the Cracked-Up Katie case (Down the Rabbit Hole, BCCB 
4/05), Ingrid knows that things are often more complicated than they seem. The 
pimples that showed up on her brother Ty’s newly muscled back at the end of the 
last book are getting worse, as is his attitude, and Ingrid suspects that something 
is amiss. As a detective, though, she is thoughtful rather than aggressive, almost 
reluctant to draw conclusions that would shake up her world. That same reluctance 
applies to her probing of her father’s and her grandfather’s situations—she under-
stands vaguely that her dad’s job is being threatened by a newly hired vice president 
in charge of development and that someone is again trying to force Grampy to sell 
his farm, but she doesn’t push or dig other than to ask a few questions that they 
aren’t willing to answer. As in the previous book, Ingrid has some close shaves with 
some very violent people; the two mysteries—Ty’s steroid use and her father’s new 
rival—touch Ingrid without touching each other, complicating the ability of Chief 
Strade, Ingrid’s police ally, to solve either case. Ingrid’s wry wit and precise reasoning 
SepTemBer 2006 • 5
once again draw readers into close connection with an active and engaging mind, 
reinforcing her solid appeal as a character. Abrahams is bravely wise in drawing his 
adults as well: Ingrid’s father is allowed to be as snappish, sullen, and bullheaded as 
a man with stress at work and teenagers starting to cause trouble is likely to be—no 
platitudes or heroic patience and understanding here. Chief Strade continues as an 
able partner for Ingrid, shrewd yet circumspect, trusting her veracity even when 
evidence points away from it, all the while giving Joey, his son who’s crushing on 
Ingrid, subtle instruction in gentlemanly behavior and courtship. Fans will relish 
the continued adventure while readers new to Echo Falls will find the substantial 
appeal here reason enough to go back for the first in the series.  KC 
Almond, dAvid Clay. Delacorte, 2006 247p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90208-5 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73171-X $15.95 
Ad Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Davie seems content with his role as a follower: his best friend 
talks him into stealing communion wine, his first romance develops only after the 
girl takes the lead, and he generally obeys his parents without question. Davie’s 
natural inclination to be led is noticed and exploited by the new boy in town, 
Stephen Rose, who draws Davie into a scheme to create a clay monster. Davie is 
troubled and uncertain about their creation; he’s seen the monster exhibit signs of 
life, but that impression could have been a result of Stephen Rose’s honed hypnotic 
skill. The death of the local bully leaves Davie wondering: did the monster actually 
become sentient and kill the young man, did Stephen Rose play an active role in the 
death, or was it, as the police have decided, an accident? Unfortunately, ambiguity 
overwhelms resolution in this novel; it is never clear whether Davie is knowingly 
involved with Stephen Rose’s sinister plans, if he is simply being tricked, or if he 
is, as Stephen claims, as much Stephen’s creature as the clay man. This element 
of uncertainty is frustrating rather than interestingly ambiguous; Davie’s naïveté 
is beyond the innocence suited to a small British provincial town of the 1960s, 
rendering him so complacent and passive as to be an unsympathetic protagonist. 
Davie’s unwillingness to control his life imbalances the story, undercutting the 
intriguing bits of mystery surrounding Stephen Rose. Almond nevertheless spins 
a moody and foreboding tale, offering arresting glimpses into the labyrinth of hu-
man nature. Whether or not the clay monster is real, the presence of and response 
to real-world cruelty is a powerful topic, and this book is a haunting exploration 
of evil in various forms.  AS
BenneTT, veronicA Angelmonster. Candlewick, 2006 236p
ISBN 0-7636-2994-4 $15.99 
Ad Gr. 7-10
It’s 1814, and Mary and her sister Jane are chafing at the confines of their shabby 
genteel life. They long to embark on romance, preferably with a poet, and Mary 
gets her wish when a beautiful young man enters her father’s bookshop. Mary and 
the married Percy Shelley set London on its ear by eloping with Jane in tow; Jane 
soon changes her name to Claire and attempts to snare a poet for herself, eventu-
ally giving birth to Lord Byron’s daughter and having an affair with Shelley. The 
novel documents the loss of three of Mary’s four children, Shelley’s increasing 
dependence on laudanum, the suicides of Mary’s sister and Shelley’s pregnant wife, 
Mary’s near-fatal miscarriage, and the fateful sea voyage that cost Shelley his life. 
In this historical fiction, Bennett plays fast, loose, and selectively with the facts, 
6 • The BulleTin
often, oddly, to her story’s detriment: why does the book delay Mary’s writing of 
Frankenstein until she’s twenty-three rather than giving her the juicy and accurate 
role of gifted teen author? Instead, the book sticks to Mary’s lurid dreams and the 
emotional rollercoaster the three rode during their time together. The narrative’s 
sharp focus on Mary’s inner life nonetheless results in a complex and compelling 
psychological portrait of a young woman ahead of her time, and there’s certainly 
plenty of juicy eventfulness in her story. Notes explain some of the alterations of 
history, and if readers aren’t too picky about their facts, the tabloid-worthy tale of 
the lives of these nineteenth-century Brad-and-Angelina equivalents will hold some 
interest for the melodramatically inclined.  KC
BrAdmAn, Tony, ed. My Dad’s a Punk. Kingfisher, 2006 271p
Paper ed. ISBN0-7534-5870-5 $7.95 
R Gr. 5-8
With writers from Britain, Canada, Australia, and the U.S. (including notables 
such as Ron Koertge and Tim Wynne-Jones), these twelve stories about boys and 
their fathers take readers to places far away from wherever they sit, from tiny cab-
ins in remote Canadian towns, to “halfway between Nowhere and Nowhere Else, 
Arizona,” to a suburban landscape of the future, to the inside of a tank during 
World War II. There they encounter fathers—a failed magician, a straitlaced soldier, 
a blockade-running sailor, a salesman who is too busy for his son, and a doctor 
and punk rocker whose sons wish their fathers were too busy for them. Many of 
the fathers are divorced from the mothers, most are white, some are dead, some 
gay, some angry, some heroic, some embarrassing, but all forge loving, ultimately 
supportive relationships with their sons. Indeed, despite the provocative-sounding 
title, the stories contained here are by turns funny, grim, and warm-hearted but 
never angry, edgy, or wrenching; the punk dad is in fact a guy who has spiky hair 
and a fondness for the Pogues and who plays in a band called “Bucket of Snot.” 
“You get used to it,” says the narrator of his story, and indeed that seems to be the 
reigning wisdom of all of these stories: dads, no matter what their weirdnesses and 
hang-ups are, are people you get used to, people who are good to have around, 
even if you have to work hard to understand and even protect them from your 
own critical judgments. Readers looking for something harsher or with more grit 
will have to look elsewhere, but these are solid stories with high-interest plots and 
mostly feel-good resolutions, just right for the audience.  KC
BruchAc, JosePh Jim Thorpe: Original All-American. Dial/Walden Media, 
2006 277p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8037-3118-3 $16.99 
R* Gr. 6-10
In Bruchac’s dynamic fictionalized autobiography of superstar athlete Jim Thorpe, 
a Native American from the Sac and Fox tribe, a couple of hundred pages zip by 
like a Thorpe ninety-yard touchdown run. Thorpe “narrates” his own tale here, and 
although a reader might briefly ponder whether his storytelling voice is accurate, it 
certainly is a convincing match with the handsome, grinning, ever so slightly cocky 
portrait on the cover. The narrative style demands a bit of reader sophistication to 
understand that this is not straight autobiography, but it allows Bruchac to speculate 
on Thorpe’s emotional life in a thoroughly engaging, non-pedantic manner. Readers 
hear Thorpe’s assessment of his Carlisle schooling (“there was nowhere else in the 
world I’d ever love or hate as much”), his impatient resentment when left on the 
bench for much of Carlisle’s 1907 football glory season, his commentary on media 
SepTemBer 2006 • 7
promotion (“Making me out to be some kind of superhuman savage made me 
scarier to our opponents”), and his rueful memory of being pressured into falsely 
confessing he had played pro sports without his school’s permission or knowledge. 
The revocation of Thorpe’s Olympic medals, an issue that cast a pall over much of 
his ensuing career, comes to light here not as an unfortunate discrete episode but as 
the inevitable collision of a school system that encouraged paid summer “outings,” 
a baseball system that encouraged short-term semipro play, and plain old publicity 
pandering and jealousy. Short chapters and a sprinkling of photographs keep the 
reading easy, and middle-schoolers seeking a thought-provoking look at Indian 
issues and those in search of a rousing good sports bio will be equally gratified. An 
annotated selected bibliography is appended.  EB
Buckley-Archer, lindA Gideon the Cutpurse. Simon, 2006 404p
ISBN 1-4169-1525-7 $17.95 
Ad Gr. 5-8
The first installment of the planned Gideon Trilogy introduces Peter Schock, cur-
rently sparring with his neglectful father for a bit of face time, and Kate Dyer, a 
friend of a friend whom Peter has just met. They need to bond quickly, since on a 
trip to Kate’s father’s workplace, the children have an unfortunate run-in with an 
antigravity machine and are transported back to 1763. Gideon, a reformed thief 
who is still in the thrall of a nobleman of questionable character, cannot understand 
the concept of time travel, but there’s no denying the evidence before his eyes. He 
offers to help the children make their way to London to retrieve the machine that 
is their only way back and which was promptly purloined by the heartless, devious 
Tar Man. Gideon’s current employers, a kindly gentry family, are remarkably quick 
to assist the pair as well, and Peter and Kate’s subsequent adventures on the road to 
London comprise expected complications ranging from encounters with highway-
men, flea-infested lodgings, bad food, worse smells, and uncomfortable clothing, 
to anxieties about returning home and pursuit by the Tar Man and his henchmen. 
The plot runs along with considerable predictability, but the eighteenth-century 
episodes are tidily drawn, the twenty-first century efforts to recover the children 
are engrossing, and the macabre backstory to the dastardly Tar Man is worth the 
price of admission. Gideon himself is benign but bland, and readers may prefer to 
have met him in his cutpurse days; the Tar Man, however, is deliciously nasty, and 
as the conclusion of this volume sends the Tar Man forward into our own time, 
the sequel may well outshine the original.  EB
BunTing, eve Pop’s Bridge; illus. by C. F. Payne. Harcourt, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-15-204773-5 $17.00 
R 5-8 yrs
Robert couldn’t be more proud of his father, who is a skywalker, a high-iron man 
working on the cables on the Golden Gate Bridge. Although he keeps most of his 
hubris private, he’s not above thinking that his friend Charlie Shu’s father is of a 
lesser order, painting the metal from a safe perch on a scaffold; in one of his pet-
tier moods, Robert even squirrels away one piece of a Golden Gate Bridge puzzle 
(prospective view) he’s working with Charlie so that Pop can complete the puzzle 
when he completes the bridge. However, one day while the boys are watching the 
construction progress through binoculars, a scaffold gives way and workers plunge 
into the bay; Charlie is beside himself until they locate Mr. Shu still at his post, and 
that night a much-shaken Robert reassesses the relative importance of his father 
within the grand scheme of the perilous project. When the two families celebrate 
8 • The BulleTin
together on the night of the bridge’s opening, Robert cuts the last puzzle piece in 
half and the two dads take equal credit for the Golden Gate’s completion. Once 
again, Bunting adroitly brings a serious, sweeping tale down to kid level, with 
silky-smooth narration and a keen eye for engrossing background details. And once 
again, as in The Wall (BCCB 7/90) and Smoky Night (BCCB 3/94), she respects 
the thoughtful epiphanies with which children are visited. Payne, whose goofily 
exaggerated figures have graced such farcical enterprises as Casey at the Bat (BCCB 
3/85), deploys his signature style to capture the civic excitement but respectfully 
ratchets down the humor in quieter, more contemplative moments. This bridge 
stands sturdily on its own, or pair it with the hoopla surrounding its East Coast 
cousin in Prince’s Twenty-One Elephants and Still Standing (BCCB 10/05). An 
historical note is appended.  EB
cárdenAs, TeresA Letters to My Mother; tr. by David Unger. Groundwood, 
2006 103p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88899-720-5 $15.95 
Ad Gr. 6-9
When her mother dies, the nameless narrator, a ten-year-old Afro-Cuban girl, moves 
in with her aunt, grandmother, and cousins; there she’s scorned and abused, the 
black family internalizing the racial prejudice in contemporary Cuba and particu-
larly taunting her for her African features. She tells of her life in letters she writes 
to her much-missed mother, letters that remind her of happier times and help her 
withstand the family’s antagonism. Though the letters are brief and intermittent, 
they document an eventful five-year period, during which the narrator’s cousin Lilita 
overcomes a serious medical problem, Tía Catalina’s boyfriend sexually molests Lilita 
and gets Tía Catalina pregnant before getting kicked out, and Grandma reveals 
our narrator’s absent father’s identity. This import, an award-winner in Cuba for 
its groundbreaking candor about Cuban culture and racism, offers a penetrating 
look at life in a different part of the Americas; racism is so thorough-going that 
the narrator’s family automatically considers themselves the inferiors of Grandma’s 
white employers, and folklore is often the narrator’s only source of medical help 
or information. The narrator’s consequent naïveté is initially believable, but her 
unchanging voice over a five-year span is implausible. Additionally, the snapshot 
effect of the letters makes it hard to engage with the protagonist or even follow 
some narrative threads, and the conclusion—she and her cousin set out happily to 
find their father—is strangely optimistic in light of both the book’s tone and their 
father’s family history. Nonetheless the subdued text is sometimes all the more 
plaintive for its understatement, and it’s an eye-opening picture of a country little 
represented in young people’s literature. Even into high school, this may especially 
draw reluctant or struggling readers who will enjoy the book for its uncomplicated 
vocabulary, short chapters, and straightforward plotline. A glossary of Cuban terms 
is appended.  CW
cArTer, Alden r. Love, Football, and Other Contact Sports. Holiday House, 
2006 261p
ISBN 0-8234-1975-4 $16.95 
Ad Gr. 5-8
To identify the polar opposite of Robert Lipsyte’s grim take on high-school football 
(Raiders Night, reviewed below), look no further than Carter’s interrelated short 
stories set in fictional Argyle High in Wisconsin. Players and their girlfriends from 
the ensemble cast take turns narrating episodes over three years, and no prob-
SepTemBer 2006 • 9
lem—from alcoholic fathers and mentally challenged cousins to required service 
projects and looming academic probation—is too big to be solved or mitigated in 
under twenty-five optimistic pages. Steroids? These guys bulk up at the local pizza 
parlor after the games. Sex? Squeaky-clean girlfriends from the school newspaper 
and pep squad keep their guys civilized and reward their good behavior with chaste 
kisses. Dirty secrets? Well, Donny does kind of lie about those Lithuanian fried 
pig brains that were actually pasta. The abundance of sunshine herein tends to 
bake all the tales an even tan, and the unremitting can-do attitude probably won’t 
convince most middle schoolers. Even the heavies are lightweight: “We don’t want 
any trouble with you. But squealing ain’t never cool. We were just having a little 
fun, and now that Howie kid’s got us in serious crap.” There’s considerable fodder 
here for light-hearted classroom readalouds, though, and the opening piece, “A 
Girl’s Guide to Football Players,” is a hoot and a half. This title’s a second-stringer, 
but it might earn a little time out on the field.  EB
chodos-irvine, mArgAreT Best Best Friends; written and illus. by Margaret 
Chodos-Irvine. Harcourt, 2006 40p
ISBN 0-15-205694-7 $16.00 
R 3-6 yrs
Mary and Clare share the intimacy of preschoolers who have found that certain 
someone who is just alike enough and just different enough to form a perfect 
complement. Clutching matching teddy bears of different hues, they move through 
their days together in uninterrupted harmony. When the special attention Mary 
receives as birthday girl begins to chafe on Clare, however, jealousy ripens into 
mean-spiritedness and harsh words, causing a breakup that lasts until after naptime; 
fortunately, Clare draws a picture for Mary as a peace offering, and all is forgiven. 
The simple familiarity of a tiff between friends achieves eloquent expression in 
Chodos-Irvine’s thoughtful compositions. Using various print-making techniques, 
she blocks out a multicultural cast of chunky preschoolers, taking care to set Mary 
and Clare in mirrored poses as their conflict escalates and then again as it is resolved. 
Color becomes a metaphor for separate identity melding into togetherness as Mary’s 
signature pink and Clare’s yellow combine in a particularly effective spread featuring 
Clare’s conciliatory drawing on the verso and the girls in various postures of working 
things out on the recto. This is a gently effective portrayal of what happens when 
sugar and spice devolves into sugar and spite, and audiences will warm to its firm 
faith that best best friends can make everything nice again.  KC 
clemenTs, Andrew Room One: A Mystery or Two; illus. by Chris Blair. Simon, 
2006 162p
ISBN 0-689-86686-0 $15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Sixth-grader Ted Hammond loves to read mysteries, so he’s intrigued when he 
happens on a real-life one: April, a girl his own age, is hiding with her mother 
and younger brother in an abandoned house outside their shrinking Nebraskan 
town. Anxious to do the right thing, Ted brings the family food and supplies and 
promises not to tell anyone they are hiding. When confronted by his teacher, Mrs. 
Mitchell, Ted decides to take her into his confidence; the next day, April and her 
family disappear. Now Ted must decide whether or not he can continue to trust 
his teacher and try to solve the mystery of what happened to the family in hiding. 
All the elements Clements fans have come to expect are here, including a deft hand 
with the school story, realistically complicated relationships between students and 
10 • The BulleTin
teachers, and good-hearted and sincere main characters. The added elements of 
mystery and danger combined with the skillful evocation of small-town life make 
this a noteworthy addition to Clements’ oeuvre, and the realistic bleakness of a Great 
Plains town on the decline is softened with quirky details. The somewhat predict-
able emphasis on good hearts of small-town folk is leavened with a surprise ending 
that is nevertheless joyous, while Blair’s pencil illustrations run the gamut from 
homey and literal to darkly atmospheric, complementing the narrative. Though 
an adult perspective intrudes occasionally—there’s sometimes more emphasis on 
the challenges of teaching in a one-room school house than on what it’s like to be 
a student—the story nevertheless holds its own; readers will be absorbed by this 
mystery and root for the survival of April’s family, the school, and the town.  LG
coomBs, kATe The Secret-Keeper; illus. by Heather M. Solomon. Atheneum, 
2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-689-83963-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-5
The path to Kalli’s cottage in the woods is familiar to almost everyone in Maldinga: 
Kalli is the village secret-keeper, and most residents regularly trek out to bring her 
their secrets. Kalli accepts the secrets without judgment, storing each one in the 
hundreds of tiny drawers that line the walls of her cabin. Although few of the confi-
dences are truly sinister, the collective weight of many small dark secrets over several 
years oppresses Kalli and makes her ill. The townspeople and the secret-keeper’s 
future love (the one man who never brought her a secret) rally around her, lifting 
her gloom by sharing their good secrets with her as well, a practice they make an 
annual tradition. This original fairy tale is elegantly and tenderly told, and it avoids 
moralizing about the existence of secrets, instead accepting them as a fact of life. 
Solomon’s watercolor and oil paintings are lushly colored, establishing Coombs’ 
story in an imagined rural European landscape. The intricate details, such as the 
concrete forms into which the secrets transform in Kalli’s keeping and the uniquely 
shaped drawers covering every surface in Kalli’s cottage, slow the eye and invite 
repeated viewings. Readers who are still several years away from Sharon Shinn’s The 
Safe-Keeper’s Secret (BCCB 6/04), which explores similar issues in more depth, will 
enjoy both the beauty and ethical weight of this picture book.  AS
crAfT, elizABeTh Bass Ackwards and Belly Up; by Elizabeth Craft and Sarah 
Fain. Little, 2006 386p
ISBN 0-316-05793-2 $16.99 
Ad Gr. 9-12
In their suburban community of Boulder, Colorado, the expectation for Harper, 
Sophie, Kate, and Becca is college, period. When Harper doesn’t get accepted to 
NYU, however, she decides to hide that fact from everyone behind a grandiose 
plan to pursue her dream to write the next Great American Novel. Her bravado 
works better than she intended and invites her friends to change their plans as 
well: Sophie decides to head to LA to give acting a try, and Kate takes a gap year 
to stump around Europe and see if she even has a dream that isn’t borrowed from 
her parents’ expectations. Only Becca stays her course, mostly because her dream 
was skiing for the best college coach in the country all along. The book follows 
the ups and downs of their year, which amount to mildly interesting though sub-
stantially clichéd adventures—Harper almost hooks up with her creative writing 
teacher from high school, Kate falls for a hot Swedish guy who helps her heal after 
SepTemBer 2006 • 11
nearly being raped in Greece, Becca gets drunk for the first time, and Sophie lands 
a commercial and gets taken for a ride by an A-list star. With its quartet of close 
friends and exploration of life’s passages, this may sound like The Sisterhood of the 
Traveling Pants (BCCB 12/01) meets, well, The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants, 
but this set of protagonists on the road to self-discovery fails to generate the same 
level of emotional attachment as the set from which they’ve been cloned. The girls 
are repeatedly described as having significant emotional walls, and those walls set 
up distance between character and reader—characters who possess extreme confi-
dence, don’t cry, and rarely suffer disappointments they don’t deserve don’t engender 
much readerly sympathy. Sophie’s instant success and incredible luck in L.A. is 
less than realistic, and Harper’s overblown disappointment in the reception of her 
first draft is kind of silly. Becca and Kate do at least offer credible counterpoints 
and inspiration for teens contemplating possibilities inside and outside the college 
box, and there’s a certain pleasure in the four-friends formula. Brashares it ain’t, 
but readers may nonetheless enjoy the opportunity to experience growing pains at 
a comfortable distance.  KC
de lA cruz, melissA Blue Bloods. Hyperion, 2006 302p
ISBN 0-7868-3892-2 $15.99 
R Gr. 9-12
The richest and most elite families of New York are the ones who can trace their 
history back to the Mayflower. Schuyler Van Alen belongs to one of these families, as 
do her classmates Oliver Hazard-Perry and the popular and glistening Force twins. 
When Schuyler receives her invitation to join the prestigious charity organization 
known as the New York Blood Bank Committee, she learns that her heritage can 
be traced back even farther—all the way back, it seems, to Lucifer and company’s 
shining fall from heaven. Condemned by God to an eternal life on earth, these old 
souls are known as the Blue Bloods, vampires who cycle through 100-year stints 
on Earth before taking a rest and reappearing. The Committee ensures that the 
vampires remain as humane as they are urbane, introducing young members to the 
vampire code of ethics and obligations to their human familiars that will govern 
their lives as they come of age. It also controls the flow of information, which 
Schuyler finds unacceptable as she learns that something out there is preying on 
the undead. It seems that an ancient enemy—Croatan—followed the Blue Bloods 
to the New World, but Miles Standish chose to stay despite what happened to the 
Roanoke colony. History, mythology, and the contemporary New York prep-school 
and club scene blend seamlessly in this sexy and sophisticated riff on vampire lore 
that never collapses into camp—indeed, de la Cruz’s cosmology is frighteningly 
believable, and it would clear up questions in many quarters were it true. YA 
central casting has been here, but the familiarity of the high-school types makes 
their vampire status all the spookier. The cliffhanger ending will have entranced 
readers throwing back their heads to howl and sprout fangs of their own as they 
impatiently await the sequel.  KC
dorfmAn, JoAquin Playing It Cool. Random House, 2006 339p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93641-6 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83641-1 $15.95 
R Gr. 9-12
Bastian is a fixer—through an intricate mix of blackmail, favors, sympathy, and 
psychology, he can get anyone almost anything they want, be it a date, an underage 
abortion, a hotel room for a mistress, or information on a long-lost father. In helping 
12 • The BulleTin
his friend Jeremy connect with a father he never knew, Bastian decides that it will 
be better to switch identities until they figure out whether Jeremy wants Dromio, 
his father, in his life. In Dromio, Bastian finds a man whose problem-solving talents 
are uncannily like his own, and he begins to suspect that Jeremy’s dad may be his 
own father as well. Dromio knows the truth, however, and he is also more self-
aware than Bastian, especially about the motives that fuel a desire to orchestrate 
the lives of others. When Baz finally does lose his cool, he does it in such a big way 
that he doesn’t fully recover—his public humiliation and personal epiphany leave 
him with greater self-knowledge but no insight on how to move forward and live 
differently. Bastian is an almost painfully sympathetic character, so vulnerable in 
his outreach to others that he can’t see either his own obsession with control or the 
potential dangers of his machinations, even for seemingly good outcomes. There 
are clear references to Shakespeare’s Comedy of Errors, but the coolness of Bastian’s 
persona is depicted through an aggregate of subjectless sentence fragments that 
provide imagistic flashes shifting in that shaky camera style favored by contempo-
rary TV cop shows and MTV videos. The slick prose presentation, combined with 
psychologically acute drama, makes this a magnet for cool-hunters.  KC
esckilsen, erik e. The Outside Groove. Lorraine/Houghton, 2006 258p
ISBN 0-618-66854-3 $16.00 
R Gr. 6-9
Casey LaPlante’s academic accomplishments and college aspirations always take a 
back seat to her older brother Wade’s performance at the stock-car races, so to get 
a little parental attention, Casey decides to take the wheel herself. Uncle Harvey, 
the family black sheep, agrees to equip her with a muscled-up beater, and the 
mathematical principle behind a first-place finish seems clear enough—stick to the 
inside of the track, since it’s the shortest distance around the oval. How hard could 
this be? Pretty darn hard, she learns in her first humiliating meet. After a review of 
the math and physics behind racing strategy and a summer’s practice in races at a 
nearby track, however, Casey’s ready to take on the home-town competition again; 
with the backing of Uncle Harvey and her all-grrrl pit crew, she becomes such a 
threat to her golden-boy brother that her parents forbid her to race and steal his 
spotlight. It’s a vintage plot, but Esckilsen customizes it with a sliver of romance, 
a touch of family mystery, and a likable narrator that lend plenty of appeal. Prop 
this one up right under the new ALA Danica Patrick READ poster.  EB
fAlconer, iAn Olivia Forms a Band; written and illus. by Ian Falconer. Schwartz/
Atheneum, 2006 44p
ISBN 1-4169-2454-X $17.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
The prospect of fireworks with no band presents the ever-rambunctious Olivia 
with a new project—if there isn’t a band, she will be the band. Scouring the house 
for props, she slyly replaces baby William’s xylophone with a bottle, brother Ian’s 
drum with a jar of cookies, and Dad’s suspenders with, well, nothing actually, so 
that his pants fall down, revealing a family fondness for red polka-dot underwear. 
Olivia’s band is quite the success, to her way of thinking at least, but then she’s over 
it, and moves on to other things, of course forgetting to put her instruments away, 
so that her mother inadvertently makes some music of her own while attempting 
to tuck her in. The jokes here clearly fit into the Olivia canon, but this particular 
offering lacks the warmth and sparkle that characterizes the other books, making 
Olivia seem more self-involved and even a bit bratty rather than the exuberantly 
SepTemBer 2006 • 13
and exasperatingly creative pig we have come to know and indulgently love. By 
following Olivia’s darting attention span, the narrative loses its arc and becomes 
scattershot, making some of the funnies—the lipstick, for instance, and the con-
tagious need to go the bathroom—seem gratuitous, and the adult-aimed details 
(such as Olivia’s out-of-nowhere final dream, wherein she’s pictured as a justice with 
the current Supreme Court) somewhat overbalance the story. Other bits, though, 
such as the disconnect in the thought bubbles as mother and daughter ponder 
the incarnation of the band, and Olivia’s mom tripping over the instruments, 
are pitch perfect for both character development and storyline. Readers may be a 
bit surprised by the addition of a blue-striped union suit to Olivia’s signature red 
wardrobe, but after all, what self-respecting fireworks band isn’t red, white, and 
blue? You go, Olivia.  KC
ferguson, AlAne The Christopher Killer. Sleuth/Viking, 2006 274p
ISBN 0-670-06008-9 $15.99 
R Gr. 7-12
The daughter of a Colorado county coroner, seventeen-year-old Cameryn Ma-
honey has a passion for forensics; when she offers to become her father’s assistant, 
he reluctantly agrees. Knowledge gleaned from textbooks, a gift for observation, 
and a strong stomach make Cameryn a valuable asset, and soon Patrick Mahoney 
is glad to have his daughter along. Then the job hits too close to home—a corpse 
found along a hiking trail turns out to be Cameryn’s friend Rachel. Though local 
authorities suspect Adam, a troubled young man who was infatuated with Rachel, 
others believe Rachel’s murder is the work of the Christopher Killer, a serial murderer 
whose signature is a St. Christopher medal hidden in the victim’s clothing. As she 
begins uncovering clues about Rachel’s death, Cameryn soon realizes that no one 
can be trusted—not even new deputy Justin, who has taken an interest in Cameryn 
but who won’t tell her why her father dislikes him. When a television psychic begins 
making eerily accurate predictions, Cameryn must also question the strict division 
she has maintained all her life between fact and faith, observation and intuition. 
Fans of forensic mysteries will not be disappointed with this offering, which includes 
realistic, often graphic details about autopsies and investigative procedure. Though 
there are many balls in the air, Ferguson manages to catch them all by the end, while 
still leaving room for Cameryn’s further adventures; Justin the deputy, it turns out, 
holds an important key to her family’s past. The writing is fairly formulaic, with 
Cameryn’s character relying overmuch upon philosophical musings, but the well-
wrought elements of mystery, supported with vivid forensics detail, will make this 
thriller a solid hit with fans of CSI and other forensic mystery series.  LG
fisher, cATherine Day of the Scarab. Greenwillow, 2006 400p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-057164-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-057163-2 $16.99 
R Gr. 6-8
In this dramatic conclusion to the Oracle Prophecies trilogy, Mirany, Seth, and 
Argelin all face their inner demons and meet their destinies head-on. In the earlier 
two volumes, The Oracle Betrayed (BCCB 6/04) and The Sphere of Secrets (BCCB 
3/05), the ritualistic and sacred home of the gods had been desecrated, the child-
god Alexos was presumed to have been murdered, and the future of most of the 
town seemed grim. Argelin, now self-appointed god and ruler, is so tormented by 
his accidental murder of his beloved, he risks his life to go through the Nine Gate-
ways into death to retrieve his love. Mirany and Seth’s fates are inextricably tied to 
14 • The BulleTin
each other, to Argelin’s choices, and to their common responsibilities to preserve 
the gods. Readers would benefit from having read the earlier two novels to flesh 
out the intriguing background glimpses offered in this final volume, but this is a 
highly satisfying conclusion. Maintaining the breathtaking pace is necessary to tie 
up all loose ends, and Fisher does so admirably: small side plots from earlier novels 
are carefully tended to and mixed into the larger destiny of this beleaguered cast of 
characters. The final showdown is a refreshing change from the usual didactic or 
straightforward confrontation between Good and Evil: instead, the characters face 
a complex and intriguing struggle among and against the contradictory impulses 
in all people. Fans of the series have likely been anticipating this volume, and they 
will not be disappointed by this satisfying (and heartbreaking) final outing.  AS
friesner, esTher Temping Fate. Dutton, 2006 279p
ISBN 0-525-47730-6 $16.99 
R Gr. 6-8 
Ilana is not ideal summer job material: her clothes aren’t nearly perky enough, her 
sarcastic attitude is not appreciated, and the skull drawn on her face is enough to 
scare away most potential employers. Ilana, however, is the one frightened and 
uncertain after her first meeting with the Divine Relief Temp Agency, where she is 
given her extraordinary assignment: temping for the Greek mythological goddesses, 
the Fates. Suddenly Ilana is comparatively bland, in a community of Greek heroes, 
gods, goddesses, and the other human workers who regularly make use of a job 
perk—temporarily borrowing the powers of their employers. At least in her job, 
Ilana is getting paid quite well to deal with petulance and moodiness; at home, she 
has to put up with her wedding-crazed older sister and preoccupied, distant parents 
for free. The chaotic and freewheeling ending (complete with naked, winged hunks, 
wedding guests turned into armadillos, and the transformation of legendary spider 
Arachne back into her human form) is an ideal finish to this strange combination of 
coming-of-age novel, fantasy, and bridezilla exposé. Ilana’s life-changing discovery 
that it feels better to forgive than hold a grudge is an important one, but the lightning 
pace, over-the-top characters, and witty dialogue are all as essential to the novel’s 
success as her personal growth. The clever integration of Greek myths and legends 
make this novel a strong possibility for a curricular entry, as it will have readers 
eagerly anticipating a deeper study of the various legendary characters.  AS 
gillilAnd, JudiTh heide Strange Birds. Kroupa/Farrar, 2006 232p
ISBN 0-374-37275-6 $17.00 
R Gr. 4-7
Anna’s sweetly privileged life falls apart fast when her parents are lost at sea just 
before her eleventh birthday. Aunt Formaldy then moves in to the family home, 
ridding it of the comfortable old furniture as well as any vestige of Anna’s parents and 
turning it into an historical showplace. Anna still has her secret, though—hidden 
deep within the boughs of a rare and ancient tree, her parents set up an elaborate 
treehouse, invisible to anyone who doesn’t know it’s there. Following a hurricane, 
her enchanted hideout becomes even more enchanted as a group of miniature 
winged horses takes up residence there. With the help of her new friend Sam and 
an old diary she finds in the stable behind her house, Anna learns the legend of the 
small horses (they’re from a fog-enshrouded island near Assateague), the secrets of 
the nutberries that grow on her tree (they have the power to shrink humans down 
small enough to ride the horses), and, importantly, the antidote to the nutberries’ 
effects. This has many ingredients that will fascinate preadolescent readers—lost 
SepTemBer 2006 • 15
parents to find, a wicked guardian to outwit, miniature magical creatures to protect 
from capture and return to their home, and a stalwart best friend; Gilliland places 
these elements into a suspenseful, well-paced narrative with a satisfying resolution. 
A light, well-crafted fantasy, it will appeal to those readers who are still in love with 
the kinds of books Lemony Snicket parodies.  KC 
grey, mini The Adventures of the Dish and the Spoon; written and illus. by Mini 
Grey. Knopf, 2006 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93691-2 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83691-8 $16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
What happened after the cow jumped over the moon and the dish ran away with 
the spoon? It is a question that many a child has surely asked, but it has not been 
answered—until now. Mini Grey, of Traction Man Is Here! (BCCB 5/05) fame, 
tackles the story with her usual quirky sense of humor and wry, intelligent detail. 
The spoon tells the story, and it is a tale of both victory and woe—the pair become 
vaudeville stars but get “a taste for the high life” and spend all of their money, 
heading into a downward spiral involving loan sharks (knives), a bank robbery, 
deportation, and an unfortunate fall and crack-up for the Dish. Readers shouldn’t 
fret, however—there is a happy ending around the corner, as the irrepressible Dish 
and Spoon won’t be held down for long. Fairly simple language contrasts with 
and heightens the satirical tone, and the narrative is packed with tongue-in-cheek 
humor. The rich art mingles paint with collage, featuring framed scenes and a 
palette of lush browns dotted with primary reds and blues. Numerous visual jokes 
and details will keep young readers and viewers looking at the illustrations for 
much longer than it takes to read the words on the page. Kids who thought they’d 
moved beyond the nursery rhyme will chortle their way through this clever twist 
on “Hey Diddle Diddle,” and they may just add their own spin to the imaginative 
possibilities it implies.  MH
griffin, Adele My Almost Epic Summer. Putnam, 2006 170p
ISBN 0-399-23784-4 $15.99 
M Gr. 7-10
After being fired from her mother’s hair salon, Irene has to settle for a summer of 
babysitting. She takes her charges, Lainie and Evan, to the local lake, where she 
is immediately fascinated by Starla, the beautiful lifeguard, who calls on her to 
witness her revenge on Drew, a boy who has scorned her. When Drew attempts to 
negotiate a truce with Starla through Irene, she realizes they have their own history 
together (she worked on a science fair project with him several years ago); Drew 
is then attracted to Irene’s brainy charms, eliciting Starla’s jealousy. Many of the 
characters suffer from an age-experience gap: Lainie’s annoyingly chirpy naïveté 
and baby-talk places her closer to five than her ostensible eight, for instance. Irene 
is the most jarring in this respect, though: the narrative voice doesn’t sound like 
a gifted bookworm just out of eighth grade but a mannered and pedantic adult, 
and the constant literary references and reflections are implausible in both their 
breadth and depth (she sees particular parallels in her situation with Lolita). De-
spite this literary-induced maturity, the seeds of emotional insight and character 
development never quite germinate in this leisurely paced novel; the “almost” in 
the title could be referring to the thematic resonance and depth—about pretty girls 
as victims of their own attractiveness, about the dangers of a Madame Bovary-like 
yearning to model your life after a work of fiction, about the complicated nature of 
16 • The BulleTin
girl crushes—the book hints at but doesn’t follow through on. Instead, it becomes 
a marginally interesting story of a geeky girl who wins the heart of a smart boy 
through no effort on her part, and an affirmation that pretty girls are often bul-
lies who aren’t very bright and therefore deserve our pity even as they evoke our 
admiration and envy.  KC 
hABer, melissA glenn The Pluto Project. Dutton, 2006 263p
ISBN 0-525-47721-7 $17.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Alan Green is an eighth-grader with a penchant for uncovering hidden mysteries, 
with varying degrees of success. When clues from a sinister conversation overheard 
in a culvert coincide with the assassination of the governor, Alan tries unsuccessfully 
to convince his friends that they’ve stumbled upon a real conspiracy—when they 
won’t believe him, he stops hanging out with them and pursues the mystery with 
new pal Juliet. Meanwhile, Alan’s belief that Juliet is romantically interested in him 
proves incorrect (Juliet professes to value Alan’s friendship too much to date him), 
and when Alan tries to rekindle his old friendships, he finds that his friends, hurt 
and confused by his behavior, have moved on. Though it lacks the tight resolution 
one might expect of a mystery, this novel’s ambiguity and unanswered questions 
work well in the context of a story about creating meaning where none may exist. 
Nowhere is this theme more deftly handled than in Haber’s treatment of the rough 
emotional landscape of junior high, particularly the complications and jealousies 
that emerge in mixed-gender groups of friends on the ’tween and early adolescence 
cusp. While the conspiracy turns out to be entirely Alan’s concoction, the behav-
ior of the two men who meet above the culvert remains suspicious; Alan has still 
stumbled upon something ominous and intriguing. Alan’s self-deprecating voice is 
appealing, and the mess he makes of his social life is exasperating and poignantly 
realistic, certain to draw in readers beyond the usual mystery and thriller genre 
suspects.  LG
hAhn, mAry downing Witch Catcher. Clarion, 2006 [240p]
ISBN 0-618-50457-5 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Jen’s father has inherited a mysterious castle in the mountains, and Jen, an adventur-
ous twelve-year-old, can’t wait to explore it. She is less thrilled, however, with Dad’s 
new girlfriend, Moura, whom he has been dating on the sly, and with whom he 
is completely smitten. Already suspicious of Moura (Jen’s certain her hypnotizing 
perfume is entrancing her father), Jen’s convinced that the mysterious glass ball 
she finds is connected to the woman; after the witch catcher is broken, a quirky 
fairy girl emerges out of the shards and confirms Jen’s suspicions, alerting her to 
Moura’s true witchy self. Now Jen, who had only hoped for a cool new house, is 
burdened with a lovestruck and suddenly distant father, a family of shape-shifting 
and untrustworthy fairies who need rescuing, and the dangerous Moura, who will 
stop at nothing to get what she wants. It is unclear why the witch traps would work 
as well for fairies as witches (Moura kept the fairy family trapped for years before 
Jen’s arrival), but this is a minor confusion in an otherwise carefully developed 
fantasy. Realistically squicky detail (there’s a great evocation of the way it might feel 
to be transformed into an ant), elegant descriptions (the swirls of colors in the glass 
traps are described with particular artistry), and a clever twist that allows the fairies 
to retain their integrity as tricksters all combine to make this fantasy an intriguing 
SepTemBer 2006 • 17
read. Hahn’s taut, fast-paced writing style works effectively to sweep readers into 
the story and keep them engaged until the fairies go home, Moura is stopped, and 
Jen finally gets her newly appreciated “regular” life back.  AS
hArdinge, frAnces Fly by Night. HarperCollins, 2006 487p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-087629-8 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-087627-1 $16.99 
R* Gr. 7-10
In a mythical realm that bears a slight resemblance to England of the early eigh-
teenth century, guilds, particularly the Stationers (who control all print) and the 
Locksmiths (against whom no door can be locked), have seized control as Parliament 
has been unable to settle the question of which king or queen should rule. Religious 
affiliation is as fragmented as political allegiance, with everyone worshipping the 
Beloved of their choice in the aftermath of the bloody years of the Birdcatchers, 
who unsuccessfully tried to use force to unify the land under one god. Twelve-year-
old Mosca Mye, deciding she has nothing left to lose after the death of her father 
and the burning of his books, throws in her hand with a rogue named Eponymous 
Clent, rescuing him from her town’s pillory on the condition that he take her and 
her homicidal goose with him wherever he goes. They travel to Mandelion, where 
they become involved in an elaborate conspiracy that could see war between the 
guilds, the re-emergence of the Birdcatchers, and the end of free thought itself 
unless Mosca can get the right messages into the right hands at the right time. 
Intricate plotting, well-developed and fascinating characters, delicious humor, and 
exquisite wordcraft envelop readers fully into this richly imagined world. Mosca 
is a gritty little survivor whose fate depends on her being able to think for herself, 
but she is also a twelve-year-old girl dazzled by power and beauty; she will remind 
readers of Pullman’s Lyra (except that she doesn’t sleep nearly as much). Though 
the philosophy and the politics may prove a bit heady for some readers (but right 
on target for others), there is also action and humor aplenty, and Mosca’s closing 
sentiment, “I don’t want a happy ending, I want more story,” will resonate right 
through to the marrow of readers as they turn the final page.  KC 
henderson, kAThy Lugalbanda: The Boy Who Got Caught Up in a War: An Epic 
Tale from Ancient Iraq; illus. by Jane Ray. Candlewick, 2006 72p
ISBN 0-7636-2782-8 $16.99 
R Gr. 4-6
Lugalbanda was an ancient Sumerian king in the land that is now Iraq, and his 
story is one of the oldest in the world—nearly 300 years older than the Epic of 
Gilgamesh. The epic tale of his adventures and triumph is gripping: Lugalbanda 
is the youngest prince in the city of Uruk, teased because he is small and weak. 
When King Enmerkar decides to conquer a nearby city, Lugalbanda tags along but 
falls ill, so he is left in a mountain cave while the army presses on. Quick wits and 
several miraculous events, including an encounter with the magical Anzu bird, allow 
Lugalbanda to save himself and gain his wish to have unending strength and “dance 
like the sunlight, leap like a flame, and dart like lightning.” Using these gifts, he 
carries a message to the goddess of war, Inana, for King Enmerkar and his flagging 
army, saving his people and setting him on the path to becoming the next great king. 
Henderson’s text is lively and accessible, streamlining the epic and dividing it into 
brief chapters that accentuate the action in descriptive yet fast-moving prose. Ray 
provides emotive illustrations that evoke the two-dimensional, stylized techniques 
of Sumerian art in muted brown tones highlighted with shimmering teal and gold. 
18 • The BulleTin
The art is carefully woven throughout the text, from full-page ziggurat city scenes 
replete with people and animals to intimate, close-up spot illustrations. The book’s 
tinted paper features lightly inked layering of fauna and animals in pale browns, 
further adding texture and ambience. Henderson appends an introduction and 
conclusion outlining historical context, source information, and her own journey 
to the tale, which should be extremely useful to adults guiding children through 
the story. This handsome and engrossing work would be a distinctive addition to 
any collection.  MH 
herrick, sTeven By the River. Front Street, 2006 238p
ISBN 1-932425-72-1 $16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Australian poet Steven Herrick paints a delicate portrait of a boy’s life in a small 
town that lazes by the side of a slow-moving river. Harry Hodby’s days unfold in 
sharply sensual free-verse poems with few lines over seven syllables; he plays soccer, 
swims, watches his brother fall in love. He himself is enamored with the eighteen-
year-old school secretary, who has to leave town when she becomes pregnant by 
the town tough. Harry carries out a secret revenge on the offending boy, who tries 
unsuccessfully to find out who keeps throwing rocks through his windows. Mean-
while, Harry tries to understand the lives and loves of those around him, especially 
his father, who seems to have come to terms with a life of sameness and sadness, 
taking his pleasures in books about faraway places and visits to his wife’s grave. 
Harry longs to leave the town by the river, but it is a soft longing; the atmospherics 
of his life are etched with grief over losing his mother and later a girl who might 
have become a girlfriend, and there is no real urgency to leave those ghosts behind. 
This isn’t an eventful accounting, but it will appeal to readers who favor warmly 
realized character development and well-executed language over complicated plots 
and angsty protagonists.  KC
hodges, mArgAreT, ad. Dick Whittington and His Cat; illus. by Mélisande 
Potter. Holiday House, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-8234-1987-8 $16.95 
R 5-8 yrs
The rags-to-riches tale of Dick Whittington and his industrious cat has garnered 
lasting fame through the oral tradition and retellings in various media, including 
chapbooks, pantomimes, and the recent Newbery Honor book by Alan Armstrong 
(BCCB 9/05). Here, noted folklorist Hodges adapts the tale from a chapbook that 
likely dates from the early 1700s. In her version, orphaned and destitute Dick seeks 
his fortune in London, where he is shown pity by a wealthy merchant. Though 
wretchedly poor, he procures a cat to chase away the rats and mice that plague 
his sleep. When the merchant offers his servants a chance to earn some money 
by sending something of value off on one of his ships to trade, Dick reluctantly 
parts with his cat, which ends up fetching an exorbitant price, making Dick one 
of the wealthiest men in London. He goes on to marry the merchant’s daughter, 
become the Lord Mayor of London three times over (in legend; in actuality, it was 
four times), and earn a lasting reputation for the good works he did on behalf of 
the poor in London. Hodges’ retelling is clear and straightforward, with enough 
detail to generate heartfelt sympathy for the ill-used but ever kind Dick. Potter’s 
line-and-gouache illustrations, done in hues of stone, timber, and the dark earthy 
dyes that dominate medieval textiles, provide cartooned but atmospheric detail of 
life in fourteenth-century London. Some of her sequential panels are ambiguously 
SepTemBer 2006 • 19
separated, making it difficult to understand the action at first, but the visuals are 
lively, and the figures’ staged and exaggerated postures echo the melodramatics of 
pantomime, which will help younger listeners connect to the emotional content of 
the timeless tale. Hodges includes a sparse note on Whittington’s real history and 
offers further context on the bells and chapbooks that preserved and perpetuated 
his story.  KC
howe, JAmes Houndsley and Catina; illus. by Marie-Louise Gay. Candlewick, 
2006 [40p]
ISBN 0-7636-2404-7 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Houndsley and Catina are the best of friends in this gently clever easy reader that 
follows in the footsteps of Frog and Toad. Houndsley is a mild-mannered dog 
who likes to cook for his friends, and Catina is an ambitious feline who dreams 
of being a famous writer. The book highlights an individual episode in each of 
its first two chapters (Catina’s book manuscript turns out to be less than stellar, 
Houndsley loses a cooking contest after he forgets to add beans to his three-bean 
chili). In Chapter Three, the friends reflect on their experiences, coming to an 
important conclusion—“If you do not have fun doing something you like to do, 
what is the point?”—and realizing that true friendship is better than prizes and 
fame. Houndsley and Catina come alive through quirky detail (Catina loves ginger 
tea), atmospheric descriptions (Houndsley has a “soft-as-a-rose-petal voice”), and 
amiable humor (“I will need more cookies,” says Houndsley when he sees Catina’s 
seventy-four-chapter book). Their friendship is remarkably caring, and the oc-
casional cajoling or misunderstanding is always overridden by compassion and 
support. Gay’s watercolor-and-collage illustrations work in harmony with the text 
and add feeling and humor, lending soft edges, explorable background details, and 
cuddleworthy, expressive characters, creating mood through color and composition. 
With its kind friendship, pleasing humor, and self-affirming lesson, this will be a 
welcome addition to the easy-reader shelves.  MH
hunT, scoTT, ed. Twice-Told; ed. and illus by Scott Hunt. Dutton, 
2006 259p
ISBN 0-525-46818-8 $19.99 
R Gr. 7-10
While wandering through a museum, illustrator Scott Hunt observed two people 
arguing vehemently over what story was being told by a painting they were view-
ing. This gave him the idea to frame an experiment of his own: he produced nine 
suggestive drawings and sent each one to two well-known authors of young adult 
fiction. The original stories that authors such as Sarah Dessen, M. T. Anderson, 
David Lubar, John Green, and Nancy Werlin, among other luminaries in the YA 
world, produced based on the illustrations are by turns haunting, surprising, and 
moving. These authors obviously find great freedom and inspiration in working to 
an assignment of this nature, and the fact that each drawing gets two very different 
treatments suggests the possibility that there are many more stories in potential 
here, opening the door for creative writing assignments for students that use Hunt’s 
own richly evocative work or the original artwork of classmates as springboards. 
Moreover, there is a lot to work with and discuss about the visual codes that might 
cause the stories to overlap in thematic terms or imagistic resonance; for instance, 
what is it about an axe on a table beside a frosted cake in a retro kitchen that would 
20 • The BulleTin
lead authors as diverse as M. T. Anderson and William Sleator into the baleful terri-
tory of a boy in violent conflict with his father over the subject of his masculinity? 
Besides being useful as a creative model and a vehicle for introducing techniques 
of visual and verbal analysis, the book features stories that are compelling examples 
of the aesthetic form of the short story, and their varied content—parent-child 
relations of many stripes, requited and unrequited love, sexuality with all of its 
confusions and abuses—will appeal on its own merits. Notes from the authors are 
included.  KC
kAABerBol, lene  The Serpent Gift; tr. by Lene Kaaberbol. Holt, 
2006 377p
ISBN 0-8050-7770-7 $18.95 
R Gr. 5-8 
Following The Shamer’s Daughter (BCCB 5/04) and The Shamer’s Signet (BCCB 
5/05), this is the third book in the projected quartet from Danish author Kaaberbol. 
Our heroine, Dina, is now twelve years old, and the short-lived peace her family 
has found in a small village is disrupted by the sudden appearance of a strange man, 
Sezuan. Dina is stunned to learn that he is her father, determined to gain access to 
her, and she’s even more stunned when her mother insists the family flee to avoid 
him. While they are on the run, a trumped-up charge lands Dina’s brother and a 
family friend in a cruel work camp. Since Dina’s gift/curse of Shaming (the power 
to elicit shamed confessions out of people through eye contact), inherited from 
her mother, has lapsed into latency, she is unable to maneuver an escape without 
Sezuan’s help. Sezuan, possessor of the serpent gift of lies and illusions, is a complex 
and fascinating character; he is not nearly as evil as Dina’s mother believes and not 
as invincible as he himself believes, and he ends up as more of a hero than anyone 
could have imagined. Kaaberbol is a gifted storyteller whose characters are each 
distinct, multifaceted, and likeable in spite of their myriad faults. Readers will benefit 
from having read the two earlier books, as there is little exposition or background 
for the characters. However, this is still an effective stand-alone novel, and it sets 
the stage perfectly for what is sure to be a dramatic finale for Dina, who is now 
burdened with two dangerous and powerful inherited gifts.  AS 
kimmel, eric A., ad. The Frog Princess: A Tlingit Legend from Alaska; illus. by 
Rosanne Litzinger. Holiday House, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-8234-1618-6 $16.95 
R 6-9 yrs
Disgusted by her current suitors, a beautiful Tlingit girl confesses that she would 
more eagerly marry a frog than any of the men. That night a handsome man with 
slightly bulging eyes knocks on her door and takes her down to the lake, where 
she is taken into the lake to live with him among the Frog People. When her griev-
ing father realizes what has happened to his daughter he threatens war, but after 
she is safely returned to her parents the girl is listless and sad, missing her former 
husband and life; soon she vanishes once again, and this time the frogs of the lake 
disappear with her. Kimmel’s retelling of this Alaskan tale (sources are provided 
in a note) is simple, haunting, and well paced; audiences will particularly enjoy 
comparing the story to other animal-transformation tales such as the Grimms’ 
“Frog Prince.” Litzinger carefully considers Tlingit imagery and color significance 
in her watercolors (an artist’s note points out the meaning of chosen motifs); her 
illustrations feature stark backgrounds, layered swaths of color, and naïve figures. 
The compositions are somewhat static, but the scenes effectively evoke the isolation 
SepTemBer 2006 • 21
and melancholy of the tale. This mysterious and lingering story is respectfully told, 
and it will leave listeners reflecting on the Tlingit girl’s choice and which world 
they might choose.  MH
kovAlski, mAryAnn Omar’s Halloween; written and illus. by Maryann 
Kovalski. Fitzhenry & Whiteside, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 1-55041-559-X $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
Halloween is coming, and Omar the bear cub can’t wait for the frightening fun. 
He’s especially excited to sport a really scary costume, but he’s having trouble there: 
spiders and bats don’t scare his biologically informed classmates, who appreciate 
the creatures’ helpful ecological contributions, and supplies at home don’t result 
in interesting changes (when he paints himself green, “he just looked like Omar, 
only green”). He resignedly accepts a mundane ghost costume, but fortunately a 
muddy, brush-ridden detour turns his Casper-like cuteness into something more 
satisfactorily alarming. Although that’s not really a believable result of a little wear 
and tear on a sheet, the book vividly depicts a youngster’s anticipation of the shivery 
delights of Halloween, and the prose has a pleasing combination of comfortable 
solidity and sweetly humorous individuality. The illustrations combine paints with 
smudgy charcoal pencil textures, in a palette that emphasizes the soft slanting light 
and earthtones of autumn; the rounded cast of toylike bears exudes a coziness that 
balances the spooky atmospheric touches. This funny yet gently understanding 
story will appeal to young fans of Halloween, who will appreciate Omar’s quest 
for a worthwhile costume and sympathize with the setbacks he encounters along 
the way.  DS
kroll, virginiA Selvakumar Knew Better; illus. by Xiaojun Li. Shen’s, 
2006 [32p]
ISBN 1-885008-29-5 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
Selvakumar is a dog, the family pet of a South Indian fishing family; while the 
humans think this is an ordinary sunny day, “Selvakumar knew better,” sensing 
the oncoming disaster that is the tsunami of December 2004. When the family 
realizes that the roaring noise in the distance is the approaching tsunami, they flee 
for high ground—except for oldest son Dinakaran, who is so overwhelmed by fear 
that he can only think to head for the safety of home. Fortunately, the determined 
Selvakumar herds his young master away from his hiding place and leads him up to 
safety on the hilltop, where Dinakaran and his faithful friend are reunited with the 
rest of his family. The end’s desire for rhetorical continuity unfortunately results in 
a minimizing of the human tragedy: when devastated residents assess the situation 
as hopeless, the dog, content with his human family around him, “knew better.” 
Nonetheless, this fact-based story has an immediate emotional appeal with its per-
sonal view of the drama and its canine hero; the writing is focused and evocative 
(if occasionally overworked), bringing the almost unimaginable experience close 
to the listening audience. Li’s trim black lines range from tidy, controlled outlines 
to sweeping evocations of texture; his moody palette of blues and taupes and his 
emotional portraits gain depth from the fresco-like smudges and folds of pigment 
in the grainy paper. This could serve as an entry-level exploration of the disaster or 
just as a dramatic dog story for young animal fans. An author’s note, which includes 
22 • The BulleTin
a photograph of the real Selvakumar and his family, explains the background of the 
story and provides more facts about the 2004 tsunami.  DS
lAsky, kAThryn Pirate Bob; illus. by David Clark. Charlesbridge, 
2006 32p
Library ed. ISBN 1-57091-595-4 $15.95 
R* 5-8 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 3.
lewis, J. PATrick Blackbeard, the Pirate King. National Geographic, 
2006 32p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7922-5586-0 $25.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7922-5585-2 $16.95 
Ad Gr. 4-7
The (possibly) bloody career of (probable) Edward Teach, better known as Black-
beard, is recounted here in a dozen poems that emphasize the romantic tales 
attached to the dread pirate’s annus terribilis of high-seas mayhem. Each verse is 
accompanied by a full-page reproduction of an artist’s rendering, with images dating 
from earlier centuries cheerfully intermixed with contemporary depictions, and by 
a snippet of historical background that coaxes some of the more improbable flights 
of legendary fancy back down to earth. Lewis scores points for varying the form of 
his poems, but even the most successful never achieve the smooth balladeering of 
Jane Yolen’s Ballad of the Pirate Queens (BCCB 4/95). The stylistic range of visual 
interpretations is impressive, but no effort is made to trace how (or why) Blackbeard 
evolved in popular imagination over time; since factual material is split between 
the body of the work and an appended timeline, informational waters are a bit 
choppy to navigate. Nonetheless, it’s hard to ignore a man who sets a controlled 
burn in his own beard, so middle-graders are bound to be captivated. A map and 
a bibliography are included.  EB
liPsyTe, roBerT Raiders Night. HarperTempest, 2006 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-059947-2 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-059946-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 9-12
Senior Matt Rydek is no model of clean play and selfless altruism: he bulks up on 
steroids, cools off with Vicodin, and swaggers through his narrow milieu with a 
belief in an athlete’s entitlement to passing grades, parental forbearance, and sex 
on demand. Still, he takes his co-captaincy on the football team seriously, and 
he is willing to give Chris, a talented transfer sophomore, a chance, despite the 
newcomer’s abrasive arrogance. However, having never acquired the skill of saying 
“No” to a teammate, he becomes an unwilling accomplice to a horrifying hazing 
at which Chris is sodomized with a plastic bat by Ramp, the brutish leader of the 
defense who sees his own position on the team threatened. Ramp then launches 
a subtle but effective blackmail campaign to secure the silence of Matt and other 
upperclass witnesses. Despite the dark edginess of locker-room language and graphic 
descriptions of violence, there’s little tension and even less moral ambiguity to the 
plot; Ramp’s villainy is painted in deepest black, and readers pretty much mark 
time waiting for Matt to get around to blowing the whistle on him. A couple of 
subplots involving Matt’s adoring mentally handicapped brother, a new prospective 
girlfriend (with whom he suffers an embarrassing bout of erectile dysfunction), 
SepTemBer 2006 • 23
and Mr. Rydek’s tyranny over his son (he’s a frustrated athletic might-have-been) 
round out Matt’s concerns but have little new to say. Nonetheless, YAs who like 
their sports stories raw and gritty should be engrossed by Lipsyte’s portrayal of 
chemically enhanced athletes wrestling with a heinous secret.  EB
lóPez, lorrAine m. Call Me Henri. Curbstone, 2006 237p
ISBN 1-931896-27-5 $17.95 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Enrique (aka Henri) juggles ESL classes at Peralta Middle School and responsibili-
ties at home babysitting his three baby brothers, all the while trying to avoid the 
gangs that plague his neighborhood, not to mention his stepfather’s harsh temper. 
Privately, he longs to learn French, a language more similar to his native Spanish 
than English, feeling that skill will take him away from his troubled life. López 
tempers the harsh urban circumstances with gentle humor and by portraying the 
world through Enrique’s innocent and untainted perspective (in fact, Enrique 
sometimes seems younger than a typical middle-schooler). The absorbing story 
creates memorably vivid characters—Marvin Alfaro’s abuelita accompanies him to 
each of his classes and grins proudly whenever he speaks; Enrique’s friend Horacio 
says “Hay labio jabón lechuga” to any girl who walks by because he thinks it sounds 
romantic (translated, it means “There is lipsoap lettuce”). The story is choppily 
written, though, and the ending sequence of events (Enrique witnesses a drive-by 
shooting in which Horacio is seriously hurt and Enrique becomes the gang’s next 
target; concerned teachers enroll him in a French immersion program in Canada 
and sneak him, dressed as a girl, to the airport) is rushed and barely plausible, with 
all concluding a bit too neatly. Still, readers will not begrudge the worthy Enrique 
an optimistic ending and the fulfillment of his dream—one can hope that his new 
direction will allow him to escape his past and reach his potential.  MH
mAc, cArrie Crush. Orca, 2006 106p (Orca Soundings)
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55143-521-7 $14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55143-526-8 $7.95 
R Gr. 7-12 
Seventeen-year-old Hope’s summer plans are out of her hands: her hippie parents 
are traipsing off to Thailand to celebrate their anniversary, and they have decided 
that Hope should spend the summer not on the commune but in New York with 
her sister, Joy. Hope’s first several days with her self-centered drug addict sister are 
lonely and depressing; things turn around quickly, however, when Hope stumbles 
into an ideal live-in nanny job and, much to her surprise, also finds herself falling in 
love with Nat, a flighty but well-meaning female bike-shop owner whose dog Hope 
rescued. Hope’s questions about her sexuality are quickly resolved with a steamy 
first kiss; indeed, most of the side plots and characters are sidelined to make room 
for romance in this brief novel. Even if some of the more intriguing subplots (such 
as Joy’s complicated wranglings with her parents and her addiction) are not fully 
explored, these issues provide a believable background against which Hope, likable 
and eager to please, is developed. Even with its requisite controlled vocabulary, clear 
plot, and relatively small cast of characters, hallmarks of the Orca Soundings hi/lo 
books, this is an emotionally complex story. Communal living, drug addiction, 
and, of course, the lesbian content will all be sure-fire discussion points, and these 
same elements, especially the hot romance, make this an intriguing book for fluent 
and struggling readers alike.  AS 
24 • The BulleTin
mAcdonAld, mAryAnn The Costume Copycat; illus. by Anne Wilsdorf. Dial, 
2006 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2929-4 $10.99 
R 3-5 yrs.
When Angela sees her older sister’s bunny suit, her own fairy costume dims by 
comparison; thus begins an annual dissatisfaction for Angela, who each year thinks 
Bernadette has the better Halloween look. Even when she wears Bernadette’s 
costume from the previous year, she never manages to look as adorable or scary as 
her older sister—and in the meantime, Bernadette assembles an even better outfit. 
Angela eventually decides to follow her own star rather than her sister’s and creates 
a ghost costume featuring a “straw hat with a big red feather,” pink rouge, and eye 
glitter. The costume is such a hit that Bernadette wants to be a ghost, too, but a case 
of chicken pox keeps her from trick-or-treating. Freed from the competition, Angela 
remembers how much she likes her older sister and, after wowing the neighbors as 
the most stylish ghost ever seen, brings a bit of trick-or-treat home to Bernadette. 
The text is unobtrusive but solid, with some carefully observed details and dry 
humor bolstering this story of sibling rivalry and the importance of choosing just 
the right Halloween couture (“Angela tried to make Bernadette vanish with her 
magic wand. It did not work”). Wilsdorf’s illustrations in casual, wiry lines and 
warm watercolor washes add sweetness and cleverness in appropriate helpings. There 
is plenty to enjoy on each page, including recurring images of the family dog and 
the neighbor’s cat, loads of costume ideas, and some offbeat artwork on the walls 
at Angela’s house, all of which provide lots of opportunities for interaction during 
readalouds. Macdonald taps into two subjects that have consistent appeal—Hal-
loween and sibling rivalry—and the combination is as tart-sweet as candy apples 
in a Halloween bag.  CW
mcnAughTon, colin Captain Abdul’s Little Treasure; written and illus. by Colin 
McNaughton. Candlewick, 2006 44p
ISBN 0-7636-3045-4 $14.99 
R 5-8 yrs
Pirate Doris Abdul is off with her friends for a bit of buccaneering, so she leaves 
her toddler son with daddy Abdul and his pirate crew on the Golden Behind. After 
plenty of Arrgh-ing and frustrated faux cursing, Abdul decides to make the best of it, 
assigning his men to take turns tending his offspring. The kid’s a quick study, picking 
up the rudiments of gunpowder, sword play, and rope knotting, and developing a 
taste for “Swossages!” that reduces his babysitters to fits of laughter. So successful 
is this exercise in piratical child-rearing that Doris’s crew finally turn over all their 
kids to their daddies and head back to sea with a parting “ooh-arrgh!” There’s an 
awful lot to take in here, and McNaughton pushes the envelope with a rambling 
surfeit of visual gags (Captain Abdul is a hook-handed hairball; Doris flies a Jolly 
Roger with a pigtailed skull), dopey nicknames (“Spanish” Omar Lette; “Yardarm” 
Pitts), sea shanties based on nursery rhymes, and ever-engrossing scatological humor 
(“Clibbidy clobbidy horsey,/ All aroun’ d’ deck./ Baby dood a poo-poo,/ Down 
d’ horsey neck”). But restraint has never been a McNaughton trait, and if the text 
runs on longer than strictly necessary, there’s a bounty of entertainment to be had 
in exploits of the ratty, boisterous crew and their rambunctious charge. Hone your 
pirate-speak (“Come back ’ere an’ fight, curse ye! Ooh-arrgh, ye swabs!”) and prepare 
for repeat performances, or turn the honor over to the attached CD.  EB 
SepTemBer 2006 • 25
meehl, BriAn Out of Patience. Delacorte, 2006 292p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90320-0 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73299-6 $15.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Patience, Kansas has been under a curse ever since Jeremiah Waters had the 
audacity to install the first flush toilet west of the Mississippi for his new bride. 
Townsfolk are suspicious, and sure enough, the darn thing clogs, causing Jeremiah 
to invent the first plunger. After a foiled robbery attempt ends in the loss of all of 
the town’s valuables as well as the plunger (now known as the Plunger of Destiny 
or the Scepter of Satan), a religious zealot predicts that its return to Patience will 
mark the beginning of the end. Over a hundred years later, Jake Waters’ dad, 
ever in search of artifacts for what he hopes will become the first American Toilet 
Museum (a major embarrassment for Jake, who longs to escape the stigma of his 
toilet-saturated heritage), purchases the plunger on eBay. From that point, things 
go from bad to worse to downright apocalyptic for the town of Patience. Hail-
storms and a tornado rain down cosmic vengeance on Patience, while the head 
of the EPA, a descendent of the zealous prophet, attempts to destroy the town in 
her own way by shutting down the fertilizer plant that represents Patience’s only 
industry. An entertaining amalgam of Sachar’s Holes (BCCB 9/98) and Hiaasen’s 
Hoot (BCCB 11/02) (or perhaps, to be more scatologically precise, Hiaasen’s more 
recent Flush, BCCB 10/05), this offering features the curse, the treasure, and the 
avenging descendents of the former and the environmental concerns of the latter. 
While it doesn’t have the mythic sensibilities or metaphoric resonances of Holes, it 
does include well-drawn characters, page-turning action, and lively prose peppered 
with dry humor and potty history. Even reluctant readers will enjoy Jake’s journey 
toward acceptance of his dubious legacy as member of a family that has made good 
through hardship and hardware.  KC
meyer, kAi Pirate Curse; tr. from the German by Elizabeth D. Crawford. McElder-
ry, 2006 320p
ISBN 1-4169-2421-3 $15.95 
Ad Gr. 5-8
In this German import, fourteen-year-old Jolly has known a pirate ship and its 
captain as her home and family for most of her life, but after the horrifying death 
of the captain and crew of her ship, she must use her gift of walking on water to 
escape sharing their fate. Exhausted and consumed with grief and guilt, Jolly ends 
up on an island where she finds another “polliwog” (water walker), Munk. The 
two seem fated to meet, as their powers will be needed to stop the advance of the 
Maelstrom, an ancient force that will consume all humanity if it continues to gain 
strength. The book offers a tasty array of villainous characters, both human and 
oceanic, who are compelling and terrifying; they serve as formidable opponents to 
the gritty nerve of both Jolly and Munk. Unfortunately, Meyer tends to tell rather 
than show in his writing; there is no subtlety or mystery in the frequent heavy-
handed stereotypes and foreshadowing, and there’s disappointingly little growth or 
development of any of the characters in spite of a never-ending siege of life-changing 
events. This is clearly the first book in what will be a series, as there are numerous 
loose ends and an abrupt finish that may leave readers feeling cheated rather than 
anticipatory. However, a high-seas book with a supernatural bent, a tough-as-nails 
heroine, and a dash of romance mixed in with the swashbuckling may be enough 
to keep pirate fans entertained.  AS
26 • The BulleTin
morAnville, shArelle ByArs A Higher Geometry. Holt, 2006 212p
ISBN 0-8050-7470-8 $16.95 
R Gr. 7-9
Fifteen-year-old Anna Conway is something of an anomaly in her 1959 high-school 
class—a girl with extraordinary interest and talent in math. Although her girlfriends 
caution her to keep her academic pursuits under wraps from prospective boyfriends, 
the ever-so-desirable Mike Dillon is not put off at all by her intellect. Her parents 
are so relieved to see her develop an interest apart from math that they bend their 
strict dating rules and allow her to see Mike pretty much as often as she chooses. 
But just as her romance takes off, so do her prospects for college, and Anna begins 
an escalating crusade to convince her father to let her compete in a regional math 
contest and then to travel to Chicago for a national meet with the promise of 
scholarships. Moranville balances the Mike and Math plotlines so carefully—from 
Anna’s sexual initiation (handled in a couple of discreet sentences) to her patient, 
persistent softening of her befuddled father’s defenses—that a conclusion that 
wraps up the Math but leaves the Mike unresolved is a bit unsettling. Still, there’s 
a quiet urgency behind this tale of a girl who wants it all that will appeal to teens 
envisioning lives without limits.  EB
murdock, cATherine gilBerT Dairy Queen. Houghton, 2006 275p
ISBN 0-618-68307-0 $16.00 
R Gr. 7-10
With her brothers off at football camp and her dad recovering from surgery, D.J. 
Schwenk is doing everything that needs doing around their small Wisconsin dairy 
farm until the coach of their rival football team sends his quarterback to help 
out. The coach has ulterior motives: he wants Brian to adopt the Schwenk work 
ethic, and he wants D.J., who grew up helping her brothers train for football, to 
train him. After a few false starts, D.J. takes Brian on as a project and before long 
decides that she, too, will follow Schwenk tradition and try out for football. D.J. 
is an utterly convincing character: a quiet girl in a quiet family, she thinks with 
the contemplative rhythms of her bovine charges, chewing over ideas and keep-
ing her peace until she has carefully worked out what she wants to say. Brian is 
equally convincing; his mom has been schooled in the communication ethics of 
Oprah, and while Brian is not entirely certain that this makes for more meaning-
ful dialogue, it certainly makes for more talk than he gets from D.J., much to his 
frustration. D.J.’s ruminations are not all that productive, again adding credibility 
to her character—she knows she isn’t book-smart, but it turns out she’s not that 
attuned to people either. She doesn’t realize, for instance, that in the eyes of her 
best friend, Amber, Amber and D.J. are a couple, that her younger brother doesn’t 
talk because he’s afraid to reveal his desire to be a dentist rather than a football 
player, or that her father is as proud of her as he is of her brothers. By the end of 
the summer, D.J. has worked most of these things out, and she emerges as a kind, 
thoughtful, funny character readers will be glad to have met. Murdock treats the 
atmospheric details of Wisconsin farm life warmly without romanticizing any of 
them, creating a believable place where a strong, hard-working farm girl can be a 
football player as well as date one.  KC 
noonAn, BrAndon Plenty Porter. Amulet, 2006 [240p]
ISBN 0-8109-5996-8 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
As the last of eleven children in a poor family, twelve-year-old Plenty feels like an 
SepTemBer 2006 • 27
afterthought. She knows about the members of her family but doesn’t really know 
them for who they are. She herself is sassy and outspoken, her outsider status ren-
dering her bold and sometimes reckless. When her sixteen-year-old sister Marcie 
comes to her with a secret—her hair is falling out—and then attempts to take her 
own life, Plenty feels even more distanced from the others, who spend their after-
noons in the hospital talking with the damaged Marcie, something Plenty can’t 
bring herself to do. Yearning for escape, Plenty is intrigued with a jump-rope rhyme 
that admonishes “Home before supper/ Not past then/ Or you’ll take a trip with 
the Gentleman.” When she finally does run away, she finds that, through a strange 
and dangerous coincidence, she is in the car of the very “Gentleman” whose abusive 
sexual demands have driven her sister to break down. This is a delicately handled 
story of relationships set in rural Illinois in during the Korean War, relationships 
that required but did not always reward turning a blind eye. Fortunately, the talent 
for open secrets that allowed a landowner to take advantage of his sharecroppers 
and a young white girl to find refuge in a juke joint run by blacks also enables a 
community to cover up a justifiable homicide and bring a family back together. 
Plenty’s brash obstinacy and petulant bravado give her considerable appeal; readers 
will be able to picture a barefoot girl with a jutting lower lip kicking at the dirt of 
her circumstances as she tries to turn things that are too big for her into manage-
able chunks. Her perspective toward her family and what’s important undergoes 
a credible shift that is lyrically underscored by a few well-conceived metaphors as 
well as through her experiences in this well-crafted first novel.  KC
PAgliArulo, AnTonio A Different Kind of Heat. Delacorte, 2006 181p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90319-7 $9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-385-73298-8 $7.50 
Ad Gr. 9-12
Luz comes to the St. Therese Home for Boys and Girls with a troubled history, 
including an inner-city childhood in the Bronx, a drug-addicted mother, and 
involvement with a gang. The crime she is caught committing, however, is not 
drug- or gang-related; she incited a riot at a protest after her brother, Julio, was 
shot and killed by a police officer. Though filled with rage, Luz is on the road to 
recovery at St. Therese until a twist of fate puts her face to face with the very officer 
who shot her brother. Luz’s story is compelling, and her fury is both understand-
able and realistic (if a bit monotonous at length). The book’s troubled characters, 
however, come off as more expected than authentic—the novel is more a litany 
of social problems than the gritty, realistic insider’s look it attempts to be. Still, 
readers will come to care about Luz, and there are genuinely moving moments 
that ably portray the urgency and desperation of her situation; the vocabulary and 
length of the book will make it easily readable even for reluctant readers. Though 
Saenz’s Sammy and Juliana in Hollywood (BCCB 9/04) and de la Peña’s Ball Don’t 
Lie (BCCB 10/05) are more convincing and tightly woven tales about Latino kids 
undergoing hard times, it is refreshing to see a strong Puerto Rican girl at the 
center of a sobering urban story, and this will be a quick pick for readers eager for 
a feminine perspective on urban drama.  MH
PAPAdemeTriou, lisA The Wizard, the Witch & Two Girls from Jersey. Razorbill, 
2006 273p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59514-074-3 $8.99 
R Gr. 6-9
Ever since Peter Jackson combined hobbits with hotties on the big screen, it was 
inevitable that we’d see a collision wherein chick lit meets epic fantasy, and here it 
28 • The BulleTin
is. Veronica, a bookish Latina, and Heather, a Jersey girl par excellence who didn’t 
even know that her favorite coffee bar was in a bookstore, tussle over the last copy 
of a fictional fantasy classic on the eve of an English paper due date and get zapped 
by an errant scanner into the second chapter of the book. They accidentally kill the 
princess heroine, and Heather is mistaken for her by a wizard, while Veronica, due 
to an unfortunate rip in the last letter of her Vassar sweatshirt, is mistaken for her 
servant. Thus this light-hearted, action-packed parody begins. The girls encounter 
all of the stock events of the hero quest—the assembly of a stalwart company, fights 
with hags and giant spiders, treacherous terrain, kidnapping by soulless henchmen 
riding leathery-winged avians, etc.—with Veronica reminding readers of numerous 
intertextual references along the way and trying desperately to get them back on 
plot. Papademetriou steps on all toes equally here; her send-up is funny enough to 
have both fantasy fans and mall-obsessed girls laughing at their own pretensions. 
Many of the jokes are suitably corny (Kiblar elves, for instance, whose specialty is 
tree-baked cookies) and accessible for those who haven’t read every fantasy referent, 
so that the Heathers can have as much fun as the Veronicas. The plot zips along 
from one near-fatal encounter to the next, but not at the expense of character 
development; both Veronica and Heather are given sensitively constructed back-
stories that make them likable and provide credible motivation for their actions 
and decisions. Give this to folks who liked the movie of Ella Enchanted (BCCB 
5/97) better than the book.  KC 
Price, chArlie Dead Connection. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2006 225p
ISBN 1-59643-114-8 $16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Murray hears dead people, and they are a lot friendlier than the people he has to 
deal with in life, so he hangs out at the graveyard. Unbeknownst to him, he’s being 
watched—by Mr. Janochek, the cemetery caretaker, Pearl, his daughter, and Billup, 
a police officer with a drinking problem, who thinks that Murray is a menace. After 
a rocky start, Murray and Pearl become friends, and he confides his secret to her, as 
well as the secret that there is a new voice in the cemetery, a girl who sounds lost and 
scared. Unaware of Murray or his abilities, a sheriff’s deputy named Gates is obsessed 
with finding out what happened to Nikki Parker, a cheerleader who disappeared 
six weeks ago. It’s Nikki’s voice that Murray hears; as Gates patiently works with 
Robert, a recovering meth addict who saw Nikki get into a car, have an argument, 
and suffer a blow to the neck, Murray and Pearl work out where she is buried and 
who killed her. None of this will stand up to the rules of evidence, of course, and 
suspense rides on the possibility that the killer will walk. Round-robin narration 
allows for the sympathetic development of all of the principal characters; readers 
see, for instance, the frustration and wariness of crank-damaged Robert when he 
can’t remember things; the gentleness of Gates, who doesn’t want to alienate his only 
witness but who also sees in him shades of his own son, who died of a speedball 
overdose; and the deterioration of Billup as he plans to start his sobriety with just 
one more party. There is a Crutcher-like sensibility in the balanced but unambigu-
ous portrayal of adults—while some are brutal, negligent, and blameworthy, others 
show nothing but compassion and understanding for the kids that these former 
monsters have messed up. Amidst the damage, then, there is love and courage in 
this page-turning mystery with a supernatural twist.  KC 
SepTemBer 2006 • 29
rex, AdAm Frankenstein Makes a Sandwich; written and illus. by Adam 
Rex. Harcourt, 2006 40p
ISBN 0-15-205766-8 $16.00 
R Gr. 3-7
This collection of humorous verse monstrosities treats old favorites, especially 
cinematic horrors, ranging from Frankenstein to Dracula to the mummy. Food is 
a recurring subject (the table of contents is labeled “Menu,” and in addition to the 
titular poem there’s an eating component to the entries about the creature from the 
black lagoon and the hunchback of Notre Dame), and there are several running 
jokes: the Phantom of the Opera is repeatedly troubled by getting tunes ineradica-
bly stuck in his head, and the Yeti and Big Foot engage in a poetic slanging match 
over people’s tendency to confuse one for the other. Though the entries are a little 
uneven, the poems are conceptually clever (kids will snicker at the idea of Count 
Dracula walking around with spinach stuck in his teeth), and the pell-mell jokery, 
with its moviegoing edge, will be irresistible to audiences fond of camp horror’s 
goofy charms. As appropriate to the film theme, the visuals carry more than their 
share of impact: Rex varies style from entry to entry, with glistening highlighted oils 
for Frankenstein’s dilemma, luminous black and white for the Phantom’s turns (in 
which the Phantom is unquestionably Lon Chaney Jr.), and soft, parodic Golden-
Books style for the Bigfoot and Yeti poems. Amusing details abound, from Rex’s 
title fonts in appropriate styles to jokes in surprising places (such as the copyright 
page) to entertaining references (roundheaded young Dracula looks like Charlie 
Brown, with a bat constituting his trademark shirt zigzag). Even the poetry-resistant 
will appreciate this blend of ghoulishness, glitz, and snarkiness.  DS 
roBBins, JAcqui The New Girl . . . and Me; illus. by Matt Phelan. Jackson/
Atheneum, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-689-86468-X $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
When the new girl, Shakeeta, arrives at Mia’s school, Ms. Becky tells her class 
that they should make Shakeeta feel at home; Mia thinks that school is probably 
pretty different from home, though, since school has eighteen girls clamoring to 
show Shakeeta around and one boy, D. J., who taunts Shakeeta as “Shakeeta Mos-
quita.” Shy Mia, initially drawn toward Shakeeta (who, intriguingly, possesses a 
pet iguana), is taken aback when the new girl stops her tormentor in his tracks by 
threatening to punch him in the head (“I do not want to get punched in the head,” 
thinks Mia worriedly). When a soccer disagreement leaves a lonely Shakeeta on 
the sidelines, Mia finally braves conversation with her, resulting in not a punch in 
the head but the birth of a new friendship. Mia’s narration deftly blends realistic 
kid focus (the dual obsession with Shakeeta’s iguana and the dramatic punch-in-
the-head notion is utterly credible) with an easygoing poetry of everyday speech 
in the repetition and grave, childish formality; the motif of feeling at home adds 
structure without overbalancing the narrative. Phelan’s soft-hued watercolors are 
shaped with slight, sketchy lines, allowing the art to soften Mia’s trepidation even 
as it gives the impression of a romping multicultural cast of kids; while the kids’ 
faces are all fairly similarly drafted, they’re tenderly drawn, and the art makes clever 
use of composition and perspective to illustrate the social negotiations (Mia and 
Shakeeta begin their rapprochement from either end of the world’s longest bench). 
Since shyness settles on just about everybody at one time or another, audiences 
will immediately sympathize with Mia’s trepidation and greet her and Shakeeta’s 
bonding with relief.  DS
30 • The BulleTin
roBBins, ken Pumpkins; written and illus. by Ken Robbins. Porter/Roaring 
Brook, 2006 32p
ISBN 1-59643-184-9 $14.95 
R 3-7 yrs
If your pumpkin-book stash is getting a little stale, here’s a fresh entry just in time 
for the high-demand autumn season. Robbins traces the life cycle of the pumpkin, 
offering in each spread just enough readaloud text and a framed photograph on 
one page, and a full-bleed photo on the facing page, all in the saturated colors for 
which he is noted. Orange fruit and green field, glowing jack-o’-lanterns and inky 
skies make naturally engrossing visual contrasts, and the intentionally blurred 
pictures of costumed ghouls and their eerily glowing, glowering pumpkins is only 
exceeded in creepiness by the photo of crushed, rotting fruit and withered vine at 
season’s end. There’s a little plant science (“The first small leaves come up in ten 
days or so, and in just a few weeks the vines spread out and flower buds begin to 
show”), a little celebration (“People hold contests to see who can grow the biggest 
ones. The gigantic pumpkin on the forklift weighs over a thousand pounds”), and 
a lot of crowd-pleasing eye candy.  EB 
roBerTs, Judson Viking Warrior. HarperCollins, 2006 360p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-079997-8 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-079996-X $16.99 
R Gr. 7-10
The bastard son of a Viking chieftain and a former Irish princess living as a thrall, 
Halfdan is bitter about his slave status. Not so bitter, though, that he is pleased 
when his mother strikes a fatal bargain—she will accompany the dying chieftain 
on his journey to Valhalla in exchange for Halfdan’s freedom and recognition as 
Hrorik’s son and heir. Halfdan proves a gifted warrior, and Hrorik’s other son, 
Harald, is proud to call him brother; Halfdan, though often pricked by his memory 
of life as a thrall, grows to love as a brother the man he formerly revered as a role 
model and despised as a master. Halfdan’s happiness is then dealt a mortal blow 
by Hrorik’s foster son, Toke, who, resenting Halfdan’s inheritance, raids the estate 
that Hrorik has left to Halfdan, killing everyone on the property, including the 
warriors who tried to defend it. Halfdan alone escapes, vowing not only to kill 
Toke but to expose him as a man without honor. To accomplish this, Halfdan has 
to earn his own reputation as a warrior of unimpeachable honor and greatness, 
which is presumably where further books in the Strongbow Saga will take him. 
Richly steeped in authentic Viking history and custom, this tale both complicates 
and confirms legends of Viking savagery. Halfdan is hard pressed to reconcile the 
stories told by his mother and his half-sister of Hrorik’s gentleness and decency 
with what he knows of the chieftain’s prowess in battle, but his own easy fall into 
the business of killing and revenge surprises him no less. As with any good Viking 
tale, there is lots of grisly storytelling, ale drinking, and warrior training here, but 
reader be warned: after some relatively leisurely accountings of battles long past, 
we’re suddenly in the thick of a tautly paced massacre followed by a breathless 
escape and a tense chase, and there’s no looking up from the page until the danger 
is past. A glossary and historical note are included.  KC
rocks, misAko Biker Girl; written and illus. by Misako Rocks. Hyperion, 
2006 112p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7868-3676-8 $7.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Aki, formerly an average seventeen-year-old girl, finds her life irrevocably changing 
SepTemBer 2006 • 31
with the appearance of a strange bicycle in her garage. The presence of the bike 
means that Aki is fated to be the next family hero, destined to stop the nefarious 
biker gang that past heroes were unable to defeat. Aki resists this role as long as 
she can, but she eventually dons a helmet and climbs onto the bike, transforming 
into Biker Girl. The bike itself has superpowers, and the fusion of girl and bike 
seems unstoppable; Aki just may fulfill her family’s destiny and get the boy of her 
dreams, all in one intense week. Aki is likable both in her everyday insecurities and 
as a bold superhero, ensuring reader connection with the central character. In this 
graphic novel, Rocks utilizes traditional manga details, including expressive dialogue 
bubbles that change form according to moods and interspersed mini-flashbacks that 
offer background details, while ultimately producing a Western graphic novel: the 
panels read from left to right, there is less adherence to manga symbols, and the 
pen-and-ink illustrations evince a spontaneity and variety that may attract readers 
who find manga visually formulaic. Though the ending is predictable, that won’t 
trouble enthusiastic readers, who will resent the mundane nature of their own 
bicycles even while cheering for Aki’s success.  AS
rodmAn, mAry Ann First Grade Stinks!; illus. by Beth Spiegel. Peachtree, 
2006 [32p]
ISBN 1-56145-377-3 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-7 yrs
Haley’s excited about starting first grade—at least at first. Unfortunately, the room 
is drab (“No kite. No colors. No fun”), the schedule is daunting (no share time, 
and only one recess), and Haley doesn’t seem to be clicking with the new teacher, 
who fails to appreciate Haley’s artistically orange sky and gently reproves her for 
distraction and whispering; what’s worse, Haley’s friend Ryan seems to be settling 
in just fine. Fortunately, when Haley finally suffers one indignity too many and 
loses it, yelling “First grade stinks!”, Ms. Gray proves to be a sympathetic and un-
derstanding teacher after all, and mercurial Haley happily does a 180° turn on the 
topic of first grade. While it’s a fairly abrupt resolution, especially for its totality, 
the story depicts with aptness, compassion, and humor a vivacious kid who’s gone 
sour on a much-anticipated experience. Haley’s narration is nicely authentic—she’s 
clearly got a case of newness panic, but it’s utterly age-appropriate that her reaction 
is to externalize her objections—and the details of her indignities (kindergartners 
got all the chocolate ice cream, so she’s stuck with vanilla) will elicit immediate 
audience understanding. Spiegel’s illustrations are dominated by doodly, energetic 
lines, with washes of color ranging from casually applied to cheerfully perfunctory 
in the dabs hinting at background colors; the palette is springy despite the back-
to-school season and the visual mood upbeat, keeping things reassuring even when 
Haley falters. Brave adults could use this to broach discussions about the differences 
between first grade and kindergarten, and it would also add some bracing wit into 
a first-day-of-school readaloud session.  DS
rosenThAl, Amy krouse Cookies: Bite-Size Life Lessons; illus. by Jane 
Dyer. HarperCollins, 2006 40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-058082-8 $13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-058081-X $12.99 
R 3-6 yrs
Grownup vocabulary comes at you fast when you’re a kid; small fry often find 
themselves awash in a sea of bewildering expectations. How can you “cooperate” 
32 • The BulleTin
and be “patient” when you don’t know what those words mean? Rosenthal gently 
renders the meanings of a selection of grownup words concrete through something 
kids do understand—cookies. “Envy” means wishing your friend’s cookie were your 
own because it looks better, for instance, and “courageous” means ’fessing up to 
the theft of a cookie. Her selections seem random until you really listen to the way 
adults talk to children about their behavior, and then you come to realize that these 
are everyday words—“polite,” “regret,” “open-minded,” “respect,” “content”—that 
can be more mystifying than enlightening when it comes to figuring out how to 
behave. Dyer’s whimsical watercolors of darling children and their clothed animal 
companions are undeniably precious (and sometimes a little blurry), but touches 
of humor, especially in the personified animals, mitigate the saccharine factor; for 
instance, a cat weeping and dabbing her eyes with a handkerchief over a dropped 
cookie, and a horse donning a yellow slicker for an outing while entrusting his 
cookie to a young friend will elicit warm chuckles and active looking. The cursive 
font for most of the explanations unfortunately renders co-reading unlikely, but 
this has a solid serviceability below the sweetness that makes it more effective than 
most such purposive entries. Put it to use in a story hour where cookie-munching 
participants can develop their own confection-inspired vocabulary entries.  KC 
rosenThAl, Amy krouse One of Those Days; illus. by Rebecca Doughty. Put-
nam, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-399-24365-8 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
It’s been over thirty years since Viorst’s Alexander had his terrible, horrible, no good, 
very bad day, but as those days still plague us, it’s high time for another litany of 
life’s minor grievances. The endpapers of this catalogue of quotidian calamities 
feature a grid of faces in various guises of grim as they ponder the annoyances 
that make for one of those nothing-is-going-my-way days—No Fair Day, Keep 
Spilling Stuff Day, Can’t Afford It Day, Answer to Everything Is No Day, etc. 
Witty illustrations give flesh to the daily titles, with shaky black outlines tracing 
potato-shaped heads, flat oval eyes, and unhappy mouths. Peg legs with impossibly 
small feet poke out beneath pants and skirts—maybe it’s this small detail that, 
while remaining comic, nonetheless arouses pathos as it renders the figures utterly 
mournful and convincingly dismayed with their temporary lot in life. Rosenthal 
does a quite satisfactory job of picking out universally resonant reasons for bad 
days, but of course audiences will happily respond, generating their own diary of 
disasters. Schadenfreude notwithstanding, it just makes you feel better to know 
that everyone has days like these.  KC
ruBin, susAn goldmAn The Cat with the Yellow Star; by Susan Goldman Rubin 
and Ela Weissberger. Holiday House, 2006 [40p]
ISBN 0-8234-1831-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
At the culmination of Kristallnacht, Marketa Stein was ordered to Nazi headquarters; 
upon her return, she hustled herself and her two daughters, Ela (co-author Weiss-
berger) and Ilona, out of Sudetenland to the relative security of Prague. Within a few 
years, that haven crumbled and the tiny family (Ela’s father had disappeared at Nazi 
hands) was removed to Terezin, where, for most of the next four years, Ela would 
grow up in Room 28 of building L410 with an ever-rotating roster of roommates, 
SepTemBer 2006 • 33
many of whom were eventually “invited” onto transports to the East. Although 
Weissberger’s earliest memories pass by in slightly choppy flashes, the clarity with 
which she and Rubin describe life in Terezin makes the account riveting. Here a 
picture emerges not just of child victims who were necessarily fearful and confused 
by the lack of reliable nourishment, inconsistently enforced rules, and sudden disap-
pearances, but also of strong-willed people who created a thriving culture within a 
system of brutal confinement. Teachers, artists, and musicians bent and broke every 
rule to keep minds and spirits vigorous. The highlight of this cooperative effort 
was the series of performances of the opera Brundibar, in which Ela and many of 
her friends participated, and which was deceptively touted by Nazi camp officials 
as “proof” to the Red Cross of their humane treatment of the Jews. Young readers 
will certainly be relieved to learn that Ela not only survives her ordeal but leaves 
Terezin with her immediate family and even reunites with several old friends years 
later in the United States. The superficially rosy outcome is tempered, however, by 
Rubin’s clear reminder in an epilogue that of the 10,632 children sent to Terezin 
fewer than half survived, and of the many girls resident in Room 28, a mere fifteen 
survived. Source notes, and index, and an extensive list of resources (many noted 
as suitable for children) round out this gripping memoir.  EB 
sAlisBury, grAhAm House of the Red Fish. Lamb, 2006 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90145-3 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73121-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Tomi Nakaji, his mother, and little sister have been muddling along alone in the year 
since Pearl Harbor was attacked and Tomi’s father and grandfather were arrested and 
taken away from their Honolulu home. Tomi’s mother is stoically content to work 
as a maid for the well-to-do Wilson family, on whose property they have a small 
house; Tomi, however, bristles under the racist slurs and threats from Mr. Wilson 
and his bullying son, Keet. Some tension lifts when the Nakajis’ close friends, the 
Davises, help get Ojii-chan (Grandpa) released and Tomi focuses on a plan to raise 
his father’s fishing boat, which was scuttled by the American military after the attack. 
Keet, however, stands squarely in the way, persistently undermining Tomi’s efforts 
by stealing boat parts, threatening to reveal Tomi’s scheme to the authorities, and 
gathering a group of thugs to back him up in fights with Tomi and his crew. The 
sequel to Under the Blood-Red Sun (BCCB 11/94) is part examination of Japanese 
and American relations in World War II and part celebration of kids’ resourceful-
ness and community cooperation in raising the sunken craft with an improvised 
tool kit. The easygoing friendship and good-natured banter among Tomi, Rico, 
Mose, and Billy make them an amiable group to be around, and readers will cheer 
their hard-won success.  EB
schAefer, lolA m. An Island Grows; illus. by Cathie Felstead. Greenwillow, 
2006 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623931-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623930-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
“Deep, deep beneath the sea/ Stone breaks/ Water quakes,” and the escaping 
magma slowly accrues into a volcanic island that breaks the surface of the ocean. 
The buffeted rock turns into soil, which blooms with plant life, attracts insects and 
34 • The BulleTin
birds, and eventually lures traders and settlers who establish a robust culture on 
their speck of turf. Schaefer’s spare couplets (“Magma glows/ Volcano blows”) are 
gracefully complemented by Felstead’s tidily composed paper collages, which evolve 
from simple studies of gray rock, fiery magma, and teal sea to a vibrant community 
that boasts a colorful harvest from land and water. One might quibble over the 
rounded rocks that somehow emerge jagged from the water, or the fact that the 
problem of active volcanoes hosting population centers is never addressed (it’s even 
sidestepped in the closing notes). The main focus here is transformation, though, 
and elementary science teachers, emergent readers, and budding geographers alike 
will appreciate this engaging introduction.  EB
serros, michele Honey Blonde Chica. Simon Pulse, 2006 298p
ISBN 1-4169-1591-5 $14.95 
Ad Gr. 9-12
Evie Gomez and her friends have a sweet southern California life. As the kids of 
wealthy Mexican-American business owners, their biggest problems are finding 
the right party, the right beach, and the right spot to eat lunch on the grounds of 
their posh private school. They even nickname themselves the Flojos—Spanish 
for “lazy” and Californian for flip-flops—to emphasize their laid-back approach 
to life and fashion. Their rivals are the Sangros (short for sangrona, Spanish for 
“bitch”), wealthier girls who hail from Distrito Federal in Mexico City, board at 
their school, and also do what they can to live up to their clique’s name. When 
Evie’s former best friend moves back to California after living in the DF for four 
years, she’s anxious to bridge the gap between the two groups, inviting Evie into 
the world of Sangro parties and honey-blonde highlights. Evie’s best Flojo friend 
Raquel howls at the betrayal, and even her guy friend Alex, who has always been 
supportive of (and secretly in love with) Evie, won’t sanction her move from flip-flops 
to high-heeled strappy sandals. Though this plays with the intracultural squabbles 
of a wealthy Latino world not often depicted in books for teens, it is still predict-
able and relatively tame chick lit, with a nice girl caught between loyalty to friends 
and a desire to run with a slicker crowd, a backstabbing boyfriend whose narrative 
function is to bring warring girlfriends tearily together, and a sweet, long-suffering 
guy waiting in the wings for things to settle down. The interest here lies in the little 
cultural details—Serros carefully depicts the nuances of emotional expression, class 
consciousness, and competitive one-upmanship that differentiate the Mexican-born 
and Mexican-American characters, making the book a useful addition to a collec-
tion in need of more Latino titles.  KC 
shermAn, deliA Changeling. Viking, 2006 [304p]
ISBN 0-670-05967-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Neef is a changeling, a human baby stolen by fairies. She lives in “New York 
Between,” an invisible parallel city, and she was raised under the protection of 
her godmother (a white rat) and the Green Lady of Central Park, the spirit that 
guards all of the myriad elves, fairies, trolls, and other magical Folk that live in the 
area. After breaking a Fairy Law, Neef is expelled, and she must complete a heroic 
quest with three tasks in order to regain entry to her community. Before she even 
begins the absurd and humorous tasks, however, she’s startled to encounter her own 
double. Dubbing the identical girl “Changeling” (saying their shared real name can 
be dangerous around the Folk), Neef adds a new item to her quest list: returning 
SepTemBer 2006 • 35
Changeling to her real New York home and family. In a thoughtful twist, Sherman 
describes Changeling’s behavior in the terms of Asperger’s Syndrome, providing an 
otherworldly explanation, the forcing of fairy instincts into human expectations, 
for the disorder. Both girls are well-developed and distinctive characters, and the 
gradual strengthening of their powerful connection will make readers wish that 
they could remain together. Sherman, who has developed the world of New York 
Between and its impressive international magical cast in previous short stories, glee-
fully drops literary characters such as Eloise, Shakespearean fairies, and Grahame’s 
Water Rat into this urban fantasy, adding to its hectic charm. Silly, profound, 
and lightning paced all at once, this novel will please adventure fans and fantasy 
readers alike.  AS 
simmons, michAel The Rise of Lubchenko. Razorbill, 2006 217p
ISBN 1-59514-061-1 $16.99 
R Gr. 7-10
Evan Macalister may, with the aid of his friends Erika and Ruben, have faced 
international criminals and reluctantly saved his stern dad’s bacon in Finding Lub-
chenko (BCCB 7/05), but he’s still the same lazy, entitled layabout (“Life’s lessons 
were wasted on me,” Evan explains helpfully, “and I learned absolutely nothing”). 
Nonetheless, he’s drawn back into the world of intrigue when an anonymous phone 
call informs him that Jim Richmond, his father’s business partner, plans first to 
take smallpox virus to Switzerland to sell on the black market, then to kill Evan’s 
father (currently abroad in Belgium), and finally to kill Evan and his friends. Evan 
decides that the only way to stop Richmond is to alert Lubchenko, the shadowy 
figure pivotal in Evan’s previous brush with international malfeasance; to this end 
Evan pilfers from his father’s valuables and funds a trip to Europe with Erika and 
Ruben, only to find that the good-guy/bad-guy scorecard may be more complicated 
than he realizes. This sometimes seems a perfunctory recapitulation of the original 
adventure, but it’s still an audaciously light-hearted and irreverent tale of murder, 
international conspiracy, and global threat. Simmons adds bite by dealing left-
handedly but acerbically with Evan’s adversarial relationship with his father; irony 
doubles back on itself as truth in the climax, where Evan diverts his father from 
becoming a murder victim by demanding they discuss their relationship, which 
is—ostensibly—the last thing in the world Evan really wants to do. Readers will 
want to start with Finding Lubchenko, but fans of that book will relish another 
outing with the antiheroic and smartmouthed Evan.  DS
sloAn, BriAn Tale of Two Summers. Simon, 2006 241p
ISBN 0-689-87439-1 $15.95 
Ad  Gr. 9-12 
Best friends since kindergarten, Hal and Chuck will be spending summer apart 
as Chuck heads off to theater camp and Hal remains behind to take Driver’s 
Ed.  They keep in touch through a private blog, with both fifteen-year-olds freed 
by the format to be even more blunt, honest, and soul-searching than they would 
be in person. Chuck’s eccentric theater camp pals make for interesting, mostly 
light-hearted story fodder for the blog, while Hal’s raging crush on the mysterious 
and mercurial French exchange student, Henri, provides a summer drama for both 
Chuck (who’s afraid his best friend will be heartbroken) and Hal (who desperately 
wants to have his first romance). Sloan’s attention to detail is exemplified in the 
blog entries, which are complete with emoticons, acronyms, and careless punctua-
tion. Unfortunately, the format is gimmicky and unoriginal, and the characters 
36 • The BulleTin
are formulaic, with Hal mostly a stereotypical histrionic gay boy and Chuck the 
über-supportive straight sidekick. However, Sloan successfully keeps both voices 
distinct, and Hal and Chuck are ultimately likable characters whose friendship 
feels genuine in its warmth. As breezy and ephemeral as many blogs themselves, 
this novel may satisfy readers looking for an alternative summer romance or the 
gay equivalent of the moneyed summer fun in Melissa de la Cruz’s Au Pairs series 
(The Au Pairs, BCCB 9/04).  AS
sTAhler, dAvid, Jr. Doppelganger. Eos/HarperCollins, 2006 258p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-087233-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-087232-2 $16.99 
 R Gr. 7-12
In Stahler’s otherwise ordinary world, doppelgangers murder humans and then 
adopt their forms and lives; it is therefore fortunate that their own existences are 
not complicated with names, societal rules, or consciences. One sixteen-year-old 
doppelganger cannot seem to settle into his fate—perhaps because he is part human, 
or perhaps he developed sympathy for the human plight from watching television 
in his isolated cabin while his absentee, indifferent mother came back only to feed 
him. After his mother kicks him out, he is forced to make his first kill to disguise 
himself, and he selects a sick, elderly man whom he can pretend was ready to die; 
he next kills Chris, a violent teen who had tried to murder the doppelganger, and he 
discovers that there may be lives crueler than his own when he becomes enmeshed 
with Chris’ sad, violent family. The book raises interesting moral questions about 
the nature of monsters: the murderous doppelganger haunted by his seemingly 
unavoidable destiny is contrasted with Chris and his father, both angry and abusive 
men who cannot change their actions. The doppelganger’s painful and realistically 
agonized first-person narration heightens sympathy, as do the sacrifices he makes to 
avoid fulfilling his murderous destiny. Stahler has written a powerful novel about 
crushing violence, fragile idealism, and the sometimes insurmountable difficulty of 
outrunning one’s upbringing. Teens struggling to create their own paths, especially 
those raised in difficult homes, will identify strongly with the protagonist and his 
onerous choices.  AS
sTork, frAncisco x. Behind the Eyes. Dutton, 2006 246p
ISBN 0-525-47735-7 $16.99 
R Gr. 10-12
After Hector’s brother is murdered by gang members, sixteen-year-old Hector 
succumbs to his rage and goes after the leader of that gang, becoming the gang’s 
next mark. His only out is to be shipped off to Furman, a military-style school 
for juvenile delinquents, where he will have to face up to his demons and sort out 
how he, formerly an honor-roll student who only wanted to avoid trouble, can 
find a way out of this mess. Stork offers a startling and authentically rough-edged 
portrayal of the inner city and juvenile facility in El Paso, Texas; the young people 
represented range from those who are devoid of hope to the truly cruel to victims of 
circumstance. Slangy Spanish (the meaning of which is mostly discernible through 
context) is liberally scattered throughout the tale, adding to the authenticity. The 
death-row-inmate main character of Stork’s adult novel, The Way of the Jaguar, 
makes an appearance as Hector’s mentor through a prison-exchange program; 
Stork structures the story similarly to that previous novel, starting in medias res, 
then letting the how and why unfold through interwoven flashbacks and recollec-
tions. This is an unsettling and harshly realistic tale most appropriate for mature 
SepTemBer 2006 • 37
readers, offering no easy answers but suggesting a thread of hope through Hector’s 
development as the book progresses. The subtly woven philosophy of individual 
responsibility and the novel’s ultimately hopeful resolution are not only important 
for those who, like Hector, are caught in a seemingly hopeless cycle of violence, 
but also for teens who, in various settings, are struggling to make peace with their 
situation or themselves.  MH 
sullivAn, george Berenice Abbott, Photographer: An Independent Vision. Clar-
ion, 2006 170p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-44026-7 $20.00 
 R Gr. 7-10
For many teen practitioners, the medium of photography has morphed from film to 
digital capture, but the fundamental debate between photography camps—pictori-
alists and documentarians—remains lively. In this biography of twentieth-century 
American photographer Berenice Abbott, readers meet a woman so single-mind-
edly dedicated to the documentary school that she publicly took on the likes of 
Alfred Stieglitz, even though her outspokenness helped make her career path 
difficult. Since Abbott remained an intensely private woman, Sullivan traces her 
movements around the photography milieu in Paris and New York but refrains 
from speculation about her interior life. A career which includes contributions 
as a sculptor, assistant to Man Ray, portraitist, promoter and archivist of Eugene 
Atget’s Paris photos, teacher, inventor, science photographer, and creator of the 
landmark collection Changing New York provides ample material beyond biography. 
Sullivan pursues an angle teen artists are likely to appreciate—this woman stuck 
to her vision with unshakable self-confidence, even when the big-name players 
left her out of the game, and although she rode out starving-artist periods in her 
roller-coaster career, she happily experienced professional and public acclaim in 
her lifetime. Sullivan’s fluent text is well matched by high-quality reproductions 
of Abbott’s black-and-white photos, although readers may wish several had been 
better aligned with pages on which referents appear. Chapter notes on quotations, 
a bibliography, and index are included.  EB 
TchAnA, kATrin hymAn, ad. Changing Woman and Her Sisters: Stories of God-
desses from Around the World; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman. Holiday House, 
2006 80p
ISBN 0-8234-1999-1 $18.95 
R Gr. 6-8
Daughter-mother duo Katrin Hyman Tchana and Trina Schart Hyman team up, 
in Hyman’s last artistic endeavor before her death in 2004, to portray ten stories of 
goddesses from a broad range of world cultures and religions. Representing wide-
ranging perspectives from Inuit, Mayan, Celtic, and Hindu to the Fon of West 
Africa, the tales each begin with an informational paragraph that briefly outlines 
context then move into a story retold from collected and documented goddess 
myths. The stories are powerful and sometimes authentically violent—the father 
of Sedna, deity of the Inuits, cuts off her hands and allows her to drown to save 
himself, and the Celtic goddess Macha is forced to race a team of horses while she 
is giving birth. They also portray love, faith, and compassion—Shinto’s Kuan Yin 
devotes herself to eliminating suffering, and the Navajo Changing Woman lovingly 
prepares a good earth in which humans will dwell. The collection’s breadth makes 
it a valuable sampling of world mythology, with the engrossing goddess theme 
tying the tales together; adult guidance or outside research may be necessary for 
38 • The BulleTin
young readers to fully appreciate these complex tales, which are often intertextually 
intertwined with larger bodies of mythology. Tchana makes the most of the brief 
space available, however, to preserve the original culture in her retellings and to 
make each tale independently readable. Hyman’s art departs somewhat from her 
customary detailed linework, instead portraying each goddess in acrylic paintings 
layered among collaged photographs and found items, tapping into the native artistic 
styles of the tales’ cultures and effectively interweaving the traditional and modern. 
A thorough artist’s note, bibliography for each tale, afterword, and author’s note are 
included. This will be a rich resource for those students wishing to delve more deeply 
into world legends than the requisite classical mythology unit allows.  MH
Thimmesh, cATherine Team Moon: How 400,000 People Landed Apollo 11 on 
the Moon. Houghton, 2006 80p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-50757-4 $19.95 
R* Gr. 4-8
Kids have seen the photographs, studied the history and science, admired the 
astronauts, and memorized the “One small step” quote, and they probably feel 
they know quite a bit about the first manned moon landing. But until they’ve read 
Thimmesh’s breathless behind-the-scenes account, they know zip. Two pages in, 
watching the world watching their TVs “wide-eyed, waiting,” Thimmesh throws 
her first curve—Nixon’s alternative speech that lurked on the sidelines in the event 
of failure: “These brave men, Neil Armstrong, and [Buzz] Aldrin, know that there 
is no hope for their recovery. But they also know there is hope for mankind in their 
sacrifice.” With this chilling comment on what-might-have-been now planted in 
readers’ minds, the text turns to seven challenges that threatened to abort the land-
ing, turn it into tragedy, or rewrite the way we’ve come to understand the mission. 
Recurring alarms begin to signal some 33,000 feet above the moon’s surface at 
descent; two separate fuel-related crises occur at landing; space suits are not certain 
to withstand unknown “field” conditions; life support during EVA is problematic; 
a windstorm threatens to scuttle television coverage; parachute deployment is 
a matter of hope; and still photos taken by the astronauts are nearly lost. Each 
crisis is resolved by the quick-thinking and consummate teamwork of people who 
never become household names, using technology that seems almost laughable by 
today’s standards. Thimmesh imbues the story with edge-of-the-seat tension, and 
even though readers know there’s a happy ending in store, fingernails will be bitten 
nonetheless. Text, much of it in white type (or blue for captions), moves in, on, 
and around color photos from the Apollo 11 mission, and four pages of thumbnail 
photos and quotes from unsung mission participants bring the journey to a close. 
Besides extensive end matter that comprises chapter notes, sources, and index, 
Thimmesh also supplies a glossary (handy for deciphering acronyms) and a brief 
recap of all seventeen Apollo flights.  EB
Thomson, sArAh l. The Secret of the Rose. Greenwillow, 2006 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-087251-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-087250-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Rosalind and Robin have come to London in the hope of finding shelter, since their 
merchant father has been arrested and jailed for practicing Catholicism, a crime in 
Elizabethan England. Unfortunately, their London friends have also been arrested, 
and fourteen-year-old Rosalind soon finds out that a girl without adult protection 
SepTemBer 2006 • 39
is extremely vulnerable in London, so she disguises herself as a boy and calls herself 
Richard. A chance encounter with playwright Christopher Marlowe gets “Richard” 
a job as a scribe, while stagestruck young Robin takes up an apprenticeship at the 
Rose theater. Though this is in many ways a standard historical piece—the girl-
passes-as-boy plot is a well-worn one, and we’ve even seen an Elizabethan scribe 
before (Blackwood’s Shakespeare’s Scribe, BCCB 10/00)—Thomson breathes new 
life into the familiar elements with solid writing and touches of quiet originality. 
The book early on faces the brutalities of its era: Rosalind barely escapes from an 
attempted rape, and she makes her way to Newgate Prison only to discover her 
father died of disease there the week before. The author’s clear familiarity with her 
era and setting (Rosalind’s name is a telling Shakespearean reference) allows her to 
create an intriguing Marlowe, who has been spying for the queen’s Privy Council-
lor and turning in Catholics, but who secretly knows the faith of his new scribe 
and remains a generous if quixotic master—until his murder. The plot still has its 
various implausibilities, but it’s a thoughtful and well-paced adventure that will 
please young drama queens.  DS
Todd, mArk Whatcha Mean, What’s a Zine?: The Art of Making Zines 
and Mini-Comics; by Mark Todd and Esther Pearl Watson. Houghton, 
2006 112p (Graphia)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-618-56315-6 $12.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Todd and Watson, zine fans and creators, utilize the freewheeling formats and diverse 
illustrative styles of zines themselves to explore what they are and how they are 
made. Incorporating contributions from over twenty zine creators (mostly one- to 
two-page spreads), Todd and Watson organize the book into eleven loose chapters 
covering a multitude of subjects including the history of zines, the manipulation of 
a copier’s limitations to one’s benefit, and suggestions for places to leave completed 
zines. The resulting text is appealingly authentic, even as it’s cluttered with an al-
most overwhelming diversity; this unusual format is ultimately effective, however, 
for describing the endlessly varied world of zines and mini-comics. Much of the 
text is created with a typewriter or is handwritten, and there are pen, pencil, and 
painted illustrations as well as collages, copier experiments, and digital coloring 
(tan and blue backgrounds and details provide effective contrast). This range of 
media will encourage readers, who can literally use the resources they have at hand 
to get started. There is a realistic emphasis on the limitations of zines: it is difficult 
to profit from the format, very few zines are published on a large scale, and early 
efforts are rarely up to one’s own expectations. However, success stories such as 
Bust magazine, which began as a zine and now has over 80,000 subscribers, infuse 
a sense of possibility into the otherwise small-scale suggestions. A glossary and 
lists of zine resources and libraries round out this exciting addition to recent DIY 
books for teens.  AS
voAke, chArloTTe Hello, Twins; written and illus. by Charlotte Voake. Can-
dlewick, 2006 28p
ISBN 0-7636-3003-9 $15.99 
R 2-4 yrs
Though they are twins, Charlotte and Simon aren’t much alike at all: Simon cleans 
his plate while Charlotte sucks her thumb and daydreams; Charlotte likes to stack 
blocks, while Simon prefers to knock them down; and though they both enjoy 
taking their toys for a walk in the baby carriage, Charlotte strolls while Simon 
40 • The BulleTin
vrooms. However, despite their different temperaments, Charlotte and Simon share 
an affectionate bond (“they like each other just the way they are”). Inspired by the 
author’s experience as a fraternal twin, this gentle readaloud aptly expresses the 
kinship between twins while acknowledging differences, a theme that will appeal 
to identical twins as well as fraternal ones. Voake makes strategic use of the double-
page spread by placing Charlotte on one side, Simon on the other, a technique 
that is especially effective when they gaze at each other across the binding; warm 
watercolor peach tones occasionally enhanced by red, green, and blue accents are 
animated by thick ink scrawls, conveying the tumult of the twins’ daily lives. Though 
ways in which Simon and Charlotte are different sometimes fall into gender stereo-
types—such as the fact that Charlotte is the stuffed animal nurturer, while Simon 
knocks things over and careens around with the baby stroller—this is nevertheless 
a charming and affectionate read, indispensable for young twins and those who 
love them. Moreover, the relative paucity of picture-book literature featuring twin 
protagonists will make this fond offering all the more appreciated.  LG
voigT, cynThiA Bad Girls, Bad Girls: Whatcha Gonna Do? Atheneum, 
2006 [448p]
ISBN 0-689-82474-2  $17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
The title isn’t just a riff on a catchy song: bad girls Mikey and Margalo (from Bad 
Girls, BCCB 4/96, etc.), now in ninth grade, find themselves encountering a series 
of challenging situations that tax their problem-solving abilities. First, they need to 
stop the merciless bullying of their friend Hadrian Klenk by a trio of upperclass-
men, but that turns out to be just a warmup for the big events: Margalo, working 
hard to earn funds for college, has over $200 stolen from her knapsack during play 
rehearsals, and Mikey, the ace tennis player, is thrown off the team when she refuses 
to obey her coach and fudge line calls to her own advantage. The story is shaped as 
much by the passing of the school year as by events, so the pace is on the deliberate 
side, but that doesn’t really impair the book: ultimately, this is a character drama, 
exploring the continuing development of two fascinating personalities. Mikey, 
the inflexible pragmatist, to whom nuance is a foreign concept, and Margalo, the 
stealth powerhouse who loves to pull the strings from behind the scenes, have 
the thoroughgoing mutual knowledge of a long-married couple and they’re as 
formidable and self-confident a partnership as ever (“We’re what normal is,” says 
Mikey with absolute certainty. “It’s everybody else that’s getting it wrong”). Yet 
they’re also ninth-graders believably developing new skills, expanding their worlds, 
and even beginning to soften their rigorous judgments (“It’s not as simple to hate 
somebody as it used to be,” Mikey wistfully observes); both girls are adjusting to 
changes in their family, and both girls begin to see that the achievement of victory 
may not always be clearcut. Knowledge of previous books will enrich the readerly 
journey, but even new readers will recognize the charisma of this pair of friends 
and appreciate the perceptive wit of their chronicle.  DS
wAlker, sAlly m. Fossils; ISBN 0-8225-5947-1; Rocks; ISBN 0-8225-5945-
5. Lerner, 2006 48p Each book: illus. with photographs (Early Bird Earth 
Science) Library ed. $25.26 
Ad Gr. 2-4
Rock hounds, neophyte paleontologists, and dirt diggers of all stripes will be 
SepTemBer 2006 • 41
drawn to the clean, spacious layout, crisp color photos, and sensible organization 
of these entries in the Early Bird Earth Science series. Just beneath the eye candy, 
though, is a text that never quite surpasses the choppy, easy-reader predictability 
of many series information books: “Sometimes melted rock cools slowly. Other 
times, melted rock cools quickly. Crystals can help you figure out whether a rock 
cooled slowly or quickly.” Each title opens with a “Be a Word Detective” spread that 
presents terms to be introduced in context and then backed up by definitions in 
an appended glossary. Leading questions at the head of each chapter direct readers 
to find a factual answer within the vicinity, and if your pedagogical plate isn’t yet 
filled to capacity, “A Note to Adults on Sharing a Book” offers painfully obvious 
advice: “Use questions to make sure the child understands the information in this 
book. Here are some suggestions: What did this paragraph tell us? What does the 
picture show?” Rocks focuses on definition, three main types of rock, and the rock 
cycle; Fossils covers definition, fossil formation, and the method and purpose of 
paleontology. Either should prove to be a reliable workhorse on the nonfiction 
shelves, and their bibliographies direct children to additional materials in print 
and on the Web. Indices are included.  EB 
wArner, sAlly Twilight Child. Viking, 2006 [240p]
ISBN 0-670-06076-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-8
Eleni is a twilight child, a rare individual who can communicate with otherworldly 
beings. These supernatural presences can offer little more than comfort and oc-
casional advice, however, as heightening tensions between Sweden and Finland 
in the 1790s lead to Eleni’s being uprooted from her Finnish home and sent to 
work as a slave. Eleni escapes by jumping off a ship and swimming to shore, luck-
ily landing on the quiet Scottish island of Mull, where she is welcomed. Though 
she misses her homeland, the friendship of a selkie girl, who was also taken in by 
Eleni’s benefactor, and the shocking return of Eleni’s beloved, Matias, whom she 
hadn’t seen for years, lead Eleni to the conclusion that home is wherever one can 
find love. Intriguing side plots around Eleni’s twilight gift fizzle as romance takes 
center stage; this focus on the relationship is an unfortunate development, as the 
appearance of Matias on the same island hundreds of miles and several years later 
and his immediate romantic love for Eleni feel more contrived and flat than sweep-
ing and destined. If elements such as the selkie and other fantastical creatures had 
been given equal attention, this could have been a captivating historical fantasy, 
but it’s nonetheless a sweet romance set in an appealingly unusual time and place. 
An author’s note, map, and glossary are included.  AS
wATTs, leAnder Beautiful City of the Dead. Houghton, 2006 254p
ISBN 0-618-59443-4 $16.00 
R Gr. 6-12
On her first day at a new high school, Zee meets Relly, the boy with “deep red, 
almost purple” eyes, who loves the same metalhead music she does and seems to 
exude a shimmery heat. He is part of an as yet unknown four-piece band, Scorpio 
Bone, and she auditions as a bass player for him, a drummer named Butt, and a 
surpassingly beautiful lead singer called Jerod. From the first song, each senses they 
are creating something beyond regular music, something Relly calls “ghost music,” 
when the sound is so loud and overwhelming that it creates a silence in which 
other sounds can be heard. The four are actually elementals, gods of fire (Relly), 
42 • The BulleTin
water (Zee), air (Jerod), and earth (Butt) who have been drawn together to form 
a unit, “just four and no more.” They aren’t the only elementals in town, though, 
and a rival group that includes the assistant principal and a biology teacher from 
Zee and Relly’s school wants Zee to replace their own mysteriously missing water 
element. She resists the lure of adult power and the subsequent mind games and 
physical threats, but when fragile Relly is kidnapped, Zee agrees to complete the 
rival quartet. Treachery is afoot: they mean to offer Relly as a sacrifice rather than 
free him, and Scorpio Bone confronts them in a final struggle for power. Watts’ 
latest offering maintains the darkly atmospheric mood of his earlier works (Ten 
Thousand Charms, BCCB 5/05) while moving the setting to today’s Goth culture, 
where song lyrics come from gravestone inscriptions and bands are named Brain 
Hammer and Little Black Pill. Though a few supernatural details remain puzzling, 
the potential love story between Relly and Zee, the supernatural rivalry between 
teens and adults, and the musical interludes will keep readers turning pages deep 
into the night.  CW
weeks, sArAh Jumping the Scratch. Geringer/HarperCollins, 2006  176p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-054110-5 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-054109-1 $15.99 
M Gr. 5-8 
Jamie has heard bad things come in threes, but for him it’s fours—first his cat 
dies, then his dad leaves, and then he and his mom have to move in with his aunt, 
who has suffered a traumatic brain injury and is no longer able to form short-term 
memories. Number four? He is sexually abused by the caretaker of his aunt’s trailer 
park. Thus he envies his aunt’s ability to forget, even while he plays games with her 
and searches for some trigger that will help her “jump the scratch,” a metaphor 
that refers to a scratch on a record album but will also make sense to those who are 
careless with their CDs. Though Weeks doesn’t provide a name or notes regarding 
Aunt Sapphy’s condition, the description of symptoms indicates anterograde am-
nesia, which, except in soap operas and extremely rare cases, does not get better, no 
matter how many triggers one pulls. Perhaps this doesn’t matter so much, though, 
since his aunt’s condition is little more than a plot device designed to carry forward 
the sexual-abuse plot, which, in turn, seems device-y and contrived as well. Jamie’s 
memory of the event, recovered by a dubious hypnosis-by-numbers conducted 
by a neighborhood geekgirl, ends in a tasteful fade to black; he tells Sapphy and 
lo, her memory is restored, the culprit is arrested, and Jamie is sufficiently healed 
to be able to plant the Christmas tree that lured him into the abuser’s clutches in 
his yard to commemorate the event. In other words, all the gears in this play on 
remembering, forgetting, and healing are visible here, and they just don’t mesh 
into anything credible. Readers interested in traversing the thematic ground of 
boys through trauma and recovery can skip this in favor of Konigsburg’s Silent to 
the Bone (BCCB 10/00).  KC 
weinsTein, lAuren r.  Girl Stories; written and illus. by Lauren R. 
Weinstein. Holt, 2006 237p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8050-7863-0$16.95 
R Gr. 9-12
In this memoir in graphic-novel form, Weinstein recalls her middle and high school 
years with a mixture of embarrassment, sympathy, and an unflinching eye for her 
younger self’s faults. The result is a deeply engaging, though painful, collection of 
comics that include such topics as gym class (“If I could envision a picture of hell, 
SepTemBer 2006 • 43
it would look exactly like volleyball”), first loves, and the almost relentless body 
insecurities many teen girls face. Occasionally, the topics may not reach every reader: 
Weinstein’s obsession with Morrissey will undoubtedly confuse those unaware of 
his status as a celibate, melancholy cult hero, though the acutely felt (if imaginary) 
bond between musician and fan will be familiar to many readers. The illustrations 
were drawn over a period of seven years and digital color was subsequently added, 
resulting in a wide range of drawing styles; this variety, in addition to changes in 
fonts and backgrounds, keeps even the shortest stories in this large collection lively. 
Much of the ruefully sardonic humor and edgily exaggerated draftsmanship recalls 
Lynda Barry, while interspersed monochromatic illustrations are more reminiscent of 
R. Crumb’s distinctive style. While the hard-earned distance and wisdom of adult-
hood occasionally appears in the stories, particularly in the bonus cartoons which 
seem to represent Lauren’s college years, most of this collection has an authentic 
young adult voice, and Weinstein explores teens’ angst, rebellion, and their quests 
for independence with respect and humor.  AS
wells, rosemAry Max’s ABC; written and illus. by Rosemary Wells. Viking, 
2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-670-06074-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 2-4 yrs
True to form, rabbit Max is beset by problems and big sister Ruby claims to have 
the answers. Ants have escaped from Max’s glassed-in ant farm and found their way 
into his overalls. His efforts to drown them in cranberry juice fail, and a change of 
clothes doesn’t help either, since the new pants are sticky from an attractively drippy 
ice pop. A bath is no good—the ants actually like it—but Ruby finally triumphs 
with her strategy of luring them to toast and jam and then vacuuming them up. 
Tenderhearted Max, of course, can’t have that, and he empties the vacuum bag 
and send the ants back to their farm. While the storyline does manage to capture 
the essence of Max and Ruby, it plays out in a rambling narrative that strains to 
incorporate letters of the alphabet in initial sounds within each brief page of text: 
“Ruby knew the ants could Never Nibble their way through the bath salts. ‘One, 
two, three, it’s Over for the ants, Max!’ said Ruby.” Wells’ drafting of her popular 
duo is at its tiptop best, with Max and Ruby scoring high on the adorability scale. 
However, despite the fact that each generously sized, sherbet-hued illustration 
features the prominent capital letter of the moment, the art cannot be used in-
dependently of the text to prompt young listeners to associate pictorial elements 
and letter sounds (the E for Ruby’s “EEEeeeeek!” has no clear visual referent on 
that page, and Max isn’t even scratching as he exclaims, “Itch! Itch! Itch!” under a 
bright yellow I). With the abundance of alphabet books available, this can hardly 
be considered a first choice, but a quick flip through to ooh and aah over the ever-
charming bunny siblings might be in order.  EB
werlin, nAncy The Rules of Survival. Dial, 2006 [272p]
ISBN 0-8037-3001-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Fourteen-year-old Matthew Walsh has lived in constant anxiety and fear of his 
mother, Nikki, for as long as he can remember. Increasingly erratic and abusive, 
Nikki is skilled at manipulating Matthew’s protectiveness of his younger sisters 
to get him to do what she wants; even adults seem cowed by Nikki, including 
44 • The BulleTin
Matthew’s distant father and Aunt Bobbie, Nikki’s sister. When Nikki begins dat-
ing Murdoch, a man whose presence seems to calm her, Matthew hopes things 
will change—then Nikki’s reckless behavior drives Murdoch away, and when the 
children clearly pine for him, she spirals even further out of control. At first distant, 
Murdoch eventually agrees (at Matthew’s urging) to help the children escape Nikki, 
beginning by enlisting the help of Matthew’s father and Aunt Bobbie. What fol-
lows is a harrowing ride, as Nikki does everything she can to scare away Murdoch; 
meanwhile, the adults must convince the authorities that the often subtle Nikki 
is actually dangerous. This portrayal of the complex dynamics of abuse, while full 
of thrilling elements, nevertheless avoids careening over the cliff into melodrama. 
Matthew’s fear for himself and sisters coupled with the slow, simmering rage that 
develops within him after years of unpredictable abuse are the book’s subjects as 
much as the quest by the adults to get the children away from Nikki. For all that, 
the story is a nail-biter, too, keeping readers guessing until the gasp-worthy con-
clusion. Fans of the Edgar Award winning The Killer’s Cousin (BCCB 09/98) will 
not be disappointed with Werlin’s latest offering, which is not only a suspenseful 
psychological thriller but a compelling and unusual insight into the experience of 
child abuse.  LG
wesTerfeld, scoTT The Last Days. Razorbill, 2006 [304p]
ISBN 1-59514-062-X $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
New York often feels an inch away from dissolution in the summer, but this year 
the general debilitation is accentuated by strange and sinister events. That’s how 
Moz meets talented musician Pearl—they join forces to save a glorious Fender 
Stratocaster guitar being hurled to destruction by a young woman frenziedly 
jettisoning her belongings. This chance meeting snowballs into the creation of a 
band, containing Moz and his friend Zahler (who have been jamming together for 
years), talented Juilliard student Pearl, gifted street drummer Alana Ray, and vocalist 
Minerva, an old friend of Pearl’s who’s just able to get out again after suffering the 
worst of a terrible illness, which has left her with a sinister charisma and a hunger 
for meat—and maybe human blood. This is set in the world of Peeps (BCCB 9/05), 
and a knowledge of that book is essentially required for understanding the stakes 
and implications here; with its slow, sinuous buildup, intense focus on the band’s 
creation of music, and rotating narration, however, this is quite a different flavor 
from the dryly humorous vampire story of Peeps. It’s a different stage of the epide-
miological game, too, since the enemy that the vampire parasites are evolutionarily 
designed to fight is rising. In fact, it’s the band’s music, especially the singing of 
Minerva, herself parasite positive, that draws the huge primeval worms from under 
the earth for the peeps to slay them, a plot turn that helps justify the extensive 
chronicling of the band’s music. Those who loved the musical exploration of Cohn 
and Levithan’s Nick and Norah’s Infinite Playlist (BCCB 6/06) will find some of the 
same appeal here, while readers following the fate of the peeps will relish seeing the 
way the story plays out.  DS
wiesner, dAvid, illus. Flotsam. Clarion, 2006 [40p]
ISBN 0-618-19457-6 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-5
Wiesner returns with his traditional wordless-narrative format for another fantastical 
SepTemBer 2006 • 45
outing. A young boy finds an old underwater camera washed up by an ocean wave, 
and he excitedly takes its roll of used film in for developing. The result is worth the 
squirmy wait: a sequence of scenes reveal amazing underwater secrets, from gaudy 
clockwork fish to castellated tortoises, kindly reading-aloud octopuses to subsurface 
alien colonies. Perhaps the most fascinating image is the one of another kid, herself 
holding up a sheaf of what are clearly other amazing photos taken by the peripatetic 
camera, topped by a picture of still another kid, holding a picture of still another 
kid, and so on; our protagonist cleverly views the recursive image under a micro-
scope, revealing the series of kids around the world and through the years who have 
found the camera and its magical images. The protagonist then takes his turn with 
the tradition, reloading the camera, snapping his own picture with the images he 
found, and returning the camera to the depths, where complicit sea creatures ferry 
it along to a faraway beach for discovery by another child. There are a multitude 
of appeals in the story—the fanciful undersea world, the kids-only secret, the web 
of connections across time and distance—and Wiesner’s cinematic visual narrative 
fills the story out cunningly, beginning with a reminder (as the protagonist peers 
through a magnifying glass at a baroquely structured crustacean) that the actual 
denizens of the sea are already pretty darn fantastical. The boy himself is visually 
a bit bland and pallid (the kids in the photos actually look more interesting than 
the protagonist), but the subtle colors and smooth regularity of the watercolor 
scenes emphasize the normality of the world in which these extraordinary visions 
turn up, underscoring the “it could happen to you” point. Pair it with Pattison’s 
The Journey of Oliver K. Woodman (BCCB 6/03) for a dual exploration of the way 
a project can link distant strangers, or just point it at Wiesner fans ready for a new 
visual adventure.  DS
wilcox, mAry Hollywood Sisters: Backstage Pass. Delacorte, 2006 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90369-3 $9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-385-73354-2 $7.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Jessica Ortiz is shy, so it’s fine with her that the spotlight is 
focused on her older sister, Eva, the breakout star of a new network sitcom, while 
Jessica hangs out in the background on the set. Unfortunately, Jessica is cursed 
with a tendency towards major faux pas, ranging from spilling peach marmalade 
on Ashton Kutcher to clipping George Clooney with an out-of-control golf cart; 
even more unfortunately, somebody with a vendetta against Eva makes sure that 
all those goofs and several other unflattering stories connected with the young TV 
star make it into the tabloids. Convinced that this is one way she can really make 
a family contribution, Jessica determines to expose and stop the mole, eventually 
teaming up with Jeremy, the show’s teen heartthrob, in finding the culprit. This is 
enjoyably fluffy subject matter done smartly and well: the Ortiz family is cool and 
well grounded without being unrealistically perfect, and Jessica balances genuine 
appreciation of her sister with a wry perspective about the business her family now 
finds itself in. The topicality earns its weight: there are funny, even campy bits such 
as Jessica’s celebrity mishaps and random encounter with the Olsen twins (“‘Hello,’ 
Mary-Kate says. Or is it the other one?”), and the multitude of brand names add 
atmosphere. The views into the machinery and consequences of fame and the often 
sardonic commentary on the process (“You know that girl in school who scuttles 
from person to person gossiping and spreading stories? Well, Hollywood is a town 
46 • The BulleTin
where people are paid to do that”) add a witty, insidery flavor. Add to that the 
pleasurable if predictable blossoming of romance between Jessica and Jeremy, and 
you’ve got an easy-to-sell, highly enjoyable tale of the small screen.  DS
young, sTeve 15 Minutes. HarperCollins, 2006 172p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-072509-5 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-072508-7 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 3-6
Fifteen minutes isn’t a lot of time, but it’s enough to fail a pop quiz, say something 
really stupid to a girl, fumble a pass, or get dunked headfirst into a boys’-room toilet 
by a popular jock. It’s also the amount of time that the Go-back machine embed-
ded in Casey Little’s watch can rewind, and after discovering the time-traveling 
properties of his watch, Casey begins rewinding time on a regular basis in order 
to fix his blunders. Once Casey goes back to a quiz and a football practice with 
foreknowledge of the answers and a crucial play, respectively, he also discovers that 
the Go-back can lead him to academic and football glory. His newfound status as a 
football hero and his knack for knowing exactly what to say gains him the attentions 
of the popular and pretty Danielle but leads him to avoid the tomboyish (but, of 
course, equally pretty) Nina, who knows about the Go-back machine and disap-
proves of Casey’s ill-begotten popularity. With its dorkily clever asides, accessible 
self-referentiality, and goofy humor, this is likely to appeal to the middle-grade fans 
of Captain Underpants and the Time Warp Trio (in fact, both Pilkey and Scieszka 
receive in-text shout-outs). The glib quippiness soon begins to wear, however, and 
there’s not enough energy in the predictable plot to reinvigorate things. Neverthe-
less, fans of Bill and Ted’s Excellent Adventure will appreciate the corny and frenetic 
humor, and they’ll revel in the guilty pleasures of rewinding time.  LG
SepTemBer 2006 • 47
gillesPie, John T. The Children’s and Young Adult Literature Handbook: A Research 
and Reference Guide. Libraries Unlimited, 2005 393p (Children’s and Young 
Adult Literature Reference Series)
ISBN 1-56308-949-1 $55.00
Gillespie’s comprehensive handbook annotates and evaluates more than one thou-
sand information-providing publications in the field of children’s and young adult 
literature. Initially intended as a reworking of Denman-West’s 1998 Children’s 
Literature: A Guide to Information Sources, the text is much broader than its prede-
cessor in scope and coverage; it notably includes not just the United States but also 
other English-speaking countries worldwide. The hefty text covers topics such as 
periodicals, multicultural resources, awards, and Internet resources, with a strong 
emphasis on bibliographies. Each citation in the volume includes bibliographic 
information, price, and a substantial summary of content. This will prove an 
invaluable resource to those in the field seeking additional sources of information; 
while some chapters speak more directly to the researcher (such as the selection of 
critical studies), the bulk speaks directly to the everyday needs of librarians seeking 
guidance in developing a collection, promoting a program, or providing information 
about the world of children’s and young adult literature. Name, title, and subject 
indices are included.  HM
schAll, lucy Teen Genre Connections: From Booktalking to Booklearning. Li-
braries Unlimited, 2005 318p
ISBN 1-59158-229-6 $40.00
Schall, author of Booktalks Plus and Booktalks and More, offers a new collection of 
themed booktalks and related follow-up activities for young adults. The volume is 
organized first by genre and within that, by theme; each thematic section offers at 
least one featured title, with attendant material including a paragraph-long summary, 
a brief booktalk, and a selection of “Learning Opportunities” (discussion questions, 
writing prompts, project and presentation ideas, and research suggestions). Follow-
ing the Learning Opportunities section is a broad selection of related works. The 
bibliographic citations include author, title, publication information, number of 
pages, price, ISBN, type designation (fiction, nonfiction, graphic novel, reference), 
and a suggested reading level. This volume will be extremely useful for those looking 
to offer detailed, thematically driven booktalks; the discussion and writing prompts 
also suggest its value to middle- and high-school literature teachers and those who 
work with reading clubs. A comprehensive index is included.  HM
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
48  •  The BulleTin
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
Abuse–fiction: López; Noonan; 
Weeks; Werlin
Actors and acting–fiction: Wilcox
AdvENTurE: Buckley-Archer; 
Hardinge; Henderson; Kaaberbol; 
Lasky; Meyer; Papademetriou; 
roberts; rocks; Sherman; Sim-
mons
ALPHABET BooKS: Wells
ANTHoLogIES: Bradman
Art: Hunt; Todd
Art and artists: Sullivan
Asian Americans–fiction: Salisbury
Aunts–fiction: Weeks
Auto racing–fiction: Esckilsen
Bears–stories: Kovalski
Behavior: rosenthal Cookies
BIogrAPHIES: Lewis; rubin; Sul-
livan; Weinstein
Books and reading–fiction: Papa-
demetriou
Brothers–fiction: roberts
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Abraha-
ms; Esckilsen; Pagliarulo; Werlin
Bullies–fiction: Almond
Cats–fiction: Howe
Cats–stories: Hodges
Cliques–fiction: Serros
Clothing–stories: Macdonald
College–fiction: Craft
Construction–stories: Bunting
Crime and criminals–fiction: Abra-
hams; Buckley-Archer; Ferguson; 
Lipsyte; López; Noonan; Paglia-
rulo; Price; Simmons; Stahler; 
Stork 
Crime and criminals–stories: Lasky
Cuba–fiction: Cárdenas
Curses–fiction: Meehl
disasters–stories: Kroll
dogs–fiction: Howe
dogs–stories: Kroll
drug abuse–fiction: Price
Ecology–fiction: Meehl
EPISToLAry NovELS: Cárdenas; 
Sloan
Ethics and values: Almond; Cle-
ments; Coombs; Fisher; griffin; 
Kaaberbol; Lipsyte; Moranville; 
richardson; rosoff; Stahler; voigt
Fairies–fiction: Hahn
Faith–fiction: MacLean
Families–fiction: Murdock; Noonan 
FANTASy: Coombs; Fisher; 
Friesner; gilliland; Hahn; 
Hardinge; Kaaberbol; Meyer; 
Papademetriou; Sherman; Stahler; 
Warner; Watts; Westerfeld; Wi-
esner; young 
Fathers–fiction: Bradman; dorf-
man; Ferguson; Hahn; Herrick; 
Kaaberbol; Simmons
Fathers–stories: Bunting
FoLKTALES ANd FAIry TALES: 
Hodges; Kimmel; Tchana
Food and eating: rosenthal Cookies
Food and eating–poetry: rex
Football–fiction: Lipsyte
Friends–fiction: Almond; Craft; 
Haber; Murdock; Serros; Sher-
man; Sloan; voigt
Friends–stories: Chodos-Irvine; rob-
bins, J.
SepTemBer 2006  •  49
Frogs–stories: Kimmel
gangs–fiction: López; Pagliarulo; 
Stork
gays and lesbians–fiction: Mac; 
Sloan
grAPHIC NovELS: rocks; 
Weinstein
growing up–fiction: Craft; Herrick
Halloween: Kovalski; robbins, K.
Halloween–stories: Macdonald
HISTorICAL FICTIoN: Almond; 
Bruchac; Bunting; Moranville; 
Noonan; roberts; Salisbury; 
Thomson
History, U. S.: Bunting; Thimmesh
Holocaust: rubin
Horses–fiction: gilliland
HoW-To BooKS: Todd
HuMor: Falconer; McNaughton; 
Meehl; Papademetriou; rex; rod-
man; rosenthal One; young
Identity–fiction: dorfman
Islands: Schaefer
Islands–fiction: Warner
Jews: rubin
Kings–fiction: Henderson
Language arts: Hunt
Latinos–fiction: López; Pagliarulo; 
Serros; Stork; Wilcox
Literature, English: Bennett
Literature, world: Henderson
Magic–fiction: Sherman
Memory–fiction: Weeks
Mothers–fiction: Cárdenas
Music and musicians–fiction: Watts; 
Westerfeld
Music and musicians–stories: Fal-
coner
MySTErIES: Abrahams; Clements; 
Ferguson; Haber; Price
Mythology, classical: Friesner
Mythology, world: Tchana
Native Americans–fiction: Bruchac
Native Americans–folklore: Kimmel
ocean–fiction: Wiesner
orphans–stories: Hodges
Photography: Sullivan
Photography–fiction: Wiesner
Pigs–stories: Falconer
Pirates: Lewis
Pirates–fiction: Meyer
Pirates–stories: Lasky; McNaughton
Plants: robbins, K.
PoETry: Lewis; rex
Popularity–fiction: young
Prisons–fiction: Stork
rabbits–stories: Wells
racism–fiction: Cárdenas; Salisbury
Reading aloud: Carter; rex
Reading, easy: Howe; Walker
Reading, reluctant: Howe; Mac; 
rocks; Wilcox
relationships–fiction: Bennett
romance–fiction: Fisher; Mac; Mo-
ranville; Sloan; Warner
rural life–fiction: Clements
School–fiction: Clements; de la 
Cruz; López; Moranville; voigt; 
Weinstein
School–stories: robbins, J.; rodman
Science: Schaefer; Walker
Secrets–fiction: Coombs; gilliland
SHorT STorIES: Bradman; 
Carter; Hunt
Sisters–fiction: Noonan
Sisters–stories: Macdonald
Space travel: Thimmesh
Spies and spying–fiction: Haber
SPorTS STorIES: Bruchac; Cart-
er; Esckilsen; Lipsyte; Murdock 
Storytelling: Tchana
Storytime: Chodos-Irving; rodman; 
rosenthal One
Summer–fiction: griffin; Sloan
SuPErNATurAL STorIES: de la 
Cruz; Price; Westerfeld
SuSPENSE: Ferguson; Werlin
Television–fiction: Wilcox
Theater–fiction: Thomson
Time travel–fiction: Buckley-Archer; 
young
ToddLEr BooKS: Fleming; 
voake
Toddlers–stories: McNaughton
Twins–stories: voake
urban life–fiction: Pagliarulo
vampires–fiction: de la Cruz; West-
erfeld
vikings–fiction: roberts
50  •  The BulleTin
volcanoes: Schaefer
voyages and travel: Thimmesh
voyages and travel–fiction: Hardinge; 
Warner
War–fiction: roberts
Witches–fiction: Hahn
Women’s studies: Sullivan; Tchana
WordLESS BooKS: Wiesner
Work–fiction: Friesner
World cultures: Tchana
World War II: rubin
World War II–fiction: Salisbury
Writers and writing: Todd
Writers and writing–fiction: Bennett; 
Thomson
