I L LL INOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
p 
o aS
CH 1
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
UI11EI VT OF ILI
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
0 
11
·~~rs~~~~·' 
"-
THE
B u L L E T I N
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
July/August 1997
Vol. 50 No. 11
A LOOK INSIDE
385 THE BIG PICTURE
Mr. Semolina-Semolinus: A Greek Folktale ad. by Anthony L. Manna and
Christodoula Mitakidou; illus. by Giselle Potter
386 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOING PEOPLE
386
389
389
400
406
414
418
420
Reviewed titles include:
* The Iron Ring by Lloyd Alexander
* More Stories Huey Tells written by Ann Cameron; illus. by Lis Toft
* Just Another Ordinary Day written and illus. by Rod Clement
* Blood and Chocolate by Annette Curtis Klause
* Peeling the Onion by Wendy Orr
* Rumpelstiltskin's Daughter written and illus. by Diane Stanley
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
ANNUAL AUTHOR AND TITLE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center fr Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Amy E. Brandt, Reviewer (AEB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
Susan S. Verner, Reviewer (SSV)
Pam McCuen, Editorial Assistant (PMc)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edulpuboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1997 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Giselle Potter, from Mr. Semolina-Semolinus: A Greek Folktale ©1997 and
used by permission of Schwartz/Atheneum Books for Young Readers.
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 385
THE BIG PICTURE
Mr. Semolina-Semolinus: A Greek Folktale
ad. by Anthony L. Manna and Christodoula Mitakidou; illustrated by Giselle Pot-
ter
From the Mediterranean comes this tale of a resourceful, creative, and faithful
young woman. Areti, a Greek princess, has a multitude of suitors but as none of
them please her, "one day she made up her mind to make a man of her own."
After combining almonds, sugar, and semolina into dough, she kneads it all to-
gether and molds herself a man, and "for forty days and forty nights she prayed to
God." God gives life to the man, Mr. Semolina-Semolinus, and what a man he is:
"He was five times beautiful and ten times kind, and his name became known the
world over." As unmitigated bliss makes for a nice life but a boring story, Mr.
Semolina-Semolinus is kidnapped by an envious (appropriately green-hued and
apparently manless) queen, and Areti wears out three pairs of iron shoes going to
the moon, sun, and stars to win him back. Areti finally succeeds in rescuing Mr.
Semolina-Semolinus, and "to the princess he now appeared ten times beautiful
and twenty times kind, for that is the way love is."
A note on the origin of the story gives some cultural background, and
places variants in the Eastern Mediterranean countries of Italy, Greece, and Tur-
key. (Although no specific source notes are given, Italian variants can be found in
Italo Calvino's Italian Folktales and Ellin Greene's Clever Cooks.) The story of a
young woman undergoing great trials to rescue her true love is a common one in
many cultural traditions, and there are several lushly illustrated (if somewhat more
sedately retold) picture-book versions available: the Dasent translation of
Asbjornsen's East o'the Sun and West o 'the Moon illustrated by P.J. Lynch (BCCB
12/92), Hooks' Appalachian Snowbear Whittington, illustrated by Victoria Lisi,
and Craft's CupidandPsyche (BCCB 9/96), to name just three recent titles. But in
these variants the love-seeking maidens only act after the fact; they are not as in-
strumental in the finding (or making) of the suitor or husband as they are in the
saving of him.
Areti does not wait for her father to choose her a husband or for the gods
to make up their minds-she takes action, from the first page to the last, in a story
that cheerily turns quite a few preconceived notions about feminist folktales and
traditional women's roles on their collective ears. Areti isn't a successful heroine
because she rejects traditional women's roles, she's successful because she embraces
them with such obvious gusto. Her creation of Mr. Semolina-Semolinus takes
place in the kitchen, and she makes him from ingredients frequently used in Medi-
terranean desserts. The heavenly beings who help Areti-the moon, sun, and
stars-are introduced to her by their radiant mothers, who have a pivotal and
powerful role as liaison between earthly princess and celestial bodies. Not all the
female characters are stellar examples of feminist integrity and maternal creativity,
386 
* 
THE BULLETIN
though. The green and greedy amorous queen is not only a kidnapper, but she's a
crummy cook, as exemplified by her own attempt to concoct a man (the result
spoils and has to be thrown away).
The tongue-in-cheek text is given visual life by the naive technique of
artist Potter, whose colored ink and colored pencil illustrations have their own airy
humor and tipsy style. Mr. Semolina-Semolinus is bigger than life, looming a bit
over the other figures in the compositional landscape, his rosy cheeks and pleas-
antly smiling demeanor relieving him of even a hint of menace. The objects in the
story (kitchens, characters, castles, etc.) give the impression of being barely teth-
ered to the page in compositions replete with a bird's-eye view of the topography,
lollipop-like trees, and proportionally creative perspectives. As traditionally ro-
mantic as this story is, Potter does not set it in the typically gorgeous, lushly ro-
mantic fairy-tale environment used by Lynch, Lisi, and Craft, but rather in a
light-filled, childlike setting with capriciously tilting architecture and appealingly
cheerful stick figures.
Potter's illustrations and Manna and Mitakidou's text combine to create
a picture-book folktale of robust wholeness, one that has appeal for a wide age
range, that can be discussed on a variety of levels, and that has the unusual advan-
tage of combining humor and substance. Oh, bliss. (Imprint information appears
on p. 402.)
Janice Del Negro, Editor
XT_.D.,.,' 
.
... 
.. 
D 
^ý 
.... 
... .i. 
r 
A 
ITV'% 
.^. 
.L r 
n...^
INEW DUUK 
OO 
UK IFRHILUKEN ANDU IUUNG 
rLEULE
ALEXANDER, LLOYD 
The Iron Ring. Dutton, 1997 
283p
ISBN 0-525-45597-3 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Tamar, the young and inexperienced king of Sundari, wagers his life on a game of
dice, and he loses the game. Honor-driven to pay his debt, he embarks on a
journey to find the mysterious king who challenged him, despite the possibility
that the game was only a dream. The Iron Ring is a complex, episodic tale told in
the tradition of great Indian epics such as the Mahabharata and Ramayana. Set in
a mythical India, Tamar's quest is a karmic one; his stubborn insistence on follow-
ing a strict kshatriya's dharma, or warrior's code of ethics, has far-reaching conse-
quences for the fates of friend and foe alike. While the conclusion seems overly
constructed, the abundance of character-driven subplots does require closure, and
Tamar's maturation is satisfyingly evident as he becomes a wiser and more com-
passionate king. Filled with swordplay, enchantment, and enough endearing hu-
man and animal characters to warrant an oft-consulted cast list, this may be a
reader advisory wish-come-true. Have philosophically savvy, Redwall-weary read-
ers contemplate this one for awhile. AEB
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 387
ALLER, 
SUSAN 
BIVIN 
Emma and the Night Dogs; illus. by Marni
Backer. 
Whitman, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-1993-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Emma's aunt is part of a canine search-and-rescue organization, going out with
her Newfoundland to find people lost in the woods. When a little boy gets lost,
the teams are mobilized, and Emma waits anxiously for the dogs to return trium-
phantly from finding him. The search teams come to Emma's house for a break
without having found their quarry, but later Emma slips out with the dogs to find
the missing child herself. Search and rescue is a fascinating subject, and this gives
a nice sense of the surrounding camaraderie and the doggy desire to find that
drives the enterprise. The story dips into sentimentality, however, with the inclu-
sion of the lost boy's train of thought, and Emma's nighttime success is wish-
fulfilling but not particularly credible. The moody oil illustrations add atmosphere
but the figures are nebulous sometimes to the point ofmuddiness. The real thing,
as presented in books such as Patent's Hugger to the Rescue (BCCB 6/94), is more
gripping, but this may suit a few young animal lovers' fantasies. DS
ANAYA, RUDOLFO, ad. 
Maya's Children: The Story ofLa Llorona; illus. by Maria
Baca. 
Hyperion, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2124-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0152-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
This retelling of the traditional tale of La Llorona, the Weeping Woman, is an
unorthodox view of both the character and the legend. Destined to be immortal,
the girl Maya is hidden from the rage of Sefior Tiempo, who vows that while she
may escape him, her children will not. As she grows older, Maya grows lonely,
and, with the help of some handsome and convenient young men, she grows chil-
dren in earthen bowls, advised by a wise owl that they will be safe as long as she
saves the bowls from which they came. Sefior Tiempo tricks her into destroying
the bowls, and Maya loses her children to time. She then spends the rest of her
immortal days seeking them by the lake and weeping for their loss. Anaya's intro-
duction states that he rewrote the legend to teach young readers about mortality,
deliberately leaving out the role La Llorona traditionally plays in the death of her
children. Putting aside the elements of revenge, sex, murder, and anguish that fuel
traditional versions of the tale, his retelling is wordy and overplotted, lacking the
compelling emotionality that drives more traditional variants. Whereas the leg-
endary La Llorona, a Medea-like figure, is active and passionate if not exactly ad-
mirable, here she is passive and easily fooled, her fate being eternal anguish simply
because she is gullible. Baca's gouache paintings are deeply hued and verdant-
looking, with an oddly off-kilter, nearly cubist physiognomy that is strangely ap-
pealing. JMD
ASCH, FRANK 
Moonbear's Pet; written and illus. by Frank Asch. 
Simon,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80794-5 
$15.00 
Ad 2-5 yrs
Bear and Little Bird have found a new friend, Splash, whom they assume is a fish.
As Splash grows, it becomes obvious (to readers, anyway) that their friend is not a
fish but a tadpole. Little Bird, mistaking the tadpole's emerging appendages for
wings, exclaims, "She must want to be a bird just like me!" Bear, however, sure
that their tiny friend wishes to emulate bear comeliness, responds testily, "Why
388 
* THE BULLETIN
would anyone want to be a chirpy sack of feathers when they could be a big strong
bear?" When Splash completes his transformation into froghood, a gentle admon-
ishment to his friends conclusively ends their disagreement. Simple contoured
shapes in bright, computer-generated hues are outlined in contrasting shades, which
results in a two-dimensional, coloring-book quality that makes the characters stilted
and mechanical. Though this little tomelet lacks the visual and textual charm of
Asch's Happy Birthday, Moon, young audiences may appreciate this modest con-
sideration of friendship, conflict resolution, and a little tadpole biology. PM
BIERHORST, JOHN, ad. 
The Dancing Fox: Arctic Folktales; illus. by Mary K.
Okheena. 
Morrow, 1997 
142p
ISBN 0-688-14406-3 
$15.00 
f 
Gr. 4-8
Eighteen tales from the Inuit peoples are accessibly retold in this well-researched
collection. The stories reflect the stark environment of the Arctic, depicting hunt-
ing over snowy plains, ice-fishing, and surviving against great odds, which lends a
strong physicality to the text. Stories of cannibal villages, woman giants, and wan-
dering souls are not the typical staples of folktale collections for young readers, and
that may strengthen this title's allure. Explicit notes help clarify elements in the
tales themselves as well as giving sources for further research. Inuit artist Mary
Okheena contributes black-and-white line drawings to the collection. With its
large typeface and generous leading, this unusual collection may attract reluctant
readers, and it will certainly be a welcome addition to culturally comprehensive
folktale collections. JMD
BURANDT, HARRIET 
Tales from the Homeplace: Adventures of a Texas Farm Girl;
by Harriet Burandt and Shelley Dale. 
Holt, 1997 
154p
ISBN 0-8050-5075-2 
$14.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Nine family stories, loosely based on the adolescent years of Burandt's mother,
Irene Hutto, offer readers a lively glimpse of a Texas farm during the 1930s. Fam-
ily stories are most effective when the listener is familiar with the characters in-
volved, and Burandt and Dale quickly make their audience feel at home with the
eight rowdy siblings, several cousins ranging from prissy to downright mean, re-
sourceful aunts, charmingly sinister neighbors, and a pair of patient, warm-hearted
parents. Each anecdote is superbly paced: "The Panther" slowly trails the titular
wildcat's every move as he stalks the children back from the river to their front
yard, while "The Unexpected Voyage" storms right along with the torrential flood
that deposits young Lucy and pregnant Aunt Belle oiled, feathered, and naked into
a chicken coop. An audience accustomed to flashy climaxes and theatrical
dinouements may find the tales' punchlines fairly gentle and even a bit abrupt, but
the homey warmth and vivid characterizations of the Hutto clan will resonate with
readers who prick up their ears when their elders begin, "When we were kids ... "
EB
CABRERA, JANE 
Cat's Colors; written and illus. by Jane Cabrera. 
Dial, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2090-4 
$13.99 
R 
2-4 yrs
A tiger-striped tabby challenges listeners to guess its favorite color. "Is it Red? Red
is the rug where I snooze by the fire." Kitten stretches out, with claws in the air and
a grin of contentment, on a spread of tasseled scarlet. "Is it yellow? Yellow is the
sand on the sunny beach." Kitten checks out the bright crabs scuttling across a
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 389
lemon background. The winning answer is orange, "the color of my mother," a
huge, stripe-tailed cat who cradles her kitten and beams with maternal pride. Some
of the kitten's color preferences are less cat-specific than others ("petals of my
favorite flowers" is a generic solution for pink), and the shadings sometimes result
in more complicated questions than would be expected, but all the crayon-box
basics are boldly represented in lavishly brushed, eye-popping double-page paint-
ings. Purr-ty good choice for tykes learning to name-that-color. EB
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
Edge. 
Viking, 1997 
[192p]
ISBN 0-670-87335-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-12
Tired of the sameness of his life, Zachary has quit school and taken a job, but he's
still feeling aimless and disaffected. He's brought to earth dramatically when his
father (divorced from Zach's mother and living across the bay in San Francisco
with his new wife) is shot in a carjacking and left paralyzed from the neck down.
Zach's anger and confusion turn to bitterness as it becomes clear that his father's
attacker will probably never be punished for his actions, and Zach begins to con-
sider enacting his own private justice. This isn't as taut as Zero at the Bone (BCCB
9/96), and some aspects of the plot are a bit contrived. The dramatic subject
matter has impact, however, and Cadnum's dark narrative is relentlessly elliptical,
with events begun, then ignored, and then finally explained in a way that may
frustrate some readers but will fascinate others. The measured, overdetermined
prose suits the shadowy and searching mood; it's a psychologically intense tale of
inner struggle in the face of tragedy. DS
CAMERON, ANN 
More Stories Huey Tells; illus. by Lis Toft. 
Foster/Farrar,
1997 
118p
ISBN 0-374-35065-5 
$13.00 
R 
Gr. 2-3
Huey (from The Stories Huey Tells, BCCB 12/95) returns here in five new chapter-
length adventures: he attempts to save his dying sunflowers, he negotiates some
hoop time with his big brother Julian, he and Julian try to convince their father to
quit smoking, he spends an evening under the stars, and he gets put in a bad
position when the neighborhood kids' homemade goldmine expands beyond their
original intentions. Throughout, Cameron displays a refreshing respect for her
engaging young hero: Huey's energetic involvement with life, whether it be the
end-of-summer seeding of sunflowers or the age of the particles in the cosmos, is
depicted with appreciation and understanding. Gentler than Beverly Cleary's
Ramona series but with much of the same authenticity and insight, Huey's stories
give younger readers a protagonist they'll enjoy knowing. Rough-edged pencil
sketches occasionally tip into cuteness, but their warm and lively depiction of the
African-American cast of characters suits the story's tone. DS
CLEMENT, ROD Just Another Ordinary Day; written and illus. by Rod
Clement. 
HarperCollins, 1997 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027667-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027666-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
Clement's text states the events ofAmanda's "ordinary day" rather prosaically, but
his illustrations are anything but. Amanda rides to school with Mrs. Ellsworth,
390 
* THE BULLETIN
the oldest person on the block (who just happens to be a dinosaur); her science
teacher likes experiments more than books (a giant fly dressed in a lab coat pours
liquid from beaker to beaker); Amanda forgets her lunch and has to buy some in
the school cafeteria (where the tables are covered in fancy red tablecloths, complete
with candelabras, double-decker hamburgers and chocolate layer cake); and Sue,
the new girl, tells them stories of her home far away (as she waves her tentacles
above her three-eyed, alien head). Clement's hilarious cartoons are nearly garish
in their coloration, and his characters are pop-eyed in their appreciation of what's
going on around them. The art is more than a one-note joke, as visual witticisms
abound in Clement's punny pictures. This is a readaloud with a Mad magazine
visual twist that will make school-age listeners and readers chuckle. JMD
CONFORD, ELLEN 
The Frog Princess ofPelham. Little, 1997 
106 p
ISBN 0-316-15246-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Chandler is rich, but it isn't making her happy. Her guardian is playing fast and
loose with her cash, she's not sure why her best girlfriends like her (could it be her
indoor pool?), and Danny Malone (a "prince of a guy") has just kissed her on a
dare-and turned her into a frog. When all else fails, Danny takes Chandler onto
a daytime talk show to find someone to break the spell, attracting the attention of
the CIA, the United States Army, and the Secret Science Police. This pretty much
sums up Conford's latest outing, but simplistic as the plot may sound, it has a
certain charm. Chandler is smart and wisecracking, Danny is the kind of guy
young girls should fall for, and Chandler's girlfriends turn out to be real pals. The
conclusion isn't exactly logical (Chandler suddenly sheds her skin and whooshes
back into herself) but getting there is still a lot of froggy fun. JMD
CONLON-MCKENNA, MARITA 
Fields ofHome. 
Holiday House, 1997 
189p
ISBN 0-8234-1295-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
A sequel to Under the Hawthorn Tree (BCCB 12/90) and Wildflower Girl (1/93),
this follows the O'Driscoll family, three children who were orphaned during the
mid-nineteenth-century Irish potato famine, into their adult years. Although no
longer faced with starvation, they still fall prey to historical forces far beyond their
control: Eily, her husband, two children (one of whom has a strong presence
here), and elderly aunt are threatened with eviction by a feckless landlord; Michael
loses his job when his English landlord's property is burned down by angry Irish
tenants; and Peggy-long a maid in Boston-loses a friend but gains a husband
before she sets out in a covered wagon toward the American frontier. The depic-
tions of socioeconomic upheaval are accurate, honest, and nuanced; the characters
are clearly realized; the narrative, though absorbing (especially for those who have
read the other books), suffers from shifts in place and focus. Readers unfamiliar
with the background of politics and immigration may not leap back and forth as
readily as they need to, but the action will hold their attention and satisfy their
hope for a happy resolution. BH
Cox, CUNTON 
Fiery Vision: The Life and Death ofJohn Brown. 
Scholastic,
1997 
[240p]
ISBN 0-590-47574-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
"I think I cannot now better serve the cause I love so much than to die for it,"
JULY/AUGUST 1997 * 391
John Brown said only days before being hanged for his role in the Harpers Ferry
attack. In this highly readable biography of John Brown's life, readers are offered
insights into the complexities of a man that devoted his life and his family to the
cause of abolition. This treatment of Brown is sympathetic without being senti-
mental: "Historians routinely use such words as 'fanatic' and 'murderer' to de-
scribe him, but use no such words to describe the slave owners and slavery supporters
he fought." Cox's research traces Brown's controversial life, weaving the histori-
cal, political, and social events of an often brutal time into a riveting narrative that
will galvanize readers up to the fateful meeting at Harpers Ferry. This is a compel-
ling read complete with black-and-white photographs, prologue, epilogue, bibli-
ography, and index. PM
DAY, ALEXANDRA 
Mirror; written and illus. by Alexandra Day and Christina
Darling. 
Farrar, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-374-34720-4 
$16.00 
M 
4-7 yrs
On the advice of her fifth-grade teacher, a little girl offers the "really true, you can
trust me" account of a mysterious mirror which hung temporarily in her room
when she was seven. The mirror projects images, fleetingly displayed at first but
growing bolder over time, until it actually draws the narrator into its proffered
scenes of beauty and adventure-circuses, sultan's tents, flying carpet rides. So
spare a plot cannot support the lengthy, rambling text, and the narrator's preco-
cious asides ("I don't know how many times I have told her that seven is much too
old for a nap, but sometimes my mother has stubborn opinions") are abrasively
cute. Although the portrayal of the little girl essentially shows her the same at
seven years old and at eleven or twelve, when she's in the fifth grade, the fanciful
scenes which form the focal point of this work interpret the story closely and thor-
oughly enough to render the text dispensable. EB
DEE, CATHERINE 
The Girls' Guide to Life: How to Take Charge of the Issues that
Affect You; illus. by Cynthia Jabar and with photographs by Carol Palmer. 
Little,
1997 
147p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-316-17952-3 
$14.95 
Ad Gr. 5-10
Three sections (Personal Life, At School, Our Society) comprise fifteen chapters
on varying subjects including self-esteem, housework, sports, classroom gender
bias, media portrayals, and the workplace. Each chapter includes a general narra-
tive and several different page-bite features such as a Things To Do section, per-
sonal viewpoints from women and girls, relevant quotes, comic strips, photographs,
and a For More Information list. This is a rather scattershot approach, and the
paring down of many complicated issues results in some misleading oversimplifi-
cations (it's implied that it's incorrect to say "Boys are better than girls at math,"
when the real problem is why that's currently true) and apparent contradictions
(however laudable, actor Ted Danson's views on what he likes in women seem out
of place here); there's also a certain sloppiness ("The Little Mermaid" is wrongly
attributed to the Grimms). The energy and upbeat tone will carry interested read-
ers over these flaws, however, particularly in the Things To Do sections, which
provide useful suggestions for concrete actions in relation to each topic. A list of
additional resources, a bibliography of principal sources, and an index are included,
as is a fold-out poster. DS
392 
* THE BULLETIN
DODDS, DAYLE ANN 
Sing, Sophie!; illus. by Rosanne Litzinger. 
Candlewick,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-0131-4 
$15.99 
R 
4-7yrs
"I looooooove to sing!" announces Little Sophie Adams, and she ain't kiddin'. The
problem is no one else really appreciates it much. Momma's trying to get baby
Jacob to sleep; her sister, Kate-Ellen, is worried that all the racket will ruin her
bouffant hairdo; Willy, Sophie's brother, can't catch any fish 'cause of all the "cat-
erwauling"-well, you get the picture. Mind you, the lyrics of Sophie's songs are
a little unconventional ("My rooster won't crow, my hen won't lay,/ My frog got
warts and hopped away./ My legs are skinny, my toes are fat,/ I've got the temper
of a tiger cat./ But I'm a cowgirl, don't you know!/ Yippee-ky-yee! Yippee-ky-
yo!"). When a summer storm scares baby Jacob, only Sophie's warbling soothes
his nerves, and the rest of the family is finally won over as she serenades them in
the grand finale ("'Well, jumping jackrabbits!' Sophie said, strumming her guitar
with glee. 'I thought you'd never ask!'"). With her ten-gallon cowgirl hat and red
cowgirl boots, our chanteuse looks the part of a crooning country singer as she
romps across her songs' silly landscapes while the lyrics cavort on the page. Her
musical exuberance serves as a contrast to the prim family scenes which appear in
calmer, framed sequences. A comically rendered cast of characters with exagger-
ated features are depicted in a rainbow palette of watercolor and gouache, a visual
match for a silly story sure to lead into some yippee-ky-yos from cowpokes in the
audience. PM
DRIMMER, FREDERICK 
Incredible People: Five Stories of Extraordinary
Lives. 
Atheneum, 1997 
182p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31921-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
The author of Born Different (BCCB 10/88) here biographizes a new set of un-
usual people: Jack Earle, a sideshow and movie giant; Ishi, last of the Yahi Indians;
Daisy and Violet Hilton, famous and exploited Siamese twins; Ota Benga, an
African Bushman brought to America; and Victor, the French "wild boy of
Aveyron." Fish out of water are appealing subjects, and the lure of the sideshow
maintains its pull even in print, so kids are bound to find the topic interesting.
Unfortunately the treatments are superficial and generally unquestioning (the book
brushes off the challenges to all the feral-child claims, for instance), the writing
unoriginal and old-fashionedly fictionalized (there's nothing about this book that
couldn't have been written in 1950), and the chronology within each chapter of-
ten confusing. It's still a browsable book on Guinness-esque notables, so kids
probably won't mind. There are no source notes; a bibliography and index are
included; black-and-white photographs appear throughout. DS
EDWARDS, 
RICHARD 
You're Safe Now, 
Waterdog; illus. by Sophy
Williams. 
Viking, 1997 
26p
ISBN 0-670-87385-3 
$14.99 
R 2-4 yrs
Watt wasn't always a Waterdog. He starts out as a very expressive stuffed dog that
his owner, a little boy named Matt, takes with him everywhere. Watt's floppy ears
perk up when they go fishing together, fly behind him when Matt races him in a
shopping cart through a grocery store, and show wounded surprise when Matt
leaves him in a dusty corner and goes to bed without him. Watt's adventures
(shown in full-bleed double-page spreads) begin when Matt forgets him on a
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 393
riverbank: "Watt lay all alone beside the river. Owls hooted in the treetops, and a
fox sniffed at Watt before slinking off into darkness." A rainstorm whooshes Watt
into the river, and young listeners will anxiously follow his journey downstream as
he passes fishermen, cows, and ducks and is finally caught by a little girl named
Hattie. She recognizes what Watt has become ("A Waterdog!") and takes him
proudly home. At bedtime she cuddles the freshly dried Watt and whispers, "You're
safe now, Waterdog." Tales of abandoned toys finding love with new owners have
been with us for a long time, but Edwards' telling is both fresh and comforting.
The loving detail and broad palette (ranging from cool blues and greens to warm
reds and oranges) of Williams' soft pastel illustrations are marred by an unsubtle
sentimentality, but they reflect the changing moods of the story. Young children
will snuggle up for this cozy bedtime readaloud. PMc
FERGUSON, ALANE 
Secrets. 
Simon, 1997 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-80313-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-7
T.J. knows he's a failure in his father's eyes, since he'd rather hang around the zoo
all summer than get any kind of job. The zoo soon brings him more than he
expected, however, when one of the employees there cultivates a friendship with
him and then confesses that T.J. was adopted and that she, Nancy, is his birth
mother. Soon his involvement with Nancy and her daughter, T.J.'s full sister,
becomes the mainstay of his days, and he decides that the family that needs him
and with whom he shares his blood is perhaps where he really belongs. The plot
contrivances here are heavy-handed indeed: it's pure coincidence that brings Nancy
and T.J. together at the zoo (and there's no suggestion that her initial approach to
T.J. is in any way problematic), and T.J.'s father is so awful that his son's final
decision to remain with him seems a gimmick to tie up the ending rather than a
response to any human connection. (It's also odd that no one ever thinks to con-
sult with--or even mention-the adoption agency or intermediary.) It's nice that
the birthmother's side is presented with some sympathy, and somewhere in this
novel is a heartfelt story of a boy considering his place in the world in face of
conflicting possibilities, but ultimately this is melodramatic and implausible soap
for soap's sake. DS
FLESCHMAN, PAUL 
Seedfolks; illus. by Judy Pedersen. 
HarperCollins, 1997 
69p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027472-7 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027471-9 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Thirteen disparate individuals come together on a garbage-strewn vacant lot in
Cleveland to create a garden and a community. Kim, a bereft Vietnamese girl,
plants lima beans in an effort to connect with her dead farmer father; Curtis, a
young African-American man, grows tomatoes as a love offering for his estranged
girlfriend; and Maricela, an unmarried, pregnant sixteen-year-old, starts to see just
what life is really made of. Viewed as a novel, the thirteen vignettes leave some-
thing to be desired-there isn't enough continuity of action or depth of character-
ization to hold them all together. However, viewed as potential monologues, they
have substantial promise. Each individual tells his or her own story about coming
to the United States, coming to the garden, and coming to a sense of community,
in voices that have immediacy and strength. Used as a series of readalouds for
young adults in a classroom or library setting, this title may well open up avenues
of discussion for some serious issues. JMD
394 * THE BULLETIN
GIBBONS, GAIL 
The Moon Book; written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. 
Holiday
House, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1297-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Phases of the moon, lunar landing missions, tides, moon myths, eclipses-Gib-
bons touches on them all in this capriciously organized Cook's tour of our satellite.
Textual explanations of lunar phenomena are confined to brief paragraphs while
Gibbons' oversized cartoon diagrams capably deliver the bulk of the astronomy
lesson. Classroom teachers in search of supplemental materials will probably pre-
fer Franklyn Branley's more focused treatments in The Moon Seems to Change and
What the Moon Is Like, but beginning readers pursuing their own random lunar
explorations and teachers in search of a book for groups will be satisfied with this
spread of moon miscellanea. EB
GILLETTE, J. LYNETT 
Dinosaur Ghosts: The Mystery of Coelophysis; illus. by Dou-
glas Henderson. 
Dial, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1722-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1721-0 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Paleontologist Gillette does a fine job involving readers in the story of the 1947
discovery of a spectacular array of fossil bones in Ghost Ranch, New Mexico and
the subsequent research sparked by the find. Gillette's cogent explanation of the
research finds are supported by Henderson's pastels, which colorfully depict the
small dinosaur in its possible natural environment. Gillette explains the available
information used to hypothesize the behavior patterns and lifestyle of the tiny
(relative to a T. rex) carnivore, with a fascinating comparison of various theories
on the demise of the coelophysis found at Ghost Ranch. The layout is an effective
one: color and black-and-white photos, in addition to Henderson's artistic inter-
pretation, combine with unintimidating text blocks and generous white borders to
make this an easy booktalk to both eager and reluctant readers. An index is in-
cluded. JMD
GINSBURG, MIRRA, ad. 
Clay Boy; illus. by Jos. A. Smith. 
Greenwillow,
1997 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14410-1 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14409-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-7 yrs
Whereas Arnold Lobel's clay pot boy really looked like a pot in Jameson's adapta-
tion of this Russian tale (Clay PotBoy, BCCB 6/73), Smith has illustrated Ginsburg's
version with a convincingly monsterish creature of ominous appetite. The clay
boy fashioned by Grandpa first eats all the food in the house, then the chickens,
geese, cat, dog, Grandma and Grandpa themselves, two women bringing water
from the well (buckets and all), a peasant with a wagon-load of hay (including the
horse, of course), and the rest of the village. It's the goat that does him in, butting
his belly so that everything he's eaten tumbles out in a crash of broken clay. The
brisk text is punctuated with choral pronouncements that are skillfully formatted
in linear patterns to reflect shapes in the illustration ("More! More!" arches over
the clay boy's head) or to accentuate tone ("And he got bigger, and BIGGER, and
BIGGER!"). The paintings feature large, open compositions that the main figure
fills as he grows. Clear colors and dramatic momentum make these pictures espe-
cially effective from a distance, say for a scary storytime where the librarian is
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 
395
confident the kids won't take Clay Boy's actions too literally. Or you could read
this just before art class and have the kids make their own doughboy from the dark
side. BH
GOLDIN, BARBARA DIAMOND, ad. 
The Girl Who Lived with the Bears; illus. by
Andrew Plewes. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1997 
40p
ISBN 0-15-200684-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
In this American Indian tale from the Pacific Northwest, a haughty young woman
insults the bears while picking berries in the forest, is abducted by the bear people,
and marries the nephew of their chief. Plewes' color illustrations, in a rich palette
of blues, greens, and gold reminiscent of Emily Carr, capture the sweeping gran-
deur of the coast, forest, and mountains of British Columbia. The sensitive inter-
pretation gives both momentum and pleasing visual unity to the story: sculptural
clouds encroach on the coast in the first double-page spread; the looming totem
poles in the bear village pick up this motif. (Less successful are the smaller charcoal
pencil drawings, which seem like stiff anthropological studies.) Goldin assumes
the voice of a traditional teller but her ample source notes refer to many written
versions of the tale and explain how her version differs from others-most signifi-
cantly by ending on the hopeful note of the young woman's return to her own
village rather than chronicling her later struggles there. This retelling brings out
the ambivalence of this homesick young woman's love for her husband (who is
very handsome when he sheds his bearskin) and emphasizes the importance of
making peace with the natural world. PMc
GORDON, DAN 
Davin; by Dan Gordon and Zaki Gordon. 
Delacorte,
1997 
170p
ISBN 0-385-32221-6 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Grandma Goddess is telling a bedtime story to her two grandsons, Yoni and Adam,
and her granddaughter, Danielle. The story is about Little Boy, whose father is
away in the RAF during World War II, and who is being raised by a nasty nanny
and a helpless mother. Little Boy falls ill, and he is convinced he can only be made
well by Davin, a teddy bear with magical powers. Little Boy's favorite toy figures
(a Civil War Bugle Boy, a Blustery Sergeant Major, a Princess, Perseus, Robin
Hood, and Chingachook, last of the Mohicans) come to life to rescue Davin from
the attic and save the Little Boy. The narrative frame of the grandmother reading
to the children is cloyingly cute and tremendously distracting, and while that sort
of framework may have worked for The Princess Bride, it doesn't work here. The
characterizations are strictly one note (the Princess exists to be rescued, and
Chingachook has a British upper-class accent) and the motivation is straight out of
The Velveteen Rabbit. Somewhere in this overwritten, overplotted, and
undercharacterized fantasy there is a story that children might like, but unfortu-
nately it's buried in a jumble of caricatures and unnecessary plot devices. JMD
GOURLEY, CATHERINE 
Beryl Markham: Never Turn Back. 
Conari,
1997 
150p 
illus. with photographs 
(Barnard Biography Series)
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57324-073-7 
$6.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Beryl Markham's life is unique: after growing up wild in colonial Kenya, she
became the first licensed female trainer of racehorses in England and the colonies,
then moved from horses to airplanes, becoming the first aviator to fly solo from
England to North America-which exploit she then chronicled in a feted book,
396 
* THE BULLETIN
West with the Night. Gourley follows the shape of that book here, giving a look
behind the scenes at Markham's failed marriages, deserted son, and possible em-
broideries on the truth, but still crediting her strong pioneering spirit and her
noteworthy achievements. This title really is more a different look at Markham's
book than a full-life biography: the fifty years following her famous flight are
disposed of in three pages, the book's style echoes Markham's spare romanticism
(not always to good effect), and there's no mention of the challenges to Markham's
authorship of West with the Night. Still, the text flows along readably, and
Markham's life is a thrilling one; readers who want more information as well as a
vivid picture of early colonial Africa will appreciate this as the next step after
Markham's own writing. There are no notes, but a list of sources are included
(and Gourley is diligent about crediting the authors in-text), along with a bio-
graphical timeline and index; photographs are limited to one page with two small
images, only one of Markham. DS
HARRAH, MADGE 
My Brother, My Enemy. 
Simon, 1997 
[144p]
ISBN 0-689-80968-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Returning from a hunt, Robert Bradford finds his family massacred by Indians; he
hails the first boat heading toward Jamestown and finds himself in the sympathetic
company of Nathaniel Bacon and his band of followers. With no family and no
immediate prospects, Robert is soon embroiled in their struggle against the colo-
nial governor for a commission to wage retaliatory war against the Indians. The
boy serves under Bacon as scout, which allows him to search out his erstwhile
friend Naokan, whom he erroneously believes took part in his family's murder.
Harrah grabs her readers' attention with an irresistible opening-"Fourteen years
old and sentenced to hang. In the morning. At dawn"-and limns vivid portraits
of the hot-headed Bacon and his aristocratic adversary Governor Berkeley. Robert's
tale, though, is somewhat less convincing: his bloodbrother relationship with
Naokan antecedes the story's action, and when he's miraculously rescued from the
gallows by Naokan (to which he and his fellow rebels had been sentenced for their
uncommissioned raids), he never glances back towards his doomed comrades at
arms. The author's notes provide some juicy historical bits and pieces, and readers
will probably enjoy Harrah's final five pages ofJamestown miscellanea as much as
the preceding novel. EB
HARRISON, BARBARA 
A Ripple ofHope: The Life ofRobert F. Kennedy; by Barbara
Harrison and Daniel Terris. 
Lodestar, 1997 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-67506-X 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
The by-product of research for cable television documentaries on Jack and Robert
Kennedy, this biography is nevertheless solid, capably crafted, and engaging.
Harrison and Terris are obviously enthralled by the Kennedys, yet they also report
on the less flattering side of Bobby (as the book refers to him). They matter-of-
factly mention his admiration for Senator Joe McCarthy (godfather to Kennedy's
first-born) and his authorizing the wiretapping of Martin Luther King, Jr.'s tele-
phone. While not excusing these transgressions, the authors put these actions in
the context of the times, doing a credible job of conveying the agony of the sixties,
when civil rights, the Vietnam War, and assassinations collided. They also movingly
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 397
describe the genuine transformation Robert Kennedy underwent after JFK's death,
as he began to believe that political power should be used to improve the lives of
Americans less fortunate than he. For today's students, the subject was a contem-
porary of their grandparents, but current readers will identify with this shy, clumsy,
and self-doubting young man. The book contains an epilogue, an afterword, end-
notes, sources of information (with comments on secondary works), a bibliogra-
phy, a chronology, and an index. SSV
HEDLUND, CAREY 
Night Fell at Harry's Farm; written and illus. by Carey
Hedlund. 
Greenwillow, 1997 
[33p]
ISBN 0-688-14932-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-4 yrs
A little girl and her family go on a car trip to Harry's, get lost, find their way, dance
with fireflies, stay overnight, and breakfast in a jolly yellow kitchen. The text
rambles a bit, but it's toddler-appealing and visually enriched by Hedlund's bright
pastels of roads winding through green fields and over stone bridges to Harry's
Farm, where the fireflies glow against green trees in the blue night. This is a simple
narrative that would fit well into a lapsit program, especially if your audience is in
the mood for an imaginary road trip. Youngsters will delight in the narrator's cozy
confidence ("That night I dreamed that the fireflies carried Harry away. But he
was back in time to make breakfast"), and they will start dreaming of nightfall so
they can go looking for fireflies as magical as Harry's. JMD
HELLMAN, HAL 
Beyond Your Senses: The New World of Sensors. 
Lodestar,
1997 
[96p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-67533-7 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
This treasure-trove of info on sensors could only be surpassed by a literate robot
programmed to turn out term papers all by itself. It's a tough subject, to be sure,
but Hellman makes it all intelligible by first describing the familiar human senses
of vision, touch, hearing, taste, and smell and then introducing the new man-
made sensors which duplicate or surpass them. This is where facts fly fast and
furious, keeping the reader hooked even though the material itself can be rather
challenging. For the most part, Hellman writes clearly and competently, only
occasionally sinking into the murk of technospeak ("the pH figure is a measure of
the substance's hydrogen ion activity"). Among the tidbits offered: listening de-
vices can hear structural stresses before they become cracks; a scent detector will be
able to alert us to rotting food in refrigerators; microwave ovens will automatically
turn off when food is cooked. The final chapter explores the possibilities of cut-
ting-edge research and stresses the peacetime applications of Cold War devices,
such as satellites which can transmit information on the pH balance in a farmer's
fields. Appended are an extensive glossary, sources of additional information, a list
of consumer catalogs that feature sensors, and a thorough reading list. SSV
HOBBS, WLL River Thunder. Delacorte, 1997 [192p]
ISBN 0-385-32316-6 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-12
In Downriver (BCCB 3/91), Jessie and her fellow rebellious adolescents took off
from the main group and rafted the Colorado on their own; here they're a year
398 
* THE BULLETIN
older and a few experiences wiser, but when a chance to finish the run comes up,
they return. Though they were lured there under false pretenses (the troublemaking
Troy sent letters in the name of their old guide) they're game for the experience,
even when record rainfalls and runoff make the trip through the canyon uniquely
demanding and dangerous. The plot runs aground on the interpersonal matters,
which are mostly residual from the first book and deal with Troy's possible matu-
ration and his relationship with Jessie. All readers will really want is for the group
to get back on the river, where Hobbs' terrific and involving descriptions of high-
pressure adventure, river lore, and Jessie's developing skill at this monumental task
will keep pulses racing. Without being flashy, the book's knowledge permeates
the story and keeps the narration credible, allowing audience members who don't
know a canyon from a culvert to understand the situation and its challenges, and
many of them will be pleased to see a girl as the capable real-life action hero. An
author's note explains his rafting experience and the record-breaking year on the
Colorado that provided the details for his group's fictional trip. DS
HOLMES, BARBARA WARE 
My Sister the Sausage Roll; illus. by Karen Lee
Schmidt. 
Hyperion, 1997 
[64p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2260-0 
$13.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7868-1182-X 
$3.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Eloise Trombly has a brand-new baby sister at home and a father who's far away;
employed by the government, Dad is gone for months, communicating with his
family only through letters and missing baby Mary Alice's early days. Eloise and
her loyal friend Jenny do their best to keep baby and Dad in touch, trying to teach
Mary Alice to say "Hi, Daddy!" and showing her his picture (altering it appropri-
ately with changes in facial hair and eyewear as per Dad's reports), until finally he
comes home in the flesh to the joy of the whole family. A note says this is based on
a story from the author's early life, and there is an old-fashioned flavor to the
situation (where's Dad's e-mail, anyway?); this results in a refreshingly angst-free
story, and the situation of parental geographic distance in a happy family is actu-
ally quite contemporary and rarely featured in children's books. The book's spark
and humor are its real benefits, however; the included correspondence is wry and
witty yet still authentic, with Dad and Eloise in engaging complicity (sharing Eloise's
horror at the prissy professional baby pictures, he observes, "No baby could look
like that and live"). In the often hard-done-by genre of the easy reader, this is a
welcomely entertaining addition. A few pages of extraneous puzzles appear in the
back; final illustrations not seen. DS
HOWE, JAMES 
The Watcher. Atheneum, 1997 
173p
ISBN 0-689-80186-6 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In summertime in an island resort community, a girl spends her days sitting and
watching the activities on the beach. Not all the activities, though: she's focused
on one particular family, a family she begins to dream that she belongs to. Inter-
spersed with her italicized fantasies and her contemplation of the beach are two
more third-person narratives: one following Evan, the boy in the watcher's ideal-
ized family, who fears that his parents are getting a divorce, and one about Chris,
the lifeguard whom Evan admires, but whose feelings of failure and confusion
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 
399
about family history make him question his summer job and his life. The mystery
and intensity here are deftly handled. Working these strands together is an ambi-
tious project but Howe does it surprisingly well; in fact, the problem tends to be
one of overneatness, especially with the tidy ending where the strands combine
(and the book seems unaware of how inconclusive that ending, where the watcher's
abusive father is finally accused, really is). Sometimes, too, the accrued drama of
the individual stories tips the book into melodrama. It's still a pleasingly original
approach to a compelling story that will gratify readers tired of the same old stuff.
DS
HUGHES, SHIRLEY 
Enchantment in the Garden; written and illus. by Shirley
Hughes. 
Lothrop, 1997 
58p
ISBN 0-688-14597-3 $18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Valerie, a poor little rich girl living in Italy, is lonely. Her loneliness summons
Cherubino, the son of an ancient sea god, from his sculpted place on a palazzo
fountain, and he becomes her only friend. Through Valerie, Cherubino fulfills his
destiny of being a sea god and guarding the wild places. Hughes' watercolors of
the Italian countryside are sumptuous and inviting. The flowering gardens, well-
defined characters, and moonlit balconies are romantic and satisfying, and they are
nearly enough to compensate for the weaknesses in the overcrowded plot. There
are too many diversions from the action as Cherubino comes to life, is sent to an
orphanage, is rescued by Valerie, becomes a gardener's boy, goes to summer at the
seashore, and reclaims his destiny. He promises to return to Valerie when she
grows up, because "sea gods can love humans sometimes, you know. Now and
again-every thousand years or so. A very unusual human, that is. And when we
do, we have very long memories. Good-bye, Valerie, till we meet again." A sim-
pler plot with a simpler text would have served these lovely illustrations better.
Still, this vision of the Italian countryside has charm, and readers with a yen for
young romance may be attracted in spite of the convoluted narrative. JMD
JOHNSON, SYLVIA A. 
Tomatoes, Potatoes, Corn, and Beans: How the Foods of the
Americas Changed Eating around the World. Atheneum, 1997 
138p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-689-80141-6 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Most food is so international now that it's hard to imagine what things were like
before the Italians had tomatoes and the Irish had potatoes. Johnson takes readers
back before East met West, hemispherically speaking, describing the history and
cross-cultural effects of the title crops and others (including peppers, peanuts, and
chocolate) that started on this side of the planet and ultimately enriched the world.
The book's food-by-food approach keeps things focused and helps shed light on
how differently different cultures have used various veggies (interestingly enough,
many foods have made themselves so at home in their adopted countries that the
inhabitants don't realize they're imported). A little more comparison of contem-
porary and early usage would have been helpful (are any of the "corn doughs"
described similar to corn meal? Is the Indian corn product rockahomonie the same
as hominy?), but there's still plenty of intriguing breadth. Black-and-white repro-
ductions of old botanical illustrations and more recent photographs (some a little
dark) assist in providing context; endnotes, a bibliography, and an index are in-
cluded. DS
400 
* THE BULLETIN
KLAUSE, ANNETTE CURTIS 
Blood and Chocolate. Delacorte, 1997 
[288p]
ISBN 0-385-32305-0 
$13.45
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Vivian is a loup-garou, a werewolf; her father died in a fire set in revenge after
younger members of the pack broke the rule against killing humans, and now the
pack has moved to the Maryland suburbs to make a new life. In the absence of
their late alpha, pack hierarchy is muddled and pack leadership is going a-begging,
leading to a free-for-all combat for the position that leaves Vivian, against her will,
alpha female-and destined mate of alpha-male Gabriel. This is problematic first
because Vivian has, against all convention, become involved with a human boy
and second, because she begins to think she may, in fits of wolfish bloodlust, have
begun to kill humans, thereby endangering the safety of the pack. Klause keeps
this story powerful and sexy, reveling in the ferality of her characters and the over-
tones of legend; some characters are a bit predictable or indistinct, but a few-
especially Vivian's human boyfriend, who thinks he wants mysticism and falls
apart when he gets it-are intriguing and vivid. At heart here is a classic romance
about a girl torn between the sensitive aesthete and the dark dominant enigma;
fans of that genre will know where they're headed, but they'll still relish the hunt.
DS
KRESS, STEPHEN W. 
Project Puffin: How We Brought Puffins Back to Egg Rock; as
told to Pete Salmansohn. 
Tilbury House, 1997 
40p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-88448-170-0 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Wildlife scientist Kress has for over twenty years worked on a project to bring
puffins back to the formerly puffin-rich coastal islands of Maine. In language
simple and forthright, he discusses the puffin's life cycle, the reasons for their dis-
appearance from the area, and the obstacles to their return. The book goes on to
describe the practical details of the repopulation effort (the building of big puffin
"suitcases" with individual carrying compartments for each chick, the sneaking of
vitamins into food fish and thereby into the puffins, the creation of painted puffin
decoys to convince prospective avian tenants that the island was an approved puf-
fin home) and its gradual but measurable success. It's hard to beat Bruce McMillan's
Nights of the Pufflings (BCCB 3/95) for sheer drama and impact, but this would
make a worthy classroom companion with the additional benefit of being closer to
home for many readers. Photographs of puffins in every conceivable attitude breeze
through the book, making the text's enthusiasm understandable. A glossary, in-
formation about puffin-watching boat trips, and a note about puffin adoption
programs are included, as is ordering information for the title's accompanying
teacher's guide. DS
KURTZ, JANE 
Only a Pigeon; by Jane and Christopher Kurtz; illus. by E. B.
Lewis. 
Simon, 1997 
40p
ISBN 0-689-80077-0 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Ondu-ahlem's first concern each morning is the safety of his pigeons. He and his
friends organize their days around training their homing pigeons and releasing
them in a competition to lure a rival's bird away, and on this particular day Ondu-
ahlem's prize bird, Chinkay, will be put to the test. Kurtz subtly introduces details
of an Ethiopian child's life marked, according to American standards, by priva-
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 401
tion-cramped and austere houses, an overcrowded school miles from home, a
hard-earned snack of roasted chickpeas purchased "from a peddler younger than
himself." Yet there is no hint of want or dissatisfaction among this band of boys
intent on the friendly rivalries of their mutual hobby, as Kurtz's narration steadily
focuses on the excitement of the game itself. Lewis' earthy, sun-stippled watercol-
ors gently document the relative poverty of the region, yet celebrate the intensity
with which the boys nurture and train their birds, suggesting to viewers among the
Sega/Nintendo set that simpler diversions may be equally satisfying. An author's
note expands on the details of pigeon training, and a glossary/pronunciation guide
smooths the way for adult readers. EB
LEVITIN, SONIA 
Yesterday's Child. Simon, 1997 
24 8p
ISBN 0-689-80810-0 
$17.00 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Laura is just beginning to realize how little she knew her mother,
who recently died and whose privacy Laura's distant father still guards. When
Laura's class takes a trip to Washington, DC, Laura determines to hunt down her
mother's past in the little Virginia town where she was born. Soon she realizes
she's stumbled onto her mother's dark mystery: back in high school, she and her
best friend, Megan, deliberately burned up Megan's house with Megan's parents
in it. What's more, Megan, now the mother of a boy whom Laura loves, is pre-
pared to kill to protect the secret of her past. Impossible as the plot is, a sinewy,
atmospheric writer of the Lois Duncan ilk might have been able to pull it off.
That unfortunately doesn't happen here: Levitin's story is baggy rather than taut,
with sloppiness (Laura's mother's death is sometimes attributed to an aneurysm
and sometimes heart failure; at least one of the included songs is titled errone-
ously) and contrivance (Laura happens immediately onto her mother's high-school
class reunion) both interfering with the smooth progression of the plot. Nor is
Laura a particularly interesting heroine: her distress is authentic, but her indiffer-
ence to the feelings of everyone but herself seems to be greater than the plot de-
mands. Laura's hunt for the truth may intrigue a few readers, but they'll be better
off with the likes of Duncan and Barbara Michaels. DS
McCuLLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
StarringMirette r Bellini; written and illus. by Emily
Arnold McCully. 
Putnam, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22636-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Mirette (from Mirette on the High Wire, BCCB 10/95) is now the partner of the
wire-walking Bellini, and they're traveling all over pre-war Europe. When they
travel to St. Petersburg, however, Mirette is concerned about the plight of the
peasants, and she and Bellini plan to exhort the Russians to freedom from the high
wire. Unfortunately this results in Bellini's arrest, which requires Mirette's perfor-
mance of a clandestine and dangerous wire-walk to rescue him from his cell. The
rescue is a pleasing conceit, but it's not that dissimilar from the story of the first
book, where Mirette also walked to Bellini's rescue; the political overtones are
chronologically appropriate but sit oddly with the more fantastic and airy nature
of Mirette's story. The art is darker and less luminous than that in the first book,
but it still offers a ginger-haired Mirette triumphant against the blue sky. Regard-
less of the bobbles in the story, Mirette's exciting life will continue to draw young
listeners. DS
402 
* THE BULLETIN
MCDONNELL, FLORA 
Flora McDonnell's ABC; written and illus. by Flora
McDonnell. 
Candlewick, 1997 
34p
ISBN 0-7636-0118-7 
$16.99 
R 
3-5 yrs
No arcane vocabulary, no letter transmutations, no trickery of design-this is a
back-to-basics alphabet book that introduces each upper and lower case letter with
a circus-bright painting of two images whose names begin with the featured letter.
Layouts are deceptively simple-in a typically uncluttered composition, a flamingo
eyes a fish in a bowl; "F fFLAMINGO" heads the page and "fish" tops the bowl. Thus
the jumbo-sized image is identified in upper-case letters, the tiny image in lower
case. The vibrant peaches and oranges of each animal fairly spring off the simple
background of rich, complementary blue. Whimsy rules, as a quartet of "cats" in
a "CAR" take a spin across a lemon yellow background in a hot pink Cadillac (com-
plete with feline hood ornament), and a stoical "TIGER" balances a "teapot" on his
head. Teachers and parents coaxing phonics into a comeback will welcome this
appealing entry. EB
MCPHAIL, DAVID 
Edward and the Pirates; written and illus. by David
McPhail. 
Little, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-316-56344-7 
$15.95 
R 
4-6 yrs
Edward has learned to read, and life will never be the same, as he envisions himself
in the center of the action in adventures of Admiral Peary, Joan of Arc, and Robin
Hood. "Next to home, the library was Edward's favorite place," and it is in the
library that Edward finds the book about lost pirate treasure. Attentive readers (or
readees) will have no problem guessing what happens next-the pirates appear in
Edward's room, seeking the book. Edward is steadfast in his refusal-it is a library
book after all-and after some intercession by his mom and dad (in the dress and
demeanor ofJoan of Arc and Robin Hood, respectively), Edward compromises by
reading the book to the illiterate pirates. Edward's imagination has a delightful
tendency to run away with him, but McPhail's illustrations don't have any prob-
lem keeping up. The acrylic paintings are dark, but in a dramatic instead of som-
ber way, and they lend weight to Edward's literary adventures. Edward's face
occasionally lacks expression, and McPhail just skirts patness in his conclusion-
still, this sequel to Santa's Book ofNames (BCCB 10/93) makes a dandy readaloud
for kids who already like books, and it might even open an imaginative door for
kids who don't. JMD
MANNA, ANTHONY L., ad. Mr. Semolina-Semolinus: A Greek Folktale; ad. by
Anthony L. Manna and Christodoula Mitakidou; illus. by Giselle
Potter. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 1997 
34p
ISBN 0-689-81093-8 
$15.00 
R* 
5-9 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 385, for review.
MANEL, LYNN 
Fifty-Five Grandmas anda Llama; illus. by Carolyn Fisher. 
Gibbs
Smith, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-87905-785-8 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"I wish I had a grandma," Sam said. "I wish it more than anything." So begins
Sam's search for grandmothers. First Sam tries the traditional route: wishing on a
star, the birthday-cake-candle thing, and the wishbone routine. When Mom en-
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 403
courages him to get a little more realistic, he pulls out his piggy bank and heads off,
encountering a firefighter rescuing a stranded cat, a salesclerk, and a magician but
not success in his quest ("Grandmas did not grow on trees. Grandmas were not a
dime a dozen. And grandmas could not be pulled out of hats"). Placing an ad in
the local newspaper finally gets results, fifty-five to be exact, with one grandma
consistently standing out from the crowd ("The grandma with the llama just winked
and smiled"). Fifty-five grandmotherly doses of love, hugs, and advice soon get
the best of Sam, however, until another newspaper ad solves the problem and fifty-
four grandmas match up with new boys and girls. The lesson that too much of a
good thing is not a good thing packs a big comic wallop here when zany grandmas,
seen from every angle and perspective, cavort in Waldo-esque scenes doing their
grandma thing. Muted jewel-like colors in surreal full-page spread illustrations
extend the craziness. The text is just right for a rompin' good readaloud. And that
grandma with the llama? She stays. PM
MAYO, MARGARET, comp. 
Mythical Birds &e Beasts from Many Lands; illus. by
Jane Ray. 
Dutton, 1997 
[10 8p]
ISBN 0-525-45788-7 
$19.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
In easy, casual language Mayo retells ten stories, among them tales of Pegasus and
the Chimera, the Thunderbird, Quetzalcoatl, and the Nagini, a Burmese Cobra-
Woman. Her light tone makes the stories easily accessible to less sophisticated
readers (although having Ariadne beg Perseus to put her ashore because she's sea-
sick is a bit of a stretch). The notes for each tale are informative, and most give
specific sources used by Mayo. Ray's fantastical, glitzy style is especially suited to
the subject, as her gold-laced interpretations of the magical creatures never falls
short of readers' expectations. Full-page, bordered paintings and smaller visual
vignettes break up the text, and fanciful patterns and decorative detailing contrib-
ute to the overall coherence of the design. This is a nice solid collection of tales on
a perennially popular topic. JMD
MEDEARIS, 
ANGELA 
SHELF 
Rum-a-Tum-Tum; illus. by James E.
Ransome. 
Holiday House, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1143-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 4-7 yrs
Street vendors sing in a turn-of-the-century New Orleans morning, offering their
produce and services to early shoppers and awakening the nightgown-clad narra-
tor: "I run to the window, open it wide,/ lean over the railing and look outside."
Children accustomed to media ad bombardment should warm right up to the
street cries, which, as Medearis explains in a concluding note, were the "trade-
marks" of the peddlers: "Juicy red watermelons!/ So sweet and fine!/ Eat the meat,
pickle the rind,/ save the seeds till planting time!" A funeral and a jazz parade
eventually enter the scene, and as the narrator finger snaps, toe taps, and rum-a-
tum-tums along with the music, the street vendor theme is hopelessly lost in the
shuffle. The author's note fails to explain either of these New Orleans musical
traditions, and listeners may wonder why this band is jazzin' up the empty streets
early in the morning. Ransome's joyously animated cast is captured at angles
which draw the viewer right onto the cobbled streets; many scenes, unfortunately,
are truncated to accommodate a broad sidebar with text and close-ups of the pro-
404 
* THE BULLETIN
duce, resulting in a cramped and cluttered presentation. Still, this entry could be
paired with Ted Lewin's Market (BCCB 9/96) for a look at shopping beyond the
mall. EB
MOLLEL, TOLOLWA M. 
Kele's Secret; illus. by Catherine Stock. 
Lodestar,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-525-67500-0 
$14.99 
R 4-7 yrs
Little Yoanes knows there's a reward in store for him when he gathers enough eggs
for Grandma Koko to take to the village market, and he's quite the expert at dis-
covering the hens' more devious hiding places-in the outhouse corner, amid the
bamboo roots, in Grandfather Akwi's cluttered bedroom loft. The hen Kele prom-
ises to be a prodigious layer, so Yoanes follows her closely along her circuitous path
to a creepy shed that he's fairly terrified to enter: "I listened to the thump-thump
of my heart and imagined the sound of Nenauner, a half-human, half-rock mon-
ster in Koko's bedtime stories." As in Big Boy (BCCB 3/95), Mollel adroitly blends
cultural specificity (the setting is loosely based on the Tanzanian coffee farm on
which the author grew up) with a universal theme-the overcoming of fear. Stock's
line and watercolor spreads reflect that balance, alternating corrugated roofed huts,
dense coffee bushes, and outdoor markets with Yoanes' imaginary camouflaged
monster and his supportive, down-to-earth grandparents. Mollel includes some
brief remarks on his own grandmother, "who [kept] us too busy to cause much
trouble," and a glossary/pronunciation guide to the Arusha Maasai terms. EB
MOODIE, FIONA, ad. 
Nabulela: A South African Folk Tale; ad. and illus. by Fiona
Moodie. 
Farrar, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-374-35486-3 
$15.00 
R 
5-7 yrs
"There was once a deep, deep lake in Africa. In the lake lived a white-skinned
monster called Nabulela. Nabulela, the monster that ate people." In the nearby
kraal is born a chiefs daughter, whom he indulges with such extravagance that
the other girls grow envious and abandon her in a pit. However, a dog she once
rescued in turn rescues her, and the miscreants must atone for their evil deed by
luring the monster out to be killed by the tribe. Considering the range of action,
Moodie has managed a tight economy of language, though she's left us clueless as
to a source and any adaptations she might have made. (The dust jacket does
identify this as "a North Nguni folktale from South Africa.") The watercolor
illustrations are rhythmically symmetrical in composition, with curving landscapes
emphasized by rounded figures. Their delicate drafting, modulated hues, and
subtle detail lighten a moral tale about equality in a tradition where the stakes are
life and death. BH
MULCAHY, ROBERT 
Medical Technology: Inventing the Instruments. Oliver,
1997 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-881508-34-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Information on the seven featured inventors and innovators (from Santorio and
his thermometer to Einthoven and his electro-cardiograph) is, admittedly, not
difficult to come by, but Mulcahy has packaged the data into a concisely orga-
nized, remarkably readable presentation. Each chapter is divided into segments on
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 405
the background of each scientist and his or her invention, why the invention marked
a technological breakthrough, and its impact on later medical developments. Al-
though the operation of each instrument is adequately explained, human drama
dominates physics here, and readers should be delighted with Mulcahy's accounts
of Rene Laennec's inordinate modesty (which led directly to his invention of the
stethoscope) and the vicious battles over patent rights to William Morton's anaes-
thetic inhaler. Among the profuse illustrations are photographs of the second
operation performed with ether, a World War I mobile x-ray unit, and the Curies
at work in their lab; an extensive glossary, a medical time line, and an index en-
hance this offering's usefulness to report writers. EB
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Outrageously Alice. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1997 
133p
ISBN 0-689-80354-0 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-8
It's the fall of eighth grade, and Alice is as conflicted as ever: "I wanted to be
noticed, but not too much. I wanted to be kissed, but not too hard. I wanted to
be like everyone else, but at the same time I wanted to be different. I wanted
excitement and adventure, but I also wanted protection." The particular incident
that prompts this evaluation is a fierce French kiss in a dark closet from an un-
known boy-whom she later finds out was her boyfriend, Patrick. She's also deal-
ing with the mysteries of sex and marriage as presented by the bridal shower (Alice
flunks the Test Your Sensuality quiz) and wedding of her brother's former girl-
friend, Crystal. Plus, of course, there are developments in her friends' lives (Eliza-
beth gains a serious admirer, Pamela's parents are separating) and in her father's
(an accident resulting in a concussion seems to bring him closer to Miss Sum-
mers). This is even more episodic than some of the previous entries in the series,
and some of the episodes-like Alice's closet kiss-are left rather incomplete. Alice's
charm and desperation-or perhaps the charm of her desperation-are still vivid
and credible, though, and the swerving around from one concern to another is
believable and age-appropriate. Patrick's star looks to be falling, however, so the
next book may be the really meaty one. DS
O'GRADY, SCOTT 
Basher Five-Two; by Scott O'Grady with Michael
French. 
Doubleday, 1997 
[144p]
ISBN 0-385-32300-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Captain Scott O'Grady, an Air Force pilot whose F-16 was shot down over Bosnia
during a 1995 NATO peacekeeping mission, recounts the attack, his survival ma-
neuvers, and his rescue by a U.S. Marine tactical force. As he evaded enemy searchers
for six days with no food, little water, and a few pieces of survival equipment,
O'Grady also dodged hunger, dehydration, hypothermia, and despair. A "Guts,
Guns, and God" patriotism, which seems to be largely out of vogue in children's
literature at the moment, is much in evidence here, as O'Grady passionately cred-
its his survival to the dedication and competence of the military, the support of his
family, and the protection of the Almighty. Middle grade hi-lo readers will espe-
cially be drawn to the tense action and to the intimate machismo of the narrative
style: "I was about to land in hostile territory, I knew from intel that I couldn't
count on finding any nice guys in Bosnia." O'Grady insists, "I wasn't really a
hero-I was a survivor," but readers are bound to think otherwise. EB
406 
* 
THE BULLETIN
OGBURN,JACQUEINEK. The Reptile Balk illus. byJohn O'Brien. Dial, 1997 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1732-6 $14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1731-8 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Fifteen poems fancifully depict aspects of a reptilian frolic including the eats ("Ar-
ranged on platters with precision and haste,/ a dish to delight each cold-blooded
taste"-"The Dining Hall"), the dances ("Snakes all shake in the Ssa-Ssa-Ssamba,/
Heeding the plea of the Anaconda"-"Ssa-Ssa-Ssamba"), and romance ("A tree
frog waltzed through the hall/ with a turtle, both ancient and tall"-"A Peculiar
Pair"). The idea is appealing, and some of the poems are witty and imaginative
("The See-Through Suitor" tells amusingly of the romantic tribulations of the
glass frog). Too often, however, the poems disappoint, with forced rhythms and
no conceptual punch. The line-and-watercolor art is droll, but it relies on darker
hues and extensive hatching and cross-hatching (for all those scales); compositions
sometimes lack focus, but kids will enjoy the beady-eyed protagonists. This isn't
quite up to the standard of Prelutsky and Sfs on mythological creatures (Monday's
Troll BCCB 3/96) or Heide and Chess on monsters (Grim and Ghastly Goings
On, BCCB 9/92), but kids who like that sort of poetic gallery of unlovelies may
enjoy slithering through this. A glossary offers illustrated descriptions of creatures
mentioned in the text or appearing in the pictures. DS
ORR, WENDY 
Peeling the Onion. Holiday House, 1997 
16 6p
ISBN 0-8234-1289-X 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Seventeen-year-old Anna is fresh from the thrill of a karate championship (com-
plete with victory kiss from longtime crush Hayden) when her life changes: a
careless driver smashes into her car and sends her to the hospital. The early im-
pression is that Anna's injuries are dramatic but not permanent, but her convic-
tion that she'll be back doing karate in six weeks finally gives way to the dawning
realization that broken neck vertebrae, irreparable bone damage, and permanent
impairment of her balance and memory mean that she will never go back to karate,
never be a physical education teacher, and never have the life she had planned.
Orr's characterizations are excellent: strong, capable Anna has spent her life defin-
ing herself by her physicality and now wonders if there's any Anna at all; Anna's
loyal friend Jenny feels guilty about her own newfound happiness with a boy-
friend, while Anna's friend Caroline finds the situation too much to deal with and
rejects Anna entirely; Anna's boyfriend Hayden, who was driving the car in which
she rode, cares for her but must deal with his own survivor guilt. The book is also
unusually honest about the chronicity and ambiguity of the results of such an
accident, with diagnoses changing constantly and medical answers frustratingly
unforthcoming. This has the appeal of the traditional disability drama, but it has
a lot more grit and general insight, and many teens trying to figure out who they
really are will appreciate it. DS
PAULSEN, GARY 
The SchernoffDiscoveries. Delacorte, 1997 
103p
ISBN 0-385-32194-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-9 .
Fourteen-year-old Harold Schernoffis brilliant, but geeky. The narrator (presum-
ably Gary Paulsen, as this novel is unabashedly autobiographical) is his only friend.
Actually, each is the other's only friend, and this book is a series of chapters on
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 407
how they survived high school without getting beat up, electrocuted, or hit on the
head with a bowling pin. Each chapter is introduced with a title giving a clue to its
content and with a quote from the brawnless but brainy Harold. (For example,
Chapter 1, "On Discovering the Benefits of Electricity," is introduced with the
question "What is it anyway?-Harold on Sex"). Harold and cohort try skiing (a
physical disaster), dating (an emotional disaster), and a part-time job (a fiscal di-
saster, although the scene of the twosome setting pins in the bowling alley is hilari-
ous). The tone is breezy, funny, and sometimes touching (but not too mushy) and
bound to keep the most reluctant reader chuckling; this would even work as an
episodic readaloud. Paulsen supplies an afterword so readers will know how every-
one turned out when they finally grew up. JMD
PEARSON, GAYLE 
The Secret Box. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1997 
119p
ISBN 0-689-81379-1 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-7
Five short stories, which feature characters from Pearson's previous offering One
Potato, Tu (BCCB 7/92), follow the emotional roller coaster of adolescence along
its dizzying ride. Taylor Finch's heart-wrenching crush on her older brother's
friend ends in abrupt disillusionment when she discovers he's a shoplifter. Sib-
lings Lindsey and Eric struggle to stifle their hilarity at a memorial service for their
loopy Aunt Flo's dog. Eric's adoration of the alluring Shellee Somerville results in
his denting his mother's car, running over his mother's computer, and, literally,
treasuring the very ground Shellee walks on. Rebounding from dashed hopes in
the third tale, Eric makes another appearance at his first job, bagging at a super-
market, where he finds that the physics teacher he idolizes has sticky fingers. Fi-
nally, Taylor comes to terms with her brother's antisocial behavior. Once again,
Pearson's collection of quietly well-crafted stories places her teens in painfully fa-
miliar situations, tests them, and finds them remarkably resilient. EB
POOLEY, SARAH 
Jump the World: Stories, Poems, and Things to Make and Dofrom
Around the World; written and illus. by Sarah Pooley. 
Dutton, 1997 
[76p]
ISBN 0-525-45798-4 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 2-5
As the subtitle broadly hints, this collection is, to put it politely, overambitious-
a liability that could be overlooked if compensated for by quality. However, Pooley
has cobbled together tales and poems that do little to illuminate regions or cultures
and has paired them with monotonously cheerful cartoon illustrations and generic
crafts only tenuously related to the narratives. How Lewis Carroll's "Jabberwocky"
was selected to represent British culture defies explanation; the sock puppet mon-
ster ("Beware the Jabbersock!") craft trivializes the listener's own wild imaginings.
Arabic proverbs, molding the Middle East into a tidy cultural lump, are enigmati-
cally paired with English equivalents-"He married the monkey for its money.
The money went, and the monkey stayed a monkey" = "You made your bed; now
you must lie in it." American Indians are represented by the retelling of a Chey-
enne tale drained of folkloric tone: "Younger was feeling very sick. His stomach
felt like a carnival merry-go-round and his eyes were as big as Ping-Pong balls." A
flat recap of "Peter and the Wolf" is Russia's offering, followed by directions for
finger puppets (Little Bird, Duck, and Grandfather look eerily similar); a tissue-
covered shoe box "treasure chest" accompanies Scandinavia's "The Captain's
Goose." Jump right past this one. EB
408 
* THE BULLETIN
PROSE, FRANCINE, ad. 
The Angel's Mistake: Stories of Chelm; illus. by Mark
Podwal. 
Greenwillow, 1997 
24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14906-5 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14905-7 
$15.00 
R 
5-7 yrs
Two angels, one carrying a bag of intelligent souls and another a bag of souls "not
so clever," are supposed to sprinkle them evenly around the world, but the bag of
fools snags on a jagged peak and all the stupid souls roll down the mountain into
the little town of Chelm. Never mind, the Chelmites are too foolish to know
they're fools. They go barefoot in the snow so their shoes don't get wet and punish
a fish by drowning it in the lake, among other carefully considered ploys, until
finally they manage to burn down their town and scatter just the way they were
supposed to in the first place. While Isaac Bashevis Singer spun their misadven-
tures into a classic collection of stories (The Fools of Chelm and Their History,
BCCB 2/74), Prose gathers bits and pieces of the Yiddish lore into a series of
descriptive jokes functioning as a pourquoi tale for younger readers. Podwal, who
also illustrated Prose's Dybbuk: A Story Made in Heaven (BCCB 4/96), paints
Chelmish scenes with brilliant levity. From upside-down houses to a roofless syna-
gogue ("so their prayers could rise directly to heaven"), these buildings seem to
float in a teal world occasionally sparked with fiery orange or midnight blue. The
spare figures stare at us solemnly enough to evoke a smile, while open composi-
tions suggest that we are all part of the mishugas. BH
RAPP, ADAM 
The Buffalo Tree. 
Front Street, 1997 
188p
ISBN 1-886910-19-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Sura is doing six-month's time in Hamstock, a facility for male juvenile offenders,
and it's rough. There's organized bullying, repeated shakedowns, tight discipline
that slips into abuse, and relentless loneliness, and it eventually proves too much
for Sura's "patch mate" (bunkmate) and friend, Coly Jo: after being driven to
assault a staff member, he spends three weeks in solitary; soon after his release back
into regular confinement, he is dead in what seems to be a suicide. Additional
elements are Sura's dangerously troubled new patch mate, an overearnest clergy-
man, and Sura's longed-for mother, whose new boyfriend may complicate Sura's
fate at his release. Rapp gets points for originality here: this is a fresh and different
approach to the topic, with a lot of atmosphere (though Sura's colloquial turn of
phrase is a bit studied) and intensity and a minimum of soul-searching explanation
for kids' behavior. Unfortunately there's little shape to the narrative, with Sura's
eventual atonement (after release, he returns the hood ornaments he stole) poorly
prepared for; there's also a problem with many of the characters, who tend to
blend together in the absence of clear differentiation. Ultimately we have little
sense of Sura himself except in his relationship with others, especially Coly Jo; the
awkward tenderness between the two boys is the strongest thing in the novel. The
appeal of that friendship and the evocative depiction of a different world will pull
many teens in. DS
REGAN, DIAN CURTIS 
Monsters in Cyberspace; illus. by Melissa Sweet. 
Holt,-
1997 
[179p]
ISBN 0-8050-4677-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
In this third entry in Regan's monster quartet (following Monster of the Month
JULY/AUGUST 1997 * 409
Club, BCCB 1/95, and Monsters in the Attic) Rilla Earth's stuffed critters come to
life, injecting havoc into the normally quiet countercultural life of Rilla, her mother
Sparrow Harmony Earth and her aunt, Poppy Harmony Earth, all of whom run
(of course) Harmony House Bed and Breakfast. Rilla and a gaggle ofother Aquarian
offspring are home-schooled and raised on organic vegetables, and they are all
learning how to assemble a greenhouse. Into this wholesome cast come the unpre-
dictable Monsters of the Month who insist on living up to their press as they surf
the Internet, play strip poker, and skateboard throughout the attic. Regan's plot is
gossamer thin, hinging on Rilla's Internet search for her long lost father who left
his pregnant wife to join the Peace Corps and later was unable to locate his off-
spring due to the family's bizarre name changes. The story doesn't really end as
much as it lurches to a halt (the already announced sequel entitled Monsters and
My One True Love will be the final member of the quartet); the characters remain
unrealized and transparent stereotypes of Flower Children. SSV
RICHARDSON, JOY 
Looking at Pictures: An Introduction to Art for Young People;
illus. by Charlotte Voake and with photographs. 
Abrams, 1997 
80p
ISBN 0-8109-4252-6 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
After some brief background (history of galleries, behind the scenes of a museum),
this book focuses on a dozen different aspects of art, such as "Telling a Story,"
"Hidden Meanings," "Focus on Colour," and "Tricking the Eye." Each section
runs approximately half-a-dozen pages, usually showcasing at least one main im-
age and several details therefrom within each spread. There's a nice chatty tone to
much of the text, and the working back and forth from detail to bigger image helps
clarify many matters (it's also helpful that real-life dimensions for many paintings
are included); the technical aspects of painting and pigments are described with
unusual and fascinating detail. Unfortunately the material under many headings
seems to be rather arbitrarily placed, and many descriptions evoke more questions
than they answer (which part of the Friedrich detail still has varnish on it, and why
doesn't the mist look pink as described in the text? When the brief history of blue
pigments is given, why aren't samples offered for illustration? Why do some paint-
ings appear with dates, country of origin, and artist information and some not?).
The author also occasionally succumbs to the art historical tendency of enthusing
over what a painting does to a viewer ("Melendez's oranges are enough to make
your mouth water"), which distances many young viewers who may feel rather
differently. Charlotte Voake's ink-and-wash spot art has its charms but ends up
adding to the pages' clutter more often than accenting or providing information.
There is a great deal of useful and intriguing information here, but the book doesn't
possess the organizational and visual clarity that made Rosemary Davidson's Take
a Look (BCCB 2/94) so stellar. DS
Ross, ALICE 
The Copper Lady; by Alice and Kent Ross; illus. by Leslie
Bowman. 
Carolrhoda, 1997 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-87614-934-4 
$13.13
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87614-960-3 
$5.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Ever since Andre's parents died, the Parisian orphan has been cruelly overworked
by coal merchant Louis Malet. Still, every chance he gets Andre steals away to
watch the craftsmen labor on FrId*ric Bartholdi's massive statue, Liberty Enlight-
ening the World. Bartholdi lets Andre try his hand at hammering the copper sheets
410 
* THE BULLETIN
into a wooden mold and, when the boy proves an apt pupil, allows him to work on
the Lady's seven-foot "little" finger. When the statue is ready to be shipped to
America the following year, Andrd stows away with the Lady, determined to be-
come a coppersmith in America where "a young man could earn a good wage and
make a new start." The Rosses have twisted too many threads into one easy reader,
spreading their attention thinly over orphan tale, construction story, stowaway
adventure, and historical notes. Bowman's earth-toned watercolors, though darkly
appealing, add more confusion than illumination to the building process. How-
ever, readers are bound to admire Lady Liberty (appearing here in her original,
unoxidized glory) and to cull a few facts about her genesis. EB
RYAN, MARY ELIZABETH 
Alias. 
Simon, 1997 
[176p]
ISBN 0-689-80789-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-9
Life on the run is the only thing fifteen-year-old Toby Chase knows as he and his
single mother flit around the country, moving from state to state on the spur of the
moment. As her unsuspecting sidekick, Toby knows his mother's rules well by
now: no questions about the past, no bank accounts, credit cards, and don't even
ask for a phone. Although Ryan's symbolism is a bit heavy handed (could "Toby
Chase" signify "to be chased"?), the story is nevertheless fast-paced and the charac-
terizations are on the mark. Mom is a dreamy, aging hippie, whose youthful ide-
alism led her into violent protests against the Vietnam War and a subsequent life
underground. Her endearing goofiness (we forgive her for originally naming her
son "Bodhisattva. It means one whose essence is enlightenment") and jokey affec-
tion for Toby pull the reader into their nomadic life. The rest of the characters are
stereotypical and serve as plot expediters: stoic widower Sam, who falls hard for
mom; Mr. Hatcher, the wounded-vet history teacher, who assigns Toby a research
project on the Vietnam War; Sunny the Vietnamese refugee, a teenage girl who
becomes Toby's first real friend. The feel-good ending, while pat (Mom turns
herself in only to discover she'd been a victim of entrapment-case closed) and
hokey (the truth shall set you free), still remains satisfying. SSV
SACHS, MARILYN 
Another Day. 
Dutton, 1997 
180p
ISBN 0-525-45787-9 
$15.99 
M 
Gr. 5-7
Fourteen-year-old Olivia's parents have recently divorced and her grandfather has
died; Dad has withdrawn into his work, Mom has withdrawn into the happiness
of her new marriage, and Grandma has simply withdrawn. Wait, there's more:
Olivia's terrified of dogs, her best friend is transferring to another school, she's
failing algebra, and she's nursing an unrequited crush on her handsome-to-die-for
upperclass tutor, Ron. All this emotional dross turns to gold, though, when Olivia
overcomes her phobia and takes custody of Ron's neglected dog Lulu; the elated
teenager now gushes, "my life changed because of Lulu. I even got a seventy-three
on my last algebra test." Until her life takes this improbable upswing late in the
novel, Olivia definitely does not suffer in silence. She causes scenes at Sabbath
dinners and in restaurants, huffs out on her girlfriend, is rude to her mother's new
in-laws, and is, in general, extremely unpleasant. Add to this the episodic plot and
Olivia's tendency to speak in choppy, juvenile sentences ("And she's such a won-
derful little dog. She's so friendly. She likes everybody, but she really loves me the
best. When I'm around, she only wants to be near me"), and most readers will
gladly leave Olivia and her miseries for another day. EB
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 411
SADLER, MARILYN 
The Parakeet Girl; illus. by Roger Bollen. 
Random House,
1997 
4 8p 
(Step into Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-97289-7 
$11.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-87289-2 
$3.99 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Emma has a major problem. Despite the care she lavishes on her pets, the puppy
likes Mom best, the cat makes her sneeze, and the goldfish "did not come when
she called him" and "never seemed happy to see her." Henry the parakeet, though,
seems to be the harbinger of better days from the moment he alights on Emma's
head in the petshop. He's teachable (masters "aardvark" along with "pretty bird"),
tractable (perches placidly on any friendly head), and helpful (sharpens the teacher's
pencils at school). Alas, when Emma's brother Bruce brings home his own para-
keet, Kate, a love-struck Henry sinks into such mournful sulkiness that Emma
realizes she has lost his exclusive devotion. "So Emma did the only thing she could
do. She set Henry free. He flew right to Kate." Ultimately this selfless act is
rewarded with two new pets-Henry and Kate's offspring-and now there are
enough birds to roost on every head in Emma's household. The deadpan narrative
plays along with bright cartoon renderings of the zingy-haired heroine and her
circle of expressive, pin dot-eyed family, friends, and fauna. Children attempting
their first solo flights in reading will enjoy testing their wings on this title. EB
SALLER, CAROL 
Florence Kelley; illus. by Ken Green. 
Carolrhoda,
1997 
4 8p (On My Own)
ISBN 1-57505-016-1 
$13.13 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Chapter-book readers are introduced to child welfare advocate Florence Kelley in
this beginner biography. Although Kelley's life-from well-off child sensitized by
her father to working-class hardships, to lawyer, factory inspector, and legislative
gadfly-is presented without formal chapter divisions, italicized profiles of several
children laboring under deplorable conditions allow readers to pause and make the
connection between Kelley's work and her proteges' needs. Sailer acknowledges
the necessity of the children's work ("But they had to work. Their parents worked.
Many parents couldn't afford food and clothes for their children unless the chil-
dren worked too"), but she never addresses how those very families would survive
under Kelley's intended child-labor restrictions. Kelley's affiliation with Jane
Addams' Hull House is mentioned, but the relationship between immigrant as-
similation and child labor is never explicitly discussed. Green's densely rendered
figures and earth-toned backdrops set an appropriately sober tone; a chronology of
important dates in Kelley's life is included. EB
SAN SoucI, ROBERT D. 
Nicholas Pipe; illus. by David Shannon. 
Dial,
1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1765-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1764-4 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Nicholas Pipe is a merman who lives on the land. He was given this ability after
saving a wizard's child from drowning, the only condition being that he must
touch the sea at least once a day. Margaret is a fisherman's daughter, and "some-
times when she was in a boat helping her father to draw in his nets, Margaret
glimpsed Nicholas racing dolphin-swift through the green depths. Then her heart
nearly broke for love of him." Nicholas loves Margaret, too, but her father, Marius,
refuses to bless their love, even after Nicholas saves them from a fierce storm at sea.
412 
* 
THE BULLETIN
At the instigation of Marius, the king's soldiers capture Nicholas because "the king
collects strange things." Margaret races after them with two casks of sea water,
only to find Nicholas, unconscious and left for dead, under a tree. Her salt tears
revive him, and together they struggle back to the sea. Nicholas is saved, and, with
her now repentant father's blessing, the two will marry. This retelling, taken from
a twelfth-century source (which included a less happy ending), is vividly brought
to life in both words and pictures. San Souci's text is beautifully understated, with
poetic turns of phrase and a plot loaded with romantic appeal. Shannon's acrylic
paintings take the fantasy and give it a robust reality, with salt of the earth (and
sea) characters that have a full, physical presence. When the restored Nicholas
places a perfect pearl in Margaret's palm, saying "This is only one of the treasures
I will bring you," the junior high girls will sigh, and the boys (well, most of them)
will wonder why. JMD
SANDERS, SCOTT RUSSELL 
A Place Called Freedom; illus. by Thomas B.
Allen. 
Atheneum, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80470-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A young ex-slave reminisces about how, several years earlier, he and his family
were freed by their master, made their way to Indiana, and became founders of a
prospering black community. Less a story than a tribute to the enterprising spirit
of the Lyles Station, Indiana founders (credited only on the jacket flap), this ac-
count raises some baffling questions for historically uninformed listeners. Why
was the entire (intact) family freed on the 1832 Tennessee plantation? Were the
relatives Papa brought up North free or runaways? Why was it safer for free blacks
to travel at night? Dreamy, hazy blue images from the narrator's memory drift on
the clean, white background, romanticizing (even sanitizing) the messiness of build-
ing a new life from scratch. Sanders' presentation makes it all seem so easy that the
audience may wonder why similar communities didn't crop up all over the North.
EB
SAsso, SANDY EISENBERG, ad. 
Prayer for the Earth: The Story ofNaamah, Noah's
Wife; illus. by Bethanne Andersen. 
Jewish Lights, 1997 
32p
ISBN 1-879045-60-5 
$16.95 
R 5-9 yrs
Noah was not the only one with a mission from God. His wife, Naamah, was
given a task as well-to collect the seeds of all the flowers and trees on the earth in
order to perpetuate them after the great flood. Naamah does as commanded, and
her garden is the only refuge on an increasingly smelly, uncomfortable sea voyage,
where "even the bright yellow mane of the lion turned green. At these times Noah
and Naamah would breathe the sweet aroma of the flowers and sit in the quiet of
the plants that they called Naamah's garden. They prayed for the rains to stop."
The rains do stop, the animals are released, and Naamah reseeds the earth, becom-
ing the guardian of all living plants. This bucolic idyll is lovingly retold and illus-
trated. The book's gentle flow lends itself to reading aloud despite the somewhat
lengthy text. The illustrations, in a pure, unmuddy palette of blue and green,
orange and gold, have a wholesome directness that reflects the story's tone. While
the notes indicate that Sasso's retelling is based upon an ancient text, no specifics
are given. JMD
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 413
SCHROEDER, ALAN 
Smoky Mountain Rose: An Appalachian Cinderella; illus. by
Brad Sneed. 
Dial, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1734-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1733-4 
$14.99 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
After a first-class source note on Appalachian variants of Cinderella, Schroeder
proceeds--oddly enough-to adapt Perrault's version instead, using a hokey moun-
tain dialect. Schroeder lays it on pretty thick in both the dialogue (the sisters
criticize Rose for "sashayin' round lak she's the belly o' the ball") and the narrative
("She'd a'fetched it, but there warn't time"). Underneath the excess are some
pretty droll lines, though, as when Rose thanks her fairy hog-mother, who re-
sponds, "Anytime, sugar." Sneed's earth-toned watercolors poke fun at the story,
too, with elongated figures, fishbowl perspectives, and an unforgettable foot shot
of two horses (actually transformed field mice) framed between Rose's slim ankles
and very high-heeled glass slippers. Fakelore it is, but fun if you can put up with
the slapstick patois. BH
SIDDALS, MARY MCKENNA 
Tell Me a Season; illus. by Petra Mathers. 
Clarion,
1997 
2 6p
ISBN 0-395-71021-9 
$12.95 
Ad 
2-4yrs
A simple text details the characteristics of each season in terms of color ("brown
mud//brown trees//sky of gray//with pink and purple clouds://Spring morning"),
treating a spring morning, a summer day, a fall evening, and a winter night, so that
we go through a year and a day simultaneously. The language is rather unimagina-
tive, with a cataloging flavor to the proceedings despite the underlying structure,
but the pared-down narrative will be right up Toddler Alley. Mathers' saturated
watercolors are variably successful, with the closeup on summer flowers, for in-
stance, seeming merely loud but the expanse of blooming summer countryside
rich and alluring. Youngsters will enjoy seeing the little red farmhouse change its
trappings along with the seasons as its residents (including a dog and cat as well as
a couple of active kids) change their activities appropriately, and the buildup to a
nighttime "good night" makes this a suitable all-season bedtime read. DS
SKURZYNSKI, GLORIA 
Virtual War. Simon, 1997 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-81374-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
The year is 2080 and Earth has become uninhabitable due to radioactivity and
pollution. War and pestilence have combined to reduce the entire global popula-
tion to about two million. A totalitarian regime is governing what used to be
North America and it is here, in a domed city, that Corgan has been produced
through genetic engineering. Now fourteen, the boy was bred for superhuman
reflexes; Corgan's sole purpose is to fight a computer-generated "war," a violent
albeit bloodless contest against the other confederations. Even though he will be
the leader of his team, Corgan is still dependent on his two other teammates: the
anarchic Sharla, a brilliant cryptanalyst, and the mutant prodigy Brig, a shrewd
strategist. The victorious confederation will win a group of uncontaminated is-
lands in the South Pacific. Skurzynski's anti-war message is clear yet never didac-
tic; her characters are complex and fully realized, the pacing brisk, and the story
compelling. Sharla is a strong, independent female character dedicated to improv-
ing the human lot, and even whiny Brig has a deep humanitarian streak. The
414 
* THE BULLETIN
symbolism of Corgan the Noble Savage on the Pacific Isles may be a little heavy-
handed, but the author makes her point and does it admirably. Today's game
players will do well to ponder their own delight in virtual violence. SSV
SMITH, SHERWOOD 
Crown Duel. Yolen/Harcourt, 1997 
214p
ISBN 0-15-201608-2 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 7-12
When their father dies, Meliara and her brother Branaric attempt to raise an army
to fight a corrupt and greedy monarch. Meliara may be a countess, but she's never
been to court, and her naivete about politics and intrigue nearly costs her her
brother, her birthright, and her life. Concrete, descriptive language nicely evokes
the fantasy environment, and even minor characters have a tangibility that makes
them live and breathe. The pace is swift, with a series of chases, some reversals of
fortune, and a few very close calls overcoming the occasional lapses in logic. Meliara
seems remarkably dense regarding the man who saves her life several times, but she
is an engagingly single-minded heroine nonetheless. Smith rejects the easy course
of tying up romantic loose ends, and the conclusion is satisfying enough to make
young adults look forward to the promised sequel. JMD
SPIVAK, 
DAWNINE 
Grass Sandals: 
The Travels of Basho; illus. by
Demi. 
Atheneum, 1997 
34p
ISBN 0-689-80776-7 
$16.00 
R* 
Gr. 2-6
This unique picture-book biography traces the life of seventeenth-century Japa-
nese poet Basho through his journeys and his poetry. The elegant physical design
of this title mirrors Spivak's simple, restrained text, Basho's poetry, and Demi's
brush-and-ink illustrations. Each double-page spread includes an event in Basho's
life, a haiku (by Basho except in one instance) reflecting the text or illustration,
and a Japanese character that does the same. The compositions are fluid and
balanced, the colors saturated yet calm against the textured rice paper background.
The fluent text, harmonious visuals, and sophisticated design makes this an un-
usually effective combination of story and style. JMD
STANLEY, DIANE 
Rumpelstiltskin's Daughter; written and illus. by Diane
Stanley. 
Morrow, 1997 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14328-8 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14327-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 4-8
In this take-offon Rumpelstiltskin, the miller's daughter (whose name is Meredith,
by the way) runs off with Rumpelstiltskin because she doesn't want to marry the
greedy king (who is depicted in a frightful wig, terrible teeth, and too many satin
furbelows to count) and because she likes Rump's views on parenting ("I promise
I'll be an excellent father. I know all the lullabies. I'll read to the child every day.
I'll even coach Little League"). Well, Meredith and Rumpelstiltskin have a daugh-
ter, and, suffice it to say, she winds up in the clutches of the still-greedy king who
wants her to spin him some (more) gold. This bright young woman gently tricks
the king into providing for his impoverished people; when he offers to mariy her
as a reward she replies, "Why don't you make me prime minister instead," and he
does. Stanley's retelling is witty, smart, and funny, and her full-color illustrations
are the same. The characters are imbued with personality, the perspective is engag-
ingly off-kilter, and the compositions draw in the viewer with delightful ease. There
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 415
are so many different audiences who are going to enjoy this book that you'd better
buy two. This one is golden. JMD
VAN LEEUWEN, JEAN 
A Fourth ofJuly on the Plains; illus. by Henri Sorensen. 
Dial,
1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1772-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1771-7 
$14.99 
R 
5-7 yrs
Mischievous, accident-prone narrator Jesse, traveling with his family along the
Oregon trail, is determined to escape his mother's watchful eye and find some way
to contribute to the Fourth of July merry-making that is being planned by mem-
bers of the wagon train. Fathers hunt, older boys collect wood for bonfires, older
girls stitch a flag from scraps and a pilfered shirt, and the hunters even scare up
some mountaintop snow to use for ice cream. Jesse and his friends slip away
during the patriotic speeches and, to everyone's delight, march back as a band,
with washtubs, tin dishes, whistles, and cowbells blaring. There's not much plot
here, but the fact-based episode is rich in specifics. Sorenson's watercolors, despite
their haziness, suggest a remarkably individuated band of travelers and draw view-
ers in close to the action-around a campfire, amid a sewing circle, at the end of a
table laden with the makeshift feast. Source notes for the story are included. EB
WALKER, PAUL ROBERT, ad. 
Little Folk: Stories from Around the World; illus. by
James Bernardin. 
Harcourt, 1997 
72p
ISBN 0-15-200327-4 
$17.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Eight stories about fantastical wee folk from as many cultures are retold in this
glossily produced collection. The opening tale is that which a collection on wee
folk cannot be without, "Rumpelstiltskin," followed by an elegantly adapted and
illustrated "One Inch Boy" from Japan. From Denmark comes the unusually
strong and humorous tale of "My Friend, the Nisse," and from Ireland a familiar
tale with new heroine, "The Red-Ribbon Leprechaun." Walker, who did such a
fine job with Big Men, Big Country (BCCB 6/93), seems a little less sure-footed
here. A problem arises with trying to fit non-European tales into a European folk
and fairy-tale structure, and as a result some tales seem a bit forced and oddly off
their cultural center (the depiction of Summer as a "fragile fairy queen" in the
American Indian tale of "The Capture of Summer," for example). Bernardin's
acrylic and colored-pencil illustrations (full-color plates and sienna line drawings)
also vary in success-the color plates have more compositional flare than the mono-
chrome drawings, while the paintings themselves range from a droll depiction of
little Issun Boshi in his floating rice bowl to oddly cartoonish renditions that lean
heavily on pointy ears, flowing beards, and unsubtle caricatures. Overall, though,
this is a well-written collection with much to offer. Each tale concludes with a
note regarding the cultural context, and the bibliography is rich with sources and
references. JMD
WESTALL, ROBERT 
Time ofFire. Scholastic, 1997 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-590-47746-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
War was one of the late Robert Westall's best subjects, and here's another look at
a young boy's experience of it. Sonny lives up in Newcastle, and the war is more
talk than action for him until a German bomb takes his mother's life. With a
416 
* THE BULLETIN
young boy's rabid fascination for aircraft, Sonny sees and identifies the plane that
dropped the bomb, and Sonny's father joins up to hunt down the German that
killed his wife, leaving the boy in the care of his grandparents. Sonny's history
makes him a minor local celebrity, but he struggles with his guilt over first his
mother's death (she was killed doing an errand he'd shirked) and, later, over the
death of his father. When a stranded German pilot heads toward the house where
Sonny chances to be alone, the boy plans to expiate his guilt by making the respon-
sible party pay for his actions. The immediacy here is the strong point: Westall
brings home the realities of war in a way that closes gaps in space and time, making
"Over There" and "way back when" into right here and now. The story of Sonny's
emotional crisis is poignant and believable, and it's blended seamlessly into the
larger historical, strategic, and moral aspects of the account. Kids who appreciated
The Machine Gunners (and who will enjoy the fact that this isn't just a rehash) will
revel in this retrospective. DS
WHITE, CAROLYN, ad. 
Whuppity Stoorie: A Scottish Folktale; illus. by S. D.
Schindler. 
Putnam, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22903-5 
$15.95 
R 5-8yrs
Kate of Kittlerumpit's mother makes a rash deal with a woman dressed in fairy
green. In order to cure her sick pig, the farm woman promises the fairy anything
she wishes, and what the fairy wishes is the farm woman's daughter, Kate. If Kate
and her mother can guess the fairy's name, however, the deal is off, and a desperate
search for names follows, with the lively Kate (with a little help from the pig)
discovering Whuppity Stoorie's name just in time. This is an eminently tellable
tale that is unfamiliar enough to be a delightful surprise for those children who
know the more common Rumpelstiltskin variant, as the three women (four, if you
count the pig) enact high drama in a few picture-book pages. Schindler's romantic
gouache and pastel compositions, complete with whitewashed cottage, lavender
hills and sky, and intricately detailed foliage, stylishly evoke a fairy-tale country-
side. Thistles and subtitle aside, no notes or sources are given. JMD
WILSON, JACQUELINE 
The Suitcase Kid. Delacorte, 1997 
[160p]
ISBN 0-385-32311-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Ever since her parents' divorce, Andy (short for Andrea) has been shuttling back
and forth between two houses week by week, and she can't get used to her chopped-
up life. With only her toy rabbit (whom Andy insists is a "mascot"), Radish, on
her side, she keeps yearning for the idyllic family life back at Mulberry Cottage,
before her parents remarried and brought Andy conflicting loyalties and trouble-
some step-siblings. After attempting to make her own private Mulberry Cottage
in a local backyard, Andy eventually finds the additional pressure of a new half-
sister to come too much to bear. Wilson, who provided a lively yet touching voice
for Elsa, Star of the Shelter (BCCB 2/96), demonstrates her ability again here.
Without making the adults (or other kids) out to be ogres, the book refreshingly
takes Andy's side rather than attempting to justify the situation; her desperation is
warranted despite the good intentions of all manner of people. Other characters
are swiftly and believably depicted, and it's clear that even if Andy does finally
accept the new arrangement she isn't going to end up best buddies with all of her
stepfamily members. Like Anne Fine's Alias Madame Doubfire (BCCB 4/88) but
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 417
somewhat lower key, this taps into the righteous indignation of a child torn be-
tween two households, and it does so deftly. DS
WOJCIECHOWSKI, SUSAN 
Beany (Not Beanhead) and the Magic Crystal; illus. by
Susanna Natti. 
Candlewick, 1997 
94p
ISBN 0-7636-0052-0 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
The likable Bernice Lorraine Sherwin-Hendricks (a.k.a. Beany) returns in this breezy
sequel to Don't Call Me Beanhead., and it's a good thing, too. The plot revolves
around a "magic" crystal with the power to grant just one wish. Beany's great
lesson here is that sometimes it's better to wish for something for someone else,
which of course she does, rather than just indulging selfish fantasies. This is less a
single narrative than a loose collection of vignettes, all five chapters of which serve
to flesh out Beany's character-spunky, funny, and fair-minded, without being
the least little bit smarmy. Beany's just boy-phobic enough to be right on target
for middle-grade girls (about her teacher: "She doesn't have any kids of her own so
she thinks even boys can be polite"), who will admire her take-charge attitude.
Susanna Natti's black-and-white line drawings add a sly humor of their own, while
giving us a better sense of this marvelous heroine. SSV
ZIEFERT, HARRIET, comp. 
Mother Goose Math; illus. by Emily Bolam. 
Viking,
1997 [2 6p]
ISBN 0-670-87569-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Ziefert culls the stock of traditional nursery rhymes for verses that include num-
bers, from the predictable "Sing a song of sixpence" to the more arcane "I bought
a dozen new-laid eggs/ Of good old Farmer Dickens." Some numerical references
are merely implied-"The man in the wilderness said to me/ How many strawber-
ries grow in the sea?/ I answered him as I thought good,/ As many red herrings as
swim in the wood." Others are supplied by Bolam: "She sells sea shells by the
seashore" features a young entrepreneur hawking her wares for 1 €, 
5¢, and Buy 3
Get 1 Free. Bolam's crayon-hued paintings are fresh and funny, making the most
of periwigged porkers and manic monkeys. An overabundance of decorative bor-
ders, though, are distracting at best and confusing at worst, visually splintering
related verses and linking unrelated rhymes. The tricky "As I was going to St. Ives"
riddle is followed by a double-page spread (looking for all the world like endpa-
pers) of myriad cats and kits, effectively deflating the punch line, which, alas, isn't
even included. Mother Goose? Sure. But the Math is only what you make of it.
EB
w.
418 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Accidents-fiction: Orr
Adoption-fiction: Ferguson
ADVENTURE STORIES: Hobbs
Africa-folklore: Moodie
Africa-stories: Kurtz; Mollel
African Americans-fiction:
Cameron
African Americans-stories:
Medearis; Sanders
Agriculture: Johnson
ALPHABET BOOKS:
McDonnell
American Indians-fiction: Harrah
American Indians-stories: Goldin
Animals-stories: Asch; Mayo;
Mollel.
ANTHOLOGIES: Pooley
Arctic-folktales: Bierhorst
Arithmetic: Ziefert
Art: Richardson
Astronomy: Gibbons
Babies-fiction: Holmes
Bears-stories: Goldin
BEDTIME STORIES: Siddals
BIOGRAPHIES: Cox; Drimmer;
Gourley; Harrison; O'Grady;
Sailer; Spivak
Birds: Kress
Birds-stories: Kurtz
Books and reading-stories:
McPhail
Brothers-fiction: Cameron
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Conlon-McKenna; Pearson;
Smith
Child abuse-fiction: Howe
Civil War: Cox
Colonial life: Harrah
Colors: Cabrera
Computers-fiction: Regan
CONCEPT BOOKS: Cabrera
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Cadnum; Levitin; Rapp; Ryan
Death and dying-fiction: Westall
Dinosaurs: Gillette
Disabilities-fiction: Orr
Divorce-fiction: Sachs; Wilson
Dogs-fiction: Sachs
Dogs-stories: Aller
Ecology: Kress
Electronics: Hellman
Environmental studies: Kress
Ethiopia-stories: Kurtz
Fairies-stories: White
FAMILY STORIES: Burandt
FANTASY: Alexander; Clement;
Conford; Day; Gordon; Klause;
McPhail; Smith
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Holmes; Regan
Fathers and sons-fiction: Cadnum;
Ferguson
Feminism: Dee
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Anaya;
Bierhorst; Ginsburg; Goldin;
Manna; Mayo; Moodie; Prose;
San Souci; Sasso; Schroeder;
Stanley; White
Food and eating: Johnson
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 419
Food and eating-stories: Ginsburg
Friends-fiction: Paulsen
Frogs-fiction: Conford
Grandmothers-stories: Manuel;
Mollel
Growing up-fiction: Naylor
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Conlon-McKenna; Harrah;
Ross; Sanders; Van Leeuwen;
Westall
Holidays-stories: Van Leeuwen
Immigration: Fleischman
India-fiction: Alexander
Inventions and inventors:
Mulcahy
Ireland-fiction: Conlon-McKenna
Italy-stories: Hughes
Japan-poetry: Spivak
Jews-folklore: Prose
Language arts: Spivak
Literature, world: Spivak
MAKE AND DO BOOKS:
Pooley
Marine life-fiction: San Souci
,Mexico-stories: 
Anaya
Mirrors-stories: Day
Moon: Gibbons
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Levitin
Mothers and sons-fiction:
Ferguson; Ryan
Music and musicians-stories:
Dodds
MYSTERIES: Cadnum; Levitin
NURSERY RHYMES: Ziefert
Pets-fiction: Sadler
Pirates-stories: McPhail
POETRY: Ogburn
Prison-fiction: Rapp
Prison and prisoners-stories:
McCully
Reading aloud: Bierhorst;
Burandt; Cameron; Fleischman;
Goldin; Ogburn; Paulsen;
San Souci; Stanley
Reading, beginning: Sadler
Reading, easy: Cameron; Holmes;
Ross; Sailer; Wojciechowski
Reading, reluctant: Paulsen
Reptiles-poetry: Ogburn
Rivers-fiction: Hobbs
Russia-folklore: Ginsburg
Russia-stories: McCully
School-fiction: Paulsen;
Wojciechowski
School-stories: Clement
Science: Hellman
SCIENCE FICTION: Skurzynski
Sea-fiction: San Souci
Seasons-stories: Siddals
SHORT STORIES: Burandt;
Pearson
Sisters-fiction: Holmes
Social studies: Fleischman
Statues-fiction: Ross
Statues-stories: Hughes
Stepfamilies-fiction: Wilson
Storytelling: Bierhorst; Ginsburg;
Goldin; Moodie; Prose; San
Souci; Sasso; Schroeder;
Stanley; White
Storytime: Asch; Cabrera;
Clement; Dodds; Hedlund;
McPhail; Mollel
SURVIVAL STORIES: Hobbs
Technology: Hellman; Mulcahy
Texas-fiction: Burandt
Toys-fiction: Gordon
Toys-stories: Edwards
Vietnam War-fiction: Ryan
Voyages and travel-stories:
Hedlund
War-fiction: Skurzynski
Weddings-fiction: Naylor
Werewolves-fiction: Klause
Women's studies: Dee; Gourley;
Manna; Sailer; Sasso
World War II-fiction: Westall
;SVWL
420 
* THE BULLETIN
THE
BULLET
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AUTHOR/TITLE INDEX, VOLUME 50
SEPTEMBER, 1996-JULY/AUGUST, 1997
101 Ways to Bug Your Parents. Wardlaw.
118.
A Is for Asia. Chin-Lee. 316.
Aardema. Lonely Lioness and the Ostrich
Chicks. 198.
. This for That. 238.
Aaseng. Genetics. 46.
Abracadabra Kid. Fleischman. 12.
Accidents May Happen. Jones. 17.
Across the Lines. Reeder. 371.
Ada. Gathering the Sun. 348.
__ 
Jordi's Star. 126.
Adedjouma. Palm of My Heart. 127.
Adem's Cross. Mead. 180.
Adler, C. More Than a Horse. 238.
Adler, D. Easy Math Puzzles. 310.
. Fraction Fun. 127.
. Lou Gehrig. 270.
Adler, N. Dial Book of Animal Tales. 90.
Adoff. I Am the Darker Brother. 311.
. Love Letters. 239.
Adventures of Sparrowboy. Pinkney. 369.
Alan Turing. Gottfried. 206.
Alarc6n. Laughing Tomatoes and Other
Spring Poems. 349.
Alcock. Red-Eared Ghosts. 270.
Aldana. Jade and Iron. 162.
Alexander, H. Oksana. 312.
Alexander, L. Iron Ring. 386.
Alexander, S. On My Own. 311.
Ali, Child of the Desert. London. 365.
Alias. Ryan. 410.
Aliki. Hello! Good-bye! 127.
All We Needed to Say. Singer. 30.
Aller. Emma and the Night Dogs. 387.
Allie's Basketball Dream. Barber. 199.
Alphabet City Ballet. Tamar. 187.
Am I the Last Virgin? Roberts. 220.
Amazon Diary. Talbott. 186.
Amazon Papers. Keller. 101.
Amber Brown Wants Extra Credit. Danziger.
54.
American Childhoods. Wormser. 81.
American Fairy Tales. Philip. 25.
American Too. Bartone. 128.
Amish. Williams. 226.
Anastasia's Album. Brewster. 164.
Anaya. Maya's Children. 387.
And the Earth Trembled. Oppenheim. 218.
Andersen. Snow Queen. 162.
_ 
Steadfast Tin Soldier. 163.
Anderson, L. Turkey Pox. 91.
Anderson, M. T. Thirsty. 271.
Anderson, Margaret. Children of Summer.
349.
Anddjar. Cuckoo. 356.
Angel Knew Papa and the Dog. McKelvey.
22.
Angel's Mistake. Prose. 408.
Angela Weaves a Dream. Sola. 375.
Animal Dads. Collard. 316.
Animals That Ought to Be. Michelson. 69.
Animals' Song. Harrison. 359.
Another Day. Sachs. 410.
Another Way to Dance. Southgate. 186.
Appelt. I See the Moon. 311.
Apple Pie Tree. Hall. 136.
Apprenticeship of Lucas Whitaker. DeFelice.
54.
Archambault. Grandmother's Garden. 47.
Armstrong. Dreams of Mairhe Mehan. 91.
Arnold, C. Bat. 47.
_ Fox. 47.
. Stone Age Farmers beside the Sea.
271.
. Stories in Stone. 163.
Arnold, K. Katya's Book of Mushrooms. 271.
Arnosky. Rabbits & Raindrops. 239.
Arthur. It Came from Ohio! 376.
Artist's Model. Barrows. 48.
IN
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 421
Asch. Moonbear's Pet. 387.
Astronauts Are Sleeping. Standiford. 223.
Atkinson. Snake Book. 327.
Auch. Journey to Nowhere. 350.
Author. Lester. 288.
Avi. Beyond the Western Sea, Book Two.
128.
SFinding Providence. 240.
Awake and Dreaming. Pearson. 332.
Awmiller. This House on Fire. 5.
Axelrod. Pigs in the Pantry. 312.
Ayres. Family Tree. 198.
Babcock. Cottonwood. 130.
Baboon. Banks. 272.
Baby Buggy*Buggy Baby. Ziefert. 302.
Baby Duck and the Bad Eyeglasses. Hest. 63.
Babylon Boyz. Mowry. 368.
Bagert. Gooch Machine. 240.
Baillie. Secrets of Walden Rising. 312.
Baker. Seneca. 240.
Balgassi. Peacebound Trains. 48.
Ballad of Lucy Whipple. Cushman. 9.
Ballot Box Battle. McCully. 22.
Bang. Goose. 128.
Banks. Baboon. 272.
Bannerman. Story of Little Babaji. 5.
Banyai. Rapid Eye Movement. 272.
Barber. Allie's Basketball Dream. 199.
Barnes. Promise Me the Moon. 199.
Baron. Red Fox and the Baby Bunnies. 273.
Barrio Streets Carnival Dreams. Carlson. 7.
Barrows. Artist's Model. 48.
Bartoletti. Dancing with Dziadziu. 313.
. Growing Up in Coal Country. 200.
Bartone. American Too. 128.
Basher Five-Two. O'Grady. 405.
Bat. Arnold. 47.
Bateman. Ring of Truth. 313.
Bateson-Hill. Lao Lao of Dragon Mountain.
164.
Batwings and the Curtain of Night. Davol.
278.
Beany (Not Beanhead) and the Magic Crystal.
Wojciechowski. 417.
Bear Who Didn't Like Honey. Maitland. 329.
Becoming Best Friends with Your Hamster,
Guinea Pig, or Rabbit. Gutman. 359.
Becoming Felix. Wilson. 188.
Becoming Rosemary. Wood. 338.
Becoming Your Cat's Best Friend. Gutman.
359.
Beethoven in Paradise. O'Connor. 332.
Beh-Eger. I Heal. 143.
Behan. King of Ireland's Son. 273.
Behind the Couch. Gerstein. 12.
Bell, A. Gold at the End of the Rainbow. 322.
Bell, L. Sea Maidens of Japan. 314.
Belton. Ernestine & Amanda. 164.
Bentley. "Dear Friend." 200.
Bernhard. Happy New Year. 48.
Berry. Everywhere Faces Everywhere. 273.
Beryl Markham. Gourley. 395.
Best. Getting Used to Harry. 49.
Between the Dragon and the Eagle.
Schneider. 257.
Beyond the Mississippi. Herb. 137.
Beyond the Western Sea, Book Two. Avi.
128.
Beyond Your Senses. Hellman. 397.
Bial. Mist over the Mountains. 350.
Bible. Genesis. 241.
Bierhorst. Dancing Fox. 388.
Big Wind Coming! English. 168.
Bill Pickett. Pinkney. 110.
Billingsley. Well Wished. 274.
Billy Lazroe and the King of the Sea. Kimmel.
140.
Biodiversity. Patent. 254.
Birthday Swap. Lopez. 365.
Bishop. Secrets of Animal Flight. 350.
Bitton-Jackson. I Have Lived a Thousand
Years. 274.
Black Legacy. Katz. 287.
Black Stallion's Shadow. Farley. 11.
Block. Girl Goddess #9. 49.
Blood and Chocolate. Klause. 400.
Blooding. Windsor. 188.
Bloom. Fruits. 275.
Bloor. Tangerine. 241.
Blue and the Gray. Bunting. 200.
Blue Lightning. Russell. 221.
Blumberg. Full Steam Ahead. 129.
Blumenthal. Chocolate-Covered-Cookie
Tantrum. 7.
Blushful Hippopotamus. Raschka. 149.
Bluthenthal. Matilda the Moocher. 275.
Boat of Many Rooms. Lewis. 212.
Boggart and the Monster. Cooper. 317.
Bootsie Barker Ballerina. Bottner. 276
Borden. Little Ships. 276.
Borton. Junk Pile! 314.
Bortz. To the Young Scientist. 276.
Bottner. Bootsie Barker Ballerina. 276
Boy and His Bear. Graham. 206.
Bradford. There Will Be Wolves. 50.
Brandenburg. Scruffy. 50.
Brass Ring. Tafuri. 78.
Braving the Frozen Frontier. Johnson. 250.
Braving the North Atlantic. West. 187.
Breaking into Print. Krensky. 177.
Breath of the Dragon. Giles. 283.
Brewster. Anastasia's Album. 164.
Bright Christmas. Clements. 93.
Bright Lights. York. 228.
Brighton. My Napoleon. 314.
Bring Back Yesterday. Sirof. 76.
422 
* THE BULLETIN
Brisson. Hot Fudge Hero. 351.
Broken Blade. Durbin. 203.
Broken Tusk. Krishnaswami. 66.
Brother Rabbit. Ho. 324.
Brown Sunshine of Sawdust Valley. Henry.
62.
Brown, M. Sleepy Men. 165.
Brown, R. Ghost of Greyfriar's Bobby. 6.
.Toad. 242.
Bruchac. Eagle Song. 242.
Buckley. Moonlight Kite. 315.
Buddha Stories. Demi. 280.
Buehner. Fanny's Dream. 7.
Buffalo Tree. Rapp. 408.
Bug Boy. Sonenklar. 335.
Bull Catcher. Carter. 242.
Bunny Cakes. Wells. 261.
Bunting. Going Home. 129.
. Blue and the Gray. 200.
_ I Am the Mummy Heb-Nefert. 315.
.Trouble on the T-Ball Team. 277.
Bunyans. Wood. 189.
Burandt. Tales from the Homeplace. 388.
Burks. Soldier Boy. 277.
Byars. Death's Door. 351.
__ 
.Tornado. 91.
Cabrera. Cat's Colors. 388.
Cadnum. Edge. 389.
.Zero at the Bone. 7.
Caleb's Choice. Wisler. 37.
Calhoun. Flood. 278.
Calvert. Glennis, Before and After. 50.
Cameron. More Stories Huey Tells. 389.
Campbell. Phoebe's Fabulous Father. 92.
Cannon. Verdi. 351.
Care and Feeding of Fish. Frieden. 58.
Carle. From Head to Toe. 352.
Carlson. Barrio Streets Carnival Dreams. 7.
Carlstrom. Let's Count It Out, Jesse Bear. 51.
_ 
. Raven and River. 352.
Carrick. Melanie. 92.
Carter. Bull Catcher. 242.
Casanova. Riot. 165.
Case of the Goblin Pearls. Yep. 339.
Cat Mummies. Trumble. 78.
Cat's Colors. Cabrera. 388.
Cecil Bunions and the Midnight Train.
Paraskevas. 147.
Celebrate! In South Asia. Viesti. 79.
Celebrate! in Southeast Asia. Viesti. 79.
Celebrating Hanukkah. Hoyt-Goldsmith. 99.
Cerullo. Octopus. 201.
Chameleons on Location. Darling. 318.
Charlie's Checklist. Lerman. 364.
Chasing Redbird. Creech. 243.
Cherry. Flute's Journey. 316.
Chilcoat. Children of Topaz. 34.
Child. Over the River and Through the
Wood. 92.
Children of Summer. Anderson. 349.
Children of Topaz. Tunnell. 34.
Children of Yucatdn. Staub. 117.
Children Save the Rain Forest. Patent. 71.
Children's Book of Kwanzaa. Johnson. 100.
Children's Hospital at Yale-New Haven. Now
I Know Better. 93.
Chin-Lee. A Is for Asia. 316.
Chocolate-Covered-Cookie Tantrum.
Blumenthal. 7.
Christelow. Five Little Monkeys With
Nothing to Do. 130.
Christina Katerina and Fats and the Great
Neighborhood War. Gauch. 357.
Chubbo's Pool. Lewin. 68.
City in Winter. Helprin. 173.
Clara and the HooDoo Man. Partridge. 25.
Clarke. Whispering Room. 166.
Classroom at the End of the Hall. Evans. 10.
Claude Monet. Harrison. 13.
Clay Boy. Ginsburg. 394.
Clearing. Miller. 108.
Clement. Just Another Ordinary Day. 389.
Clements. Bright Christmas. 93.
. Frindle. 51.
Close, Closer, Closest. Rotner. 294.
Coburn. Jouanah. 130.
Cody and Quinn, Sitting in a Tree. Larson.
19.
Cold War. Warren. 225.
Cole. Magic School Bus Inside a Beehive. 52.
Collard. Animal Dads. 316.
Come Sunday. Grimes. 248.
Comfort Creek. McDonald. 213.
Confess-O-Rama. Koertge. 103.
Conford. Frog Princess of Pelham. 390.
Conlon-McKenna. Fields of Home. 390.
Conrad. Zoe Rising. 52.
Construction Zone. Hoban. 284.
Cool Ali. Poydar. 73.
Cooney, B. Eleanor. 93.
Cooney, C. Voice on the Radio. 94.
Cooper, I. Dead Sea Scrolls. 317.
Cooper, M. Hell Fighters. 201.
Cooper, S. Boggart and the Monster. 317.
Copper Lady. Ross. 409.
Coren. Man Who Created Narnia. 243.
Cormier. Tenderness. 277.
Cottonwood. Babcock. 130.
Cottringer. Ella and the Naughty Lion. 52.
Countdown. Mikaelsen. 107.
Cowley. Gracias. 94.
Cox. Fiery Vision. 390.
Coy. Night Driving. 131.
Craft. Cupid and Psyche. 8.
Crampton. Final Journey. 148.
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 423
Creech. Chasing Redbird. 243.
.Pleasing the Ghost. 53.
Cricket's Cage. Czernecki. 353.
Croll. Redoutd. 8.
Cross. Pictures in the Dark. 166.
Crown Duel. Smith. 414.
Crum. Let's Rodeo. 132.
Cuckoo. Ehlert. 356.
Cummins. Inside-Outside Book of Libraries.
53.
Cupid and Psyche. Craft. 8.
Curlee. Ships of the Air. 53.
Currie. We Have Marched Together. 353.
Curry. Moon Window. 95.
Curses, Inc. Vande Velde. 336.
Curtis. Tell Me Again About the Night I Was
Born. 166.
Cushman. Ballad of Lucy Whipple. 9.
Cutler. Spaceman. 318.
Cyrus. Tangle Town. 244.
Czernecki. Cricket's Cage. 353.
Daddy, Could I Have an Elephant? Wolf. 80.
Dade. You Must Remember This. 356.
Dadey. Shooting Star. 353.
Dale. Tales from the Homeplace. 388.
Dalkey. Little Sister. 132.
Dance with Rosie. Giff. 135.
Dancing Fox. Bierhorst. 388.
Dancing with Dziadziu. Bartoletti. 313.
Dancing with Great-Aunt Cornelia. Quirk.
370.
Danger Along the Ohio. Willis. 330.
Dangerous Skies. Staples. 77.
Danziger. Amber Brown Wants Extra Credit.
54.
Darkfright. Huth. 175.
Darling, C. Mirror. 391.
Darling, K. Chameleons on Location. 318.
_ Desert Babies. 244.
. Komodo Dragon on Location. 318.
_ Seashore Babies. 244.
Davin. Gordon. 395.
Davol. Batwings and the Curtain of Night.
278.
Day, A. Mirror. 391.
Day, N. Kancil and the Crocodiles. 166.
Dazzling Disguises and Clever Costumes.
Wilkes. 119.
Dead Sea Scrolls. Cooper. 317.
Deal with a Ghost. Singer. 374.
"Dear Friend." Bentley. 200.
Death's Door. Byars. 351.
Dee. Girls' Guide to Life. 391.
Deep Doo-Doo. Delaney. 203.
DeFelice. Apprenticeship of Lucas Whitaker.
54.
.Willy's Silly Grandma. 354.
Degens. Freya on the Wall. 278.
Delacre. Golden Tales. 167.
Delaney. Deep Doo-Doo. 203.
Dematons. Looking For Cinderella. 55.
Demi. Buddha Stories. 280.
. Dragon's Tale. 167.
_ One Grain of Rice. 202.
Denenberg. When Will This Cruel War Be
Over? 55.
Desert Babies. Darling. 244.
Desire Lines. Gantos. 281.
Dessen. That Summer. 95.
Deuker. Painting the Black. 354.
Dewey. Rattlesnake Dance. 245.
Dexter. I Dream of Murder. 245.
. Safe Return. 95.
Diakit6. Hunterman and the Crocodile. 203.
Dial Book of Animal Tales. Adler. 90.
Dickinson. Lion Tamer's Daughter. 245.
Did You See What I Saw? Winters. 37.
Dinosaur Dinner (With a Slice of Alligator
Pie). Lee. 364.
Dinosaur Ghosts. Gillette. 394.
Disappearing Lake. Miller. 215.
Discovering the Iceman. Tanaka. 336.
Distant Enemy. Vanasse. 298.
Do Cowboys Ride Bikes? Tucker. 376.
Dodds. Sing, Sophie! 392.
Dog Who Lost His Bob. McNeal. 69.
Dolan. Our Poisoned Waters. 2A0.
Don't You Dare Read This, Mrs. Dunphrey.
Haddix. 172.
Donoghue. Kissing the Witch. 280.
Dorris. Sees Behind Trees. 168.
Dorros. Tree Is Growing. 355.
Down and Up Fall. Hurwitz. 16.
Down by the River. Hallworth. 172.
Down Home at Miss Dessa's. Stroud. 153.
Doyle, B. Uncle Ronald. 203.
Doyle, D. Groogleman. 132.
Dragon's Tale. Demi. 167.
Draper. Forged by Fire. 355.
Dreams of Mairhe Mehan. Armstrong. 91.
Drimmer. Incredible People. 392.
Drive-By. Ewing. 11.
Drop of Water. Wick. 226.
Ducks Disappearing. Naylor. 217.
Duffey. Virtual Cody. 355.
Duffy. Stopping for Death. 9.
Duke the Dairy Delight Dog. Ernst. 168.
Duncan. Gallows Hill. 246.
Dunlop. Ghost by the Sea. 246.
Duquennoy. Ghosts' Trip to Loch Ness. 56.
Durbin. Broken Blade. 203.
Durrant. Echohawk. 56.
Dwyer. What Do You Mean I Have Attention
Deficit Disorder? 10.
Eagle Song. Bruchac. 242.
Easy Math Puzzles. Adler. 310.
424 * THE BULLETIN
Echohawk. Durrant. 56.
Edge. Cadnum. 389.
Edward and the Pirates. McPhail. 402.
Edwards, C. Young Inline Skater. 132.
Edwards, R. You're Safe Now, Waterdog.
392.
Ehlert. Cuckoo. 356.
Eleanor. Cooney. 93.
Eli and Uncle Dawn. Rosenberg. 372.
Elijah's Tears. Pearl. 109.
Elisabeth. Nivola. 253.
Ella and the Naughty Lion. Cottringer. 52.
Ella Enchanted. Levine. 327.
Emily in Love. Rubin. 294.
Emma and the Night Dogs. Aller. 387.
Emma's Rug. Say. 114.
Empires Lost and Won. Marrin. 330.
Enchantment in the Garden. Hughes. 399.
English. Big Wind Coming! 168.
Ericsson. Most Beautiful Kid in the World.
57.
Erlbruch. Mrs. Meyer the Bird. 319.
Ernestine & Amanda. Belton. 164.
Ernst. Duke the Dairy Delight Dog. 168.
Etcher's Studio. Geisert. 358.
Evans, D. Classroom at the End of the Hall.
10.
Evans, K. You Must Remember This. 356.
Everywhere Faces Everywhere. Berry. 273.
Evil Encounter. Levitin. 67.
Ewing. Drive-By. 11.
Expecting the Unexpected. Jukes. 140.
Extraordinary Life. Pringle. 333.
Eye of the Storm. Kramer. 289.
Fabulous Faces. 168.
Face at the Window. Hanson. 323.
Fain. Snow Day. 57.
Faith and the Electric Dogs.-Jennings. 176.
Family Tree. Ayres. 198.
Fanny's Dream. Buehner. 7.
Fantastic Drawings of Danielle. McClintock.
213.
Farewell, John Barleycorn. Hintz. 63.
Farish. Talking in Animal. 95.
Farley, C. Mr. Pak Buys a Story. 319.
Farley, S. Black Stallion's Shadow. 11.
Farmer. Girl Named Disaster. 133.
Farmers' Market. Johnson. 286.
Farmyard Animals. McQuinn. 23.
Fat Cat Sat on the Mat. Karlin. 65.
Fatima and the Dream Thief. Schami. 222.
Female Focus. Horwitz. 209.
Fenwick's Suit. Small. 76.
Ferguson. Secrets. 393.
_ 
. Tumbleweed Christmas. 96.
Fields of Home. Conlon-McKenna. 390.
Fiery Vision. Cox. 390.
Fifty-Five Grandmas and a Llama. Manuel.
402.
Final Journey. Pausewang. 148.
Finding Providence. Avi. 240.
Finding the Lost Cities. Stefoff. 258.
Fingerprints and Talking Bones. Jones. 362.
Finkelstein. With Heroic Truth. 357.
Fish Tale. Yerxa. 39.
Fitz-Randolph. Mummies, Dinosaurs, Moon
Rocks. 139.
Five Little Monkeys With Nothing to Do.
Christelow. 130.
Five Sisters. Mahy. 329.
Flashy Fantastic Rain Forest Frogs. Patent.
254.
Fleischman, P. Seedfolks. 393.
Fleischman, S. Abracadabra Kid. 12.
Fletcher. Spider Boy. 281.
Floating Home. Getz. 321.
Flood. Calhoun. 278.
Flora McDonnell's ABC. McDonnell. 402.
Florence Kelley. Sailer. 411.
Florian. In the Swim. 320.
Flower Girl. Herman. 14.
Flute's Journey. Cherry. 316.
Fly Traps! Jenkins. 175.
Following My Own Footsteps. Hahn. 61.
For the Love of the Game. Greenfield. 248.
For Your Eyes Only! Rocklin. 292.
Foreman. Seal Surfer. 320.
Forest. Wisdom Tales. 204.
Forged by Fire. Draper. 355.
Found. Oldham. 183.
Fourth of July on the Plains. Van Leeuwen.
415.
Fox. Arnold. 47.
Foxspell. Rubinstein. 184.
Fraction Fun. Adler. 127.
Frank and Joey Eat Lunch. Yorinks. 228.
Frank and Joey Go to Work. Yorinks. 228.
Franklin. Lone Wolf. 320.
.Nerd No More. 57.
Freedman. Out of Darkness. 321.
Freedom's Fruit. Hooks. 16.
Freedom's Gifts. Wesley. 378.
Freeman. Stink Bomb Mom. 204.
French, F. Lord of the Animals. 357.
French, M. Basher Five-Two. 405.
Freya on the Wall. Degens. 278.
Frieden. Care and Feeding of Fish. 58.
Friends. Yumoto. 229.
Friends to Die For. Giberga. 247.
Frindle. Clements. 51.
Froese. Wise Washerman. 133.
Frog Princess of Pelham. Conford. 390.
From Head to Toe. Carle. 352.
Fruits. Bloom. 275.
Full Steam Ahead. Blumberg. 129.
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 425
Gaffney. Grandpa Takes Me to the Moon.
58.
Gallows Hill. Duncan. 246.
Gandhi. Severance. 373.
Gantos. Desire Lines. 281.
Garden. Good Moon Rising. 134.
Garden. Matas. 330.
Garland. Letters from the Mountain. 169.
Gathering the Sun. Ada. 348.
Gauch. Christina Katerina and Fats and the
Great Neighborhood War. 357.
Gay. Saving the Environment. 59.
Geeslin. In Rosa's Mexico. 170.
Geisert. Etcher's Studio. 358.
Genesis. Bible. 241.
Genetics. Aaseng. 46.
George, J. Tarantula in My Purse and 172
Other Wild Pets. 134.
George, K. Great Frog Race and Other
Poems. 358.
Gerstein. Behind the Couch. 12.
Get It While It's Hot. Or Not. Hobbs. 99.
Getting into the Game. Greenberg. 322.
Getting Used to Harry. Best. 49.
Getz. Floating Home. 321.
Ghazi. Ramadan. 134.
Ghost by the Sea. Dunlop. 246.
Ghost Canoe. Hobbs. 285.
Ghost Horses. Hill. 15.
Ghost of Greyfriar's Bobby. Brown. 6.
Ghost of Nicholas Greebe. Johnston. 65.
Ghost Story. Thompson. 260.
Ghost Train. Mowry. 145.
Ghost Train. Yee. 227.
Ghosts' Trip to Loch Ness. Duquennoy. 56.
Gibbons, F. Mountain Wedding. 12.
Gibbons, G. Honey Makers. 282.
.Moon Book. 394.
Giberga. Friends to Die For. 247.
Giff. Dance with Rosie. 135.
.Good Luck, Ronald Morgan! 59.
. Lily's Crossing. 282.
. Rosie's Nutcracker Dreams. 135.
Gift Horse. Levin. 105.
Gift of the Sun. Stewart. 153.
Gifts to Make for Your Favorite Grownup.
Ross. 151.
Gilbert, B. Stone Water. 170.
Gilbert, S. Hawk Hill. 135.
Giles. Breath of the Dragon. 283.
Gillette. Dinosaur Ghosts. 394.
Gilman. Gypsy Princess. 247.
Gilson. Wagon Train 911. 170.
Ginger. Voake. 299.
Ginsburg. Clay Boy. 394.
Girl Goddess #9. Block. 49.
Girl Named Disaster. Farmer. 133.
Girl Who Lived With the Bears. Goldin. 395.
Girls Speak Out. Johnston. 210.
Girls' Guide to Life. Dee. 391.
Glass. Sweetwater Run. 135.
Glenn. Taking of Room 114. 247.
Glennis, Before and After. Calvert. 50.
Gliori. Snow Lambs. 204.
Goalie. Shreve. 185.
Going Back Home. Igus. 139.
Going Home. Bunting. 129.
Gold at the End of the Rainbow. Hanel. 322.
Golden Tales. Delacre. 167.
Goldin. Girl Who Lived With the Bears. 395.
. While the Candles Burn. 96.
Golem. Rogasky. 27.
Golem. Wisniewski. 27.
Gollub. Uncle Snake. 59.
Gonzalez. Sefior Cat's Romance. 283.
Gooch Machine. Bagert. 240.
Good Luck, Ronald Morgan! Giff. 59.
Good Moon Rising. Garden. 134.
Goode. Mama's Perfect Present. 136.
Goodman, J. Winter Hare. 205.
Goodman, S. Great Antler Auction. 60.
Goose. Bang. 128.
Gordon. Davin. 395.
Gorrell. North Star to Freedom. 205.
Gotcha! Jorgensen. 286.
Gottfried. Alan Turing. 206.
Gourley. Beryl Markham. 395.
SSharks! 171.
Grace. I Want to Be an Astronaut. 320.
. I Want to Be a Veterinarian. 321.
Gracias. Cowley. 94.
Graham. Boy and His Bear. 206.
Grandmother's Garden. Archambault. 47.
Grandpa Takes Me to the Moon. Gaffney.
58.
Graphic Alphabet. Pelletier. 148.
Grass Sandals. Spivak. 414.
Gravett. Knight's Handbook. 322.
Gray. Little Lil and the Swing-Singing Sax.
206.
Great Antler Auction. Goodman. 60.
Great Eye. Shalant. 222.
Great Frog Race. George. 358.
Great Interactive Dream Machine. Peck. 109.
Green Frogs. Heo. 62.
Greenberg, J. Getting into the Game. 322.
Greenberg, M. Amazon Diary. 186.
Greenfield. For the Love of the Game. 248.
Gregory, K. Winter of Red Snow. 55.
Gregory, V. When Stories Fell Like Shooting
Stars. 207.
Griffin's Castle. Nimmo. 291.
Griffin, A. Rainy Season. 207.
Griffin, P. Margo's House. 97.
Grimes. Come Sunday. 248.
Grimm. Twelve Dancing Princesses. 171.
426 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Grindley. Why Is the Sky Blue? 359.
Griswold v. Connecticut. Wawrose. 36.
Groogleman. Doyle. 132.
Grossman. My Little Sister Ate One Hare.
171.
Growing Up in Coal Country. Bartoletti.
200.
Gruntle Piggle Takes Off. Little. 328.
Grunwald. Now Soon Later. 60.
Guernsey. Scruffy. 50.
Guiberson. Into the Sea. 13.
Gutman, B. Becoming Best Friends with Your
Hamster, Guinea Pig, or Rabbit. 359.
. Becoming Your Cat's Best Friend.
359.
Gutman, D. Kid Who Ran for President. 97.
Gypsy Game. Snyder. 223.
Gypsy Princess. Gilman. 247.
Haas. Westminster West. 284.
Haddix. Don't You Dare Read This, Mrs.
Dunphrey. 172.
Hahn. Following My Own Footsteps. 61.
Hall, Diane. Celebrate! In South Asia. 79.
. Celebrate! in Southeast Asia. 79.
Hall, Donald. Old Home Day. 61.
Hall, Z. Apple Pie Tree. 136.
Hallworth. Down by the River. 172.
Han. Kongi and Potgi. 207.
Hanson. Face at the Window. 323.
Happy New Year. Bernhard. 48.
Harding. Leaving Summer. 13.
Harlem. Myers. 252.
Harley. Sarah's Story. 249.
Harrah. My Brother, My Enemy. 396.
Harris. Mouse Creeps. 249.
Harrison, B. Ripple of Hope. 396.
Harrison, D. Animals' Song. 359.
Harrison, P. Claude Monet. 13.
. Vincent Van Gogh. 13.
Haskins. I Am Rosa Parks. 369.
.Spike Lee. 323.
Haunts. Medearis. 214.
Hautman. Mr. Was. 98.
Hawk Hill. Gilbert. 135.
Hazelton. Jade and Iron. 162.
Hgnel. Gold at the End of the Rainbow. 322.
Heart. Simon. 75.
Heartbeat of Halftime. Wunderli. 38.
Hedlund. Night Fell at Harry's Farm. 397.
Hehl. Tale of Tsar Saltan. 110.
Hell Fighters. Cooper. 201.
Helldorfer. Jack, Skinny Bones, and the
Golden Pancakes. 137.
Hellman. Beyond Your Senses. 397.
Hello! Good-bye! Aliki. 127.
"Hello," I Lied. Kerr. 362.
Helprin..City in Winter. 173.
Heneghan. Wish Me Luck. 284.
Henkes. Lilly's Purple Plastic Purse. 62.
Henry. Brown Sunshine of Sawdust Valley.
62.
Heo. Green Frogs. 62.
Herb. Beyond the Mississippi. 137.
Herman. Flower Girl. 14.
Herron. Nappy Hair. 208.
Hesse. Music of Dolphins. 137.
Hest. Baby Duck and the Bad Eyeglasses. 63.
. Jamaica Louise James. 14.
Hey, Dad, Get a Life! Strasser. 259.
Hiatt. If I Were Queen of the World. 360.
Hickox. Zorro and Quwi. 208.
Hill, D. Take It Easy. 360.
Hill, P. Ghost Horses. 15.
Hillert. Sky is Not So Far Away. 98.
Hines. Miss Emma's Wild Garden. 324.
Hintz. Farewell, John Barleycorn. 63.
Hired Hand. San Souci. 295.
HIV Positive. Wolf. 338.
Ho. Maples in the Mist. 15.
.Brother Rabbit. 324.
Hoban, R. Trokeville Way. 209.
Hoban, T. Construction Zone. 284.
Hobbs, V. Get It While It's Hot. Or Not. 99.
Hobbs, W. Ghost Canoe. 285.
. River Thunder. 397.
Hoberman. Seven Silly Eaters. 324.
Hodges. Molly Limbo. 64.
Holmes. My Sister the Sausage Roll. 398.
Home on the Bayou. Karas. 176.
Home Sweet Home. Marzollo. 330.
Honey Makers. Gibbons. 282.
Honeycutt. Twilight in Grace Falls. 360.
Honor Bright. Platt. 255.
Hooks. Freedom's Fruit. 16.
Hopcraft. How It Was With Dooms. 361.
Horsepower. Peterson. 292.
Horvath. When the Circus Came to Town.
138.
Horwitz. Female Focus. 209.
Hostage to War. Wassiljewa. 299.
Hot Fudge Hero. Brisson. 351.
How Do You Spell Geek? Peters. 72.
How I Survived Being a Girl. Van Draanen.
298.
How It Was With Dooms. Hopcraft. 361.
How to Make Holiday Pop-Ups. Irvine. 16.
Howard. Log Cabin Quilt. 64.
Howarth. Pits. 138.
Howe, James. Watcher. 398.
Howe, John. Knight with the Lion. 211.
Hoyt-Goldsmith. Celebrating Hanukkah. 99.
Hubbard. Lives Turned Upside Down. 173.
Huck. Toads and Diamonds. 173.
Hughes, D. Team Picture. 174.
Hughes, S. Enchantment in the Garden. 399.
Hulme. Sea Sums. 139.
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 427
Humane Societies. Sateren. 75.
Humpty Dumpty. Mother Goose. 70.
Hunter. Possum's Harvest Moon. 65.
Hunterman and the Crocodile. Diakit6. 203.
Hurricanes. Lauber. 67.
Hurwitz. Down and Up Fall. 16.
.Spring Break. 285.
Husain. Safari Animals. 23.
Huth. Darkfright. 175.
I Am Rosa Parks. Parks. 369.
I Am the Darker Brother. Adoff. 311.
I Am the Mummy Heb-Nefert. Bunting. 315.
I Dream of Murder. Dexter. 245.
I Have Lived a Thousand Years. Bitton-
Jackson. 274.
I Heal. Marx. 143.
I Love My Busy Book. Szekeres. 259.
I See the Moon. Appelt. 311.
I Want to Be a Veterinarian. Grace. 321.
I Want to Be an Astronaut. Grace. 320.
I Was Born About 10,000 Years Ago. Kellogg.
66.
If I Didn't Have Elbows. Toksvig. 154.
If I Had a Robot. Yaccarino. 38.
If I Were Queen of the World. Hiatt. 360.
Igus. Going Back Home. 139.
Iliad and the Odyssey. Williams. 227.
In My Pocket. Sim. 374.
In Rosa's Mexico. Geeslin. 170.
In the Swim. Florian. 320.
Incredible People. Drimmer. 392.
Ingold. Window. 174.
Inside the Walls of Troy. McLaren. 106.
Inside-Outside Book of Libraries. Cummins.
53.
Into the Sea. Guiberson. 13.
Invisible Ladder. Rosenberg. 112.
Irene Jennie and the Christmas Masquerade.
Smalls. 115.
Iron Ring. Alexander. 386.
Irrepressible Spirit. Kuklin. 19.
Irvine. How to Make Holiday Pop-Ups. 16.
Irwin. Sarah with an H. 99.
Ishtar and Tammuz. Moore. 144.
It Came from Ohio! Stine. 376.
Jack and Jill. Mother Goose. 70.
Jack, Skinny Bones, and the Golden Pancakes.
Helldorfer. 137.
Jackrabbit. London. 20.
Jacks Around the World. Lankford. 141.
Jacobs. James Printer. 250.
Jacques. Pearls of Lutra. 285.
Jade and Iron. Aldana. 162.
Jaffe, N. Mysterious Visitor. 361.
Jaffe, S. Who Were the Founding Fathers?
100.
Jamaica Louise James. Hest. 14.
James Printer. Jacobs. 250.
James, M. Shoebag Returns. 210.
James, S. Leon and Bob. 250.
Jelly Beans for Sale. McMillan. 69.
Jenkins, L. So Loud a Silence. 175.
Jenkins, M. Fly Traps. 175.
Jennings, D. Me, Dad, & Number 6. 325.
Jennings, P. Faith and the Electric Dogs. 176.
Jenny Reen and the Jack Muh Lantern.
Smalls. 152.
Jespersen. Mummies, Dinosaurs, Moon
Rocks. 139.
Jip. Paterson. 147.
John Burroughs, the Sage of Slabsides.
Wadsworth. 336.
Johnny Voodoo. Lane. 178.
Johnson, A. Rolling Store. 325.
Johnson, D. Children's Book of Kwanzaa.
100.
Johnson, P. Farmers' Market. 286.
Johnson, R. Braving the Frozen Frontier. 250.
Johnson, S. Tomatoes, Potatoes, Corn, and
Beans. 399.
Johnston, A. Girls Speak Out. 210.
Johnston, T. Ghost of Nicholas Greebe. 65.
.Wagon. 17.
Jojofu. Waite. 79.
Jones, C. Accidents May Happen. 17.
. Fingerprints and Talking Bones. 362.
Jones, D. Time of the Ghost. 65.
Jones, K. Maurice. Spike Lee and the African
American Filmmakers. 211.
Jones, R. President Has Been Shot! 18.
Jordi's Star. Ada. 126.
Jorgensen. Gotcha! 286.
Josefina. Winter. 80.
Jouanah. Coburn. 130.
Journey to Nowhere. Auch. 350.
Journey to the New World. Lasky. 55.
Jukes. Expecting the Unexpected. 140.
Juliet. Kirwan. 102.
Jump the World. Pooley. 407.
Junk Pile! Borton. 314.
Just Another Ordinary Day. Clement. 389.
Just Like New. Manson. 180.
Just One Flick of a Finger. Lorbiecki. 20.
Kancil and the Crocodiles. Day. 166.
Karas. Home on the Bayou. 176.
Karate Boy. Morris. 24.
Karlin. Fat Cat Sat on the Mat. 65.
Katya's Book of Mushrooms. Arnold. 271.
Katz. Black Legacy. 287.
Kehret. Small Steps. 100.
Keillor. Sandy Bottom Orchestra. 211.
Kele's Secret. Mollel. 404.
Keller, B. Amazon Papers. 101.
Keller, E. Margaret Bourke-White. 18.
Kellogg. I Was Born About 10,000 Years Ago.
66.
428 
* THE BULLETIN
Kennedy, R. Snow Queen. 162.
Kennedy, X. J. Uncle Switch. 287.
Kerr. "Hello," I Lied. 362.
Ketchup on Your Cornflakes? Sharratt. 373.
Khan's Daughter. Yep. 263.
Kid Who Ran for President. Gutman. 97.
Kimmel. Billy Lazroe and the King of the Sea.
140.
.Magic Dreidels. 101.
_ 
Tale ofAli Baba and the Forty
Thieves. 211.
Kindl. Woman in the Wall. 251.
King of Ireland's Son. Behan. 273.
King-Smith. Stray. 102.
Kirwan. Juliet. 102.
Kissing the Witch. Donoghue. 280.
Klause. Blood and Chocolate. 400.
Knight with the Lion. Howe. 211.
Knight's Handbook. Gravett. 322.
Koertge. Confess-O-Rama. 103.
Koller. No Such Thing. 251.
Komodo Dragon on Location. Darling. 318.
Kongi and Potgi. Han. 207.
Konigsburg. View from Saturday. 103.
Kort. Yitzhak Rabin. 176.
Koufax Dilemma. Schnur. 334.
Kramer. Eye of the Storm. 289.
Krensky. Breaking into Print. 177.
. Lionel and His Friends. 212.
. My Teacher's Secret Life. 140.
. Striking It Rich. 104.
Kress. Project Puffin. 400.
Krishnaswami. Broken Tusk. 66.
Krull. Lives of the Athletes. 363.
. Wish You Were Here. 326.
Kudlinski. Shannon. 102.
Kuklin. Irrepressible Spirit. 19.
Kurdish Family. O'Connor. 146.
Kurtz. Only a Pigeon. 400.
. Trouble. 326.
Kvasnosky. Mr. Chips! 104.
_ 
. What Shall I Dream? 177.
Lady Muck. Mayne. 290.
Lane. Johnny Voodoo. 178.
Language of Doves. Wells. 36.
Lankford. Jacks around the World. 141.
Lansky. You're Invited to Bruce Lansky's
Poetry Party! 66.
Lao Lao of Dragon Mountain. Bateson-Hill.
164.
Larson, K. Cody and Quinn, Sitting in a
Tree. 19.
Larson, R. What I Know Now. 363.
Laser. Rain. 363.
Lasky. Journey to the New World. 55.
_ . True North. 104,
Last Payback. VanOosting. 377.
Lauber. Hurricanes. 67.
Laughing Tomatoes. Alarc6n. 349.
Lawlor. Where Will This Shoe Take You?
178.
Lawrence. Toussaint L'Ouverture. 181.
Leaving Home. Rochman. 256.
Leaving Summer. Harding. 13.
Lee, D. Dinosaur Dinner (With a Slice of
Alligator Pie). 364.
Lee, Marie. Necessary Roughness. 178.
Lee, Milly. Nim and the War Effort. 252.
Lee, T. Jouanah. 130.
Legend of the Windigo. Ross. 112.
Leo the Magnificat. Martin. 142.
Leon and Bob. James. 250.
Leonardo da Vinci. Stanley. 32.
Lerman. Charlie's Checklist. 364.
Lester. Author. 288.
. Princess Penelope's Parrot. 179.
Let's Count It Out, Jesse Bear. Carlstrom. 51.
Let's Eat! Zamorano. 301.
Let's Play Cards! Silbaugh. 30.
Let's Rodeo. Crum. 132.
Letters from the Mountain. Garland. 169.
Levin. Gift Horse. 105.
Levine. Ella Enchanted. 327.
Levitin. Evil Encounter. 67.
. Nine for California. 141.
. Piece of Home. 179.
. Yesterday's Child. 401.
Lewin, B. Chubbo's Pool. 68.
Lewin, T. Market! 19.
Lewis. Boat of Many Rooms. 212.
Liar. Morris. 181.
Library Card. Spinelli. 258.
Lichee Tree. Russell. 294.
Life and Times of the Peanut. Micucci. 331.
Lilly's Purple Plastic Purse. Henkes. 62.
Lily's Crossing. Giff. 282.
Ling. Snake Book. 327.
Lion Tamer's Daughter. Dickinson. 245.
Lionel and His Friends. Krensky. 212.
Little Big Ears. Moss. 216.
Little Folk. Walker. 415.
Little Humpbacked Horse. Winthrop. 337.
Little Lil and the Swing-Singing Sax. Gray.
206.
Little Red Cowboy Hat. Lowell. 365.
Little Ships. Borden. 276.
Little Sister. Dalkey. 132.
Little. Gruntle Piggle Takes Off. 328.
Live a Little. Neenan. 70.
Lives of the Athletes. Krull. 363.
Lives Turned Upside Down. Hubbard. 173.
Locker. Water Dance. 328.
Loewer. Pond Water Zoo. 141.
Log Cabin Quilt. Howard. 64.
London. Ali, Child of the Desert. 365.
.Jackrabbit. 20.
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 429
. What Newt Could Do for Turtle.
213.
Lone Wolf. Franklin. 320.
Lonely Lioness and the Ostrich Chicks.
Aardema. 198.
Loo-Loo, Boo, and Art You Can Do. Roche.
26.
Looking at Pictures. Richardson. 409.
Looking for Cinderella. Dematons. 55.
Lopez. Birthday Swap. 365.
Lorbiecki. Just One Flick of a Finger. 20.
. My Palace of Leaves in Sarajevo. 252.
Lord of the Animals. French. 357.
Losers, Inc. Mills. 290.
Lou Gehrig. Adler. 270.
Love Letters. Adoff. 239.
Lowell. Little Red Cowboy Hat. 365.
Lowery. Wilma Mankiller. 21.
Lowry. See You Around, Sam! 105.
Lynch. Political Timber. 106.
Lyons. Painting Dreams. 21.
Ma Dear's Aprons. McKissack. 367.
MacDonald, A. No More Nice! 68.
MacDonald, J. Groogleman. 132.
MacDonald, S. Peck, Slither, and Slide. 366.
Mackel. Season of Comebacks. 289.
Madaket Millie. Weller. 300.
Maestro. Story of Religion. 23.
Maestro. Wynne-Jones. 81.
Magic Cornfield. Willard. 379.
Magic Dreidels. Kimmel. 101.
Magic School Bus Inside a Beehive. Cole. 52.
Magic Squad and the Dog of Great Potential.
Quattlebaum. 220.
Maguire. Oasis. 179.
Mahy. Five Sisters. 329.
Maitland. Bear Who Didn't Like Honey. 329.
Mama's Perfect Present. Goode. 136.
Man Who Created Narnia. Coren. 243.
Mangaboom. Pomerantz. 333.
Manna. Mr. Semolina-Semolinius. 402.
Manuel. Fifty-Five Grandmas and a Llama.
402.
Manson. Just Like New, 180.
Many. These Are the Rules. 289.
Maples in the Mist. Ho. 15.
Marduk the Mighty. Matthews. 367.
Margaret Bourke-White. Keller. 18.
Margo's House. Griffin. 97.
Mark. Tale of Tobias. 142.
Market! Lewin. 19.
Marrin. Empires Lost and Won. 330.
Martha Blah Blah. Meddaugh. 144.
Martin. Leo the Magnificat. 142.
Martinez. Parrot in the Oven. 143.
Marushka and the Month Brothers. Vojtech.
260.
Marx. I Heal. 143.
Marzollo. Home Sweet Home. 330.
Matas. More Minds. 214.
. Garden. 330.
Matilda the Moocher. Bluthenthal. 275.
Matthews. Marduk the Mighty. 367.
Mayne. Lady Muck. 290.
Maya's Children. Anaya. 387.
Mayo. Mythical Birds & Beasts from Many
Lands. 403.
. When the World Was Young. 214.
Mazer. Sliver of Glass and Other Uncommon
Tales. 107.
McCampbell. Leaving Home. 256.
McCaughrean. Silver Treasure. 366.
McClintock. Fantastic Drawings of Danielle.
213.
McCully. Ballot Box Battle. 22.
.Starring Mirette & Bellini. 401.
McDonald, J. Comfort Creek. 213.
McDonald, M. My House Has Stars. 106.
McDonnell. Flora McDonnell's ABC. 402.
McDuffMoves In. Wells. 300.
McGuigan. Where You Belong. 328.
McGuire. What's Wrong with This Book?
288.
McKelvey. Angel Knew Papa and the Dog.
22.
McKissack. Ma Dear's Aprons. 367.
McLaren. Inside the Walls of Troy. 106.
McManus. Never Cry "Arp!" 22.
McMillan. Jelly Beans for Sale. 69.
McNeal. Dog Who Lost His Bob. 69.
McPhail. Edward and the Pirates. 402.
McQuinn. Farmyard Animals. 23.
. Safari Animals. 23.
Me, Dad, & Number 6. Jennings. 325.
Mead. Adem's Cross. 180.
Meddaugh. Martha Blah Blah. 144.
Medearis. Haunts. 214.
. Rum-a-Tum-Tum. 403.
Medical Technology. Mulcahy. 404.
Melanie. Carrick. 92.
Meltzer. Weapons and Warfare. 215.
Mennyms Alone. Waugh. 118.
Merl and Jasper's Supper Caper. Rankin. 370.
Michelson. Animals That Ought to Be. 69.
Micucci. Life and Times of the Peanut. 331.
Mikaelsen. Countdown. 107.
Milk and Honey. Yolen. 119.
Millen. Symphony for the Sheep. 144.
Miller, Debbie. Disappearing Lake. 215.
Miller, Dorothy. Clearing. 108.
Mills. Losers, Inc. 290.
Minas and the Fish. Pastuchiv. 332.
Minerva Louise at School. Stoeke. 32.
Minters. Sleepless Beauty. 108.
Mirror. Day. 391.
430 
* THE BULLETIN
Miss Bindergarten Gets Ready for Kindergar-
ten. Slate. 31.
Miss Emma's Wild Garden. Hines. 324.
Missing Sunflowers. Stern. 297.
Mississippi Mud. Turner. 376.
Mist over the Mountains. Bial. 350.
Mitakidou. Mr. Semolina-Semolinus. 402.
Mitchell, A. Steadfast Tin Soldier. 163.
Mitchell, B. Red Bird. 24.
.Waterman's Child. 291.
Mitchell, R. Talking Cloth. 367.
Mola. Presilla. 184.
Mollel. Kele's Secret. 404.
Molly Limbo. Hodges. 64.
Monster Faces. 169.
Monsters in Cyberspace. Regan. 408.
Moodie. Nabulela. 404.
Moon Book. Gibbons. 394.
Moon Window. Curry. 95.
Moonbear's Pet. Asch. 387.
Mooney. Voices of Silence. 291.
Moonlight Kite. Buckley. 315.
Moore. Ishtar and Tammuz. 144.
More Minds. Matas. 214.
More Stories Huey Tells. Cameron. 389.
More Than a Horse. Adler. 238.
More than One. Schlein. 185.
Morpurgo. Robin of Sherwood. 181.
Morris, A. Karate Boy. 24.
Morris, J. Nightwalkers. 145.
Morris, W. Liar. 181.
Moss, C. Little Big Ears. 216.
Moss, M. Ugly Menorah. 108.
Most Beautiful Kid in the World. Ericsson.
57.
Mother Goose. Humpty Dumpty. 70.
.Jack and Jill. 70.
. My Very First Mother Goose. 147.
Mother Goose Math. Ziefert. 417.
Mothers and Other Strangers. Wilson. 36.
Mountain Wedding. Gibbons. 12.
Mouse Creeps. Harris. 249.
Mowry. Babylon Boyz. 368.
. Ghost Train. 145.
Mr. Chips! Kvasnosky. 104.
Mr. Pak Buys a Story. Farley. 319.
Mr. Semolina-Semolinus. Manna. 402.
Mr. Was. Hautman. 98.
Mrs. Meyer the Bird. Erlbruch. 319.
Ms. MacDonald Has a Class. Ormerod. 71.
Mulcahy. Medical Technology. 404.
Mummies, Dinosaurs, Moon Rocks.
Jespersen. 139.
Music and Drum. Robb. 334.
Music of Dolphins. Hesse. 137.
My Best Defense. Riggs. 26.
My Brother, My Enemy. Harrah. 396.
My Dinosaur. Weatherby. 337.
My House Has Stars. McDonald. 106.
My Little Sister Ate One Hare. Grossman.
171.
My Name Is Seepeetza. Sterling. 335.
My Napoleon. Brighton. 314.
My Palace of Leaves in Sarajevo. Lorbiecki.
252.
My Sister the Sausage Roll. Holmes. 398.
My Teacher's Secret Life. Krensky. 140.
My Very First Mother Goose. Opie. 147.
Myers, A. Spotting the Leopard. 216.
Myers, W. Harlem. 252.
_ Slam! 216.
. Toussaint L'Ouverture. 181.
Mysterious Visitor. Jaffe. 361.
Mythical Birds & Beasts from Many Lands.
Mayo. 403.
Nabulela. Moodie. 404.
Naidoo. No Turning Back. 217.
Nanovic. Ghosts' Trip to Loch Ness. 56.
Napoli. On Guard. 217.
.Song of the Magdalene. 182.
.Trouble on the Tracks. 253.
Nappy Hair. Herron. 208.
Naylor. Ducks Disappearing. 217.
.Outrageously Alice. 405.
.Shiloh Season. 145.
Necessary Roughness. Lee. 178.
Neenan. Live a Little. 70.
Neitzel. We're Making Breakfast for Mother.
331.
Nerd No More. Franklin. 57.
Never Cry "Arp!" McManus. 22.
Never-Ending Greenness. Waldman. 377.
Nicholas Pipe. San Souci. 411.
Night Driving. Coy. 131.
Night Fell at Harry's Farm. Hedlund. 397.
Night*Knight. Ziefert. 302.
Nightwalkers. Morris. 145.
Nim and the War Effort. Lee. 252.
Nimmo. Griffin's Castle. 291.
Nine Candles. Testa. 34.
Nine for California. Levitin. 141.
Nine-Ton Cat. Thomson. 298.
Nirgiotis. No More Dodos. 218.
Nivola. Elisabeth. 253.
Nix. Sabriel. 146.
Nixon. Search for the Shadowman. 182.
No More Dodos. Nirgiotis. 218.
No More Nice! MacDonald. 68.
No Such Thing. Koller. 251.
No Turning Back. Naidoo. 217.
North Star to Freedom. Gorrell. 205.
Now I Know Better. Children's Hospital at
Yale-New Haven. 93.
Now Soon Later. Grunwald. 60.
O Christmas Tree. Rahaman. 111.
O'Connor, B. Beethoven in Paradise. 332.
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 
431
_ 
. Soldier's Voice. 71.
O'Connor, K. Kurdish Family. 146.
O'Grady. Basher Five-Two. 405.
Oasis. Maguire. 179.
Octopus. Cerullo. 201.
Odin's Family. Philip. 73.
Off and Running. Soto. 77.
Ogburn. Reptile Ball. 406.
Oh, No, Toto! Tchana. 259.
Oksana. Baiul. 312.
Old Home Day. Hall. 61.
Old Ironsides. Weitzman. 377.
Old Man and His Door. Soto. 31.
Old Winter. Richardson. 150.
Oldest Elf. Stevenson. 77.
Oldham. Found. 183.
Olivo. Close, Closer, Closest. 294.
Ollie All Over. Roche. 372.
On Board the Titanic. Tanaka. 34.
On Guard. Napoli. 217.
On My Own. Alexander. 311.
Once Upon a Time This Morning. Rockwell.
293.
One Grain of Rice. Demi. 202.
One World, Many Religions. Osborne. 183.
Only a Pigeon. Kurtz. 400.
Only One Ollie. Roche. 372.
Opie. My Very First Mother Goose. 147.
Oppenheim. And the Earth Trembled. 218.
Ormerod. Ms. MacDonald Has a Class. 71.
Orphan of Ellis Island. Woodruff. 261.
Orphan Train Rider. Warren. 35.
Orr. Peeling the Onion. 406.
Osborne. One World, Many Religions. 183.
Oughton. War in Georgia. 368.
Our Poisoned Waters. Dolan. 280.
Out of Darkness. Freedman. 321.
Outrageously Alice. Naylor. 405.
Over the River andtthrough the Wood. Child.
92.
Over the Top of the World. Steger. 223.
Owen. Rosie No-Name. 183.
Painting Dreams. Lyons. 21.
Painting the Black. Deuker. 354.
Palm of My Heart. Adedjouma. 127.
Pami. Oh, No, Toto! 259.
Parakeet Girl. Sadler. 411.
Paraskevas. Cecil Bunions and the Midnight
Train. 147.
Parks. I Am Rosa Parks. 369.
Parrot in the Oven. Martinez. 143.
Partridge. Clara and the HooDoo Man. 25.
Pastuchiv. Minas and the Fish. 332.
Patent. Biodiversity. 254.
.Children Save the Rain Forest. 71.
. Flashy Fantastic Rain Forest Frogs.
254.
___ .Prairies. 219.
Paterson. Jip. 147.
Pausewang. Final Journey. 148.
Paulsen. Schernoff Discoveries. 406.
Peacebound Trains. Balgassi. 48.
Pearl. Elijah's Tears. 109.
Pearls of Lutra. Jacques. 285.
Pearson, G. Secret Box. 407.
Pearson, K. Awake and Dreaming. 332.
Pearson, T. Purple Hat. 254.
Peck, Slither, and Slide. MacDonald. 366.
Peck. Great Interactive Dream Machine. 109.
Pedro and the Monkey. San Souci. 113.
Peeling the Onion. Orr. 406.
Pelletier. Graphic Alphabet. 148.
Peters. How Do You Spell Geek? 72.
Petersen. White Water. 369.
Peterson. Horsepower. 292.
Pfeffer. Polar Bears. 72.
Philip. American Fairy Tales. 25.
.Odin's Family. 73.
Phoebe's Fabulous Father. Campbell. 92.
Pictures in the Dark. Cross. 166.
Piece of Home. Levitin. 179.
Pigs in the Mud in the Middle of the Rud.
Plourde. 219.
Pigs in the Pantry. Axelrod. 312.
Pinkney, A. Bill Pickett. 110.
Pinkney, B. Adventures of Sparrowboy. 369.
Pinkwater. Wallpaper from Space. 73.
Pitcher. Snow Whale. 148.
Pits. Howarth. 138.
Pizza the Size of the Sun. Prelutsky. 25.
Place Called Freedom. Sanders. 412.
Planes and Other Flying Things. Temko. 187.
Platt. Honor Bright. 255.
Pleasing the Ghost. Creech. 53.
Plourde. Pigs in the Mud in the Middle of the
Rud. 219.
Plunkett. Kongi and Potgi. 207.
Polar Bears. Pfeffer. 72.
Police Patrol. Winkleman. 189.
Political Timber. Lynch. 106.
Pomerantz. Mangaboom. 333.
Pond Water Zoo. Loewer. 141.
Pooley. Jump the World. 407.
Possum's Harvest Moon. Hunter. 65.
Powell. Whistling Toilets. 110.
Poydar. Cool Ali. 73.
Prairies. Patent. 219.
Prayer for the Earth. Sasso. 412.
Prelutsky. Dinosaur Dinner (With a Slice of
Alligator Pie). 364.
__ . Pizza the Size of the Sun. 25.
President Has Been Shot! Jones. 18.
Presilla. Mola. 184.
Princess Penelope's Parrot. Lester. 179.
Pringle. Extraordinary Life. 333.
Project Puffin. Kress. 400.
432 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Promise Me the Moon. Barnes. 199.
Prose. Angel's Mistake. 408.
Pryor. Toenails, Tonsils, and Tornadoes. 370.
Punia and the King of Sharks. Wardlaw. 225.
Purple Hat. Pearson. 254.
Pushkin. Tale of Tsar Saltan. 110.
Puzzles. Walker. 261.
Quattlebaum. Magic Squad and the Dog of
Great Potential. 220.
Queen of Dreamland. Tomey. 78.
Quilted Landscape. Strom. 224.
Quirk. Dancing with Great-Aunt Cornelia.
370.
Rabbits & Raindrops. Arnosky. 239.
Rael. What Zeesie Saw on Delancey Street.
149.
Rahaman. O Christmas Tree. 111.
. Read for Me, Mama. 255.
Rain. Laser. 363.
Rainy Season. Griffin. 207.
Ramadan. Ghazi. 134.
Rankin. Merl and Jasper's.Supper Caper. 370.
Rapid Eye Movement. Banyai. 272.
Rapp. Buffalo Tree. 408.
Raschka. Blushful Hippopotamus. 149.
Rattlesnake Dance. Dewey. 245.
Raven and River. Carlstrom. 352.
Ray. Twelve Dancing Princesses. 171.
Read for Me, Mama. Rahaman. 255.
Red Bird. Mitchell. 24.
Red Fox and the Baby Bunnies. Baron. 273.
Red Heels. San Souci. 74.
Red-Eared Ghosts. Alcock. 270.
Redoutr. Croll. 8.
Reeder. Across the Lines. 371.
Regan. Monsters in Cyberspace. 408.
Reptile Ball. Ogburn. 406.
Rheingrover. Veronica's First Year. 150.
Rice. Swim! 26.
Richardson, Joy. Looking at Pictures. 409.
Richardson, Judith. Old Winter. 150.
Riecken. Today Is the Day. 26.
Riggio. Secret Signs. 220.
Riggs. My Best Defense. 26.
Rinaldi. Second Bend in the River. 256.
Ring of Truth. Bateman. 313.
Riot. Casanova. 165.
Ripple of Hope. Harrison. 397.
River Thunder. Hobbs. 397.
Robb. Music and Drum. 334.
Robbins. Rodeo. 150.
Roberts. Am I the Last Virgin? 220.
Robertshaw. Soldier's Life. 371.
Robin of Sherwood. Morpurgo. 181.
Robinet. Washington City is Burning. 151.
Robins in Your Backyard. Willis. 379.
Roche. Loo-Loo, Boo, and Art You Can Do.
26.
_ 
Ollie All Over. 372.
.Only One Ollie. 372.
Rochman. Leaving Home. 256.
Rocklin. For Your Eyes Only! 292.
Rockwell. Once Upon a Time This Morning.
293.
Rodeo. Robbins. 150.
Rogasky. Golem. 27.
Rogue Wave. Taylor. 224.
Rolling Store. Johnson. 325.
Root. Rosie's Fiddle. 293.
Ros. Brother Rabbit. 324.
Rosa and Her Singing Grandfather.
Rosselson. 28.
Rosales. 'Twas the Night B'fore Christmas.
111.
Rosenberg. Invisible Ladder. 112.
. Eli and Uncle Dawn. 372.
Rosie No-Name. Owen. 183.
Rosie's Fiddle. Root. 293.
Rosie's Nutcracker Dreams. Giff. 135.
Ross, A. Copper Lady. 409.
Ross, G. Legend of the Windigo. 112.
Ross, K. Gifts to Make for Your Favorite
Grownup. 151.
Rosselson. Rosa and Her Singing Grandfa-
ther. 28.
Rossiter. Rugby & Rosie. 257.
Rotner. Close, Closer, Closest. 294.
Royal Switch. York. 228.
Rubalcaba. Saint Vitus' Dance. 113.
Rubin. Emily in Love. 294.
Rubinstein. Foxspell. 184.
Rugby & Rosie. Rossiter. 257.
Rum-a-Tum-Tum. Medearis. 403.
Rumpelstiltskin's Daughter. Stanley. 414.
Russell, B. Blue Lightning. 221.
Russell, C. Lichee Tree. 294.
Russo. Under the Table. 334.
Ryan. Alias. 410.
Ryder. Shark in the Sea. 295.
Sabriel. Nix. 146.
Sabuda. Twelve Days of Christmas. 28.
Sachs. Another Day. 410.
Sadler. Parakeet Girl. 411.
Safari Animals. McQuinn. 23.
Safe Return. Dexter. 95.
Saint James. Sunday. 74.
Saint Vitus' Dance. Rubalcaba. 113.
Sailer. Florence Kelley. 411.
Salmansohn. Project Puffin. 400.
Sam Sunday and the Mystery at the Ocean
Beach Hotel. Supraner. 33.
San Souci. Hired Hand. 295.
. Nicholas Pipe. 411.
. Pedro and the Monkey. 113.
.Red Heels. 74.
Sanders. Place Called Freedom. 412.
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 433
Sandy Bottom Orchestra. Keillor. 211.
Sarah and the People of Sand River.
Valgardson. 154.
Sarah with an H. Irwin. 99.
Sarah's Story. Harley. 249.
Sasso. Prayer for the Earth. 412.
Sateren. Humane Societies. 75.
Sauerwein. Looking for Cinderella. 55.
Savage. Under a Different Sky. 372.
Saving Sweetness. Stanley. 116.
Saving the Environment. Gay. 59.
Say. Emma's Rug. 114.
Schaefer. Squiggle. 222.
Schami. Fatima and the Dream Thief. 222.
Schernoff Discoveries. Paulsen. 406.
Schlein. More Than One. 185.
Schmidt. Sin Eater. 114.
Schneider. Between the Dragon and the
Eagle. 257.
Schnur. Koufax Dilemma. 334.
Schroeder, A. Smoky Mountain Rose. 413.
Schroeder, R. Walt Disney. 115.
Schwartz. Wonder Child. 222.
Scruffy. Brandenburg. 50.
Sea Maidens of Japan. Bell. 314.
Sea Sums. Hulme. 139.
Seal Surfer. Foreman. 320.
Search for the Shadowman. Nixon. 182.
Seashore Babies. Darling. 244.
Season of Comebacks. Mackel. 289.
Second Bend in the River. Rinaldi. 256.
Secret Box. Pearson. 407.
Secret Signs. Riggio. 220.
Secret Star. Springer. 375.
Secrets. Ferguson. 393.
Secrets of Animal Flight. Bishop. 350.
Secrets of Walden Rising. Baillie. 312.
See You Around, Sam! Lowry. 105.
Seedfolks. Fleischman. 393.
Seed Bunny. Selby. 296.
Sees Behind Trees. Dorris. 168.
Selby. Seed Bunny. 296.
Seneca. Baker. 240.
Sefior Cat's Romance. Gonzilez. 283.
Serfozo. What's What? 75.
Seven Silly Eaters. Hoberman. 324.
Seventeen Guide to Sex and Your Body.
Solin. 185.
Severance. Gandhi. 373.
Shalant. Great Eye. 222.
Shannon. Kudlinski. 102.
Shark in the Sea. Ryder. 295.
Sharks! Gourley. 171.
Sharratt. Ketchup on Your Cornflakes? 373.
Shhh! Sykes. 117.
Shiloh Season. Naylor. 145.
Ships of the Air. Curlee. 53.
Shoebag Returns. James. 210.
Shoes. Yue. 379.
Shooting Star. Dadey. 353.
Shoup. Stranded in Harmony. 296.
Shreve. Goalie. 185.
Siddals. Tell Me a Season. 413.
Siegelson. Terrible, Wonderful Tellin' at Hog
Hammock. 29.
Siegen-Smith. Songs for Survival. 29.
. Welcome to the World. 152.
Silbaugh. Let's Play Cards! 30.
Silver Treasure. McCaughrean. 366.
Sim. In My Pocket. 374.
Simon. Heart. 75.
Sin Eater. Schmidt. 114.
Sing, Sophie! Dodds. 392.
Singer. All We Needed to Say. 30.
. Deal with a Ghost. 374.
Sirof. Bring Back Yesterday. 76.
Sfs. Starry Messenger. 115.
Skurzynski. Virtual War. 413.
Sky Is Not So Far Away. Hillert. 98.
Slam! Myers. 216.
Slate. Miss Bindergarten Gets Ready for
Kindergarten. 31.
Slave Day. Thomas. 297.
Sleepless Beauty. Minters. 108.
Sleepy Men. Brown. 165.
Sliver of Glass. Mazer. 107.
Small Steps. Kehret. 100.
Small. Fenwick's Suit. 76.
Smalls. Irene Jennie and the Christmas
Masquerade. 115.
.Jenny Reen and the Jack Muh
Lantern. 152.
Smith. Crown Duel. 414.
Smoky Mountain Rose. Schroeder. 413.
Snake Book. Ling. 327.
Snapshots from the Wedding. Soto. 296.
Snow Day. Fain. 57.
Snow Lambs. Gliori. 204.
Snow Queen. Andersen. 162.
Snow Walker. Wetterer. 155.
Snow Whale. Pitcher. 148.
Snyder. Gypsy Game. 223.
So Loud a Silence. Jenkins. 175.
Soli. Angela Weaves a Dream. 375.
Soldier Boy. Burks. 277.
Soldier's Life. Robertshaw. 371.
Soldier's Voice. O'Connor. 71.
Solin. Seventeen Guide to Sex and Your
Body. 185.
Some Friend. Warner. 35.
Sonenklar. Bug Boy. 335.
Song of the Magdalene. Napoli. 182.
Songs for Survival. Siegen-Smith. 29.
Soto. Off and Running. 77.
. Old Man and His Door. 31.
. Snapshots from the Wedding. 296.
434 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Southgate. Another Way to Dance. 186.
Spaceman. Cutler. 318.
Spider Boy. Fletcher. 281.
Spike Lee. Haskins. 323.
Spike Lee and the African American
Filmmakers. Jones. 211.
Spinelli. Library Card. 258.
Spivak. Grass Sandals. 414.
Spotting the Leopard. Myers. 216.
Spring Break. Hurwitz. 285.
Springer. Secret Star. 375.
Squiggle. Schaefer. 222.
St. George. To See With the Heart. 31.
Standiford. Astronauts Are Sleeping. 223.
Stanley. Leonardo da Vinci. 32.
. Rumpelstiltskin's Daughter. 414.
. Saving Sweetness. 116.
Staples. Dangerous Skies. 77.
Starring Mirette & Bellini. McCully. 401.
Starry Messenger. Sis. 115.
Staub. Children ofYucatin. 117.
Steadfast Tin Soldier. Andersen. 163.
Stefoff. Finding the Lost Cities. 258.
Steger. Over the Top of the World. 223.
Stemp. Waterbound. 153.
Sterling. My Name Is Seepeetza. 335.
Stern. Missing Sunflowers. 297.
Stevenson. Oldest Elf. 77.
Stewart. Gift of the Sun. 153.
Stine. It Came from Ohio! 376.
Stink Bomb Mom. Freeman. 204.
Stoehr. Wannabe. 258.
Stoeke. Minerva Louise at School. 32.
Stone Age Farmers beside the Sea. Arnold.
271.
Stone Water. Gilbert. 170.
Stopping for Death. Duffy. 9.
Stories in Stone. Arnold. 163.
Story of Little Babaji. Bannerman. 5.
Story of Religion. Maestro. 23.
Stranded in Harmony. Shoup. 296.
Strasser. Hey, Dad, Get a Life! 259.
Stray. King-Smith. 102.
Striking It Rich. Krensky. 104.
Strom. Quilted Landscape. 224.
Stroude. Down Home at Miss Dessa's. 153.
Sturges. Marushka and the Month Brothers.
260.
Suitcase Kid. Wilson. 416.
Sunday. Saint James. 74.
Supraner. Sam Sunday and the Mystery at the
Ocean Beach Hotel. 33.
Sutcliff. Wanderings of Odysseus. 33.
Sweetwater Run. Glass. 135.
Swim! Rice. 26.
Swope. Katya's Book of Mushrooms. 271.
Sykes. Shhh! 117.
Symphony for the Sheep. Millen. 144.
Szekeres. I Love My Busy Book. 259.
Tafuri. Brass Ring. 78.
Take It Easy. Hill. 360.
Taking of Room 114. Glenn. 247.
Talbott. Amazon Diary. 186.
Tale of Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves.
Kimmel. 211.
Tale of Tobias. Mark. 142.
Tale of Tsar Saltan. Pushkin. 110.
Tales from the Homeplace. Burandt. 388.
Talking Cloth. Mitchell. 367.
Talking in Animal. Farish. 95.
Tamar. Alphabet City Ballet. 187.
Tanaka. Discovering the Iceman. 336.
_ 
. On Board the Titanic. 34.
Tangerine. Bloor. 241.
Tangle Town. Cyrus. 244.
Tarantula in My Purse and 172 Other Wild
Pets. George. 134.
Taylor. Rogue Wave and Other Red-Blooded
Sea Stories. 224.
Tchana. Oh, No, Toto! 259.
Team Picture. Hughes. 174.
Tell Me a Season. Siddals. 413.
Tell Me Again about the Night I Was Born.
Curtis. 166.
Temko. Planes and Other Flying Things. 187.
. Traditional Crafts from Mexico and
Central America. 225.
Tenderness. Cormier. 277.
Terrible, Wonderful Tellin' at Hog
Hammock. Siegelson. 29.
Terris. Ripple of Hope. 396.
Testa. Nine Candles. 34.
That Summer. Dessen. 95.
There Will Be Wolves. Bradford. 50.
These Are the Rules. Many. 289.
Thief. Turner. 117.
Thirsty. Anderson. 271.
This for That. Aardema. 238.
This House on Fire. Awmiller. 5.
Thomas. Slave Day. 297.
Thompson. Ghost Story. 260.
Thomson. Nine-Ton Cat. 298.
Thornhill. Wild in the City. 154.
Time of Fire. Westall. 415.
You're Safe Now, Waterdog. Edwards. 392.
Time of the Ghost. Jones. 65.
To See With the Heart. St. George. 31.
To the Young Scientist. Bortz. 276.
Toad. Brown. 242.
Toads and Diamonds. Huck. 173.
Today Is the Day. Riecken. 26.
Toenails, Tonsils, and Tornadoes. Pryor. 370.
Toksvig. If I Didn't Have Elbows. 154.
Tolan. Welcome to the Ark. 117.
Tomatoes, Potatoes, Corn, and Beans.
Johnson. 399.
JULY/AUGUST 1997 
* 435
Tomey. Queen of Dreamland. 78.
Too Many Pumpkins. White. 155.
Tornado. Byars. 91.
Toussaint L'Ouverture. Myers. 181.
Traditional Crafts from Mexico and Central
America. Temko. 225.
Tree Is Growing. Dorros. 355.
Trenter. Hostage to War. 299.
Trokeville Way. Hoban. 209.
Trouble on the T-Ball Team. Bunting. 277.
Trouble on the Tracks. Napoli. 253.
Trouble. Kurtz. 326.
True Colors of Caitlynne Jackson. Williams.
226.
True North. Lasky. 104.
Trumble. Cat Mummies. 78.
Tucker. Do Cowboys Ride Bikes? 376.
Tumbleweed Christmas. Ferguson. 96.
Tunnell. Children of Topaz. 34.
Turkey Pox. Anderson. 91.
Turner, A. Mississippi Mud. 376.
Turner, M. Thief. 117.
'Twas the Night B'fore Christmas. Rosales.
111.
Twelve Dancing Princesses. Grimm. 171.
Twelve Days of Christmas. Sabuda. 28.
Twilight in Grace Falls. Honeycutt. 360.
Ugly Menorah. Moss. 108.
Uncle Ronald. Doyle. 203.
Uncle Snake. Gollub. 59.
Uncle Switch. Kennedy. 287.
Under a Different Sky. Savage. 372.
Under the Table. Russo. 334.
Valgardson. Sarah and the People of Sand
River. 154.
Van Draanen. How I Survived Being a Girl.
298.
Van Leeuwen. Fourth of July on the Plains.
415.
Vanasse. Distant Enemy. 298.
Vande Velde. Curses, Inc. 336.
VanOosting. Last Payback. 377.
Verdi. Cannon. 351.
Veronica's First Year. Rheingrover. 150.
Viesti. Celebrate! In South Asia. 79.
. Celebrate! in Southeast Asia. 79.
View from Saturday. Konigsburg. 103.
Vincent Van Gogh. Harrison. 13.
Virtual Cody. Duffey. 355.
Virtual War. Skurzynski. 413.
Voake. Ginger. 299.
Voice on the Radio. Cooney. 94.
Voices of Silence. Mooney. 291.
Voices of the Heart. Young. 301.
Vojtech. Marushka and the Month Brothers.
260.
Wadsworth. John Burroughs, the Sage of
Slabsides. 336.
Wagon Train 911. Gilson. 170.
Wagon. Johnston. 17.
Waite. Jojofu. 79.
Waldman. Never-Ending Greenness. 377.
Walker, D. Puzzles. 261.
Walker, R. Little Folk. 415.
Wallpaper from Space. Pinkwater. 73.
Walt Disney. Schroeder. 115.
Wan. Lao Lao of Dragon Mountain. 164.
Wanderings of Odysseus. Sutcliff. 33.
Wannabe. Stoehr. 258.
War in Georgia. Oughton. 368.
Wardlaw. 101 Ways to Bug Your Parents.
118.
. Punia and the King of Sharks. 225.
Warner. Some Friend. 35.
Warren, A. Orphan Train Rider. 35.
Warren, J. Cold War. 225.
Washington City is Burning. Robinet. 151.
Wassiljewa. Hostage to War. 299.
Watcher. Howe. 398.
Water Dance. Locker. 328.
Waterbound. Stemp. 153.
Waterman's Child. Mitchell. 291.
Waugh. Mennyms Alone. 118.
Wawrose. Griswold v. Connecticut. 36.
We Have Marched Together. Currien. 353.
We're Making Breakfast for Mother. Neitzel.
331.
Weapons and Warfare. Meltzer. 215.
Weatherby. My Dinosaur. 337.
Weitzman. Old Ironsides. 377.
Welcome to the Ark. Tolan. 117.
Welcome to the World. Siegen-Smith. 152.
Well Wished. Billingsley. 274.
Weller. Madaket Millie. 300.
Wells. Bunny Cakes. 261.
_ Language of Doves. 36.
_ McDuff Moves In. 300.
Wersba. Whistle Me Home. 337.
Wesley. Freedom's Gifts. 378.
West. Braving the North Atlantic. 187.
Westall. Time of Fire. 415.
Westminster West. Haas. 284.
Wetterer. Snow Walker. 155.
What Do You Mean I Have Attention Deficit
Disorder? Dwyer. 10.
What I Know Now. Larson. 363.
What Newt Could Do for Turtle. London.
213.
What Shall I Dream? Kvasnosky. 177.
What Zeesie Saw on Delancey Street. Rael.
149.
What's What? Serfozo. 75.
What's Wrong with This Book? McGuire.
288.
When Stories Fell Like Shooting Stars.
Gregory. 207.
436 
* THE BULLETIN
When the Circus Came to Town. Horvath.
138.
When the World Was Young. Mayo. 214.
When Will This Cruel War Be Over?
Denenberg. 55.
Where Will This Shoe Take You? Lawlor.
178.
Where You Belong. McGuigan. 328.
While the Candles Burn. Goldin. 96.
Whispering Room. Clarke. 166.
Whistle Me Home. Wersba. 337.
Whistling Toilets. Powell. 110.
White Water. Petersen. 369.
White, C. Whuppity Stoorie. 416.
White, L. Too Many Pumpkins. 155.
Who Were the Founding Fathers? Jaffe. 100.
Whuppity Stoorie. White. 416.
Why Is the Sky Blue? Grindley. 359.
Wick. Drop of Water. 226.
Wild in the City. Thornhill. 154.
Wilkes. Dazzling Disguises and Clever
Costumes. 119.
Willard. Magic Cornfield. 379.
Williams, C. True Colors of Caitlynne
Jackson. 226.
Williams, J. Amish. 226.
Williams, M. Iliad and the Odyssey. 227.
Willis, N. Robins in Your Backyard. 379.
Willis, P. Danger Along the Ohio. 330.
Willy's Silly Grandma. DeFelice. 354.
Wilma Mankiller. Lowery. 21.
Wilson, B. Mothers and Other Strangers. 36.
Wilson, J. Suitcase Kid. 416.
Wilson, N. Becoming Felix. 188.
Windigo's Return. Wood. 112.
Window. Ingold. 174.
Windsor. Blooding. 188.
Winkleman. Police Patrol. 189.
Winter Hare. Goodman. 205.
Winter of Red Snow. Gregory. 55.
Winter. Josefina. 80.
Winters. Did You See What I Saw? 37.
Winthrop. Little Humpbacked Horse. 337.
Wisdom Tales from Around the World.
Forest. 204.
Wise Washerman. Froese. 133.
Wish Me Luck. Heneghan. 284.
Wish You Were Here. Krull. 326.
Wisler. Caleb's Choice. 37.
Wisniewski. Golem. 27.
With Heroic Truth. Finkelstein. 357.
Wojciechowski. Beany (Not Beanhead) and
the Magic Crystal. 417.
Wolf, B. HIV Positive. 338.
Wolf, J. Daddy, Could I Have an Elephant?
80.
Woman in the Wall. Kindl. 251.
Wonder Child. Schwartz. 222.
Wood, A. Bunyans. 189.
Wood, D. Windigo's Return. 112.
Wood, F. Becoming Rosemary. 338.
Woodruff. Orphan of Ellis Island. 261.
Wormser. American Childhoods. 81.
Wunderli. Heartbeat of Halftime. 38.
Wynne-Jones. Maestro. 81.
Yaccarino. If I Had a Robot. 38.
Yee. Ghost Train. 227.
Yep. Case of the Goblin Pearls. 339.
. Khan's Daughter. 263.
Yerxa. Fish Tale. 39.
Yesterday's Child. Levitin. 401.
Yitzhak Rabin. Kort. 176.
Yolen. Milk and Honey. 119.
Yorinks. Frank and Joey Go to Work. 228.
. Frank and Joey Eat Lunch. 228.
York. Royal Switch. 228.
. Bright Lights. 228.
You Must Remember This. Evans. 356.
You're Invited to Bruce Lansky's Poetry Party!
Lansky. 66.
Young Inline Skater. Edwards. 132.
Young. Genesis. 241.
. Voices of the Heart. 301.
Yue. Shoes. 379.
Yumoto. Friends. 229.
Zamorano. Let's Eat! 301.
Zero at the Bone. Cadnum. 7.
Ziefert. Baby Buggy*Buggy Baby. 302.
.Mother Goose Math. 417.
.Night*Knight. 302.
Zoe Rising. Conrad. 52.
Zorro and Quwi. Hickox. 208.
Zubizarreta. Gathering the Sun. 348.
I 
/^-h-.
QAIL CARSON LEVINE
"The canon of retold fairy tales has some distinguished titles, such
as McKinley's Beauty .... Now room must be made for Levine's
superbly plotted and thoroughly enjoyable retelling of the
Cinderella story. As finely designed and executed as a tapestry,
Ella's story neatly incorporates both elements of the original
tale and mightily expands it with a heroine so spirited she wins
[^^^ 
-^*L 
M-A 
" 
I -.--.---- I 
-:.. 
Ali A 
-
i:-
SHarperCollinsChildren's Books
10 East 53rd St., New York, NY 10022 A
367 8/97
39270
SHARON CREECH
Winner of the Newbery Medal for Walk Two Moona
CHASING
Thirteen-year-old Zlinny discovers that life is a tangle of
mysteries, surprises and everyday occurrences --
a journey that often needs unraveling and that
somnetimnes must be traveled alone.
"This journey for Zinny and readers is intriguing, delightful,
and touching. With wonderfully quirky characters and a
focus on the setting of the natural world, this story [is]
much fresher than most."--(starred review) School Library Journal
"Setting the story where ·Walk Two Moons begins and
ends, Sharon Creech has written a striking novel,
notable for its emotional honesty."-mTe 
Horn Book
"This sturdy but sensitive tale is Creech's best yet."
--(starred review) Publishers Weekly
Ages 8 up. $i14.95TR (0-06-026987-i); $14.89LB 
(0-06-026988X)(
Joanna Cotler Books
Sharon Creech 's recent novels
ABSOLUTELY NORMAL CHAOS 
WALK TWO MOONS
Ages 8-12. $i4.95TR (0-06-026989-8) 
Winner of the Newbery 
Medni
$i4.89LB (0-06-026992-8) 
Ages 8-12. $i6.O0TR (0-06-023334-6); $i5.89LB
$4.5OPB (0-06-440632-6) 
(0-06-023337-0) $4.50PB (0-06-440517-6)
PLEASING THE GHOST
Ages 8412. $i3.95TR (0-06-026985-5)
$i3.89LB 
(0-06-026986-3) 
~ 
HarperCOllinSChild"en'S 
Books
10 East 53rd St.. New York, NY 10022
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(199707/08)50:11*;1-V
4
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
** ,.' 
*-
