T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
July/August 2015
Vol. 68   No. 11
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 68 (2015).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $62.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$103.00 (print); $115.00 (online);  
$144.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
July/August 2015
Vol. 68 No. 11
533  the BIg PICture
 
  Flutter & Hum: Animal Poems/Aleteo y Zumbido: Poemas de Ani-
males  written and illus. by Julie Paschkis
534  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
535 • The Skunk  by Mac Barnett; illus. by Patrick McDonnell
539 • From the Notebooks of a Middle School Princess  by Meg Cabot
549 •  The Boys Who Challenged Hitler: Knud Pedersen and the Churchill Club  by 
Phillip Hoose
555 •  Little Chanclas written and illus. by José Lozano; Spanish text by Luis 
Humberto Crosthwaite
558 •  Not Otherwise Specified by Hannah Moskowitz
576  suBjeCt And use Index
579  AnnuAL Author And tItLe Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $103.00 or electronic $115.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2015 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Flutter & Hum: Animal Poems/Aleteo y Zumbido: Poemas de Animales by Julie 
Paschkis copyright ©2015 and used by permission of Henry Holt and Company.
July/August 2015 • 533
the BIg PICture
Flutter & Hum: Animal Poems/Aleteo y Zumbido: 
Poemas de Animales
written and illustrated by Julie Paschkis
Picture book criticism talks a lot about the relationship between the text and illus-
tration, about using each art form to speak to the other to create a unified whole. 
Occasionally, a bilingual book (almost always a poetry book) manages to achieve 
similar complementary with its paired texts, as did Lori Carlson’s Cool Salsa (BCCB 
9/94). Now Julie Paschkis has managed to achieve such a relationship between art 
and text and between text in two languages at the same time, in an alchemy that 
results in a cohesive yet multi-faceted whole.
Probably best known to date as an illustrator, Paschkis comes to the fore 
here as a poet as well in this bilingual collection of fourteen animal-themed poems. 
The poems treat mammals and birds, insects and fish, and they are each titled the 
singular name of the subject animal (“Crow,” “Dog,” “Fly,” in English without an 
article as if the poems were about the platonic ideal of each creature). These are 
bijou short-lined verses; the longest is fourteen lines, with only a few words per 
line, and the shortest four lines, but the poems’ compactness gives them additional 
impact. And though the style is playful and musing, the verses are slyly intricate 
and stealthily well crafted; the poems are sometimes decorated with alliteration, 
sometimes rhyming, though in capricious rather than organized form. While some 
are haiku-like impressions (“Crow”), others trip to a satisfying stop (the “Snake” who 
“only knows/ one letter:/ ssssssssss”), mixing one kind of poetic pleasure with another. 
The poems in English would be pleasing enough on their own, but they’re 
not on their own. The author created both the English and Spanish texts and didn’t 
simply translate one into the other; she worked initially in Spanish and then revised 
back and forth between the two to ensure the poems were successful individually 
as well as being mutually reflective. The result is a truly bilingual book: it avoids 
the seeming English prioritization of many dual-language texts, and it offers special 
treats in both versions that mean readers—and, especially, readers-aloud—who skip 
one language will miss half the show. For instance, some Spanish poems offer allit-
eration where the English poem plays with rhyme and vice versa, and some elegant 
or capering turns appear only in one language (the Spanish text for “Whale” offers 
the delicious and inimitable wordplay of “la ballena bailarina”—the dancing whale). 
The gouache illustrations wittily weave relevant words in English and 
Spanish into the landscape and even the animals, often creating a poem all their 
own—the turtle’s patterned shell reads “Go,” “Glow,” “Glisten,” “Listen” on the 
English verso and “Goce,” “Gema,” “Lustra,” “Llena” on the Spanish recto. Com-
534 • the Bulletin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
positions dance delicately between the ornate (the curly-tailed, curly-patterned 
cats), the spare (the huge strawberry flanked by a fly on each side), and the fluid 
(a spume of linear dots impels the whales forward), while there’s definite progress 
toward the nocturnal in the last few poems, ending with the bedtime poem of “Fish.” 
This is a celebration in text and art of words, of language, and of the 
spaces between and their possibilities. Appropriately enough, the book itself is also 
filled with possibilities—for reading aloud, for performing, for general language 
arts use—and kids will savor it however they meet it. A detailed author/illustrator’s 
note explains her process. (See p. 560 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Alcott, JessicA Even When You Lie to Me. Crown, 2015 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39117-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39116-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39118-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Senior year looks to be just more awkward introversion and plaid shirts for Charlie 
(short for Charlotte), much to her mother’s dismay. The new English teacher, Mr. 
Drummond, changes all that when Charlie develops a tremendous crush on the 
bantering and charismatic instructor. Most of her class is taken with him too (“He 
flirts with everybody,” notes Charlie’s perceptive classmate Asha), but Charlie feels 
his attentiveness particularly keenly. As her year progresses and she works with Mr. 
Drummond on the newspaper as well as seeing him in class, her crush mounts and 
she begins to see indications that his interest in her may go beyond the teacherly. 
Alcott skillfully layers the facets of Charlie’s life, such as the dispiriting pressure from 
her mother, new distance from her beloved father, and her increasingly sexualized 
milieu to give extra weight to her yearning for a man who finds her delightful. 
Charlie’s negotiation with sexuality is a key aspect of the novel, from her catching her 
parents in flagrante delicto to her new skills in masturbation; it’s unsurprising that 
this leads her finally to an emotional and steamy encounter with Mr. Drummond. 
The book offers solid signs that Mr. Drummond isn’t perfect, and he realistically 
doesn’t so much reciprocate Charlie’s feelings as find her devotion exciting and 
flattering. Charlie’s infatuated narration (which is ringingly, heatedly authentic) 
makes it possible to ignore Drummond’s flaws and read the story as a compelling 
July/August 2015 • 535
star-crossed romance, but savvier readers will see that there’s a complex story about 
all kinds of need—and all kinds of mistakes—behind it.  DS
AlifirenkA, cAitlin I Will Always Write Back: How One Letter Changed Two Lives; 
by Caitlin Alifirenka and Martin Ganda with Liz Welch. Little, 2015 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24131-1 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24134-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
A “typical twelve-year-old American girl,” Caitlin Stoicsitz began her correspondence 
with fourteen-year-old Martin Ganda as a result of a school assignment. Her letters 
were full of middle-school melodrama, while gifted student Martin was determined 
to find his way out of the slums of Zimbabwe by pursuing his education. Though 
Caitlin initially knew very little of Martin’s abject poverty, she eventually began 
sending him money and soon enlisted the help of her mother in finding ways to 
fund his school tuition and to send care packages of clothes and shoes. The Stoic-
sitzes’ generosity did not stop there: upon learning of Martin’s ambitions to attend 
university in the States, Caitlin’s mother worked tirelessly to find him a full scholar-
ship to Villanova, and the book closes with pictures of Martin and Wallace, another 
boy from his school whom the Stoicsitz family took under their wing, at Caitlin’s 
wedding, as well as an epilogue where Martin describes his career success. While 
this is certainly an inspirational story with which to open a unit on cross-cultural 
communication, Caitlin’s claims to be “typical” are somewhat strained given her 
multiple international vacations with her family, and there’s a strong sentimental 
overlay to the account. However, Martin’s story is eye-opening to say the least, and 
the suspense generated by Caitlin’s mother’s repeated and often frustrated attempts 
to secure funding reads like well-wrought fiction. Martin seems so earnest and well 
intentioned that it is impossible not to root for his success; readers may be encour-
aged to find their own Martin to support.  KC 
BArnett, MAc The Skunk; illus. by Patrick McDonnell. Roaring Brook, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-966-5 $17.99  
R* Gr. 2-4
Our protagonist, dapper in tails and a radiant red bow tie, is heading out for the 
evening when he finds a skunk following him. The narrator attempts to elude the 
skunk, but when he takes a taxi, “the skunk took the next cab,” and when he makes 
it to the opera house, the skunk turns up and sits on a lady’s head. Finally Mr. 
Opera-goer flees through the sewers to a different part of the city, where he builds 
a new existence. However, his fear of the skunk’s reappearance in his life leads him 
to track the animal down—and follow him. The pokerfaced approach to absurdity 
(“The skunk did not answer. The skunk was a skunk”) recalls practitioners of the 
style from Thurber to Yorinks, and the short sentences, restrained vocabulary, and 
occasional repetition add to the hilarity as well as easing the way for readers. For 
audiences willing to sit through a longer text and ready to grasp the irony of the 
ending, though, this could also make a daffy yet stylish readaloud with surprising 
performance possibilities. There’s a genial mid-century air to design and art by 
Caldecott Honor winner McDonnell: cartoonishly drawn black and white figures 
float against airy matte backgrounds, with occasional touches of digital color (the 
skunk has a Rudolphian red nose to match the protagonist’s red tie) suggesting 
536 • the Bulletin
two-color illustrations but sneaking a few extra hues in. Kids looking for something 
a little drier and more sophisticated to liven up their early reading will be ready to 
follow along with skunk and man. Note the witty endpapers, whose streamlined 
design salutes the skunk in front (black and white stripes) and the man in back 
(black and white stripes with red bow tie).  DS
BAskin, norA rAleigh Ruby on the Outside. Simon, 2015 163p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8503-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8505-1 $10.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Ruby was five years old when her mother went to prison, and the gaps in her memory 
of that turbulent time have been something of a blessing. She has been raised and 
loved by Mom’s older sister, Barbara, whom Ruby has nicknamed Matoo (Mom, 
too), and the condo complex in which they live is close enough for Ruby to visit her 
mother on a regular basis. Now Ruby is a rising middle-schooler with a chance to 
make her first real friend, Margalit, who shares her enthusiasm for everything from 
swimming pool cannonballs, to mac and cheese, to jointly making illustrated stories. 
The possibility of friendship ignites changes in Ruby’s perspective on her mother 
and her crime, and Ruby now wants more information—about Mom’s involvement 
in the shooting that led to her arrest; about Nick, Mom’s ex-husband, who pulled 
the trigger but managed to plea bargain a lighter sentence. Most of all, Ruby wants 
an answer to the question she’s most afraid to ask—was the store clerk who lost his 
life in the shooting Margalit’s older brother? Ruby is entering adolescence, and with 
that maturity comes an inevitable shake-up in the mother-daughter relationship. 
She has plenty of anger to direct at Mom for ruining her opportunity for a normal 
life, and readers will empathize with her reticence to gamble on a new friend’s 
understanding and compassion. The plot thread regarding the victim’s identity 
ramps up the angst, offering middle-graders a tantalizing taste of the melodrama 
that awaits them around the corner in YA fiction.  EB
BAusuM, Ann Stonewall: Breaking Out in the Fight for Gay Rights. Viking, 
2015 [128p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-670-01679-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Noted author Bausum undertakes a tricky task here: to inform readers who know 
little or nothing of the 1969 Stonewall Riots about this landmark episode in civil 
rights history, while demythologizing the event for readers who regard Stonewall 
as the beginning of the gay rights movement. Teens unfamiliar with Stonewall get 
a rousing re-creation of the raid that, most improbably for the 1960s, saw bottle-
throwing young rebels get the better of an undermanned police operation, hobbled 
by poor communication and ignorance of the turf they were sent to reclaim. For 
better-informed teens, Bausum sets the confrontation between police and gay bar 
patrons into the context of an already established movement, albeit one struggling 
for a broader audience and committed activists, and the general atmosphere of youth 
anger toward political and military authority that marked the Vietnam Era. She 
also reminds those readers inclined to enshrine Stonewall as a place of pilgrimage 
that it was, in fact, a Mafia-run dump that existed on police payoffs and unloaded 
watered-down, illegal liquor on gay patrons who had few alternative venues in 
which to meet, much less dance and socialize with some degree of freedom. After 
July/August 2015 • 537
the exciting play-by-play details of the sweltering night of rioting, more subdued 
chapters skim topics such as the AIDS epidemic and the emergence of the mar-
riage equality issue, though readers will want to look elsewhere for more in-depth 
treatment of those subjects. Nonetheless, this illustrated history lifts Stonewall 
from its customary footnote or chapter status into the YA book-length treatment 
it deserves. Source notes and a bibliography are included; the bound book will 
contain an index.  EB
BluMenthAl, kAren Tommy: The Gun That Changed America. Roaring Brook, 
2015 [240p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-62672-084-8 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-10
Although the rapid-fire Gatling gun was introduced in the Civil War, the United 
States military resisted its widespread use on the battlefield: effective, yes, but heavy 
and somehow not gentlemanly enough for the conventions of war at the time. 
Eventually, though, a lieutenant and an ordnance officer, John Henry Parker and 
John Thompson, recognized rapid-fire weaponry as the wave of the future and pro-
moted the Gatling Gun during the Spanish American War. Still, the military balked, 
and the World War I armistice came and went without significant machine-gun 
development. Thompson left the military to start his own development company, 
Auto-Ordnance, to perfect a lighter weight, single-operator gun—a weapon that 
would become known as the Thompson Submachine Gun, or Tommy gun. In 
the early 1920s many landed, amid scandal, in the hands of the Irish Republican 
Army; by the mid 1920s, Tommy became the weapon of choice for Chicago gang-
sters. Auto-Ordnance’s infamy grew as its carefully cultivated markets expanded to 
Depression-era crime-spree criminals and corporations threatened by labor unrest. 
In this fascinating slice of American social history, Blumenthal traces not only the 
development of the gun itself but also the struggles between pro- and anti-gun 
control advocates, whose concerns had previously been limited to regulation of 
concealed weapons. Those who pay even passing interest to the news will find 
early iterations of current issues throughout Tommy gun’s story: financiers’ narrow 
interests in sales; gun sales to foreign governments; gun smuggling to paramilitary 
organizations; licensing and registration policies; evolving interpretations of the 
Second Amendment. Chapter notes and a thematic bibliography will assist research-
ers, but expect that many teens will read this simply as a great story well told.  EB
BoMBAck, MArk Mapmaker; by Mark Bomback and Galaxy Craze. Soho Teen, 
2015 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61695-347-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61695-350-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Tanya is still reeling from the disappearance of her father, lost on a mapping expe-
dition that he wasn’t even meant to be on. She tries (and mostly fails) to get along 
with her stepmother, but she is hoping that she will get closure or at least a worthy 
distraction from her internship at MapOut, the company that her dad created with 
Tanya’s godfather. One of the first surprises is the appearance of Connor, an old crush 
who now seems to reciprocate Tanya’s feelings. The next surprise is what they find 
when they do some password hacking of her dad’s old equipment: indications of 
538 • the Bulletin
sketchy experiments going on behind the scenes of the high-tech company. Before 
they even fully grasp the implications of what they find, Connor disappears, Tanya 
is kidnapped, and her father resurfaces, though he has been drugged or tortured into 
being a shell of his former self. The pervasive nature of surveillance in this novel is 
haunting and compelling—Tanya repeatedly thinks she is successfully hiding only 
to discover that there is really no such thing as off the grid. Unfortunately, there 
are a lot of twists, and the complete lack of resolution is frustrating; indeed, not all 
of the engines of the plot, let alone their conclusions, are revealed by the end. In 
addition, the pace is uneven and the book takes a long time to really get cooking. 
Even so, tech-inspired readers will love the idea of MapOut, and they’ll appreciate 
the point that the impact of new technology depends on who’s wielding it.  AS
Britt, PAige The Lost Track of Time; illus. by Lee White. Scholastic, 
2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-53812-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-53814-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Every minute of preteen Penelope’s life is scheduled, even on summer vacation. 
Between piano practice, SAT vocab drills, doctors’ appointments, summer read-
ing, and chores, she has to steal moments before breakfast to get all her story 
ideas on paper (and then under her bed, alongside all other items of whimsy her 
mother wouldn’t want to see). The only person in her overly structured life who 
embraces downtime is Miss Maddie, her salt-of-the-earth neighbor who knows 
the importance of doing nothing. It is during a brief escape to Miss Maddie’s that 
Penelope finds herself gazing at a blank spot in her calendar—a stare that brings 
her into the Realm of Possibility, a land where once anything could happen, but 
now overlord Chronos has made the effective keeping and efficient usage of time 
paramount. With her newfound friend Dill as a guide, Penelope sets out to find 
the Great Moodler, whose ability to muse and ponder makes her the only person 
able to defeat Chronos. Along the way, Penelope encounters all manner of punnily 
named beings and places, from the Wild Bore to the Fancies (who fly when tickled) 
in this twenty-first-century answer to The Phantom Tollbooth. The book is clever in 
its personified concepts and relevant in its championing of the value of unscheduled 
time. However, its languid pacing and borderline burdensome detail bog down the 
whimsy, and, though the lesson may elicit knowing nods, its heavy-handedness 
makes it more a musing on modern childhood for wordplay-loving adults than 
for actual child readers. White’s jaunty drawings lighten the self-conscious text, 
and there are laughs to be had for those precocious, determined readers who enjoy 
puns and allusions.  AA
BrockenBrough, MArthA The Game of Love and Death. Levine/Scholastic, 
2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-66834-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-66835-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 8-10
Henry Bishop and Flora Saudade couldn’t be more different: Henry’s a white boy 
living in wealth and privilege even during the Great Depression, and Flora is an 
African-American girl who dreams of being the next Bessie Coleman but who must 
July/August 2015 • 539
work in jazz clubs at night to make ends meet. They are both pawns, however, in 
a game that has been played over and over again throughout the centuries by Love 
and Death. If Love can bring Flora and Henry together, despite their differences 
and the cultural restrictions of the times, then Love wins and the pair lives happily 
ever after; if not, Death triumphs and gets to claim Flora’s life—as she has claimed 
Cleopatra, Helen, Juliet and others before because Death always wins. Why, then, 
does Love play at all? There lies the thematic underpinning of the entire book, and 
the question is played out in the exquisite depiction of Henry and Flora’s blossom-
ing relationship and in the earnest, unfettered conversations between Love and 
Death. Though both immortal beings have developed a certain amount of cynicism 
about the human race, their discussions, stripped bare of any sentiment, address 
an eternal question: if “death is the only true ending” for mortals, then what does 
human life mean? If Brockenbrough is direct in her depiction of Death and Love, 
she more subtly portrays the ways in which love and loss play out in Henry and 
Flora’s lives, threading their stories with the financial uncertainty of the times, 
the violence abroad in the lead up to World War II, and the hostility in the U.S. 
among the races. Romance fans will find plenty to swoon over here, while aspiring 
philosophers will find just as much to ponder.  KQG 
Bunting, eve Yard Sale; illus. by Lauren Castillo. Candlewick, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6542-5 $15.99  
R 5-8 yrs
There may be cheerful balloons flying, but that doesn’t mean Callie is happy about 
her family’s yard sale, which is selling off the belongings that won’t fit in their new 
small apartment. Callie grieves when her bedstead goes and rages when somebody 
buys her bike; it’s all too much when a customer jokes about Callie herself being for 
sale, and she tearfully begs reassurance from her father than she’s not being gotten 
rid of too. The story has an appropriately melancholy note as Callie watches nearly 
everything that had been part of her life hauled away and she has to say her goodbyes 
to her best friend and neighbor, Sara. It’s also clear that this is a tough move for 
everybody, not just Callie (“It’s something to do with money,” Callie struggles to 
explain to Sara). The switch to cheerful optimism at the end is less credible than 
the story’s previous somberness, but it makes for a reassuring evolution. The ink 
and watercolor art relies on thick, even linework that suggests colored pencil in its 
regular granularity; the softer brown of most of the outlining gentles the impact 
of the scenes and coordinates effectively with the olive-toned green that dominates 
in most spreads. The result is a quietly domestic, visually accessible style that of-
fers a feeling of stability, which helps cushion the sadder implications of the story. 
It’s useful to have a story where moving may be no adventure for anybody in the 
family, but where things will still be okay.  DS 
cABot, Meg From the Notebooks of a Middle School Princess; written and illus. by 
Meg Cabot. Feiwel, 2015 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-06602-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-06603-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
This Princess Diaries spinoff aimed at a younger crowd reveals that Mia Thermopolis 
was not the only missing princess of Genovia. Just as twelve-year-old Olivia Grace 
Clarisse Mignonette Harrison is about to receive the beatdown of a lifetime from 
540 • the Bulletin
bully Annabelle Jenkins, a limo pulls up in front of their middle school and out 
steps the beautiful and famous Princess Mia. The crowd parts (well, after demanding 
some selfies) and Mia whisks Olivia away, informing the young girl that she is Mia’s 
half sister and the daughter of the prince of Genovia. At first, Olivia is stunned but 
delighted—who wouldn’t want to be a princess?—but as Mia discovered before 
her, becoming royalty is not all that easy. The press is hounding Olivia, asking if 
the prince abandoned her because she is black (he didn’t; it was her now-deceased 
mother who requested that she have a non-royal childhood), her aunt and uncle 
who raised her are demanding that she return home (mainly so they can keep get-
ting the checks the prince was sending to them for Olivia’s care), and Annabelle 
Jenkins’ lawyer father is threatening to sue after Annabelle has a run-in with Olivia’s 
new bodyguards. Of course, this is Cabot and the Princess Diaries, so everything 
ends with a happily ever after and some major wish fulfillment (including a very 
cute poodle for pet-deprived Olivia), though fans of the earlier series may find this 
too familiar of a retread. Still, Olivia has an amusing and self-deprecating wit that 
makes the narration breezy and accessible, and Cabot’s black and white illustrations 
liven up the tale. Youngsters who aspire to be the next Kate Middleton will find 
this enchanting and perhaps instructional.  KQG 
cAMeron, shAron Rook. Scholastic, 2015 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-67599-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-67600-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Heads are rolling in the center of Paris, mobs riot in the streets, and a madman at 
the helm of the government demands that more and more people be put to the 
“Razor.” No, this is not Robespierre’s Reign of Terror but a post-apocalyptic version 
of France where austerity rules, technology is forbidden, and innocents are daily 
put to death—unless they are lucky enough to be rescued by “The Red Rook,” a 
shadowy figure who leaves a red-tipped feather as calling card. No one would guess 
that sixteen-year-old socialite Sophia Bellamy is the people’s savior, certainly not 
her newly betrothed, the vain and rather flighty René Hasard. Sophia’s not the only 
one with secrets, though, and René turns out to be a rather useful (and handsome) 
accomplice when LeBlanc, the ringleader of the executions, arrests Sophia’s brother 
and the Red Rook is forced to make her most daring rescue yet. Cameron crafts 
a brilliant homage to The Scarlet Pimpernel yet also manages to make her telling 
unique, particularly in her careful construction of a world where relics of the “An-
cients,” like plastic earrings and functioning clocks, are looked upon with wonder 
and/or suspicion. Sophia is veritable whirlwind of a girl, armed with either a sharp 
sword or cutting remark depending on the situation, and the rakish René makes 
a perfect romantic sparring partner. LeBlanc is disturbing and formidable as the 
villain, though the secondary cast of Sophia’s benevolent assistants and LeBlanc’s 
henchmen gets a bit unwieldy. Each of them, however, has a part to play in the 
final chapters, and the many twists, turns, betrayals, and lucky breaks will keep 
readers breathless until the very end.  KQG
July/August 2015 • 541
christensen, Bonnie Elvis: The Story of the Rock and Roll King; written and illus. 
by Bonnie Christensen. Ottaviano/Holt, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9447-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
In the intimate, affectionate voice of a neighbor or acquaintance who might have 
“known him when,” Christensen traces the early years of Elvis Presley through the 
release of “That’s All Right,” the breakout hit for Sun Records that launched his 
career. Before the truck-driving teenager first hit the Memphis stage with his signa-
ture leg shaking (a ruse to hide his nervousness?) and his startling fusion of gospel, 
country, and Delta blues, he was a “shy, quiet, dreamy boy, that Elvis./ Tied to his 
mama’s apron strings./ No brothers, no sisters, just Elvis./ His little family kept to 
themselves,/ poor as sin, barely getting by.” Christensen skillfully complements the 
images of the adult Elvis that children may have already encountered with a portrait 
of a quiet youngster remarkable only for persistence in seeking an audience for his 
music: “Elvis stopped by week after week./ ‘Need a singer?’/ Week after week./ the 
answer was ‘No.’/ Month after month—‘No.’” Mixed-media artwork, an evocative 
collage of painting and retouched photographs, transports viewers from trackside 
wooden cottages in East Tupelo, Mississippi, along the river winding through 
Memphis, and into a cramped recording booth at Sun Records, where Elvis slaps 
his forehead in frustration. A page turn later, the double-page spread shifts to verti-
cal orientation as he finally belts out the music he’s been reaching for and viewers 
get their first true glimpse of the rising star. An author’s note, a timeline of Elvis’s 
career, and a brief list of sources are included.  EB
constAntine, roBin The Secrets of Attraction. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 
2015. 380p
ISBN 978-0-06-227951-4 $17.99 
 R Gr. 9-12
Madison isn’t in love with Zach, but she enjoys kissing him, and that’s enough for 
her. Jesse is reeling from the heartbreak of having his girlfriend, Hannah, cheat on 
him with his band’s drummer; not only did she break his heart, she broke up the 
band. Spurred by the news that the traitorous drummer has joined a rival band, Jesse 
rouses himself to find a new one, who happens to be the boyfriend of Madison’s best 
friend. The fact that Madison, who frequents the coffee shop where Jesse works, 
will likely come to their gigs is an unexpected perk. Madison and Jesse’s narrations 
alternate, and while Madison’s voice is fairly ordinary as far as first-person YA girls 
go, Jesse’s creates a character who is by turns stubborn, broody, angry, self-aware, 
ironic, and emotionally wide open—in other words, everything a girl could ask 
for. When Madison’s life becomes complicated by an unexpected revelation from 
her mother, some of the residual effects of the distrust of not knowing her father 
threaten to interfere with her budding relationship with Jesse, but the patience of 
good friends keeps her on track. Their inevitable romance develops slowly despite 
a zing of physical attraction, as it takes time for Jesse to let go of the possibility 
of Hannah and for Madison to walk away from the safety of the known quantity 
that is Zach. Both Hannah and Zach are credible characters in their own right; 
Hannah is believably fickle, looking for a guy who puts her before his music, and 
Zach legitimately confuses Madison’s physical desire for him with love. Constantine 
has a keen ear for witty teen banter and good insight into the deeply felt pain of 
young heartbreak.  KC 
542 • the Bulletin
Defelice, cynthiA Fort. Farrar, 2015 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-374-32427-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-5
Wyatt and Augie are summer friends, and this year they slip once again into a 
comfortable routine of dispatching their chores and family obligations in order to 
spend every possible moment hanging out and doing whatever comes to mind. 
With summer hours ticking away, the push is on to build that fort they’ve been 
planning. There’s a perfect spot in the woods behind the junkyard where Augie’s 
great uncle, “Unk,” hangs out with his own best buddy, Al. There are generous 
contributions of lumber, paint, metal sheeting, and homemade cookies from the 
relatives. Best of all, there’s permission from both families for the eleven-year-olds 
to sleep overnight in the fort, hunting for squirrel, fishing, and supplementing their 
catch with whatever they can plunder from their household pantries. Unfortunately, 
there is also a pair of local bullies, J. R. and Morrie, who have been causing plenty 
of trouble and laying the blame on Gerard, a slow-witted and friendless sixteen-
year-old. Now they turn their unwelcome attention to Wyatt and Augie, who team 
up with Gerard for an overnight at the fort, carefully planned to lure the bullies 
into ingenious booby traps for a well-deserved comeuppance. Middle-grade kids 
chafing under parental restraint and supervised playdates will latch right on to this 
affable exercise in wish fulfillment. Wyatt and Augie aren’t quite independent, but 
they are resourceful; they aren’t do-gooders, but they do right by Gerard; they aren’t 
fearless, but they’re brave enough to confront the bullies and take their licks. Mostly, 
they are tight pals, and readers will delight at being let in on their friendship.  EB
DerBy, sAlly Sunday Shopping; illus. by Shadra Strickland. Lee & Low, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-60060-438-6 $17.95  
R 5-8 yrs
Every Sunday night, the narrator, Evie, and her grandmother indulge in their favorite 
ritual: they curl up together in Grandma’s bed and pretend-shop the circulars in the 
Sunday paper. Evie cuts out ads for ham, a new sofa and TV, some new clothes, and 
other delights, paying with money from her purse (“Our shopping dollars are easy 
to tell apart because they’re all different colors”). Evie finishes by secretly “buying” 
her grandmother a cutout floral bouquet, which she leaves on her grandmother’s 
nightstand to wake to in the morning. The scenario is inviting: Evie and her 
grandmother have a close and comradely relationship, and the game is a delicious 
combination of a shared pretend and a cut-and-collect craft. Strickland’s mixed-
media art effectively differentiates real from pretend; reality offers cozily domestic 
views in a softly edged circle, with African-American Evie and her grandmother 
sprawled comfortably in bed as the cat wanders through the proceedings. Pretend, 
on the other hand, stretches out across the pages in full-bleed and electric scenes 
of plenty, with a cornucopia of layered collage elements freely playing with scale 
in cheerfully surreal and energetic scenes. The illustrations hint that Evie’s with 
Grandma because Mom’s away on military service, but even kids with everybody 
at home will enjoy the imaginative game and the idea of one-on-one closeness with 
a beloved grandparent.  DS
July/August 2015 • 543
Dessen, sArAh Saint Anything. Viking, 2015 417p
ISBN 978-0-451-47470-4 $19.99 
 Ad Gr. 7-10
Sydney is the good sibling, leaving the screwing up to her older brother, Peyton, 
whoes drunk-driving accident leaves a fifteen-year-old boy paralyzed. A devastated 
Sydney transfers from private to public school, where she is embraced by a group of 
new friends, including a pair of siblings from the Chatham family, who are several 
steps below her parents’ income bracket. The various Chathams meet Sydney’s 
every relationship and personal growth need: Layla becomes her unflappable, 
nonjudgmental best friend; Mac fills the role of protective, sensitive boyfriend; 
and their mother, who has MS, becomes her surrogate mom, dispensing wisdom 
and advice to help Sydney move past her anger and guilt. Each secondary charac-
ter appears carefully designed to be a prop in Sydney’s drama, and the clear class 
binary between the dysfunctional rich and the deserving poor is heavy-handed to 
say the least. However, Dessen’s fans are sure to appreciate the successful formula 
she has developed of a girl coming into a strong sense of self through mother/
daughter conflict, the support of a spunky female friend, and above all, finding 
the right guy.  KC 
Downes, PAtrick Fell of Dark. Philomel, 2015 191p
ISBN 978-0-399-17290-8 $17.99 
 R Gr. 9-12
Two boys have been savaged by separate griefs: Erik lost his father to a drunk driver 
just before he turned five and suffered a sexual assault at the hands of a stranger 
shortly thereafter. Thorn’s older sister drowned trying to rescue young Thorn when 
he drifted too far from shore, and his parents became physically abusive in their 
grief. Nine years later both boys struggle to discover their purpose in life; Erik gives 
up speaking altogether and imagines he is bleeding from stigmata, and Thorn’s 
broken mind has split itself into pieces—a Protector who stands between him and 
other people, the Sawmen who punish him from within, the Guardians who jeer 
at him while the Sawmen rip him apart, and the Architect, who directs them all 
and makes Thorn do cruel, self-destructive things. Erik works out his philosophy 
of suffering and redemption in separately titled, lyrical vignettes that read like prose 
poems; Thorn’s narratives, while artful in a different way, are more disturbing as 
they chart his spiral toward madness and a potentially horrific act that brings the 
boys together. Reality skims in, out, and across both boys’ stories, providing just 
enough of an event structure for readers to latch on to while staying firmly within 
each boy’s particular way of seeing or, perhaps more precisely, feeling a world that 
has proven too painfully dissatisfying for them to look at head-on. Readers who 
are up for a literary challenge will find this dual narrative provocative, beautiful, 
and deeply sad.  KC
fryDenBorg, kAy Chocolate: Sweet Science and Dark Secrets of the World’s Favorite 
Treat. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-544-17566-2 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-9
Modern and ancient history; botany, chemistry, ecology, and the physiology of 
taste; invention, commerce, and labor economics—actual samples are (sadly) the 
notably missing element in this multi-faceted overview of cacao, cocoa, and their 
marvelous manifestation, chocolate candy. Wide-ranging issues covered here resist 
544 • the Bulletin
consistent organization, though, so readers follow Frydenborg along a twisting path 
through the near past (e.g., the Milton Hershey generation) and the remote past 
(cacao cultivation predating the Maya); through the uses of cocoa as nutritious food, 
medicine, and sinful (literally, to some) snack; to causes of cacao’s endangerment, 
degradation, and hope for a brighter agri-future. Additionally, offhand references are 
surprisingly inaccurate. Many of her side trips are worthwhile, though—the topics 
of the slave trade and continuing exploitative labor practices; differences among 
South American, Central American, and African products; how to accommodate 
both taste and ethics when selecting chocolate candy. Adding to the organizational 
complexity, however, is the illustration layout, a hodgepodge of black and white in-
text illustrations and a tipped-in section of color plates. Supplemental information 
nonetheless is abundant and valuable, from the chocolate timeline and bibliography 
to the extensive, densely annotated list of chocolate related websites.  EB
funke, corneliA The Pirate Pig; tr. from the German by Oliver Latsch; illus. by 
Kerstin Meyer. Random House, 2015 55p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37546-7 $12.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37544-3 $9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37545-0 $5.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37547-4 $9.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Stout Sam and his deckhand, Pip, transport cargo to tropical Butterfly Island and 
also share a hut there. When a barrel containing a pig (wearing a skull and crossbones 
necklace) washes ashore, they adopt her, dubbing her “Julie.” Julie loves to ride in the 
boat with Sam and Pip, and it isn’t long before Sam and Pip identify Julie’s hidden 
talent—sniffing out pirate treasure in the sea. (Pirates, it seems, sometimes train 
pigs in this endeavor and if they fail to find enough gold, the scurvy dogs throw the 
porkers overboard in a barrel.) Pip and Sam soon have plenty of treasure, thanks 
to Julie, but word gets back to her previous owner, the nefarious Barracuda Bill, 
who sends his minions to pig-nap Julie. There are no chapter breaks in this short 
novel (previously published in Germany in 1999), but the book’s brevity, plethora 
of lively, full-color illustrations, and amusing situations will draw in reluctant 
middle-grade readers. While the rescue at the ending is a little anticlimactic, the 
trio’s happy escape from harm is still satisfying, and animal-loving kids will find 
Julie a lovable addition to this pirate yarn. Stubble-face Stout Sam (who lives up 
to his name) is visually balanced by the leaner, stocking-capped Pip, and plump, 
pink, perpetually startled Julie is endearing as well. Younger Funke fans, as well as 
pirate and pig enthusiasts, will want to check out this endeavor.  JH
gAlveston, louise In Todd We Trust. Razorbill, 2015 247p
ISBN 978-1-59514-679-3 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6
In this sequel to By the Grace of Todd (BCCB 2/14), the wee Toddlians are still 
worshiping their god, twelve-year-old Todd. These tiny beings were spontaneously 
spawned out of Todd’s dirty clothes, and they are now a fully realized society, 
depending on Todd for food, water, and other comforts. Todd, unfortunately, is 
a terrible god—he is forgetful, selfish, and short-sighted. The suffering Toddlians 
try to guess what they might have done wrong, some plotting defection to a better 
god while others want to focus their energies on making things right with their 
July/August 2015 • 545
current one. Todd’s not trying to be horrible, though; he’s just in middle school 
and being bullied and juggling too many things to remember details—like the 
fact that a moldy apple left out contains a worm that could kill the Toddlians. 
Even with his negligence, Todd’s pretty sympathetic since he’s trying mightily to 
do the right things. The real stars, however, are the Toddlians, who learned most 
of life from television and therefore lead lives filled with random accents, dramatic 
observations about the world, and unrealistic understandings. Their cleverness in 
the face of neglect and their devotion to the boy on whose dirt they literally feed 
is genuinely moving, and readers will be fervently hoping for a happy end for this 
little civilization.  AS
gArton, sAM Otter in Space; written and illus. by Sam Garton. Balzer + Bray/
HarperCollins, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-224776-6 $16.99  
R 4-7 yrs
In this second adventure for Otter and her comically passive companion Teddy, their 
human, Otter Keeper, has taken them on a museum outing and inspired Otter with 
a new ambition—to go to the moon and retrieve a moon rock, since Otto Keeper 
did not let her buy one at the museum gift store. Otter devises a cardboard-box 
spacesuit, puts Teddy through anti-gravity training in the dryer, appoints Giraffe to 
“Mishun Control,” launches their makeshift spacecraft down the slide, and survives 
a bumpy moon landing in Otter Keeper’s garden, where she digs up a rock at least 
half her size. The moon rock turns out to be surprisingly good company, perched 
on a pillow for a board game or decked out in pirate regalia for make-believe. Otter 
Keeper comes home, however, and the fun’s over: “He was quite upset and said that 
the moon rock had to go back to where it came from. This was a silly idea—we 
obviously couldn’t get it back to the moon, because our space ship was broken!” It 
all ends happily with a compromise, bedtime, and a new plan to dig up a dinosaur 
tomorrow. Otter’s world looks more like suburbia than the Hundred Acre Wood, 
but there’s a Pooh-like quality to the existential ground Otter occupies between toy 
and sentient creature. Vividly colored digital art has a subtle snarkiness that works 
well with Otter’s wry narration. This title is bound to please established fans and 
to cultivate some new ones.  EB
gilBert, kelly loy Conviction. Hyperion, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-9738-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
“You’ve always been the only one who understood me,” says Braden’s father to his 
son, and Braden has tried hard to live up to the expectations of his dad, who’s a 
conservative radio talk-show host. To that end, Braden develops his killer instinct 
as a pitcher, planning to turn pro after high school graduation; he also avoids 
bringing up his mother (publicly referred to as dead, but who really left the family 
when Braden was a baby) and his older brother, Trey, whose savage battles with 
their father resulted in Trey’s leaving town years ago. Now Braden’s father is in jail, 
awaiting trial for deliberately running over a police officer; Trey is back in Braden’s 
house to care for Braden; and Braden is slowly reassessing his life with his father as 
he nervously faces testifying to exonerate him—or, if he breaks free of his father’s 
hold, to incriminate him. Braden’s narration is a plausible blend of intensity and 
uncertainty, and flashbacks convincingly depict him as a child who has accepted 
546 • the Bulletin
his father’s rages, abuse, and judgment as behaviors justified by such a flawed son. 
Trey’s revelation that his coming out to their father is what precipitated his departure 
may be predicted by some readers, but there are still twists and surprises left in the 
story, and the victory might not be where readers expect. Carl Deuker fans will 
appreciate the book’s mix of on-field and off-field drama, but it could also make a 
thought-provoking partner to Myers’ Monster (BCCB 5/99).  DS
golio, gAry Bird & Diz; illus. by Ed Young. Candlewick, 2015 26p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6660-6 $19.99  
R 5-8 yrs 
John “Dizzy” Gillespie and Charlie “Bird” Parker have both garnered picture-book 
attention, but here Golio attempts to convey how the be bop masters played as a 
duet—a raucous game of try-to-top-this, catch-me-if-you-can. “Salt Peanuts” is 
ostensibly the featured piece, but in the obvious absence of a soundtrack, method 
becomes the book’s focus: “Two hearts—one heartbeat./ You can’t even tell whose 
notes are whose!/ But then Diz’s cheeks swell up, like a frog with glasses./ He points 
his trumpet and shoots out fireworks./ Tag, Bird—you’re it.” While the spare text 
tracks the back-and-forth of the players, Young’s freewheeling illustrations sprawl 
across the spreads in an uninterrupted flow that suggests the continuous waterfall 
of sound, while scorching colors splashed against dashes of black line give shape 
to faces and instruments. It’s the bookmaking itself that steals this show, though, 
as accordion-folded pages are “read” left to right and then flipped to reverse at the 
halfway mark. Alternatively, the pages can be stretched out into a double-sided 
frieze, and the entire production is held intact with a magnetized clasp on the 
cover. Though it doesn’t quite match Jonah Winter’s Dizzy (BCCB 11/06) or Chris 
Raschka’s Charlie Parker Played Be Bop (BCCB 12/92), an afterword offers a bit of 
background on bebop and encourages children to search online for performance 
clips and to “pick up your crayons and draw!” This could indeed be an inspiring 
impetus for an artistic enterprise, but it’s also an informative introduction to two 
jazz greats.  EB
hAnnigAn, kAte The Detective’s Assistant. Little, 2015 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-40351-1 $17.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-40350-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 4-6
Thrust unceremoniously upon her only surviving relative in mid nineteenth-century 
Chicago, thirteen-year old Cornelia tries hard to prove her worthiness to Aunt Kitty, 
who carries a grudge against the girl because Cornelia’s father shot her husband, 
his own brother. Still, despite the tension between them, Kitty—based on the 
real-life Kate Warne, the first female detective—finds the girl’s quick thinking and 
keen observational skills helpful in solving crimes, and soon Kitty and Cornelia, 
now known as Nell, form an uneasy duo. Their tentative bond solidifies when 
Nell proves that her father’s shooting of his brother was an accident that occurred 
when the men were aiding in the efforts of the Underground Railroad, a revelation 
aided by Nell’s correspondence with her friend, Jemma, whose family escaped to 
Canada thanks to Nell’s father. Nell and Jemma reveal information through codes 
and clues that ring true to their age and give readers something to puzzle over, while 
Nell and Kitty’s detective work offers excitement and intrigue without an intense 
sense of fear or danger—a remarkable balance that keeps this novel accessible and 
July/August 2015 • 547
captivating. Sprinkled with period details (often cleverly revealed through Nell’s 
voracious appetite for daily newspapers), this novel provides a rich but approachable 
historic context for the smart, admirable Nell and the steely Aunt Kitty, both well 
drawn here under Hannigan’s sure hand. Her extensive author’s note offers readers 
information about Kate Warne and the actual cases on which the book’s adventures 
are based, including the plot to kill Abraham Lincoln. With skilled writing that 
conveys the excitement of detective work, the appeal of history, and Nell’s authentic, 
good-humored personal growth, this is one for the ages.  AA
hArrolD, A. f. The Imaginary; illus. by Emily Gravett. Bloomsbury, 
2015 221p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3811-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-670-5 $11.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Amanda doesn’t care a whit that her best friend, Rudger, is imaginary. After a car 
accident leaves her unconscious, however, the bond between Rudger and Amanda 
weakens and he begins to disappear; he takes refuge in the library, where creativity is 
available in sufficient abundance to keep forgotten imaginary friends alive. Rudger 
just wants Amanda to be safe and remember him, but the creepy Mr. Bunting and 
his own shadowy pal want to devour Rudger. The villain, clad in a Hawaiian-print 
shirt and dorky sunglasses but oozing malevolence, will likely be the most memo-
rable element of this story, especially when readers discover what he feeds on to keep 
extending his life. Gravett’s full color double-page spreads are magnificent in their 
capture of the otherworldly tone of the novel, and the smaller accent illustrations 
reflect the text, either heightening the spooky factor or reinforcing the cozy, lighter 
scenes. The buoyancy and joy in the scenes where Amanda and Rudger take a few 
ordinary objects and dream up whole worlds of entertainment may have readers 
wishing they had such a perfect friend. Many readers, however, will spot the fact 
that Rudger mostly adjusts to being what Amanda needs or demands, and while 
this doesn’t seem to weaken their bond, it does hint at an eventual return to the 
library for Rudger once he is outgrown.  AS
hAyDu, corey Ann Making Pretty. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2015 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229408-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229410-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
“Whatever Arizona and I get never lasts,” says seventeen-year-old Montana, 
referring to the fact that her and her sister’s third stepmother has recently flown 
the coop; additionally, Montana’s feeling bereft because Arizona, her ally against 
family dysfunction, has left their New York home and gone away to college. Mon-
tana’s therefore trying to look to the future, loving her cool, adult friendship with 
twenty-three-year-old acting-class buddy Karissa, and diving into a relationship 
with Bernardo, the boy she’s been flirting with from a distance. This happy new 
world spins out of orbit when it turns out Karissa is seeing Montana’s dad and is on 
track to be her new stepmother. Montana is a wonderful, believable concoction of 
Manhattan faux-sophistication (she’s drunk throughout a significant portion of the 
novel), sound understanding, and desperate little girl trying to find a mother. Her 
girl-crush on Karissa is character-appropriate, but there are early hints that Karissa 
isn’t really the bold iconoclast Montana believes; when Karissa begins to fall into 
548 • the Bulletin
line as yet another plastic-surgeried wife of Montana’s father’s, the reader may be 
less surprised than Montana. Montana’s fast-moving love affair with Bernardo is 
delicious but also troubling, as she realizes she’s emulating her father’s speed to the 
altar. Readers will vicariously thrill to the drama, but they’ll also feel for Montana’s 
struggle to find stability in the face of her ever-transforming family.  DS
hegArty, shAne The Legends Begin; illus. by James de la Rue. Harper/Harp-
erCollins, 2015 403p (Darkmouth)
ISBN 978-0-06-231125-2 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Poor Finn just wants to be a veterinarian, but instead he is genetically bound to be 
a Legend Hunter and keep the monsters from the Infested Side at bay. In Dark-
mouth, Ireland, minotaurs and other creatures keep slipping through the barrier, 
necessitating Finn’s continued training at the hands of his successful father. Over 
on the Infested Side, a plot to take over the good side of the world is underway, and 
an epic battle is brewing that may put way more than Darkmouth at risk. Finn is 
sharply funny and not afraid to look dumb, excellent traits in the protagonist of a 
new series. Even if he is about as far from perfect as one could want in a monster-
hunting world savior, he’s certainly earnest, wellintentioned, and curious enough to 
spot when things are even less right than usual (as when a close family friend turns 
out to be working for the horrifyingly wrong side). Ireland gets some nods in the 
vocabulary and setting descriptions, adding a nice bit of specificity to the fantasy 
locations. Fans who have finished or moved on from the How to Train Your Dragon 
series will find this to be a logical next step, particularly when Finn and one of the 
creatures from the other side actually find a bit of common ground. Detailed line 
drawings, mostly full page, ramp up the atmosphere.  AS
hogAn, eDwArD The Messengers. Candlewick, 2015 208p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7112-9 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-10 
Frances’ older brother, Johnny, goes on the run after hitting a policeman hard 
enough that the cop lands in a coma. A distraught Frances goes to stay with family 
in a village by the sea, where she meets Peter, to whom she is eerily drawn. Their 
real connection lies in the fact that they are messengers; they suffer blackouts after 
which they draw remarkably precise scenes of deaths that haven’t happened yet. 
They have a limited amount of time to find the victim and deliver the message, 
which, it turns out, appears to the recipient as nothing more than an abstract sketch. 
Frances thinks this is stupid—if they can’t understand the message, why deliver it 
at all? If they know exactly where someone is going to die, she reasons, why not 
prevent the death? Choosing not to deliver the message puts the messenger’s family 
in jeopardy, though, so there’s no possibility of inaction—a problem when Johnny 
shows up in one of Frances’ drawings. The premise of this British import remains 
somewhat murky, but this is still an interesting, well-written tale. The story poses 
the kind of ethical questions so popular in basic philosophy courses: if you had the 
opportunity to save a complete stranger at great risk to you or your family, would 
you do it? Since such quandaries are the stuff of teen existential exploration, this 
will please those of a philosophical as well as a supernatural turn of mind.  KC 
July/August 2015 • 549
holt, kiMBerly willis Dear Hank Williams. Ottaviano/Holt, 2015 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-8022-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
When her teacher assigns a letter-writing project, eleven-year-old Tate Ellerbee 
knows exactly who her pen pal will be: rising country star Hank Williams. She 
begins writing him regularly, telling him of her absent movie-star mother and 
photojournalist father, her pesky little brother, and the aunt and uncle with whom 
she lives, as well as sharing the secret of her own singing aspirations. Through 
these humorous letters, by turn self-important and self-effacing, Tate’s resilient, 
persistent personality emerges, as does the tragic truth underlying her chipper 
and fantastical story. Underpinning this epistolary novel is the sense that Tate is 
not completely forthcoming, a feeling palpable enough for readers to take her 
tales with a grain of salt but understated enough for the surprise ending to pack 
a wallop. The book unfolds key details slowly, subtly laying the groundwork for 
Tate’s revelations while creating a strong sense of the people and places that make 
up life in 1948 Rippling Creek, Louisiana. Tate’s bluster-as-coping-mechanism is 
believable, and although her voice verges on twee at points, her indomitable spirit 
ultimately wins the day—and hearts. While readers will find plenty to love and to 
revisit if encountering this novel on their own, the snappy pace, engaging tone, 
and epistolary format make this an engaging classroom readaloud, with the skillful 
exposition and the incorporation of historical details providing discussion fodder 
and potential curricular connection.  AA 
hoose, PhilliP The Boys Who Challenged Hitler: Knud Pedersen and the Churchill 
Club. Farrar, 2015 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30022-7 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 6-10
As Germany attacked, occupied, and brokered tenuous neutrality agreements with 
its European neighbors in World War II, teenage brothers Knud and Jens Pedersen 
of Denmark felt nothing but disdain for their country’s willingness to accommodate 
its Nazi occupiers. If adults refused to act, the teens would, and the brothers formed 
a resistance movement among a small cadre of like-minded classmates, naming it 
the RAF Club after the British flyers they idolized. Riding bicycles and striking in 
daylight, they vandalized signage and clipped communication lines while managing 
to escape identification. A family move put the boys near a strategically important 
airfield, giving them an opportunity to organize once again, this time with plenty 
of room to hold meetings, experiment with explosives, and stash stolen weapons. 
Knud and his colleagues’ escalating activities—now under the name Churchill 
Club—inevitably caught the attention of their Nazi targets; the boys were arrested, 
stood trial in a Danish court, and were sentenced to terms in the Danish state prison. 
Their exploits, now widely (if covertly) published among the Danes, were credited 
with helping to awaken the national conscience and instigate the formation of 
more resistance cells. Hoose employs a format similar to that of his award-winning 
Claudette Colvin (BCCB 2/09), serving here as Knud Pedersen’s interviewer and 
editor, and supplying segues and insets while allowing Pedersen’s voice to carry the 
narrative. What an edge-of-your-seat narrative it is—and even more compelling 
for teen readers, who are the same age as the real-life protagonists. Plenty of black 
550 • the Bulletin
and white photographs document the extent of the damage wrought by resisters. A 
selected bibliography, chapter notes, and an index are included, as well an epilogue 
recapping the later years of the RAF Club and Churchill Club members.  EB
horácˇek, Petr The Fly; written and illus. by Petr Horácˇek. Candlewick, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7480-9 $14.99  
Ad 3-6 yrs
Our titular narrator just can’t catch a break. He points out, quite reasonably, the 
irony of a housefly being unwelcome in a house and airs several complaints about 
the creatures with whom he must coexist. Those 156 laps around the ceiling light 
humans consider so annoying? That’s how he keeps fit. That trip to the fruit bowl 
for a snack that they begrudge him? He’s perfectly willing to share, but the humans 
aren’t equally gracious. Sweet-smelling cows flick him away with their tails and birds 
try to eat him; even worse, a red-headed boy pursues with deadly intent. The fly’s-
eye vantage point is deftly conveyed, particularly the topsy-turvy scene in which 
the fly addresses viewers from the ceiling, while the boy seems suspended from 
the floor. The boy’s blue flyswatter plays a big role here, its edges die-cut into the 
heavy paper stock for maximum page-turning effect (“Whoops! FLAP! Here we 
go again!”). The ending, however, is puzzling at best, problematic at worst: “So, if 
you see me, please be kind. HEY, don’t close the book. . . . HELP . . . HELP . . . 
Do you want to squash me?” This Hobson’s choice will undoubtedly delight more 
sanguinary readers—after all, you can’t leave the book open forever—but children 
who have actually come around to empathizing with the beleaguered little guy may 
be less pleased to find themselves cornered by the interactive gag. Elise Gravel’s The 
Fly (BCCB 5/14) may be the better compromise, with its affable narrator, goofy 
jokes, broader scope of information, and life-and-let-live spirit.  EB
hosler, JAy Last of the Sandwalkers; written and illus. by Jay Hosler. First 
Second, 2015 312p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-024-4 $16.99  
R Gr. 6-12
This graphic novel, a followup to Hosler’s Sandwalk Adventures, features young 
beetle Lucy. A scientist who feels certain that life exists outside her community’s 
isolated oasis, Lucy is leading an excursion of bold insect explorers into the surround-
ing desert in search of proof. Dour Professor Owen is intent on seeing the team 
fail, though, and soon sabotages the expedition, sending Lucy and her companions 
flying into far-off grasslands, where they meet a series of dangerous predators. The 
stalwart travelers must learn to escape the various traps of birds, bugs, snakes, and 
spiders if they ever hope to return home. Along the way, they also find surprising 
allies and uncover unexpected truths about their own community’s history that 
might help them defeat dastardly Professor Owen once and for all. The book is 
educational fun of the very best sort. The narrative is engaging, a series of nail-biting 
escapes designed to showcase each beetle’s biological gifts for survival and the team’s 
plucky inventiveness. The story is driven as much by character as by science, and 
team leader Lucy reads as pure adolescent, a mixture of idealism and willfulness 
that will draw readers in and have them cheering for her to succeed. The detailed, 
at times technical black and white pictures invite lingering over every page; the 
July/August 2015 • 551
novel also includes a list of references and extensive and often playful endnotes that 
flesh out entomological context. Perfect for the bug-loving reader, this is also book 
to grow into, with layers of science learning opportunities (including a handful of 
potshots at creationism) that broaden appeal and encourage multiple readings.  AM
hoyle, toM Thirteen. Holiday House, 2015 229p
ISBN 978-0-8234-3294-3 $16.95  
R Gr. 7-10
Thirteen years ago, Adam was born in London to a struggling single mother at the 
stroke of midnight of the new millennium. He was also nearly killed by a sword-
wielding madman bent on murdering all boys born at the beginning of the year as 
part of a mission from the violent cult, the People. Adopted away from his birth 
mother and now leading the life of an average thirteen-year-old, Adam knows 
nothing of his history; however, Coron, the leader of the cult, has been systemati-
cally eradicating the other boys, and now he has his eyes set on Adam. With the 
help of his friend Megan and an ex-member of the People, Adam manages to evade 
Coron and his followers (some of whom are police), but when Coron nearly kills 
Adam’s parents and kidnaps Megan, Adam must face down his enemy. This taut, 
compact thriller dives right into the action, making the danger immediately clear 
with violent, bloody scenes of Coron’s deeds. The plot zings along at a blink-and-
you’ll-miss-it pace, leaving little time for character development, but readers are 
unlikely to care as they race through the pages to see if and how Adam is going to 
survive. Plentiful dialogue and cliffhanger chapter endings make this an easy pick 
for reluctant readers.  KQG 
huBBArD, kirsten Watch the Sky. Disney Hyperion, 2015 262p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-0833-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-0880-4 $9.99  
R Gr. 5-7
Signs—signs that foretell upcoming doom, signs that can appear in the sky or in a 
random meeting with a person—are all-important in Jory’s household; his stepfather, 
Caleb, believes they mean something bad is coming and that only a few people 
will be prepared. Sixth-grader Jory wants to please Caleb, but he’s also trying to 
care for Kit, his unofficial foster sister whom the family took in several years ago, 
and he’s gradually starting to enjoy being with other kids at school after years of 
homeschooling. When Caleb sets the family to digging, creating a bunker in the 
canyon behind the house and sacrificing Jory’s sleep to hours of sweaty hard labor, 
Jory begins to question Caleb’s certainty (“Why does he keep so many secrets from 
us?”) and his mother’s aquiescence. Hubbard writes fluently and accessibly, and she 
capably delineates the dynamics: Jory’s timid and anxiety-prone mother who values 
Caleb’s protection, Jory’s prizing of his stepfather’s approval but growing invest-
ment in his school friends, Caleb’s genial capability and charismatic storytelling. 
The subplot about selectively mute Kit (who appeared one day on her own and 
was taken into the family) strains credulity somewhat, but the flow of the prose 
smooths out the awkwardness and focuses readers on the warmth of her relation-
ship with Jory. This is an interesting combination of plausible realism and highly 
unlikely experience, and middle-graders will find it an absorbing tale that suggests 
possible drama behind the faces of unconsidered classmates.  DS
552 • the Bulletin
huDson, kAty Bear and Duck; written and illus. by Katy Hudson. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-232051-3 $17.99  
R 4-7 yrs
“I am done being a bear,” states Bear, who’s tired of hibernating and suffering from 
the heat of a fur coat in the summer. When he happens on a line of waddling ducks, 
he decides this is his destiny and joins them; the leading duck insists it’s not that 
simple but agrees to teach Bear the ways of duckdom. Bear struggles a little with 
nest-building and swimming and fails utterly at flying—until he mistakes a plum-
met from the tree he climbed for flight. The inevitable hard landing makes him 
realize that being a duck may not be for him after all, but his new buddy reassures 
him: “You make a really good bear . . . and a really good friend.” The climactic 
twist is pretty abrupt, but the text has a cozy, Milne-infused flavor (Bear is alerted 
to the ducks by “a noise. A happy, I-don’t-sleep-all-winter-or-have-hot-fur-or-
bees-stinging-my-nose kind of noise”), with lots of lively dialogue. There are also 
dollops of humor: the “How to Be a Duck” spreads amusingly outline the rules for 
various duck behaviors, contrasting with Bear’s game but inept execution of same. 
The ink and watercolor illustrations place big, softly brown Bear against airy white 
backgrounds, with verdant and flowering meadow underfoot adding to the sunny 
feel. Bear has a limited number of poses, but his lack of flexibility is narratively ap-
propriate, and when the illustrations do bust out the broad visual comedy—when 
Bear’s splashing upends the ducks around him—it’s a raucous ramp-up. There’s 
no shortage of adorable picture-book bears, but this one is a lovable goofball, and 
he and his friend Duck will add giggles to a storytime.  DS
Jury, wAlter Burn; written by Walter Jury and Sarah Fine. Putnam, 
2015 334p
ISBN 978-0-399-16068-4 $17.99  
R Gr. 9-12
In the cliffhanger ending of Scan (BCCB 6/14), it was discovered that a scanner 
that detected aliens (appearing red) among the humans (showing up blue) could 
also identify a third color, indicating a new player in this battle for the survival of 
humanity. In this book, Tate and Christina are still madly in love, unfazed by their 
new awareness that Christina is H2—one of the aliens—rather than human, and 
they are still trying to save the world from whatever bad guy is in front of them. 
In this novel, it’s mostly the Sicarii, the new beings, that are the real danger, and 
the H2 and humans, long locked in fierce hatred and distrust, must throw aside 
their differences and stop this malevolent, parasitic race before they destroy Earth 
as they destroyed the H2 home planet. Gripping discussions of what makes one 
human and the space between tolerance and inclusion are surprisingly memorable 
and moving, snuck in among the fight scenes and exploding buildings. The action 
itself is effective, and the lightning pace sends readers careening into danger from 
the start along with Tate, who narrates on the fly, making it clear that sometimes 
he is just crossing his fingers and hoping he is making the right choices. The father/
son tension of the first novel is poignantly revisited here, as Tate must find a way to 
make peace with the father who died before explaining why he had pushed his son 
so hard: to be part of an elite group tasked with saving the world. This is a tight, 
fully realized conclusion to the earlier novel, and while every piece isn’t wrapped 
up, it is clear that Tate (and everyone else) has a safe home planet on which to 
figure the rest of it out.  AS
July/August 2015 • 553
krisP, cAleB Anyone but Ivy Pocket; illus. by Barbara Cantini. Greenwillow/
HarperCollins, 2015 382p
ISBN 978-0-06-236434-0 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 4-6 
“You have a great many talents, Miss Pocket—self-delusion, bad manners, general 
insufferability—but as for you being the savior of an entire kingdom? I think 
not.” So utters Miss Frost, at least half correctly, as she and other magical creatures 
from her realm battle for the diamond in Ivy’s care as well as for twelve-year-old 
Ivy herself, an orphan turned lady’s maid, in this British fantasy. The treacherous 
Miss Always thinks Ivy might be the Dual, the fabled girl who will heal her people 
and ascend the throne, and ingratiates herself with the girl as other forces work 
to save Ivy and the mystical Clock Diamond. There’s reward here in the period 
backdrop (Ivy begins in Paris, where her mistress disappears, and then returns to 
England) and in the Snickety self-awareness of genre tropes. Unfortunately, Ivy 
lives up a bit too much to Miss Frost’s description, with her delusions of grandeur 
and blindness to the obvious more alienating than humorous. Her archness and 
her self-aggrandizing schtick are also too often overplayed, becoming tedious over 
the considerable length of the novel. Still, there’s an enduring appeal in a plucky 
orphan who’s too big for her britches, and readers who appreciate the ghosts, visions, 
and other supernatural elements of the book, as well as the occasionally successful 
one-liner, may find sufficient intrigue and imagination here.  AA
kuhlMAn, evAn Great Ball of Light; illus. by Jeremy Holmes. Atheneum, 
2015 295p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-6461-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2661-0 $10.99  
R Gr. 5-8
This curious, haunting novel explores family redemption through lightning, zom-
bies, and twelve-year-old twins who keep trying to fix everything even as it all spins 
out of control. It starts simply enough: Fenton, the bolder twin, grabs a mysterious 
ball of light, and the twins discover that it can bring dead things back to life. The 
kids move on fairly quickly from dead rodents and insects to the family dog, who 
does come back but isn’t really himself anymore. Nonetheless, Fiona and Fenton 
decide to bring back their grandfather, a controversial figure who in spite of his deep 
flaws is missed by his widow, if not his children. Grandpa is different once he revives 
(and, to be clear, this all falls into horrifying zombie territory with flesh falling off, 
exposed bones, and disgusting smells), a fact that doesn’t go unnoticed by his own 
son, who slowly warms to this man who was a drunken disappointment in life but 
seems genuinely contrite now. A startling additional death and reanimation don’t 
go as well, sending the family on the run; in the end, though, Fiona’s narration ends 
with a tentatively optimistic tone, with all undead and living people trying to use 
their time wisely, and the ball of lightning out of the family’s hands. The zombies 
and the sharp, specific discussions of the transient nature of life itself make this 
particularly suitable for those more intrigued than frightened by the gruesome and 
the fatal. For those, this is a gem of a philosophical, outlandish story, and Fiona’s 
narrative voice is intelligent, wry, and thoughtful.  AS
554 • the Bulletin
lAthAM, Jennifer Scarlett Undercover. Little, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-28393-9 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-28389-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old private detective Scarlett never expected a case from a nine-year-old 
girl to lead anywhere interesting. Her investigation into the girl’s brother’s strange 
behavior gets weird fast, though, and soon Scarlett is scouring the city’s seedy 
side, playing it cool in the face of death threats, and dodging sketchy strangers on 
her tail. The plot thickens further as clues lead from an old tattoo parlor to a cult 
obsessed with jinn folklore and, odder still, to her own father’s unsolved murder. 
Scarlett gradually finds herself in over her head, especially when her young client 
disappears and Scarlett’s sister’s life is threatened. With a centuries-old conspiracy 
to solve, ancient artifacts to protect, and the villains closing in, she’ll need the sup-
port of friendly, conspicuously knowledgeable neighbors, including the hot Jewish 
boy from the local diner, if she’s going to save herself and the people she loves. 
Steeped in Islamic mythology and Muslim cultural traditions (Scarlett is Muslim 
herself), this fast-paced mystery offers more than the standard genre title. Scarlett 
is a spunky, sassy heroine who kicks butt, takes names, and still manages to go to 
mosque with her sister, and readers will be drawn in by her combination of witty 
self-confidence and vulnerability. The noir elements seem forced at times, but the 
Middle Eastern folklore and Arabic phrases are woven seamlessly into the plot 
and dialogue. There’s plenty of likely appeal for detective-story fans looking for a 
well-rendered puzzle to solve.  AM
leAthers, PhiliPPA How to Catch a Mouse; written and illus. by Philippa Leath-
ers. Candlewick, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6912-6 $15.99  
R* 3-6 yrs 
Though she’s never actually seen a mouse, Clemmie the cat is convinced that 
she is an expert mouser. She’s on the alert when she sees something mouselike: 
“What’s that? A mouse has a long pink tail.” She attacks, but the “tail” proves to 
be the string on a hat, which is initially disappointing (“This is not a mouse”) but 
then affirming (“There are no mice in this house!”). This pattern is repeated with 
a pair of round ears that belong to a stuffed bear and a whiskery “nose” that turns 
out to be a leggy spider. Meanwhile, an actual mouse has been roaming around in 
increasing stages of disguise (including a Groucho Marx pair of glasses with nose 
and mustache to shield its whiskers). When Clemmie finally spies the real mouse 
she takes a page from the mouse’s book and disguises herself before launching her 
attack. Whether or not she is successful is left up to the viewer, as the final page 
shows her only in hot pursuit, a clever ambiguity considering that plenty of children 
will be sympathetic to the mouse. Repetition and the plot’s pattern make this an 
easy pick for storytime, and the thoughtful positioning of the page turns placed 
just after each “What’s that? A mouse has . . .” moment (accompanied by a hinting 
illustration) allows for audience guessing. The handsome pencil and watercolor 
illustrations (combined digitally) are clean and crisp, with golden little Clemmie 
contrasting against the white space and gentle background hues. The cute factor 
of the mouse is ramped up by its increasingly amusing disguises, but it’s Clemmie 
who steals the show, whether proudly smiling while declaring her superior mousing 
July/August 2015 • 555
skills or rearing back in surprise at the discovered mouse. Kids and adults alike will 
find Clemmie a charmer.  JH
lieB, Josh Ratscalibur; illus. by Tom Lintern. Razorbill, 2015 [192p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-242-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
The busy streets of New York are offputting enough for newcomer Joey, but the 
city becomes especially dangerous when the seventh-grade boy is transformed into 
a three-inch-tall rat by Gondorff the Gray, a dying Ragician (a wielder of rat magic) 
who tasks Joey with getting an important message to the king of Ravalon. Hoping 
to find another Ragician (or Dogician, Squagician, whatever) to transform him 
back, Joey navigates the trash heaps, back alleys, and dog doo-doo laden sidewalks 
(which all smell delicious to Joey’s new rat nose) to make it to Ravalon, where he 
accidentally pulls the Spork from the Scone and becomes the prophesied hero that 
will save the kingdom from the dark forces of Salaman. Lieb may have his tongue 
firmly planted in his cheek when it comes to the various references to Arthurian 
legends, The Lord of the Rings, and The Three Musketeers, but he also creates an 
absorbing fantasy, rich in its world building, careful in its pacing, and convincing in 
its characterizations. Joey is immediately likable as the Everykid turned hero, and the 
ragtag group he accumulates on his quest is equally delightful (particularly amusing 
is Brutilda, a guinea-pig escapee from a kindergarten class, now a devoted servant 
to King Uther). The humor is spot on for the age group, and so is the adventure, 
with Joey going up against one-eyed alley cats, raging sewer rats, and evil crows in 
epic battles. Readers who enjoyed Jonell’s Emmy and the Incredible Shrinking Rat 
(BCCB 1/08) will be pleased to go on another under-city journey with Joey.  KQG 
lozAno, José Little Chanclas; written and illus. by José Lozano; Spanish text by 
Luis Humberto Crosthwaite. Cinco Puntos, 2015 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-85-6 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-86-3 $7.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-87-0 $7.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
Some kids get obsessed with an item of clothing no matter how ratty it gets, and for 
little Lily, star of this bilingual book, it’s her flip-flops, or chanclas. She wears them 
everywhere and won’t be bribed or enticed into other shoes, much to the annoyance 
of her family (especially her glamorous big sister, Lulú). When a lively moment at 
a party results in the final and irreparable breakage of the ragged footwear, Lily is 
disconsolate, rejecting all new shoe offers; fortunately, Granny Lola comes to the 
rescue with boxes and boxes of—what else?—chanclas. Lozano makes this into a 
rollicking and witty tale that draws on folkloric echoes (there’s a repeated “slippety-
slappity” sound for the noise of Lily’s flip-floppy walk) while remaining amusingly 
real, and the fact that Lily herself never speaks makes her peculiarly powerful. The 
text draws the ebullient neighborhood with a few quick and humorous strokes, 
and the party disaster, with one sandal bouncing off a lady’s hair-do and into the 
guacamole and another snapped up by a chew-happy dog, is audience-pleasing 
slapstick. The line and watercolor illustrations are vivid and compelling, with full-
bleed crowd scenes bringing viewers to the heart of the action. There’s a touch of 
grotesque style in the draftsmanship that recalls Lynda Barry’s comics as well as 
556 • the Bulletin
folk-art traditions, while the luminous panels of color, textured with sturdy strokes, 
gleam like stained glass. The art is neatly designed to allow space for both English 
and Spanish text, and contrasting colors clearly differentiate the two. Even Fancy 
Nancies will be tickled by Lily’s devotion to her battered chanclas, and kids will 
get a kick out of doing a bit of slippety-slappety in comradely celebration.  DS
MAAs, sArAh J. A Court of Thorns and Roses. Bloomsbury, 2015 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-444-2 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-445-9 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
After her father’s risky investments left the family destitute, Feyre has been respon-
sible for providing for her two sisters and their now-disabled father by hunting in 
the dangerous but bountiful woods that separate the mortal world and the faerie 
realm of Prythian. Her killing of a wolf in those woods breaks a treaty between the 
two races, and a beastly creature shows up at her door to collect Feyre, forcing her 
to return with him to Prythian to make amends. The gorgeous estate she arrives at, 
however, and the transformation of the beast into Tamlin, a beautiful and rather 
hospitable faerie, are at total odds with the stories of the bloodthirsty, violent Fae 
she’s heard all her life. After a bit of push and pull, she and Tamlin fall headlong 
into a fiery romance, but their relationship is threatened by a wicked force that has 
cursed Tamlin and may potentially destroy both their worlds. Events are occasionally 
driven more by plot convenience than logic, but readers are unlikely to notice; they 
will be dazzled by the steamy and sensuous romance between Feyre and Tamlin, 
and they’ll be invested when he is taken from her and she must fight some pretty 
nasty faeries to get him back. Elements from “Beauty and the Beast,” “East o’ the 
Sun, West o’ the Moon,” the myth of Persephone, and the legend of Tamlin are 
seamlessly interwoven with clever allusions, while the faerie world is resplendent in 
its initial beauty and then horrific in the brutality Feyre later encounters. The book’s 
latter half is as much adventure as it is romance, and while readers will delight in 
the lovers’ eventual reunion, they’ll likely be even more pleased about the promise 
of further action to come in this proposed series.  KQG 
MAccoll, MichAelA The Revelation of Louisa May. Chronicle, 2015 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-4521-3357-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
In this new installment of MacColl’s historically based mysteries, young Louisa 
May Alcott’s mother is out of town, so Louisa is left in charge of the family as well 
as a “package” that has arrived at their stop on the Underground Railroad. When 
a sinister stranger and an old friend arrive, Louisa’s tasks become more compli-
cated; the stranger, a slave hunter, not only dogs her steps but finds opportuni-
ties for blackmail among the good people of Concord, while the friend, an old 
chum named Fred, presses his suit on the flattered Louisa. Then the slave hunter 
is found murdered, and Louisa has no end of suspects: Henry Thoreau, who was 
caught pursuing Emerson’s wife; Louisa’s father, Bronson Alcott, who was found 
unconscious at the scene of the crime; a female con artist who was in town trying 
to tempt Alcott, Emerson, and Thoreau into supporting a nonexistent journal; 
George, the escaped slave who had the most to fear from the victim; and Mr. Pryor, 
the conductor on the Railroad. MacColl’s ability to steep herself in the imagined 
July/August 2015 • 557
lives of her historical figures enables her to craft just the right fictional characters 
to round out her mysteries. As she did with Emily Dickinson in Nobody’s Secret 
(BCCB 4/13), she creates an encounter for the never-married Louisa that pits ideals 
against romance and manages a credible win for ideals. Each chapter is headed with 
an apt, contextualizing quotation from Little Women that will encourage readers 
to believe that these imagined events could have happened in life and maybe even 
inspired Alcott’s fiction. The author’s note at the end returns readers to reality but 
leaves them with a greater interest in one of the most beloved American novelists 
of all time.  KC 
Meyer, MArissA Fairest. Feiwel, 2015 220p (The Lunar Chronicles)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-06055-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-06874-3 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
In this bridge to her Lunar Chronicles series, Meyer shifts the focus from the cyborg 
Cinder (featured in Cinder, BCCB 2/12) and her attempts to save Earth from a 
Lunar invasion, focusing instead on the backstory of Levana, the Lunar queen 
and formidable villain of the series. Readers are taken back over a decade to the 
moon to find Levana as a painfully awkward teenage girl, scarred and mutilated 
from years of abuse at the hands of her merciless older sister. Although Levana’s 
powers of glamour allow others to see her as still beautiful, her insecurities reach 
an almost paranoid level and lead her down a path of increasingly immoral choices, 
from using her mind-control abilities to get a married man to love her to eventu-
ally killing her niece to secure her position as queen. Although the abuse by her 
sister is horrific, Levana is no accidental monster created by victimization; she is 
a calculating and intelligent young adult who weighs the pros and cons of each 
situation, choosing the strategy that is most likely to gain her power, whether it 
be over another person or an entire kingdom. Although she’s not terribly easy to 
sympathize with, she’s awfully fascinating to watch, and readers of a series that has 
so far been mostly about noble heroics might find the perspective of someone so 
morally bankrupt as provocative as it is disturbing. Levana’s stepdaughter, Winter, 
also makes an appearance, ostensibly as the Snow White of this multivolume fairy 
tale sci-fi mashup, and the book ends with the first three chapters of Winter’s tale, 
ensuring Meyer’s rabid fanbase will stick around for the full version’s release later 
this year.  KQG 
MontgoMery, sy The Octopus Scientists: Exploring the Mind of a Mollusk; il-
lus. with photographs by Keith Ellenbogen. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2015 71p (Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 978-0-544-23270-9 $18.99  
R Gr. 5-8
The reliably informative and entertaining Montgomery is off on another Scientists 
in the Field adventure, this time tracking Dr. Jennifer Mather and a research team 
on the island of Moorea, near Tahiti, where they hope to study the elusive octopus. 
They’ll need to find two habitats in order to establish comparisons, and consider-
ing Montgomery’s two-week time limit, they’ll need to find them promptly. It’s 
just this sort of consideration that makes this series so intriguing: science doesn’t 
operate on a publishing schedule, and octopuses don’t share the author’s sense of 
urgency. And so, while quietly stressing about whether she’ll get to see an octopus, 
and noting the irony of passing by myriad marine wonders in rushed pursuit of 
558 • the Bulletin
her quarry, Montgomery explores why the octopus is so very difficult to study. The 
relatively shallow waters in which they live are challenging, rife with poisonous 
sea life and skin-lacerating corals and algae. Mostly, though, it’s the nature of the 
beast itself, a boneless master of camouflage that changes color and skin texture 
in a fraction of a second and slips through improbably tiny holes to hide. The 
team does, thankfully, find octopuses before Montgomery’s departure, and it not 
only inventories their post-prandial trash heaps but also administers interactive 
tests that Dr. Mather has devised to assess individual octopus personalities. Each 
chapter of triple-columned text is heavily illustrated with photographs taken on 
site and includes two or more pages of related information on the scientists, the 
CRIOBE (Le Centre de Recherches Insulaires et Observatoire de l’Environnement 
de Polynésie Française) research facility, and octopus physiology and behavior. An 
index and selected bibliography are included.  EB
Moskowitz, hAnnAh Not Otherwise Specified. Simon Pulse, 2015 260p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0596-6 $19.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0595-9 $11.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0598-0 $8.99  
R* Gr. 9-12
Being seventeen is hard; being seventeen, black, and bisexual is even harder; being 
seventeen, black, and bisexual and living in small-town Nebraska is nearly unbear-
able. Etta is determined to head to New York as soon as she can, but in the meantime 
she’s got to deal with her former friend clique, the Disco Dykes, who have rejected 
her for dating a boy, and she has to negotiate her challenging recovery from an eating 
disorder. It’s at the eating disorder therapy group that she meets fragile fourteen-
year-old Bianca, and she’s soon drawn into the girl’s social circle, auditioning with 
Bianca, her brother, and her brother’s friend for a New York performing arts school 
that Etta hopes will be her ticket out of the Midwest. That may seem like a lot of 
plot, but this is less a book about storyline than it is about human complexity. Etta 
is an utterly convincing mix of self-deprecation and audacity, and her frustration 
at never seeming to fit properly—in her beloved ballet, with her lesbian friends, 
even in the eating disorder group—is painful and understandable. The fact that 
New York doesn’t so much resolve that dilemma as offer Etta a chance to create 
her own space is an engagingly original twist. Multiple threads—Etta’s concern for 
obviously ill Bianca, Bianca’s brother’s coming out, Etta’s anguished longing for 
her former best friend—add facets and plausible complication without detracting 
from the emotional impact. Etta’s finding-her-place dilemma makes her a proxy 
for just about every teen, and they’ll be glad to see her growing more confident of 
making her own mark.  DS
nielsen, susin We Are All Made of Molecules. Lamb, 2015 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49687-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49686-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49688-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-8
Despite having lost his mother to cancer two years ago and despite his social 
awkwardness, thirteen-year-old Stewart is an eternal optimist. When his father an-
nounces that he and Stewart will be moving in with his father’s girlfriend and her 
daughter, Ashley, Stewart is “89.9 percent” excited, especially about the prospect of 
July/August 2015 • 559
finally having a sister. Queen bee Ashley, unfortunately, is unwelcoming, enraged 
that “freakazoid” Stewart is invading her house and still terrified that her A-lister 
friends will discover the real reason her parents split a few years ago—her dad’s gay. 
The trials and tribulations of blending a family are brought into sharp but humorous 
relief here, and Nielsen deftly inserts mini-dramas between the various adults, mak-
ing it clear that it’s not just the kids who have to make some adjustments. Stewart’s 
the geeky nerd who builds models of the Eiffel Tower for fun and names his cat 
Schrödinger, and Ashley’s the popularity-obsessed snob who is not necessarily the 
sharpest knife in the drawer, but as narration alternates between the two they get a 
bit more depth. The comedy comes too often at Ashley’s expense, however, and it’s 
obvious that Stewart is the good guy here and Ashley is the one who needs to learn 
a lesson, a lesson didactically learned only after a near sexual assault by an arrogant 
jock makes her see sense. Still, there’s a lot of insight here into what makes families 
tick, what makes them collapse, and what brings them back together, so fans of 
realistic dramedies will find plenty to think and laugh over.  KQG
noBle, cArrie Anne The Mermaid’s Sister. Skyscape, 2015 [243p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-2088-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Two sisters, Clara and Maren, have grown up as orphans, adored by their adopted 
mother, all three hidden away in the mountains of Pennsylvania in the late 1800s. 
Now, though, a dramatic event has changed things: Maren has beguns to transform 
into a mermaid, so the sisters must leave their mother, who is cursed and forced to 
stay near her home, and embark on an epic quest. The salt water is a good distance 
away, so Clara is lucky to have a good friend (with whom she is secretly in love) to 
help her transport her shrinking, dying sister. All is not well on the trip, however, 
as they encounter various difficulties, including a traveling show that traps them, 
forcing them to participate in their events. While the story itself is impeccably 
paced and there is effective tension about whether Maren will make it to the sea in 
time, the true star of this novel is the setting. Noble carefully incorporates the time 
and place into the behaviors and language of her characters, in the wild, not quite 
familiar landscapes, and in the gauzy otherworldliness that makes a girl becoming 
a mermaid plausible rather than fantastical. Offer this to mermaid fans, of course, 
but also to historical fiction buffs who appreciate sharp, intelligent period pieces 
and don’t mind a bit of magic mixed in.  AS
ockler, sArAh The Summer of Chasing Mermaids. Simon Pulse, 2015 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-481-40127-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-481-40129-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
After losing her voice in a tragic boating accident, Elyse flees her home on the Ca-
ribbean island of Tobago to find refuge with an old family friend in Atargatis Cove 
on the coast of Oregon. People there may look at her sideways for her dark skin 
and inability to speak, but at least they don’t know the true extent of her loss—the 
singing career she was about to embark on with her twin sister, who was responsible 
for the damage to Elyse’s vocal cords. Elyse finds herself drawn to Christian Kane, 
a notorious player, and when Christian’s father bets the fate of the town on his 
son’s ability to win the annual regatta, Elyse volunteers to be his first mate—despite 
560 • the Bulletin
her terror at being out on the ocean again and her attraction to the unattainable 
Christian. Even without her voice, Elyse can be as bold and brassy as Christian, 
and their inevitable romantic pairing is thankfully more a meeting of equals than 
the usual trope of a bad boy saving a broken girl; their steamy sessions will leave 
readers a bit breathless. Elyse finds just as much healing in beauty of Atargatis 
Cove and the friends she finds there as she does with Christian. Her narration is 
heavy with maritime metaphors, which occasionally verge on melodrama but are 
at times hauntingly elegant. The rich details of her home back in Tobago and the 
new home she makes for herself in Oregon will have readers feeling the pull of the 
tide, and they’ll want to throw this breezy but thoughtful romance in the bag on 
their way to the beach.  KQG
PAschkis, Julie Flutter & Hum: Animal Poems/Aleteo y Zumbido: Poemas de 
Animales; written and illus. by Julie Paschkis. Holt, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-62779-103-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 3-6
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 533, for review.
PAul, MirAnDA Water Is Water: A Book about the Water Cycle; illus. by Jason 
Chin. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2015 40p
ISBN 978-1-59643-984-9 $17.99  
R 4-8 yrs
As a sister and brother pass through a cycle of seasons, occupied with play, school, 
and family time, the water that nurtures their world undergoes continual change. 
Vapor that cools high in the sky takes on fascinating shapes: “A dragon in a wagon?/ 
A crow kneading dough?/ Clouds are clouds unless . . . / they form low.” A page 
turn moves the cloud-gazing kids from summer into autumn, where they stand 
among fallen leaves and wait for their school bus to emerge over a fog-banked 
rise: “Misty. Twisty./ Where is the town?/ Fog is fog unless . . . / it falls down.” 
Here they arrive at school just in time for the “patter. Splatter” of rain. While the 
states of water are described in everyday language throughout the linked verses, 
a concluding note, with thumbnails referring to specific points in the text, offers 
additional information and more precise terminology. Younger children can easily 
follow pictures and poem to connect a puddle soaking the roots of a tree with the 
apples pressed into cider in the next spread; older listeners and independent read-
ers can turn to the back pages and learn about “seepage,” “uptake,” and the watery 
composition of the apples that are squeezed for their liquid. Watercolor scenes 
invite close examination—brother chases sister off the school bus with a garter 
snake; neighbor kids armed with snowballs sneak around the corner of the house 
to ambush snowman makers; sister’s butterfly kite gets stuck in a tree; a novice 
skater crashes into a snowbank. Lists of sources and children’s materials for further 
reading are included. Follow this, if possible, with a group walk around the block 
to talk about where the water is.  EB 
July/August 2015 • 561
Pichon, liz Tom Gates: Excellent Excuses (and Other Good Stuff); written and 
illus. by Liz Pichon. Candlewick, 2015 340p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7474-8 $12.99  
R Gr. 4-7
Preteen Tom Gates is caught in that awkward period between still-sleeps-with-teddy-
bear and let’s-get-a-band-together. He’s got two glorious weeks off from school that 
he intends to fill with eating sweets, watching TV, annoying his sister, and rocking 
out with his best friend, Derek. When school resumes, he’s faced with a toothache 
and the need to find a drummer to prepare for the band’s first gig, as well as trying 
to catch a cheating bully in the act and dealing with the consequences of cribbing 
a book report on trees. The airy handwriting-style font of this quasi-graphic novel 
is peppered throughout with tidy, energetic, thin-line ink doodles in a near-rebus 
fashion. Tom is a master of avoidance of all things unpleasant, and his twitchy 
friend, Norman, and hipster grandparents, aka the Fossils, add to the zaniness. Fans 
of Diary of a Wimpy Kid are a natural audience for this British import, the second 
in a series that will surely please budding Anglophiles; an illustrated glossary of 
Britishisms is included.  KC
PlecAs, Jennifer BAH! Said the Baby; written and illus. by Jennifer Ple-
cas. Philomel, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-16606-8 $16.99  
R 4-6 yrs
Deciphering a baby’s first words can be a challenge, as the mother, big brother, and 
big sister of this little tyke discover. Baby’s declaration of “BAH!” receives multiple 
interpretations by his/her family: book, ball, bow? Brother, bunny, lamb? Bear, block, 
bottle? Finally, Mom figures it out—the baby says “Bah!” every time someone leaves 
the room, so “bah” equals “bye.” Baby is relieved to finally be understood, but then 
the family ups the ante, asking Baby to say “hello.” The baby’s having none of that, 
though, preferring to stick to “bah” since it is now time to say “bye” to the audi-
ence of the book. This is both amusing and clever, and a second reading will get 
kids noticing the visual context clues (people or the pet cat exiting the room) that 
prompts the “bah” each time. The baby of unspecified gender, clad in red footie 
pajamas, is an endearing figure, and clearly a beloved member of the family. Plecas 
wisely keeps the backgrounds of her illustrations (rendered in traditional media 
and Photoshop) minimal, sticking to a palette of slightly textured pastel nursery 
shades, while the human figures, cat, and baby’s toys are brighter and clearer, and 
tidily outlined in black for emphasis. Add this charmer to the lineup for a baby-
themed storytime, or share it with the older sibs of an almost-verbal little one.  JH
Potter, AliciA Miss Hazeltine’s Home for Shy and Fearful Cats; illus. by Birgitta 
Sif. Knopf, 2015 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75335-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75334-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75336-4 $10.99  
R 5-8 yrs
When Miss Hazeltine opens a “Home for Shy and Fearful Cats,” she is inundated 
with faint-hearted felines, including little orange Crumb, who only wants to hide. 
Miss Hazeltine is a wise and sympathetic caregiver, and through lessons in “Meet-
ing New Friends,” “Pouncing,” and “How Not to Fear the Broom,” her kitty 
charges gradually become bolder. When Miss Hazeltine make an emergency milk 
562 • the Bulletin
run and ends up with a twisted ankle in a ditch in the dark, only Crumb knows 
where she’s gone, and he bravely leads the others in a search and successful rescue 
mission. With the house sign amended (“Home for Shy and Pretty Brave If You 
Ask Us Cats”) and Miss Hazeltine’s words of gratitude, the cats are pretty pleased 
with themselves, especially Crumb, who finally eschews his dark hiding places to 
curl up on Miss Hazeltine herself. Potter’s storytelling is smooth and well paced, 
and Miss Hazeltine is an endearing character. Shy kids will particularly appreciate 
Miss Hazeltine’s non-pushy approach to bolstering the timid cats, and cat lovers 
will enjoy the thought of a house wholly dedicated to kitty care. Sif’s illustrations, 
hand-drawn in pencil and digitally colored, are affectionate but also possess a quiet 
quirkiness that balances the sweetness of the story. Miss Hazeltine has spiky hair, 
red high-top sneakers, and a whimsical pointy hat, and her wide eyes and lanky 
proportions are echoed in the pop eyes and sinuous forms of the felines. This could 
easily be tied into a discussion of either shyness or animal care, or it could simply 
be shared with kids in the company of a cuddly cat or two.  JH
rosenthAl, Betsy r. An Ambush of Tigers: A Wild Gathering of Collective Nouns; 
illus. by Jago. Millbrook, 2015 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1464-8 $19.99  
R 7-10 yrs
“Do you ever wonder what animals do/ when they gather in groups of more than 
two?” queries the author in this clever contemplation of animal-centric collective 
nouns. Some of the text’s rhyming questions are relatively straightforward (“Does 
a pack of wolves/ load up bags for vacation?// Does a cast of hawks/ get a standing 
ovation?”), while others are more complex: “Would a labor of moles/ wear polka-dot 
ties// when it goes to work/ for a business of flies?” While this is basically a list of 
collective nouns, the rhythmic text is inventively and captivatingly composed, and 
the rhyme scheme is consistent and effective. Jago’s digital illustrations are equally 
intriguing in their imaginative visualization of the text. The stylized figures and 
rich backgrounds in faux-linen texturing have subtle layers of patterning or color 
embellishing the art. Some amusingly depict the literal meaning of the collective 
noun, such as the “stench” of skunks surrounded by a marbleized, translucent green 
fog as the “band” (as in “rock band”) of gorillas holds its noses in dismay, or the 
sash-clad “troop” of kangaroos selling Girl Scout–style boxes of cookies. A glossary 
listing each collective noun’s more customary definition (e.g., “labor (moles): to 
work hard”) is also included. Language arts teachers as well as librarians will want 
to get their paws on this title.  JH
ross, Joel The Fog Diver. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-235293-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-235296-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Centuries ago, nanites were created to clean up the pollution humans had created. 
The nanites didn’t self-destruct as they should have, however, and instead turned 
themselves into a permanent, malevolent fog and began treating people as a form of 
pollution. Animals and plants continue to thrive, but since then, the few remaining 
humans who weren’t driven mad or killed in the Fog eke out a living above it in the 
sky (on all manner of air vehicles) and on the highest mountains. Chess, however, 
has a Fog-eye, the rare ability to enter the Fog to hunt and scavenge without it 
July/August 2015 • 563
destroying his brain; this ability makes him vital to his salvage raft’s crew, but it 
is also a skill much sought after by the terrifying Lord Kodoc, who experiments 
on children to try to find a child with such a gift. The book’s pace is impeccable, 
and Chess’ narration is lively and sympathetic as he expresses his anxiety at being 
found by Kodoc, describes his love and worry for his crew, who have become his 
family, and breathlessly relates fight and chase scenes. There’s both creepiness and 
a ramshackle charm to the setting, and while Ross occasionally overuses the gim-
mick of having the characters spout some mixed-up version of our contemporary 
pop culture, the device adds levity. The conclusion begs for a sequel, even as many 
elements are satisfyingly resolved by the end—readers will undoubtedly think there 
is still more to say about Chess, his fantastic crew, and the Fog itself.  AS
ryAn, cArrie Daughter of Deep Silence. Dutton, 2015 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42650-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Four years ago, the cruise ship Persephone sank after being hit by a rogue wave, 
leaving only Senator Wells, his son Grey, and Libby O’Martin as survivors. At least 
that’s the story the world has been told, but Frances Mace knows differently: the 
ship was attacked by armed gunmen and sunk by explosions, Libby, Frances’ best 
friend, died on a lifeboat she and Frances used to escape, and the senator and his son 
have been lying for years. Orphaned by the attack, Frances was taken in by Libby’s 
wealthy father, who convinced her to assume Libby’s identity and move with him 
to Europe for her protection. Convinced that the Wells’ lies four years ago led to 
Libby’s death, Frances has now returned to determine the truth behind the attack 
and exact revenge on the Wells family. This requires that she face Grey Wells, the 
boy she was in love with at fourteen, and Shepherd, the boy Libby was in love with, 
who is not quite buying Frances’ guise as Libby. The premise demands quite a bit 
of suspension of disbelief on the reader’s part, so it falls to character development 
to make this work; fortunately, the book serves that up in spades. Frances’ voice 
is exceptionally well crafted, shifting between burning fury, all-consuming grief, 
and choking fear; her identity from before the attack is as dead as Libby, and now 
simply sees herself as a weapon carved out of a horrific and violent tragedy, even 
as Grey and Shepherd each tempt her to move on. The details of the night of the 
assault and the power players behind it are carefully spooled out while the tension 
ratchets up as Frances finds herself in even more danger. Fans of the television shows 
Revenge, Arrow, and Pretty Little Liars will devour this thriller.  KQG
schMiDt, tiffAny Hold Me Like a Breath. Bloomsbury, 2015 390p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3782-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3810-3 $12.99  
R Gr. 8-10
Diagnosed in childhood with a rare blood disorder, seventeen-year-old Penelope 
Landlow has always been coddled, a virtual prisoner on her family’s vast estate. 
Her fragile health also puts her out of the running to take over the family business, 
procuring illegal organ transplants for the wealthy and powerful. Penny’s carefully 
guarded world suddenly overturns, though, when a series of attacks means she’s 
without family, she’s been declared dead, and she’s on the run for her life. Now 
hiding out in New York, Penny is drawn out by her first taste of freedom, mak-
ing an unexpected love connection with a charming boy who may be too good to 
564 • the Bulletin
be true and finding a way to manage her health on her own terms. There’s still a 
looming threat of discovery and death, so Penny plans to uncover the killers, take 
down the transplant black market, and gain control of her future, or die trying. 
With its unusual premise and memorable combination of gangsters, deadly secrets, 
and subtle fairy-tale allusions, this novel offers an adventure with broad appeal. 
Penny is a captivating and compelling heroine, physically fragile but with an inner 
strength beyond her own imagination, and readers will be drawn into her progress 
from willful, sheltered girl to self-reliant young woman. The narrative style matches 
Penny’s emotional state: slow and constricted on the compound, reveling in detail 
on the streets of New York, building to a breathless pace for the final showdown. 
A likely hit with fans of Goeglein’s Cold Fury (BCCB 9/12), this first in a new 
crime-family series will also thrill romance-loving adventure readers and leave them 
holding their breath for more.  AM 
scofielD, chris The Shark Curtain. Black Sheep/Akashic, 2015 [320p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-61775-313-8 $13.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61775-369-5 $13.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 10-12
Had Lily Asher been a teen today, her compulsions, hallucinations and manic 
episodes would have earned her a clinical diagnosis; in the 1960s, however, the 
diagnosis is simply: weirdo. Her beleaguered parents love and try their best to sup-
port her, but they have their own problems, since her mother relies on excessive 
drinking and happy pills and her dad gambles. At times, her pathological anger and 
fear manifest in her behaving like a dog, and she is further traumatized when her 
own dog drowns while saving her life when she swims too far from shore. Mostly, 
though, she is beset by hallucinations of a hapless Jesus, who won’t leave her alone 
but also won’t give her the help she asks for. This is more a window into a three-year 
period than a focused plot, but Lily’s narration is a very busy nightmare trip into 
a troubled mind. She’s clearly fighting as hard as she can to transform her real and 
imaginary horrors into art, even when no one but her mother recognizes her efforts 
as such. Some genuinely traumatic scenes—the death of her dog, her victimization 
at the hands of a peeping Tom, her finding her mother’s miscarried fetus in the 
toilet—as well as the artfully chaotic prose make this a challenging read, but those 
who prefer edgy period fiction with truly original characters will be fascinated by 
this glimpse into the mind of an unmedicated non-neurotypical teen struggling 
to come of age in the ’60s.  KC 
shAnnon, george One Family; illus. by Blanca Gómez. Foster/Farrar, 
2015 26p
ISBN 978-0-374-30003-6 $17.99  
R 4-6 yrs
An author gifted at making the familiar fresh (as in White Is for Blueberry, BCCB 
5/05), Shannon here turns his hand to the classic counting book, with a clever and 
stealthily simple text that plays collective nouns against countable individual nouns. 
The concept of one seems familiar enough, but the trickiness becomes apparent 
with two: “One is two./ One pair of shoes. One team of horses./ One family.” 
The book works its way up to ten, identifying as it goes a multitude of thought-
provoking collectives (“One bunch of bananas”; “One flock of birds”; “One flight 
of stairs”) and ending each small verse with “One family”; a closing (“One earth. 
July/August 2015 • 565
One world./ One family”) takes the collective larger and makes it a warmhearted 
statement. The text is focused and precise, and the examples are often friendly 
(“One pile of pups”) and sometimes rhyming (“One house of bears. One bowl of 
pears”), making for a cozy readaloud that trips agreeably off the tongue. The round-
headed Fisher-Price style of Gomez’s figures and the slightly shaded retro tones of 
teal, rust, forest green, and peach give the digital art a gently old-fashioned flavor, 
but the thoroughly multicultural cast is highly contemporary. There’s an entertain-
ing seek-and-find element to the cited objects, perfect for sharp young eyes, and 
a closing spread identifies all the countable objects spread by spread. Complicate 
your counting curricula in the nicest possible way with this.  DS
shePherD, MegAn The Cage. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2015 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-224305-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-224307-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
When sixteen-year-old Cora wakes up in a strange place, her assumption that she’s 
being held for ransom quickly gives way to the realization that she, along with other 
teens, has been kidnapped by aliens for a strange human science experiment. Now, 
trapped in a seemingly edgeless biosphere and treated like lab rats, Cora and her 
fellow captives must learn to navigate mazes, solve puzzles, and procreate to ensure 
their survival. At first, the teens unite over fear and a desire to escape, but soon 
secrets, suspicions, and hidden agendas cause the group to splinter. Some learn to 
adapt, happily playing along and starting relationships, and others break under the 
pressure, while Cora finds herself increasingly isolated and seeking solace in con-
versations with Cassian, the handsome alien in charge of their care. But Cassian is 
hiding secrets of his own, and even as Cora begins to fall in love, revelations emerge 
that might derail her hopes for escape. With its complex and nuanced narrative, 
this novel offers compelling contemporary science fiction with a classic Star Trek 
flair. The plot moves at a steady pace, building on a series of reveals and thoughtful 
character development, and it blends emotional and psychological elements into a 
cohesive whole with plenty of drama and suspense. While the focus here is squarely 
on Cora, interspersed chapters on other characters round out perspectives on their 
captivity (especially in the face of harsh realities back on Earth) and give the novel 
added depth and intelligence. Intriguing, if underexplained, world-building will 
draw readers in, while plenty of unanswered questions, unresolved romances, and 
a last-page reveal will ensure their return for planned sequels.  AM 
sheth, kAshMirA Sona and the Wedding Game; illus. by Yoshiko Jaeg-
gi. Peachtree, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-56145-735-9 $16.95  
R 5-8 yrs
Sona’s big sister, Nisha-Ben, is about to be married, and Sona finds the learning 
curve of wedding ritual pretty steep. Relatives from India, particularly her know-
it-all cousin Vishal, are nearly as overwhelming as the litany of customs, and Sona 
is perplexed by their suggestion that she steal the bridegroom’s shoes: “And what 
will I do with his shoes, anyway?” Apparently, she’s supposed to take the shoes 
and then the groom has to bargain with her for their return, so Sona gamely plots 
her strategy through the hours filled with household decorating, henna applica-
tion, adorning the bride, and welcoming the groom’s arrival on horseback. Sona is 
566 • the Bulletin
forced to enlist Vishal’s assistance, and between the two of them, they pull off the 
shoe heist—switching the shoes bagged and guarded by the groom’s brother with 
Sona’s own during the ceremony itself, surprising her new brother-in-law with her 
cleverness and striking a perfect bargain that’s as certain to please the audience as 
it does Sona. Sheth explains in a closing note how the customs described in this 
fictional tale played out in Hindu weddings she and her family have attended, 
including the tradition of the groom removing his shoes to enter the sacred space 
of the wedding canopy, and the light-hearted game to which that tradition has 
given rise. Jaeggi’s figure drawing is not as consistently convincing as one might 
wish, and Vishal’s giggly impishness verges on cloying, but the gauzy profusion of 
silky saris, the girls-only mehndi party, bejeweled guests, and a white horse decked 
out in embroidery and tassels make the Western tradition of flower girl look—just 
perhaps—a teeny bit disappointing?  EB
shurtliff, liesl Jack: The True Story of Jack & the Beanstalk. Knopf, 
2015 296p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75580-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75579-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75581-8 $10.99  
R Gr. 3-5
He may have quite the track record of naughty behavior, switching out salt for sugar, 
putting spiders in his sister’s bed, and (accidentally) setting fire to the blacksmith’s 
shop, but twelve-year old Jack isn’t responsible for the nighttime raids on the fields 
surrounding his village. Named for his great-great-great-great-great-great-great 
grandpa, Jack the Giant Killer, Jack’s more than ready to believe that the pillaging 
is the work of giants, as the town tinker claims. When he sees his own beloved 
father abducted by giants who’ve descended from the sky, Jack not only has his 
suspicions confirmed, he has a much longed-for adventure, journeying into the 
giants’ land to save his papa. Shurtl creates a quick-moving plot incorporating ele-
ments of various fairy and folktales; readers will enjoy uncovering these allusions 
and they’ll get a kick out of Jack’s smart-aleck observations as he navigates the 
giants’ world, making new friends, negotiating temperamental pixies, and saving 
the realm from a gold-obsessed king. With a healthy dose of honor and integrity to 
accompany his wisecracking ways, Jack is a winning hero, and his adventures—both 
unexpected and recognizable—will please those readers with rollicking spirits or 
a yen for tales retold.  AA
sMith, lAne Return to Augie Hobble; written and illus. by Lane Smith. Roaring 
Brook, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-054-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-6
Fairy Tale Place, the fading amusement park owned by Augie Hobble’s family, has 
always been a strange place to grow up in, but lately Augie has been wondering if 
there’s something supernatural going on. An encounter with a wolfish creature in the 
nearby woods leaves Augie sprouting some mysterious hair, pets are going missing, 
and strange, jumbled entries are appearing in Augie’s journal—entries he is sure he 
never wrote. Meanwhile there are the trials of everyday life as a middle-schooler to 
contend with, including bullying by the obnoxious Hogg Wills, Augie’s failure in 
Creative Arts class, and his best friend’s vacation that will leave Augie friendless and 
July/August 2015 • 567
alone. A quirky setting with a host of eccentric characters places this in seemingly 
familiar territory, and Smith’s frequent black and white illustrations, along with 
Augie’s cartoons and handwritten stories, add humor and accessibility. The twists 
and turns into supernatural happenings initially make for a pleasingly off-kilter 
trajectory, but when the book suddenly veers into real tragedy, the shock is jarring 
and the continuous comedy seems at odds with the overwhelming loss that Augie 
experiences. At the heart of the story, though, is a connection between two boys 
that transcends even death, and readers willing to overlook the tonal inconsistencies 
will find an emotionally resonant reflection on friendship and loss.  KQG 
sMith, linDsAy Skandal. Roaring Brook. 2015 326p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-005-3 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-250-07369-3 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-006-0 $9.99  
R Gr. 8-10
In this sequel to the clever Sekret (BCCB 5/14), Yulia has left Russia behind and 
is trying to dive into 1960s American culture with no language skills, her psychic 
powers untrained, and her family still in peril. Yulia has agreed to work with the CIA, 
in part to stop the bad guys she ran away from in Russia, and in part to help her 
family (her mother is still working closely with the KGB back in Russia). Her own 
doubts and anxieties, however, pervade everything: she’s uncertain about her own 
psychic skills and whether they can match the extrasensory powers of the KGB, and 
she feels unworthy to be with the most patient, adorable boyfriend ever (a defector 
as well). Yulia’s narration keeps readers locked in with her worries—even as they 
might see the confidence and faith others have in her, her own repeating concerns 
are much louder and more persistent. Her switch to action and an understanding 
that she must believe in herself to save what she loves offers palpable relief to Yulia 
and, likely, the reader as well. The communist Russia setting in the previous novel 
is replaced here with the Cold War–era U.S. and the details of teenaged-girl life 
in the mid-1960s, and Smith integrates setting effectively, making it into an extra 
element to which Yulia must adapt. A brief author’s note provides political context 
for the story.  AS
sMith, MAtthew clArk Small Wonders: Jean-Henri Fabre & His World of Insects; 
illus. by Giuliano Ferri. Two Lions, 2015 [42p]
ISBN 978-1-4778-2632-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
At a time when naturalists were more inclined to describe the physical characteristics 
of species than observe their behavior, nineteenth-century Frenchman Jean-Henri 
Fabre translated his childhood fascination with insects into the work of a very long, 
if often quite secluded, life—so long and secluded, in fact, that neighbors were 
thoroughly baffled when the French president arrived to visit the elderly man at his 
home. That opening scene segues into a flashback of Fabre’s life. Frequent moves 
and family sorrows threatened to derail his studies, but he nonetheless established a 
teaching and writing career in which he reported frankly on Nature’s seamier side: 
“When the authorities found out what he was teaching, they were not pleased. 
The bloodthirsty exploits of ant warriors? The secret love life of plants? Before he 
knew it, Henri was out of a job.” He persisted in his writing, though, adopting an 
authorial style of such grace that his Souvenirs entomologiques earned him a nomina-
568 • the Bulletin
tion for the Nobel Prize in Literature. Although the picture-book format, with its 
whimsical exaggeration of the insects that would dominate Fabre’s life, may suggest 
a primary-grade audience, the lengthy text and details of the naturalist’s studies are 
better suited to middle-graders, who will benefit from the two-page historical note 
and the timeline that sets Fabre’s life in the context of world events. A brief list of 
sources is also included.  EB
sPector, toDD How to Pee: Potty Training for Boys; illus. by Arree Chung. Holt, 
2015 33p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9773-3 $12.99  
R 2-4 yrs 
Even if the mysteries of the porcelain bowl don’t initially entice a toddler, certainly 
being the center of parental attention and star of his own revue will. Here family 
practitioner Spector harnesses little tykes’ penchant for showmanship in service of 
toilet training, offering nine scenarios in which a little guy approaches this life skill 
as performance art. There is, for example, his Superhero Style in four easy steps: 
“Put on your cape”; “Don’t forget your mask”; “Put up your dukes”; and “Get the 
bad guy” with a urine stream directed at a stick figure villain crayoned onto a sheet 
of toilet paper. There’s Waterfall Style, which calls for climbing to the top of a small 
hill, carving a riverbed with a stick, and filling it with a, well, river. And, of course, 
there’s the venerable Firefighter Style in which the hero rushes to the bathroom to 
put out a fire and “turn on the hose!” The cartoon boy is clearly having a great time, 
while his parents gamely assume the role of audience rather than cheerleader, coach, 
or disciplinarian. Spector’s introductory and closing notes, aimed at parents, are 
calm and non-judgmental, delivered from the perspective of a good-natured dad as 
well as a doctor. Not everyone will embrace his laid-back “don’t worry about a few 
accidents on your floor” remark, but even parents reluctant to toss the diapers will 
want to hold up our peeing protagonist as a model. And what little guy wouldn’t 
want to try urinating on command when it’s obviously this much of a hoot.  EB
sPringstuBB, triciA Cody and the Fountain of Happiness; illus. by Eliza Wheel-
er. Candlewick, 2015 151p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5857-1 $14.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Middle-grader Cody is finding summer vacation a bit boring, since she only has 
her teenaged brother Wyatt around; Mom works all day and Cody’s dad, a truck 
driver, is often on the road. Luckily, Cody meets Spencer, who’s staying with his 
cool science-teacher grandmother, GG (Grandma Grace), and GG’s old, deaf cat, 
MewMew. Cody convinces Spencer that she can hypnotize MewMew, enabling the 
cat to safely roam outside; when the hypnosis seems successful, Cody and Spencer 
then try to hypnotize her babysitter (and Wyatt’s secret and unrequited crush), 
Payton, into falling in love with Wyatt. During the “hypnosis” Cody reveals Wyatt’s 
infatuation to Payton, who is surprised but also intrigued, while poor Wyatt wit-
nesses the revelation of his secret and MewMew ends up going missing in the com-
motion. Cody is a likable heroine who believably illustrates that the combination of 
good intentions and a fertile imagination doesn’t always lead to the best outcomes. 
Springstubb excels at giving Cody a credibly youthful and entertaining voice and 
at penning pithy, memorable descriptions and insights. Wheeler’s monochromatic 
ink and watercolor illustrations add warmth and detail to the middle-grade-friendly 
July/August 2015 • 569
text and its multicultural cast. Fans of Cleary’s classic Ramona series or McDonald’s 
Judy Moody titles may especially enjoy creative-minded Cody.  JH 
stevens, roBin Murder Is Bad Manners. Simon, 2015 307p (A Wells & 
Wong Mystery)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2212-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2214-7 $10.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Hazel Wong and her best friend, Daisy Wells, students at 
Deepdean School in 1930s England, aspire to be detectives. To that end they have 
formed a secret Detective Society, practicing their observational skills by snooping 
on their peers and teachers and memorizing license plates. When Hazel discovers 
science teacher Miss Bell dead in the gym one evening, and the corpse then disap-
pears before anyone else can witness it, the society has a real case at last (much to 
Daisy’s delight and Hazel’s trepidation). The pair put their deductive skills to work 
as they seek to solve the mystery of Miss Bell’s death, and gradually they begin to 
whittle down the suspect list, discovering a connection to a Deepdean student who 
“accidentally” died the previous year. Stevens’ story, narrated by Hazel, is a first-rate 
homage to English boarding school adventure and period murder-mystery tales. 
Hazel’s astute observations as a cultural outsider (she’s a native of Hong Kong) add 
an interesting layer of depth to the narrative while also making it more accessible 
to non-British audiences (a helpful “Guide to Deepdean,” provided by Daisy at 
book’s end, amusingly sheds more light on specific terminology). Spot art at the 
beginning of each chapter features Daisy and Hazel in silhouette and sporting 
flashlights, a satisfyingly correct period detail. Middle-schoolers with a taste for 
Agatha Christie (and perhaps PBS costume or mystery dramas) will eat this up 
and ask for more.  JH
stevenson, noelle Nimona; written and illus. by Noelle Stevenson. Harper-
Teen/HarperCollins, 2015 266p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227823-4 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227822-7 $12.99  
R* Gr. 7-10
Fans of the titular web comic will rejoice to see Nimona turned into a sharp, gor-
geous graphic novel; new readers who had no idea of the web presence have been 
missing out, but at least they have her in their lives now. Nimona has already 
decided that she is the new sidekick of Ballister Blackheart, a supervillain who is 
the bitter enemy of the champion, Sir Ambrosius Goldenloin. It only takes a few 
pages to realize almost none of that previous sentence is true, as Blackheart is too 
fair and kind to be a true supervillain, Goldenloin is far from a real hero, and their 
history is complicated, messy, and unresolved, though they do mostly pretend to be 
enemies. Blackheart tries to send Nimona away, but he quickly spots that she needs 
him way more than he needs her, as she has little control over her remarkable (and 
exceedingly rare) shapeshifting power. He carefully begins to tame her, so to speak, 
but before he can make much progress she is kidnapped by the “good” guys for 
horrible purposes. Stevenson toys with comic-book archetypes while never mocking 
them; her characters are all complex, even though they appear to slide neatly into 
various hero and villain slots. The world-building is impeccable, with glimpses of 
a fascinating and troubling world that slowly coalesce into a fully realized society, 
where ignorance and fear have allowed for woefully unbalanced power structures. 
570 • the Bulletin
The vibrant digital illustrations are stunning, working seamlessly to move the story 
along as much as the text itself. While Stevenson primarily sticks with the panel 
format, dramatic scenes spill out of their boxes, and wordless pages demonstrate 
that sometimes all you need is a compelling image. Graphic novel fans will finish 
the book in a gallop and then want to start right back at the first page to see what 
they missed about Nimona’s mysterious background and identity.  AS
sturM, JAMes Sleepless Knight; written and illus. by James Sturm, Andrew Arnold, 
and Alexis Frederick-Frost. First Second, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-651-0 $14.99 
 R Gr. 2-4
A diminutive knight and his faithful steed, Edward, embark upon a camping trip 
in the wilderness—or at least, among the trees that stand a good ten yards or so 
from the castle. The knight has brought all the essentials—tent, marshmallows 
(thirty bags), and his beloved teddy—but come bedtime, his teddy bear has gone 
missing. Edward, deep in a marshmallow-induced snooze, is no help at all, and the 
knight must enlist a local bunny to help him find his bear. The bunny leads him 
to a bear—a real bear, who is put out at being awakened—and the knight leaves 
in haste. Returning to camp, he discovers Teddy beneath the sleeping Edward, but 
their reunion awakens the poor horse, who is then wide awake along with the bunny 
and bear, who followed the knight to the campground. The trio of animals enjoys a 
fireside songfest and marshmallow roast, while the knight snores the night away with 
Teddy. The snappy text, told completely in dialogue, and the cartoonish pictures 
successfully combine to humorous effect. The crisp, comics-style panels and fairly 
easy vocabulary make this accessible and appealing to strong primary-grade readers 
as well as middle-graders. The figures are simple (the knight’s helmeted head is a 
circle attached to a trapezoidal body with stick arms and legs) but expressive in their 
positioning, and varying font sizes and styles of the word bubbles add emotion to 
the narrative. Instructions for drawing the characters appear on the endpapers. Fans 
of Sturm’s Adventures in Cartooning titles (BCCB 7/09, etc.) may want to check 
out this more straightforward story; it might also make an entertaining companion 
to Thomas’ Good Night, Good Knight (BCCB 2/00).  JH
suMMers, courtney All the Rage. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-02191-5 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-02192-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 10-12
A year ago, Romy was raped at a party. Now she’s an outcast for accusing the sher-
iff’s son, she’s bullied at school by her assailant’s brother and his cronies, and she’s 
abandoned by her former best friend, Penny. She’s also physically and psychologically 
haunted by the crime, which shadows her slowly growing relationship with a nice 
coworker, Leon. When Romy finds herself at the infamous huge senior party by the 
lake, there’s a horrifying outcome: she’s left unconscious on a back road with “Rape 
Me” written on her in lipstick, and Penny has gone missing. Romy’s anguish domi-
nates her narration, and the details of her experience—the victim-blaming by her 
classmates, both boys and girls, and her keeping it all secret from her mother—are 
acutely observed. The picture of a small rural town is sharply drawn, with residents 
pragmatic about the futility of going against the town elite, and the sins of Romy’s 
drunken father used to convict his daughter. Penny’s disappearance adds a touch 
July/August 2015 • 571
of crime procedural that undermines the personal and social impact of Romy’s 
story, but it does offer some fruitful opportunities for contrasting her and Romy’s 
experiences. In fact, injustice and privilege are the major themes of the novel, and 
those are topics that ensure this book will elicit lively classroom discussion.  DS
suMMy, BArrie The Disappearance of Emily H. Delacorte, 2015 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90790-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73943-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89756-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Tired of being whisked from place to place whenever her mother gets her heart 
broken, Raine developed some skills at being the new girl, which include keep-
ing quiet about her ability to read people’s memories from traces left on physical 
objects. When she starts a new school in eighth grade, things are going reasonably 
well until she gets too curious about Jennifer, a mean girl who is torturing Shirlee, 
another new girl. Raine borrows Jennifer’s necklace in hopes that the memories 
that cling to it will provide some ammunition to fight back, but what she finds is 
more disturbing than she bargained for: Jennifer is implicated in the disappear-
ance of a girl named Emily, who used to live in Raine’s house. While Raine tries 
to figure out what happened, she and Shirlee devise a plan to get Jennifer to show 
her true colors, but when they get too close to the truth about Emily, they end up 
in grave danger. This is a captivating mystery predicated on the stuff of middle-
school drama. Raine’s extrasensory ability is a nifty device that gives her access to 
important clues, but she still needs to put them together and decide on an action 
plan. The portrayal of Jennifer’s bullying power is sadly credible, but Raine and 
Shirlee cleverly manage to curb her without turning into bullies themselves. De-
spite her powers, Raine is a believably moody eighth-grader with the right mix of 
gumption and vulnerability to make her likable. Fans of Peter Abrahams’s Echo 
Falls mysteries will enjoy this.  KC 
sweeney, DiAnA The Minnow. Text Publishing, 2015 263p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-922182-01-2 $9.95  
R Gr. 10-12
After losing her family in a flood that destroyed her small Australian town, fourteen-
year-old Tom moves in with Bill, a character as shady as he is randy; once he discovers 
that Tom is in fact a girl, the two “mucked around a bit until I’d had sex,” Tom says. 
Their mucking around leaves Tom with the Minnow, which is what she calls her 
unborn child. Tom moves in with her gay best friend, Jonah, who has also lost his 
family in the flood, and the gentle rhythms of their grief become entangled with 
preparing for the baby, easing back into school, and, for Jonah, finding love. Tom 
can communicate with the Minnow, who is prescient when it comes to predicting 
trouble; she also converses with the ghosts of her grandfather, who hangs around her 
grandmother in the old folks’ home; her sister, who hasn’t quite settled into death; 
and an elderly carp, who is leading Tom back into the waters around her home in 
search of answers that will give her peace. The voices of all of these ethereal beings 
render the story atmospheric and lyrical if a bit gauzy; readers travel with Tom in 
and out of her surface reality, which becomes even more tenuous as she experiences 
complications with the pregnancy. The surreal quality of the prose gets the tone 
just right for the unthinkably tragic circumstances of the devastating flood; one can 
572 • the Bulletin
certainly understand that the real world might take quite a while to return to its 
proper place in the aftermath of losing everything you’ve ever known and discover-
ing new life inside you. Readers seeking melancholy beauty will find it here.  KC 
vAughn, J. D. The Second Guard. Disney Hyperion, 2015 415p
ISBN 978-1-4231-6909-3 $16.99  
R Gr. 6-9
Tali of the Sun Guild has always accepted the fact that when she is fifteen, she will 
go and train for the Second Guard, an elite group that protects the Queen. Tali 
quickly teams up with Zarif and Chey, two kind boys who become her fierce allies, 
and together they break some rules, subvert a few paradigms, and (mostly) manage 
to stay out of danger as they stumble into mysteries that are none of their business. 
Even more interesting than the political machinations that shape the plot is the 
setting of Tequende itself and its social stratification into three separate groups, 
the Sun Guild, the Moon Guild, and the Earth Guild. While there are occasional 
dips into earnest lessons about tolerance and diversity, the writing duo behind the 
pen name mostly let the characters blunder into true understanding of cultural 
diversity on their own, creating meaningful movement away from a lifetime of 
incorrect assumptions. Each chapter begins with a page out of a collected history 
of Tequende, a device that offer bursts of insight into the background of how this 
particular political system evolved.  AS
voAke, chArlotte Melissa’s Octopus and Other Unsuitable Pets; written and illus. 
by Charlotte Voake. Candlewick, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7481-6 $16.99  
R 4-6 yrs
Melissa’s octopus may be a showstopper of a pet (“What a splendid creature he 
is”), but his bathing habits are sloppy; Thomas and Betty can never find their pets 
(mole and chameleon). Arthur’s warthog is overbearing while Caroline’s giraffe is 
too tall, Simon can’t make heads or tails of his pet worm, and Peter’s elephant has 
an unfortunate habit of falling through the floor. Kevin and Bertrand’s crocodile 
may be stunning, but is he trustworthy around this group of small—and potentially 
tasty—children? A suggestion that he has eaten the lot of them is followed by a 
reassuring illustration of the children sitting together at a table (“Phew! They’re 
all having a snack”) but the closing picture implies that it may only be a matter 
of time before one of them becomes lunch. Many a kid has enjoyably speculated 
about owning such unsuitable pets, and there is plenty of entertainment value in 
Voake’s brief, drolly understated text and her lively pen and watercolor illustrations. 
Though this has great potential as a humorous readaloud, the simple text, printed 
in large red san serif type, is also fairly accessible to young readers (perhaps with a 
bit of support for words like “chameleon”). Printed on matte paper, the figures of 
the “pets” and their owners are presented in warm, rich hues (casually but carefully 
accented and outlined with thin black strokes) against an elegant pale gray back-
ground—except for the scene of the possibly full (of children) crocodile, in which 
the font changes to white capitals and the backdrop dramatically shifts to bright 
red. This could be an enjoyable addition to a pet-themed story session or a useful 
prompt for some what-if creative writing or drawing assignments.  JH
July/August 2015 • 573
wAlter, Jon Close to the Wind. Fickling/Scholastic, 2015 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-81662-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82298-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
After the soldiers come and his mother disappears, ten-year-old Malik travels with 
his grandfather, Papa, to a port city; Papa says Malik’s mother will meet them there 
and they will all board a vessel that will take them to a new life away from their 
war-torn land. When Papa allows supposed friends to remove his tooth to sell the 
prize diamond he has cemented therein, the friends take the diamond-studded 
tooth and disappear, leaving money for only one passage. Tricked into boarding 
the ship without Papa, Malik settles in among the orphaned refugees and cares for 
his smuggled cat until the young son of the rich man who robbed his grandfather 
initiates an exchange—Malik’s cat for the diamond. Though regretting his trade and 
scared to death that he will end up with nothing, Malik shows himself resourceful, 
tricky, brave, and wise in his dealings—in short, utterly worthy of his grandfather’s 
legacy. The third-person narration mostly shows events through Malik’s eyes, giving 
his story a credible naïveté and untrammeled hope that is ultimately rewarded, at 
least in part. Malik’s dilemma in trading the cat for the diamond ably shows the 
irony of value (“But the diamond didn’t make him happy. His cat had made him 
happy”) but also provides a softly poignant coming-of-age moment when Malik 
works out that his grandfather would have made the same trade and had the same 
regret. Malik’s story is simultaneously worldly and gentle, reminding readers that 
though life is sometimes breathtakingly disappointing and war can certainly bring 
out the worst in people, bad guys don’t always win in the end.  KC 
whiting, sue Portraits of Celina. Switch, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-63079-024-0 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
After the sudden death of her father, sixteen-year-old Bayley relocates with her fam-
ily from Sydney, Australia to a small town in the country, where they move into a 
house with its own tragic past. Forty years ago, Celina O’Malley, cousin to Bayley’s 
mom, walked to the school bus stop alone and was never seen again. Bayley finds 
a box of Celina’s old belongings in her room, and her fascination with the girl’s 
disappearance quickly becomes an obsession, especially when she begins to think 
that Celina’s spirit may be trying to tell her something. As Bayley’s family continues 
to spin out of control with grief, Celina’s ghost becomes more insistent, demand-
ing that Bayley take revenge on the man that took Celina’s life. Whiting relies too 
heavily on tired tropes (a scary encounter in the forest, a “psychic” friend, etc.) for 
this to be truly chilling, and the subplot involving the unraveling of Bayley’s fam-
ily is more a distraction than an atmospheric contribution to the chaos. The most 
intriguing character is Celina herself, remembered by others as a sweet, fun-loving 
girl but revealed as a rather cold and calculating teen through her interactions with 
Bayley. The plot is straightforward and the language accessible, so despite the book’s 
length the pages breeze by while this is not as sophisticated as Suma’s ghost story 
The Walls around Us (BCCB 6/15), this might still draw reluctant readers looking 
for a few scares.  KQG 
574 • the Bulletin
yohAleM, eve Cast Off: The Strange Adventures of Petra De Winter and Bram 
Broen. Dial, 2015 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42856-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Petra De Winter is accustomed to her father’s abuse, but when he 
chases her through the Amsterdam streets with an iron poker, she is finally desperate 
enough to stow away on a Dutch East India Company ship preparing to set sail. 
She’s discovered by Bram, the half-Dutch, half-Javanese son of the ship’s carpenter; 
Bram’s biracial status has left him virtually trapped aboard the ship, with no maternal 
family left in Java and no landing privileges in his father’s homeland. His one hope 
for freedom is to secure official papers of legitimacy, for which he will need the 
captain’s recommendation, and to that end he strikes a bargain with Petra. He’ll 
keep her presence secret if she will help ingratiate him with Captain De Ridder by 
performing some of Bram’s shipboard tasks. At first, the arrangement works well; 
Petra, who is used to meticulous management of her father’s household, is happi-
est when she’s working; Bram is steadily rising in De Ridder’s esteem as a valued 
crew member. Petra, however, comes down with a serious fever and must see the 
ship’s doctor, who discovers their ruse. Soon the crew turns against Petra and Bram, 
superstitiously blaming any misfortune on the presence of a female. Although com-
parisons of Petra with the spirited heroines of Avi’s The True Adventures of Charlotte 
Doyle (BCCB 11/90) and Meyer’s Bloody Jack (BCCB 12/02) are inevitable, this 
is as much Bram’s story as Petra’s, and the setting aboard a seventeenth-century 
commercial vessel—carrying Dutch East India Company payroll and thus a target 
for piracy and mutiny—offers opportunity to refresh a well-worn plot. It’s nearly 
unthinkable that Yohalem will abandon her protagonists on the lonely island on 
which they’re last seen, so keep your eyes peeled for a sequel.  EB
zAPPiA, frAncescA Made You Up. Greenwillow, 2015 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229010-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229012-0 $10.99  
R Gr. 9-12
While schizophrenia doesn’t ordinarily manifest until the late teens, Alex had her first 
hallucination when she was seven and received her official diagnosis when she was 
thirteen. Her meds are somewhat effective, but her most successful coping strategy 
is to take pictures, which retain the real when the paranoid delusions disappear. 
Following an incident where she graffitied the word “Communists” on the gym 
floor of her high school, she is set to enter a new school, where she has been assigned 
mandatory community service through an afterschool club run by a strange boy 
named Miles. Alex believes that Miles might be connected to the hallucination she 
had when she was seven, but he won’t admit to knowing her, and the two embark 
on a prank war. She also learns that her principal has a weird obsession with the 
gym’s scoreboard and that Miles pulls elaborate pranks for money. While much of 
the narration focuses on Alex’s deadpan but amusing attempts to sort reality from 
hallucination, the action centers on the mystery of how the principal, the scoreboard, 
and a mean-girl wannabe connect, and on figuring out Miles, who is as much an 
enigma to himself as to everyone around him. The storytelling texture here recalls 
Andrew Smith and Sean Beaudoin but with less edge and more sensitivity to Alex’s 
plight; there are some seriously bizarre goings-on at this school, but since Alex is 
July/August 2015 • 575
so convinced of her unreliability, she (and the reader) are never quite sure what 
is real and what is a product of Alex’s paranoid imagination. In the end, though, 
there are moments of genuine tragedy redeemed by the acceptance Miles and Alex 
find in each other amidst all of their imperfections; if love doesn’t conquer all, it 
certainly makes the battles easier to bear. Readers who like their romances strange 
will enjoy this quirky trip.  KC 
576  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Downes; Gilbert; 
Meyer; Yohalem
ADventure: Cameron; Funke; 
Hannigan; Jury; Krisp; Maas; 
ross; Schmidt; Shurtliff; Smith, 
Lindsay; Stevenson; Yohalem
African Americans: Golio
African Americans–fiction: Brocken-
brough; Cabot; Moskowitz
African Americans–stories: Derby
Agriculture: Frydenborg
Aliens–fiction: Jury; Shepherd
Animals: rosenthal
Animals–stories: Garton; Leathers; 
Potter
Animals–poetry: Paschkis
Babies–stories: Plecas
Bears–stories: Hudson
BiLinGuAL BooKS: Lozano; 
Paschkis
BioGrAPHieS: Christensen; Go-
lio; Smith, M.
Boarding schools–fiction: Stevens
Boys: Spector
Brothers–fiction: Gilbert
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Hogan
Bullying–fiction: DeFelice; Summy
Camping–fiction: Sturm
Cats–fiction: Springstubb
Cats–stories: Leathers; Potter
Clothes–stories: Lozano
Cold War–fiction: Smith, Lindsay
ConCePt BooKS: Shannon; 
Spector
CountinG BooKS: Shannon
Crime and criminals: Blumenthal
Crime and criminals–fiction: Baskin; 
Bomback; Gilbert; Hoyle; ryan; 
Schmidt; Stevens; Summers
Cults–fiction: Hoyle
Death–fiction: Kuhlman; Smith, 
Lane
Depression, the–fiction: Brocken-
brough
DeteCtive StorieS: Hannigan; 
Latham; Stevens
Disabilities–fiction: ockler
Disasters–fiction: Sweeney
Ducks–stories: Hudson
Dystopias–fiction: ross
eating disorders–fiction: Moskowitz
eSP–fiction: Smith, Lindsay; 
Summy
Ethics and values: Alcott; Bomback; 
Brockenbrough; Summers
Fairies–fiction: Maas
Families–fiction: Baskin; Des-
sen; Haydu; Hubbard; nielsen; 
Schmidt; Scofield; Whiting
Families–stories: Bunting; Sheth 
FAntASY: Britt; Galveston; Har-
rold; Hegarty; Krisp; Lieb; Maas; 
noble; Shurtliff; Stevenson; 
vaughn
Fathers–fiction: Gilbert; nielsen
Fear–stories: Potter 
Flies–stories: Horácˇek
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: 
Latham; Meyer; Shurtliff
Food and eating: Frydenborg
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
July/AugusT 2015  •  577
Friends: Alifirenka
Friends–fiction: Baskin; DeFelice; 
Harrold; Haydu; Springstubb; 
Summers; vaughn
Friends–stories: Hudson
Future–fiction: Cameron
Games–stories: Derby
Ghosts–fiction: Whiting
GLBtQ people: Bausum
GLBtQ people–fiction: Moskowitz
Grandparents–fiction: Walter
Grandparents–stories: Derby
GrAPHiC noveLS: Hosler; Steven-
son; Sturm
Grief–fiction: Sweeney; Whiting
Guns: Blumenthal
Hallucinations–fiction: Downes
Hindus–stories: Sheth 
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: Hannigan; 
Holt; MacColl; Scofield; Stevens; 
Yohalem
History, U.S.: Bausum; Blumenthal
History, world: Frydenborg; Hoose
Horror: Kuhlman
HuMor: Barnett; Galveston; Gar-
ton; Horácˇek; Hudson; Leathers; 
Lieb; Lozano; Pichon; Plecas; Pot-
ter; Smith, Lane; Spector; Sturm; 
voake 
Hypnosis–fiction: Springstubb
identity–fiction: ryan
identity–stories: Hudson
illness–fiction: Schmidt
imagination–fiction: Britt
imagination–stories: Derby; Garton 
immigration–fiction: Walter
insects: Smith, M.
insects–fiction: Hosler
insects–stories: Horácˇek 
ireland–fiction: Hegarty
Kidnapping–fiction: Shepherd
Knights–fiction: Sturm
Language arts: Paschkis; rosenthal; 
Shannon
Language–stories: Plecas
Latinos–stories: Lozano
Legends, Arthurian: Lieb
Letter-writing–fiction: Holt
Letters: Alifirenka
Literature, American: MacColl
Magic–fiction: Meyer
Maps–fiction: Bomback
Marine biology: Montgomery
Mental illness–fiction: Downes; Sco-
field; Zappia
Mermaids–fiction: noble
Mice–stories: Leathers
Missing persons–fiction: Summers 
Monsters–fiction: Hegarty
Mothers–fiction: Constantine
Moving–stories: Bunting
Music and musicians: Christensen; 
Golio
Music and musicians–fiction: Con-
stantine; Pichon
Muslims–fiction: Latham
MYSterieS: Latham; MacColl; 
Stevens; Summy
Nature study: Montgomery; Smith, 
M.
octopuses: Montgomery
orphans–fiction: Krisp
otters–stories: Garton
Pets–stories: voake
Pigs–fiction: Funke
Pirates–fiction: Funke 
PoetrY: Paschkis; Paul 
Political activism: Bausum 
Political science: Hoose
Pregnancy–fiction: Sweeney
Prejudice–fiction: vaughn
Prophecies–fiction: Hubbard
racism–fiction: Brockenbrough
rats–fiction: Lieb
Reading aloud: Barnett; Holt; Pasch-
kis
Reading, beginning: voake 
Reading, easy: Barnett; Funke; 
Springstubb; Sturm
Reading, reluctant: Funke; Hoyle
refugees–fiction: Walter
relationships–fiction: Alcott; Des-
sen; Gilbert; Haydu; Hubbard; 
Moskowitz
resistance movements: Hoose
rHYMinG StorieS: Paul; rosen-
thal 
578  •  The BulleTin
romance–fiction: Brockenbrough; 
Constantine; Dessen; Maas; ock-
ler; Zappia
royalty–fiction: Cabot
School–fiction: Alcott; Pichon; 
Summy; Zappia
Science: Hosler; Montgomery; Paul
Science and scientists: Montgomery
SCienCe FiCtion: Jury; Meyer; 
ross; Shepherd
Secrets–fiction: Baskin; Cameron; 
Holt; ryan
Sexual assault–fiction: Summers
Ships and sailing–fiction: Yohalem 
Shopping–stories: Derby 
Sisters–fiction: Cabot; Haydu; noble
Skunks–stories: Barnett
Space travel–stories: Garton
Spies and espionage–fiction: Smith, 
Lindsay
Stepfamilies–fiction: Hubbard; 
nielsen
Storytime: Hudson; Leathers; Plecas
Summer–fiction: DeFelice; Springs-
tubb
SuPernAturAL StorieS: Har-
rold; Hogan; Smith, Lane
teachers–fiction: Alcott
technology–fiction: Bomback
tHriLLerS: Hoyle; ryan; Smith, 
Lindsay
time–fiction: Britt
toilet training: Spector
underground railroad–fiction: Mac-
Coll
voyages and travel–fiction: noble; 
Walter; Yohalem
War–fiction: Walter
Water: Paul
Weddings–stories: Sheth
West indians–fiction: ockler
World War ii: Hoose
Writers and writing–fiction: MacColl
Yard sales–stories: Bunting
Zimbabwe: Alifirenka
Zombies–fiction: Kuhlman
July/August 2015 • 579
10 Times 10. Tullet. 233.
100 Sideways Miles. Smith. 128.
17 First Kisses. Allen. 4.
99 Days. Cotugno. 484.
Abawi. Secret Sky. 142.
Abdul-Jabbar. Stealing the Game. 386.
Abirached. I Remember Beirut. 192.
About That Night. McClintock. 217.
Above the Dreamless Dead. Duffy. 150.
Absolutely Almost. Graff. 24.
Absolutely Truly. Frederick. 254.
Accidental Highwayman. Tripp. 279.
Adrenaline Crush. Crompton. 201.
Adrian and the Tree of Secrets. Hubert. 
315.
Adrian. Tunnel Vision. 344.
Afterworlds. Westerfeld. 180.
Aguirre. Mortal Danger. 84.
Ahdieh. Wrath and the Dawn. 478. 
Ain. Starring Jules (Third Grade Debut). 
192.
Akins. Loop. 143.
Albaugh. Because I Am a Girl. 268.
Albee. Why’d They Wear That? 345.
Albertalli. Simon vs. the Homo Sapiens 
Agenda. 436.
Alcott. Even When You Lie to Me. 534.
Alender. Famous Last Words. 246
Alex as Well. Brugman. 303.
Alex Crow. Smith. 385.
Alexander. Ambassador. 193.
Ali. Denenberg. 149.
Alifirenka. I Will Always Write Back. 535.
Alistair Grim’s Odditorium. Funaro. 399. 
Alko. Case for Loving. 345.
All Four Stars. Dairman. 94.
All the Answers. Messner. 458.
All the Bright Places. Niven. 364.
All the Rage. Summers. 570.
Allen. 17 First Kisses. 4.
Alloway. Dreamfire. 437.
Almond. Tightrope Walkers. 387. 
Althea & Oliver. Moracho. 270.
Alvin Ho: Allergic to the Great Wall, the 
Forbidden Palace, and Other Tourist 
Attractions. Look. 115.
Amato. Get Happy. 296.
Amazing Age of John Roy Lynch. Barton. 
481.
Ambassador. Alexander. 193.
Ambush of Tigers. Rosenthal. 562.
And Then Comes Christmas. Brenner. 197.
And Two Boys Booed. Viorst. 280.
Anders. Frostborn. 193.
Andersen. Snow Queen. 297.
Anderson, Jodi. Vanishing Season. 5.
Anderson, John. Minion. 5.
Andrews, A. Some Assembly Required. 
297.
Andrews, T. Trombone Shorty. 479.
Angel. Things I’ll Never Say. 437.
Angelini. Trial by Fire. 85.
Animals’ Santa. Brett. 197.
Anna & Solomon. Snyder. 67.
Antony. Betty Goes Bananas. 247.
_____. Please, Mr. Panda. 346.
Any Questions? Gay. 256.
Anybody Shining. Dowell. 96.
T h e B u l l e T i n
 
of the Center for Children’s Books
auThor/TiTle index, volume 68
sepTemBer, 2014—july/augusT, 2015
580 • the Bulletin
Anyone but Ivy Pocket. Krisp. 553.
Apocalypse Bow Wow. Proimos. 416.
Appel. Pinstripe Pride. 346.
Appelt. When Otis Courted Mama. 387.
Apple and Rain. Crossan. 485.
Applegate. Ivan. 247. 
Arcady’s Goal. Yelchin. 237.
Arctic Code. Kirby. 499.
Arnett. Polaris. 298.
Arnold, A. Sleepless Knight. 570.
Arnold, D. Mosquitoland. 438.
Arnold, E. Infandous. 438.
_____. Question of Miracles. 298.
Arntson. Trap. 479.
Aronson. One Death, Nine Stories. 85.
As an Oak Tree Grows. Karas. 210.
As Red as Blood. Simukka. 127.
As White as Snow. Simukka. 517.
Ashley Bryan’s Puppets. Bryan. 90.
Ask the Dark. Turner. 470.
Aslan. Islands at the End of the World. 
143.
Aston. Nest Is Noisy. 480.
Atlantia. Condie. 250.
Atteberry. Bunnies!!! 347.
Audacity. Crowder. 352.
Averbeck. Hitch at the Fairmont. 6.
Aveyard. Red Queen. 299.
Avi. Catch You Later, Traitor. 439.
Axelrod. Law of Loving Others. 299.
Baby Bedtime. Fox. 101.
Baby Swap. Ormerod. 461.
Baby Tree. Blackall. 9.
Bachmann. Cabinet of Curiosities. 6.
Bacigalupi. Doubt Factory. 144.
Backwards Moon. Losure. 164.
Bad Magic. Bosch. 146.
Badger Knight. Erskine. 97.
BAH! Said the Baby. Plecas. 561.
Bair. Bullies of Wall Street. 439.
Baker, K. Little Green Peas. 86.
Baker, M. If You Find This. 480.
Baking Day at Grandma’s. Denise. 150.
Balak. Stranger. 440.
Balliett. Pieces and Players. 481.
Banash. Silent Alarm. 388.
Bane Chronicles. Clare. 250.
Bang. Buried Sunlight. 300.
Banks, A. Finding Serendipity. 347.
Banks, K. Max’s Math. 388.
Barbarian Lord. Smith. 67.
Bargaining. West. 335.
Barnett. Sam & Dave Dig a Hole. 144.
_____. Skunk. 535.
Barnhill. Witch’s Boy. 248.
Barnholdt. Through to You. 7.
Barton. Amazing Age of John Roy Lynch. 
481.
Baskin. Ruby on the Outside. 536.
Bauer. Tell Me. 86.
Bausum. Stonewall. 536.
_____. Stubby the War Dog. 7.
Be Not Afraid. Galante. 445.
Be Patient, Pandora! Holub. 108.
Bear and Duck. Hudson. 552.
Bear Ate Your Sandwich. Sarcone-Roach. 
369.
Beast Keeper. Coats. 304.
Beastkeeper. Hellisen. 356.
Beaufrand. Rise and Fall of the Gallivant-
ers. 482.
Beauty of the Broken. Waters. 179.
Because I Am a Girl. McCarney. 268. 
Because They Marched. Freedman. 255.
Becker, A. Quest. 8.
Becker, B. Library Book for Bear. 8.
Becker, H. Dirk Daring, Secret Agent. 194.
Becker, S. Kate the Great. 86.
Bed for Kitty. Surovec. 176.
Bedtime at Bessie and Lil’s. Sternberg. 519.
Bee. Worst in Show. 389.
Beetle Boy. Willey. 181.
Beetle Busters. Burns. 198.
Beha. Secrets of Eastcliff-by-the-Sea. 145.
Bell, A. Snow Queen. 297.
Bell, Cathleen. I Remember You. 389.
Bell, Cece. El Deafo. 87.
Belzhar. Wolitzer. 182.
Ben Franklin’s Big Splash. Rosenstock. 123.
Beneath. Smith. 332.
Benson. Draw What You See. 348.
Bently. Meet the Parents. 9.
Berger. Finding Spring. 390.
Bergin. H2O. 194.
Berry. Scandalous Sisterhood of Prickwil-
low Place. 87.
Betts. Zac and Mia. 145.
Betty Bunny Loves Easter. Kaplan. 358.
July/August 2015 • 581
Betty Goes Bananas. Antony. 247.
Beware the Wild. Parker. 223.
Biddulph. Blown Away. 348.
Big Bad Baby. Hale. 105.
Big Bad Detective Agency. Hale. 312.
Big Blue Thing on the Hill. Zommer. 424.
Big Game. Smith. 468.
Big Red Kangaroo. Saxby. 370.
Biggie. Sullivan. 519.
Bilby. Wignell. 370.
Bingham. Circle, Square, Moose. 195.
Bird. There’s a Mouse Hiding in This Book! 
88.
Bird & Diz. Golio. 546.
Birdsall. Penderwicks in Spring. 390.
Birmingham. Tastes Like Music. 248.
Black, H. Darkest Part of the Forest. 301.
_____. Iron Trial. 88.
Black, P. Urban Outlaws. 195.
Black Dove. Wein. 524.
Black Ice. Fitzpatrick. 204. 
Blackall. Baby Tree. 9.
Blackbird Fly. Kelly. 406.
Blacker. Twyning. 249.
Blackfin Sky. Ellis. 97.
Blakemore. Spy Catchers of Maple Hill. 10.
Blind. DeWoskin. 19.
Bliss. No Parking at the End Times. 391.
Blizzard. Rocco. 191.
Block. Island of Excess Love. 89.
Blood in the Water. London. 115.
Bloom. Monkey Goes Bananas. 10.
Blown Away. Biddulph. 348.
Blue Lily, Lily Blue. Stiefvater. 232.
Blume. Julia and the Art of Practical Travel. 
349.
Blumenthal. Tommy. 537.
Boats Go. Light. 504.
Bodeen. Shipwreck Island. 10.
Bodies We Wear. Roberts. 226.
Bolden. Capital Days. 301.
Bomback. Mapmaker. 537.
Bombay Blues. Hidier. 107.
Bone Gap. Ruby. 367.
Book of Bad Things. Poblocki. 120.
Book of Storms. Hatfield. 313.
Book with No Pictures. Novak. 170.
Boom Boom. Naberhaus. 324.
Boone. Compulsion. 196.
Boorman. Winterkill. 146.
Booth. Kinda Like Brothers. 89.
Born in the Wild. Judge. 263.
Bosch. Bad Magic. 146.
Bottner. Miss Brooks’ Story Nook. 196.
Boulder Brothers. Lynn. 362.
Bow-Wow’s Nightmare Neighbors. New-
garden. 52.
Boy I Love. De Gramont. 252.
Boy in the Black Suit. Reynolds. 327.
Boy Next Door. Van Ark. 374.
Boyd. Flashlight. 146.
Boyne. Great War. 401.
Boys Don’t Knit. Easton. 444.
Boys Who Challenged Hitler. Hoose. 549.
Bradley, K. War That Saved My Life. 343.
Bradley, S. Henry Holton Takes the Ice. 
349.
Bradshaw. Everybody Knows Your Name. 
515.
Brave Chicken Little. Byrd. 199.
Breaking Sky. McCarthy. 456.
Breakout. Emerson. 398. 
Breathe, Annie, Breathe. Kenneally. 35.
Brennan. Bane Chronicles. 250.
Brenner. And Then Comes Christmas. 197.
Breslin. Dragon Stoorworm. 350.
Brett. Animals’ Santa. 197.
Brewer. Cemetery Boys. 391.
Brilliant Light of Amber Sunrise. Crow. 
395.
Brimner. Strike! 198.
Britt. Lost Track of Time. 538.
Brockenbrough. Game of Love and Death. 
538.
Brooks, J. In a World Just Right. 482.
Brooks, K. Bunker Diary. 483.
Brown, Jaye. No Place to Fall. 302.
Brown, Jennifer. Life on Mars. 350.
Brown, P. My Teacher Is a Monster! 11.
Brown, R. Stranger. 302.
Brown Girl Dreaming. Woodson. 3.
Browne. What If . . . ? 11.
Bruel. Wonderful Year. 302.
Brugman. Alex as Well. 303.
Bryan. Ashley Bryan’s Puppets. 90.
Bryant. Right Word. 147.
Buckingham. Terminals. 249.
Buckle and Squash. Courtauld. 484.
582 • the Bulletin
Bullies of Wall Street. Bair. 439.
Bunker Diary. Brooks. 483.
Bunnies!!! Atteberry. 347.
Bunting. Yard Sale. 539.
Buried Sunlight. Bang. 300.
Burleigh. Edward Hopper Paints His 
World. 90.
Burn. Jury. 552.
Burning Kingdoms. DeStefano. 486.
Burningham. Picnic. 12.
Burns. Beetle Busters. 198.
Bus Ride. Dubuc. 487.
Busch. Lion, Lion. 91.
Buxton. Temple Boys. 391.
Buzzeo. My Bibi Always Remembers. 91.
By Mouse & Frog. Freedman. 489.
Byrd. Brave Chicken Little. 199.
Byrne. This Book Just Ate My Dog! 199.
Cabinet of Curiosities. Bachmann. 6.
Cabot. From the Notebooks of a Middle 
School Princess. 539.
Cage. Shepherd. 565.
Calonita. Flunked. 483.
Camden. Tape. 92.
Cameron. Rook. 540.
Campbell, I. Troubles of Johnny Cannon. 
200.
Campbell, S. Hug Machine. 12.
Camper. Lowriders in Space. 249.
Can’t Look Away. Cooner. 93.
Capetta. Unmade. 440.
Capital Days. Bolden. 301.
Carey. In the Time of Dragon Moon.
Carnesi. Sleepover with Beatrice & Bear. 
147.
Carroll. Through the Woods. 13.
Carter, C. My Best Friend, Maybe. 13.
Carter, M. Splinters. 177.
Cartwheeling in Thunderstorms. Rundell. 
123.
Case for Loving. Alko. 345.
Case of the Stolen Sixpence. Webb. 234.
Case of the Vanishing Little Brown Bats. 
Markle. 167.
Cash. Bow-Wow’s Nightmare Neighbors. 
52.
Cast Off. Yohalem. 574.
Castaldo. Sniffer Dogs. 14.
Castellucci. Stone in the Sky. 441.
Castle Hangnail. Vernon. 523.
Cat & Bunny. Lundquist. 361.
Cat at the Wall. Ellis. 96.
Cat Napped! Hernandez. 107.
Cat, the Dog, Little Red, the Exploding 
Eggs, the Wolf, and Grandma. Fox. 
100.
Catch That Cookie! Durand. 202.
Catch You Later, Traitor. Avi. 439.
Categorical Universe of Candice Phee. 
Jonsberg. 110.
Catmull. Cabinet of Curiosities. 6. 
Cemetery Boys. Brewer. 391.
Centaur Rising. Yolen. 283.
Chabert. Eerie Elementary. 14.
Challenger Deep. Shusterman. 516.
Chaos of Stars. White. 180.
Chapman. XYZs of Being Wicked. 15.
Charisma. Ryan. 513.
Chasing Freedom. Grimes. 355.
Chasing Power. Durst. 203.
Chasing the Milky Way. Moulton. 49.
Cheaney. Somebody on This Bus Is Going 
to Be Famous. 92.
Chernobyl’s Wild Kingdom. Johnson. 262.
Cherry. For Real. 304.
Chevalier. Great War. 401. 
Chik Chak Shabbat. Rockliff. 122.
Child. New Small Person. 392.
Children Growing Up with War. Matthews. 
168.
Chimpanzee Children of Gombe. Goodall. 
256.
Chisholm. Buried Sunlight. 300.
Chocolate. Frydenborg. 543.
Chooky-Doodle-Doo. Whiten. 471.
Chosen Prince. Stanley. 421.
Christensen. Elvis. 541.
Chung. Ninja! 15.
Chupeco. Girl from the Well. 200.
Cipher. Ford. 353.
Circle of Stones. Fisher. 99.
Circle, Square, Moose. Bingham. 195.
City of Savages. Kelly. 317.
Clare. Bane Chronicles. 250.
_____. Iron Trial. 88.
Clariel. Nix. 271.
Clark. Finding Mr. Brightside. 442.
Clarkson. Sleeping Cinderella. 392.
July/August 2015 • 583
Cline-Ransome. Whale Trails. 393.
Close to the Wind. Walter. 573.
Clover’s Luck. George. 446.
Coat. Rhymoceros. 442.
Coats. Beast Keeper. 304.
Cody and the Fountain of Happiness. 
Springstubb. 568.
Cohn, A. Zoo Box. 148.
Cohn, E. Spirit’s Key. 93.
Cole. Wall. 201.
Colfer. Hangman’s Revolution. 16.
Collard. Fire Birds. 393.
Colossal. Rutabaga. 443.
Comics Squad. Holm. 30.
Coming Home. Ruth. 245.
Compulsion. Boone. 196.
Condie. Atlantia. 250.
Conkling. Passenger on the Pearl. 305.
Connolly. Monstrous. 394.
Connor. Things You Kiss Goodbye. 16.
Conspiracy of Us. Hall. 355.
Constantine. Secrets of Attraction. 541.
Conviction. Gilbert. 545.
Cook, E. Remember. 351.
Cook, M. Uncaged. 62. 
Cooner. Can’t Look Away. 93.
Cottage in the Woods. Coville. 394.
Cotugno. 99 Days. 484.
Courage for Beginners. Harrington. 106.
Courage of Cat Campbell. Lowe. 410.
Court of Thorns and Roses. Maas. 556.
Courtauld. Buckle and Squash. 484.
Coville. Cottage in the Woods. 394.
Coyle. Vivian Apple at the End of the 
World. 395.
Craze. Mapmaker. 537.
Crazy. Phillips. 273.
Creature Features. Jenkins. 261.
Crespo. Sock Thief. 484.
Crimson Bound. Hodge. 496.
Crompton. Adrenaline Crush. 201.
Cronin. Smick! 351.
Cronn-Mills. Transgender Lives. 251.
Crossan. Apple and Rain. 485.
Crow. Brilliant Light of Amber Sunrise. 
395.
Crowder. Audacity. 352.
Crowe. Death Coming up the Hill. 251.
Crown Affair. Ransom. 464.
Cruschiform. Full Speed Ahead! 252.
Cuckoo Song. Hardinge. 494.
Cullen. Dear Mr. Washington. 396.
Cupcake Cousins. Hannigan. 105.
Cure for Dreaming. Winters. 236.
Curious Cat Spy Club. Singleton. 517.
Curtis. Madman of Piney Woods. 94.
Cut Me Free. Johansson. 317.
Cutler. Susan Marcus Bends the Rules. 17.
Czukas. Top Ten Clues You’re Clueless. 
305.
Dairman. All Four Stars. 94.
Dale. Little White Lies. 306.
Dalrymple. Wrenchies. 17.
Daly. Emily’s Blue Period. 18.
Damaged. Reed. 225.
Damico. Hellhole. 306.
Danger Is Everywhere. O’Doherty. 365.
Darkest Part of the Forest. Black. 301.
Daughter of Deep Silence. Ryan. 563.
Davies, B. Storm Whale. 95.
Davies, N. Tiny Creatures. 18.
Davis, J. Map to Everywhere. 330.
Davis, K. Mr. Ferris and His Wheel. 19.
Dawson. Hit. 485.
_____. Servants of the Storm. 95.
Dayton. Seeker. 396.
DeFelice. Fort. 542.
de Fombelle. Vango. 202.
De Gramont. Boy I Love. 252.
de la Peña. Last Stop on Market Street. 
307.
Dead to Me. McCoy. 363.
Dear Hank Williams. Holt. 549.
Dear Mr. Washington. Cullen. 396.
Dear Wandering Wildebeest. Latham. 264.
Death by Toilet Paper. Gephart. 102.
Death Coming up the Hill. Crowe. 251.
Death of the Hat. Janeczko. 451.
DeCamp. My Near-Death Adventures 
(99% True!). 352.
DeKeyser. One Witch at a Time. 397.
Delacroix. Prickly Jenny. 486.
Delaney. New Darkness. 202.
Demetrios. Exquisite Captive. 148.
_____. I’ll Meet You There. 307.
Demon Notebook. McGann. 46.
Denenberg. Ali. 149.
Denise. Baking Day at Grandma’s. 150.
584 • the Bulletin
Denton Little’s Deathdate. Rubin. 513.
Derby. Sunday Shopping. 542.
Dessen. Saint Anything. 543.
DeStefano. Burning Kingdoms. 486.
Detective’s Assistant. Hannigan. 546.
Devil’s Intern. Hosie. 209.
Devine. Press Play. 253.
DeWoskin. Blind. 19.
Di Bartolo. In the Shadows. 72. 
Diamond Boy. Williams. 335.
Diamond Thief. Gosling. 257.
Diary of a Waitress. Meyer. 459.
DiCamillo. Leroy Ninker Saddles Up. 20.
Digby O’Day. Hughes. 159.
Digging a Hole to Heaven. Nelson. 51.
Dinosaur vs. School. Shea. 64.
DiPucchio. Gaston. 20.
Dirk Daring. Secret Agent. Becker. 194.
Disappearance of Emily H. Summy. 571.
Distance between Lost and Found. 
Holmes. 357.
Doctorow. In Real Life. 150.
Dog vs. Cat. Gall. 23.
Doll Graveyard. Ruby. 61.
Dominguez. Knit Together. 487.
Don. Tale of Tam Linn. 350.
Don’t Touch. Wilson. 235.
Door in the Moon. Fisher. 445.
Doubt Factory. Bacigalupi. 144.
Doug Unplugs on the Farm. Yaccarino. 
134.
Dowell. Anybody Shining. 96.
_____. Phineas L. MacGuire. . . Gets 
Cooking! 253.
Downes. Fell of Dark. 543.
Dr. Critchlore’s School for Minions. Grau. 
491.
Dragon Stoorworm. Breslin. 350.
Dragon’s Guide to the Care and Feeding of 
Humans. Yep. 424.
Dragons at Crumbling Castle. Pratchett. 
464.
Draper. Stella by Starlight. 308.
Draw What You See. Benson. 348.
Dreamfire. Alloway. 437.
Dreamwood. Mackey. 42.
Drive Me Crazy. McVoy. 506.
Drowned. Reilly. 59.
Drum Dream Girl. Engle. 444.
Druthers. Phelan. 120.
Dubuc. Bus Ride. 487.
Duck in the Fridge. Mack. 267.
Duffy. Above the Dreamless Dead. 150.
Dunn. Rebels by Accident. 308.
Durand. Catch That Cookie! 202.
Durst. Chasing Power. 203.
Dyckman. Wolfie the Bunny. 398.
Eagland. World Within. 443.
Earmuffs for Everyone! McCarthy. 322.
Easton. Boys Don’t Knit. 444.
Echo. Ryan. 368.
Eden West. Hautman. 495.
Edgar’s Second Word. Vernick. 132.
Edge of Nowhere. Smelcer. 128.
Edison’s Alley. Shusterman. 468.
Edward Hopper Paints His World. Bur-
leigh. 90.
Edwards, G. Never Ask a Dinosaur to Din-
ner. 488.
Edwards, K. Fly! 398.
Eerie Elementary. Chabert. 14.
Egg. Jenkins. 405. 
Egg & Spoon. Maguire. 166.
Ehrlich. Nest. 151.
El Deafo. Bell. 87.
Elevator Ghost. Huser. 109.
Elfman. Edison’s Alley. 468.
Elliott, D. This Orq. (he cave boy.). 151.
Elliott, J. Save Me. 309.
Ellis, D. Cat at the Wall. 96.
Ellis, K. Blackfin Sky. 97.
Elvis. Christensen. 541.
Ember in the Ashes. Tahir. 521.
Emerson. Breakout. 398. 
Emily’s Blue Period. Daly. 18.
Emma and the Blue Genie. Funke. 153.
Emmanuel’s Dream. Thompson. 372.
Endangered. Giles. 490.
Endgame. Frey. 311.
Engle. Drum Dream Girl. 
English. Skateboard Party. 309.
Ensnared. Howard. 314.
Erskine. Badger Knight. 97.
Esbaum. I Am Cow, Hear Me Moo! 20.
Escoffier. Take Away the A. 254.
Even in Paradise. Philpot. 273.
Even When You Lie to Me. Alcott. 534.
Every Breath. Marney. 215.
July/August 2015 • 585
Every Last Promise. Halbrook. 492.
Everybody Knows Your Name. Seigel. 515.
Everyone Dies in the End. Katcher. 35.
Everything Leads to You. LaCour. 37.
Everything That Makes You. McStay. 506.
Evil Librarian. Knudsen. 113.
Ewing. Jewel. 98.
Expiration Day. Powell. 57.
Exquisite Captive. Demetrios. 148.
Eyes Wide Open. Fleischman. 100.
Falkoff. Playlist for the Dead. 353.
Fairest. Meyer. 557.
Fall. Griffin. 206.
Falling into Place. Zhang. 238.
Family Romanov. Fleming. 22.
Family Ties. Paulsen. 53.
Famous Last Words. Alender. 246
Fantasmagory. Hanlon. 312.
Fantasy League. Lupica. 214.
Farmer and the Clown. Frazee. 152.
Farmer’s Away! Kennedy. 36.
Fart Squad. Pilger. 510.
Fat & Bones. Theule. 232.
Fat Boy vs. the Cheerleaders. Herbach. 29.
Fatal Fever. Jarrow. 404. 
FDR and the American Crisis. Marrin. 
320.
Fearless. Pass. 508.
Feiffer. Rupert Can Dance. 151.
Feinstein. Walk On. 203.
Fell of Dark. Downes. 543.
Feral Child. Golden. 23.
Ferals. Grey. 491.
Fetch. Hurley. 403.
Fichera. Played. 21.
Fiedler. Mouseheart. 98.
Finding Mr. Brightside. Clark. 442.
Finding Paris. Preble. 510.
Finding Ruby Starling. Rivers. 122.
Finding Serendipity. Banks. 347.
Finding Spring. Berger. 390.
Fine. Burn. 552.
_____. Of Metal and Wishes. 99.
Fine Dessert. Jenkins. 405.
Fiore. Just Like the Movies. 21.
Fire Artist. Whitney. 235.
Fire Birds. Collard. 393.
Fire Wish. Lough. 41.
Firebug. McBride. 116.
Firefight. Sanderson. 369.
First Flight Around the World. Grove. 448.
First Snow. McCarty. 322.
First Team. Green. 258.
Fish in a Tree. Hunt. 357.
Fisher, C. Circle of Stones. 99.
_____. Door in the Moon. 445.
Fisher, V. I Can Do It Myself. 22.
Fitzpatrick. Black Ice. 204. 
Flake. Unstoppable Octobia May. 99.
Flashlight. Boyd. 146.
Fleabrain Loves Franny. Rocklin. 172.
Fleischman. Eyes Wide Open. 100.
Fleming, C. Family Romanov. 22.
Fleming, D. Go, Shapes, Go! 310.
Florian. How to Draw a Dragon. 488.
Flunked. Calonita. 483.
Flutter & Hum. Paschkis. 560.
Fly! Edwards. 398.
Fly. Horácˇek. 550.
Fog Diver. Ross. 562.
Footer Davis Probably Is Crazy. Vaught. 
522.
For Real. Cherry. 304.
Forbidden. Little. 265.
Ford. Cipher. 353.
Forman. I Was Here. 310.
Fort. DeFelice. 542.
Found Things. Hilton. 30.
Founding Fathers! Winter. 378.
Fourteenth Goldfish. Holm. 31.
Fox, D. Cat, the Dog, Little Red, the Ex-
ploding Eggs, the Wolf, and Grandma. 
100.
Fox, M. Baby Bedtime. 101.
Frank Einstein and the Antimatter Motor. 
Scieszka. 63.
Frank. Two Girls Staring at the Ceiling. 
101.
Frazee. Farmer and the Clown. 152.
Frederick. Absolutely Truly. 254.
Frederick-Frost. Sleepless Knight. 570.
Freedman, D. By Mouse & Frog. 489.
Freedman, R. Because They Marched. 255.
Freeman. Orphan and the Mouse. 311.
Freitas. Tenderness of Thieves. 489.
French. My Cousin’s Keeper. 152.
Frey. Endgame. 311.
Frida & Diego. Reef. 58.
586 • the Bulletin
From the Notebooks of a Middle School 
Princess. Cabot. 539.
Froodle. Portis. 57.
Frostborn. Anders. 193.
Frydenborg. Chocolate. 543.
Full Speed Ahead! Cruschiform. 252.
Funaro. Alistair Grim’s Odditorium. 399. 
Funke. Emma and the Blue Genie. 153.
_____. Pirate Pig. 544.
Funny Face. Symes. 520.
Furniss. Year of the Rat. 255.
Gabi. Quintero. 274.
Gabriel Finley and the Raven’s Riddle. 
Hagen. 104.
Gaiman. Graveyard Book Graphic Novel 
Volume 1. 153.
_____. Graveyard Book Graphic Novel 
Volume 2. 204.
_____. Hansel and Gretel. 205.
Galante. Be Not Afraid. 445.
Galaxy’s Most Wanted. Kloepfer. 112.
Gale. Zoo at the Edge of the World. 102.
Gall. Dog vs. Cat. 23.
Galveston. In Todd We Trust. 544.
Game of Love and Death. Brockenbrough. 
538.
Game Seven. Volponi. 422.
Ganda. I Will Always Write Back. 535.
Gantos. Key That Swallowed Joey Pigza. 
141.
Garcia Sánchez. Lost in NYC. 518.
Garton. Otter in Space. 545.
Gaston. DiPucchio. 20.
Gavin. Room for Bear. 400.
Gay. Any Questions? 256.
Geek Girl. Smale. 420.
Gehl. One Big Pair of Underwear. 206.
Gemeinhart. Honest Truth. 446.
Genuine Sweet. Harkey. 494.
George. Clover’s Luck. 446.
Gephart. Death by Toilet Paper. 102.
Get Even. McNeil. 269.
Get Happy. Amato. 296.
Ghost Walls. Walker. 280.
Ghosting. Pattou. 119.
Ghosts of Heaven. Sedgwick. 331.
Giant Vehicles. Green. 25.
Gibbs. Space Case. 103.
Gilbert. Conviction. 545.
Giles. Endangered. 490.
Gingerbread for Liberty! Rockliff. 328.
Girl at Midnight. Grey. 492.
Girl Defective. Howell. 159.
Girl from the Well. Chupeco. 200.
Girl with the Glass Bird. Kerr. 407.
Give and Take. Raschka. 58.
Glamourpuss. Weeks. 377.
Glass Sentence. Grove. 27.
Glewwe. Sparkers. 154.
Glorkian Warrior Eats Adventure Pie. 
Kochalka. 408.
Glory O’Brien’s History of the Future. 
King. 161.
Go to Sleep, Little Farm. Ray. 172.
Go, Shapes, Go! Fleming. 310.
Goatilocks and the Three Bears. Perl. 55.
God Loves Hair. Shraya. 229.
Godkin. Skydiver. 103.
Golden. Feral Child. 23.
Goldstone. I See a Pattern Here. 447.
Golio. Bird & Diz. 546.
Gone Crazy in Alabama. Williams-Garcia. 
435.
Good Sister. Kain. 210.
Goodall. Chimpanzee Children of Gombe. 
256.
Goodnight Already! John. 262.
Gordon Parks. Weatherford. 470.
Gosling. Diamond Thief. 257.
Grabenstein. Island of Dr. Libris. 490.
Gracefully Grayson. Polonsky. 325.
Graff. Absolutely Almost. 24.
Graham Cracker Plot. Tougas. 177.
Graham, B. Vanilla Ice Cream. 155.
Graham, E. Night Sky Dragons. 272. 
Grant, G. Monstrous Affections. 163.
Grant, H. League of Beastly Dreadfuls. 
400. 
Gratton. Strange Maid. 24.
Grau. Dr. Critchlore’s School for Minions. 
491.
Graudin. Walled City. 257.
Gravel. Head Lice. 447.
_____. Jessie Elliot Is a Big Chicken. 25.
Graveyard Book Graphic Novel Volume 1. 
Gaiman. 153.
Graveyard Book Graphic Novel Volume 2. 
Gaiman. 204.
July/August 2015 • 587
Gray. Thousand Pieces of You. 257.
Great Ball of Light. Kuhlman. 553.
Green, R. Giant Vehicles. 25.
Green, T. First Team. 258.
Greene. Princess Posey and the First Grade 
Boys. 26.
Greenglass House. Milford. 220.
Greenwald. Katie Friedman Gives Up 
Texting! 354.
Gregorio. None of the Above. 448.
Grey, J. Ferals. 491.
Grey, Melissa. Girl at Midnight. 492.
Grey, Mini. Hermelin. 26.
Griffin, A. Unfinished Life of Addison 
Stone. 104.
Griffin, B. Fall. 206.
Griffin, N. Smashie McPerter and the 
Mystery of Room 11. 401. 
Grimes. Chasing Freedom. 355.
Grounded. Morrison. 507.
Grove, S. Glass Sentence. 27.
Grove, T. First Flight Around the World. 
448.
Growing Up Pedro. Tavares. 469.
Grün. Legend of Saint Nicholas. 27. 
Guarding Secrets. Jones. 498. 
Guys Read: True Stories. Scieszka. 125.
H2O. Bergin. 194.
Hagen. Gabriel Finley and the Raven’s 
Riddle. 104.
Hahn. Where I Belong. 155.
Halbrook. Every Last Promise. 492.
Hale, B. Big Bad Baby. 105.
_____. Big Bad Detective Agency. 312.
_____. Thicker Than Water. 28.
Hale, S. Princess Academy: The Forgotten 
Sisters. 493.
_____. Princess in Black. 155.
Half a World Away. Kadohata. 161.
Half Life of Molly Pierce. Leno. 38.
Hall, Maggie. Conspiracy of Us. 355.
Hall, Michael. It’s an Orange Aardvark! 28.
Hall, T. Shadow of the Wolf. 493.
Hand. Last Time We Say Goodbye. 449.
Hangman’s Revolution. Colfer. 16.
Hanlon. Fantasmagory. 312.
Hannigan. Cupcake Cousins. 105.
_____. Detective’s Assistant. 546.
Hansel and Gretel. Gaiman. 205.
Harazin. Painless. 356.
Hardinge. Cuckoo Song. 494.
Harkey. Genuine Sweet. 494.
Harlem Hellfighters. Lewis. 114.
Harrington. Courage for Beginners. 106.
Harris, R. What’s So Yummy? 156.
Harris, T. Perfect Place. 258.
Harrold. Imaginary. 547.
Harwell. Spider Ring. 313.
Hasak-Lowy. Me Being Me Is Exactly as 
Insane as You Being You. 495.
Hatfield. Book of Storms. 313.
Hatke. Julia’s House for Lost Creatures. 
259.
Haughton. Shh! 156.
Hautala. Waiting for Unicorns. 313.
Hautman. Eden West. 495.
Hawkins. Miss Mayhem. 495.
Haydu. Making Pretty. 547.
Head Lice. Gravel. 447.
Headley. Magonia. 449.
Healy. Love & Profanity. 50.
Heapy. Very Little Red Riding Hood. 106.
Hegarty. Legends Begin. 548.
Heinz. Mocha Dick. 157.
Hellhole. Damico. 306.
Hellisen. Beastkeeper.  356.
Hello, I’m Johnny Cash. Neri. 117.
Hendrix. Shooting at the Stars. 207.
Henn. Where Bear? 402.
Henry Holton Takes the Ice. Bradley. 349.
Henry Hubble’s Book of Troubles. Myer. 
507.
Heos. I, Fly. 496.
Heppermann. Poisoned Apples. 207.
Herbach. Fat Boy vs. the Cheerleaders. 29.
Here Comes Santa Cat. Underwood. 233.
Hermelin. Grey. 26.
Hernandez. Cat Napped! 107.
Herthel. I Am Jazz. 107.
Hiaasen. Skink. 157. 
Hickory Dickory Dog. Murray. 50.
Hidden. Napoli. 364.
Hidier. Bombay Blues. 107.
High. Teeny Little Grief Machines. 208.
Hill. Rethinking Normal. 314.
Hills. Rocket’s 100th Day of School. 259.
Hilmo. Skies Like These. 29.
Hinds. Macbeth. 419.
588 • the Bulletin
Hilton. Found Things. 30.
Hippos Are Huge! London. 455.
History of Money. Jenkins. 32.
Hit. Dawson. 485.
Hit Count. Lynch. 505.
Hitch at the Fairmont. Averbeck. 6.
Hoban. Jim’s Lion. 260.
Hodge. Crimson Bound. 496.
Hoffman. Nightbird. 450.
Hogan. Messengers. 548.
Hokenson. Leif ’s Journey. 402.
Hold Me Closer. Levithan. 410.
Hold Me Like a Breath. Schmidt. 563.
Hold Tight, Don’t Let Go. Wagner. 374.
Holm. Comics Squad. 30.
_____. Fourteenth Goldfish. 31.
Holmes. Distance between Lost and 
Found. 357.
Holt, K. A. Rhyme Schemer. 158.
Holt, Kimberly. Dear Hank Williams. 549.
Holtei. In the New World. 511.
Holub. Be Patient, Pandora! 108.
Honest Truth. Gemeinhart. 446.
Hood. Tickly Toes. 109.
Hook’s Revenge. Schulz. 174.
Hoose. Boys Who Challenged Hitler. 549.
Hoot Owl. Taylor. 421.
Hopkins. Rumble. 158.
Horácˇek. Fly. 550.
_____. Mouse Who Ate the Moon. 208.
Hosie. Devil’s Intern. 209.
Hosler. Last of the Sandwalkers. 550.
Houts. Winterfrost. 109.
How It Went Down. Magoon. 166.
How to Catch a Mouse. Leathers. 554.
How to Draw a Dragon. Florian. 488.
How to Draw with Your Funny Bone. 
Smith. 518.
How to Pee. Spector. 568.
How to Speak Cat. Newman. 414.
How to Win at High School. Matthews. 
455.
Howard, A. Ensnared. 314.
Howard, J. Tracers. 315.
Howell. Girl Defective. 159.
Howson. Unravel. 31.
Hoyle. Thirteen. 551.
Hubbard. Watch the Sky. 551.
Hubert. Adrian and the Tree of Secrets. 
315.
Hudson. Bear and Duck. 552.
Hug Machine. Campbell. 12.
Hughes. Digby O’Day. 159.
Hunt. Fish in a Tree. 357.
Hunt for the Bamboo Rat. Salisbury. 173.
Hunters of the Great Forest. Nolan. 221. 
Hurley. Fetch. 403.
Huser. Elevator Ghost. 109.
I Am a Witch’s Cat. Muncaster. 50.
I Am Cow, Hear Me Moo! Esbaum. 20.
I Am Her Revenge. Moore. 460.
I Am Jazz. Herthel. 107.
I Can Do It Myself. Fisher. 22.
I Don’t Want To Be a Frog. Petty. 509.
I Feel Five! Murguia. 116.
I Got the Rhythm. Schofield-Morrison. 63.
I Love I Hate I Miss My Sister. Sarn. 124.
I Remember Beirut. Abirached. 192.
I Remember You. Bell. 389.
I See a Pattern Here. Goldstone. 447.
I Was Here. Forman. 310.
I Will Always Write Back. Alifirenka. 535.
I Wish I Had a Pet. Rudy. 61.
I, Fly. Heos. 496.
I’ll Give You the Sun. Nelson. 221.
I’ll Meet You There. Demetrios. 307.
I’m Glad I Did. Weil. 377.
I’m Gonna Climb a Mountain in My Pat-
ent Leather Shoes. Singer. 128.
I’m My Own Dog. Stein. 69.
Ice Dragon. Martin. 321.
Icinori. Issun Bôshi. 260.
Ida M. Tarbell. McCully. 46.
Ieronimo. Thirst for Home. 32.
If. Smith. 66.
If I Had a Raptor. O’Connor. 52.
If I Had a Triceratops. O’Connor. 415.
If You Find This. Baker. 480.
If You Were a Dog. Swenson. 277.
If You’re Reading This. Reedy. 121.
Illusions of Fate. White. 181.
Imaginary. Harrold. 547.
In a World Just Right. Brooks. 482.
In Mary’s Garden. Kügler. 500.
In Real Life. Doctorow. 150.
In the New World. Raidt. 511.
In the Shadows. White. 72.
In the Time of Dragon Moon. Carey. 441.
In Todd We Trust. Galveston. 544.
July/August 2015 • 589
Incredible Space Raiders from Space! King. 
318.
Infandous. Arnold. 438.
Infected. Littlefield. 320.
Inherit Midnight. Myers. 413.
Inside Charlie’s Chocolate Factory. Man-
gan. 167.
Intergalactic Pizza. Yaccarino. 183.
Into the Grey. Kierman. 111.
Invaded. Landers. 409.
Inventions That Could Have Changed the 
World . . . But Didn’t. Rhatigan. 417.
Invincible. Reed. 512.
Irene’s Wish. Nolen. 222.
Iron Trial. Black. 88.
Isadora. Jake at Gymnastics. 110.
Isbell. Prey. 316.
Island of Dr. Libris. Grabenstein. 490.
Island of Excess Love. Block. 89.
Islands at the End of the World. Aslan. 
143.
Islands of Chaldea. Jones. 34.
Issun Bôshi. Icinori. 260.
It Takes Two. Payton. 54. 
It’s an Orange Aardvark! Hall. 28.
Ivan. Applegate. 247. 
Jack. Shurtliff. 566.
Jack & Louisa. Keenan-Bolger. 358.
Jacobson. Paper Things. 403.
Jaeckel. Siberiak. 261. 
Jake at Gymnastics. Isadora.110.
Jamieson. Roller Girl. 404.
Janeczko. Death of the Hat. 451.
Jarrow. Fatal Fever. 404. 
Jay. Princess of Thorns. 316.
Jeffers. Once upon an Alphabet. 209.
Jelly Bean. Lord. 164.
Jenkins, E. Fine Dessert. 405.
Jenkins, M. History of Money. 32.
Jenkins, S. Egg. 405. 
_____. Creature Features. 261.
Jennings. I Am Jazz. 107.
Jensen. Woven. 406.
Jessie Elliot Is a Big Chicken. Gravel. 25.
Jewel. Ewing. 98.
Jim’s Lion. Hoban. 260.
Jinks. Plague of Bogles. 317.
Joey and Johnny. Pallace. 462.
Johansson. Cut Me Free. 317.
John. Goodnight Already! 262.
Johnson, A. Love Is the Drug. 160.
Johnson, M. Bane Chronicles. 250.
Johnson, P. Life and Times of Benny 
Alvarez. 33.
Johnson, R. Chernobyl’s Wild Kingdom. 
262.
_____. When Lunch Fights Back. 160.
Johnson-Shelton. Endgame. 311.
Johnston, E. Prairie Fire. 497.
Johnston, T. Winter Is Coming. 33.
Johnstone. Mirror Chronicles. 497.
Joltin’ Joe DiMaggio. Winter. 133.
Jones, D. Islands of Chaldea. 34.
Jones, P. Guarding Secrets. 498. 
_____. Taking Sides. 498.
Jonsberg. Categorical Universe of Candice 
Phee. 110.
Jordan-Fenton. Not My Girl. 34.
Juby. Truth Commission. 451.
Judge. Born in the Wild. 263.
Julia and the Art of Practical Travel. Blume. 
349.
Julia’s House for Lost Creatures. Hatke. 
259.
Junkyard Bot. Richards. 226. 
Jury. Burn. 552.
Just Call My Name. Sloan. 66.
Just Itzy. Krumwiede. 453.
Just Like the Movies. Fiore. 21.
Kadohata. Half a World Away. 161.
Kain. Good Sister. 210.
Kalahari. Khoury. 359.
Kang. You Are (Not) Small. 111.
Kaplan. Betty Bunny Loves Easter. 358.
Kaplan. Meaniehead. 34.
Karas. As an Oak Tree Grows. 210.
Katcher. Everyone Dies in the End. 35.
Kate the Great. Becker. 86.
Katie Friedman Gives Up Texting! Green-
wald. 354.
Keenan-Bolger. Jack & Louisa. 358.
Keepers. Sanders. 514.
Kelly, E. Blackbird Fly. 406.
Kelly, L. City of Savages. 317.
Kenneally. Breathe, Annie, Breathe. 35.
Kennedy. Farmer’s Away! 36.
Kephart. One Thing Stolen. 452.
Kern. Little Peach. 407.
590 • the Bulletin
Kerr. Girl with the Glass Bird. 407.
Key That Swallowed Joey Pigza. Gantos. 
141.
Khoury. Kalahari. 359.
Kid Sheriff and the Terrible Toads. Shea. 
228.
Kidney Hypothetical. Yee. 423.
Kierman. Into the Grey. 111.
Killing Time in Crystal City. Lynch. 362.
Kim. My Best Buddy. 498.
Kimmel. Simon and the Bear. 211.
Kinda Like Brothers. Booth. 89.
King, A. Glory O’Brien’s History of the 
Future. 161.
King, D. Woven. 406. 
King, W. Incredible Space Raiders from 
Space! 318.
King Dork Approximately. Portman. 274.
Kirby, J. Things We Know by Heart. 499.
Kirby, M. Arctic Code. 499.
Kirk. You Are Not My Friend. 263. 
Kishira. Who’s Next Door? 112.
Kiss Kill Vanish. Martinez. 216.
Kiss of Broken Glass. Kuderick. 211.
Kloepfer. Galaxy’s Most Wanted. 112.
Knit Together. Dominguez. 487.
Knockout Games. Neri. 169.
Knowles. Read Between the Lines. 452.
Knudsen. Evil Librarian. 113.
_____. Marilyn’s Monster. 453.
Kochalka. Glorkian Warrior Eats Adventure 
Pie. 408.
Korda. So Cozy. 500.
Korman. Masterminds. 359.
Koyczan. To This Day. 162.
Krisp. Anyone but Ivy Pocket. 553.
Krosoczka. Comics Squad. 30.
Krug. No, Silly! 408.
Krull. Lives of the Explorers. 36.
Krumwiede. Just Itzy. 455.
Kuderick. Kiss of Broken Glass. 211.
Kügler. In Mary’s Garden. 500.
Kuhlman. Great Ball of Light. 553.
Kulling. Spic-and-Span! 113.
Kulper. Salt & Storm. 212.
Kurti. Monkey Wars. 409.
Kutner. Soda Bottle School. 37.
LaCour. Everything Leads to You. 37.
L.ai. Listen, Slowly. 360.
Lake. There Will Be Lies. 318.
LaMarche. Like No Other. 38.
Landers. Invaded. 409.
Landström. Where Is Pim? 501.
Lang. Original Cowgirl. 454.
Larbalestier. Razorhurst. 501.
Lark Rising. Waugh. 281.
Larsen. See You Next Year. 502.
Larson. Pennyroyal Academy. 162.
Last Good Day of the Year. Warman. 523.
Last of the Sandwalkers. Hosler. 550.
Last Stop on Market Street. de la Peña. 
307.
Last Time We Say Goodbye. Hand. 449.
Latham, I. Dear Wandering Wildebeest. 
264.
Latham, J. Scarlett Undercover. 554.
Latitude Zero. Renn. 59.
Latsch. Pirate Pig. 544.
Lauer. Please Excuse This Poem. 360. 
Lauren. Sublime. 212.
Laurie. When. 319.
Law of Loving Others. Axelrod. 299.
League of Beastly Dreadfuls. Grant. 400. 
Leathers. How to Catch a Mouse. 554.
Leaver. Secrets We Keep. 502.
LeBoutillier. Love & Profanity. 450.
Lee. Zodiac Legacy. 361.
Left Behinds and the iPhone That Saved 
George Washington. Potter. 326.
Legend of Saint Nicholas. Grün. 27. 
Legends Begin. Hegarty. 548.
Legrand. Cabinet of Curiosities. 6.
_____. Winterspell. 163.
Lehmann. Spinoza. 264.
Leif’s Journey. Hokenson. 402.
Leno. Half Life of Molly Pierce. 38.
Leontyne Price. Weatherford. 282.
Leroy Ninker Saddles Up. DiCamillo. 20.
Letter for Leo. Ruzzier. 330.
Leveen. Random. 114.
Levine, G. Writer to Writer. 319.
Levine, K. Paper Cowboy. 212.
Levithan. Hold Me Closer. 410.
Levy. Misadventures of the Family Fletcher. 
39.
Lewis, G. Moon Bear. 503.
Lewis, J. Wren and the Sparrow. 503.
_____. Harlem Hellfighters. 114.
July/August 2015 • 591
Lewis, R. Stitching Snow. 213.
Library Book for Bear. Becker. 8.
Lieb. Ratscalibur. 555.
Lies My Girlfriend Told Me. Peters. 55.
Lies We Tell Ourselves. Talley. 278.
Life and Times of Benny Alvarez. Johnson. 
33.
Life on Mars. Brown. 350.
Light. Boats Go. 504.
Like a River. Wiechman. 524.
Like No Other. LaMarche. 38.
Like Water on Stone. Walrath. 281.
Lindelauf. Nine Open Arms. 39.
Lingard. Sign of the Black Dagger. 265.
Link. Monstrous Affections. 163. 
Lion, Lion. Busch. 91.
Lippert-Martin. Tabula Rasa. 163.
Listen, Slowly. La˙i. 360.
Little. Forbidden. 265.
_____. Time of the Fireflies. 40.
Little Author in the Big Woods. Mc-
Donough. 268.
Little Bit of Spectacular. Phillips. 463.
Little Chanclas. Lozano. 555.
Little Green Men at the Mercury Inn. 
Smith. 129.
Little Green Peas. Baker. 86.
Little Peach. Kern. 407.
Little White Lies. Dale. 306.
Littlefield. Infected. 320.
Lives of the Explorers. Krull. 36.
Loftin. Wish Girl. 454.
London, C. Blood in the Water. 115.
London, J. Hippos Are Huge! 455.
Longo. Six Feet Over It. 40.
Look. Alvin Ho: Allergic to the Great Wall, 
the Forbidden Palace, and Other Tour-
ist Attractions. 115.
Loop. Akins. 143.
Lord, C. Jelly Bean. 164.
Lord, E. Start of Me and You. 504.
Lost in NYC. Spiegelman. 518.
Lost Track of Time. Britt. 538.
Losure. Backwards Moon. 164.
Lough. Fire Wish. 41.
Love & Profanity. Healy. 50.
Love and Other Foreign Words. McCahan. 
44.
Love Is the Drug. Johnson. 160.
Lovejoy. Running Out of Night. 265.
Lowe. Courage of Cat Campbell. 410.
Lowery. Turning 15 on the Road to Free-
dom. 295.
Lowriders in Space. Camper. 249.
Lozano, José. Little Chanclas. 555.
Lu. Young Elites. 213.
Lucky. Mackintosh. 215.
Lucky Strike. Pyron. 416.
Lundquist. Cat & Bunny. 361.
Lupica. Fantasy League. 214.
_____. Only Game. 411.
Lynch. Hit Count. 505.
_____. Killing Time in Crystal City. 362.
_____. World War II #2. 166.
Lynn. Boulder Brothers. 362.
Lyon. Some Assembly Required. 297. 
Maas. Court of Thorns and Roses. 556.
Macbeth. Shakespeare. 419.
MacColl. Revelation of Louisa May. 556.
Machado. Until the Day Arrives. 266.
Mack. Duck in the Fridge. 267.
_____. Who Wants a Hug? 363.
Mackall. Secrets of Tree Taylor. 42.
Mackey. Dreamwood. 42.
Mackintosh. Lucky. 215.
Macy. Roller Derby Rivals. 215.
_____. Sally Ride. 165.
Maddy Kettle. Orchard. 271.
Made for You. Marr. 168.
Made You Up. Zappia. 574.
Madman of Piney Woods. Curtis. 94.
Magaziner. Only Thing Worse Than 
Witches. 43.
Magic Delivery. Smith. 129.
Magonia. Headley. 449.
Magoon. How It Went Down. 166.
_____. X. 331.
Maguire. Egg & Spoon. 166.
Maine Coon’s Haiku. Rosen. 465.
Making Pretty. Haydu. 547.
Malala. Winter. 236.
Mallory. Wild. 43.
Maloney. Ready Rabbit Gets Ready! 505.
Mangan. Inside Charlie’s Chocolate Fac-
tory. 167.
Map to Everywhere. Ryan. 330.
Mapmaker. Bomback. 537.
Marilyn’s Monster. Knudsen. 453.
592 • the Bulletin
Mark of the Thief. Nielsen. 414.
Markle. Case of the Vanishing Little Brown 
Bats. 167.
Marney. Every Breath. 215.
Marr. Made for You. 168.
Marrin. FDR and the American Crisis. 
320.
_____. Thomas Paine. 321.
Martin, A. Rain Reign. 216.
Martin, G. Ice Dragon. 321.
Martinez. Kiss Kill Vanish. 216.
Martínez. Pig Park. 267.
Masterminds. Korman. 359.
Matson. Since You’ve Been Gone. 44.
Matthews, J. Children Growing Up with 
War. 168.
Matthews, O. How to Win at High School. 
455.
Max’s Math. Banks. 388.
McBride, L. Firebug. 116.
McBride, S. Very Bad Things. 217.
McCahan. Love and Other Foreign Words. 
44.
McCarney. Because I Am a Girl. 268. 
McCarthy, C. Breaking Sky. 456
McCarthy, M. Earmuffs for Everyone! 322.
McCarty. First Snow. 322.
McClintock. About That Night. 217.
McCormick. Mr. Pants. 45.
McCoy, C. Prom Goer’s Interstellar Excursion.
McCoy, M. Dead to Me. 363.
McCreely. My Zombie Hamster. 45.
McCully. Ida M. Tarbell. 46.
_____. Queen of the Diamond. 411.
_____. Strongheart. 218.
McDonnell. Perfectly Messed Up Story. 
218.
McDonough. Little Author in the Big 
Woods. 268.
McGann. Demon Notebook. 46.
McGhee. Star Bright. 219.
McGovern. Say What You Will. 47.
McIntosh. Whisperer. 457.
McMullan. Pinocchio. 269.
McNeil. Get Even. 269.
McStay. Everything That Makes You. 506.
McVoy. Drive Me Crazy. 506.
Me & Dog. Weingarten. 179.
Me Being Me Is Exactly as Insane as You 
Being You. Hasak-Lowy. 495.
Meadows. Orphan Queen. 457.
Meaniehead. Kaplan. 34.
Meaning of Maggie. Sovern. 68.
Meet the Bigfeet. Sherry. 229.
Meet the Dullards. Pennypacker. 463.
Meet the Parents. Bently. 9.
Melissa’s Octopus and Other Unsuitable 
Pets. Voake. 572.
Melnick. Please Excuse This Poem. 360.
Mermaid’s Sister. Noble. 559.
Mesmerized. Rockliff. 367.
Mesrobian. Perfectly Good White Boy. 
219.
Messengers. Hogan. 548.
Messner. All the Answers. 458.
Metcalfe. Tragic Age. 458.
Meyer, C. Diary of a Waitress. 459.
Meyer, M. Fairest. 557.
Meyer, S. New Shoes. 412.
Mikis and the Donkey. Tak. 334. 
Milford. Greenglass House. 220.
Miller, J. Nerdy Dozen. 47.
Miller, K. Nightmares! 228.
Mills. Positively Beautiful. 459.
Milway. Pigsticks and Harold and the 
Incredible Journey. 48.
Minion. Anderson. 5.
Minnow. Sweeney. 571.
Miranda. Soulprint. 412.
Mirror Chronicles. Johnstone. 497.
Misadventures of Sweetie Pie. Van Allsburg. 
279.
Misadventures of the Family Fletcher. Levy. 
39.
Miss Brooks’ Story Nook. Bottner. 196.
Miss Hazeltine’s Home for Shy and Fearful 
Cats. Potter. 561.
Miss Mayhem. Hawkins. 495.
Missing Pieces of Me. Van Leeuwen. 178.
Mister Max. Voigt. 179.
Mitten String. Rosner. 328.
Mocha Dick. Heinz. 157.
Mohn. Love & Profanity. 450.
Monir. Suspicion. 323.
Monkey Goes Bananas. Bloom. 10.
Monkey Wars. Kurti. 409.
Monsters and Madness. Verday. 178.
Monstrous. Connolly. 394.
Monstrous Affections. Link. 163. 
Montgomery. Octopus Scientists. 557.
July/August 2015 • 593
Moon Bear. Lewis. 503.
Moonhead and the Music Machine. Rae. 
172.
Moonpenny Island. Springstubb. 332.
Moore, M. I Am Her Revenge. 460.
Moore, S. Zodiac Legacy. 361. 
Moracho. Althea & Oliver. 270.
Morales. Viva Frida. 220.
Morris. This Is a Moose. 48.
Morrison. Grounded. 507.
Mortal Danger. Aguirre. 84.
Moses. Perepeczko. 54.
Moskowitz, H. Not Otherwise Specified. 
558.
Moskowitz, T. Rookie Bookie. 282.
Mosquitoland. Arnold. 438.
Moulton. Chasing the Milky Way. 49.
Mouse Who Ate the Moon. Horácˇek. 208.
Mouseheart. Fiedler. 98.
Mr. Cornell’s Dream Boxes. Winter. 72.
Mr. Ferris and His Wheel. Davis. 19.
Mr. Pants. McCormick. 45.
Mr. Wayne’s Masterpiece. Polacco. 56.
Mulligan. Ribblestrop. 49.
Muncaster. I Am a Witch’s Cat. 50.
Murder Is Bad Manners. Stevens. 569.
Murguia. I Feel Five! 116.
Murray. Hickory Dickory Dog. 50.
My Best Buddy. Kim. 498.
My Best Everything. Tomp. 521.
My Best Friend, Maybe. Carter. 13.
My Bibi Always Remembers. Buzzeo. 91.
My Cousin’s Keeper. French. 152.
My Heart and Other Black Holes. Warga. 
375. 
My Last Kiss. Neal. 51.
My Name Is Truth. Turner. 373.
My Near-Death Adventures (99% True!). 
DeCamp. 352.
My Teacher Is a Monster! Brown. 11.
My True Love Gave to Me. Perkins. 170.
My Zombie Hamster. McCreely. 45.
Myer. Henry Hubble’s Book of Troubles. 
507.
Myers, E. Silence of Six. 323.
Myers, K. Inherit Midnight. 413.
Myers, S. Stone Cove Island. 270.
Myers, W. On a Clear Day. 169.
Naberhaus. Boom Boom. 324.
Nadol. This Is How It Ends. 271.
Napoli. Hidden. 364.
Neal. My Last Kiss. 51.
Neighborhood Sharks. Roy. 227.
Nelson, S. Digging a Hole to Heaven. 51.
Nelson, J. I’ll Give You the Sun. 221.
Nelson, T. Year We Sailed the Sun. 413.
Nerdy Dozen. Miller. 47.
Neri. Hello, I’m Johnny Cash. 117.
_____. Knockout Games. 169.
Nest Is Noisy. Aston. 480.
Nest. Ehrlich. 151.
Never Ask a Dinosaur to Dinner. Edwards. 
488.
New Darkness. Delaney. 202.
New Friend for Marmalade. Reynolds. 121.
New Shoes. Meyer. 412.
New Small Person. Child. 392.
Newgarden. Bow-Wow’s Nightmare Neigh-
bors. 52.
Newman. How to Speak Cat. 414.
Next Wave. Rusch. 227.
Nichols. Now That You’re Here. 324.
Nielsen, J. Mark of the Thief. 414.
Nielsen, S. We Are All Made of Molecules. 
558.
Night Sky Dragons. Peet. 272.
Nightbird. Hoffman. 450.
Nightmares! Segel. 228.
Nimona. Stevenson. 569.
Nine Open Arms. Lindelauf. 39.
Ninja! Chung. 15.
Ninja Boy Goes to School. Wilson. 132.
Niven. All the Bright Places. 364.
Nix. Clariel. 271.
Nnewts. TenNapel. 372.
No Name. Tingle. 278.
No Nap! Yes Nap! Palatini. 118.
No Parking at the End Times. Bliss. 391.
No Place to Fall. Brown. 302.
No, Silly! Krug. 408.
Noble. Mermaid’s Sister. 559.
Nolan. Hunters of the Great Forest. 221. 
Nolen. Irene’s Wish. 222.
None of the Above. Gregorio. 448.
North. Starbreak. 52.
Not My Girl. Jordan-Fenton. 34.
Not Otherwise Specified. Moskowitz. 558.
Novak. Book with No Pictures. 170.
Now That You’re Here. Nichols. 324.
Nuts to You. Perkins. 272.
594 • the Bulletin
Nye. Turtle of Oman. 83.
O’Brien, C. Vault of Dreamers. 117.
O’Brien, L. Love & Profanity. 450.
O’Connor. If I Had a Raptor. 52.
_____. If I Had a Triceratops. 415.
O’Doherty. Danger Is Everywhere. 365.
O’Donnell. Tank & Fizz. 460.
Obstfeld. Stealing the Game. 386. 
Ockler. Summer of Chasing Mermaids. 
559.
Octopus Scientists. Montgomery. 557.
Of Metal and Wishes. Fine. 99.
Offill. While You Were Napping. 118.
Oh No! Stoeke. 130.
Olin. Wicked Games. 53.
Oliver. Vanishing Girls. 365.
Oliver and His Egg. Schmid. 125.
Olson. Twisted Fate. 325.
Omega City. Peterfreund. 509.
Omololu. Third Twin. 366.
On a Clear Day. Myers. 169.
On the Edge. van Diepen. 335.
Once upon an Alphabet. Jeffers. 209.
One Big Pair of Underwear. Gehl. 206.
One Family. Shannon. 564.
One Death, Nine Stories. Aronson. 85.
One Thing Stolen. Kephart. 452.
One Witch at a Time. DeKeyser. 397.
Only Everything. Scott. 64.
Only Game. Lupica. 411.
Only Thing Worse Than Witches. Maga-
ziner. 43.
Orchard. Maddy Kettle. 271.
Original Cowgirl. Lang. 454.
Ormerod. Baby Swap. 461.
Orphan and the Mouse. Freeman. 311.
Orphan Queen. Meadows. 457.
Oseman. Solitaire. 461.
Otter in Space. Garton. 545.
Page. Creature Features. 261.
_____. Egg. 405. 
Paige. Wicked Will Rise. 508.
Painless. Harazin. 356.
Palatini. No Nap! Yes Nap! 118.
Pallace. Joey and Johnny. 462.
Paper Cowboy. Levine. 212.
Paper Things. Jacobson. 403.
Parenteau. Ship of Dolls. 222.
Parker. Beware the Wild. 223.
Paschkis. Flutter & Hum. 560.
Pass. Fearless. 508.
Passenger on the Pearl. Conkling. 305.
Patent. Super Sniffers. 223. 
Pattou. Ghosting. 119.
Paul. Water Is Water. 560.
Paulsen. Family Ties. 53.
Payton. It Takes Two. 54. 
Pearce. Pip Bartlett’s Guide to Magical 
Creatures. 462.
Peet. Night Sky Dragons. 272.
Penderwicks in Spring. Birdsall. 390.
Pennypacker. Meet the Dullards. 463.
Pennyroyal Academy. Larson. 162.
Perepeczko. Moses. 54.
Perfect Place. Harris. 258.
Perfectionists. Shepard. 276.
Perfectly Good White Boy. Mesrobian. 
219.
Perfectly Messed Up Story. McDonnell. 
218.
Perkins, L. Nuts to You. 272.
Perkins, S. My True Love Gave to Me. 170.
Perl. Goatilocks and the Three Bears. 55.
Perry, J. Stronger Than You Know. 119.
Perry, M. Scavengers. 171.
Peterfreund. Omega City. 509.
Peters. Lies My Girlfriend Told Me. 55.
Petruck. Steering Toward Normal. 56.
Petty, D. I Don’t Want To Be a Frog. 509.
Petty, J. Rise of Aurora West. 224. 
Pham. Piece of Cake. 120.
Phelan. Druthers. 120.
Phillips, G. Little Bit of Spectacular. 463.
Phillips, L. Crazy. 273.
Philpot. Even in Paradise. 273.
Phineas L. MacGuire . . . Gets Cooking! 
Dowell. 253.
Phoebe and Her Unicorn. Simpson. 127.
Photos Framed. Thomson. 71.
Pichon. Tom Gates. 561.
Picnic. Burningham. 12.
Piece of Cake. Pham. 120.
Pieces and Players. Balliett. 481.
Pig Park. Martínez. 267.
Pigsticks and Harold and the Incredible 
Journey. Milway. 48.
Pilger. Fart Squad. 510.
Pinkney. Red Pencil. 224.
July/August 2015 • 595
Pinocchio. McMullan. 269.
Pinstripe Pride. Appel. 346.
Pip Bartlett’s Guide to Magical Creatures. 
Pearce. 462.
Pirate Pig. Funke. 544.
Pizzoli. Tricky Vic. 415.
Place Hacking. Rosen. 418.
Plague of Bogles. Jinks. 317.
Plague of Unicorns. Yolen. 336.
Play Me Backwards. Selzer. 126.
Played. Fichera. 21.
Playing by the Book. Shirley. 65.
Playing with Matches. Rosen. 275.
Playlist for the Dead. Falkoff. 353.
Please Excuse This Poem. Lauer. 360. 
Please, Mr. Panda. Antony. 346.
Plecas. BAH! Said the Baby. 561.
Poblocki. Book of Bad Things. 120.
Poisoned Apples. Heppermann. 207.
Pokiak-Fenton. Not My Girl. 34. 
Polacco. Mr. Wayne’s Masterpiece. 56.
Polaris. Arnett. 298.
Polonsky. Gracefully Grayson. 325.
Popcorn Astronauts. Ruddell. 465.
Pope. Rise of Aurora West. 224.
Portis. Froodle. 57.
Portman. King Dork Approximately. 274.
Portraits of Celina. Whiting. 573.
Positively Beautiful. Mills. 459.
Potter, A. Miss Hazeltine’s Home for Shy 
and Fearful Cats. 561.
Potter, D. Left Behinds and the iPhone 
That Saved George Washington. 326.
Powell. Expiration Day. 57.
Prairie Fire. Johnston. 497.
Pratchett. Dragons at Crumbling Castle. 
464.
Preble. Finding Paris. 510.
Press Play. Devine. 253.
Prévot. Wangari Maathai. 327.
Prey. Isbell. 316.
Prickly Jenny. Delacroix. 486.
Prince. Tomboy. 171.
Princess Academy: The Forgotten Sisters. 
Hale. 493.
Princess Decomposia and Count Spatula. 
Watson. 376.
Princess in Black. Hale. 155.
Princess of Thorns. Jay. 316.
Princess Posey and the First Grade Boys. 
Greene. 26.
Problem with NOT Being Scared of Mon-
sters. Richards. 60.
Proimos. Apocalypse Bow Wow. 416.
Project Superhero. Zehr. 237.
Prom Goer’s Interstellar Excursion. McCoy. 
456.
Pyron. Lucky Strike. 416.
Qitsualik-Tinsley. Skraelings. 225.
Queen of the Diamond. McCully. 411.
Quest. Becker. 8.
Question of Miracles. Arnold. 298.
Quinny & Hopper. Schanen. 62.
Quintero. Gabi. 274.
Raasch. Snow Like Ashes. 275.
Rae. Moonhead and the Music Machine. 
172.
Raidt. In the New World. 511.
Rain Reign. Martin. 216.
Random. Leveen. 114.
Ransom. Crown Affair. 464.
Raschka. Give and Take. 58.
Ratscalibur. Lieb. 555.
Rauch. Unlikely Warrior. 511.
Ray. Go to Sleep, Little Farm. 172.
_____. Violin for Elva. 366.
Razorhurst. Larbalestier. 501.
Read Between the Lines. Knowles. 452.
Ready Rabbit Gets Ready! Maloney. 505.
Rebels by Accident. Dunn. 308.
Reckoning. Wilkinson. 72.
Red Butterfly. Sonnichsen. 420.
Red Pencil. Pinkney. 224.
Red Queen. Aveyard. 299.
Reed. Damaged. 225.
_____. Invincible. 512.
Reedy. If You’re Reading This. 121.
Reef. Frida & Diego. 58.
Rehr. Terrorist. 512.
Reilly. Drowned. 59.
Remember. Cook. 351.
Renn. Latitude Zero. 59.
Rethinking Normal. Hill. 314.
Return to Augie Hobble. Smith. 566.
Revelation of Louisa May. MacColl. 556.
Rex. Smek for President. 327.
Reynolds, A. New Friend for Marmalade. 
121.
596 • the Bulletin
Reynolds, J. Boy in the Black Suit. 327.
Reynolds, P. Sydney & Simon. 60.
Rhatigan. Inventions That Could Have 
Changed the World . . . But Didn’t. 
417.
Rhyme Schemer. Holt. 158.
Rhymoceros. Coat. 442.
Ribblestrop. Mulligan. 49.
Richards, C. Junkyard Bot. 226. 
Richards, D. Problem with NOT Being 
Scared of Monsters. 60.
Right Word. Bryant. 147.
Rise and Fall of the Gallivanters. Beau-
frand. 482.
Rise of Aurora West. Pope. 224.
River Music. Sauerwein. 174.
Rivers. Finding Ruby Starling. 122.
Roberts. Bodies We Wear. 226.
Rocco. Blizzard. 191.
Rock. Scripted. 417.
Rocket’s 100th Day of School. Hills. 259.
Rockliff. Chik Chak Shabbat. 122.
_____. Gingerbread for Liberty! 328.
_____. Mesmerized. 367.
Rocklin. Fleabrain Loves Franny. 172.
Rodriguez. When Reason Breaks. 418.
Roller Derby Rivals. Macy. 215.
Roller Girl. Jamieson. 404.
Rook. Cameron. 540.
Rookie Bookie. Wertheim. 282.
Room for Bear. Gavin. 400.
Rosen, M. Maine Coon’s Haiku. 465.
_____. Place Hacking. 418.
_____. Send for a Superhero. 60.
Rosen, S. Playing with Matches. 275.
Rosenstock. Ben Franklin’s Big Splash. 123.
Rosenthal. An Ambush of Tigers. 562.
Ross. Fog Diver. 562.
Rosner. Mitten String. 328.
Roy. Neighborhood Sharks. 227.
Rubin, L. Denton Little’s Deathdate. 513.
Rubin, S. Stand There! She Shouted. 173.
Ruby, Laura. Bone Gap. 367.
Ruby, Lois. Doll Graveyard. 61.
Ruby on the Outside. Baskin. 536.
Ruddell. Popcorn Astronauts. 465.
Rudy. I Wish I Had a Pet. 61.
Rumble. Hopkins. 158.
Rundell. Cartwheeling in Thunderstorms. 
123.
Running Out of Night. Lovejoy. 265.
Rupert Can Dance. Feiffer. 151.
Rusch. Next Wave. 227.
Russell, J. Graveyard Book Graphic Novel 
Volume 1. 154.
_____. Graveyard Book Graphic Novel 
Volume 2. 204.
Russell, R. Zodiac. 329.
Rutabaga. Colossal. 443.
Ruth. Coming Home. 245.
Rutkoski. Winner’s Crime. 329.
Ruzzier. Letter for Leo. 330.
Ryan, C. Daughter of Deep Silence. 563.
_____. Map to Everywhere. 330.
Ryan, J. Charisma. 513.
Ryan, P. Echo. 368.
_____. Tony Baloney: Buddy Trouble. 124.
Ryder. Dragon’s Guide to the Care and 
Feeding of Humans. 424.
Saeed. Written in the Stars. 466.
Saint Anything. Dessen. 543.
Salisbury, G. Hunt for the Bamboo Rat. 
173.
Salisbury, M. Sin Eater’s Daughter. 419.
Sally Ride. Macy. 165.
Salt & Storm. Kulper. 212.
Sam & Dave Dig a Hole. Barnett. 144.
Sanders. Keepers. 514.
Sanderson. Firefight. 369.
Sandford. Uncaged. 62.
Sanlaville. Stranger. 440.
Sarcone-Roach. Bear Ate Your Sandwich. 
369.
Sarn. I Love I Hate I Miss My Sister. 124.
Sauerwein. River Music. 174.
Save Me. Elliott. 309.
Saxby. Big Red Kangaroo. 370.
Say What You Will. McGovern. 47.
Scandalous Sisterhood of Prickwillow Place. 
Berry. 87.
Scattergood. Way to Stay in Destiny. 370.
Scavengers. Perry. 171.
Scarlett Undercover. Latham. 554.
Schanen. Quinny & Hopper. 62.
Schertle. Such a Little Mouse. 466. 
Schmid. Oliver and His Egg. 125.
Schmidt. Hold Me Like a Breath. 563.
Schofield-Morrison. I Got the Rhythm. 63.
Schrag. Rethinking Normal. 314.
Schulz. Hook’s Revenge. 174.
July/August 2015 • 597
Scieszka. Frank Einstein and the Antimatter 
Motor. 63.
_____. Guys Read: True Stories. 125.
Scofield. Shark Curtain. 564.
Scott. Only Everything. 64.
_____. What Waits in the Woods. 514.
Scripted. Rock. 417.
Second Guard. Vaughn. 572.
Secret Sky. Abawi. 142.
Secrets of Attraction. Constantine. 541.
Secrets of Eastcliff-by-the-Sea. Beha. 145.
Secrets of Tree Taylor. Mackall. 42.
Secrets We Keep. Leaver. 502.
Sedgwick. Ghosts of Heaven. 331.
See You Next Year. Larsen. 502.
Seeker. Dayton. 396.
Segel. Nightmares! 228.
Seidman. What If I’m an Atheist? 515.
Seigel. Everybody Knows Your Name. 515.
Selzer. Play Me Backwards. 126.
Send for a Superhero. Rosen. 60.
Servants of the Storm. Dawson. 95.
Serwacki. Joey and Johnny, the Ninjas. 462. 
Shabazz. X. 331.
Shadow Hero. Yang. 73.
Shadow of the Wolf. Hall. 493.
Shakespeare. Macbeth. 419.
Shang. Way Home Looks Now. 467.
Shannon. One Family. 564.
Shark Curtain. Scofield. 564.
Shea. Dinosaur vs. School. 64.
_____. Kid Sheriff and the Terrible Toads. 
228.
Shepard. Perfectionists. 276.
Shepherd. Cage. 565.
Sherry. Meet the Bigfeet. 229.
_____. Turtle Island. 65.
Sheth. Sona and the Wedding Game. 565.
Shh! Haughton. 156.
Ship of Dolls. Parenteau. 222.
Shipwreck Island. Bodeen. 10.
Shirley. Playing by the Book. 65.
Shivery Shades of Halloween. Siddals. 126.
Shooting at the Stars. Hendrix. 207.
Shraya. God Loves Hair. 229.
Shull. Swap. 175.
Shurtliff. Jack. 566.
Shusterman. Challenger Deep. 516.
_____. Edison’s Alley. 468.
Siberiak. Jaeckel. 261. 
Siddals. Shivery Shades of Halloween. 126.
Sidman. Winter Bees. 230.
Sign of the Black Dagger. Lingard. 265.
Silence of Six. Myers. 323.
Silent Alarm. Banash. 388.
Simon and the Bear. Kimmel. 211.
Simon vs. the Homo Sapiens Agenda. 
Albertalli. 436.
Simpson. Phoebe and Her Unicorn. 127.
_____. Unicorn on a Roll. 516.
Simukka. As Red as Blood. 127.
_____. As White as Snow. 517.
Sin Eater’s Daughter. Salisbury. 419.
Since You’ve Been Gone. Matson. 44.
Singer. I’m Gonna Climb a Mountain in 
My Patent Leather Shoes. 128.
Singleton. Curious Cat Spy Club. 517.
Sinner. Stiefvater. 69.
Sisson. Star Stuff. 230.
Sisters. Telgemeier. 70.
Six Feet Over It. Longo. 40.
Skandal. Smith. 567.
Skateboard Party. English. 309.
Skies Like These. Hilmo. 29.
Skink. Hiaasen. 157. 
Skraelings. Qitsualik-Tinsley. 225.
Skunk. Barnett. 535.
Skydiver. Godkin. 103.
Skye. Witherwood Reform School. 518.
Slade. Soda Bottle School. 37. 
_____. With Books and Bricks. 175.
Sleeping Cinderella. Clarkson. 392.
Sleepless Knight. Sturm. 570.
Sleepover with Beatrice & Bear. Carnesi. 
147.
Sloan. Just Call My Name. 66.
Slump. Waltman. 234.
Smale. Geek Girl. 420.
Small Wonders. Smith. 567.
Smashie McPerter and the Mystery of 
Room 11. Griffin. 401. 
Smek for President. Rex. 327.
Smelcer. Edge of Nowhere. 128.
Smick! Cronin. 351.
_____. Magic Delivery. 129.
Smith, C. One Death, Nine Stories. 85. 
Smith, Daniel. Big Game. 468.
Smith, David. If. 66.
Smith, E. How to Draw with Your Funny 
Bone. 518.
598 • the Bulletin
Smith, G. Little Green Men at the Mercury 
Inn. 129.
Smith, Lane. Return to Augie Hobble. 566.
Smith, Lindsay. Skandal. 567.
Smith, Matt. Barbarian Lord. 67.
Smith, Matthew Clark. Small Wonders. 
567.
Smith, P. 100 Sideways Miles. 128.
_____. Alex Crow. 385.
Smith, S. Stranger. 302.
Smith, R. Beneath. 332.
Sniffer Dogs. Castaldo. 14.
Snow Like Ashes. Raasch. 275.
Snow Queen. Andersen. 297.
Snyder. Anna & Solomon. 67.
So Cozy. Korda. 500.
Sock Thief. Crespo. 484.
Soda Bottle School. Kutner. 37.
Solitaire. Oseman. 461.
Some Assembly Required. Andrews. 297.
Somebody on This Bus Is Going to Be 
Famous. Cheaney. 92.
Sona and the Wedding Game. Sheth. 565.
Sonnichsen. Red Butterfly. 420.
Soulprint. Miranda. 412.
Sovern. Meaning of Maggie. 68.
Space Case. Gibbs. 103.
Sparkers. Glewwe. 154.
Spears. Sway. 130.
Spector. How to Pee. 568.
Spic-and-Span! Kulling. 113.
Spider Ring. Harwell. 313.
Spiegelman. Lost in NYC. 518.
Spinoza. Lehmann. 264.
Spirit’s Key. Cohn. 93.
Splinters. Titchenell. 177. 
Springstubb. Cody and the Fountain of 
Happiness. 568.
_____. Moonpenny Island. 332.
Spy Catchers of Maple Hill. Blakemore. 10.
St. Antoine. Three Bird Summer. 68.
St. Claire. They All Fall Down. 333.
Stand There! She Shouted. Rubin. 173.
Stanley. Chosen Prince. 421.
Star Bright. McGhee. 219.
Star Stuff. Sisson. 230.
Starbreak. North. 52.
Stark. Yule Tomte and the Little Rabbits. 
230.
Starring Jules (Third Grade Debut). Ain. 
192.
Start of Me and You. Lord. 504.
Stealing the Game. Abdul-Jabbar. 386.
Steering Toward Normal. Petruck. 56.
Stein. I’m My Own Dog. 69.
Stella by Starlight. Draper. 308.
Sternberg. Bedtime at Bessie and Lil’s. 519.
_____. Top-Secret Diary of Celie Valen-
tine. 231.
Stevens. Murder Is Bad Manners. 569.
Stevenson. Nimona. 569.
Stiefvater. Blue Lily, Lily Blue. 232.
_____. Pip Bartlett’s Guide to Magical 
Creatures. 462.
_____. Sinner. 69.
Stirling. When My Heart Was Wicked. 
333.
Stitching Snow. Lewis. 213.
Stoeke. Oh No! 130.
Stone Angel. Yolen. 525.
Stone Cove Island. Myers. 270.
Stone in the Sky. Castellucci. 441.
Stonewall. Bausum. 536.
Storm Whale. Davies. 95.
Stott. What to Do When You’re Sent to 
Your Room. 131.
Strange Maid. Gratton. 24.
Stranger. Balak. 440.
Stranger. Brown. 302.
Stray. Sussman. 176.
Strayhorn. Way We Bared Our Souls. 371.
Strike! Brimner. 198.
Stronger Than You Know. Perry. 119.
Strongheart. McCully. 218.
Stubby the War Dog. Bausum. 7.
Sturm. Sleepless Knight. 570.
Sublime. Lauren. 212.
Such a Little Mouse. Schertle. 466.
Sullivan. Biggie. 519.
Suma. Walls around Us. 520.
Summer. Trust Me, I’m Lying. 277.
Summer of Chasing Mermaids. Ockler. 
559.
Summers. All the Rage. 570.
Summy. Disappearance of Emily H. 571.
Sunday Shopping. Derby. 542.
Sundquist. We Should Hang Out Some-
time. 371.
July/August 2015 • 599
Super Sniffers. Patent. 223. 
Supercat vs. the Fry Thief. Willis. 525.
Surovec. Bed for Kitty. 176.
Susan Marcus Bends the Rules. Cutler. 17.
Suspicion. Monir. 323.
Sussman. Stray. 176.
Sutcliffe. White House Is Burning. 70.
Swap. Shull. 175.
Sway. Spears. 130.
Sweeney. Minnow. 571.
Swenson. If You Were a Dog. 277.
Sydney & Simon. Reynolds. 60.
Symes. Funny Face. 520.
Tabula Rasa. Lippert-Martin. 163.
Tahir. Ember in the Ashes. 521.
Tak. Mikis and the Donkey. 334. 
Take Away the A. Escoffier. 254.
Taking Sides. Jones. 498.
Tale of Tam Linn. Don. 350.
Talley. Lies We Tell Ourselves. 278.
Tank & Fizz. O’Donnell. 460.
Tape. Camden. 92.
Tastes Like Music. Birmingham. 248.
Tavares. Growing Up Pedro. 469.
Taylor. Hoot Owl. 421.
Teeny Little Grief Machines. High. 208.
Telgemeier. Sisters. 70.
Tell Me. Bauer. 86.
Temple Boys. Buxton. 391.
Tenderness of Thieves. Freitas. 489.
TenNapel. Nnewts. 372.
Terminals. Buckingham. 249.
Terrorist. Rehr. 512.
There Will Be Lies. Lake. 318.
There’s a Mouse Hiding in This Book! 
Bird. 88.
Theule. Fat & Bones. 232.
They All Fall Down. St. Claire. 333.
Thicker Than Water. Hale. 28.
Thickety. White. 378.
Things I’ll Never Say. Angel. 437.
Things We Know by Heart. Kirby. 499.
Things You Kiss Goodbye. Connor. 16.
Third Twin. Omololu. 366.
Thirst for Home. Ieronimo. 32.
Thirteen. Hoyle. 551.
This Book Just Ate My Dog! Byrne. 199.
This Is a Moose. Morris. 48.
This Is How It Ends. Nadol. 271.
This Orq. (he cave boy.). Elliott. 151.
This Side of Home. Watson. 376.
Thomas. Wicked Thing. 334.
Thomas Paine. Marrin. 321.
Thompson. Emmanuel’s Dream. 372.
Thomson. Photos Framed. 71.
Thorne. Wrong Side of Right. 373.
Thousand Pieces of You. Gray. 257.
Three Bird Summer. St. Antoine. 68.
Three Mouths of Little Tom Drum. Wil-
lard. 423.
Through the Woods. Carroll. 13.
Through to You. Barnholdt. 7.
Tickly Toes. Hood. 109.
Tightrope Walkers. Almond. 387. 
Time of the Fireflies. Little. 40.
Time to Dance. Venkatraman. 71.
Tingle. No Name. 278.
Tiny Creatures. Davies. 18.
Titchenell. Splinters. 177. 
To This Day. Koyczan. 162.
Tom Gates. Pichon. 561.
Tommy. Blumenthal. 537.
Tomboy. Prince. 171.
Tomp. My Best Everything. 521.
Tony Baloney. Ryan. 124.
Top Ten Clues You’re Clueless. Czukas. 
305.
Top-Secret Diary of Celie Valentine. Stern-
berg. 231.
Toten. Unlikely Hero of Room 13 B. 522.
Tougas. Graham Cracker Plot. 177.
Tracers. Howard. 315.
Tragic Age. Metcalfe. 458.
Transgender Lives. Cronn-Mills. 251.
Trap. Arntson. 479.
Trevayne. Cabinet of Curiosities. 6.
Trial by Fire. Angelini. 85.
Tricky Vic. Pizzoli. 415.
Trine. Willy Maykit in Space. 469.
Tripp. Accidental Highwayman. 279.
Trombone Shorty. Andrews. 479.
Troubles of Johnny Cannon. Campbell. 
200.
Trust Me, I’m Lying. Summer. 277.
Truth Commission. Juby. 451.
Tullet. 10 Times 10. 233.
Tunnel Vision. Adrian. 344.
Turner, A. My Name Is Truth. 373.
600 • the Bulletin
Turner, H. Ask the Dark. 470.
Turning 15 on the Road to Freedom. 
Lowery. 295.
Turtle Island. Sherry. 65.
Turtle of Oman. Nye. 83.
Twisted Fate. Olson. 325.
Two Girls Staring at the Ceiling. Frank. 
101.
Twyning. Blacker. 249.
Uncaged. Sandford. 62.
Underwood. Here Comes Santa Cat. 233.
Unfinished Life of Addison Stone. Griffin. 
104.
Unfriended. Vail. 131.
Unicorn on a Roll. Simpson. 516.
Unlikely Hero of Room 13 B. Toten. 522.
Unlikely Warrior. Rauch. 511.
Unmade. Capetta. 440.
Unravel. Howson. 31.
Unstoppable Octobia May. Flake. 99.
Until the Day Arrives. Machado. 266.
Urban Outlaws. Black. 195.
Utopia, Iowa. Yansky. 336.
Vail. Unfriended. 131.
Van Allsburg. Misadventures of Sweetie 
Pie. 279.
Van Ark. Boy Next Door. 374.
van Diepen. On the Edge. 335.
Van Leeuwen. Missing Pieces of Me. 178.
Vango. de Fombelle. 202.
Vanilla Ice Cream. Graham. 155.
Vanishing Girls. Oliver. 365.
Vanishing Season. Anderson. 5.
Vaughn. Second Guard. 572.
Vaught. Footer Davis Probably Is Crazy. 
522.
Vault of Dreamers. O’Brien. 117.
Venkatraman. Time to Dance. 71.
Verday. Monsters and Madness. 178.
Vernick. Edgar’s Second Word. 132.
Vernon. Castle Hangnail. 523.
Very Bad Things. McBride. 217.
Very Little Red Riding Hood. Heapy. 106.
Violin for Elva. Ray. 366.
Viorst. And Two Boys Booed. 280.
Viva Frida. Morales. 220.
Vivès. Stranger. 440.
Vivian Apple at the End of the World. 
Coyle. 395.
Voake. Melissa’s Octopus and Other Un-
suitable Pets. 572.
Voigt. Mister Max. 179.
Volponi. Game Seven. 422.
Wagner. Hold Tight, Don’t Let Go. 374.
Waiting for Unicorns. Hautala. 313.
Walk On. Feinstein. 203.
Walker. Ghost Walls. 280.
_____. Winnie. 375.
Wall. Cole. 201.
Wallach. We All Looked Up. 422.
Walled City. Graudin. 257.
Walls around Us. Suma. 520.
Walrath. Like Water on Stone. 281.
Walter. Close to the Wind. 573.
Waltman. Slump. 234.
Wangari Maathai. Prévot. 327.
War That Saved My Life. Bradley. 343.
Wardlaw. Won Ton and Chopstick. 523.
Warga. My Heart and Other Black Holes. 
375. 
Warman. Last Good Day of the Year. 523.
Watch the Sky. Hubbard. 551.
Water Is Water. Paul. 560.
Waters. Beauty of the Broken. 179.
Watson, A. Princess Decomposia and 
Count Spatula. 376.
Watson, R. This Side of Home. 376.
Waugh. Lark Rising. 281.
Way Home Looks Now. Shang. 467.
Way to Stay in Destiny. Scattergood. 370.
Way We Bared Our Souls. Strayhorn. 371.
We All Looked Up. Wallach. 422.
We Are All Made of Molecules. Nielsen. 
558.
We Should Hang Out Sometime. Sun-
dquist. 371.
Weatherford. Gordon Parks.
_____. Leontyne Price. 282.
Webb. Case of the Stolen Sixpence. 234.
Weeks. Glamourpuss. 377.
Weil. I’m Glad I Did. 377.
Wein. Black Dove. 524.
Weingarten. Me & Dog. 179.
Weitzman. How to Speak Cat. 414.
Welch. I Will Always Write Back. 535.
Wertheim. Rookie Bookie. 282.
West. Bargaining. 335.
Westerfeld. Afterworlds. 180.
July/August 2015 • 601
Wetherhead. Jack & Louisa. 358.
Whale Trails. Cline-Ransome. 393.
What If . . . ? Browne. 11.
What If I’m an Atheist? Seidman. 515.
What to Do When You’re Sent to Your 
Room. Stott. 131.
What Waits in the Woods. Scott. 514.
What’s So Yummy? Harris. 156.
When. Laurie. 319.
When a Grandpa Says “I Love You.” Wood. 
133.
When Lunch Fights Back. Johnson. 160.
When My Heart Was Wicked. Stirling. 
333.
When Otis Courted Mama. Appelt. 387.
When Reason Breaks. Rodriguez. 418.
Where Bear? Henn. 402.
Where I Belong. Hahn. 155.
Where Is Pim? Landström. 501.
While You Were Napping. Offill. 118.
Whisperer. McIntosh. 457.
White House Is Burning. Sutcliffe. 70.
White, K. Chaos of Stars. 180.
_____. Illusions of Fate. 181.
_____. In the Shadows. 72.
White, J. Thickety. 378.
Whiten. Chooky-Doodle-Doo. 471.
Whiting. Portraits of Celina. 573.
Whitney. Fire Artist. 235.
Who Wants a Hug? Mack. 363.
Who’s Next Door? Kishira. 112.
Why’d They Wear That? Albee. 345.
Wicked Games. Olin. 53.
Wicked Thing. Thomas. 334.
Wicked Will Rise. Paige. 508.
Wiechman. Like a River. 524.
Wignell. Bilby. 370.
Wild. Mallory. 43.
Wildlife. Wood. 182.
Wilkinson. Reckoning. 72.
Willard. Three Mouths of Little Tom 
Drum. 423.
Willey. Beetle Boy. 181.
Williams. Diamond Boy. 335.
Williams-Garcia. Gone Crazy in Alabama. 
435.
Willis. Supercat vs. the Fry Thief. 525.
Willy Maykit in Space. Trine. 469.
Wilson, N. Ninja Boy Goes to School. 132.
Wilson, R. Don’t Touch. 235.
Winner’s Crime. Rutkoski. 329.
Winnie. Walker. 375.
Winter, Jeanette. Malala. 236.
_____. Mr. Cornell’s Dream Boxes. 72.
Winter, Jonah. Founding Fathers! 378.
_____. Joltin’ Joe DiMaggio. 133.
Winter Bees. Sidman. 230.
Winter Is Coming. Johnston. 33.
Winterfrost. Houts. 109.
Winterkill. Boorman. 146.
Winters. Cure for Dreaming. 236.
Winterspell. Legrand. 163.
Wish Girl. Loftin. 454.
Witch’s Boy. Barnhill. 248.
With Books and Bricks. Slade. 175.
Witherwood Reform School. Skye. 518.
Wolfie the Bunny. Dyckman. 398.
Wolitzer. Belzhar. 182.
Won Ton and Chopstick. Wardlaw. 523.
Wonderful Year. Bruel. 302.
Wood, D. When a Grandpa Says “I Love 
You.” 133.
Wood, F. Wildlife. 182.
Woodson. Brown Girl Dreaming. 3.
World War II #2. Lynch. 165.
World Within. Eagland. 443.
Worst in Show. Bee. 389.
Woven. Jensen. 406.
Wrath and the Dawn. Ahdieh. 478. 
Wren and the Sparrow. Lewis. 503.
Wrenchies. Dalrymple. 17.
Writer to Writer. Levine. 319.
Written in the Stars. Saeed. 466.
Wrong Side of Right. Thorne. 373.
X. Shabazz. 331.
XYZs of Being Wicked. Chapman. 15.
Yaccarino. Doug Unplugs on the Farm. 
134.
_____. Intergalactic Pizza. 183.
Yang. Shadow Hero. 73.
Yansky. Utopia, Iowa. 336.
Yard Sale. Bunting. 539.
Year of the Rat. Furniss. 255.
Year We Sailed the Sun. Nelson. 413.
Yee. Kidney Hypothetical. 423.
Yelchin. Arcady’s Goal. 237.
Yep. Dragon’s Guide to the Care and Feed-
ing of Humans. 424.
602 • the Bulletin
Yeti and the Bird. Shireen. 467.
Yohalem. Cast Off. 574.
Yolen. Centaur Rising. 283.
_____. Plague of Unicorns. 336.
_____. Stone Angel. 525.
You Are (Not) Small. Kang. 111.
You Are Not My Friend. Kirk. 263. 
Young Elites. Lu. 213.
Yule Tomte and the Little Rabbits. Stark. 
230.
Yum. Twins’ Little Sister. 74.
Zac and Mia. Betts. 145.
Zappia. Made You Up. 574.
Zehr. Project Superhero. 237.
Zhang. Falling into Place. 238.
Zodiac. Russell. 329.
Zodiac Legacy. Lee. 361.
Zommer. Big Blue Thing on the Hill. 424.
Zoo at the Edge of the World. Gale. 102.
Zoo Box. Cohn. 148.
