I L 
I N
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
~~
i·
"I 
'"" 
~::·;;~ r·
t~'
5-;1,:1~~·: 
":,·5-~B~·~~ 
-b'--i;0~_
gnificently
tasy pits a bright,
le girl against a
ng horror that
the reality right
or.... Gaiman's
:1 for children
ure sense of a
s-and the child's
vercome those
For stout-hearted
o love a brush
e sinister:
ine is spot on."
-Starred review/
Kirkus Reviews
Coraline is a
ter with whom
ill surely identify,
y will love being
ad out of their
rhis is just right
hose requests
cary book."
-Starred review/
hool Library Journal
- "An electrifyingly
eepy tale likely
haunt young
iders for many
)ns.... A real
me-buster."
irred, boxed review/
Publishers Weekly
Sup.
99 Tr (0-380-97778-8)
'.89 Lb (0-06-623744-0)
nabridaed audios
Cassette
0-06-050454-4 $18.00
CD
0-06-051048-X $22.00
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
October 2002
Vol. 56 No. 2
A LOOK INSIDE
45 
THE BIG PICTURE
Scranimals by Jack Prelutsky; illus. by Peter Sfs
46 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
48 
* Stand Tall by Joan Bauer
63 
* Fireboat: The Heroic Adventures ofthe John J. Harvey written and illus.
by Maira Kalman
66 
* Gooney Bird Greene by Lois Lowry; illus. by Middy Thomas
68 
* The Other Side ofDawn by John Marsden
72 
* The Same Stuffas Stars by Katherine Paterson
80 
* Potch &Polly by William Steig; illus. by Jon Agee
88 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
89 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Jeannette M. Hulick, Reviewer (JMH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2002 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Peter Sfs from Scranimals ©2002. Used by permission of Greenwillow Books.
OCTOBER 2002 
* 45
THE BIG PICTURE
Scranimals
by Jack Prelutsky; illus. by Peter Sfs
Ah, landmark authors, those whose contributions are so reliably rewarding that
each new book can be safely anticipated and opened with glee. And ah, the sweet-
ness of surprise and delight when it's discovered that said author has actually man-
aged to exceed expectation.
And so it is with Jack Prelutsky's Scranimals, in which Prelutsky takes the
familiar concept of scrambled animals to dazzling new heights in this series of
nineteen poems describing a visit to mythical Scranimal Island. Rejecting mun-
dane mammalian combinations, poems here soar into the creative stratosphere
with bizarre but linguistically plausible hybrids between vegetables and amphib-
ians ("The Potatoad"), mammals and fungi ("The Hippopotamushrooms"), and
birds and fish ("The Cardinalbacore"). The verse sparkles with wit and mad in-
vention, the wordplay elegant enough to impress sophisticated readers yet precise
enough to be funny to youngsters still grappling with the possibilities of poetic
language; in fact, there's a Beatrix-Potteresque tendency to play elevated vocabu-
lary for comic effect and then puncture it with the bathos of simple earthiness
("The Hippopotamushrooms/ Suffer from deficient grace/ And their tubby, blobby
bodies/ Tend to take up too much space"). There are plenty of inventive riffs on
biology true and mythical (the Ostricheetahs hide their heads in the sand), and
concepts are accessible enough to amuse younger audiences: they'll snicker not
just at the lumbering awkwardness of the Stormy Petrelephant, an elephant with
sadly insufficient wings, but at the narrators' understandable relief at its
groundedness ("The Stormy Petrelephant's failures/ Relieve us of absolute dread./
We love it in fields of azaleas-/ We'd hate if it soared overhead").
Yet there's more than just humor here: Prelutsky keeps the uneasy strange-
ness of these odd mongrels lurking in every verse, and he impeccably orchestrates
sounds and cadences to suit a variety of moods. One of the finest poems, "The
Detested Radishark" (see cover for a glimpse of his horrific visage), is as jubilantly
sinister as Silverstein's classic "The Slithergadee." The enduring theme of rapa-
ciousness ("For it eats what it wants,/ And it always wants to eat") is made more
dramatic by the vivid description ("Its appalling, bulbous body/ Is astonishingly
red") and the pounding and relentless pace: "And the only thought it harbors/ In
its small but frightful mind,/ Is to catch you and to bite you/ On your belly and
behind." A lot of families will happily evolve a tradition of gently acting out the
"catch you" and "bite you" portions, and a lot of delighted victims will happily
squeal with shivery glee.
Sis' art picks up on the strange and otherworldly aspects of the poems,
evincing a surreal and haunting edge to its intricately lined visions that recalls
Odilon Redon (especially in the sepia-toned puffed-up Potatoad with its little
potato-toad eyes). That's an additional lure for older readers, but there's enough
46 
* THE BULLETIN
restraint to keep things from becoming purely monstrous, especially in every
picture's inclusion, in brighter, reassuring hues, of the intrepid boy and girl who
are touring the island; happy tourists on their magical scooter (which has all the
transportational versatility of Chitty Chitty Bang Bang), they're intrigued but
unintimidated by the wonders they view. The depictions of those wonders also
suggest the poetic yet thorough detailing of an old bestiary, and the mock-scientific
approach (also evident in the helpful inclusion of a pronunciation guide for each
animal's coined name) is enhanced by the artist's creation of an actual geography
for the island (there's a table-of-contents map keyed to the poems, and endpapers
sport an overhead view of the whole island). Throughout the book, the individual
scenes faithfully and amusingly adhere to this geography, so readers can further
entertain themselves with glimpses of neighboring habitats and their residents: a
distant Petrelephant flounders amid the trees beyond the savanna wherein the
Broccolions stalk the Antelopetunia, a Camelberta Peach's hump protrudes from
the hills behind the Spinachicken patch. Those in the mood for more playful
science can turn to the back cover, where Sis helpfully visually enumerates the
biology of each Scranimal in mathematical terms: a banana + an anaconda = a
Bananaconda, a panda + a daffodil = a Pandaffodil, and so on.
There's something here for just about every poetic need-for readalouds,
for performances, for readalones, for reading with a flashlight at sleepovers, for
taunting and amusing younger siblings. Ultimately, this is a stunning achieve-
ment-Carrollian-level poetry with art to match-that's sure to provide delight
for years. (Imprint information appears on p. 75.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Avi 
Crispin: The Cross ofLead. Hyperion, 2002 
[262p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2647-9 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0828-4 
$15.99 
R Gr. 6-9
In the midst of his grief over his mother's death, the thirteen-year-old boy known
only as "Asta's son" finds himself caught up in circumstances he cannot under-
stand. John Aycliffe, steward of the boy's poor fourteenth-century village in the
long absence of the crusading Lord Furnival, has declared the boy a "wolf's head"
(less than human) for a crime he did not commit, thereby sentencing him to cer-
tain death. The boy finds an ally in the village priest, who informs him that his real
name is Crispin and who promises to tell him of his origin. When the priest is
murdered, Crispin flees for his life, on the road meeting up with Bear, a traveling
performer, to whom Crispin becomes an apprentice. Bit by bit Crispin discovers
the truth of his origins: he is the bastard son of Lord Furnival, and Aycliffe wishes
him dead to keep him from making a claim on the lord's estate. The book's
conclusion is abrupt and the resolution insufficiently grounded, but the rest of the
book is a hearty ramble. Avi conjures the atmosphere of the medieval English
OCTOBER 2002 
* 47
landscape by concentrating on that world's physical details (especially the smells),
yet it's also clear from Crispin's narration, wherein he constantly defers to the will
of God, the overwhelming role that religion played in the life of the medieval
peasant. The pace is quick, and the boy's change from cowed serf to courageous
hero is logical and believable. This picaresque adventure will appeal to young
medievalists as well as serving as an entry point to discussions of life in the Middle
Ages. JMD
BANKS, KATE 
Dillon Dillon. Foster/Farrar, 2002 
150p
ISBN 0-374-31786-0 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Dillon Dillon is ten years old when he finally hears the story behind his name: he
was born Dillon McDermott and adopted as a baby by his current parents, his
biological aunt and uncle, when his birth parents were killed in a plane crash.
Shocked by the life-changing news, he spends the summer attempting to adjust to
his now-altered view of the world, often by visiting a loon pair and their new
hatchling, with whom he feels a strange bond. Banks writes with a streamlined,
crystalline style that recalls Paula Fox in its rhythms and quiet revelation ("Once
he'd had both of his sneakers. Once he'd had different parents. But things had
changed. Things were always changing. That was life"), so that the somewhat
contrived backstory that got Dillon to this point fades in comparison with the
carefully crafted development of his adjustment. The symbolic relationship with
the loons is deftly unfolded, avoiding heavy-handed pointers to the parallels, and
the book's tactful evocation of Dillon's gradual realignment of his world is more
convincing than many more manifestly angst-filled narratives. Precisely and ten-
derly told, this is a perceptive reminder that not all significant changes involve
overt drama. DS
BARLOW, MAISIE (YARRCALI) 
Jirrbal: RainforestDreamtime Stories; illus. by Michael
(Boiyool) Anning. 
Magabala, 2002 
59p
ISBN 1-875641-06-8 
$18.65 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Aboriginal author Barlow, one of the last remaining elders of the Jirrbal people of
Ravenshoe, Far North Queensland, retells four traditional tales of her people, fol-
lowed by personal stories of her own youth. Folklore fans will hear the echoes of
other traditions in Barlow's stories of the origin of dew, the birds' acquisition of
fire, the dangers of disobedience, and the way selfish Bangarra (the blue-tongued
lizard) was forced to share his water with the animals. These traditional tales are
simply told, without ornament or artifice, and the author's autobiographical sto-
ries are filled with the everyday details (where she slept, what she ate, what kind of
pets she had, etc.) that children find intriguing. Anning's effectively rendered
colored-pencil illustrations are iconographic rather than realistic; the animal fig-
ures are combinations of geometric shapes that are sure to inspire replication in
artistically inclined readers. Thumbnail icons are scattered through the index and
the personal stories, adding a bright counterpoint to the blocks of text. While
there are some minor inconsistencies (some, but not all, of the Jirrbal words are
translated within the text), overall this is a solidly conceived bridge to both tradi-
tional and modern Aboriginal culture. A section called "Learn a Little Jirrbal" acts
as a key to traditional language used in the books; both Jirrbal to English and
English to Jirrbal glossaries are included. JMD
48 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BARTLET, SUSAN 
The Seal Island Seven; illus. by Tricia Tusa. 
Viking, 2002 
80p
ISBN 0-670-03533-5 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Seal Island (first introduced in SealIsland School, BCCB 3/99) is a tiny spot off the
coast of Maine, with a one-room schoolhouse and a close group of resident island-
ers. Fourth-grader Pru is happy that school includes two new students, first-grader
Sophie and her older sister Clara, since Pru hopes Clara will become a friend.
Among the projects of the seven students (the titular Seal Island Seven) is the
building of small "fairy houses" out of twigs along the hiking path in the island
woods; when the children discover that someone has kicked down their fairy houses,
they vow to find the culprit. Pru, however, is distracted by the fact that her best
friend, Nicholas, shares a secret with Clara, and it isn't until Nicholas lets Pru in
on the matter (the fairy houses were knocked down by a contingent of residents,
including Nicholas' mother, who believe that the houses are encouraging environ-
mental damage) that Pru reconciles sharing the old friend with the new. The
island setting is alluring, and the details of this unusual life, such as Pru's riding her
pony to the docks to meet the ferry, are enticing. This sequel lacks the cohesion
and tension of the first title, however, and the solution to the conflict is more
convenience than compromise. This is nonetheless a useful addition to transi-
tional-reader fare, and Tusa's squiggly-lined black-and-white illustrations provide
additional welcome. JMD
BAUER,JOAN 
Stand Tall. Putnam, 2002 
[192p]
ISBN 0-399-23473-X 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Since he's six-foot-three-and-one-half inches tall at twelve years old, it's not sur-
prising that Tree (given name Sam) is called Tree. This height makes his life
difficult, leading to teasing from classmates and misguided expectations ofathleti-
cism from coaches; it also leads to parental belief that Tree is surviving the rigors of
divorce just fine ("To look at this boy, it was easy to believe he was handling
things"). In reality, Tree is still desolate, hating being uprooted to his mom's
unfamiliar apartment all the time in the name of joint custody and continually
saddened by the changes in every member of his family ("Tree wondered if divorce
was like war and always had a lasting effect on the people who went through it").
He's helped by his close relationship with his grandfather, whose literal amputa-
tion (the legacy of his experience in the Vietnam War) parallels the severing of
Tree's existence, and by his growing friendship with eccentric eighth-grader Sophie,
but he may need more than that to survive the devastation when a flood hits the
town. While the third-person narration and quieter tone are a change from Bauer's
best-known style (found in Hope Was Here, BCCB 9/00, and others), the approach
suits the embarrassed understatement of a preadolescent boy and allows her deft
balance of sadness and humor to show itself to good advantage. Rather than tidily
demarcating main plot and subplots, the book allows them to combine and sepa-
rate much as strands of real life do, resulting paradoxically in a more cohesive view
of its protagonist's life than more tightly structured plots. Bauer also manages the
delicate task of writing articulately and realistically about Tree's suffering without
making Tree himself unrealistically articulate; instead, he's a believable good kid
trying to survive believable bad times, and readers will easily relate to him. DS
OCTOBER 2002 
* 49
BERGER, BARBARA HELEN, ad. All the Way to Lhasa: A Tale from Tibet; ad. and
illus. by Barbara Helen Berger. 
Philomel, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23387-3 
$15.99 
R 
4-7 yrs
An old woman sitting by the road to Lhasa encounters two very different travelers,
a rider on a galloping horse and a boy leading a yak, each seeking information
about the distance to Lhasa; she gives each a different answer. And indeed, the
hasty rider founders, while the boy walks, "one foot in front of the other," up
slopes, across bridges, through snow, until "in the last rays of sun before night, he
heard deep horns calling. He heard bells, si li li, and drums, dro lo lo. Emaho! He
had made it-one foot in front of the other, all the way to the holy city of Lhasa."
Berger's straightforward retelling of this parable has a simple, melodic inevitabil-
ity. The illustrations (acrylic, colored pencil, and gouache) gracefully emphasize
the story's mystical nature: swirling clouds that float not only in the sky but through
the landscape add to the sensation of mountain heights; flapping varicolored flags,
snowy shrines, and carved prayer stones (not to mention the old woman, present
at the beginning of the boy's journey and in Lhasa when he arrives) add mystery.
This cultural and spiritual evocation should find use within a comparative reli-
gions unit or other situations wherein adults seek to share spiritual insights with
the young. Berger includes a note which explains the importance of the holy city
of Lhasa to Tibetan culture, reveals the meaning behind the prayers carved into
the rocks on the travelers' way, and explains other Tibetan images. JMD
BRETT, JAN 
Who's That Knocking on Christmas Eve?; written and illus. by Jan
Brett. 
Putnam, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23873-5 
$16.99 
R 5-7 yrs
A young boy traveling with his ice bear to Oslo on Christmas Eve asks for shelter
at a hut nestled in the icy mountains. Kyri, the daughter of the house, is home
alone preparing the holiday dinner while her father is out attempting to frighten
off the trolls that annually steal the celebratory feast; she welcomes boy and bear in
out of the cold. When their peace is invaded by hungry trolls, boy and girl take
shelter in an adjoining animal shed, but the bear snores comfortably under the
stove until one foolish troll tickles "Kitty's" nose with a hot sausage: "The ice bear
leapt up with a tremendous roar, his nose burning terribly. Growling, he chased
the little trolls and all the big trolls around the table, up the walls, and out the
windows." This is a vigorous and entertaining story: the plot is simple, the pace is
quick, and the denouement is satisfying. Brett foreshadows and expands the ac-
tion through illustrative inserts on each spread, providing a multitude of places to
feast the eye. If the watercolor and gouache illustrations are a bit dark (the palette
leans heavily toward unrelenting cobalt blue), the characters sometimes awkwardly
drafted, and the details more crowded than ornate, the momentum will still carry
readers and listeners through. Those seeking a less Santa-oriented holiday saga
will settle happily in here. JMD
BRIDGES, SHIRIN YIM 
Ruby's Wish; illus. by Sophie Blackall. 
Chronicle,
2002 
30p
ISBN 0-8118-3490-5 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Ruby (so named for her insistence on wearing something red every day) is one of
the many grandchildren of a wealthy man who returned to China after making his
50 
* 
THE BULLETIN
fortune in the Gold Rush. She's such a promising student that her teacher brings
one of her poems to her grandfather: "Alas, bad luck to be born a girl; worse luck to
be born into this house where only boys are caredfor." When her grandfather ques-
tions Ruby, he discovers the source of her lament: she wants not just the tradi-
tional male household perks (the yolk part of the Moon Festival cake, a red lantern
during the Lantern Festival) but also a chance to go to the university. Time passes,
her sisters get married and her brothers go away to school, and one New Year's
Day, her grandfather hands her a fat red envelope: "It was a letter from a univer-
sity, saying that they would be proud to accept Ruby as one of their first female
students." This true story about Bridges' own grandmother has a gentle momen-
tum that moves it beyond the usual programmatic lucky-to-get-an-education story.
Ruby's determined character will capture the audience's imagination, making her
desire for advanced schooling a more immediate concern to youngsters than it
might otherwise be. Blackall's gouache illustrations have a quietly historical air,
their palette subtly shaded with smoky inks and highlighted with touches of bril-
liant red; roundly drafted characters make their semi-stately way through stylized
compositions framed with simple borders. Bridges' conclusion ("So that's how
Ruby got her wish. It's a true story. And how do I know this? Well, Ruby is my
grandmother, and every day she still wears a little red") has a happily-ever-after
flair that will leave listeners contented. JMD
BROWNE, N. M. 
Warriors ofAlavna. 
Bloomsbury, 2002 
310p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58234-775-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Contemporary teenagers Dan and Ursula are on a field trip when, after being
separated from their school chums by a viscous yellow mist, they emerge in a
parallel world that bears extensive similarities to Britain in A.D. 75. There they
discover that they have been summoned by the sorceress Rhonwen to help her
brother Macsen, leader of the Combrogi, defeat the Romans/Ravens who are in-
tent on genocide and domination. Mistaken for a boy, six-foot-tall Ursula takes
the name Boar Skull, and she begins to realize that she has developed the powers of
a sorceress, powers that rival even Rhonwen's. Dan, on the other hand, has be-
come Bear Sark, the berserker, one who in the frenzy of battle becomes an un-
thinking, nearly unstoppable, killing machine. With Macsen and his warriors, the
two unlikely heroes fight their way to the Cambrogi stronghold, where they make
ready for an almost certainly suicidal assault against the Ravens. Characterizations
are a bit thin, and the parallel-worlds theme is neither satisfactorily nor clearly
developed, but there are plenty of fights, chases, and escapes to keep this plot
moving. The bringing of a lost Roman legion to Macsen's aid is a terrific reach,
but Browne makes it work through some clever parallel history shifting. Blood
and battles hold this historical fantasy together; readers content with action and
less concerned with character will be satisfied here. JMD
BUNTING, EVE 
The Bones of Fred McFee; illus. by Kurt Cyrus. 
Harcourt,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202004-7 
$16.00 
R 5-8 yrs
The narrator of this divertingly discomfiting verse tells of Fred McFee, the plastic
skeleton he and his sister acquired at the harvest fair and then hung in the sy-
camore tree outside their house. Despite the skeleton's artificiality, he's quite a
creepy figure ("Our skeleton dances the dance of the dead,/ There in our sycamore
OCTOBER 2002 
* 
51
tree"), and he seems to be the agent of some strange events ("Now the rooster's
gone and the hens won't lay/ Since we got Fred McFee"), including his own disap-
pearance on Halloween ("His bones have vanished in the night,/ Gone from our
sycamore tree"), presumably into the newly dug grave below. While the plot doesn't
have the punch of Johnston's The Ghost of Nicholas Greebe (BCCB 10/96), the
bony balladry has a pleasingly ghoulish lilt that's bound to provide enjoyable thrills
for the audience. Cyrus' linocut-like scratchboard and watercolor is a smidgen too
corporeal for the supernaturalness of the story, but the crisply carved lines convey
the clean sharpness of autumn's edges and add their own skeletal touches to noc-
turnal scenes; perspectival play adds a frisson to images of the pendant Fred, with
viewpoints from above subtly suggesting an unseen watcher at a different level.
This entry would pair nicely with Cynthia De Felice's The Dancing Skeleton (BCCB
10/89); be sure to include any resident plastic skeletons in the spooky fun. DS
BURGESS, MELVIN 
Lady: My Life as a Bitch. Holt, 2002 
235p
ISBN 0-8050-7148-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Sandra is having a blast, partying every night with a different
guy and a different mind-altering substance. More gets altered than her mind,
however, after an encounter with Terry, a homeless drunk with a mean temper
and unusual transformative abilities: he changes her into a dog. When she realizes
what's happened, Sandra seeks Terry out and becomes his pet in an effort to return
to her normal state; eventually, though, she finds she enjoys life as a dog: running,
hunting, going into heat and having sex, roaming the streets, and especially living
in the moment without guilt or worry. A final effort to return home and convince
her family she's alive in the body of a dog permits some intriguing exploration of
exactly what it is that makes humans what they are. The effort ultimately fails,
however, and Sandra/Lady succumbs to the exhortations of her canine friends
("Oh, you pretty little bitch! Come to me, baby!"). This is a provocative concept,
and Burgess certainly knows how to capture readers' attention; Sandra's transfor-
mation occurs very early in the text, allowing the author plenty of time to explore
his heroine's options. Unfortunately, both as dog and person the protagonist is
fairly limited: Sandra is essentially a self-absorbed, shallow character, and her easy
adjustment to canine life is unsurprising. This is fast-moving and sensational, if
ultimately without much depth; adolescents with a surfeit of angst may recognize
themselves in the reality-avoiding Sandra and, in light of her final choice, wonder
what their own would have been. JMD
CARVELL, MARLENE 
Who Will TellMy Brother? Hyperion, 2002 
[150p]
ISBN 0-7868-0827-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In this novel in verse, high-school senior Evan questions his identity and its impli-
cations, since his father is reconnecting with Mohawk family on the reservation,
family repudiated by a previous generation. This reminder of his heritage inspires
Evan to take up his brother's old cause at school: attempting to get the school's
ersatz-Indian mascot, with the accompanying mock-Indian dances and gestures at
pep rallies, retired ("an Indian face as a mascot for a school/ creates a feeling of
dishonor, not pride,/ creates a sense of shame, not respect"). Evan's stand arouses
antagonism in the administration and, more directly, in some of his classmates,
and relations become increasingly-perhaps dangerously-adversarial. The sub-
ject is both unusual and highly topical, and there's considerable appeal in the story
52 
* THE BULLETIN
of a young person's moral battle against the system. There are some realistic touches,
too, both in the dynamics (there's a teacher who supports Evan privately but not
publicly) and in Evan's ultimate lack of success (in fact, the school makes an ex-
plicit public stand in favor of the mascot as a consequence). Other aspects of the
narrative are less successful, however: the free-verse poetry is often stilted in phrase-
ology and prosy in rhythm, and Evan's voice is sometimes pompous; his character
is also so saintly and so martyred that it confounds both credibility and identifica-
tion. Nonetheless, this is an accessible treatment of a significant current issue, and
it may provoke some useful discussion. A small note on the copyright page ex-
plains that the story is based on the experiences of the author's two sons. DS
CINDRICH, LISA 
In the Shadow of the Pali: A Story of the Hawaiian Leper
Colony. 
Putnam, 2002 
24 5p
ISBN 0-399-23855-7 
$18.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
After being forced by her cruel uncle to nurse her leprosy-stricken grandmother
for the past five years, twelve-year-old native Hawaiian Liliha has herself contracted
the disease; as a result, she's been shipped off to a remote leper settlement, Kalawao,
on the island of Molokai during the mid-1800s. Upon arrival, Liliha quickly
discovers that she and her shipmates have been seriously misled about the state of
things in Kalawao: the living conditions are harsh, the irregular food shipments
are snatched up by the more able-bodied lepers the moment they are delivered, the
government-appointed superintendent is a useless drunk, and the only person who
seems to be truly in charge is Kaalani, a particularly vicious female resident. With
the help of another resident, Manukekua (a boy about Liliha's age), and Hana, the
Christian wife of one of the lepers, Liliha fights to survive in the face of hunger,
mob rule, Kaalani's vengeance, and her own denial of her inevitably worsening
condition. While the premise is an intriguing and unusual one, the pace is plod-
ding, the characterization is relatively shallow, and much of the dialogue is flat, all
of which serve to lessen the emotional impact of the narrative. There are some
gripping scenes, however, as Liliha struggles with the ethics of stealing the only
bucket from the colony hospital or discovers that she's beginning to lose feeling in
her feet. It's also hard to beat the combination of disease (and graphic descriptions
thereof), a near-wilderness island setting, and a dangerous enemy, and Cindrich
casts a pleasurably ominous mood over this offbeat historical story. JMH
CLARKE, JUDITH 
Wolf on the Fold. Front Street, 2002 
[17 6p]
ISBN 1-886910-79-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Over a span of seventy years, multiple generations of an Australian family face life-
changing moments in this brief but rich collection of six short stories. A folktale-
like entry opens the book, as fourteen-year-old Kenny Sinclair (who has recently
become the man of the house after his father's sudden death) heads off in search of
work during the Great Depression; ignoring his mother's warning to stay on the
road, he stops to warm himself at a seemingly unattended fire and only narrowly
escapes from a murderous vagrant. Subsequent stories of later times provide
poignant glimpses into the lives of Kenny's daughters, Clightie and Frances, and
their offspring. Ironically, the most moving story of the bunch is the one that
focuses not on the Sinclairs but on a neighboring Indian family. Brothers Kanti
and Raj face prejudice on a daily basis, leaving Kanti disillusioned ("It was an idea
OCTOBER 2002 
* 
53
that always made him feel sick at heart: the way ordinary people might turn savage
if you gave them the right occasion") and Raj belligerent; after a tender encounter
with a now-adult Kenny and his sister, the boys finally begin to deal with their
buried grief for the baby sister they lost in the violence during their family's forced
removal from Africa. The family connections between these stories seem somewhat
unnecessary, and a couple of stories may have little relevance to the lives of
adolescents. However, most of these tales are right on target in their presentation
of the pivotal experiences and private thoughts of young people who are on the
brink of growing up; these are powerful and truthful depictions of the complexity
of human, especially familial, relationships. JMH
COHN, DIANA 
Dream Carver; illus. by Amy C6rdova. 
Chronicle, 2002 
34p
ISBN 0-8118-1244-8 
$15.95 
Ad 6-9yrs
Like his father and many others in their Oaxacan village, young Mateo carves little
wooden animals (which the women then paint in bright colors) for sale to the
tourists. He dreams of a bolder artistry, however, and secretly begins carving much
larger animals, hoping to display them at the fiesta to the approbation of the villag-
ers and, even more, his father. There's a somewhat touristy and old-fashioned
tone to the narrative, and Mateo's innovation, in the context of the story, seems
ultimately rather modest to cause such tension. Cohn has, however, capably con-
veyed the dreamy, magical realistic elements of this art form and its significance in
the region, and the notion of a talented kid who sends tradition in a new direction
is likely to appeal. The artwork, in thick acrylics, paradoxically downplays the
vivid colors of Mateo's animals by using hues of similar richness and value for all of
the visual elements, but there's still plenty of drama in the strong, sculptured lines
of the human figures and the black-backgrounded text blocks in strongly contrast-
ing borders. This falls a bit short on its own as a tale of artistry or as an introduc-
tion to Oaxacan folk art, but used in concert with Winter's Frida (BCCB 2/02) or
a photographic treatment of this art form it could open many youngsters' eyes to
artistic possibilities. A note on the Oaxacan wood carving tradition (especially the
innovator who, 
la Mateo, enlarged the carvings' traditional size) is appended.
DS
CONFORD, ELLEN Annabel theActress Starring in Hound of the Barkervilles; illus.
by Renee W. Andriani. 
Simon, 2002 
83p
ISBN 0-689-84734-3 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Ready for another adventure, the intrepid Annabel is cast as a servant's child in a
fund-raising production called Hound ofthe Barkervilles. She's seriously dedicated
to honing her craft (she had her lines memorized by the second rehearsal), but her
role as chief dog-handler for a Newfoundland and the demand that she play her
dignified part in a pair of bunny pajamas, complete with ears and tail, bring unex-
pected challenges. A bigger challenge awaits her when her arch enemy shows up in
the play's audience. Conford's beginning chapter book has a light and breezy
tone, and the constant action will keep novice readers turning the pages. Sen-
tences are crisp and dialogue well-paced, making room for lots of humor; inter-
spersed line drawings help bridge the gap between picture books and chapter books.
Fans of Conford's other Annabel the Actress titles (such as Annabel the Actress in
Gorilla My Dreams, BCCB 7/99) will be happy to see her again, and newcomers
will enjoy their first encounter with this entertaining young thespian. EAB
54 
* 
THE BULLETIN
CORBETT, SUE 
12Again. 
Dutton, 2002 
227p
ISBN 0-525-46899-4 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
"Patrick's mother vanished on Labor Day, the day before her birthday, the day
before he started seventh grade." At least, from her family's standpoint she has
disappeared, but in fact Bernadette has been transformed, after a visit to her late
mother's house, into her twelve-year-old self. Unsure of how it happened or what
she can do to correct the situation, she attends Patrick's grade at school, watching
her son from afar while trying to solve the mystery of her regression. Meanwhile a
worried Patrick waits and hopes desperately for his mother's return, watching his
father and two brothers grow sadder and less optimistic as the weeks go by-until
he begins to get emails from his mother. There's definitely a Freaky Friday/Back to
the Future appeal to the plotline, as Bernadette, now Detta, scrambles past admin-
istrative bureaucracy, survives classwork, and fights offseventh-grade enemies, and
there's an amiable suspense in Patrick's race to gather together the elements of his
mother's strange request (she needs to reverse the effects of the magical potion she
drank) in time without knowing exactly why he's doing it. Ultimately, though,
the book doesn't live up to its possibilities. There are quite a few plot holes and
conveniences (why doesn't Bernadette just send her family a letter rather than
being forced to remain incommunicado until she can get out an email?); the tone
wavers, with the family's eight weeks of genuine desolation interfering with the
more lighthearted aspects of Detta's school career, and the scenario is adult-slanted
with little payoff for kids (there's nothing much for Mom to learn from this expe-
rience about being a kid, and her secret remains an adult one). The concept is
sufficiently inviting that middle-graders may nonetheless find the book intriguing;
perhaps they'll start speculatively eyeing their own new classmates. DS
DRAPER, SHARON M. 
Double Dutch. Atheneum, 2002 
183p
ISBN 0-689-84230-9 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-9
No one has figured out that Delia can't read and that Randy has been living alone
since his father (a long-distance truck driver) took off, but these high-functioning
eighth graders may not be able to maintain their false fronts much longer: Delia
must take a mandatory state proficiency test and Randy has run out of money for
necessities. Complicating their situation is the atmosphere of fear that pervades
their Ohio school, especially after the school bullies (twins Tabu and Titan Tolliver)
are hyped on a television talk show as "Teens Who Terrify." Well-defined charac-
ters and dialogue that errs on the side of standard English (lightly spiced with
slang) provide clear access to a plot that gains speed as coach's aid Randy helps
Delia and her teammates prepare for the national double-dutch championships.
Things really shake down, however, when a pair of tornadoes tear apart the school,
forcing several characters-including the Tollivers-to act in ways that reveal their
true vulnerabilities. Once everyone's secrets are out, the overlapping plots are
wrapped up a little too quickly and neatly, but for the most part Draper uses her
poetic license to weave a well-paced and engagingly detailed exploration of a double-
sided world of public and private truths that teens will find very familiar. FK
ELLIOTT, LAURA MALONE 
Hunter's Best Friend at School; illus. by Lynn
Munsinger. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000231-X 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000230-1 
$15.99 
R 4-6 yrs
Hunter and Stripe are raccoon best friends who "liked all the same things," and at
OCTOBER 2002 
* 55
school they "did everything together." That's a pleasing practice for them both
until the day that Stripe arrives at school in an obstreperous frame of mind, squirm-
ing and poking Hunter during story hour, sticking out his tongue out at the girls
during lunch, and flinging pieces of his paper frog around gaily during art. Loyal
Hunter joins in with his best friend but ends up unhappy as a result (he'd really
wanted to take his lovely green frog home to his mother), so the next day, armed
with Mom's advice ("Sometimes being a best friend means you have to help your
friend be his best self'), he tries a different approach. The message is obvious (and
Stripe's quick conversion to upright citizen more wishful than likely) but it's also
useful, and Elliott wisely makes Stripe's misbehavior inviting (it is fun to secretly
poke and giggle during story hour) and playful rather than mean-spirited. As
usual, Munsinger's deceptively simple line-and-watercolor art gives her characters
individualistic charm without cloying cuteness. She gets a good deal of furry mile-
age from raccoon whiskers and ringed tails, making Hunter and Stripe's raccoon-
filled classroom one that many youngsters will envy, but even on a raccoon's masked
face the expressions are humanly recognizable. It's hard to prompt genuine behav-
ioral suasion on the story rug, but this endearing attempt is worth a try. DS
FINE, ANNE 
The Jamie and Angus Stories; illus. by Penny Dale. 
Candlewick,
2002 
110p
ISBN 0-7636-1862-4 
$15.99 
R 
4-7 yrs
Jamie is a boy and Angus is a toy, a small soft Highland bull, and the two have
been inseparable ever since Jamie got Angus for Christmas. In six chapters, they
undergo a series of daily-life adventures, such as dry-clean-only Angus' trip through
the washing machine, the duo's experience as guests at Jamie's babysitter's wed-
ding, Jamie's stay in the hospital, and Jamie's day of restricting himself to grownup
pleasures. This has a much gentler style than Fine's keenly observed material for
older readers, and occasionally the adult viewpoint (especially when depicting adults
interacting with Angus) gets downright pink and fluffy. More often, though, the
proceedings are cuddly rather than cutesy, especially as the specifics ground the
material in realistic detail (Jamie's yearning to keep one of the wedding-celebra-
tion balloons, his inability to resist the treasured candy of his hospital neighbor),
and there's genuine respect for the importance of the relationship between the
two. The easy flow of the text may inspire some youngsters to try to read ahead of
the readaloud, and the Milne-esque sweetness will probably make it a favorite of
some kids even when they're capable of racing through the material on their own;
they might even be willing to share it with younger sibs. Dale's soft and smoky
pencil drawings pop up informally between lines, decorating every spread and
adding to the cozy atmosphere. DS
FINK, SAM 
The Declaration of Independence; illus. by Sam Fink. 
Scholastic,
2002 
160p
ISBN 0-439-40700-1 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Among the many children's titles in what seems to be a publishers' patriotic renais-
sance are several that clarify the text of national documents and nationalistic proc-
lamations, such as Bill Martin's I Pledge Allegiance (reviewed below). With its
lengthy, arcane prose and its helpings of now presumably (hopefully?) obsolete
subject matter, the Declaration of Independence remains a kid-elusive document.
Fink judiciously bypasses the picture-book set and aims at an older, more history-
savvy crowd, illustrating the unabridged text with line-and-watercolor drawings in
56 
* THE BULLETIN
the tradition of political cartoons. Drafting is first rate and broad humor carries
the day, from the Jefferson-esque Founder drop-kicking the British crown while
his compatriots dance behind him (". .. it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off
such Government") to an imperious King George dangling a bewigged justice from
puppet strings ("He has made Judges dependent on his Will alone"). Fink care-
fully limits each spread to include a single concept so that each meaty bit receives
its own illustration, and although the occasional modern reference slips in (Patrick
Henry holds a 1776 New Hampshire license plate reading "Live free or die"), most
remain true to the spirit of the Patriot rebels. The Declaration's full text is re-
peated at the end, and a glossary, index, illustrator's note, and annotated chronol-
ogy of pre-Revolutionary events from 1748 to 1776 round out the volume. EB
FLEMING, DENISE 
Alphabet under Construction; written and illus. by Denise
Fleming. 
Holt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6848-1 
$16.95 
R 2-5 yrs
In Fleming's new treat for toddlers, each letter of the alphabet undergoes a series of
construction-related processes at the hands of an enthusiastic mouse: "Mouse
airbrushes the A,/ buttons the B,/ carves the C ... " and so forth, until the entire
alphabet has been altered, constructed, created, or decorated in some fashion.
Though some viewers may wish for more involvement of trucks, cranes, and other
popular earth movers, they'll enjoy the mouse's modest construction labors.
Fleming's art is perfect for her young audience, combining the strong lines of the
affable mouse and bold colors for various letters with her characteristically intrigu-
ing textures in handmade-paper collage and soft layers, which add visual interest
and invite viewers to touch the pages. This is a solid and effective title for young
abecedarians. KM
FRANK, HILLARY 
Better Than Running at Night. Houghton, 2002 
[24 0p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-618-10439-9 
$17.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-618-25073-5 
$10.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Ellie's a freshman at art college, and her new life is bringing her all the changes she
could have desired. She's in an intense and strange introductory class, which is
causing her to rethink her artistic priorities; more significantly, she's in her first
serious and sexual relationship. Though deeply enmeshed with Nate, a fellow art
student, Ellie finds herself increasingly troubled by his freewheeling approach to
romance (not only does he have another girlfriend, he keeps painting sexy nude
portraits of the attractive female students) and increasingly uncertain about his
truthfulness in his statements about her and about other women. There's some
contrivance here (eavesdropping furthers the plot, and a key aspect of Ellie's his-
tory depends on a biological myth that's presented as a fact), and some issues beg
for resolution they never receive (Ellie's lack of sexual satisfaction in her relation-
ship with Nate, her lingering unease about her ignorance of her biological father),
but Ellie's awakening on several fronts is deftly drawn. Frank is patient and tactful
in her evolution of character, allowing Ellie's professor, for instance, to move gradu-
ally from hyperactive and buffoonish to sharp and knowledgeable without strain.
Ellie herself is a deeply authentic mix of uncertainty, daring, and personal strength,
and her revelatory first semester is true to life; the development of her artistic con-
OCTOBER 2002 
* 57
fidence is a particularly original and compelling theme. Even kids who scorn
Felicity will relish this vision of a life of exploration outside parental walls. DS
GLASSMAN, MIRIAM 
Halloweena; illus. by Victoria Roberts. 
Atheneum,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82825-X 
$15.95 
R 
5-7 yrs
Hepzibah is a mean old witch ("No one in the neighborhood dared to speak to
her, and children were warned to stay away from her door") and proud of it. Her
sister, Zillah, leaves her a baby (taken in exchange for some Brussels sprouts) to
care for, with express instructions to keep her away from humans. Hepzibah re-
luctantly takes on this cheerful child ("She poked the baby. The baby smiled. She
scowled at the baby. The baby still smiled"), names her Halloweena, and deter-
mines to turn her into a "clever little witch." Being a single mother is no picnic,
even for a witch, and Hepzibah finds herself planting wholesome fruits and veggies
and giving up "wild nights out with the ghouls." Halloweena, in the meantime,
grows into a sturdy but lonesome witch-child, who yearns to play with the other
neighborhood children. A clever bit of planting results in Halloweena's growing a
field of candy corn, which attracts a field full of candy-corn-loving friends and
results in the first "Halloweena party." Glassman offers an often witty (if some-
times wordy) tale of motherly love and daughterly determination. Roberts' line-
and-watercolor illustrations are characterized by sophisticated visual humor and
understated whimsy; tiny touches throughout add to every scene (a critter emerges
from the rag rug on the floor, an observant moon notices the goings-on, ghosts
peek from behind doors, etc.). The transformations of Hepzibah from wicked
witch to concerned parent and of Halloweena from gurgling baby to good little
witch are cleverly accomplished through situations that, though shaded by magic,
will remind viewers of their own more down-to-earth growing pains. JMD
GRAHAM, BOB Jethro Byrd: Fairy Child; written and illus. by Bob
Graham. 
Candlewick, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-1772-5 $15.99 
R 4-8 yrs
Certain there are fairies, even in her family's weedy cement garden, Annabelle one
day finds her faith rewarded: "There she met a boy-as big as her finger. His
wings shivered in the breeze. 'Who are you?' she asked. He hitched up his jeans,
flew onto a leaf, and wiped his nose on the back of his sleeve. 'Jethro,' he said.
'Jethro Byrd... I'm a Fairy Child.'" Jethro and his family are on their way to make
ice cream at the Fairy Travelers' picnic (they are traveling in a diminutive ice-
cream truck), but they've stopped for tea, and "to feed baby Cecily," who is "as big
as a fingernail." Annabelle's mother gamely makes tea and cakes for what she
believes are Annabelle's imaginary friends, and there ensues a resplendently magi-
cal, down-to-earth tea party, that ends, as magical things must, with farewells,
parting gifts, and admonitions to "keep looking." Graham (author/illustrator of
"Let's Get a Pup!" Said Kate, BCCB 9/01) has put together a jolly little fairy tale,
with little sentimentalizing. Line-and-watercolor illustrations reflect the wry hu-
mor and urban magic of the text: Annabelle, with a head of tight curls, dominates
many spreads by her sheer comparative size; the Byrd family, on the other hand,
lounges among the teacups as if at an amusement park ride, casually eating, sing-
ing, and fiddling. This is a deft balance of the fanciful and the domestic that
should appeal to partisans of both. JMD
58 
* THE BULLETIN
GUEST, ELISSA HADEN 
Iris and Walter: The Sleepover; illus. by Christine
Davenier. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2002 
44p
ISBN 0-15-216487-1 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Best friends Iris and Walter (from Iris and Walter and Baby Rose, BCCB 4/02, etc.)
return in this four-chapter look at a first sleepover. Initially very excited about
staying overnight at Walter's house, Iris relishes their plans to put on a puppet
show, ride Walter's horse in their pajamas, stay up late, and sleep out on the porch.
At the sleepover itself, the planned activities are as delightful as predicted, but
when Walter falls asleep before Iris, she falls prey to homesickness. Home she goes
to her understanding family and all ends reassuringly: "'I'll sleep over at Walter's
another time,' said Iris yawning. 'Of course you will,' said her mother. And she
did." Iris and Walter's wholesome friendship comes through clearly in this new
adventure; the close family relationships are also well defined, adding a pleasant
backdrop to the domestic drama. Davenier's color-washed lines are free flowing,
the blue tones suited to the evening-on-the-porch setting. While the denouement
will certainly be comforting to those kids who have found themselves in similar
situations, it might have been more encouraging if the usually plucky Iris stuck it
out till breakfast. Iris' fans may miss her usual gumption, but they'll certainly still
find comfort in the twosome's continuing friendship. JMD
HADDIX, MARGARET PETERSON 
Among the Betrayed. Simon, 2002 
156p
ISBN 0-689-83905-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
In this finale to her popular series (starting with Among the Hidden), Haddix con-
tinues the saga of the illegal third children called "shadow children," this time
treating the events from the point of view of Nina Idi. Previously a confidante of
informer Jason, Nina is now herself betrayed as a shadow child and imprisoned by
the Population Police. There she's offered a tough choice: gain the confidence of
her three cellmates and acquire sufficient information with which to condemn
them, thereby leading them to their deaths, or face death herself. Haddix's plot
initially flows slowly, snagging on Nina's honest but painstaking reflections; then
it abruptly springs into breakneck speed when Nina proves her loyalty to cellmates
Matthias, Percy, and Alia and the true nature of Nina's challenge is revealed. Readers
will wonder at the treatment Nina received while, it is later revealed, her loyalty
was being tested, and they may be taken aback as the tables are turned so quickly
on their narrator. Nonetheless, Nina's story will bring to light questions readers
will want to ponder, and those who've pursued the first two installments of the
trilogy will want to see the story to its end. EAB
HASSINGER, PETER W. 
The Book ofAlfar: A Tale of the Hudson Highlands; illus.
by Brett Helquist. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2002 264p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028470-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028469-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Sander's family has moved to the country to embrace the quiet bucolic life, but
that's far from what greets them. Overturned trashcans, marauding foxes, and an
infestation of honeybees exasperate his parents, but only Sander knows that the
troubles aren't caused by local wildlife but by an ancient and malevolent dwarf,
Dwerg, who's determined to extend a centuries-old curse and to pass on his dark
magic to his reluctant grandson, Alfar. Plot clarifications are slow in coming, and
the momentum doesn't really pick up until the final confrontation between Dwerg
OCTOBER 2002 
* 
59
and Alfar. Overall, the characterizations are not particularly memorable, and the
battle between good and evil never quite achieves the clarity necessary to make the
conflict vital. Still, there are some surefire, kid-pleasing elements here, the mea-
sured text lends itself to reading aloud, and those readers looking for a tamer en-
trance to modern fantasy may find this just their speed. Oh, and that final
confrontation? Well, wizards' duels are pretty exciting, no matter how you get
there. Sander's final discovery of Alfar's farewell gift, a belt of invisibility, leaves
the portal open for a sequel. JMD
HEILIGMAN, DEBORAH 
Babies; illus. by Laura Freeman. 
National Geographic,
2002 
32p 
(Jump into Science)
ISBN 0-7922-8205-1 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Even aside from the question of their origins, babies are rather mysterious crea-
tures, especially to those who were themselves babies not so long ago. This neat
and informative little introduction helps clear up some of that mystery and even
convert it to fascination with its enthusiastic and informative approach. Topics
covered range from babies' astonishing growth rate ("If you grew at that rate every
year, you'd weigh more than a thousand pounds by the time you were five") to
their familial awareness ("A newborn baby can recognize his mother's voice as
soon as he is born") to their learning abilities ("He tries to copy what you do").
There are a few glitches in the information (it's simply not true, for instance, that
"the most babies a mom ever gave birth to was seven"), but in general there's a
generous helping of good material suitable for a variety of family experiences; much
of the text would be suitable for reading aloud to siblings-in-wait, too. The illus-
trations, sketches with color added by computer, sometimes become overactive
with the interplay of busy borders and main action, and there's an overdose of
cutesiness in the faces, especially the babies' Bambi eyes; the soft tones avoid the
slickness often found in computer-assisted art, however, and there's a homey real-
ism in the multicultural cast of alarmed siblings and occasionally blear-eyed par-
ents. This will be a boon to many curricula as well as to families and, of course, to
that coterie of baby-mad youngsters. A rather skimpy scientific experiment is
appended. DS
HICKS, BETTY 
ISmellLike Ham. Roaring Brook, 2002 
133p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2857-2 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1748-1 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Nick's prospects for starting as point guard on the sixth-grade basketball team are
rapidly dimming; smoking, lying, womanizing (well, girl-izing) Carson persists in
coming out of nowhere to steal the ball whenever Nick thinks he's in control.
Practice time at the home hoop has taken a hit, too, because Nick's newly acquired
third-grade stepbrother, Dwayne, is constantly and adoringly underfoot. Nick
may in time reconcile himself to his new stepmother's clove shampoo (hence, the
titular scent) and tofu dinners, but omnipresent "Duh-wayne," with his perfectly
sculpted hair and neatly tucked shirttails, is a blight on Nick's social life. Dwayne
is as determined to get in Nick's good graces as Nick is to avoid him, and after
undermining Nick's standing with the coach by insisting that his brother get more
playing time, the youngster runs away to prove his courage and earn Nick's regard.
There are no real surprises here, and readers will see the happy ending coming
from clear across the court. Hicks does, however, craft in Nick a most credible
preteen, a basically good kid who's not above sneaking a cigarette to get the guys
60 
* 
THE BULLETIN
off his case, and who instantly knows that, in calling his new sibling "Moron," he's
gone too far. Readers will applaud Nick's inevitable awakening-almost as loudly
as Dwayne's newly scuffed shoes and dangling shirttails. EB
HINDLEY, JUDY 
Does a Cow Say Boo?; illus. by Brita Granstrom. 
Candlewick,
2002 
26p
ISBN 0-7636-1718-0 
$15.99 
R 
2-4 yrs
Five precocious tots trot through a farmyard, exploring the local fauna with the
intent of discovering the answer to the question, "Who says BOO?" Their travels
lead them from the cow ("Does a cow say BOO? Oh, no! What does a cow say? A
cow says...moo! That's what a cow says-and you can, too"), to the pig pen ("A
pig says oink! And a pig goes grunt as it sqwuffles in the mud. Oink, oink! Grunt,
grunt!"), and through the barn to owl ("whoo-tu-whit, tu-whoo!"), every time
leaving ample opportunity for budding linguists to try out the funny sounds of
their animal friends. What lifts this above the usual farm fare is Hindley's deft use
of guessing-game momentum to lead an otherwise distractible audience through
the extra-sturdy picture-book pages. Granstr6m's vibrant watercolor illustrations,
depicting a merry multicultural cast reminiscent of Oxenbury's cuddly youngsters,
extend the text with details like a piggy backpack and a child's playful imitation of
a cow with horns. Though your shelves are already bulging with barnyard matters
for the younger set, make room for this title. EAB
HOBBIE, HOLLY 
Toot & Puddle: Top of the World; written and illus. by Holly
Hobbie. 
Little, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-316-36513-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Piglet buddies Toot and Puddle are back for another adventure, precipitated by
Toot's failure to return after going out for a walk one fine morning. A worried
Puddle, putting himself in his Toot's shoes in order to search for his friend, finds
himself on a train, on a bus, at the airport, and in Provence before you can say
"piggy passport." He finds Toot in Coucou Poche ("I had a whim," explains the
peripatetic pig), and the two head for home, but not before making a side expedi-
tion to Nepal to climb an unidentified peak. The narrative fluidity of Toot and
Puddle's previous exploits is missing here; the text is a bit choppy and contrived,
and Hobbie depends on her art to carry the very slight story. A few of the compo-
sitions echo images seen in previous titles, but overall the watercolors will not
disappoint fans: Toot and Puddle's insouciance is ever present, and the contrast
between the sprightly little pigs (and their home in cozy Woodcock Pocket) and
the big wide world makes home sweet home seem even sweeter. Illustrations fea-
turing a lonely Puddle riding a boxcar, boarding a bus, etc. emphasize his singular
loneliness, and the friends' joyful reunion is still heartwarming. JMD
HOFFMAN, MARY 
The Color of Home; illus. by Karin Littlewood. 
Fogelman,
2002 
26p
ISBN 0-8037-2841-7 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
A young Somali refugee finds his first days at an American school strange: "The
children were friendly. They smiled at Hassan, and one of the boys kicked a soccer
ball toward him. But he didn't understand anything that anyone said-only his
name and 'hello' and 'bathroom.'" Hassan does manage to communicate some of
his feelings and experiences through a vivid picture of his Somali home that he
OCTOBER 2002 
* 61
paints and then, apparently, ruins ("He took the red paint again and splattered it
on the white wall of the house. He smudged his uncle out of the picture"). After
telling the rest of his tragic story to his teacher through a Somali interpreter the
next day, he feels sufficiently unburdened to paint for his mother a cheerier memory
of his old home to brighten up their comparatively colorless new one. The story is
purposive but effective, and the focus on a beloved pet (left behind when the fam-
ily fled) creates a sympathetic connection to Hassan's experience. Expressive swaths
of color (the palette reflecting the relative warmth of Hassan's memories and per-
ceptions) surround and connect the well-defined figures of teachers and students,
slightly obscuring the details of a world that has not yet come into focus for him.
It's clear but not overstated that the prospects of Hassan's family are beginning to
brighten, which will leave readers with a hopeful glow that owes as much to the
illustrations as the text. FK
HONEY, ELIZABETH 
Remote Man; written and illus. by Elizabeth Honey. 
Knopf,
2002 
260p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91413-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81413-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
This compelling story starts as a domestic drama, with thirteen-year-old Ned and
his environmental scientist mother, Janet, pushing each other's buttons-via fax,
answering machine, email, and, when she finally gets home, in person. After being
diagnosed with depression, Janet sends Ned to visit family in the Northern Terri-
tory, where he meets his cousin Kate ("tough and harebrained") and views a rare
Oenpelli python (a treat for the reptile-lover); after he gets back, Ned and his
mom hit the road to recovery together, going all the way to Concord, Massachu-
setts, where both find causes-and friends-that draw them out of themselves.
Ned and his cartoonishly vibrant pal Rocky hook up electronically with Kate ("Re-
mote Man" is Ned's nom de chat room), who invites Cleverton Lee (a Jamaican
librarian's computer protedg) and Yvette Claverloux (student at an abbey school
near Thenay in France) to bring their local knowledge and problem-solving skills
to bear on the task of entrapping a former Hollywood stuntman who smuggles
exotic pets from their four corners of the world for rich clients. At 250+ pages, this
is not a quick read, but it's a rich one that steadily gains momentum, culminating
with a heart-stopping car chase; deceptively casual line drawings and multi-fonted
chat room conversations add to the feeling of intimacy and immediacy. Quirky
three-dimensional characters, organically integrated factoids, and engagingly off-
beat prose make this Australian import (by the author of Don't Pat the Wombat,
BCCB 7/00 and Fiddleback, BCCB 7/01) a particularly exhilarating international
secret to share with animal lovers, armchair travelers, technophiles, and just plain
seekers of literary thrills. FK
HOWE, JAMES 
Tales from the House ofBunnicula: It Came from Beneath the Bed!;
illus. by Brett Helquist. 
Atheneum, 2002 
90p
ISBN 0-689-83947-2 
$9.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Talesfrom the House ofBunnicula: Invasion ofthe Mind Swappersfrom Asteroid
6!; illus. by Brett Helquist. 
Atheneum, 2002 
89p
ISBN 0-689-83949-9 
$9.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Wirehaired dachshund Howie, a budding writer, is getting writing tips from his
Uncle Harold, who wrote "all these books about Bunnicula, this strange but lov-
62 * THE BULLETIN
able rabbit who lives here with us." Both titles combine Howie's writing journal
(apparently written on notebook paper) and his actual stories; the journal portion
first discusses Howie's writing process and reader reactions to his work, then dis-
plays Howie's revisions. The stories themselves involve a science project gone
horribly awry and the invasion of Earth by mind-snatching aliens, but the spoofy
plots are actually secondary to the voice, which is that of an overexcited authorial
pup with a book contract. Howe (coauthor of the original Bunnicula) plays the
writing jokes for all they're worth (Howie, the hero of his own books, is described
in multitudinous adulatory adjectives, for example) but never gets snide or rises
above the heads of his intended audience. Plentiful illustrations rich with broad
humor and the easygoing format will entice reluctant as well as eager readers. Even
while Howe is poking fun at series genres, he's actually giving good advice about
writing, so wannabe writers as well as Bunnicula fans will appreciate this behind-
the-scenes look at a puppy's progress. JMD
HULING, JAN 
Puss in Cowboy Boots; illus. by Phil Huling. 
Simon, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83119-6 
$16.00 
R 7-10 yrs
The familiar feline folktale is transplanted to the heart of Texas, where Puss asks
his young master, Dan (whose rodeo clown dad has "kicked the bucket"), for a
pair of cowboy boots. Puss then proceeds to win over Mr. Patoot-Texas's richest
oil tycoon and a man with a taste for down-home 'possum pie-by presenting him
with a variety of wild game and convincing both him and his art-student daughter,
Rosie May, that "Rancher Dan" is the richest and most down-to-earth rancher
around. Puss quickly dispatches an evil ranch-owning ogre in the usual manner,
and he and Dan hold a barbecue shindig at Dan's newly acquired ranch, where
Rosie May agrees to marry Dan. Though the Texas twang gets a bit overbearing,
the setting provides a refreshing twist to Perrault's tale, and the folksy Texan dia-
lect is savory and humorous. 
Full-page and spot art, rendered in desert-toned
watercolors, complements the story's southwestern sense of place. The black-and-
white Puss is somewhat creepily humanoid, but he's an arresting figure, and the
lanky, square-featured human figures are suitably rustic. This novel take on "Puss
in Boots" would pair well with a more traditional version for a presentation on
folktale variants or with Susan Lowell's Cindy Ellen (BCCB 9/00) for a folktale
storytime with a western twist. JMH
JOHNSON, DOUG 
Substitute Teacher Plans; illus. by Tammy Smith. 
Holt,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6520-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
When her boisterous class starts wearing on her nerves, Miss Huff decides to take
a vacation day. She excitedly writes out a list of fun things to do on her day off and
dutifully writes up classroom plans for her substitute, but uh-oh-the lists get
switched. This isn't so terrible, however, as Miss Huff enjoys her day of reading
(giggling over a joke book), writing (catching up on her correspondence), math
(paying her bills), and so on while the class joins doughty substitute Mrs. Martin
on a rollercoaster ride, a scuba-diving outing, a ski trip, and various other shenani-
gans. There are holes aplenty in the plot, and the ending is somewhat strained, but
audiences will relish the classroom hijinks, the holiday/school reversal, and the fact
that they know better than the vacationing teacher; the substitute's intrepid nature
("The lion tamer . .. just happened to be Mrs. Martin") adds another layer of
enjoyment. The mixed-media illustrations aren't as satisfying: the clay figures of
OCTOBER 2002 
* 63
the characters, with their round heads and noodly legs, are amusing, but they
don't blend well with the sketchier elements; the harsh Photoshopped shadows
give many spreads a stilted or even sinister air. While the multitude of contrasting
saturated colors lends an intriguingly surreal aura, many compositions lack suffi-
cient focus to lead the viewer's eye through all the hues of similar value and inten-
sity. The otherworldly flavor is appropriate for this fantastical conceit, however,
and kids will thrill to the idea of a sub with such pizzazz. DS
KALMAN, MAIRA 
Fireboat: The Heroic Adventures ofthe John J. Harvey; written
and illus. by Maira Kalman. 
Putnam, 2002 
42p
ISBN 0-399-23953-7 
$16.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Launched in 1931, the fireboat John J. Harvey was a shiny marvel with "5 diesel
engines so it could go 20 miles per hour (that's pretty fast!)/ 8 pipes that could
shoot 16,000 gallons of water per minute (equal to 20 fire trucks!)/ A very nice
can to oil all squeaks." Throughout her distinguished career, she fought fires from
city piers to the liner Normandie, but as the harbor changed, so did its need for big
fireboats, leaving the John J. Harvey destined for the scrap heap. A group of entre-
preneurs restored her as a showpiece, but she still had some important work left to
do. When planes crashed into the Twin Towers on September 11, 2001, the
Harvey was pressed back into service first as a ferry, then as a pumping station.
"For four days and nights the Harvey pumped water. The crew took turns sleep-
ing. .. . They worked and cried. They fought the fire until it was under control."
Among the many literary tributes to 9-11 heroism, Kalman's is particularly excit-
ing, uplifting, and child-sensitive. She recounts the Twin Towers explosion with
two spreads devoted to the eerie approach of two aircraft in a cloudless sky and the
rain of smoke and metal shards from the stricken building; then she plows straight
ahead to the Harvey's shoreside efforts, casting the fireboat's labors at the site as yet
another important task in her long history of civic service. Stylized images straddle
crayon-bright backgrounds, and Kalman's customarily tipsy angles are replaced
here by bridges and boats and buildings on solid, confident footing. This title
revisits the tragedy without the terror and conveys pride without preachiness; con-
sider purchasing an extra copy. EB
KARR, KATHLEEN 
Bone Dry. 
Hyperion, 2002 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-7868-0776-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Orphan Matthew Morrissey and his phrenologist employer, Dr. Asa B. Cornwall,
are off on their second cranial quest (see Skullduggery, BCCB 4/00), to ferret out
and study the skull of Alexander the Great. First stop is a remote corner of the
Sahara, where they hope to cull background on the conqueror's life. A well-equipped
caravan is readied, a knowledgeable guide hired, and camels brought to some sem-
blance of discipline, but Fate can hardly wait to stretch out her foot to trip the
adventurers. A raging sandstorm threatens to suffocate them, desert jinn thrust
their unsettling companionship on Matthew, and slave traders slaughter their en-
tourage and take Matthew, Dr. ABC, and their guide captive. None of this, of
course, is anything an ingenious boy from the States can't handle, and with a few
hoary magic tricks, the cooperation of unshackled African slaves, a cheetah avatar,
and a mysterious, decimated geezer named Father Moses, Matthew not only se-
cures everyone's freedom but finds enough hidden treasure to fund their research
for some time to come. Karr hurls her plot forward with the breakneck pacing and
64 
* THE BULLETIN
thrilling improbability of an Indiana Jones flick, and the tacit promise of forth-
coming episodes is as welcome as it is predictable. When the kids have exhausted
the summer's big-screen blockbusters, hand them a ticket to Matthew Morrissey's
latest action adventure. EB
KOLLER, JACKIE FRENCH 
Someday. 
Orchard, 2002 
215p
ISBN 0-439-29317-0 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-9
For nearly as long as Cecelia Wheeler can remember, her town of Enfield, Massa-
chusetts has been scheduled to disappear-flooded over to form part of the im-
mense reservoir that will supply drinking water to the burgeoning population of
1930s Boston. The vague "someday" has arrived; residents receive notice to evacuate,
and Cecelia awakens to the reality of losing her best friend, "Chubby" Miller, who
is no longer chubby and no longer content to be merely her best friend. Moreover,
Mama, widowed when Cecelia was little, is anxious to rebuild her life in a big city,
and Gram is deep in denial, unwilling to field offers by the water commission to
purchase her house. Koller bases her tale (reminiscent of Doyle's look at a similar
event in Canadian history, MaryAnn Alice, BCCB 6/02) on the Quabbin reservoir
project in which several towns were condemned under the Swift River Act of 1928.
Details of Enfield's gradual but inexorable shutdown-Cecelia and Chubby's
eighth-grade graduation, the community ball to mark the midnight the town offi-
cially ceases to exist, the last wedding, the razing and burning of homesites-serve
as backdrop to the more intimate but equally potent drama within the Wheeler
family, as Cecelia and her mother both try to assuage their loneliness and uncer-
tainties by flirting with a charming young water-commission representative. His-
tory does not allow a reprieve for Enfield, but there's plenty of hope for Cecelia-in
Chubby's final declaration of love and of faith in the future, and in the true-life
"handful of displaced residents" who, as Koller notes, continue to meet regularly
as a "community, held together by their memories and their sense of belonging to
one another." EB
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Porkenstein; illus. by David Jarvis. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-62380-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
Following the consumption of his brothers by the Big Bad Wolf, Dr. Smart Pig
finds himself lonely and longing for a friend. He decides to solve all his problems
in one go by inventing a wolf-proof pig companion, and after a few false starts (a
pig fish, a pig bat) he creates a humongous porcine playmate, who's absolutely
ravenous ("I've-I've--created a monster!" exclaims a stunned Dr. Pig). When
the Big Bad Wolf hears of the oversized pig and decides to come a-calling, it's up
to Porkenstein to save Dr. Pig's bacon. This is an amiable hammy outing that
gains additional savor from its Halloween overtones (the Big Bad Wolf camou-
flages himself as a trick-or-treating grandma). Though the final resolution comes
out of the blue (it's not clear why the rapacious Porkenstein's snarfing of the Big
Bad Wolf makes him an ideal friend when before he'd been a nuisance), the story
trots along solidly, making amusing hay from its twists on the familiar in monster
movies and folktales. Saturated colors give Jarvis' plump and polished figures a
three-dimensional plasticity, which slightly softens the blubbery peach-fuzz mon-
strosity that is Porkenstein; varied vantage points add to the slightly (and appro-
OCTOBER 2002 
* 65
priately) surreal air. Kids looking for something wilder than Trivizas' The Three
Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig (BCCB 9/93) will find this pig a tasty dish. DS
LAYTON, NEAL 
The Sunday Blues; written and illus. by Neal Layton. 
Candlewick,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-1975-2 
$15.99 
R Gr. 1-3
Steve's ability to relax and enjoy a fun-filled Sunday afternoon with his accommo-
dating folks and devoted Scottie dog is undercut by the gloomy thought that the
next day he has to go to school: "He was sure he'd have a terrible day there,
because school was really, really, really horrible." The grownups don't seem to see
the problem (Aunt Velma spoils tea time by reminiscing about all the fun she used
to have at school), and, frankly, by the time Steve gets to school and sees his friends
frolicking on the playground, he's not quite sure what he was worried about either:
"Maybe school wasn't so bad after all!" This unsurprising conclusion is the flattest
moment in an otherwise engaging look at a weekly malady many schoolgoers-
teachers as well as students-will recognize. Lively, well-paced text and skillfully
composed pages of deftly mixed media (created using collage, ink, and Photoshop)
bring to life the highs and lows ofwoebegone Steve's day. Ultra-realistic but muted
retro backgrounds (in colors that reflect Steve's moods) surround figures whose
dark outlines and crude features mimic the immature renderings of the book's
target audience. The whole package-from the dark cloud on the title page to the
evocative blueprint-style endpapers-has a cheerful irreverence and sleight-of-hand
sophistication that both kids and adults will relish, whatever Monday brings. FK
LEUCK, 
LAURA 
Goodnight, 
Baby 
Monster; 
illus. 
by 
Nigel
McMullen. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
[24p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029152-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029151-6 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
It's bedtime for babies everywhere, but these aren't your usual babies: the tots
being sent off to sleep here are a mummy, a witch, a dragon, a ghost, and other
assorted creepy critters. Each little ghastly gets one line of a rhyming couplet
("Goodnight, baby mummy, wrapped up in your tomb./ Goodnight, baby witch,
asleep near your broom"); though the text is slight, the "Goodnight, baby" repeti-
tion makes for a sweetly soporific pattern, and the beastly babies are an entertain-
ing concept. The line-and-watercolor illustrations add some amusing detail (the
sleepy little dragon clutches a toy knight), but they unfortunately undercut the
playful energy of the concept, turning the monsters into bland, sweet cuddly-toy
incarnations (literally so in the last spread, where they perch on the windowsill of
a little human's bedroom) that don't fulfill the promise of the text. This still has
enough of an edge to lull to sleep little Halloweenies or those who have enjoyed
Thomas' What If(BCCB 9/99). DS
LEVINE, GAIL CARSON 
Betsy Who Cried Wolf illus. by Scott Nash. 
HarperCollins,
2002 
36p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028764-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028763-2 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"On her eighth birthday, Betsy took the Shepherd's Oath" and started her sheep-
herding career. Unfortunately for Betsy, Zimmo the wolf is a wolf with a plan,
66 
* THE BULLETIN
repeatedly showing himself to Betsy and disappearing when she cries "Wolf!" Af-
ter a couple of rounds, the farmers think Betsy is behaving like that boy who cried
wolf, and they remit her for shepherd reeducation. On Betsy's last chance back in
the pasture, Zimmo appears again, "BARING HIS FANGS! GALLOPING!!
DOWN THE MOUNTAIN!!! TOWARD THE SHEEP!!!!" Since her alarums
are ignored by the disbelieving farmers, Betsy handles Zimmo by giving the hun-
gry wolf her lunch: "And from then on, Betsy and Zimmo herded together and
ate Mom's pies together, the two shepherds of Bray." Wishful wolf thinking this
may be, but it sure is funny. Levine's text rolls along at a brisk and bouncy pace,
Betsy is one cool (and compassionate) customer, and Zimmo has a lot of charm for
a lamb-stealing wolf. Nash's acrylics are a cartoony field day, with jokes both
introduced and extended in the visuals; audiences will relish the pert-nosed Betsy,
the nattily scarfed Zimmo, and the overly fluffy, toothy sheep who comment con-
stantly on the action in dialogue balloons. Chatty sheep, a girl-and-wolf alliance,
and multitudinous opportunities to howl like a wolf make this a storytime, story-
telling treat. JMD
LICHTENHELD, TOM 
Everything I Know about Monsters: A Collection ofMade-up
Facts, Educated Guesses, and Silly Pictures about Creatures ofCreepiness; written and
illus. by Tom Lichtenheld. 
Simon, 2002 
34p
ISBN 0-689-84381-X 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
The author of Everything I Know about Pirates (BCCB 4/00) returns here with a
new and scarier topic. Opening with an acknowledgment that monsters don't
really exist, he then goes on to discuss various kinds of monsters, some of which
kids will already know (Under-the-Bed Monsters, Closet Monsters) and some that
may be new concepts (the Big Butted Bug Eyed Terrible Tongue Twister); there's
then a discussion of manmade, especially movie and TV, monsters. Since there's
no factual basis to the material, this spins its wheels considerably more than the
previous volume, with the silliness sometimes more random than on target, but
there's such relentless high spirits and monstrous good fellowship that it's still hard
to resist. There's also some genuine connection with kid discomforts ("Have you
ever noticed how your friend's house always smells different and kind of weird?
That's actually the smell of their monsters, which you're not used to") and under-
standing of the charms of media monsters ("Robots aren't much fun because they
don't scream, stink, get bug-eyed, or have out-of-control bodily fluids").
Lichtenheld's murky palette, dark taupe punctuated by black and frightful greens
and oranges, is well suited to the subject, and the overstuffed pages are entertain-
ingly pell-mell, with sidebars, speech balloons, captions, diagrams, and various
gleefully silly tidbits. There's not much redeeming social value here, but that in
itself is going to be a plus for readers, reluctant and otherwise, who are looking for
a break. DS
LowRY, Lois 
Gooney Bird Greene; illus. by Middy Thomas. 
Lorraine/Hough-
ton, 2002 
[96p]
ISBN 0-618-23848-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Gooney Bird Greene makes quite a splash when she arrives in the second grade at
Watertower Elementary School: "She opened the second grade classroom door at
ten o'clock on a Wednesday morning and appeared there all alone, without even a
OCTOBER 2002 
* 67
mother to introduce her. She was wearing pajamas and cowboy boots and was
holding a dictionary and a lunch box." Her classmates-and her teacher--don't
know quite what to do with the unique little girl, but it soon becomes clear that
their job is to listen to the stories she tells about a young life that is equally as
colorful as her outrageous garb. Gooney Bird tells how she got her name, how her
cat was consumed by a cow, how she came from China on a flying carpet, and how
she conducted an orchestra (and, as Gooney Bird herself says, all her stories are
absolutely true). Seven chapters are divided into classroom doings (presented in a
smaller, traditional typesize) and Gooney Bird's stories (presented in a larger, "easy-
to-read" size). Full-page illustrations, most of the winning title character in vari-
ous shades of sartorial splendor, are generously scattered throughout the text. In
the course of Gooney Bird's vivid storytelling, she (and her teacher, Mrs. Pidgeon)
impart the fundamentals of story structure to the class (beginning, middle and
ending, characters, suspense, etc.) as well as inspiring them to some storytelling
(and fashion risk-taking) of their own. Lowry's masterful writing style reaches
directly into her audience, managing both to appeal to young listeners and to
engage older readers. Gooney Bird has the same vitality that made Sam (AllAbout
Sam, BCCB 10/88) such a memorable kid; here's hoping we see more of her.
JMD
MACDONALD, AMY, ad. 
Please, Malese!: A Trickster Tale from Haiti; illus. by
Emily Lisker. 
Kroupa/Farrar, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-374-36000-6 $16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Malese would rather plot than work for what he wants, and his devious machina-
tions get him brand new shoes, a half a bottle of rum, and a ride home. When the
victims of his trickery discover they've been duped, they lock Malese up for a
month, only to discover that taking care of an incarcerated Malese is more work
than they thought. MacDonald bases the plot on W. B. Seabrook's The Magic
Island and peoples this story with characters from traditional Haitian folklore
(Malese, Bouki), though Malese here is more of a good-natured than malicious
trickster figure. The stimulating, expressive language matches the fast and funny
plot, and the dialogue will lend itself easily to readers' theater and storytelling.
Lisker's illustrations are rendered in a tropical-punch palette of pink, yellow, and
green; Malese's geometrically marked black-and-white cat acts as an exclamatory
counterpoint against the saturated hues. Those intrigued by Wolkstein's Haitian-
sourced Bouki Dances the Kokioko (BCCB 9/97) will find this more tricky enter-
tainment. JMD
MACKALL, DANDI DALEY 
Offto Bethlehem!; illus. by R. W. Alley. 
HarperFestival,
2002 
[18p]
ISBN 0-694-01505-9 
$8.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
Mary and Joseph, shepherds and Magi make their convergent trips once again to
Bethlehem, but tonight the mood is not one of awe or solemnity, but pure joy.
Mackall cuts right to the chase and spares nary a word for censuses or "with child"s:
"Today's the day!/ Don't delay/ Donkey's running all the way!/ Trotting fast,/
Time at last,/ Off to Bethlehem!" There's the frantic hunt for accommodations,
the welcoming stablemates, a raucous angel choir, frenetic shepherds, and deter-
mined but saddle-weary kings, all propelled by Mackall's rolling verse to the awaited
68 
* THE BULLETIN
climax: "Wondrous sight,/ God's own light,/ Christ the King is born this night!/
Go and tell-/ All is well.../ Here in Bethlehem!" Alley's watercolor cast fairly
trip over their own heels with excitement, all wide eyes focused toward the recto as
they tumble across briskly flipping pages on to the concluding stable scene. Mary
is delighted and disheveled, Joseph hovers protectively, and the cueball-pated babe
(strong and precocious) is enamored of the critters who have come to visit. This
has "Read it again" written all over it, and parents will be happy to comply. EB
MARSDEN, JOHN 
The Other Side ofDawn. 
Houghton, 2002 
[34 4 p]
ISBN 0-618-07028-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
With this seventh title, Marsden brings his nail-gnawing Tomorrow, When the War
Began (BCCB 4/95) series to a satisfying conclusion. Ellie and her band are handed
a load of plastic explosives and carte blanche from the New Zealand armed forces
to run as many guerrilla diversionary attacks as possible, while the Kiwis and their
allies launch a major liberating offensive. Sabotage of an enemy-convoy rest stop
is a resounding success, but the teens are separated in the effort, and Marsden
follows Ellie alone as she wrecks a transport train, is wounded in her attempted
flight, is incarcerated in a military hospital and detention camp, and is finally
reunited with her family after the armistice. Although stunning action sequences
have always been a hallmark of the series, its true excellence is due in large part to
Marsden's thoughtful exploration of the psychological costs of the teens' heroic,
violent exploits. In closing the series, he realistically examines the emotional tur-
bulence of the sudden attack of peace. Ellie, aching to rest in her parents' care,
becomes the support of her broken-spirited mother, parentless Lee resentfully puts
his ambitions on hold to tend his younger siblings, Kevin drops off the map, and
readers vicariously share the psychic letdown and cautious hope of the war-weary
Aussies in their now-divided country. Yes, it may be time for Marsden to shut
down his engines, but it's been one heckuva ride. EB
MARTIN, BILL, JR. 
I Pledge Allegiance; by Bill Martin, Jr. and Michael Sampson;
illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Candlewick, 2002 
36p
ISBN 0-7636-1648-6 
$15.99 
R 6-9 yrs
The "plejuleejuns," variously muttered, mumbled, and garbled each morning in
classrooms nationwide, gets some attractively packaged and much-needed exegesis
here. Martin allots a mere word or two to each page and lingers to comment on its
meaning or to offer a tidbit of related information: "pledge/ A Pledge is a promise/
allegiance to/ Allegiance is loyalty"; "God,/ Many people believe that a democracy
is a reflection of how God thinks--every single person is important." Raschka's
ink and torn-paper spreads, with Cubist figures in patriotic red-white-blue, fur-
ther illuminate the document's meaning with such kid-accessible images as joined
hands (pledge), a waggy-tailed dog (allegiance), and a flag that dissolves into red-
striped sun rays under blue clouds and over rolling blue hills (nation under). No
mention is made of how the pledge's current form differs from Francis Bellamy's
1892 original, or why the formulation has taken deep root in elementary-school
culture. The point is here to define and explain-and define and explain it does,
cearly and stylishly: "America grows and changes as the world changes, but we
always try to hold on the principles of'liberty and justice for all.'" EB
OCTOBER 2002 
* 
69
MCCLINTOCK, 
BARBARA 
Dahlia; written 
and illus. 
by 
Barbara
McClintock. 
Foster/Farrar, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-374-31678-3 
$16.00 
R 5-8 yrs
Charlotte may be a sweet young Victorian thing in puffed sleeves, but she's no
prissy missy, and she's quite put off by her Aunt Edme's gift of an elegant and
beribboned doll ("Charlotte didn't have a doll. Charlotte didn't want a doll"). As
Charlotte grudgingly includes the doll in her and her teddy bear Bruno's daily
activities (making mud cakes, sailing boats in the stream, and racing wagons with
the boys), she begins to admire the doll's pluck, and she names her Dahlia-but
what will Aunt Edme think of her now muddy and torn gift? Charlotte is a fresh
and unusual heroine, and the story of her confounded expectations (about Aunt
Edme, who's thrilled that Dahlia enjoys such an eventful life, as well as about
Dahlia) is droll; there will also likely be an external parallel with the reactions of
some viewers who find this a more robust tale than they expected (though some
doll fanciers may be horrified by Dahlia's dishevelment). McClintock's line-and-
watercolor illustrations have their usual Golden-Age flavor, with fine detailed lines
suggestive of Crane and whisper-soft colors reminiscent of Greenaway, but they're
tapped into the energetic aspects of the era with Charlotte herself and with her
Beatrix Potteresque fascination with biology (her room is brimful of flora, fauna,
and fungi, specimen cases, and nature drawing). This will be just right for those
seeking a toy story with surprising adventurousness as well as sweetness. DS
MCDONNELL, FLORA 
Giddy-up! Let's Ride!; written and illus. by Flora
McDonnell. 
Candlewick, 2002 
26p
ISBN 0-7636-1778-4 
$16.99 
R 
1-3 yrs
Drawing on the old nursery rhyme of "This Is the Way the Lady Rides," McDonnell
offers a multitude of noisemaking riding possibilities: the drummer rides "Bang!
Bang! Boom! Boom!", the knight rides "clank clank clanketty-clank," the cowgirl
rides "yee-ha," and so on, until we finally finish with a group of children riding
toys and imaginary horses to "Giddy-up! Giddy-up! Let's ride!" It's a list, of
course, but it's quite a diverting one, with some splendid sounds little listeners
may enjoy acting out as well as essaying ("Rumpetta-trump rumpetta-trump" for
the rajah on the elephant, "lolloppy-plod lolloppy-plod" for the nomad on the
dromedary), and the range of characters (for both mount and rider) extends the
audience appeal beyond young pony lovers. The mounts are generally glamorous,
romantic, and utterly desirable, and their little-kid riders make the fantasy seem all
the more attainable. It's a real pity that the ravenous gutter often eats up a dra-
matic section of horse and interrupts the spreads at their best points, but the over-
sized pages nonetheless give plenty of room for McDonnell's sweeping strokes of
color, with each scene carefully balanced to provide rich contrasts, enticing bits of
detail, and effective focus on the featured pair. This is a great accompaniment for
a knee-bounce, a rocking-horse ride, or just a prance, trot, and gallop around the
room. DS
MCGHEE, ALISON 
Countdown to Kindergarten; illus. by Harry Bliss. 
Silver
Whistle/Harcourt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202516-2 
$16.00 
R 4-6 yrs
The almost-a-kindergartner narrator opens this story with an attention-getter: "I
am in BIG trouble. I'm going to kindergarten in ten days. I've heard from a first
70 
* THE BULLETIN
grader that they have lots of rules there." The reported rules include no stuffed
animals, no cats, and no asking for help to tie your shoes (which you have to know
how to do yourself). Our heroine cannot tie her shoes alone, no matter how hard
she tries; her failure results in her attempting to get rid of her shoelaces (mostly by
offering them to the cat as a snack) and/or her shoes. Despite her best efforts, off
to kindergarten she goes, only to find (of course) that that first-grader was pulling
her laces, um, leg. McGhee effectively captures the anxiety of going off to school
for the first time, and the escalation of misinformation ("You're not allowed to ask
for help. Ever") adds to the humor. Bliss' line-and-watercolor art renders the
oval-eyed, occasionally wild-haired heroine and her feline cohort expressively. The
illustrations, replete with dialogue balloons, are laid out almost like a graphic novel
sans frames; varied layouts ranging from multiple images on a page to full-page
pictures to double-page spreads add a frenetic energy. Children looking forward
(or not) to kindergarten will identify with the protagonist's worries and appreciate
this insight into preschool anxiety. JMD
McNISH, CLIFF 
The Doomspell; illus. by GeoffTaylor. 
Fogelman, 2002 
2 14p
ISBN 0-8037-2710-0 
$17.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Sister and brother Rachel and Eric are torn from this world and transported to
Ithrea, a snowbound planet ruled over by a banished witch, Dragwena. Dragwena,
exiled to Ithrea by an ancient magic for raising an army of children against the
wizards, has been kidnapping children from Earth for centuries in efforts to break
free of her prison. Rachel is the special child the witch has been waiting for, one
with the magical powers that, combined with Dragwena's, will free the witch and
give her unlimited power. Rachel, however, resists both blandishments and threats,
and she and her brother flee, assisted by a band of rebels; then the battle begins in
earnest. On the one hand, McNish borrows heavily from the motifs and con-
structs of LeGuin, Lewis, and other fantasists, making this effort highly derivative.
On the other hand, despite the fact that the plot takes some very convenient turns,
the author knows how to build momentum, and once the action starts rolling it
doesn't stop until the end. Chases, escapes, and magical confrontations (even a
traditional wizards' shape-shifting duel) keep the plot going fast and furious. This
may not be very original, but fantasy fans will have fun picking out the elements
they've seen elsewhere as they go along for the ride. JMD
MONTGOMERY, HUGH 
The Voyage of The Arctic Tern; illus. by Nick
Poullis. 
Candlewick, 2002 
212p
ISBN 0-7636-1902-7 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Condemned to wander the Earth as punishment for an act of treachery, the ghost
of seafarer Bruno must accomplish three tasks to earn eternal rest. He's incarnated
as envoy on a goodwill mission from the unnamed queen of England to the un-
named king of Spain, and with the assistance of two mortals and a faithful dog
with a strong set of choppers, Bruno almost gains his redemption by saving the
king's life. Bruno's nemesis-the king's poisoner and the very same villain who
lured him into crime years before-escapes with the treasure Bruno must distrib-
ute to the poor, and centuries later the tenacious ghost reassembles his old team in
present-day England to finally retrieve the goods. Montgomery giddily plunders
classic adventure stories for his cargo of venerable motifs and plotlines and packs
them chock-a-block into a ballad that's alternately atmospheric ("On silence,
muffled sounds intrude-/ The creak of timbers. Bilge's slop./ The lonely whale
OCTOBER 2002 
* 71
song of foghorns./ Licking water's slap and drop") and melodramatically silly
("For the king, moving slowly, was sure to be harmed,/ When [dog] Daisy howled
loudly and dived from the throne/ To sink all her teeth, from midair, in his arm."
Poullis' abundant ink drawings are as creepy as Spanish moss by moonlight, the
extra-heavy stock and faux-marbled binding suggest a treasured heirloom, and read-
ers will debate whether the total effect is impressively ambitious or embarrassingly
pretentious. Readers who don't require originality of their ghosts will be well
pleased, but YAs in quest of dark and stormy adventure had better sign on with
Iain Lawrence and The Wreckers (BCCB 6/98). EB
MYERS, LAURIE 
Lewis and Clark and Me: A Dog's Tale; illus. by Michael
Dooling. 
Holt, 2002 
6 4p
ISBN 0-8050-6368-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
The "Me" of the title is Seaman, Meriwether Lewis' Newfoundland dog, who
accompanied the Lewis and Clark expedition across the northwest and who here
relates highlights of his travels. Each chapter focuses on a particular incident-
Seaman's hunting of squirrels for the men's dinner, his interception of a charging
buffalo, his attempted dognapping at the hands of the Clatsop Indians-and ends
with a dated entry from Lewis' actual diary that alludes to the relevant incident.
Seaman is an appealing character, and Myers does a capable job of fleshing out
some glancing references into good stories. Overall, however, the narrative is too
episodic for independent momentum, with insufficient information about the ex-
pedition to make this an alternative viewpoint and insufficient development of the
canine side to make this a freestanding dog story. Dooling's paintings tend to be
stiffly historical, with Seaman sometimes looking oddly terrieresque, but there's a
quiet and atmospheric majesty to some of the images of the wilderness. This will
be a natural adjunct, perhaps even in readaloud selections, to a unit on the Lewis
and Clark Expedition. Source notes and a map of the expedition are included. DS
NAMIOKA, LENSEY An Ocean Apart, a WorldAway. 
Delacorte, 2002 
197p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90053-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73002-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Sixteen-year-old Yanyan is strongly attracted to her older brother's friend, Liang
Baoshu, but his unexpected proposal that they run away together jolts her into
realizing that the aura of excitement and danger that hovers around him is most of
his appeal. Her longstanding ambition to become a doctor triumphs, and with her
father's support she leaves her home in southern China to seek truly modern edu-
cation at Cornell University in New York. When she arrives, she discovers that a
"modern" (1921) American university is less forward-thinking than she had hoped:
her advisor steers her into home economics and language courses, only reluctantly
approving her choice of physics. Loneliness takes its toll, physics turns out to be
truly difficult, fellow Chinese students offer her a mixed reception, and the heavy
foreign diet and hilly terrain leave her physically exhausted. Yanyan perseveres,
and when Liang Baoshu arrives to press his suit more forcefully, she is fully com-
mitted to a career and a probable attachment with a Chinese classmate. Namioka's
prose is somewhat stiff and stodgy ("Our country is still unsettled, and I might
meet some unruly types on my way home from school, for instance"), and Yanyan's
cool, dispassionate narration makes her supposedly heated intrigue with Liang
Baoshu difficult to accept. Still, her innocent view of America is frequently de-
lightful ("From the yells, I gathered that someone had downed a touch--or maybe
72 
* THE BULLETIN
touched a down. Whatever it was, it was obviously a good thing"), and historical-
fiction buffs may welcome a tale of Chinese immigration that takes them far from
the west coast. EB
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Please Do Feed the Bears; illus. by Ana L6pez
Escrivi. Atheneum, 2002 
[34p]
ISBN 0-689-82561-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
Percy the bear is ready for the family trip to the beach, but each time he looks
around he sees just one more stuffed bear that he has to take along. Each family
member explains that there's no room for another thing, so Percy waits until their
backs are turned to remove from the cooler something he deems expendable and
tuck a toy in its place. Of course, when lunchtime comes around there's no food
left at all-but Percy has a solution for this, too. He sets up each toy with an
empty plate, chalks "Please DO feed the bears" on the boardwalk, and comestible
donations from passersby roll right in. Naylor enriches what could be a one-joke
plot by evoking the bustling preparations for the trip itself ("Everyone squeezed
and squirmed and turned and twisted until the whole family was in the car") and
repeating the pleasures of the beach "where the water was warm, the sand was soft,
where breezes blew, and waves crashed over the rocks." Escrivi's acrylic paintings
cleverly make the teddy-bearish family as toylike as Percy's animals, distinguish-
able from their stuffed counterparts mainly by size and animation, and their light
brown fur blends so naturally with the golden sand that the beach seems to be their
second home. No matter how tightly the vacation car is packed, there's probably
just room enough for this. EB
NUMEROFF, 
LAURA 
If You Take a Mouse to School; illus. by Felicia
Bond. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028329-7 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028328-9 
$15.99 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Just when you thought you had listened to that demanding mouse for the last time
(If You Take a Mouse to the Movies, BCCB 12/00), Numeroff brings him back,
imagining the scenario if you took the cute-yet-trying mouse to school. The text
follows the predictable structure of the past books, beginning with the "If you give
a mouse a... " and following with "then he'll... " statements. The text for this
addition to the mousey adventures is not as tightly woven as in the previous titles,
losing the momentum of the circular logic with longer forays into various disrupt-
ing activities. Bond's illustrations again extend the text with clever details, like the
assortment of pictures on the refrigerator from previous adventures. The quality
of the illustrations sometimes wobbles, though, with some compositions
distractingly rather than enjoyably cluttered. Fans of the previous books probably
won't care, since what youngster wouldn't love to shake up the classroom with a
rodential pal? EAB
PATERSON, KATHERINE 
The Same Stuffas Stars. 
Clarion, 2002 
[256p]
ISBN 0-618-24744-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
With her father in jail and her mother only intermittently responsible, eleven-
year-old Angel is accustomed to taking care of herself and her little brother, Bernie.
OCTOBER 2002 
* 73
She's nonetheless floored when her mother dumps her and Bernie at their great-
grandmother's, leaving them stranded at an old farmhouse with only an elderly
crabby invalid as their ostensible guardian. As Angel begins yet again to pull her-
self together in the face of adult folly, she encounters a strange man who, outside
the farmhouse at night, introduces her to the mysteries of astronomy, and her
thirst for more knowledge leads her to greater understanding of her town and
family as well as of the stars. Paterson's salt-of-the-earth style is in fine form here,
making Angel's dilemma a credible one and Angel herself, with her mixture of
pride in and resentment of her prematurely adult responsibilities, a compelling
and believable figure. There's an element of Voigt's Homecoming here, but Angel's
got a tougher row to hoe than Dicey, both in her great-grandmother's near-total
incapacity and her mother's cruelly quixotic decision to return for Bernie but not
for Angel. The peace of the nocturnal explorations of the stars provides a useful
narrative breathing space as well as some succor and reassurance for Angel, and her
gradual rooting into the community and the consequent increase of support will
bring relief to readers as well as to Angel. Once again, what shines through in
Paterson's heroines is their surprising strength; despite tragedy and setbacks, that
strength makes Angel's story a hopeful one indeed. DS
PEARCE, PHILIPPA 
Familiar and Haunting: Collected Stories. 
Greenwillow,
2002 
392p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623965-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623964-8 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-12
The near-legendary author returns with a collection of over three dozen short sto-
ries (some previously published), the first half of the anthology dealing with daily
life, the second imbued with the supernatural. Most feature young people as their
protagonists, and there's a tendency to focus on family, friends, and moments of
significant transition. Rather than mundane, however, they're a perceptive and
nuanced gathering, salted with dry and apt humor ("They weren't sure what they
were looking for, and at first they certainly weren't finding it") and graced by the
elegance of Pearce's meticulously crafted prose. Aside from that consistency, there's
a wide range of subject and mood: there's the glorious daring of "Still Jim and
Silent Jim," a tale of the close relationship between a young boy and his grandfa-
ther; the anxiety and sorrow of "Black Eyes," an account of a young girl's taunting
by an unhappy cousin; the inevitable grief of "At the River Gates," wherein ghostly
assistance saves a miller while heralding family tragedy. Plot takes second place to
mood and atmosphere, especially, surprisingly enough, in the "Familiar" section,
so that the literary travel is more important than the destination. Pearce is among
the finest of guides, and this is a collection of trips worth taking. DS
PIERCE, TAMORA 
Protector of the Small: Lady Knight. 
Random House,
2002 
[4 16p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91465-X 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81465-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
In a kingdom at war, Keladry of Mindelan has finally become a knight, ready to
prove herself in wartime service to her king. Instead of covering herself with mili-
tary glory, however, she is assigned to command a refugee camp, where she spends
much of her time counting supplies, cleaning latrines, and breaking up fights among
74 
* THE BULLETIN
her displaced charges. Despite her apparent domesticity, Keladry sees action: the
enemy thinks the camp an easy target but soon discovers differently as the Keladry-
trained inmates fight for their lives. When her camp is overrun in her absence and
her charges force-marched across the enemy border, Keladry gets the chance to
fulfill her foretold destiny (revealed in Protector ofthe Small: Squire, BCCB 6/01).
The author makes even her minor players memorable, so everyone's fate matters.
The plot is complex but not crowded, and the action fast, rousing, and furious;
good does not always win, so the conclusions are never foregone and the suspense
is steady. Keladry's final confrontation with the necromancer she calls "the Noth-
ing Man" provides a balanced and satisfying conclusion to this fantasy quartet.
JMD
POLACCO, PATRICIA 
Christmas Tapestry; written and illus. by Patricia
Polacco. 
Philomel, 2002 
48p
ISBN 0-399-23955-3 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Although Jonathan Weeks' father insists that everything happens for good reason,
the boy can see no sense at all in their transfer from their well-appointed, well-run
ministry in Tennessee to this rundown church and congregation in Detroit. Little
by little, Reverend Weeks' talent for reviving a parish brings his church back to
life, and things should be in pretty good shape for Christmas services, but a record-
breaking storm insinuates itself through the aging roof and behind the plaster, and
their hard work is upstaged by a gaping hole in the wall. On a trip into the city,
father and son find an antique embroidered cloth to cover the hole, and also pick
up an elderly woman who could use a ride. She recognizes the cloth as her own
chuppah, made for her wedding in happier days before she and her young husband
were separated in a Nazi death camp. She's pleased to leave her handiwork gracing
the church, and there it hangs until it's recognized again by the plasterer who
comes to mend the wall. Clearly this was made by his bride, lost to him years
before. The couple is reunited, and Jonathan admits the wisdom of his father's life
view. Polacco resets in Michigan a sort of devotional urban legend that has been
diffused over several decades via sermons. Although the story is touching, even
powerful, her telling occasionally slips into mawkishness, and Jonathan's incessant
whining would try the patience of a better man than his pious father. Likewise,
this is not Polacco's finest hour with pencil and brush; muddy grays dominate, and
visages are emotionally overwrought. Still, misty eyes are surely forgiven (perhaps
even expected) at Christmas, and this is guaranteed to bring on sniffles and smiles.
EB
POTTER, GISELLE 
The Year I Didn't Go to School; written and illus. by Giselle
Potter. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2002 
34p
ISBN 0-689-84730-0 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Personal memoir in picture books is often too adult to be appealing to the in-
tended audience. Not so in Potter's tale of the year she didn't go to school but
instead accompanied her parents and sister to Italy to perform in a traveling pup-
pet troupe. Potter wisely concentrates on concrete, clearly remembered incidents-
the family's first street performance, their truck's mishap in an alley, her sister's
dog bite, the family's stay in a house full of circus people-all shot through with
simple Italian phrases easily understood in context. Immediate language infused
with a sense of nervous excitement propels the straightforward storytelling, and
OCTOBER 2002 
* 75
the author never loses the child's point of view. The thoroughly engaging text is
accompanied by illustrations in Potter's own recognizably airy style: gracefully
elongated figures inhabit a simple yet distinct environment, enlivened by the occa-
sional fountain, street scene, or theatrical accoutrements. This may not be quite
the same thing as running off to join the circus, but it has the same sort of adven-
turous appeal, and readers will sigh for some equally romantic journeys of their
own. JMD
PRELUTSKY, JACK 
Scranimals; illus. by Peter Sis. 
Greenwillow, 2002 
4 0p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17820-0 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17819-7 
$16.99 
R* 
Gr. 3-7
See this month's Big Picture, p. 45, for review.
PRICEMAN, MARJORIE 
Princess Picky; written and illus. by Marjorie
Priceman. 
Roaring Brook, 2002 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2418-6 $22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1525-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
When the otherwise perfect Princess Nicki persistently refuses to eat her veggies
(hence her nickname of "Princess Picky"), the royal parents are in despair. The
royal wizard (taking a cue from Thurber's Many Moons jester) asks the princess
what it is that she does want. In response to her broad-ranging answer ("I want to
be tall. I want hair down to my knees. I want to be very, very smart.... I want to
see for miles ... "), the wizard gives Nicki some pips to plant, promising they'll
turn into magic potions. When the potions prove to be a vegetable garden, Nicki
confronts the wizard with his perfidy, and he replies that eating vegetables will
make her tall and strong, give her shiny, healthy hair, etc., and so they do. The
ending is abrupt and the story's message is predictable, but it's humorously deliv-
ered. The exaggerated text is accompanied by equally exaggerated art: the palace
setting is replete with elegantly elongated figures, oversized thrones, vaulted ceil-
ings, and huge chambers. Though purposive, this tale is also clever and funny, and
that makes all the difference. JMD
ROCKLIN, JOANNE 
This Book Is Haunted; illus. byJoAnn Adinolfi. 
HarperCollins,
2002 
4 8p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028457-9 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028456-0 
$15.99 
R Gr. 1-3
Four brief stories, interspersed with a couple of creepy poems, provide a tasty
selection of Halloween treats (and tricks). The stories all depict mildly spooky
situations that turn out to be really spooky-trick-or-treating kids discover that
one house's witch and ghost are the real kind, an empty house's disturbing echo
proves to be something considerably more disturbing-while the lively poems take
a different tack. The stories are somewhat uneven, but they're a diverting and
original collection with some genuine entry-level chills, and the poems are crisp
and energetic, quite worthy of independent attention. The stories vary somewhat
in difficulty, but even novice readers will appreciate the luxury of choice afforded
by a collection. Adinolfi's pointy and naively drawn figures are skewed to suit the
offbeat mood, and the saturated colors (especially in the purply blue nocturnal
scenes) provide a theatrical touch that keeps the proceedings from being too scary
76 * THE BULLETIN
whether in rich full-bleed images or spiky bits of spot art. This will offer happy
horrors to youngsters looking for an alternative to Schwartz' In a Dark, Dark Room.
DS
ROCKWELL, ANNE 
100 School Days; illus. by Lizzy Rockwell. 
HarperCollins,
2002 
[33p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029145-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029144-3 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-6 yrs
The long count to one hundred begins as the first penny drops into the classroom
jar on the first day of school. Day 10 finds the students blowing up ten balloons
for the principal; on Day 20 Evan shows off his twenty Matchbox cars; Kate brings
seventy sunflower seeds on Day 70 so the children can make a "sunflower cake and
put it in a string bag for the hungry birds." Listeners know that there's something
big in store for Day 100. But what? Everyone contributes a hundred tiny snacks,
from fish crackers to jelly beans, and the sweet and salty mix is shared at a cafeteria-
wide nosh. And the hundred pennies? "All [the neighborhood] schools are going
to send their jars of 100 pennies far away. They're sending the money to the town
where the hurricane hit." Lizzy Rockwell's diverse cast is sweet and cheery, but the
pedestrian compositions can't hold a candle to Rosemary Wells' (in Emily's First
100 Days of School, BCCB 7/00). However, the class's social concern and their
tangible efforts to make positive contributions near and far add weight to the tale
without adding pedantry. Preschool and kindergarten teachers looking to make
the Hundred Day celebration more than a math exercise will find inspiration right
here. EB
ROSENBERG, Liz 
On Christmas Eve; illus. by John Clapp. 
Roaring Brook,
2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2707-X 
$21.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1627-2 
$15.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
The family road trip to Aunt Cleo's house is cut short by a winter storm, and the
young narrator finds himself on Christmas Eve in a motel with, as he points out
anxiously to his mother, "no chimney-not even a mailbox." This is, of course,
no challenge to Santa Claus, who receives the boy's message, whispered on a win-
dow in fogging breath, and arrives right on time with his sackful of gifts. The thin,
reassuringly predictable story offers no twists or surprises, but Clapp imbues some
magic into the night with his hyperrealistic figures steeped in shadows cast by eerie
light from motel neon and moonlight-mottled snowflakes. The narrator, con-
vincingly poised just at the brink of Santa disbelief, is fashioned by both text and
pictures into an empathetic character, surrounded by an older brother too cool to
care about Christmas, a baby sister too young to know, and parents too tired and
stressed to offer more than perfunctory comfort. While Rosenberg's opus doesn't
convey the sustained suspense or satisfying wonder of Van Allsburg's The Polar
Express, there's just enough intrigue to make a diverting holiday side trip. EB
RuPP, REBECCA 
The Waterstone. Candlewick, 2002 
275p
ISBN 0-7636-0726-6 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Tad, Birdie, and their father, Pondleweed, are members of the Fisher tribe; their
livelihood depends upon the water. The ponds and streams are drying up, how-
OCTOBER 2002 
* 77
ever, and the three journey upstream to discover the reason. Pondleweed falls
victim to a wicked nixie, and Tad discovers that he is the Sagamore, a legendary
hero returned to conquer the nixie and save the Tribes from the Great Drying.
The deliberate writing style sometimes plods instead of flies, and the labored con-
struction of the fantasy world is often evident. Still, the heroic-journey stuff is
enjoyable if standard-Tad, an unlikely hero, rises to a dangerous occasion; on his
quest he gathers wisdom from his elders, support from his peers, and assistance
from the occasional animal helper-and there's a satisfyingly strong conclusion
(the tense, culminating battle unites the Tribes against their foe and pits young
hero against ancient evil). Ultimately, Rupp (author of The Dragon ofLonely Is-
land, BCCB 12/98) manages to pull off a quest novel that will have a lot of appeal
to younger fantasy readers not ready for the classics. JMD
RYDER, JOANNE 
Big Bear Ball; illus. by Steven Kellogg. 
HarperCollins,
2002 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027956-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027955-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Bears of all shapes and sizes (and even species) arrive by balloon from near and far
for the Big Bear Ball, and an all-night hoedown ensues: "Small bears sway/ and
slap your paws./ Tall bears stomp/ and pop your jaws." Despite the bouncy rhythms,
the story itself is mighty slight; the text is stilted at times, with forced rhymes and
confusing vocabulary that, without adult interpretation, will leave young listeners
in the dark (will they really know what a "broad-beamed caller howdys all" means?).
The unabashed ebullience of Kellogg's illustrations helps redeem the enterprise;
the neon colors sometimes tip into the garish, but they suit the giddy exuberance
of the soft cartoon-like bears who boisterously dance and prance through the moonlit
night. If they're looking for energy rather than craft, this will be just the dance
ticket for young bear lovers, who may use it as a springboard for imaginary parties
of their own. KM
SALLEY, COLEEN 
Epossumondas; illus. by Janet Stevens. 
Harcourt, 2002 
34 p
ISBN 0-15-216748-X 
$16.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
The traditional noodlehead story of the boy who "doesn't have the sense he was
born with" has long been a popular one with listeners and storytellers, although
picture-book versions have been hard to come by. Enter Epossumondas
("Epossumondas was his mama's and his auntie's sweet little patootie. They just
loved him to death"), an inexperienced, diaper-wearing, pacifier-sucking baby
opossum, whose misadventures on his visits to his auntie are sure to cause a case of
the storytime giggles. No matter what gift his auntie gives him (cake, butter, or
bread), it bears little resemblance to its original form when Epossumondas gets it
home. His despairing mother gives him advice, but the endearingly loopy baby
'possum constantly misinterprets her suggestions. Stevens' mixed-media (water-
color, colored pencil, photo and computer images) illustrations feature roundly
comfortable women in flowered dresses and eye-catching hats, along with person-
ality-packed animal characters. Light and dark dashes outline the animals' coats
and add a scruffily energetic edge. Librarians and teachers who have been telling
versions of the sometimes unfavored "Epaminondas" and "Lazy Jack" will happily
welcome Salley's variation on the theme. An extensive note discusses the general
origins of the tale, but no specific sources are given. JMD
78 
* THE BULLETIN
SAN SoucI, ROBERT D., ad. 
The Twins and the Bird of Darkness: A Hero Tale
from the Caribbean; illus. by Terry Widener. 
Simon, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-689-83343-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Heroic Soliday sets off to save the king's daughter, Marie, who has been kidnapped
by the Bird of Darkness; Soliday's identical twin, lazy, dishonest Salicota, decides
to accompany him on the grounds that riches may be forthcoming. When Soliday
succeeds in his quest, Salicota betrays him, taking the princess and the seven heads
of the Bird of Darkness back to Marie's kingdom and leaving his brother to die.
Fortunately, Marie detects something different about her rescuer/soon-to-be hus-
band and delays the wedding long enough for Soliday to return and claim her as
rightfully his. That's really just the bare bones of a remarkably detailed, involving
story, told here in powerfully evocative language (the Bird of Darkness has "vast
wings, which were blacker than the heart of night. They swallowed the sunshine
and moonlight and starlight. When the bird perched on the island's highest peak
and unfolded its wings, they swirled and spread across the sky like ink clouds in a
pool of water. Noon turned to midnight"). The momentum has a cumulative
effect, incident upon incident rolling inexorably to the conclusion. Widener's
acrylic illustrations are sometimes too stylized to do the players justice, but that
fresh and naive style may be an asset when contrasted with the story's very lengthy
text. Use this with students ready for a serious introduction to epic tales of the
hero's journey. An extensive source note is included. JMD
SEINFELD, JERRY 
Halloween; illus. by James Bennett. 
Preiss/Little, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-316-70625-6 
$18.95 
R Gr. 3-6
The comedian's treatment of the holiday focuses on its all-important candy-
acquisition aspect ("The only really clear thought I had as a kid was GET CANDY"),
expanding to include costumes ("I knew my destiny was to one day get a real
Superman Halloween costume from the store"), general observations about
childhood ("When you're little, your whole life is up. You want to grow up.
Everything is up!"), and Halloween for older kids ("I was just kinda going through
the motions"). Though this is sometimes more an adult nostalgia piece than a
story for kids, the candy emphasis is kid-true, and the text captures the yearning-
for more candy, for a better costume, for whatever-that surrounds the holiday.
The visuals are slick and broadly wacky (very much in the style of Mad magazine,
for which Bennett has worked), employing a young Seinfeld as their protagonist
and offering a high if shallow energy that pairs effectively with the text. The
voracious viewpoint will strike a universal chord, and the jaded approach will appeal
to middle-grade sophisticates. DS
SLOAN, CHRISTOPHER 
Bury the Dead: Tombs, Corpses, Mummies, Skeletons, d&
Rituals. National Geographic, 2002 
64p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-7192-0 
$18.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Sloan conducts readers on a chronological, four-continent tour of ancient funerary
customs, ranging broadly through speculations on how humans first began to pur-
posefully inter the remains of their deceased, then focusing specifically on Egyp-
tian mummification and entombments among the Scytho-Siberian culture, Shang
and Qin dynasty China, and the Moche of what is present-day Peru. His text
takes on the most interest--and depth-when he interprets the archeological record,
notes its often contradictory implications, and offers comparisons and connec-
OCTOBER 2002 
* 79
tions between diverse ancient and modern burial practices. However, the bulk of
this discussion is relegated to opening and closing chapters; entries themed around
specific geographical sites are largely descriptive, and some of the material is cov-
ered in fuller detail for the same-age audience in such works as O'Connor's The
Emperor's Silent Army (BCCB 7/02) Still, Sloan treats even the most seemingly
outre rituals with respect ("People on the island of Sulawesi in Indonesia bury
their infants in a tree .... They believe the child will rise up safely to the heavens
through the trunk"), and it's hard to beat National Geographic for a seductive
color-photo array. Readers with late-blooming interest in archaeology will find
this an enticing, cogent introduction. Bibliography and index are included. EB
SMITH, CHARLES R., JR. 
Perfect Harmony: A Musical Journey with the Boys Choir
ofHarlem; written and illus. with photographs by Charles R. Smith, Jr. Jump at
the Sun/Hyperion, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7868-0758-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-7
Better known for his works about basketball (Short Takes: Fast Break Basketball
Poetry, BCCB 2/01, etc.), Smith turns here to quite another group activity: choral
singing. A baker's dozen of poems in a variety of forms treats various aspects of the
choral experience, from breath control ("Ex-/ hale/ slo w. / In-/ hale/ d e e p"
"Deep Breaths") to singing solo ("I part the/ sea/ of harmony"-"Flying Solo") to
the various parts (in "Soprano Haiku," "Alto Haiku," "Tenor Haiku," and "Bass
Haiku"). This is a less familiar world than the basketball court for most kids, and
Smith capably brings into focus some components that novices may not have con-
sidered; his energy, especially in rhythm-driven entries such as "B-Flat Boogie"
("B-flat Boogie and/ bebop beats bounce beautiful/ bodies in plush seats"), should
dispel notions that choir-singing is a dry and tediously respectable enterprise.
Unfortunately, though, it doesn't give much idea of what it actually is-a glossary
helps with choral terms in the text, but there's no information on the Boys Choir
to differentiate their experience from any other; the poetry is also sometimes forced.
While the photographs are often energetic, they lack the sheer electricity of Smith's
artistically processed images for Short Takes, as does the comparatively sedate for-
matting. There are still some diverting possibilities here, especially for reading
aloud or recitation and perhaps even for some intriguing comparison between the
poetry of hoops and the poetry of song. DS
ST. GEORGE, JUDITH 
So You Want to Be an Inventor?; illus. by David
Small. 
Philomel, 2002 
48p
ISBN 0-399-23593-0 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Following up on their Caldecott-winning collaboration, So You Want to Be Presi-
dent? (BCCB 7/00), St. George and Small are back, this time presenting a collec-
tive look at inventors. Using a similar format, St. George offers pithy anecdotes
and little-known facts to introduce a series of famous inventors and their inven-
tions. Unfortunately, this volume lacks the cohesion of the previous one; after
engaging the readers with a conversational opening ("And you want to be an in-
ventor too?"), the text segues rapidly into a catalogue of inventors that never really
synthesizes into a whole. As a result, the writing is occasionally choppy, with
unclear transitions that require readers to have some previous knowledge of the
topic to understand the information. Small's art is charming, with sophisticated
80 
* 
THE BULLETIN
cartoon renderings that offer a layer of humor that helps ameliorate the flaws of
the text. However, some of the illustrations don't effectively show what these
inventions are and what they do, such as the image showing two cows stuck back
to back with cockleburs (which were the inspiration for Velcro) in which the cock-
leburs themselves are difficult to see. There's not enough information here to
satisfy report writers or other fact-hungry individuals, but the book's buoyant en-
thusiasm may still whet young inventors' appetites for more information or jump-
start a unit on inventors and inventions. KM
STEIG, WILLIAM 
Potch &-Polly; illus. by Jon Agee. 
Farrar, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-374-36090-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Potch is an ebullient and jovial soul; greeted at birth by "an angel with a clown's
face," he has laughed his way through life ever since. When he meets Polly Pum-
pernickel, he thinks he's found the love of his life, but unfortunately his gleeful
rompings misfire: he drops her in the ornamental pool, his elephant lays waste to
her rose garden, his fireworks accidentally torch her bedroom. Fortunately, the
clown-faced angel cunningly intervenes, tricking Polly into realizing her feelings
for Potch and coming up with her own dotty-and successful-courtship maneu-
ver. As he so often does, Steig offers the droll conciseness of a fairy tale ("Even as
a grownup, Potch turned off the lights reluctantly, and always woke up happy to
be who and where he was") with unconventional, archetype-rejecting twists ("Polly
Pumpernickel, to tell the truth, was no beauty. But to Potch, who was no beauty
himself, she was a sugar bowl"). Agee's thick, scratchy lines give a toylike sturdi-
ness to his figures, and there's a touch of the comics to his taste for panels, speech
balloons, and print sound effects; the art parallels the text in its gleeful indifference
to traditions (the happy couple are physically disparate as well as a considerable
departure from the folkloric ideal). Even kids allergic to love stories will get a kick
out of this rambunctious and slapstick-ridden romance. DS
STINE, R. L., comp. 
Beware!: R. L. Stine Picks His Favorite Scary
Stories. HarperCollins, 2002 
214p 
illus.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623843-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623842-0 
$11.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
From Ray Bradbury's "Black Ferris" (the basis for his later novel Something Wicked
This Way Comes) to Robert Service's "The Cremation of Sam McGee," from Patricia
McKissack's "The Conjure Brother" to Gahan Wilson's "Mr. Ice Cold," Stine's
collection of fifteen stories and four poems ranges from spookily gross to creepily
chilling. Unfortunately, the quality of writing often sags, and the authorial selec-
tion is old-fashioned (and all authors except for one are white and male). There
are useful possibilities here, however, whether readers are seeking a quick, funny
bit with supernatural overtones (Stine's own "Joe Is Not a Monster"), more subtle
chills (Daniel Wynn Barber's "Tiger in the Snow"), or some visual commentary
(Jack Kamen's Vault of Horror comic book tale, "A Sock for Christmas"). Each
story is illustrated by a different artist, with most art reproduced from the origi-
nally published text. Shadowy spot art consisting of spider webs cornering each
spread and full-page webs behind opening tides adds a consistent visual motif that
carries throughout the work. Stine's introductions to each tale sometimes over-
state his case, but it's possible that his effusive recommendations may lead middle-
OCTOBER 2002 
* 
81
grade readers to more sophisticated fare. With its creepy cover featuring a foil
demon clawing a tombstone, this is one collection that will wear out its binding by
next Halloween. JMD
SUNAMI, KITOBA 
How the Fisherman Tricked the Genie: A Tale within a Tale
within a Tale; illus. by Amiko Hirao. 
Atheneum, 2002 
34p
ISBN 0-689-83399-7 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
A fisherman releases a genie from a bottle; the genie, embittered by his long im-
prisonment, refuses to grant wishes and instead swears vengeance. The fisherman
counters by telling the genie a story of a king and a healer, and within that story,
the healer tells the king a story of a prince and his dog; each tale illustrates the
moral of how evil deeds only beget evil. When the genie remains unimpressed, the
fisherman questions the genie's might, challenging him to grow both large and
small-just small enough to fit back in the bottle. This tale borrows heavily from
traditional folklore, from the opening sequence wherein the fisherman catches a
genie's lamp in his nets to the concluding contest of wits between genie and man.
The storytelling is lengthy but smooth, and while the wordiness may limit the
title's readaloud value, the construction of the tale within the tale is clever enough
to capture independent readers looking for something a little different. While the
Middle Eastern motifs are somewhat generic, the changing perspectives of Hirao's
intensely hued pastels enhance the unusual compositions; sometimes huge figures
dominate the pages, sometimes single figures dramatically emphasize spatial dif-
ferences. These are moral tales attractively disguised, and teachers seeking to spark
discussion of issues of responsibility and ethics would do well to look here. JMD
TABACK, SIMMS, ad. 
This Is the House that Jack Built; ad. and illus. by Simms
Taback. 
Putnam, 2002 
27p
ISBN 0-399-23488-8 
$15.99 
R 
4-6 yrs
Jack has built a lot of houses over time, and here he is with a brand new one.
Taback's visual reimagining of this familiar piece includes colored backdrops on
the versos alternating with black backgrounds on the rectos, the versos featuring
the character or element (house, cheese, rat, etc.) that anchors the rhyme, the re-
petitive portion of the rhyme (in varicolored text) accumulating on the recto, along
with brilliantly colored spot art reflecting the action. Bits of textual business (rhymes,
labels, etc.) add humor to the illustrations; kids will easily guess the identity of the
mystery guest on the last spread, while adults will be amused by the endpapers,
which feature newspaper real-estate ads illustrated with Taback-style architecture.
The artist takes this rhyme through the same sort of illustrative metamorphosis,
short of die cuts, he used with There Was an OldLady Who Swallowed a Fly (BCCB
3/98), and the result is equally effective. Make some room on the block for this
funny new neighbor. JMD
TANZMAN, CAROL M. 
The Shadow Place. Roaring Brook, 2002 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2610-3 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1588-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Lissa has been friends with her neighbor Rodney for years, but she's finding the
friendship more and more difficult: he's getting angrier and stranger, and her
other friends are pressuring her to drop him. After finding him in gun-related
82 
* 
THE BULLETIN
chatrooms and connecting him with acts of violence at school, she begins to fear
that he's not just a social liability but an actual danger, and she suspects that his
resentment of his classmates and his hatred of his father may lead him to irrevers-
ible tragedy. The topicality of the subject makes it immediately interesting, and
the book is tough and honest about Lissa's divided loyalties and her embarrass-
ment about her lifelong friend. The actual development of the plot is heavy-
handed, however, with labored writing and contrived overdramatic scenes (a dream
sequence that's very obviously a dream sequence provides false thrills, for instance)
interfering with the development and credibility of the plot; the end (in the nick of
time, Lissa prevents Rodney from carrying out his plans) is predictable and abrupt.
Readers looking for a more emotionally nuanced exploration of this kind of situa-
tion may want to turn to Koertge's Brimstone Diaries (BCCB 4/01) or Strasser's
Give a Boy a Gun (BCCB 10/00), but there's enough teen-flick energy here to
make this readable as a soapy thriller. DS
THOMAS, JOYCE CAROL 
Crowning Glory; illus. by Brenda Joysmith. 
Cotler/
HarperCollins, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023474-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023473-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Joining the throng of recent picture books celebrating the glories of African-
American hair (such as Tarpley's ILove My Hair, BCCB 4/98, and Herron's Nappy
Hair, 2/97) is Thomas' offering of fourteen brief poems in rhymed and free verse.
From memories of a mother's care in "Tenderness" ("I remember Mama/ The
hairdresser/ And the way she hummed/ When she plaited my hair./ 'Mama,' I
asked,/ 'Is this my crowning glory?'") to a celebration of ornamentation in "Adorned"
("Ribbons and combs/ Feathers and beads/ Bands and bows/ Shells and nets/ Flowers
and hairpins/ Rainbow barrettes") to the concluding anthem, "Crowning Glory"
("hair/ a gift/ wrapped/ ribboned/ curled/ tied"), Thomas presents moments that
bear the stamp of personal experience. While the language is sometimes pedestrian
and the rhymes are often predictable, some of the details, both historical (stove-
heated curling irons) and contemporary, are rarely seen in picture books, and there's
a touching intimacy to the lyrics. The art is somewhat uneven; the figures are
occasionally stiff, and the hazy, rosy palette tips the images into the sentimental,
but there's a warm affection to the depictions of this close female world. The
intergenerational approach and the wide variety of "crowning glory" featured will
make this welcome in many homes as well as useful in collections. JMD
TOLAN, STEPHANIE S. 
Surviving the Applewhites. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
216p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623603-7 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623602-9 
$15.99 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Jake Semple has had an impressive career of school expulsion, so his residential
placement in the Applewhites' home-schooling program is pretty much his last
chance. He's academically teamed with one of the family daughters, twelve-year-
old E. D., who's annoyed at being saddled with Jake; Jake in turn is stunned by the
colorful crew that is the Applewhites and startled to find himself getting sucked
into their world and their schemes, especially E. D.'s father's tempestuous local
production of The Sound ofMusic. While eccentric families are a reliable source of
comedic chaos, there's ultimately not much beyond that here: the sources ofJake's
delinquency are overexplained (and oversimplified) at the beginning but never
OCTOBER 2002 
* 
83
really addressed, as he seems merely to be ignored by more artistic people than
usual. Except for E. D., whose dilemma (feeling out of place in her creative fam-
ily) never really gets solved, the Applewhites seem to be more labels than charac-
ters, and they're surprisingly superficial and charmless (and the youngest Applewhite,
who wins Jake's heart, is a cutesy cliche). Events are contrived with a heavy hand,
as are responses to them-the havoc-ridden Sound of Music production, for in-
stance, is received with baffling reverence. For a better portrait of a kid unwillingly
undergoing reformation, look to Williams-Garcia's Like Sisters on the Homefront
(BCCB 9/95); McKay's Saffy's Angel, 5/02 (or that old classic You Can't Take It
with You), is a better depiction of the strength and humor of an unconventional
family. DS
TORRES, LAURA 
Crossing Montana. Holiday House, 2002 
119p
ISBN 0-8234-1643-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Fifteen-year-old Callie Gray's not that crazy about being dragged off to Idaho, but
her grandfather has taken the truck and disappeared, so she, her mother, and her
little brother are rallying to support Grandma and to offer what little assistance
they can in trying to find Grandpa. Over the family's worry lies the never-really-
discussed shadow of another disappearance, that of Grandpa's son, Callie's father,
who died on his own road trip years ago. When Callie realizes her grandfather
took his fishing pole, she gets a sneaking hunch about his whereabouts ("Grandpa
once said to me, 'Callie, one thing I'll do before I die is catch the Baetis hatch on
the Gallatin River'") and drives off after him, unearthing her stowaway little brother
en route and hoping desperately her instincts are correct. This is a quietly told and
believable tale, with diverse elements-Callie's frustration at her mother's prac-
ticed helplessness, her troubled recollections of her father, her supportive relation-
ship with Raphael, her friend-turned-boyfriend-intermingling effectively. The
final wrap-up has little reason beyond the need for conclusion, and readers will
probably realize long before Callie does that her father's accident was in fact a
suicide, but there's a musing fluidity to Callie's narration that will sweep readers
up in its currents. DS
TRACQUI, VALURIE 
Face-to-Face with the Ladybug; tr. by Lisa Laird; illus. with
photographs by Patrick Lorne. 
Charlesbridge, 2002 
26p 
(Face to Face)
ISBN 1-57091-453-2 
$9.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
If there's one insect that even squeamish youngsters find endearing, it's the sturdy
little ladybug, and this title (in a series imported from France) provides a succinct
yet detailed introduction to the little guys (gals?). Simple text follows the ladybug's
annual cycle, on the way discussing appearance, food acquisition, egg laying, the
growth of larvae, and other buggy tidbits. Even more of a draw here, however, are
the crisp and closeup color photographs, three or four to a page, of ladybugs and
ladybug larvae in all kinds of action (including being eaten as well as eating); there's
much to marvel at in the astonishing details revealed in the images, such as the
gradual change of a yellow-shelled youngster ripening into the more familiar black-
spotted tomato color (captions provide additional information). Additional buggy
graphics floating around the pages unfortunately detract from the visual impact,
and it's odd to have a final page-indexed quiz rather than an index. The pithy text
and high-impact pictures nonetheless make this ideal for browsing or reading as
well as for sharing with entomologically eager pre-readers. DS
84 
* THE BULLETIN
VOIGT, CYNTHIA 
Bad Girls in Love. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2002 
233p
ISBN 0-689-82471-8 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Ah, how the mighty Bad Girls (from It's Not Easy Being Bad, 12/00, etc.) have
fallen. Margalo at least has the sense to keep her crush on her teacher a deep, dark
secret from everyone including Mikey, but Mikey, predictably, falls in "lurve"
("like a combination of'lurch' and 'love,'" defines Margalo) loudly and unsubtly.
Her heartthrob is Shawn Macavity, who's caught the fancy of just about all of the
girls in eighth grade; none of the others, however, gallop after him with Mikey's
particular brand of aggressive and heedless enthusiasm, force-feeding him cookies,
writing their initials together on blackboards around the school, and gifting him
with a t-shirt that declares his love for her. It's no surprise that this behavior
doesn't cause Shawn to return Mikey's affections, but there's still one burning
question: who will Shawn ask to the dance? Voigt makes sure that Mikey's
experience of a normal age-related stage ("In eighth grade school was about couples
and love and/or sex and/or everything-in-between") is outlandish enough to be
Mikey-credible while still recognizable as a phenomenon with which readers can
sympathize. There's also room for enlivening details that enrich for their own sake
(and may-who knows?-pay off in later titles), such as Mikey's secret admirer
and the shifting dynamics of the classroom. As usual, Margalo's keen observations
keep her prominent even when Mikey seems guaranteed to secure the spotlight,
and the relationship between the two remains just as intriguing as any others they
might develop. Even readers unfamiliar with the previous volumes can relate to
this tale of wayward and yearning junior-high hearts. DS
WALLACE, NANCY ELIZABETH 
Pumpkin Day!; written and illus. by Nancy Eliza-
beth Wallace. 
Cavendish, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5128-5 
$16.95 
R 4-7 yrs
The rabbit family's fall ritual kicks off with pumpkin pancakes for breakfast, fol-
lowed by the awaited hike to Mrs. Bell's Pumpkin Hollow Farm to gather the
goods for carving and decorating and baking and feasting. Mrs. Bell shows them
around the fields, pointing out the various varieties of pumpkins and their uses
and answering the children's questions about pumpkin cultivation. The family
settles up at the farm stand-picking up some muffin mix and pies, too-and
then resumes the festivities at home. Dinner features pumpkin muffins and pies
and toasted seeds, and the jack-o'-lanterns carved in the afternoon grace the win-
dows at dark: "oooooooooo! Boo!" Wallace manages to squash (sorry) an impres-
sive amount of information as well as pumpkins into the day, much of it delivered
via sidebar recipe cards, signs with jokes and trivia throughout the pumpkin patch,
and casual family chatter in the kitchen. Cut-paper illustrations are detailed yet
restrained, and the colors capture the gold and pure blues of a perfect autumn day.
Listeners will probably demand similar gastronomic overload, but what the heck-
there's lots of vitamin B, and Pumpkin Day only comes once a year. EB
WEATHERLY, LEE 
ChildX 
Fickling, 2002 
2 11p
ISBN 0-385-75009-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Juliet, more usually known as Jules, is a thirteen-year-old budding actress, looking
forward to trying out for Lyra in a stage production of Pullman's Northern Lights,
when her life crumbles around her: her parents have split up. More accurately,
her formerly adoring father has walked out, not just on Jules' mother but on Jules
OCTOBER 2002 
* 85
as well, leaving no contact information and failing to respond to messages Jules
leaves for him. Already miserable with her workaholic mother and convinced she's
to blame for the parental rift, Jules is stunned to discover the reason for her father's
departure-she's not his biological child-and his reaction-he's suing her mother
for, as the media puts it, "'deceit,' the emotional distress caused by the discovery,
and the costs, with interest, he incurred while bringing up Child X." Characters
and reactions are awfully cut-and-dried in this British import, with personal changes
(in Jules' mother, father, and school enemy) more melodramatically convenient
than likely, and a mere paternity blur seems a pretty tame cause for this kind of
publicity. It's still a tasty scandal to read about, and the media circus that Jules' life
becomes is credibly deranged ("The photographers were everywhere, swarms of
them. All around the outside of the school fence, hanging over it, pointing cam-
eras at me"). Jules' anger and anguish are both authentic and justified; in fact,
Weatherly provides Jules with a more explicitly enacted version of the ordinary
desertions and repudiations inherent in many divorces, so many readers will relate
to her situation even if their own family dissolutions are less tabloid. This isn't
quite in the league of Cooney's Tune In Anytime (BCCB 10/99), but it's still an
affecting tale of a kid who's suffering for grownup stupidity. DS
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Timothy's Tales from Hilltop School; written and illus. by Rose-
mary Wells. 
Viking, 2002 
64p
ISBN 0-670-03554-8 
$16.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Six short stories reflect the simple comedies and dramas of life at Hilltop School as
students interact in and out of class, learning to try, learning to share, and learning
to laugh at themselves. This is a collection full of moments for readers and listen-
ers to share and discuss, such as when Fritz realizes it isn't possible to build a
particle accelerator out of toilet-paper rolls, Doris realizes she's not a skinny kid,
and Grace realizes it isn't all about her. Wells' mastery of the understated, effective
kids' story is evident here; the language is evocative, the dilemmas are real, and the
solutions are satisfying. Watercolor personality portraits and spot art throughout
feature Wells' familiar and beloved animal characters. This is a cozy but not cutesy
collection that deserves a warm nook on the parenting and readaloud shelves. JMD
WHIPPLE, LAURA 
If the Shoe Fits: Voices from Cinderella; illus. by Laura
Beingessner. 
McElderry, 2002 
70p
ISBN 0-689-84070-5 
$17.95 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Thirty-three poems tell the story of Cinderella from varying points of view.
"Cinderella's Prelude" opens the story with a cinematic echo: an elderly Cinder-
ella (who closely resembles Jeanne Moreau's Grande Dame in the movie Ever Af-
ter) invites readers into her life ("Gather round./ Listen ... "). "Father's Ghost"
sets up the standard plot, as Cindy's father laments both his decision to marry and
his untimely death that left his daughter to the mercy of her wicked stepmother.
In "Stepmother's Rhythm," the stepmother revels in her escape from poverty and
her determination to keep Cinderella from outshining her own daughters; the
family cat observes Cinderella fondly in "Garden Master" and tells "Good-Young-
Her's" troubles to "the Magic-Her" who sends Cinderella to the ball. Overall, the
poems themselves are transparently accessible, and there is a witty charm to giving
even the glass slippers the chance to tell their story. Unfortunately, there is little
freshness to this versified rendition of the well-known tale; minor additions to
86 
* THE BULLETIN
character motivation do little to shed new light, and the poems suffer from occa-
sional mixed metaphors ("A waterfall of joy/ floods me like enchanted dust!") and
awkward constructions. Beingessner's gouache paintings are uneven and some
scenes narrowly avoid blandness; still, the small portraits offer characters with know-
ing eyes and articulate faces, and the sentimental style does not fail the romance of
the tale. Junior-high poetry mavens are going to snap this up; don't be surprised if
they're inspired to try their hand at some poetic storytelling of their own. JMD
WILSON, JACQUELINE 
Girls under Pressure. Delacorte, 2002 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90041-4 
$11.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-385-72975-8 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Ellie and her friends Nadine and Magda (of Girls in Love, BCCB 2/02) are back
for the second title in their trilogy, and they are indeed, as the title suggests, under
pressure. Nadine's in the running for a teen-modeling prize offered by trendy
Spicy magazine, and Magda's stunned to discover that her approachability and
mature looks have gotten her a reputation as an easy lay. Narrator Ellie is worst off
of all: horrified by the difference between her rounder body and the skinny frames
of the wannabe models, she throws herself into dieting with a dangerous determi-
nation, falling back in desperation on bulimia and becoming generally obsessed,
unhealthy, and unhappy. This is fairly programmatic, complete with the obliga-
tory hospitalized anorexic to serve as a warning, and some of the implications are
unintentionally problematic (there's repetition of the fact that Ellie was never fat,
but little acknowledgment that this approach would be dangerous even if she re-
ally had been overweight). Wilson's writing remains lively even when preachy,
however, and she's tapped into authentic anguish with Ellie's conviction that she's
Nadine's "sad fat friend" and her desire to enact some control over her own body.
The portrait of Ellie's caring but thoroughly confused and unhelpful family is also
realistic, and the acknowledgment of the familial strains such a problem can bring
adds some welcome breadth to the picture. This isn't quite up to the standard of
the first title, but it's nonetheless a companionable narrative about a trio that many
readers will recognize as comrades. DS
YOUNG, CATHY, ed. 
One Hot Second: Stories about Desire. Knopf, 2002 
218p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91203-7 
$12.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81203-2 
$10.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
A veritable who's who of rising and established young-adult authors (Ellen
Wittlinger, Norma Fox Mazer, Rachel Vail, Nancy Garden, Jacqueline Woodson,
and six others) have contributed new stories about young love, physical attraction,
and sexual desire to this eclectic compilation. The title and the cover art (an up-
lifted female face, mouth moist and semi-open) are titillating come-ons that don't
quite deliver what they promise, but even the most expectant reader should none-
theless be satisfied by the thoughtfulness of most of the stories. Sarah Dessen's
"Someone Bold" follows Angela as she realizes her own capabilities in a world that
treats her as unremarkable; Emma Donoghue's "Team Men" limns the affair be-
tween two star soccer players and the revelation that frees one and confuses the
other; Angela Johnson's "A Kind of Music" is a free-verse paean to joyful first love
and first sex; and Victor Martinez' "The County Fair" is a bittersweet recognition
of unrequited love and the trap of social status. Although the quality wavers slightly,
OCTOBER 2002 
* 87
overall the collection is strong and the theme consistent. Each story is followed by
commentary by the author that is sometimes more revelatory than the story itself.
JMD
ZEPHANIAH, BENJAMIN 
Refugee Boy. 
Bloomsbury, 2002 
[288p]
ISBN 1-58234-763-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Alem Kelo is stunned to find that his father has returned to Africa, leaving him
behind in hopes that the fourteen-year-old will be safer in England than in Ethio-
pia (his father's home) or Eritrea (his mother's) while the two countries are at war.
Like Beverley Naidoo in The Other Side of Truth (BCCB 9/01), Zephaniah offers
an unflinching teens'-eye-view of a refugee's experiences with child-welfare insti-
tutions (including foster care) and Home Office bureaucracy. Alem is consistently
straightforward and remarkably self-possessed: as he explains to workers from the
Refugee Council, "I was thinking that we came here for a holiday, so that I could
practise my English and see the buildings, but my father left me here so that I will
not die." Some disconcerting shifts in perspective undercut the reader's ability to
empathize with Alem, whose thoughts and feelings are de-emphasized at emotion-
ally intense moments (as when he learns about his mother's disappearance and
grisly death), and a narrative tendency to tell rather than show distances the reader
from the gritty reality of Alem's life. Other technical choices more effectively
forward the thematic program of this ambitious novel: it opens with paralleled
descriptions of scenes in which the Kelo family is terrorized in both Ethiopia and
Eritrea, and, in an epilogue, Alem speaks against anti-immigration sentiment and
resists closure of his "case," declaring "This is not The End." This lacks the impact
of Naidoo's exceptional novel, but younger readers who are not ready for the com-
plexity she offers will appreciate the accessibility of this engaging but more pro-
grammatic offering. FK
The ISBN for the trade edition ofJamie Gilson's Stink Alley, reviewed in the Sep-
tember issue of the Bulletin, was incorrectly listed; the correct ISBN is 0-688-
17864-2.
88 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
MARCUS, LEONARD S. 
Ways of Telling: Conversations on the Art of the Picture
Book. 
Dutton, 2002 
24 7p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-46490-5 
$29.99
Historian Marcus has compiled fourteen of his interviews with authors and illus-
trators of picture books for youth, interviews-with such luminaries as Mitsumasa
Anno, Eric Carle, Helen Oxenbury, Jerry Pinkney, William Steig, and others-
that were conducted in person and via telephone between 1988 and 1999. Marcus'
skill as an interviewer comes through in each session; insightful questions bespeak
careful research, and the interviewer's willingness to abandon planned questions in
favor of going with the interviewee's train of thought results in vigorous and en-
lightening discussions. Each entry gives the subject's place and date of birth (and,
in James Marshall's case, the year of his death), followed by a brief summary of the
artist's life and work and the date and location of the interview or interviews.
Marcus' humor, enthusiasm, and obvious knowledge of his subjects inform each
session, making this title highly entertaining as well as enlightening. A bibliogra-
phy for each artist is appended, as is an index; color inserts of relevant art are
included. JMD
REID, SUZANNE 
Book Bridges for ESL Students: Using YoungAdult and Children's
Literature to Teach ESL. 
Scarecrow, 2002 
144p
ISBN 0-8108-4213-0 
$32.50
Reid's background in teaching effectively informs this handbook for teachers with
ESL students. She opens with an overview of the very basics, advice Reid wishes
she had had when she began teaching ESL students, and offers a rationale for using
juvenile literature in the ESL classroom. Subsequent chapters discuss advantages
to ESL students of "multiple passes" (reading material more than once), the use of
picture books, the teaching of specific subjects, and additional challenges for teaching
across a language barrier. Each chapter includes concrete suggestions for approaches
and exercises for use in the classroom. End matter includes chapter-keyed bibliog-
raphies of suggested titles to use with youth (the booklists are somewhat dated, but
presumably these titles are included because of Reid's own success in using them).
An annotated resource list for teachers and an index are also included; no sugges-
tions for electronic resources are given. Reid attempts to cover an enormous amount
of ground in what is essentially a brief introduction to a complex topic, and as a
result the coverage is somewhat shallow. However, the advantage here is that
teachers facing these same challenges will find Reid's approach unthreatening and
accessible. New professionals working with ESL populations, whether seeking
practical advice or a fast overview, would do well to begin here. JMD
OCTOBER 2002 
* 
89
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Aborigines-folklore: Barlow
Actors and acting-fiction: Conford;
Tolan
Adoption-fiction: Banks
ADVENTURE: Browne; Karr;
Marsden; Montgomery; Pierce
Africa-fiction: Zephaniah
African-Americans-fiction: Draper
African Americans-poetry: Smith;
Thomas
ALPHABET BOOKS: Fleming
American Indians-poetry: Carvell
ANIMAL STORIES: Hindley;
Myers
Animals-poetry: Prelutsky
Anxiety-stories: McGhee
Archaeology: Sloan
Archaeology-fiction: Karr
Arithmetic: Rockwell
Art and artists-fiction: Frank
Art and artists-stories: Cohn
Astronomy-fiction: Paterson
Aunts and uncles-fiction: Banks
Babies: Heiligman
Basketball-fiction: Hicks
Beaches-stories: Naylor
Bears-stories: Brett; Naylor; Ryder
BEDTIME BOOKS: Leuck
BIOGRAPHIES: Barlow
Birds-fiction: Banks
Brothers-fiction: San Souci
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
McNish; Torres
Bullying-fiction: Draper
Cats-stories: Huling
China-stories: Bridges
Chinese-fiction: Namioka
Christmas: Brett; Mackall; Polacco;
Rosenberg
Churches-stories: Polacco
Circuses: Potter
Civics: Fink; Martin
COUNTING BOOKS: Cotten;
Rockwell
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Haddix; Honey; Montgomery
CUMULATIVE STORIES: Taback
Current events: Kalman
Dancers and dancing-stories: Ryder
Death and dying: Sloan
Depression-fiction: Honey
Disease-fiction: Cindrich
Divorce-fiction: Bauer; Weatherly
Dogs-fiction: Burgess; Conford;
Howe; Myers
Dolls-stories: McClintock
Eating disorders-fiction: Wilson
Education-stories: Bridges
Ethics and values: Bridges; Carvell;
Cindrich; Haddix; Sunami
Explorers and exploring-fiction:
Myers
Fairies-stories: Graham
Families-fiction: Bauer; Clarke;
Paterson; Tolan; Torres;
Weatherly
FANTASY: Browne; Burgess;
Corbett; Hassinger; McNish;
Pierce; Rupp
Farms-stories: Hindley
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Frank
Fathers and sons-stories: Polacco
Firefighters: Kalman
Floods-fiction: Bauer; Koller
90 
* THE BULLETIN
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Barlow; Berger; Huling;
MacDonald; Salley; San Souci;
Sunami; Whipple
Food and eating-stories: Lasky;
Naylor; Priceman; Seinfeld;
Wallace
Foster care-fiction: Zephaniah
Friendship-fiction: Bartlett; Bauer;
Guest; Honey; Koller; Tanzman;
Voigt; Wilson
Friendship-stories: Elliott; Fine;
Hobbie
Future-fiction: Haddix
GHOST STORIES: Montgomery
Grandfathers-fiction: Bauer; Torres
Grandfathers-stories: Bridges
Hair-poetry: Thomas
Haiti-folklore: MacDonald
Halloween: Bunting; Glassman;
Lasky; Leuck; Lichtenheld;
Rocklin; Seinfeld; Wallace
HISTORICAL FICTION: Avi;
Cindrich; Clarke; Karr; Koller;
Myers; Namioka
History, U.S.: Fink; Martin
History, world: Sloan
Homeschooling-fiction: Tolan
Horses-stories: McDonnell
HUMOR: Conford; Glassman;
Howe; Johnson; Layton; Levine;
Lichtenheld; MacDonald;
McGhee; Prelutsky; Priceman;
Salley; Steig; Taback; Wells
Identity-fiction: Avi; Banks
Immigrants-fiction: Namioka;
Zephaniah
Immigrants-stories: Hoffman
Insects: Tracqui
Inventors and inventing: St. George
Islands-fiction: Bartlett
Knights-fiction: Pierce
Language arts: Prelutsky
Latinos-stories: Cohn
LOVE STORIES: Steig
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Browne; Hassinger; McNish
Media-fiction: Weatherly
Medieval life-fiction: Avi
Mexico-stories: Cohn
Mice-stories: Fleming; Numeroff
Monsters-stories: Lasky; Leuck;
Lichtenheld
Mothers-fiction: Corbett
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Glassman
Mothers and sons-fiction: Honey
Mummies: Sloan
Music and musicians-poetry: Smith
Nature study: Tracqui
Opossums-stories: Salley
Orphans-fiction: Karr
Parties-stories: Ryder
Pigs-stories: Hobbie; Lasky
POETRY: Bunting; Carvell;
Prelutsky; Smith; Thomas;
Whipple
Princesses-stories: Priceman
Pumpkins-stories: Wallace
Quests-fiction: Rupp
Racism-poetry: Carvell
Ranches-stories: Huling
Readers' theater: MacDonald
Reading aloud: Hassinger;
Heiligman; Lowry; Myers;
Prelutsky; Seinfeld; Smith; St.
George
Reading, easy: Bartlett; Conford;
Guest; Rocklin
Reading, reluctant: Howe; Karr;
Lichtenheld
Refugees-fiction: Zephaniah
Refugees-stories: Hoffman
Relationships-fiction: Clarke; Frank
Religion-stories: Berger
Revolutionary War: Fink
RHYMING BOOKS: Leuck;
Mackall; Ryder; Taback
ROMANCE: Voigt; Whipple;
Young
SCARY STORIES: Rocklin; Stine
School-fiction: Draper; Frank;
Lowry; Namioka; Tanzman; Voigt
School-poetry: Carvell
School-stories: Elliott; Hoffman;
Johnson; Layton; McGhee;
Numeroff; Rockwell; Wells
Science: Heiligman; St. George;
Tracqui
SCIENCE FICTION: Haddix
Seasons-stories: Wallace
OCTOBER 2002 
* 91
Secrets-fiction: Banks; Draper
Sex-fiction: Frank; Young
Sheep-stories: Levine
Ships and sailing: Kalman
Ships and sailing-fiction: Mont-
gomery
SHORT STORIES: Clarke; Pearce;
Stine; Young
Skeletons-poetry: Bunting
Sleepovers-fiction: Guest
Social studies: Barlow; Fink; Martin
Soldiers-fiction: Pierce
Sounds-stories: Hindley;
McDonnell
SPORTS STORIES: Draper; Hicks
Stepfamilies-fiction: Hicks
Storytelling: Levine; MacDonald;
Salley; San Souci; Sunami
Storytelling-fiction: Lowry
Storytelling-stories: Sunami
Storytime: Brett; Bunting; Elliott;
Fleming; Glassman; Hindley;
Hobbie; Huling; Johnson; Lasky;
Levine; MacDonald; Mackall;
McDonnell; McGhee; Naylor;
Numeroff; Priceman; Salley;
Taback
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Pearce; Stine
SURVIVAL STORIES: Cindrich;
Marsden; Paterson
Teachers-stories: Johnson
Tibet-stories: Berger
Time travel-fiction: Browne;
Corbett; Hassinger
Tornadoes-fiction: Draper
Toys-stories: Fine; McClintock;
Naylor
Trolls-stories: Brett
Twins-fiction: Draper; San Souci
Violence-fiction: Tanzman
Voyages and travel: Potter
Voyages and travel-fiction: Myers;
Torres
Voyages and travel-stories: Hobbie;
Rosenberg
War-fiction: Browne; Marsden;
Zephaniah
Water-fiction: Rupp
West, the-stories: Huling
Witches-fiction: McNish
Witches-stories: Glassman
Wizards-stories: Priceman
Wolves-stories: Lasky; Levine
Women's studies: Bridges
World cultures: Barlow; Berger;
Cohn; Hoffman
Writers and writing-fiction: Howe
After saving his widowed mother
from a horrendous second
marriage, 12-year-old Haoyou
has life-changing adventures
when he takes to the sky
as a circus kite rider in
the dangerous world of
13th-century China.
*- 
"McCaughrean's
account of Haoyou's
journey from innocence
to experience is driven by
a plot that sweeps readers
along like the kamikaze
wind .
. [Her] characters
transcend all boundaries as
their common humanity touches
readers' hearts." -Starred 
review/
School Library Journal
* 
"A genuine page-turner ...
this [is] not only a solid
adventure story but also a
window to a fascinating time F
and place." -Starred 
review/
ALA Booklist
"- 
"A dizzying adventure
across China... fast- 
G
paced and densely
plotted, absorbing,
and at times even
hilarious."
-
Starred review/
Kirkus Reviews
Yoa're Only Yoang Twice
Children's Literature and Film
TIM MORRIS
"Grounding his analyses in trips to the video store and reading
aloud to his son, Morris makes the question of whether Dr.
Seuss's oobleck' is really Lacan's obet petit a lot less scary than
Sit sound." -
Publishers Weekly
HwdAnoW S495
Writing Fiction for Cldrea
Stories onrewu Can Td
JUDY K. MORRIS
" The exrcises will help both novices and seond authors gain
insight nd mow foward with thir writing." -
Jane Leslie Conly,
author of Cry Lady, a Newm 
ry Honor Book
HosWstAK 
$15
A whole new way to....Captivate a child's
attention and build their character.
It's INCREDIBLE...the only thing more exciting than watching
children learn, is watching them have FUN in the process!
I'm going to let you in on a secret...MAGIC POWER videos teach
the art of magic. Magic has a direct impact on character
development in the following ways: Encourages problem solving,
expands creative abilities, increases digital dexterity, strengthens
social skills, stimulates self confidence and is a unique & flexible
activity.
3 Powerful reasons to check out our report..
#1 Ideal children's activity for one child or a whole class.
#2 A unique and fun way to impact children.
#3 FREE gift just for requesting our report!
To learn more, simply call our TOLL FREE 24 hr. recorded message
line at:
1-888-554-3321 press MAGIC POWER videos.
I L L IN 0 1
pariah. . .. Compassionate." -Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly
"Zinkoffis a flawed but tough kid with an unshakable
optimism that readers will find endearing. 'Losers'in
schools everywhere will find great comfort in this story,
and the kids who would so casually brand their classmates
should retd it, too." 
-School 
Library journal
* "A heartwarming story."*
GOOSE'S STORY
CARl BEST
Pictures by HOLLY MEADE
* 
"A young girl is thrilled when geese land at the
nearby pond in spring. After her dog barks and the
birds jump for the sky, the child realizes that one goose
has been left behind. This goose has a dangling foot
(some kind of accident?), and next day its foot is gone ...
The story is based on Best's experience with a wounded
goose that landed in her backyard, and every child who
has nursed an injured creature will recognize the bond,
the distance, and the hope." -Starred, 
Booklist
S"Bests story will appeal to young nature lovers
and to anyone with a soft spot for an underdog.
Meade's paper-collage illustrations capture the action as
$16.00 / 0-374-32750-5 / Ages 4-8
Melanie Kroupa Books
I"In 
Hobbs' latest wilderness
survival tale, a Colorado
teenager stranded on Alaska's remote
Admiralty Island not only encounters
bears, wolves, and a hermit with Stone
Age weapons, but makes a startling
archaeological discovery to boot.
Andy faces challenges with admirable
courage, and his descriptions of woods,
wildlife, and the spectacular cave
formations he discovers have a ring of
authenticity that makes his hardships
and adventures compelling."
-Kirkus Reviews
ENCOURAGE THEIR
SENSE OF WONDER
OCTOBER 2002
JANUANT 
LUUJ 
JANUARY 
2003
Providing vital and accessible
information for children is central
to DK's vision. In this exciting
series of reference books, children
are introduced to a stunning new
view of the natural world and
sciences. Full-color photography is
matched with informative text to
build a foundation in learning
that children ages 5 to 8 will use
in school-and for enjoyment.
EARTH
0-7894-8867- , he
0-7894-8868-X, lb
MAMMALS
0-7894-8869-8, hc
0-7894-8900-7, Ib
HUMAN BODY
0-7894-9044-7, he
0-7894-9045-5, Ib
RIVERS AND LAKES
0-7894-9046-3, he
$9.99,* 
Hadoe: 
799 
irr 
idn
OCTOBER 2002
ý IEIye
While recovering from the loss of his dog Skip, 14-year-old Chad
helps train the new family dog Queenie with the help of an animal
trainer who shapes animals' behavior using positive reinforcement.
But who is being shaped here, Queenie, or Chad himself?
'*V "Haas, who seems to get stronger with every book, uses
well-chosen details to create living, breathing characters with family
traditions and personal histories that began before we ever met
them and that promise to continue long after we finish reading
the novel." 
-
Starred review / The Horn Book
-Mi1-1
Ages 10 up.
$16.95 Tr
(0-06-000170-4)
$16.89 Lb
(0-06-000171-2)
E
9
r4
as
~~;a·e~s~~
Universi
1325 So
Champa
U.S.A.
RETURN
cr~
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2002 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccbl
2. When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and password.
This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit number but
may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
cr~
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICAS
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.SA 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
"isr-
E 
;·
Is
NIL
I:
0 0 11106(20011
0008-9036(200210)56:2; 1 -Q
-~!-~; 
:~·-~~-:·~-~--
· ·
·
~z~r·
