I L L IN
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
7ý1.V 
Ai
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
Air
9
-e 
~·Jk
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
November 2004
Vol. 58 No. 3
A LOOK INSIDE
111 
THE BIG PICTURE
Madam President by Catherine Thimmesh; illus. by Douglas B. Jones
112 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
116 * Call Me Maria by Judith Ortiz Cofer
117 * Fair Monaco written and illus. by Brock Cole
119 
* The Sea of Trolls by Nancy Farmer
127 * Pagan's Vows by Catherine Jinks
143 
* Science Verse by Jon Scieszka; illus. by Lane Smith
144 * The Train ofStates written and illus. by Peter Sfs
155 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
156 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
· _
·· i
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Timnah Card, Reviewer (TC)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Molly Dolan
Krista Hutley
Maggie Hommel
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $7.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box
1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2004 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Douglas B. Jones from Madam President ©2004. Used by permission of
Houghton Mifflin Company.
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
111
THE BIG PICTURE
Madam President
by Catherine Thimmesh; illus. by Douglas B. Jones
It's November and it's time to elect the president of the United States. Once again
voters, regardless of party affiliation, will go to the polls and select candidates in
impeccably tailored business suits and conservative, camera-friendly neckties. Again,
there's not a kick pleat, a diamond tennis bracelet, or even a pair of comfortable
pumps in the running. Thimmesh challenges the seeming inevitability of all this
in a sassily organized and argued rallying cry for girls-soon-to-be-women to stake a
claim for the Executive Office.
In the opening sequence a pigtailed tweenager announces she intends to
become president. Peers and adults suggest more easily attainable goals, citing
examples of women who flexed considerable political muscle outside the Oval
Office. She could, for instance, marry a president: Edith Wilson appears to have
called the shots during her husband's period of disability. Or she could vote for
the president: Elizabeth Cady Stanton worked long and hard to secure that right
for women, despite never enjoying it herself. She could get into Congress: Nancy
Pelosi sets House Democratic party agenda. Why not land a presidential appoint-
ment? You can't deny Madeleine Albright's clout. How about settling for vice-
president? Geraldine Ferraro almost-made it. If all else fails, move to another
country: an entire generation of Iceland's children "thought the president of a
country was always a woman." Sorry, but that's just not good enough. The Con-
stitution stipulates two criteria for the presidency and neither one is gender, so our
girl is bound for the White House with pigtails flying.
If you're looking for an unabashed praisefest, this isn't it. Thimmesh
selects female politicos who fare no better or worse than their male counterparts-
Jeannette Rankin cripples her political career with her pacifist vote against entry
into World War I, and the Mondale/Ferraro ticket goes up in flames-and she
blazes through the thumbnail entries with a recap of each subject's notable "first"
and a pithy quotation in blue font-so many stepping stones paving women's
path to the White House. Indeed, one occasionally wishes she would slow down
long enough to nuance a broad statement (the WPA "is generally credited with the
country's economic recovery from the Great Depression") or to substantiate an
eyebrow-raising claim (Edith Wilson's assertion that she did not make decisions
for her husband has been disproved by "recent evidence" from his medical records).
However, she delights in ironic tidbits and delivers them with a dash of venom.
Susan B. Anthony rises in historic stature from a three-cent stamp, to a fifty-cent
stamp, all the way to a silver dollar. The ratification of the Nineteenth Amend-
ment turns on a letter from Mom to her Tennessee representative son. Senate
chambers are notably tardy in adding "Wo-" to the Men's Room doors.
112 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Jones is adept at interweaving framing scenes that separate "chapters"
with focus pieces that advance Thimmesh's argument. Fictional characters, with
their freckles, ruddy cheeks, and slouchy socks, could sit for Norman Rockwell,
but although a palette muted in gray tones suggests historical pedigree, the crisp
angularity of the figures and their startled, patronizing, or contentious expressions
are grounded in the present moment. Caricatures of the featured women seize the
witty metaphor: Nancy Pelosi drags her chair to the presidential table; a broom-
wielding Frances Perkins makes sweeping changes in labor policy; Margaret
Thatcher is clad in armor.
Thimmesh's messages are clear: women have the political wherewithal
to hold executive office, and the U.S. is looking mighty shabby in the equal oppor-
tunity department: "[WJhile the closest the United States has come to electing a
woman to the highest office was to have Geraldine Ferraro a vice presidential can-
didate two decades ago, at least twenty-eight other nations ... have elected female
heads of state." Come on, gals, the door's been kicked wide open. Who wants to
be first to step on through? (Imprint information appears on p. 148.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, DAVID A. 
Bones and the Big Yellow Mystery; illus. by Barbara Johansen
Newman. 
Viking, 2004 
32p 
(Viking Easy-To-Read)
ISBN 0-670-05947-1 
$13.99 
R Gr. 1-3
Newly independent reader Jeffrey Bones is a self-styled detective: while at the mall
with his grandfather, Jeffrey collects clues from store signs and from his school bus
driver, Mr. Green, and helps find a mislaid bus. In the process, Jeffrey meets a
friendly dog with curly hair and a curly tail in a pet-store window, and while
Jeffrey is saddened when his parents say he's too young to have a pet, he's thrilled
that Grandpa takes Detective Dog Curly home with him. Illustrations packed
with shine and motion bring Jeffrey's mall mystery to life, the characters caught
with bright eyes and mobile expressions as they work through the clues to the
solution. Emergent readers will feel secure with the simplicity of the text and the
mystery, both of which are gauged for an audience just beginning to learn the fine
points of decoding. Main character Jeffrey is clever in a way that other kids his age
will appreciate-it is entirely believable that neither Grandpa nor Mr. Green thinks
of backtracking through the suits and shoes to find Mr. Green's original entrance
and therefore the parked bus, but the hints given in dialogue and illustration are
sufficient to lead Bones and the reader to the correct conclusion. Warm relation-
ships between Jeffrey, Grandpa, and Detective Dog Curly meld with the punchline
clout of a last-page pun to make the story satisfying on multiple levels, a quality
that will win this new series many friends among easy reader enthusiasts. TC
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
113
ASHMAN, LINDA 
How to Make a Night; illus. by Tricia Tusa. 
HarperCollins,
2004 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029014-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029032-3 
$15.99 
R* 
4-7 yrs
After a particularly raucous day that leaves Papa's hair "haywire" and Mama's face
"pale," one girl rises above the rabble of her uncountable siblings and proceeds, in
a manner resembling the work of a domestic fairy, to make the night. Climbing a
tree, she mops up the clouds and lassoes the sun, tucking it into her pocket. She
rolls up the blue sky and dyes it black, splattering it with gold paint for a starry
effect. She makes the moon from a bit of rock and assembles a nighttime choir of
crickets and owls. Then she goes home and tends to more familiar evening chores,
cleaning herself and her room before supper and bed. The rhyming text shifts
from a businesslike briskness, as the little girl swings into action, to gentler, more
tactile evocations of night's drowsy fall as her efforts bear fruit. The illustrations
have a ramped-up Quentin Blake feel to them; that is, Blakelike character shapes
get treated to thick black outlines that wiggle and break on their figures, making
them seem frenetically in motion. As the little girl begins to create the night, Tusa
introduces collage effects, using photographs of leaves, fabric, and bugs to high-
light the eccentricity of the project. Lemons, golfballs, artichokes, and marbles
become planets, an homage to "Hey, Diddle, Diddle" takes shape, and scientific
line drawings punctuate the delightfully weird fantasy. Back at home, the collage
features disappear and the cartoonlike family members return, bringing closure to
the story. Youngsters who relish an active role in making their days and nights
work will have a lot of fun with this quirky tale. KC
Avi 
The End ofthe Beginning: Being the Adventures ofa Small Snail (and an Even
Smaller Ant); illus. by Tricia Tusa. 
Harcourt, 2004 
144p
ISBN 0-15-204968-1 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
The adventures of Avon the snail and Edward the ant extend from Avon's front
door to the end of his branch and back again. This book (based on an earlier work
by the author) is therefore more about the adventure of going than actually getting
anywhere, since placid Avon and eager Edward's contemplation of the small hap-
penings they encounter (the birth of a butterfly, a cricket in need-they think--of
their assistance) is more interesting than the actual events. Their chronicle com-
prises not a story so much as a collection of narrative tangents rife with the word-
play and hypercourtesy typical of genial British classics such as Winnie the Pooh
(to which Avi's chapter titles, with their "In Which . . " format, allude). Each
short chapter reads as a complete fable by itself, while the book en toto celebrates
new experiences, especially if these come as a result of the change in oneself rather
than a change in one's surroundings. Softly shaded black-and-white drawings
portray this gently optimistic world in small sketches distributed liberally through-
out the book, the creatures' expressive and often homely faces adding warmth and
personality to the sprightly text. TC
BARRY, DAVE 
Peter and the Starcatchers; by Dave Barry and Ridley Pearson; illus.
by Greg Call. 
Disney/Hyperion, 2004 
452p
ISBN 0-7868-5445-6 
$17.99 
M 
Gr. 7 up
The Peter of the title is a pre-Pan version of the legendary boy in green, and Barry
and Pearson are proffering an explanation of his origins in this prequel. Here
114 
a THE BULLETIN
Peter is being transported by ship (the Never Land), along with his fellow orphans,
to a faraway kingdom that will appreciate their cheap and disposable labor, where
he meets and befriends first-class passenger Molly Aster. Unbeknownst to Peter,
Molly is a young Starcatcher, a tribe that tries to collect fallen star matter that has
made it to Earth before its power can be used for ill by the wrong people; unbe-
knownst to both Peter and Molly, the trunk ofstarstuff that was ostensibly travel-
ing on another ship with Molly's father is actually traveling in the hold of Peter
and Molly's ship. The fearsome pirate Black Stache is better informed, however,
and he's ruthlessly pursuing both ships, and then Peter and Molly, in his determi-
nation to acquire the trunk that he's sure will bring him unimaginable power.
This starts off as an entertaining pastiche of period pirate adventure, with sassy
repartee and kitschy comedy detail (Black Stache's secret sailing gimmick is a sail
shaped like a huge brassiere), and the book has diligently accounted for all the key
elements of Peter Pan, ranging from Peter's eternal youth and ability to fly to
Captain Hook and his crocodile follower. Unfortunately, its buccaneering energy
is squandered over the course of the long and often slow narrative, and the starstuff
plotline is talkily expounded and poorly mated with the piratical tale. The straight-
forward writing, especially about more serious emotions (such as Peter and Molly's
mutual attraction), is awkward and pedestrian, and characters are sometimes inef-
fectively differentiated (it's easy to confuse the nasty pirate captain with the nasty
skipper of the Never Land) or evolved (there's no obvious reason why a formerly
lazy and dissolute seaman becomes the orphans' champion). Occasional full-page
illustrations lose their edge in their smudgy gray tones, but they help lighten the
density of the text. Aside from those fans determined to see their authorial idols
embrace the pirate life, readers will likely fare better with McCaughrean's The
Pirate's Son (BCCB 9/98) or Meyer's BloodyJack (BCCB 12/02). DS
BLUMENTHAL, DEBORAH 
Don't Let the Peas Touch!: and Other Stories; illus. by
Timothy Basil Ering. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2004 
[48p]
ISBN 0-439-29732-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
6-9 yrs
Three personable stories chronicle the authentically thorny relationship between
Sophie and her older sister, Annie. In the first story, Annie's culinary display falls
afoul of Sophie's determined pickiness; in the second, Sophie's good intentions
aren't enough to achieve the quiet time Annie requests; finally, Annie makes up for
a mean big-sister remark with a surprise pet that she and Sophie can share. These
gently shaped slice-of-life stories fairly vibrate with personality, and that personal-
ity is usually that of forceful little Sophie, whether she's holding her meat up to the
light in wary search of fat and gristle or helpfully leading her toy animals in a very
quiet circus while her sister studies. Sprightly natural dialogue captures the true,
not always fond, tone of sisterly exchanges, and careful word choice makes the
simple sentences a quiet triumph of rhythmic exposition. Mixed-media illustra-
tions rely mostly on strong acrylic pigments, often textured with scrawls of grease
pencil; Sophie's redder-than-red curls draw the eye in most illustrations, but they're
well balanced with a delicious buffet of spicy touches and cool colors, standing out
against softly muted backgrounds. The vivid colors and changing layouts, ranging
from spot art to vignettes to spreads, provide a rollicking visual cadence, while the
sharp lines of faces add emotional punctuation to the scenes. The three-chapter
format allows the readaloud pleasure to be drawn out over several sittings, and
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 115
beginning readers brave enough to tackle occasionally creative font will also enjoy
this sisterly literary outing. DS
BRACKETT, VIRGINIA 
Restless Genius: The Story of Virginia Woolf. Morgan
Reynolds, 2004 
14 4p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 1-931798-37-0 
$21.95 
R Gr. 9-12
This highly readable literary biography of Virginia Woolf moves dexterously among
the many relationships and ideas that influenced the troubled writer. Brackett
employs a straightforward journalistic style, but Woolfs life was so rich and com-
plicated that little embellishment is needed to make for fascinating reading. Brackett
is forthright about the more controversial aspects of Woolf s life and the lives of
those around her, including their complicated sexualities and marital structures,
their personal and professional passions and jealousies, and Woolfs recurrent prob-
lems with depression, hallucinations, and suicidal impulses. That said, the book
tends to give Woolfs relationship with Vita Sackville-West short shrift; she men-
tions that it was influential in her writing and continued until Woolfs death, but
she doesn't tell us anything about the nature of a love affair that was obviously
quite important in her subject's life. Instead, she focuses on the strong but often
fractious relationship Woolf enjoyed with her sister Vanessa, and the literally life-
sustaining love and support of Leonard, Woolfs husband and business partner.
Throughout, the work offers interpretive readings of Woolf s novels, showing how
and why her experimental prose continues to be influential. Brackett traces out
thematic continuities that occasionally disrupt the chronology of events, but it's a
forgivable sin in light of Woolfs formidably active intellectual life that kept her
juggling multiple projects at any given time. Pictures and portraits of important
figures in the Woolfs' lives appear throughout the text; the layout is unfortunately
somewhat stodgy, and the photographs reproduced in subdued pale grays. A chro-
nology is included, as is a bibliography and an index. The work relies on endnotes
without in-text citations, making this an accessible read for students new to the
conventions of scholarly writing; advanced students who have read Woolfs fiction
and nonfiction prose will welcome this intimate portrait of a very important artist.
KC
BRENNAN, HERBIE 
The Purple Emperor. Bloomsbury, 2004 
431p
ISBN 1-58234-880-4 
$17.95 
R Gr. 7-10
This sequel to Faerie Wars (BCCB 5/03), beginning just weeks after the assassina-
tion of faerie Emperor Apatura Iris, continues the adventures of Iris' children Pyrgus,
Holly Blue, and Comma and their human friends Henry and Mr. Fogarty as they
battle the machinations of the Faeries of the Night and the demons of Hael. The
evil faerie Lord Hairstreak, Prince of Darkness Beleth, master spy and pedophile
Chalkhill, and ever-practical murderous scoundrel Brimstone have recovered from
the losses suffered in the first book and now engage in ever more dastardly tactics
to take control of the faerie empire-the most attention-grabbing of which is the
kidnapping of the newly (and illegally) resurrected Emperor Iris (okay, he's a zom-
bie) for use as a pawn in a political coup. Swiftly paced and narratively compli-
cated, the novel is a significantly stronger offering than its predecessor, crammed
with the gruesome details and reprehensible characters that make it, like the earlier
volume, attractive to fantasy buffs and gamers, while developing those characters
sufficiently to give readers the happy sense that they truly are living in 3-D. Comma's
116 
* THE BULLETIN
still-inscrutable personality (is he preternaturally crafty, or just insane?), the con-
tinuing liberty of the whole cadre of archvillains, and Holly Blue's growing ro-
mance with Henry promise more kingdom-rocking escapades to come. An extensive
glossary is included. TC
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH, ad. 
Raccoon's Last Race: A Traditional Abenaki Story; ad. by
Joseph and James Bruchac; illus. by Jose Aruego and Ariane Dewey. 
Dial,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2977-4 
$15.99 
R 4-6 yrs
Azban the Raccoon has long, long legs. He is faster than Bear, faster than Fox,
faster than Rabbit. He is even faster than Big Rock, who goes tumbling down the
mountain, "Ka-boom!Ka-boom! Ka-boom!" Thinking this is a race, Azban zigzags
in front of Big Rock as it rolls, but as he turns to sneer at his supposed competitor,
he trips... and Big Rock keeps on rolling: "Ka-boom!Ka-boom!SPLA T!Ka-boom!
Ka-boom!Ka-boom!" The humble ants agree to help tug poor flattened Azban back
into shape, but his impatience and rudeness keep them from finishing the job,
leaving the raccoon in the squatty, not-at-all swift shape we recognize. Beginning
with a startling face-on double-page spread of the long-limbed, crafty Azban, Aruego
and Dewey's distinctive comical, texture-rich illustrations give this roadkill folk-
tale a pulsing visual rhythm, the dark-furred characters (and storm-cloud-blue Big
Rock) romping and racing all over the pages on clear-toned backgrounds of blue,
green, and yellow. Concise, dryly humorous sentences describe Azban's vanity
and downfall in succinct paragraphs, their content developed by the illustrated
action and their brevity facilitating reading aloud or alone. Notes from the adapt-
ers give the history of the Azban stories among the Abenaki (and one print source)
and correlate these legends with other American Indian trickster tales. TC
COFER, JUDITH ORTIZ 
CallMe Maria. Orchard, 2004 
[144p]
ISBN 0-439-38577-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Letters home (and a few back), free-verse poems, and "Instant Histories" of friends
and passersby record fifteen-year-old Maria's struggle with her identity as a Puerto
Rican immigrant on the mainland, caught in limbo between her Island heritage
and her new home in an urban barrio (and between her mother, who stays in
Puerto Rico, and her father, a diehard Puerto Rican mainlander). The allure and
possibilities of language have always appealed to her, and now language becomes a
way to create her own identity and find a way to embrace all her heritages as she
becomes a trilingual poet (fluent in Spanish, English, and barrio Spanglish), ready
to make her place in a rich multicultural world. Marfa's characterizations of her-
self and others are consistently eloquent yet believably tremulous in their emergent
power, and her various texts reflect her growth as a writer, their erratic power
finally coalescing toward the end to produce some startlingly thoughtful, image-
rich pieces: "My treasure room is full./ My second language/ is a silver cup/ from
which I intend to drink/ the best wine./ Each word I make mine/ is a pearl, a
diamond,/ a ruby, I will someday string/ into a necklace/ and wear everywhere,/ as
if I had been born/ rich in English." The mix of brief pieces in different formats
gives this work the enticing air of literary collage, so even timid readers will find in
Maria's self-portrait a quiet power, making this offering a strong addition to the
Latino/a collection as well as an eloquent story of identity and coming of age. TC
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
117
COLE, BROCK 
Fair Monaco. Front Street, 2004 
[32p]
ISBN 1-932425-07-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Maggie, Katie, and Nora are initially frustrated by their stay with Granny, whose
obsession with safety means she won't let the girls do anything interesting like take
a walk, play on the fire escape, or send little Nora down the laundry chute; she's
too worried even to tell them the glorious story of the night she danced with the
Prince in fair Monaco. When the three sisters resignedly go to bed, they get sucked
into the frightening and frightened dreams of the granny-witch about the terrible
threats of the city, but they wisely counteract the bad witchy dreams with good
dreams of their own, thereby transforming not only the dreams they're inhabiting
but also the urban world to which they awake. Cole imbues his fluid prose with
echoes of nursery-rhyme structures and rhythms, giving the girls' dreamy peregri-
nations a context that makes them particularly plausible. It's the illustrations,
however, that expand the text into a story: Granny's apartment (described in the
text as being on Queen Street, but identified in the illustrations, in a nod to the old
expression, as being literally on Queer Street) initially appears to be a decaying
urban wilderness, an understandable cause of the old lady's fear, but the morning
after the girls' transformative journey, the battered streets teem with bustling and
affectionate human life (the proximity to a faded building labeled "Club Monaco"
suggests that Granny's Prince may have appeared long ago, but not actually so far
away). Whether the lines are parading in skewed regimentation through the
cityscapes or trickling and meandering to create organic figures, they dominate the
illustrations, but the slightly muted watercolors soften the visual bite; the gentle
tones also meld the scenes together, deliciously delaying the discovery of quirky
elements that make the art worth poring over (the nocturnal transformation of the
girls' room, the elements of Granny's grannyish apartment). While some of the
changes wrought do seem to be external (the graffiti is apparently being painted
over), it's clear that Granny's willingness to look with new eyes is really what al-
lows the streetscape to cheer up. Even kids unconcerned about the underlying
implications will revel in this celebration of positive kid power and the good that
lurks right beneath our eyes. DS
DALE, ANNA 
Whispering to Witches. 
Bloomsbury, 2004 
30 4p
ISBN 1-58234-890-1 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Joe Binks, off to visit his mother, stepfather, and stepsister for Christmas, runs
into some strange people on the train to Canterbury, and he's so unsettled that he
gets off at the wrong stop and has to borrow a bike for the last five miles. The bike,
however, turns out to be a bespelled broomstick, and it races off with Joe through
hedges, fences, and traffic to land him among a coven of witches. Though they
send Joe home sans his memory, the young witch Twiggy reverses the spell because
she's spotted the symbol of a rival coven drawn on Joe's suitcase. Attempting to
solve this mystery puts Joe and Twiggy on the trail of another: finding a long-lost
page from a famous book of magic before the wrong witches find it first. This
British import will likely suffer from comparison with Harry Potter, as it goes
through some familiar paces without adding anything terribly new to the already
substantial witch market. Still, this magical mystery strikes the right balance be-
tween silliness and suspense, keeping readers hooked with well-timed clues while
throwing in some good-natured tweaking of witch lore (like the supposedly dan-
gerous Spillikins of Doom, a sort of evil pick-up-sticks). The witches in the coven
118 
* THE BULLETIN
are charmingly eccentric, but it's their status as perennial underdogs in "polite"
witch society that will make them attractive to children who are already sensitive
to their place in the social hierarchy. Though the ending is unbelievably tidy, this
will likely satisfy those reading for pure entertainment, especially lovers of easy
witchy fantasy. KH
DAVIES, NICOLA 
Poop: A Natural History of the Unmentionable; illus. by Neal
Layton. 
Candlewick, 2004 
62p
ISBN 0-7636-2437-3 
$12.99 
R Gr. 3-5
One might say it's been a crappy year, what with Goodman's The Truth about
Poop (BCCB 6/04) and now this title from Nicola Davies, stalwart provider of
early-grades biology works such as Surprising Sharks (BCCB 2/04) and One Tiny
Turtle (11/01). Davies is more briskly knowledgeable as well as humorous, pro-
viding a well-ordered tour de feces from the variety of shapes and sizes of different
animals' excretions, through the reasons for that variety (and for varieties in color),
and to the recycling of poop whether through the animal of its origin or through
other species (an Australian town has a monument to the humble dung beetle).
There's also some compact explanation of the other uses of poop, whether it be an
aid to navigation or a message-sometimes hostile, sometimes enticing-to other
creatures. The coverage is concise yet thorough, and the details have the appeal of
trivia while effectively presenting the material as part of the larger biological jig-
saw. Layton's zany scrawls, touched with muted, grayed pastels but predomi-
nantly (of course) brown, add enough silliness to keep readers unselfconscious
about their own giggles as they read; diagram captions and speech balloons convey
information as well as adding interest. This will make a lovely little biological
present for the reluctant readers' shelf. An index and glossary are included. DS
DICKINSON, JOHN 
The Cup ofthe World. Fickling, 2004 
432p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75034-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75025-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 8-12
When at seventeen Phaedra is faced with marriage to the kind but ordinary Prince
Septimus, the ethereal knight who has visited her in dreams since she was eleven
answers her plea for help by stepping abruptly from her reveries into reality, bring-
ing with him a ship and soldiers to safeguard their nocturnal elopement. Phaedra
discovers the knight is Ulfin, the March-Lord ofTarceny, a nobleman indepen-
dent of the current King and possessing arcane powers. Phaedra sacrifices home,
father, and Kingdom to be with her new husband, only to find she has made
herself the bone of contention in a civil war that beggars the land and draws Ulfin
far from her in battle. Left alone in Ulfin's castle, Phaedra receives visits from
unearthly visitors who bring with them a pervading sense of evil. Fearing she has
gone mad from her guilt and shame over the war, she hopes for salvation from
Ulfin-only to find that her mate has a darker soul and darker secrets than any she
brought to their marriage bed. In Phaedra's Kingdom, the political balance of
power constantly shifts as lords, ladies, and knights change landholdings and loy-
alties within an intriguing layering of classical, medieval, and ancient pagan influ-
ences, the many strata providing fertile ground for the development of a story rich
in emotional and symbolic power. These strengths, combined with skillful, often
lyrical wordcraft, are offset by Phaedra's locational and emotional distance from
nearly every other primary character. As a result of this distancing, the ability of
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
119
the story to engage the reader is subdued until the last hundred and fifty pages,
where Phaedra confronts the consequences of her actions. Still, fantasy buffs with
a proclivity for well-built imaginary worlds will want to join Phaedra on her ex-
traordinary if dilatory journey toward autonomy. TC
DOYLE, 
MALACHY 
Splash, Joshua, Splash!; illus. by Ken Wilson-
Max. 
Bloomsbury, 2004 
32p
ISBN 1-58234-837-5 
$15.95 
R 2-5 yrs
Joshua and Granny are having an especially wet day; they feed the ducks in the
pond, splash through puddles while walking the dog, play in a fountain, spend
time at a pool, and finally, ride a bus home through the rain. Their adventures are
told with sometimes rhyming, sometimes rhythmic wordplay that splashes off the
page and bounces off the tongue. The illustrations echo the splashy text: the
chunky paint splattered on the cover and endpapers assumes more control but no
less energy throughout the book, with the bold, paint-stroked figures barely con-
tained by their swooshy black outlines. Wilson-Max's perspectives take the reader
right down the slide and under the water with Joshua and his granny; between the
energy of the text and the exuberance of the illustrations, it's a breathless and
exhilarating ride. KC
FARMER, NANCY 
The Sea of Trolls. Jackson/Atheneum, 2004 
4 59p
ISBN 0-689-86744-1 
$17.95 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
Out of all the boys in their eighth-century Saxon village, eleven-year-old Jack is
chosen by the Bard to become his apprentice. Soon Jack is learning how to call up
fog and fire and sense the flow of the life force in the world around him-impor-
tant skills to possess, it turns out, when he and his six-year-old sister, Lucy, are
kidnapped by Viking raiders and swept across the sea to become slaves in the
Northland. Accompanied by Bold Heart, a brave, intelligent crow from his home
village, Jack seizes his only chance to win freedom for himself and his sister by
embarking on a journey to Jotunheim, the land of the trolls, where he may or may
not be able to drink from the Well of Mimir and gain the wisdom necessary to
reverse his accidental magical disfigurement of the harpy-tempered, half-troll wife
of King Ivar the Boneless. In this substantial and swiftly moving fantasy, Jack's
medieval world envelops the reader from the first page, and even secondary charac-
ters and villains have sufficient faults, virtues, dreams, and disappointments to
make them sympathetic to the reader to some degree. This adroit worldbuilding
and dead-on characterization combine with faultless plotting and an irresistible
mixture of historical truth and mythological invention to create a tale of high
adventure and exploration that reads with unexpected sensitivity, warmth, and
humor. Maps, a cast of characters, a series of short explanatory appendices, and a
list of sources are included. TC
FREDERICKS, MARIAH 
Head Games. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2004 
260p
ISBN 0-689-85532-X 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
"I don't want anyone knowing me," says Judith, who finds that real life, with its
snickering ex-friends, competitive brainy classmates, and faraway father, simply
reinforces her sense of vulnerability. Her preferred realm is her online game, wherein
she relishes taking the role of a cunning and indomitable male thief, but a showdown
with a destructive and mysterious fellow player robs her of even that pleasure.
120 
* 
THE BULLETIN
When she realizes that the person behind that player is actually Jonathan, the bad
boy of her apartment complex, she embarks on a wary partnership with him, wherein
they draw on their gaming interest to create a more challenging live-action game of
their own, developing a surprising friendship along the way. As she did in The
True Meaning of Cleavage (BCCB 3/03), Fredericks displays an admirable gift for
significant perception expressed in accessible and often witty terms ("What happens
if you try not to be the doof everyone says you are, but you find out, whoops, you
really are a doofP"), which makes her subtle understanding look easy. The book
tackles head-on the notion of the pleasures of gaming and its contrast to the
unruliness of real life (Judith is still haunted by an attempted sexual assault from a
year ago, and as a consequence she's particularly drawn to the power she sees in
male game characters), but it's believable in its depiction ofJudith's growing interest
in the rewards of reality. While a few inconsistencies remain in the portrayal of
bad-boy-turned-friend-and-possible-boyfriend Jonathan, his prickly relationship
with Judith effectively conveys his complexity as well as her ambivalence; there's
also a smoothly executed subplot about Judith's grudging friendship with Katie,
the ditzy, work-shy rich girl out of step with her overachieving classmates. The
humor is welcome and the intelligence penetrating, while Judith's growing
connection to her fellow humans may encourage uncertain teens to strengthen
their own relationships. DS
FRIEND, NATASHA 
Perfect. 
Milkweed, 2004 
[208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 1-57131-652-3 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57131-651-5 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
When Isabelle fails to meet her younger sister's bribe standards, April tells their
mother Isabelle's secret: she's bulimic. This revelation lands Isabelle in group
therapy, where she adamantly refuses to discuss her grief over her father's death or
her mother's subsequent incapacitating depression. In Isabelle's mind, the real
benefit to Group is her incipient friendship with Ashley, the queen of eighth grade,
who behind her polished exterior hides deep insecurity and a major-league eating
disorder. Eating disorder plots aren't new, even with the intensity of physical
detail provided here (there's in fact quite a bit of unintentional how-to offered),
but Friend tells this more as a family story, bringing a spontaneity and engagement
to Isabelle's narration that lifts this above most pointed problem novels. In par-
ticular, Isabelle's frustration with her mother's frozen refusal to allow the family to
grieve and to acknowledge her own problems (Isabelle says bitterly, "I so much did
not want to hear the words tired orfine anymore") is painful and understandable;
the family dynamics, with Isabelle and April alternating between squabbling and
anxious solidarity, are nuanced yet legitimate. Readers drawn by the car-crash
fascination of eating disorder will stay for the witty and perceptive family drama.
DS
GEISERT, ARTHUR 
Pigaroons; written and illus. by Arthur Geisert. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-41058-9 
$16.00 
R 
4-7yrs
In Nursery Crimes (BCCB 9/01), Ames, Iowa suffered from the larcenous rampage
of topiary thieves, and now Geisert exposes yet another nest of piggish crime, this
time on the banks of the Mississippi. The Pigaroons have swiped the huge ice
NOVEMBER2004 
* 
121
block so lovingly cleft from the frozen stream by the peaceful River Patrollers, who
enter-and generally win-the ice carving contest at each year's festival. The
Pigaroons sculpt the purloined block into a larger-than-life Hernando de Soto,
leaving the River Patrollers with nothing but a thin slab of ice, their plucky spirit
of inventiveness, and a powerful thirst for justice. While the Pigaroons hawk pop-
corn balls and show off their gleaming creation, River Patrollers devise a hot-air
balloon to speed their secret weapon to the Ice Festival. Hovering above the crowd,
they train a highly polished ice lens at de Soto and the popcorn balls, reducing
them to water and goo. Take that, Pigaroons! This is vintage Geisert: obsessive in
architectural and Rube Goldbergian detail, meticulous in precision line hatching,
straightfaced in narration, and delightfully overinvested in his porcine universe.
Between Geisert's pilfering pigs and Daniel Pinkwater's muffin-nabbing polar bears,
kids can rejoice in the current crime spree in the animal kingdom. EB
GIFF, PATRICIA REILLY 
A House of Tailors. 
Lamb, 2004 
[144p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90879-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73066-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Roughly based on the author's own grandmother's immigration story, this histori-
cal novel chronicles thirteen-year old Dina Kirk's emigration from Germany to
Brooklyn in 1870. Though initially overjoyed at the prospect of a new life away
from her family's sewing shop with "Mama's rich older brother" in New York,
Dina is surprised and dismayed to find that she is expected to do piecework in the
German tenement district where her uncle (who is in fact not rich) lives with his
young bride and their baby. This is a fairly typical immigration narrative, punctu-
ated by periods of homesickness, the trials of smallpox and a housefire, and loving
letters sent from her family back home. Dina runs the gamut of highs and lows,
from determination to return to Germany as quickly as possible to enchantment
with the sounds of the English language and the beginnings of a romance with a
young German locksmith. Her voice is stubbornly obstinate and her abrasive
interactions with her uncle ("we rubbed each other like emery") a bit offputting;
rather than coming across as admirable for her spunk, she seems unappreciative
and anachronistic in her constant talking back and confrontation. Her relation-
ship with her uncle's wife is endearing, however, and the gradual building up of
her place in the new family is well developed. The atmospheric details of the
crowded Brooklyn streets paint a visible picture of tenement life in the time pe-
riod, making this a useful work of fiction to include in immigration units. An
afterword, identifying those parts of the story taken from Giffs own lineage, is
included. HM
GODDU, KRYSTYNA PORAY 
Dollmakers and Their Stories: Women Who Changed
the World ofPlay. 
Holt, 2004 
160p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-7257-8 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
This collective biography features a treatment of five women noted for their con-
tributions in the design and business of dollmaking, then goes on to a brief over-
view of some contemporary women currently doing creative work in the field.
The result provides not only a glimpse into the history of the modern doll (the
creators of Madame Alexander dolls, Barbie, and the American Girls dolls all get
chronicled here), but also a look at the entrepreneurship these women have dis-
122 
* THE BULLETIN
played as they developed processes, built companies, and found niches in the world-
wide marketplace. Unfortunately, the text is dry and slow moving, and the por-
traits of the dollmakers are adulatory and unquestioning; the occasional undersized
black-and-white photographs of the dolls (and sometimes the dollmakers) won't
really give doll-hungry readers the up-close and personal encounter they desire.
Still, business-inclined readers and those whose interest in dolls has gone beyond
that of the casual user may welcome this more involved treatment, and they'll
appreciate Goddu's implicit statement of ownership: women defined the doll as it
stands today, and women have the right to love dolls and design them still, at age
nine or ninety. A varied list of resources includes organizations and museums
(suitable for participation in and visiting by young people); there are unfortunately
no notes or index, but a bibliography is included. TC
GRAY, MARGARET 
The Lovesick Salesman; illus. by Randy Cecil. 
Holt,
2004 
184p
ISBN 0-8050-7558-5 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Irwin and Seymour are best friends, at least, they're friends until Seymour's training
to be a hero swells his head and he scorns the love of the beautiful, intelligent
princess Julia, whom Irwin secretly adores. Over the next three years, the former
friends see little of each other as Seymour learns to advertise his own heroism, Julia
practices ruling the country and playing hard to get, and Irwin enjoys a contented
life in the candy business in spite of his unrequited passion. However, when Julia
turns fifteen, she turns all their lives upside down by arranging a tournament for
her hand, hoping to discourage the hordes of hopeful young heroes that throng the
castle and to encourage Seymour to put in an appearance. Instead, through a series
of accidents and the jealous interference ofJulia's older sister, the witch Murgatroyd-
Liza, Seymour sponsors Irwin as a contestant, giving true love a chance to win the
day (which eventually leads to Irwin's becoming the loving father of the protagonist
of The Ugly Princess and the Wise Fool, BCCB 12/02). Packed with twisting but
finally intersecting plot lines, wry characterization, and contemporary caricatures
of traditional fairy-tale elements, the novel gives readers plenty to giggle at, while
the black-and-white illustrations of dorkily potato-faced, French-fry-fingered folk
both emphasize and soften the satiric bent. The characters become more silly and
the plot more random in the last third of the book, making the tale a frothy parody
rather than a comedic masterpiece, but middle-grade readers awake to the
contradictions inherent in image-driven popular culture will appreciate this witty
takedown, as it manages to retain the frivolous delight of fairy tales and commercial
marketing while poking fun at both traditions. A map of the kingdom is included.
TC
HAHN, MARY DOWNING 
The Old Willis Place: A Ghost Story. 
Clarion,
2004 
[208p]
ISBN 0-618-43018-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Diana is excited when the new caretaker at the old Willis place turns out to have a
daughter, Lissa, who's Diana's age; Diana's existence, which is restricted by a series
of inflexible rules, largely limits her to staying on the Willis place and playing with
her little brother, Georgie, so she's thrilled by the prospect of genuine friendship.
Though Lissa is somewhat taken aback by Diana's strange ways and appearance,
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
123
the two girls soon become close companions, but their closeness makes it increas-
ingly difficult for Diana to hide her frightening secret (which she withholds from
the reader as well as from Lissa): she and Georgie are ghosts. Lissa's diary entries,
which counterpoint Diana's narration, are relentlessly dutiful in their plot exposi-
tion rather than credible as actual preteen journal writing, but otherwise Hahn's
sure hand at haunting is evident. The story offers some genuine horror, since the
ghost of Miss Lilian Willis, who was responsible for Diana's and Georgie's deaths,
still hunts for the two kids, but the malevolence isn't a driving narrative force but
rather a carefully measured seasoning in an emotional middle-grades-suitable ghost
story. The twist of secretly giving the ghost herself the narration will be new to
many young readers, and the unfolding of the plot will remain creepy and enjoy-
able no matter where along the narrative way they realize the reason for Diana and
Georgie's strangeness. This satisfyingly fills that gap between more light-hearted
early ghost stories and the hard-edged terror of classic older works, so it'll need no
ghostly assistance to fly off the shelves. DS
HALE, SHANNON 
Enna Burning. Bloomsbury, 2004 
317p
ISBN 1-58234-889-8 
$17.95 
R Gr. 8-12
With her best friend, Isi, happily married and ruling the country of Bayern (see
Goose Girl, BCCB 11/03), Enna returns to the Forest to live quietly with her
brother, Leifer, who has found a piece of vellum that explains how to speak the
language of fire and so control it. Unfortunately, this knowledge works in the user
like a powerfully addictive drug and usually leads to a rather crispy death, i.e.,
burning from the inside out. The power seems the perfect weapon to defend
Bayern from the attacking forces of neighboring Tira, so Enna commits to memory
the writing on the vellum, in spite of the fact that Leifer burned himself to a shell
during the course of just one battle. Soon Enna's power over fire is discovered,
and she is captured by the Tirans and brainwashed into using her talent against her
own people. Isi, too, has found that her ability to speak with the winds is more a
burden than a gift-the constant flow of information from the living air is begin-
ning to drive her mad. In spite of Enna's exploits as a spy and a saboteur, her story
is more an exploration of self than a tale of adventure. However, Hale's lifelike
characters and down-to-earth dialogue invigorate the story throughout the devel-
opment of Enna's supernatural powers and her (and Isi's) subsequent descent into
addiction and madness. Equally potent is the balance between the despair gener-
ated by Enna's mistakes and misfortunes and the hope given to her by the love of
her friends and her own resilience. A poignant exploration of dependency, abuse,
and recovery but also a finely crafted fantasy, this novel will be appreciated as
much for its reflection of the real world as for its development of a complex imagi-
nary realm. A map is included. TC
HANNIGAN, KATHERINE 
Ida B: ... and Her Plans to Maximize Fun, Avoid Disas-
ter, and (Possibly) Save the World. Greenwillow, 2004 
256p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-073025-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-073024-2 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
At nine years old, Ida B is happy with her life on her beloved farm and her
homeschooling with her beloved parents; she can fit into her busy, self-imposed
schedule all of the most important things-like figuring out how to talk with the
apple trees and to hear what the brook is really saying. The idyll is over when
124 
* THE BULLETIN
Mama is diagnosed with cancer, and the resulting treatments leave her too weak to
teach Ida B. Still shocked by the physical change in her mother and the resulting
loss of security at home, Ida B bitterly resents her return to the rule-bound public
school that made her miserable in kindergarten. Worse, Daddy confesses that he's
had to sell part of Ida B's beloved orchard to a housing contractor in order to pay
Mama's medical bills, enraging Ida B with what she sees as his broken promise to
her and to the land. Though some of the interludes (especially Ida B's collusion
with the trees) border on the precious and the protagonist's contemplations some-
times slow the pacing, Ida B is an appealingly strong-willed character, and her
emotional honesty, as she determinedly refuses to forgive her parents or enjoy the
possibilities of school, adds depth to the narrative. Her precocity in self-expression
allows her to speak for youngsters less gifted, while her youth limits her under-
standing and makes poignant her feelings of loss and her struggle to protect herself
in a world that seems out of control. There's also plenty of laugh-out-loud humor
in Ida B's observations and actions, but it's the concrete descriptions of her mael-
strom of emotions that will lead readers to embrace her as a friend. TC
HARRINGTON, JANICE N. 
Going North; illus. by Jerome Lagarrigue. 
Kroupa/
Farrar, 2004 
40p
ISBN 0-374-32681-9 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Leaving behind a loving assembly of grandparents, aunts, uncles, cousins, and
friends, Jessie and her family load their banana-yellow station wagon with all they
own and head North toward a better life, away from the segregated South of the
early '60s. Jessie's questions and worries about leaving home are met with "don't
knows," but as she feels the tension of a low gas gauge with only white gas stations
in sight, she begins to think that maybe things will be better for her family up
North. The thrums of Harrington's language beat out the road rhythms of a long
car trip. Her attention to detail deepens the symbolic resonance of the family's
journey; for instance, it is as if the land itself offers the family welcome, with the
dirt symbolically and actually changing from the red clay of Alabama to the fertile
black earth of Nebraska. Lagarrigue's deeply hued, soul-stirring landscapes escort
the family from that red earth, across the drifted white cotton fields of Mississippi,
through the turquoise night sky of Arkansas, to the verdant welcome of Nebraska.
His people are warm and wistful, and his grainy, rough-brushed surfaces give the
impression of being hazed over with the memory of the hope that pushed these
pioneers northward. Together, text and illustration offer an almost tangible em-
bodiment of the regrets that accompany leaving and the anticipation of better
things to come. This offers a keen emotional verification to similar accounts of
African-American families leaving the segregated South, but it will have appeal for
any family leaving the familiar in search of something better. An author's note is
included. KC
HARRISON, METTE IVIE 
Mira, Mirror. Viking, 2004 
314p
ISBN 0-670-05923-4 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-12
Trapped for over a hundred years in the mirror, Mira has become almost as cold
and self-promoting as the traitorous sister witch who sealed her there. She lies to
and manipulates innocents and pilfers magic in order to appropriate enough power
to release herself from the confines of the mirror, but before Mira achieves free-
dom, a mysterious crone (actually Mira's long-lost sister) steals the Mira-mirror,
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
125
threatening to keep the spellbound witch as a slave forever. Having learned that
"magic is born in death... But love is born in life, and death cannot end it," Mira
surprisingly gives up her own quest in order to salve the wounds of her aged sister
sorceress, an act which leads (indirectly) to Mira's own release. This version of the
wicked-witch story is peopled by multilayered, sympathetic characters, whose dis-
tinct voices and personal agendas twist the age-old plot into new shapes. The
satisfyingly realistic feudal setting is grounded and expanded by the definition of
the bloody source of the witches' magic; the resulting mixture of fascination and
revulsion will keep readers transfixed through page after page of elegant prose until
Mira's quest has ended. Unfortunately for readers so riveted, after the first 150
pages the rising action levels off, and while Mira continues to discourse on love
both sisterly and motherly, her actual experience of any healthy affection is so slim
that her sudden adoption of love as a guiding principle during the ending se-
quence simply cannot be believed. Still, some readers will care more about the
secondary characters than about Mira-not an impossible preference, since the
secondary characters are the ones who really learn how to give and receive love-
and these will take the sputtering finish in stride. TC
HILL, ELIZABETH STARR 
Wildfire!; illus. by Rob Shepperson. 
Farrar, 2004 
66p
ISBN 0-374-31712-7 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Ben lives with his great-grandmother and his grandparents in the Florida woods,
which this year are dangerously dry, making Independence Day fireworks out of
the question. New boy Elliot tags after Ben, but when he puts down Ben's small
town and his house and family, Ben wants to show Elliot a thing or two. On a
dare from a local girl, Ben takes a group of kids into the brush and sets off a rocket,
unleashing a shower of sparks and scaring Elliot's new puppy into the forest. The
two boys chase the puppy deep into the trees, where they face the threat of a
charging wild boar and the burgeoning wildfire. The straightforward prose main-
tains a healthy vigor, peppering the narrative with believable dialogue and apt,
occasionally fresh descriptions: "Ideas bubbled in him, sweet as soda." Black-and-
white illustrations employ some interesting perspectives and compositions, giving
the friendly-lined figures a milieu with a little extra depth. While skeptics may
wonder if a ten-year-old boy could outrun a wild boar, or if the boar would fail to
smell him as he hid in a thicket with a squirming puppy, the rapid pace of this
animal rescue story and the satisfying tie-in of all the plot lines make this book a
sure sell to readers just beginning to embark on longer literary adventures. TC
HILLENBRAND, WILL 
Asleep in the Stable; written and illus. by Will
Hillenbrand. 
Holiday House, 2004 32p
ISBN 0-8234-1824-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
Baby Owl starts his day in the middle of the night, filled with questions about the
family he has discovered sharing the barn: "WHOOOO. .. 
is that baby sleeping
in the nest below?" Mama explains, "That is Jesus, the Holy Child." "'WHOOOO,'
asked Baby Owl, 'is that man with the beard?' 'He is the baby's earthly father,'
answered Mama. 'The Holy Child also has a Heavenly Father."' Baby Owl's
questions concerning the baby's eggless birth and featherless state lead Mama into
a gentle discussion of Divine paternity, the warmth of God's protection, and even
the origin of the bright star that glows over the barn. This is not the traditional
retelling of the Nativity story-indeed there's no mention of how the family came
126 
* 
THE BULLETIN
to the barn, much less any hint of the Baby's mission-nor is it a Friendly Beasts
tale, with animals tenderly nuzzling the Holy Baby. This is more properly Baby's
First Catechism, which concludes rather illogically with a mama loves baby/baby
loves mama bedtime wrap-up. The mixed-media and collage illustrations focus
primarily on the owls (only three spreads feature the Holy Family, and two of
them are nearly identical), to whom Hillenbrand imparts an unexpected cuddliness.
A variety of mottled, scratched, and layered textures give depth to the simple fig-
ures. Hillenbrand initiates the parent/child dialogue on the spiritual aspect of
Christmas, but if your own owlet inquires, "WHOOOO is God?," you're on your
own. EB
HOOSE, PHILLIP 
The Race to Save the Lord God Bird. Kroupa/Farrar,
2004 
196p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-374-36173-8 
$20.00 
R* Gr. 6-10
Hunted by artists, naturalists, and even millinery suppliers, and squeezed by di-
minishing habitats, the Ivory-billed Woodpecker is now found only in collectors'
cabinets and museum displays. Hoose traces its flight path to extinction from the
early nineteenth century through the last verified sightings in forest canopies of
the southeastern United States and Cuba, weaving not only a tale of a single spe-
cies' demise, but also of the evolution of ornithology from mere physical descrip-
tion, to investigation of behavior and habitat, to commitment to conservation.
Hoose is a gifted storyteller, opening with a riveting scene of a wounded wood-
pecker trashing a hotel room with all the zeal of a rock band, and then spinning a
gripping adventure tale that comprises everything from "plume wars" over ladies'
hat trim, to murdered game wardens, to the development of bird-call recording
devices, to the heartbreaking failure of conservator/developer compromise. An
ample selection of black-and-white photos, fascinating sidebars on a wide variety
of subjects (e.g., an 1807 squirrel scalp tax; the inverse relationship between bobbed
hair and feathered hats), maps of the shrinking Ivory-bill range, a timeline, glos-
sary, index, and detailed source notes are included. There is no plangent predic-
tion of ecological gloom and doom here, just an engrossing story that leaves readers
with the uncomfortable suspicion that this plot plays out more often than we like
to believe. EB
HUGHES, SHIRLEY 
Ella's Big Chance: A Jazz-Age Cinderella; written and illus. by
Shirley Hughes. 
Simon, 2004 
48p
ISBN 0-689-87399-9 
$16.95 
R 
6-8 yrs
Ella's dad owns a successful dressmaking shop, and Ella bids fair to follow in her
father's footsteps as a master clothier. The arrival of a stepmother and stepsisters is
followed by the conversion of the shop into a couture gallery, forcing Ella to work
nonstop in the basement while her stepsisters saunter through the upper floors,
modeling her creations for customers. Doorman/delivery boy Buttons stands by
Ella, cheering her with serenades and impromptu moonlight dances in the store-
room. When the Duke of Arc gives a ball and Ella's fairy godmother sends her off
to it, resplendent in a limousine (Buttons's newly enchanted delivery bicycle) driven
by an impeccably dressed chauffeur (Ella's cat), the little dressmaker captivates the
Duke but eludes captivation herself, preferring to marry Buttons and set up her
own shop of "stunning clothes." (The Duke retreats to South America to "recover
from his broken heart.") The earnest tone of the text works perfectly with the
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
127
rags-to-rags romantic twist to invest this reworking of the traditional tale with
fresh allure. The 1920s fascination with color, line, and texture in clothing pro-
vides ample scope for gouache and pen illustrations drenched in shimmering hues,
swirling with bold curves, and enriched with riotously striated shading, while mi-
nor plot points receive black-and-white treatment in miniature panels below the
text blocks. Viewers, listeners, and readers alike will enjoy the visual and narrative
richness of this period renovation. A note gives credit for inspiration for the ball
scenes and dress designs. TC
IRVING, JOHN 
A Sound Like Someone Trying Not to Make a Sound; illus. by Tatjana
Hauptmann. 
Doubleday, 2004 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90910-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74680-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
A bump in the night awakens Tom and prompts him to tell his father of the furry
monster with no arms and legs that has undoubtedly taken over the house. Though
the text indicates that he is conversing with his father about the monster (who
logically concludes that it is a mouse in the walls), the pictures show Tom and his
teddy exploring the night-dark house. Dad gives Tom a strategy for dealing with
the critter-just hit the wall when you hear him scritching and scratching. Tom is
comforted enough to go to sleep, but baby brother, Tim, who has been awakened
by the commotion, gladly heeds his father's advice, since he has no idea that a
mouse isn't a wet, furry monster with no arms and legs. The book's look vaguely
recalls Sendak's Where the Wild Things Are; it alternates wordless, crosshatched
spreads with pictures that sometimes do and sometimes don't cross the ditch, all
held tightly in check by tidy white borders that contain the text. The palette is
appropriately (if monotonously) deep-night purple and turquoise with moonlit
shadows that comically enhance the size of the "monster" the boy and his bear are
stalking. The boy seems always to be bathed in the glow of moonlight, however,
and his rumpled pjs, spiky bedhead, and wary eyes take the fear right out of the
nighttime for the child viewer. Taken from one of Irving's novels, wherein the
story is penned by a rather unpleasant writer for children, this doesn't entirely
stand on its own: poor little Tim has been left out of any climactic reassurance,
and the ending is stunningly abrupt. The conceit and the descriptions are cer-
tainly evocative, though, and youngsters may appreciate this comforting explana-
tion of mysterious nocturnal noises. KC
JINKS, CATHERINE 
Pagan's Vows. 
Candlewick, 2004 
[33 6p]
ISBN 0-7636-2021-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
After facing Saladin in the Crusade and surviving a bloodbath at the Roucy de
Bram estate (Pagan in Exile and Pagan's Crusade, BCCB 2/04), Lord Roland and
his squire Pagan Kidrouk have had their fill of death, and they present themselves
at the Benedictine abbey of Saint Martin and ask to be accepted as novices. Roland
immediately retreats into maudlin penitence, not only for the blood on his hands,
but also for his forbidden love for a heretic woman. Pagan, always ready to follow
the knight wherever he leads, finds monastic discipline far more daunting, particu-
larly when his smart-mouthed retorts cause the irascible novice-master to load him
up with lessons in logic and rhetoric. During one of many punishments, Pagan
connects an overheard remark about the number of beggars seeking alms with a
128 
* THE BULLETIN
disparate number of distributed coins, and soon he's hot on the trail of embezzle-
ment, blackmail and, ultimately, murder. This is no knockoff of the Brother
Cadfael titles, and the mystery, though engrossing, serves more as plot device to
explore Pagan's and Roland's commitment to a life of godliness (and to their en-
during friendship) than as the main event. Jinks again displays an amazing knack
for blending utterly convincing period detail, earthy wisecracking, and profound
respect for courtly and spiritual ideals, regardless of how difficult they may be for
her characters to attain. There is at least one more volume to come in the Pagan
series, and the final scene that finds the knight helping his squire onto a horse,
bound to prepare for a career as a lay canon lawyer, will leave fans of the series
(who absolutely know the pair cannot be separated for long) howling for the next
title. EB
JOHNSON, D. B. 
Henry Works; written and illus. by D. B. Johnson. 
Houghton,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-42003-7 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
This fourth entry in Johnson's continuing homage to Henry David Thoreau is
likely to appeal even to children who care neither for Thoreau nor for the previous
titles in the series (Henry Hikes to Fitchburg, BCCB 7/00, etc.) as it treats a subject
more readily recognizable and kid-friendly than the others-unappreciated work.
Henry begins his day by "walking to work," but in reality, the walk is the start of
his work. He checks the weather and finds a foxhole, and he then uses his observa-
tions to warn one neighbor to take in her laundry because it's going to rain and
another to guard her chickens against foxes. He helps with gardening, puts some
crossing stones in the creek, measures the depth of the millstream, and marks the
way to a huckleberry bush ripe for picking. All of these important chores go unno-
ticed by his by-now familiar neighbors-anthropomorphized bears of Transcen-
dentalist fame done up in a cubist style-who assume that he's not doing anything,
especially since he ends up where he started, at his cabin. His walk proceeds in a
circle around Concord, giving the story a satisfyingly tight narrative trajectory,
and Johnson unobtrusively shows the importance of each of Henry's little jobs
along the way. The misty weather warrants the graying over of the landscapes that
has proved visually unsatisfactory in past offerings; here it works to create a dewy
atmosphere for an early morning jaunt. This title offers subtle reassurance that
things that don't read like work can be quite important; kids who have had their
diligent efforts to keep their worlds in order go unnoticed will feel a kinship with
this observant, tireless bear. KC
JOHNSON, MAUREEN 
The Bermudez Triangle. Razorbill/Penguin, 2004 
370p
ISBN 1-59514-019-0 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
When Nina Bermudez spends the summer before senior year away at a pre-college
program, the friendship triangle is reduced to a pair as Nina's best friends, Avery
and Mel (short for Melanie), labor away together at a local restaurant; to the sur-
prise of both girls, the pairing becomes more than just friendship as their relation-
ship blossoms into romance. When Nina returns, now engaged in a passionate
long-distance relationship with a boy from her program, she's caught off-balance
by her friends' new closeness and its effect on the triangle, especially as the ensuing
year sees Avery and Mel's romance turn sour, almost destroying the trio's long
friendship. This is more lengthily ponderous than the author's Key to the Golden
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
129
Firebird (BCCB 7/04), but its slow movement helps capture the sense of time's
passage and provide a credible pace for the girls' growth. Avery and Mel's affair-
experimentation for Avery, commitment for Mel-offers not only thoughtful ex-
ploration of sexual identity but also intelligent inquiry into relationship meaning
and priorities, with Nina feeling shut out of friendship and wondering if there are
implications for her own sexuality and Avery increasingly uncomfortable with her
and Mel's romance but concerned about the consequences of ending it ("That was
the problem with dating your best friend-you needed a really serious reason to
stop"). The omniscient narration slips easily from viewpoint to viewpoint, which
helps keep the girls sympathetic through good behavior and bad (Avery's dumping
of Mel is pretty brutal) and makes credible the final restoration and affirmation of
friendship. Readers fond of Brashares' Traveling Pants titles (BCCB 12/01, 5/03)
who embrace the different forms in which sisterhood comes will enjoy the com-
pany of this trio. DS
KERET, ETGAR 
Dad Runs Away with the Circus; tr. from the Hebrew by Noah
Stollman; illus. by Rutu Modan. 
Candlewick, 2004 
40p
ISBN 0-7636-2247-8 
$16.99 
R 4-7yrs
When Dad takes the family to the circus, he's so enthralled by the show that he
refuses to come home again. Instead, he joins the troupe and travels around the
world, sending his bereft family frequent postcards from exotic locales. Eventually
the circus returns to town, and Dad's wife and children, newly appreciative of the
work and risk behind every successful act, receive him back into their lives with
open arms. Notwithstanding their digital layering, the illustrations are deceptively
old-fashioned, drawn in pencil, colored with textures reminiscent of old barn paint,
and harking back in style to 1800s festival posters (a sample of which is given in
the second spread). They exude creativity beyond their influences, however, lark-
ing about with perspective and color, redirecting traditional shapes into new pro-
portions and drenching the whole in eye-grabbing shades like tangerine, scarlet,
and lime, which give even the family's pedestrian activities the feeling of the swift
movement and aerial exploits associated with the circus. The characters' thick-
lipped smiles and wide eyes emphasize the happy-go-lucky weirdness of the tale,
which glosses over the pathos and tension of Dad's hasty abandonment of his
family and instead celebrates the sparkle and verve brought into all their lives be-
cause of Dad's experiences and new friends (for some reason, the entire family
suddenly can do circus tricks now that Dad's home). The text is succinct but
sufficient, its humor understated (though occasionally aimed at adults) and inter-
dependent with the drama of the illustrations, within which choice details-such
as the antics of the family dog or the circus crowds-supply high-spirited enter-
tainment. TC
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
Cactus Soup; illus. by Phil Huling. 
Cavendish,
2004 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7614-5155-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 7-10 yrs
The traditional stone soup story provides the makings for this original tale set
during the Mexican Revolution, wherein the people of a tiny village run to their
mayor for guidance when they spot a band of soldiers approaching. "'Soldiers are
all alike, no matter whose side they fight on,' the mayor grumbled. 'They eat like
130 
* THE BULLETIN
wolves. There won't be a tortilla left when they get through!"' To avoid the
inevitable raiding of pantries, the mayor instructs the townspeople to hide their
food and go undercover, dressing in rags and smearing dirt on their faces. Inevita-
bly, the captain of the soldiers produces a cactus needle and the promise of cactus
soup ... only there are a few ingredients that would make the soup much better.
The resulting soup, chock full of onions, tomatoes, chicken, and chiles, is such a
hit that the townspeople gladly produce the rest of their stores, and "What a feast
they had!" The entertaining twist in Kimmel's retelling is the humor of the trick-
sters getting tricked; young listeners are certain to catch on to the crowd's persis-
tent ignorance ("And to think it was made from a cactus thorn!") and gleefully
point out the error of their ways. Huling's watercolor and ink illustrations some-
times tip from stylized into stereotypical, but they offer some intriguing perspec-
tives (looking down over the pot of soup or viewing a crowd scene at nose level),
and the elongated Goya-esque figures add a certain drama as well as comedy. The
readaloud potential abounds, as does the opportunity to compare Kimmel's Mexi-
can take on this oft-retold tale with similar picture-book projects (such as Muth's
Stone Soup, BCCB 3/03). An author's note offering historical information is in-
cluded, as is a glossary. HM
KOONS, JON 
A Confused Hanukkah: An Original Story of Chelm; illus. by S. D.
Schindler. 
Dutton, 2004 
40p
ISBN 0-525-46969-9 
$16.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The rabbi has left town, and the dear but dim denizens of Chelm cannot remem-
ber how or why they are supposed to celebrate Hanukkah. They send Yossel on a
fact-finding mission, but he ends up in the Big City, where the prosperous urban-
ites are celebrating their own feast of lights, namely, Christmas. Yossel returns
home with plenty of misguided ideas for their festivities, from a tree in the town
square (to be decorated with menorahs and dreidels), to a fat man in a velvet suit
(blue, with a Star of David belt buckle) who bellows "Oy! Oy! Oy!" Fortunately
the rabbi arrives in time to set them straight, and after a fairly staid explanation of
the miracle of the lights, "the people of Chelm ate and sang and played games and
gave gifts and had the best Hanukkah they'd ever had." Of course, the fun of
noodlehead stories in general and Chelm tales in particular is chuckling over the
characters' good-natured, topsy-turvy logic. Too often, though, Koons' jokes fall
flatter than a latke as he explains even the most obvious gags. Schindler's watercol-
ors do strike the right balance between gentle satire and genuine affection, and the
slightly subdued palette of rusty reds, evergreens, and dashes of gold and blue
combine Old World sobriety with holiday cheer. EB
KUNS, J. IRVIN 
While You Were Out. Dutton, 2004 
132p
ISBN 0-525-47295-9 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Penelope's fifth-grade year at her tiny rural school has two big differences from her
previous year: one difference is an addition, the new presence of her father as the
school janitor, and one difference is a lack, the absence of her best friend, Tim,
who died over the summer. Her dad's clumsy and well-meant efforts to be her
school chum just make things worse for Penelope, and in her lonely grief for Tim,
Penelope begins writing him notes and leaving them in his old desk. Recurrent
motifs such as the poems Penelope and Tim created and the succinct, therapy-
taught metaphors ("Today my name is Yellow Hope") in which Penelope expresses
NOVEMBER2004 
* 
131
her feelings are distracting and contrived, and plot elements such as the mistaken
identity of Penelope's secret correspondent are more neat than emotionally satisfy-
ing. The more effective story here is that of Penelope's relationship with her fa-
ther, as she's legitimately concerned about his job performance (he's quickly gotten
bored with every job he has had) and understandably embarrassed by his behavior
(he sits with her at lunch and joins in at jumping rope), but she nonetheless recog-
nizes his love and concern. While there are more compelling bereavement stories
(Bridge to Terabithia remains the high mark), the account of Penelope's changing
relationship with her father may elicit sympathy and even yearning from many
youngsters who'd like to find such closeness with their own parents. DS
LA FEVERS, R. L. 
The Forging of the Blade. 
Dutton, 2004 
[144p]
ISBN 0-525-47349-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
What can a villain do if, once he slays the rightful king and usurps his throne, the
blasted wretch's sword of power disappears, its loss threatening his ability to con-
trol the kingdom? Kidnap all the blacksmiths and force them to forge blades until
one of them manages to craft a suitable replacement, of course. Unfortunately for
the despicable usurper, Lord Mordig, one of the blacksmiths he kidnaps leaves
behind a surprisingly resourceful eleven-year-old son who manages, with some
supernatural help, to infiltrate the conquered castle and challenge Mordig's au-
thority. Predictability largely permeates the plot (of course the supernatural help-
ers have magic relics to give the boy, incidentally fulfilling a prophecy) and the
dramatis personae display a certain woodenness. Nonetheless, the heroic style and
brisk pacing make this short chapter book (first in the Lowther's Blade trilogy) a
temptingly bite-sized introduction to epic fantasy for young readers. TC
LEE, STAN 
Stan Lee's Superhero Christmas; illus. by Tim Jessell. 
Preiss/Tegen/
HarperCollins, 2004 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-056560-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-056559-4 
$15.99 
M 
4-7 yrs
On the night before Christmas, Santa's old foe the Ice King springs a surprise
attack and traps Santa in a cage of ice. The Protector comes to the rescue, only to
be trapped himself. Luckily, his wife happens to be the Protectress, and with her
powers and their two children's canny planning, both Santa and the Protector are
saved, the Ice King melting away in a morass of rock salt and sunshine. To cap off
the happy event, the children receive their own superpowers for Christmas. The
text from Spiderman creator Lee seems to have been written for a comic book; it is
mostly dialogue with occasional snappy sentences, allowing considerable gaps of
time and logic that should be picked up seamlessly by the corresponding pictures.
However, the technique falls flat in a picture-book format that relies on one- or
two-page spreads showing a single action scene; the illustrations only supply small
pieces of the action, not alleviating the confusions created by having the bulk of
the story told in bad dialogue and jokes that miss the mark. Jessell's illustrations
are slick and overcrowded for their picture-book setting, but they're more success-
ful than the text in connecting with their comic-book origins: drawn with exag-
gerated realism, the expertly modeled and costumed figures are larger than life and
unambiguously good or evil; the dark palette, sparkling with icy blue-white light,
gives the battle heightened drama. While the premise and pictures may suck in
132 
* THE BULLETIN
some children looking for a superhero Christmas, kids with comic-book tastes will
be more satisfied with the real thing. KH
LEE, TANITH 
Piratica: Being a Daring Tale ofa Singular Girl'sAdventure upon the
High Seas. 
Dutton, 2004 
288p
ISBN 0-525-47324-6 
$17.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
A tumble down the school stairs unearths a cache of buried memories in sixteen-
year-old Art(emesia), and in defiance of her father she leaves the toney academy to
return to sea, where she was raised by her pirate mother. No matter that her
deceased mother was actually an actress who played a lady buccaneer, and Art
merely a child at her side on stage. Art rounds up the old cast-now hawking
Pirate Coffee off an undersized advertising ship-and after taking aboard hand-
some Felix Phoenix, who has been misidentified by the police as highwayman
Gentleman Jack Cuckoo, Art thieves her way around the globe, pursued by Goldie
(vengeful daughter of an all-too-real pirate), dodging the law, discovering a trunk
of treasure maps, and succumbing to true love when Felix rescues her from the
gallows at the big finish. This never quite fulfills its Fun Potential; Lee patches
together stock elements of piratical romance so conscientiously that her tale has
little independent life of its own. The parallel world setting, in which 1802 En-
gland is a republic and France groans under monarchy, sometimes seems little
more than excuse for Lee to toy with British place names, wordplay which is likely
to resonate only with geographically savvy readers. Still, there's action aplenty,
and the swordpoint showdown between Art and Goldie is worth the price of pas-
sage. EB
LEIBER, FRITZ 
Gonna Roll the Bones; ad. by Sarah L. Thomson; illus. by David
Wiesner. 
Milk & Cookies, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-689-03591-8 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 3-6
One night, a restless Joe Slattermill decides he needs to get out of the house, so he
heads to the new gambling joint in town to "roll the bones." A skilled player, Joe
is drawn to the craps table where he sees a mysterious, high-rolling Big Gambler.
Soon Joe and the Big Gambler are facing off for high stakes, and even as Joe real-
izes he's gambling for his life with an opponent who's not just a mere gambler but
death himself, he begins to lose. There are some interesting elements in the story,
with its echoes of folkloric gambles and menacing atmosphere, but the pace is
sluggish; even more problematic is the ending, wherein Joe simply bashes death to
pieces and thereby manages to escape even after losing to him, which suggests that
any tension over the game was merely illusory. The real reason for this book is
apparently Wiesner's illustrations; a note from Wiesner, which is revealingly titled
"Author's Note," explains that he conceived this project years ago in school as a
wordless adaptation, and this incarnation is an expanded and amended version of
that long-ago attempt. The pencil-on-vellum illustrations manage a visually in-
triguing feel, though the club scenes are more literal and less moody, paradoxically
making the skull-headed death less ominous than the winding roads to town; ulti-
mately, though, the art never really manages to be effectively narrative or dramatic.
Each monochromatic image is seated in a fake frame and placed on carefully faux-
aged pages, which would be a nicer design touch if the toasty pigment of the pages
didn't further subdue the already understated drama of the sepia-toned art. This
isn't successful as a condensed yet shivery visual delight akin to, say, Gaiman's The
NOVEMBER2004 
* 
133
Wolves in the Walls (BCCB 9/03), and kids up to the sophistication of this can
probably read Leiber's original story, so this will mostly interest young readers
with a taste for comparing variants or looking for impetus to doing their own
illustrations of their favorite spooky stories. DS
LESTER, HELEN 
Hurty Feelings; illus. by Lynn Munsinger. 
Lorraine/Houghton,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-41082-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Endowed with a solidity prized among hippos, Fragility twists every compliment
into an insult and collapses in a tearful heap, sobbing, "You hurt my feeeeelings!"
Eventually, no one wants to talk to her at all. Then, during a game of pickup
soccer (in which Fragility is an outstanding goalkeeper, since no one can get the
ball past her immobile vastness), a marauding elephant tries to incapacitate her
with insults. However, as Fragility points out, all of the pejoratives hurled by her
persecutor describe his own immensity as well as hers, and soon Rudy the elephant
is a soggy mess, collapsed under the weight of his own hurty feelings. Fragility's
delicious sturdiness dominates the pastel watercolor illustrations, her prominent
gray belly and bewhiskered pink snout counterpointing her floppy hair bow and
shiny toenails. Spread after spread emphasizes the benefits of Fragility's bulk, and
in the standoff with Rudy, mirror images of rotund hippo and hefty elephant
point up the irony of name-calling between giants. However, the point of the text
is less well defined: is this a tale of bully besting or self-appreciation? In Fragility's
brief confrontation with Rudy, she defends herself and then salves the feelings of
her wounded foe, but this exchange provides no obvious reason for Fragility's last-
page acceptance of the social value of her physical graces or the complimentary
nature of her peers' comments. Still, the visual humor and the many opportuni-
ties for group interaction (imagine a cohort of children pretending to blubber like
Fragility) may win the book its own cadre of storytime fans. TC
LEWIS, RICHARD 
The Flame Tree. 
Simon, 2004 
288p
ISBN 0-689-86333-0 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
In August, 2001, the fictional Javanese town ofWonobo is gathering support for
Nahdlatul Umat Islam, a group (also fictional) branded by the U.S. government as
a terrorist organization. The local imam is an outspoken advocate of NUI, and as
anti-Western sentiment burgeons, twelve-year-old Isaac Williams, son of doctors
at the Union Baptists' Immanuel Hospital, loses his closest friend, Ismail, who
aligns himself with radical Islamists. In the wake of the September 11th attacks,
Americans are evacuated from Wonobo, but Isaac's helicopter crashes and the boy
is taken into custody by NUI adherents, who school the boy in the Qur'an and
then, in a televised event, "invite" him to profess Islam. Isaac refuses, but rather
than face any of the possible dire consequences he feared, he is promptly released
to his parents in a public demonstration of NUI's commitment to Islamic belief in
free-will submission to Allah. Lewis clearly intends to explore the boundaries be-
tween Islamic faith and Islamist politics, and to suggest that organizations decried
as "terrorist" may have more diverse membership than that damning label implies.
However, centrist voices that speak here in quiet, instructive, often preachy ca-
dence are swamped by searing images of extremist activity-a booby-trapped corpse
that detonates on the hospital grounds, graphic description of a beheading dis-
seminated over the Internet, brutal details of Isaac's forced circumcision. More-
134 
* THE BULLETIN
over, the disconnect between the level of violence depicted, the complexity of is-
sues presented, and the relatively young age of the protagonist makes it difficult to
pinpoint a target audience. Lewis begs for a sophisticated, open-minded reader-
ship, and one can only hope that's what he gets. EB
LUPICA, MIKE 
Travel Team. 
Philomel, 2004 
288p
ISBN 0-399-24150-7 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Danny Walker, who has played on the prestigious local basketball travel team for
two years running, has been cut from the seventh-grade team because he's just too
short. Never mind that he's a speed demon and an acute strategist-height is what
counts. Or at least that's the semi-official reason. More likely it's because Coach
Ross has it in for Danny's dad, an absentee father whose own stellar hoops career
was snuffed out years ago in a car accident. Mr. Walker's a physical wreck and not
much of a father, but he's not about to let Danny's talent be squandered, so he
puts together a travel team of outcasts, wannabes, and a gifted tall-girl ringer, and
the rest, of course, is middle-school sports fantasy come true. All the clich6s are
firmly in place-the ragged practice sessions, the coaches who won't let kids be
kids, the alcoholic father who makes good, the best friend who walks out on his
league-leading team to join the spirited misfits, and, needless to say, the come-
from-behind victory. Sure, it's hokey, but it's also effective, and just about any kid
who wishes he could communicate with his parents, catch the eye of the class
beauty, or prove his mettle as a player on the court and as a coach on the sidelines
can tuck this title under his pillow for the sweetest of hoop dreams. EB
MACLACHLAN, PATRICIA 
More Perfect than the Moon. Cotler/HarperCollins,
2004 
96p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027559-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027558-8 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 3-5
MacLachlan makes her fourth visit to the Witting family of Sarah, Plain and Tall
fame, this time to welcome a new baby for Sarah. In the eyes of eight-year-old
Cassie, however, the baby is anything but welcome. Unlike her half-siblings Caleb
and Anna, Cassie is Sarah's child, and she is ill-disposed to share that position,
repeatedly asserting that she is not going to like this baby; even worse, she is plagued
with the fear that, like Anna and Caleb's mother, Sarah will die in childbirth. The
author renders Cassie's childish resentment and fear in simple, concrete images
and dialogue; the spare, elegant prose that characterizes this series provides a ve-
hicle for the believably uncomplicated emotions Cassie brings to this change in her
life. She turns to her journal for solace, using her storyteller's gift to write what she
wants to be true, and sometimes surprising herself by the way her fears, desires,
and jealousy take shape on the page. The book crafts differently nuanced relation-
ships for Cassie as each of her rather doting family members helps her work through
her feelings about the baby; even Caleb achieves a new level of sensitivity in deal-
ing with pesky little sisters as he sparks a love of his own. This gentle story about
relationships that remain steadfastly loving despite change will appeal most to those
who have already developed their own relationship with this blended family. KC
MARTINI, CLEM 
The Mob. 
Kids Can, 2004 
239p
ISBN 1-55337-574-2 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
For generations, the Kinaar family of crows has convened once yearly in the old
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
135
Gathering Tree for storytelling and celebrating. This year, the clan threatens to
split over questions of religious practice, leadership authority, and individual re-
sponsibility for the death of a juvenile killed by a cat, but such concerns are made
peripheral by the sudden onslaught of a blizzard that imperils old and young alike,
a hazard complicated by the attack of a gang of murderous cats. Three young
Crows, Kyp, Kym, and Kuper, provide the daring, brains, and brawn necessary to
save the family from both storm and strike, allowing the clan to reform post-
disaster under new leadership and with a gentler perspective. Told in first person
by the engagingly benign Crow leader, Kalum, to the resurrected flock as a ritual
reworking of the family's oral history and group identity, the well-paced story is
interlaced with intriguing bits of Crow mythology, law, and Kalum's personal
observations, as well as the occasional run-in with those unpredictable, fascinat-
ing, ancient enemies of the Crows, the humans. This opening volume of the
Feather and Bone: The Crow Chronicles trilogy will soothe readers screeching for
animal adventures rivaling those of Oppel's Silverwing (BCCB 1/98) and its suc-
cessors. TC
MERCADO, NANCY E., ed. 
Tripping Over the Lunch Lady and Other School
Stories. 
Dial, 2004 
192p
ISBN 0-8037-2873-5 
$16.99 
R Gr. 3-5
The ten stories in this collection explore that time of life from late elementary to
early middle school when your confidence forsakes you at the worst possible mo-
ment but your clumsiness never does, when both your love life and your room
resemble nothing so much as a science experiment, and when everything having to
do with school seems designed to expose you to maximum embarrassment. Fol-
lowing a brief but energetic introduction that extols the virtues of laughing your
way through the pain of these hyberbolic years, notable authors such as Avi, An-
gela Johnson, Terry Trueman, and Susan Shreve, among others, provide opportu-
nities to do just that. The collection is especially friendly for reluctant readers and
less-than-stellar scholars, as it includes a graphic-novel-style story, and one with a
hero whose bad spelling gets him and his teacher out of a tight spot. Following
each story is a photo of the writer as a young person (with the exception of Avi,
who is "camera shy," and James Proimos, who prefers a cartoon persona) and a
"school report," where the author reminisces about cafeteria food, field trips, pranks,
gym, teachers, and those unforgettable school smells. Surprisingly few of the sto-
ries are encumbered with annoying uplifting morals, and each author manages to
mimic, albeit in a slightly different tonal register, the melodramatic keening of
those desperately loopy tween years. KC
MYERS, TIM 
Basho and the River Stones; illus. by Oki S. Han. 
Cavendish,
2004 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7614-5165-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Basho and the foxes live in relative harmony in the Fuka River region of Japan; he
willingly shares the fruit of his cherry tree with the foxes, and they leave him in
peace to work on his poetry. That is, until one "impatient and greedy" fox decides
to play a trick on Basho. Transforming himself into a wandering monk, he con-
vinces the poet to sign over all rights to the cherry tree in exchange for three coins
that, in fact, are transformed river stones. When the gold turns back into stones
136 
* 
THE BULLETIN
the next morning, the kindhearted Basho responds mildly, by writing a haiku,
which, he explains, "lasts much longer" than money. The mortified fox, upon
hearing the results of his trickery, begs forgiveness of the gentle poet and tries to
pay him with three real coins. Basho denies the offer of money but willingly
accepts the fox's second offer of three river stones . . which magically transform
into the same three coins the following day. This original tale is creatively pat-
terned to lead the fox through clear levels of greed, then humility, then generosity,
and the ending, wherein the fox uses his power for good rather than the satisfac-
tion of his own needs, is both imaginative and satisfying. The layout is somewhat
cluttered, with text appearing in bordered boxes against busy watercolors, and the
text is inconsistently proportioned, with some pages offering a single line and oth-
ers several paragraphs. Han's watercolors, encompassing a rich, dark palette, effec-
tively invoke the Japanese setting, full of lush gardens and spare architecture; the
anthropomorphization of the foxes (they walk upright and wear patterned silk
robes) is, however, rather discordant. The fox's evolution is the real strength of the
story, and this would work well in juxtaposition with more traditional fox-as-
trickster folktales where there is no redemption to be had. An author's note about
the historical figure of Basho is included. HM
NEALE, JONATHAN 
Himalaya. Houghton, 2004 
[160p]
ISBN 0-618-41200-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
You'd think their nearly disastrous sailing journey in Lost at Sea (BCCB 5/02)
would have dampened their appetite, but now Jack and Orrie (short for Orchid),
alternating narrators, and their younger brother, Andy, are off for a new adven-
ture, joining their father and his girlfriend, Libby, for a mountain-climbing trip in
Nepal. Already resentful of Libby, Orrie is furious when she discovers her father is
heeding the head Sherpa's warning about child climbers and leaving her behind
with Libby and Andy at Base Camp while he and Jack climb the mountain. She's
even more incensed to realize that the Sherpa warned against taking Jack up as
well, but her father is so afraid of losing his son's love that he can't refuse him this
trip ("Dad thinks that if he doesn't let Jack climb, Jack won't love him. And then
Jack won't go live with Dad. Dad's right, too"). The Sherpa's warning proves to
be well founded, as Jack suffers from altitude sickness during the ascent and the
team's attempt to return in bad weather leads to a terrible accident, leaving Orrie,
Libby, and Andy as their only hope. Neale is an accomplished traveler who knows
his terrain and its risks, and that knowledge imbues this novel with physical au-
thenticity: here's one adventure story where readers will be genuinely uncertain
about the cast's survival. The portrayals of the protagonists are occasionally less
sure-footed (the narrative voice sometimes roams out of believable reach for twelve-
and thirteen-year-old speakers, and the preternaturally spiritual Andy strains cred-
ibility), but the emotional drama at the heart of the events ("People are so hard,
and mountains are so easy") is tough and compelling. The story is bracingly un-
compromising in both its acknowledgment of the ferocity and danger of human
emotions and the ferocity and danger of the elements: Dad survives the conse-
quences of his mistaken decision, but at considerable cost physically (he loses a
leg), financially (there's a high bill for the rescue flight), and emotionally (his rela-
tionship with Libby doesn't survive the event). Adventure-loving readers not yet
ready to climb the heights of Krakauer's Into Thin Air will find this a chilling and
dramatic outing. DS
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
137
NOLAN, Lucy 
Down Girl and Sit: Smarter than Squirrels; illus. by Mike
Reed. 
Cavendish, 2004 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-7614-5184-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 2-4
Our narrator, Down Girl, is a dog who lives happily with her owner, Rruff, next
door to her good friend Sit. In four chapters, she and Sit keep the neighborhood
safe from menace ("The secret to our success is simple. We are smarter than squir-
rels"), even if it means eating above and beyond the call ("When life gives you pie,
you should never stop to think"); the two dogs track their masters down after
being left at home for lunch, and Down Girl subjects a replacement caretaker to
her keen scrutiny ("I loved this boy. He was my new best friend"). This has the
same pokerfaced comedy of limited viewpoint as Finney's I, Jack (BCCB 4/04),
with the doggy narration streamlined for much younger readers (or even for listen-
ers). Simple vocabulary and brief paragraphs enhance readability without ham-
pering style, in fact often increasing it instead, and novice readers will revel in
being part of a joke that relies on their superior understanding. Reed's spirited
vignettes, which include a helpful (and humorous) opening map of Down Girl's
neighborhood, have a homey scruffiness suitable to their subject. This will make
dog lovers sit up and beg, and even reluctant readers, if tempted with a booktalk or
chapter readaloud, will go fetch. DS
NOYES, DEBORAH, ed. 
Gothic!: Ten Original Dark Tales. 
Candlewick,
2004 
256p
ISBN 0-7636-2243-5 
$15.99 
R Gr. 9-12
The ten stories in this collection support Noyes' introductory assertion that there
is "something gothic about coming of age." Rife with forbidden loves, ancient
homes, ghastly secrets, and tragic pasts, these stories-spanning classic, contem-
porary, fantasy, and humor-conjure up the grotesque, desolate, and shadowy
side of growing up. Many of the stories thrust unsuspecting characters into danger
without a safety net and watch them plummet into darkness, as in Vivian Vande
Velde's "Morgan Roehmar's Boys," where a haunted hayride volunteer makes a
fatal mistake when she assumes the ghost of a young boy is a murder victim and
not the killer. Though not all of the characters meet such a tragic end, few remain
untouched by its possibility, and they approach the brink of adulthood with a
heavy loss of innocence. The most resonant stories leave their characters wrestling
with this transformation: in M. T. Anderson's disturbing "Watch and Wake," a
disaffected teenager, hired to guard a corpse for the night, falls asleep and loses his
face, and therefore his identity, to hungry witches, while in both Janni Lee Simner's
"Stone Tower" and Gregory Maguire's "The Prank," young women must realize
the effect that their family secrets have had on their stunted upbringing before they
can hope for better. Breaking up the grimness is Neil Gaiman's hilarious parody
of gothic conventions, "Forbidden Brides of the Faceless Slaves in the Nameless
House of the Night of Dread Desire," wherein a writer attempting to craft a "slice-
of-life" novel cannot escape mockery of his all-too-gothic reality. Young horror
fans will find these tales chilling, thoughtful, and surprising, and the collection
may pique their interest in such gothic classics as The Castle of Otranto or The
Monk. KH
138 
* THE BULLETIN
NUMEROFF, 
LAURA 
Beatrice Doesn't Want To; illus. 
by 
Lynn
Munsinger. 
Candlewick, 2004 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7636-1160-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
"Beatrice didn't like books. She didn't even like to read. More than that, she
hated going to the library." Unfortunately for Beatrice, a long-eared basset hound,
that is exactly where she has to go three days in a row while her older brother works
on his dinosaur report. The story follows the stubborn Beatrice through several
days of troublemaking and brother-bothering before he spots a sign for a story
hour with the children's librarian. Poor Beatrice is left in a room full of other
doggy children where, much to her surprise, she ends up really enjoying the cardi-
gan-clad librarian's reading ofAlbert Mouse Has a Brand-New House (which Wanda,
the pug seated next to Beatrice, has heard twice). Predictably, when her brother
comes to claim her, Beatrice is as resistant to leaving the library as she had been to
going in the first place. Numeroff, author ofIfYou Give a Mouse a Cookie (BCCB
7/85), has effectively captured the dynamic and often creatively executed resis-
tance of a stubborn child, the "I don't want to," impossible-to-please kind that
adults are sure to recognize, and while the story is a bit self-serving in its purpose,
Beatrice is an entertaining protagonist. Though anthropomorphized, she and the
other library patrons remain remarkably doglike throughout, especially in the mostly
realistic rendering of their faces. This isn't as much fun as Sierra's celebratory Wild
about Books (BCCB 9/04); still, librarians are sure to get a lot of mileage out of the
relevant theme of the power of a good book. HM
O'CONNELL, TYNE 
Pulling Princes. Bloomsbury, 2004 
224 p
ISBN 1-58234-957-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
As an American non-aristocrat, fourteen-year-old Calypso Kelly feels terribly out
of place at her posh British boarding school, and now she's saddled with Georgina,
the school's queen bee and dearest friend of the malevolent Honey ("In a school
where bitchiness was currency, Honey was filthy rich"), as a roommate. She man-
ages to goose her status by setting up a fictional affair with an older man from
home, but her star zooms to its zenith when a fencing match with the nearby boys'
school (a thinly veiled Eton) pits her against young Prince Freddie, the hottie of
the British royal family. Freddie promptly develops an interest in Calypso, but is
his company worth the wrath of the dread Honey, and is he even the one for
Calypso? This is every bit the effervescent chick-lit fantasy the plot suggests, and
the details of the hothouse-insular existence at school, ranging from the coolness
of the nuns amid an otherwise fusty staff to the convention of slipping vodka into
Body Shop bottles for secret imbibing, are an additional rich and gossipy treat.
The revelation of Georgina's underlying niceness is gradual and believable, and
Calypso's intoxication with dreamy Freddie is played with the right mixture of
susceptibility and skepticism; in fact, that's a blend that characterizes the book in
general, so that cynical readers can relish the Nancy Mitford mentions while ro-
mantic royal-watchers can revel in Calypso's thorny relationship with the hunky
heir-to-the-heir apparent. The occasional attempts to convey a meaningful mes-
sage (usually about confidence in one's self) sink like lead through the froth, and
the ending is so abrupt as to suggest authorial abduction rather than a lead-in to a
second volume, but readers thrilled by the current windfall of glitzy chick-lit (such
as The Princess Diaries, BCCB 12/00, and Burnham's Royally Jacked, 3/04) will
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
139
want to catch this. A map of Calypso's school and a glossary of British slang are
included. DS
O'CONNOR, BARBARA 
Taking Care ofMoses. 
Foster/Farrar, 2004 
144p
ISBN 0-374-38038-4 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-5
Randall Mackey knows exactly who left the baby late at night in front of the Rock
of Ages Baptist Church, but if he tells, someone will ask how he happened to be
there. Then he'll be forced to admit he was keeping an eye on Queenie Avery, the
dementia-afflicted wife of a local janitor who would be heartbroken if he had to
send his beloved to a nursing home. As Randall keeps mum, the congregation
frets and spats over who should care for the foundling-Miss Frieda, a black woman
who is licensed to take in foster children, or the white preacher and his wife, on
whose doorstep, so to speak, the baby was abandoned. While the adults quarrel
over the guardianship issue, Randall manages to identify the baby's mother, who
turns out to be the catalyst for reuniting feuding church members and expanding
their mission to overburdened mothers in the town. Again O'Connor explores the
dynamics of a tight-knit Southern community (Beethoven in Paradise, BCCB 5/97;
Fame and Glory in Freedom, Georgia, BCCB 3/03), wryly jabbing at the gossip and
cat-scratching, but ultimately celebrating the bonds of custom and affection that
keep the town humming. In this outing she gently but insistently probes racial
issues as well, offering a child's-eye view of the block on which the Mackeys are the
only remaining white family, and of the church in which Randall's best friend,
Jaybird, and his family are the only black members. The racial divide may be hard
to cross, but the Rock of Ages believers take their Bible seriously and, in the goofily
misquoted words of Randall's bratty friend Althea, "Let all bitterness and wrath be
put away from you with a mallet." EB
OGILV, IAN 
Measle and the Wrathmonk. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
22 4p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-058686-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-058685-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
As long as he can remember, Measle Stubbs has been the ward of Basil Tramplebone,
a pale, vindictive man with cold, fishy eyes and pointed teeth. When Basil catches
Measle playing with Basil's model train set, the man reveals his true nature as a
Wrathmonk (definition: an insane wizard) and shrinks Measle to half an inch tall,
fating him to wander the landscape of the train set until the steady diet of dough-
nut crumbs and pink lemonade drops (litter from Basil's snacks) turns him into
plastic, like the other six miniaturized people Measle finds in the set and rescues
from petrification by judicious treatment with moldy carrots. As Basil searches in
vain for his revived plastic people, his ire mounting against the heroic Measle, and
Basil's pet mutant bat lurks in the rafters to eat any tiny thing that moves, the
seven victims combine their talents for a last-ditch effort to overthrow the crafty
Wrathmonk and win their freedom. This eccentric tale of insurrection and sur-
vival relies for its comedic energy almost completely on coincidental twists, given
credibility with brief passages describing the characters' emotional and mental pro-
cesses before, during, and after each providential event. That narrative strategy
makes the book a pleasurable but not brilliant read, and the paragraphs dedicated
to characters other than Measle, while entertaining, serve primarily to further the
plot and not to fully develop anyone's personality. However, Basil's increasing
creepiness and (it must be admitted) charismatic enthusiasm for evil will evoke
140 
* THE BULLETIN
readerly trills of mirth as well as thrills of apprehension, and Measle affords readers
a likable hero with which to identify, centering this offering squarely in the current
middle-grade marketing sweet spot. TC
PAULSEN, GARY 
Molly McGinty Has a Really Good Day. Lamb, 2004 
105p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90911-X 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32588-6 
$12.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Molly McGinty's notebook, with lists and files and phone numbers, schedules and
notes and quotes, is the memory bank and organizing system around which she
plans her life. The day she loses her notebook is also the day her free-spirited
grandmother, Irene, joins her at middle school for Senior Citizens' Day, saddling
Molly with carting around Irene's gigantic black purse. It is the day Molly gets a
black eye, tears the skirt of her school uniform, escapes being set on fire by juvenile
delinquents, catches a plate of spaghetti in the chest, and suffers the theft of her
clothes from her gym locker, among other misadventures. When Irene reveals that
she is the mastermind behind the disappearance of Molly's notebook and much of
the ensuing drama, Molly humbly recognizes that her hyperorganized lifestyle pre-
vents her from interacting normally with the students and teachers at her Catholic
school-especially with "cutest boy" Jake Dempsey, who likes Molly's grandmother
because she's "interesting to talk to." Molly isn't entirely successful as a narrator,
since her voice is stiff and her girlishness counterfeit; though the day's events have
great comic potential, most are referred to in dialogue rather than seen in action,
considerably dampening their humorous effect. That said, the complete unlikeli-
hood of the whole train of events (driven forward by the over-the-top yet com-
pletely calm personality of Irene) suffuses the book with an attractive level of manic
glee. The additional draw of watching the central character attain an exhilarating
closeness to the object of her affection may suffice to lure readers looking for some
undemanding yet diverting academic mayhem. TC
PECK, RICHARD 
The Teacher's Funeral: A Comedy in Three Parts. Dial,
2004 
190p
ISBN 0-8037-2736-4 
$16.99 
R Gr. 5-8
News that the superannuated mistress of their rural Indiana school house has, at
last, passed away sends fifteen-year-old Russell Culver into a fit of premature re-
joicing. Now he can shuffle off the remainder of his academic career and get on
with farming-preferably in the Dakotas with his best buddy Charlie. However,
he didn't count on the locals actually hiring a new teacher for the tiny band of
reluctant scholars at Hominy Ridge School, let alone his own older sister, Tansy,
who's just the bargain the tight-pursed citizens are looking for. Tansy's no genius,
but she certainly knows every trick in the farm kids' book and, mustering a
wagonload of common sense, she fashions a somewhat eccentric curriculum and
actually manages to haul Russell and Charlie through their eighth-grade exams,
win the approval of the school superintendent, and meet her future husband among
her classroom charges. Although there is a clearer trajectory to the Culvers' tale
than in Peck's more anecdotal offerings A Year Down Yonder and A Long Wayfrom
Chicago (BCCB 1/01, 10/98), the author's deft hand at setting and milking come-
dic scenes is again strongly in evidence, from the practical jokes surrounding the
ghost of the unlamented Miss Myrt Arbuckle, to the strenuous retrieval of an
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 141
overweight neighbor from a schoolyard ditch. Kids with reservations concerning
their own teachers better not look to Russell for sympathy. EB
RABIN, STATON 
Betsy and the Emperor. McElderry, 2004 
294p
ISBN 0-689-85880-9 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 5-9
Until permanent accommodation on Saint Helena can be arranged for exiled Na-
poleon, he and his retinue are lodged at the Briars, where agent Balcombe of the
East India Company is resident. Balcombe's daughter, Betsy, has just returned
from her English boarding school and finds that life has gotten much more inter-
esting now that royalty has arrived. She rapidly overcomes her horror of having a
public enemy on the grounds, and she takes pleasure in teasing the august guest.
Napoleon, in turn, welcomes the diversion of entertaining a pert teenager who
refuses to be cowed by his arrogance and yet respects him nonetheless. Huff, tutor
to Betsy's little brothers, openly admires the emperor and involves Betsy in an
abortive plan to spirit Napoleon off the island in a hot-air balloon. Although it
becomes clear that the emperor is trapped on the island for good, Betsy contrives
to score a victory for him by racing his horse, Hope, and beating that of Saint
Helena's hated governor. Rabin loosely bases her tale on the real Betsy Balcombe,
who did in fact make Napoleon's acquaintance during his exile. "Loosely" is the
operative word, though. Rabin's concluding notes shed insufficient light on the
line between fact and fiction ("Any quotes in this book attributed to Betsy, Napo-
leon, or members of his suite were either invented by me or taken directly from
historical accounts"), and her insouciant approach to research is troubling ("I have
gone to enormous lengths to avoid reading [Betsy's autobiography] as I feared
... it might discourage me from having the temerity to attempt to tell Betsy's
story in my own way"). Perhaps that critical bit of reading would have helped
Rabin fashion a Betsy who sounds less like a sassy After School Special heroine and
imparted the credibility that historical-fiction fans have a right to expect. EB
REEVE, PHILIP 
Predator's Gold. HarperCollins, 2004 
325p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-072194-4 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-072193-6 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
More than two years after the annihilation of the great Traction City of London,
Tom and Hester (Mortal Engines, BCCB 3/04) still fly the skies in the airship
Jenny Haniver, formerly the possession of the now-deceased Anti-Traction League
agent Anna Fang. New enemies stalk their ship, however-the feared radical en-
vironmentalist group the Green Storm-and the couple's evasive maneuvers leave
them stranded in the icy wastes of the far north, on the seldom-seen Traction City
of Anchorage, which is itself beating a hasty retreat from the hunting grounds of
another massive predator city. Tom and Hester swiftly find themselves embroiled
in a power struggle and a flight for freedom upon which the fate of the world may
rest. The highly original future described in the first novel is here presented with
more gore and less idealism than before-even the mutually supportive partner-
ship of Hester and Tom shrivels as Hester converts into a hardened mercenary. In
fact, no kind deed goes unpunished, as every generous-hearted character, even
those in minor roles, suffers at the hands of the ambitious and the vicious. New
characters who choose to sacrifice for others' welfare do provide wellsprings of
hope, and the addition to the political mix of a newly built Stalker cyborg of Anna
Fang, created to lead the Green Storm to victory, and a master thief known only as
142 
* THE BULLETIN
Uncle, commander of an unnumbered army of burglar boys, extends the dramatic
potential of the tale. This second volume ups the stakes of the saga while prepar-
ing readers for a globe-sweeping confrontation in future episodes. TC
RUNYON, BRENT 
The Burn Journals. Knopf, 2004 
374p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92621-6 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82621-1 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Suicidal inclinations and fear of punishment for vandalism drive fourteen-year-old
Brent to douse himself with gasoline and set himself on fire. Instead of the hasty
end to his trouble he sought, however, he instead finds himself the agonized victim
of terrible burns, airlifted to the hospital and struggling to face his altered future,
his devastated family, and his arduous recovery. Runyon's autobiographical narra-
tion follows the form of a journal that traces the events as they happened from
February of 1991 to January of 1992 of his life, starting with a brief chronicle of
leadup events and then following from his first fragmented thoughts upon waking
in the hospital to his return to regular school a year later. The hard details are
faithfully depicted, and the journal is earnest and truthful in its as-it-happens veri-
similitude (Runyon is touchingly candid abut the trials and temptations of experi-
encing active puberty while undergoing the constant physical attention of attractive
nurses). The narrative is largely uninflected and unshaped, however, with events
appearing episodically rather than contributing to any overall arc (it's startling at
one point to hear a therapist refer to Brent's psychological progress, since little
advancement of overall insight has appeared), and the concentration on mundane
elements (especially on popular-culture details from the period) sometimes buries
the more significant elements of the story. Nonetheless, the truth of the story
gives it an impact even when its telling doesn't, and kids troubled by their own
darknesses may find this a compelling argument for hanging in there. DS
SANCHEZ, ALEX 
So Hard to Say. 
Simon, 2004 
230p
ISBN 0-689-86564-3 
$14.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Xio is an effervescent eighth-grader and Frederick is the sweet new boy in class, on
whom she has a major crush. The two kids take turns narrating the events as Xio
and Frederick grow closer, making Xio giddy with romantic excitement and
Frederick increasingly anxious about his lack of physical attraction to Xio. In fact,
Frederick is disturbed to find himself more excited about his growing friendship
with the handsome Victor ("Please God," Frederick thinks frantically, "don't let
me be gay. I'm weird enough as it is"), and he's thrown unwillingly into serious
examination of his sexuality. Sanchez effectively differentiates Xio's bubbly, gar-
rulous narration and Frederick's tentative and uncertain voice, and the clear depic-
tions help make the characters the driving force of this novel. There's some
oversimplification (the book implies that nothing other than homosexuality could
account for Frederick's failure to be attracted to Xio and for his contemplation of
male sexuality) and idealization (after initial reactions, there's little negative re-
sponse to Frederick's coming out, while another gay eighth-grader bears the taunts
of classmates and family with philosopher's wisdom), but the emotional core of
the story remains solid and authentic. The inclusion of Xio's viewpoint means
that readers identifying with Frederick encounter a model of survivable reaction
from a friend, and they also get to see the kind of confusion and disappointment
self-misrepresentation can cause in those whose lives they touch. Subplots such as
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
143
Xio's disappointment with her own absent father (who may in fact be gay himself)
and the atmosphere of the multi-ethnic, Latino-rich California community add
dimension to the narrative. A lot of kids question their identity before the tradi-
tional YA bracket, and this accessible read will give them reassurance and food for
thought. DS
SCIESZKA, JON 
Science Verse; illus. by Lane Smith. 
Viking, 2004 
40p
ISBN 0-670-91057-0 
$16.99 
R Gr. 3-6
Scieszka and Smith are evidently working their way around the curriculum, fol-
lowing up their Math Curse (BCCB 10/95) with this exploration of the wonders-
or not-of science. There's a slender frame of a youngster panicked into eliding
science and poetry, but mostly this is a collection of poetic pastiche, scientific
subjects treated or lampooned to the rhythm of classic songs or verses. Approxi-
mately a score of verses treat subjects such as evolution ("Evolution," to the tune of
"The Battle Hymn of the Republic"), the excessive study of dinosaurs ("Dino-
Sore," modeled after Poe's "The Raven"), and the Big Bang ("'Twas the Night,"
echoing Moore's "A Visit from Saint Nicholas") in verses of various sizes and shapes
but a constantly collusively goofy tone. This isn't one of the dorkily dynamic
duo's breakthrough volumes, and some of the poetic parodies are more crisply
executed than others, but there's good humor enough to get kids guffawing whether
they know the poetic originals or not (the final page helpfully, if not entirely
straightfacedly, provides source notes). Smith's darkly comic visuals have always
had a Victorian touch of scientific oddity, which is put to particularly good use
here; the edgy exaggeration and grayed-out palette add a sophisticated spin to the
corny joys of the rhymes. Possible uses are myriad, from science class to poetry
unit, readaloud to choral reading project to inspiration for kids to write their own
verse. For additional amusement, a CD of the author's and illustrator's perfor-
mance of the entries is included. DS
SHANNON, DAVID 
Alice the Fairy; written and illus. by David Shannon. 
Blue
Sky/Scholastic, 2004 
[40p]
ISBN 0-439-49025-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4 -7 yrs
She may look like an ordinary goldy-locked, gap-toothed urchin with strapped-on
wings and a sequin-studded wand, but she's a "Temporary fairy" with the creds to
prove it. After all, she can turn her oatmeal into cake with a sprinkling of fairy
dust (well, sugar), turn her dad's chocolate-chip cookies into her own (through an
act of bold preemption), and make herself disappear with a wave of her wand
(swatting the light switch). Admittedly, making the dog levitate and her clothes
magically dance onto the closet rod is going to take a bit more practice, and she
does have a touch of trouble with the duchess, who serves her broccoli and con-
fines her to her chambers for turning her white dress red. Shannon's heroine looks
suspiciously like a relative of his rollicking David (No, David!, BCCB 9/98 etc.)
and inhabits the same domestic turf where impishness, properly viewed from a
child perspective, is the normal course of events. Hasty shwooshes of heavily ap-
plied paint that spill untidily from scrappy black outlining underscore the
rambunctiousness of the Temporary fairy herself. While this romp doesn't have
the David books' bonus of limited vocabulary, it will appeal to little gals who
comprise equal measures of sugar and pepper. EB
144 
* THE BULLETIN
SHAW, SUSAN 
The Boyfrom the Basement. Dutton, 2004 
198p
ISBN 0-525-47223-1 
$16.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Abused, deprived, and isolated, Charlie has been consigned to life in the basement
by his punitive father, and his ineffectual mother is too afraid to intervene. After
he accidentally locks himself out of the basement, the sick and malnourished boy
is found and taken to the hospital, where the authorities intervene in his situation;
all Charlie knows is that he's thrust suddenly out into a world of unfamiliar con-
cepts, such as school and pleasurable pastimes, and that he's sure his father is going
to punish him for going outside and telling his family's business. Even when he
starts to settle in at the home of his new foster mother, Mrs. Harrigan, and his
younger foster brother, Ambrose, he remains convinced that his father will re-
turn-and perhaps he's right. While the story is still touched with sentimentality
and unlikelihood (especially in the climactic scene of Charlie's father's reappear-
ance), this is a more cohesive and successful rescue drama than Shaw's previous
title (Black-EyedSuzie, BCCB 9/02). Shaw lifts the darkness of her central premise
by peopling the story with strongly sympathetic secondary characters, from Charlie's
easygoing hospital roomie to his admiring foster brother, making Charlie's incre-
mental recovery and blossoming a narratively justifiable response. She also effec-
tively underplays the effects of his deprivation, giving as much time to his ignorance,
which will make considerable impact on young readers, as to his fear. This is less
a credible psychological exploration than a dramatically drawn fantasy of despair
and recovery, but that's a popular and compelling theme; fans of Pelzer's A Child
Called It will applaud Charlie's discovery of his own worth. DS
Sfs, PETER 
The Train of States; written and illus. by Peter Sfs. 
Greenwillow,
2004 
6 4p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-057839-4 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-057838-6 
$17.99 
R* 
Gr. 1-4
It's inevitable: countless school children will attack the perennial states assign-
ment, wherein they consult the Fast Facts section of a states series and dutifully
copy their designated flower, motto, capital, etc. Now Sfs provides some visual
fireworks to spark up the task-and even to engross browsers with a taste for na-
tional trivia. All the requisite report data is loaded onto bright, ornately embel-
lished circus wagons that boast the state flag, flora and fauna, motto, nickname,
and some well-known citizens and/or prominent sites. Each wagon rides a flatbed
rail car emblazoned with the state name, the name's derivation, and the date of
entry into the Union. Finally, the track is laid atop a yellow band that offers
barebones report information, right-sized for the youngest researchers: capital,
flower, tree, bird, and "fun fact." The circus cars roll by in order of admission, and
the entire parade is framed by horizontal panels that depict the approaching train
through the windows of a one-room schoolhouse, the passing train followed by
the school children, a glorious double-page spread of American icons performing
under a big top, and a closing page of suggestions for further research on each
state. Each circus car wittily incorporates elements that reinforce a state feature
(Mt. Rushmore tops the South Dakota car; a pair of spuds crown Idaho) or tease
kids to check the addendum for explanations (Nevada's prominent camel; the tiny
aviator waving from the Kansas wagon). Page-flippers will marvel at the ever-
changing intensity of Sfs' delicately textured line and watercolor paintings, and
visual learners will delight in this spiffy approach to research. EB
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 145
SNOW, ALAN 
How Santa Really Works; written and illus. by Alan
Snow. 
Atheneum, 2004 
48p
ISBN 0-689-85817-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-5
If you still believe those Christmas card pictures of the quaint cottage industry at
the North Pole, you have been sadly misled. Snow is here with the real scoop on
Santa's state-of-the-art operation that encompasses "factories, warehouses, trans-
port facilities, a communications center, and many other vital and necessary de-
partments." 
Serious business, this. Elves are recruited, trained (reindeer
maintenance, weather forecasting, surveillance), and placed through an annual job
fair. Wish letters are processed ("This little girl asked for a china doll. Didn't she
get one last year?" "Yes, but her grandmother sat on it"). Children are investi-
gated by the CIA (Christmas Intelligence Agency) for behavior patterns. Toys
emerge from a two-step process of research and development, and production.
Then of course there is the sleigh packing, as toys are offloaded from cleverly
concealed tenders. There's even a plausible explanation of how Santa makes his
getaway if a child wakes up in the middle of a delivery. Double-page spreads are
crammed chock-a-block with enough zany visual details, teeny dialogue bubbles,
document excerpts, hard-working elf borders, and industrial diagrams to keep kids
busy 'til, well, Christmas. Snow's thorough, plainspoken explanations have the
ring of truth for believers and teetering skeptics, and confirmed humbuggers will
simply revel in his over-the-top inventiveness. Everyone should pay particular
attention, though, to what's in store for those who fall from Santa's favor. There's
still time to repent. EB
SPOHN, KATE 
By WordofMouse; written and illus. by Kate Spohn. 
Bloomsbury,
2004 
32p
ISBN 1-58234-867-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
Dorothy and Gertrude, two artist sisters who live together, are noted for their
kindness and their love of animals, but that love doesn't quite extend to a desire for
mice to infest their home. Lucy (a mouse) decides to move in anyway. She's
grateful that the sisters take her to visit her family in the woods, not understanding
that they have just caught her in a safe trap and are trying to get rid of her. Lucy
returns, this time with friends, and the sisters resign themselves to having mice for
houseguests, until an unfortunate incident with some cooling cookies forces them
to get the safe traps out again. Undaunted, the mice tell their friends of the mar-
velous cookies, and the sisters accept their fate, even making little beds for their
new roomies and featuring them in their books, which become famous. (Indeed,
Dorothy Lathrop was the first recipient of the Caldecott medal in 1938, as the
author notes.) A bit more explanation of the Lathrops might have provided some
energy for the story, since it's rather limited in its own right; the gentle rodential
evictions that look like they're going to be a structural element peter out, leaving
instead a sweet but unremarkable plot about happy mice. The kindly critter-
friendly home is a cozy setting, however, and Lucy's persistence and eventual re-
ward may strike a chord with very young listeners. In the oil-paint illustrations,
the pert mice seem always to be simultaneously dancing and smelling something
wonderful. Other figures-the sisters, their sculptures, the landscapes-have an
elemental simplicity that, though warm, lacks depth. It's too bad a little more
wasn't made of this enticing Beatrix Potteresque situation, but young listeners
with a soft spot for anything with fur will find this a snug, nondemanding story.
KC
146 
* THE BULLETIN
STANLEY, DIANE 
The Giant and the Beanstalk; written and illus. by Diane
Stanley. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000011-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000010-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4 -7 yrs
Otto is a giant misfit. When other giants curse, he coos; when they stamp, he
sighs. For a pet, he chooses a drab little hen instead of "a werewolf or a baby
dragon." Then redheaded Jack steals poor Clara the hen right out from under
Otto's nose. When Otto shinnies down the beanstalk to reclaim his beloved pet,
he finds Jack after Jack after Jack, all engaged in some nursery-rhyme activity, but
he finally runs redheaded Jack to ground in the market square and retrieves his
hen. Homely pictorial details, such as a reverent portrait of Clara the hen over her
nest, play for viewer sympathy, and the lush greens and warm browns of the col-
ored pencil illustrations evince a blithe calm even as the characters dash, leap, and
tumble over the countryside. The giant's discovery that "scaring humans" is "kind
of exciting" adds depth to his kindly nature and establishes him as a rounded hero,
while the rapid jumps in and out of familiar nursery rhyme scenarios keep this
folktale revision lively despite the somewhat protracted text. Though the ending
rings slightly false-Otto's daring act unaccountably reverses his plummeting sta-
tus in the giant kingdom by sparking a new fashion for poetry, flower crowns, and
trimmed toenails-the final image of redheaded Jack warbling with his vocally
talented bovine darlings assures a concluding grin. Two pages of Jack-centered
nursery rhymes with accompanying vignette portraits from the main story are in-
cluded. TC
STEWART, PAUL 
Lake ofSkulls; illus. by Chris Riddell. 
Atheneum, 2004 
14 4p
ISBN 0-689-87239-9 
$9.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
In this addition to the pun-slinging, skull-cracking tradition familiar from comic
books and gumshoe fiction, a nameless "sir knight" (a "free lance," unbonded to
any master) accepts a charge from the local Lord Big Nose to overcome nameless
dangers and liberate an enchanted crown from a heap of skulls across the lake. The
dangers turn out to be three brawny, voracious hags, two of whom the knight
vanquishes, while the third fulfills the ancient curse on the crown by beheading
Lord Big Nose and reforming the gruesome heap of skulls with his dripping nog-
gin at the top. There's not much tension in this breezy entry, and its stock sup-
porting characters and plot give readers the same impression they give the knight:
that this is a tangential episode, to be enjoyed for what it's worth but not to be
taken seriously. However, the knight is a reluctant hero readers will relish; his
sardonic internal dialogue, macho remarks, and self-preserving mindset establish
him as a medieval Bruce Willis, less irresistible than he'd like to be, but nonethe-
less entertaining. The untidy line drawings, caricaturish yet energetically charis-
matic, surround the hero with large-bosomed women and rodent-faced villains
and portray the hero as the typical ruggedly handsome fantasy champion, a style
that promises the undemanding action the book delivers. TC
STEWART, SARAH 
The Friend; illus. by David Small. 
Farrar, 2004 
48p
ISBN 0-374-32463-8 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Annabelle Bernadette Clementine Dodd's posh parents entrust their little darling
to the care of Beatrice Smith, their black housekeeper and nanny. Every day is
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
147
devoted to a different household chore, with Bea patiently tolerating (and cleaning
up after) Belle's attempts to help. Then it's off to the beach, where Belle scampers
about while Bea sits or stands, quietly erect and poised, in full-page wordless im-
ages that evoke the calm, eternal presence of sand and sea, childhood efferves-
cence, and the steady protective companionship of a loving adult. One day, though,
Belle takes off on her own, and Bea, sensing danger, must rescue the little girl from
the pounding surf. The rhyming text sometimes renders dialogue a bit stiff; in
contrast, Small's dexterity with the fluid line and delicate watercolor wash allows
him to effectively capture the gangly, unstudied grace of Belle. He complements
this flighty wisp of a girl with the upright and stately solidity of Bea, making Bea's
final image of post-traumatic exhaustion especially powerful. The ending of the
story is abrupt, with an obeisant Belle proffering cocoa to an emotionally wrung-
out Bea; the story seems to require not only the nostalgic timeshift where an eld-
erly Belle reflects on Bea's memory, but also Stewart's dedication ("To all the
people across the world who have saved the lives of children by paying attention
when others did not") to achieve narrative resolution. This complex thematic
interplay creates a manifold implied audience-children who experience the stead-
fast love and heroism of their nonrelated caregivers, caregivers whose ministrations
to small children often go uncelebrated, and overly busy parents who are out of
touch with their children's daily lives. The result is an homage with the bite of an
indictment-warm, touching, and bravely unsettling. KC
STOLZ, JOELLE 
The Shadows of Ghadames; tr. from the French by Catherine
Temerson. 
Delacorte, 2004 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90131-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73104-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
In the Libyan city of Ghadames in the late nineteenth century, the women exist in
a world of rooftops, a world where conversations, daily chores, and planning for
the future all take place several stories above street level. In this coming-of-age
tale, twelve-year-old Malika, on the brink of permanent restriction to this rooftop
world, has mixed feelings about the strict gender roles enforced by local Muslim
tradition. While Mahmoud, Malika's father, is away on a trade journey, Malika,
her mother, and Mahmoud's second wife secretly take in an injured man,
Abdelkarim, and nurse him back to health. There is little in the way of plot devel-
opment; the secrecy surrounding their care ofAbdelkarim, who was in fact injured
while running from the town's authorities, offers some semblance of tension, but
it is a thread that never comes to its full potential. A friendship between Malika
and Abdelkarim, and their mutual confusion about the role of men and women in
the present day, is similarly connoted without being developed. This remains,
however, a beautifully written story about a seldom-described world, and the lyri-
cal descriptions of the town and its traditions offer perspective of a culture un-
known by many. The mystical world of the women, the role of the revered healer
Aishatou, and the secrets that are just beginning to be revealed to Malika are simi-
larly beguiling if insubstantial. Young readers themselves approaching adulthood
may appreciate this window into another girl's experience in a faraway time and
place. HM
148 
* THE BULLETIN
STROUD, JONATHAN 
The Golem's Eye. 
Miramax/Hyperion, 2004 
56 2p
ISBN 0-7868-1860-3 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
The sarcastic djinni Bartimaeus and his ambitious master Nathaniel (from The
Amulet ofSamarkand, BCCB 3/04), in spite of mutual vows to leave each other in
peace, are reunited "two years, eight months" later in another race to save London
from the terrorist acts of political conspirators and Resistance fighters. Only
Nathaniel realizes that certain of the attacks on the city (mysterious, large-scale
destructions of valuable property) come from a source other than the grassroots
Resistance, a deduction which leads him on an undercover mission to the formerly
great magical city of Prague, which was, not coincidentally, the site of the creation
of the first golem, centuries before. Mortal danger, international intrigue, and
treacherous allies keep the temperature high throughout this supersized sequel,
while Bartimaeus' acid commentary and wry footnotes add pepper to the pot.
Resistance fighter Kitty, introduced in the first volume and now forced into action
as a major player in the struggle for power, infuses the tale with moral complexity
as she consistently chooses idealistic heroism over practical self-preservation, win-
ning Bartimaeus' admiration and providing the more easily corruptible Nathaniel
with both a foil and a reason to doubt the wisdom of his own choices. With a fast-
paced, open-ended d6nouement assuring readers further high adventure in the
next installment, this second book of the trilogy fulfills the potential of the first
and promises a satisfying conclusion to come. A list of main characters is pro-
vided. TC
THIMMESH, CATHERINE 
Madam President; illus. by Douglas B. Jones. 
Houghton,
2004 
80p
ISBN 0-618-39666-7 
$17.00 
R Gr. 4-8
See this month's Big Picture, p. 111, for review.
TRUEMAN, TERRY 
Cruise Control. HarperTempest, 2004 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623961-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623960-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
In Stuck in Neutral (BCCB 6/00), severely cerebral palsied Shawn gained a voice
in print that his life had denied him, while his devoted but exhausted family be-
lieved him to be uncomprehending as well as uncommunicating (and his father
therefore contemplated a mercy killing); in this followup, Shawn's brother, Paul,
describes his progress through senior year in a family shaped by Shawn's constant
needs. Paul actually seems to be faring quite well, with high grades and an impres-
sive athletic career that will surely bring him scholarship offers for college, but he's
actually seething with easily aroused anger, especially at his writer father ("That's
the meat and potatoes of Dad's career, being a tragic, famous retard-dad"), who's
left his family, but also at himself for not being the brother to Shawn that he thinks
he ought to be. This isn't a sequel so much as a different story based on the same
situation; while Paul's narrative doesn't outright contradict Shawn's, its impact is
its own, and it may even be more effective read independently. Trueman is hu-
mane yet honest in his depiction of the price Paul's family pays ("There's no way
I'll ever believe that the problems a brother like Shawn brings to a family are 'gifts
from God,"' says his devoted sister, rejecting a talk-show host's syrupy platitudes)
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 149
and the protocols a family can tacitly develop ("We never talk about Shawn this
way. We never tell the truth"), as well as the misunderstandings that can result
(Paul's father actually left at the request of Paul's mother). Paul's tormenting guilt
at his resentment of Shawn and his Shawn-centered life is compellingly depicted,
but it's also clear that Paul's actual behavior toward Shawn has been nonetheless
pretty commendable (he has a touchingly brotherly habit of secretly slipping Shawn
bites of junk food his mother would never provide). Many young people know
what it's like to feel trapped by family, and they'll empathize with Paul's dilemma
while gaining an understanding of his-and perhaps their own-strength. DS
TURNBULL, ANN 
No Shame, No Fear. Candlewick, 2004 
30 4p
ISBN 0-7636-2505-1 
$15.99 
R Gr. 6-10
Will Heywood, son of a prosperous merchant, has a more serious outlook than
most of his seventeen-year-old peers, and he privately admires the Quakers, whom
his father considers to be dangerous radicals. Meeting Susanna Thorn, who works
for a local printer, strengthens his resolve to investigate the sect more seriously,
and finally to join Susanna's group of worshippers. The two fall deeply in love,
and although their Quaker friends quietly approve their proper courtship, Will
hides the relationship from his family and tries to defer his father's plans to ap-
prentice him to a London businessman. Parliament threatens to be an even more
fearsome obstacle than Mr. Heywood, however, as the 1662 laws severely restrict-
ing Quaker meetings unleash a wave of assaults, fines, and imprisonment on their
community. Turnbull accomplishes an all-too-rare feat in historical fiction, craft-
ing an honest-to-goodness love story that resonates across nearly four centuries.
The Quaker persecution that forms the backdrop for the lovers' tale unfolds with-
out pedantic explanation or stuffy expository dialogue, and although Will and
Susanna undergo their share of suffering at the hands of overzealous constables, it
is ultimately the universal problems of youth, unemployment, and parental resis-
tance that stand in the way of romance. Turnbull doesn't bring them all the way
to the altar (or, more precisely, to the meeting house), but she does leave the door
wide open for a contented future, and readers will be hard pressed to discover two
more truly likable and better matched characters, more deserving of a happy end-
ing. EB
WARD, HELEN, ad. 
Unwitting Wisdom: An Anthology ofAesop's Fables; ad. and
illus. by Helen Ward. 
Chronicle, 2004 
6 4p
ISBN 0-8118-4450-1 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Ward, who has adapted individual Aesop tales in picture-book form (The Hare
and the Tortoise, BCCB 6/99, etc.) here offers a polished gallery of a dozen fables,
all of them featuring animal protagonists. The lushly descriptive, sometimes lofty
language brings resonance to popular tales such as those featuring the fox and the
grapes ("Sour Grapes"), the wolf in sheep's clothing ("Pot Luck"), and the mouse
and the lion ("Size Isn't Everything"); wry and witty turns of phrase ("The mouse
in turn tried to look heroic and brave and as unlike a tasty snack as he could") lift
these above grave didacticism and add some punch for readalouds. Visually, this is
a coolly elegant volume, with its snowy white pages, artistic and varied typefaces
(with story titles appearing in a soft gray that's also the color of the page decora-
tions), and austere line-and-watercolor art; there's an astonishingly delicate preci-
sion to Ward's threadlike outlines and feathery hatching, resulting in animal figures
150 
* THE BULLETIN
who seem like reality magnified beyond the everyday. The book's sophistication
sometimes works against it, however: few young audiences will have the slightest
idea what "passing the port" is in "The Trappings of Power," and some of the
graceful tale-opening spreads lose impact to the gutter. Unlike Pinkney's illus-
trated version (BCCB 12/00) or Ward's own single-volume adaptations, this isn't
likely to work as baby's first Aesop, but older kids who've been away from the
fables for awhile may find this artistic and allusive presentation a lure to reexami-
nation. An introductory note provides some background on Aesop and his tales.
DS
WEATHERLY, LEE 
MissingAbby. 
Fickling, 2004 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75053-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75052-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Thirteen-year-old Emma is shocked to discover that Abby, her best friend from
her old school, has been reported as missing; she's even more stunned when she
realizes that her uneasy conversation with Abby on the bus was the last sighting
anybody had of the missing girl. Emma's worry over Abby sends her into wincing
recollection of the demise of their friendship, when their shared pleasure in fantasy
literature and speculation led to merciless pillorying and constant humiliation from
the popular girls; unable to weather the abuse, Emma changed schools and remade
herself as a mainstream teen, petrified that the old social stigma would bring her
world crashing down, while Abby staunchly stuck to her Goth and role-playing-
games tastes. Now Emma's trying to negotiate a prickly detente with Abby's cur-
rent friends and to put together old and new knowledge of Abby to unravel the
mystery of her disappearance. The story trips sometimes into contrivance, espe-
cially in Emma's certainty that her new friends are preparing to dump her now
that they know her history and in the slightly Scooby-Doo-esque investigation
that discovers Abby's tragic fate (she is eventually found dead, having suffered an
accident while setting up a live-action game), but the original premise taps effec-
tively into one of the great guilts of growing up: leaving other people behind.
Even readers whose reasons for drifting away from old friends aren't as self-protec-
tive as Emma's will recognize the attendant sorrow, discomfort, and relief, as well
as the awkwardness of later encounters with the former friend's parents or new
friends. Emma's gradual reacknowledgment of the Emma she's been fearfully
suppressing is laudable as well as credible, allowing her reintegration to serve as
Abby's legacy. Readers will enjoy puzzling out the mystery, and they may take
home the quiet point that old friends are worth keeping in the face of change. DS
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
My Kindergarten; written and illus. by Rosemary
Wells. 
Hyperion, 2004 
96p
ISBN 0-7868-0833-0 
$16.99 
R 4-6yrs
Unlike most back-to-school books that focus on overcoming first-day jitters and
making new friends, this title takes the reader through an entire year of kindergar-
ten curriculum. Wells embeds the first-person narration of one of her signature
trapezoidal bunnies in this school tour, taking her from first-day fears through
Back to School night, multicultural winter holidays, classroom activities, troubles
with math, all the way to cleanup day and the last day of school. Along the way,
Wells demonstrates co-curricular activities, such as collecting weeds and seeds,
making maps for geography, and measuring everything from caterpillars to blood
NOVEMBER 2004 
* 
151
pressure that parents can do at home to extend student learning. Kid-friendly
explanations are offered to explain some of the adult values that school introduces;
for instance, in a segment on voting, Grandpa explains, "We vote ... in order to
try and make more good things than bad things happen in the world." Later, Papa
explains the importance of using proper grammar by comparing a blast on a trom-
bone with a song played on the same instrument. The teacher encourages learn-
ing-style diversity throughout, offering alternative assignments for students who
aren't clicking with the rest of the kids. Each concept Wells introduces is demon-
strated by her cheerfully chunky menagerie of woodland youngsters; she reinforces
the new words and ideas in border illustrations and captioned inset drawings.
Though she doesn't offer prescriptive advice on how to use the book, parents can
easily replicate and expand on the ideas to connect with their kindergartners' learning
throughout the year. KC
WILKINS, ROSE 
So Super Starry. 
Dial, 2004 
230p
ISBN 0-8037-3049-7 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Octavia loathes her school, a London academy for the display if not education of
kids with rich, famous, and/or aristocratic parents, wishing instead that she could
lead a nice normal life like her down-to-earth friend Viv. When her status-mad
classmate India invites Octavia to a party (in the hope of getting access to Octavia's
director father and the hunky superstar appearing in his current film), Octavia is
surprised to find herself not only making a bit of a splash but also meeting a com-
pelling young man, Alex. Although he proves to be the older brother of the loath-
some India, and, even worse, Octavia's mother is thrilled at her daughter's new
involvement with high society, Octavia begins dating Alex, enjoying his attentions
and hoping that together they can find a relationship based on something more
meaningful than a high propensity for magazine appearance. The elements here
(even down to several characters' names) resemble those in O'Connell's Pulling
Princes, reviewed above, so this will also draw readers looking for a window into
under-eighteen high life among the moneyed British. That audience will enjoy
the loving details of high-fashion clothes and ritzy parties, but they're likely to find
Octavia's relentless denunciation of the very things that appeal to them rather
offputting; nor does the book generally seem to realize that Octavia's condemna-
tions of the chic life are as facile and groundless as she considers India et al. to be
(there's nothing inherently superior, after all, about casual clothing), which results
in Octavia's being rather unsympathetically smug and self-righteous rather than
thoughtfully critical. Consequently, there's actually more effective questioning as
well as sheer fun in the O'Connell, but status-intrigued readers may well appreci-
ate the chance to have one's high-status cake and reject it, too. DS
WILLNER-PARDO, GINA 
My Mom and Other Mysteries of the Universe. Clarion,
2004 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-618-43020-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Arlie's mom loves six-year-old Michael more than she does eleven-year-old Arlie.
That's just a fact, Arlie thinks, and she tries not to resent her brother or hate her
mom because of it, even as her dad and her aunt (her mom's sister, Isabelle) try to
convince Arlie that her nitpicking, strong-minded mother truly does love her. When
her parents are hospitalized after a car crash and her mother goes into a coma on
the same day that Casey, a strange new girl with her mother's looks, personality,
152 
* THE BULLETIN
and history, appears in Arlie's class at school, Arlie is convinced that the new girl,
Casey Lane, is really a manifestation of her mother, Lacey Caine. Arlie's associa-
tion with Casey is just as problematic as her relationship with her mother has been,
and for many of the same reasons, but it also affords Arlie the opportunity to mend
that relationship in ways that seem to carry over once Casey moves away and Arlie's
mother awakens from her coma. A realistic novel that uses a potentially super-
natural occurrence to catalyze a character's personal change is a hard trick to pull
off, but Willner-Pardo provides coincidences too numerous to deny and gives Arlie
just enough psychic presentiments to bear out her admittedly bizarre beliefs. The
characters' relationships throughout are normal and authentic, built on the small
choices and interactions of everyday, so that Arlie's credibly modest reconciliation
with her mother is equally believable as the result of a devastating accident and as
the outcome of an otherworldly encounter-both of which options are presented
to the reader, though Arlie chooses to see Casey's friendship as "an incredible gift"
she "should just unwrap" instead of analyzing. Those comfortable and uncom-
fortable with this open-ended resolution will enjoy the concrete details, smooth
prose, and sympathetic characterization of this unusually normal paranormal mys-
tery. TC
WITTLINGER, ELLEN 
Heart on My Sleeve. 
Simon, 2004 
220p
ISBN 0-689-84997-4 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
At the center of this ensemble drama are two high-school seniors, Julian and Chloe,
who turn a lip-locking campus preview weekend into a fantasy love through the
subsequent exchange of openhearted email. As the story unfolds through emails,
instant messages, and old-fashioned longhand letters, relationships are made and
broken, deepened and destroyed. Chloe, for instance, has a longtime boyfriend,
Eli, but she insists to Julian (and to herself) that Eli is only a platonic friend.
Julian's passion is reserved for his music; his infatuation with Chloe's voice con-
vinces him that they can be a duet. Both Chloe and Julian have older sisters who,
while not overly wise in the ways of love themselves, nonetheless provide the per-
spective the two need when their "love" turns out to be as thin as the wires that
carried it. The format requires some acclimatization, but once the reader has mas-
tered whose font is whose, characterization and situation unfold smoothly. To
Wittlinger's credit, the rather contrived setup doesn't read like a contrivance; the
voices of the teens, the twentysomethings, and the aging hipster parents all ring
true if a bit hackneyed. Their written reactions to Chloe's sister's coming out, for
instance, are as cliched as they would be in real life, and Chloe, in typical teen-girl
fashion, is constantly in danger of drowning in a sea of introspection an inch deep.
However, Wittlinger uses the contemporary epistolary genre effectively to explore
the vagaries of different kinds of relationships: those online, those carried out on
a day-to-day basis, and those born of short bursts of intense proximity (Chloe
develops yet another crush on a fellow camp counselor-she is so ready to move on
from poor Eli), making this a good choice for book groups who will undoubtedly
have experience with each of these types of relationships. KC
WONG, JANET S. 
Alex and the Wednesday Chess Club; illus. by Stacey
Schuett. 
McElderry, 2004 
40p
ISBN 0-689-85890-6 
$16.95 
R* Gr. 2-4
Eight mini-chapters in ragged-right text that suggests free verse chronicle Alex's
NOVEMBER2004 
* 153
passage from rookie chess player at age four to seasoned tournament contestant at
age nine. An early enthusiast, Alex loses all interest in the game for three years after
being whupped by his next-door neighbor's heartless Uncle Hooya, and he only
returns to play when it seems joining the chess club might be more fun than get-
ting trounced in football. Then a surprise confrontation at the city tournament
with his "next-door neighbor's Little Cousin Hooya" (accompanied by the hated
Uncle Hooya) gives Alex the chance to cement his reclamation of the game. Short
lines of text and apt metaphors emphasize shifts in the action and make the story
easy and satisfying to read alone, while Alex's unaffected internal dialogue and
refreshingly normal reaction to the perks and perils of competition chess make
him immediately likable. The dewy sheen and mottled texture of the gouache and
ink illustrations lend movement and continuity to the narrative, and the varied
perspectives and humorous touches (such as the horrified facial expressions of chess
pieces about to be taken) provide the text with vivacious embellishment. A list of
"Alex's Top 10 Chess Tips" gives valuable advice to budding chess masters and
certifies Alex as an experienced player, bringing the story to a triumphant end.
Checkmate! TC
WREDE, PATRICIA C. 
The Grand Tour, or The Purloined Coronation Regalia; by
Patricia C. Wrede and Caroline Stevermer. 
Harcourt, 2004 
4 80p
ISBN 0-15-204616-X 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Wrede and Stevermer revisit the magic infested drawing rooms of Regency En-
gland (Sorcery and Cecelia, BCCB 7/03) as cousins Cecy and Kate, married off-
stage to their respective beaux James and Thomas from the previous novel, embark
together on their honeymoons on the Continent. Trouble, in the guise of an
alabaster flask with an odd, oily residue, finds them in Paris, and the quartet are
compelled to foil a dastardly plot to crown a new emperor of all Europe, whose
reign will be cut short by a megalomaniac contessa with goddess aspirations. Natu-
rally, Thomas' and Cecy's wizardly prowess is called upon to save the day, and
Kate proves to be a surprisingly deft hand herself. The authors again have a grand
old time making magic feel as comfortable and ordinary among the upper crust as
kid gloves and crumpets. In this tale, though, following the trail of moth-eaten
coronation regalia and inscrutable rituals (oh, yes, and a couple of murders) is at
least as compelling as the arcane arts, and the lovers' adjustments to marriage on
the road will delight the romantically inclined. Wrede and Stevermer have hit
their stride, and readers will no doubt hope that Kate and Cecy's tour doesn't end
here. EB
ZALBEN, JANE BRESKIN 
Baby Babka, the Gorgeous Genius; illus. by Victoria
Chess. 
Clarion, 2004 
[40p]
ISBN 0-618-23489-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Beryl has been eagerly anticipating the arrival of a new baby sister, whom she's
already named "Babka" after her mother's best dessert, and she's crushed when the
arrival proves to be a boy, who's been named Zachary without any input from
Beryl and who, according to the jealous Beryl, is "a big, fat, dumb lump." Five
brief chapters allow for a bit more thorough exploration than usual of this classic
new-sibling drama; Zalben takes a fresh approach in making Zachary not in fact
Beryl's first younger brother but no less disturbing for that, and there are appeal-
154 
* THE BULLETIN
ing touches in Beryl's relationship with Sam, the younger brother already annoy-
ing Beryl. The intervention of Uncle Morty, who tells Beryl and Sam stories of his
own childhood, is handled lightly; his anecdotes are thick with character and re-
peatable refrains that will make a hit whether listeners believe his message about
sibling fondness or not. Chess, more often associated with delicious wickedness
(as in Heide's Tales for the Perfect Child, BCCB 11/85), brings her figures' usual
beady-eyed intensity to this familiar domestic story; while the result robs her pink-
cheeked characters of their usual enjoyable irony, the focused precision of her vi-
gnettes and their humorous exaggeration makes them an appetizing balance of tart
and sweet. As a chapter-by-chapter readaloud or readalone, this offers a cozy and
personable story that will invite audiences to lessen the sting of their sibling bur-
dens by spinning their own family yarns. DS
ZHANG, ANGE 
RedLand Yellow River: A Storyfrom the Cultural Revolution; writ-
ten and illus. byAnge Zhang and with photographs. 
Groundwood, 2004 
[56p]
ISBN 0-88899-489-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
Author Zhang had just reached his teen years in 1966, and the uniforms, armbands,
rallies, and noisy camaraderie of Mao's Cultural Revolution were nothing short of
alluring. As the son of a respected writer and prominent member of the Commu-
nist Party, Zhang believed he would be welcomed as a member of the Red Guard.
However, as the movement began to target intellectuals, Zhang's father was sub-
ject to public humiliation and the boy himself labeled "a 'black kid,' the enemy of
the revolution." Neither discrimination nor the ransacking of the family's home
deterred him from trying to insinuate himself among the elect, and only when he
suffered a beating did he begin to reevaluate his position on the merits of the
revolution. Forced relocation to a peasant farming community gave him ample
time to rethink his aspirations, and a chance encounter with a box of paints di-
rected him to his chosen-and current-career as an artist. Although presented in
picture-book format, this is a sophisticated personal reflection on the Cultural
Revolution, and even though the formal, clipped narration is not, in itself, particu-
larly daunting, the social turmoil and profound soul-searching herein demand some
maturity of its readership. Zhang's digitally produced illustrations are dramati-
cally front lit, often positioning the viewer slightly below the level of the action, a
probable reflection of Zhang's work in theater design. A substantial concluding
chapter, "China's Cultural Revolution," supplies the background needed to con-
textualize Zhang's memoir and can even stand alone as an engrossing mini history
lesson on a movement not often discussed in children's literature. EB
NOVEMBER2004 
* 155
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
BARNHOUSE, REBECCA 
The Middle Ages in Literature for Youth: A Guide and Re-
source Book. 
Scarecrow Press, 2004 
208p 
(Literature for Youth)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8108-4916-X 
$30.00
This fourth entry in Scarecrow's Literature for Youth Series offers an in-depth
bibliography of books about the years 500-1500. There are more than 500 book
citations, each including publication information and a brief annotation; because
many of the titles referenced are out of print, it is probably more useful as an
organizing tool than as a guide for collection development. The division of the
entries is a bit haphazard, with sections sometimes governed by geography (Conti-
nental Europe, the British Isles), sometimes focusing on a particular group (the
Vikings), at other times centering on popular figures (Joan of Arc, Robin Hood);
while books of all age ranges are considered, the definite emphasis here is on middle
and high school. The book includes nonfiction and realistic fiction but doesn't
extend its reach to include fantasy novels set in a context that recalls the Middle
Ages. Not all titles are strongly recommended; in the instances where the author
has reservations, they are clearly stated in the annotations and are most often due
to stereotypical representations. The latter part of the book provides professional
resources for educators, including books, articles, and ERIC documents, as well as
suggested classroom activities. Although a brief chapter considers non-Western
cultures, the definite emphasis here is on Western Europe. Barnhouse, herself a
medievalist and teacher, has compiled a valuable resource for any school or public
library that provides materials for unit studies on the middle ages. HM
156 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Shaw
Accidents-fiction: Neale
ADVENTURE: Barry; Brennan;
Farmer; Hale; Hill; Jinks; Reeve;
Stroud
Africa-fiction: Stolz
African Americans-fiction:
O'Connor
African Americans-stories:
Harrington; Stewart, S.
Animals-fiction: Avi
Animals-folklore: Bruchac
Animals-stories: Lester
ANTHOLOGIES: Mercado; Noyes
Babies-fiction: MacLachlan;
O'Connor
Babies-stories: Zalben
Basketball-fiction: Lupica
Bears-stories: Johnson, D.
BEDTIME STORIES: Ashman;
Hillenbrand; Irving
BIOGRAPHIES: Brackett; Runyon;
Zhang
Biology: Davies
Birds: Hoose
Birds-fiction: Martini
Birds-stories: Hillenbrand
Boarding school-fiction: O'Connell
Books and reading-stories:
Numeroff
Brothers-fiction: Trueman
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Peck
Bullies-stories: Lester
Chess-fiction: Wong
Child care-stories: Stewart, S.
China: Zhang
Christmas-fiction: Snow
Christmas-stories: Hillenbrand; Lee
Circuses-stories: Keret
Clothing-stories: Hughes
Computers-fiction: Fredericks
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Brennan
Crime and criminals-stories: Geisert
Current events: Lewis
Death and dying-fiction: Friend;
Leiber
Demons-fiction: Stroud
Disabilities: Runyon
Disabilities-fiction: Trueman
Disasters-fiction: Hill
Dogs-fiction: Adler; Hill; Nolan
Dolls: Goddu
Ethics and values: Lewis; Myers;
Trueman; Weatherly; Wilkins;
Zhang
Eating disorders-fiction: Friend
Ecology: Davies; Hoose
Emotions-stories: Lester
Environmental studies: Hoose
EPISTOLARY FICTION:
Wittlinger
FABLES: Ward
Families-fiction: Friend; Trueman
FANTASY: Barry; Brennan; Cole;
Dale; Dickinson; Farmer; Gray;
Hale; Harrison; La Fevers; Leiber;
Martini; Ogilvy; Reeve; Willner-
Pardo; Wrede
Fathers-fiction: Kuns; Lupica;
Neale; Shaw
Fathers-stories: Keret
Fire-fiction: Hill
NOVEMBER2004 
* 157
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Bruchac; Hughes; Kimmel;
Stanley
Food and eating-stories: Kimmel
Foxes-stories: Myers
Friends-fiction: Avi; Fredericks;
Gray; Hahn; Johnson, M.; Kuns;
Sanchez; Weatherly
Future-fiction: Reeve
Games-fiction: Fredericks
Games-stories: Wong
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Johnson,
M.; Sanchez
GHOST STORIES: Hahn
Giants-stories: Stanley
Government: Thimmesh
Grandfathers-fiction: Adler
Grandmothers-fiction: Paulsen
Grandmothers-stories: Cole
Grief-fiction: Friend; Kuns
Hanukkah-stories: Koons
HISTORICAL FICTION: Giff;
MacLachlan; Peck; Rabin; Stolz;
Turnbull
History, U.S.: Sfs; Thimmesh
History, world: Jinks; Zhang
Human rights: Zhang
HUMOR: Blumenthal; Bruchac;
Gray; Keret; Koons; Nolan;
Ogilvy; Paulsen; Scieszka;
Shannon; Snow; Wrede
Identity-fiction: Cofer
Illness-fiction: Hannigan
Immigrants-fiction: Cofer; Giff
Japan-stories: Myers
Jealousy-fiction: Willner-Pardo
Jealousy-stories: Zalben
Journals-fiction: MacLachlan
JOURNALS: Runyon
Kidnapping-fiction: Farmer; La
Fevers
Kindergarten-stories: Wells
Knights and chivalry-fiction: Gray;
Jinks; Stewart, P.
Latinos-fiction: Cofer; Sanchez
Libraries-stories: Numeroff
Literature, children's: Barry
Literature, English: Brackett
LOVE STORIES: Turnbull
Magic-fiction: Hale; Ogilvy;
Stroud; Wrede
Medieval life-fiction: Jinks
Mexico-stories: Kimmel
Mice-stories: Irving; Spohn
Mischief-stories: Shannon
Monsters-stories: Irving
Mothers-fiction: Willner-Pardo
Mountain climbing-fiction: Neale
Muslims-fiction: Lewis; Stolz
MYSTERIES: Adler; Dale;
Weatherly
Night-stories: Ashman
Pigs-stories: Geisert
Pirates-fiction: Barry; Lee
POETRY: Scieszka
Politics-fiction: Dickinson
Princes-fiction: O'Connell
Prophecies-fiction: La Fevers
Reading aloud: Avi; Nolan; Scieszka
Reading, beginning: Blumenthal
Reading, easy: Adler; Hill; La
Fevers; Nolan; Wong; Zalben
Reading, reluctant: Davies;
Mercado; Nolan; Sis; Snow;
Stewart, P.
Relationships-fiction: Fredericks;
Johnson, M.; Wilkins; Wittlinger
RHYMING STORIES: Ashman;
Stewart, S.
ROMANCE: Lee; O'Connell;
Turnbull; Wittlinger; Wrede
Royalty-fiction: O'Connell; Rabin
SCARY STORIES: Irving; Leiber;
Noyes
School-fiction: Hannigan; Kuns;
Mercado; O'Connell; Paulsen;
Peck; Wilkins
School-stories: Wells
Science-poetry: Scieszka
SCIENCE FICTION: Reeve
Sexuality-fiction: Sanchez
SHORT STORIES: Mercado;
Noyes
Sisters-fiction: Harrison
Sisters-stories: Blumenthal
Social studies: Sfs
South, the-fiction: O'Connor
SPORTS STORIES: Lupica
158 
* THE BULLETIN
States: Sis
Storytelling-fiction: Martini
Storytime: Bruchac; Cole; Doyle;
Hughes; Koons; Numeroff;
Shannon; Spohn; Stanley
Suicide: Runyon
Superheroes-stories: Lee
SUSPENSE: Hahn
Teachers-fiction: Peck
Terrorism-fiction: Lewis
Toys: Goddu
Uncles-stories: Zalben
Urban life-stories: Cole
Violence-fiction: Trueman
Voyages and travel-fiction: Barry;
Farmer; Lee; Wrede
Voyages and travel-stories:
Harrington
War-fiction: Dickinson; Stroud
Water-stories: Doyle
Witches-fiction: Dale; Harrison
Women's studies: Brackett; Goddu;
Thimmesh
Work-fiction: Giff
Work-stories: Johnson, D.
Writers and writing-stories: Myers
Snurtt
A Pabi~em Weekly
EdAWo's Pick
A Springfmmiw
~ ch~i~ 
I 
Boalkeww CMi~rm's Pick
f awmasy
lokng for
mthe
New Storytelling Books
FROM 
A U G U S T HOUSE
PICY HOT COLORS
Sherry Shahan
Illustrated by Paula Barrag6n
September
SBN 
0-87483-741-3
i16.95
ewn 
hardback binding
5'x 11"
pages; all full color
rs explode off the page in this energetic, jazzy picture
that introduces children to colors in English and
sh. Shohan's rhythmic text echoes Chicko Chicka
Boom and Ecuadoran artist Paula Barrag6n's mixed-
illustrations expand the rhythm of the text and the
of Latino culture.
FOR SURE! FOR SURE!
Hans Christian Andersen
Translated by Mus White
Illustrated by Stefan Czemecki
August* ISBN 
0-87483-742-1
$16.95 * Sewn hardback binding
32 pages, 
all full color
VIEW & DOWNLOAD THE
ENTIRE FOLKTALE AND
STORYTELLING CATALOG AT
www.augusthouse.com
August House Publishers, Inc.
August House is the
Storytelling Source.
THREE-
MINUTE 1
TALES
rnnAll innlhkin
IUIE6) rKIM AKVRIUN
THE WORLD TO SHARE
WHEN TIME IS SHORT
Margaret Read MacDonald
Jul
ISBN 
0-87483-728-t
$24.9
Sewn hardback bindii
7"x 10' 
Staff Resource Titie
MacDonald includes stories from Mexico, China, Indonesia, Japan,
Cuba, Turkey, Syria, Native America, Jewish culture, and other
nanons an nrraaions in a
useful volume for parents,
teachers, librarians, church
school leaders, and others.
AUGUST
HoUSE
www.augusthouse.com
AUGUST 
HOUSE 
/ P.O. BOX 
3223 / UTTIE 
ROCK, 
AR 72203 / 201 EAST 
MARKHAM 
72201 / 1-800-284-8784 / FAX 
501-372-5579
FREE
TRIAL ISSUE
of an award-winning
publication!
Visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Click on
FREE TRIAL ISSUE
Teaching K-8 is 
filled
and activities that help teachi
to their students, learn new con
OF EiA1ONAL
mumx(A
ML
Books make great gifts, but oick-
ing the perfect books for your
favorite youngsters can be daunt-
ing. Let the expert staff of The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books help you navigate the book-
store wilderness full of shiny new children's
books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edi-
tion, the Guide Book to Gift Books contains
annotations of the best books for giving (and
receiving) and is available as a downloadable
PDF file that you can print out and use for
every holiday, birthday, or other gift-giving
occasion on your calendar this year.
Listed books have all been recommended in
full Bulletin reviews from the last three years
and are verified as currently in print. Entries
are divided into age groups and include
author, title, publisher, and the current list
price.
To purchase, go to:
www.lis.uiuc.edulgiftbooks/
r
1325 Sol
Champa
U.SA
ADDRESs
i;?
1325 Sol
Champa
U.SA
ADDRESs
i;?
~0;1~x" 
i;?
University of llinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
ty 
o 
Ilinos 
PessPERIODICAS
ii5 
oth Oak StreetPOTG
Capign IL 61820 
PALO
CHAIMPAIGJ 
I
ADE SERVICE REQUETD
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PA~D
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The online ver
database by au
To access The
i. 
Go tohtt
2. When acoe
scriber nui
mailing labl
word. This
number bu
3. 
After loggi
password 1
case sensit
password i
scriber nu(
Remember, Thr
vidual print sut:
access, so pleas
expand The Buti
electronic subs
Non-subscribel
Children's Books
Please e-mail ai
~0;1~x" 
i;?
"1" 11
~o;"r"
ey 
ar-e puvllsrecl.
;ue or the entire
·a~l
re, use the sub-
corner of the
name and pars-
r- or five-digit
~ber combination.
·ed to change your
This password is
i store this new
also your sub-
c use; only indi-
aff are gramed
Ire working to
:reate broader
nrtions.
re Center for
iali..uiuc.edu. 
i
·ri
i·r 
·
-··;s
I ,,,j.,vvj 
TIuurs 
as, 
c a ipfua uel 
r.UI 
wIII. Ia)u 
ad uey 
ae 
puUMal0lu.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, tite, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http//www.prairienet.orglccbl
2. 
When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at h 
://www.is.uiuc.edu/pubofflb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
Is
N, IL
--cC
i~%c;:: 
"'
.;r
0008-9036(200411)58:3;1 -E
, , 
, 
,, 
;• 
• 
''
0008-9036(200411 )58:3;1 if:
,iP~'·" 
·ri
-ii-·· 
·,i
,1, 
, 
F 
-··;·
i·r·
~o;"r" 
;-·· 
i~·" 
~:";j"·"
·i~: 
~ 
~s~i-I
