H
ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
^ ».*' '*"'.a*^ 11" 
'SiS "' 
-*"*^ ^ " ." "' 
*r ''' 
*'''
i
A 1999 ALA Notable Children's Book
Onch!
Full-color pictures by Fred Marcellino
This story tells all about young Marco, who starts off as nobody
special and ends up king. Not that it's an easy path, the most
dangerous part being an errand that takes him down into Hell.
But thanks to the Devil's grandmother, it all comes right in the end.
"A fine, comfortable storyteller's voice meets up with sly and
elegant illustrations in this tale from the Brothers Grimm,"
-Pointer 
review / Kirkus Reviews
A Bulletin Blue Ribbon Book 1998
"Babbitt's rollicking retelling ... [and] Marcellino's full-bodied
palette make this brilliantly designed book a visually piquant
feast as well as a verbally fleet feat. Read it to everyone you
can find. Show the pictures. Such artistry is a little bit of
heaven on earth." -- Starred review / Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
All ages * $14.95 TR 0-06-205066-4 * $14.89 LB 0-06-205067-2
Michael di Capua Books 
* HarperCollins Publishers
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
May 1999
Vol. 52 No. 9
A LOOK INSIDE
305 THE BIG PICTURE
Mary Louise Loses Her Manners by Diane Cuneo; illus. by Jack E. Davis
306 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
310 * New Cat written and illus. by Yangsook Choi
311 * Come All You Brave Soldiers: Blacks in the Revolutionary War by
Clinton Cox
323 * Monster by Walter Dean Myers
325 * Captain Underpants and the Attack of the Talking Toilets written and
illus. by Day Pilkey
333 * Sebastian: A Book about Bach written and illus. by Jeanette Winter
336 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
337 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
~
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Janice N. Harrington, Reviewer (NH)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1999 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Jack E. Davis from Mary Louise Loses Her Manners ©1999. Used by
permission of Doubleday Books for Young Readers.
MAY 1999 
* 305
THE BIG PICTURE
Mary Louise Loses Her Manners
by Diane Cuneo; illustrated by Jack E. Davis
Etiquette books in collections for youth usually gather dust until some poor belea-
guered grownups come seeking a title that will turn their little hellions into little
adults, well-mannered and preferably silent. Picture books about manners for
children run the gamut from the unabashed behavior modification of the Berenstains
to Sendak's more appealing role-playing images; there are books featuring mon-
sters, dinosaurs, and alligators, all in need of having their attitudes adjusted so as to
make the world a more polite and civilized place. The available manners books are
typically missives with a message, and, while the subtlety and effectiveness of the
delivery varies from title to title, there is no escaping the fact that these are books
that are supposed to be good for you-and books that are good for you may be
good for you, but they usually aren't much fun. Well, all that's about to change.
Sweep those dusty tomes from the etiquette shelves (politely, of course) and make
room for the redoubtable Mary Louise.
When Mary Louise misplaces her manners (a loss which becomes appar-
ent at breakfast when she tells her mother, "Pass the pancakes, poop"), her father
orders her to leave the table and not come back until she's found them. Mary
Louise looks everywhere: "She turned her pockets inside out. She shook her hair.
She looked up her nose. Between her toes. Inside her shoes. But they weren't
there." So she grabs her little red wagon and goes out looking for them. She runs
into Mrs. Abby, a local bohemian, barefoot with rose in hair, who is sketching a
neighbor's portrait. A quick exchange of pleasantries reveals the nature of Mary
Louise's loss, and, after a description by the determined Mary Louise ("They [the
manners] have a big head for remembering all the rules there are about manners ...
and big ears for listening. And a little mouth to keep naughty words from slipping
out. And no nose, for there's nothing polite about smelling or sniffing"), the fast-
drawing Mrs. Abby sketches a picture of the missing manners, which Mary Louise
then uses to track them down. From restaurant ("'I hope you throw up your
meal,' she said sincerely") to doctor's office ("And instead of saying, 'Bless you,'
she said, 'Boogers'"), from hot dog vendor to street musician to bus driver, Mary
Louise follows her manners' trail of good deeds, leaving chaos in her own unman-
nerly wake. Exhausted ("She wished she had exercised her manners more often.
Maybe then they wouldn't have been running around town exercising themselves"),
she finally tracks her manners to the library ("Hey! Who's in charge here!" ML
yells) where, directed by an understanding and good-humored librarian, she finds
them snoozing under a pile of newspapers. Mary Louise gently lifts her manners
into her little red wagon and "promised herself she would never give her manners
a reason to run away again. 'Please,' she said. 'Thank you,' she said. 'Bless you,'
306 
* THE BULLETIN
she said. 'Excuse me,' she said. 'After you,' she said. 'Lovely day,' she said. All the
way home."
Cuneo's irreverent text is accompanied by a riotous visual rendition, com-
pliments of Davis' toothy characterizations and slick settings. From the family
breakfast table domesticity to the squeaky-clean neighborhood streets to the blue-
shadowed hush of the many-shelved library, Mary Louise travels through a melange
of wildly expressive and fortunately helpful characters who direct her to her man-
ners' final destination. ML's world is colorfully rendered in a stylistic combina-
tion of David Catrow and Roy Gerrard (with a little Underdog and Bullwinkle
thrown in), and the illustrations have an airbrushed sophistication that both con-
trasts with and emphasizes the absurdity of the accelerating plot. Framed full- and
double-page spreads, like giant cartoon panels, barely contain the antic activity,
and Mary Louise's carroty cowlicks constantly escape the controlling borders.
Upfront perspectives and monumentally drawn figures bring a stolid solidity to
Mary Louise's environment that belies the unapologetic silliness of the ongoing
action. The fact that readers and viewers never see the specifically described mis-
placed manners is a hospitable invitation for a group art activity that will simply
extend the hilarity while reinforcing the point.
A spunky heroine on a personal quest for self-realization is the perfect
antidote to preachy manners picture books; Mary Louise's dogged determination
to retrieve what's hers will have kids snorting over the pages, spank you very much.
(Imprint information appears on p. 312.)
JaniceM. Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANCONA, GEORGE 
Charro: The Mexican Cowboy; written and illus. with photo-
graphs by George Ancona. 
Harcourt, 1999 
48p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-201047-5 
$18.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-201046-7 
$9.00
Spanish paper ed. ISBN 0-15-202026-7 
$9.00 
R Gr. 2-4
La charreria is a distinctive sport of Mexico, celebrating the old traditions of run-
ning cattle on the haciendas. At its center is la charreada, Mexico's answer to the
American rodeo, which includes familiar events such as bull riding (jineteada de
toros) and bronc riding (jineteada deyeguas) as well as some less likely to appear in
the U.S., such as the coleada (spinning a bull to the ground by its tail) and the
manganas (roping a galloping horse's front legs). The book does a capable job of
placing this pastime and event in its cultural context, including aspects such as the
morning mass on eldia delcharro and the pre-charreada parade, as well as devoting
a good chunk of the book to the children's charreada, where youngsters show off
their developing talents. Rough and tumble is putting it mildly for some of the
events, and the book notes on the copyright page that, like the U.S. rodeo, the
MAY 1999 
* 307
charreada grew out of old ways of handling animals and is sometimes violent in
modern terms (some of its practices are actually illegal in some areas of the U.S.).
The photographs, crisp and well-displayed though sometimes rather less intense in
color than one would expect, make it clear that this really is an event of pageantry
and excitement: arrays of rippling red skirts (in the women's escaramuza charra),
gleaming silver, spinning ropes, and high-speed riding action bring the drama up-
close and vivid. Kids who think that field day is the be-all and end-all will get their
eyes opened by this, and young buckaroos who enjoy a rodeo will be intrigued by
this southern alternative. A glossary is appended. DS
ANHOLT, LAURENCE 
Billy and the Big New School; illus. by Catherine
Anholt. Whitman, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-0743-1 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
The prospect of starting school in a big building with lots of big kids has Billy
understandably nervous, and he wishes he could become one of the birds he so
admires and take a pass on education. An encounter with an injured sparrow,
however, demonstrates that a bird's life isn't so easy either, and just as the bird
recovers and takes wing, Billy finds he is well able to fly solo on his first day at
school. Softly tinted watercolor scenes depict a cozy home and affectionate mother
that would, indeed, be difficult for a little tyke to leave, and a schoolroom full of
enticing activities, smiling friends, and a welcoming teacher that would be equally
difficult for a little tyke to resist. The bird analogy is a bit labored, with Billy's bird
pictures, conversations with the birds, dreams about birds, show-and-tell about
birds, and new friends with shared bird interests hammering the point home. Still,
listeners who are similarly about to be nudged off the limb will understand the
metaphor and welcome the reassurance of the Anholts' gentle tale. EB
ARNOSKY, JIM 
Mouse Letters: A Very First Alphabet Book; illus. by Jim
Arnosky. 
Clarion, 1999 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-395-55386-5 
$4.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-5 yrs
ARNOSKY, JIM 
Mouse Numbers: A Very First Counting Book; illus. by Jim
Arnosky. 
Clarion, 1999 
[48p]
ISBN 0-395-55006-8 
$4.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-5 yrs
A potbellied little yellow rodent embarks upon a series of adventures as he shapes
the alphabet and counts up and down between zero and ten in this pair of wordless
picture books, trim-sized to nestle in small hands. In Letters he ambles through a
grassy countryside picking up sticks to be formed into letters, some of which prove
downright dangerous, at least in the tradition of cartoon slapstick. The curve of
the "G" springs back, catapulting the mouse through the air; a fall from a broken
"T" plunges him onto the "U" that dips between the walls of a ravine. But the "Z"
ultimately reminds him ofnaptime, and he disassembles the letter and reconfigures
it into an "A"-a perfect tent under which to take a rest. Numbers finds the
mouse emerging from the "0" of his mouse hole and heading out for a day at the
beach; after hopping 1 mushroom, climbing 2 hills, making 8 splashes with 7
skipping stones, he takes a snooze in the sun. Suddenly swamped by the rising
tide, he finds himself swimming with 9 harmless little fish and one huge, mean fish
with 10 sharp teeth, which sends him scurrying in a countdown back to the safety
308 
* 
THE BULLETIN
of his own "0" hideaway. Color-cued outlining and highlighting make the letters
(in gold) and numerals and countable objects (in pink) in each illustration easy to
identify, and there's just enough suggestion of a plot to engage pre-readers in sup-
plying the narrative. Sturdy stock assures these will stand up to the constant thumb-
ing they deserve. EB
BEARD, DARLEEN BAILEY 
Twister; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. 
Farrar, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-374-37977-7 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Lucille and her little brother, Natt, are partaking in the idle pleasures of summer
when a storm blows up; when the storm throws a funnel cloud, Mama commands
her brood out of their mobile home to safety in the storm cellar ("'Twister!' shouts
Mama. 'Head for the cellar!"') while she goes in search of an elderly neighbor.
Alone in the dark storm cellar, the kids try to divert themselves ("We tap our toes
in puddles. We count to a hundred and three") while worrying about their mother,
concerned that the sound of pounding hail might be their mother's knock and that
the twister's pull at the cellar door might be their mother trying to get in out of the
maelstrom. Lucille's present-tense first-person narration is unforcedly full of tell-
ing details that make the account immediate, whether it be the siblings' pushing
each other around in the wheelbarrow for diversion or their excited post-tornado
collection of hailstones. Carpenter's thick, smudgy pastels deftly convey the vis-
cousness of summer air before a storm and the weight of the threatening skies and
the inky cellar dark. With an energy and a specific imagination that most such
accounts lack, this will pair effectively with more factual treatments such as Seymour
Simon's Tornado (BCCB 4/99). DS
BEST, CARI 
Last Licks: A Spaldeen Story; illus. by Diane Palmisciano. 
Kroupa/
DK Ink, 1999 
[40p]
ISBN 0-7894-2513-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
For those of you who were deprived as children, a Spaldeen is a small pink rubber
ball, that, when new, is covered with a fine white powder, has a clean fresh rubber-
band smell, and bounces higher than a telephone pole. Annie Ellis is the proud
owner of a Sky-High Super Pinkie, a new lucky Spaldeen, and she is just itching to
bounce it around. Despite a teacher's note complaining that Annie would rather
play ball than concentrate on her spelling, despite a building superintendent who
collects any and all Pinkies that hit his window (where he displays them like tro-
phies), despite an aunt, mother, and father who simply do not understand that
playing ball is what Annie does, Annie remains devoted to her sport. Best has a wry
storytelling voice and she doesn't stint on the details that make characters and
situations both engaging and funny, unerringly limning the joy of a new Spaldeen
in the hands of a Pinkie virtuoso. Palmisciano's oil pastels give a skinny-legged,
redheaded, red-sneakered Annie and her classmate cohorts a raffish charm reminis-
cent of a bunch of cleaned-up Bowery Boys; the characters are involvingly emotive,
both in their body language and facial expressions. The urban landscape is evoked
by aerial views of three-flats and storefronts, and while they may be a bit squeaky
clean, they have enough grit to make them more cheerful than idyllic. The final
double-page spread, wherein all the characters have caught Annie's Spaldeen fever,
is enough to send you out to the stoop. Play ball! JMD
MAY 1999 
* 309
BITTON-JACKSON, LIVIA 
My Bridges of Hope: Searching for Life and Love after
Auschwitz. 
Simon, 1999 
258p
ISBN 0-689-82026-7 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
In this sequel to I Have Lived a Thousand Years (BCCB 4/97), Bitton-Jackson
details her family's efforts to re-establish a normal life in Czechoslovakia after sur-
viving incarceration in Auschwitz. Luckier than many, Elli (the author) and her
mother are reunited with her brother; with an invitation from an uncle already
established in America, they hope to emigrate. The reality of life behind the Iron
Curtain in 1945, however, means a long wait for exit visas. Finally, despite the
family's desire to never be separated again, Elli's brother, Bubi, leaves for the United
States on a special student visa. Elli and her mother begin a long wait for exit visas,
seeking asylum in one place or another, ironically winding up in Germany, where
Elli gets a job translating for the American occupation forces. In 1951, mother
and daughter are finally given permission to emigrate. Bitton-Jackson recalls her
family's day to day struggle for survival: her mother sews fancy dresses for the
Russian women soldiers in order to buy food, Elli begs for the return of household
goods hidden with friends for the duration of the war, and Bubi steals lightbulbs
from a sleeping officer. They live on a mixture of thin soup, the hope of being able
to emigrate, and the dream of the establishment of Eretz Israel. The story's stylis-
tic sameness does not always serve it well-accounts of everyday activities are de-
livered in the same tone as dangerous incidents, and overall the pace is somewhat
slow. Still, this is a solid chronology of an adolescent's passage to adulthood inter-
spersed with the many crushes and romances that Bitton-Jackson recalls from her
youth, and the inherent drama of the postwar events should be enough to keep
readers moving with Elli toward the safe haven of the United States. JMD
BROOKS, BRUCE 
Vanishing. Geringer/HarperCollins, 1999 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028237-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028236-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Eleven-year-old Alice extricated herself from life with her alcoholic mother and
sour stepfather to go live with her father; when Alice's coughing disturbed her
grandmother, however, her father shipped Alice right back. The coughing, which
proved to be from bronchitis and pneumonia, puts Alice in the hospital, where she
takes a stand against her lack of power over her own life by going on a hunger
strike that will keep her in the safe neutrality of the children's ward. She's aided
and abetted by Rex, a fellow ward-dweller, who has challenged probability with
his remissions from his terminal disease, who understands Alice's rage at her impo-
tence, but who eventually shows her that winning through giving up is ultimately
still loss. This is an ingenious and aggressive exploration of childhood powerless-
ness and one girl's challenge to it; the situation is set up believably, with Alice's
adults more shocking in their myopic focus on themselves than any overt abuse
would make them. Brooks undercuts his impact, however, by giving the kids
middle-aged and formal phraseology (Alice dismisses Winnie-the-Pooh as "a shock-
ing mess of homily"), which makes them more mouthpieces than characters; this
adultification impedes the point by excluding the child voice from the issue. The
combination of intelligent philosophy and exploration of a serious issue will ap-
peal to thoughtful young readers who've relished intellectual engagements with
Brooks' works such as Asylum for Nightface (BCCB 6/96). DS
310 
* THE BULLETIN
BUNTING, EVE 
IHave an Olive Tree; illus. by Karen Barbour. 
Cotler/Harper-
Collins, 1999 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027574-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027573-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Sophia and her mother return to Greece to place her late grandmother's necklace
in the olive tree given to Sophia by her now-dead grandfather. Initially, Sophia
doesn't understand why her grandfather gave her the tree, but visiting Greece con-
nects her with her family's roots. Naive color-saturated illustrations of family
gatherings and Greek village life fill the double-page spreads, including a striking
vertical spread with a worm's-eye view of Sophia, her mother, and the olive tree.
Busy compositions are accompanied by informal lines of gracefully undulating
text that conform to the curves of the landscape and the limbs of the olive tree.
The art echoes the heavy lines and colors of ceramic pottery, with fanciful ele-
ments (fish flying through trees, the grandfather's spirit flying over the olive tree)
in a bold palette adding a subtle yet effective earthiness. The semi-abstract art-
work and the stylized faces are a bit distancing, however, and the extensive text
tells rather than shows Sophia's feelings: "I was feeling something strange. My
chest hurt. I began to cry." The pace slows as the already subdued action is quietly
described: "We walked past houses, whitewashed, sleeping in the sun. Sometimes
my mother stopped and put the suitcase down and I thought she was resting, but
I could see she was looking at things and probably remembering." There is much
worth discussing here, but children without a strong sense of immigrant history
may need the intervention of a knowing adult in order to find the roots of their
family's story in the branches of Sophia's olive tree. JNH
CHOI, YANGSOOK 
New Cat; written and illus. by Yangsook Choi. 
Foster/Far-
rar, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-374-35512-6 
$16.00 
R 
4-7yrs
You may not think that some tofu, a cat, and a mouse up to no good sound like the
stuff suspense melodrama is made of, but that's only because you haven't met New
Cat. New Cat belongs to Mr. Kim, a tofu manufacturer, and her factory duties
include dusting the computer monitor with her tail and making sure the factory is
a mice-free zone. Unknown to Mr. Kim, a mouse has slipped into the production
room, the one place in the factory New Cat is strictly forbidden to go. An un-
latched door provides her with an opportunity to apprehend the little rodent, but
instead of catching the miscreant mouse, she discovers a fire. In her effort to
escape, New Cat knocks over a bucket of tofu, which keeps the fire from spreading
until the firemen get there. Choi combines a strong narrative and a flair for the
dramatic with droll representations of the action, from a pompous New Cat sit-
ting under a portrait of herself behind a sign reading "president," to a frustrated
New Cat peeking under a locked door at a wicked-looking mouse, to a damp New
Cat peering over the edge of a full bucket of tofu. The acute angles, straight lines,
and sharp edges of the factory are offset by New Cat, who is round and fatly feline,
with big expressive eyes and a self-satisfied grin. The compositions have a gratify-
ing way of spilling across spreads, whether it's the hoses of the firemen curving
across a double-page spread or a bucket of tofu spilling from one page to another.
Ham this up for a suspenseful readaloud, but don't stop there--the size of the
print and the simple but effective text will make this a winner for new readers, too.
JMD
MAY 1999 
* 311
CHRISTELOW, EILEEN 
What Do Illustrators Do?; written and illus. by Eileen
Christelow. 
Clarion, 1999 
[40p]
ISBN 0-395-90230-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Christelow capably demystifies the process of illustration here, using as models
two fictional illustrators, each one working on art for a new edition of "Jack and
the Beanstalk." The dual-illustrator concept allows the author to demonstrate just
how different two things that sound the same will actually prove to be as she walks
the illustrators through the choosing of scenes to illustrate, the creation of the
dummy, the drawing of preliminary sketches, decisions about point of view, use of
models, illustrative style, and several other crucial aspects of the creation of book
art. The layout combines simple big-print text with comic-book panels for both
the drama of illustrating and the drama of the illustrated story; examples of all
manner of things float through the open and friendly format, as do a dog-and-cat
pair who comment on the proceedings in speech balloons. There are also some
salutary subtle lessons about revisions ("Sometimes they change the colors"), dead
ends ("Sometimes illustrators throw away their pictures and start again"), and edi-
torial input, giving a sense of the creative process as well as the technical aspects of
illustration. Christelow's line-and-watercolor art is cartoonishly genial, and she
doesn't dumb down her sample illustrations to force her visual point. Youthful
paintbox junkies (as well as many adults who are in the dark about the process) will
snap this one up, and teachers might want to use this in self-defense-it would
considerably raise the caliber of make-your-own-book projects. DS
COBB, VICKI 
You Gotta Try This!: Absolutely Irresistible Science; by Vicki Cobb
and Kathy Darling; illus. by True Kelley. 
Morrow, 1999 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-688-15740-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-8
Kids who like their science loud, messy, flashy, and fast will delight in Cobb and
Darling's latest serving of several dozen experiments and observations (see Don't
Try This at Home, BCCB 4/98). For starters, how about trying to resuscitate a
drowned fly? It's probably not dead-it just needs a sprinkle of salt to clear its
spiracles. Perhaps replicate, instead, the string-and-abrasive cleanser saw used in a
New York jailbreak. Marshmallows toasted inside out and an "erupting volcano"
of Ivory soap foam require little more than access to a microwave oven (and, need-
less to say, a tolerant parent). Ever-popular explosions and combustions can be
wrested, respectively, from zip-style sandwich bags and Lipton tea bags. Each
experiment is followed by Insider Information on its hows and whys and occa-
sional comments regarding the authors' own successes and failures. Clear warn-
ings are included wherever safety goggles and adult supervision are required-it
should be easy for "researchers" to round up a willing grownup to lend a hand. EB
Cox, CLINTON 
Come All You Brave Soldiers: Blacks in the Revolutionary
War. 
Scholastic, 1999 
208p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-47576-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
This history of the Revolutionary War places black patriots at the center of an
involving story of ideals, economics, and political expediency. From the free blacks
who enlisted in the Continental Army of their own accord, to the slaves who were
sent in place of their white owners, to those who fled slavery for the military and
312 
* THE BULLETIN
the possibility of freedom, Cox firmly establishes the presence of black soldiers at
every important juncture of the war. Soldiers, spies, and aides de camp, black
soldiers proved themselves on the fields of battle, despite laws and attitudes that
did little to encourage them. The hypocrisy of new Americans fighting for free-
dom while protecting the institution of slavery is given prominent play here
(Alexander Hamilton, Thomas Paine, and the Marquis de Lafayette all argued
against it, even while Thomas Jefferson and George Washington defended their
right to own slaves), and the betrayal of the black patriots after the Revolution was
successfully won (many black soldiers and sailors were resold as slaves after the
war) speaks volumes about the undeniable racism and lack of foresight ofAmerica's
founding fathers. While the list of battles gets repetitious and the style is dry, the
dramatic sweep of the military events and the insights into the foibles of America's
historical heroes will easily involve readers. Two inserts of captioned black-and-
white plates, an extensive bibliography, and an index are included. JMD
CUNEO, 
DIANE 
Mary Louise Loses Her Manners; illus. by Jack E.
Davis. 
Doubleday, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-385-32538-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 305, for review.
FLETCHER, RALPH 
Relatively Speaking: Poems about Family; illus. by Walter Lyon
Krudop. 
Orchard, 1999 
42p
Libraryed. ISBN 0-531-33141-5 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30141-9 
$14.95 
Ad Gr. 4-6
In a direct, age-appropriate voice, an eleven-year-old describes his family life in
free-verse monologues: a brother's almost fatal accident, family reunions, loving
and quietly heroic parents, and the family's anticipation of a new baby. Entries
touch on such family problems as aging, death, and an uncle's alcoholism. They
come closest to real emotional content in "The Bravest Deed," where an abusive
parent punishes her child in the grocery store: "The girl is screaming/ and the lady
gets ready to smack her again/ but all of a sudden Mom/ sort of steps between
them/ and asks: Is everything okay?/ You're having a hard time,/ looks like." The
poems present a repertoire of figurative language and comparisons that stay con-
crete and familiar: "Our family becomes/ like a package of plums/ shrink-wrapped/
at the supermarket/ so small and tight/ I can hardly breathe." Fletcher's verses
vary in form, mixing dialogue with narration and drawing on creative line breaks
or the occasional anaphora; typically, however, they build to a climax in the last
stanza or to a tidy last line, giving the individual poems a distracting predictability.
Though the poetry may not invite repeated reading, the straightforward style makes
it accessible and young readers will surely identify with the appealing protagonist.
Pencil sketches reflect thematic images from the poems. JNH
GARZA, CARMEN LOMAS 
Magic Windows/Ventanas maigicas; by Carmen Lomas
Garza, as told to Harriet Rohmer; illus. by Carmen Lomas Garza; Spanish tr. by
Francisco X. Alarc6n 
Children's Book Press, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-89239-157-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-12
In a conversational tone, an accomplished visual artist describes and showcases her
MAY 1999 
* 
313
masterful papelpicado or cut-paper art. With bold, interconnecting lines and en-
gaging compositions, Garza creates paper windows that depict scenes from her
family life, the desert, and Mexican culture. She places seventeen papercuttings,
mostly made from black paper, against vibrant backgrounds of turquoise, tanger-
ine, lime and other tropical colors. Opposite the papelpicado, text in English and
Spanish explains the artistic process, providing cultural or personal information
related to the papercutting. Beside a picture of hummingbirds and cactus flowers,
the artist explains that hummingbirds were the souls of warriors who died in battle
or women who died in childbirth. After the "Eagle with Rattlesnake," she states,
"This is the national emblem of Mexico. You can see it on the Mexican flag.... It
was hard to figure out how to show the cactus, the mountains and the lakes, and
still have it all connect." The work ends with a color photograph of Garza's "Ofrenda
para Antonio Lomas" (offering for her grandfather, Antonio Lomas), an installa-
tion at the Mexican Fine Arts Center Museum in Chicago. Vivid examples and
simple explanations make this unusual art form intriguing and accessible. A how-
to title by Garza called Making Magic Windows is also available. JNH
GAY, MARIE-LOUISE 
Stella, Star of the Sea; written and illus. by Marie-Louise
Gay. 
Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-88899-337-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
"Stella and Sam were spending a day at the seashore. It was Sam's very first time.
'Isn't it beautiful, Sam?' asked Stella. 'It's very big,' said Sam, 'and noisy.'" Big
sister Stella, having seen the sea once before Sam was born, has no fear and races
toward the water. Sam, on the other hand, needs a little coaxing. After being
assured by Stella that there are no sea monsters and that she's only ever seen a very
little shark, Sam is still full of questions: "'Does the sea touch the sky?' asked Sam.
'Do boats sail off the edge? Where do waves come from? Why...' 'Sam!!' yelled
Stella. 'Are you ever coming in?' 'YES!' said Sam," and he races toward Stella and
the sea. Gay's simple text is a treasury of seaside memories that floats gently on her
watercolors of the sea and the sea lovers, Stella and Sam. The opening spread
shows the two children standing on top of a sand dune gazing at the water: Stella,
with her red hair streaming behind her, grins with delighted satisfaction; tow-
headed Sam has his mouth open in astonished surprise. The siblings' ensuing
conversation is an exchange of imagination and information, as Stella talks of
moonshells from the moon, starfish as falling stars that fell in love with the sea, and
seahorses ridden bareback. Gay's watercolors are rendered in an ocean palette of
blues, greens, and yellows, with sparks of red and pink for emphasis; the seaside
sensibility is evoked with the small details of shells, starfish, sandpipers, and the
soaring space of the sky over the sea and shore. The closing illustration of Sam and
Stella floating on the waves, gazing up at the sky with blissful grins, will elicit
down-to-the-sea-again longing from both viewers and readers. JMD
GLENN, MEL 
Foreign Exchange: A Mystery in Poems. Morrow, 1999 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-688-16472-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
When Kristen Clarke, a small-town girl, is killed, locals blame a black student
visiting from an urban high school. In over one hundred free-verse poems, Glenn
reveals the murderer's identity, describes life in Hudson Landing, and uncovers
314 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Kristen's personality: "When my boyfriend and me make love/ In the front seat of
his pickup truck,/ We both take off our watches/ And put them in the glove compart-
ment/ for safekeeping." The poems touch on broader themes such as teens' stereo-
types about urban or rural life, the ethics of baby selling, and racial prejudice.
Glenn manipulates cliches: the beautiful blonde who feels insecure and ugly, the
black youth from the projects who comes from a loving home and is a good stu-
dent, and the bucolic town with big-city problems. The poems present so many
characters and voices, however, that trying to remember their lives becomes frus-
trating. Fewer monologues might have streamlined the pacing and lessened the
confusion. Still, the characters are solidly evoked and their voices are distinct.
Despite the unremarkable poetry the book will satisfy its intended audience, even
though astute readers, familiar.with television murder plots, will quickly deduce
the murderer's identity. JNH
GORRELL, GENA K. 
Catching Fire: The Story of Firefighting. Tundra,
1999 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-88776-430-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Efforts at fire prevention and extinction, from earliest attempts to appease fire
gods to the recent daunting challenge of controlling Kuwaiti oil field blazes, are
covered in this overview. Topics range from the principles of combustion and the
development of organized firefighting brigades, to rescuing victims and investigat-
ing arsons. Gorrell casts a wide but shallow net across her subject, tantalizing
readers with sidebar information on everything from training simulators for off-
shore oil rig fire emergencies to the origin of the term "curfew," while rushing over
equally intriguing textual references: "And what could be more frightening than a
fire in space-like the 1997 blaze on the Soviet space station Mir, when an oxygen
tank burst into flames that fire extinguishers couldn't put out?" Black-and-white
illustrations, though plentiful, cannot rival the arresting color photography of
Masoffs Fire! (BCCB 4/98) or Beil's Fire in Their Eyes (BCCB 4/99). Still, the
trove of useful data on current firefighting techniques and gadgetry such as fire
imagers (which make invisible flames visible) and AVIRIS (which remotely mea-
sures factors pertaining to a forest's combustibility) will be happily plundered by
young report writers and would-be firefighters. An index will be included in the
bound book. EB
HAWES, LOUISE 
Rosey in the Present Tense. 
Walker, 1999 
128p
ISBN 0-8027-8685-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
It's been six months since the tragedy, but Franklin is still unable to accept the
death of his beloved girlfriend, Rosey Mishimi. Franklin's grief brings Rosey back
as a most unghostly warm and sassy ghost; the company of her blithe spirit cheers
him no end, but his psychologist, mother, and friends are even more worried about
him than before, since they can't see the returned Rosey upon whom Franklin
lavishes his attention. Ultimately, this is an effective romantic drama, with Franklin's
deep attachment to Rosey evident in both the main third-person narrative and his
first-person recollections of their time together, written, as his psychologist notes,
in the present tense. There are also overtones of Our Town in Rosey's touching
return to her parents' home, where she is invisible to all except her dying grand-
mother (who, after death, shows Rosey the way to move on). Rosey's a little too
MAY 1999 
* 315
perfect and the love story a bit too idyllic for reality, but the point here is yearning,
not verisimilitude, and Hawes delivers with a generous hand. This bittersweet
romance will be welcomed by readers in search of a tug on the heartstrings. DS
HAZEN-HAMMOND, SUSAN 
Thunder Bear andKo: The Buffalo Nation and Nambe
Pueblo; written and illus. with photographs by Susan Hazen-Hammond. 
Dutton,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46013-6 $16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
In this photoessay, Hazen-Hammond tells the story of the reintroduction of Ko-
or buffalo-to the Nambe Pueblo, focusing on eight-year-old Thunder Bear Yates,
(who will one day succeed his father Ben as the leader of the Winter People of
Nambe Pueblo). The handsome design employs a creative and varied layout with
decorative borders on creamy pages; uncaptioned, high-quality color photographs
capture glimpses of daily life in the Nambe Pueblo today: Thunder Bear playing
catch, Ben tanning a buffalo skin, a helicopter herding buffalo, and Thunder Bear
dancing in a traditional native costume. Unfortunately, Hazen-Hammond ro-
manticizes the Nambe Pueblo culture and creates distance between the topic and
the reader by using stilted third-person narration instead of direct quotes from her
subjects: "The wind was cold as Thunder Bear and the other children began to
move their feet up and down, back and forth, in the same ancient rhythm that
their ancestors used. But they didn't feel the cold. It seemed as if their feet had
always known these steps." Similarly, as Ben goes hiking, the narrative takes addi-
tional poetic license: "In the stillness that followed the rain, he could almost hear
his ancestors speaking softly." Hazen-Hammond discusses the need to honor with
privacy some sacred religious practices by not photographing them, although she
still speaks of them in her text. For a more clear-eyed approach to the Pueblo
culture, look instead to Marcia Keegan's Pueblo Boy (BCCB 4/91), George Ancona's
Earth Daughter, or Bruce Hucko's Where There Is No Name for Art. EAB
HEO, YUMI 
One Sunday Morning; written and illus. by Yumi Heo. 
Orchard,
1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33156-3 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30156-7 
$15.95 
M 
4-6 yrs
Minho and his father go on an outing to Central Park and engage in a variety of
activities, starting with a ride on the subway. As they walk along the park paths
they observe bicyclists, joggers, and roller-bladers, watch people sail remote-con-
trol boats in a pond, buy lunch from a hot dog vendor, watch a clown make bal-
loon animals, go to the zoo, etc. At the end of a long catalogue of park activities,
the boy rides the carousel, after which comes a puzzling revelation: "'Rise and
shine!' said Minho's father as he pulled up the blind. 'Oh no! It was only a
Dreeeeeeeeeeeam'" says a disappointed Minho as he sits up in his bed. Heo's
collage art is endearing and fanciful, with energetic compositions that balance
slanted, curved, and horizontal perspectives with creative placement of items and
characters. Unfortunately, the story is merely a list of things to do in the park, and
there is little action. Minho's awakening is an unexpected and jarring conclusion
that has little inherent logic and even less satisfaction. Listeners who enjoy list-
making may take a shine to this sunnily illustrated title; others will prefer to take
their own walk in the park. JMD
316 
* THE BULLETIN
HOLT, DANIEL D., tr. and ed. 
Tigers, Frogs, and Rice Cakes: A Book of Korean
Proverbs; illus. by Soma Han Stickler. 
Shen's, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 1-885008-10-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Tired of the phrase "Speak of the devil"? How about "Speak of the tiger, and it
appears"? Looking for a variation on "The grass is always greener"? Try "Someone
else's rice cake looks bigger." These and eighteen other Korean proverbs appear
here with a full-page or double-spread treatment that includes an illustration, the
proverb in Korean (both in the Korean alphabet and in a phonetic pronunciation),
and an English translation. Some concepts, as in the aforementioned two, will be
familiar; some ("While two are eating, one wouldn't know even if the other dies")
lack any obvious English counterpart but will be quickly understandable nonethe-
less, and some ("A frog in a well") will simply pique curiosity. Proverbs have a
word-gamish appeal that certainly pertains here; guessing at the meanings, coming
up with other versions, and making up their own original proverbs will keep kids
happily engrossed. The art doesn't pack the same proverbial punch, unfortunately;
the draftsmanship is stilted and the colors often inharmonious, but the illustra-
tions do provide a decorative setting for the maxims. An introduction offers gen-
eral information on proverbs and on the approach here, while specific interpretations
appear at the end of the book. DS
HOPKINS, LEE BENNETT, comp. 
Lives: Poems about Famous Americans; illus. by
Leslie Staub. 
HarperCollins, 1999 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027768-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027767-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 3-6
Fourteen VIPs, arranged chronologically from Paul Revere to Neil Armstrong, are
showcased in this uneven collection of celebratory verse (most commissioned ex-
pressly for this title). In "Till," Helen Keller receives a tribute of some delicacy
from Tom Robert Shields: "No roses seen./ No songbird heard./ No moonlight./
Not a single word./ Till . .. Annie came." Beverly McLaughland suggests the
mystery and tension of Harriet Tubman's midnight rendezvous: "And one night/
The whippoorwill calls/ And the warm air/ Carries the haunting sound/ Across the
fields/ And into the small dark cabins." An old-fashioned naivetd which assumes
uncritical, universal acclaim of the subjects permeates the collection, though, and
many readers will recognize that John F. Kennedy, the Hero of PT 109, had feet of
clay that go unnoticed here, that Abe the Rail-Splitter was not roundly adored, and
that Eleanor Roosevelt's face can hardly be described as "a portrait of beguiling
grace." While students may be able to scoop up a little Social Studies extra credit
with an entry or two, poetry lovers probably won't be engaged by the likes of "O,
Babe, come back/ Hit one more/ Homer/ For one of your earth's children." Full-
page folk-artsy color portraits (all with narrow-eyed stares and most with eerily
interchangeable features) accompany the poems, and a concluding double spread
offers a paragraph of biographical information for each personage. EB
HOWARD, EuEN 
The Gate in the Wall. Karl/Atheneum, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-82295-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
When Emma is shut out from her job at the silk mill, she's reluctant to return
MAY 1999 
* 317
home to her brother-in-law's blows, so she decides to pass through the mysterious
gate in the town wall that has long fascinated her. What she finds on the other
side, the canal system and a gaily painted canal boat, seems a different world to the
Victorian factory girl. When she succumbs to her hunger and steals a potato from
the boat, its owner, Mrs. Minshull, insists she work off the theft by acting as
"huffler," guiding the canal horse and working the locks as the boat travels on to
deliver its cargo. Emma begins to settle into canal life and to develop an affection
for gruff but kindly Mrs. Minshull, but her concern about the family she's left
behind means she must make a decision about where her loyalty lies. Howard's
picture of a little-known aspect of Victorian life is vivid and affectionate, weaving
in North Country phraseology (there's a glossary in the back) and technical/eco-
nomic details about the canals without drying out the narrative. There's a solidity
to the plot that makes its simplicity (there's little complexity of motives, and the
happy ending is tidy and unsurprising) straightforward rather than shallow, and
Emma's blossoming in the wider world she'd never seen in her industrial city is
effectively presented. Here's an intriguing portrait of nineteenth-century exist-
ence that offers a contrast to stories of millwork and farm life. DS
HUNTER, RYAN ANN 
Dig a Tunnel; illus. by Edward Miller. 
Holiday House,
1999 26 p
ISBN 0-8234-1391-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7yrs
Lest enthusiastic listeners take the imperative title too seriously, Hunter opens
with a warning in stop-sign red: "Digging tunnels can be extremely dangerous,
because they sometimes collapse. Never try to dig your own tunnel." That said,
she offers a series of loosely organized observations on animal tunnels (of moles
and ants), historical tunnels (for access to water and castle invasion), criminal tun-
nels (for prisoner escapes and bank robberies), and contemporary tunnels (Chesa-
peake Bay Bridge-Tunnel, the Chunnel, the Mont Blanc Car Tunnel). Several
spreads on tunnel engineering and construction top off the text, which closes with
a glance toward the future: "Some people are planning whole cities underground.
What would it be like to live there?" Stylized, matte finished buildings and ve-
hicles sport the friendly familiarity of a child's toy-town play set. Even the clearest
illustrations, though, cannot answer a number of questions raised and left dan-
gling by the text-Why are the rock walls hot in the deepest mine tunnels? How
do tunnel crews working inward from opposite ends manage to meet in the middle?
Why are round tunnels better than arched tunnels in soft ground? Where will the
new undersea anchored tunnels be constructed? Still, not all children will clamor
for a deeper level of explanation, and those who simply revel in major earth mov-
ing projects are undoubtedly gonna dig this. EB
JONAS, ANN 
Bird Talk; written and illus. by Ann Jonas. 
Greenwillow,
1999 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14173-0 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14174-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 3-6 yrs
"Memory phrases" used by ornithologists to describe bird calls provide the inspira-
tion for this gallery of loosely related spreads, in which a bevy of North American
birds "converse" about the scenes they encounter on a typical day. A cat lurks in
the grass: the grey catbird and little tern mimic it with cries of "Meow" and "Kitty-
318 
* THE BULLETIN
kitty-kitty," while the willow ptarmigan warns, "Go-out, Go-out, Go-back, Go-
back." As a rabbit makes off with a carrot from a field, the blue jay and mocking-
bird call out "Thief! Thief! Thiefl" and the white-throated sparrow commiserates
with the farmer, "Oooh, poor Sam Peabody, Peabody, Peabody." 
Although the
birds are rendered with loving accuracy, individuals occasionally stray from their
customary turf, as the tundra-dwelling willow ptarmigan chats with a black rail
from warmer climes and the reclusive, forest-dwelling barred owl joins the more
sociable brown-headed cowbird at a family picnic. Birds aren't identified until the
concluding two pages, which offer a spread-by-spread key correlating memory
phrases with species. Undoubtedly bird fanciers already familiar with the voice
descriptions in their handy field guides will award the extended joke an apprecia-
tive twitter. But this still prompts the question-just how many pre- and primary
schoolers are up on their field guides? EB
KETCHAM, SALLIE 
Bach's Big Adventure; illus. by Timothy Bush. 
Orchard,
1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33140-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30140-0 
$16.95 
R 4-8 yrs
In contrast to Jeanette Winter's Bach bio (reviewed below), Ketcham bases her
fictionalized tale on "a story Bach liked to tell about his long walk to hear ... Jan
Adam Reincken ... 
play in St. Catherine's Church in Hamburg." Ketcham's
protagonist is a mouthy, arrogant little scamp, convinced he is the greatest organist
in the world, despite his older brother's insistence that "Old Adam Reincken of
Hamburg is the best. Go to bed." Young Bach figures that, since he can play
Reincken's music ("It's easy. I could play it with my toes"), he must be his musical
peer, and he sets out on foot to hear the master at work. As Reincken's music
"soothed the curly sheep, grazing silently on the golden heath" and "rolled high
above the countryside, dipping with the gulls," the youngster realizes he doesn't
yet have the music market cornered; the elder organist assures him, though, that
his talent is genuine, and Bach returns home a bit humbled but incorrigibly hopeful
for a brilliant future. Ketcham's narration is a rollicking bit of storytelling, with
evocative imagery and liberal doses of humor. Bush's watercolor characters wear
their emotions close to the surface, with cartoon-like expressiveness; the greeting-
card German landscape and its exuberant populace exude Gemiitlichkeit. Pair this
with Winter's Sebastian, pop in a CD, and your musical storytime is complete. EB
KOLLER, JACKIE FRENCH 
One Monkey Too Many; illus. by Lynn
Munsinger. 
Harcourt, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200006-2 
$16.00 
R 3-6 yrs
A rowdy primate crew ignores the warnings of their elders, with cumulatively glee-
ful results. A bikeman tells the first monkey that the bicycle is made for one, but
on hops a second monkey: "It started to wobble,/ it started to pitch./ One monkey
too many/ crashed into the ditch." Similar golf-carting and canoeing incidents
ensue, followed by a gross breach of etiquette at an overcrowded table in an elegant
restaurant, a decidedly unfriendly pillow fight in an overcrowded bed, and a clever
self-referential finale: "'Six,' said the author,/ 'This book is for six./ The pages are
full,/ so no more of your tricks.'" But one more monkey manages to sneak in
anyhow, and all seven trash the previous double spread before riding off in a golf
cart. Munsinger's line and watercolor cast are paragons of heedless energy, ap-
proaching each situation with the most innocent of countenances, then tossing
MAY 1999 
* 
319
self-control to the wind as they tumble across frenetic double spreads. Pair this
with your favorite version of "No More Monkeys Jumping on the Bed." Think
they might be relatives? EB
KRISHNASWAMI, UMA, ad. 
Shower of Gold: Girls and Women in the Stories ofln-
dia; illus. by Maniam Selven. 
Linnet, 1999 
[125p]
ISBN 0-208-02484-0 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Krishnaswami, author of The Broken Tusk: Stories ofthe Hindu God Ganesha (BCCB
10/96) returns with a fascinating collection of eighteen tales featuring heroines
and goddesses of India. From the well-known story of Savitri, who defeated the
God of Death in order to save her beloved husband, to wives who prove their
worth to unappreciative husbands and mothers-in-law, to goddesses of plenty and
of vengeance, Krishnaswami presents a selection of legends, folktales, and true
tales that run a wide gamut of emotional and cultural nuance. In her introduc-
tion, Krishnaswami discusses the movement of stories from place to place, time to
time, and culture to culture. She takes particular care in explaining the varied
origins of her tales as the Panchatantra and Mahabharata. An explanation of the
role of women in Indian culture, society, and religions that gives further context
for the tales is also included. Each individual story is followed by notes on that
specific tale; a pronunciation guide, a list of characters, a glossary, and further
source notes are appended at the conclusion of the volume. The notes and other
explanatory matter are succinct and informative, and they add tremendously to
the tales as written. The retellings, simply and poetically presented, are a fine
example of the storyteller's art and are accompanied by graceful black-and-white
line drawings. Humor, pathos, romance, and courage all have prominent places in
these stories of women, girls, and goddesses; set within the cultural framework so
expertly provided, these tales will be a rich and rewarding experience for both
readers and storytellers. JMD
LAFAYE,A. 
Strawberry Hill. Simon, 1999 
[272p]
ISBN 0-689-82441-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Raleia doesn't feel like she belongs in the modern world of 1976 ("The kids in her
class . . . called her Amelia Earhart because, like Amelia, Raleia was lost in the
past"), and she doesn't feel like she belongs in her family with her eccentric hippie
parents. Now they've moved to Tidal, Maine, which has tried to keep itself a
living museum of the town it was in 1911, when a tidal wave brought tragedy to
the town; Raleia is exhilarated by the proximity to such history, especially in the
person of Mr. Rutherford, a recluse who shut himself away after the disaster. As
Raleia gets to know Mr. Rutherford, she begins to realize that her rosy view of the
past doesn't tell the whole story, and she also begins to realize that her parents do
indeed love her despite their atypical ways of showing it. The book unfortunately
shifts emotional tempi too often, with skirmishes and rapprochement between
Raleia and Mr. Rutherford and between Raleia and a parent repeating themselves
rather than increasing in depth of impact; Mr. Rutherford's pristine isolation is
also rather more convenient than credible. The specter of the past-both the
town's and the family's-shadows the proceedings quietly but effectively, how-
ever, and Raleia's struggles are authentic; her frustration with her parents, who
320 
* 
THE BULLETIN
veer between being overprotective to being overly demanding of maturity, is un-
derstandable. With its easygoing yet imaginative style, this examination of a girl's
search for her own time and place will strike a chord with similarly inquisitive
young readers. DS
LESSER, CAROLYN 
Spots: Counting Creatures from Sky to Sea; illus. by Laura
Regan. 
Harcourt, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-200666-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
A rhyming text introduces a variety of spotted creatures and some fun-and-fancy
vocabulary to describe them in this ecologically minded counting book. From one
to ten, Lesser describes creatures of the sea and sky: "flapping, looping, cruising
spots" describes "one leopard ray"; "slinking, prowling, hunting spots" describes
"two sleek jaguars"; "scuffling, climbing, piling spots" describes "nine Sally
Nightfoot crabs," and so on. Lesser's inventive language is accompanied by glossy
photo-like (but not necessarily realistic) oil and gouache paintings that play to the
nuances of the variegated skins, feathers, fins, and furs of the featured creatures.
Golden spotted trout crowd together in clear water, black and yellow salamanders
climb over smooth wet stones, and sloe-eyed giraffes nibble on lofty green leaves,
on double-page spreads that, while a bit slick, will catch the eyes of close-up and
far away viewers. The counting-book format is more for structure than instruc-
tion, and Lesser's opening and closing rhymes are excessively cute, but her descrip-
tive language for each creature is unusual and chantable. The final page entitled
"More to Explore" defines the biomes-open ocean, coral reefs, savannah, tun-
dra, etc.-inhabited by the various wildlife. JMD
LEVINE, GAIL CARSON 
The Fairy's Mistake. HarperCollins, 1999 
87p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028061-1 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028060-3 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
The Princess Test. 
HarperCollins, 1999 
91p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028063-8 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028062-X 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Readers enchanted by Ella (Ella Enchanted, BCCB 5/97) now embark on two
separate journeys to the fairy tale village of Snettering-on-Snoakes, in the kingdom
of Biddle, where fair maidens get their guys despite the best efforts of Fate and
annoying adults to keep them apart. In The Fairy's Mistake, lovely Rosella is re-
warded for a kind deed to the fairy Ethelinda, who arranges that her every utter-
ance will be accompanied by an outpouring of jewels; nasty sister Myrtle, who tries
to replicate her sibling's success, is punished with a similar cascade of loathsome
reptiles and insects. However, in a near miss of fairy-tale justice, Rosella is wed to
a greedy prince, while Myrtle happily exploits the bribery and threat potential of
her new gift, and it takes some down-to-earth negotiation to set things right. The
Princess Test, a retelling of"The Princess and the Pea," finds accident-prone Lorelei
undergoing a bizarre series of tests-from finding a fleck of tuna in chocolate cake
icing, to observing that the bodice and skirt of an elaborate gown are ever-so-
slightly mismatched in weight-while her prince suitor sweats out the results. Both
tales are breezily told, with a wealth of comic detail, slyly contemporary dialogue,
and genuine affection for the genre that inspired them. EB
MAY 1999 
* 321
LURIE, ALISON, ad. 
The Black Geese: A Baba Yaga Story from Russia; illus. by
Jessica Souhami. 
DK Ink, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2558-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Elena is left in charge of her baby brother when her parents go to market; absorbed
in playing games with her friends, she leaves the boy unattended, giving the baby-
stealing geese of the terrible witch Baba Yaga an opportunity too good to miss.
Elena races to the rescue, receiving gifts from a fish, a squirrel, and a mouse on her
way. Stealing her brother back from the sleeping Baba Yaga is easy enough, but
making good their escape is a bit more complicated. Baba Yaga gives chase, but
she is foiled when Elena's gifts of shell, walnut, and pebble turn into a lake, a
forest, and a mountain range and block her hungry pursuit. This is a stripped-
down retelling with no superfluous words-it is strictly action from start to finish.
Cut-paper collage is set upon a sand-colored background, against which Elena's
red skirt and green vest pop with hot intensity. Souhami's experience as a shadow
puppeteer is evident here, as the figures have the feeling of shadow puppets in their
physical motions, angular bodies, and occasionally unattached limbs. Unfortu-
nately the illustrations suffer from an undeniable flatness and lack of emotion that
undercuts the story's impact. A source note indicates Lurie's retelling is partly
based on a tale in Aleksandr Afanasyev's collection Russian Fairy Tales and was
previously published in her collection Clever Gretchen and Other Forgotten Folk-
tales (BCCB 6/80). JMD
MCNAMEE, GRAHAM 
Hate You. 
Delacorte, 1999 
119p
ISBN 0-385-32593-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Alice Silvers' words "Hate You" cut to the quick of adolescent angst as she writes
of a father whose near-strangulation of her, in a fit of rage when she was five, left
her voice scratchy and broken. Now Alice can only dream of singing her song,
with a normal voice, to her absent father. Meanwhile, she meets Eric (who loves
her voice because it's her) and his cousin Rachel (who possesses an angelic voice
but no confidence), who help to break down the walls she has built to shut every-
one out. Rachel records one of Alice's songs, but not until Alice records her own
song in her own "Frankenstein" voice does she have the courage to confront her
dying father. McNamee uses stock teenage fare to lure his audience in quickly:
angry teenager, abusive father, hate-filled thoughts. What saves this book is
McNamee's realistic portrayal of Alice's intimate relationships with Eric, Rachel,
her mother, and her father, revealing with candor the ongoing battle of adoles-
cence as emerging adults struggle to find their own voices. EAB
MCPHAIL, DAVID 
Mole Music; written and illus. by David McPhail. 
Holt,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8050-2819-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
The cycle of work, dinner, television, and bedtime leaves a void in Mole's solitary
life, but hearing a man play the violin on television one night gives Mole a new
interest and purpose. When his mail order instrument arrives, he sets right to
work on learning it, "but instead of beautiful music, all he made was a horrible
screeching sound." For years he practices and improves, never realizing the impact
322 
* THE BULLETIN
his hobby is making on the world outside his tunnel home. Watercolor paintings
in rich tones of blue and brown contrast with subtle humor the private world of
Mole's underground abode and the happiness and peace his music brings to affairs
of the wider world above. The sapling whose roots reach into Mole's tunnel serves
as a visual barometer of his artistic growth, cringing and drooping at his early
efforts, but becoming stout and lush as his skill improves and the musical staff
wafts through its foliage. Literal-minded listeners may wonder at Mole's longevity
and at the anachronistic parade of historical figures and types who find-and even
make-peace around Mole's tree, but they should nonetheless warm to the gentle
reminder that music does, indeed, have "charms to soothe a savage breast." EB
MAESTRO, BETSY 
The Story of Clocks and Calendars: Marking a Millennium; il-
lus. by Giulio Maestro. 
Lothrop, 1999 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14549-3 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14548-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Not just another rider on the millennium bandwagon, this title actually puts the
human obsession with time measures and markers into perspective, briskly (and
often humorously) unraveling the tangle of competing calendars that reflect di-
verse world views. Maestro begins with historical consideration of our increasing
need to track seasons accurately and to break time into increasingly tinier, measur-
able portions. This leads into a discussion of the development of the most widely
accepted Western calendar and a comparison of calendars from other cultures past
and present. From here she segues smoothly into an overview of timekeepers,
from the earliest sundials to the atomic clock. By the time Maestro reaches her
conclusion with remarks on fixing the exact date and place for the dawning of the
millennium, readers should easily catch her implicit message-millennium is so
relative and amorphous a concept that grasping for exactitude is grasping at straws.
Although the text flows as a continuous essay, an index and miscellaneous time-
related addenda make this accessible to students on the prowl for info-bites, and
the color illustrations, though more workmanlike than attractive, ably illuminate
some of the thornier concepts within the text. Happy Y2K, or whatever. EB
MILLER, BRANDON MARIE 
Dressed for the Occasion: WhatAmericans Wore, 1620-
1970. Lerner, 1999 
96p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-1738-8 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Lively text and heaps of sharply reproduced sepia-toned illustrations guide readers
on a chronological jaunt through American fashion and the economic, political,
and social trends that influence it. Emphasis here is on everyday attire rather than
haute couture, and men's and children's costume gets plenty of time in the spot-
light alongside the more oft-treated women's clothing; American Indian and slave
clothing is also briefly analyzed, particularly in relation to availability of materials
and white standards of dress. While Miller supplies a gold mine of intriguing
trivia (from wig snatchers of the seventeenth century to the oh-so-desirable ar-
senic-induced pallor of the nineteenth century), still more impressive is her ability
to compact so broad a topic into so cogent and smoothly written a narrative. The
bibliography and index will be welcome features for report writers, and even the
most casual picture browsers may be surprised to find themselves actually perusing
the text. EB
MAY 1999 
* 323
MOSIER, ELIZABETH My Life as a Girl. Random House, 1999 
[212p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99035-6 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89035-1 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
The book opens with Jaime safely ensconced as a freshman at Bryn Mawr, away
from the father in jail and the bad-boy boyfriend, Buddy, who filled her world in
Phoenix before she left. When Buddy turns up at Bryn Mawr, Jaime is catapulted
back into all she's trying to get away from, and the book then flashes back to the
long hot Phoenix summer before college. Working two jobs, sticking to the straight
and narrow in an attempt to differentiate herself from her father (who awaits trial
for stealing Jaime's college money), Jaime finds Buddy a seductive emblem of all
she's denying. Buddy's visit proves that the end of the summer didn't finish this
chapter in her life, and when she returns from college for the Christmas holiday,
she looks for closure. Mosier has an imagistic and sophisticated style that's atmo-
spheric but sometimes brittle and distancing. The feeling is that of a short-story
mood piece, and when drawn out for the length of a novel the pacing and overall
impact suffers as a result of the focus on sensation rather than plot curve. The
picture ofJaime is memorable, however, as she labors through the sizzling Phoenix
summer poised on the brink of change. DS
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Monster. 
HarperCollins, 1999 
[288p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028078-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028077-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
In prison awaiting trial for felony murder, sixteen-year-old Steve Harmon, film
student, deals with the terrifying situation by writing it as a film script. In between
the precise and distanced script sections are handwritten first-person notes detail-
ing Steve's emotional reactions to his incarceration, to his parents' fear and grief,
to the events of the trial. The crime was one of robbery, in which a store owner
was killed; the prosecution, based on testimony of informants, claims Steve acted
as lookout. While the script is sometimes a bit stilted and the pacing of the court-
room scenes sometimes flags, Steve's panic is keenly conveyed, and his questions
about who he is-is he, as the prosecutor states, the "monster" of the title?-are
purposive but direct and valid. Myers gives the situation a sharp, unsentimental
edge, however, in his subtle yet clear indications that Steve did in fact get mixed
up in the crime and that he's now trying to convince himself as well as the jury of
his own lack of culpability. The book therefore clamors to be used as a discussion
starter, with possible topics ranging from the justice of Steve's fate to the accuracy
of the "monster" characterization to the fairness and effectiveness of the system as
a whole. While less experienced readers may need some guidance in picking up
the clues about Steve's involvement, the drama of the situation and the ethical
questions raised will keep the audience not just reading but thinking. DS
NAMIOKA, LENSEY 
Ties That Bind, Ties That Break. Delacorte, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-385-32666-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Ailin, third daughter of a Chinese civil servant with an admiration for Western
culture, succeeds through tantrums and resistance in convincing her father not to
insist that her feet be bound. Although many family friends gladly adopt Western
324 
* THE BULLETIN
fashion and agree to the inevitability of change, the foot binding tradition dies
hard; Ailin's engagement to the son of a respectable, affectionate family is broken
and her prospects as a respectable woman in early twentieth-century China be-
come a matter of grave concern. Ailin attends public school and trains to become
a teacher, but when her father dies, her uncle, as family patriarch, withdraws finan-
cial support for her education and gives her the alternatives of becoming a farmer's
wife, a nun, or a concubine. Now at the age of twelve (by Western reckoning) she
parlays her education and command of English into a job as amah, or nanny, to
the children of a missionary couple and eventually accompanies them when they
return to the United States. Namioka explores the complexities of abandoning
long-standing tradition, and narrator Ailin voices regret over her broken engage-
ment, her break with her family, and her considerable loss of social status. How-
ever, Namioka also interjects through overheard family dialogues a cumbersome
amount of historical background concerning China's foreign relations, which fre-
quently stalls the action of Ailin's otherwise compelling personal story. EB
NOVAK, MATT 
The Robobots; written and illus. by Matt Novak. Jackson/DK
Ink, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2566-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
A family of alien robot-like beings has trouble finding acceptance in their new
earth neighborhood until they welcome their neighbors into their strange house,
where animated chairs fly and sentient coat racks run away with the visitors' hats.
Once the ice breaks, misunderstanding and fear turn to discovery and friendship:
"It was time to go. Cousin Coatrack gave Mr. Peebles his hat back. 'That is the
most fun I've had in years,' said Miss Grizwald. 'Me too,' said Mr. Bumpus."
Listeners will enjoy the dialogue-driven text, the mixed-up confusions of the
Robobots, and the accessible plot sprinkled with alliteration and rhyme: "The
refrigerator said, 'Rink-a-tink. Have a cool drink.' The stove said, 'Huff-a-puff-
puff. I bake good stuff.'" The silliness is further captured by cartoon-like acrylic
illustrations in a candy-coated palette of primary and secondary colors. The faces
are individualized and expressive, while cylindrical shapes, curved lines, and unob-
trusive patterning (white-speckled foregrounds or backgrounds) convey dimen-
sion, depth, and texture. Eye-pleasing compositions work their way through a
rhythmic interplay of single- and double-page spreads that build to a satisfying
close as the Robobot family, trying to interest a lamppost in dinner, announces
that they like their new neighbors after all, even if some of them are a little strange.
JNH
PATNEAUDE, DAVID 
Framed in Fire. Whitman, 1999 
[21 4 p]
ISBN 0-8075-9098-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Peter's stepfather clearly has it in for him-Buck has carefully, with the aid of a
cold psychiatrist, established that Peter is hyperactive and even violent so that he
needs medication and, finally, hospitalization. At Resthaven Hospital, Peter finds
allies where he didn't expect them, and he also finds intimations of past mystery
about his father's death when Peter was only two. Soon Peter is on the run, helped
by a friendly hospital employee on a journey to find the man they believe is Peter's
still-living father. The book seems unsure as to which kind of formula fiction it
MAY 1999 
* 325
really wishes to be-the Cinderella stepchild plot doesn't really fit with the thread
about Peter's half-brother's psychic visions, and the move to the road trip is abrupt;
the characters are cursory or cliched, especially the Snidely Whiplash stepfather.
The pacing is swift and the reading easy, however, and Peter's first-person narra-
tion offers readers the distinct pleasure of empathizing with his being cruelly mis-
understood and unfairly disposed of. Kids looking for enjoyable adventure will
warm to the "My real parents would never be this mean" fantasy played out as
truth in novel form. DS
PILKEY, DAV 
Captain Underpants and the Attack of the Talking Toilets; written
and illus. by Dav Pilkey. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1999 
140p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-590-63136-5 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-63427-5 
$3.99 
-
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
A book featuring superhero Captain Underpants and a fleet of man-eating toilets
is pretty much reviewer-proof, but you might as well know it's here. Those famil-
iar with the Captain's previous flight (The Adventures of Captain Underpants) will
understand that Captain Underpants is just the principal, who responds to a post-
hypnotic suggestion by becoming said officer of unmentionables from time to
time-the real heroes are George and Harold, lovable fourth-graders with a slight
tendency towards mischief. In this outing, George and Harold intend to copy
their Captain Underpants comic book and accidentally use the genius-nerd's sci-
ence project, which brings pictured images to three-dimensional reality. This re-
sults in carnivorous toilets galloping through the school, chanting "YUM, YUM, EAT
'EM UP" and consuming all the teachers, until the boys elicit regurgitation by feed-
ing the commodes cafeteria food and then trounce the Turbo Toilet with a hastily
created super Robo-Plunger. The format cobbles together regular text, comic-
panel pages, joking disclaimers, and a truthfully advertised "cheesy animation tech-
nique" that makes flip books look slick by comparison, but that's the point-this
is dopey fun. The combination of total departure from reality, smirky insider
humor ("They'll never let us get away with that in a children's book!" exclaims
George at one point), and crucial taboos as plot points will draw middle-graders
like magnets. There's no depth or expansion in the story, just the one relentlessly
glib note, so proceedings spin out over rather a long time. The effect is one of
reading a television cartoon, one designed by third-graders with unusual concen-
tration; the simply lined black-and-white illustrations (which make the boys vaguely
reminiscent of streamlined Calvins from Calvin and Hobbes) have a polish that
third-graders wouldn't manage, but they provide all the yucks that fans could wish.
A tome for the ages this ain't, but it'll make kids laugh until soda comes out of
their noses. DS
PRIGGER, MARY SKILLINGS 
Aunt Minnie McGranahan; illus. by Betsy
Lewin. 
Clarion, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-82270-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
Minnie McGranahan is an incredibly neat, organized woman, who has a day for
every chore on her neat little farm and a place for everything in her neat little
house. Her neighbors in St. Clere all agree that "it's lucky Minnie McGranahan
has no children. Children might interfere with Minnie's system." When Minnie
suddenly inherits her brother's nine orphaned children, everyone wonders how
326 
* THE BULLETIN
she'll cope-but Minnie "had a system. Her system was that-The oldest looked
after the youngest. The ones in the middle looked after each other. And Aunt
Minnie looked after them all." Her system is well-oiled with laughter, hugs, and
harmonica tunes, and it works whether the children are bathing, running chores,
or waiting in line for the johnny-house ("Aunt Minnie had a system for the johnny-
house. It was short and simple. 'Stand in line, wait your turn, and help with the
buttons"'). This buoyant family story about a houseful of children and their lov-
ing aunt is complemented by Lewin's lighthearted watercolors. The early twenti-
eth-century setting features a wood-burning stove, baths in a wooden barrel, and
Aunt Minnie's Model T Ford. From jaunty cows and chickens to a passel of dot-
eyed, expressive kids to the indomitable Minnie herself, Lewin has populated
Prigger's tale with memorable characters in a style reminiscent of James Stevenson
at his best. Young readers will be tickled by Minnie and her brood and, in the end,
will agree with Minnie's neighbors, who say, "Well, who would believe it? Minnie
McGranahan must have liked children after all." JMD
REICH, 
SUSANNA 
Clara Schumann: 
Piano 
Virtuoso. Clarion,
1999 
[128p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-89119-1 
$19.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Marked for musical greatness by her piano-teacher father from early youth, Clara
Schumann rose from prodigy to successful professional artist, earning pan-Euro-
pean respect and enough money to support her large family. Reich, daughter of a
musicologist specializing in Schumann, effectively paints the picture of Schumann's
life: her obedient childhood performances as essentially an advertisement for her
father's talent, her rebellious attachment to music student Robert Schumann, her
post-marriage combining of family and professional obligations, and her becom-
ing the mainstay of the family after her husband's commitment to an insane asy-
lum (where he soon died) are all thoughtfully explored. Excellent use of original
material helps bring the realities of Schumann's unusual life into focus (an epi-
logue discusses source material in detail), making clear the astonishing height of
this woman's achievement in an era when women were muses, not musicians, and
demonstrating the extent of her effect in the artistic world in which she traveled.
The result is a revealing look at the nineteenth-century musical milieu as well as a
capable biography of a woman whose historic importance is being rediscovered.
Black-and-white reproductions of period art and photographs appear throughout;
a timeline and an index will be included. DS
ROCKLIN, JOANNE 
StrudelStories. Delacorte, 1999 
131p
ISBN 0-385-32602-5 
$14.95 
R Gr.4-8
Members of a Jewish family tell their stories across generations while baking stru-
del in kitchens from Odessa to New York's lower east side to Los Angeles. Each
strudelmaker tells family stories of children growing up, of emigrating to America,
of the hardship and rewards of living in a new land, because, as Grandfather Willy
says, "Without stories a strudel is a big fat flop." The passing on of stories is
combined with the passing on of family recipes for strudel, and Rocklin's sincere
narrative voice never falters. The book is divided by kitchens-Sarah's Kitchen,
Bertie's Kitchen, Willie's Kitchen-and within each section several stories are told.
The stories are related by adults, but the tales are often childhood memories, and
MAY 1999 
* 327
the child-centered point of view ensures the interest of young readers. Rocklin
based her fiction on "the memoirs of ordinary people," and each of her narrators
has an individual, personal voice that rings true. It's a tribute to Rocklin's story-
telling that this light but nourishing title leaves readers wanting more. An author's
note, a family tree, and strudel recipes are included. JMD
SAN Souci, ROBERT D. 
Brave Margaret: An Irish Adventure; illus. by Sally Wern
Comport. 
Simon, 1999 
40p
ISBN 0-689-81072-5 
$17.00 
R 
6-lOyrs
Brave Margaret leaps at the chance to leave her isolated home and go to sea with
Simon, a handsome stranger. Their voyage, however, is not without peril-on the
third day, a sea monster demands "the red woman," Margaret, as payment for not
swallowing ship and sailors. Simon refuses, but Margaret lowers herself in a small
boat, and with nerve and strength, hurls an axe deep into the maw of the monster
and kills it. The death throes of the creature cause mountainous waves that push
Simon's ship out to sea and Margaret's boat to the shore, where she shelters in the
cottage of an old woman. When Simon arrives seeking Margaret, the old woman
captures them with sorcery and demands that Simon slay the giant that stole her
family treasure. Many have died trying, and Simon is doomed as well, until Mar-
garet seizes a magic sword and, in a momentous battle, slays the giant. San Souci's
skill for retelling traditional tales doesn't desert him here-Margaret's bravery,
Simon's nobility, the old woman's sorcery, and even the giant's habitual homi-
cides are evoked in vigorous language that lends itself to reading or telling aloud.
The specifically sourced, action-packed text cuts to the chase (or, in this case, the
sea monster) by the fourth turn of a page, and the pace doesn't let up until the final
double-page spread of Simon and Margaret's wedding under a sunset sky.
Comport's pastel illustrations, while soft for the sea, light, and the lovers, have
enough of an edge to make the stormy waves roil with power. From a determined
Simon galloping under turbulent skies toward the deadly giant, to Margaret, her
red hair flaming as she rides a wild-eyed horse to Simon's rescue, to the giant
himself, grimacing ugly with toothy mouth and hairy snout, the compositions
seethe with drama and intensity. The end-tying conclusion, with giant defeated,
old woman restored, and lovers united, resounds satisfyingly: "Their wedding
lasted nine nights and nine days, but their happiness lasted a lifetime." JMD
SCHMIDT, GARY D. 
Anson's Way. 
Clarion, 1999 
[224p]
ISBN 0-395-91529-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Anson Stapylton has always dreamed of being a Staffordshire Fencible, a soldier
serving His Majesty, George II, following in the military footsteps of his father and
his father's father. As drummer for the Fencibles he is sent, under his colonel
father's command, to maintain the peace in Ireland. Anson soon learns that main-
taining the peace means different things to different men, and he is torn between
his desire to be an honor to his family and his realization that justice is not always
served by the Crown. The tragic burning of a town by the English forces in retali-
ation for the death of an officer exacerbates the tension between the occupying
English army and the Irish. After his father is seriously wounded and a harsher
officer assumes command, Anson takes justice into his own hands and pays a high
price for his decision. Eighteenth-century Ireland is depicted as a land of wild
328 
* THE BULLETIN
beauty, and her peoples' passionate desire to hold onto their history and language
is poetically realized. A short introduction sets the scene and provides some his-
torical context. This is a complex action/adventure novel with a shifting moral
center in which characters make life and death decisions based on strongly held
belief systems; readers will come away understanding both Anson's decision and
his confusion. JMD
Sis, PETER 
Trucks Trucks Trucks; written and illus. by Peter Sis. 
Greenwillow,
1999 
24p
ISBN 0-688-16276-2 
$14.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
Matt of Fire Truck (BCCB 1/99) returns, this time taking a slight diversion as he
puts away his toys. Luscious action verbs (on most spreads, the only text) border
the page as Matt tidies by DIGGING, PLOWING, PUSHING, SWEEPING, and so on with
the trucks that had been strewn about his room. Sis employs the same vigorous
simple line on white background as in Matt's previous outing, this time relying on
classic truck-yellow with a few subtle accents; he cleverly shifts the ratio of boy to
truck as the pages progress and the trucks get larger, with Matt initially boy with
toy and finally the capable driver of a fold-out-spread crane. Imbued with the roar
of machines and opportunities for sound effects, this will gun toddlers' motors.
DS
SMALLS, IRENE 
Kevin andHis Dad; illus. by Michael Hays. 
Little, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-79899-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
In this companion to Jonathan and His Mommy (BCCB 1/93), Kevin and his
father clean house and then enjoy a day together. Domestic chores are given a
playful twist: "First we take the vacuum and railroad the rugs-/ choo, choo, com-
ing through!/ I love cleaning up with you," and "Next we fix, fix, fix the faucets,/
squeeze, squeeze, squeeze the soap,/ dunk, dunk, dunk the dishes." Though the
scansion sometimes stumbles, the verse effectively uses alliteration, repetition, and
rhyme to express emotion, provide dramatic movement, and give a sense of
housekeeping's repetitiveness. Michael Hays' oil paintings are filled with comple-
mentary combinations of blues and oranges, accented by green. Soft, diffused
light spills into each double-page spread, suggesting sunlight or the city's neon
signs. The figures are realistic, but the drafting is inconsistent and often flat: the
clearly drawn and warmly attractive picture of Kevin's father rubbing his son's
head is followed by distorted drafting of the father at the movie theater and run-
ning with Kevin. Still, this may motivate young listeners toward the energetic
completion of a few household chores. JNH
SMITH, CHARLES R. JR. 
Rimshots: Basketball Pix, Rolls, and Rhythms; written and
illus. by Charles R. Smith, Jr. 
Dutton, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46099-3 
$15.99 
R Gr. 4-8
Packed with the energy of a full-court press, this book uses photography, concrete
poetry, and free verse stream-of-consciousness writing to evoke a love of basket-
ball. Each entry fits compactly into a double spread and offers very personal angles
from inside the game. Smith begins his tribute with "I remember," recounting his
personal experiences with basketball ("I remember being so small that I wondered
how I wiould ever get that big orange ball into that basket that seemed so high"),
MAY 1999 
* 
329
then moves on to the swooping trajectory of "The Sweetest Roll" ("As I/ rise/
high/ to the sky/ I/let fly/ my/ all/ with the/ ball/ as the/ buzzer/ sounds/ and the/
swish/ falls") and "Please Put Me In, Coach!!" ("I know that last time I turned the
ball over 10 times and that even though I was only in for 15 minutes, I made 4
fouls; but I promise I'll change"). Smith's text reveals his love for hip-hop and jazz,
sometimes playing better off the tongue than on the page ("Hot Like Fire") but
nonetheless evoking the heat, tension, and sweat of the neighborhood court.
Cropped two-toned photographs, in a newspapery taupe on black, offers unique
perspectives; text accented by a variety of fonts and colors and bouncing around
the pages in an enticing and sophisticated layout adds visual energy. For a slightly
older audience than Robert Burleigh's Hoops, pair this with Nick Dolin's Basket-
ball Stars. It might spur some of your own basketball aficionados (who would
rather shoot hoops than read) to create their own sports memoirs and then (gasp)
venture into the 796s. EAB
SPIRES, ELIZABETH 
Riddle Road: Puzzles in Poems and Pictures; illus. by Erik
Blegvad. 
McElderry, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-81783-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
This followup to With One White Wing (BCCB 2/96) uses the same riddling ap-
proach: each page contains a succinct riddle poem while an illustration provides
artful clues to the solution and the answer appears upside down at the page's bot-
tom. Subjects include a ladybug ("Stop telling me/ my house is on fire,/ my chil-
dren are gone!"), a Christmas tree ("Now stars hang on my arms/ and my hair is
filled with light"), and stars ("We listen to wishes/ but have no ears.// We're at
home in the dark/ without any fears"), and verses offer a variety of poetic forms
and often a nice line in subtle puns. There are a few confusing touches (why do
goldfish "fear only ice"?), but the combination of pithiness and accessibility will
intrigue many youngsters looking to add some verbal games to the I Spy pleasures.
Blegvad's illustrations are key to the riddling success: the precise watercolors in-
clude visual clues, jokes, and often the answer itself, providing kids with a boost
without making things insultingly easy. Like its predecessor, this is an engaging
junior puzzler for those not quite ready for J. Patrick Lewis' Riddle-icious (BCCB
6/96). DS
STEVENSON, 
JAMES 
Candy Corn; written 
and 
illus. 
by James
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 1999 
56p
ISBN 0-688-15837-4 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Stevenson, author of Popcorn (BCCB 4/98) and Sweet Corn (3/95) returns with
two dozen new poems, which loosely follow the trajectory of the year from "Early
Spring" through to fall ("The Morning after Halloween" and "Two Weeks Later").
Though the poems still tend towards the prosy, lacking the freshness of Valerie
Worth's equally accessible imagery, there is a varied array of sturdy and succinct
stanzas. "The Junkyard Guard" offers an amusing take on the old guy sitting at
the junkyard; "Dawn" is a mood piece about the coming of blue sky; "Night"
imaginatively depicts schoolbuses at the close of day. As in the previous titles, each
poem gets a double-page spread with its own unique format (fonts and print col-
ors, sometimes even page colors, change from spread to spread) and line-and-wa-
tercolor vignette; this volume benefits from particularly harmonious blendings and
330 
* THE BULLETIN
transitions from opening to opening. Young readers just beginning to steel them-
selves for non-comic poetry will find Stevenson's offhand approachability reassur-
ing indeed. DS
TALBERT, MARC 
Star ofLuis. Clarion, 1999 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-91423-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
When his father joins the army after the bombing of Pearl Harbor, Luis and his
mother, Sarah, leave Los Angeles to go back to her hometown of Las Manos, New
Mexico, to reconcile with her parents and to be there when her ailing father dies.
Luis has no idea what to expect but adapts quickly to outhouses, chores at dawn,
and a one-room schoolhouse. His transition is eased by his extended family, in-
cluding his father's younger brother Antonio and his uncle Solom6n, a Roman
Catholic priest. Revelations about the family's past are less easily handled-Luis is
shocked to learn his family is Jewish, descended from those who became Los
Conversos during the Spanish Inquisition, and that they have hidden their reli-
gion for generations. Luis' confusion ("How could he, Luis, look like a Mexican
and be a Jew? It seemed impossible-like being a girl and a boy at the same time")
prompts questions about circumcision, family customs, and faith. Talbert effec-
tively depicts Luis' worlds from the stickball games and racial epithets of LA to the
religious processions and corrida del gallo of Las Manos. The specifics of Luis'
family secret sometime careen out of control; instead of threads of detail being
interwoven into the plot, there is a recurring sense of being talked at by the author.
Talbert's language is earthy and immediate, however, and Luis' triumphant real-
ization of his own maturity results in a resonant conclusion. JMD
TAYLOR, ANN 
Baby Dance; illus. by Marjorie van Heerden. 
HarperFestival,
1999 
14p
ISBN 0-694-01206-8 
$5.95 
R 
6 mos.-2 yrs
In this adaptation of Taylor's poem, Mom is napping on the couch, and Dad
hushes their crying baby daughter with a rhythmic swing-around, dance-around
game: "Dance, little baby,/ to and fro/ Coo and crow, baby/ there you go." Fa-
ther and daughter cavort across varicolored pages, their happy motion indicated
by swooshes of white chalk against deep-toned backgrounds. The father's white
shirt glows against his brown skin and provides a focal point for each spread; baby's
black curls are tied up in bouncing blue, green, and yellow bows that dance along
with her "up to the ceiling,/ down to the ground/ Backward, forward,/ 'round and
'round." A good board book is worth its weight in dancing babies-here's a sturdy
title that will become a toddler collection staple. JMD
TAYLOR, MAUREEN 
Through the Eyes of Your Ancestors: A Step-by-Step Guide to
Uncovering Your Family's History. Houghton, 1999 
[96p] 
illus. with photo-
graphs
Trade ed. ISBN 0-395-86980-3 
$16.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-395-869282-X 
$8.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Rather than the plotted methodology suggested by the subtitle, Taylor offers a
broad menu of approaches and resources for tracking one's ancestry and hints for
compiling raw genealogical data into a focused family history. Chapters are orga-
MAY 1999 
* 331
nized around a variety of research challenges such as setting up logs and charts,
dealing with elusive personal and geographical names, investigating veterans and
civilian support personnel from different wartime eras. Information is often too
general to be of much practical help (the blithe annotation for the Library of Con-
gress website, "You can check their on-line catalog for materials that might apply,"
should drive novices into a state of confusion), and one can only hope that the
myriad special libraries staffs to which Taylor refers her readers are as gracious and
accommodating to child researchers as she predicts they will be. Although readers
with particular genealogical problems may not find specific guidance here beyond
advice to ask an expert (even such common challenges as drawing a pedigree chart
for a family with step-relatives or locating records for Holocaust victims are not
addressed), rookies will get a mind-broadening overview of the types of reference
materials that often prove productive to genealogists, particularly materials avail-
able on-line or in electronic formats. Black-and-white historical photos and some
chart samples are included; although no index is provided, source notes for each
chapter often include additional leads. EB
TREMBATH, DON 
A Beautiful Place on Yonge Street. 
Orca, 1999 
190p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55143-121-1 
$6.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Harper, ofA Fly NamedAlfred (BCCB 10/97), is now exercising his literary talents
at a summer writing camp. More notable than the writing, however, is the acqui-
sition of his first girlfriend in the person of lively Sunny. The relationship contin-
ues to blossom when Harper and Sunny return home, but a cloud looms on the
horizon when she contemplates moving away to attend art school. Funny but
authentically awkward and touching, Harper's narration captures the delights and
the confusion of young romance (meeting each other's parents, grappling for bra
hooks, pretending to have more experience than one does), and Trembath effec-
tively counterpoints Harper's growing closeness to Sunny with his discovery of a
warmth and togetherness in her family that his own never seems to muster. The
pacing lags a bit towards the finale, but the combination of heady first love and the
sad necessity of letting go will keep readers absorbed to the end-and ready for the
next installment in Harper's saga. DS
TSUBAKIYAMA, MARGARET HOLLOWAY 
Mei-Mei Loves the Morning; illus. by
Cornelius Van Wright and Ying-Hwa Hu. Whitman, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-5039-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Mei-Mei spends the morning with her grandfather, bicycling to the park, practic-
ing tai-chi, enjoying a street vendor's treat, and finally, sharing a warm embrace. A
brief third-person narrative catalogs Mei-Mei's enjoyment: "Mei-Mei loves the
morning because Grandpa lets her unzip the night cover on Bai-Ling's cage. Mei-
Mei looks inside the cage. Bai-Ling's eyes are shining in the darkness. When Mei-
Mei lifts off the cover, Bai-Ling begins to sing." Expressive watercolor and pencil
illustrations convey a loving relationship between grandparent and child. Double-
page spreads show home life, urban street scenes, and a park with its tree of bird
cages, concluding with a single-page picture of Mei-Mei in her grandfather's arms.
The liner notes place the story in "big-city China," a setting suggested by depic-
tions of a moon gate, bicycle-filled streets, and citizens practicing tai-chi. While
Mei-Mei and her grandfather are rendered with attractive, articulate faces, the
332 
* 
THE BULLETIN
background figures are distorted and less distinct, appearing stilted and frozen.
Intriguing cultural details (pickled vegetables for breakfast, bicycles loaded with
mattresses, a loa-bing vendor) are not enough to engage listeners in what is essen-
tially more a chronology of events than a developed storyline. Nevertheless, bal-
anced compositions and a palette of muted blues, greens, and browns bring out
Mei-Mei's luminous face and her round, pink-cheeked joy. JNH
WIELER, DIANA 
Drive. Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 1999 
245p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88899-347-1 
$15.95 
R Gr. 9-12
"Drive" is what Jens has-he drove himself to be his high-school football team's
wide receiver, he drove himself to sell mindboggling amounts of candy on behalf
of the team, and he drove himself as a car salesman, quitting school in his senior
year in order to make money while his dad was laid up recovering from a heart
attack. Unfortunately, Jens hits some major potholes: plummeting car sales have
resulted in his being laid off, he's behind in his rent, and his moody kid brother,
Daniel, a talented blues guitarist, is into a recording agent for $5000 and has
begged Jens for help. So now "drive" is what Jens does-he and Daniel take off in
Jens' dealer truck (retained without permission after Jens' firing) to crisscross
Manitoba finding audiences for Daniel's music and, more importantly, buyers for
Daniel's demo tapes. Wieler packs a tremendous energy into the love-hate rela-
tionship between the two brothers: Jens' failure and some dark family secrets are
eating him up, and he punishes Daniel unjustifiably and mercilessly, but Daniel's
arrogance and persistent self-sabotage lend some credibility to Jens' frustration.
The desperation in Jens' narration is palpable without being overplayed, his re-
grets about the downside of his approach, especially as he contrasts his own sex-
driven and perfunctory relationships with women with his brother's deep devotion
to a fellow musician, are effective, and his genuine talent at the game of salesman-
ship gives his character an original twist. The climax isn't quite worthy of the rest
of the book, but this is still an intense road story of brotherly anguish. DS
WILLAMS, SHERLEYANNE 
Girls Together; illus. by Synthia Saint James. 
Harcourt,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-15-230982-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Williams, author of Working Cotton (BCCB 10/92) leaves the migrant fields for
the urban projects in this paean to friendship. Four girls, "almost like stairsteps,"
slip outside on a summer morning before their mothers can find something for
them to do. They walk through and out of their neighborhood to a street where
sycamore, oak, and magnolia trees grow, and there they climb trees and pin mag-
nolia blossoms in their hair. Saint James' acrylic paintings are composed of clean
lines and geometric shapes against solid pages of saturated color; the emotions of
her featureless characters are hinted at through their body language. There is no
sense of place in these sanitized illustrations and little indication of the urban cen-
ter in which these girls live. Except for one double-page spread that shows a line of
nondescript buildings, the project is depicted against glossy color backgrounds
notable for their lack of detail. Plain but still colorful apartment buildings sans
trees are juxtaposed with colorful bungalows set on perfect green lawns complete
with palm trees, but the contrast is painless and lacks tension. Still, Williams' text
is a nuanced combination of description .("Ruise, the oldest, skinny as a snake,
have a grin make you grin with her, her teeth so white and straight") and action
MAY 1999 
* 
333
("We leave out the Project, all us girls together. Hey, hey, we say, and link arms
when we walk") that makes this first-person narration an undemanding and com-
fortable readaloud. JMD
WINTER, JEANETTE 
Sebastian: A Book about Bach; written and illus. by Jeanette
Winter. 
Browndeer/Harcourt, 1999 
[40p]
ISBN 0-15-200629-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
In melodious prose befitting the subject, Winter introduces Johann Sebastian's
musical forebears ("In the days of castles and kings, the birds listened when Vitus
Bach played his cittern") and sets the scene for this brief exploration of Bach's
education, fortunes and misfortunes as an instrumentalist and composer, and his
.prodigious body of work. Bach's sixty-five years are neatly compressed into a
child-size package through several gracefully deployed illustration devices-a two-
hundred-mile journey (on foot) is expressed as a black silhouette, arching over the
sleeping figure of Bach on a grassy knoll; career moves are represented by two
bewigged Bachs, fiddling amid four rolling hills crowned by churches; and the
temporal passage of the music itself is beautifully realized in a double spread featuring
a host of musicians perched atop ribbons of jewel-toned sound that ripple across a
star-studded black background. Folkloric cherubs hover above the magnificent
pipe organ as "his hands and feet flew over the keys and pedals. The music filled
the church like thunder. Angels listened." Primary schoolers will too. EB
WITHROW, SARAH 
Bat Summer. 
Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre,
1999 
174p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88899-351-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
At loose ends for the summer, Terence falls in with the eccentric Lucy, who loves
bats-actually, she wears a bat cape and insists that she is a bat. Proximity soon
breeds genuine friendship, and Terence becomes Lucy's ally, helping her negotiate
in her disorganized family and eventually providing her with supplies after she
runs away. Withrow paints the unusual friendship credibly, keeping Lucy's weird-
ness believably offputting but also believably intriguing as Terence compares her
world of limitless imagination to the more grounded-and limited-orthodoxy of
his best friend Tom. The aimlessness of summer kid existence makes for an effec-
tive undercurrent here as well, with the characters' general isolation in the face of
busy parents and preoccupied older siblings and cousins a constant background to
the relationship between the two friends. The runaway drama gets somewhat
prolonged, however, as Terence honors his promise not to reveal Lucy's where-
abouts in a bat-to-bat pact with his friend while the rest of the world is searching
for her; the suspicions thrown on an adult acquaintance of Lucy's are unnecessarily
melodramatic. Nonetheless, this is a smoothly told friendship story with some
unusual twists. DS
WOOD, NANCY 
Thunderwoman: A Mythic Novel ofthe Pueblos; illus. by Richard
Erdoes. 
Dutton, 1999 
28 6p
ISBN 0-525-45498-5 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 9-12
Wood meshes mythic themes and characters with recognized history in this fan-
tasy novel of the invasion of New Mexico by the Spaniards. It is 1522, in Arenal,
334 
* THE BULLETIN
New Mexico. Kobili, a powerful shaman, awaits the return of his great love. Her
rebirth as the baby Sayah is cause for rejoicing, but their rejoicing is short-lived, for
the time of the Great Goodness is over, and the people of the Pueblos will soon fall
beneath the heel of the Spanish Conquistadores. Seven of the nine parts of this
extensive narrative concentrate on the years between 1522-1680, and they force-
fully bring home the genocidal spirit of the invading conquerors, as well as the
spirited resistance of the Pueblos as they grimly fight to hold onto their religion
and their way of life. The eighth section jumps to Taos in 1847, "the last great
revolt in Nueva Mexico, the last time blood was spilled in the plazas, the last time
the Pueblos believed it was possible to return to an obsolete life"; the ninth section
leaps to New Mexico's Atomic City in 1947 and a new spirit of forgiveness among
the Pueblos toward their conquerors. The opening sections of this title have a
relentless momentum that drives the narrative despite a ponderously poetic style
that sometimes gets in its own way. Unfortunately, Wood loses her hard-won
momentum just when she needs it most, with a conclusion that peters off into
recent history and wishful thinking. The facile denouement, in which "the Mys-
tical Beings" representative of the Pueblo nation forgive their conquerors, is abruptly
reached and ungrounded in what has come before. This novel has more adult than
young adult appeal, but even that is bound to be limited by the dense re-creations
of the appalling but undifferentiated tragedies of Pueblo history. JMD
YUMOTO, KAZUMI 
The Spring Tone; trans. by Cathy Hirano. 
Farrar,
1999. 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-374-37153-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Tomomi is on spring break between elementary school and junior high; she is
coping with a household in which her parents are barely speaking, with a neighbor
who is causing great strife by the location of his garden wall, and with a younger
brother, Tetsu, who would rather sleep in an old bus in a garbage dump than at
home. Poised on the brink of adolescent blossoming, Tomomi is certain she is
turning into a monster. She doesn't understand the physical changes her body is
going through, the emotional changes have her on a roller coaster of feverish highs
and somnolent lows, and both are compounded by her desire to stay the child she
once was but is no longer. For lack of something better to do, Tomomi roams the
streets after Tetsu, meeting the woman who feeds the dozens of stray cats in the
park and the dump, and even taking over the care and feeding of said felines when
the woman becomes ill. The characterizations of Tomomi and Tetsu and the
careful orchestration of their relationship are the driving forces of Yumoto's novel.
When events finally reach critical mass, Tomomi sits, literally, on the wall between
two gardens; metaphorically, she sits on the wall between youthful indiscretion
and adult responsibility. Set in Japan, this is an unusually evocative rite of passage
novel, made even more so by Yumoto's lyrical language and cannily precise delin-
eation of one girl's long step into womanhood. JMD
ZEINERT, KAREN 
The Lincoln Murder Plot. Linnet, 1999 
113p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-208-02451-4 
$22.50 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Zeinert delineates the events leading up to and culminating in the assassination of
President Abraham Lincoln by John Wilkes Booth, including the aftermath of the
MAY 1999 
* 
335
controversial trial and executions of those believed responsible. Zeinert's history is
character-driven, giving readers a strong sense of the personal aspirations and mo-
tives of assassin Booth and of Booth's influence and sway over his co-conspirators.
Opening with an account of the assassination itself, she discusses the reaction of
the nation, the nearly hysterical demand for justice that resulted in both swift
arrests and conspiracy theories, and the rush to judgment and execution that de-
stroyed several lives and may have killed an innocent woman. Throughout, Zeinert
makes a complex political and legal situation clearer with the use of primary source
quotes, extensively captioned black-and-white photographs, and text boxes giving
biographical data on involved parties. A cast of characters, a timeline, an index,
notes, bibliography, and list of additional readings are included. JMD
ZIMMERMAN, ANDREA 
Trashy Town; by Andrea Zimmerman and David Clemesha;
illus. by Dan Yaccarino. 
HarperCollins, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027140-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027139-6 
$14.95 
R* 
3-5 yrs
In his overalls, black boots, and heavy gloves, Mr. Gilly cruises the streets and
alleys on the lookout for garbage; when he finds it, our burly hero handily hoists it
into the truck. Stopping only as long as it takes listeners to repeat the eminently
chantable refrain "Dump it in, smash it down, drive around the trashy town," Mr.
Gilly hits the road again, clearing the refuse from school and fire station, park and
pizza parlor. When the load has been delivered to the dump, there's only one
grubby item left-Mr. Gilly himself, who ends his day with a well-deserved bubble
bath. Yaccarino's Mr. Gilly is a larger-than-life sultan of sanitation, who nimbly
juggles galvanized cans and wire baskets with effortless aplomb, and always has
time to wave at the school kids and pet the fire house Dalmatian. Chunky, stream-
lined shapes with a retro flair will show to advantage for preschool groups, where
Mr. Gilly is certain to be a star of the "community helpers" unit. EB
336 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Dole, Patricia Pearl. Children's Books about Religion. Libraries Unlimited, 1999.
ISBN 1-56308-515-1. $32.00. 230p.
Titles relevant to religion sometimes move in mysterious ways, but Dole's capable
and far-reaching annotated bibliography will help clear up the mystery. Chapters
focus on subjects including prayer, the Bible (one chapter for overall, one chapter
each for Old and New Testament), different denominations, church history and
biography, and faiths ranging from Judaism to Native American religions to Islam.
Most chapters have subsections providing further thematic focus, but even within
subsections the range of books addressed is impressive. Dole has focused on books
published since 1990, but the limitations stop there: she includes series books,
trade books, and paperbacks, titles from presses both religious and secular, fic-
tional treatments of themes and nonfiction examinations of theology, folktales,
hagiography, and just about anything else that might be thought of. Numbered
annotations are generally positive without being relentlessly chirpy (reservations
about titles are occasionally noted) and include LC numbers as well as ISBN and
other publishing information; a useful "Older and Noteworthy" roundup at the
end of each chapter mentions useful titles published before this decade. Those
looking to make the creative most of their collections in this area or to expand will
find this an invaluable asset. An author/title and a subject index are included. DS
Hopkins, Lee Bennett. Pass the Poetry, Please! 3rd ed. HarperCollins, 1998.
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027746-7; $25.00. Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-446199-8; $13.95.
276p.
Hopkins is one of the best-known contemporary anthologists and poets for young
readers, and here he offers a revised and enlarged version of his classic volume of
poetic advocacy. The book has four sections: an opening that champions imagi-
native teaching of poetry; a gallery of two dozen poets from Adoff to Yolen, in-
cluding the living and the dead; a discussion of verse forms and stylistic tropes that
function particularly well as a teaching hook; and a collection of poetry-project
ideas, complete with themed bibliographies. Hopkins' tone is exclamatory and
enthusiastic, and he backs his commitment with solid suggestions and resource
lists that will inspire teachers to go forth and versify. Various bibliographies ap-
pear throughout the book; an author and title (of individual poems as well as
volumes of poetry) index is appended. DS
MAY 1999 
* 337
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African-Americans: Cox
African-Americans-fiction: Myers
African Americans-stories: Smalls;
Taylor, A.; Williams
ALPHABET BOOKS: Arnosky
American Indians: Hazen-
Hammond
American Indians-fiction: Wood
Art: Christelow; Garza
Aunts-stories: Prigger
Basketball-poetry: Smith
BIOGRAPHIES: Bitton-Jackson;
Hopkins; Ketcham; Reich;
Winter
Birds-stories: Anholt
Birds: Jonas
Books and reading: Christelow
Brothers-fiction: Wieler
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Yumoto
Brothers and sisters-stories: Beard;
Gay
Calendars: Maestro
Cats-stories: Choi
China-fiction: Namioka
China-stories: Tsubakiyama
Community helpers: Gorrell;
Zimmerman
COUNTING BOOKS: Arnosky;
Lesser
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Mosier; Myers
Crime and criminals: Glenn;
Zeinert
Dating-fiction: Mosier
Death and dying-fiction: Brooks;
Hawes; McNamee
Ecology: Lesser
Engineering: Hunter
Ethics and values: Myers; Talbert
Etiquette: Cuneo
Extraterrestrials-stories: Novak
Families-fiction: LaFaye
Families-poetry: Fletcher
FANTASY: Levine; Wood
Fashion: Miller
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
McNamee; Namioka
Fathers and sons-fiction:
Patneaude; Schmidt
Fathers and sons-stories: Heo;
Smalls
Festivals: Ancona
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Krishnaswami;
Levine; Lurie; San Souci
Friendship-fiction: Brooks; Pilkey;
Withrow
Friendship-stories: Williams
FUNNY STORIES: Cuneo;
Pilkey
Games-stories: Best
Genealogy: Taylor, M.
Geology: Hunter
Ghosts-fiction: Hawes
Grandfathers-stories: Bunting;
Tsubakiyama
Greece-stories: Bunting
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Howard; LaFaye; Namioka;
Rocklin; Schmidt; Talbert
History, U. S.: Cox; Miller;
Zeinert
Holocaust, the: Bitton-Jackson
Illness-fiction: Brooks
India-folklore: Krishnaswami
338 
* THE BULLETIN
Ireland-fiction: Schmidt
Ireland-folklore: San Souci
Japan-fiction: Yumoto
Jews-fiction: Talbert
Korea-folklore: Holt
Language arts: Holt; Spires
Latinos: Garza
Latinos-fiction: Talbert
LOVE STORIES: Hawes;
Trembath
Mexico: Ancona; Garza
Monkeys-stories: Koller
Mothers and daughters: Bitton-
Jackson
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Brooks
Mothers and sons-fiction: Talbert
Music and musicians: Reich;
Winter
Music and musicians-fiction:
McNamee; Wieler
Music and musicians-stories:
Ketcham; McPhail
MYSTERIES: Glenn; Patneaude
Nature study: Jonas; Lesser
Ocean-stories: Gay
Orphans-stories: Prigger
Parks-stories: Heo
POETRY: Fletcher; Glenn;
Hopkins; Smith; Stevenson
Princesses-fiction: Levine
PROVERBS: Holt
Reading aloud: Krishnaswami;
Lurie; San Souci; Stevenson
Reading, reluctant: Gorrell
Revolutionary War: Cox
RHYMING STORIES: Taylor, A.;
Zimmerman
RIDDLES: Spires
Robots-stories: Novak
Runaways-fiction: Withrow
Russia-folklore: Lurie
School-fiction: Anholt; Pilkey
Science: Cobb
Science projects: Cobb
SHORT STORIES: Rocklin
Soldiers: Schmidt
Sports: Ancona
Sports-poetry: Smith
Storytelling: Krishnaswami; Lurie; San
Souci
Storytime: Beard; Choi; Gay; Koller;
Zimmerman
Time: Maestro
Toys-stories: Best
Trucks-stories: Sis
Tunnels: Hunter
Voyages and travel-fiction: Howard
Weather-stories: Beard
Women's studies: Krishnaswami; Reich
World cultures: Ancona; Holt
Writers and writing-fiction: Trembath
"Hesse's language is
surge.... Muth contri
watercolor atmospher
sultry summer scenes
the heat is almost pal
and raucous wet seen
of jubilant dancers."
--Kirus Reviews
M "The text is
strong and lyrical...
a delight to share."
-Booklist,
boxed review
"Lyrically written ani
this is one you'll war
over again."
-School Library Journal
c 
itsalo 
Press=
SCH0 LB ST I C
---------
•--r
El -A 
-Arrr~r
d»
hCII 
YII 
CU~
Sclc~:
The Other Side
Shorter Poems by Angela Johnson
"Johnson offers a collection of 
'
poems that comprise a single,
intricate story of the town of
Shorter, Alabama.... This
bittersweet volume will catch
the heart of any reader who
believes that growing up
means leaving home
behind." 
-
Kirkus Reviews
"May just open up increased
awareness and understand-
ing about the way things
were-and sometimes how
they still are-for African
Americans." 
I
-
School Library Journal
"This short collection packs a
powerful punch." 
-
Booklist
The Last Fortress
Gloria D. Miklowitz
FIRST PRIZE SUGARMAN FAMILY AWARD
FOR JEWISH CHILDREN'S LITERATURE 1999
1999 BOOKS FOR THE TEEN AGE LIST
NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY
NOTABLE CHILDREN'S TRADE BOOKS IN THE FIELD
OF SOCIAL STUDIES FOR 1999
"Miklowitz personalizes history in this
account of the fall of Masada as seen
through the eyes of a young Jewish
man. ... A powerful offering."
-
Booklist
"Readers get deeply involved in the
paradoxical suspense of doomed char-
acters who nourish their lives in the
face of death."
The Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books
* Ages 12 and up
SNOWFLAKE BENTLEY
written by JACQUELINE BRIGGS MARTIN
illustrated by MARY AZARIAN
Ages 4--8'6 32 pages * $16.00 * ISBN 0-395-86162-4
Winner of the 1999 Caldecott Medal
An AIA Notiable Children's Book
A Bookdist Editors' Choice
A Bulletin of the Center or Children's Books Blue Ribbon
An NSTACBC Outstanding Science Trade Book for Children
* "There will be so many uses for this book -
not the
least of which is simply'handing it to a child and letting
his or her imagination' sar like 
ien4ey's" -Booklist,
starred review
"Thisis picture-book biography at its very best: written
like a prose poem and beautifully illustrated.'
-New 
York Times Book Review
S"Aaria's haid-colored Woodcuts are jusfhe right
complement to MarstJ4 tt,' 
-Bullem 
f the Center
for Children's Books, st~fred review
Houghton Mifflin Company * 222 Berkeley Street * Boston, MA
S Makes Reading Fun!
E 
ewitness 
Reader 
:
Secrets of the Mummie
By Harriet Griffey
"Intriguing tales and
photographs of
mummified remains are
sure hooks for young
readers... riveting
illustrations. A good choice
for reluctant readers."
-School 
Library Journal
Photographs, illustrations, glossary.
Trade hardcover $12.95 / 0-7894-3764-3
$3.95 pb / 0-7894-3442-3 / Grades 2-4
Eyewitness Readers:
Days of the Knights: A
Tale of Castles
By Christopher
Maynard
"The publisher's
statement that this
level of the series is
intended for proficient
readers and that the
title includes "rich
vocabulary and challenging sentence structure" is
right on target... this title might be used in
middle grade classes. Recommended."
Library Talk Nov/Dec 1998
Photographs, illustrations, glossary.
$3.95 pb / 0-7894-2963-2 / Grades 2-4
Eyewitness Readers: Shark Attack
By Cathy East
Eyewitness Readers: Bugs! Bugs! Bugs!
By Jennifer Dussling
"DK has become an expert at combining crisp,
colorful shots to entice readers. These titles, on
topics selected to capture the attention of the
intended audience, are carefully laid out in a user-
friendly format guaranteed to reassure neophyte
readers...All in all, colorful additions."
-School 
Library Journal
Shark: $12.95 trade hardcover / 0-7894-3763-5
$3.95 pb / 0-7894-3440-7 / Grades 1-3
Bugs: $12.95 trade hardcover / 0-7894-3762-7
$3.95 pb / 0-7894-3438-5 / Grades 1-3
The Illustrated Book of Fairy Tales
Retold by Neil Philp, illustrated by Nilesh Mistry
"The idea of using tales from around the world to
illustrate different themes.. is interesting...
Throughout the narrative, sidebars illustrated with
photos, drawings, and reproductions provide informa-
tion about the folktales, their origins, where they might
have taken place, and what makes them special."
-School 
Library Journal
Illustrations / $19.95 / 0-7894-2794-X / Grades 3-6
Where Learning
Comes To Life
DK Publishing, Inc.
95 Madison Avenue
New York, NY 10016
http://www.dk.com
Available from your
regular supplier, or call
1-888-DIA-DKP
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(1
-X
0008-9036(199905)52:9*;1 -X
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1998
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more ... updated monthly!
.i.: 
· ·
ic
..
,,,,, 
_i-4_~·
:1
~ai~~~6
;% 
: --a·:;El 
·:·;- 
~·
is:: 
.*:-·-·-- 
.g
