T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
February 2016
Vol. 69   No. 6
Library and Information Science:
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Library Trends ISSN: 0024-2594 / E-ISSN: 1559-0682
Portal: Libraries and the Academy ISSN: 1531-2542 / E-ISSN: 1530-7131
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
To us, the role of libraries and the 
future of information science clicks.
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
February 2016
Vol. 69 No. 6
291  the BIg PICture
 
 Anna and the Swallow Man   by Gavriel Savit; illus. by Laura Carlin
292  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
300 • Chloe in India  by Kate Darnton
301 • Don’t Feed the Geckos!  by Karen English; illus. by Laura Freeman
308 •  I Hear a Pickle (and Smell, See, Touch, and Taste It, Too!) written and illus. 
by Rachel Isadora
318 • A Tangle of Gold  by Jaclyn Moriarty
329 •  Here Comes Valentine Cat by Deborah Underwood; illus. by Claudia 
Rueda
334  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
335  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
For up-to-date pricing information, please visit the journal webpage at: http://www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/bulletin_of_the_center_for_childrens_books/pricing.html. Volumes available in microfilm 
from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in micro-
fiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should 
be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2016 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Anna and the Swallow Man ⓒ 2016 by Laura Carlin and used by permission of 
Alfred A. Knopf Books for Young Readers.
February 2016 • 291
the BIg PICture
Anna and the Swallow Man
by Gavriel Savit; illustrated by Laura Carlin
Convention tells us that a love story is about boy or girl meets boy or girl, but there 
are plenty of love stories that aren’t about romance. A father unflaggingly supports 
his son as the boy falls into mental illness (Shusterman’s Challenger Deep, BCCB 
6/15); a community offers hope and comfort to a grieving girl (Sloan’s Counting 
by 7s, BCCB 9/13); a newly crowned queen gives up her personal happiness to 
give her beloved kingdom a chance at renewal (Cashore’s Bitterblue, BCCB 5/12). 
These types of love stories aren’t straight lines from one player to another that 
culminate in a neat conclusion, but instead they shift and adapt to complications 
and often break and regroup without ensuring a happy ending. Such a relationship 
is forged in the the midst of World War II, as young Anna finds a father figure in 
the enigmatic Swallow Man; both are broken in their own way, find wholeness in 
each other, and then break again in this quiet exploration of love and its limits. 
When Nazis round up Krakow’s intellectuals to be shipped off to concen-
tration camps in 1939, seven-year-old Anna doesn’t understand why her father, a 
linguistics professor, doesn’t come home. A tall, thin man approaches and appears 
to be fluent in as many as languages as Anna, which immediately earns him her 
trust; when he calls down a swallow and appears to speak to it after it lands on his 
outstretched hand, Anna believes him to be magic and decides to follow him. They 
travel together through the Polish countryside over the next several years, and the 
Swallow Man (Anna’s name for him, since he refuses to reveal his real one) does his 
best to protect Anna as the Germans and the Soviets “split the carcass of Poland.” 
The threat of death becomes clear with every destroyed village they move through, 
every desperate person they encounter, but nothing terrifies Anna as much as the 
Swallow Man’s rapid descent into madness when the supply of pills he takes daily 
runs out in the middle of the wilderness.
Readers begin with Anna at seven, seeing the world with a sense of awe 
and wonder and viewing the Swallow Man as a miraculous guardian, a savior sent 
just for her. That innocence is slowly scraped away during the next several years as 
they travel through war-torn Poland; Anna is forced to scavenge through the be-
longings of dead soldiers, crawl though mass graves, and give her body to a stranger 
in order to get medicine for the Swallow Man, who is not magical so much as ill 
and grieving the loss of a child. When the crux of their relationship, her need of 
a protective parental figure and his filling that need, flips completely in a sudden 
and violent way, how do they retrieve those familiar dynamics?
The war that makes their relationship necessary and that even perhaps 
nurtured it is the same thing that almost destroys it, but their love returns, bruised 
292 • The bulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
and battered. And that is ultimately the takeaway here—that love can endure, 
but it must transform after chaos has consumed it and spit it out. (See p. 325 for 
publication information.)
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor
Acioli, Socorro The Head of the Saint; tr. from the Portuguese by Daniel 
Hahn. Delacorte, 2016 [192p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53794-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53792-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53793-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 8-12
When Samuel turns fourteen, his dying mother requests that after her death he 
travel from his home in Juazeiro, Brazil, to the town of Candeia to find his es-
tranged father and grandmother. He faithfully complies, embarking on a grueling 
sixteen-day walk to Candeia, but his grandmother shoos him away into the forest; 
there he stumbles into the enormous, abandoned, hollow concrete head of a poorly 
engineered statue of St. Anthony, the failure of which has brought a curse upon the 
slowly dying town. From inside the head, the skeptical Samuel hears the prayers 
of several women to the saint. He teams up with Francisco, a boy who sneaks into 
the head to read porn, to hatch a plan to make money off the knowledge Samuel 
gleans from the women’s prayers. Their plan works spectacularly, and soon the town 
experiences a social and economic resurrection due to the local miracles. Samuel and 
Francisco are charming opportunists, bilking the faithful with pragmatic, amiable 
cheer. Acioli handles her subject with a light hand, playing out her themes of the 
mysteries of faith, the harm of betrayal, the follies of hubris, and the simple good-
ness of friendship with gentle wit and lyrical description. Indeed, all of humanity 
and no small measure of godliness are on display in this translated Brazilian import 
that evokes a sense of wonder and treats readers to a fascinating glimpse of a setting 
and worldview seldom seen in Anglophone youth literature.  KC
Adler, dAvid A. 
Get a Hit, Mo!; illus. by Sam Ricks. 
Penguin, 
2016 [32p] (Penguin Young Readers)
ISBN 978-0-670-01632-7 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. K-2
Mo is younger and shorter and, let’s face it, less talented than his Lions team-
mates, and despite his best efforts, he’s not carrying his weight in their match-up 
February 2016 • 293
with the Bears. His outfield position keeps him largely out of trouble, but at-bats 
bring nothing but strikeouts. In the last inning, with two outs and two Lions on 
base, Mo’s up to bat. Two swings . . . two strikes . . . will this underdog become 
the hero? Of course he will, but not in the way anybody expects: in a moment 
of distraction he turns to listen to the shouted advice of his coach, accidentally 
whacks the ball with his bat, and makes it to second base, forcing the winning runs. 
There’s more than a hint here of Leonard Kessler’s vintage beginning reader Here 
Comes the Strikeout (BCCB 6/65), and parents who honed their reading skills on 
that title will be either amused or appalled that Mo makes the big play through a 
serendipitous blunder rather than practice and discipline. They will appreciate the 
updates, though—a multicultural cast, a mixed-gender team, a female coach, and 
full-color illustrations (in larky, slightly exaggerated line and watercolor scenes). 
Primary-schoolers who play on park district and rec center teams will recognize 
the truth at the core of this leveled reader: anybody can get lucky out there, and 
maybe next time it will be them.  EB
Allen, eliSe Gabby Duran: Troll Control; by Elise Allen and Daryle Con-
ners. Disney Hyperion, 2016 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-0936-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-2508-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Gabby (from Gabby Duran and the Unsittables, BCCB 9/15) is back with a new 
batch of alien kids to babysit, and this time her charge is particularly challenging: 
a troll. Trymmy himself is adorable, but his parents ooze distrust and contempt 
for humans, plus Gabby has to contend with trolls’ known penchant for stealing 
things that can only be returned after a riddle is solved. When something impor-
tant does go missing, Gabby is certainly lucky to have her two close friends, her 
unflappable sister (who shines with her wry, razor-sharp approach to the world), 
and Edwina, her liaison for the alien babysitting system, all on her side. None-
theless, waiting to see if Gabby will be able to right everything by the end of the 
book is still nail-bitingly suspenseful, but ultimately all goes well and Gabby gets 
to keep her beloved job. The action is zippy, and there is effective humor built in 
to balance Gabby’s trials. Allen offers some implied commentary about tolerance 
and cultural misunderstanding, as neither the humans nor the trolls seem willing 
to budge at first on their assumptions, but this lesson is subtle rather than preachy. 
Sitters, take note: even if your charges aren’t as unusual as Gabby’s, there are plenty 
of cool ideas to borrow here about the perfect babysitting backpack that will save 
all sorts of situations.  AS
Appelt, KAthi Maybe a Fox; by Kathi Appelt and Alison McGhee. Dlouhy/
Atheneum, 2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8242-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8244-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Jules and her older sister, Sylvie, know that the Slip, the dangerous 
place where the river near their house flows into a deep cavern, has been declared 
off limits by their father; the warning, however, has often gone unheeded as the two 
girls go there to throw “wish” stones. One morning Sylvie leaves Jules behind and 
runs to the Slip to make a quick wish, and she doesn’t return. Jules’ time is then 
294 • The bulleTin
separated into Before Sylvie and After Sylvie as she grieves for her sister and tries 
to hold off the guilt she feels about Sylvie’s death. As Jules wanders, lost, through 
her days, she often catches sight of a red fox that she feels a connection to; in fact, 
the fox is a Kennen, a spirit meant to help humans. The book keenly conveys Jules’ 
pain at the loss of Sylvie and realistically complements it with absolute fury at her 
sister’s actions. The chapters that focus on the fox are warmly narrated, and the 
fox itself is gently curious and then genuinely empathetic toward Jules. A subplot 
involving the return of the older brother of Jules best friend from Afghanistan 
shows that grief manifests in many ways, a message that is underlined by the howl 
of the fox’s family after she sacrifices herself for Jules. This is a quiet exploration 
of what it is to continue life after the death of a loved one.  KQG
AShmAn, lindA Henry Wants More!; illus. by Brooke Boynton Hughes. Random 
House, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-385-38512-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-5 yrs
Whether it’s tosses into the air, songs, stories, games, or wagon rides, once isn’t 
enough for toddler Henry, who beseeches his family with cries of “More!” and 
“Again!” When the end of day finally sees Henry off to sleep, his accommodating 
but weary family can also take a rest, although his mom finds that when it comes 
to kissing a sleeping Henry, she’s the one who wants more. Ashman’s rhyming 
verse is catchy and skillfully executed (“She plays it once./ She plays it twice./ She 
loses count at ten./ Our ears are getting weary, but Henry cheers:// AGAIN!”). 
Listeners will enjoy discerning the pattern and predicting whether Henry’s cry 
will be “More!” or “Again!” and they’ll be amused by the tiny twist: when Henry 
falls asleep it’s not “More!” the family hears, but a quiet “snore.” Hughes’ appeal-
ing illustrations paint a cheery picture of biracial Henry’s family and home; tidy 
compositions, delicate black outlines, and a palette of clear, cool blues and greens, 
warmed up with touches of gold, brown, and red, work in harmony to create a 
sense of an orderly but engaging life. As depicted by Hughes, Henry’s energetic 
enjoyment of life is more infectious than obnoxious, and it’s easy to see why his 
family indulges his requests for “More!” Multiple ages will get a kick out of this, 
whether adult, older sibling, or little one who, like Henry, always wants a repeat 
performance—just be ready to read it “Again!”  JH
AuStriAn, J. J. Worm Loves Worm; illus. by Mike Curato. Balzer + Bray/Harp-
erCollins, 2016 26p
ISBN 978-0-06-238633-5 $17.99   
R 4-6 yrs
Worm and Worm love each other, and the two decide that it’s time to be married. 
Cricket says they need someone to do the marrying honors, because “that’s how 
it’s always been done”; Beetle volunteers to be the best beetle, and so on. When the 
best beetle and the bride’s bees want to know who is bride and who is groom, the 
worms cheerfully agree that each will be both; when Cricket says, “That isn’t how 
it’s always been done,” the couple amiably responds, “Then we’ll just change how it’s 
done,” and a fine wedding is had by all. While there’s an obvious subtextual message 
here, this is also a witty and playful story, and given that they’re hermaphroditic, 
worms are a hilarious and perfect protagonist choice. The wedding plans combine 
matter-of-fact child fantasy with some slyly funny touches in moments like Spider’s 
February 2016 • 295
deliberately ambiguous sentence (“I can eat the cake along with Cricket and Beetle”) 
and the realistic tendency of everybody around to tell the affianced how to hold their 
wedding. The illustrations, in pencil and Photoshop, focus almost entirely on the 
cast, with the softly lined, slightly toylike figures floating against white backdrops 
as they play out the nuptial drama. Adults looking for some assistance in explain-
ing marriage equality will find this a concise and useful tool, and it’s also just an 
entertaining addition to the genre of kid-friendly wedding stories.  DS
BAchmAnn, StefAn A Drop of Night. Greenwillow, 2016 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-228992-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-228994-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 10-12
In rural France of 1789, teenage aristocrat Aurélie du Bessancourt escaped from 
a murderous peasant mob into the underground palace built by her father, only 
to find that the palace and her father were the real terrors she should be fleeing. 
Now, more than two hundred years later, seventeen-year-old Anouk Peerenboom 
has been invited with four other teens to explore the ruins of that mysterious 
French palace. Soon, though, the five are trapped within a vast, opulent labyrinth 
with killers waiting outside and something far more gruesome within. Forced to 
make their way through a series of deadly traps, they find evidence of scientific 
experiments in immortality gone awry and seemingly inhuman creatures who are 
both helpful and vicious, all as they search desperately for an escape. As a horror 
confection, the novel succeeds, with plenty of elements to draw reader interest and 
a fast-moving plot that is sure to have them eagerly flipping pages. Beyond that,  
though, it ultimately crumbles. Narration that alternates between Anouk, on her 
quest for survival, and Aurélie, with her desperation to escape, weaves connections 
between past and present that draw readers into the story, but eventually the lack of 
cohesion takes a narrative toll. A science-horror backstory, introduced in the final 
chapters, is contrived and superfluous, and awkward attempts at hidden complexities 
still fail to save characters from underdevelopment. The sadistic house of horrors 
is fantastically drawn, though, and readers looking for a scare for scare’s sake will 
revel in the grotesqueness and cheer when Anouk and company take down their 
captors for a satisfying end.  AM
BAnKS, lynne reid Uprooted: A Canadian War Story. HarperCollins, 
2015 [336p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-00-813235-4 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
When World War II breaks out, ten-year-old Lindy, her mother, and Lindy’s 
twelve-year-old cousin, Cameron, leave London for safety in distant Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan. While a guilty Cameron feels like he’s abandoning England, Lindy 
thrives in Canada; she’s not even that thrown by the family’s several moves (away 
from their first generous hosts when the husband drunkenly makes a pass at Lindy’s 
mother; away from the next tiny shared house when it has to be sold). She’s mainly 
concerned about the family’s finances, since initially Britain forbids money to be 
sent to expat refugees, and about the men sniffing around her beautiful actress 
mother, who is thousands of miles from her husband. Soon, though, Lindy real-
izes it’s Cameron, who’s so desperate to get back to England that he runs away, 
296 • The bulleTin
she really needs to worry about. Based on Banks’ own childhood experiences, this 
novel understandably has the flavor and pace of a memoir, with events happening 
episodically rather than a plot trajectory unfolding. It is nonetheless compellingly 
readable; evocative details lay out the difference between England and Canada, 
and then, when the family visits New Jersey and New York, the contrast between 
Canada and the U.S. The independent wandering for the kids, especially when 
they’re off at a summer cabin, is joyously playful and will likely be the envy of 
contemporary readers. There’s a touch of didacticism in Lindy’s brief friendship 
with her neighbor, an elderly Métis woman, but it’s clear that Lindy is learning 
along with the reader. Readers who appreciated Hartnett’s war story The Children 
of the King (BCCB 3/14) will be intrigued by this story of children who traveled 
even farther for safety.  DS
BAuer, JoAn Soar. Viking, 2016 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-451-47034-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
When Jeremiah’s mother abandoned baby Jeremiah in the workplace of computer 
guru Walt Lopper, she seemed to know what she was doing. Walt legally adopted 
the boy and has never had a moment of regret raising him over the past eleven 
years—even when a childhood virus left Jeremiah with cardiomyopathy and sent 
him into a spiral of medical interventions, including a heart transplant at ten years 
old. Two years later, Jeremiah’s health has improved, and his obsession with baseball 
(enthusiastically nurtured by Walt) hasn’t faltered. When Walt gets a consulting 
job in Ohio, the pair moves to a town that just happens to be as baseball crazy as 
they are. Jeremiah’s a tad nerdy but fairly self-confident, and he not only cultivates 
a friendship with a neighbor girl but wrangles a sort-of coaching position with the 
middle school team. This gives him a front-row seat when a local scandal erupts 
around the death of a star high school pitcher and the coach who gave his play-
ers performance-enhancing drugs. Despite the ailing-adolescent premise and the 
generic doping subplot, this is not the predictable baseball-as-metaphor-for-life 
offering it seems but rather a character study in resilience and a tender evocation 
of a father-son relationship. “Tender,” however, is not code for “slow” or “dull”; 
Jeremiah is a wry and witty narrator, and his take-charge (but sensible) approach 
to life impels the story along at a brisk clip. Bauer’s offerings have tended to feature 
female protagonists, and it’s gratifying to see what she can do with a “guy book.”  EB
BemiS, John clAude The Wooden Prince. Disney Hyperion, 2016 [320p] (Out 
of Abaton)
ISBN 978-1-4847-0727-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Pinocchio gets a new look in this curious, complex novel of betrayal, rebellion, and 
loyalty. In this version, Geppetto is an alchemist who has been given Pinocchio 
as a gift to help soothe his grief over his dead wife and child. The story is set in 
Venice, though realistic elements are quickly done away with as the reader is swept 
into a steampunk-inspired world with automatons, winged fighters, alchemy, and 
chimeras. In the middle of this world is earnest, confused Pinocchio, who isn’t sure 
why he is becoming human, but even as he’s kidnapped, threatened, and crowned 
king he knows he wants to be with Geppetto. The dialogue is stiff at times, but the 
February 2016 • 297
world building is impressive, and the captivating setting will likely attract fantasy, 
steampunk, and adventure fans alike. Readers seeking an entirely different look at 
the little wooden puppet will find this to be a worthy investment.  AS
Brown, GAvin Josh Baxter Levels Up. Scholastic, 2016 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-77294-5 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-77295-2 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Now at his third new school in two years, Josh knows that his mother is doing the 
best she can, but he’s tired of moving and starting over. He takes comfort in video 
gaming, even if he can see that it is impeding both his school and social progress, 
but it isn’t until his mother actually locks up his consoles that Josh is pushed out of 
his comfort zone. No matter; Josh will just turn his life into a video game, and he 
does so with aplomb, mapping out experience points, allies, storylines, and goals 
that he must accomplish. Gamers will appreciate that each chapter ends with a 
full-page recap of Josh’s current experience level, health, lives remaining, and new 
skills unlocked (clever summaries of major events he successfully navigated). Even 
non-gamer kids will likely appreciate Josh, however, as he is earnestly interested in 
but not always adept at navigating the often baffling social flow of middle school. 
He is a sympathetic character, even if he messes up a lot, and the characters around 
him are well developed. Josh’s ultimate success isn’t too surprising, but it is hearten-
ing that his life isn’t perfect, just improved because he actually put time and effort 
into things like homework, developing friends, and being honest with his family. 
The frequent video game references (from Pokemon to NES games) add humor 
and the gaming-graphic spot art and big type makes the book visually accessible, 
helping all the life lessons go down smoothly.  AS
BurAch, roSS There’s a Giraffe in My Soup; written and illus. by Ross 
Burach. Harper/HarperCollins, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-06-236014-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Our hero, sporting a natty bow tie and driving his finest tricycle up to the valet 
parking stand, is out for a posh dinner, but it’s not going well. First, his soup is over-
flowing with an enormous giraffe, teetering on the tiny bowl; then his replacement 
soup is hiding a crocodile, the next one has an elephant, and so on. Finally the waiter 
informs our diner that they’ve figured out the problem: the zoo was accidentally 
sent the restaurant’s food while the restaurant received the zoo animals. However, 
a complimentary dessert of chocolate moose proves too much, and everybody, 
including the soup-served zoo animals, heads over to the zoo for dinner. This has 
the carefully structured absurdity of an old vaudeville sketch, and kids will guffaw 
at the stream of unexpected animals and the dapper waiter’s alternating between 
obsequious apology and resentment (“Can’t he just eat around it?” he grumbles as 
he heaves the rejected whale-topped soup back into the kitchen). There’s a retro-
cartoony touch to the pencil, acrylic, and digital illustrations; exaggeration is the 
name of the game, from the waiter’s pipestem legs to the goofy grins of many of the 
souped-up animals, and the absence of background detail enhances the comedic 
theatricality. This would be lively transition to a zoo story like Savage’s Where’s 
Walrus? (BCCB 2/11) or just to a snacktime—perhaps with animal crackers.  DS
298 • The bulleTin
BurleiGh, roBert Solving the Puzzle under the Sea: Marie Tharp Maps the Ocean 
Floor; illus. by Raúl Colón. Wiseman/Simon, 2016 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1600-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1601-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
The post–World War II years were the best and worst of times for the daughter of a 
cartographer to launch a career in oceanography. On the plus side, Marie Tharp, who 
shared her father’s passion for mapmaking, was entering a field alive with exciting 
debate over whether Earth’s surface was fixed or mobile; moreover, the technology 
existed for deep sea soundings to help determine the contours of the ocean floor. 
On the minus side, women were generally barred from maritime research, a hold-
over from superstitious seafaring days in which women were regarded as bad luck 
aboard ships. Quietly determined to make this her life’s work, even if landbound, 
Tharp worked with fellow oceanographer Bruce Heezen to turn the data from depth 
measurements into the first ocean-floor maps; after interpreting their renderings, she 
garnered scientific support for the theory of plate tectonics. Burleigh does a credible 
job explaining the basics of taking soundings and the evidence the maps offered 
for supporting the idea that Atlantic plates separated along a rift valley along the 
Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The narration, in Tharp’s fictionalized voice, conveys both sad 
resignation at the limits placed on her career and pride at her significant contribu-
tion to a new worldview. Golds and blues of Colón’s signature illustrations work 
particularly well here, and he uses indoor scenes of the cartography lab to zoom in 
on the mapping process. A biographical note, selective glossary, print and online 
resources, and discussion and activity starters are included.  EB
cAStromAn, nicole Blackhearts. Simon Pulse, 2016 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3841-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3843-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Born the daughter of a freed slave and a wealthy Bristol merchant, sixteen-year-
old Anne Barrett has always felt like a child of two worlds, belonging nowhere. 
Similarly out of place and longing for freedom, Edward Drummond, known as 
Teach to his friends, is the wayward son of the household in which Anne works; he 
recognizes in her a kindred spirit, and an unlikely friendship between them soon 
blossoms into passion. Together they face down myriad obstacles, including his 
unwanted betrothal, charges of piracy, and her secret stash of stolen goods. When 
their clandestine love is revealed, the pressure of society and his family forces them 
apart again and puts Teach on the path to piratical infamy. Castroman takes full 
advantage of the mystery surrounding the pirate Edward “Blackbeard” Teach’s 
origins to craft this absorbing tale of romance, destiny, and heartbreak. Despite the 
piratical touches, the novel is entirely landlocked and largely domestic, but those 
looking for a smart, lively historical romance will be drawn in by the heartstrings. 
Alternating narration provide glimpses of the developing relationship from both 
Anne’s and Teach’s perspectives and draws readers more fully into the minds and 
hearts of these strong-willed, confident (if sometimes anachronistic) characters. 
History demands an unhappy ending to the love story, but the novel still ends with 
hope, stirring readers to dream of a possible reunion on high seas.  AM
February 2016 • 299
cherry, AliSon The Classy Crooks Club. Aladdin, 2016 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4637-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4639-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
AJ can’t believe she has to spend most of her summer with her stiff, formal grand-
mother who seems to think that AJ’s sporty, messy lifestyle is unacceptable. She 
does get to be driven around by a hunky chauffeur, and her grandma’s friends are 
quirky and fun, but, more excitingly, she stumbles onto an incredible secret: her 
grandmother and her cronies are criminals who “liberate” things they believe would 
be better off in other homes. Her grandmother’s passion is exotic pets who are 
mistreated, and AJ’s first heist involves saving a bird. Soon AJ learns lock-picking, 
gets her first pair of night-vision goggles, and embarks on a life of crime. The twist 
near the end involving a kidnapping is less successful than the rest of the story, but 
the warm conclusion shows growth for both AJ and her mellower grandma. It is a 
clever choice to have AJ narrate, as this makes the section where she is kidnapped 
tense and startling—she clearly had no clue, in spite of what readers might have 
caught about one character’s sketchy history. The heists themselves carry all the 
drama one would expect—these women clearly consider themselves to be profes-
sionals and train AJ rigorously. Offer this to young caper fans; they’ll even leave 
with a couple of tips on how to start mapping out their own criminal futures.  AS
cohen, mArinA The Inn Between; illus. by Sarah Watts. Roaring Brook, 
2016 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-202-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-203-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Still reeling from the disappearance of her younger sister, eleven-year-old Quinn 
Martin is relieved to go on a road trip with her friend Kara’s family. A long day on 
the road soon leads to an unplanned overnight stop at a beautiful, isolated hotel 
with a strange staff and an eclectic clientele. Matters only get weirder when Kara’s 
parents and then her brother disappear, a little boy reported missing by the papers 
suddenly appears, and a creepy but familiar man seems to be following the girls 
around the hotel. A desperate search for parents, or a way out, eventually uncovers 
the hotel’s hidden horrors and reveals the heartbreaking truth—about what really 
happened to the girls. A younger version of Young’s Hotel Ruby (BCCB 1/16), 
this is creepy yet thoughtful. The well-placed narrative balances emotion and plot, 
and the strong underlying mysteries offer up plenty of clues for attentive readers 
to piece together. Quinn is a likable, authentically muddled young character, and 
occasional flashbacks to events surrounding her sister’s loss flesh out her guilt-ridden 
motivations without overtaking the story. Ultimately offering a happy resolution, 
this middle-grade supernatural story functions well as horror for beginners and a 
clever concept for fans of imaginative fiction.  AM
300 • The bulleTin
connolly, mArcyKAte Ravenous. Harper/HarperCollins, 2016 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227274-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227276-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Greta, first appearing as a supporting character in Monstrous (BCCB 4/15), loves 
her brother Hans, so when he’s captured by a witch, she makes a deal to save him. 
She must use whatever allies she can to find a long-lost cornucopia that the witch 
(whose chicken-leg house suggests Baba Yaga and whose eating of children, along 
with the characters’ names, points to “Hansel and Gretel”) desires so that Greta’s 
brother will remain uneaten. It’s nice that Greta’s sort of a mess—she flares up at 
the wrong times, she alienates would-be allies on occasion, and she’s just plain 
grumpy. Even with her flaws, her fierce dedication to her brother is admirable, 
and her slow transformation into a more accepting, open person is all the more 
satisfying given her earlier closed views. Readers who missed the previous novel may 
lack some emotional backstory, but all of the key events are revisited in seamless 
ways in this sequel. The finished copy will include a novella, Precious, a prequel 
to both novels.  AS
culBertSon, Kim The Possibility of Now. Point/Scholastic, 2016 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-73146-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-73147-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
The stress of being a high achiever finally tips high school junior Mara James over 
the edge; in the middle of a calculus exam, she has a spectacular meltdown that 
ends up going viral on YouTube. She decides that she wants to escape San Diego 
and go stay with her father, a ski bum in Lake Tahoe. Once there, she finds that 
it’s harder than she thinks to leave her nose-to-the-grindstone ways behind, but 
gradually, with the help of some friendly local teens, she learns to relocate her self-
worth in things other than achieving the next goal or checking every single thing off 
her neverending lists. The text is pretty evenly divided between an homage to the 
beauty of Tahoe in winter and Mara’s reflections on her values. The insta-friends 
she hangs with are helpful in this endeavor, serving as either bad examples of self-
indulgent slacker behavior couched in immature philosophical rebellion, or good 
examples of bona fide achievers who have their competitive spirits under control. 
Add in a sweet romance, and you have an overt, timely lesson about keeping things 
in perspective by realizing that the fall from first place isn’t a fatal one and that it’s 
perfectly okay to let some things slide if it helps you keep your balance. Give this 
to overachievers who are starting to fray around the edges.  KC
dArnton, KAte Chloe in India. Delacorte, 2016 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53505-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53504-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53506-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
When her parents move the family to New Delhi from Boston, eleven-year old 
Chloe feels awkward and out of place. Though Anvi, the popular girl at her new 
private school, quickly befriends her, Chloe can’t shake the feeling that Anvi sees 
February 2016 • 301
her as a novelty and not a real person. When Lakshmi, an EWS (Economically 
Weak Section) student, arrives at Premier Academy, Chloe discovers a true friend 
but also realizes that distinct boundaries between rich and poor require that she and 
Lakshmi only be friends outside of school, at least if Chloe wants to maintain any 
sort of social standing. The friendship-ethics drama is not a new one, but Darnton 
deals effectively with its familiar dynamics while bringing a fresh dimension to it. 
The result is an informed and informative work of fiction that incorporates eye-
opening facts about poverty and social systems outside of the United States while 
never losing the protagonist’s authentic and relatable voice. Evocative in setting, 
sympathetic in character, and noble in intent, this story is for armchair travelers 
and seekers of fairness and friendship.  AA
dooley, SArAh Free Verse. Putnam, 2016 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16503-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Sasha has suffered many losses: her mother left, her father died in a 
mining accident, and her brother, who was ten years older and gave up his dreams 
of travel and college to take care of her, has now died fighting a fire. Fortunately, 
she finds herself in the care of a kind, patient foster mother, and she finds a kindred 
spirit in her second cousin Mikey, a quiet, sad eight-year-old; when Mikey’s dad 
is late coming home after an accident in the mine, Sasha convinces Mikey to run 
away with her so they don’t have to face the worst, but their efforts go awry when 
Sasha is caught by the police and Mikey disappears. The search for Mikey goes on 
for months, during which Sasha finds refuge in assignments from her poetry club. 
The story mounts a quiet defense of the nobility of broken people, particularly men, 
who hold on when all seems lost and sacrifice much out of love for their children. 
The hardships and grief that seed the characters’ lives don’t grow into bitterness, 
and Sasha learns that, for all of her brother’s plans and desires to leave their West 
Virginia town, plans and desires that she was expected to share, home is where you 
make your family. Sasha’s quietly moving poems, included in an interstitial section 
designed to resemble a poetry notebook of experiments with various forms, trace 
the evolution of her appreciation for what she has and her understanding that one 
must find one’s own way to wholeness after loss.  KC 
enGliSh, KAren Don’t Feed the Geckos!; illus. by Laura Freeman. Clarion, 
2015 [144p] (Carver Chronicles)
ISBN 978-0-544-57529-5 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Like Nikki, Deja, and Richard (from Skateboard Party, BCCB 2/15, etc.), Carlos 
is a student in Ms. Shelby Ortiz’s class at Carver Elementary, and he’s recently had 
some success in turning over a new leaf and becoming an organized, responsible 
kind of guy. He’s therefore thrown when his same-age (but much bigger) cousin 
Bernardo comes to stay with the family, not only taking over Carlos’ room but also 
exhibiting the kind of “knucklehead behavior” at home and school that Carlos has 
worked so hard to leave behind. It doesn’t help that Bernardo is effortlessly good 
at sports in a way that Carlos’ father delights in—and that Carlos never manages 
to be. English again demonstrates her deep understanding of elementary school 
kids, here focusing on the kind of child who doesn’t get that much literary atten-
302 • The bulleTin
tion—the one whose big improvement happened before the story starts, and who 
really wants to maintain it. Readers will understand his anxiety, and they’ll share 
his reasonable worry about his beloved geckos and ant farm, which reside in his 
room and draw Bernardo’s clumsy interest; Carlos’ hurt feelings at his father’s clear 
excitement over Bernardo’s sports triumphs are also relatable. Freeman’s friendly 
monochromatic illustrations offer a multitude of spot art to break up the pages as 
well as full-page illustrations. Budding zoologist Carlos is a great addition to the 
roster at Carver Elementary, and whether kids have read the previous title in the 
series or not, they’ll find him appealing and authentic company.  DS
federle, tim The Great American Whatever. Simon, 2016 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0409-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0411-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
After stealing the show with his popular middle-grade novels (Better Nate Than 
Ever, BCCB 2/13, Five, Six, Seven, Nate!, BCCB 1/14), Federle turns his attention 
to teen angst. At sixteen, Quinn Roberts has retreated to his room after his older 
sister, Annabeth, ran a red light, probably while texting, and was instantly killed in 
a collision. His best friend, Geoff, has other plans for Quinn, however, including 
facilitating his relationship with a handsome Iranian-American college guy named 
Amir. Quinn’s head is turned by the older, more experienced Amir, but nothing 
shakes Quinn’s wisecracking veneer until he learns that he didn’t know Annabeth 
as well as he thought he did and realizes that his self-involvement means he never 
heard what she truly wanted. Quinn’s management of his relationships is as credible 
as it is frustrating; he’s constantly stepping out of the scene he’s in to focus on his 
inner world, and his angry jealousy over his sister’s life apart from him bears out 
his need to read and heed the final text she sent. However, he is both lovable and 
well-loved by Geoff, who wins major bro points for his unfailing support. Amir 
treats Quinn with remarkable kindness as well, although there is much to discuss 
regarding whether Quinn’s motivations to lose his virginity, and Amir’s willing 
participation in that effort, are entirely wise under the circumstances. Lively first-
person narration peppered with imaginary screenplay scenes keep the serious from 
being too serious, and there is absolutely no don’t-text-and-drive messaging here; in 
the end, this is about Quinn’s distractions rather than Annabeth’s, and his chain of 
successes in life and love proves, perhaps, that it really is all about him after all.  KC
fern, trAcey W Is for Webster: Noah Webster and His American Dictionary; illus. 
by Boris Kulikov. Ferguson/Farrar, 2015 34p
ISBN 978-0-374-38240-7 $17.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Stuffy and prim, Noah Webster was no bon vivant, and biographers of the father 
of the American dictionary face quite the challenge in making his story interesting 
and informative. Fern’s keen directorial skills leave the duller stretches of his life on 
the cutting room floor and add touches of humor, and the result is an engaging, 
diverting read. She pokes a bit of fun at Webster’s serious side (“Noah begged his 
pa to send him to a school with lots of work and books and hardly any goofing 
around”), abridges his string of career failures, and cleverly turns his own stilted 
verbiage into a foreshadowing of his grand opus, the American dictionary: “Noah 
thought the schools were ‘wretched’ and the British textbooks being used were ‘defec-
February 2016 • 303
tive and erroneous.’ That was Noah’s way of saying they stunk.” Visually propelled 
by Kulikov’s zany illustrations, in which Webster freely interacts with the symbols 
of his life work (e.g., literally and laboriously digging his way through the letter 
A), readers quickly reach the highlight of his career, An American Dictionary of the 
English Language, and an understanding of what made it groundbreaking. Bubbly 
if not comprehensive, this makes for a pleasant reading experience, and even older 
students will probably prefer this frothier take to more cut and dried approaches 
to Webster’s life. An author’s note and brief bibliography are included.  EB
foremAn, michAel The Tortoise and the Soldier: A Story of Courage and Friend-
ship in World War I; written and illus. by Michael Foreman. Holt, 2015 120p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62779-173-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62779-174-8 $9.99   
R Gr. 4-6 
A fictional young reporter in the 1950s finds a dramatic story in a local tortoise and 
his owner in the framing device for this historical tale. Henry Friston, the tortoise’s 
owner, was a gunner on the battleship HMS Implacable in the Royal Navy during 
World War I, and it’s his wartime tales that capture the aspiring journalist’s attention. 
Henry first encounters the tortoise in Gallipoli, when it lands on his head after a 
shell blast. Henry eventually smuggles the reptile onto the Implacable, dubbing him 
“Ali Pasha” after a ruler of the Ottoman Empire, and the two successfully ride out 
the rest of the war together before heading home to Britain and peace. Through 
Henry’s tale, the narrator gains a new understanding of the realities of war, makes 
two new friends, and ends up with a fine newspaper story. The reporter conceit is 
rather contrived, but the war account is compelling and Foreman’s art enhances the 
storytelling. Single or half-page illustrations are given to genial, homey scenes, while 
battles and ships are given full-page spreads; dappled textures and soft linework 
temper some of the more graphic scenes. In the closing notes, Foreman explains his 
own connection to Henry and Ali Pasha, shares more information about Ali Pasha 
(including photos), and provides closure to the story of Henry and the tortoise.  JH
french, viviAn The Most Wonderful Thing in the World; illus. by Angela Bar-
rett. Candlewick, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7501-1 $18.99   
R* Gr. 3-5
A wise old man advises his king and queen that the best way to find a suitable 
husband for their daughter, Lucia, is to “find the young man who can show you 
the most wonderful thing in the world.” As a parade of suitors ensues, Lucia takes 
advantage of her parents’ distraction by would-be husbands to explore her city under 
the guidance of Wise Old Angelo’s grandson, Salvatore (who does not know her royal 
identity). While unsuitable suitors come and go, Lucia and Salvatore wander and fall 
in love, but after discovering Lucia’s parentage, Salvatore despairs at his chances of 
being with her. When he watches the king and queen interact with their daughter, 
though, the answer to the riddle comes to him—the most wonderful thing in the 
world is Lucia herself—and a happy wedding follows. According to information 
on the jacket flap, this is a retelling of a story that Barrett remembers from her 
youth, and French’s version is elegant and lyrical with touches of humor. Barrett’s 
refined watercolor illustrations evoke picturesque Italian vistas and Edwardian-era 
fashion, and the softening of the edges of the figures and backgrounds creates a 
dreamy mood that complements the romantic tale; the intricate detailing of the 
304 • The bulleTin
scenes and the ornateness of the frames that surround both text and illustrations 
makes this best enjoyed at close range. This is a polished gem, to be savored and 
sighed over by fairy-tale lovers of all ages.  JH
GArvin, Jeff Symptoms of Being Human. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 
2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238286-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238288-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Gender fluidity is still a rare topic in YA literature, and this novel offers an insightful 
if slightly implausible look at one teen’s coming out as a gender fluid teen. Riley’s 
father is a California politician, and the need for Riley to dress up and be an ap-
propriate, public politician’s kid is part of what pushed the teenager to attempt 
suicide. With the help of a good therapist, medication, and a school switch, Riley’s 
armed with a plan to try blogging about feelings and events to see if it provides 
insight. The blog is surprisingly successful for aiding Riley’s growth and in garnering 
readership, though it does draw some unwanted media attention. The text of the 
blog is used as a disguised instructional tool, explaining what gender fluidity is, how 
it feels (there is an effective metaphor used throughout about a gauge that swings 
from F to M on different days), and how it is a different place on the spectrum 
than transgender identity or being gay, bisexual, or queer (though it can potentially 
overlap with them). The author chooses to never identify Riley’s biological sex, 
carefully choosing descriptions that evade specific designation, even in a sexual 
assault scene. The overall emphasis on coming out being the primary goal for all 
teens feels unrealistic if well-intentioned, but this is undoubtedly an important 
introduction for readers who know little about gender fluidity and a welcome nod 
to those who may be experiencing similar feelings.  AS
GAvin, ciArA Bear Is Not Tired; written and illus. by Ciara Gavin. Knopf, 
2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-385-75476-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
In Room for Bear (BCCB 4/15), Bear found himself a home with an adorable flock 
of ducks. Now they’re “one big happy family,” but as the weather gets colder, he’s 
reminded of a key difference between bears and ducks: “Ducks don’t sleep through 
the winter.” Bear is initially determined that he won’t either, but eventually, after 
he repeatedly falls asleep “at the most inconvenient times,” Mama Duck explains 
that he can’t fight his true nature and it’s time for bed. He’s still an important part 
of the family even when asleep, though, and when he wakes up, the ducklings 
happily show him pictures of everything that went on around him (and sometimes 
on him) during his hibernation. This will immediately ring a bell with kids whose 
fear of missing out makes bedtime a challenge, while others will just appreciate 
the amusement of Bear’s relationship with his beloved ducklings and his desperate 
attempts to stay awake. That bear/duckling relationship plays out with particular 
charm and detail in the soft watercolor and pencil illustrations. Vignettes of their 
shared activities (Bear in a swim ring paddling diligently along behind the birds; 
the ducklings helpfully holding Bear’s eyelids open; the adoring little birds’ creation 
of a snow bear instead of a snow man) are enchanting stories in their own right for 
February 2016 • 305
viewers to enjoy independently of the text. Kids who bonded with the bear and 
duck family in the previous book will definitely want to snore along with Bear this 
time. Pair this with Carnesi’s Sleepover with Beatrice and Bear (11/14) to make an 
offbeat winter storytime, or use it at bedtime with those evasive young sleepers.  DS
GAyton, SAm The Adventures of Lettie Peppercorn; illus. by Poly Berna-
tene. McElderry, 2016 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4769-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4771-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
When Lettie was two years old, her mother took off, leaving only a note with an 
instruction that her daughter never step foot on the ground of Albion. That request 
has been difficult to honor, considering that Albion is the town Lettie lives in, but 
for the last ten years she’s managed to abide by it by staying within the walls of her 
home. When a frost-covered stranger with an icicle beard shows up and claims to be 
an alchemist who can create a mysterious substance called snow, Lettie’s intrigued. 
When the Snow Merchant reveals he knows her mother—also an alchemist—Lettie 
throws caution to the wind and follows the man after he leaves. She finds a friend 
in Noah, a boy who happens to be captain of a boat, and the two take to the seas 
to track the Snow Merchant and eventually find Lettie’s mother. A subplot involv-
ing two greedy women following the Snow Merchant to obtain the ingredients for 
snow convolutes an already overstuffed plot, and the revelation of the motivation 
behind Lettie’s mother’s disappearance melts like a snowflake under examination, 
making the whole adventure rather pointless. Still, there’s a whimsical humor to the 
storytelling that adds flair to the tale, and the secondary cast is amusingly eccentric. 
Lettie’s stubborn insistence on doing the right thing, even when it might not get 
her what she wants, makes her an admirable and endearing heroine. Bernatene’s 
black and white illustrations often provide more substantial action than the text. 
Readers who enjoyed the wonder of Townley’s The Blue Shoe (BCCB 11/09) may 
enjoy the similar quirkiness here.  KQG
GeorGe, KAllie The Enchanted Egg; illus. by Alexandra Boiger. Disney Hyper-
ion, 2015 [144p] (Magical Animal Adoption Agency)
ISBN 978-1-4231-8383-9 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
“An egg is full of possibilities. Especially an enchanted one.” Looking after just 
such an egg is young Clover’s current job at the Magical Animal Adoption Agency. 
As in this series’ first book (Clover’s Luck, BCCB 5/15), Mr. Jams (head of the 
agency) takes off on an urgent errand leaving Clover in charge of the egg and of 
the rest of the animals at the agency. When the egg hatches ahead of schedule and 
its inhabitant is nowhere in sight, Clover is concerned. Other issues arise as well, 
such as resident unicorn Cocoa’s sudden development of allergy-like symptoms 
(including sparkly snot) and various magical folks who come looking for pets to 
adopt. Although uncertain, Clover manages to cope with all the situations, finding 
and caring for the lost hatchling (an invisible winged puppy) and matchmaking 
between the wannabe pet owners and the unusual shelter animals. The devices that 
get the adults out of the way are becoming a little obvious, but the magical animals 
and the details of their care are definitely enticing and the gentle but intrepid Clover 
306 • The bulleTin
continues to charm; the story’s structure is also supportively solid and the mystery 
of the egg’s inhabitant is well paced. Fantasy and animal story fans will continue to 
enjoy spending time with Clover and her critters. Boiger’s sketchy monochromatic 
illustrations convey the cozy tone of the text, and the dainty Clover and the magical 
animals are appealing figures.  JH
GiBney, ShAnnon See No Color. Carolrhoda Lab, 2015 186p
ISBN 978-1-4677-7682-0 $18.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Alex worships her baseball-obsessed dad; after brief success as a 
pro player before a career-ending injury, he now coaches his kids, and Alex is a 
tough and competitive player. She’s also a biracial adoptee, the only dark-skinned 
member of her white family, and she’s begun to think more about her identity and 
her family’s awkward avoidance of the topic of race (“We don’t even see color,” her 
mother says defensively). Gibney, herself adopted into a white family, writes with 
keen understanding of a girl’s negotiating the tension between her family’s denial of 
her skin color and the outside world’s intense focus on it. Alex is credibly envious 
of her new boyfriend Reggie’s culturally embedded African-American household 
and she’s believably worried about their view of her family. Unfortunately, though 
the narrative vignettes are dramatic, they chop up the emotional trajectory and 
give events and relationships little chance to build; there’s also contrivance in the 
character of Alex’s gadfly little sister and in Alex’s meeting with her birth father. 
There’s not much written about transracial adoption, especially transracial domestic 
adoption, though, and Gibney’s exploration may ring a bell for readers with their 
own familial identity challenges.  DS
GrAnt, michAel Front Lines. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2016 [576p]
ISBN 978-0-06-234215-7 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
In this alternative history set during World War II, the Supreme Court hands down 
a verdict stating all U.S citizens, regardless of gender, are subject to the draft at 
eighteen years of age. Rio Richlin doesn’t wait to be drafted but enlists shortly after 
her sister is killed at Pearl Harbor; Frangie Marr goes voluntarily as well, despite 
knowing that a black woman in the military will face an onslaught of bigotry and 
sexism; Rainy Schulterman has been assigned to military intelligence school ,and 
she’s desperate to join the fight against the Nazis who have likely killed her Jewish 
relatives. Readers follow the three young women as they endure and sometimes 
fail brutal training in the States, as they are transported from one post to the next, 
and finally, as they meet the enemy on the battlefield. The tone of the prose and 
the rhythm of the dialogue shifts as the focus of each chapter moves among the 
protagonists, and Rio, Frangie, and Rainy offer multiple access points for readers. 
The experiences of female soldiers in the military are plainly and honestly depicted; 
the threat of sexual violence hangs over each of their heads and the women all face 
various forms of sexism, from mere indifference to downright violence. The first 
part of the novel is mostly devoted to preparation for war, and here both Frangie’s 
and Rainy’s characters are developed, laying out their motivations and fears. Rio 
comes to life in the actual battle, where she’s terrified that she will be either a coward 
or a killer, and in the end she is both. Grant makes it clear that war is hell for both 
sexes in this immersive, powerful tale.  KQG
February 2016 • 307
hAinSworth, emily Take the Fall. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2016 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-209422-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-209424-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
When Sonia appears at her family’s diner, gasping, disheveled, scraped, and bruised, 
it’s clear that she’s been attacked near their house, though she can’t say who her 
assailant was. Then Sonia’s best friend, Gretchen, is found dead at the base of the 
town’s famous waterfall the next morning, and the search for the girls’ attacker 
becomes urgent. The chief suspect is Gretchen’s former boyfriend, Marcus, but 
when he enlists Sonia’s help to prove his innocence, she fears her own attraction to 
him will keep her from being objective. There are other suspects as well, though, 
and as the web of lies and cruel, dangerous games Gretchen was playing surfaces, 
the mystery becomes not who had a motive to kill Gretchen but who didn’t; indeed, 
the sea becomes rather thick with plausible red herrings until the dramatic reveal. 
While it’s something of a hard sell to convince readers that Marcus would be so 
forgiving after all he’s been through, enough sympathy has been created for Sonia to 
allow it, especially since Gretchen becomes such a well-crafted villain. Readers who 
enjoy procedural mysteries that keep you guessing until the end will enjoy this.  KC
heiliG, heidi The Girl from Everywhere. Greenwillow, 2016 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238075-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238077-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Although Nixie was born in Hawaii in 1868, she has traveled through time and 
space on her father’s ship since she was an infant. Now she’s the procurer and reader 
of the maps that her father, the Navigator, follows to move the ship back and forth 
along the space-time continuum. Her father directs the ship from eighteenth cen-
tury India to 1980s New York to fictional lands with one purpose: to find the map 
that will return him to Hawaii, 1868, to save Nixie’s mother from the infection 
that killed her after Nixie’s birth. So far none of the maps from Nixie’s time and 
birthplace of birth has worked, and the latest one lands the ship and its crew in 
1884 in the Kingdom of Hawaii and a chain of events that gets Nixie involved with 
the Hawaiian League and their attempts to annex Hawaii. Unfortunately, details 
of the time travel are vague and convenient, and the plot winds around itself in a 
frustratingly disorienting way, closing readers out of the puzzle and instead offering 
a finished product that seems more “gotcha” than satisfying. Additionally, Nixie’s 
voice is rather bland, and the love triangle between Nixie, a fellow crewmate, and 
the son of colonist is tepid at best. The historical details are interesting, though, 
and they are enhanced by an informative author’s note. Though the time-travel 
plot disappoints, history buffs may be intrigued enough to follow the twisting line 
of Nixie’s story.  KQG
hiGGinS, wendy The Great Hunt. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2016 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238133-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238135-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
When a terrifying beast ravages the kingdom of Lochlanach, marriage to Princess 
Aerity and a place in the royal family are offered up as the prize to any hunter who 
308 • The bulleTin
can take the creature down. Aerity’s not particularly happy about being a prize, 
but she’s willing to do her duty for the safety of her kingdom. Paxton Seabolt 
joins the hordes of men eager to hunt the beast, but he’s seeking only to protect 
his fellow villagers; he has no interest in the princess or the royal family, especially 
since their rules about magic probably shortened his beloved grandmother’s life. 
To the great dismay of both Aerity and Paxton, they find each other absolutely 
irresistible, despite Paxton’s being an arrogant jerk and Aerity’s being a bit clueless. 
The focus shifts between Aerity and Paxton as they navigate their separate roles 
in the palace and in the hunt, but as their relationship heats up, the story narrows 
to just their push and pull attraction. There’s little world building after the initial 
setup, though, so it can be a challenge to parse the various political motivations 
and conflicts that influence the actions of secondary characters, many of whom 
are threats to Aerity and Paxton. As a romance, however, the book hits the sweet 
spots—the talented, lone wolf hero, the vulnerable but determined heroine, and 
the many, many obstacles their love must overcome—but even these elements are 
somewhat generic. The ending feels like a missed opportunity to empower Aerity, 
but it may offer enough intrigue to have readers hunting the shelves for the next 
installment.  KQG
hitchcocK, ShAnnon Ruby Lee & Me. Scholastic, 2016 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-78230-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-78232-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Sarah Beth is supposed to be watching her little sister, Robin, when a car hits and 
injures the little girl. Now eleven-year-old Sarah Beth is spending the summer 
of 1969 on her grandparents’ farm, hanging out with her friend Ruby Lee and 
concocting ways that she can make things right with her sister. When Sarah Beth’s 
and Ruby Lee’s grandmothers, themselves friends of a sort, explain to the girls that 
they won’t be able to associate at their newly integrated junior high (since Sarah 
Beth is white and Ruby Lee is black), Sarah Beth also must grapple with baffling, 
hurtful social conventions and their impact on her friendship with Ruby Lee. 
Though an author’s note helps explain the scope of the book as well as its basis 
in fact, the breadth of issues it addresses becomes unwieldy, and Ruby Lee seems 
largely incidental to Sarah Beth’s life until at least halfway through the novel; ad-
ditionally, the writing, especially the dialogue, is stiff at times. Still, Sarah Beth is 
sympathetic, and the challenges of 1969 North Carolina are both sobering and 
thought-provoking; furthermore, Ruby Lee has dignity and purpose beyond as-
suaging Sarah Beth’s feelings and does not hesitate to let Sarah Beth know when she 
has been a bad friend. This is one for readers unafraid of thorny issues—provided 
they read authors’ notes.  AA
iSAdorA, rAchel I Hear a Pickle (and Smell, See, Touch, and Taste It, Too!); written 
and illus. by Rachel Isadora.  Paulsen/Penguin, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16049-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 2-4 yrs
This fetching concept book from veteran author/illustrator Isadora offers a gallery 
of sensory experiences broken into sections for each of the five senses. Under “I 
Hear,” for instance, kids note what they hear (“I hear the birdie”; “I hear the bee. 
February 2016 • 309
Uh-oh!”) and sometimes don’t hear (“I don’t hear the worm,” says the girl looking 
intently at the very quiet worm) in a variety of settings, from outside to inside, rural 
to urban. The result has the gently carnivalesque charm of Krauss and Sendak’s A 
Hole Is to Dig as kids weigh in on different experiences and responses in multiple 
vignettes per page. Some of the vignettes are self-contained moments of poetry (“I 
touch the rain”); sometimes a sequence provides a satisfying bijou story (“I don’t 
see the words in my book./ I wear my glasses. I see the words!”). Delicate lines with 
simple watercolor shading and patterns keep the small tableaux simple, but they’re 
vivid with life from the multicultural cast of bouncy kids and the evocation of life’s 
sensory encounters, from the homely smell of baby poo to the glorious vision of 
fireworks. This will be excellent fodder for sharing in a preschool curriculum, and 
audiences will be chiming in to offer their own examples of what they hear, see, 
and most definitely smell.  DS
JinKS, cAtherine The Last Bogler; illus. by Sarah Watts. Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt, 2016 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-544-08696-8 $16.99 
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Master bogle hunter Alfred Bunce (from How to Catch a Bogle, BCCB 10/13) has 
stepped a few rungs up the ladder of respectability with his appointment to the 
newly formed Committee for the Regulation of Subterranean Anomalies. The 
cachet and steady paycheck of a government job notwithstanding, the actual busi-
ness of destroying child-eating bogles is as messy and dangerous as ever. What’s 
new, however, is the evolving public attitude toward bogles in particular and the 
preternatural in general. Victorian London is entering the age of science and de-
manding more efficient ways to deal with public nuisances, and Bunce rises to the 
challenge. The first step is to isolate the “magic” in Bunce’s bogling rod, which turns 
out to be an easily replicated toxin. Next step is to devise a strategy to lure out the 
bogles en masse and to deliver the poison is one massive attack. Here apprentice 
Ned proves to be especially adept, and his quick wits and ready apprehension of 
engineered systems will be called upon to save the day, and ultimately to save him 
from the permanent bogling career he has dreaded. Jinks has planted themes and 
ideas throughout her series on the relationship of folk belief to the modern world, 
and here she allows these concepts free rein. Ned muses, “Bogles stopped being 
magic when the Sewers Office took over their management. For the Sewers Office 
don’t deal in magic. Any more’n the Post Office would be sending telegraph boys 
to work on broomsticks.” But make no mistake: thoughtfulness never gets in the 
way of a rousing good adventure, and the conclusion of this trilogy will satisfy 
thrillseekers and armchair philosophers alike.  EB
JohnSton, Jeffry w. The Truth. Sourcebooks Fire, 2016 [240p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4926-2320-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Eight days have passed since an armed intruder broke into the Russos’ home and 
was shot dead on the kitchen floor. In the aftermath, sixteen-year-old Chris Russo 
has been praised as a hero for protecting his little brother. Chris, though, wonders if 
he’s done the right thing, especially when he learns that the intruder was a thirteen-
year-old boy. The victim’s older brother Derek, meanwhile, has questions of his own 
310 • The bulleTin
and kidnaps Chris, intending to torture the truth out of him. Now, under threat 
of losing his fingers should he lie, Chris spills every detail he remembers about the 
night of the robbery and the days after, revealing emotions about his long-dead 
father and his idolized little brother—and the truth about who really pulled the 
trigger that night. Alternating between flashbacks of the days following the break-in 
and the ongoing confrontation between Chris and Derek, this captivating thriller 
keeps the pacing fast, the tension high, and the emotions raw. The focus here is 
less on violence than those emotions, as the two boys find common ground in 
their respective levels of guilt and face their shared responsibility. Derek is at times 
implausibly more like a demented therapist than a brother seeking retribution, 
but the underlying mystery is solid; as a psychodrama, it has a lot to offer readers 
looking to explore the dark side of brotherly affection.  AM
JordAn, Sophie Reign of Shadows. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2016 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-237764-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-237766-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
On the night Luna, princess and heir to the throne of Relhok, was born, an eclipse 
sent the kingdom into perpetual darkness, her parents were slaughtered by the 
chancellor, and the queen’s handmaid escaped the castle with infant Luna in her 
arms. In the seventeen years since, sightless Luna has been living behind the protec-
tive walls of a tower hidden in the Black Forest, where she’s safe from the dwellers, 
flesh-eaters that arose with the dark. When soldiers from the chancellor-turned-king 
discover the tower, Luna flees, navigating the forest with her other senses and find-
ing a traveling companion in Fowler, a young tracker seeking a rumored island of 
light. He’s resistant and sulky, she’s cheerfully optimistic and resilient, so romance 
ensues, and a steamy one at that. Their flirtatious banter, or at least Luna’s banter 
at a taciturn Fowler, provides a bit of light to leaven the setting’s oppressive dark-
ness. The focus on Luna and Fowler’s relationship doesn’t leave much room for 
world building, but descriptions of the dwellers make the immediate threat crystal 
clear; there’s more than blindness to Luna, and her sightlessness is authentically 
depicted as an advantage at times and a vulnerability at others. While not nearly as 
expansive or detailed as Marchetta’s similarly themed Finnikin of the Rock (BCCB 
3/10), this will appeal to readers who were drawn to the romance at the heart of 
that novel.  KQG
KormAn, Gordon Masterminds: Criminal Destiny. Balzer + Bray, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-230002-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-230004-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
As readers discovered in the Masterminds series debut (Masterminds, BCCB 3/15), 
the model town of Serenity, New Mexico is actually a behavioral science lab test-
ing whether nature or nurture makes a criminal, and five of the children cloned 
from the DNA of infamous criminals made their break from Serenity. One is now 
gone, but four are still on the lam with a dual mission: to find their identities and 
to shut down the experiment. Korman puts on an amazing balancing act here. 
Cat-and-mouse chase scenes deliver the thrills as the kids try to keep half a step 
ahead of their pursuers, while the sheltered escapees’ rude introduction to the 
February 2016 • 311
outside world is rife with comedic confusion, from discovering the joy of junk 
food to untangling the mysteries of idiom (e.g., problematic discourse on “out 
the wazoo”). Adolescent search for identity, which infuses so many middle school 
novels, takes on heightened significance for these kids who fear their character 
may have been predetermined in a laboratory. And most importantly, Korman 
never lets the philosophical Big Question—what, exactly, makes us human?—slip 
too far from his readers’ consciousness. In keeping with this theme, the members 
of the ensemble cast are distinguished by attitude and disposition rather than by 
serendipitous skill set, and the object of their wild road trip is no hollow McGuffin. 
Volume three can’t get here soon enough.  EB
lAnderS, meliSSA Starflight. Hyperion, 2016 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-2324-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Driven to commit a crime in order to impress an ex-boyfriend, Solara needs to get 
to the outer realm where her criminal tattoos won’t keep her from finding work 
with her mechanical skills. Wealthy pretty boy Doran needs a servant and will pay 
her passage, but after Solara realizes he is planning to fire her, she drugs him and 
uses his temporary amnesia to claim a connection between them that doesn’t exist. 
They wind up on a spaceship that is filled with its own problems, and suddenly 
all are on the run from space pirates and corrupt governments. Add in a subplot 
about a presumed dead twin brother and a steamy hate turned to lust turned to 
love romance, and you’ve got a space soap opera. It all works fairly well, and readers 
along for the romp will appreciate the zippy pace, snarky repartee between Doran 
and Solara, and the clear resolution of the storyline). The outer space location is 
underused, with even the descriptions of zero gravity or space ships mostly scenery, 
but those seeking adventurous romance in an alternative setting will find this fills 
the bill.  AS
lAnG, heAther Fearless Flyer: Ruth Law and Her Flying Machine; illus. by Raúl 
Colón. Calkins Creek, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-62091-650-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Early twentieth-century aviatrix Ruth Law wasn’t satisfied with barnstorming and 
set her sights on breaking a long-distance flight record. Although she fell short of 
her intended goal of an uninterrupted flight from Chicago to New York City, she 
did best the previous accomplishment of pilot Victor Carlstrom, which was no 
mean feat in her biplane carrying the weight of extra gas tanks and a metal wind 
guard, for which it wasn’t designed. Forced into two landings by fuel shortage and 
darkness, she nonetheless completed her flight to New York, circled the Statue of 
Liberty, and won the approbation of her naysayers. A fine supplement to Brown’s 
Ruth Law Thrills a Nation (BCCB 12/93), this title aims for a slightly older audi-
ence; the plane’s modifications, the scrolling map strapped to her leg, the difficulty 
of operating levers in the freezing wind, etc., are all detailed here, but so are social 
obstacles that Law faced in procuring a plane for her venture. Colón’s grainily 
textured colored-pencil illustrations cast Law’s Curtiss biplane in a co-starring role, 
and black and white photos included with the author’s note and quotation cita-
tions assist readers in envisioning the challenges of early flight. This year marks the 
312 • The bulleTin
hundredth anniversary of Law’s achievement, and this title could be a particularly 
good focus piece for curriculum and programming that encourages girls’ interest 
in STEM fields.  EB
lAnGe, erin JAde Rebel, Bully, Geek, Pariah. Bloomsbury, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-498-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-499-2 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
While the title suggests that the characters in this ensemble drama were pulled from 
a John Hughes film, the situation in which they find themselves is no Breakfast Club 
detention scenario. Sam is the pariah, wanting nothing more than to hide both the 
physical and emotional scars of her mother’s drug addiction by flying under the 
radar. She inadvertently runs afoul of Andi, the rebel, when she tries to buy her 
mother’s pawned violin only to have Andi taunt her by stealing it. Sam gives chase 
and ends up following Andi to a party in the woods, where they happen upon York, 
a hulking bully, beating up on his geeky little brother, Boston. Cast assembled, the 
four “borrow” a car to run from cops raiding the party, barrel into a cop, and keep 
going only to find themselves in way over their heads: the SUV they’ve stolen appears 
to be a police vehicle, and it definitely contains a very large stash of heroin. In the 
midst of trying to figure out what to do and remain hidden from the threatening 
voices coming through the walkie-talkies in the glove compartment, the four come 
to know and trust one another, giving narrator Sam a sense of family for the first 
time. While their choices are clearly stupid and their plans to get out of trouble 
are manifestly unrealistic, the plot veers in a surprising way that makes unexpected 
sense in caper logic. Readers who focus more on character dynamics than plot will 
not be disappointed either, as the relationships and backstories, while cinematically 
caricatured, will make readers will care not only about what happens but who it 
happens to. Give this to readers who enjoy action-packed crime dramas spiced with 
a little danger and a healthy dash of heart.  KC
liGht, Steve Swap!; written and illus. by Steve Light. Candlewick, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7990-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
The old tar sitting despondently on the pier clearly longs for one more adventure 
at sea, and the rickety old ship at anchor nearby is just as clearly unfit to deliver 
it. When a button pops off his tattered coat, his young friend, a perky little girl, 
starts in motion a scheme to put the wind back in his sails and suggests the two 
see what they can get for the button (“Let’s swap!”). First, they trade the button 
for two teacups from a nice seaport resident; next they exchange the two cups for 
three coils of rope. Two of the coils get swapped for six oars; two of the oars buy 
them four flags. Upon making the final trade, they are now able to refit the leaky 
vessel and put out to sea (“Ahoy!”). The value of the trades will seem improbable to 
even the most naïve bargainers, but it’s all part of the fun, as the audience follows 
the endpaper maps around the islands where the trading is conducted, watches the 
monkey who frolics on the fringes with clues for the upcoming swap, and revels 
in the persnickety details of the fantastical, intricate black and white marketplaces 
and backdrops. Any girl who’s ever bellowed “Aargh!” will appreciate the humor 
that it’s a frilly-skirted girl who stumps around nimbly on a peg leg in this sea 
story, making her older pal’s dreams come true. The limited, repetitive text will 
February 2016 • 313
be a boon to beginning readers, and the unusual deployment of limited swaths of 
matte color to accent the sea, the protagonists, and their trades will invite older 
viewers to consider how color guides the eye across a spread.  EB
mAcy, Sue Miss Mary Reporting: The True Story of Sportswriter Mary Garber; illus. 
by C. F. Payne. Wiseman/Simon, 2016 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0120-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0121-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Playing tackle with the neighborhood boys was all well and good when Mary 
Garber was just a kid, but it certainly wasn’t a viable career choice for a woman in 
the decades between the two world wars. Sportswriting initially didn’t look much 
more promising, but after college graduation Garber worked her way up from a 
sorely mismatched stint as a society-page writer to a reporter covering local sports 
teams for the Twin City Sentinel in North Carolina. Throughout a long career she 
became known for encouraging young players with positive reporting, pushing past 
racial bias to cover black players and teams, claiming a spot in the guys-only press 
box, kicking open the door to men’s locker rooms for female sports reporters, and 
inspiring women sportswriters who followed. Quotes from Garber herself show a 
woman with a sense of humor, looking back with laughter at the time she hastily 
stitched up a basketball player’s shorts and hoped they’d last out the game. Payne’s 
illustrations are a perfect complement, drawing on both caricature and photorealism 
to produce scenes that are funny and informative. A brief author’s note, timeline of 
Garber’s career, source notes, and lists of resources are appended.  EB
mAGAziner, lAuren Pilfer Academy: A School So Bad It’s Criminal. Dial, 
2016 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3919-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
George doesn’t really think of himself as a bad kid, but when he’s kidnapped by 
Pilfer Academy and told that learning to be a criminal is his new life goal, he’s 
forced to reconsider. Now he’s attending classes on breaking and entering, stealth, 
and gadgetry, and it’s clear he’s an early star. Catching the attention of the dean is 
more of a hindrance than a benefit, however, as jealous students and intense adult 
pressure only reinforce George’s loneliness and his doubt that this is where he 
belongs. A theft too far cements it for George that he is no criminal, but escaping 
from this school of thieves, connivers, criminals, and rogues is no easy task. There’s 
contrivance in the setup that convinces George’s parents to let him go, but we are 
talking about a world so bizarre that the punishment is a hellish amusement park 
ride, so whatevs. School-story buffs with a taste for absurd, off-kilter humor will 
find this a welcome addition to the mix.  AS
mAlone, lee GJertSen The Last Boy at St. Edith’s. Aladdin, 2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4435-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4437-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
When girls were introduced to the all-male St. Edith’s Academy, the boys began 
transferring to other schools in droves. Seventh-grader Jeremy, however, has no shot 
314 • The bulleTin
at leaving because his single mom is the secretary at St. Edith’s, and now he is the 
last boy standing. He and his best pal Claudia cook up a plan of pranks they hope 
will get Jeremy expelled with minimal damage to his permanent record. The first 
few stunts go off without a hitch, but as the pranks get increasingly bigger, so do 
the consequences: the school roof caves in, a girl nearly dies from an asthma attack, 
and Jeremy almost gets his older sister kicked off the volleyball team that’s her only 
hope for a college scholarship. Jeremy’s initially a pretty sympathetic guy—most 
kids know what it feels like to be the odd man out, and he’s got insightful notions 
about how that outsider status can play a large part in shaping one’s identity: “How 
do you figure out . . . how to be a guy when you were surrounded by girls all the 
time?” Unfortunately, when he continues the pranks, even after they’ve hurt people, 
he meanders into selfish jerk territory. The depiction of female characters is mostly 
two dimensional: his mother is either crying or shrill, Claudia’s a younger take on 
Election’s Tracy Flick, and the fact that the girl who reveals Jeremy’s exploits does so 
because he scorned her romantically is an unpleasant cliché. Still, this is thoughtful 
look at the various ways identity is affected and shaped, and as long as kids stick to 
Jeremy’s first few pranks as guidelines, they’ll probably find some excellent inspira-
tion for their own shenanigans.  KQG
mArKel, michelle Hillary Rodham Clinton: Some Girls Are Born to Lead; illus. 
by LeUyen Pham. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-06-238122-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
winter, JonAh Hillary; illus. by Raúl Colón. Schwartz & Wade, 2016 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53389-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53388-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53390-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Even the most fanatical Hillary Clinton supporters may join their opponents in some 
justifiably skeptical eyerolling at the release of these picture books at the kick-off to 
election season, particularly when the intended audience won’t be showing up at 
the polls. It’s perhaps best, then, to consider if these slim biographies might have a 
shelf life after the ballyhoo is over and their subject is either In or Out of the Oval 
Office. Both focus more on the highlights of Clinton’s political career, with her 
personal life minimally referenced. Both emphasize the continuity between early 
interest in civil and women’s rights and her determination to have both a career and 
a family throughout a period in which such an attempt garnered public criticism. 
Markel’s offering initially appears the more lightweight, with a breezier, staccato 
narrative and Pham’s more broadly caricatured artwork. Nonetheless, this title is 
more candid about the nasty personal comments leveled at Clinton that probably 
wouldn’t be leveled at a man in a similar role, and extensive notes from author and 
illustrator encourage readers to reread attentively to find a wealth of embedded 
details. Winter and Colón’s presentation is more formal, the writing slightly more 
dense, the illustrations more dramatically composed, and the tone slipping from 
enthusiasm into hagiography. The closing note, however, acknowledges Clinton’s 
“militaristic streak” and early support for Barry Goldwater, which Markel leaves 
unmentioned. Together, this pair of titles, read in their entirety, could give young 
election watchers a reasonable view of Clinton as both statesman and candidate, 
but it’s Markel’s more honest and open portrayal that will likely outlast 2016.  EB
February 2016 • 315
mArr, meliSSA Seven Black Diamonds. Harper/HarperCollins, 2016 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-201117-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223921-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
When the fae Queen of Sea and Sky lost her baby to a manmade oil spill, she began 
a guerilla war against humanity and quickly earned her new name, the Queen of 
Blood and Rage. Her sleeper cells have committed horrific acts of terrorism, and 
there is none more effective and loyal than her Black Diamonds. Lily Abernathy 
lives in the human world but suspects she has fae heritage, considering her ability 
to bend the elements to her will. What she does not know is that the six people she 
befriends at her new boarding school are indeed the Black Diamonds, and she is 
meant to complete their group and marry their leader, Zephyr, despite her attrac-
tion to Creed, another member of the group. The first half of the book is largely 
devoted to Zephyr and Creed’s competition for Lily’s affection; fortunately, as the 
plot moves them from the human world to the faerie world, the setting expands 
and secondary characters are given more hefty roles, and a tragic backstory unfolds, 
lending depth and emotional resonance to the story. The spare moments in which 
the queen’s façade falls just enough to reveal her grief at the loss of her child are 
heartbreaking, as are the times when the Diamonds admit their guilt and disgust 
at the acts of murder they have committed. The love triangle might be a familiar 
trope, but Marr wisely uses it to draw readers in and then enchant them with a 
compelling world of magic, power, and regret.  KQG
mArSh, KAtherine The Door by the Staircase; illus. by Kelly Murphy. Disney 
Hyperion, 2016 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-3499-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 4-6
Mary has lived in a cruel and austere orphanage ever since her mother and brother 
died in a house fire. When Madame Z appears looking for a girl to adopt, Mary 
dares to believe her luck might finally be changing. Mary does indeed go home 
with Madame Z and lands in Iris, a town filled with charlatans, pickpockets, and 
people with real magic; there she makes her first true friend, Jacob, the son of a 
magician. She’s also gaining weight and being warmly clothed, and she seems to 
be viewed fondly by Madame Z, though Mary can tell something clandestine is 
going on. When she realizes that Madame Z’s real identity is Baba Yaga and that 
she has scared away many other girls (who were then apparently caught and eaten), 
Mary decides that she likes her home nonetheless, and she’s determines to tame the 
witch. This book is a splendid mix of traditional Russian folkloric details, magical 
adventure, and hints of historical fiction. The subtlety with which the clues are 
laid out may mean that readers don’t figure out anything before Mary herself does, 
but that only means they’ll find her quest to save herself and change the witch 
even more intriguing. Fans of McCoola’s recent graphic novel Baba Yaga’s Assistant 
(BCCB 10/15) will be thrilled to see another book focusing on this clever, wicked, 
and memorable character, and Mary’s gritty determination and fierce loyalty make 
her a worthy companion.  AS
316 • The bulleTin
mArtin, dAvid Shh! Bears Sleeping; illus. by Steve Johnson and Lou Fancher. Vi-
king, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01718-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Compact rhyming lines describe the cycle of bear life, from spring awakening from 
hibernation, through summer and fall eating and, for cubs, playing and growing, 
and on to winter when “Bears go/ In their den/ Warm and deep,” to reemerge 
in spring again. Though the scansion stumbles at times, the short lines are lively, 
evocative, and even playful (“Bears wiggle/ Bears shake/ Winter over/ Bears awake”), 
and the text is both informative and inviting. Johnson and Fancher’s expansive oil 
paintings are softly textured, with underbrush and bear fur coats thick and tactile; 
the landscapes are detailed and attractive in their own right (most notably when the 
focus-pulling bears are back underground and out of sight), and the bear cubs are 
simultaneously realistic and adorable. The result is an effective entry-level natural 
history lesson that’s a great transition for lovers of fictional picture-book bears. A 
note explains the behavior of the black bears featured in the book.  DS
mAynor, meGAn Ella and Penguin; illus. by Rosalinde Bonnet. Harper/Harp-
erCollins, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-06-233088-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Little girl Ella and her best bud Penguin are afraid of the dark, which poses a 
problem when Ella gets some glow-in-the-dark space stickers. The duo tries other 
low-light settings (behind the shower curtain, under the laundry basket, and so 
on) without success, until they finally muster the courage to go inside the closet: 
“Penguin chewed his flipper. ‘Are there any spiders in there?’ ‘No,’ said Ella. ‘Big 
dogs?’ ‘Uh-uh.’ ‘Narwhals?’ Ella looked around. ‘This closet is narwhal-free.’” 
After a few false starts, they manage to close the door, and once Penguin is brave 
enough to open his eyes, they are rewarded with the neon glow of Ella’s stickers. 
Ella and Penguin are a charming pair, and plenty of kids will identify with their 
fears of the dark. Maynor’s touches of humor keep the tone light, and the process 
Ella and Penguin follow (approaching the darkness in gradual steps, holding hands, 
taking a deep breath) gives youngsters some supportive suggestions for acclimating 
themselves to darkness as well. Bonnet’s watercolor and digital illustrations capture 
the shadowy uncertainty of the dark while still keeping the tone buoyant. The 
rotund, toylike Penguin will elicit sympathy and some good-natured chuckles as 
he nibbles his flippers in anxiety or claps them to his rosy cheeks in amazement at 
the fuzzy-edged glow of the stickers. Kids not quite emotionally ready for Snicket’s 
The Dark (BCCB 6/13) will appreciate this more comfortable approach to a com-
mon childhood fear.  JH
mcAnulty, StAcy The Dino Files: A Mysterious Egg; illus. by Mike Boldt. Step-
ping Stone/Random House, 2016 [128p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52192-4 $12.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52191-7 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52193-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-3
Nine-year-old Frank has big dreams of becoming a paleontologist, but for now 
February 2016 • 317
he’s happy to spend his summers at DECoW, the Dinosaur Education Center of 
Wyoming, a museum and seven dig sites. Frank gets special access to the center 
because his grandparents own it, but most days he’s stuck in the museum, straight-
ening signs and displays, instead of out in the field, digging for fossils. Excitement 
finds him, however, when Gram brings in a fossilized dinosaur egg, a rare discovery 
(“You’re more likely to get eaten by a shark and then struck by lightning”), from 
the field. It turns out the egg is not so fossilized, though, as Frank discovers one 
night when a cuddly and friendly dinosaur cracks his way out of the egg. Frank 
tries to keep “Peanut” a secret at first; an angry neighbor is trying to claim the egg, 
since it was technically found on his property, and Frank believes that claim would 
leave Peanut either in a zoo or a science lab. Readers know what happens when a 
kid tries to hide a creature from adults, and the story follows the familiar trajectory 
with Frank eventually revealing the truth to his grandparents and the neighbors. 
Their reactions give the story some emotional heft, subverting the trope of the 
all-knowing adult. Frank’s narration is funny and effervescent, and he proudly 
waves his nerd flag when it comes to his passion for dinosaurs. A fresh take on a 
fossilized premise, this will appeal to dino fans and readers with their own nerd 
badge. Final art not seen.  KQG
mccArthy, cori You Were Here. Sourcebooks Fire, 2016 [400p]
ISBN 978-1-4926-1704-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
It’s the fifth anniversary of the death of Jaycee’s daredevil brother Jake, and Jaycee is 
marking it by revisiting the site of his fatal stunt and toying with the idea of repeat-
ing it. As her former best friend, Natalie, drives by the playground and sees what 
Jaycee may be about to do, she stops the car to intervene, and their adventures begin. 
Jaycee convinces straitlaced Natalie, her perpetually drunk boyfriend, Zach, and their 
lovelorn friend, Bishop, to join her in exploring some urban ruins, literally following 
in Jake’s footsteps. They are joined by the enigmatic Mik, one of Jake’s best friends 
and a selective mute who is as haunted by the memory of Jake as he is by his crush 
on Jaycee. Their adventures are related through chapters that alternate between the 
first-person narration of Jaycee, third-person accounts focusing on Natalie and Zach, 
sequential graphic novel interludes from Mik’s perspective, and poetic graffiti by 
Bishop, each reflecting the character’s personality. Natalie’s years of therapy and sharp 
wit complement Jaycee’s emotional blind spots while still revealing Natalie herself 
as a hot mess of unrealistic expectations and unprocessed stress. Zach’s fashioning 
of his experiences into video game scenarios highlights his pillbug response to the 
threat of growing up, Bishop’s artistic creations turn teen heartbreak into profundity, 
and Mik’s graphic narratives transform his silence into a very loud ache. The mix of 
forms as well as the insights each character gleans through their urban explorations 
render this book both readable and teachable on multiple levels.  KC
mccArthy, meGhAn The Wildest Race Ever: The Story of the 1904 Olympic Mara-
thon; written and illus. by Meghan McCarthy. Wiseman/Simon, 2016 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0639-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0640-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 3-5
The wildest race? That’s a pretty big claim, but as McCarthy retells the tale, it just 
might be true. The year was 1904 (long before marathons were an every-weekend 
318 • The bulleTin
event), the place was the World’s Fair in St. Louis (that of hot dog and ice cream 
cone fame), the route was awful (rain had turned roads to mud, which then dried 
to dust), the weather was smothering (August heat at three in the afternoon), the 
runners were, well, quite a crew, and their trainers were, well, nothing short of 
ignorant by today’s standards. McCarthy introduces ten contestants in thumbnail 
bios that give an indication of the range of experience on the track that day—from 
Cuban Felix Carvajal, who arrived in long sleeves and street shoes, to Fred Lorz, 
a bricklayer who trained after work, to Ian Mashiani and Len Tau, South African 
messengers during the Boer Wars who were now working at the Fair. Many runners 
dropped like flies, some engulfed in clouds of dust that impaired their vision and 
breathing, some from exhaustion, some from dehydration as their trainers refused 
to give them water; one water-deprived runner was given strychnine by his trainer 
in an early version of performance-enhancing drugs. Others did splendidly, stop-
ping to chat with fans along the route, or sprinting across the finish line with the 
expressed wish that the course had been longer. McCarthy’s signature google-eyed 
cartoon cast neatly underscores the absurdities of the race, and her early invitation 
for readers to guess the winner gives them some stake in the game. A lively endnote 
elaborates on some of the more vibrant runners—and touches on the strychnine 
issue—and a bibliography directs kids to original newspaper reports.  EB 
mcintoSh, will Burning Midnight. Delacorte, 2016 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53412-2 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53410-8 $17.99 
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53411-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Ever since thousands of mysterious colored spheres suddenly appeared around the 
globe, the world’s economy has revolved around the dwindling supply of these 
seemingly magical marbles. Seventeen-year-old David “Sully” Sullivan trades 
these marbles at a local Yonkers flea market, and he’s intrigued when beautiful 
seventeen-year-old Hunter appears with a rare trade and a natural talent for find-
ing the most well-hidden spheres. Soon the two strike up a partnership, but even 
as Sully starts falling for Hunter, their friendship is strained by their discovery of a 
never-before-seen Gold. Rather than sell the priceless sphere, they hit the road, with 
friends in tow and a marble-hunting billionaire on their trail. With an inventive 
premise, this sci-fi adventure offers a scavenger hunt story with layers both political 
and emotional. The detailed backstory and underlying logic are clearly conveyed 
without dragging down the pace, and the plot manages to twist and surprise. The 
real strength of the narrative rests with the relationships, though, as old and new, 
romantic, familial, and platonic connections face tests and betrayals. Ultimately 
a winning story of friendship in the face of easy money and power, this novel has 
much to offer the reader who’s up for something new.  AM
moriArty, JAclyn A Tangle of Gold. Levine/Scholastic, 2016 [480p] (The 
Colors of Madeleine)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-39740-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-77735-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
In this stunning conclusion to the Colors of Madeleine series (A Corner of White, 
February 2016 • 319
BCCB 5/13, and The Cracks in the Kingdom, BCCB 2/13), Elliot Baranski has fallen 
through from the fantastical Kingdom of Cello into the real city of Cambridge. 
While seeking out Madeleine, the girl he has been corresponding with illegally be-
tween worlds, he stumbles across his long-lost father, and the two are ushered back 
into Cello by Keira, a girl who can see and open the cracks between the two worlds. 
In Cambridge, Keira works with Madeleine to try to bring the Royals of Cello 
back to their land; back in Cello, Elliot questions his political allegiances, eventu-
ally throwing his lot in with the Hostiles who want to overthrow the monarchy. A 
startling and clever conclusion bring together the quirky inhabitants of Cambridge 
with the figure of Isaac Newton and the citizens of Cello in a breathtaking climax 
that has metaphoric resonance far beyond the events of the tale. Elliot’s alliance 
with the Hostiles, for instance, offers a subtle yet brilliantly conceived explora-
tion of the way people are tempted by fanatical belief; world building that locates 
Isaac Newton at the structural rift between an out-of-control world of magic and 
a disenchanted world of science is philosophically sophisticated while never losing 
the thread of story. While the resolution is, strictly speaking, näively utopian, it 
speaks to core desires in a complicated, broken world, making this an eminently 
satisfying conclusion for the heart.  KC 
nAnneStAd, KAtrinA When Mischief Came to Town. Houghton Mifflin Har-
court, 2016 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-544-53432-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-544-63376-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
When newly orphaned Inge Maria arrives on the island of Bornholm, she meets 
with a chill, both from the Danish winter air and also from the taciturn grand-
mother she has never seen in all her ten years. With half her hair missing (eaten by 
the goat sandwiched next to her on the long boat ride from Copenhagen) and a 
habit of thanking inanimate objects for their service, not to mention a propensity 
for bursting into whimsical song, Inge makes quite the impression on her new 
community. Before long, she manages to win over even the hardest hearts in the 
village in a charm offensive on par with that of Anne Shirley, establishing ties and 
finding familial love and belonging. A large quantity of heart and a poignant por-
trayal of loss trump any lack of subtlety here; indeed, Inge’s grief over the death 
of her beloved mother seeps in despite hijinks and distractions, and it cuts to the 
quick. With both a judicious amount to cry at and much to delight in, this book 
will satisfy lovers of orphan stories and good-natured mischief makers alike.  AA 
newquiSt, hp The Human Body: The Story of How We Protect, Repair, and 
Make Ourselves Stronger. Smithsonian/Viking, 2015 112p illus. with photo-
graphs (Invention & Impact)
ISBN 978-0-451-47643-2 $18.99   
Ad Gr. 5-9
“We’re going to see how flesh and bone have given way to wood and metal, glass 
and gold, carbon fiber and computers,” says the introduction to this overview of 
medical innovations. The first section, “Body Parts,” which takes up more than half 
of the book, focuses on the history of prosthetics and replacements, from glass eyes 
to dental implants to artificial hearts; the middle section, “The Medicine Cabinet,” 
focuses on soap, aspirin, and antibiotics; a final section, “Tools and Treatments,” 
320 • The bulleTin
talks about the development of surgery, ways to peek inside the body and its 
processes from stethoscopes to MRIs, and vaccines. The Body Parts section is an 
interesting overview of human ingenuity and engineering, exploring developments 
from thousands of years ago through today and hypothesizing about the future. 
Subsequent sections are less successful, though; they’re briefly summarizing ground 
that’s often better trodden elsewhere, and the attitude of uncritical celebration is 
disappointingly superficial given topics that can result in considerable negative 
consequences and provoke some intense discussions of ethics. Nonetheless, the 
chronicle of invention is inspiring, and the short chapters will allow readers to 
cherry-pick the most useful parts. Reproductions of period and contemporary 
images, sometimes adding a gross and/or a cool factor, enliven the pages; a list of 
web and print resources and an index are included.  DS
noyeS, deBorAh Ten Days a Madwoman: The Daring Life and Turbulent Times 
of the Original “Girl” Reporter Nellie Bly. Viking, 2016 [144p] illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 978-0-8037-4017-4 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
If the name Nellie Bly (pen name of Elizabeth “Pink” Cochran) conjures recognition 
among middle-school readers, it undoubtedly suggests a determined young turn-of-
the-century woman, in a slim-waisted checkered coat and carrying a satchel, off to 
beat the circumnavigation record of the fictional Phileas Fogg. That’s only a piece 
of Bly’s story, though, and it’s not even the stunt that brought her to the dance. The 
work that, years before her worldwide trip, truly launched her career and provides 
the teaser line for this title was her far more lurid investigative story on the insane 
asylum on New York’s Blackwell’s Island, which she infiltrated as a “patient” in 
1887. Making this episode the biography’s lure is effective, and Noyes’ emphasis 
on muckraking as opposed to showmanship is a valuable corrective to Bly’s popular 
legacy. The overall quality of this biography is marred, however, by cumbersome 
organization and the intrusive placement of additional insets that address episodes 
throughout Bly’s life and issues to clarify context. The result is information that is 
disturbingly out of chronological order and an otherwise lively narrative pitted with 
interruptions. Readers patient enough to put the puzzle together, though, will be 
rewarded with this introduction to an early celebrity. An index, source notes, and 
an excellent closing essay on investigative and stunt reporting are included.  EB 
o’donnell, liAm The Case of the Battling Bots; illus. by Mike Deas. Orca, 
2016 [176p] (Tank & Fizz)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0813-3 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Our favorite goblin and troll detective team Tank & Fizz (from Tank & Fizz: The 
Case of the Slime Stampede, BCCB 5/15) returns, this time to determine whether 
an unpopular schoolmate is cheating when building his impressive battle bot. A 
side plot becomes central as plans to build a huge sports arena in Slick City and a 
mysterious figure who warns against its completion lead the detectives to mysteries 
that include portals, demons, corrupt officials, and school bullying. With a joyful 
literary shrug, these are handled with pretty much identical amounts of urgency 
as Tank and Fizz fumble their way toward discoveries and into saving their town. 
February 2016 • 321
As with the previous volume, the book seamlessly moves from text to illustrated 
panels, both telling the core narrative. The pace is swift, keeping readers from 
thinking overmuch about the convoluted plot; they will careen along as gleefully 
as Tank and Fizz themselves, rejoicing when all ends well. Monster fans who don’t 
like things too scary will likely find this a perfect mix of monstrous and silly.  AS
oStrovSKi, emil Away We Go. Greenwillow, 2016 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223855-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223857-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
There’s a lot to unpack in this complex, nihilistic novel where teens all have a 
virus (PPV, the Peter Pan Virus) that will kill them before adulthood, assuming 
the world doesn’t end via the meteor that may hit Earth in a few months. Most 
teens now reside at “recovery centers,” facilities that mostly just distract them from 
their imminent deaths and keeps them out of the general population. Noah lives 
at Westing, an exclusive prep school version of these centers, where at least the 
intellectual pursuits offered are more challenging. Noah is often bitter, selfish, and 
self-pitying, but he’s also trying to be the person he knows he should be. This would 
be a believable combination even in realistic fiction, but it’s even more so in this 
this dystopian world where teens know they are going to die soon, and everyone 
seems bent on keeping them locked up and ignored. It’s more remarkable, in fact, 
that Noah is surrounded by a core group of caring, thoughtful, earnest friends who 
struggle mightily to keep our narrator from total darkness. The complex organiza-
tion of the novel requires careful attention—time jumps in sometimes confusing 
ways, flyers, scripts, and announcements are interleaved with the chapters, and the 
world building is subtle. Even so, brainy readers who want to see just how grim 
Holden Caulfield would get if he knew he was dying soon will find this to be a 
pretty accurate approximation.  AS
pArKer, nAtAlie c. 
Behold the Bones. 
HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2016 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-224155-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-224157-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10 
Candy knows there might be truth to the local lore about the ominous swamp 
that surrounds her small town of Sticks, Louisiana—she was there when her friend 
Sterling saved their friend Abigail from becoming a swamp monster (Beware the 
Wild, BCCB 12/14)—but does everyone have to make such a big deal about it? It’s 
the same with her family, who insist on celebrating her birthday by reciting a list of 
those relatives who inherited the Craven family curse, a curse she now supposedly 
shoulders. She’d like to just ignore it all, but now ghosts have started turning up in 
her wake and the ghost hunter that just moved into town has his camera trained 
on Candy, especially after she dispels a spirit in a very public fashion. Candy was 
the fiery best friend in the previous title, and here her lively, no-nonsense attitude 
comes through here in all its glory. Her bravado, however, has an undercurrent of 
anxiety, one that eventually sweeps her to the swamp and its inevitable connection 
to her life. Since the ghosts are already acknowledged, the suspense comes from 
figuring out their motivation, and Candy has to reckon with some awfully nasty 
322 • The bulleTin
monsters, both human and otherwise, to get the answer. The creepy, oppressive 
atmosphere from the first book is just as well drawn here, and folklore weaves with 
horror to create a gripping read. An added bonus is the tight friendship between 
Candy, Sterling, and Abigail; here’s hoping we get Abigail’s point of view in the 
next foray into the swamp.  KQG
peArlmAn, roBB Groundhog’s Day Off; illus. by Brett Helquist. Bloomsbury, 
2015 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-289-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-291-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
Groundhog is sick of being taken for granted so he ups and quits before the big 
day, leaving a note and heading off in a huff to the spa. The desperate mayor holds 
auditions for another animal to take Groundhog’s place, but no one fits (“Monkey 
was asked to leave after an unfortunate banana-cream-pie incident”), and the mayor 
sends out a televised plea for Groundhog’s return. Moved by the plea, Groundhog 
heads home to crash the auditions, going on on to ace his special day and bask in 
the glory of the other animals’ admiration. (Then he sees on TV that the Easter 
Bunny has called it quits, and the closing pages find the holiday duo sunning 
themselves together on an empty beach.) The personable, furry brown Groundhog 
divertingly emotes his way through the pages, and the pictures of him brushing his 
oversize teeth or lounging at the spa provide notes of humor that will amuse both 
adult readers and young audiences. The blue-gray cast to the sturdy acrylic and 
oil art sometimes comes across as drab, but the illustrations do effectively convey 
the chill of February air. There are plenty of mediocre Groundhog Day books in 
existence, so this one is a breath of fresh spring air.  JH
pennypAcKer, SArA Pax; illus. by Jon Klassen. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 
2016 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-237701-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-237703-6 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7 
“War is coming. It means sacrifices for everyone.” So says Peter’s father as he leaves 
to serve and sends Peter to live with his grandfather three hundred miles away, 
which means Peter must release back into the wild Pax, the fox he has been caring 
for five years. Peter doesn’t even last one night at his grandfather’s house before he 
gathers up supplies and heads homeward to find his fox; meanwhile, Pax is forced 
deeper into the forest by army traffic. Separated by miles, the friends embark on 
two very different journeys that eventually bring them together, just not in the 
way they expected. The focalization alternates between Peter and the fox, giving 
readers a sense of the depth of their connection and particularly Peter’s need for 
reunion; afraid that he will inherit his father’s bouts of anger and violence, Peter 
hopes that nurturing Pax will prevent that fate. The narration that follows Pax has 
a simplicity that still manages to be strikingly emotional, while Peter’s chapters are 
more layered, with painful secrets revealed at a steady but organic pace. Pennypacker 
doesn’t romanticize her animal world, with believable territorial fights happening 
among the wildlife; ultimately, though, the book is an indictment of war, notable 
in the depiction of the soldiers reveling in destruction and through the character 
February 2016 • 323
of Vola, an ex-medic who cares for Peter when he breaks his foot. The ending is a 
classic tearjerker, and even readers who predict it will still find themselves reaching 
for a tissue.  KQG 
pinKwAter, dAniel Bear and Bunny; illus. by Will Hillenbrand. Candlewick, 
2015 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7153-2 $15.99   
R 4-6 yrs
In this follow up to Bear in Love (BCCB 9/12), Bear (who believes Bunny is also a 
bear) and Bunny (who believes Bear is also a bunny) are now fond friends, enthu-
siastically sharing stories of their individual adventures and together going through 
the forest singing. When Bunny suggests to Bear that they two might get a pet (“A 
pet is an animal you take care of and feed, and it loves you”), Bear can’t think of 
an animal that would be suitable. When the two happen on a frog on a high tree 
branch, they conclude it’s a kitty, rescue it from its perch, and happily make it their 
new pet. The gentle storytelling tone, with its affectionate dialogue between the 
friends, has a Milne-esque echo, and the unseen narrator’s witty but delicate take 
on the misunderstood-species joke (“It would be too hard to explain it to them. 
Besides, it doesn’t matter”) will tickle youngsters’ funnybones. The mixed-media 
art is sweet but not saccharine, balancing the rosy-cheeked cuddliness of the animal 
friends with more rugged textures in pencil hatching; the landscapes are an inviting 
blend of detail (the occasional foregrounded flower or precisely limned tree) and 
suggestion, with forest fading into mist behind the protagonists. The Bear/Bunny 
friendship continues to be weird and wonderful (a nice touch is that the two enjoy 
spending time apart as well as together), and audiences will enjoy being included 
in the warmth as the two widen their circle.  DS
roBinSon, michelle A Beginner’s Guide to Bear Spotting; illus. by David Rob-
erts. Bloomsbury, 2016 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-68119-026-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-68119-027-3 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-7 yrs
Tricked out in a lumberjack-check jacket, balaclava, immense blue mittens, and 
a head-to-knee sized backpack, our protagonist is well prepared for woodland ad-
venture. Or at least you’d think so, but as the authoritative voice of the narrator/
guide book cautions, a lot can go wrong when bears become involved. There are 
three kinds of bears under consideration here: black (Ursus americanus), brown 
(Ursus arctos), and blue stuffie (“just plain silly”). As the field guide voice wryly 
vacillates between solid advice and predictions of doom, the backpacker blunders 
through perilous encounters. He’s chased up a tree by a black bear, plays dead for 
a brown bear, infuriates both bears with a sticky chewing-gum bubble, tries to 
placate them with tighty whities and fairy tales, and finally outsmarts both beasts 
and guidebook by deploying the blue bear stuffie, with which they cuddle as they 
drift off to Dreamland. The deadpan humor of the text is well matched by mixed-
media illustrations of the adventurer’s expressive little face peering out from his 
headgear, the slightly dopey yet threatening bears whose forest has been invaded, 
and the forest itself, whose spiky trunks totter like building blocks about to collapse. 
Sweet, silly, and just a wee bit scary, this title could make a great wind-down story 
for a cold winter’s night.  EB
324 • The bulleTin
SArAh, lindA Big Friends; illus. by Benji Davies. Holt, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-62779-330-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
Youngsters Birt and Etho are friends, “big friends,” who engage in imaginative play 
with the help of two large cardboard boxes: “Sometimes they’re kings, soldiers, 
astronauts. Sometimes they’re pirates sailing wild seas and skies.” Birt is content 
with this one-on-one arrangement and is taken aback when a new boy, Shu, brings 
his own cardboard box and asks to join them. Gracious Etho welcomes Shu, and 
the three of them continue to play—but Birt has difficulty changing the dynamic 
from two to three and eventually bows out, even going so far as to destroy his 
box in a fit of irritation. Etho and Shu, though, persist in inviting Birt into their 
play and eventually lure him back with a new creation—multiple boxes mounted 
on wheels—which expands their adventures and leads Birt to decide that new 
and different can also be good. Sarah’s thoughtful, pithy storytelling is pleasingly 
punctuated with quirky, childlike phrases that add both freshness and credibility 
to the tale. A common and often tricky situation among children is portrayed with 
compassion and honesty; Birt does not come around immediately—he needs time 
on his own to adjust to the idea—and Etho and Shu’s gentle persistence in trying to 
get Birt back in the game is both heartening and satisfying. Davies’ palette of muted 
browns, blues, grays, and olive greens are well-chosen for the outdoor setting and 
it, coupled with the simple, dot-eyed figures, gives the inviting digital illustrations 
a classic, retro feel. Both useful and attractive, this will hit the spot for school and 
home discussions of friendship dynamics.  JH
SAvAGe, Kim After the Woods. Farrar, 2016 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-374-30055-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-374-30056-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
When Julia saw a man attacking her best friend, Liv, she rushed him; Liv fled, 
leaving Julia as the man’s prisoner. After a hellish night in the woods, Julia too 
escapes, ignoring her fear, the pain of a badly injured ankle, and something that 
she can’t allow herself to remember, until she makes her way to safety. Now, a year 
later, their attacker is dead by his own hand, and the body of a girl has been found. 
Julia’s need to recover her lost memory is as urgent as her need to understand why 
her best friend abandoned her and seems to have changed so much since that day. 
As Julia tries to sort out what really happened in the woods with the help of a 
therapist and a nosy reporter, she comes face to face with some unsettling truths 
about Liv that complicate her notions of what it means to be brave and require a 
new understanding of the lengths both girls have gone to in order to save them-
selves. Julia is a likable main character even when she makes some questionable 
choices, and her snappy exchanges with the crushworthy son of a police officer 
are amusing. The really interesting story here turns out to be Liv’s, though, and 
a strikingly original plot twist emerges as Julia stumbles toward a painful reveal; 
readers will be left questioning how they define courage and what they might do to 
escape chronic, longstanding abuse. Though Julia’s relatively normal existence with 
supportive friends and family and a sweet romance soften the dynamics here, this 
shares emotional themes with Scott’s Living Dead Girl (BCCB 9/08), so give it to 
those who are interested in the subject but might not be able to face the intensity 
of that book.  KC 
February 2016 • 325
SAvit, GAvriel Anna and the Swallow Man; illus. by Laura Carlin. Knopf, 
2016 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52206-8 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51334-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52207-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 291, for review.
Scott, victoriA Titans. Scholastic, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-80601-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-80602-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Seventeen-year-old Astrid can’t help but be entranced by the Titans, steel automated 
horses, even if gambling on them has ruined many families, including her own, in 
her poor neighborhood. The horses are generally only ridden by the very wealthy, 
but Astrid stumbles into an opportunity to ride a very early version of one, a Titan 
1.0, in an upcoming race. She’s lucky that there are grizzled old-timers around to 
train her how to work with the Titan, and she is also fortunate enough to have a 
fiercely loyal best friend and parents who are willing to bend their assumptions and 
cultural beliefs to allow for their young daughter to risk her life in the dangerous 
races. Fans of horse races will likely find the lengthy racing scenes to be irresistible; 
Scott balances excitement, tension, risk, and athleticism successfully in these sec-
tions. Unfortunately, Astrid’s stubborn refusal to turn on the emotional powers of 
the earlier Titan 1.0 (never mind the never-explained reason why only the prototype 
had this capacity) is baffling, with no motivation other than the wild drama when 
she finally does engage it. In addition, the character development is uneven, with 
personalities shifting depending on what is needed at the moment. However, the 
pacing and lush, adoring descriptions of the Titans themselves are both done well, 
and readers may get caught up enough to keep zipping along to the not terribly 
surprising but still satisfying conclusion.  AS
SepAhBAn, loiS Paper Wishes. Ferguson/Farrar, 2016 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-374-30216-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-374-30217-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Manami is ten when she and her Japanese-American family are removed from their 
Bainbridge Island home and sent to the Manzanar internment camp in the Califor-
nia desert. Devastated at leaving behind her beloved dog, Yujiin, after she attempts 
to smuggle him on the journey, Manami falls mute and grieves, thinking she sees 
Yujiin around every corner and sending drawings of him on the wind to lead him 
to her. This is an accessible tale of the Japanese-American internment experience 
for younger readers, and details such as divided loyalties and intragroup schisms 
(Manami’s brother leaves college to be with his family and then finds himself the 
target of camp troublemakers after he reports their activities) add dimension. The 
language is oddly stilted and formal, though, distancing Manami’s narration and, 
ironically, making her American-born English seem strained and foreign; her elective 
mutism is dramatic, but it’s also a well-worn literary contrivance. While Larson’s 
Dash is a more solid dog-themed internment camp story, readers will sympathize 
with Manami’s loss.  DS
326 • The bulleTin
SepetyS, rutA Salt to the Sea.  Philomel, 2016 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16030-1 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
As Russian troops move into German territory in 1945, four German teens escape, 
fleeing both the Red Army and their guilt, shame, and fear. Fifteen-year-old Emilia 
wishes to forget her encounter with the Russian solders, but her growing belly 
won’t let her; Joana serves as a nurse to make amends for a murder she commit-
ted. Florian hopes to get revenge for the death of his father, and Alfred believes his 
devotion to the Nazi cause will finally earn him a bit of respect. The fates of the 
four teens collide aboard the Wilhelm Gustloff, a German transport ship that has a 
destiny of its own. The teens take turn narrating, their distinct and powerful voices 
giving their experiences a harrowing immediacy and laying bare the desperation, 
depravity, and despair of civilians and soldiers alike. With the shaky nervousness 
of a scared rabbit, Emilia’s narration is by far the most heartbreaking, serving as a 
proxy for the victims of mass rapes perpetrated during the war. Alfred’s posturing 
gives voice to a rabid apostle of the Nazi cause, while the romance that blooms 
between Florian and Joana offers a shimmer of optimism in the sea of misery. 
The occasional infodumps are jarring, but they lend much needed context to the 
complexities of the Russian-German conflict. The book unflinchingly depicts the 
reality as Russian torpedoes hit the Gustloff, and the voices of the teens turn from 
prosy to spare as the lifeboats are lowered and thousands die. Even with the bit-
tersweet, hopeful ending, this is still a haunting tale that questions whether small 
acts of kindness are enough to hold back the tide of human cruelty. An author’s 
note and lists of sources reveals Sepetys’ meticulous research.  KQG 
SheehAn, Judy I Woke Up Dead at the Mall. Delacorte, 2016 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51247-2 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51246-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51248-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Sarah’s dead. She was happy at her dad’s wedding and then she woke up at the 
Mall of America, wearing the worst bridesmaid’s dress ever and no longer alive. It’s 
a major bummer, but her perky death coach is determined to help her tie up her 
loose ends and go into the light. The worst thing that can happen is that one will 
become one of the walkers, lost souls stuck in loops of a painful moment in their 
lives who can walk for years, even decades, without any resolution. Sarah thinks 
she is too smart for that, and for the rules, so she starts breaking regulations im-
mediately—falling for a cute dead guy, trying to solve her murder (it turns out she 
was poisoned), and making contact with the living world. The pace is measured, 
which works well in a book about the undead who don’t flow through the rapid 
path toward reincarnation; the ones who are stuck for various reasons can be around 
for a long time, after all. The philosophical scenes about life, death, family, and 
friendships are effective, and they are lightened by Sarah’s sharp, snarky wit. She 
realizes when she is being an obnoxious teen but generally embraces it, as it worked 
for her when she was alive; the book wisely allows her to soften a bit by the end, 
becoming more open to seeing the struggles others hide rather than judging them 
by what they show. Malls are sort of like limbo anyway, so it was a clever jump to 
just go ahead and make one a literal way-stop for the dead.  AS
February 2016 • 327
SimpSon, dAnA Unicorn vs. Goblins: Another Phoebe and Her Unicorn Adventure; 
written and illus. by Dana Simpson. Andrews McMeel, 2016 [176p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4494-7628-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
A clever introduction by Cory Doctorow and his young daughter catches new 
readers up on the key characters in this third comic collection featuring Phoebe 
and her best friend, Marigold, a unicorn with a very healthy ego (Unicorn on a Roll, 
BCCB 6/15, etc.). It’s summer for the two friends, which means music camp and 
lots of lazy adventures. Phoebe’s wry parents and her frenemy, the über-popular 
Dakota, return to play their roles effectively, but there are new faces as well: the 
perhaps murderously competitive Sue, Phoebe’s camp bunkmate, and the romanti-
cally lucky Florence Unfortunate Nostrils, Marigold’s estranged sister. There are 
moments of sheer brilliance, as when Phoebe realizes how astonishingly foolish it 
was to try to teach the egomaniacal Marigold to sing the blues, or when Dakota’s 
bewitched hair (from an earlier misadventure) stages a revolt, but mostly this is 
solid, amusing, and ultimately familiar fare for fans of the series. Readers certainly 
won’t be complaining about the chance to spend more time with these two; they’ll 
appreciate the insider feel that comes with a third book and recognize the visual 
cues and subtle references to earlier events.  AS
Snow, cArol The Last Place on Earth. Holt, 2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-62779-039-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Daisy Cruz knows that her best friend, sixteen-year-old Henry Hawking, wouldn’t 
just up and leave without saying anything, even though his family has disappeared 
on camping trips regularly over the years. After much speculation and an extended 
search, Daisy tracks down Henry’s location via an enigmatic text, only to find herself 
trapped, alone, in a well-supplied underground bunker. When she’s let out, Henry 
has some explaining to do. It turns out that he and his family are preppers, and they 
fear the worst has come in the form of a pandemic, so they have retreated to their 
safe house in the mountains. Unable to bear the thought of losing Daisy, Henry 
brought her to join them against his parents’ wishes, and now she is separated from 
her family and in the clutches of a group of paranoid survivalists. Henry’s family is 
depicted as fairly normal, but the caretakers of the safe house, a family called the 
Dunkles, are clichéd crazies—large, blond, square-jawed parents with large, blond, 
square-jawed children who have never interacted with outsiders and who disdain 
anyone who doesn’t know how to kill, skin and cook woodland creatures. While 
her time with the survivalists is interesting in its novelty and grossness, Daisy’s 
search for Henry goes on too long; what’s unexpected, however, is the seriousness 
with which the novel takes the preppers’ fears—the virus is new, the epidemic is 
real, and people off the mountain die until a cure is accidentally found. The other 
worst-case scenarios that Henry’s parents enumerate to Daisy actually seem more 
inevitable than paranoid, giving their extreme response more credibility than it 
might seem at first blush to deserve; while readers may be dismissive of the Dunkles, 
they will certainly think twice about their chances when civilization’s dominoes 
start to fall.  KC
328 • The bulleTin
SommerSet, mArK Baa Baa Smart Sheep; illus. by Rowan Sommerset. Candle-
wick, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-8066-4 $14.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Little Baa Baa is bored, and that means trouble. When Quirky Turkey stops by, 
Baa Baa engages the bird in banter; when Turkey asks what the mound of brown, 
organic-looking pellets next to Baa Baa is, Baa Baa tells him that they are “smarty 
tablets” that will make their consumer more intelligent, and that they are free to 
turkeys. Turkey is suspicious (“They look a bit like poo. . . . They smell a bit like 
poo, too”), but Baa Baa’s fast talk overcomes his reservations. Turkey gobbles the 
pile down only to have his worst fears confirmed (“It IS poo!”), whereupon Baa 
Baa slyly tells him, “See, you’re getting smarter already!” This is an amusing early 
shaggy dog (sheep?) story that will elicit a delighted groan at the punchline and 
that is all the cleverer for making the poo-eating part of the build-up rather than 
the joke itself. The repetitive back-and-forth between the turkey and the sheep 
(which is almost the entirety of the text) has the percussive resonance of stage pat-
ter and offers entertaining possibilities for performance as well as reading aloud. 
There’s an innocent Boynton-esque silliness to the pencil and digital art in subtle 
earthtones, and butter wouldn’t melt in the mouth of the wide-eyed, fuzzy-faced, 
yet diabolical Baa Baa. The format is on the small side for large groups, but given 
the comedic chaos this is likely to cause, it’s perhaps just as well that it’s most ef-
fectively deployed with a small (and unsuspecting) audience.  DS
Stout, ShAwn K. A Tiny Piece of Sky. Philomel, 2016 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17343-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
The summer of 1939 is not turning out quite as ten-year old Frankie Baum hoped: 
her favorite sister is away, and Frankie also has to help in the kitchen of her family’s 
new restaurant, prepping food in the Maryland heat rather than swimming with 
her cousins. When her father refuses to conform to the demands of the president 
of the chamber of commerce, rumors begin to spread that her kind, ever-optimistic 
dad has ties to the Third Reich; though Frankie can’t believe this, she struggles to 
make sense of his late-night phone calls and a mysterious photo she found. An 
engaging narrator and keen observer with an appealing sense of humor, pronounced 
sense of fairness, and relatable independent streak, Frankie provides a light but ef-
fective touch on weighty issues. Tackling race, social justice, and even death, this 
well-paced novel will find the right audience among readers wanting fairness with 
their historical fiction.  AA 
SullivAn, tArA The Bitter Side of Sweet. Putnam, 2016 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17307-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
When famine threatens thirteen-year-old Amadou and his family in Mali, he sets out 
with his six-year-old brother, Seydou, to find paid work. They are instead captured 
and forced to work long, hungry, dangerous hours on a cacao plantation in Ivory 
Coast. Amadou does his best to protect Seydou during their two years of work and 
counting. At first a fighting, out-of-control girl named Khadija leads the brothers 
into trouble and savage punishment, but when Seydou is badly injured, Amadou 
February 2016 • 329
realizes that Khadija’s desperate plan to escape is their only hope. Their escape and 
journey to find Khadija’s journalist mother is harrowing but not untouched by 
kindness; when they arrive, it is made even more poignant by Amadou’s first taste 
of processed chocolate and his worry that Mrs. Kablan will be silenced by fear. 
Part of Amadou’s journey, then, is relearning how and whom to trust, especially 
as he realizes that his options don’t include going home. First-world readers will 
learn much about how their pleasures are underwritten by the labor of their third-
world peers; Amadou is credibly fearful, resolutely brave, and appropriately angry 
at his situation. The resolution, which finds Amadou and Seydou working on a 
plantation that is committed to decent wages as well as education for its workers, 
is an as-good-as-it-gets kind of compromise that leaves much room for the activ-
ism advocated for in the author’s note that follows; however, readers will need to 
do their own research to find appropriate avenues for expressing their objections 
to child slavery.  KC 
SwAllow, Gerry Blue in the Face: A Story of Risk, Rhyme, and Rebellion; illus. by 
Valerio Fabbretti. Bloomsbury, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-487-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-488-6 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Elspeth is a brat, plain and simple. Her parents have let the eleven-year-old get away 
with things for so long that now all she has to do is threaten to hold her breath 
and even impossible things (like keeping an alpaca as a pet in the family’s Seattle 
apartment) are promised to her. The one time they stand up to her, Elspeth passes 
out and awakens in a forest where nursery-rhyme characters are suffering under 
the reign of King Krool. There she discovers that Jack and Jill are her real parents 
and that they’ve been looking for her for years after the king threw her down a 
well. As she meets more oppressed characters, she becomes invested in changing 
this world for the better, maturing in the process. It’s a lot of silliness, even with 
the government overthrow plot, and humorous illustrations punctuate the text, 
adding even more levity. Elspeth herself is so deliciously horrid at the beginning 
that her eventual transformation is disappointing, making her into a less interesting, 
if more admirable, character. However, she is surrounded by secondary characters 
that readers will recall happily from their nursery rhymes, and they may find this 
novel a clever re-use of classic Mother Goose.  AS
underwood, deBorAh Here Comes Valentine Cat; illus. by Claudia Rueda. Dial, 
2016 [88p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42915-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
The festive sign-wielding feline (from Here Comes Easter Cat, BCCB 1/14) is 
back, only this time he’s cranky rather than captivated, since he is repulsed by the 
mushiness of Valentine’s Day. Despite the urging of the unseen narrator, Cat resists 
creating a nice valentine for the new dog next door (Dog has tossed bones and a 
ball over the fence between them, hitting Cat), instead designing a few mocking 
and unsendable efforts. An explanatory valentine from Dog, however, makes it clear 
that the tossed objects were presents and that Dog is lonely. This revelation moves 
Cat to tears and he finally brings a nice valentine and a new ball to Dog. This series 
330 • The bulleTin
continues to create fresh and satisfying literacy experiences for kids; the second-
person narration, especially when read by children themselves, empowers kids by 
positioning them as the narrative voice of reason. The storyline can easily prompt 
discussion of miscommunication and the misunderstandings that can impede friend-
ships, and Cat’s facial expressions, body positioning, and reliance on images and 
symbols to express himself also provide rich fodder for analysis and interpretation. 
Rueda’s sassy, buff-colored Cat is a hoot at the height of his naughtiness, but also 
he’s poignantly repentant as he weeps at the realization of poor Dog’s loneliness. 
The pared-down compositions allow viewers to focus on the visual storytelling and 
on the emotional dynamics of the story. Fans of Cat’s previous books (and even 
Valentine’s Day–phobes) are likely to fall in love with this series installment.  JH
vAron, SArA Sweaterweather; written and illus. by Sara Varon. First Second, 
2016 125p
ISBN 978-1-62672-118-0 $19.99   
R Gr. 4-8
This expanded version of a book originally published in 2003 contains the original 
comics, which provides a glimpse into work young readers probably haven’t seen, 
and adds many entries and features, including a short personal piece wherein Va-
ron interviews other creative people who also work at their craft as full-time jobs. 
Prefacing each piece is a short comment by Varon, and these personal glimpses 
into what she thinks of her work are intriguing, as when she conjectures that she’s 
some of the magic and originality that she once had, even while her artwork is 
sharper and better. While some observations may go over the heads of the young-
est audiences, many may relate to this sense of evolution that is both celebratory 
and poignant. Varon covers robots, baking, and friendship, key themes across 
her work, throwing in dinosaurs and a note that she was a boxer (accompanied 
by a memorable strip featuring two boxing friends who patch each other up after 
the bout). Accompanying the text are her brush and ink illustrations (with clear 
notes on all writing/drawing materials used), friendly drawings that range from 
finely detailed, realistic sketches (as in her segment on urban beekeeping) to loose, 
open paper dolls that could appeal to very young audiences. Varon fans will be 
fascinated by all the insider information, and developing artists will appreciate the 
range of styles, materials, color choices (especially the insight on how single colors 
can carry a whole story) and the sense of developing craft over the decade or so 
this book covers.  AS
wAllAch, tommy Thanks for the Trouble. Simon, 2016 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1880-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1882-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Parker Santé has suffered from psychogenic aphonia, an inability to speak, ever 
since he was in a car wreck that killed his father five years earlier. He’s also become 
a bit of a hard case, getting into fights and hanging out at swanky hotels in order 
to steal from the patrons. When he accidentally leaves his journal, which he uses 
for communication as well as writing dark, fairy-tale-inspired stories, at the table 
of a beautiful silver-haired girl, he and Zelda strike up a conversation. She informs 
him that she is planning to kill herself, so he persuades her to spend the day with 
him instead; she strikes a bargain that if he will commit to applying to college 
February 2016 • 331
and considering a future for himself, she will indeed spend the day and all of her 
money on him. As the day turns into a weekend, Zelda tells Parker that she was 
born in 1770 and is tired of living, and while he doesn’t believe that, she does make 
him believe that he might have a future worth pursuing. The mystical resonance 
of Zelda’s character is complemented by Parker’s haunting stories and Wallach’s 
lyrical prose, which flows between the realistic diction of a contemporary, writerly 
Latino teen in Parker’s narration and the more formal cadences in Zelda’s dialogue 
and in Parker’s stories. Those embedded tales from Parker’s journal are gems in and 
of themselves, and while the overall conceit that this is a college application essay 
doesn’t quite work, it hardly matters. Readers looking for a beautifully written 
philosophical romance will enjoy losing themselves in this one.  KC 
wAlliAmS, dAvid Demon Dentist; illus. by Tony Ross. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2016 [448p]
ISBN 978-0-06-241704-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Alfie thinks he already had the worst dentist—the one who pulled the wrong 
tooth—so he’s made a policy of avoiding dentists entirely, and his mouth shows it. 
Finally, the social worker who helps his ailing father forces Alfie to go to Miss Root, 
the elaborately menacing new dentist in town—who pulls all of Alfie’s teeth in one 
go. Toothless and terrified but determined to save his town from this monster, Alfie 
finds himself on a dangerous quest that is sometimes just scary and other times 
downright impossible. While there are a few too many “made-up word” footnotes, 
this is an Dahl-esque mix of humor and horror that will appeal to fans of both. 
Ross’ familiar scrawled illustrations appear on most pages, punctuating the large-
print text and exaggerating even further the horrific and absurd details. A brief 
author’s note introduces non-English readers to Walliams, a celebrity comedian 
now making his name as a popular British children’s author, and points them to 
some of his other books.  AS
wellS, dAn Bluescreen. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2016 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-06-234787-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
In the future, where neural implants connect to an immersive virtual world, a 
trendy new digital drug called Bluescreen is putting the minds of users at risk of 
external control and permanent brain-crash. When the drug finds its way into the 
hands of her friends and younger siblings, seventeen-year-old semi-pro gamer and 
elite hacker Marisa Carnesca decides to stop the drug at its source. With the help 
from an eclectic team that includes fellow gamers, offline friends, former enemies, 
and a suave former drug dealer, Mari tracks the drug across the richest and poorest 
parts of Los Angeles, but her quest soon puts her in the crosshairs of drug gangs, 
extortion mafias, and super-wealthy tech-companies execs alike. Meanwhile a shad-
owy online character begins offering his assistance, but at a price. This gripping 
cyberpunk thriller reads like an homage to Neal Stephenson’s genre-defining Snow 
Crash, but Wells mixes well-extrapolated world building and nuanced storytelling 
into something convincingly fresh and original. The plot builds slowly, adding 
layers of tension with bursts of adrenaline-fueled action. The narration is likewise 
thematically strong, raising awareness of economic and social issues without being 
332 • The bulleTin
preachy. Most notable, though, is the richly diverse cast, including and international 
crew of tech-savvy girlfriends and a Latino female narrator with a prosthetic arm 
and an abundance of talent and attitude. A few unresolved mysteries and lingering 
questions about Mari’s online ally/nemesis set up planned sequels, which should 
thrill readers who enjoy intense, intelligent cyber-fare like Anderson’s Feed (BCCB 
11/02) and Doctorow’s Little Brother (BCCB 11/08).  AM
wellS, roBiSon Dark Energy. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2016 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227505-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227507-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
A massive spacecraft crashes in Iowa, killing thousands before skidding to a stop 
hundreds of miles away. Alice relocates with her NASA-official dad so that he can 
be on the scene, and she settles in quickly at her new boarding school, finding in-
stant friends and even a potential romantic interest, while also helping her father. 
Once the aliens emerge, two of them enroll at Alice’s school, so she feeds her dad 
information about them while also assisting him in cataloging the enormous ship. 
It turns out there are secrets that involve the ancestry of the aliens, the control of 
the ship (the aliens are not in charge—villainous Masters are coming for them), 
and potential connections with the Anasazi or Ancestral Puebloans (the author 
uses both and explains term usage in an afterword), but Alice is keen to unravel it 
all. The novel has a sharp beginning, with the crash and the numbed devastation 
that follow crisply conveyed. Unfortunately, there’s way too much packed into the 
book—the Native American connection, the shocking violence of the Masters, the 
human/alien attempts to relate to each other, the boarding school romance—for any 
plot point to really land. In addition, Alice is smart but not terribly likable, and the 
speed with which she judges others and decides her way is generally the best grows 
quickly wearisome. Even so, readers who can’t get enough extraterrestrial books 
may find this a more poignant look than some other tales of alien invasion.  AS
winter, JonAh Hillary; illus. by Raúl Colón.
See review under Markel, p. 314.
winterS, cAt The Steep & Thorny Way. Amulet, 2016 [352p] illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 978-1-4197-1915-8 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
As the daughter of a white woman and a black man in the 1920s, Hanalee has been 
mostly tolerated by her white neighbors in Elston, Oregon, but never welcomed. 
Even the meager goodwill she’s gained over her sixteen years is lost, however, when 
she joins up with Joe Adder, the supposed murderer of her late father, to investigate 
the activities of the KKK and their influence in Elston. Recently released from jail, 
Joe shows up not to beg for forgiveness from Hanalee but to inform her that it 
was really her uncle Clyde, now her stepfather, who was responsible for her dad’s 
death. Joe’s out for revenge and Hanalee’s looking for answers, but their search for 
the truth leads them down a twisting rabbit hole of prejudice, hate, and crime that 
ends at Elston’s lynching tree. Shakespeare’s Hamlet serves as the obvious framework 
February 2016 • 333
for the plot, but the story soon shakes that off, evolving into its own unique and 
harrowing account of the ways in which people hurt each other out of ignorance 
and fear. Hanalee’s narration is folksy and immediate, and readers are with her every 
step of the way as she pieces together the puzzle of her father’s death and wipes 
away her town’s veneer of acceptance. Winter’s use of historical photographs isn’t 
quite as successful as in her previous books (Shadow of Blackbirds, BCCB 4/13) but 
the image of the KKK marching through Jackson County, Oregon, is particularly 
haunting. A timeline of Oregon’s segregation laws and an informative author’s note 
emphasize the fact that racism has never been limited to the South.  KQG
334 • The bulleTin
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
freedmAn, Judy The Handbook for Storytime Programs; by Judy Freeman and 
Caroline Feller Bauer. ALA, 2015 665p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8389-1265-2 $65.00
       The Handbook for Storytellers; by Judy Freeman and Caroline Feller Bauer. 
ALA, 2015 416p 
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8389-1100-6 $65.00
Taken together, these two guidebooks could easily serve as story programming 
boot camp for rookie children’s librarians. Freeman, a former school librarian and 
now adjunct professor at the Pratt Institute, and the late Bauer, a public librarian, 
professor of children’s literature, and performer and storyteller, offer a revision of 
Bauer’s 1977 The Handbook for Storytellers. That guide has now been separated into 
two texts to accommodate the scores of stories, poems, book lists, etc. included, as 
well as to note the differences between and the overlaps of storytimes and storytell-
ing. Each book contains annotated booklists of children’s literature, ranging from 
folklore to recently published titles; the full texts of some stories and a plethora of 
rhymes, fingerplays, and songs; practical suggestions for creating and promoting 
programs in school libraries, classrooms, and public libraries; storytelling techniques 
and readaloud strategies; activities that can be used in storytimes, booktalks, library 
lessons; annotated lists of professional books and website bibliographies; and indexes 
by author, title, and subject. Newbies on the job or old hats looking to freshen up 
an old storytime will find plenty of help here.  KQG
February 2016 • 335
Abandonment–fiction: Bauer; 
Gayton
Abuse–fiction: Savage
Adoption–fiction: Gibney
Adventure: Cherry; Gayton; 
Korman; Lang; Lange;  
McCarthy, C.; McIntosh; 
O’donnell; robinson
Africa–fiction: Sullivan
African Americans–fiction: Adler
Afterlife–fiction: Cohen; Sheehan
Aliens–fiction: Wells
ALternAtIve hIStOry: Grant
Animals–fiction: Pennypacker
Animals–stories: Burach; Pearlman; 
Sommerset
Art and artists: varon
Aviation: Lang
Babysitting–fiction: Allen
Baseball–fiction: Adler; Bauer; 
Gibney
Bears–fiction: Gavin
Bears–stories: Martin; Pinkwater; 
robinson
Behavior–fiction: Swallow
BIOGrAPhIeS: Burleigh; Fern; 
Lang; Macy; Markel; noyes; 
Winter
Biracial people–fiction: Castroman; 
Gibney; Winters
Biracial people–stories: Ashman
Blindness–fiction: Jordan
Blogs–fiction: Garvin
Bogles–fiction: Jinks
Brothers–fiction: Johnston
Brothers and sisters–fiction:  
Connolly; Federle
Canada–fiction: Banks
Cats–stories: underwood
COnCePt BOOKS: Isadora
Conspiracies–fiction: Korman
Crime and criminals–fiction: Cherry; 
hainsworth; Johnston; Korman; 
Landers; Lange; Magaziner;  
McIntosh; Savage; Wells; Winters
Cryptids–fiction: George
Current events: Austrian; Markel; 
Sullivan; Winter
Curses–fiction: Parker
death–fiction: Appelt; Cohen;  
dooley; Federle; Ostrovski; 
Sheehan
dentists–fiction: Walliams
dictionaries: Fern
dinosaurs–fiction: McAnulty
disabilities–fiction: Jordan; Wallach
disasters–fiction: Sepetys
drug abuse–fiction: Wells
ducks–stories: Gavin
dystopias–fiction: Ostrovski
emotions–fiction: english
emotions–stories: Pearlman; Sarah
Ethics and values: Culbertson; 
darnton; Garvin; Malone;  
Moriarty; Stout; Sullivan
Families–fiction: Federle
FAntASy: Allen; Bemis; Connolly; 
Gayton; George; higgins; Jinks; 
Marr; Marsh; Moriarty; Parker; 
Simpson; Swallow
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
336 • The bulleTin
Fathers–fiction: Culbertson; heilig; 
Stout
Fear–stories: Maynor
FOLKLIKe tALeS: French
FOLKtALeS And FAIry tALeS: 
Bemis
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction:  
Connolly; Marsh
Food and eating–stories: Burach
Foxes–fiction: Appelt
France–fiction: Bachmann
Fraud–fiction: Acioli
Friends–fiction: Acioli; Culbertson; 
darnton; Gavin; hainsworth; 
hitchcock; McCarthy, C.;  
McIntosh; Moriarty; Ostrovski; 
Parker; Savage; Savit; Simpson; 
Snow
Friends–stories: Maynor; Pinkwater; 
Sarah
Future–fiction: Wells
Gender fluidity–fiction: Garvin
Ghosts–fiction: Parker
GLBtQ people–fiction: Federle; 
Garvin
Government: Markel; Winter
Grandparents–fiction: Cherry
GrAPhIC nOveLS: Simpson; 
varon
Grief–fiction: Appelt; dooley; Federle; 
Marr; McCarthy, C.; nannestad; 
Wallach
Health: Garvin; newquist
hIStOrICAL FICtIOn:  
Castroman; hitchcock; Sepahban; 
Stout; Winters
History, U.S.: McCarthy, M.
Holidays: Pearlman
holidays–stories: underwood
homelessness–fiction: Savit
hOrrOr: Bachmann; Cohen;  
Walliams
horses–fiction: Scott
hotels–fiction: Cohen
huMOr: Austrian; Burach; 
Gavin; George; Korman; Light; 
Magaziner; Maynor; nannestad; 
O’donnell; Pearlman; robinson; 
Sheehan; Simpson; Sommerset; 
underwood; Walliams
Identity–fiction: Gibney; Korman
Illness–fiction: Bauer; Ostrovski; Snow
Imagination–stories: Sarah
Internment camps–fiction: Sepahban
Japanese American–fiction: Sepahban
Journalism: Macy; noyes
Language arts: Fern; varon
Latinos–fiction: english; Wallach; 
Wells
Literature, English: Winters
Magic–fiction: Jinks
Marriage–fiction: French
Memory–fiction: Savage
Missing children–fiction: dooley
Monsters–fiction: higgins
Mothers–fiction: Gayton
MySterIeS: hainsworth; 
O’donnell; Savage; Sheehan
Nature study: Martin
nursery rhymes–fiction: Swallow
Oceanography: Burleigh
Olympics: McCarthy, M.
Orphans–fiction: dooley; Marsh; 
nannestad
Perception: Isadora
Pets–fiction: Pennypacker
Pets–stories: Pinkwater
Pirates–fiction: Castroman
Pirates–stories: Light
Play–stories: Sarah
Politics: Markel; Winter
Poverty–fiction: Acioli
Pranks–fiction: Malone
Prejudice–fiction: darnton
rabbits–stories: Pinkwater
races: McCarthy, M.
races–fiction: Scott
racism–fiction: hitchcock; Winters
Readers theater: Sommerset
Reading, beginning: Adler; Light
Reading, easy: english; George; 
McAnulty
refugees–fiction: Banks
relationships–fiction: Lange; Marr
revenge–fiction: Marr
rhyMInG StOrIeS: Ashman; 
Martin
robots: varon
romance–fiction: Castroman;  
higgins; Jordan; Landers; Marr; 
Wallach; Wells
February 2016 • 337
royalty–fiction: French; higgins; 
Jordan
School–fiction: Brown; english; 
Magaziner; Malone
Science: Burleigh; newquist
Science and scientists: Burleigh
SCIenCe FICtIOn: Bachmann; 
heilig; Landers; McIntosh; 
O’donnell; Scott; Wells, d.;  
Wells, r.
Seasons–stories: Martin
Secrets–fiction: hainsworth; McAnulty
Senses: Isadora
Sexism: Burleigh
Ships–fiction: Sepetys
Ships–stories: Light
Sisters–fiction: Appelt; hitchcock
Slavery–fiction: Sullivan
Soldiers–fiction: Foreman; Grant
Sports: Macy; McCarthy, M.
Storytime: Burach; Gavin; Maynor; 
Pinkwater; Sommerset
SuPernAturAL StOrIeS:  
Cohen; Parker
Survivalists–fiction: Snow
SuSPenSe: Johnston
thrILLerS: Johnston
time travel–fiction: heilig
tOddLer BOOKS: Ashman; 
Isadora
tortoises–fiction: Foreman 
trolls–fiction: Allen
urban exploration–fiction:  
McCarthy, C.
valentine’s day–stories: underwood
video games–fiction: Brown
voyages and travel: Lang
voyages and travel–fiction: Jordan; 
Landers; McIntosh; Pennypacker
War–fiction: Grant; Pennypacker
Weddings–stories: Austrian
Witches–fiction: Connolly; Marsh
Women’s studies: Burleigh; Lang; 
Macy; Markel; noyes
World cultures: Sullivan
World War I–fiction: Foreman
World War II–fiction: Banks; Grant; 
Savit; Sepahban; Sepetys
Worms–stories: Austrian
Writers and writing–fiction: dooley
New perspectives  
that are anything 
but elementary.
JHU Press scholarly journal offerings in  
Children’s Literature:
Bookbird: A Journal of International Children’s Literature
ISSN: 0006-7377 / E-ISSN: 1918-6983
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books  
ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Children’s Literature ISSN: 0092-8208 / E-ISSN: 1543-3374
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly ISSN: 0885-0429 / E-ISSN: 1553-1201
The Lion and the Unicorn ISSN: 0147-2593 / E-ISSN: 1080-6563
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
 
To order
Call 630.571.4520; fax 708.876.5598; e-mail info@childlitassn.
org; visit us online at www.childlitassn.org; or write ChLA at 
1301 W. 22nd St., Suite 202, Oak Brook, IL 60523.
Not  
child’s play.
R. H. W. Dillard, Editor-in-Chief 
Amanda Cockrell, Editor 
Hollins UniversiTy
Encouraging serious scholarship and research, 
Children’s Literature publishes theoretically-based 
articles that address key issues in the field. Each 
volume includes articles, essays, and abstracts 
of dissertations of note. Children’s Literature is 
the annual publication of the Modern Language 
Association Division on Children’s Literature and the 
Children’s Literature Association (ChLA). 
Published annually in May for the Modern Language Association 
Division on Children’s Literature, the Children’s Literature 
Association, and Hollins University. Volume 44 (2016).  
ISSN 0092-8208; E-ISSN 1543-3374.
childreN’s literature
Individual and institutional 
subscription is one of many benefits of 
membership to the ChLA.
