ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
411
~':h:~
-ii"- "-- 
--
-
;--~-- 
~~
" *i
AV
,~~ 
"
i r
o0 Hev Poems
His Poems (Oleded i
FEEL
a i I IT 
I P
-Starred 
review. School Library joi
* .
. The sheer varie ty-oily a fraction by potets wl
are even relatively familiar-is extraordinary. .. this is
wonder... " 
-Pointer 
review, IGrkus Reviews
"...You dip into this great collection anywhere and dis-
cover something astonishing to read, one poem at a
time." 
-Boxed 
review, Bookst
0-689-80518-7 * $17.00 * Ages 12 up
SIMON & SCHUSTER BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
230 Avenue of the Americas * New York, NY 10020
mens
source
; 
II 
; i; 
·
·
ii
jw
i
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
June 1996
Vol. 49 No. 10
A LOOK INSIDE
325 THE BIG PICTURE
Riddle-icious written by J. Patrick Lewis; illustrated by Debbie Tilley
326 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
327 * Clown illustrated by Quentin Blake
328 * Asylumfor Nightface by Bruce Brooks
332 * The Magic ofSpider Woman written by Lois Duncan; illustrated by
Shonto Begay
334 * Shimmy Shimmy Shimmy Like My Sister Kate: Looking at the Harlem
Renaissance through Poems comp. ed. by Nikki Giovanni
338 * Soulfre by Lorri Hewett
353 * Falling Up written and illustrated by Shel Silverstein
358 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
__ 
__ 
__ _
r f j f
Jr
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Acting Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Christine Jenkins, Reviewer (CJ)
Susan S. Verner, Reviewer (SSV)
Roger Sutton, Reviewer (RS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Tara L. Rivera, Editorial Assistant (TLR)
Amy E. Brandt, Graduate Research Assistant (AEB)
Lisa Mahoney, Graduate Research Assistant (LM)
Pat Mathews, Graduate Research Assistant (PM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Deborah Stevenson, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center,
51 Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1996 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Debbie Tilley, from Riddle-icious ©1996 and used by permission of Alfred A.
Knopf.
JUNE 1996 * 325
THE BIG PICTURE
Riddle-icious
written by J. Patrick Lewis; illustrated by Debbie Tilley
"Standing under summer skies,/ Her back end's good for swatting flies.// If there's
nothing else to do,/ Her front end's good for making moo.// Front to back and in
between,/ She's the original cream machine." What is it? Well, it's a cow, of
course; it's also an entry from an inventive collection of riddles in poetry. Joke
books abound; although riddle books of the classical kind, involving what-am-I
questions couched in crafty wordplay, are less common, the appearance of this on
the heels of last season's With One White Wing (BCCB 2/96), by Elizabeth Spires,
suggests a pleasing resurgence of a useful and diverting genre.
Where Spires was delicate, however, Lewis is energetic. His poems vary in style-
some are in the traditional first-person voice ("I am a helmet/ on the ground... "),
some hearken back to classic word games ("What's in a song, but not in a tune?"),
some are galloping rhymes ("As I was driving to Van Nuys/ I met a hangman who
had three eyes"), and some are poetic free-verse vignettes ("After the heavy traffic
of rain/ The sun gives the green light/ To a truck of colors making/ A U-turn in
the sky"). His tone varies too; without seeming fragmented, the collection moves
from giggly to incantatory to hushed to deftly cornball, but the spirit of linguistic
invention and joie de mots pervades every entry. This spirit of play extends to
wordplay within each poem as well as the game of each poem: Lewis dabbles in
alliteration, dips into anaphora, sprinkles in the odd bit of onomatopoeia, pours
on the puns, and finishes with a concrete poem.
Each riddle's answer is printed in reverse typeface on the bottom of the page,
but most readers won't need the answers (although they may enjoy the challenge
of trying to read them backwards). More clever metaphors than brain-teasers, the
riddles and their illustrations are filled with broad and amusing hints, so even
younger audiences hearing these as readalouds will be able to guess most of them.
The accessibly zany line-and-watercolor illustrations are reminiscent of Nadine
Bernard Westcott's art (in Never Take a Pig to Lunch, BCCB 6/94, and Florence
Parry Heide's Oh, Grow Up, 3/96), only spikier and a bit darker-hued. The pic-
tures are filled with visual riffs on the text as well as their own inventive ideas: the
chattering-teeth lawnmowers whittle down the rows of corn on the cob, the pack
of cards lines up for a group portrait, and assorted animals-ranging from dogs to
mice to armadillos-snooze through the action or peer at it. And, appropriately
enough in a riddle book, the art is relentlessly personifying, so that no picture is
faceless and many have faces where readers might not expect (carrots, letters of the
alphabet, trees).
It's a fortunate time in children's literature, poetically speaking; we're gifted
with talents such as Prelutsky and Kennedy, Florian and Silverstein. Yet in some
326 
* THE BULLETIN
ways Riddle-icious speaks more directly than do those poets' works to the poetic
impulse, and it offers poems that, in demonstrating the worth of taking the phra-
seological scenic route to define another word, are subtly about poetry itself. Clever
and cheerful, this is a convincing introduction to the pleasures of metaphor. Some
books try to make language fun; this one knows it already is and invites readers to
share in the revel. (Imprint information appears on p. 343.)
Deborah Stevenson, Acting Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANDERSON, JOAN 
Cowboys: Roundup on an American Ranch; illus. with photo-
graphs by George Ancona. 
Scholastic, 1996 
48p
ISBN 0-590-48424-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Cowboys seem to be "in" these days, and here's a nice look at them. This photoes-
say examines the life of a New Mexico ranching family, where three generations,
including the older kids (boys ages thirteen and eleven), saddle up come roundup
time and go out on the range. Without seeming overstuffed, the book gets in
details about horse-breaking, range management, branding, and marketing but
combines it all into an evocative glimpse of a life different from that of most young
readers. Ancona's photographs glory in the slanting light of dawn and evening and
offer up-close and personal views of Herefords, cow ponies, and prickly pear cac-
tus. This really gives the flavor as well as the facts of an historic way of life, and
kids who thought their shot at riding the range died with Trigger will appreciate a
chance to stop and smell the sagebrush. A useful glossary of terms is included. DS
APPELT, KATHI 
Watermelon Day; illus. by Dale Gottlieb. 
Holt, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-2304-6 
$14.95 
R 5-8yrs
When Jesse finds a tiny watermelon, not yet as big as her fist, in the corner patch
where the fence posts meet, Pappy tells her to leave it for Watermelon Day. Jesse
knows that's a whole summer away; in the meantime, she checks on it every day,
patting it and listening to its sound brighten. Eventually, when Pappy decrees it to
be Watermelon Day, he cuts the cord and floats the melon on the surface of the
cold lake, under the willow tree. Jesse then has to suffer through a family reunion
of ball-playing cousins and banjo-strumming uncles, not to mention an ice-cream-
serving Mama, until Pappyfinally sets the watermelon down on the front porch
and whacks it open with his fist. Anyone who's ever had to wait an unbearably
long time for something wonderful will appreciate the patience it takes just to
stand back and let time roll on. The leisurely-almost too leisurely-pace of the
text and the periodic fruity repetition ("Watermelon, watermelon," "A Water-
melon Day") allow time to hang in the air; the illustrations, with their naive style
and angularly drafted figures, change from the fresh green of spring to radiant
JUNE 1996 
* 327
orange in the summer as the watermelon fills up with cool summer rains and the
deep hot sun. Appelt neatly presents her simple tale, filled with the lazy rhythms
of a summer day, while the dusty intensity of Gottlieb's palette captures the story's
joys. SSV
ASHER, SANDY, ed. 
But That's Another Story: Famous Authors Introduce Popular
Genres. 
Walker, 1996 
[176p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8425-9 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8424-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
In her preface, Sandy Asher notes that each fictional genre "has its own rules, its
own fictional world, and its own special rewards for readers." In order to demon-
strate these unique attributes, she has gathered twelve original stories in genres
ranging from adventure (Elaine Marie Alphin's "A Time to Stand Up") to animal
story (Patricia Calvert's "Tug, in His Own Time") to contemporary realism (Marie
Lee's "An Education"); a brief generic description, an author biography and bibli-
ography, and a short author interview are included with each entry. The pieces
here vary in quality, with some examples of genre cliches as well as genre character-
istics, and Asher never acknowledges the more classical and nonthematic usage of
the word "genre." Stories such as Angela Johnson's poignant "Flying Away," Bar-
bara Robinson's tightly comedic "Alligator Mystique," and H. M. Hoover's drolly
science fictional "Just a Theory" make the collection worth dipping into, however;
the author interviews are specific enough to be immediately relevant and contain
helpful authorial recommendations for further reading within each genre. Though
it has its weaknesses, this offers some useful curricular possibilities as well as a
manageable introduction to potential new pleasures. DS
BLAKE, QUENTIN 
Clown; illus. by Quentin Blake. 
Holt, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-4399-3 
$15.95 
5-8 yrs 
R*
"One man's trash is another man's treasure," an adage proved anew by Blake's toy
clown who, although consigned to the garbage, eventually brings beauty and warmth
to the family of the girl who takes him in. The book's first picture shows an all-
too-respectable matron dropping Clown and several stuffed animals into a trash
can, but Clown tumbles onto the ground, dons a pair of tossed-out sneakers, and
speeds about the city searching for a child who will adopt him and his friends.
This wordless book works because of the expressiveness of the artist's drawings.
Despite their sketchy quality (half-realized backgrounds, eyes that are no more
than rings with dots for irises), the drawings precisely convey mood and personal-
ity. The curve of a mouth that consists of a single line, the reddening of a cheek, or
the gesture of an arm can express sorrow, anger, or joy so clearly that one never has
to guess at Blake's meaning. Repeated grays, greens, and purples give continuity
and harmony to the pictures, and the soft colors keep the tone gentle even when
individual episodes within the story are not, as when Clown is hurled through the
air by ignorant grown-ups (twice) and chased by a snarling dog. Clown will en-
dear himself to the reader as he does to the children he meets in the story, enter-
taining them with physical antics made possible by a body more limber than
Shannon Miller's, saving his stuffed friends from the landfill, and bringing warmth
to the decaying apartment of the family that adopts him. Even broken-stemmed
flowers snatched from the trash can make a charming bouquet and, in the presence
328 
* 
THE BULLETIN
of love, the yellow and lime-green light from a single bare ceiling bulb can suffuse
an impoverished room with comfort. In Clown, joy blossoms from the most scorned
and unlikely sources, but only through the loving and imaginative cultivation of
children or of the childlike Clown himself. LM
BROOKS, BRUCE 
Asylum for Nightface. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 1996 
[14 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027061-6 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027060-8 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Zimmerman (named for Bob Dylan) is fourteen, and his religious devotion has
been a puzzle to his superficial, fun-loving parents for years. Now, however, they've
come back from vacation with a newborn zeal for Christ and for a charismatic, up-
market religious leader, and they're determined that their son's preexisting faith
become a testament to the worth of their own. The book intersperses Zim's narra-
tion of the genesis of this situation with chapters describing a local card shop,
where the work of an eccentric comic-book genius sits on open display despite its
$10,000 price tag, and where, it turns out, Zim intends to perform an action that
will rescue him from becoming his parents' holy relic. As always, Brooks is a
brilliant and original writer, delving here into philosophical and theological ques-
tions rarely raised in children's literature, and he's masterfully depicted the increas-
ing claustrophobia and the irony of Zim's situation while delicately drawing and
redrawing the lines of character interaction. Ultimately, however, his characters
are fascinating without quite being convincing (Zim's parents and their idol are
broadly ad shallowly conceived), and the main irony of Zim's final action springs
from a particularly blatant and unbelievable contrivance; the combination of Zim's
certitude and the abstractness of his contemplations sometimes makes his dilemma
seem less a heartfelt quandary than a brittle academic problem. This is flawed, but
elegant, compact, and intriguing; young readers hungry for philosophical chal-
lenge may find that this is what they've been looking for. DS
BYARS, BETSY 
The Joy Boys; illus. by Frank Remkiewicz. 
Yearling,
1996 
4 8p 
(Yearling First Choice Chapter Books)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32164-3 
$13.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-440-41094-0 
$3.99 
R 
Gr. K-2
No matter how challenging a jam the brothers Joy get themselves into, Harry and
J.J. are careful to use tightly controlled vocabulary in this beginning reader: in the
face of a charging bull it's "Let's get out of here. Get me to the fence." Well, really,
what more is there to say? Four related stories of narrow escapes from one dicey
situation after another entertain without falling into a sing-songy Dick and Jane
cadence, and that's no small accomplishment. Byars infuses the characters with as
much personality as possible, given the constraints of the format. Beginning read-
ers will be motivated to discover if Harry and J.J. are disemboweled by the bull,
grounded forever by Mom after a mud battle, or eaten alive by wild animals. Not
to worry, all finishes happily and so will the reluctant reader who tackles this.
Cleverly cartoony illustrations by Remkiewicz help to round out the characters
while adding a touch of sly humor to the mix-the face of the family collie, called
by each brother from opposite sides of their room, is suitably and comically con-
fused. Try this one on the very newest readers. SSV
JUNE 1996 
* 329
CUNNINGHAM, 
DAVID 
A Crow's Journey; written and illus. by David
Cunningham. 
Whitman, 1996 
40p
ISBN 0-8075-1356-3 
$16.95 
R 4-6 yrs
"A wandering crow" follows the course of melting mountain snow from trickle to
brook to waterfall to stream to river to ocean. The rhyming text is spare: some-
times smooth ("Beneath the pines and listening thrush/ a shallow brook begins to
rush"), sometimes bumpy ("The rapid water/ runs strong and clear,/ wearing rough
stones/ smoother each year"), and finally concluding with an elegant triplet ("Here
the river/ mouth spreads wide/ and finally meets the ocean tide.// And now the
crow is satisfied"). While the text doesn't give you much to go on, the real draw
here is Cunningham's gouache art that has the clarity of photographs, the delicacy
of ink, and the transparency of watercolor. With the crow sometimes quietly
hidden in shadow or a corner, the pictures range from precise close-ups, such as
the first small trickle of the snow downhill, to more expansive views of the water-
fall and meandering stream, and the picture size alternates between small squares
and larger rectangles. The book is nicely but not ostentatiously designed, offering
a meditative companion to such extravaganzas as Paddle-to-the-Sea and Frank Asch's
Water (BCCB 4/95). RS
DAHL, Lucy James and the Giant Peach: The Book and Movie Scrapbook; written
and illus. with photographs by Lucy Dahl. 
Disney, 1996 
[60p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-3106-5 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7868-4085-4 
$7.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Roald Dahl's James is now a movie, so we'll doubtless be seeing a great deal of
literary peachery this summer. This book is Dahl's daughter's account of the movie's
making and of her memories of her father. There is a plethora of interesting
details here: we see design sketches for James' insect friends (largely created through
stop-motion technique) and hear about the rocky relationship between the young
human star and a co-starring tarantula, and we get glimpses into Roald Dahl's
writing sanctum sanctorum. The focus leaps confusingly back and forth between
the two subjects, however (with Dahl Senior sometimes referred to as "Dahl" and
sometimes "Dad"), and the effect is ultimately too scrapbook-y. The varying type-
face seems to change only out of a desire for alteration, and while the multitude of
photographs are crisp and clear, they ultimately don't reveal all that much about
the more baffling aspects of either writing or film-making. Fans of the movie will
enjoy this glossy tribute, but readers looking for something a little more informa-
tive may want to turn to a Dahl biography or to Elaine Scott's Look Alive (BCCB
9/92). DS
DAY, NANCY 
Violence in Schools: Learningin Fear. Enslow, 1996 
128p 
illus.
with photographs 
(Issues in Focus)
ISBN 0-89490-734-4 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
By incorporating voices of students and real-life stories of school violence, Day
adds reading appeal to this treatment of a hot contemporary subject. She covers
many topics-student-on-student and teacher-student violence, gangs, guns, drugs,
bullying, sexual harassment, etc.-and, though her discussions usually are thor-
ough, some matters get short shrift. In describing the history of (presumably Ameri-
can) gangs, Day dispenses with the period between 1700 and World War II in
330 
* 
THE BULLETIN
three short, vague sentences. Cloudy assertions such as "Many young people seem
to have accepted violence as a way of life" are extensively buttressed with numbers,
but the plethora of statistics (especially in the first chapter) and the adequate but
pedestrian prose blunt the subject's inherent power. A glossary, a bibliography,
and a list of organizations will aid the student researcher. Endnotes are clear and
extensive, but the index could be more detailed: an index term such as "break-
down of the family" refers to only one page number on which that specific term
appears, but the subject recurs throughout the book. Although a young researcher
will find much useful and timely information here, the presentation puts the book
solidly in the "use-it-for-homework" realm. LM
DEMI 
Buddha; written and illus. by Demi. 
Holt, 1996 
4 2p
ISBN 0-8050-4203-2 
$18.95 
R Gr. 3-5
In her picture-book portrayal of the Buddha Siddhartha's life and teachings, Demi,
a practicing Buddhist, uses clear, uncomplicated storytelling to present complex
philosophical concepts. She also capably addresses the more abstract and difficult-
to-grasp religious tenets such as the Four Noble Truths and the Eightfold Path,
and her courage in doing so is to be commended, as many children's authors shy
away from these specifics when writing about Buddhism. Her careful choice of
narrative detail sheds light on the Buddha and Buddhism without becoming a
sentimentalized fairy tale or chatty tell-all biography. The gilded illustrations (based,
according to the jacket, on "Indian, Chinese, Japanese, Burmese, and Indonesian
paintings, sculptures, and sutra illustrations") are delicate, yet the colors and com-
position are bold, with central figures and action cascading beyond the careful
borders. Transitions are subtle and the book is less immediately accessible than
Demi's Chingis Khan (BCCB 1/91), for example, but patient readers (Buddhist
and non-Buddhist alike) will come away with a richer sense of the tradition. AEB
DEMUTH, PATRICIA BRENNAN 
Busy at Day Care Head to Toe; illus. with photo-
graphs by Jack Demuth. 
Dutton, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-52545603-1 
$14.99 
M 
3-5 yrs
High-energy color photographs are the main draw of this day-care primer, which
is short on information but looks like fun. "Busy," however, is the operative word
for text and design as well as for the recreational activities portrayed herein. The
rhyming text is cheerful but shallow; it has no clear rhythm, bouncing along for a
while ("After lunch,/ it's time to sleep./ The lights go low;/ there's not a peep") and
then slamming to a halt ("Now your nap/ is done./ Are you ready/ for more fun?").
Nice as the photos are, they have to compete for attention with a design that
includes pastel reproductions of children's art in the background and a flurry of
colored triangles that sometimes "mount" the photos but more often just lie around
for no particular reason, sometimes making the book look more like a promo-
tional brochure. Fred Rogers' Going to Day Care offers a more cohesive presenta-
tion of the same topic. RS
DE VRIES, ANKE 
My Elephant Can Do Almost Anything; illus. by Ilja
Walraven. 
Front Street/Lemniscaat, 1996 
30p
ISBN 1-886910-06-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
The unidentified speaker lists his or her elephant's capabilities and characteristics:
he can stand on top of things (a balloon, a ball, the coffee pot), he can hang upside
JUNE 1996 
* 331
down from the ceiling, he can see through things, and he mourns the narrator's
absence at school during the day. The absurdity here has its charm (for instance,
the elephant can balance on the balloon because he's holding his breath), and the
explanations of nonsensical elephantine doings are entertainingly serious in tone.
This is an amusing list rather than a story, however, and there's no payoff at the
abrupt end. The art consists of a series of pachyderm portraits in various styles:
sometimes the fiery orange elephant has hands for ears and a blurry aureole for a
boundary; sometimes he's constituted of vigorous black line; sometimes he be-
comes an abstract, vaguely recognizable design. Although the fantasy elephant is
often an appealing fellow, the overall effect is distancing if artistic, more like view-
ing art in a gallery than entering an illustrated world. Kids will want more infor-
mation about this pair of friends than the book provides, but some may enjoy the
book's matter-of-fact strangeness and find it a stimulus to their own imaginative
stories of unusual companions. DS
DISNEY'S JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH; adapted from the film by Karey Kirkpatrick,
Jonathan Roberts, and Steve Bloom; illus. by Lane Smith. 
Disney, 1996 
4 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-5039-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-3105-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Yes, not only is there the book about the movie (see Dahl, above), there's the book
of the movie. Disney's novelization whips through the happenings at a brisk clip,
following James' modified adventures as he and his insect friends travel to New
York in the giant peach while he attempts to shake off his fears of the horrible
aunts (who, in this version, pursue him). The stripped-down account allows for
little characterization, and it emphasizes the programmatic sappiness of the movie's
empower-yourself theme (nor does it include any of Dahl's original poems). The
book is really a showcase for Lane Smith's darkly peachy art (Smith has also illus-
trated the new edition of Dahl's original text, as well as working on the movie),
which retains the sharp Dahlian edge that the story here lacks. The illustrations
evoke the monstrous opponents and forlorn little James particularly well, although
one often longs for a wider view (a stunning exception is an initially perplexing
aerial view of the peach soaring over the Arctic ice). If the movie's hot, this book
will get a lot of wear; even if it's not, Stinky Cheese fans won't want to miss one of
their heroes in artistic action. DS
DUGGLEBY, JOHN 
Artist in Overalls: The Life of Grant Wood. 
Chronicle,
1996 
[57p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8118-1242-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Grant Wood's American Gothic is probably the best-known American painting
ever, but here's a Wood biography that brings into focus more than just the fa-
mous farm couple. Duggleby traces Wood's life from his upbringing on an Iowa
farm to his brief travels for education to Minneapolis, Chicago, and Paris, and
finally to his return to Iowa and his increasing fame. There are no source notes,
and the style here is fictional, but there's a clear picture of the awkward man whose
passion for his art, his country, and his people translated into the art movement of
Regionalism. Often more articulate than the text are the many reproductions of
undeservedly lesser-known Wood paintings, such as the eerily lit Midnight Ride of
Paul Revere or the rich velvety countryside of Spring Turning, which bear fresh
332 
* THE BULLETIN
witness to the artist's talent. It's slightly frustrating to have to turn to the appendix
(which lists the locations of the works included) for dates on the paintings, and the
brief section "Drawing and Painting like Grant Wood" is wildly oversimplified
and out of place here. Wood is an artist, however, who has much to offer beyond
his one unavoidable painting, and this will give young artists a better idea of his
contributions. DS
DUNCAN, Lois 
The Magic ofSpider Woman; illus. by Shonto Begay. 
Scholastic,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-590-46155-9 
$14.95 
R 5-8yrs
In whatever mythology one examines, hubris seems to be a favorite target of super-
natural powers; this Navajo tale is thematically reminiscent of the Greek myth
about Arachne, whose pride in her weaving is punished. During the creation of
the world, Spider Woman teaches a headstrong young shepherdess how to weave
and leaves her with the warning not to become so absorbed in her art that she
forgets the Middle Way, for she must respect the balance of life. In a burst of
spring colors, Weaving Woman disregards the advice, and her spirit is trapped in a
perfect rug until Spider Woman frees her by pulling out a strand of wool to open
a pathway. It's a complex story with a rich cultural subtext, and one yearns for a
more specific reference than "several well-documented versions" in order to decide
independently whether veteran novelist Duncan "has maintained the integrity of
the legend" (as a brief note asserts). Shonto Begay's art shows tonal kinship with
his illustrations for Mar'ii and Cousin Horned Toad (BCCB 10/92); he has once
again struck a balance between literal and symbolic, with many compositions sug-
gesting surreal aspects of space and action. Deep turquoise and earthy red domi-
nate the scenes, in balance with background paper resembling rough-textured sand.
It's refreshing to see the deeply important figure of Spider Woman featured in a
picture-book literature that has been dominated by tricksters, especially Coyote,
and primary graders could compare this with other women-and-weaving stories
for an intriguing multicultural folklore unit. BH
FORD, BARBARA 
The Most WonderfulMovie in the World. Dutton, 1996 
[160p]
ISBN 0-525-45455-1 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Moira is thrilled. Nearly two years after its release, the film of Moira's favorite
book, Gone with the Wind, is finally coming to town. There's a problem, though:
Moira (who is eleven) and her family are devout Catholics, and the Catholic Le-
gion of Decency has given Gone with the Wind a "B" rating, "Objectionable in
Part for All," which means neither Moira nor her parents are supposed to see it.
Nicely spliced into the will I/won't I and can I/can't I suspense of Moira's di-
lemma are appealing, honest scenes of a 1941 Catholic girlhood at home, church,
and school, where Moira is a bussed-in outsider under the strict but ultimately
benign eye of Sister Gabriel Murphy. The gathering clouds of war darken but do
not take over the story, and Moira's spiritual crisis is played out at just the right
seventh-grade level: when a young priest advises her to consult with her con-
science, Moira thinks, "Suppose you had never asked your conscience anything?
Your conscience was probably just lying around inside, sleeping. She had to figure
out how to wake it up." And so she does, for an ending that is both satisfying and
surprising. RS
JUNE 1996 
* 333
FRADIN, DENNIS BRINDELL 
"We Have Conquered Pain " The Discovery ofAnesthe-
sia. 
McElderry, 1996 
148p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-50587-6 
$16.00 
Ad Gr. 6-9
One of the great medical discoveries of the nineteenth century was the safe and
effective elimination of pain from the surgical process, but credit for that discovery
is still controversial. Fradin examines the work and claims of the four men whose
sometimes independent and sometimes shared labor led to the popularization of
nitrous oxide and of ether (the latter most successfully) as anesthetic agents. The
story of human greed and desire battling with medical advances has a compelling
timelessness to it, and Fradin carefully traces the chronology and considers the
validity of all of the claimants. Overall, however, this has an old-fashioned Holly-
wood bio-pic flavor to it, with a certain melodrama permeating the treatment of
the subject and the individuals involved sometimes difficult to distinguish. The
author appears to have done extensive research but unfortunately includes no notes,
so that viewpoint and credibility can be difficult for the reader to judge. It's still a
personalizing examination of the turning and occasional sticking of the gears be-
hind the scientific establishment; readers anesthetized into thinking that all medi-
cal advances were sterile and decorous might find this an eye-opener.
Black-and-white photographs appear throughout; a bibliography and an index are
included. DS
GALLI, LETIZIA 
Mona Lisa: The Secret ofthe Smile; tr. by Nicholas B. A. Nicholson;
written and illus. by Letizia Galli. 
Doubleday, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-385-32108-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Similar to the Galli-illustrated Michael theAngel (BCCB 8/93), authored by Laura
Fischetto, this tells in picture-book format of the life of Leonardo Da Vinci. The
book talks about Leonardo's early iconoclasm, his indomitable spirit of invention,
and his artistic labors (despite the title, the Mona Lisa only makes it into the last
two pages). Unfortunately, the breeze through such a rich life is blandly written
(the real-life Mona Lisa "was very kind and had a magical smile") and overly sum-
mary; there's not enough shape for the account to work as a story nor enough
biographical information (especially when compared to picture-book biographies
such as Diane Stanley's) to convey a sense of what Leonardo really did. The art
relies on broad geometric shapes in sunbaked colors arrayed in de Chirico-esque
distortions; the frosty mottling of the surfaces appropriately suggests a fresco, but
the bright-eyed, sharp-featured crowds are definitely contemporary visions. This
is not the best introduction to Leonardo, but it does open the door to his fascinat-
ing world, and even a small taste of enduring genius might whet young readers'
appetites for more. DS
GAUTHIER, GAIL 
My Life Among the Aliens. 
Putnam, 1996 
104 p
ISBN 0-399-22945-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Fifth-grader Will Denis has had enough already of aliens ringing his doorbell,
crashing his birthday parties, barking at him, landing in his backyard, sliding down
his chimney, and hiding out in his tree house. Will and younger brother Rob can
spot aliens at fifty paces: these beings may appear sufficiently earthly to others, but
the brothers know they are merely masquerading as the new boys on the block, a
prissily dressed girl, the neighbor's golden retriever, or-the greatest sacrilege of
all--Santa Claus. Will and Rob feel the pressure you'd expect from schoolboys
334 
* THE BULLETIN
entrusted with saving Planet Earth from alien domination, but they never falter in
the face of duty. You can see why after meeting Mom, the real hero of the story,
who is unflappable in the face of out-of-this-world domestic mayhem. 
Rookie
Gauthier proves herself adept at zany riffs on family life (to the sobbing aliens:
"On this planet, you can't do anything unless a mom says you can") but has trouble
keeping the shtick alive; the story suffers from its one-jokeitis. Of course, the Big
Question is why are aliens choosing Will and Rob over and over and the answer is
that word has spread throughout the galaxy about Mom's muffins featuring bran,
nuts, raisins, wheat germ, and shredded zucchini. It seems only aliens savor the
taste of health food. This is an entertaining-if uneven-debut. SSV
GIOVANNI, NIKKI, comp. ed. 
Shimmy Shimmy Shimmy Like My Sister Kate: Looking
at the Harlem Renaissance through Poems. 
Holt, 1996 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8050-3494-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 8 up
"The Renaissance, the rebirth of Harlem, the recognition of that flame involved
laughter, and music, and even a dress," says Nikki Giovanni; in this account/an-
thology of the Harlem Renaissance, Giovanni offers commentary, anecdotes, and
personal musings that make it clear the movement was more than a tidy selection
of poems. Not that the verses here are insignificant: the range of poets is gratify-
ingly wide (Giovanni, in fact, broadens the traditional parameters of the Harlem
Renaissance considerably), including not only famous names such as Langston
Hughes, Paul Lawrence Dunbar, and Richard Wright, but also powerful poems by
less-anthologized writers such as Melvin B. Tolson and Richard Hayden. Through-
out, Giovanni's responses are enticingly confiding yet strong-willed (she applauds
Leroi Jones' groundbreaking public profanity, for instance), giving a picture of a
varied group of individuals and a strong sense of enduring connections among
them. While the attitude and approach is essentially adult (and familiarity with
most of the writers featured seems to be assumed), this picture of a thriving and
creative group will give teens a fuller understanding of a cultural movement. A
bibliography and compact but spirited biographies of the poets are appended; the
finished book will have an index. DS
GREENSTEIN, ELAINE 
Mrs. Rose's Garden; written and illus. by Elaine
Greenstein. 
Simon, 1996 
[26p]
ISBN 0-689-80215-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Assiduous attention to fertilizer has finally put this year's blue ribbon for biggest
vegetables within Mrs. Rose's grasp; her plate-sized radishes and lettuce larger than
the cat are early harbingers of a clean sweep at the county fair. But Mrs. Rose
suddenly finds she cannot enjoy success at the price of her neighbors' defeat, so she
and Mr. Rose smuggle their plants into other gardens in the dark of the night and
assure that all their friends come up winners. Greenstein's text simply and grace-
fully lays out Mrs. Rose's guilty predicament: "She'd thought it would be fun to
win a blue ribbon, but now she was sure to win every single one. Somehow it
didn't seem like fun anymore." It is Greenstein's paintings, however, with their
touch of Cezanne and a wallop ofClaes Oldenburg, that carry the day. Rendered
in summer-soft hues and springing from a landscape as innocent and mild as the
Roses themselves, the tomatoes and melons and cucumbers dwarf the neighbors,
JUNE 1996 
* 335
all of whom sport their blue ribbons with a placid satisfaction drolly out of sync
with their towering achievements. If the subject of adults competing for first place
in a garden contest seems a bit rarified for the picture-book set, there's charm
enough in the prodigious produce and in the secret good deed to topple the age
barrier. Couple this with Lisa Campbell Ernst's similarly themed Miss Penny and
Mr. Grubbs (BCCB 4/91). EB
GRIMM, JAKOB LUDWIG KARL 
The Six Servants; tr. by Anthea Bell; illus. by Sergei
Goloshapov. 
North-South, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-476-5 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-475-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
A young prince sets out to win the hand of an enchantress' beautiful daughter, and
along the way picks up six servants, each of whom has some kind of amazing
capability: one man can puff his girth out to a huge size, another hears everything
that goes on in the world, the third is taller than the highest mountain on earth,
the next possesses a glance so powerful it breaks its object to pieces, the fifth feels
cold where others feel heat and heat when others freeze, and the last can see right
through the world. The enchantress (and her reluctant daughter) puts the prince
through trials, but his servants see him through, and the couple marry and--even-
tually-live happily ever after. The oddly-gifted-servant motif is an appealing one
(especially to youngsters who may recognize it from the film The Adventures of
Baron Munchausen), and the writing is smooth and lively; the tale goes on a bit,
however, and the story is rather episodic, with twists and turns preceding and
following the servants' tasks before the couple can enjoy their connubial bliss.
Goloshapov's illustrations are primarily portraits, which emphasize the dramatis
personae at the expense of the action; his Bosch-like, darkly distorted images are
similar to those of Gennady Spirin, but his slick gouache visions (here on glossy
paper) have a fantasy-art grotesqueness that is less subtle but will probably have
more immediate impact on young readers. Kids may not remember what hap-
pened to the servants' prince, but they'll relish the superheroesque characteristics
of his servants. DS
HALEY, GAIL, E., ad. 
Two Bad Boys: A Very Old Cherokee Tale; ad. and illus. by
Gail E. Haley. 
Dutton, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45311-3 
$14.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
"Listen! In the beginning, before there was a world of work, there was a family."
In this ideal setting, Corn Mother and First Hunter have always provided copious
food for Boy, who "watched all that his parents did and listened carefully to the
stories they told him." Then one day Boy looks into the river and finds Wild Boy,
with whom he plays and whom his parents adopt. Wild Boy brings havoc to their
lives, enlisting Boy's help to discover the forbidden secret of First Hunter's source
of game and, later, of Corn Mother's supply of beans and corn. Because of the
boys' disobedience, their parents fly away to the Western Land of the Darkening
Sun, and the boys are punished with the hard work of hunting the animals they
released into the world and farming the vegetables they need in order to survive.
Haley's depiction of an idyllic forested Eden includes lush Appalachian flora (flow-
ering dogwood, rhododendron, wisteria, iris, tulip-tree blossoms) and fauna, as
well as a perfectly handsome family with flowing fringes of traditional deerskin
clothing (traditionally motifed borders compete with some of the busier composi-
336 
* THE BULLETIN
tions). If the total artistic affect is glamorized, it is also mythically imagined, pro-
viding a lyrical graphic backdrop for an American Indian creation story with in-
triguing contrasts to the Biblical Adam and Eve. The concept of psychically opposite
twins appears in many other mythologies and allows for a revealing analysis of our
inner polarities, which are often demonstrated in a child's blaming his invisible
friend for making all the mischief in the house. In addition to the aesthetic and
narrative effects of the picture book, parents and teachers will appreciate the rich
themes for classroom/family discussion. The source note is specific ("a traditional
Cherokee legend as recorded by Swimmer, a famous Cherokee shaman and story-
teller" born in 1835 and literate by virtue of Sequoyah's alphabet) and in addition
addresses the context and meaning of the story. BH
HALL, DONALD 
When WillardMetBabe Ruth; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Browndeer/
Harcourt, 1996 
4 2p
ISBN 0-15-200273-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The title event occurred in 1917, when farm-boy Willard was twelve and he and
his father pulled the baseball star's car out of a ditch; the boy is rewarded with a gift
of Ruth's glove. Willard becomes a confirmed fan for life, writing a prize-winning
poem about the Babe, naming his daughter Ruth in the player's honor, and follow-
ing his career (meeting him twice more) for nearly twenty years until the legendary
hitter retires. The book has a leisurely small-town pace and engages in a subtle
examination of the passing ofAmerican generations as Willard's dad, then Willard,
and then Willard's daughter take their turns carrying the baseball torch; the result
is attractive but inactive, likelier to appeal more to adults than to kids who want to
see real baseball action. Moser's full-page watercolor portraits have an appropriate
quiet stillness to them, but some of the figure drawing is tinged with awkwardness.
There aren't many good early baseball stories for this age group; Willard's story
will at least give young fans a glimpse at how things were back in the days of the
legends. A historical note about Babe Ruth is appended, but there's no hint as to
Willard's factual or fictional nature. DS
HAMILTON, VIRGINIA, ad. 
When Birds Could Talk and Bats Could Sing: The Ad-
ventures ofBruh Sparrow, Sis Wren, and Their Friends; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Blue
Sky/Scholastic, 1996 
66p
ISBN 0-590-47372-7 
$17.95 
R* 
Gr. 3-5
Drawn from post-Civil War African-American stories collected by Martha Young,
a wealthy white woman raised on southern plantations, these stories acquire new
life with Virginia Hamilton's lyrical idiom and Barry Moser's fun-poking pictures.
The cast is largely avian. Sis Wren and Bruh Sparrow lose an argument about the
ownership of an impossibly large pumpkin ("Pick on your own size. For it's no use
squabbling over what's too big for you to handle"), Miss Bat loses her beautiful
feathers and songs because of inordinate pride, Bluejay and Swallow steal from old
Firekeeper (who looks a lot like old Barry Moser), Bruh Buzzard loses his top to an
aggrieved victim, Hummingbird loses her voice to Old Wind, Cardinal acquires
red feathers but almost loses his gray wife when he cleans up Bruh Deer after a
hunter's gunshot, and Brown Wren tries to fly too high ("You were born down
there.... Get used to it"). Some of these stories are folktales, and some are original
stories (Young never differentiated). One could surmise that the latter are the
more rambling ("Hummingbird and Little Breeze," for instance, or "Little Brown
JUNE 1996 
* 337
Wren"), and it's interesting to compare the former to the tightly structured pour-
quoi tales of Uncle Remus ("How the Birds Talk," "Why the Turkey Buzzard Is
Baldheaded," "The Most Beautiful Bird in the World," etc.). Along with his sig-
nature portraits (take a gander at loop-eyed Bruh Buzzard), Moser has injected the
collection with spirited action and sprightly colors, as well as a varied page design
that will wake up sleepy readers. These pictures are as loud as birdsong on a
country morning. The compositions are bold, the humor sly, and the drafting
uncannily accurate even as it's indulgently anthropomorphized. Although inde-
pendent readers will be able to handle this oversized picture book on their own,
don't miss the fun of reading it aloud. BH
HAUSMAN, GERALD 
Night Flight. Philomel, 1996 
133p
ISBN 0-399-22758-X 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
In a not-so-thinly veiled autobiographical novel, Hausman tries his hand at "ban-
ishing ghosts that have remained" from his own childhood. It's the summer of
'57 in rural New Jersey, and twelve-year-olds Jeff Hausman and Max Maeder ex-
pect a blissful vacation-the boys, their dogs, the woods, and the lake. But on an
overnight campout both dogs are fatally poisoned; in fact, over a dozen more dogs
die in the next few days. Hausman pulls us right into the mystery, but his lyrical
prose and skillful revelation of character are what make this book compelling.
When Max insists to Jeff that nearby immigrant European Jews are guilty of the
crime, Jeff is ashamed to admit that he is, himself, half Jewish. Hausman sensi-
tively portrays Jeffs adolescent torment-wanting to be liked by a much admired
macho friend, yet knowing that he must confront Max about Max's anti-Semitism
and stand up to Max's bullying. The boys' contrasting relationships with their
parents (the Maeders cold and aloof, the Hausmans warm and caring) provide
clues to their emerging characters. Generally avoiding cliches and easy answers,
Jeff and his father talk through what it means to be a young man and to face the
essential irrationality of life: "Sometimes," says the dad, "you must use the mysti-
cal instead of the logical." Despite the revelation that Max's father, an immigrant
German glassmaker, is not only an unrepentant Nazi (complete with a photo of
Hitler on his desk) but also the probable poisoner, Hausman never allows his
characters to become evil or good incarnate; just as in real life, there's plenty of
both to go around. The philosophizing slows the pace a bit, but there's enough
adventure and authentic emotion to snag a reader. SSV
HEISEL, SHARON E. 
Eyes ofa Stranger. Delacorte, 1996 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-385-32229-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 9-12
Charismatic Nick ensnares teenage girls as he progresses through a sequence of
psychotic rituals that begins with the Hunt, continues through Courtship (a ride
on a carousel), and ends with the murder of each girl in a grisly sunrise ceremony.
Marissa, the carousel owner's niece, nearly becomes Nick's "perfect sacrifice" in a
story that threatens to become as silly as the cliche of Nick's serial-killer giggle.
Give Heisel credit for taking the time to try to make her characters more complex
than those in a series YA horror novel: Marissa's low self-esteem, brought on by
her malformed leg and the insults it occasions, makes her vulnerable to Nick's
attentions, and Nick's cruelty is equally understandable, if hackneyed, given the
brutal childhood punishments his mother dealt him. Unfortunately, Marissa some-
338 
* THE BULLETIN
times seems more dull-witted than vulnerable, and Nick's tortured rites degener-
ate into the obligatory stylizations of the fictional psycho killer. Heisel outdoes
Nick's sense of drama ("The Dispensation is always at sunrise") with her own
melodramatic narration: Marissa fights back "blossoming horror" even as "word-
less roars" rise from Nick's throat "like a throng of desperate beasts escaping into
the night." Disparities in tone unsettle the story: Marissa-like a good feminist
heroine-saves her own life, but only after being shackled to a wall and nearly tied,
spread-eagle, to stakes in the ground (a semi-striptease helps her elude the latter
torture). Nick's collection of dead girls' toes coexists uneasily with talk of school
fundraisers and student council seats. High schoolers ready for something more
complex than Fear Street may thrill to this novel's horrors, but readers accustomed
to the more sophisticated plotting and characterization of Stephen King or Clive
Barker will be disappointed. LM
HELLER, CATHERINE, ad. 
The Untold Story of Snow White; illus. by Karen
Stolper. 
Birch Lane, 1996 
40p 
(Upside Down Tales)
ISBN 1-55972-326-2 
$13.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
The boxed statement on the title page says it all: "Here is Snow White's version of
this famous story. Turn the book over and read the story from her stepmother's
point of view." Postmodern fairy tales, which have made the most of twisting
perspectives, often generate questions of audience, and this one is no different.
Young children identify with fairy tales exactly because of the vulnerable young
heroes/heroines making their way in the world; how many will sympathize with an
aging voice that reports how spoiled, selfish, and irresponsible they are ("She was
rude, sloppy, disobedient, and threatened to run away when she didn't get her
way. I was worried for her safety")? Although there's a hint of tongue-in-cheek
humor here, the major impact is more purposeful ("Just remember-there's al-
ways another side to the story") than funny (per Sciesczka's The True Story of the
Three Little Pigs). There's also an odd tonal breakdown in the attempted paral-
lel-Snow White's story is third-person traditional (and told unremarkably) while
her stepmother's is first-person contemporary. Stolper's full-page paintings, which
alternate with pages of text featuring inset details, have a stately 1940s look blended
with a slightly surrealistic Dorothy-in-Oz atmosphere. The compositions are cen-
trally focused, the hues muted, and the scenes otherworldly--often with dramatic
cloud formations. As a class readaloud, this could stimulate discussion and cre-
ative-writing exercises to explore alternative voices or values in traditional tales.
BH
HEWETT, LORRI 
Soulfire. 
Dutton, 1996 
231p
ISBN 0-525-45559-0 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Remarkable for its honesty and immediacy in depicting the lives of its cast of
African-American teenagers, this first novel is narrated by Todd, who is something
of a brainy outsider in his circle of friends. Todd is worried about his cousin
Ezekiel, who seems determined to become something like a hero in keeping an-
other cousin, young Tommy, out of the gang run by Todd's big brother Marcus.
Into this already volatile mix comes Leandrea, a privileged biracial girl in love with
Zeke and his role as a black crusader. The story has an appeal as old as Durango
Street or The Outsiders; in fact, despite its setting in contemporary Denver, the
book's treatment of its canvas seems to hearken back to earlier days of young adult
fiction, particularly in its depiction of driven teens grappling with a troubling world
JUNE 1996 
* 
339
that adults can only dimly understand. Todd is an acute observer, interestingly
poised among his fellows, and his developing love for Leandrea, combined with
his intensely volatile friendship with Zeke, brings a magnetic love triangle into the
bleak setting and often violent events of the story. RS
HOBAN, TANA Just Look; illus. with photographs by Tana Hoban. 
Greenwillow,
1996 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14041-6 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14040-8 
$16.00 
R 3-6 yrs
First, there's a black page with a die-cut peephole, offering a glimpse of dark fur
streaked with white. Kids who recognize this genre know the drill-this must be
a skunk. Turn the page and ... nope, it's a streak across the head and neck of a
penguin. Turn once more and find the penguin with his buddies on a barren
beach. Eight more exercises in visual trickery follow this puzzler, with nigh-
unguessable images ranging from the delicate marbled veining of a rabbit's ear-
liningto the complex symmetry of an illuminated Eiffel Tower. Ebony pages and
borders heighten the drama of each fresh discovery and allow the pristine photos
to glow within their stark settings. There's no pressure to identify a right answer,
and kids can just kick back and enjoy the game, because the point here clearly isn't
What? but Wow! EB
HUGHES, MONICA 
A Handful ofSeeds; illus. by Luis Garay. 
Orchard, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-531-09498-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When her grandmother dies and Concepcion is forced to leave her village to try
and survive in an unnamed city, she recalls the wise woman's adage, "Remember
to save enough seed for the next planting . .. Then you will always have some-
thing to eat." When she reaches a miserable barrio, Concepcion is shocked at the
other children's suggestion that she steal food; instead she plants corn and beans
and chilies, only to see her garden destroyed when police come and chase and beat
her new friends. With the help of these friends and her cache of seeds, she plants
again, and Concepcion's vision of self-sufficiency spreads through the shantytown.
This is a pretty fable, but begs too many questions of reality-most notably, what
did Concepcion eat while waiting for her crops to grow?-to be convincing. Like
the text, the textured illustrations are a bit too elegantly stylized, with tidy fine
lines making even the garbage picturesque. This is pitched in a lower key than
such ostentatious lesson-stories as Mem Fox's Feathers and Fools (BCCB 4/96),
but it lacks the hardiness that would allow it truly to flower. RS
JACKSON, ELLEN, ad. 
The Precious Gift: A Navaho Creation Myth; illus. by
Woodleigh Marx Hubbard. 
Simon, 1996 
33p
ISBN 0-689-80480-6 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
After First Man emerged from the underworld through a reed in the ocean, he
realized that he had neglected to bring any fresh water with him to the arid surface.
Otter and Beaver volunteer to return for water but, distracted by lovely marine
flora, they return without it and are condemned to live evermore in swamps with
their lilies and vines. Other animals fail at the same mission, until Snail struggles
under the weight of a leaky flask tied to his back and delivers a single drop of water
to waiting First Man, whose chant transforms this precious treasure into a raging
river. The storytelling is pleasantly homely, and Hubbard's gouache paintings set
340 
* THE BULLETIN
this Navajo creation myth (ackson appends a source note) in a fantasy land- and
seascape in which a wavy sun blazes in a swirling blue sky, stylized animals and
people hover tenuously above their surroundings, and an anxious moon observes
the progress of the plucky snail over the searing orange hills. Listeners may enjoy
contrasting this account of how water came to earth with Jaffe's retelling of a
Taino myth, reviewed below. EB
JAFFE, NINA, ad. 
The Golden Flower: A Taino Myth from Puerto Rico; illus. by
Enrique O. Sanchez. 
Simon, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80469-5 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
This Taino myth tells of a child who planted seeds on top of a high mountain that
stood upon the arid plain. Amid the lush forest that grew from the seeds, a flower
bloomed and produced a glowing golden ball. Lured by its power, greedy men
struggled over the ball (in fact, a calabaza or pumpkin) until it broke from its vine
and crashed down the mountainside, spilling its contents, the sea, and flooding
the earth right up to the mountaintop forest. "And that is how, the Taino say,
between the sun and the sparkling blue sea, their island home-Boriquen-came
to be." Not many creation myths are as accessible to a young audience as this tale,
and listeners will be intrigued to see the familiar old pumpkin cast in so unusual a
role. Sandoz constructs highly stylized images with overlaid shapes of softly mottled,
translucent color which lends a bright airiness to the densely patterned scenes.
Despite their complex composition, human figures are pudgy and naive, bowing
to the youth of both the tale's audience and its child hero. In an afterword, Jaffe
offers a source note and comments on the Taino legacy in present day Puerto Rico.
EB
JASPERSOHN, WILLIAM 
Timber!; written and illus. with photographs by William
Jaspersohn. 
Little, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-316-45825-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
From chain saw to feller-buncher, grapple skidder to knuckle boom, Jaspersohn
acquaints readers with the machines that transform trees into fuel, lumber, and
paper. Color photographs (sometimes dark and unclear, due to forest foliage or a
mill's cave-like interior) illustrate the cutting, hauling, and processing of a Ver-
mont forest and follow the trees as they power an electricity plant, are shaved into
veneer, or get digested into paper pulp. The book provides a simple introduction
to the post-lumberjack destiny of trees, but problems arise when it branches off
into botany and ecology. Tiny photo insets (bark, leaves, cones) identify hard-
wood and softwood trees inconsistently. Labels include both genus and species in
the common names of some trees ("American Sugar Maple" and "White Pine"),
while neglecting the species names of others-Northern Red Oak and Balsam Fir
are sweepingly labeled "Oak" and "Balsam." Environmental sound-bites ("Tim-
ber Fact," "To Cut or Not to Cut") interrupt throughout, many of them posing as
eco-questions unsupported by the main text: "What do you think? Is it enough to
scatter the branches of a felled tree ... so that they rot back into the soil? Or
should trees not be cut at all?" Another such sidebar encourages readers to become
recycling advocates and save trees, but earth-savvy kids will note that these book
pages are not made from recycled paper. Jaspersohn's attempt to graft issues is
awkward, but the solid wood of the main topic renders this a useful library addi-
tion. AEB
JUNE 1996 
* 341
JENSEN, VICKIE 
Carving a Totem Pole; written and illus. with photographs by
Vickie Jensen. 
Holt, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-3754-3 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Jensen's photo essay treats the same theme as Diane Hoyt-Goldsmith's Totem Pole
(BCCB 4/90) but brings the woodworking process into the spotlight, while stream-
lining the cultural background information prominent in the earlier work. Nisga'a
artist Norman Tait (who also supplies the foreword) designs, directs, and executes
the work on an unpainted doorway pole for the Vancouver, BC Native Education
Centre, and he trains several relatives who assist on the project. Jensen observes
not only the steps in carving, but also the individuated tricks and techniques that
leave each artist's unique stamp upon his work. Sepia-toned photos, which subtly
suggest the antiquity of this Native American craft, lend the volume a more so-
phisticated look than that of Hoyt-Goldsmith's brightly colored work, yet Jensen's
leaner text is accessible to a slightly younger audience. EB
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
Onions and Garlic: An Old Tale; illus. by Katya
Arnold. 
Holiday House, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1222-9 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
This familiar Talmudic story (a brief note mentions other tellings as well) rolls
right along just the way you expect it to: against the wishes of his father, the
youngest brother sails around the world bartering onions for goods and returns
home with sacks full of diamonds. And, of course, the older brothers attempt this
good fortune for themselves and return with sacks full of-you guessed it--on-
ions. Kimmel's text keeps things moving along quickly, clearly, and eventfully.
The Eastern European flavor of the story is enhanced by Arnold's jaunty thickly
bordered illustrations; they feature suitably ridiculous greedy merchants and silly
kings in a lively folk-art palette. The readaloud crowd will enjoy anticipating the
success of the ne'er-do-well youngest brother and the failure of the arrogant older
brothers, and they might learn a thing or two about supply and demand. SSV
KIPLING, RUDYARD 
TheJungle Book; illus. by Christian Broutin and with photo-
graphs. 
Viking, 1996 
210p 
(The Whole Story)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-670-86919-8 
$22.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-670-86797-7 
$14.99 
M 
Gr. 6 up
STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS 
Treasure Island; illus. by Francois Place and with pho-
tographs. 
Viking, 1996 
296p 
(The Whole Story)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-670-86920-1 
$23.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-670-86795-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6 up
An imported series, The Whole Story presents unabridged texts of classic litera-
ture, newly illustrated and heavily laden with captioned picture annotation, which,
the jacket flap claims, allows readers to "enjoy and understand the story in a way as
close as possible to that of audiences when [the author] wrote it." Given that
mission, it is difficult to explain why most ungle Book addenda focus on animals
(information readily available to young readers) while virtually no data are pro-
vided within the annotations to shed light on Kipling's paternalistic attitudes to-
ward India's native population or on the "white man's burden" philosophy prevalent
among many of his contemporaries; even the reasons for the British presence in
India are neglected until the final story, "Her Majesty's Servants." Treasure Island
fares somewhat better, with plenty of piratical lore enlivening the margins, and
342 
* THE BULLETIN
with Fran;ois Place's line-and-wash sketches outclassing the luridly colored paint-
ings in The Jungle Book. But here again, seafaring lingo is defined with even more
jargon ("The jibs were attached to the stays running from the bowsprit to the top
of the foremast"), which tends to obfuscate more than enlighten. The bright, busy
look of these volumes may tempt browsers to get their feet wet on the classics, but
only readers undaunted by the original texts are likely to take the plunge. EB
KLINTING, LARS 
Bruno the Carpenter; written and illus. by Lars Klinting. 
Holt,
1996 34p
ISBN 0-8050-4501-5 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Ever wondered how to make a toolbox? Or what a T-square is? Klinting's Bruno,
aptly characterized as a diligent beaver, demonstrates the essentials of the carpen-
try craft. If the book's purpose is to get readers excited about what Bruno is doing,
it succeeds. The introduction of Bruno and his purpose makes the story personal;
Bruno is in his messy workshop looking for misplaced tools, tools that he will later
put into his newly built toolbox. Young listeners will be pleasantly entertained
with the story's pattern (on one page a new tool is introduced; on the correspond-
ing page an industrious Bruno is shown using it). The language is also carefully
structured with sentences that are simple to follow ("Bruno's grandfather built the
carpenter's table. It is very old. Bruno built the green stool. It is brand new").
While Bruno's assured expressions and the book's earthy, solidly centered water-
colors add warmth, close-ups of the tools provide realism, especially since the plans
are included. Klinting has created an enticingly purposeful make-believe world
for handy young eager beavers. TLR
LAMB, NANCY 
OneAprilMorning: Children Remember the Oklahoma City Bomb-
ing; by Nancy Lamb and Children of Oklahoma City; illus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Lo-
throp, 1996 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14724-0 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14666-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Like Ross and Myers' Dear Oklahoma City, Get Well Soon (reviewed below), this is
a book aimed at both children and adults, with limited success in shaping the
material for either audience. The first three pages, clearly meant to reassure adults,
offer a formidably black-framed note from the author and two messages from
experts, one "A Letter to Parents and Teachers" and the other about "The Journey
of Healing." The next page, "Before," describes the explosion at the Oklahoma
City Federal Building, and each of the succeeding pages is divided between adult
descriptions and children's reiterations: "Along with the buildings, along with the
lives of innocent people and the hopes and dreams of survivors, the explosion also
destroyed the sense of security the children had always lived with. 'Anything can
happen to anyone, anytime, anywhere,' said Emili. 'There could be a bomb right
here,' said Abby. 'At my school, at my house, even in my car.' 'You can't really
control what happens,' said Cicely." The last double spread, "After," returns to a
straightforward description of the rescue efforts, cleanup, and national outpouring
of aid. Cooper's rough-textured, soft-edged illustrations on mottled backgrounds
show an ethnically varied cast of children, their peers, and their families in various
stages of grief or recovery. The figures are capably drafted; the scenes seem sus-
pended in time. Children may find the text both repetitious and amorphous, but
the overall tone is not so sentimentalized as Dear Oklahoma, and an adult who
JUNE 1996 
* 343
connects with the book could render it a cohesive experience by storytelling be-
tween the lines. BH
LAVENDER, DAVID 
Snowbound: The Tragic Story of the Donner Party. Holiday
House, 1996 
87p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1231-8 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Even if the Donner Party had never been driven to the prandial peculiarities for
which they are infamous, their ordeals along the Overland Trail would be well
worth recounting. At this 150th anniversary of the tragedy, Lavender retraces the
bungled journey to the California promised land and revisits the debate over whether
it was the negligence and/or duplicity of guidebook author and California booster
Lanford Hastings, or the overconfident naivet6 of the travelers themselves that
caused the party to become stranded in the Sierra Nevadas. While Lavender places
most of the blame on Hastings, he also charges the emigrants with acts of selfish-
ness and with inequitable distribution of scant resources, which endangered the
welfare of the group. Although Lavender offers explanations for the emigrants'
harsh and often questionable decisions, his grim portrayal makes it easy for readers
to accept any and all tales of cannibalism that have been handed down in Donner
lore and are reiterated here. In light of such unpleasantry, his rosy but summary
assessment of the ordeal ("In some ways it is a dark picture. But it is also bright
with threads of courage and sharing") is difficult to comprehend. Nonetheless,
this clear narrative draws the many strands of the rescuers' and the victims' tales
into an intriguing whole. Portraits, period artwork, and black-and-white photos
of sites through which the party passed are included, as are a bibliographic essay
and index. EB
LEVI, STEVEN C. 
Cowboys of the Sky: The Story ofAlaska's Bush Pilots. Walker,
1996 
114p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8332-5 
$18.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8331-7 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Ninety percent of Alaska is unreachable by road, and it's the bush pilots who bring
residents their mail, supplies, and, until recently, most of their contact with the
rest of the world. Levi examines the history of Alaskan aeronautics starting from
the daring and dangerous twenties through its strategic importance in World War
II to its role in tourism today. The best part of the book is the aviation anecdotes,
legends, and tall tales, involving landings on precipices, polar bears as freight, planes
held together with piano wire, and any number of brushes with-and sometimes
losses to-death. The stories, however, are rather loosely strung together so that
the chapters lack focus beyond the chronological, and the technical information
tends to bog down the pace of the text but is probably still too sketchy for hard-
ware devotees. The book works best as an engaging introduction to a gallery of
characters on the edge of law and legend. A map prefaces the text; black-and-
white photographs appear throughout; endnotes, a glossary, bibliography, and in-
dex are included. DS
LEwis, J. PATRICK 
Riddle-icious; illus. by Debbie Tilley. 
Knopf, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-94011-1 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-84011-7 
$15.00 
R* Gr. 2-4
See this month's Big Picture, p. 325, for review.
344 
* THE BULLETIN
LONDON, JACK 
The Call of the Wild; illus. by Philippe Munch and with
photographs. 
Viking, 1996 
126p 
(The Whole Story)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-670-86918-X 
$21.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-670-86796-9 
$13.99 
NR Gr. 6 up
In a series that also includes editions of The Jungle Book and Treasure Island (see
review under Kipling, above), Jack London's brutal masterpiece is tamed by a
plethora of Classic-Comics-style illustrations; sidebarred historical photos and in-
formation about dogs, wolves, the Gold Rush, and the Yukon; and two-page inter-
ruptions on related topics. Not only is the plethora frantic and distracting, most
of the marginalia is irrelevant to the nearby text and often actively contradicts the
tone of the story. Next to a fierce paragraph about a fight between Buck and Spitz,
for example, we find out that "the shape of dog harnesses varies by region. The
Indians prefer fan-shaped team formations. In the West and in the Klondike, the
dogs are lined up in pairs." Aside from the fact that "the Indians" are not a "re-
gion," this information has nothing to do with the action. When Buck has killed
Spitz and is demanding the leadership of the team, we see in the margin "A picnic
in the snow: in the freezing open air, the men eat their plates of baked beans."
And when we would like a little assistance, such as a gloss on "Again from its
brumal sleep/ Wakens the ferine strain," the sidebar tells us instead about "gold
fever." Thankfully, in the last pages where Buck discovers the body of John
Thornton, the margins finally have the good grace to shut up. Anyone who in-
flicts this upon students as a "unique documentary approach" (or so the jacket
states) oughta be thrown to the wolves. RS
LONDON, JONATHAN 
Red Wolf Country; illus. by Daniel San Souci. 
Dutton,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45191-9 
$15.99 
R 3-6 yrs
By 1980 red wolves had disappeared from their wild habitat in the southeastern
United States, where once they had roamed from present day Texas to the eastern
seaboard and from Florida to Illinois. Kept alive in captivity, red wolves have
recently been reintroduced to five southern sites; an endnote tells us that they now
number over one hundred. The story here is simple enough; spare and lyrical, it
takes us through a year in the life of a pair of red wolves as they skirt danger (guns
and 'gators) and raise their litter. It's the artwork here that really evokes the wild
life: although the luminous landscapes are more impressive than the stiffly drawn
wolves, fourteen double-page paintings are richly hued and realistic. They don't
let us forget that these are wild animals: the alligators are really scary, and even the
adorable wolf pups look as if they mean business. This would be an excellent
jump-off to a discussion of endangered species for the youngest patrons. A
publisher's note informs us that a portion of the book's proceeds will be donated
to protecting the red wolf, and there is an afterword by the former red-wolf species
coordinator for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. SSV
MACDONALD, AMY 
Cousin Ruth's Tooth; illus. by Marjorie Priceman. 
Houghton,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-71253-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
In this semi-sequel to Rachel Fister's Blister, another physical calamity befalls a
member of the family: Cousin Ruth loses her tooth. Sensible Ruth tries to ex-
JUNE 1996 
* 345
plain, but the rest of the family panics and attempts to solve the problem of the
missing molar in various ways: buying a replacement at Wal-Mart, refashioning a
prosthesis from clay, calling the police to track down the original, and so forth.
Finally a fax from the Queen ("Time heals all wounds") gives them a glimmer of
hope, at which point Ruthie at last manages to convey the fact that she has no
dearth of dentition ("'Ahem,' said Ruth./ 'I FOUND MY TOOTH!'/ and opened
up for all to see"). This is, in its rhyme, chaotic activity, and concept, an unabash-
edly silly story with no further pretensions. The short verses clip along, with the
family ever more dizzy and distraught as the situation deteriorates, and the specif-
ics of the search ("Check the hatbox./ Check the cat box./ Look inside the VCR")
ensure that things remain funny as well as speedy. Priceman's watercolors have an
appropriately dashed-off look to them, and the compositions, generally figures
flying across the white page, demonstrate a fitting sense of disarray as well as a
diverting attention to detail (even without the text's prompting, the Fisters look in
the goldfish bowl and under somebody's toupee). The loose-tooth genre often
tends toward the fey or the lugubrious; here's a frothy and giggly entry that chat-
ters right along. DS
MCGRAW, ELOISE 
The Moorchild. McElderry, 1996 
24 1p
ISBN 0-689-80654-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
"Freaky-odd." "Eldritch." "Pixie." The villagers of medieval Torskaal jeer at
Saaski, the smith's daughter, for her strange looks and ways; they accuse her of
being a fairy changeling. (Which, as the reader learns early on, she is.) Once,
Saaski had been a carefree Folk youngling, making otherworldly mischief on the
moor, until the day her half-human (and thus magic-impaired) heritage endan-
gered the Moorfolk community. The powers-that-be then "changed" her with a
human baby from Torskaal and now she has forgotten her past life. However, in
the human world her half-Folkish tendencies surface and threaten the village com-
munity. Day after day, Saaski escapes to the moor, "the only place she had ever
felt she belonged," where she begins the process of rediscovering and accepting
who she is. Because the reader is denied the suspense that would make quicksilver
Saaski's slow self-realization bearable, this who-am-I tale becomes a bit tedious.
The themes of identity and isolation-within-the-community are similar to the ones
in Monica Furlong's Wise Child (BCCB 2/88), but overall, McGraw's book lacks
that book's urgency and depth. Though the language is as lilting as the elfin tunes
Saaski plays on her bagpipes, the story too often lapses into tell-not-show prose,
keeping the characters at an emotional distance. The classic components of the
story, however, will be pleasingly familiar to many readers and may engage fantasy
lovers nonetheless. AEB
McKISSACK, PATRICIA C. 
RebelsAgainst Slavery: American Slave Revolts; by Patricia
C. and Fredrick L. McKissack. Scholastic, 1996 
[17 6p] 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-590-45735-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Although stories of slave insurrections can easily be found in other sources, here
the McKissacks present the revolts of Toussaint L'Ouverture, Denmark Vesey,
John Brown, and others as an intensifying continuum of resistance, which devel-
ops from early sporadic attacks aimed at securing individual liberty to organized
346 * THE BULLETIN
insurrections to bring down the very structure of slavery. Political and rhetorical
fronts in the war against slavery in the Americas remain largely in the background,
and at first glance even the inclusion of Harriet Tubman's courageous, yet essen-
tially nonviolent, resistance seems out of place amid accounts of bloody revolt.
Ultimately, however, each figure in this volume is linked by a belief that "the only
course of action . . . open to them was to end their enslavement by force," and
Tubman's willingness to shoot any runaway too weak to complete the journey
ranks her as a comrade in arms. The prose occasionally turns florid ("[Gabriel
Prosser] became the martyr of an oppressed people who heard in his voice the
trumpet of freedom") or confusing ("There are existing 'confessions' given by con-
demned prisoners as they hung on the scaffold"), but the tone is generally moder-
ate; heroic legend and verifiable facts are carefully distinguished throughout the
text. A chronology and bibliography are included; the finished book will contain
black-and-white photographs. EB
MAYO, EDITH P. 
The Smithsonian Book of the First Ladies: Their Lives, Times,
and Issues. 
Holt, 1996 
302p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-1751-8 
$24.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
This is your basic treasury of a treasury-prone subject, apparently designed to ac-
company the new Smithsonian exhibit on the same theme. The book gives a brief
account of the life and White House doings of first ladies from Martha Washing-
ton to Hillary Rodham Clinton; it also mentions White House hostesses who were
not presidential wives (such as James Buchanan's niece) and gives a quick prdcis of
those women who didn't live long enough to see their husbands attain the highest
office in the land. Interspersed with the biographical vignettes are brief examina-
tions of the changing role of women, the suffrage question, the temperance move-
ment, and so forth. The subject is appealing and the book, which is heavily
illustrated with reproduced paintings and photographs, is attractively designed;
the writing, however, is disjointed and uneven and a certain shallowness pervades
the old-fashioned approach. Youngsters drawn by the theme and the pleasures of
a compendium will still appreciate the look at some great ladies and a personalized
view of history; this is also a useful reference source and might serve as a compan-
ion to White House children books such as Katherine Leiner's First Children (BCCB
3/96). An index, a divided bibliography (but no notes), and a list of sources for
further reading are included. DS
MERTINS, LISA 
Ginkgo andMoon; written and illus. by Lisa Mertins. 
Houghton,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-395-73576-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A slender, shady ginkgo tree is in love with the moon, finding "her luminous
round face beautiful beyond compare." While trying to attract Moon's attention,
Ginkgo incurs the ire of Sun, who sends wind to blow Ginkgo's leaves off; after
winter passes, a repentant Moon shines down on Ginkgo's new leaves "with a
beam so bright that his leaves turn a magnificent yellow." It's a pretty thought,
but the story here is rambling and vague and the point obscure: it's too convo-
luted to work as apourquoi tale and not pithy enough to be a fable. The art is more
impressive: relying on a range of browns and yellows, the illustrations (alkyd paints
on masonite, according to a note) counterpoint delicately stylized draftsmanship
with rough and tactile textures; while the effect is sometimes diminished by inter-
ference of the gutter, the pictures generally offer an alluring if static nocturnal
JUNE 1996 
* 
347
world. Young listeners patient with ambiguities may appreciate this as a tranquil
bedtime book; for a more effective written folk-like tale in the same vein, try Amy
MacDonald's The Spider Who Created the World (BCCB 5/96). DS
MURPHY, JIM 
A Young Patriot: The American Revolution as Experienced by One
Boy. 
Clarion, 1996 
[101p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-60523-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Enlisting at fifteen (underage) to avoid teasing by his friends, Joseph Plumb Mar-
tin served in many of the major engagements from New York to Virginia during
the war for Independence; his memoirs, which he zestily recorded at age seventy,
offer an intimate and sometimes humorous perspective on the battles and their
participants, and Murphy weaves them carefully into this biography. Martin learned
new military drill under von Steuben (who cursed in several languages), witnessed
a cannonball pass between Molly Pitcher's legs ("She observed that it was lucky it
did not pass a little higher"), and wryly commented on his commander's equiva-
lent of a modern photo-op ("General Washington struck a few blows with a
pickax. . . that it might be said 'General Washington with his own hands first
broke ground at the siege of Yorktown'"). Martin and Murphy frequently remind
readers that the soldiers were fighting for political liberties toward which their
fellow countrymen were often hostile or apathetic; periods of deprivation and even
starvation for the army occurred in times of plenty, as supplies were withheld by
Tory sympathizers and tightwad allies. Period engravings are accompanied by
caption commentaries that point out inaccuracies and romanticization in the im-
ages, and viewers can visually trace the development of Revolutionary legend.
Report writers will appreciate the detailed index, and a chronology fixes Martin's
experiences within the larger framework of wartime events. Bibliographical refer-
ences are included. EB
MURPHY, VIRGINIA REED 
Across the Plains in the Donner Party; with letters by
James Reed; ed. by Karen Zeinert. 
Linnet, 1996 
[112p] 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-208-02404-2 
$19.50
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-10
A somewhat different view of the Donner Party debacle emerges from the primary
source materials assembled here than from Lavender's account, reviewed above.
Virginia Reed was about twelve years old when her stepfather James Reed struck
out for California with his family and the Donners; her memoirs of the journey,
written for a magazine after her marriage, form the basis for this volume, with her
necessarily limited view expanded by entries from her stepfather's and fellow emi-
grant Patrick Breen's diaries and from a secondary source based on James Reed's
notes. Through their accounts the reader meets a band of emigrants largely enjoy-
ing each other's company, impressed by the scenery, and amused by hunting par-
ties right up to the point of their time-consuming misdirection at Hastings Cutoff.
Then, as each ensuing disaster hits, the emigrants respond in character-from
Breen's clipped "Continues to snow. Don't know the depth, maybe seven feet" to
Virginia's emotional "I found myself on my knees ... making a vow that I would
become a Catholic if God would send relief." Editor Zeinert divides the volume
into two parts (up to and following the point at which the travelers become stranded)
and introduces each with a chronology and notes on the extent of her textual
348 
* 
THE BULLETIN
amendments. Readers on the trail of gory detail will perhaps be surprised that the
only reference to cannibalism is in the second hand account by journalist J. H.
Merryman; social studies classes may find this to be a good starting point for dis-
cussion of the scope and slant of sources. EB
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
How Mr. Monkey Saw the Whole World; illus. by Synthia
Saint James. 
Doubleday, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-385-32057-4 
$14.95 
R 3-6yrs
Mr. Buzzard knows an easy way to get food during a famine: he cons the forest
animals, one by one, into taking a flight on his back, promising each that he will be
the first of his kind "to see the whole world." Then, midflight, Buzzard dangles
Messrs. Hare, Antelope, and Crab upside down and extorts their promise of a
cushy food supply in exchange for a cushiony landing. Clever Mr. Monkey is on
to Buzzard's trick though, and when his turn comes to see the whole world he
covers Buzzard's eyes with a palm leaf until the disoriented pilot agrees to return
his ill-gotten gains. Myers keeps the structure simple, the mood light, and the
ending predictably happy, and he even tosses in a line or two for the adult reader's
amusement ("Mr. Antelope got skinny as a bone, and his wife ran away with a
goat"). Saint James' paintings are bold as Buzzard himself, with the animals ren-
dered as sleek shapes (clad in boxer shorts) and settings slyly suggested by a scatter-
ing of pill-shaped clouds or a mound of green earth. This is a nifty readaloud for
youngsters just beginning to explore the pleasures offolklorically monkeying around.
EB
OSOFSKY, AUDREY 
Free to Dream: The Making ofa Poet: Langston Hughes. 
Lo-
throp, 1996 
112p
ISBN 0-688-10605-6 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
This accessible biography of a great American writer traces Hughes' life from his
peripatetic and uncertain childhood, through his international travels and poetic
growth, to his status as one of the pre-eminent poets of the Harlem Renaissance.
The book focuses primarily on the poet's early years (his last three decades are
covered in the final six pages), depicting Hughes as loyal to but buffeted by his
inconstant and demanding mother, frustrated by his embittered and distant fa-
ther, and constantly trying, through his writing and through sharing it, to secure
his place in a persistently hostile world. The book's elegance and composition
make it resemble an album, an effect enhanced by the inclusion of bordered pho-
tographs of Hughes and his family, clippings from his yearbooks, and relevant
selections from period newspapers. While the result occasionally substitutes art-
istry for usefulness (the poetic opening and closing sections confusingly mix Hughes'
verse and Osofsky's storytelling narration, and the author's musical setting of
Hughes' "Hold Fast to Dreams" is attractive but extraneous), it's overall an effec-
tive evocation of an individual artistic life. Endnotes, a bibliography, and an index
are included. DS
PARKER, NANCY WINSLOW 
Locks, Crocs, & Skeeters: The Story ofthe Panama Ca-
nak written and illus. by Nancy Winslow Parker. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-688-12241-8 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-5
Even readers devoid of enthusiasm for engineering marvels may find their interest
sparked by this comprehensive and well-organized account of humans bullishly
JUNE 1996 
* 
349
beating nature into tenuous submission. Parker heads off with a poem: "Beyond
the Chagres" by James Stanley Gilbert, Panama booster and man of (mediocre)
letters. The poem's not here for window-dressing-Gilbert's observation that "ten
thousand dangers/ Hide in the noxious air" accurately describes the view of his
American and European contemporaries and prepares readers to appreciate the air
of mystery and danger that surrounded the French and American canal builders
(even while Parker's slapstick illustrations don't seem to take the poem very seri-
ously). In Part Two, which is a delight for browsers and a boon for middle-grade
report writers, Parker begins with an overview of Panama's history and then offers
a series of close-ups of persons (and mosquitoes) who influenced and/or impeded
the isthmus's development. Although the focus is on the Big Names-Theodore
Roosevelt, George Goethals, William Gorgas, etc.-Parker also credits the thou-
sands of Jamaican, Chinese, and West Indian workers whose lives were lost in the
jungles. 
A sunny cartoon portrait accompanies each entry, several maps trace
changes in the landscape, and a final section on the completed canal and its cur-
rent operation has some simple, sensible charts and graphs; an index is also in-
cluded. EB
PERL, LILA 
Four Perfect Pebbles: A Holocaust Story; by Lila Perl and Marion
Blumenthal Lazan. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
130p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-688-14294-X 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Starting with a description of one of the days that Marion Blumenthal Lazan sur-
vived in Bergen-Belsen, this chronicle of her experiences during the Holocaust
then goes further back for a look at her family's secure prewar life in Germany (her
grandparents had run a successful business in Hoya since 1894). Step by step,
Hitler's policies cut off their living and endanger their lives as they move to Hanover,
flee to Holland, are deported from Westerbork to Bergen-Belsen, and finally are
shipped on a death train toward Auschwitz before the Russians liberate them. It is
too late for Marion's father, who dies of typhus, but she and her mother and
brother eventually make their way to the U.S. and manage to build new lives.
Lazan's recollections, along with occasional quotes from her mother, are inter-
twined with Perl's background narrative to make a smooth factual flow. Especially
telling are details such as the silence Marion maintains when a secret pot of boiling
soup, which she and her mother rush to hide during a surprise inspection of their
barrack, scalds her leg. There's no hint of overdramatization here; the tone is, if
anything, understated in a story carried by the momentum of history itself. Two
insets of family and historical photos intensify the poignancy of the account. BH
PFEFFER, SUSAN BETH 
The Trouble with Wishes; illus. by Jennifer Plecas. 
Holt,
1996 
71p 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-3826-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
It's just a normal day in Katie Logan's class: "Michelle was hitting Leslie. Roger
and Amy were throwing pencil parts at each other. And Michael was trying to bite
Kevin's neck." To make matters worse their teacher, Ms. Bauman, is given to long
soliloquies about their awful behavior. The class is preparing a Thanksgiving play
to perform in front of the whole school, but Katie is not chosen to be a Pilgrim or
a Native American: "Katie was a tree. She hated being a tree. What she really
wanted was Jessica's part . .
the star of the show." After a disastrous rehearsal,
Katie walks home through the park and finds a three-wish-granting magic lamp.
350 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Katie shares her good fortune with her brother Alex, who points out that all the
best wishes are problematic: a thirty-five inch TV set? ("You might get a TV set
that doesn't work.") World peace? ("Suppose there's world peace and nobody
dies in wars anymore. Then maybe there'd be too many people on Earth and not
enough food and we'd all die from hunger.") Riches? Beauty? Only one wish
seems foolproof: "I'll get to be the star and I'll still have two wishes left!" Thus
Katie replaces Jessica as the "star" of the show, with chaotic results. Pfeffer has
taken the age-old, eternally appealing magic-lamp motif and added believable grade-
school drama and a distinct cast of third graders any teacher would recognize.
Katie's final wish, which provides the amicable, we-all-like-each-other ending, may
engender some skepticism, but readers will be amused by the funny dialogue and
situations. Plecas' cartoon-like but soft pencil illustrations enhance the whimsical
quality of this light-hearted story. PM
PORTE, BARBARA ANN 
Black Elephant with a Brown Ear (in Alabama); illus. by
Bill Traylor. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[48p]
ISBN 0-688-14374-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
"When I look at many of Bill Traylor's pictures," says Barbara Porte, "I think of
them as stories that he told himself. Seeing them, I tell myself different stories."
Ten such stories are included here, addressing such topics as porcine heroism ("Prize
Pig," responding to Traylor's "Purple Pigs"), disgruntled canines ("Red and Black
Dogfight," responding to "Fighting Dogs"), or wayward transportation ("Run-
away Goat Cart" develops from "Hell-Bent for Leather"). The stories couldn't
stand independently, but they're not meant to; a blend of musing, humor, and just
plain serendipity, they bounce off and diverge from the art as much as finding
inspiration in it, so the gap between picture and text is as telling as the connection.
The tone and effects vary considerably: "Scary Creature," for instance, is a matter-
of-fact but creepy vignette, whereas the title story is gravely, randomly hilarious in
a manner reminiscent of James Thurber. 
Traylor's surreal but literal art is fasci-
nating, although there isn't much of it here (only one painting per story). Porte
includes a biographical note and an endnote that will point readers to more sources
(she also includes source notes for borrowed bits of her tales). Most important
here, though, is the demonstration of one kind of art as inspiration to another; it
may also inspire teachers-and kids-with ideas for similar projects. DS
PRESILLA, MARICEL E. 
Life Around the Lake; written by Maricel E. Presilla and
Gloria Soto; embroideries by the women of Lake Patzcuaro. 
Holt, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-3800-0 
$16.95 
Ad Gr. 2-4
This photoessay offers readers a substantial amount of material about the area
around Lake Pitzcuaro, located in Michoacin, a state in west-central Mexico. In
an attempt to celebrate life around the lake, the book treats ecological concerns,
local fishermen's woes, food preparation, a wedding ceremony, special feast days,
and the history of the local embroiderers' guild. Photographs of the exquisitely
detailed embroideries provide brilliant jewel-like color, but they do not offset per-
plexing inconsistencies in the text. For instance, in the explanation of "The Dance
of the Old Men," "dance master Nicolas Constantino thinks he knows why the
dancers wear white masks," but in the illustration the dancers wear red masks.
Quotations, presumably from local people, are placed capriciously throughout the
JUNE 1996 
* 351
book, neither clarifying nor defining its various sections. There's just too riuch
going on here; the information given is sketchy and confusing, and it's delivered in
an adulatory tone that becomes wearisome. Why are fruits and gifts thrown down
from the tower of the four-hundred-year-old Franciscan church on the Feast of
Corpus Christi? Because "this feast is a time of giving." Okay, but who's throwing
all those goodies and who's getting them? The embroiderers of the Lake Patzcuaro
area are obviously talented artists, and this book is a colorful tribute to their excep-
tional work. The book's cumbersome scope and choppy text may hamper young
readers' appreciation of the artists' creative skills, but the scarcity of other works on
this vivid craft makes this title a worthwhile resource. PM
ROACH, MARILYNNE K. 
In the Days of the Salem Witchcraft Trials; written and
illus. by Marilynne K. Roach. 
Houghton, 1996 
92p
ISBN 0-395-69704-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Believing that the key to the extraordinary witchhunt of 1692 is to be found in the
ordinary circumstances of colonial life, Roach conducts readers on a thematic tour
of the milieu from which the trials arose. Opening chapters on law, punishment,
and the invisible world convincingly present a system of beliefs encompassing su-
pernatural "evidence" upon which defendants could be charged and convicted.
However, as Roach extends her discussion to the land, farming calendar, recre-
ation, etc., her grasp on the original argument weakens and, indeed, connections
to the trial are frequently neglected for long stretches of text. Her conclusion that
"the Salem witchcraft panic began with personal fear, grew with neighborhood
suspicion, and then spread through the region fueled by the time's tensions" is
credible but dangles largely unsupported in the final chapter. If this work doesn't
contribute much to the debate on the trials' genesis, it does provide a smoothly
readable overview of the far-from-homogeneous culture of seventeenth-century
Massachusetts. Scribbly line vignettes are jarringly light-hearted, given Roach's
premise that this was a population "at risk from so many earthly threats." An
index is appended. EB
Ross, JIM, ed. 
Dear Oklahoma City, Get Well Soon: America's Children Reach
Out to the People of Oklahoma; ed. by Jim Ross and Paul Myers. 
Walker,
1996 
48p 
illus.
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8437-2 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8436-4 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Children need and yearn to express themselves, and their expressions can be
unselfconsciously moving for an adult audience, especially when offering a child's-
eye record of events; a good example is the art and writing by young Holocaust
victims in I Never Saw Another Butterfly, which also has juvenile appeal because of
its consistent focus on youthful viewpoints. The difficulty with Ross and Myers'
book, featuring responses to the bombing of Oklahoma City's Federal Building, is
its inclusion of quotations from both adults and children. The editors' introduc-
tion is clearly written to adults: "This book has its roots in the belief that through-
out this tragedy the voices of America's children were all but lost in the torrent of
dramatic stories and images saturating the news. Yet their reactions, expressed in
both writing and art, cut straight to the heart of the disaster's impact on all of us."
Similarly, Oklahoma first lady Cathy Keating's note is clearly an I-they rather than
an I-you address. Throughout, the text varies in adult/child balance, leaving a
352 
* 
THE BULLETIN
question as to who the audience really is for this picture book. The adult passages
are frequently above or beyond primary-grade reading levels, while the children's
passages will appeal to young readers only when emotionally forceful; children
don't see or care what's "cute" about misspellings or quaint phrasing ("Sory! I feel
sad what hapin to the pepol"). The art varies from a pale crayon illustration of a
big rainbow over a small building ("This is our school") to a picture full of red
hearts, a Teddy Bear waving a flag, lots of fire engines, and other naively drawn
images. This is a patriotic book with strong sentimental appeal-most of the
children are reacting to what they've heard from family or television reporters
rather than to the experience itself. The biggest audience will be adults appreciat-
ing children for their fresh vision of the world and of one of its tragedies. BH
SCARBORO, ELIZABETH 
Phoenix, Upside Down. Viking, 1996 
[128p]
ISBN 0-670-86335-1 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Jamie is not happy about her family's move from Boulder to Phoenix: she misses
her old friends, she's unhappy in her new fourth-grade class, and she mourns her
pet rat, who died upon arrival in Arizona. The one bright spot in Jamie's new
neighborhood is Celia, an old lady with a passion for her garden and an interest in
Jamie and her little sister, Rachel; through her friendship with Celia, who is herself
dealing with the changes of advancing age, Jamie gradually adjusts to the change in
her own life. This relocation story doesn't chart any new territory, but Scarboro
has a quiet style rich in particularity and nuance, which makes Jamie's ordeal of
transitioning to a new school culture honest and vivid ("At her old school, she
never cared if people saw her standing alone. Then again, she wasn't alone that
often"). The book wisely underplays the connection with Celia, keeping her rela-
tionship with the girls realistically shy and uncertain on both sides, and the story is
also authentic in its depiction of the ups and downs of incipient friendships. Kids
will appreciate this insightful, well-modulated story about an all-too-common child-
hood hurdle. DS
SHERMAN, JOSEPHA 
Trickster Tales: Forty Folk Stories from Around the World;
illus. by David Boston. 
August House, 1996 
[17 2p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-87483-449-X 
$28.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87483-450-3 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Serving a dual purpose as storyteller's source and elementary students' browse,
these tales circle the globe in sections: Africa, Europe, the Near East, Asia and
Polynesia, Meso- and South America, and North America. Tricksters take many
forms, and many of the forms they take here are not commonly anthologized or
picturebooked-with exceptions such as the familiar "Raven Steals the Light."
Even Brer Rabbit and the Tar Baby acquire unfamiliar faces in a French Creole
variant called "Lapin and the Little Tar Man." While Sherman's adaptations are
neither lyrical nor colloquial, the tales thrive on a straightforward style that lets
their structure shine through, and her notes are impeccable, giving cultural con-
text, motif numbers, and sources (even the puzzling phrase "This story is known to
the author" gets an accompanying suggestion of sources for "very similar versions").
Full-page pen-and-ink hatch drawings, which introduce each section, are precisely
drafted, satirically exaggerated, and tonally attuned to the characters they portray.
BH
JUNE 1996 
* 353
SILVERSTEIN, SHEL Falling Up; written and illus. by Shel Silverstein. 
Harper-
Collins, 1996 
176p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024803-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024802-5 
$16.95 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
Yes, this is a fully fledged, brand-new volume of Silverstein in the vein of Where the
Sidewalk Ends and A Light in theAttic. And Uncle Shelby's still got it-the poems
here range from vivid to raucous to sly to tender, telling tales of monsters ("It's the
deadly eye/ Of Poogley-Pie"-from "The Deadly Eye") and mistakes ("We gave
you a chance/ To water the plants./ We didn't mean that way/ Now zip up your
pants"-"Gardener") and a multiplicity of characters ("Larry's such a liar-/ He
tells outrageous lies./ He says he's ninety-nine years old/ Instead of only five"-
from "Lyin' Larry"). Silverstein's scratchily eccentric line drawings illustrate po-
etic conceits, provide punch lines, and add jokes of their own. Not every entry is
a home run, but the enticing blend of wickedness, creativity, and rhythm makes
the verse entertaining, readable, and often chantable. Many of the poems would
make dynamic readalouds for younger listeners, and they might particularly suit
an older-child/younger-child sharing session. A title index of poems is included.
DS
SNEDDEN, ROBERT 
Yuck!: A BigBook ofLittle Horrors. Simon, 1996 [32p] 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-689-80676-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
No matter how cozy, your home will seem terrifying after you see these startling
magnifications of ordinary critters, foods, and products found under your roof. As
they did with Cobb's similar For Your Own Protection (BCCB 2/90), kids will find
irresistible the mundane made extraordinary, here in disgusting shots of peanut
butter, toothbrushes, ants, silverfish, and, yes, human skin, all shown enlarged
anywhere from hundreds to many thousands of times their actual sizes. The double-
page spreads pose a question on the left side and provide the answer on the right
side underneath a lift-up flap. Most of the spreads are horizontal, but a couple are
vertical in a nifty example of creative bookmaking. The star quality of the photos
is outstanding throughout; the text sensibly accepts second billing. One shot kids
will love shows the actual pits in a compact disc, which are read by a laser and
translated into music. And, of course, the predictable curtain-closer is a revolting
montage of human body parts-hair, tongue, sweat-up close and all too per-
sonal. Even the most jaded of the Nintendo set will be drawn into the guessing
game-what is that thing with its antennae waving, an alien? Nope, just a back-
yard mushroom. All this and the joy of knowing that even Martha Stewart's home
holds the same nightmares. SSV
STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS 
Treasure Island.
See review under Kipling, p. 341.
SWANSON, DIANE 
Buffalo Sunrise: The Story ofa North American Giant. Sierra
Club, 1996 
58p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-87156-861-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Everyone's familiar with the depressing numbers-where once sixty million bison,
commonly known as buffaloes, roamed the length and breadth of North America,
354 
* THE BULLETIN
only one thousand were left by the end of the nineteenth century. In the name of
sport, Europeans and North Americans alike went on buffalo safaris, one Irish
noble named (appropriately) Gore killing over 2,000 buffaloes on a hunting trip
in the 1850s. But the title of this book reflects the current optimistic state of the
buffalo; now numbering over 200,000, the herds are, in fact, thriving in both the
U.S. and Canada. While there has hardly been a stampede of books on the sub-
ject, enough ground has been covered that Swanson has to work hard to tell us
something new. She delivers admirably and kids will be able to stump each other
with buffalo facts. Among the tidbits: American Indians had over one hundred
uses, including employing buffalo ribs as runners on sleds, for the animal; early
pioneers crossed the plains following "Bison Streets," trails made by herds; a cross
between a buffalo and a cow results in a "cattalo"; a bellowing bull can be heard
over three miles away. The handsome illustrations include reproductions of paint-
ings, archival materials, and current wildlife photographs. Occasional inserts,
dropped in as sidebars, offer related information, and an index will assist young
researchers. SSV
THOMPSON, COLIN 
How to Live Forever; written and illus. by Colin
Thompson. 
Knopf, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-679-87898-X 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Peter Robinson lives in a book in a library that houses every book in the world.
One book, however-How to Live Forever-is missing, and Peter determines to
find it and secure eternal youth. He hunts through the crumbling stacks until he
encounters a quartet of elders who offer him the book; Peter then meets the An-
cient Child, the one person who has read the book and remains frighteningly,
miserably, frozen in youth while the rest of the world goes by, and Peter sensibly
decides not to read the book after all. As fables go, this is fairly thin and obvious
(and, as Jonathan Swift pointed out, immortality need not mean eternal youth
anyway). The real draw here is the art: Thompson's line-and-watercolor pictures
depict a bibliomane's heaven, as rows of punnily titled books (The Lizard of Oz,
Finnegans Snake) topple onto each other in Dickensian disarray and near-Escherian
structure; readers will relish the hunt for illustrative details such as gardens beyond
volumes or tiny stack-dwelling folk. Thompson's ability to create a unique visual
world will pull youngsters in; perhaps in the future he might concentrate on that
strength and, a la Mitsumasa Anno or Peter Collington, simply let those visions
tell the story on their own. DS
TRAHANT, LENORA BEGAY 
The Success ofthe Navajo Arts and Crafts Enterprise: A
RetailSuccess Story; illus. with photographs by Monty Roessel. 
Walker, 1996 
78p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8337-6 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8336-8 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 5-8
As the title indicates, this is less a book about cultural traditions than it is one
about business (the publisher's Success series has also spotlighted entrepreneurial
successes by other minority-owned businesses). The Navajo Arts and Crafts En-
terprise (NACE) succeeded the Navajo Arts and Crafts Guild in 1972, changing
what had been a consortium of independent artists into an assembly-line for mass-
producing silver jewelry. This was not a success ("One thing led to another and
the quality of the jewelry went down"), and Raymond Smith, a former member of
the Navajo Tribal Council, was then hired to redirect the organization. The book
JUNE 1996 
* 355
examines the changes Smith wrought, describes the system that links jewelry mak-
ers and weavers to NACE, which sells them raw material and buys their creations,
and provides brief interviews with Smith, various managers, and artists. There's
quite a bit of repetition in the thinly spread information, and the business talk is
not always clear: "The difference between retail and wholesale is the amount of
jewelry sold to individuals or companies." Still, Trahant goes easy on the self-
esteem talk that usually nibbles at this kind of book, and even business-impaired
readers can appreciate the clear descriptions of how the crafts are made. Black-
and-white photos generally prefer portraits to merchandise; a glossary, index, and
appendices of crafts organizations and American Indian associations are included.
RS
WALSH, 
ELLEN STOLL 
Samantha; written and illus. by Ellen Stoll
Walsh. 
Harcourt, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-15-252264-6 
$14.00 
R 4-6 yrs
Samantha is a young mouse who becomes overwhelmed with the roughness of her
older siblings' play, and who wishes for a fairy godmother to protect her-and "a
fairy godmother must have been listening, because one appeared out of nowhere
to take up her new responsibilities." Samantha's F.G. keeps her safe and away
from all the playing until Samantha finally gets fed up with the restriction and
chases her away; soon, however, Samantha misses the security, brings her guardian
back, and negotiates a more moderate deal. Fairy godmother notwithstanding,
this story will ring completely true to adults familiar with children's contradictory
demands for safety and independence, and kids will understand Samantha's im-
pulses completely. Walsh's cut-paper collage mice (strongly reminiscent of Leo
Lionni's in Frederick, BCCB 10/67) are their usual cuddly but serious selves; their
bright-eyed gamboling makes a nice counterpoint to the softer comradeship of the
delicate-winged lavender mouse-godmother and her charge. It's a bit on the sweet
side, but the text is low-key and restrained and Samantha's too strong-willed to be
cloying. This will make a cozy but not suffocating readaloud for youngsters push-
ing a bit farther than The Runaway Bunny. DS
WATSON, 
ESTHER 
Talking to Angels; written and illus. by Esther
Watson. 
Harcourt, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201077-7 
$16.00 
M 
5-8 yrs
This book introduces listeners to the narrator's (and the author's) autistic sister
Christa, describing her activities and preferences ("Christa likes to do what I
do ... Christa loves the way water looks. She also likes the way kittens feel on her
cheek") and summing up by stating that "my sister Christa is autistic. And she is
my best friend, too." This is a simply worded and affectionate tribute, but it's not
much more than that. The text is bound to confuse young listeners: though at
one point it reads "She doesn't speak to me out loud," at another juncture Christa
is speaking to the narrator face to face, and it's not clear whether Christa considers
herself to be "softly talking to angels," or if that is somebody else's interpretation of
her activity. Nor does the readaloud audience, who may also cover their ears when
they hear bad noises and enjoy the feel of kittens, get any hints as to what those
things have to do with Christa's autism, what autism is, or if they have it too. The
mixed-media art is intriguing and deliberately childlike, focusing on tremulously
lined faces and multifingered hands; the images are telling to those in the know
356 * THE BULLETIN
without, unfortunately, assisting much in explaining Christa to the audience. The
narrator's love shines through, but it's never quite clear what that love is illuminat-
ing. For a book that will really help kids understand the concept of autism, see
Charles Amenta's Russell Is Extra Special (BCCB 12/92). DS
WILLHOITE, MICHAEL 
Daddy's Wedding; written and illus by Michael
Willhoite. 
Alyson Wonderland, 1996 32p
ISBN 1-55583-350-0 
$15.95 
M 
5-7yrs
Daddy is at again! The story opens at a backyard picnic where Daddy and Frank
(Daddy's Roommate, BCCB 3/91) announce to son Nick that they are getting
married ("'We call it a commitment ceremony, Nick,' said Frank") and everyone's
happy (as Mommy says, "It sounds like a lot of fun. Nothing's better than a
wedding in June"). Nick signs on as best man and the wedding is off and running,
replete with balloons and matching tuxedos. Daddy and Frank recite their vows,
exchange rings, and kiss. Clancy-Daddy and Frank's rambunctious dog-beats
the guests to the wedding cake, but this is the only flaw in an otherwise lovely
party. . . uh, I mean, wedding reception. The guests chat and eat, Daddy and
Frank depart for a San Francisco honeymoon, and Nick goes to baseball camp.
The end. This book is not so much a story as a series of snapshots (in broad and
pedestrianly drafted cartoons) of the happiest family in America. However, the
same light touch that Willhoite employed to normalize the relationship between
Daddy and Frank in Daddy's Roommate here works to trivialize their pledge of
life-long love as roughly equivalent to, say, sharing a popsicle--or, in this case, co-
hosting a backyard party. To compound the problem, the writing is flat and unin-
spired, and the events (witness Clancy's mishap) have a sitcom predictability. In a
well-intentioned effort to portray Daddy and Frank's wedding as Perfectly Ordi-
nary, Willhoite has made it No Big Deal. Though this is one of a handful of
picture books on weddings of any kind, adults will probably be far more interested
in Daddy's Wedding--for better or worse-than the book's intended audience. CJ
WILSON, JANET 
The Ingenious Mr. Peale: Painter, Patriot and Man of
Science. 
Atheneum, 1996 
[128p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31884-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Eighteenth-century dilettante Charles Willson Peale has made several appearances
in children's literature, but most accounts either fictionalize his life (e.g., the Epsteins'
Mr. Peale's Mammoth) or highlight a single incident (Michael Tunnell's The Joke's
on George, BCCB 10/93). Wilson offers middle graders a balanced biography that
integrates Peale's disparate careers and portrays him as the free-wheeling son of the
Enlightenment he was. Readers familiar only with Peale's enterprises in painting
and natural history will learn of his debt-driven stumble into art, his passion for
Revolutionary politics, his reluctant service as a military officer, and his dabbles in
inventing, farming, and even motion pictures. Peale's family life remains largely
in the background, although his succession of wives and his strained relations with
artist son Raphaelle do receive some attention. Wilson covers a lot of ground in
her energetic, no-nonsense charge through Peale's vita, and samples of Peale's paint-
ings illuminate his stylistic development and benchmark events in his life. A bib-
liography and index are appended. EB
JUNE 1996 * 357
YOLEN, JANE 
Sea Watch: A Book of Poetry; illus. by Ted Lewin. 
Philomel,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22734-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Readers familiar with Yolen and Lewin's first poetry cum painting collaboration,
Bird Watch (BCCB 12/90), will (with respect to the title) be expecting a sequel.
Caveat aviator. In the earlier collection, text and illustration extended each other
throughout; the book became a wooded path, a park bench, a window from which
we could fully observe and respond to the birds around us. In Sea Watch, text and
illustration often ride cross-currents, and our experience of marine life is less holis-
tic. Visually, we become the snorkelers or sailors peering through the murky, wa-
tercolor depths, yet textually we remain readers, learning about fourteen different
predatory or preyed-upon creatures of the sea. As a result, the mood conveyed by
a painting is not necessarily the mood conveyed by the accompanying verse. In
"Octopus," a golden, glowing mollusk curls its tentacles around and about the
inky deep, almost reverent in its embrace. However, this sophisticated offering is
joined by a rhyme-the-verb counting poem-featuring arm number one through,
yes, eight. Alone, Lewin's watercolors can be effective: aquamarines and violets
bleed into the paper, brush strokes vary tones and suggest sleek underwater move-
ment ("Warning: Shark," "Sea Canary-Beluga"). Unfortunately, Yolen's verse
seems to tread water alongside; with a few buoyant exceptions ("A thousand thou-
sand wriggling fish/ Upon the dark wet sand"), the rhythm is often uneven and the
imagery weighed down by rhyme. Some of her strongest poems are also her most
puzzling ones, as she twists little-known characteristics of the creature into a poem-
as-riddle ("Anemone," "The Grunion"). Fortunately, factual endnotes about each
animal demystify the poetic images and eventually extend our understanding of
both animal and poem. Despite the book's inconsistencies, teachers eager to in-
corporate a bit of right-brain thinking into their units on marine life will welcome
this collection, and young readers may very well be inspired to create oceanic odes
of their own. AEB
046
358 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans: McKissack
African Americans-biographies:
Osofsky
African Americans-fiction: Hewett
African Americans-folklore:
Hamilton
Alaska: Levi
American Indians: Jensen; Trahant
American Indians-folklore:
Duncan; Haley; Jackson
Art and artists: Duggleby; Galli;
Jensen
Art: Dahl; Porte; Presilla
Autism: Watson
Aviation: Levi
Baseball-fiction: Hall
Beavers-stories: Klinting
BIOGRAPHIES: Demi;
Duggleby; Galli; Murphy, J.;
Osofsky; Wilson
Birds-fiction: Hamilton
Birds-stories: Cunningham; Myers
Bison: Swanson
Brothers-fiction: Byars; Gauthier
Brothers-stories: Kimmel
Brothers and sisters-stories: Walsh
Catholics-fiction: Ford
Colonial life: Roach
CONCEPT BOOKS: Hoban
Contests-stories: Greenstein
Cousins-stories: Hewett
Cowboys: Anderson
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Heisel
Current events: Day; Lamb; Ross
Disabilities-fiction: Heisel
Dogs-fiction: London, Jack
Ecology: Jaspersohn; London,
Jonathan; Swanson
Elephants-stories: de Vries
Ethics and values: Brooks; Ford
Family problems-fiction: Brooks;
Hewett
FANTASIES: Disney; McGraw;
Pfeffer; Thompson
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Hall
Fathers and sons-fiction:
Hausman
Fathers and sons-stories: Willhoite
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Duncan;
Grimm; Haley; Hamilton;
Heller; Jackson; Jaffe; Kimmel;
Mertins; Myers; Sherman
Food and eating-stories: Kimmel
Friends-fiction: Hausman;
Scarboro
FUNNY STORIES: Gauthier
Gangs-fiction: Hewett
Gardening-stories: Appelt;
Greenstein; Hughes
Government: Mayo
HISTORICAL FICTION: Ford;
Hall; Hausman
History, American: Parker
History, U.S.: Fradin; Lavender;
Levi; Mayo; McKissack;
JUNE 1996 
* 
359
Murphy, J.; Murphy, V.;
Roach; Wilson
Holocaust: Perl
Homelessness-stories: Hughes
Homosexuality-stories: Willhoite
Industry: Jaspersohn
Insects-fiction: Disney
Jews: Perl
Jews-fiction: Hausman
Kidnapping-fiction: Heisel
Language arts: Heller; Lewis
Latinos-stories: Hughes
Libraries-fiction: Thompson
Literature, American: London,
Jack; Osofsky
Literature, children's: Dahl
Literature, English: Asher; Kipling
Mexico: Presilla
Mice-stories: Walsh
Monkeys-stories: Myers
Motion pictures: Dahl
Motion pictures-fiction: Ford
Moving-fiction: Scarboro
Nature study: Cunningham;
London, Jonathan; Swanson
Panama Canal: Parker
Pets-stories: de Vries
Photography: Hoban; Snedden
Pioneer life: Lavender; Murphy,
V.
POETRY: Lewis; Silverstein
Prejudice-fiction: Hausman
Ranch life: Anderson
Reading aloud: Disney; Grimm;
Hamilton; Lewis; Silverstein
Reading, beginning: Byars
Reading, easy: Pfeffer
Reading, family: Silverstein
Reading, reluctant: Dahl;
Gauthier; Heisel; Snedden
Religion-fiction: Brooks; Ford
Religious education: Brooks;
Demi
Revolutionary War: Murphy, J.
School-fiction: Scarboro; Pfeffer
SCIENCE FICTION: Gauthier
Science: Cunningham; Fradin;
Snedden
SHORT STORIES: Asher; Porte
Sisters: Watson
Slavery: McKissack
Social studies: Day; Lamb; Ross
Story hour: Appelt; Demuth; Duncan;
Haley; Jackson; Jaffe; Kimmel;
MacDonald; Mertins; Myers
Teeth-stories: MacDonald
Toys-stories: Blake
Transportation: Levi; Parker
Trees-stories: Mertins
Voyages and travel-fiction: Disney
Water-stories: Cunningham
Weddings-stories: Willhoite
West, the: Anderson; Lavender; Murphy,
V.
Wishing-fiction: Pfeffer
Wolves: London, Jonathan
Women's studies: Mayo
WORDLESS BOOKS: Blake
Work-stories: Klinting
World War II: Perl
S\|
k HAMILTON
When Birds Could Talk
& Bats Could Sing
The Adventures ofBruh Sparrow, Sis Wren, and Their Friends
Illustrated by Barry Moser
* "With impressive aplomb, Hamilton follows the ambitious Her Stores
with eight animal tales....A wonderful complement to the front-porch
voice of the stories, Moser's bright watercolors vibrate...and help to
make this book...one of (Hamilton's) most enjoyable and accessible."
-
Publihers Weekly, starred review
S"Demands to be read aloud...Moser's exact, energetic paintings of
brightly colored birds...make perfect accompaniment....These wry,
comic, tender tales should...find the wide audience they deserve."
- KirkuJ Reviews, pointer review
* "The text the layout, and the illustrations work together seamlessly in
this beautifully designed, well-crafted collection.' - Booklit, starred review
* "The dynamic duo that created In the Beginning has succeeded again
with this lively collection." - SchoolLibrary Journal, starred review
72 pages * $17.95 * 0-590-47372-7 * All Ages
THE BLUE SKY PRESS
An Imprint of Scholastic Inc.
I
m
' School Library Journal stars
WILD and WOOLLY
MAMMOTHS
6 ALIKI
"This revision of a popular title (1977) provides a fascinating
glimpse of woolly mammoths and the cave dwellers who
hunted the
with many
sidebars re
discoveries
enlarged..
are beautif
is now geai
or third gra
level, but v
make a fas
read-aloud
younger ch
Overall, a
book has b
transforme
an even be
-SLJ
Ages 4-8.
$14.95 TR (0-0
$14.89 LB (0-0
Among Aliki's HarperCollins books
MY VISIT TO THE AQUARIUM 
THE GODS AND GODDESSES
Ages 4-8. $15.00 TR (0-06-021458-9) 
OF OLYMPUS
$14.89 LB (0-06-021459-7) 
Ages 4-8. $16.00 TR (0-06-023530-6)
$15.89 LB (0-06-023531-4)
- HarperCollins Children'sBooks
10 E. 53rd St.. New York. NY 10022
10 
E 53r SNeYok 
Y102
-A &tt...
8t
THE
BLOCK
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GuARkorED
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
German Youth against Hitler
The chilling, true story of four 
eow
lives on the truth. Intercepting
flyers and distributed them
The group was arrested, interrogated, t
Court," and its sixteen-year-old leader, Hel
0008-9036(199606)49:10*;1-1
454
'JI 
PQ~P~I"
31*11 
.
·II 
-
L 
·11~~I-_.._ 
.(.-C-i 
~
%"·:I
"
%
