ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
# 
AO 
A 
.
10
_~__
*"Extremely and continuously funny"'*
in age from
house in the
a stretch of
d dialogue that
hanting March
hildren's Books
Hue Ribbon 1992
houghtless
transformation
heir own identi-
rel from a
-Starred, Booklist
rs throughout act
bly."
Bookl
nfare List
real gift for
ue and descrip-
tful debut."
kus Reviews
$14.95 SBE
50555-8/Ages 9-12
SBE indicates a rinforced
hardcover edition.
MARGARET K.
McELDERRY
BOOKS
An imprint of the
Macmnillan
Children's Book
Group
866 Third Avenue
New York, NY 10022
ii 
_ i: ::: 
j 
I
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
April 1993
Vol. 46 No. 8
A LOOK INSIDE
237 THE BIG PICTURE
Blessed Are You: Traditional Everyday Hebrew Prayers
written and illustrated by Michelle Edwards
238 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
248 * The Story ofMay by Mordicai Gerstein
259 * Out of Control by Norma Fox Mazer
260 
* The Magic Circle by Donna Jo Napoli
260 * The Boys Start the War by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor
267 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
268 SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
~C~j3
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $3.00. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois, and additional mailing offices
© 1993 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Michelle Edwards, from BlessedAre You: Traditional Hebrew Prayers, © 1993
by Michelle Edwards and used by permission of Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Books.
APRIL 1993 
* 237
THE BIG PICTURE
BlessedAre You: Traditional Everyday Hebrew
Prayers
written and illustrated by Michelle Edwards
"There is no literature without roots," writes Isaac Bashevis Singer, and he goes on
to point out that the more specific a piece of literature becomes, the more univer-
sally it can be understood. What is it that allows a culture-specific book to reach
beyond its immediate audience and stir empathy among readers or listeners farther
afield? The simplest answer-and one which Singer would sanction-is a good
story. Michelle Edwards has demonstrated an understanding of this principle in
each of her picture books, which are idiosyncratic but deeply rooted in Jewish
tradition. What more unlikely subject for general appeal than her first book, Chicken
Man (BCCB 5/91), the story of an Israeli kibbutznik with a gift for fowl play? Or
A Baker's Portrait (2/92), about a Yiddish artist who paints too literally what she
sees until she discovers the diplomatic possibilities of symbolic art? Each of these
books reached beyond cultural boundaries with a good story, but Edwards took a
step further by displaying, in her Hebrew alphabet book Alef-Bet (5/92), an ability
to transform concept into story through narrative art. As Molly Bang did in Ten,
Nine, Eight-and as all great concept books do-Edwards turned an intellectual
scheme into child's play.
BlessedAre You: Traditional Everyday Hebrew Prayers also expands a story
through pictures accompanied by non-narrative text. These are thirteen tradi-
tional Jewish prayers, each presented in Hebrew, English, and transliteration on
the left-hand side of the spread, with a related painting on the facing page. It's a
complex page layout, and sometimes Edwards' elaborate borders for framing the
three blocks of text get a little cluttered in juxtaposition with her painterly effects
of pattern and texture. Overall, though, she controls the flow with skillful color
blends and relates each prayer to the context of three children's lives.
The first, "Thank you, God of everything, for the morning, when I wake
again to You," shows twins, a boy and a girl, sticking their heads out of a tent.
These two play with each other and their baby brother in fully imagined scenes
that include baking, playing at the beach, skiing, burying a dead pet ("Blessed are
You, our God, Ruler of the universe, who help me when I am sad and tired"),
reading together on the couch, picking apples, and getting ready for bed. Their
personalities emerge clearly, while the warmth of their sibling relationship reflects
a family that is secure and giving. For Jewish children who haven't learned the
prayers, here's an opportunity to do so at several stages, from oral to written; those
238 
* 
THE BULLETIN
who already know the prayers will find themselves reminded of the values they
represent. For non-Jewish children, the book offers a chance to compare prayers
from a different faith-they'll find more similarities than contrasts. Certainly, the
gouache paintings, with their homely images and comfortable compositions, will
reach across ethnic differences with a common, yet quirky, sense of humanity.
Like all great literature, prayers tell a story. Sometimes the story is im-
plied: "Be gracious to me, my Father, hold up my boat," say the Andean Yahgan
people of South America. Even this prayer, brief as it is, builds suspense by being
specific. And even the kind of general anthology from which it is quoted, Bijou
LeTord's Peace On Earth: A Book ofPrayers from Around the World(BCCB 12/92),
shows that the most vivid language is rooted in specific experience. That's what
makes "holiday fare" such as Barbara Goldin's adaptation of I. L. Peretz' The
Magician's Visit: A Passover Tale (3/93) last all year around. Even when prayers
sound generic-"God bless my mother and father," for instance-they are reso-
nant with emotional images specific to each individual. That's what makes a book
of Jewish prayers, with Edwards' story bridge of illustration, meaningful to those
who aren't Jewish-and even to those who don't pray.
Betsy Hearne, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANGELL, JUDIE 
Yours Truly. Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08622-4 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05472-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Nicki's family has been through some changes: her mother has finally kicked out
Nicki's drug-using father and become seriously involved with McLennon, her busi-
ness partner, so now Nicki's starting eighth grade at a new school in Queens, New
York, a far cry from her beloved New Hampshire. Nicki's little brother Jerry
adores McLennon, but Nicki is her daddy's girl and suffers terribly through the
year and a half without word from him. She also starts running with a wild crowd,
including over-eighteen young men (one of whom gets her seriously drunk and
others who are connected with a gang), and when her clearly-unreformed father
finally reappears, she sees as much as possible of him too. This is an unusually
well-told story of a young girl's drifting out of the white-bread mainstream; Nicki's
first-person narration is convincing with its eerie River's Edge flatness, emotional
shallowness, and touching naivete (much thinking in italics and exclamation points),
and the characterization rings true throughout, even that of the felonious and
pathetic father. Angell also wisely eschews overt psychologizing or moralizing,
keeping the story as absorbing as a documentary while allowing readers to draw
APRIL 1993 
* 239
their own conclusions. Nicki's life and milieu will probably be more familiar to
many kids than adults would like to admit, and the story keeps its integrity to the
end by making Nicki's future pretty much a mystery notwithstanding a final soft-
ening of her rebellious attitude. DS
ARNOLD, CAROLINE 
DinosaursAllAround: An Artist's View ofthe Prehistoric World;
illus. with photographs by Richard Hewett. 
Clarion, 1993 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-395-62363-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Arnold has had considerable practice with this subject (Dinosaur Mountain, BCCB
6/89; Trapped in Tar, BCCB 6/87), and the first half of the book features a cohe-
sive discussion and display of work by Stephen and Sylvia Czerkas, who make
dinosaur models for museum exhibits. The latter half becomes a descriptive cata-
logue of various species (Styracosaurus, Albertosaurus, Tyrannosaurus Rex,
Allosaurus, Deinonychus, Compsognathus, and Stegosaurus), which young read-
ers will play along with because of the dramatic color photographs of sculptures
sporting long teeth, sharp claws, and hatching eggs. Given the Czerkas' meticu-
lous paleontological research of fossil discoveries such as the patterns of scales on
dinosaur skin, the photographed models are superior to most drawings; they add a
lifelike dimension to the book, along with a subtle implication that if you follow
your dream as these artists have ("Stephen . . . made his first dinosaur sculpture
with mud in his back yard when he was four years old"), you may find it. (And for
more autobiographical detail, see Stephen and Sylvia Czerkas' My Life with the
Dinosaurs, BCCB 6/89.) BH
BABBITT, Lucy CULLYFORD 
Where the Truth Lies. Jackson/Orchard,
1993 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08623-2 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05473-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
Kyra has been asked by her parents, prominent citizens in the Sanctuary, to help
resolve the conflict between the Tribes and Godsland, two religiously inflamed
groups, one poly-, the other monotheistic, warring eternally about whose religion
is "true." The people of the high-walled Sanctuary, atheists all, have a scheme in
which a leader's child of each of the three groups will secretly travel together to a
cave revered by both Tribes and Godsland, and where each set of believers intends
to find its proof. It's unusual to find, even in fantasy, a YA novel so intently
concerned with the paradoxes of religious faith, and it's to Babbitt's credit that she
makes the spiritual journey to the mysterious cave as suspenseful as the physical
one. What will they find? is a question the author engages here with some subtlety.
However, the storytelling and characterization, though efficient, seem programmed,
even dogmatic. Kyra is freethinking; the Triber, a boy who insists upon being
called The Glorious One, is a suspicious, sensuous pagan; Lillen, of the Handmaid's
Tale-like Godslanders, is a "perfect daughter" who harbors thoughts of lust and
yearns for punishment. There's too much speechmaking, and it's a slip that Bab-
bitt does not confront the probability that such different cultures would have dif-
ferent languages, but the ideas are clearly put and will be intensely felt by adolescent
readers. RS
240 
* THE BULLETIN
BARRErT, TRACY 
Nat Turner and the Slave Revolt. 
Millbrook, 1993 
32p 
illus.
with photographs 
(Gateway Civil Rights)
ISBN 1-56294-275-1 
$11.90 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Beginning with the dramatic scene of Nat Turner's conviction in the Southampton
County Courthouse, 1831, this gives an overview of his youth, visions, and revolt.
The style is clear and the information appears to be straightforward, but there is a
slight imbalance resulting from focusing on the revolt without more background
on the context of slavery. Thus the emphasis on details of the slaves' slaughtering
whites, compared to generalizations about the whites' cruelty to African-Ameri-
cans, makes Turner seem less a leader than a madman. Perhaps some subjects are
impossible to simplify without distortion; certainly objectivity was an aim here,
and the conclusion makes clear that Turner's action may have either entrenched
slavery further or hastened its end. Photographs, period art, chronology, suggested
readings, notes, and an index attest to the book's usefulness if balanced by accounts
such as Virginia Hamilton's in Many Thousand Gone (BCCB 3/93). BH
BEIRNE, BARBARA 
Siobhan'sJourney: A Belfast Girl Visits the United States; written
and illus. with photographs by Barbara Beirne. 
Carolrhoda, 1993 
4 8p
ISBN 0-87614-728-7 
$14.96 
R 
Gr. 2-5
A sprightly photodocumentary follows ten-year-old Siobhan McNulty from her
home in Belfast through her summer vacation with a family in New Jersey under
the auspices of Project Children. This organization transports Catholic and Prot-
estant kids from Northern Ireland to the U.S. for relief from "the Troubles," which
are briefly explained here in an introductory note. The real focus is on Siobhan's
adjustment to American culture ("Catholics and Protestants often live on the very
same street, and they get along well") and her developing friendship with a girl the
same age, Lauren Farrell, with whom she stays. Their activities-including daily
trips to the beach, picnics, shopping, peach-picking, and sightseeing-sound like
any child's ideal treat; the exchange is clearly reaching across boundaries of class as
well as those of religion. The first-person narration sometimes sounds forced, and
the end is self-consciously preachy, but in general Siobhan's voice does reflect the
excitement shining from her face in Beirne's abundant full-color photographs. A
glossary clues readers into the Irish expressions Siobhan uses in describing her trip.
BH
BERGER, MELVIN AND GILDA 
Where Are the Stars During the Day?: A Book about
Stars; illus. by Blanche Sims; Library ed. ISBN 0-8249-8644-X; Paper ed. ISBN 0-
8249-8607-5. 
Where Did Your Family Come From?: A Book about Immigrants;
illus. by Robert Quackenbush; Library ed. ISBN 0-8249-8647-4; Paper ed. ISBN
0-8249-8610-5. 
The Whole World in Your Hands: Looking at Maps; illus. by
Robert Quackenbush; Library ed. ISBN 0-8249-8646-6; Paper ed. ISBN 0-8249-
8609-1. 
Each book: 
Ideals, 1993 
4 8p 
(Discovery Readers) 
Library ed.
$12.00; Paper ed. $3.95 
M 
Gr. 1-3
There's a great need for informational books in a beginning-reader format, but this
series suffers from choppy writing and oversimplification that results in factual
errors. Where Are the Stars... is the clearest of the three titles, giving brief facts
about the solar system, constellations and galaxies, although it unfortunately im-
plies that the constellations of the Big Dipper and Orion are not part of the Milky
APRIL 1993 
* 241
Way. The Whole World. . . progresses logically, from a map of a floor plan to
world maps and globes, but it mistakenly states that the world's countries are spread
over seven continents and that "few" people live near the equator. Where Did Your
Family ... incorrectly defines people whose ancestors were immigrants as immi-
grants themselves and says wrongly that only those eighteen years old and over can
become U. S. citizens, and its fictional narratives about four immigrant children
are, taken as a whole, stereotyped: Boris' father is a scientist from Russia, Rosa's
father is a farmworker from Mexico, Maria's family from Italy runs a pizzeria, and
Chang's Korean family runs a grocery. It's also odd that even though these are all
supposed to be contemporary children, Chang's family are political refugees from
what must be the aftermath of the Korean War. None of these mistakes is fatal,
but together they beg the authority of the series. Pleasant color illustrations appear
on every page, and each book has a skimpy index appended. RS
BETANCOURT, JEANNE 
My Name Is Brain Brian. Scholastic, 1993 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-590-44921-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Brian just finished a great summer with his three best friends and he dreads going
back to school. After a lecture from his oppressive father, Brian vows to himself,
"This year I'll really try. I can do it." 
It takes his new sixth-grade homeroom
teacher to discover that Brian's problems at school stem from dyslexia. While
Brian struggles with the unfamiliar stigma of his learning disability, he learns that
two of his summer pals aren't such good friends after all. This story is very similar
in plot to There's a Boy in the Girl's Bathroom (BCCB 4/87) by Louis Sachar and
Tall Enough to Own the World by Berniece Rabe (5/89). All three authors show
the main character's dyslexia affecting both home and school behavior-problems
that can apparently be overcome by a kind tutor and some confidence. Although
such stories are beginning to fall into formula, Brian's uinique struggle with friends
and family gives this story its own momentum. KJ
CASELEY, JUDITH 
Chloe in the Know. 
Greenwillow, 1993 
[144p]
ISBN 0-688-11055-X 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Chloe, older sister to Harry (Hurricane Harry, BCCB 11/91) and Dorothy (Star-
ring Dorothy Kane, 5/92) Kane, here gets a book of her own, and about time, too,
because Chloe is clearly fed up with the first being last. As she writes in a compo-
sition for school, "It's just not fair. If I could go on strike, I would. But I can't,
because I'm the oldest." This intemperate outburst, however, is occasioned by the
prospect of a new baby sibling; generally, Chloe is a reliable big sister who, in turn,
finds the two younger ones always eager-too eager-to help her out. In the open-
ing chapter, for instance, Chloe is moaning about her nose being ugly, and Harry
assures her that her nose is fine-but her ears stick out. The novel is rather hap-
hazardly episodic, with Chloe finding herself in various mildly sticky situations
that always turn out okay, and the major narrative line about Mrs. Kane expecting
a baby isn't as interestingly handled as it is in, say, Anastasia Krupnik. What works
is the warm family feeling coupled with the slightly spacey dialogue, as in the
what-shall-we-name-the-baby scene where Harry settles on "Burp" while Mr. Kane
is still stuck on "Dakota." RS
242 
* THE BULLETIN
CAVAN, SEAMus 
The Irish-American Experience. Millbrook, 1993 
64p
(Coming to America)
ISBN 1-56294-218-2 
$14.90 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Perhaps it's asking too much to pack a hundred and fifty years of history, plus
background on centuries more, into sixty pages of text and photographs. When
Cavan concentrates on the Irish famine and subsequent immigration, the account
is specific enough to give a clear picture of the early Irish-American experience, but
later chapters degenerate into paragraphs that come close to being lists of leaders
and their achievements. Still, the book will prove helpful to students researching
ethnic roots, and the inserts that include primary source quotes ("At Sea," "Tene-
ment Life," "Getting Started in Politics," etc.), while they interrupt the flow of
format, are among the most vivid. Similarly, the historical photographs are con-
siderably more revealing than the modern news shots of the Democratic conven-
tion where Kennedy was nominated or of girls in a New York City Saint Patrick's
Day parade. A brief listing of children's books, several footnotes, and an index
conclude the survey. BH
CLARKE, J. 
Al Capsella Takes a Vacation. Holt, 1993 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8050-2685-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Hapless and humorous Al Capsella, hero of The Heroic Life ofAl Capsella (BCCB
7/90), is back in another adventure, or rather an anti-adventure. At sixteen, he
and his best mate Lou are eager to escape on a parent-free beach vacation, but a
slight confusion about place names sends the two of them to a tiny inland town
where they stay in a converted chicken house in Mrs. Mulroony's backyard. Pride
prevents them from calling for help, so they stick it out in sustainedly funny inac-
tivity, making valiant attempts to cook stewing fowl from the local store, joining
their landlady in watching her favorite soap, and conferring about Lou's letters to
his sweet and hopefully sultry Swedish pen-pal (who turns out to be perhaps seven
years old). Clarke sounds like an Australian Jean Shepherd with her wry yet bub-
bling humor of observation and coincidence, and the Down Under touches like
summer at Christmastime make the book intriguingly exotic to American readers.
The mournfully rollicking rhythm of the story might make this a good readaloud
for older listeners, and both Al Capsella fans and new friends will relish a tale of
independence gone awry. DS
COERR, ELEANOR 
Mieko and the Fifth Treasure. Putnam, 1993 
[78p]
ISBN 0-399-22434-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The author of Sadako and the Thousand Paper Cranes (BCCB 7/77), a poignant
account of a Japanese girl's death from leukemia after the bombing of Hiroshima,
has returned to a similar subject in portraying a young girl, Mieko, who has suf-
fered a deep wound in her hand and arm during the bombing of Nagasaki. Mieko
feels shocked by the experience, displaced when her parents send her to her grand-
parents' while they help other victims, and-most painful-afraid she has lost the
special gift that made her such a promising artist. The story itself has appealing
aspects, but the writing is sometimes cliched. Days fly by, the light comes at the
end of the tunnel, happiness washes over her, she's weak with laughter, her eyes
crinkle in a smile, snow glints like diamonds, etc. Even more operative in keeping
APRIL 1993 
* 243
the story at surface level, however, is the barrage of adults' rubrics suggesting that
Mieko is feeling sorry for herself, sulking, and cowardly. "Hatred will grow in
your heart like a bad weed until there is no room for love or beauty," sermonizes
the doctor. "Nothing in life is easy," Aunt Hisako says, and later, "Remember, a
gem, unless polished, does not glitter." As Mieko begins to absorb all these les-
sons, Grandpa makes it more obvious: "You are learning to accept things you
cannot change. And most important, you are accepting yourself-scars and all."
The friend whom Mieko reaches out to ("'You girls are as close as a pair of chop-
sticks,' Grandpa said") seems calculated to demonstrate how to overcome adver-
sity with a smile. Despite these flaws, the situation will elicit sympathy; it's developed
at a simple reading level; and Coerr has avoided a trite ending by not revealing who
wins the calligraphy contest for which Mieko practices so hard-her recovered
concentration is its own reward. BH
COLEMAN, MARY ANN 
The Dreams of Hummingbirds: Poems from Nature; illus.
by Robert Masheris. 
Whitman, 1993 
[32 p]
ISBN 0-8075-1720-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
With this graceful book, Coleman and Masheris offer children the best reason to
cherish both nature and poetry-for the sheer beauty of it. Coleman's twenty-one
poems open with an invitation, "Bicycle Trip": "A poem/ is like an/ unplanned/
trip by bicycle./ The wind of words/ blows in your ears./ Jack-in-the-pulpits,/
Lady Slippers/ become the handlebars./ You begin to understand/ fireplugs shin-
ing in the sun,/ the wild toss of bachelor buttons.// The limits of the street change,
shrink-/ two-lane highways, a country road./ Then with an unexpected lurch,/
thought turns into a side dirt path/ where stones and pine straw lie/ and hickories
grow, shaggy and gray./ A lake opens, a mountain roars./ Surprised, you're part of
the landscape." The movement of short lines to long rtflects an gradually widen-
ing view, both visually and imaginatively, and the illustration that envelopes the
poem also extends it across the page into a delicately tinted jungle of wildflowers.
Various animals, plants, and habitats figure in the poems and pictures that follow,
all bearing a close complementary relationship to one another and to the reader.
This is a book that poetry buffs will want to linger over and that readers new to
poetry will find alluring. BH
CROWLEY, MICHAEL 
Shack and Back; illus. by Abby Carter. 
Little, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-16231-0 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
"To the Lobster Shack and back" is the course for a bike race between the repre-
sentative champions of the Spurwink Gang and the Broad Cove Bullies. Unfortu-
nately for the Spurwink Gang (our heroes, previously seen in New Kid on Spurwink
Avenue), there's been some troublesome internecine strife: "Crater" Creighton has
called the female members of the gang "sissy-girls" when they expressed an interest
in cooking, which has led to secession. Intrepid "sissy-girl" T-Ball is the fastest
bike-rider in the Spurwink Gang, so Crater swallows his pride and grovels until
she relents, rejoins, and resoundingly trounces Ernest of the Broad Cove Bullies.
The squabbling here is authentically vinegary, keeping the innocence of these
"gangs" from cloying, especially when the main sweetness comes from regarding
the fall of the pompous (both Crater and Ernest). Carter's line-and-watercolor
244 
* THE BULLETIN
illustrations employ entertaining perspectives, zooming up and down as well as in
and out. They make the most of the comic possibilities of the pretty coastal loca-
tion as well as the shaggy and ironically unisex-looking pack of Spurwinkers; the
live-wire lines of the kids and bikes keep everything in constant motion. Since not
all the Spurwink guys are jerks, boys aren't precluded from enjoying this, which is
just as well; the eventual triumph belongs to the girls, but the idyllic yet vigorous
camaraderie-by-the-sea should appeal to all kinds of youngsters. DS
CRUTCHER, CHRIS 
Staying Fatfor Sarah Byrnes. Greenwillow, 1993 
[2 2 4 p]
ISBN 0-688-11552-7 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Eric Calhoune is a high-school senior, widely known as Moby because of his ro-
tund shape and swimming ability. His best friend is Sarah Byrnes, who's "as physi-
cally ugly as a person gets" as a result of suffering terrible facial burns as a small
child. Sarah is smart, sarcastic, and tough, but something has caused her to retreat
into a silence so impenetrable that she's been placed in the psychiatric unit of the
local hospital. Eric's narrative is interspersed with flashbacks to his and Sarah's
eighth-grade year as he attempts to understand the reasons behind her current
dilemma, which turns out to be an intentional response to her father's escalating
violence. And that's just the beginning, as Eric's sympathetic swim coach/English
teacher hides Sarah after she escapes from the hospital, then takes her to Reno to
find her long-lost mother, who can testify that Sarah's father willfully caused his
daughter's disfigurement, while Mr. Byrnes hijacks Eric's car, then stabs him. Yes,
it's melodramatic, and there are subplots even beyond those, but it holds together
better than one might expect (although the flashbacks can get a little confusing).
More of a problem is the talkiness and implicit preachiness of the classroom ses-
sions devoted to contemporary morality. The ending is also awfully neat, with
Mr. Byrnes getting the crap beaten out of him, Eric getting a classy girlfriend, and
Sarah being adopted by the helpful English teacher. It's nonetheless an enjoyable
read; Crutcher's teen-appealing style of wild similes and elaborate metaphor ("If
my belly button were a knothole it would be more congruous with my keglike
body") keeps the colorfulness quotient high, and kids will appreciate the triumph
of the underdog protagonists. DS
DOLPHIN, LAURIE 
Neve Shalom/Wahat al-Salam: Oasis of Peace; illus. with pho-
tographs by Ben Dolphin. 
Scholastic, 1993 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-590-45799-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
"This is one of the only schools that teaches Jews about Arabs and Arabs about
Jews," and both Schlomki and Muhammad-a Jewish boy and an Arab boy whose
parents have decided to send them to Neve Shalom/Wahat al-Salam-are ner-
vous. Like Ashabranner's Gavriel andJemal (BCCB 12/84), Dolphin's book in-
troduces each child in context of his family and culture; but whereas Ashabranner's
subjects never meet, Dolphin's book follows Schlomki and Muhammad through
the first days of school and of tentative friendship. Their well-to-do backgrounds,
combined with the unusual nature of a school dedicated to overcoming language
and cultural barriers, perhaps over-optimize the possibilities of resolution to a deeply
rooted intolerance that is touched on in various factual segments at the back of the
book: one double spread demonstrates the diversity in Israel's citizenry and geog-
APRIL 1993 
* 
245
raphy; another double spread summarizes the history of the Middle Eastern struggle
and the background of the peace settlement that sponsors the school; a final spread
features a glossary and Hebrew/Arabic language comparison. What the book makes
clear, with a somewhat programmed determination, is that real peace must begin
with individuals and committed effort (even Muhammad's new horse is at first
afraid to trust strangers). The arresting color photographs establish a vivid setting
for this view of how much traditional enemies can have in common, and starting
with a conflict distant from the U.S. is an ideal way to open discussions on multi-
cultural outreach at home. BH
EDWARDS, MICHELLE 
BlessedAre You: Traditional Everyday Hebrew Prayers; comp.
and illus. by Michelle Edwards. 
Lothrop, 1993 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10760-5 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10759-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture for review.
EHLERT, Lois 
Nuts to You; written and illus. by Lois Ehlert. 
Harcourt,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-15-257647-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
An unnamed child narrates in rhyme the story of a denizen of the neighborhood,
an intrepid gray squirrel, who slips into the narrator's apartment until she or he
lures the critter out again. The too-cute couplets often scan awkwardly, not helped
by a text that uses line breaks for visual rather than rhythmic effect ("There he
goes-/ up the bricks,/ on his claws./ He steals seeds and/ eats with his paws").
The illustrations are a treat to the eye, with full-page bleeds of textured brick,
watercolor-dappled squirrel, and vivid glowing window-box plants; the gray-brown
squirrel against the red-brown brick may be too low-contrast for long-distance
viewing, but the real contrast problem is in the small identification captions in
black letters that appear next to the various flora and fauna. The "Squirrel Talk"
section at the end imparts more natural history, which the story seems too slight to
justify. Youngsters, drawn by the cheeky squirrel on the cover looking out through
the cut-out hollow of a tree, probably won't mind the flaws; they'll enjoy gazing at
Ehlert's botanical creations and lap-sharing the appealing story of the squirrel who
came in from the cold. DS
FAIRMAN, TONY, ad. 
Bury My Bones But Keep My Words: African Tales for Retell-
ing; illus. by Meshack Asare. 
Holt, 1993 
192p
ISBN 0-8050-2333-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Thirteen folktales from Kenya, Botswana, Egypt, Nigeria, South Africa, Namibia,
and the Gambia are varied in tone and theme, with an adaptive style that is free
and often funny, but nevertheless sometimes distracts from the story by calling
attention to itself or to its framework. "Shall we go to Africa. .. ?" Thus begins
the first story, but not really, because a description of the storytelling context-
vivid, but two pages long-intervenes before the action begins. Intermittently,
the tellers break into the story with remarks, boxed into the page design, and the
storyteller suggests tunes such as "My Bonnie Lies Over the Ocean" to go along
with the chants. Independent readers may get impatient with all this-proceed
246 
* 
THE BULLETIN
with the story, already--but the loosening of reverential constraints is all to the
good, and storytellers will certainly find the collection a valuable resource. Spooky
stories and trickster tales abound, complete with lots of sound effects. None of the
selections is prettified or over-anthologized. "The Man with a Tree on His Head"
will make a great companion to the Japanese variant about a miser from whose
head a cherry tree grows. What the author says is true: "I really ought not to be
writing these tales down; I ought to be telling them. .. ." And he has given you
that option. BH
FERGUSON, ALANE 
Stardust. Bradbury, 1993 
[176p]
ISBN 0-02-734527-0 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Sixth-grader Haley is trying very hard to adjust to civilian, suburban life after
several seasons as a child star on a TV comedy. Unlike her tough-talking alter-ego
"Samantha Love," Haley is scared and shy, so she simply goes through each school
day pretending to be Samantha, who has a snappy retort for every occasion: "What's
your prob-lem?" This gains her popularity with a certain segment of the school;
unfortunately, nice-guy Andy finds Haley incredibly annoying and never hesitates
to tell her so. Some funny Junior-Tracy-and-Hepburn exchanges between Haley
and Andy enliven a classroom gestalt that is as a whole lightly but effectively handled.
There's a bit of authorial preaching about the need to be oneself, etc., but the
glamor of the premise and the familiarity of the setting and characters win out. RS
FRENCH, VIVIAN 
Once Upon a Time; illus. by John Prater. 
Candlewick,
1993 
[2 6 p]
ISBN 1-56402-177-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Less sarcastic than Scieszka and Smith's The Stinky Cheese Man (BCCB 10/92),
this offbeat bedtime story gently turns the tables on several folktale characters, all
blissfully pursuing their fates while an uncomprehending little boy watches. "Dad's
off to work now,/ Mom's up too./ Not much to see./ Not much to do." Not
much-just a trio of pigs setting forth with various building materials while a little
golden-haired girl runs from a bear clutching a broken stool. On succeeding double
spreads, the cast enlarges to include Little Red Riding Hood, the Big Bad Wolf, a
witch, a giant, and Humpty Dumpty. And as night falls, the cow that's been
peacefully grazing all along jumps over the moon. Prater's crayon-and-watercolor
illustrations are graced with witty, expressive lines set into an inviting pastoral
landscape. Although the concept isn't fully sustained (the giant and the witch are
generic characters rather than part of a tale), kids will enjoy the disparity between
the laconic rhyming text and the visual dramas and will appreciate being one up
on the young narrator. RS
GARDNER, JANE MYLUM 
Henry Moore: From Bones and Stones to Sketches and
Sculptures. Four Winds, 1993 
32p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-02-735812-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
This is really a chronicle of how Moore worked rather than a biography: Gardner
describes his inspiration by natural objects, his early drawing, his production of
small plaster models, and the creation of his famous huge sculptures. She also
mentions his daily routine, including his bicycle "commute" to his studio in the
APRIL 1993 
* 247
garden and his full-day labor broken by lunch with his wife. The simple text is
quiet and matter-of-fact, wisely allowing the photographs of the sculptor and his
work to speak the loudest. The illustrations, all black-and-white photographs,
include pictures of Moore sculpting, reproductions of his initial sketches, children's
drawings of his work, and photos of his sculptures amid sheep, under children, or
in silent solitary grandeur. The book is designed with a sharp eye to the play of
shapes, textures, and light and dark; white space abounds, photos are cropped to
the outlines of the featured object, and text floats in airy small blocks. Easy for
younger readers to understand, the book is visually dignified enough to interest
older kids with artistic leanings. A biographical note is appended. DS
GARIAND, MICHAEL 
Circus Girl; written and illus. by Michael Garland. 
Dutton,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45069-6 
$14.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Alice, the circus girl of the title, and the rest of her family travel with an old-
fashioned three-ring circus, complete with an elephant parade and motorcycling
bears. Alice can't decide whether she wants to be a tightrope walker (like her
mother) or a clown (like her father) when she grows up; in the meantime, she
"holds the hoop for her Auntie Anne's Amazing Performing Trick Dogs" and
helps in other ways. Like Peter Spier's Circus (BCCB 2/93), this is a plotless series
of vignettes following a circus from arrival through the show to departure; it's less
comprehensive than Spier's book, but the focus on Alice allows a couple of inter-
esting looks into quieter backstage moments, such as the performers (including
Alice) readying costumes and makeup for the show and sitting down to a meal
afterwards. The illustrations, ranging from full-page to double-spread in an over-
sized format, are circus-colored, rather luridly lit acrylic paintings that range in
tone from realism to humorous exaggeration; the draftsmanship, particularly of
human figures and faces, is frequently awkward, making people seem distorted or
sinister. Nor is verisimilitude strong, with clowns in makeup long after the show,
horses untethered, and the grounds unbelievably clean. The whole nonetheless
has sort of a carousel-comes-alive feeling, and kids will enjoy imagining themselves
in the thick of it, just like Alice. DS
GARLAND, SHERRY 
The Silent Storm. 
Harcourt, 1993 
[252p]
ISBN 0-15-274170-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Ever since her mother's death and father's disappearance at sea during a hurricane
three years ago, Alyssa, the only survivor from their boat, has been unable to speak.
Shunted into special education classes, ignored by her former best friend, ridiculed
by other kids, Alyssa, now thirteen, lives a half-wild existence on Galveston Island
with her grandfather, caring only about him and the horses they keep for tourist
rides. The Gulf island setting and the magnificence as well as destructiveness of
the ocean storms that shape its landscape and the islanders' way of life are strongly
evoked, and the stormy atmosphere is appropriately echoed in Alyssa's ever-frus-
trated attempts to overcome her trauma. There are two crises here: first, her
grandfather decides to return to his native Scotland and sends Alyssa to some city
relatives; second, a powerful hurricane hits the island, almost killing Grandpa,
who is delirious and will only survive, according to the doctor, if Alyssa, who was
out in the storm, can tell him she's alive and well. Forcing herself to relive the
248 
* THE BULLETIN
shipwreck, Alyssa regains her speech in a scene as subtle as a Shirley Temple movie:
"'Alyssa?' Captain Mac asked softly. 'Are ye really talkin', lass?"' Sure, it's hokey,
but middle school readers will adore the melodrama and the plethora of sensa-
tional events. Garland's style is sometimes overexplanatory but her storytelling is
propulsive. RS
GERAS, ADELE 
Pictures of the Night. Harcourt, 1993 
[12 8p]
ISBN 0-15-261588-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
This is the third book in Geras' trilogy about British schoolgirls as fairy-tale hero-
ines (The Tower Room, BCCB 5/92 and Watching the Roses, 11/92); Pictures of the
Night belongs to Bella, the Snow White of the trio. Mercurial Bella has hooked
up with a rock band, the seven members of which share a house where she now
stays. Bella travels with the band as a vocalist the summer before college or some
other destiny, but her pleasure is marred by old women who remind her of her
jealous stepmother and who cause her mysterious harm with a too-tight belt and
an apparently poisoned hair comb. Fortunately, none of this prevents her from
uniting with her Prince Charming (an American medical student), whose kiss of
life revives her after she almost suffocates while performing in a fancy glass cage at
a club. While the fairy-tale parallels are less successful here than in the first two
books, with no resolution to the stepmother question, for instance, they're still
entertaining. Self-dramatizing Bella is at home in what seems rather like a sophis-
ticated schoolgirl's fantasy of an odyssey with a squeaky-clean, if untidy, rock band
(complete with inclusion of the lyrics Bella sings). The darker and more intrigu-
ing matter of Bella's stepmother, about whom Geras writes with real power, is,
unfortunately, secondary. Fairy-princess dreamers and fans of the first two books
(familiarity with which is pretty much a necessity) should enjoy this romantic
finale. DS
GERSTEIN, MORDICAI 
The Story of May; written and illus. by Mordicai
Gerstein. 
HarperCollins, 1993 
[4 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022289-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022288-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4 -7 yrs
Gracefully finessing Einstein's time/space continuum, the young month of May
decides to visit the father she has never met who lives "in the northernmost moun-
tains of the year." Helped in her quest by her Aunt June, Uncle July, Grandfather
August, Aunt September, Uncle October, and Grandmother November, May fi-
nally meets her father, December, who explains that the months once wandered
freely, but he and her mother, April, bickered so much that everyone agreed that
some order would be better for all concerned, and December and April were put at
opposite (well, almost) ends of the year. And after the cozy reunion, May travels
on ("the world is round and so is time," says her father) and is helped along by her
relatives January, February, and March, a merry cousin-kite who takes May home
to spring. The idea sounds a lot more cutesy than it actually turns out to be in this
calendular fable, partly because of the distinctively appropriate personalities of
each month, and partly for the seasonal storytelling of Gerstein's watercolor illus-
trations. The Months are an affable pantheon: June is a bronze-skinned woman
APRIL 1993 
* 249
in garden-green; Grandfather August resembles a glowing, buoyant beach-ball;
May's November grandmother lives in a cozy refuge on a stormy hillside where
"gray grasses hissed and whispered in the chill wind." Story hour audiences (in the
temperate zone of the Northern Hemisphere, anyway) will love the details of each
month's motifs in text and pictures, but what will engage them even more is the
simultaneous comfort and suspense of May's cyclical journey. RS
GLEITZMAN, MORRIS 
Misery Guts; ISBN 0-15-254768-1; [144p]. 
Worry Warts;
ISBN 0-15-299666-4; [12 8 p]. 
Each book: Harcourt, 1993 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Keith, twelve, is bothered about his overworked parents turning into a pair of
"misery guts," and he's determined to cheer them up. And if redecorating their
London fish-and-chips shop with Tropical Mango Hi-Gloss paint won't do it (it
doesn't), maybe convincing them to move to Australia will. It does, but both
Keith and his parents soon learn that tropical paradises can harbor all kinds of
trouble (such as a cyclone), not to mention the problems everyone thought were
left behind in London (such as the fact that Keith's parents are thinking of split-
ting up). Misery Guts takes the family to Australia and through the cyclone; Worry
Warts shows Keith's efforts to save his parents' marriage. As was true of the author's
Two Weeks with the Queen (BCCB 4/91), the protagonist here often seems too
naive for twelve, and his various schemes for happiness can be unbelievably in-
genuous, as when Keith takes off for Central Australia to pick up a few opals and
save the family's finances. The fact that he wants to is poignantly credible; the fact
that he succeeds is exceedingly unlikely; the fact that his parents divorce anyway is
bracingly realistic. While neither book is very convincing, plotwise, the emotional
currents run true and the author's adroit mix of humor and desperation make
Keith a hero to cheer for. RS
GODDEN, 
RUMER 
Great Grandfather's House; illus. 
by 
Valerie
Littlewood. 
Greenwillow, 1993 
[80p]
ISBN 0-688-11319-2 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-9 yrs
When little Keiko's parents go off to England for three months, she has to leave
her urban Japanese home to stay with her Old Mother and Great Grandfather in
the countryside. Keiko, thoroughly modern and cranky and whiny, doesn't like
Great Grandfather's quiet house, nor does she like all the timeless customs the two
older people follow. "I like everything new," says Keiko. But, of course, she
learns: her cousin Y6ji (at six, a year younger than Keiko) is also staying at the
house and loves it there, and while he teaches Keiko the simple pleasures of walnut
shell boats and bamboo toy horses, it's up to the gentling influence of Old Mother
to teach Keiko manners and patience. It's all pretty didactic, both in terms of
Keiko's reformation and in the way the story seems primarily designed to teach
readers facts about traditional Japanese culture. The writing, too, is stilted, par-
ticularly in the way the characters cry "Wah! Wah!" whenever there's trouble.
However, the pleasures of Great Grandfather's house will seem exotically attrac-
tive to American readers, and Littlewood's delicate line-and-watercolor sketches
provide additional padding for a quiet little armchair visit. RS
250 
* 
THE BULLETIN
GOMI, TARO 
Everyone Poops; written and illus. by Taro Gomi; tr. by Amanda
Mayer Stinchecum. 
Kane/Miller, 1993 
28p 
(Curious Nell Books)
ISBN 0-916291-45-6 
$11.95 
R 
2-4 yrs
Birds do it, bees do it . . . everyone poops. That's the message of this concept
book, which begins with a simple comparison ("An elephant makes a big poop ...
A mouse makes a tiny poop") and goes on to explain the variety of excreta ("Dif-
ferent shapes . . . Different colors . . . Even different smells") as well as excretory
techniques ("Some stop to poop ... 
Others do it on the move") found in the
animal kingdom. The next step is a logical one: "Grown-ups poop. . . Children
poop too." Daddy is shown sedately reading on the toilet, while three children in
descending age are shown, respectively, on a toilet, astride a potty, and pooping
into a diaper. Toilet-training toddlers will enjoy the book's acknowledgment of
their current obsession, and the direct tone of both text and pictures is a welcome
contrast to Alona Frankel's odiously cute and ubiquitous Once Upon a Potty. The
watercolor illustrations are flat but friendly, with the expressive, cartoon-like de-
tailing of the animals echoed in the specificity of their poops. For a couple of
pages, the book wanders away from its focus, asking "Which end is the snake's
behind?" and "What does whale poop look like?", the former irrelevant and the
latter a question that is left unanswered. The last two double spreads are a classic
pair; the first showing a little boy and six different animals eating, the second, an
inevitable-and unforgettable-rear view of the results. RS
GRIFFITH, 
HELEN 
V. 
Grandaddy and Janetta; illus. 
by James
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 1993 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11227-7 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11226-9 
$14.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
Janetta has returned to the scene of Georgia Music (BCCB 12/86) and Grandaddy's
Place (11/87) in these six vignettes, which include a train ride from Baltimore,
Grandaddy's greeting, a tall tale over a game of checkers, an evening of homemade
music, a new litter of kittens, and a plan to take Janetta's favorite one back to
Baltimore. Griffith has a gift for compressed but unhurried development through
selective dialogue. Janetta sets up Grandaddy for his classic one-liners, making
him the real star of the show in spite of the faithful child's eye view. When she tells
him how worried she was about recognizing him after a year away, he says, "That's
funny .... 
I worried about the same thing. I thought to myself, if that child has
grown a beard, how will I ever know her?" It's satisfying to find low-key wit that
reaches both children and adults at their different levels of experience. Enjoy it out
loud, and don't forget to leave time for looking at Stevenson's pen-and-wash pic-
tures, which further realize the personalties of Star the mule, various chickens, and
a beat-up truck, along with the two main characters. Acquaintance with the first
two books in the series is not necessary to the enjoyment of this one, but kids will
want to hear them if they haven't and hear them again if they have. BH
HARTMAN, VICTORIA 
The Silliest Joke Book Ever; illus. by R. W. Alley. 
Lothrop,
1993 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10110-0 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10109-7 
$14.00 
R Gr. K-4
This joke book has two big advantages: wordplay that stretches vocabulary in a
nondidactic way, and currency very much in touch with a hi-tech world. Rhymes,
puns, and homonyms figure prominently in Hartman's original riddles, more than
APRIL 1993 * 251
a hundred of which are packaged with Alley's jovial watercolor drawings. On top
of their language arts value, these are guaranteed kid-pleasers. "How does an up-
to-date shepherd tell time? With a digital flock. How does a rooster tell time?
With a Squawk-man. What do you call very little brides? Micro-wives. ... What
do mummies love to listen to? Wrap music." Just the fact that a reviewer can't
stop quoting examples means that either the reviewer or the author is stuck at a
primary-grade level of humor, which is all to the good in identifying potential
readers. Organized into sections (Food Funnies, Animal Snickers, Wacky Work-
ers, Techie Ticklers, Journey Jests, and Gruesome Giggles), these will get suitably
jumbled as they're passed around the classroom and dinner table. "Why was the
hotdog so brave? He mustard up his courage. . . . What Egyptian queen liked
spaghetti? Cleopasta." Get bready for some pure corn. BH
HEST, AMY 
Weekend Girl; illus. by Harvey Stevenson. 
Morrow, 1993 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09690-5 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09689-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
When Sophie's parents take off every year for their "private, no-kid vacation,"
Sophie and her dog, Shaker spend the long weekend with her loving grandparents
in New York City. While Sophie misses her parents, she enjoys this special time
with her photographer Grampa and dance teacher Gram, who plan a special sur-
prise for Sophie's visit every year (this year, it's a picnic at a Central Park concert).
This is a gentle, idyllic story chock-a-block with family values (Sophie's parents
have returned for their tenth anniversary to the site of their honeymoon, which
was also where Grampa and Gram honeymooned and where Sophie wants to go),
but the authenticity of the familial warmth and the liveliness of the writing keeps
the book from being sugary. The illustrations are light pencil-and-watercolor,
with sturdy lines to balance the pastel greens and yellows that predominate. The
idea of connecting to parents' and grandparents' youth will appeal to kids, and
adults will enjoy lapsharing this sweet intergenerational love story. DS
HOPPER, NANCY J. 
I Was a Fifth-Grade Zebra. Dial, 1993 
[14 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1595-1 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1420-3 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Chelsea Zeller's fifth-grade world has been shaken by a party invitation that in-
cludes the instruction "Wear your best party dress and bring a boy." Chelsea is a
junior biologist, happiest trampling through muddy creekbeds, and her "best party
dress is a pair of jeans." 
Feeling as different as a "zebra in a herd of ponies,"
Chelsea is torn between wanting to follow her inclinations and wanting desper-
ately to be included in the group. The fifth-grade date-getting is authentic in its
cavalierness about people's feelings-boys ask girls to uninvite them, girls swap
party dates without their dates' consent, and Chelsea's seventh-grade blind date
stands her up, sending his third-grade brother instead (although the evening turns
out to be surprisingly enjoyable). The ending is a little too neat, with Chelsea
discovering that the previously reluctant seventh-grade hunk is as interested in
pond life as she is, so change is unnecessary, but her confusion and frustration ring
as true as the dreadful social practices of the teen-wannabes of the grade-school set.
Somewhat reminiscent of Claudia Mills' Hannah on Her Way (BCCB 4/91), this
is a reader-friendly school story that will elicit recognition and sympathy. DS
252 
* 
THE BULLETIN
HoYT-GOLDSMITH, DIANE 
Cherokee Summer; illus. with photographs by Lawrence
Migdale. 
Holiday House, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-0995-3 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Like Pueblo Storyteller by the same team (BCCB 4/91), this first-person narrative
gives a glimpse at contemporary life in a Native American community. After a
brief introduction to the Cherokee nation's trials at the hands of Europeans-the
Trail of Tears being one of the most brutal forced marches in history--Bridget
introduces her mother (a "full-blood"), her father ("mixed-blood"), and her little
brother Dusty, as well as the grandparents with whom she is close on both sides.
The entire family is deeply involved in crafts and traditions, from stitchery to
spearfishing crawdads. A section on the Cherokee language, which includes a
syllabary, mentions Sequoyah's nineteenth-century work and a recent computer
program designed to help learn kids the language. An adapted story ("Possum
Learns a Lesson") and a description of a stomp dance (plus the Hog Fry recipe to
go with it) round off the account, which is somewhat idealized in focus but all the
more appealing as a consequence. Glossary, index, maps, and copious, clear color
photos add to the information. BH
HUDSON, WADE, comp. 
Pass It On: African-American Poetry for Children; illus.
by Floyd Cooper. 
Scholastic, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-45770-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In a picture-book anthology illustrated with grainy-surfaced, realistic paintings,
nineteen poems by African-American poets describe a range of experience from
the sweetly playful to the overtly political. The selection, and the painting, teeters
toward the sentimental, but Naomi Long Madgett's rousing "Midway" ("I'm com-
ing and I'm going/ And I'm stretching and I'm growing/ And I'll reap what I've
been sowing or my skin's not black") and Langston Hughes' "Dream Variation"
("Night coming tenderly/ Black like me") are prime picks for reading aloud, and
Countee Cullen's "Incident" is a bracing shock ("Now I was eight and very small,
And he was no whit bigger,/ And so I smiled, but he poked out/ His tongue and
called me, 'Nigger'"). Good poems by Gwendolyn Brooks, Eloise Greenfield, and
Nikki Giovanni are also included here, but the anthology as a whole is not as
strong as some of the collections issued by each of these poets separately. Still, the
book introduces some of the major figures in African-American writing, and the
picture book format will be inviting to both parents and children for some reflec-
tive lap-reading. RS
HURWITZ, JOHANNA 
The Up 6- Down Spring, illus. by Gail Owens. 
Morrow,
1993 
[11 2 p]
ISBN 0-688-11922-0 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
In this sequel to The Hot and Cold Summer (BCCB 5/84) and The Cold and Hot
Winter (11/88) Derek and Rory are thrilled at the chance to visit their friend Bo-
livia in upstate New York, even though Rory is definitely not thrilled at the pros-
pect of flying there. He's glad they take a bus instead, only to be confronted with
Bolivia's big surprise: her uncle Harold has a pilot's license and has offered to take
APRIL 1993 
* 
253
the three friends up for a ride. Rory's fear of flying provides just the right amount
of emotional tension in this essentially easygoing story about two boys "visiting
strange people and staying in their house and all," as well as enjoying the reunion
with their exuberant, take-charge friend. The author's gentle humor, reassuring
tone, and respectful empathy for the anxieties of ten-year-old living will make this
simply written chapter book as popular as the first two-and kids will be pleased
to note that Derek, Rory, and Bolivia still have one season to go. RS
ISADORA, RACHEL 
Lili at Ballet; written and illus. by Rachel Isadora. 
Putnam,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22423-8 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Lili "dreams of becoming a ballerina," and she has a wall festooned with ballerina
pictures and posters and ballet shoes in sugar-plum shades of pink, lavender, and
peach. She also has ballet class, and Isadora follows Lili and her classmates through
some aspects of basic ballet, such as attire, warm-ups, barre work, the five posi-
tions, and various steps and leaps. The illustrative figures float across a white
background, making it difficult to know whether they're sapposed to be airborne
or not (this absence of background at one point appears to put a boy in the girls'
changing room), but it's always difficult to show movement in art. The corps of
little Degas girls with demurely knotted hair and limber joints remain fascinating
in their carefully captioned, romantically named passes en pointe and arabesques,
and their high-leaping male counterparts add a touch of manly vigor while re-
maining properly in the background. For spice, there's a double-spread gallery of
famous ballet roles and then young Lili as the flower fairy in her school perfor-
mance. Actual young dancers may want more sweat and less gossamer, but this is
a nice Nutcrackery treat for armchair Giselles. DS
JASPERSOHN, WILLIAM 
Cookies; written and illus. with photographs by William
Jaspersohn. 
Macmillan, 1993 
4 8p
ISBN 0-02-747822-X 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Similar in concept to the author's Ice Cream, Cookies traces the genesis of a batch
of Famous Amos chocolate chip cookies with pecans. The book even covers the
milling of wheat into flour and the processing of cocoa beans into chocolate chips,
then describes the batter-mixing and cookie-making process. The text is clear,
understandable, and not cute, addressing economic aspects ("Cookies make their
companies big money-about $3.5 billion annually") as well as bulk manufactur-
ing protocols ("The rotating drums inside the depositor pull the dough down to a
Teflon strip called a die, which has cookie-width holes running along it.... Nine
hundred unbaked disks of dough fall onto the band every minute"). The black-
and-white, on-site photographs are so full of factory gizmos that they're occasion-
ally overcrowded, but they're always interesting and such real-life constraints are
hard to overcome (presumably that's why we don't get a picture of millions of
chocolate chips rolling down a conveyor belt as the text describes, but it's mollify-
ing to at least be able to see raw cookies parading along by the gross). Manufactur-
ing is a dark and deep mystery for many kids and adults alike, but this clear-eyed
and lip-smacking approach should both explain and entertain. DS
254 
* 
THE BULLETIN
JOHNSON, JAMES WELDON 
Lift Every Voice and Sing; illus. by Elizabeth
Catlett. 
Walker, 1993 
36 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8251-5 
$15.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8250-7 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-5
This picture book version of a modern hymn that came to be known as the "Negro
National Anthem" is blessed with a design of great simplicity and dignity, with the
verses of the song printed on the recto and bordered by a simple frame of black and
aqua triangles. On the verso are linocuts done by Elizabeth Catlett in the 194 0s,
and while they were created independently of the hymn, her images of African-
American strength and suffering provide a fitting counterpoint to James Weldon
Johnson's words. "Facing the rising sun of our new day begun/ Let us march on
till victory is won" faces a print of Harriet Tubman leading slaves to freedom; "We
have come over a way that with tears has been watered,/ We have come, treading
our path through the blood of the slaughtered," is illustrated with a picture of a
lynched black man lying on the ground. All the prints are strong and sinewy, with
the tone of proletarian art from the '30s and '40s. As with any song-lyric picture
book, there are questions of use and audience. Although the words are filled with
inspiring images and gorgeous rhetorical flourishes, there's no story; still, both text
and pictures provide an unusual opportunity for some one-on-one black history.
Words and music (with a majestic piano part) are appended. RS
JOHNSTON, JULIE 
Hero of Lesser Causes. Joy Street, 1993 
[192p]
ISBN 0-316-46988-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Originally published in Canada, this first novel set in a small town just after the
end of World War II tells of the changes and enduring relationship between a
brother and sister. Keely is twelve, competitive, spontaneous, labeled a "screw-
ball" by some classmates; she's devoted to her brash older brother Patrick, and
she's devastated when polio leaves him almost completely paralyzed and terribly
depressed. Keely's desperate and imaginative attempts to reawaken her brother's
interest in life are interwoven with more mundane pastimes, such as learning to
ride, plotting other people's romances, and developing a sort-of-friendship with a
tiresome but lonely neighbor girl. Johnston's particular gift is the authenticity of
her characters and relationships: intrepid Keely's vivid narration reveals a person
rather than a stereotype, and Patrick is frequently unattractive, sullen, and wasp-
ish, adolescent as well as anguished. This is a touching and funny story of sibling
maturation. DS
KASZA, KEIKO 
The Rat and the Tiger; written and illus. by Keiko Kasza. 
Putnam,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22404-1 
$14.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
Friendship isn't always easy: ask the narrator of this book, a "tiny little rat" who's
friends with a big tough tiger (named Tiger). Things always seem to go Tiger's
way, with Rat always getting the short end of the stick, the loser's role in the let's-
pretend game, and the tiny piece of the shared doughnut (his sad and recurring
refrain is, "What could I say? I'm just a tiny little rat"). Finally Rat has enough
and tells Tiger the friendship is over, which causes him to think worriedly, "I was
mad. And I was sad. But most of all, I was scared. I had never yelled at Tiger like
APRIL 1993 
* 255
that before." Tiger makes amends and restitution, and Rat forgives-eventually,
after lording it over Tiger for a bit. Friendships cause trouble as often as enmities
do, and this is a sweet and prickly tale of friendship with which many young mam-
mals will empathize. Kasza's airy line-and-watercolor art keeps the situation from
becoming heavy, as do the animals' expressions: Tiger's goofy face marks him as
more thoughtless than bullying, and Rat's woebegone and sorrowful countenance
offers both comedy and pathos. And if you thought things were turning out too
neatly, on the last page there's a new, bigger kid on the block .... DS
KING-SMITH, DICK 
The Invisible Dog; illus. by Roger Roth. 
Crown,
1993 
[4 8 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-59425-0 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-59424-2 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-3
A popular British author of animal fantasies (Babe: The Gallant Pig, The Fox Bust-
ers, BCCB 10/88) turns from the barnyard to the backyard, and the fantasy goes
internal. When seven-year-old Janie discovers an old dog collar and leash in the
garage, it's not long before she's imagining a Great Dane to go with it, in spite of
the £300 her parents don't have to pay for one. Supported by the unwavering
faith of Mrs. Garrow, a fortune-telling neighbor with the clairvoyance (and black
cat) of a white witch, Janie walks her invisible dog everywhere, undermines her
parents' nominal resistance (they both really do want a dog just like their Great
Dane that died), inherits £500, and finds a breeder willing to sell a harlequin Great
Dane with a minor defect. Coincidentally, it bears the same name as Janie's invis-
ible dog, but readers will surmise that magic more than coincidence is afoot. It's
all too easy by half, but the reading is easy, too, and there's room for a little wish
fulfillment in the early decoding stage. BH
KROLL, VIRGINIA 
Africa Brothers and Sisters; illus. by Vanessa French. 
Four
Winds, 1993 
32 p
ISBN 0-02-751166-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
In what is clearly a game the two have played before, a boy complains to his father
about not having any brothers or sisters, and Daddy responds as he always does:
"You do. Dozens of brothers, hundreds of sisters, thousands of Africa brothers
and sisters." (Why Africa rather than African?) Daddy goes on to mention various
African tribes and their special customs or talents; it all sounds wonderful to the
boy, who sees a connection between his own interests and those of his "brothers
and sisters," and who is especially appreciative of the bond he shares with his fa-
ther. The conversation is a cozy slice-of-life, but the information about the tribes
is sometimes sketchy and obtrusive: "'Some of your Africa brothers and sisters are
Ashanti,' Daddy went on. 'They weave beautiful, colorful cloth with special de-
signs for all their people to wear for celebrations.'" Colored-pencil and watercolor
illustrations are stiff but instructive; a glossary and map of Africa are appended
(although it is ironic that the map includes Bophuthatswana, Venda, Transkei and
Ciskei, all of which are South African "homelands" created by the white govern-
ment to forcibly contain the black majority and none of which are recognized by
other countries). RS
256 
* 
THE BULLETIN
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
Lives of the Musicians: Good Times, Bad Times (And What the
Neighbors Thought); illus. by Kathryn Hewitt. 
Harcourt, 1993 
96 p
ISBN 0-15-248010-2 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Twenty (including both Gilbert and Sullivan) composers, from Vivaldi to
Gershwin, are here profiled in a series of irreverent, anecdotal vignettes, each styl-
ishly illustrated with an elegant caricature. Although it's questionable whether the
gossipy details (Stephen Foster: "He could write a song in the morning, sell it in
the afternoon, and spend the money in bars that night") will hold much interest
for those without a prior acquaintance with the subjects, the book could serve as a
down-to-earth, humanizing introduction to leaven more sober-sided accounts. Will
knowing that Beethoven kept a ("full") chamber pot under the piano add to our
appreciation of his Moonlight Sonata? No, but it's the kind of detail that may
allow kids to let down their guards a bit when it comes to classical music, and
young music students will find the humorous slant a great equalizer between them-
selves and the masters. A glossary of musical terms is appended. RS
LEE, MARIE G. 
If It Hadn't Been for Yoon Jun. Houghton, 1993 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-395-62941-1 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Adoptee Alice has never spent too much time thinking about her Korean heritage;
she's too busy mooning over football hunk Tory Hill and obsessing about whether
she's made the junior-high cheerleading squad. So Alice doesn't see any reason to
befriend Yoon Jun, a new classmate from Korea. He's geeky-looking and speaks
English poorly, and Alice even suspects him of writing "Yoon Jun Lee loves Alice
Larsen" on a cafeteria table. However, the book's title promises reconciliation,
and Alice gradually befriends Yoon Jun and his mother, and begins to take an
interest in her heritage, learning some important lessons about prejudice along the
way. The story is calculated and message-driven, with the cliched device of Alice
and Yoon Jun being thrown together for a group project-about Korea-obtrud-
ing as a particular contrivance. Still, the book will appeal to school-story fans, and
Alice is a likable, realistic mixture of good intentions and exasperating behavior.
RS
LEVINE, ELLEN 
. . . If Your Name Was Changed at Ellis Island; illus. by Wayne
Parmenter. 
Scholastic, 1993 
[80p]
ISBN 0-590-46134-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Levine uses a question-and-answer format to provide information about immigra-
tion procedures at Ellis Island, and, by extension, to discuss more generally the
United States' heritage as a nation of immigrants. Among the thirty-six questions
are general topics ("Why did people come to America?") as well as more specific
inquiries ("What would you eat at Ellis Island?"), and the clear answers range in
length from half a page to two pages, each illustrated with handsome, thickly tex-
tured oil paintings that give a more vivid sense of Ellis Island life than does Leighton's
An Ellis Island Christmas (BCCB 9/92). In order to keep the text simple, Levine
generally eschews the use of specific dates, so that different immigration periods
become confusingly conflated. After a paragraph discussing the forced immigra-
tion of blacks as slaves, for example, the author goes on to say "But not all blacks
APRIL 1993 
* 
257
came as slaves. Some came by choice, usually from different Caribbean islands."
That's true, but that immigration wave happened much later. Although each of
the questions is listed in the table of contents, there is no index (nor bibliography),
and the book is lengthy enough to need one, particularly since related information
is scattered throughout various questions. Still, the book allows for informative
browsing, and the attractive format will encourage and reward even casual perusal.
RS
LOWRY, Lois 
The Giver. Houghton, 1993 
[208p]
ISBN 0-395-64566-2 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The future society in which Jonas lives is benevolently, but totally, controlled.
Babies are birthed by anonymous Birthmothers, then adopted by couples who
each raise no more than two children. Sex is repressed, thanks to a pill each citizen
of the Community is given upon reaching puberty. Vocations are assigned by the
Committee of Elders when each child reaches the age of twelve. While all these
strictures are staples of science fiction, author Lowry, new to the genre, must be
credited for the calm simplicity with which she describes Jonas' community. Like
B. F. Skinner's Walden Two, it seems a peaceful place, where its people have been
so seduced into its protections that they don't think to question the alternatives.
But Jonas, who much to his surprise has been assigned the important job of Re-
ceiver, the one who holds all the memories of the past for the community, learns
that security may mean less than total fulfillment. The novel takes a didactic turn
when Jonas, through the elderly Giver, begins to receive memories of colors, Christ-
mas, family warmth and deep unhappiness. All these losses have already been
implicitly rendered, and spelling them out turns story into sermon. When Jonas
learns that his tiny foster brother Gabriel is to be Released (killed) for his failure to
thrive, he runs away with the baby-a tense escape, the first real action in the
story, but unfortunately it's the conclusion, and a closing ecstatic vision leaves
readers thinking that Jonas and Gabe have either died of exposure, or have headed
into a new life, one that might be detailed in a sequel. Lowry could go a lot further
with the intriguingly cool world she has created, but the present novel feels too
much like a scene-setting introduction. RS
McCANN, HELEN 
What's French for HELP, George?; illus. by Ellen Eagle. 
Simon,
1993 
[2 08p]
ISBN 0-671-74689-8 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
George, a young British teen (first seen in What Do We Do Now, George.?, is
desperate to go with his school chums on a trip to France. With his pals Kev, Tub,
and Stick (and Stick's bossy little sister, Julia), he concocts a plan to award himself
a free ticket. As is usual for George, the plan goes monumentally awry but things
turn out all right nonetheless, so George and his disaster-prone friends make an
exciting trip to France. Wild schemes, elaborate coincidence, and unintended
destruction ensue as the kids foil a benign kidnapping, drive the French crazy, and
mess up the Tour de France bicycle race. It's mainly stock humor, with the French
talking funny, the adults displaying exaggerated mortification, and little character-
ization surfacing anywhere. It's well-paced and light-hearted slapstick, however,
and readers who enjoy havoc-wreaking hijinks will find it rewarding. DS
258 
* 
THE BULLETIN
MCFARLAND, CYNTHIA 
Hoofbeats: The Story ofa Thoroughbred; written and illus.
with photographs by Cynthia McFarland. 
Atheneum, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31757-3 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Hoofbeats tells the story of a Thoroughbred race horse from his birth on the breed-
ing farm through his year of training to his first race. Sailed at Dawn-Sailor to
his groom-changes from a fuzzy baby to a gangly adolescent, reluctant student,
and apprentice racehorse before our eyes, and McFarland offers general informa-
tion about the stages as the colt passes through them: "Now called weanlings, the
foals are soon accustomed to being apart from their mothers and play together."
There are a few omissions-we're never told, for instance, that Sailor has actually
turned two so he erroneously seems to be racing as a yearling, and the absence of
any stallions from the pictures (despite their mention in the text) may confuse
young readers unfamiliar with the conventions of raising livestock. The color
photos are bucolic and appealing, if occasionally unfortunately shadowy. This is a
nice upbeat portrait of one colt's life and it's fun to watch him at different ages,
seeing how he changes and remains the same. DS
MCMILLAN, BRUCE 
Mouse Views: What the Class Pet Saw; written and illus. with
photographs by Bruce McMillan. 
Holiday House, 1993 
3 2p
ISBN 0-8234-1008-0 
$15.95 
R 
4-6 yrs
The classroom mouse is loose, and photographer McMillan takes us along on its
peregrinations through the school, challenging readers to identify the close-up pho-
tos of the objects the mouse finds in its travels. Dusty pink circles are revealed to
be pencil erasers, another page turn identifies some silvery sticks as scissors; a pile
of red plastic ridges turns out to be a stack of lunch trays in the cafeteria. This isn't
a new idea (see Peter Ziebel's Look Closer!, BCCB 5/89), but the photos are bright
and tidy, preschoolers and kindergartners will enjoy the school supplies, and the
mouse is a cute narrative guide. As usual, McMillan provides scrupulous technical
notes, although his appended suggestion that the book could be used to enhance
map-reading skills doesn't seem entirely to the point. RS
MATAS, CAROL 
Sworn Enemies. Bantam, 1993 
132p
ISBN 0-553-08326-0 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
It's a sign of fine writing when a historical novel asserts the impact of here-and-
now fiction, and Matas (Lisa's War, BCCB 9/89; and Code Name Kris, 1/91) has
achieved just such an effect with this alternating first-person narrative of two sworn
enemies in nineteenth-century Russia. Aaron is an upright, gifted Yeshiva student
whose father has paid to keep him out of the army, but Zev, jealous of Aaron's
betrothal to a girl they both love, has him kidnapped to fill the Czar's military
quota. Then Zev himself is snared by recruiters, and the two end up on a forced
march that nearly kills them both. The brutal anti-Semitism is only a background
here for the moral dilemmas more fully developed through portrayals of each
character's inner conflicts. Ultimately, a hero and a villain do emerge, but their
motivations and ambiguities-all revealed through urgently paced action-seem
as important as the choices they have made. It's unusual to have religious issues
explored without thematic didacticism. This is the kind of book that will chal-
lenge readers to wonder what they would have done under the circumstances; their
absorption of historical information in vivid detail is a valuable bonus. BH
APRIL 1993 
* 
259
MAZER, NORMA Fox 
Out of Control. Morrow, 1993 
[224p]
ISBN 0-688-10208-5 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
"It wasn't an assault. We didn't beat her up or rape her or anything. ... 
It was
something we did, and, like Candy said, it got a little out of hand," says Rollo,
attempting to explain to himself an incident that may ruin his life. Rollo and his
buddies Brig and Candy, all high-school juniors, have a casual enmity with their
classmate Valerie Michon which explodes into something else in a deserted school
hallway. What happened then is fairly clear-even the unrepentant Candy the
unrepentant says, "So we pushed her a little, maybe grabbed some skin," but the
question is what the incident means. The third-person narration alternates be-
tween Rollo and Valerie's point of view as Rollo attempts to understand the situa-
tion and Valerie tries to come to terms with her post-assault fear and anger. The
characterizations and plot are full of interesting ambiguities, with school honor,
romantic disillusionment, class hatred, and family dynamics all playing strong parts
in the story. Mazer has worked this ethics-charged subject matter into a tight and
readable novel, whose explorations of groupthink versus individual responsibility
are reminiscent of Killing Mr. Griffin. This is gripping enough to deliver the
recreational read the title and cover promise, but it could also prompt some ex-
tremely lively classroom discussion. DS
MAZZIO, JOANN 
Leaving Eldorado. Houghton, 1993 
[176p]
ISBN 0-395-64381-3 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Maude Brannigan's mother has just died after a long illness, and Maude's father
has taken off to look for Yukon gold, expecting that his daughter will be cared for
by eastern relatives. The relatives don't come through, and Maude is left alone at
fourteen in turn-of-the-century New Mexico territory. Maude chronicles her days
in letters (really a diary) to her dead mother, describing her getting work at a local
hotel and beginning to discover more about the town around her. Maude devel-
ops a friendship with Annie, a shy Apache fellow worker, and with Venus Adonna,
one of the town's "soiled doves"-prostitutes--just her age, but she longs to get
out of Eldorado and to become an artist. After turning down an honorable pro-
posal, fighting off a dishonorable assault, and rescuing Annie from a fire, Maude
manages to leave with her two friends, hopefully for better things. Maude is an
engaging character, but it's not particularly original, in historical fiction, to depict
a brave young girl who sees through the prejudices of her time and has ambitions
inappropriate for them. The framework is contrived, but the narrative is appeal-
ing; the hard realities of the frontier town and its various residents are well-evoked.
Kids who appreciate historical melodrama will find plucky Maude's story worth
their time. DS
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Young Martin's Promise; illus. by Barbara Higgins
Bond. 
Raintree/Steck-Vaughn, 1993 
32p 
(Stories of America)
ISBN 0-8114-7210-8 
$12.96 
M 
Gr. 1-3
Unlike Marzollo's and Livingston's picture book biographies of King (BCCB 2/93,
Myers' book focuses on the childhood of the great civil rights leader, selecting
incidents that show young Martin's exposure to racial prejudice and his early de-
260 
* 
THE BULLETIN
termination to do something about it. After Martin's first day at (a segregated)
school, he comes home to discover that his white friends, at the behest of their
parents, won't play with him anymore. (All of a sudden? Is this a true story?)
When Martin and his father walk out of a shoe store after refusing to be seated in
the "colored" section, Martin tells him, "I'll help you fight against segregation,"
and the concluding pages show King as an adult, and state simply his achievement:
"Because of Martin Luther King, Jr., kids of all colors can just be friends." The
text is easy but not choppy, but the awkward illustrations have a fine-lined, luridly
colored hyper-reality. It's odd that the book doesn't mention that both King and
his father were ministers, nor does it state in the text proper or in the introduction
or afterword that King was assassinated. Still, the slender, digest-sized format and
the undemanding language make this a possible choice for newly independent
readers. RS
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
The Magic Circle. Dutton, 1993 
[12 8 p]
ISBN 0-525-45127-7 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7 up
Napoli turns from the hilarity of her last book, The Prince of the Pond (BCCB
1/93), to a dark tone and highly charged plot developed as a kind of prequel to
"Hansel and Gretel." The heroine of this first-person, present-tense narrative is
called "Ugly One." Twisted in body but kind in heart, the devoted mother of an
illegitimate daughter, she's a woman whose interest in healing lures her from mid-
wifery into sorcery. Finally, the demons whom she has commanded trick her into
becoming a witch, and she flees their initiation rite of eating a child, only to be
confronted, after years of lonely resistance, by two succulent children in the iso-
lated woods where she has sought shelter from her appetites. Napoli flexes her
proven talent for unexpected viewpoints, builds strong pace with compressed vigor,
and evokes powerful sensory images-at one point, the witch uses her iron teeth to
bite off her tongue, which flies across the hut and writhes in a corner on the floor.
As brief as the novel is, each aspect is vividly realized with details such as the
narrator's compulsive sweeping to clean away the spiders that spy on her move-
ments. Intense overall, this has an ending that will guarantee it a place in the
hearts of young adult gothic fans. It is in many ways a groundbreaking book,
treating demonic evil seriously and flying in the face of politically correct revision-
ist history about women falsely accused of witchcraft. Although the community
does react with conventional ignorance and hatred toward this social outcast, it is
the narrator's own pride that proves her downfall. The scene where she breaks the
magic circle to retrieve a coveted ring is gripping enough to make a reader want to
stop reading so she won't do it. When she and her daughter are tied to the stake-
where she makes a demonic pact to save her daughter from the flames-we per-
ceive the sinister underside of a magic lightly played out in books such as McKinley's
Beauty. Gwen Strauss' Trail of Stones (BCCB 4/90), the poetic retelling of fairy
tales from the antihero's viewpoint, or Patricia Wrightson's A Little Fear (BCCB
11/83) make more apt companions to The Magic Circle. BH
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
The Boys Start the War. Delacorte, 1993 
[ 14 4 p]
ISBN 0-385-30814-0 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
APRIL 1993 
* 
261
The versatile author here tells a rambunctious tale of an age-old feud between two
ancient clans: the boys and the girls. The boys are the four Hatford kids, who are
upset that their new across-the-river neighbors are the Malloys, a family with three
girls. The boys try to convince the girls that the river is polluted; the girls respond
by pretending that one of them is dead and stage a mock burial in the water. The
boys' mother sends a cake over to the Malloys as a welcoming gift; the girls, think-
ing it's a trick of the boys, toss it in the river. The girls steal a pair of underpants
from the Hatford clothesline; Mr. Hatford telephones and politely asks for his
briefs back. Etc. The battling is ferocious (and far more entertaining than hands-
across-the-water) and the obstreperous humor delivers a swift kick. Nothing is
settled at the end of the book and a sequel is promised: The Girls Fight Back. RS
NEAR, HOLLY 
The Great Peace March; illus. by Lisa Desimini. 
Holt,
1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8050-1941-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
Although blessed with classier illustrations than was Joni Mitchell's Both Sides
Now (BCCB 9/92), this is still another picture book designed for parents who
wish to relive their countercultural youth through their children. Near's song was
written for the 1986 Great Peace March, and as far as anthems go it may be
marchable, but it's also a vague conglomeration of feel-good cliches: "Are you
black like night or red like clay?/ Are you gold like sun or brown like earth?/ Gray
like mist or white like moon?/ My love for you is the reason for my birth./ Peace
can start with just one heart,/ From a small step to leaps and bounds." Desimini's
paintings, in her familiar moody-magical style, contain some haunting images, but
following the text, they're all over the place, so that the ultimate effect of the book
is vague and soft-centered. Grownups who insist upon singing the book aloud
(the music and lyrics are appended) should think about picking on someone their
own size. RS
O'CONNOR, BARBARA 
Mammolina: A Story about Maria Montessori; illus. by Sara
Campitelli. 
Carolrhoda, 1993 
6 4 p 
(Creative Minds Biographies)
Library ed. ISBN 0-87614-743-0 
$11.21
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87614-602-7 
$5.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Maria Montessori started out being bored in school and ended up making sure
that future children had a chance to love learning. That alone will appeal to stu-
dents as an important theme in this simple biography, but the subject offers other
riches: Montessori's determination to become the first woman doctor in Italy and
the barriers she had to overcome; her love affair with another young doctor and the
conflict between acknowledging her baby or continuing her career; and her pio-
neer work with disabled children. The text moves skillfully and selectively be-
tween important scenes in Montessori's life, including the dreaded dissections she
had to do alone at night ("It would not have been proper for a woman to study a
body in the company of men"). The pen-and-ink sketches are cluttered with heavy
hatch and cross-hatch, and the faces are awkwardly drawn, but the smooth story-
telling will ease readers past them. No index, but there's an outline of "A Typical
Day at the Casa dei Bambini," along with a brief bibliography. BH
262 
* THE BULLETIN
PACE, SUE 
The Last Oasis. Delacorte, 1993 
[240p]
ISBN 0-385-30881-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Teenagers Phoenix and Madonna need to believe that some place on the planet
has not been destroyed by the ecological devastation left over from the Oil Wars.
Even though they are among the lucky ones, neither mutants nor crazed and starv-
ing Beggars, their lives in the General Store police state have little hope. Madonna's
theft of a lipstick from the Mall sends them running for their lives, away from the
city and the GS police toward the dream of the fertile place their food comes
from-Idaho. Human life has so little value in this survivalist society that it's
amazing how many times the two friends (and the Mall Brat orphan who follows
them) avoid certain death. The hopelessness drags on a little too long as Phoenix,
Madonna, and Twerp go from one desperate situation to another-stowing away
on a barge carrying human waste, being threatened with child sacrifice by a Shoshone
tribe, and evading an angry mob of mutants in a convenient hot-air balloon. All
their narrow escapes seem feasible until the last, when the story's logic falls apart.
Why the mutants are spellbound by a con-man evangelist who plans a dramatic
escape in the balloon is quite vague, except that it allows for the getaway of the
three friends. It is a relief when the companions finally reach the oasis promised by
the book's title. After all the death and desperation, the contrasting ending is as
happy as a fairy tale's. KJ
PINKWATER, 
DANIEL 
Author's Day; written and illus. by Daniel
Pinkwater. 
Macmillan, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-02-774642-9 
$13.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Shortly after the librarian hangs out a banner saying "WELCOME MR.
BRAMWELL WINK-PORTER AUTHOR OF THE FUZZY BUNNY," a rusty
green car drives up with a bumper sticker saying: "I'D RATHER BE WRIT-
ING." The subsequent comedy of errors details Author's Day at Melvinville El-
ementary School, where no one seems to hear Mr. Wink-Porter's repeated protests
that he wrote neither The Fuzzy Bunny nor the book he's been given to autograph,
Bunnies for Breakfast. His book is The Bunny Brothers. Never mind, it doesn't
matter-which is the whole point. The traditions surrounding such events ac-
quire a good deal more importance than whatever the events are meant to honor,
and young listeners will relish the spoof in just the same way they savor James
Marshall's school satires involving Miss Viola Swamp. The book does have its
adult moments: "I have written a book, too," a teacher confides to the Author. "It
is called Bunnies in Love. I have it here. It is nine hundred pages long. I wonder
if you would read it while you eat your lunch." The ludicrous magic-marker
cartoons with which Daniel Pinkwater, who appears to be a close relative of
Bramwell Wink-Porter, accompanies this farce bring it lightly down to kids' level,
and the twist at the end-when one fan (of the wrong book) asks just one more
question ("Do you think you might ever write a book about us?")-turns it into a
tale within a tale, perfect to raise your kids' consciousness in preparation for the
next visiting Author! BH
RASCHKA, CHRIS 
Yo! 
Yes?; written and illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Jackson/Or-
chard, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08619-4 
$14.99
Tradeed. ISBN 0-531-05469-1 
$14.95 
R 
4 -6 yrs
APRIL 1993 
* 
263
"Yo! Yes? Hey! Who? You! Me? Yes, you. Oh." And so two boys, one black,
one white, meet in a monosyllabic standoff that quickly turns to new friendship:
"Well? Well. ? Yes! Yo! Yes!" Once or twice the dialogue seems less than natural
("What's up? Not much. Why? No fun"), but overall, there's a novel's worth of
drama in these exchanges, and Raschka's charcoal and watercolor characters pop
with longing and vitality. The African-American kid is hip-hop cool, with posture
that reveals the vulnerability beneath his exuberance; the little white boy (who was
clearly dressed by his mother) definitely needs a friend. Together, the two figures
lean and bend and veer toward the double spread split in a way that generates
considerable tension and suspense; the high-five portrait on the last page is the
perfect punctuation: "Yow!" The design and drawing are bold, spare and expres-
sive; the language has the strength and rhythm of a playground chant; the story is
a ritual played out worldwide. RS
SANDBURG, CARL 
Arithmetic; illus. by Ted Rand. 
Harcourt, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-203865-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Sandburg's "Arithmetic," made famous through generations of grade-school reci-
tations, is the perfect vehicle for Rand's swoony, stretchy, "anamorphic" illustra-
tions. In an informative afterword, Rand explains how anamorphic distortion
works and how readers can change the way the pictures look by viewing them from
different angles. This viewer did not find a whole lot of difference between the
paintings as observed straight-on and as seen from peering across the page from
the indicated red arrow, but the distortions in any case work their own kind of
magic, as in the prancing zebra that stretches 
across the page illustrating
"how many animal crackers will you have if somebody offers you five six seven. ... "
For a final bonus, the book includes a flexible mylar mirror that can be used to
interpret the fried eggs in the closing breakfast equation: "If you ask your mother
for one fried egg for breakfast and she gives you two fried eggs and you eat both of
them, who is better at arithmetic, you or your mother?" As is usually true with this
artist, the drawing is impeccable and the odd perceptual premise gives the book an
exuberant zing missing from some of Rand's staider offerings. RS
ScoTT, ANN HERBERT 
A Brand Is Forever; illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Clarion,
1993 
[4 8 p]
ISBN 0-395-60118-5 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
There's something spooky about that title, especially when it's accompanied by an
engaging cover painting that shows a sturdy little girl contentedly and possessively
holding a lovable calf. Annie is apprehensive about the shortly upcoming fact that
Doodle, an orphan calf Annie has been raising, is now due to be branded ... with
a special new brand Annie's grandfather has concocted for Annie's first heifer: the
Double H-A (A is for Annie). Gramp reassures Annie that the branding is like a
measles shot ("For a minute there it burns like crazy. You bite your lip and try not
to cry. And then it's over. That's the way it will be with Doodle") and explains
why branding is better than tags or paint: "only the brands last as long as the cows.
A brand is forever." Annie's brother bets her his prized pocket knife that she won't
be able to keep her eyes open while Gramp applies the brand to Doodle but Annie
bravely watches through her tears. "Tenderly Annie stroked Doodle's hip near the
burnt brown letters of the Double H-A. 'No matter what happens,' she whispered
264 
* 
THE BULLETIN
to Doodle, 'you'll always belong to me. Remember, a brand is forever."' Scott's
quiet but plain-speaking tone, as well as the cozy warmth of Himler's watercolors,
makes branding day seem a matter-of-fact part of ranch life, and while Annie's
fears are understandable, they are overcome within the context of her family's
livelihood. Sort of: Doodle has in fact achieved the status of being both livestock
and pet, with the brand acting as a superior species of dog tag. As Annie explains
to her calf, "Once you've been branded with my own iron, you're never going to
be lost." RS
SHIEFMAN, VICKI 
Good-bye to the Trees. Atheneum, 1993 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-689-31806-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Thirteen-year-old Fagel begins her narrative by saying goodbye to her brothers,
sisters, and widowed mother, all of whom she hopes to bring to America from
their Russian home, where Jews suffer a precarious, often dangerous life in 1907.
The story covers a lot of space, giving only the briefest attention to the old country
setting after which the book is titled, the transatlantic passage, and a stay on Ellis
Island. The primary focus is on Fagel's first home with an aunt and uncle, her
later position as a live-in servant for a bossy neighbor, and a budding romance with
a boy she meets at a dance. The cast is large, as well, with Fagel's six siblings and
six cousins to sort out and not much time to develop primary characters. Some
superficial treatment ("This boat, the Barbarossa, is dreadful") results from skim-
ming so much surface, along with a kind of schematic conflation that is perhaps
best represented when Fagel gazes at "the long, white flowers, dark purple fruit"
that evidently-and impossibly-coexist on a cherry tree symbolic of her sister.
Yet Fagel's voice emerges with a distinctive authenticity when she reveals a grow-
ing resentment of her boss' sugar-coated tyranny, a vividly realized and unusual
theme in books about the immigration experience, which all too often emphasize
gratitude for New World blessings at all costs. BH
SINYKIN, SHERI COOPER 
Slate Blue. 
Lothrop, 1993 
[176p]
ISBN 0-688-11212-9 
$12.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Reina is intrigued-if disconcerted-to discover that the famous heavy metal star
Slate is her aunt, and she wonders if the connection might mean a welcome up-
swing in Reina's middle-school popularity. According to Reina's mother, who
had long concealed the relationship, Slate is a classic prodigal sister whom she had
given up on years before as hopelessly irresponsible and narcissistic, but now Slate
is in town, and apparently eager to mend her fences. Combining an ordinary story
of school cliques and social pressures with a more serious theme of family loyalty
and hero worship, the novel follows Reina through the stages of infatuation with
her charismatic aunt (and a sexy band member), the unwelcome conflicts that
popularity can bring, and her eventual understanding of why Mom could not trust
Slate. Girls will enjoy this glamorous, turbulent overlay on the typical school
story, and the heavy metal moments are as innocent as an Amy Grant concert.
Cover art is meant to depict Reina and Slate, but it looks more like two little girls
playing with makeup-ironic in terms of the novel's outcome, but unrevealing in
terms of its premise. RS
APRIL 1993 
* 265
STEWART, DIANNE 
The Dove; illus. by Jude Daly. 
Greenwillow, 1993 
[32 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11265-X 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11264-1 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
"The great flood came to Natal without warning." Thus begins this involving
story of Lindi and her Grandmother Maloko, who must make ends meet despite
rains that prevent them from planting crops in the hills of southern Africa. The
dove they see and compare to Noah's turns out to be a good omen; when Grand-
mother Maloko cannot sell her beadwork, the memory of the dove inspires Lindi
to make a beaded dove that generates demand for their crafts. Both the plot and
the characters have an integrity that is underscored by dignified paintings rendered
in a naive tone. While delicately stylized, the effects of the storm are not pretti-
fied-dead animals and debris litter the countryside-and the spare compositions
give credence to the characters' poverty and the country's devastation. The ending
is a bit neat, but the writing maintains a warm simplicity and the fine gradations of
color give textured depth to the planar surfaces of Jude Daly's art. BH
STRAUCH, EILEEN WALSH 
Hey You, Sister Rose. 
Tambourine, 1993 
[128p]
ISBN 0-688-11829-1 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Arlene's worst fears have come true. Her new teacher is the dreaded (albeit young
and pretty) Sister Rose, who, on the last Good Friday, caught Arlene giggling in
church, sharply reprimanded her, and left her with a warning: "'All right, you can
go. But remember, I'll be watching you!" And with Sister Rose so intent upon
finding fault with her, Arlene believes that sixth-grade is going to be sheer misery
and that even her usual best subject, English, will occasion one of Sister's scathing
comments: "I could write Moby-Dick and Sister Rose would find something wrong
with it." Set in Baltimore during the Korean War, the book delivers all the plea-
surable staples of the school story with a vivid immediacy of detail and character-
ization that distinguishes it from bland contemporary variants. Neither the historical
setting nor the Catholic context is obtrusive, and readers will identify with Arlene's
fierce sense of injustice as much as they will enjoy Sister Rose's surprising turn-
abouts, as when she stands up for her students against the petty bullying of a
prominent parishioner. Unlike the nuns in Judy Delton's Near Occasion of Sin
(BCCB 12/84), Sister Rose is no monster, but she is too hard on Arlene, and their
eventual rapprochement is satisfying because it is hard-earned on both sides. RS
TEMPLE, FRANCES 
Grab Hands and Run. Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08630-5 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05480-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Whereas Temple's first novel, Taste ofSalt/(BCCB 11/92), documented the politi-
cal persecution of two adolescents in Haiti, this one follows twelve-year-old Felipe,
his mother, and his younger sister on their precarious journey from El Salvador to
Canada. Felipe's father has known that his anti-government activities may be
fatal, and his disappearance triggers their flight. There's tension built into every
border the family crosses illegally and into every mile that leads them through a
266 
* THE BULLETIN
labyrinth of humanity, sometimes treacherous, sometimes generous. Temple has
carefully set up the situation with characters for whom a reader will have real sym-
pathy; only at the end does she telescope the action: in the U.S. detention center,
the fierce grief Felipe feels on learning of his father's brutal murder seems to col-
lapse in one page; thereafter, everything goes right, and he is consumed by the
cheery details of acceptance for Canadian citizenship. Most of the story is devel-
oped with an immediacy that will start readers on their own journey toward un-
derstanding some of the individuals who are too often lumped together as a problem
called "illegal aliens." BH
WEAVER, LYDuI 
Close to Home: A Story of the Polio Epidemic; illus. by Aileen
Arrington. 
Viking, 1993 
[6 4 p] 
(Once Upon America)
ISBN 0-670-84511-6 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
It's the summer of 1952, and fifth-grade classmates Betsy and Leticia decide to
become friends, if only because they seem to have so little in common. Betsy's
middle-class family includes a reporter father and a scientist mother; Leticia lives
in upper-crust solitude with her mother, who dreads the polio epidemic that is
sweeping the country. The story is an efficient if formulaic glimpse at the events of
another era, and the fact that Betsy's mother is working with Jonas Salk on a polio
vaccine and that privileged Leticia is stricken by the disease are both plot devices
that work despite their predictability. An author's afterword suggesting parallels
between the polio and AIDS epidemics is oversimplified if well-meaning; the state-
ment that "someday scientists will develop a vaccine for AIDS, the way they did
for polio" is optimistic-just like the story. RS
WESTALL, ROBERT 
The Stones ofMuncaster Cathedral. Farrar, 1993 
[96 p]
ISBN 0-374-37263-2 
$11.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Joe Clarke is a steeplejack, clambering across roofs, topping chimneys, and repair-
ing steeples for a living. He's at first thrilled to land the prestigious renovation job
at Muncaster Cathedral-but then things start going very, very wrong. The tower
he's working on doesn't feel right, the locals don't want to talk about it, and the
history of the cathedral is full of topplings, shiftings, fatal accidents, and inexpli-
cable deterioration of stone. The evil seems to emanate from a particular gargoyle,
and Joe becomes locked in combat as the stone creature, which has been luring
children to their deaths for centuries, attempts to draw in Joe's young son. Westall's
atmospheric talent does the story proud, with the precariousness of Joe's sky-high
perch on the cathedral adding to the suspense, and the naturalness of Joe's salt-of-
the-earth, rural English craftsman narration makes it all believable. The story is
rounded out with interesting touches of history and politics and some gruesome
medieval wickedness (the gargoyle, originally a medieval builder, had bricked up
his first child victims in the tower walls). This is a fine spooky story with proper
amounts of death, malignancy, and readability; the kids drawn by the cover (a
gaping-mouthed gargoyle glares down from his tower perch as a full moon shines)
are probably just the ones who'll appreciate the book. DS
APRIL 1993 
* 
267
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
Griswold, Jerry. Audacious Kids: Coming of Age in America's Classic Children's
Books (Oxford University Press, 1992. 285p.; ISBN 0-19-505888-7, $25.00)
Audacious Kids theorizes that The Wizard of Oz, The Adventures of Huckleberry
Finn, Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm, Little Lord Fauntleroy, Tarzan of the Apes, The
Prince and the Pauper, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, Little Women, Toby Tyler,
Hans Brinker, The Secret Garden, and Pollyanna share a structural pattern that he
calls "The Three Lives of the Child-Hero": 1) exposure (often a dispossessed or-
phan suffering poverty or neglect and consequently launched upon a journey; 2)
social problems (including destination, adoption, antagonism, and triumph); and
3) return (identity resolved, recognition ceremonies, accommodation of two lives).
Griswold argues his psychological case with substantiating detail from each of the
novels, involving analysis of American social and cultural values along the way.
It's a thoughtful, readable exploration, substantially footnoted, though nearly a
century of library schools' scholarship in children's literature is casually dismissed
in an "Afterword," in which he states that children's literature "was regarded as a
suitable subject only for 'methods' courses offered to would-be schoolteachers by
Education departments." Librarians will have fun reading this anyway, and apply-
ing it to the contemporary children's literature that English departments still ne-
glect in their fixation on "The Golden Age" of children's literature. There are
intriguing parallels here with Joseph Campbell's monomyth of separation-initia-
tion-return, which Elliot pjose has explored in Mere Creatures: A Study ofModern
Fantasy Tales for Children. BH
Schimmel, Nancy. Just Enough to MakeA Story (58p., paper ed. ISBN 0-932164-
03-X, $14.75.) Order from Sisters' Choice Press, 1450 6th Street, Berkeley, CA
94710
The third edition of Just Enough to Make A Story, in print since 1978, has been
rewritten and updated bibliographically throughout, with the addition of a new
section, "Ecology Stories and Songs." The suggestions in "Active Heroines," "Sto-
ries in Service of Peace," and "Sources for Stories to Tell to Adults" are still singu-
larly valuable, and the tone of the book-a down-home approach that will get
storytellers started with experienced but undaunting advice-makes this one of
the best available resource books on the subject. BH
From the journals:
Avi. "The Child in Children's Literature," Horn Book, January/February, 1993.
Bodmer, George. "Sendak into Opera: Wild Things and Higglety Pigglety Pop!,"
The Lion and the Unicorn, December, 1992.
Harrington, Janice N. "The Need for Cultural Diversity in Preschool Services,"
Journal of Youth Services in Libraries, Winter, 1993.
Roback, Diane. "Children's Bookstores: Applying the Brakes," Publishers Weekly,
January 11, 1993.
268 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this new index, which
will appear in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this rather
idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books that could fill
a particular gap in a collection, to help teachers and librarians find books that
might be useful in various school or recreational settings, and to help in those
requests for a "love story" or a "scary story." In the case of subject headings, the
subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those
books intended for independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Lee
African-Americans: Myers
African-Americans-music: Johnson
African-Americans-poetry: Hudson
African-Americans-stories: Kroll;
Raschka
African-Americans-biography:
Barrett
Africa-folklore: Fairman
Arithmetic: Sandburg
Art and artists-fiction: Coerr
Art and artists-stories: Stewart
Art History: Gardner
Art: Sandburg
Asian-Americans-fiction: Lee
Astronomy: Berger
Aunts-fiction: Sinykin
Australia-fiction: Clarke; Gleitzman
Ballet: Isadora
BEDTIME STORIES: French
BIOGRAPHIES: Barrett; Gardner;
O'Connor
Birds: McMillan
Brothers 
and sisters-fiction:
Johnston
Canada-fiction: Johnston
Catholics-fiction: Strauch
Child abuse-fiction: Crutcher
Circuses-stories: Garland, M.
Clubs-stories: Crowley
CONCEPT BOOKS: Gerstein;
Gomi
Current events: Beirne; Dolphin;
Temple
Dinosaurs: Arnold
Disabilities-fiction: Betancourt
Disasters-fiction: Garland, S.
Dogs-fiction: King-Smith
Education: O'Connor
El Salvador-fiction: Temple
Emotional 
problems-fiction:
Crutcher; Garland, S.
England-fiction: Westall
Ethics and values: Babbitt; Matas;
Mazer
EVERYDAY LIFE STORIES:
Hurwitz; Caseley; Hopper;
Naylor; Ferguson
FAIRYTALES AND FOLKTALES:
Allen; Fairman
Family problems-fiction: Angell;
Gleitzman; Sinykin
FANTASY: Babbitt; Napoli
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Angell
Food and eating: Jaspersohn
France-fiction: McCann
Friends-stories: Kasza; Raschka
FUNNY 
STORIES: 
Clarke;
McCann
Geography: Berger
Grandmothers-stories:
Grandparents-fiction: Coerr; Gar-
land, S.; Godden
Grandparents-stories: Griffith; Hest;
Stewart
HISTORICAL 
FICTION:
Johnston; 
Matas; 
Mazzio;
Shiefman; Strauch; Weaver
APRIL 1993 
* 
269
History, U. S.: Barrett; Cavan;
Johnson; Levine; Myers; Weaver
Horses: McFarland
Illness-fiction: Weaver
Immigration: Berger; Cavan; Levine
Immigration-fiction: Shiefman;
Temple
Ireland: Cavan
Israel: Dolphin
Japan-fiction: Coerr; Godden
Jews-fiction: Matas
Jews-stories: Edwards
JOKE BOOKS: Hartman
Language arts: Hartman
Manufacturing: Jaspersohn
Music and musicians-fiction: Geras;
Sinykin
Music: Johnson; Krull; Near
Native Americans: Hoyt-Goldsmith
Nature study: Coleman; Ehlert;
McMillan
New Jersey: Beirne
New Mexico-fiction: Mazzio
New York City-fiction: Angell
Northern Ireland: Beirne
Peace-songs: Near
POETRY: Coleman; Hudson
Poetry: Sandburg
Prayers: Edwards
Reading aloud: Clarke; Coleman;
Fairman; Griffith; Hudson
Reading, beginning: Berger; Myers
Reading, easy: Caseley; Hartman;
King-Smith; O'Connor
Reading, family: Edwards; Gomi;
Hest; Hudson; Johnson
Reading, reluctant: Ferguson;
Hartman
Religious education: Babbitt; Dol-
phin; Edwards; Matas
Rural life-stories: Griffith
Russia-fiction: Matas
SCARY STORIES: Westall
SCHOOL STORIES: Betancourt;
Strauch
SCIENCE FICTION: Lowry; Pace
Sexual harassment-fiction: Mazer
Slavery: Barrett
South Africa-stories: Stewart
Squirrels-stories: Ehlert
Stepparents-fiction: Geras
Story hour: Allen; Crowley; Ehlert;
Fairman; French; Garland, M.;
Gerstein; Hest; Kasza; Stewart
Teachers-fiction: Strauch
Texas-fiction: Garland, S.
Urban life-stories: Hest
Witches-fiction: Napoli
World War II-fiction: Coerr
~·4,
' 
School Library Journal stars
THE LAND AND PEOPLE OF PAKISTAN
by Mark Weston
Photographs and maps
"Weston examine
geography, ethnicity,
history of Pakistan,
goes on to exploi
political, social, econo
and cultural life.
sections dealing %
Pakistan's contem
rary troubled polit
scene [including
presence of so ma
illiterate females] a
especially notewortf
... Lively, informe
highly readable."-Sl
"This entry in a wor
derfully useful serie
[is] a solid, wide
ranging survey.
-Kirkus Review:
Ages 11 up
$18.00* (022789-3)
$17.89t (022790-7)
THE LAND A
OF I
by Davi
$18.00* ((
$17.89t (0
uner recent Lana ana reopie DOOKS
ND PEOPLE 
THE LAND AND PEOPLE OF NORWAY
TALY 
by Claudette Charbonneau &
d Travis 
Patricia Slade Lander
)22778-8) 
$18.00* (020573-3)
122784-2) 
$17.89t (020583-0)
THE LAND AND PEOPLE OF SPAIN
by Adrain Schubert
$18.00* (020217-3); $17.89t'(020218-1)
Each: With photographs and maps. Ages 11 up.
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06. *Trade ed tLibrary ed.
Publisher's prices only and in no way reflect the prices at which available from any other source.
& HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
Day
ozens of creative and lively ideas for storytelling, 
RJ
reader's theater, poetry, crafts, games, and exhibits. 
7
"Given her winning combination of enthusiasm and
experience, it's a treasure trove of advice, short stories,
poems, bibliographies,nformation, and practical
programs...a bountiful resource." -BOOKLST
A Potpourri of Storytelling Treasures
With just the right mix of unconventional but effective teaching ideas,
entertainment, and good literature, Read for the Fun of It features:
" Puppets 
* Reader's Theater 
* Booklists
" Creative Writing 
f Games 
* Magic.
Easy-to-Follow Projects
Librarians, teachers, parents, and other adults working with
children will welcome the multitude of ready-made ideas for bringing
children and books together:
" Developing Lifelong Reading Habits
" Ways to Show, Tell, Read, and Write Stories ,
" Making Poetry Come Alive
" Lively, Effective Book Programming. 
,
Delightful Reproducible Illustrations
Read for the Fun of It also features illustrations
and reading slogans which can be
reproduced as:
f Posters
f Certificates 
f
f Awards
* Bookmarks 
' 
I
f Flyers. 
B,
More Favorites
by Caroline Feller Bauer
PRESENTING READER'S
THEATER
250 pp. 1987 ISBN 0-8242-0748-3 LC 87-2105
$42 US. and Canada, S47 other countries.
CELEBRATIONS
Read-Aloud Holiday and
Theme Book Programs
301pp. 1985 ISBN 0-8242-7084 LC 85-714
$42 U.S. and Canada, $47 other countries.
THIS WAY TO BOOKS
376pp. 1983 ISBN 0-8242-0678.9 LC 82-19985
$45 U.S. and Canada, $50 other countries.
STORYTELLING WITH
CAROLINE FELLER BAUER
Videocassette 28 minutes 1986
ISBN 0-8242-0740-8
Full ColorVHS with Viewer's Guide.
$89 U.S. and Canada, $99 other countries.
To Order Call Toll-Free
800-367.6770.
Outside of the U.S. and
Canada, call 718-588-8400
Fax 718-590-1617
1 95 
0 
U N I VE RS II 
Y 
A VE 
NU 
E 
B R0 
NX 
NY 
10 
45
Introduce them to Shakespeare
-as they'll like it!
For the first time, this groundbreaking series makes the best of the Bard
accessible to a new, younger audience. Each play has been abridged to preserve
Shakespeare's incomparable language and illustrated to capture the full comic
or dramatic flavor of the original. Perfect for classroom use, these handsome,
readable volumes set the stage for a love of Shakespeare that can last a lifetime.
Grades 5 up. Paper, $6.99 each; *GLB $11.99 each.
Companion videos available from Random House Home Video.
Alfred A. Knopf X'O
Uniquely designed to open young eyes
to the glory of Shakespeare
* Expertly abridged under 
* Introductions to the plays and to
the supervision of leading 
Shakespeare's life and theater.
Shakespearean scholars. 
* Graphic onstage directions that
* Full-color illustrations on 
bring the action dramatically
every spread. 
to life.
LOTUS SEED
by Sherry Garland
Illustrated by Tatsuro Kiuchi
On thp dav the Fmnprnr of Vietnam is
d, a young girl takes a lotus
om the Imperial garden.
Many years later the
lotus seed is her only
possession as she flees
her homeland for America.
When her grandson takes
e seed and plants it in the
rden, she is distraught at
loss of her precious keep-
But the lotus blooms
ibol of life and continuity.
a backdrop of historical
Lotus Seed is an emotional
and family heritage, which,
Sseed. can survive even the
worst of circumstances.
0-15-249465-0 April Ages 8 and up $14.95
HARCOURT
=BRACE
Children's Books Division
1250 Sixth Avenue, San Diego, CA 92101
1-800-543-1918
Books for Young Readers-Spring 1993
FEBRUARY
Lift Every Voice
and Sing
Lyrics by James Weldon Johnson
Illustrations by Elizabeth Catlett
Introduction by Jim Haskins
All ages 8 x 11 36 pages
24 linocut prints
Cloth 
ISBN 0-8027 8250-7 
$14.95
Reinf. 
ISBN 0-8027-8251-5 
$15.85
The Forgotten Players
THE STORY OF BLACK BASEBALL
IN AMERICA
by Robert Gardner and Dennis Shoritelle
Ages 12 and up 6 x 9 128 pages
20 black-and-white photographs
Cloth 
ISBN 0-8027-8248-5 
$12.95
Reinf. ISBN 0-8027-8249-3 
$13.85
Susan Butcher and the
-Lif Evey Voice-
Illustrations by Elizabeth Catlett
True Champions
GREAT ATHLETES AND THEIR
OFF-THE-FIELD HEROICS
by Nathan Aaseng
Ages 10 and up 6 x 
9 
128 pages
18 black-and-white photographs
Cloth 
ISBN 0-8027-8246-9 
$14.95
Reinf 
ISBN 0-8027-8247-7 
$15.85
The Locker Room Mirror
Gus and the Green Thing
by Janet Reich
Ages 4-8 6 1/2 x 6 1/2 24 pages
20 black-and-green illustrations
Cloth 
ISBN 0-8027-8252-3 
$8.95
Renf. ISBN 0-8027-8253-1 
$9.85
NATIVE AMERICAN TRICKSTER TALES
Retold and il llustrated by Gretchen Will Mayo
Ages 610 8 x 8 48 pages
35 full-color illus trations
Meet Tricky Coyote
Cloth 
ISBN 0-8027-8198-5 
$12.95
Reinf. ISBN 0-8027-8199-3 
$13.85
That Tricky Coyote
Cloth 
ISBN 0-8027-8200-0 
$12.95
Reinf. ISBN 0-8027-8201-9 
$13.85
JUNE
Where Are My
Birth Parents?
A GUIDE FOR TEENAGE 
ADOPTEES
by Karen Gravelle and Susan Ftscher
Ages 12 and up 6x
9 
112 pages
Cloth 
ISBN 0-8027-8257-4 
$14.95
Reinf. ISBN 0-8027-8258-2 
$15.85
Sexual Harassment
by Elaie Ladau
Ages 12 and up 6 x 9 128 pages
Cloth 
ISBN 0-8027-8265-5 
$14.95
Reinf. ISBN 0-8027 8266-3 
$15.85
WALKER
PAPERBACKS!
Out of Many
Waters
b Jactqueline 
Di mbar Greene
Ages 
10 and 
,p 5 1/2 x 81/4 208
Nper ISBN 7401-6 
$8s95
This Place is Dry:
Arizona's Sonoran
Desert
by Viki Cobb
Ill9eoatio, by Baarra Laallee
Ages8 nd up 8 1/2 x 10
32 pa es Fullc lor i 
calust 
tins
Pas- ISBN 74004 
5 6.95
This Place Is Wet:
The Brazilian Rainforest
by Vicki Cobb
Illauationt 
by Barbara 
Lcatelee
Ages 8 and up I/z x 10 
/ 
2t
Pae 
$6,95 ISBN 7399-0
_
, n
m
m
.to WalkerandCompan
The Olympics
A History of the
Modern Games
Allen Guttmann
Glories and flascos, triumphs and
tragedies, records and near misses-
all are included in this vivid history
of the modem Olympics. Using as a
backdrop the athletic events that draw
television viewing audiences in the
billions, Allen Guttmann has written
an interpretive social history of the
games. The book includes lively
accounts of individual competitions.
Guttmann also provides insight into the
behind-the-scenes maneuvering involved
in site selection, and little-known facts
about the general history of the games
and about longtime IOC leader Avery
Brundage.
"A sound, readable narrative.... Explores
the ambitions and prejudices of the various
IOC leaders over the years and demon-
strates how various countries have tried
to exploit the games. In short, Guttmann
touches every major issue in this spirited
narrative." -
Randy Roberts, co-author
of Winning Is the Only Thing: Sports in
America since 1945.
Illus. Cloth, $24.95
Order toll free 8001545-4703 from
University of Illinois Press
54 E. Gregory Drive * Champaign, IL 61820
__
BTSB books...a dream
come true for your library.
Saving money for your library
doesn't have to be a dream. It's
an everyday affair when you
order your new prebound
titles from Bound To Stay
Bound Books.
cards, and laminated jackets.
* Free bar codes and disk-
ettes for circulation systems.
* Lower prices for volume
* Pre-sorted catalog cards.
Call or write for a copy of our
l~KU wes
