T H E
B U L L E T I N
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
March 2012
Vol. 65   No. 7
 
T
he Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and 
critical evaluations of current children’s 
books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding 
the ever-evolving children’s literature field. 
Reviews give an in-depth look at a selected book’s content, reading 
level, strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, as well as 
suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August).  
To order: 
Volume 65 (2012). 
Call: 800-548-1784 or 410-516-6987
$55.00, individuals (print), $58.00 (online) 
Fax: 410-516-3866 
$95.00, institutions (print), $100.00 (online)  Email: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu 
$133.00, institutions (print & online) 
Online: www.press.jhu.edu/journals
ISSN 0008-9036 / E-ISSN 1558-6766
Published by  
T h e JOhns hOpkins UnivErsiTy prEss
The BulleTin of The CenTer  
for Children’s Books: 
essenTial.
Deborah stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
March 2012
Vol. 65 No. 7
337  the BIg PICture
 
  And Then It’s Spring  by Julie Fogliano; illus. by Erin E. Stead
338  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
339 •  Marching to the Mountaintop: How Povery, Labor Fights, and Civil Rights 
Set the Stage for Martin Luther King, Jr.’s Final Hours by Ann Bausum
340 •  Pink Smog: Becoming Weetzie Bat  by Francesca Lia Block
351 •  UnBEElievables  written and illus. by Douglas Florian
375 •  Double  by Jenny Valentine
376 • The Final Four  by Paul Volponi
381  Professional ConneCtions
382  subjeCt and use index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $93.00; combined print & electronic $130.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $16.50 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $11.99. Single copy rate: $10.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2012 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from And Then It’s Spring ©2012 by Erin E. Stead and used by permission of Roaring 
Brook Press.
March 2012 • 337
the BIg PICture
And Then It’s Spring
by Julie Fogliano; illustrated by Erin E. Stead
Oh, spring. At first it’s muddy and drab and grim, and it seems like the green, 
growing things may never return. The slow change of season is particularly hard 
for gardeners, like the boy in this picture book. Amid the brown “all around,” he 
plants seeds, and he waits hopefully for the miracle of their growth; he trudges 
through in the rain and squelches out in the post-rain puddles to check, but there’s 
no sign of progress. As the weeks of waiting go by and the earth remains stub-
bornly brown, the boy fears that disaster (“maybe it was the birds . . . or maybe it 
was the bears and all that stomping”) has befallen his would-be crop. Eventually, 
though, spring, real spring, comes, greening up the earth and sprouting the young 
gardener’s young seedlings. 
The subject is a perennial, if you’ll pardon the expression, favorite, and 
Fogliano treats it with a tenderness and homey conversational lyricism that recalls 
Margaret Wise Brown and her picture-book-text compatriots of the mid-twentieth 
century. The direct second-person address (“and you worry about those little seeds”) 
enhances the quiet intimacy of the prose; the text breathes just a few words per 
page, returning to “brown” and “green” as almost incantatory (“It is still brown, but 
a hopeful, very possible sort of brown”) and upping the suspense with the recur-
ring phrase “and then it is one more week.” Yet there’s a sturdy simplicity to the 
description that ensures it’s never precious or fussy, and even the touch of fancy in 
the worry about randomly marauding bears enhances the shine without diverting 
the story’s trajectory. It’s also an effective representation of the kid viewpoint, where 
a week is unbearable and two weeks eternity, and each plodding day seems to get 
you no closer to the desired outcome.
The illustrations reflect the unassuming poetry of the text and expand 
it into a humble yet miraculous world; they’re where the story’s real drama takes 
place as the quiet text is made fascinatingly particular with the cast of a spectacle-
sporting boy, his amiable yellow dog, and a collection of unexpected animals. Kids 
will especially latch onto the critters subtly and humorously tucked into the spreads: 
the turtle that trudges along faithfully after the boy, the twitchy-eared rabbit who 
pokes his nose into various aspects of the enterprise, the rotund little birds that 
perch on the fenceposts and supervise the proceedings; even the worms who peri-
scope up inquiringly from underground. Audiences will particularly delight in the 
cutaway spread revealing a host of rodents and worms listening for spring in their 
underground burrows while the boy and his friends—dog, turtle, rabbit—press 
themselves to the ground to detect sounds from below. Caldecott winner Stead 
338 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
employs delicate colors in her woodblocks, pale slate blue for the sky and sandy 
brown for the soil, subtly transitioning from flat, grayed tones to clearer and more 
hopeful blues and greens. Their subtlety makes them an effective backdrop for her 
soft, nimbly modeled pencil-drawn figures, captured in enchantingly offhand and 
personable poses: the rabbit peers into a flowerpot as he valiantly hangs onto its 
rim; the dog snoozes bonelessly in the red wagon, his paw dangling over the edge; 
even the imagined bears are marvels of character as they indolently, insolently 
disrespect the hopeful mounds of seeds. 
With its close, confiding gentleness, this will be at its best in quiet one-
to-one sharing. It could also be an imaginative introduction to a seed-planting 
project, a spring hike or park trek, or just a session of nature-watching with noses 
pressed to the window. (See p. 351 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
abbott, tony Goofballs: The Strange Case of Missing Thunder; illus. by Colleen 
Madden. Egmont, 2012 [96p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-342-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-164-8 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-340-6 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-298-0 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 2-4
Jeff Bunter and his friends Brian, Mara, and Kelly call themselves “goofball private 
eyes,” and in this first outing of what looks to be a series, they solve the mystery of 
the disappearance of young Randall Crandall’s beloved pony. This early mystery 
focuses on accessibility and easy grade-school humor, making it a useful entry 
point for kids just coming to the genre. There is too much buildup and not enough 
actual crime-solving, though; the Goofballs don’t get the details of the case until 
more than halfway through the book and then speedily find the answer. Genre 
fans will find the sleuthing elements lacking, as the general process seems to be 
to write down everything you hear and then read through your notes, which will 
allow you to figure out what went wrong. Madden’s monochromatic illustrations, 
in partial-page vignettes, offer breezily scrawled views of the Goofballs and their 
March 2012 • 339
surroundings. The lean plot development won’t be enough for established mystery 
fans, but novices to the genre (and, indeed, to chapter books) may appreciate its 
straightforwardness and welcoming simplicity.  HM
ajmera, maya What We Wear: Dressing Up around the World; by Maya Ajmera, 
Elise Hofer Derstine, and Cynthia Pon. Charlesbridge, 2012 32p illus. with 
photographs (Global Fund for Children Books)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-416-6 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-417-3 $7.95  
Ad 5-8 yrs
This new entry in the Global Fund for Children series provides a simple, celebratory 
narrative about children’s clothing and dress alongside vivid color photographs of 
children from around the word. Offering three or four pictures per spread, the book 
notes dress for occasions ordinary (school uniforms, sports uniforms) and special 
(festivals, religious events, celebrations), with captions under each photograph 
identifying the relevant country. This is basically a list, and there’s no additional 
information about the context of the photograph (not even identification of what 
sport kids are playing or what holiday they’re celebrating), severely impairing the 
title’s utility. The vibrant photographs of children bedecked, bejeweled, and even 
at times bemasked are nonetheless engaging, and they could prompt conversational 
speculation or additional research to explore the pictured activity further. End mat-
ter offers ideas for learning more about international clothing and a suggestion for 
kids to play “let’s pretend” with their own masks and costumes. Flaws aside, this is 
an appealing celebration of children around the world that will draw browsers and 
could elicit some thoughtful discussion. A map identifying the covered countries 
is included.  HM
bausum, ann Marching to the Mountaintop: How Poverty, Labor Fights, and Civil 
Rights Set the Stage for Martin Luther King, Jr.’s Final Hours. National Geographic, 
2012 104p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0940-3 $28.90
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0939-7 $19.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0945-8 $19.99  
R* Gr. 6-9
In this riveting account of the 1968 Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike, Bausum 
adroitly handles both the labor action itself—born of institutionalized racial injus-
tice within the public works system and the tragic deaths of two African-American 
workers in a faulty compactor—and what would be the final civil rights action of 
Dr. King’s storied career. Bausum brings readers onboard with a gagworthy intro-
duction to garbage in the 1960s, before plastic trash-can liners, before curbside 
pickup, before ready-to-eat scrap-free meals. She then turns to the African-American 
workers who accepted these lowest-rung, lowest-paid, dangerous sanitation jobs, 
and to the ploys to cut back their already minimal pay. With the stage set for the 
strike itself and the initially reluctant support of the union, the focus shifts to follow 
King’s involvement, as he hoped the national focus on labor injustice would draw 
attention to his broader plans for an attack on poverty itself as the next great civil 
rights issue. Bausum discusses with objectivity and compassion the way grassroots 
action in Memphis surged ahead of King’s organization, and how younger activist 
groups such as the Invaders, impatient with the nonviolent approach of the old 
guard, condoned (or at least empathized with) the rioting and looting into which 
340 • The BulleTin
peaceful marches devolved. Although the Sanitation Workers‘ story would have 
a relatively happy ending, with union recognition, pay raises, and institutional 
reforms, the Memphis Campaign would end tragically with King’s assassination 
and the splintering of his organization among leaders with divergent strategies and 
agendas. Clearly organized and densely illustrated, this title includes features such 
as an introductory “cast of characters,” an annotated timeline of the strike, and a 
list of King’s campaigns from 1955 through 1968 to help untangle a complex set 
of intertwined events. A resource guide, bibliography, citations list, and index are 
also included.  EB
bernheimer, Kate The Lonely Book; illus. by Chris Sheban. Schwartz & Wade, 
2012 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96226-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86226-7 $17.99 
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
“Once there was a brand-new book at the library,” and although the new book is 
initially well loved and frequently checked out, its readership slowly dwindles over 
the years until the book, become shabby over time, is neglected by modern-day 
patrons. One day young Alice discovers the book and falls in love with it, reading 
it every night with her father; she’s distracted at the library when she means to 
renew the book, and it accidentally ends up with the book-sale titles. Fortunately, 
a distraught Alice attends the book sale and finally recovers her beloved book: “‘I 
knew I’d find you!’ Alice cried, gently touching the frayed yellow ribbon.” This 
emotionally affecting story will resonate with young (and old) readers who have 
already experienced book love firsthand, and it may prompt reluctant readers to keep 
searching for that special book that will hook them as well. Bernheimer’s clear, direct 
language possesses a slightly formal tone that keeps the story’s emotion from tipping 
over into sloppy sentiment, and the titular book is wisely anthropomorphized just 
enough to evoke sincere sympathy. Sheban’s softly textured illustrations (rendered 
in watercolor, graphite, and colored pencil) are both dreamy and substantive, and 
his striking compositions and deft use of light and shadow add dramatic emphasis 
to the contemplative text; the spread in which Alice and the book are reunited is 
particularly moving. This quiet title would make an excellent prompt for a heartfelt 
discussion about favorite books.  JH
bloCK, franCesCa lia Pink Smog: Becoming Weetzie Bat. HarperTeen, 
2012 185p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-156598-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-210201-0 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
It’s been over twenty years since YA lit’s most notable Manic Pixie Dream Girl 
introduced readers to her slinkster-cool world of Shangri-L.A. Now the question 
of who Weetzie Bat was before she appeared decked out in feathers and glitter and 
swimming in her love current is answered, and in a rather surprising way. Louise 
Bat is a skinny, awkward seventh-grader saddened by the fights between her alco-
holic mother and drug-addicted father. When her beloved father leaves and her 
mother slips into an alcoholic haze, she flounders in her sadness until she befriends 
two equally beleaguered classmates, who bond with her over their outcast status. 
March 2012 • 341
Weetzie has two mysteries to solve: first, who is the beautiful boy who shows up out 
of nowhere whenever she needs him, and second, who keeps sending her cryptic 
riddles that introduce her to intriguing places in her city? As she follows the scav-
enger hunt of the messages and gets to know her guardian angel and his sinister, 
voodoo-practicing sister (whose name and practices hint that she may become 
Vixanne Wigg, Weetzie’s nemesis), Weetzie begins a self-aware transformation from 
sad, neglected tween to self-sufficient caregiver, who intentionally replaces despair 
with pistachio-and-cherry ice cream, fills her mother’s empty liquor bottles with 
stolen flowers, and learns “how to forget the things that make [her] sad.” The prose 
both charts and matches Weetzie’s transformation from ordinary girl into someone 
who deliberately creates the world she wants to live in; as she changes, so does the 
language, from a straightforward reporting of events to the more dreamlike, haunt-
ing quality of Block’s signature style. This canny introduction to Weetzie is the 
perfect prep for younger readers to get to know someone they can grow with.  KC
borden, louise His Name Was Raoul Wallenberg: Courage, Rescue, and Mystery 
During World War II. Houghton, 2012 136p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-618-50755-9 $18.99 
 R Gr. 5-8
This scrupulously researched biography recounts the remarkable life and work of 
Raoul Wallenberg, a Swedish businessman who dedicated the latter part of his life 
to helping Hungarian Jews escape from Budapest at the end of the Second World 
War. As a young man, he had copious opportunities, due in large part to his fam-
ily’s wealth, and took full advantage of them, learning five languages, traveling 
extensively, and attending an American university. Wallenberg’s business dealings 
in Hungary made him an ideal candidate when the American-based War Refugee 
Board came to Sweden seeking someone for a mission to Hungary, to provide 
assistance to Jews who were being deported to Auschwitz by the trainload. Upon 
arrival in Budapest, Wallenberg invented the schutzpasse system, wherein falsified 
documents connected Hungarian Jews to neutral Sweden and subsequently saved 
the lives of thousands. Wallenberg mysteriously disappeared in January 1945 
following a covert meeting with Soviet military leaders, and to this day his fate 
remains unknown. Borden spent nearly a decade researching this book, meeting 
with remaining members of Wallenberg’s family and interviewing individuals who 
received help from Wallenberg during the war, and the resulting account is rich 
with detailed information. While the amount of detail may be a little daunting, to 
readers unfamiliar with the historical context, the writing is helpfully accessible. 
The story is riveting, and the stylish prose, in compact, ragged-right format, pro-
vides a sense of urgency and mystery. Color photos and facsimiles of documents 
are abundantly sprinkled throughout the text, and an author’s note, bibliography, 
and index are included.  HM
boreen, Kevin 
Higgins Hole; illus. by David Clark. 
Charlesbridge, 
2012 [224p]
ISBN 978-1-57091-641-0 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
When great white shark Tacitus, known as the “Scourge of the Sea,” and his band 
of twenty attack the small reef community of Higgins Hole (near the Florida Keys), 
the reef’s terrified inhabitants seek help. Wise lobster Lutus, the leader of Higgins 
342 • The BulleTin
Hole, travels with old sea turtle Apollo and seahorse (and narrator) Petronius to 
get permission from the Oceanic Council to call in the intrepid Flying Dolphin 
Squadron. While the fish of Higgins Hole await the dolphins, help comes from 
another surprising source as well, and with everyone’s cooperation the great whites 
are defeated and Higgins Hole is saved. While epics about land animals abound, 
aquatic animal sagas (with nary a mermaid in sight) are few and far between, and 
the underwater setting and fishy characters make this a fresh and original take 
on a familiar plot. Although Boreen does sneak in some critical commentary on 
government and war here, he wisely keeps the overall tone fairly light, with humor-
ous touches provided by the slightly vain voice of Petronius and by frequent (and 
often groan-inducing) puns (“Many were impressed with her fine, strong voice. 
Someone noted that she could really hold a tuna”). A quick pace that builds toward 
the final battle will keep kids flipping pages to the end, and Clark’s bold pen and 
ink illustrations give added support as readers visualize the marine scenes. Hand 
this to kids who loved Finding Nemo way back in the primary grades; they’ll get 
along swimmingly.  JH
bowen, anne Scooter in the Outside; illus. by Abby Carter. Holiday House, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2326-2 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Life is pretty good for rotund pup Scooter, who adores his young mistress, Lucy. 
He knows it would be even better, though, if he could just leave the block for the 
wonders that surely await him beyond it. When Lucy’s at school one morning, 
Scooter sees his chance and slips through the open door to the great world beyond: 
“the OUTSIDE.” The plot is a little bland, but the third-person narration is effec-
tive at conveying the canine yearning for that wonderful-smelling world beyond 
the end of the leash; kids will certainly relate to Scooter’s discovery that he’s not 
as ready for independence in the big wide world as he thought he was. The text 
is as much script for performance as story, with emphatically capitalized words 
and onomatopoeic utterances (“‘AAAAAAA-ROOOOOOO,’ Scooter howled”) 
throughout. Carter uses black pencil and watercolor to create a world of rumpled 
and eccentric humor; scenes are appropriately Scooter-centric, filled with action as 
the cuddly, sunny yellow pooch bounds and yips. Read this aloud with panache, 
or turn it into a full-fledged performance by assigning participants to Foley up as 
needed.  DS
burKs, james Beep and Bah; written and illus. by James Burks. Carolrhoda, 
2012 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-6567-9 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-8721-3 $12.95  
R Gr. 2-3
When goat Bah (all he ever says is “Bah”) wakes to find only one of a pair of socks 
lying outside his garbage-can home, he goes to enthusiastic (if somewhat inept) 
robot Beep for help. Beep decides they must search for the sock’s mate, and search 
they do, traveling high and low—but, ultimately, unsuccessfully—in search of the 
missing sock. The last page reveals the location of said sock to the reader (but not 
to Beep and Bah), however; it has been attached via static cling to the side of Bah 
all along. Author and illustrator Burks is an animation storyboarder, and the book 
March 2012 • 343
evinces a storyboard-like sensibility, with smaller, panels interspersed with larger 
half- and full-page illustrations, and the text consisting of the characters’ dialogue; 
it’s easy to imagine this as an amusing animated short on Nick or the Disney 
Channel. The rapid pace and ridiculous humor (“Do you smell that, Bah?” says 
Beep.“That, my friend, is the smell of adventure. Or it could be this sock”) will 
further make kids steeped in Phineas and Ferb feel right at home. Burks’ digitally 
created illustrations are appealingly cartoonish, with exaggeratedly angular animals 
and bright, candy colors (a few landscapes call Dr. Seuss to mind). Small, orange 
Beep has a single leg (ending in a wheel) and two arms, all of which telescope crazily 
as he overconfidently leads this journey with frequently comic results. This will be 
a perfect fit for kids drawn to graphic novels but not quite ready for a full-length 
one, and youngsters who enjoy cartooning or simply relish a fast and funny read 
will also find Bah and Beep worthy companions.  JH
ClarK, Catherine How NOT to Run for President. Egmont, 2012 235p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-101-3 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-302-4 $15.99  
Ad Gr. 4-7 
Aidan Schroeckenbauer is about as politically apathetic as a twelve-year-old can 
get, until he pushes third-party presidential candidate Bettina Brandon out of the 
way of falling signage and gets himself thrust into the public spotlight. Video of 
Aidan in his dorky band uniform as he saves Brandon, gets carted away by the 
secret service, and returns to play a winsomely horrible clarinet solo goes viral on 
the internet, and the Brandon campaign knows they’ve discovered gold. With little 
more than a duffle bag, his clarinet, and his parents’ permission, Aidan is on the 
campaign bus to win Brandon votes as a plainspoken, endearing kid next door who 
knows instinctively how to deliver pitch-perfect sound bites on the way the difficult 
economy has impacted his belt-tightening family. Brandon’s daughter, however, is 
trying to scuttle her mother’s campaign so they can get back to Minnesota and a 
normal life in the governor’s mansion. Moreover, a Limbaugh-like talk-show host 
plants lies about Aidan on the news circuit in an effort to take Brandon down. This 
is largely a sharp-edged but ultimately good-natured send up of campaign frenzy, 
with Brandon portrayed as a plausible but far from heroic candidate, and Aidan as 
a naïve good guy, ripe for disillusionment. The story unfortunately grinds to a halt 
in a highly contrived ending that shifts the momentum from “Yeah, campaigning 
sounds a lot like this,” to “Come on, this is too phony even for national politics.” 
Still, the whirlwind rise, fall, and reclamation of a candidate—which turn on the 
slightest moves of her handlers and supporters—makes for amusing 2012 election-
cycle reading. EB
Cottrell boyCe, franK Chitty Chitty Bang Bang Flies Again; illus. by Joe 
Berger. Candlewick, 2012 [224p]
Trade ISBN 978-0-7636-5957-8 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5961-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Much to the distress of Lucy, Jem, and Little Harry Tooting, their father has been 
laid off from Very Small Parts for Very Big Machines. Hoping to keep the wacky 
inventor occupied, Mrs. Tooting provides him with a beat-up old camper to restore, 
and her husband pops in a super-charged engine that he finds at a scrap lot and 
344 • The BulleTin
declares the upgraded camper the perfect vehicle to take on a worldwide vacation. 
With its new engine, though, the camper has its own itinerary in mind, and the 
Tootings’ trip takes a few detours as their automobile transforms from camper to 
airplane to submarine while narrowly escaping the clutches of foreign governments 
and unseemly bank robbers, all of whom are interested in the car’s amazing abilities. 
The details sound familiar because Boyce’s modernized sequel to Ian Fleming’s clas-
sic Chitty Chitty Bang Bang  faithfully reflects the elements of the original, and the 
nods to Fleming’s book and the subsequent movie make this retread of the ultimate 
family road trip even more enjoyable. Fans of either interpretation will recognize 
Chitty’s characteristic temperament, as well as the quick mentions of Count Louis 
Zborowski, the car’s original engineer, and the Potts family, its former owners. The 
Tootings, however, hold their own when it comes to aptitude for zany adventures, 
so even readers with no knowledge of Dick Van Dyke or Truly Scrumptious will 
want to tag along for the family’s run-ins with car-obsessed thieves, giant squids, 
and rogue spies. Berger’s energetic line-and-wash illustrations depict a thoroughly 
modern biracial family, completing the successful retooling of a beloved classic. 
Mr. Potts would be proud.  KQG
Cross, julie Tempest. Dunne/St. Martin’s Griffin, 2012 [352p] 
ISBN 978-0-312-56889-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Nineteen-year-old Jackson Meyer may only be able to jump a couple of hours 
back in time by a couple hours, but he knows enough to keep his freakish skill 
set a secret from his overprotective father and his beloved girlfriend Holly. When 
two armed men attempt to kidnap Jackson, shooting and most likely killing Holly 
in the process, Jackson time-jumps in a panic and inexplicably finds himself in 
2007, where he is stuck until he can figure out how to get back to the future and 
save Holly. In the meantime, Jackson discovers that the man he has called Dad all 
these years is not in fact his father but rather a CIA agent and part of a shadowy 
government experiment called Tempest—an experiment that includes Jackson 
as one of its results. Wildly imaginative, this twist in the space-time continuum 
makes for an accessible and entertaining (if not totally thoughtful) read that should 
please thriller and romance fans alike. Cross deftly handles the complexities of a 
non-linear storyline, and her ability to explain the physics of time travel without 
bogging down the pace is an impressive feat. Driven primarily by hormones and 
bravado, Jackson is more of a cad (sometimes to the point of misogyny) than the 
book seems to realize, but his devotion to Holly is the stuff romance novels are 
made of and the sacrifice he ultimately makes for her well being is both touching 
and admirable. Readers will be wishing they had Jackson’s abilities themselves as 
they await the rest of the projected trilogy.  KQG
Crowley, Cath Graffiti Moon. Knopf, 2012 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96953-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86953-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98365-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Lucy and Ed went on a disastrous date two years ago, and they’ve avoided each 
other ever since. When Lucy’s friend Jazz takes a fancy to Ed’s friend Leo, though, 
Lucy and Ed are thrown together for a night. Believing that Ed knows Shadow, a 
March 2012 • 345
graffiti artist whose paintings have inspired her romantic fantasies, Lucy follows 
Ed on a tour of Shadow’s work around the town. The reader is in on the secret 
from the start: Ed is Shadow. A self-doubting dropout who finds reading severely 
challenging, Ed is also an immensely talented and thoughtful artist who can see no 
viable outlet for his ability, and he’s at a crossroads: later this night, he and Leo are 
planning to rob the high school, Ed for rent, Leo to pay back a dangerous thug. 
This sophomore release from Crowley (A Little Wanting Song, BCCB 9/10) has all 
the earnest emotion and elaborate architecture of a Cohn/Levithan collaboration 
(Nick and Norah’s Infinite Playlist, BCCB 6/06), and it is similarly structured, with 
the narrative alternating between Lucy’s and Ed’s voices (occasionally interspersed 
with poems by Leo). Lucy and Ed are a wonderfully matched and misunderstood 
pair, and their journey from mutual dislike and disappointment to interest and 
affection is well constructed and moving. The problems they struggle with—par-
ticularly Ed’s financial woes and uncertain future—give the narrative a grittiness 
that makes its sweetness all the more powerful. From the magic of late-night es-
capades, to the skilled use of the tried-and-true secret-identity love triangle that’s 
not actually a triangle, to the host of engaging secondary characters, this is a love 
story with something for everyone.  CG
daley, miChael j. Pinch and Dash Make Soup; illus. by Thomas F. Yezer-
ski. Charlesbridge, 2012 48p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-346-6 $12.95
Paper ed, ISBN 978-1-58089-347-3 $5.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-081-2 $9.99  
R Gr. 1-2
Pinch (an unidentified, vaguely gopher-ish critter) is hungry, and his fridge contains 
only a potato, spinach, and cheese. Too lazy to walk all the way to the Chat and 
Chew Café, he instead makes his way to friend Dash’s house: “Dash was always 
cooking something. His kitchen would be warm. His kitchen would be full of good 
smells.” He prudently brings along some hot sauce and pepper, however, knowing 
that Dash doesn’t share Pinch’s love for spicy heat. Dash (another unidentified 
animal) is indeed cooking, but his soup is pretty thin, so Pinch offers his potato, 
and then, one by one, the rest of his stores. Both Pinch and Dash in turn secretly 
slip extra heat into the dish, and the resulting soup is so spicy as to be ruined, so 
the two end up amiably heading to the Chat and Chew after all. Beginning read-
ers who need a lot of flash and action will not find it here, but those youngsters 
who appreciate a quieter approach will find this enjoyable. Daley’s effective use of 
repeated words and phrases, simple vocabulary, and grouping of events into four 
short chapters make this very accessible to novices, while the gentle situational 
humor will also help facilitate readers’ digestion of this easy reader. Yezerski’s line-
and-watercolor illustrations are loosely low-key as well, with muted shades of golds, 
browns, blues, and greens punctuated with slightly scratchy thin black outlines. 
For instructional use, or for kids who like their entertainment on the mild side, 
this is a solid little title.  JH
damiCo, Gina Croak. Graphia/Houghton, 2012 [320p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-547-60832-7 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
After throwing one too many punches, sixteen-year-old bad girl Lex Bartleby is 
shipped off to her uncle Mort’s farm, supposedly to figure out her anger issues 
346 • The BulleTin
with the help of manual labor. Instead, she learns that “farmer” Mort is a reaper 
of another kind entirely and that, as mayor of Croak, a small collection of Grim 
Reapers, he will be teaching Lex the family business. Although she initially takes 
to ferrying souls into the Afterlife with aplomb, Lex begins to question the roles of 
Reapers as silent witnesses to the world’s injustices, especially when their knowledge 
of people’s deaths would allow them to wreak karmic justice upon the murderers 
and rapists that otherwise get away with their crimes. Damico nicely balances the 
grim subject matter with a heavy dose of humor, and the third-person narration 
provides some deadpan perspective on Lex’s absurd situation that gives the story an 
appealing tall-tale feel. The macabre comedy extends to the setting as Croak’s main 
street is populated with punnily named shops (the florist’s shop is called Pushing 
Daisies, the grocery store is Bought the Farm) and a host of eccentric, death-obsessed 
folk, but under all this dry wit lies an intricate and imaginative construction of the 
afterlife that is as amusing as it is unique. Both Lex and the reader are presented 
with a very real ethical dilemma when a rogue Reaper goes vigilante, damning 
criminals and innocents alike, and the surprising conclusion will leave readers with 
plenty of questions while laying the groundwork for the second installment. Fans 
who thought McBride’s Hold Me Closer, Necromancer (BCCB 12/10) was to die 
for will find this one equally croak-worthy.  KQG
danforth, emily m. The Miseducation of Cameron Post. Balzer + Bray/Harp-
erCollins, 2012 [480p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-202056-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-210196-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 10 up
Danforth’s impressive debut is really two novels: one a sprawling tale of coming 
of age as a lesbian in Miles City, Montana, in the early ’90s, and the other a grip-
ping, ripped-from-the-headlines drama of teen life in a pray-away-the-gay camp. 
Adopted by her born-again aunt Ruth after her parents’ deaths, Cameron finds her 
first sexual explorations result in a betrayal that lands her in a re-education program 
called God’s Promise. Once Cameron settles in at God’s Promise, the book takes 
off, heading into surreal But I’m a Cheerleader territory with its slightly off-the-
wall portrayal of the camp’s routines and the disciples’ attempts to maintain their 
sanity as the isolation and single-minded messaging inevitably leave their mark. 
That the book completely avoids sensationalism—God’s Promise isn’t brutal or 
regimented, just earnestly convinced of its residents’ sin—makes its depiction of 
the program’s effects all the more hard-hitting. Without ever preaching, Danforth 
makes clear that it’s the ideology, not the methodology or the intent, that is the 
core issue. Aunt Ruth and the other adults who fail Cameron believe in their 
righteousness and genuinely worry for Cameron’s well-being, all the while blind to 
how they are harming her, and Ruth in particular is a nuanced, complex character. 
Cameron’s high school years are packed with semi-nostalgic cultural references that, 
while evocative in their specificity, may have more meaning for adults who shared 
similar cultural moments than for today’s teen readers. Nevertheless, Cameron is 
a memorable heroine with an unforgettable and important story to tell, and she 
does so with wit, emotion, and depth.  CG
March 2012 • 347
davies, niCola Outside Your Window: A First Book of Nature; illus. by Mark 
Hearld. Candlewick, 2012 108p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5549-5 $19.99  
R Gr. 2-4
Biologist and nature author Davies takes a poetical look at the seasons in this col-
lection of nearly sixty poems. The year starts with spring (featuring aspects such 
as “Bulbs,” “Lambs’ Tails,” and “Planting Seeds”) and goes on through summer (a 
bird’s “Summer Song,” a farm’s “Making Hay”) and on to fall (“Acorn,” “Harvest,” 
“Berry Picking”) and finally winter (“Winter Trees,” “Snow Song”). The verses, in 
different forms ranging from prose poems (including craft instructions) to tightly 
metered rhymes, are often more blandly enthusiastic than artful, but they’re specific 
and accessible. The best offer delicate observations (“In the morning, you’ll find 
the snow has kept a diary/ of things that happened when you were asleep”—“Snow 
Song”) or inviting humor (one of the “Five Reasons to Keep Chickens” is “They 
look very silly when they are taking a dust bath”). It’s the look of the book that’s 
really going to draw attention, however: oversized matte pages with full-bleed il-
lustrations in rich complex hues suggest classic twentieth-century treasuries, and 
indeed the mixed-media art (which includes paints, prints, and collage work) recalls 
the spirited and earthtone-touched work of the Provensens. The combination of 
designerly patterning and vigorous individual style is particularly strong in the 
critters, as in the intricate barring on the wings of the wide-eyed chickens or the 
rough multi-toned coat on the russet fox. The start-to-finish care taken in the book’s 
design will make it a popular gift book (there’s even a nameplate included on the 
frontispiece), but the detailed yet digestible observations of the natural world will 
make it partner well with Joyce Sidman’s work, especially her similarly seasonal Red 
Sings from Treetops (BCCB 3/09), in readalouds or readalones.  DS
davies, niCola Welcome to Silver Street Farm; illus. by Katharine McEwen. Can-
dlewick, 2012 [80p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5831-1 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5996-7 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-3
Longtime friends Meera, Gemma, and Karl may have found a way to make their 
childhood dream of creating a city farm into a reality when Meera finds out about 
a possible location for their dream. This plan is kicked into high gear when Karl’s 
aunt Nat, a Russian immigrant, accidentally acquires two lambs (she thinks she is 
buying poodle puppies), and Gemma ends up with a flock of baby ducks (the vet 
she works for thought the eggs were rotten—surprise!). The kids take their plans 
to the local TV station, and, with support from other local residents, they are soon 
facing down the city council who want to turn the property into a parking garage. 
It’s all pretty unsurprising, but the friends are an agreeable lot, and their improvised 
farm-animal care provides some of the creature-centric details that livestock lovers 
crave. British author Davies keeps the short chapters briskly trotting along, and the 
quick pacing and brief page count will entice even reluctant readers to give this a 
go. The incident with the lambs posing as poodles is also genuinely amusing, and 
McEwen’s cheerful monochromatic spot illustrations add further warmth. While 
the animal stories of Dick King-Smith are still the reigning champs for this age 
and format, this first entry in a series is still going to please a lot of animal-loving 
primary-schoolers.  JH
348 • The BulleTin
deans, sis Riding Out the Storm. Holt, 2012 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9355-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-9
It’s a long way from Maine to New Jersey, especially on a Greyhound bus in the 
winter. Eighth-grader Zach, making the trip with his grandfather, is keenly aware 
of this fact, but it’s also the only way he can visit his older brother, Derek, who’s in 
a psychiatric institution in New Jersey in treatment for his bipolar disorder. The 
long night on the road gives Zach a chance to reflect on Derek and the rest of his 
family; he also finds himself gradually sharing confidences with a punky high-school 
girl. Deans effectively captures the strange situational intimacy of a dark night on 
the road, with secrets shared between people who don’t actually know each other’s 
name (the girl is just “Purplehead,” for her dyed hair, from start to finish) and would 
never otherwise connect. The book mines additional atmosphere from the winter 
landscape and the difficult travel, including a slide of the bus off the road, which 
provides an undertone of unease to intensify the situation. Less successful, though, 
is the story about Derek, which isn’t developed enough to be interesting, let alone 
as interesting as the bus ride itself, and ends up as a distracting frame rather than 
an underlying issue addressed by the main action. The trip itself remains rewarding, 
however, and readers will be drawn into imagining how their own lives might be 
changed by hopping a Hound.  DS
durbin, frederiC s. The Star Shard. Houghton, 2012 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-547-37025-5 $16.99 
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Thunder Rake is a mobile city that sits atop a giant wagon, and twelve-year-old 
Cymbril is just one of the many slaves beholden to its iron-fisted master, Rombol. 
During the day, Cymbril is forced to sing to attract customers to Rombol’s travel-
ing market, but at night the young girl often escapes to explore the many decks of 
the Rake, befriending its odd inhabitants and discovering shadowy and enchanted 
rooms unknown to the city’s master or its crew. During her nightly wanderings she 
meets Loric, a faerie boy who tells Cymbril that she too is part Sidhe, and the two 
begin to plan to flee the Rake completely and make for Loric’s homeland. Harpies, 
murderous dogs, two evil witches, and Rombol himself manage to foil each of their 
plans, however, and the two are soon left to choose between their separate freedom 
or staying together. Evocative imagery, an enthralling world, and a fully realized 
storyline that does not depend on future installments make this a standout among 
recent pre-YA fantasies. The charm of old-school fantasy blends with the mechanics 
of steampunk aboard the Rake, making the massive city feel both menacing in its 
size and enchanting in its secrets. Cymbril’s longing for freedom is deeply felt, and 
even as she acknowledges her privileges as one of the more well-kept slaves, her 
desire to become more than the possession of another person and find a life of her 
own will resonate with young readers just coming into their independence. Durbin’s 
quiet, reverent tone does slow some of the more action-driven scenes, but the lush, 
almost poetic prose is something readers will want to linger over anyway.  KQG
March 2012 • 349
etienne, sara wilson Harbinger. Putnam, 2012 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25668-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
When Faye’s father drops her off at Holbrook Academy to “get the help she needs,” 
she’s angry but not entirely surprised: after all, her folks have enough to worry about 
with the food rations, the endless Peak War for energy, and the violence outside the 
Cooperatives without having to concern themselves with their potentially mentally 
ill daughter. The visions of destruction that have been haunting Faye since she 
was six only get worse at Holbrook, and as she and her new friends wake up with 
red mud on their hands and vague memories of nighttime rituals, it appears her 
visions may have been rooted in reality. Teaming up with the brooding Kel, Faye 
learns that she is part of an ancient people charged with protecting the earth at any 
cost and that a three-thousand-year-old prophecy indicates that she must use her 
power to essentially wipe out humanity. In this blend of boarding-school drama, 
dystopian thriller, and supernatural romance, Etienne builds a compelling picture 
of a world at the brink of extinction. Her characters unfortunately do not possess 
the same authenticity, though; despite meeting other Holbrook inmates who have 
suffered abuse and poverty, Faye continues to act as though her bad dreams are a 
fate unmatched in horrors, and this inability to relate to other people makes her 
relationships with Kel and the others unbelievable. Still, the imagery of a polluted, 
toxic world and the catastrophic flood that threatens to cleanse it is powerful stuff, 
and Faye’s choice to be either savior or destroyer will leave readers with plenty to 
ponder. The timely environmental topic, as well as the author’s reference to a real-
world ancient clan gone missing, makes this an easy choice for booktalking.  KQG
fantasKey, beth Jessica Rules the Dark Side. Harcourt, 2012 309p
ISBN 978-0-547-39309-4 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 8-10 
When Jessica left the doldrums of high school to marry the hot vampire prince 
Lucius (in Jessica’s Guide to Dating on the Dark Side, BCCB 1/09), thus becoming 
both undead and royalty herself, she was certain she was doing the right thing by 
fulfilling her destiny as a vampire princess. Unfortunately, trying to bring peace to 
the warring factions of the underworld turns out to be much trickier than senior-year 
calculus, and Jessica isn’t helping herself by playing the timid mouse to the other 
vampire nobles’ bloodthirsty lions. When Lucius is unjustly accused of a horrific 
crime, she is forced to step up her game; fortunately, reinforcements come in the 
form of her wisecracking, hair-styling best friend, Mindy, and Mindy’s surfer-hippie 
ex-boyfriend, who also happens to be one of the most feared vampires around. 
There’s not a lot of room for the rapid-fire snark that characterized Fantaskey’s first 
outing in the darkly ominous world of vampire politics (which mainly consists of 
a lot of backstabbing—literally), and even the comic relief offered by Mindy and 
her vegan vampire love interest comes with some serious emotional baggage that 
weighs much of the plot down with unnecessary melodrama. Jessica’s meekness is 
at times grating but mostly understandable since her former take-charge attitude 
could likely get both her and her husband killed here. Fans of Jessica’s swoony 
romance with Lucius may find themselves disappointed by the couple’s more sub-
dued displays of affection, but fortunately, the steamy subplot involving the hunky 
Raniero and his attempts to woo Mindy help make up for the lack of heat in the 
350 • The BulleTin
royal couple’s bedroom. Although not quite as wickedly campy as the original, this 
still has enough death, subterfuge, and forbidden love to keep avid fans of vampire 
romances reading.  KQG
fitzmauriCe, Kathryn A Diamond in the Desert. Viking, 2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01292-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7
Tetsu is twelve when he and his mother and sister are relocated by World War 
II’s infamous Executive Order 9066, which justified the internment of Japanese-
Americans, to the camp at Gila River. His father, a leader in the Japanese-American 
community, is detained separately in another location, and Tetsu generally takes 
his responsibility as the oldest male in the immediate family very seriously. He’s 
particularly solicitous of his younger sister, Kimi, who is so traumatized by the 
lack of privacy in the camp that she cannot go to the latrine without an escort and 
a pillowcase to put over her head. New friends and interests begin to tempt Tetsu 
away from his familial duties, though, and when his involvement in building a 
baseball field and forming a team cause him to abandon Kimi to her own devices, 
the little girl wanders out into the desert, where she nearly dies. Guilt-stricken, 
Tetsu withdraws from baseball and from his friends, until his father arrives at Gila 
River and rekindles his son’s interest in life. A somewhat formal, even poetic tone 
never rings quite true to boy-speak, and the carefully orchestrated plotting, which 
delivers a hopeful ending for everyone from Tetsu’s elective-mute buddy to Kimi’s 
battered dog, feels a little too purposefully contrived. However, the ultra-brief 
chapters (often less than a page long) will make this a good choice for children 
seeking a quick but heartfelt introduction to the plight of Japanese Americans in 
World War II.  EB
flinn, alex Bewitching. HarperTeen, 2012 [336p] (The Kendra Chron-
icles)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-202414-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-210406-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
After cursing a superficial teenage boy to life as a beast (in Beastly, BCCB 10/07), 
Kendra decides that perhaps it’s time to use her powers for good and sets her sights 
on Emma, a young girl whose new stepsister is horning in on her relationship with 
her beloved father. Kendra offers readers a glimpse of her centuries-long witchy 
existence as she reflects upon her previous—and often unsuccessful—attempts at 
helping people, including the time she assisted King Louis of France in obtain-
ing a wife (through a set of grueling tests that involved a pea, a mattress, and an 
extremely unhappy princess) and transformed a mermaid into a human only so 
that she could be unceremoniously dumped by the man of her dreams. Fans of 
Flinn will no doubt recognize her characteristic mashup of classic fairy tales in the 
modern world, and although this outing lacks the panache of her recent Cloaked 
(BCCB 1/11), it is still an engaging read that manages to weave elements of both 
historical fiction and fairy tales into the melodrama of adolescence. Perspectives 
shift between Kendra and Emma, allowing readers the opportunity to see their own 
romantic and familial dilemmas in Emma’s situations while perhaps recognizing 
the more profound and often tragic struggles faced by Kendra. The ending is en-
March 2012 • 351
tirely and unbelievably happy, but what else are fairy tales for, if not the utter wish 
fulfillment of bringing karmic justice to the snotty queen bee and landing Prince 
Charming in the meantime?  KQG
florian, douGlas UnBEElievables; written and illus. by Douglas Florian. Beach 
Lane/Simon, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-2652-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Poetic chronicler of the natural world Florian takes on a more tightly focused subject 
than usual, winging his way through the world of the honeybee in fourteen rhyming 
poems. Topics include types of bees (“Queen Bee,” “Worker Bee,” “Drone”) and 
other aspects of bee life (“Honey,” “Pollen,” “Swarm”), and Florian slips informa-
tion into the poems themselves as well as including a prose paragraph with further 
explanation in each spread. The result is a slightly more grounded exploration than 
some of his previous titles, and the matte pages and greater proportion of grainy 
colored pencil to liquid watercolor in the mixed-media art further emphasize the 
worldly over the dreamy. There’s still plenty of fun in Florian’s trademark word- 
and soundplay, however: a bee brags of being her “own pollen nation” in “Summer 
Hummer,” while the onomatopoeic “Bees Buzz” will have kids bzzing their way 
through the day. A bibliography—sorry, “BEEbliography”—and a couple of web 
links for further reading are included.  DS
foGliano, julie And Then It’s Spring; illus. by Erin E. Stead. Porter/Roaring 
Brook, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-624-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 337, for review.
frazier, sundee t. Brendan Buckley’s Sixth-Grade Experiment. Delacorte, 
2012 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98949-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74050-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89930-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Sixth grade starts off pretty well for science geek Brendan Buckley when his favorite 
teacher announces that their class will participate in a national science competi-
tion. His lab partner is a cute girl who’s interested in science, but she has a way 
of distracting him at the most inconvenient of times, and his friend Khal isn’t too 
pleased that Brendan is suddenly spending all his time with a girl. At home, his strict 
cop father is disappointed that Brendan has been neglecting more athletic pursuits 
in favor of the competition; when Brendan overhears his dad referring to him an 
“egghead,” he begins to wonder if winning a national prize is worth upsetting both 
his dad and his best friend. After tackling issues of racism and biracial identity in 
Brendan Buckley’s Universe and Everything In It, Frazier here takes on the somewhat 
more mundane fare of middle-school dramas involving changing bodies, values, 
and friends. Brendan is both nerdy and immensely likable, especially because he is 
mostly comfortable with said nerdiness and only wishes other people—especially 
352 • The BulleTin
his dad—would expand their definition of cool to include science. The prickliness 
between Brendan and his father is handled with particular deftness, allowing Dad 
plenty of opportunities to not seem like a total jerk; although his ultimate realiza-
tion that Brendan is in fact a great kid, geek or not, is predictable, it is nonetheless 
moving. Readers whose idea of fun includes parking themselves in front of the 500s 
will find a kindred soul in Brendan.  KQG
fryd, hallie Scandalous!: 50 Shocking Events You Should Know About (So You Can 
Impress Your Friends). Zest, 2012 221p illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-9827322-0-5 $13.99  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Anyone who’s ever propped a celebrity magazine behind a textbook in class (come 
on, admit it) will immediately appreciate the brilliance of this offering, a couple 
hundred pages of juicy gossip raised almost to respectability by dual claims to his-
torical significance and cultural literacy. Fryd digs up the most pungent dirt from 
twentieth-century America and mounds it into neat little four-page piles under 
consistent headings of “What Went Down,” “Quoteables,” “The Aftermath,” 
“Why We Still Care,” and a sidebar of related intrigue. From the 1906 murder of 
womanizing architect Stanford White at the hands of a jealous husband, through 
the less titillating but arguably more important shenanigans of the Gore-Bush 2000 
election recount, readers are treated to a parade of political, sexual, athletic, criminal, 
and financial hijinks. “What Went Down” descriptions are tiny germs of stories 
in concise and slangy text (a notable number of characters are “pissed off”). The 
“Why We Still Care” sections constitute the author’s best shot at making this exercise 
relevant, but for every seriously thought-provoking issue—“The [Mapplethorpe] 
scandal created an on-going debate on how much control the government should 
have over the art it funds”—there is at least another overblown bit of fluff—“The 
[Milli Vanilli] scandal illustrated how focused the public is on image.” Since the 
scandals here grind to a halt at the turn of the millennium, most readers will have 
been in diapers, at best, when the most recent stories broke. And that, happily, 
clinches the argument that this is really a book about history. Really. It is. Sure.  EB
Gould, sasha Cross My Heart. Delacorte, 2012 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99007-6 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74150-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98540-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-10
As the second daughter in a distinguished but declining sixteenth-century Venetian 
family, Laura della Scala is packed off to a convent when her mother dies. Six years 
later, the sixteen-year-old is called home abruptly by her father; the death of her 
beloved older sister means that Laura is now expected to assume her sibling’s role 
of fiancée to an elderly nobleman, who will restore the family’s fortune. Desper-
ate to avoid the marriage, Laura seeks the aid of the Segreta, a powerful group of 
masked Venetian women who, for the price of an important secret, can turn events 
to a supplicant’s favor. Laura confides a secret concerning the chronic illness of the 
Doge, and in return her betrothed is driven out of Venice in a scandal. However, 
involvement with the Segreta also brings Laura information about her sister’s prob-
able murder and the renewal of a vendetta against the Doge’s son, with whom she 
has fallen in love, and it’s up to Laura to engineer an end to the vendetta and save 
March 2012 • 353
her lover’s life. Considering that the Segreta is at the heart of all these machina-
tions, Gould offers disappointingly little about their membership and how they 
pull off their social coups. The plotting, which turns predictable as soon as the 
poor-artist-in-disguise becomes an object of Laura’s affection, is so overly dramatized 
that it becomes risible at times. Nonetheless, sixteenth-century Venice is always a 
dependable setting for life-imperiling intrigue, forced marriage is always a reliably 
hackle-raising theme, and the addition of murder, vendetta, and astonishingly 
beautiful ballgowns is bound to win a rapt following.  EB
Gravett, emily Wolf Won’t Bite!; written and illus. by Emily Gravett. Simon, 
2012 28p
ISBN 978-1-4424-2763-1 $16.99  
R 4-6 yrs
In defiance of folklore, three pigs have captured a wild wolf, and now he’s the star 
of their little circus production as the ringmaster gloatingly presents his patient 
submission: “I can stand him on a stool! I can dress him in a bow. . . I can ride him 
like a horse but WOLF WON’T BITE!” When the trio attempts to place their 
heads “between his mighty jaws,” however, they have tried the wolf’s patience too 
far (fortunately, not to a fatal degree, as the endpapers show the wolf pursuing the 
three with a bit of the ringmaster pig’s jacket in his mouth). The text is appealingly 
rhythmic, and the repetition of the “wolf won’t bite” will encourage children to 
join in the reading. Youngsters will also relish seeing the outcome that they will 
surely know is coming (and the more tender-hearted will be glad to see that the 
pigs escape chastened but unscathed) as the poor, put-upon wolf finally reaches 
the end of his tether. Gravett uses a limited palette of gray, pale pink, red, cream, 
and gold in her watercolor and oil-based pencil art (which includes hand-lettered 
text) and the result is impressive in its simplicity and skillful rendering. Viewers 
will sympathize with the bewildered, shaggy gray wolf, whose ears indicate his 
unhappy tolerance of the situation as he is hauled around by the pigs and ridden 
like a circus pony, while the pigs in their circus-like outfits are winning in their 
unabashed brashness. The compositions are as bold as the saucy pigs themselves, 
and the pictures will translate as well to a crowd as they will to a single child. Wolf 
may not bite, but the kids will eat this up.  JH
halls, Kelly milner, ed. Girl Meets Boy: Because There Are Two Sides to Every 
Story. Chronicle, 2012 204p
ISBN 978-1-4521-0264-1 $16.99  
R Gr. 9-12
Twelve authors of young adult fiction, most of them well known, team up in 
pairs to tell six stories; each offers a male and a female perspective on a relation-
ship. Interestingly, even within this boy/girl setup, the stories traverse the gender 
spectrum, including a story about a girl who poses online as a gay boy to find and 
screen a potential boyfriend for her brother (by James Howe and Ellen Wittlinger), 
and a boy who seeks out his long-lost crush only to find that she’s undergone some 
significant, i.e., transsexual, changes (Sara Ryan and Randy Powell). Only a few 
of the stories feature traditional romantic pairings, and these emerge through the 
overcoming of racial, ethnic, and body-image differences, as a white boy crushes on 
a black girl (Rita Garcia-Williams and Terry Trueman), a smallish Native American 
boy falls for a taller, stronger girl (Joseph Bruchac and Cynthia Leitich Smith), and 
a Muslim boy and a white Christian farm girl can’t keep their hands off each other 
354 • The BulleTin
(Terry Davis and Rebecca Fjelland Davis). Chris Crutcher’s and Kelly Milner Halls’ 
offering looks frankly at two teens trying, and failing, to forge a relationship that 
moves them beyond their damage; both have significantly skewed notions of the 
relationship between sex and caring that they can’t overcome. The stories are thus 
surprising and varied, avoiding any sort of formulaic treatment of relationship 
dynamics and giving full weight to the complexities of what can happen when a 
girl meets a boy.  KC
hautman, Pete What Boys Really Want. Scholastic, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-545-11315-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Lita and Adam have been friends since kindergarten, but that doesn’t mean they 
don’t keep secrets from each other. Lita has never told Adam that she is behind the 
snarky and irreverent teen advice blog Miz Fitz, or that she has basically sabotaged 
all of his romantic relationships to date. Adam hasn’t confided the fact that he’s 
getting most of his information for his latest moneymaking scheme, a book on 
what boys want from girls, from the internet, specifically Miz Fitz’s blog. As Adam 
barrels forward with his project, Lita ignores him as best she can, partly because 
she can’t believe that her slacker friend will ever follow through with the book, 
but mostly because she’s jealous: writing is her territory, not his. Miz Fitz’s snarky, 
sexist advice column provides plenty of chuckles and quotable laugh lines, and the 
resolution resolves not only the story but also the friendship wounds in a realistic, 
fair, and satisfying way. Neither Adam nor Lita, who take turns narrating, emerges 
as particularly fresh or sympathetic, though—Lita’s too petty and self-absorbed, 
and Adam is too driven and self-absorbed. Adam’s views show, surprisingly for 
Hautman, a distinct lack of respect for the emotional range of teenage boys; his 
wisdom tends to reflect comic platitudes such as boys don’t listen if girls talk too 
much and they like gadgets. Those seeking genuine insight into what boys—or 
girls—really want from relationships will have to keep searching, but readers look-
ing for a light-hearted romantic comedy may enjoy this.  KC
hellisen, Cat When the Sea Is Rising Red. Farrar, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-374-36475-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12 
As the daughter of Pelimburg’s founding House, Felicita is expected to obediently 
marry the man her older brother chooses, produce babies, and, above all, uphold 
the appearance of propriety. After her best friend leaps off a cliff, taking Felicita’s 
happiness with her, Felicita flees the magic-hoarding aristocracy for a place among 
the impoverished Hobs and magicless low Lammers. The stench and hard work 
initially have her rethinking her choice, but Felicita eventually falls in with the 
enigmatic Dash and his crew, eking out a living (and embarking on a a relationship 
with Dash) until she realizes that Dash’s schemes are part of a larger design to bring 
about the fall of Pelimburg’s ruling families, including her own. Vivid descrip-
tions of a sea-swept world, rank with wet and salt, abound, while the intricacies 
of Pelimburg’s complex social hierarchy and its contradictions are gradually and 
effectively conveyed through both dialogue and character reactions. As the sheltered 
daughter of the world’s highest house, Felicita plays the cool and aloof narrator 
with an almost offputting ease. Her ignorance makes her sympathetic, though; 
March 2012 • 355
despite her insistence that she is well versed in the politics of Pelimburg’s elite, the 
reader quickly realizes there is more going on than just the parlor games of the 
rich, and Felicita’s role as a pawn in someone else’s revolt provides for a compelling 
storyline. There’s sexuality evident all along the continuum and across orientations, 
and the various drug-fueled trysts between multiple characters lead to more lust, 
heartbreak, and ultimately betrayal. Dark, foreboding, and not entirely redemptive, 
this is an intense look at the seeds of rebellion and the individual consequences 
they sometimes reap.  KQG
hiranandani, veera The Whole Story of Half a Girl. Delacorte, 2012 209p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98995-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74128-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98441-9 $10.99  
Ad Gr. 4-7
When Sonia’s father loses his job at the end of her fifth-grade year, it means she can’t 
return to her beloved private school and instead must navigate the rocky waters 
of public school for the first time. Up until this point, eleven-year-old Sonia has 
never thought that much about her identity as the daughter of an Indian father 
and a Jewish-American mother, but she is suddenly faced with questions that she 
can’t always answer about her race, her ethnicity, and her core values. She clumsily 
begins two friendships: with Kate, a very perky, popular girl who encourages Sonia 
to try out for cheerleading but seems very keen on transforming her into something 
she isn’t, and with Alisha, who, like Sonia, aspires to be a writer. Narrator Sonia 
seesaws between overly mature and completely childlike; while at times she con-
templates on her challenges with clear adult overtones, at others her whiny sense of 
entitlement disrupts any implied personal growth. The description of public versus 
private middle school is a bit caricatured, with Sonia shocked by everything from 
the unhealthiness of the cafeteria food to playing spin the bottle at a birthday party. 
The exploration of the family’s struggles is stronger than the friendship storylines, 
and the illness of her father, who is diagnosed as clinically depressed, is effectively 
presented. While his subsequent disappearance does border on the overly dramatic, 
it serves the purpose of forcing the family to get it all together before the story’s 
conclusion, and there is great promise and hope in Sonia’s final reflections. In the 
end, Sonia rises above, and even those readers a bit irritated with her along the way 
are likely to cheer her evolution.  HM
horvath, Polly Mr. and Mrs. Bunny—Detectives Extraordinaire!; illus. by Sophie 
Blackall. Schwartz & Wade, 2012 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96755-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86755-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89827-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 4-6
Raised by hapless hippie parents on a small island off the coast of Vancouver Island, 
middle-schooler Madeline has learned to be resourceful, a skill upon which she calls 
when her parents are kidnapped by foxes who want a bunch of coded recipes (for 
rabbit products and by-products) decoded by Madeline’s elusive uncle Runyon, a 
code-savvy spy. Madeline first seeks out Runyon herself, but he suddenly falls into 
a coma, so she turns for help to a pair of fedora-wearing rabbits, taking them for 
detectives. Mr. and Mrs. Bunny are only too happy to assist, albeit in an extremely 
356 • The BulleTin
roundabout way (confrontations with a code-cracking marmot, bunny-hat club 
meetings, the bunny hound-patrol, and a pair of purple platform disco shoes are 
involved), and a happy ending is had by almost all. This is about style as much as 
substance, so don’t expect a speedy pace to the solution of the mystery, but those 
willing to suspend disbelief and wander along this trippy, zigzag path will find plenty 
to amuse and entertain them. Mr. and Mrs. Bunny are very likable individuals, 
and they, along with the garlic-bread-loving “The Marmot” (who insists on being 
called “The”) and pushy neighbor Mrs. Treaclebunny, are also very funny; when 
Mrs. Bunny inquires about a house that Mr. Bunny has just rashly purchased, 
he replies, “Well, no place is marmot-free, Mrs. Bunny. Let us not dwell in fools’ 
paradises.” Blackall’s attractive monochromatic illustrations have a cozy and quirky 
sensibility that suit the text’s tone. A skillful reader-aloud will be able to make the 
most of this for a broader audience, while lovers of absurdity and talking animals 
will fare best with it among independent readers.  JH
hubbard, jennifer r. Try Not to Breathe. Viking, 2012 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01390-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
A half-hearted suicide attempt lands Ryan at a facility for adolescents with emotional 
problems. He makes friends and recovers, but now that he’s home again, he’s not 
quite sure how to re-enter his life, especially when he meets a girl named Nicki, 
who keeps pressuring him to share his secrets. She is looking for answers as to why 
her father killed himself, and she’s convinced that Ryan knows something that he’s 
not telling about what it feels like to want to commit suicide. As they grow closer, 
he reveals his story, which is fairly undramatic—a bout of mono and a series of 
failed attempts to connect with girls have left him feeling as if nothing will ever get 
better, hence his decision to take his life. Nicki and Ryan’s relationship grows in fits 
and starts as he discovers that she has lied to and manipulated him, but he gradu-
ally realizes that he has the inner resources to cope with rejection and uncertainty. 
The ordinariness and simplicity of Ryan’s situation are what makes this story work; 
he’s not someone who has been bullied or abused, there is no instigating trauma, 
and his circumstances don’t outwardly warrant his extreme emotional response, 
but nonetheless, he, like many teens, despairs of ever being happy or successful in 
a relationship. As he negotiates his recovery, he does begin to see the roots of his 
unhappiness in his mother’s compulsive behavior and his father’s distance, but his 
greater awareness results in an increased capacity for empathy rather than blame 
and anger, which is exactly the path Nicki needs to follow. However, there is very 
little overt psychologizing of that sort in the text, just a straightforward depiction 
of normal relationship dynamics put under abnormal pressure, making this an 
accessible exploration of the return of hope and possibility after one has gone to 
the edge.  KC
hunter-Gault, Charlayne To the Mountaintop: My Journey Through the Civil 
Rights Movement. Roaring Brook, 2012 [208p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59643-605-3 $22.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Hunter-Gault and classmate Hamilton Holmes were the first African Americans 
to be admitted to the University of Georgia, Athens. Here the author recalls the 
turbulent years from 1959, when she was first approached to challenge the system 
March 2012 • 357
by seeking admission, through two years of legal battles for her admission to be 
finalized, through the campus protests and challenges unleashed by her actual 
enrollment, to graduation and her full-time position in 1965 at the New Yorker. 
Organized by year, Hunter-Gault’s personal experiences are set within the context 
of the larger civil rights movement. Since even the hint of extralegal activism 
could compromise her student status at UGA, she kept away from the protests 
she followed with passionate interest, confining her role to that of reporter rather 
than participant. And it is that role of observer and journalist that, in this title, 
eclipses what must be her own engrossing story. With other able overviews of the 
civil rights movement readily available (Diane McWhorter’s A Dream of Freedom, 
BCCB 1/05, is a notable example), it is disappointing that Hunter-Gault conducts 
a name-dropping, breakneck tour through the era rather than concentrating on the 
social and emotional details only she could supply about the experience a young 
woman in the vanguard of integration in higher education. Was she socially isolated? 
How did her professors treat her? How did she meet and date the white man she 
would marry after graduation? How did she land a job right out of college at the 
New Yorker? A plethora of useful end matter supplements the text, however, and 
students will appreciate the inclusion of full-length articles from the New York 
Times, as well as a timeline, quotation sources, and lists for further reading (there’s 
additional promise of an index in the bound book).  EB
jonell, lynne Lawn Mower Magic; illus. by Brandon Dorman. Random House, 
2012 [112p] (Stepping Stone Books)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96661-3 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86661-6 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89673-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 2-3
Just weeks after their encounter with a magical hamster (Hamster Magic, BCCB 
1/11), the Willow children—Abner, Tate, Derek, and Celia—find magic in a wholly 
different manifestation. When the family lawn mower breaks down, the kids dig 
out an old manual push mower from a forgotten shed and put it to use. Luckily for 
the Willow kids, that lawn mower seems to have a bit of magic left over from the 
previous book, and as soon as it touches grass, it takes off on its own. Unlucky for 
the Willow children, it doesn’t have an off switch, and the kids are unable to stop it 
from raging through the vegetable garden, over a hedge, and into the river dragging 
three kids behind it. The story has the madcap feel of a cartoon rather than the 
quiet charm of the first series entry, and it’s more a single humorous episode than 
a fully developed novel; in fact, the thin plot is stretched beyond capacity here. As 
in Hamster Magic, there is a lot of appeal in the kids’ deep-rooted commitment to 
each other and to working as a team, however, and young readers will cheer for 
their final cooperative victory even if they find themselves fairly unengaged with 
the notion of a magical lawnmower along the way. Final illustrations not seen.  HM
KaPlan, miChael Betty Bunny Wants Everything; illus. by Stéphane Jorisch. Dial, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3408-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
On a trip to the toy store, Betty Bunny (from Betty Bunny Loves Chocolate Cake, 
BCCB 6/11) and her siblings are allowed to select one toy apiece as a special treat. 
358 • The BulleTin
Betty Bunny, however, can’t stop at one; seduced by packaging and possibility, she 
frantically piles items into the shopping cart (“She didn’t know what any of these 
things were or what she might do with them, but she knew that she had to have 
them”) and completely melts down when her mother drags her out of the store 
toyless. Her thoughtful parents take her back to the toy store once they find a way 
to teach her about reasonable limits—or so they think. Kaplan again has his finger 
on the pulse of childhood insatiability (“You can’t have everything you want,” says 
Betty’s practical sister, to which Betty wails for all of us, “But I want everything 
I want”), perfectly depicting the kid who just can’t put on her own brakes in the 
face of temptation. The underlying humor of the family dialogue (epitomized by 
older brother Bill’s sardonic commentary) keeps the exploration light and provides 
a perspectival counterpoint to Betty’s unstoppable logic. Jorisch’s art involves a 
slender, delicate line creatively married to splashes of deep-hued watercolor and 
gouache, effortlessly balancing precision and comedy. Betty Bunny herself has all 
the intensely conveyed emotion of a silent movie star, whether she’s striding across 
the toy store with gleeful determination or melted into an armchair at home in a 
cloudburst of tears. Audiences will recognize the impulses, celebrate the disaster, 
and take sly pleasure in Betty’s victory over parental reason.  DS
Klauss, luCas Everything You Need to Survive the Apocalypse. Simon Pulse, 
2012 403p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2388-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2390-9 $9.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Trying unsuccessfully to avoid his sadistic cross-country coach, known as “Ferret,” 
Phillip hides behind a mailbox only to be found simultaneously by Rebekah, a 
pretty girl, and by Ferret himself. Rebekah saves the situation by inviting Phillip 
to her church youth group, of which Ferret is one of the leaders. Phillip goes to the 
meeting and eventually makes the decision to become a Christian, partly because 
he wants to get close to Rebekah, and partly because he genuinely feels called. His 
father, however, takes a very dim view of any kind of spirituality; Phillip’s mother’s 
involvement in a fundamentalist church convinced her that the family needed 
to prepare for the coming Apocalypse, and now that she’s dead, all that’s left is 
a basement full of supplies and a lot of unresolved feelings. As Phillip becomes 
more involved in church activities, he does in fact get closer to Rebekah and he 
also becomes Ferret’s special project, but neither helps him understand what his 
new faith means, and he’s thrown prematurely into a situation he can’t handle. The 
various emotional threads are loosely woven here, without sufficient development 
to really get at why Phillip is so attracted to end-of-the-world scenarios and how 
that attraction affects his decisions; readers need to make a lot of inferences on 
scant information. In particular, the plot threads involving his relationships with 
Rebekah and Ferret, his feelings for his mother, and most importantly, his faith, are 
left largely unresolved in the end, which might gain full marks for realism in teen 
life but offers considerably less satisfaction in fiction. However, the realism here 
can be instructive, helping readers see the consequences of trying to change your 
life for the wrong reasons and trying to practice a faith you don’t understand.  KC
March 2012 • 359
Klimo, Kate Daughter of the Centaurs. Random House, 2012 370p (The 
Centauriad)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96975-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86975-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98542-3 $10.99  
Ad Gr. 8-12
In a far future, a pocket of humans lives on the plains, close to the earth and dis-
tant from technology. Malora, daughter of an expert horseman, is left with only a 
herd of horses for company when her village—and to her knowledge, the last of 
humanity—is wiped out by deadly mutant Leatherwings. Then she’s picked up by 
Orion Silvermane, the son of a centaur leader, and escorted to lands she had no 
idea even existed and a society that is utterly foreign to her. Centaur civilization is 
marked by sophistication to the point of extravagance, deep class and caste divides, 
and disgust with their horse halves, which are covered up by flowing fabrics and 
delicate scents. It’s into this world that Malora is brought as a horse-trainer for an 
upcoming high-profile race. The setup is engaging but only shallowly explored, and 
the foreground and background plots seem swapped, with the horse race taking 
on a significance that the large cast’s political maneuverings and the encroaching 
dangers of the outside world never achieve. Malora is certainly a strong heroine in 
the vein of McKinley’s The Blue Sword (BCCB 2/83), but readers will have to wait 
for later series entries to find an equal interest in her world. Still, fans of sweeping, 
unconventional dystopias with determined bow-and-arrow-wielding heroines will 
want to give this one a try.  CG
KoPs, deborah 
The Great Molasses Flood: Boston, 1919. 
Charles-
bridge, 2012 102p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-58089-348-0 $18.95  
R Gr. 4-7
Even Kops admits, “It sounds like a bad joke”—a deadly turn by the stuff of gin-
gerbread cookies smacks of Second City shtick rather than historical fact. However, 
on January 15, 1919, an industrial storage tank filled with the sweet, sticky goo 
burst open and a wave of molasses swept Boston buildings off their foundation, 
drowned workers and children in the immediate area, trapped others under debris, 
and ultimately claimed twenty-one lives. In this accessible account, Kops first intro-
duces the characters whose lives would be altered by the disaster, then describes the 
flood, the rescue efforts, theories on the cause of the flood, the three years of court 
hearings, and the final determination of liability. Relatively short sentences, slightly 
oversized font and wide leading, chapter subheadings, and ample illustrations make 
this a strong choice for reluctant or struggling readers. Streamlined presentation 
does not, however, imply simplified content. Indeed, Kops handily guides readers 
through a thoughtful discussion of the how the fear of anarchist activity following 
World War I led many to believe that the tank was bombed, a view steadily held 
by the tank owners, the U.S. Industrial Alcohol Company, who sought to avoid 
liability for death and damages. Photo credits and an index are included, and al-
though Kops mentions several important sources in her acknowledgement, notes 
are not included.  EB
360 • The BulleTin
laKe, niCK In Darkness. Bloomsbury, 2012 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-743-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
This harrowing novel, set in Haiti, alternates between the narration of a contem-
porary fifteen-year-old, trapped in the rubble following the 2010 earthquake, 
and the story of Toussaint L’Ouverture, the legendary eighteenth-century leader 
of Haiti’s anti-colonial revolution. The two become aware of each other through 
dreams; Shorty experiences Toussaint’s reality while Toussaint perceives the bewil-
dering future setting in which Shorty lives. Each story is powerful in its own right, 
and both share graphic depictions of the cruelty and violence of the protagonists’ 
lives. Shorty tells of his pre-earthquake life in quick allusions and references that 
eventually cohere into a complete story, and readers that stick with him through its 
unfolding will find his tale riveting. In contrast, the Toussaint story is slower paced 
and imbued with historical decorum, but the events render it fascinating. Readers 
will come away from this book with a greater understanding of both Haiti’s past 
and present as experienced through two very different and yet remarkably similar 
characters. An author’s note are included.  HM
lamPson, david This One Time with Julia. Razorbill, 2012 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59514-340-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Since his twin brother, Alvin, fell in love and left to live with Julia in Tennessee, 
eighteen-year-old Joe has lived alone with his testy brother Marcus. As a result, 
Joe hasn’t had much schooling, and he doesn’t know how to read, which bothers 
Marcus, but suits Alvin just fine, since he likes Joe just the way he is—sweet and 
simple-minded, as easily controlled as he is easygoing. After returning unexpect-
edly, Alvin disappears even more unexpectedly. Julia comes looking for Alvin but 
finds Joe instead, and the two return to Tennessee, where Joe gets a job, falls in 
love with Julia, and makes his first real friend, only to have his entire world turned 
upside down when he learns the ugly, decidedly gothic truths about Julia’s wealthy 
Southern family. Joe is a truly dear character in the tradition of Forrest Gump, 
while his brothers are both despicable in their own ways; their strangely formal 
diction makes them sound arch and blithely unethical in their interactions with Joe, 
whom they treat as their foil and plaything. Julia and her brother seem at first to 
offer a safe harbor and happy landing for the hapless Joe, giving him the attention 
and education he needs and appreciating him for who he is, until their own secrets 
are revealed as more creepy than eccentric. Quirks abound in all of the characters, 
however, from Julia’s strange nocturnal confessions to Joe’s ongoing sightings of 
and conversations with his absent brother. The ending is quite shocking, mostly 
for its nonchalance; readers open to something a little puzzling, a little bittersweet, 
a little sinister, and a lot weird will enjoy this offbeat offering.  KC
lin, GraCe Dumpling Days; written and illus. by Grace Lin. Little, 
2012 [264p]
ISBN 978-0-316-12590-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Pacy (from The Year of the Dog, BCCB 2/06, and The Year of the Rat) is back, and 
this time her family is headed to Taiwan to visit family for an entire month. Pacy 
March 2012 • 361
has never been to the country of her parents’ birth, and the trip proves challenging: 
her mother signs her up for a Chinese painting class, where Pacy’s American art 
skills seem worthless, and she’s defensive about her inability to speak Taiwanese. 
Despite Pacy’s initial resistance to the experience, her youthful observations of this 
new and very different place are spot-on, and the book paints a vivid picture of 
the international setting. The story is episodic, with chapters highlighting different 
outings and events and occasionally including a relevant family story or a folktale, 
and Pacy’s own tidy line drawings, complete with explanatory captions, dot the 
pages. Though many new people appear, they’re neatly contextualized along the 
way. This story will appeal to a wide audience, from those drawn to strong voices 
to those interested in experiencing the sights and sounds of a distant land.  HM
littlewood, Kathryn Bliss. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2012 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208423-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208425-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Rosemary (Rose) Bliss knows her parents, proprietors of the Follow 
Your Bliss Bakery are not ordinary bakers; she has, after all, seen her mother bottle 
lightning and use it in a cake that miraculously heals a comatose boy. When Rose’s 
parents leave her and her three siblings for a week, a gorgeous woman claiming to 
be their aunt Lily arrives and proceeds to win over Rose’s three siblings with her 
beauty and charm, and Rose herself with her appreciation of Rose’s baking talent, a 
skill that has paled beside her siblings’ more noticeable talents. When Rose and her 
brothers begin experimenting with the family’s magic Cookery Booke, the results 
are disastrous. Can they keep the bakery running and put their mistakes to rights 
before their parents return (or before Lily steals the cookbook)? This sweet (but 
never syrupy) story has surprising substance and broad appeal: fans of food-centered 
novels such as Weeks’ Pie (BCCB 12/11), lovers of domestic magic such as Van 
Cleve’s Drizzle (BCCB 5/10), and kids who have felt invisible and underappreci-
ated will all find this a treat. A humorous tone (“Two things were clear to Rose: 1. 
Lindsey Borzini wanted her brother’s autograph; and 2. Lindsey Borzini was under 
the influence of magical baked goods”), clear, thoughtful writing (Rose’s feelings 
of inadequacy are spot-on for her age), and a brisk pace will also ensure that this 
one is gobbled up quickly.  JH
lobel, anita 10 Hungry Rabbits: Counting & Color Concepts; written and illus. 
by Anita Lobel. Knopf, 2012 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96864-8 $12.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86864-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R 3-6 yrs
When Mama Rabbit announces that she has nothing to put in her soup pot, her 
ten hungry offspring hop off to the garden in search of vegetables. Each rabbit finds 
something for the soup, in a pattern involving increasing numbers and various colors 
(“The first rabbit found ONE big PURPLE cabbage,” “The second rabbit pulled 
up TWO WHITE onions,” etc.). When the ten return, Mama makes soup, and 
they all sit down to a delicious dinner together. Save the one notable oddity in the 
list (blueberries may be blue, but they do not generally go in vegetable soup), this 
is a very nicely organized and executed concept book from noted author/illustrator 
362 • The BulleTin
Lobel. Each of the ten pages is jam-packed with usefulness, containing an ordinal 
number, an action word, a cardinal number, a color, and the name of a vegetable. 
The gouache and watercolor illustrations clearly convey the elements: each page 
emphasizes the concepts with a large and countable image of the gathered ingredients 
with the relevant numeral and number name, and each page is carefully color-coded 
to the target hue without being monochromatic. This will fit smoothly into the 
early childhood curriculum, while lapsitters will adore playing seek-and-find and 
count-the-vegetables on each page.  HM
lyons, Kelly starlinG Ellen’s Broom; illus. by Daniel Minter. Putnam, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25003-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 5-8 yrs
Set during Reconstruction, this picture book, based on a historical event, opens 
with a preacher’s announcement to his black congregation that “all former slaves 
living as husband and wife shall be registered and seen as married in the eyes of 
the law.” Young Ellen doesn’t quite understand what this means until her mother 
explains to her that during slavery, slave couples like Ellen’s mother and father were 
only allowed “broom weddings,” wherein couples would jump over a broom and 
into their new life together. When it’s time to go to the courthouse to register her 
parents’ marriage, Ellen grabs the marriage broom from its spot over the mantle, 
decorates it with flowers, and hands it to her parents during the ceremony. From 
that day forward, the broom hangs along with the marriage certificate, symbolizing 
both events in the family’s history. While the story touches carefully upon some 
of the horrors of slavery, the emphasis here is on how formerly enslaved people 
moved forward and found new and meaningful ways to celebrate their freedoms 
during the period of Reconstruction. Current debates about the definition of mar-
riage add additional relevance to the story, but the emphasis here is less on politics 
than familial love. The writing is unfortunately bland and stilted, undermining 
the individuality and interest of the story. The girl’s point of view is effectively 
emphasized, though, as she tries to make sense of the changing circumstances 
around her. Minter’s hand-colored linoprints are vibrantly inked, with strong and 
balanced compositions, but the figures are sometimes stiff and awkwardly posed. 
This is, however, an unusual selection about a period of history not often covered 
in picture books, and the story will enlighten many young listeners. An author’s 
note is included.  HM
mazer, harry Somebody Please Tell Me Who I Am; by Harry Mazer and Peter 
Lerangis. Simon, 2012 [160p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-3895-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-10
In May, Ben tells his family and friends he’s joining the army after graduation; in 
June, he goes off to basic training; in July, he’s deployed to Iraq; in September, his 
vehicle blows up and he’s returned stateside with a traumatic brain injury. His girl-
friend, his best friend, and his family, all sick with grief and worry, come together 
to support Ben as he struggles to recover and communicate. The book is compact 
and sharply focused, with “Before,” “During,” and “After” sections that mark out 
three momentous stages of Ben’s experience. The story’s very brevity and spareness, 
March 2012 • 363
however, make it feel more like a sketch than a finished novel, and the secondary 
characters, who take center stage during much of the book, never really come alive. 
More compelling is Ben’s kaleidoscopic and confusing view of the world as he tries 
to piece together reality with his limited ability and information; the book’s deft 
third-person focalization conveys the reality of the events and of Ben’s impairment 
alongside his damaged understanding, making it clear both how close he comes 
and how far he remains. While this is a less effective story than Suzanne Williams’ 
Bull Rider (BCCB 1/09), also about a returning vet with severe rehab challenges, 
its accessibility and directness may help readers understand how many things aren’t 
over just because a war ends.  DS
mCmann, lisa Dead to You. Simon Pulse, 2012 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0388-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0390-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
After nine years, Ethan’s coming home. Years after his abduction, his captor aban-
doned him, and the homeless sixteen-year-old found his family of origin on the 
internet; now they’re delirious with joy at his return to their family. Or, at least, 
some of them are: his younger brother, Blake, is angry about the effects of both 
Ethan’s initial departure and his return, especially the fact that Ethan can’t remember 
any details of his pre-abduction life. Between Blake’s simmering resentment and 
the difficulty of fitting back into small-town life at school, Ethan’s having a tough 
time adjusting. The dynamics are credible and compelling, and Ethan’s challenge 
in negotiating the complicated territory will ring true even with kids whose situa-
tions are less dramatic. The key twist, however, isn’t well foregrounded, happening 
abruptly right near the end and leaving the protagonist hanging; it also undermines 
much of the book’s previously constructed emotional architecture. Valentine’s 
Double (reviewed below) is a much more successfully handled version of roughly 
the same plot, but readers who can’t get enough of complex stories of the missing 
restored may find Ethan’s travails intriguing.  DS
mCPhail, david Pig Pig Meets the Lion; written and illus. by David 
McPhail. Charlesbridge, 2012 28p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-358-9 $15.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-080-5 $9.99  
R 4-6 yrs
The new tale starring old friend Pig Pig begins wordlessly on the pre-title page 
and continues onto the opening pages, as a lion escapes from a zoo and climbs up 
the tree outside Pig Pig’s bedroom window. From there, the friendly lion enters 
Pig Pig’s room, much to the delight of Pig Pig, who jumps “out of bed” and runs 
“down the stairs,” followed by the lion. Pig Pig and the lion continue their romp 
through the house, unbeknownst to his ever-distracted mother, and though Pig 
Pig longs to keep the lion, it must skedaddle when the zookeepers show up on the 
doorstep on the book’s closing endpapers. There’s a manifestly educational bent to 
this escapade, as prepositions are printed in boldfaced type, helping young listen-
ers take note of this often puzzling type of word (most cleverly occurring when 
the lion climbs on top of the TV just as it broadcasts a picture of the lion on a 
news update, leading Pig Pig to exclaim, “The lion is on the TV!”). The focus on 
directional words is right on target for the developing verbal skills of the young 
364 • The BulleTin
audience, and youngsters will also be amused by the various antics of Pig Pig and 
the lion and by Mom’s complete obliviousness to the lion’s presence. McPhail’s ink 
and watercolor illustrations continue to be strong and lively, with a loose, energetic 
feel. Cute Pig Pig, in his striped pajamas, and the shaggy, smiling lion are clearly 
having a jolly good time, and their depiction is both joyful and humorous. Cur-
ricular and storytime use abound here, of course, but this pig tale is also perfectly 
fine as a standalone story.  JH
meyer, Kai Arcadia Awakens; tr. from the German by Anthea Bell. Balzer + 
Bray/HarperCollins, 2012 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-200606-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-209296-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
When Rosa Alcantara leaves New York to join her older sister and aunt in Sicily, 
she knows she’ll be walking into a minefield of secrets and Mafia politics, but she 
has no idea just how deep the secrets run. Before she even gets off the plane, she’s 
romanced by Alessandro, soon to be the leader of a powerful Carnevare family (an 
ancient enemy of the Alcantaras) when he turns eighteen in a few weeks—unless 
a rival for the top spot gets rid of him. As the danger to Rosa and those around 
her intensifies, she discovers her heritage: she, like all the Alcantaras, is a Lamia, 
a snake-woman, able to shapeshift into a deadly reptile when under the influence 
of strong emotions. Meyer interweaves Mafia lore and Greek mythology for this 
supernaturally tinged tale of dynastic intrigue and familial fractures and puts the 
rich history of the vividly depicted Sicilian setting to good use, integrating ruins, 
mazes, and legends into the action. Rosa’s a scrappy, scarred heroine, a risk junkie 
whose past trauma and impetus for returning to Italy is teased out over the course 
of the book. Alessandro (who can turn into a panther) is a worthy romantic foil, 
genuine but guarded, powerful but conflicted. Meyer doesn’t skimp on the moral 
ambiguity: heir to generations of corruption, both Alessandro and Rosa understand 
that, to stay alive and maintain control over their own destinies, their best choices 
may simply be the least of a multitude of evils. Short chapters and constant, shift-
ing peril from multiple antagonists keep the tension high and the plot barreling 
forward, and readers will be clamoring for the next installment from this veteran 
German fantasist.  CG
miller, barnabas Rock God: The Legend of B.J. Levine. Sourcebooks, 
2012 [288p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-5962-3 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-8
B.J. Levine has not an ounce of apparent musical talent, which may be the reason 
that he and his father, a dedicated ’80s-rock fan, are somewhat distant. However, 
when a mysterious, scary-looking visitor leaves behind a tattered book that seems 
to explain a legend—or a prophecy—of a rock god, B.J. is compelled to form a 
band. (Luckily, his ability to scream like a girl makes him a pretty good lead singer.) 
Following the clues in the book, the band hits the road on a whim, with B.J. al-
ternating between trying to convince his bandmates he’s not crazy and trying to 
write a decent song for them to perform. Meanwhile, an enigmatic and possibly 
sinister group of red-bandanna-ed Harley riders known as B.L.A.S.T. (what that 
March 2012 • 365
stands for, B.J. is not yet sure) are trailing him. Miller’s bizarre, reference-infused 
rock odyssey has the frenetic, trippy tone of Bray’s Going Bovine (BCCB 11/09) 
for a slightly younger crowd. Characterizations are a bit thin at times, but the plot 
builds steadily to a twist conclusion that gives all the hijinks some meaning beyond 
mere absurdity. It’s all topped off with some dry commentary on the fleetingness 
of popularity (“Do you know ZZ Top? I think they have a song on Guitar Hero”). 
Hand this to readers with a passion for rock ’n’ roll history.  CG
montGomery, monte The Young Person’s Guide to Grown-Ups; illus. by Patricia 
Storms. Walker, 2012 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-8643-2 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-2353-6 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-6
The mysterious and often bewildering (or, more accurately, bewildered) creature 
that is the average American adult is explained in this humorous guide that aims 
to level the playing field between kids and grownups once and for all. A brief 
introduction lamenting the injustices of childhood is followed by a play-by-play 
categorization of the physical differences between youth and old age, including a 
chapter called “The Sounds of Seniority: Groans, Wheezes, Sighs, and Snores,” 
while three subsequent sections are devoted to the adult human’s primary habitats: 
home, school, and “the wild.” As the title suggests, the book’s target audience is 
children, but it is more likely that the chuckles will be coming from members of 
the of-age sector, most of whom have the benefit of experiencing both sides of the 
kid v. grown-up conflict and can readily identify with the author’s musings on the 
nature of time and the correlation between food choices and age. Youngsters will 
appreciate the conversational tone, and the various tactics offered to thwart the 
powers-that-be will certainly tempt a few kids into rebellion (the memo to the 
babysitter regarding house rules is particularly inventive), but savvy readers will 
notice that the overarching message is one of good behavior and appreciating what 
you have—a nice message, but a thoroughly adult one. As a read-together between 
parent and child, however, this offers endless possibilities for some good-natured 
ribbing and may in fact end up succeeding in its mission of making the world a 
more kid-friendly place by getting the grownups to lighten up a bit.  KQG
niChols, travis Matthew Meets the Man; written and illus. by Travis Nich-
ols. Roaring Brook, 2012 [128p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-545-2 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-9
Stuck in a small Texas town whose only redeeming quality is that it’s a rest stop for 
bands traveling between Dallas and Austin, teenaged Matthew is a school-band 
trumpet player with dreams of becoming a drummer in a cool band. Unfortunately, 
even used drum sets are well out of his price range. His attempts to raise the needed 
money start with pawning his CDs and progress through working at his dictatorial 
uncle’s restaurant (where he is outraged to find that “some FICA thing stole like 
thirty bucks from me”), and are mostly cancelled out by a few impulse purchases and 
the newly discovered financial impact of dating. Still, Matthew perseveres, with the 
goal of entering a local Battle of the Bands and winning some prize money, and with 
some DIY wizardry and bandmates quirky enough to appreciate the innovations of 
366 • The BulleTin
necessity, he pulls out a decent musical act. Nichols (Punk Rock Etiquette, BCCB 
10/08) captures the fun and creative energy of band membership in both text and 
pictures (thick-lined comics-style spot illustrations), and the climactic performance 
and makeshift drum set will both amuse and inspire readers. Unfortunately, most 
of the subplots fall flat. Matthew’s romance with Hope is more perfunctory than 
comically stilted, and the portrayal of his evolving relationship with The Man—
from his resentment of seemingly arbitrary rules to his willingness to work within 
them to achieve his goals—is heavy-handed. Nevertheless, the put-upon tone, dry 
humor, illustrative style, and attention to the travails of adolescent life make this a 
quick pick for older Diary of a Wimpy Kid (BCCB 6/07) fans, with the band focus 
adding a welcome indie twist to a familiar setup.  CG
osborne, linda barrett Miles to Go for Freedom: Segregation & Civil Rights in 
the Jim Crow Years. Abrams, 2012 118p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-4197-0020-0 $27.95  
R Gr. 5-8
Tight, consistent focus, pristine organization, and eminently browsable illustra-
tions make this middle-school offering a strong recommendation. As a follow-up 
companion to Osborne’s title on Reconstruction, Traveling the Freedom Road, Miles 
to Go concentrates on the period between the Plessy v. Ferguson decision establish-
ing the legality of separate but equal accommodations, through the 1954 Brown v. 
Board decision, which found separate accommodations to be inherently unequal. 
After introductory discussion of the rapid upward rise of many freedmen after the 
Civil War, which Osborne cites as an important cause of white backlash against 
African Americans as Reconstruction drew to an end, she looks at the Jim Crow 
laws and customs that became imbedded in the South, in the North, and within 
federal programs and agencies. The litany of extreme segregation measures will 
no doubt be astonishing to many readers: separate paycheck windows in South 
Carolina, separate phone booths in Oklahoma, separate sections in a pet cemetery 
in Washington, DC. Osborne also attends to the measures of resistance and adapta-
tion that helped African Americans retain their dignity as they struggled for their 
civil rights: from the black universities, mutual-aid societies, and Green Book travel 
guides, to the Harlem Renaissance and black nationalist movements. Complete with 
a timeline, bibliography with children’s books noted, thorough source notes, and an 
index, this will be a fine resource for children beginning research on this era.  EB
PalaCio, r. j. Wonder. Knopf, 2012 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96902-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86902-0 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89988-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Middle school is tough for just about everybody, but it’s going to be a particular 
challenge for new fifth-grader Auggie Pullman; Auggie has been homeschooled all 
his life, and he has a genetic disorder that makes his face a stare-drawing anomaly. 
He makes a couple of friends, but he’s also a key figure in the intense social dramas 
of middle school (there’s a secret but widespread game about the horror of touching 
Auggie, and a friend’s loyalty to him divides the boys into factions based on their 
willingness to ostracize Auggie by proxy). Despite the ups and downs, though, Aug-
gie negotiates what turns out to be a surprisingly successful fifth-grade year. What 
March 2012 • 367
lifts this book above the ordinary mainstreaming drama is its shifting viewpoints, 
with sections narrated by Auggie’s classmates, his older sister, and her friends as 
well as by Auggie himself. The result is a gently told yet perceptive study of the 
way societal difference sends ripples through a group. Characterization is generally 
credibly complex, believably depicting the moral frailty of kids at an age where 
they’re just discovering the savage power of the group and offering some insight 
into what enables some classmates to withstand the pressure to reject Auggie. The 
changing dynamics are particularly shrewdly observed, as followers tire of one-note 
extremists, and an attack by outsiders (Auggie is bullied on a multi-school outing) 
elicits group solidarity in a way that thoughtfulness never could. This is bursting 
with possibilities for classroom discussion, but it’ll also provide compelling insight 
for everybody who has ever felt different—in other words, everybody.  DS 
Potter, ellen The Humming Room. Feiwel, 2012 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-312-64438-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7 
Hidden under the family trailer, Roo hears but doesn’t see the murder of her drug-
dealing father and his current girlfriend. After a brief stint in a foster home, she is 
sent to live with her rich but reclusive uncle on Cough Rock, a spooky old house 
named for its former use as a sanitarium for sick and dying children. Add in a crusty 
personal assistant, a cheerful local servant, a mysterious wild boy, and a secluded 
boy cousin with a fearful temper who is not expected to live, and you have all of 
the right ingredients for this engaging revisitation of The Secret Garden. Readers 
familiar with the original will enjoy linking up the similarities in plot, character, 
and setting, which feel not so much derivative as delightfully familiar yet refreshed, 
and readers new to the story will find the elements that made Mary Lennox’s story 
an enduring classic combined here in a similarly compelling tale. The gothic setting 
allows the children both freedom from the watchful eyes of adults and a sense of 
lugubrious mystery, but the ghost that haunts the house turns out to be benevolent 
and even loving, while the children, like their turn-of-the-century predecessors, 
effect their own healing through working to bring a neglected garden back to life. 
Potter excels in creating quirky yet sympathetic characters with richly allusive con-
nections to classic children’s literature; obviously here she is more directly engaged 
in that game of “this reminds me of . . . .” a game that will delight the bookish but 
may also snare the neophyte with a plot and characters that have enchanted readers 
for over 100 years and are here couched in the accessible cadences of twenty-first-
century prose.  KC 
PurCell, Kim Trafficked. Viking, 2012 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01280-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When Hannah’s parents are killed in an explosion in a café in the breakaway repub-
lic of Transnistria, she and her grandmother are hard pressed to make ends meet 
in their Moldovan home. Then her uncle disappears, and with an eviction notice 
looming over their heads, Hannah decides to take an offer to go to America as a 
nanny for a Russian family. The offer seems legitimate and even generous at $400 
a week, and she is looking forward to learning English, sending money home to 
her grandmother, and eventually becoming a doctor. What she finds in America 
368 • The BulleTin
is a harsh reality check; yes, she is a nanny to a reasonably wealthy family, but the 
family confiscates her return ticket, she is forbidden to leave the house or even speak 
English, and no money is forthcoming. She is also under threat from a family friend 
to whom her employer owes money; he imports Russian girls as prostitutes, and 
between the family’s debt and the wife’s suspicions about her husband’s affection 
for Hannah, Hannah is constantly worried about what will happen to her. Avoid-
ing any hint of sensationalism, this richly detailed account of contemporary abuse 
and slavery is nonetheless frankly horrific. Though her exploitation isn’t strictly 
sexual, the elements are there and her helplessness is keenly conveyed; her letters 
are not being sent and her potentially sympathetic employer is, on the one hand, 
utterly cowed by his sadistic and unbalanced wife, and on the other, sexually at-
tracted to her and therefore one more source of danger. Hannah herself is smart and 
resourceful, which makes her powerlessness all the more maddening, particularly 
as she brings her distrust of the police with her from her experiences in Moldova. 
Her rescue is dramatic and poignant, reinforcing the fact that while she may still 
not be completely safe, she at least has options if she stays strong. A brief author’s 
note about human trafficking is included.  KC
reese, jenn Above World. Candlewick, 2012 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5417-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5958-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-9
In the far future, the remaining, splintered sects of humanity have used technology 
to adapt their bodies to the remaining hospitable corners of the world. There are 
the Aviars, who fly the skies, the centaur-like Equians, who inhabit the desert, the 
Deepfell, who have taken on so many shark characteristics that they are barely hu-
man at all, and many more. Thirteen-year-old Aluna is one of the Kampii (think 
techno-mermaids), but she challenges the Kampii leaders’ silence on the increasing 
failure of the technology that allows the Kampii to live underwater and escape the 
dangers of the surface world. Exiled, she travels to the surface with her nerdy friend 
Hoku to find the technology needed to protect her people; there she meets a group 
of Amazonian Aviars and discovers that an evil genius named Fathom is sabotaging 
the technology to draw the Kampii out into the open. Reese’s world-building is 
intriguing, especially the details of the villains, their genesis, and their Borg-like 
minions, and the book’s premise is filled with dramatic and emotional potential. 
Unfortunately, the characters are implausibly flawless, with Aluna in particular 
seeming too good to be true in every way, from fighting skills that allow her to go 
head to head with grown warriors to her unwavering heroic intentions and ability 
to verbalize her feelings. In addition, the neat coupling off of the quartet of evil-
fighting teens (they acquire a runaway Aviar and a banished Equian along the way) 
is an overconvenient contrivance. Middle-school readers who like straightforward, 
butt-kicking heroines and creative speculative settings will nonetheless appreci-
ate all that this book has to offer and be pleased that the open-ended conclusion 
promises sequels.  CG
March 2012 • 369
rex, adam Cold Cereal; written and illus. by Adam Rex. Balzer + Bray, 
2012 [432p]
ISBN 978-0-06-206002-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
The Goodco Cereal Company isn’t kidding when it says their products contain 
“a little bit of magic”: the marketers of Burlap Crisp and KokoLumps have been 
kidnapping magical creatures for years now and extracting their essence to enhance 
their cereals for unsuspecting customers. Mick the Angry Leprechaun is an escapee 
from the company’s labs; when he meets Scott, a half-fey boy who up until now 
thought his visions of unicats (horned cats) and mermaids were indications of a 
budding mental illness, the two team up to take down the breakfast-food behemoth. 
Two of Scott’s classmates, who have also been used as lab rats for Goodco’s nefarious 
purposes, join the cause, along with a hairless Big Foot, a rabbit-headed pooka, 
and a soon-to-be washed-up actor, but they meet their match when they confront 
the woman behind Goodco’s misdeeds, a villain of legendary origins. The most 
boring meal of the day gets Rex’s characteristic wacky treatment, as pink dragons 
and deranged cereal mascots run amok amidst sly commentary indicting consumer 
culture and food industry practices, à la Michael Pollan. As the opening book in 
a proposed trilogy, however, this fails to tie up many of the more absurd strands it 
introduces, and the conclusion lacks the shrewdness of Rex’s The True Meaning of 
Smekday (BCCB 2/08), making all the weirdness feel frustratingly purposeless. Still, 
the humor is wryly entertaining, and the fantasy creatures (in particular, Mick) are 
responsible for some of the book’s most pointed zingers and profound musings. 
Fans of the author will probably trust him enough to tag along despite the book’s 
meanderings, but it will be up to the future installments to make the zaniness feel 
clever and not just silly.  KQG
rosenthal, amy Krouse Plant a Kiss; illus. by Peter H. Reynolds. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-198675-8 $14.99  
R 4-7 yrs
Little Miss plants a kiss . . . then waits . . . and waits . . . until finally, it blooms. 
She harvests the love into a big red basket and generously spreads it all around 
(“To and fro./ High and low”), despite her friends’ insistence that she keep it to 
herself (“Don’t you dare!/ It’s far too rare!”). When her basket runs dry, she returns 
to the plant and finds that there is an everlasting supply of twinkly love sprouting 
(“From one little kiss . . . /endless bliss!”). The jaunty rhyme has a lyrical edge 
to it that plays nicely with the sweet sentiment of the story, and if the narrative 
is on the saccharine side, it successfully radiates the joy of sharing affection with 
others. Rosenthal partners here for the first time with Reynolds, whose simple yet 
expressive style neatly matches the story’s tone. Scrawled figures, floating against 
white backgrounds, are barely brushed with digital color, often just one other hue 
setting off a shadowy taupe; the occasional splash of pink and the bright red bas-
ket therefore stand out strongly, and the characters’ actions take center stage. The 
“bliss” itself is a glittery, sparkly shower of pink and yellow dots that swishes and 
swirls through the story’s pages. This spirited ode to happiness will spread plenty 
of it among young audiences.  HM
370 • The BulleTin
roth, judith l. Goodnight, Dragons; illus. by Pascal Lemaitre. Disney Hy-
perion, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-4190-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 5-8 yrs
A boy sets off into the woods with a wagonload of supplies, intent upon taming 
the dragons who live there with affection and kindness. “Come, you heartbreakers. 
Come, you brokenhearted. Come, put out your fire with sweet chocolate milk,” he 
calls to the skies, and swarms of dragons descend upon him. The boy then showers 
the dragons with tender love and care and, with the assistance of dragon’s flame, 
turns a pot of chocolate milk into the world’s first hot chocolate. The initial premise 
here is sweet, and the boy’s poetic narration has an appealing knightly formality. 
The story is unfocused, though, and the hot-chocolate element is problematic on 
two fronts: first, it’s a change from what the boy was actually promising to the 
dragons, and more significantly, it shifts the balance from a magical story of a boy 
to a culinary pourquoi tale. Lemaitre’s illustrations, rendered in pencil and colored 
digitally, have a touch of Crockett Johnson to them, and the focused scenes often 
float against generous negative space. The light shifts with the passing of the day, 
moving from the pale light of afternoon to the deep purple of twilight, and touches 
of dense texture, particularly the leaves on trees, add further visual interest. Young 
listeners would be better off turning to Isop’s How Do You Hug a Porcupine? (BCCB 
9/11) for a more entertaining overview of the gentle approach, but those with secret 
dreams of taming the scaly wild things may enjoy picturing themselves joining the 
protagonist amid a huddle of sleepy dragons.  HM
sáenz, benjamin alire Aristotle and Dante Discover the Secrets of the Universe. Sim-
on, 2011 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0892-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0894-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
It’s the beginning of a long, hot summer in El Paso in 1987, and fifteen-year-old 
Ari is restless and bored when a boy named Dante offers to teach him to swim. 
Dante’s open demeanor is attractive to Ari, who’s never really had a good friend 
before, and the two boys soon become inseparable despite their differences. Dante 
is bookish and sweet, while Ari likes to brood, specifically about his older brother 
whom his family never mentions because he’s in prison. When Dante is almost hit 
by a car, Ari risks his life to save him and then pulls back emotionally from Dante’s 
effusive gratitude, but it isn’t until Dante moves away for the school year and begins 
experimenting with his sexuality, eventually coming to realize that he likes boys, 
that Ari really has to confront the secrets of his own universe. While there are lots 
of plot twists and some homophobic violence, there is little real conflict; instead, 
this is primarily a character- and relationship-driven novel, written with patient and 
lyrical prose that explores the boys’ emotional lives with butterfly-wing delicacy. 
Focalized through Ari, who feels that “the problem with my life was that it was 
someone else’s idea,” this teen loner tale leavens its angst with a considerable amount 
of wit, especially in Ari’s conversations with his mother. Readers may note that Ari’s 
character never really overcomes his main problem, as it is his remarkably sensitive 
parents who ultimately clue him in to his deepest feelings for Dante and push him 
March 2012 • 371
to accept them, but he seems to adjust to the situation as they help him realize that 
getting it right in this life doesn’t mean not making mistakes along the way.  KC 
sChmid, Paul Petunia Goes Wild; written and illus. by Paul Schmid. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-06-196334-6 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Little Petunia (from A Pet for Petunia) would much rather be an animal than a 
human girl, a preference that she expresses by wearing a tiger tail, roaring at pass-
ersby, and pleading with her parents for a cave in which to live. As a compromise, 
she offers to be their pet, an offer that provokes a page-long parental lecture: “No, 
you may NOT! Where did you get such an idea? Of all the crazy things! That is 
NOT how nice little girls behave.” Feeling completely misunderstood, Petunia ad-
dresses a packing box to Africa and climbs in, only to have second thoughts when 
she overhears her mother singing in the kitchen (“Tigers did not sing, thought 
Petunia. Or tickle at bedtime, neither”), and she decides to stay—but saves the 
box for moments when she needs a “wild place of her own.” Although the ending 
is a bit anticlimactic, Petunia’s desire for wildness will be easily understood by kids 
who have similar trouble containing themselves, and her parents’ overreaction to 
her behavior will likely resonate with obstreperous youngsters as well. They’ll also 
be tickled by her actions, especially when “Petunia, wearing no more than a smile, 
bathed in a mud puddle.” Schmid’s cheerful, minimalist illustrations (dark pencil 
occasionally accented with golden orange and periwinkle watercolor) feature scribbly 
lines in a childlike style against lots of white space. Petunia is irrepressibly jaunty 
in her striped dress and tiger tail, and she’s as endearing as she is excessive.  JH 
sierra, judy Suppose You Meet a Dinosaur: A First Book of Manners; illus. by Tim 
Bowers. Knopf, 2012 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96720-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86720-0 $16.99  
R 4-7 yrs
Sierra’s latest recounts, in playful rhymed verse, a chance meeting between a young 
girl and a dinosaur at the grocery store. Over the course of their shopping adven-
ture, the two have many opportunities to display their good manners, from an “I’m 
pleased to meet you” in the beginning to a “Thank you” when the girl helps the 
dinosaur pick up the apples she accidentally knocked over. The format is designed 
for readaloud interaction, with the stanzas describing the situation, then asking 
the listeners to come up with the correct responses (“She asks you, ‘Would you like 
some more?’/ How do you answer the dinosaur?” followed by “Yes, please”). While 
adult readers may have to provide a little additional prompting for the responses, 
this is overall an accessible and entertaining vehicle for talking about good manners. 
Bowers’ amiably slick acrylic compositions focus primarily on the girl, a pig-tailed 
brunette, and the dinosaur, a purse-carrying, pink-horned-rimmed-glasses-wearing 
lady T-Rex. Extreme closeups employ playfully skewed angles, adding absurdity to 
an already comic situation. This first book of manners infuses a potentially boring 
topic with playful energy and opportunities for verbal practice, making it a useful 
book for classrooms, storytimes, and families.  HM
372 • The BulleTin
simmons, Kristen Article 5. Tor, 2012 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-7653-2958-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
A war has destroyed all the major cities and a new political order has replaced the 
Bill of Rights with the Moral Statutes. Like many, seventeen-year-old Ember lives 
uneasily in this brave new world: she wonders what happened to the classmate who 
was arrested for observing Passover, worries about her mother’s stubborn refusal to 
stop reading romance novels, and longs for Chase, her childhood sweetheart and 
first love, who joined the military during the war and hasn’t been heard from for 
years. When Ember’s mother is arrested, Ember is sent to a reformatory. Chase is 
one of the arresting officers, and he and Ember are soon on the run together, with 
Ember determined to rescue her mother and Chase just trying to keep Ember safe. 
Ember’s continued failure to grasp the situation she’s put Chase in and the realities 
of her world can be frustrating, as it frequently places her in a damsel-in-distress 
role and adds a somewhat petty dimension to the mistrust and fear thwarting the 
inevitable romance. While the new world imagined here is legitimately terrifying, 
it is only sketchily developed. The pacing and emotions, however, will keep readers 
eagerly turning the pages, keen to follow Chase and Ember to a hopefully happy 
end. While its dystopic element isn’t successful, the chemistry between Chase and 
Ember is excellent, and the plentiful action, high stakes, and deliciously angst-laden 
love story (reminiscent of Mafi’s recent Shatter Me, BCCB 1/12) will please readers 
who didn’t come for the sci-fi.  CG
smith, GreG leitiCh Chronal Engine; illus. by Blake Henry. Clarion, 
2012 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-547-60849-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
When rising eighth-grader Max Pierson-Takahashi and his siblings Kyle and Emma 
spend their summer on a Texas ranch with their grandfather while their paleontolo-
gist mother digs for dinosaurs, strange things start happening almost immediately. 
The kids know the family lore—that their great-great-grandfather claimed to have 
invented a time machine he called the “chronal engine”—but certainly don’t expect 
that their grandfather will use it to predict his own heart attack, which he suffers after 
showing them how to use the machine. Then Emma is kidnapped by a mysterious 
man, Kyle and Max find her footprint among fossils from the Cretaceous period, 
and Max, Kyle, and their neighbor Petra know they must use the chronal engine 
to find and save her. The book careens through its setup with an overreliance on 
readers’ suspension of disbelief, and the puzzle pieces (for instance, Max’s extensive 
knowledge of dinosaurs and Petra’s ability to use a bow and arrow) all fall too neatly 
into place. The layering of time-travel paradoxes (someone seems to have traveled 
back a second time to pack exactly what they’ll need, give them warnings, etc.) 
is occasionally mind-bending but more often seems just a device for explaining 
the characters’ improbable success. Still, the spectacle of three teens gallivanting 
around prehistoric Texas battling (or, more often, fleeing) house-sized dinos in the 
flesh will be appeal enough for many dinophiles. There’s peril aplenty, but Smith 
keeps the tone light and easy, making this accessible to younger readers averse to 
anything truly scary. Occasional full-page illustrations, rendered in a smooth and 
March 2012 • 373
idealized digital style reminiscent of a Disney cartoon are generally static but help 
reinforce key moments.  CG
sPinelli, eileen A Big Boy Now; illus. by Megan Lloyd. Harper/HarperCol-
lins, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-008673-2 $16.99  
R 4-6 yrs
An unnamed bunny boy lists all the ways in which he is now “a big boy” (“In the 
morning I get dressed. All by myself”). When he removes the training wheels on his 
bike and takes quite a spill, however, the resulting scraped knee sends him crying 
to his mom and worrying that maybe he isn’t really a big boy after all. Fortunately, 
Mom’s reassurance is enough to send him back on to his bike. Boys and girls both 
will enjoy comparing their own developing skills with those of this bunny, and adults 
reading this aloud will undoubtedly hear a chorus of “I can do that, too” from their 
young audiences. Spinelli uses a clear narrative voice, short sentences, and simple 
vocabulary, and the text is printed in a large, bold font, making this additionally 
useful as a readalone selection for youngsters who already have a few easy readers 
under their belts. Lloyd’s line and watercolor illustrations are crisp and clear, with 
polished, regular lines contrasting against white space or softly tinted backgrounds. 
Lively poses and lots of action lines keep the art dynamic, and the scene in which 
the bunny runs home to mom with a bloody knee has real, age-appropriate drama. 
This would be a good introduction to an activity in which kids catalogue their own 
“big boy/girl” skills, or an enjoyable family readaloud selection.  JH
sPotswood, jessiCa Born Wicked. Putnam, 2012 [336p] (Cahill Witch 
Chronicles)
ISBN 978-0-399-25745-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 7-10
In this alternative version of the late nineteenth century, the Brotherhood rules 
New England with an iron fist, punishing any hint of witchcraft with death and 
limiting the fate of young girls to either marriage or the Sisterhood. With her sev-
enteenth birthday just weeks away, Cate Cahill must declare her future intentions 
in a mandatory ceremony, but she’s not prepared to become either a wife or a Sister. 
Instead, she’s determined to keep the promise she made to her dying mother to 
protect her younger sisters, who, like Cate, happen to be witches. Things get even 
trickier as Cate tries to manage a snooping governess, two interested suitors, her 
hot-tempered siblings, and a prophecy that indicates that the Cahill sisters have the 
potential to bring the Brotherhood to its knees—or bring about the mass slaughter 
of hundreds of women. Disorienting in an intriguing kind of way, Spotswood’s 
world is vaguely familiar, and it alludes more than once to current oppressions 
under certain religious oligarchies. Cate is a product of her times and culture—her 
belief in the wickedness of both her ability to do magic and her own femininity is 
authentically drawn, and her reluctance to concede that anything good can come 
from her gift is heartbreakingly credible. Cate’s inhibitions do fall away when it 
comes to one super-sexy gardener, and fans will get a heady dose of forbidden love 
here, complete with sighs tantalizingly repressed and bodices just short of ripping. 
The transformation of Cate’s main love interest from know-it-all bookworm to 
sun-kissed handyman will make any girl swoon, and readers may be a bit breathless 
themselves as they wait for the second installment.  KQG
374 • The BulleTin
staub, leslie Everybody Gets the Blues; illus. by R. G. Roth. Harcourt, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-15-206300-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 5-7 yrs
A young boy describes his changing moods, explaining that “sometimes I’m happy 
under the great blue sky./ Other times I cry and cry.” At times like those, he is 
visited by “Blues Guy,” who plays his horn and commiserates. The boy and Blues 
Guy go on to expound that “everybody gets the blues sometimes,” and together 
they sing the blues “sweet and slow for everyone who’s feeling low,” until the 
mood passes and people cheer up. This poetic look at sad feelings has about as 
much substance as the pale clouds that pepper the illustrations, and while much 
of the text possesses a reasonably blues-like cadence, a few lines are a bit ponder-
ous: “We sing: ‘I’ve got the blues so bad, I want to cry, cry, cry,/ I feel so bad and 
mad and sad inside!’” Still, the message about the universality of occasional blues 
may be a useful talking point for adults and kids (flap copy states that the author, 
a New Orleans native, was inspired by the way people survived and rallied after 
Hurricane Katrina). Roth’s sophisticated and stylized art, blending the handmade 
with the digital, uses appropriately muted tones of blues, grays, and browns. Subtle 
scratchy or fabric-like textures, especially in collage elements, add richness, while 
the blocky, angular human figures accentuate the sharpness of the bad feelings. 
A pleasantly retro sensibility and the pale tones keep things from becoming too 
depressing, however—this is blues lite—and while kids may not walk away much 
greater understanding of blue moods from this, it might make an attractive and 
useful partner to Rosen’s Michael Rosen’s Sad Book (BCCB 4/05).  JH 
stills, Caroline The House of 12 Bunnies; by Caroline Stills and Sarcia Stills-
Blott; illus. by Judith Rossell. Holiday House, 2012 [24p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2422-1 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Sophia, a small white bunny, searches for a lost item among various rooms in the 
bunny house as her eleven siblings cavort around her. The catalogues of room 
contents (“In the kitchen there are 5 cups, 4 plates, 2 bowls, and a mug without 
a handle”) provide the audience with a seek and find game and a counting op-
portunity, and the key use of prepositions (“Sophia hunts through the cupboards,” 
“Sophia looks on top of the table”) adds further educational value. Sophia finally 
looks “under her pillow” and finds the object of her search, a bedtime book, which 
she reads to the other eleven bunnies as they all drift off to sleep. Based on a story 
by her then-nine-year-old daughter, Stills’ bunny tale is a richer alternative (both 
textually and visually) to the more commercial seek and find books on the market 
for this age group, and its additional conceptual elements add to its utility. Ros-
sell’s cuddly pencil and watercolor art features fresh, spring shades of green, red, 
blue, and yellow against white or paler pastel backgrounds. The fuzzy bunnies 
themselves are ridiculously adorable, in combinations of white, gray, and brown. 
Several sport distinctive accessories (hats, bows, etc.), so that a particular bunny 
can easily be followed throughout the pages (the bunny in pearls, for example, ap-
parently loves to dance). Pair this with Jenkins’ Five Creatures (BCCB 2/01), use it 
to inspire kids to write their own similar stories, or pop it in an Easter basket for 
a sugar-free sweet treat.  JH
March 2012 • 375
sutton, sally Demolition; illus. by Brian Lovelock. Candlewick, 2012 24p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5830-4 $15.99  
R 3-6 yrs
Building things: good. Knocking things down: better. This onomatopoetic homage 
to destruction finds a multicultural and mixed-gender crew of workers suiting up 
at the job site, swinging a wrecking ball, chomping through concrete and rebar, 
ramming down walls, hosing dust, crushing stone, chipping wood, sorting steel 
scrap, and clearing the way for an urban play lot. Each double-page spread features 
husky black font alongside textured mixed-media scenes of the mighty machines in 
action. Four-line rhymed verses will have the story-hour set roaring out the sound 
effects: “Swing the ball. Swing the ball./ Thump and smash and whack./ Bring the 
top floors tumbling down./ Bang! CLANG! CRACK!” Sutton makes it clear that 
materials from the demolished building will be recycled, and so it seems like a bit 
of a missed opportunity that the playground equipment (which looks suspiciously 
like PVC pipe and springy, rubber-like matting) doesn’t clearly demonstrate the 
full circle of material use. Youthful demolition crews in training are unlikely to 
quibble, though, caught up as they’ll be in the sheer joy of bashing, slamming, and 
crunching—with impunity. EB
valentine, jenny Double. Hyperion, 2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-4714-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-10
After landing in a hostel for down and out kids in London, our protagonist is rec-
ognized as Cassiel Roadnight, a boy who went missing two years ago at the age of 
fourteen. Cassiel’s mother is thrilled through her haze of sedatives; Cassiel’s sister, 
Edie, tempers her delight with anger but is also ecstatic; Cassiel’s older brother 
greets him with warmth and a willingness to overlook the past. The first problem 
is that our protagonist is not actually Cassiel, just a dead ringer with an absence of 
home and identity due to the strangeness of his upbringing by his long-gone care-
taker. The second problem is that he’s walked into more danger than he’s escaped, 
because Cassiel’s home hides a treacherous secret bigger than his own. Valentine 
has superb control over her story, feeding reader suspicion in various directions as 
the tale unfolds and ensuring there’s still plenty of taut mystery even when it’s clear 
the protagonist couldn’t be Cassiel. The book gains additional emotional traction 
from the fact that the narrator is actually a better guy than Cassiel was and that his 
deception is benefiting Cassiel’s broken family as well as saving himself. The sus-
pense and sympathy play off of each other and the human dynamics are authentic, 
so the stakes remain high enough throughout to support the dramatic backstory 
revelations. Fans of psychodramas and family mysteries will rejoice in finding a 
book that’s as effective in the unwinding as in the original twist.  DS
vermond, Kira The Secret Life of Money: A Kid’s Guide to Cash; illus. by Clayton 
Hanmer. Owlkids, 2012 151p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-926973-19-7 $19.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-926973-18-0 $13.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-926973-20-3 $13.95  
M Gr. 4-7
This looks like a book about personal money management for kids, or possibly 
an overview of how American (U.S. and Canadian) monetary systems operate. 
376 • The BulleTin
Instead, Vermond delivers an unfocused mashup of personal and international 
finance that is likely to leave kids with little other than platitudes about saving 
their money, going to college, and distinguishing the International Monetary Fund 
from the World Bank. Chapters are randomly topical, with information failing to 
build upon established concepts and such basic terms as “bankruptcy” languish-
ing without definition, either in the text or glossary. Glaring contradictions pop 
up: advice against upscale labels at an upscale price because they mask clothing 
identical to that at lower prices is upended by a discussion of how “cheap clothes 
[are] not cheap.” Generalizations and simplifications can be downright insulting, 
such as the assertion that two-income families have more disposable income (tell 
that to minimum-wage workers who can’t make ends meet on two salaries). Other 
issues are suspiciously out of date, such as a student loan for college presented 
unquestioningly as a form of “good debt” or an example of annual return rates 
on investments at 10 to 12%. The strongest sections in this presentation are more 
concerned with philosophy and ethics than cash, as Vermond makes some useful 
points about the way we attempt to place value on different types of jobs, how 
culture figures into definitions of poverty, and even how to weigh the upside and 
downside of used-clothing donations. Libraries with broad collections on money 
and finance may want to include this title, but kids looking for sound, clear advice 
on how to grow pennies into dollars should probably invest their book-buying 
money elsewhere.  EB
volPoni, Paul The Final Four. Viking, 2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01264-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr.7-12
In this new novel from Volponi (Black and White, BCCB 6/05, etc.), basketball’s 
March Madness draws down toward the championship game with a match-up 
between the Michigan State Spartans and the Troy University (Alabama) Trojans, 
to see who will take on Duke or North Carolina for the national title. Spartans 
are led by Malcolm McBride, a “one and done” freshman who’s headed directly 
to the NBA and is more than willing to spout his views to sports reporters con-
cerning the inequity of unpaid college athletics. The Trojans boast Roko Bacic, a 
towering immigrant from war-torn Croatia who treasures his opportunity to play 
the game he loves and get a free college education into the bargain. It’s the classic 
setup of the team with individual star power versus the team with cohesion and 
cooperation, and you’d think that in YA Lit Land this could only lead to one of 
two foregone conclusions: the author awards the Cinderella-season good guys the 
win (happy sports-story ending), or the author throws the game in favor of the 
brash, cold-hearted, raw talent (the grim, life-sucks-and-then-you-die YA-novel 
ending). Volponi, however, won’t make either of the easy calls, creating instead a 
complex backstory for each of the featured players and their important teammates 
and airing a thought-provoking discussion of the pros and cons of student athletes 
vs. professional college players. A triple-overtime game keeps readers on the edge 
of their seats, but nerve-wracking as the action on the floor may be, the baggage 
that the players bring to the game is equally fraught. Don’t look to this review for 
a spoiler; suffice it to say, there is a winner and a loser. Just maybe not the kind 
you imagine.  EB
March 2012 • 377
walKer, sally m. Freedom Song: The Story of Henry “Box” Brown; illus. by Sean 
Qualls. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-058310-1 $17.99  
R* 5-8yrs
Ellen Levine and Kadir Nelson’s Henry’s Freedom Box (BCCB 4/07) sets the bar high 
for picture books about the Virginia slave who endured pummeling confinement 
in a crate as he had himself shipped to New York and freedom. Walker, inspired 
by the discovery that Henry Brown sang for many years in a church choir, takes a 
more poetic but equally successful tack, imagining that rhythm and song sustained 
Brown throughout his years of enslaved labor and inspired him to seek his freedom 
when his wife and children were sold away from Virginia. Walker infuses her text 
and Brown’s thoughts with patterned phrasing, from the “twist, snap, pick-a-pea” 
work songs he sang in the fields, to the “freedom-land, family, stay-together words” 
that comforted him as a child, to the “stay-still, don’t move, wait-to-be-sure words” 
that kept him silent as he waited for release from his shipping crate. Qualls’ mixed-
media illustrations, far more dreamy and stylized than Nelson’s near-photorealistic 
renderings, are nonetheless an excellent match for Walker’s text. Even his signature 
aquas and pinks, embellished with free-floating bubbles, are tempered with more 
sober grays, browns, and deep blues, and weighted with heavily textured brushwork. 
An author’s note touches on Walker’s research and what little is known of Brown’s 
subsequent history; also appended is the fascinating text of a letter from Brown’s 
accomplice in 1849, detailing Brown’s escape and cautioning the recipient, “for 
Heaven’s sake don’t publish this affair or allow it to be published. It would . . . 
prevent all others from escaping in the same way.”  EB
ward, lindsay When Blue Met Egg; written and illus. by Lindsay Ward. Dial, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3718-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-6 yrs
Stocking-capped Blue, a bird, is surprised when an “egg” (which sharp-eyed view-
ers will realize is a snowball) mysteriously lands in her nest one winter morning. 
Unable to find its mother, Blue adopts Egg as her sidekick, taking it sledding, on a 
carousel ride, and even, as the months roll past, to the art museum and the opera. 
As spring approaches, Egg begins to shrink and Blue “tried everything to make egg 
feel better. Even soup, but that just seemed to make things worse.” Eventually, Egg 
disappears, but in the midst of the puddle that its melting creates is a pink flower: 
“‘Egg, you’ve bloomed!’ exclaimed Blue.” The logical flaws here are pretty consid-
erable: kids will ask why Egg doesn’t melt in the museum or the opera house, and 
they’ll wonder how Blue will feel when the flower-Egg soon dies. This is otherwise 
an engaging story, though, and many kids will be amused by the snowball/egg mix-
up and by the “Egg’s” passive participation in Blue’s human-like activities. Ward’s 
art (mixed media with extensive cut-paper collage) excels in the winter city scenes, 
with patterned papers (e.g., graph paper, street maps) lending subtle textures to 
the snow-speckled cityscapes. Blue herself is a lovely robin’s egg blue, and her red 
and white polka-dotted hat make her relatively easy to spot against the occasionally 
busy compositions. This might pair will with that famous snowball story Keats’ 
The Snowy Day (BCCB 12/62), or children may enjoy comparing Blue to another 
clueless avian: Stoeke’s Minerva Louise.  JH
378 • The BulleTin
wasserman, robin The Book of Blood and Shadow. Knopf, 2012 [448p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96876-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86876-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89961-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Nora’s independent study, helping an eccentric professor translate a sixteenth-
century book by a notable alchemist (and the letters left by his daughter, Elizabeth), 
seems like a great way to spice up her senior year at boarding school while spending 
more time with her best friend, Chris, and his roommate, Max, who are also work-
ing on the project. Just as quickly as Nora becomes invested in Elizabeth’s life, Max 
transforms from a slightly creepy tagalong to a sweet, solicitous boyfriend. Then 
Chris is brutally murdered, his girlfriend Adriane is left without memory of the 
night, and Max (the main suspect in the crime) disappears. With Adriane, Chris’ 
cousin Eli, and the manuscripts salvaged from an earlier attack on the professor in 
tow, Nora embarks on a globe-trotting search for Max, continuing her translation 
of the secrets encrypted in Elizabeth’s long-ago communications and uncovering 
conspiracies of legendary proportions in which she herself is apparently a key figure. 
Nora is a sympathetic heroine, studious and slightly wounded, and the supporting 
characters are vivid and appealingly quirky, making their gradually revealed loyal-
ties and betrayals all the more gripping. This is a compulsively readable mashup 
of Twilight and The Da Vinci Code, tying together breathless first love and secret 
societies, codes and puzzles, deadly secret histories, and endless twists for edge-of-
your-seat appeal.  CG
whitaKer, aleCia The Queen of Kentucky. Poppy/Little, 2012 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-12506-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-19337-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Ricki Jo is determined to give herself an extreme makeover as she enters high school, 
leaving behind her tiny Catholic grade school and expanding her horizons beyond 
her life as a hard-working farm girl. Another new girl, Mackenzie, becomes her 
ally, and things look promising as they join up with an established group of friends 
who are definitely in the cool crowd. Ricki Jo, now Ericka, becomes a cheerleader, 
develops a crush on a much sought after boy who teases her mercilessly, experiments 
with alcohol, and reinvents her sense of style through magazines. Her transforma-
tion doesn’t always go smoothly, and her best friend, Luke, tries his best to keep 
her grounded, but Ericka is determined to transform from her old self to what 
she considers her new and improved self. There are hints of authorial nostalgia in 
Ericka’s canny and sometimes apologetic self-awareness, but her perspective remains 
steadfastly young teen as she argues for her right to change herself, and she never 
dives overboard into hyberbolic mayhem. Ericka is forthright and down-to-earth 
enough to be sympathetic; she clearly has her limits, even if she is willing to push 
them a bit, and younger readers looking to break out of an old persona into a new 
one will find both her complaints and her moments of triumph all too familiar. 
They’ll just wish for their own Luke, who clearly wins all awards for best best-
friend-turned-boyfriend in a tween novel.  KC
March 2012 • 379
woodinG, Chris Pandemonium; illus. by Cassandra Diaz. Graphix/Scholastic, 
2012 [160p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-25221-8 $22.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-439-87759-6 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Seifer Tombchewer (the surname earned by his senile grandfather with a literal taste 
for rocks) is a dead ringer for Prince Talon of the Darkling Realm, a fact he only 
becomes aware of after he is kidnapped from his mountain village and forced to 
play substitute for the missing prince by his royal advisors. Nothing in his peasant 
upbringing could have prepared Seifer for palace life, but he is able to fool most 
of the necessary people (with the notable exception of his new sister, the princess) 
and even manages to negotiate a few peace treaties through his imaginative ap-
proach to governing—which includes burping contests and stare-downs. Between 
the creatively snarky names of the characters (Master Lumbago has creaky back 
problems, and Seifer’s future mother-in-law is the Baroness Crustacea Effluvia) 
and the epic pomposity of the royal family, Wooding takes some choice cracks at 
classic fantasy tropes in this graphic novel, but the tongue-in-cheek humor is all 
in good fun. As the underdog, Seifer is easy to root for, especially when it becomes 
clear that he’s got more than a few enemies in the royal court and even those he 
thought he could count on have questionable motives. Although the panels are at 
times cluttered with superfluous text, the full-color manga-flavored illustrations 
(viewed in a partially uncolored galley) are lively, and with their horns and bat-like 
wings, the dark faeries of the Realm are striking figures. An adventure story with 
a good dose of irreverence (and giant, maniacal cats) is hard to resist, so have this 
one ready for your jokesters as well as your fantasists.  KQG
woodson, jaCqueline Beneath a Meth Moon. Paulsen/Penguin, 2012 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25250-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Laurel, her father, and her little brother are reeling from the deaths of her mother 
and grandmother, who refused to leave their home in Pass Christian, Mississippi, 
during Hurricane Katrina. As they try to start life over in a new town, things look 
better for Laurel: she meets a sympathetic new friend named Kaylee, becomes a 
cheerleader, and starts dating T-Boom. Their first night together, though, T-Boom 
introduces her to meth, and she becomes instantly addicted. Her addiction pro-
gresses quickly, and when Kaylee confronts her and her father finds her stash, she 
runs away and lives on the streets, begging for money and trying desperately to 
stay high. She meets Moses, who paints murals of kids who have died as a result of 
meth, and he tries to talk her around to getting help before she becomes another 
one of his portraits. Woodson’s depiction of Laurel’s addiction is as accurate as 
it is heartbreaking; readers will be deeply moved by her memories as she works 
through her grief, and they’ll sympathize with her desire to find some way to feel 
better. Woodson’s use of the term “moon” for the drug is uncommon if not her 
own invention, but it effectively conveys the experience Laurel has when under the 
influence; she feels luminous and happy despite her persistent grief. Those with 
no prior knowledge about meth addiction, however, will need more context than 
Woodson gives to understand the rapidity of Laurel’s descent. Moses is a somewhat 
380 • The BulleTin
clichéd hero as he becomes the gay black savior of this distressed white cheerleader, 
and her angelic little brother Jesse seems designed to pull on the heartstrings as 
he begs his sister not to die. The overt sentimentality of these two characters dims 
what could otherwise be a powerful portrait of an utterly misguided response to 
grief, but readers looking to understand the attraction of a destructive substance 
will get a glimmer of understanding through Laurel.  KC 
wriGht, barbara Crow. Random House, 2012 296p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96928-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86928-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98270-5 $10.99  
Ad Gr. 5-8
As the nineteenth century draws to a close, Moses Thomas has reason to feel opti-
mistic. His college-educated father, a reporter for an expanding African-American 
newspaper in Wilmington, NC, sets high expectations for Moses, and the general 
prosperity of his middle-class black community makes the future seem realistically 
bright. Grandmother Boo Nanny, however, reads the signs in nature—particularly 
the shadow of a crow that signifies ill fortune—and senses that things will soon 
change for the worse. An inflammatory article on the perceived threat to white 
womanhood provokes an equally incendiary response from Mr. Thomas’ editor, and 
the issue becomes a flashpoint upon which the Wilmington election turns. White 
supremacist candidates are elected, a self-appointed committee of white business 
leaders calls for the resignation of black officials, and vigilante law throws the once 
tolerant community into a full-out race riot. Wright bases her novel on historical 
events of 1898 Wilmington, but setting the stage for the climactic conflagration 
(literal and figurative) takes over half the novel, most of which is focused on small 
episodes from boyhood memories, recalled by an adult Moses of indeterminate age. 
Mr. Thomas, Moses’ personal hero and a martyr for his community, takes on an 
almost superhuman persona, and his bursts of hyper-articulate oration often make 
the idiomatic speech patterns of his family and neighbors sound stereotypically 
countrified in contrast. Nonetheless, this fictional snapshot of the waning days of 
Reconstruction ably captures the moment when reason moved out of Wilmington, 
North Carolina and Jim Crow moved in.  EB
correcTion:
Cynthia Grady, author of our Big Picture title for February, I Lay My Stitches Down: 
Poems of American Slavery, wrote a wonderful book. Cynthia Grant, an author whose 
last outing was in 2002, also wrote many fine books. They are, however, not the 
same person, and we apologize for crediting Ms. Grady’s book to Ms. Grant in the 
byline of the Big Picture. 
March 2012 • 381
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
butler, rebeCCa P. Copyright for Teachers and Librarians in the 21st Century.
Neal-Schuman, 2011 276p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1555707385 $70.00
An invaluable resource for media specialists and school librarians, this accessible 
guide offers a thorough look at copyright law, negotiating the principles of fair use 
and public domain to reveal their relevant applications in the classroom and library 
settings. The first portion of the book gives a general introduction to copyright 
law (both federal and international) and its associated concepts, citing particularly 
thorny areas and laying out the consequences of copyright infringement. The sec-
ond and perhaps most helpful part describes the applications of the law to specific 
types of media, including internet materials and electronic resources, as well the 
impact of copyright law on interlibrary loan and distance education. Drawing on 
her experiences with teachers and educators through her copyright workshops, 
Butler presents a plethora of real-world examples that address the most common 
questions librarians may face (such as “Can I copy this to use in class?”) and more 
complicated and obscure issues (such as “Can we videotape the performance of 
the school band playing this copyrighted song and upload it to the web?”). Also 
immensely helpful to the professional on the go are the easy-to-follow flowcharts 
that pepper the chapters and will allow librarians to easily become their organiza-
tion’s resident copyright expert.  KQG 
382  •  The BulleTin
Addiction–fiction: Woodson
Adventure: Cottrell Boyce; 
Gibbs; Klimo; reese; Simmons; 
Smith; Wasserman
African Americans: Bausum; Hunter-
Gault; Osborne; Walker
African Americans–fiction: Frazier; 
Woodson; Wright
African Americans–stories: Lyons
Animals–fiction: Boreen; Burks; 
davies Welcome
Animals–stories: McPhail
Appearance–fiction: Palacio
Art and artists–fiction: Crowley
Asian Americans–fiction: Lin
Bands–fiction: nichols
Basketball–fiction: volponi
Bees–poetry: Florian
Behavior: Montgomery
Behavior–stories: Schmid; Sierra
BiOGrAPHieS: Bausum; Borden; 
Hunter-Gault; Walker
Birds–stories: Ward
Blogs–fiction: Hautman
Books and reading–stories: Bern-
heimer
Brothers–fiction: deans; Lampson; 
McMann
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Jonell; 
Smith
Cars–fiction: Cottrell Boyce
Centaurs–fiction: Klimo
Circuses–stories: Gravett
Cities–fiction: durbin
Civil rights movement: Bausum; 
Hunter-Gault; Osborne
Clothing: Ajmera
Clothing–fiction: Burks
Colors: Lobel
Companies–fiction: rex
COnCePt BOOKS: Lobel
Conspiracies–fiction: Wasserman
Consumer education: vermond
COuntinG BOOKS: Lobel; Stills
Crime and criminals–fiction: Purcell; 
valentine; Wasserman
death–fiction: damico
depression–fiction: Hubbard
dinosaurs–fiction: Smith
dinosaurs–stories: Sierra
disabilities–fiction: Mazer
disasters: Kops
disasters–fiction: Lake
dogs–stories: Bowen
dystopias–fiction: etienne; Sim-
mons
Economics: vermond
elections–fiction: Burks
emotions–stories: Staub
Ethics and values: Borden; reese
etiquette–stories: Sierra
Fairies–fiction: durbin
Faith–fiction: Klauss
Families–fiction: Block; Fitzmaurice; 
Flinn; Klauss; Lin; Littlewood; 
McMann; valentine
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
March 2012  •  383
Families–stories: Kaplan; Lyons
FAntASy: Cross; damico; durbin; 
etienne; Fantaskey; Flinn; 
Hellisen; Jonell; Klimo; Meyer; 
reese; Spotswood
Fathers–fiction: Frazier; Hiranandani
Fish–fiction: Boreen
FOLKtALeS And FAiry tALeS: 
Flinn
Food and eating–fiction: daley; 
Littlewood; rex
Food and eating–stories: Lobel
Friends–fiction: Abbott; Block; 
Burks; daley; deans; Hautman; 
Hiranandani; Hubbard; Sáenz
Gardens–fiction: Potter
Gardens–stories: Fogliano
Gays and lesbians–fiction: danforth; 
Sáenz
Grandparents–fiction: deans
GrAPHiC nOveLS: Wooding
Grief–fiction: Woodson
Growing up–stories: Spinelli
Haiti–fiction: Lake
Happiness–stories: rosenthal
HiStOriCAL FiCtiOn: dan-
forth; Gould; Lyons; Wright
History, U.S.: Bausum; Fitzmaurice; 
Fryd; Hunter-Gault; Kops; Lyons; 
Osborne; Walker
Holocaust: Borden
Horses–fiction: Klimo
HuMOr: damico; davies Wel-
come; Florian; Gravett; Horvath; 
Kaplan; McPhail; Montgomery; 
rex; Ward; Wooding
identity–fiction: Frazier; Palacio; 
Whitaker
identity–stories: Schmid
imagination–stories: Schmid
immigrants–fiction: Purcell
indian Americans–fiction: Hiranan-
dani
iraq War–fiction: Mazer
Japanese Americans–fiction: 
Fitzmaurice
Language arts: McPhail
Latinos–fiction: Sáenz
Libraries–stories: Bernheimer
Literature, children’s: Potter
Machines: Sutton
Magic–fiction: Flinn; Jonell; Little-
wood
Marine life–fiction: Boreen
Media–fiction: Burks
Money: vermond
Money–fiction: nichols
Music and musicians–fiction: Miller; 
nichols
MySterieS: Abbott; Horvath; 
Lampson; Miller; valentine; Was-
serman
Nature study: davies Outside; 
Florian
nobility–fiction: Hellisen
Orphans–fiction: Potter
Pigs–stories: Gravett
POetry: davies Outside; Florian
Politics–fiction: Burks; Hellisen
Poverty–fiction: Lake
rabbits–fiction: Horvath
rabbits–stories: Stills
racism: Osborne
racism–fiction: Wright
Reading aloud: Florian; Horvath
Reading, easy: Abbott; Burks; 
daley; davies Welcome; Spinelli
Reading, reluctant: davies Welcome; 
Fryd
relationships–fiction: Crowley; 
Halls; Hautman; Klauss; Whita-
ker
religion–fiction: danforth
rHyMinG StOrieS: Sierra; Staub
romance–fiction: Cross; etienne; 
Fantaskey; Meyer; Simmons; 
Spotswood
royalty–fiction: Wooding
School–fiction: Block; etienne; 
Gibbs; Hiranandani; Palacio; 
Whitaker
Science and scientists–fiction: Frazier
SCienCe FiCtiOn: Cross
Seasons–poetry: davies Outside
Secrets–fiction: Crowley; Gould; 
Lampson; McMann
384  •  The BulleTin
SeeK And Find BOOKS: Stills
Self-control–stories: Kaplan
Shopping–stories: Kaplan
SHOrt StOrieS: Halls
Sicily–fiction: Meyer
Sisters–fiction: Spotswood
Slavery: Walker
Soldiers–fiction: Mazer
Spies and spying–fiction: Gibbs
Sports–fiction: volponi
Spring–stories: Fogliano
SteAMPunK: durbin
Storytime: Bowen; Gravett; Spinelli; 
Sutton
Suicide–fiction: Hubbard
SuPernAturAL StOrieS: Meyer
SuSPenSe: valentine; volponi
technology–fiction: reese
time travel–fiction: Cross; Smith
trafficking–fiction: Purcell
uncles–fiction: damico
vampires–fiction: Fantaskey
venice–fiction: Gould
voyages and travel–fiction: deans; 
Lin; Miller; Wasserman
Witches–fiction: Flinn; Spotswood
Wolves–stories: Gravett
World cultures: Ajmera
World War ii: Borden
World War ii–fiction: Fitzmaurice
2715 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD 21218 • 1.800.548.1784 • 410.516.6987 • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
The Bulletin of the  
Center for Children’s Books
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
issn: 0008-9036 / e-issn: 1558-6766
Children’s literature*
R. H. W. Dillard, Editor-in-Chief 
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, Editors
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
issn: 0092-8208 / e-issn: 1543-3374
Children’s literature 
assoCiation Quarterly*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, Editor
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
issn: 0885-0429 / e-issn: 1553-1201
The lion and the uniCorn
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman,  
and Naomi J. Wood, Editors
An international theme- and genre-centered  
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion  
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
issn: 0147-2593 / e-issn: 1080-6563
*Please direct inquiries and orders to the ChLA:  
www.childlitassn.org.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
ChiLDreN’S LiterAture
 
T
he Lion and the Unicorn, an 
international theme- and 
genre-centered journal, 
is committed to a serious, ongoing 
discussion of literature for children.  
The journal’s coverage includes the 
state of the publishing industry, regional authors, 
comparative studies of significant books and genres, new developments 
in theory, the art of illustration, the mass media, and popular culture. 
It is especially noted for its interviews with authors, editors, and other 
important contributors to the field, as well as its outstanding book 
review section. 
Published three times per year.  
To order: 
Volume 36 (2012). 
Call: 800-548-1784 or 410-516-6987
$40.00, individuals (print), $43.00 (online) 
Fax: 410-516-3866 
$123.00, institutions (print), $130.00 (online) Email: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu 
$172.00, institutions (print & online) 
Online: www.press.jhu.edu/journals
ISSN 0147-2593 / E-ISSN 1080-6563
Published by  
T h e JOhns hOpkins UnivErsiTy prEss
The Lion and The Unicorn: 
a criTicaL JoUrnaL of  
chiLdren’s LiTeraTUre 
expLoring LiTeraTUre 
for chiLdren.
state of the publishing industry, regional authors, 
David L. russell, Ferris sTaTe UniversiTy, 
karin E. Westman, Kansas sTaTe UniversiTy,  
and naomi J. Wood, Kansas sTaTe UniversiTy, 
Editors
