T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
October 2006
Vol. 60   No. 2
A Look InsIde
T  h  e   B  u  l  l  e  T  i  n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
October 2006
Vol. 60   No. 2
53  The Big PicTure
 
 Dear Mr. Rosenwald  by Carole Boston Weatherford; illus. by R. Gregory Christie
54  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
59  • Framed  by Frank Cottrell Boyce
64  • Extreme Animals  by Nicola Davies; illus. by Neal Layton
66  • Escape!: The Story of the Great Houdini  by Sid Fleischman
84  • Porch Lies:  Tales of Slicksters, Tricksters, and Other Wily Characters   
 
 by Patricia McKissack; illus. by André Carrilho
90  • Bad Bear Detectives:  An Irving and Muktuk Story  by Daniel Pinkwater;  
 
 illus. by Jill Pinkwater
103  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
105  suBjeCt And use Index
52 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only.  Recommended for the   
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Loretta Gaffney, Reviewer (LG)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann
Melissa Zilic
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $80.00; combined print & electronic $112.00; multiple 
institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $50.00; 
students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $13.20 per subscription for postage; 
subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $9.35. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm 
from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in 
microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks 
should be made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals 
Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. 
FAX: 410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.
edu/journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: 
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2006 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by R. Gregory Christie from Dear Mr. Rosenwald  ©2006. Used by permission of 
Scholastic Press.
OcTOBer 2006 • 53
the BIg PICture
Dear Mr. Rosenwald
by Carole Boston Weatherford; illustrated by R. Gregory Christie
It’s 1921, and Ovella, the daughter of African-American sharecroppers, goes to 
school in an old church, a cold, leaky, rickety structure divided into two classrooms 
by a sheet.  When news comes that Julius Rosenwald, the president of Sears, is 
responding to the call of the Tuskegee Institute’s Booker T. Washington by donating 
money for school construction, the hopeful community digs deep to meet the re-
quirements, finding land and raising money for matching funds.  Soon the building 
goes up, a playground is constructed, and the proud community celebrates its new 
school.  The kids’ first assignment?  A thank-you letter to Mr. Rosenwald.  
Weatherford tells Ovella’s story in fourteen free-verse poems narrated by 
Ovella herself, compactly conveying a life where hard work is an everyday reality 
and solvency is a dream always deferred.  The book’s second poem, “Sharecropping,” 
imparts two pieces of news:  that despite a good crop, the family is more in debt to 
their landlord than ever, and that there’s a new baby on the way.  Those strictures 
set up the key narrative question:  “How on earth will poor people/ find money 
to give away?”  What’s important here, though, is not so much the how—selling 
crops from donated land, holding box parties, earmarking collection money at 
church—as the why—to find a concrete way to give these kids a better future.  The 
church’s donation of school land, “Land that would have been used for graves,” 
goes instead for the future: “Now, a seed is sowed instead.”  Ovella’s family has even 
more hope for this seed than the ones they grow, with Mama determinedly saying 
“This child will have a better chance” when baby sister Leona is born.  Christie’s 
sweeps of color convey the ramshackle nature of the current structures with their 
blotchy and uneven textures, while the people are vivid, intensely hued figures, 
grouped in strong configurations against the earthtoned landscape. The strong 
angles of building and roads that anchor many spreads are always punctuated and 
invigorated by large or small human groupings—by the people who created those 
very structures.  The final spread celebrates both the new school, with its clean, 
solid walls, and the bell-ringing teacher who stands tall before it, summoning her 
students in and inspiring Ovella to follow in her footsteps.  
Most contemporary American kids take schooling for granted, if they’re 
not actively hostile.  Between Christie’s artistic vigor and Weatherford’s quiet-
spoken sincerity, this avoids becoming a preachy lesson about the importance of 
schooling, but the point is effectively made:  “My parents are counting on me/ to 
learn all I can,” Ovella says simply, understanding that it’s now her turn to carry 
this responsibility.  Nor is this an overall treatment of the often-forgotten, flawed 
but effective and widespread enterprise of the Rosenwald schools (details about 
Booker T. Washington’s influence and Rosenwald’s funding are simply and effectively 
54 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
related without bogging the story down, and an author’s note gives more informa-
tion about the schools), and for all the respect paid in the title and the book to 
Julius Rosenwald, this isn’t a tale about the wonders of philanthropy.  Rosenwald’s 
money is itself a seed, the providing of an opportunity for a community that pulls 
together to make the most out of this start, even in the midst of hard times.  Even 
more than an eye-opening look at history, this is a compelling and emotional tale 
of a community laboring toward a better future for the next generation, with a 
kid’s-eye understanding that brings that large and abstract theme into accessible 
reach.  (See review, p. 100, for publication information.)  
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
ArmsTrong, Jennifer The American Story: 100 True Tales from American History; 
illus. by Roger Roth. Knopf, 2006 358p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91256-8 $39.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81256-3 $34.95 
Ad Gr. 4-7
From the contentious founding of St. Augustine in 1565 through the contentious 
presidential election of 2000, these chronologically arranged stories hit many high 
points of American history and culture. Selection of episodes seems more closely 
aligned to Armstrong’s interests than the middle-grades social-studies curriculum, 
which can be variously regarded as a boon (inclusion of such interesting figures 
as Asser Levy, the first American Jew to struggle for and win several disputed civil 
rights) or a bust (1929 is evidently more notable for the St. Valentine’s Day Mas-
sacre than the stock market crash). Armstrong embellishes her brief tales with some 
old-fashioned embroidery (“The land teemed with deer and bear, the waters flashed 
with the fins of many fishes, and mussels and oysters were as numerous as grains of 
sand”), and Roth’s generous line-and-watercolor illustrations take a comical turn, 
no matter the gravity of the subject. The most valuable feature of this volume is 
not the storytelling itself but the indexing of the tales for access to both specific 
information and general themes. Besides a standard index of events, names, and 
places, Armstrong also identifies “story arcs,” thematic headings under which 
several episodes are grouped. Again, these arcs seem to reflect not only the useful 
and expected (religion, communications) but also the eccentric and serendipitous 
(cattle and bananas). This may well generate more interest as a research sourcebook 
or a teacher’s handy stash of three- to five-page readalouds than as a child’s choice 
for independent reading, but isn’t practicality, after all, a quintessential American 
trait?  EB 
AugArde, sTeve Celandine. Fickling, 2006 [496p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75049-8 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75048-X $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-8
Although this is the second book in an expected trilogy, this British import is actually 
OcTOBer 2006 • 55
the prequel to the first volume: long before Midge, the human protagonist of The 
Various (BCCB 5/04), is even born, Celandine is having adventures with the four 
tribes of little people that secretly live on the borders of human life. Seeking refuge 
from a miserable boarding school and trying to outrun her grief for a brother who 
was recently killed in World War I, Celandine is determined to find the group of 
otherworldly creatures she glimpsed in her family’s woods years before. Although 
she does find and join them, her tribe, the Tinklers, is now being viciously attacked 
by power seekers who will stop at nothing to acquire a mystical, powerful talisman 
that the Tinklers protect. While a good deal of the book is focused on Celandine’s 
domestic and school disputes, these real-world foci shape Celandine into the au-
dacious thirteen-year-old that she is, and since she is an admirable and engaging 
heroine regardless of her surroundings, this careful attention to both halves of her 
life is warranted. However, Augarde’s writerly enthusiasm and gift for evocative 
description are best conveyed through the perilous adventures of the Various and the 
gripping details of their struggle for survival in a world that is relentlessly dangerous 
for tiny creatures. Fans of the previous volume and fantasy readers searching for a 
compelling and lavishly detailed book will enjoy this rich offering; established and 
new fans alike will anxiously anticipate the wrap-up to the trilogy.  AS 
BArnes, Jennifer Lynn Golden. Delacorte, 2006 247p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90330-8 $9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-385-73311-9 $7.95 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Subtlety is not part of the social system at Lissy’s high school in Oklahoma; 
you’re either Golden or you’re a Non, and not even Lissy’s status as the new girl 
from California gives her enough cachet for entry into the top caste. Though her 
grandmother calls Lissy’s ability to see auras a gift, and Lissy’s little sister Lexie is 
dying for her own Sight to manifest itself, Lissy sees it as one more weirdness that 
contributes to her status as social pariah. As her Sight develops, though, she is able 
to see more than auras—she begins to see the connections between people, making 
a walk through the halls of her high school into a technicolored octopus of stream-
ing and intertwining auras; she also sees nauseating, terrifying evil in the very hot 
math teacher that everyone thinks is such a great guy. The pace lags through overly 
repetitive descriptions of Lissy’s visions, and the basis of the situation is a standard 
chick-lit drama. It’s nice to see a touch of innovation on the new-girl-crashes-school-
hierarchy plot, though; being able to see and even manipulate who’s crushing on 
whom and who is really evil underneath their suave exteriors is a handy skill that 
most high-schoolers would covet. Barnes also makes some of her characters more 
ambiguous than one might expect, and the climax is B-horror-movie worthy. Shop 
this to readers who liked Lauren Myracle’s Rhymes with Witches (BCCB 5/05) to 
add another dimension to their suspicions that there’s something occult driving 
the high school social scene.  KC
BAskin, norA rALeigh In the Company of Crazies; illus. by Henry P. 
Raleigh. HarperCollins, 2006 [176p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-059608-2 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-059607-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Seventh-grader Mia rebels against her mother’s expectations for academic success, 
her grades decline and she develops a shoplifting habit, leading to mounting friction 
with her parents that results in her being sent to Mountain Laurel, a boarding school 
56 • The BulleTin
for emotionally troubled boys that is now opening its doors to female students. 
There Mia undergoes requisite teasing as the only girl, but it’s good-natured; the 
boys mostly needle one other, and Mia soon grows fascinated by them, especially 
Drew, a brooding boy with a startling artistic talent. Mia’s stint at Mountain Laurel 
alternates with flashbacks that reveal the depth of Mia’s mother’s investment in her 
academic and personal success and the damage it has done to their relationship, as 
well as Mia’s disquietude about a classmate’s death. The oddity of being a female 
student among a group of boys with varying degrees of emotional and social capac-
ity is underplayed in favor of highlighting Mia’s emotional landscape, as she slowly 
begins to understand her troubled relationship with her mother and processes her 
bereavement. Spot art consists of doodles representing Mia’s own drawings, which 
intertwine with the main narrative. This relatively gentle treatment of a troubled 
girl’s emotional journey is gracefully told; though it raises some nagging questions 
about why Mia was admitted to Mountain Laurel, they are also in some sense 
beside the point of her journey, in which she must not only listen to others but 
learn to listen to herself.  LG
BeLL, hiLAri The Prophecy. Eos/HarperColllins, 2006 195p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-059944-8 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-059943-X $15.99 
R Gr. 5-7
Prince Perryndon, or Perryn, as he would rather be called, is not the swaggering, 
belligerent warrior his father hoped he would become. Instead, the fourteen-year-
old has spent years in the royal libraries quietly researching a foolproof method of 
killing a dangerous local dragon. While trying to elude a murderous traitor in the 
castle, Perryn finally stumbles across a promising dragon-slaying prophecy requiring 
the convergence of three beings: a true bard, a unicorn, and the Sword of Samhain 
(a tough-talking magical weapon). Certain that the slaying of the dragon will make 
his father love and respect him, Perryn sets out on his quest. Happily, Perryn is 
braver than he thinks and smarter than he knows; even without the prophecy, he is 
equipped with all of the tools he needs to slay the dragon. Bell is an adept storyteller 
who turns this straightforward, familiar plot into an intriguing and emotionally taut 
coming-of-age story, fusing the flourishes of battle scenes with humorous dialogue. 
The troubling of the “happily ever after” convention will appeal to readers who have 
outgrown an ideal ending: they will appreciate the well-told fairy tale and revel in 
the ambiguous, multifaceted nature of the protagonists and their uncertain futures. 
Issues of war, altruism, and the complicated bonds of family imbue the book with 
elements of realistic fiction, making it a likely sell even to non-fantasy fans (if they 
can get past the cheesy unicorn cover).  AS
BerkowiTz, JAcoB Jurassic Poop: What Dinosaurs (and Others) Left Behind; illus. 
by Steve Mack. Kids Can, 2006 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55337-860-1 $14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55337-867-9 $6.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Who knew that poop would be such a popular subject (see Davies’ Poop: A Natural 
History of the Unmentionable, BCCB 11/04, and Goodman’s The Truth about Poop, 
6/04) that authors would need to specialize within the field? Berkowitz narrows 
the fecal focus to poops of the past and what they can tell us, whether it be about 
dinosaurs or long-ago humans. Berkowitz’ style is goofy and lighthearted, but there’s 
plenty of real information, ranging from profiles of scientists who study different 
OcTOBer 2006 • 57
aspects of historic poop, features on particular poop lessons (ancient Texans ate 
fifteen times the amount of fiber we do), discussions of terminology, and advice 
on how to find coproliths (petrified poop) and whip up a fake batch at home. The 
approach occasionally becomes a bit more fluffy than usefully comedic, but overall 
this is an effectively wacky look at a revealing if odd branch of science. The brows-
able format combines cartoony digital art, photographs (which are sometimes too 
small for real impact), and design elements such as spiky borders and background 
shading, and each feature has a catchy title (“Turd to Treasure,” “Don’t Scoop That 
Poop!”, “History from the Bottom Up”); the result is a homey clutter that will 
reassure reluctant readers and invite looky-loos in for further reading. A glossary, 
answer key to quizzes, and index are included.  DS
BLAcker, Terence Parent Swap.  Farrar, 2006 [240p]
ISBN 0-374-35752-8 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Danny Bell’s tendency to spin outlandish fantasies about escaping his family life 
is understandable, given that his mother has moved out and that his father spends 
all day drinking beer in front of the television, nostalgic for his glory days as an 
(almost) famous rock star. Then Danny discovers that his dreams can become a 
reality: after finding an intriguing ad for ParentSwap™ in his backpack, Danny calls 
the company up and learns that ParentSwap™ can help him to leave his home and 
relocate with a more compatible family. Pushing guilty feelings aside, Danny chooses 
reassignment with the Harrisons, whose staid, orderly lifestyle seems to promise the 
stability that he craves. Soon, though, the Harrisons’ controlling tendencies and 
over protectiveness of their daughter explode, leaving Danny disenchanted with 
his new parents. While more pedestrian fare might end here—i.e., Danny realiz-
ing that his own folks aren’t that bad after all and moving back home—this dryly 
humorous British import instead takes a surprising turn: various clues and a vague 
sensation that he’s being watched lead to Danny’s discovery that ParentSwap™ 
is actually a front for a reality-television series. Danny’s alternating irritation with 
and protectiveness of his father adds a layer of warmth to the fast-paced snark, and 
interviews with the various players interspersed throughout the narrative inflect 
the novel itself with a reality-TV feel. Those who have fantasized about trading in 
their parents for a different model will find the idea of the parent swap entertain-
ing, while fans of reality television will not be disappointed when Danny, realizing 
that he’s been duped in Joe Schmo fashion, hits back with a surprising and satisfying 
revenge.  LG
BLedsoe, Lucy JAne How to Survive in Antarctica; written and illus. with pho-
tographs by Lucy Jane Bledsoe. Holiday House, 2006 102p
ISBN 0-8234-1890-1 $16.95 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Bledsoe turns her three extensive trips to Antarctica into a cheerful and informal 
overview of life on the southernmost continent. After an opening chapter that 
provides preliminary information about travel to Antarctica, three chapters focus 
respectively on the Antarctic Peninsula, McMurdo Sound, and the South Pole, all 
major Antarctic research areas and population centers. The tone is lively and the 
book is browsable, with a mixture of personal and scientific interest in the travel-
guidish narrative. Unfortunately, it is also sometimes confusing: anecdotes describing 
aspects of “The Adventure” the author experienced aren’t differentiated clearly from 
58 • The BulleTin
primary text, and the sidebars are additionally simply interleaved with the main 
narrative. Information is doled out unevenly, with redundancy in some places and 
gaps in others; maps are a little scanty as well, lacking scale information and some 
important elements (like Ross Island), and some fairly exotic terms are explained 
only in the glossary or not at all. The best part of the book lies in Bledsoe’s eager 
tales of her Antarctic exploits, from camping on the Antarctic peninsula to taking 
a helicopter ride over the rugged land near McMurdo; those and the daily-life 
accounts of existence in various Antarctic settlements should provide satisfying 
armchair travel for ice-yearning youngsters. A glossary and a historical timeline 
are included; there is no index.  DS
BLume, LesLey m. m.  Cornelia and the Audacious Escapades of the Somerset 
Sisters. Knopf, 2006 264p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93523-1 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83523-7 $15.95 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Eleven-year-old Cornelia Englehart is the lonely, disaffected daughter of a world-
famous concert pianist. Everywhere she goes, she disappears behind her mother’s 
reputation, so she shuns social contact, erecting a wall of obfuscatory verbiage to 
shut down conversation and gain the privacy she thinks she craves. A new neigh-
bor changes all that: an elderly writer with a wealth of stories and life experience 
to draw from, Virginia welcomes Cornelia as a kindred spirit, and the two spend 
hours together as Virginia tells of the wondrous adventures she had with her sisters 
as they traveled the world in the 1950s. Each story wraps a little too conveniently 
around Cornelia’s own problem du jour—if her mother is in Morocco or Paris, 
Virginia takes Cornelia on a mental excursion to Marrakech or the City of Light; 
if she is feeling competitive with her mother, a story about Virginia’s competitive 
sisters will follow—making Cornelia’s emotional growth through the narrative 
trajectory seem rather contrived. Virginia’s stories require a sophisticated palate to 
fully appreciate the hijinks of single women of unlimited wealth globe-trotting in 
a post World War II environment; more engaging for young readers is Cornelia’s 
own story of loneliness cured by an exotic, wise friend who has turned her apart-
ment into a pleasure garden. Blume establishes immediate empathy for the child 
neglected by her overbusy, glamorous parent and constructs Virginia as so perfectly 
sympathetic that her death comes as a stunning, if not unpredictable, blow. While 
the book’s overall appeal may narrow to fans of old movies and to readers enamored 
of mental travel to far-off destinations in a simpler time, those readers will find 
much to sink their teeth into here.  KC 
Bowsher, meLodie My Lost and Found Life. Bloomsbury, 2006 [350p]
ISBN 1-58234-736-0 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M Gr. 9-12
Life in a toney San Francisco suburb suits eighteen-year-old Ashley just fine, but 
the very material girl is in for a rude awakening when her bookkeeper mother dis-
appears, apparently after embezzling company funds, leaving Ashley with nothing 
to get by on but her questionable skills and charm. She finally lands work at an 
eccentric coffeehouse in San Francisco and gets free accommodation in her mother’s 
ex-boyfriend’s unused camper (while her classmates are all going off to expensive 
private colleges), along the way trying to unravel the mystery of her mother’s disap-
pearance. The story of a brash, pampered princess forced to reconsider her priorities 
OcTOBer 2006 • 59
as a result of family malfeasance is an intriguing one, and Ashley’s gradual, bitter 
realization of her predicament is credible. The book largely pushes that interesting 
plot to the background, however, and focuses instead on a slow-paced evocation of 
Ashley’s growth as a person as a consequence of being forced to take responsibility 
for her own life. Unfortunately, she doesn’t demonstrate enough of that growth to 
make believable other characters’ warm responses to her, seeming merely to make 
occasional exceptions in her general superciliousness, and the book pulls its punches 
by giving her free housing, leaving her still a fairly privileged soul compared to 
most. The retrospective consideration of her and her mother’s relationship is never 
really convincing, and her mother’s fate (it’s eventually discovered that she died in 
a car accident the day she attempted to flee) is an implausible plot convenience. 
The parental-miscreant story may catch readers’ attention, but they’ll be better off 
with Marcia Byalick’s It’s a Matter of Trust (BCCB 1/96).  DS
Boyce, frAnk coTTreLL Framed. HarperCollins, 2006 306p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-073403-5 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-073402-7 $16.99 
R* Gr. 5-9
The small Welsh town of Manod may be a gray, wet place that has been growing 
steadily smaller as residents leave for economic opportunity elsewhere, but Dylan 
Hughes loves it. Life there gets even better when a convoy of trucks hits town from 
London: it turns out that they’re carrying paintings from the National Gallery, 
storing them in the old underground slate quarry to keep them safe from the flood-
ing occurring in London. Since the curator mistakes Dylan’s loving employment 
of Italian artists’ names for artistic fervor (it’s actually his passion for the Teenage 
Mutant Ninja Turtles), Dylan gets special attention and viewing privileges. As word 
leaks out and painting viewings become more locally common, there’s a ripple effect 
of artistic changes within the town (inspired by a still life, one young man creates 
dramatic shop-window displays; Dylan’s mother, intrigued by a Renoir, turns the 
walk to school into a “psychedelic boa constrictor” with a plethora of colorful 
umbrellas). Dylan, his crime-mad little sister, Minnie, and his father’s assistant 
(Nice Tom, formerly known as Daft Tom) are secretly working on a different kind 
of change: a theft of one of the paintings in the hope that the subsequent financial 
gain will bring the family garage business out of the red and thus allow Dylan’s 
father to return home. Author of the fabulous Millions (BCCB 7/04), Boyce also 
has extensive experience as a screenwriter, and this novel’s wry, quirky sweetness 
suggests movies such as the old Ealing comedies or more recent indie British films of 
rueful comedic character, from Local Hero to Billy Elliot. Like those, this operates as 
a literary photo-mosaic, with a multitude of small, individualistic images combining 
to make the overall picture; the cast of characters is matter-of-factly colorful, with 
their own dramas and challenges that sometimes bounce off of other people’s stories 
and sometimes remain their own personal stories. The book minimizes pathos by 
making Dylan credibly unaware of the storms within his family (his father isn’t just 
working outside of Manod, he’s left the family, probably after committing insurance 
fraud), and there’s sufficient acerbity in various viewpoints to ensure the sweetness 
doesn’t become saccharine. This could connect with readers on any number of 
points, but certainly Anglophiles (well, Britophiles) and fans of eccentric comedy 
will want to spend some time at the Hugheses’ Snowdonia Oasis.  DS
60 • The BulleTin
Boyne, John The Boy in the Striped Pajamas: A Fable. Fickling, 2006 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75107-9 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75106-0 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10 
Though nine-year-old Bruno knows his father is one of the most powerful men 
in Berlin, he has no idea what his father does, beyond the fact that his father is a 
soldier and that “the Fury,” their leader, has great things in store for him. Bruno’s 
confusion only deepens when his family moves from their spacious home to a 
gloomy place he believes to be called “Out-With,” a house bordered by a fence 
that stretches as far as Bruno can see. Anxious to find out more about the people 
on the other side of the fence, lonely Bruno befriends Shmuel, a boy who shares 
his birthday. Despite the fact that they are separated from each other by a fence, 
the two become close—though Bruno cannot understand why Shmuel grows ever 
thinner, and Shmuel wonders how Bruno can be so kind when Bruno’s father is so 
terrifying. The story, which subtitles itself “a fable,” is crafted so that the Holocaust 
is never named outright until the appended author’s note; clues abound, but they 
are deliberately muddied by Bruno’s tendency to mispronounce words and misread 
signs. Once readers figure out that “Out-With” is Auschwitz, the narrative arc relies 
upon their knowing what the protagonist does not, as Boyne delicately balances 
Bruno’s innocence with Shmuel’s reticence. While Bruno and Shmuel’s friendship 
is genuinely touching, the tendency to overplay their similarities pushes the story 
from poignant to preachy and the message is unsubtle. Moreover, sophisticated 
readers may pick up on the deliberately shrouded setting too quickly to have much 
patience with Bruno’s implausible naïveté, while those who learn about the fence 
at Bruno’s pace will have little preparation for the heft of the novel’s ironic conclu-
sion. Glatshteyn’s Emil and Karl (BCCB 4/06), written during the period it depicts, 
makes the same point more compellingly; nevertheless, the care Boyne takes with 
character development, his measured hand with highly charged material, and his use 
of well-chosen detail makes this British import a sometimes haunting read.  LG
BruchAc, JosePh The Return of Skeleton Man; illus. by Sally Wern Comport. Harper-
Collins, 2006 136p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-058091-7 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-058090-9 $15.99 
R Gr. 4-7
It’s been about a year since Molly and her family were terrorized by Skeleton Man 
(BCCB 9/01), or whatever the man or creature was that seemed to channel the 
flesh-eating monster from their Mohawk folklore. Although he was by all accounts 
done in and gone for good, Molly and her parents haven’t completely shaken off 
their uneasiness. Now, at a conference in a beautiful, remote resort in New York, 
all three feel his presence strongly and begin to have dreams that foreshadow his 
return. They take every precaution to strengthen the family circle, which they liter-
ally and figuratively form to bond in protection and support, but Skeleton Man 
is set on revenge and once again separates parents from child during a cunningly 
contrived power failure. Molly is left to contend with the monster, and she draws 
on her helpful spirit guide and her own quick wits and self-reliance (Dad’s lessons 
in operating heavy machinery sure pay off) to bury Skeleton Man beneath a rock-
slide—but is he gone once and for all? Bruchac interjects elements increasingly 
rare in unsentimentalized children’s books—parents who talk with rather than to 
their child, a child who accepts her parents’ guidance, family faith in the wisdom 
OcTOBer 2006 • 61
imparted within their culture (in this case, Mohawk)—and ably demonstrates 
that sane characters are no impediment to a roaring good horror story. Enigmatic 
Skeleton Man is evil made flesh (or at least bone), and despite all the ability and 
support with which Molly is generously endowed, readers are never quite certain 
that her survival is a sure thing. The handful of black-and-white illustrations scat-
tered throughout are unfortunately staid and cheesy, but their presence is rendered 
unnecessary by Bruchac’s creepy conjuring.  EB
BuLion, LesLie Hey There, Stink Bug!; illus. by Leslie Evans. Charlesbridge, 
2006 45p
ISBN 1-58089-304-X $12.95 
R* Gr. 4-7
In just under a score of poems, Bulion addresses various denizens of the insect 
world in witty, tightly structured verse, with an informational prose sidebar about 
the subject accompanying each poem. Entries treat critters such as the bombadier 
beetle (“slow on the wing but thinks fast on its feetle”), spiders (“I dreamed a spider 
from the ceiling/ dropped into my mouth”), and flies (“real flies feed on ghastly 
things”), as well as the insect world generally (“This is/ an insect world with hu-
mans in it”), in poetic forms ranging from free verse to the sonnet, the limerick to 
the haiku. This resembles Sidman’s Song of the Water Boatman (BCCB 7/05) in its 
sparkling blend of biology and poetry, but the poetic approach here emphasizes 
humor, making these well-crafted verses eminently suitable for reading aloud to 
spice up an entomology unit or offering on the relevant buggy spot during a fly-
distracted language arts lesson. A glossary is included, notes describe in some detail 
the poetic devices and formats employed in each entry, and there’s a handy list of 
insect resources on the web and in print.  DS
BuTTerworTh, chris Sea Horse: The Shyest Fish in the Sea; illus. by John 
Lawrence. Candlewick, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-7636-2989-8 $16.99 
R* 4-8 yrs
With its involvingly detailed illustrations and a text perfectly attuned to the early 
elementary set, this is an exemplary introduction to the fish that breaks the rules of 
fishiness. Butterworth employs slightly oversized blue font to trace the life cycle of 
the Barbour’s sea horse, lingering a tad longer over child-pleasing information on 
self-defense, male sea horse pregnancy, and locomotion through and anchorage in 
turbulent waters of the coral reefs. Smaller font signals supplementary information 
that’s geared to older listeners or independent readers—e.g., the meaning of the 
scientific name hippocampus; precise terminology such as “plankton,” “camouflage,” 
“prehensile tail”; time frames for maturity and mating—but which even the younger 
audience will want to know, especially on a second reading. Lawrence’s intricately 
textured vinyl and wood prints, highlighted with watercolor wash, coordinate closely 
with Butterworth’s text, occasionally breaking into sequential frames to explicate 
camouflage color change, a sinuous mating dance, or the variant body positions 
that allow the sea horse to rise or sink in the water. Given the profusion of life in a 
sea horse’s milieu, viewers will want to invest some time examining its reefmates at 
a leisurely pace. An index, although not critical in such a short work, is nonetheless 
a nice touch for directing children straight to their favorite parts, and the endpapers 
offer profiles of a dozen different sea horses for comparison.  EB
62 • The BulleTin
cABoT, meg How to Be Popular. HarperTempest, 2006 288p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-088013-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-088012-0 $16.99 
Ad Gr. 6-9
Steph Landry is starting junior year in a small-town high school where social 
reputations have been set in stone for years; unfortunately for Steph, her reputa-
tion has been that of a heedless loser, with “pulling a Steph Landry” a school and 
town byword for an act of dorky cluelessness. Steph’s determined to change that, 
however, with a new attitude, a new approach to style, and an old book—about 
half a century old—that maps the road to popularity. Her revamp goes so well 
that she’s even garnering the attention of her crush, a hottie football player, and 
the uneasy respect of his girlfriend (the evil one who promulgated Steph’s name 
as denigration in the first place), but why is it taking such a toll on her enduring 
friendship with next-door neighbor Jason? The book hints at some interesting 
elements of popularity but then dispenses with them, instead using its topic for 
predictable adult didacticism rather than originality or insight (popularity brings 
Steph only hollow glory and superficial connections who just want to use her, while 
it estranges her from her old friends). It’s equally expectable that she ends up with 
Jason, though that’s at least a classic formula element that romance fans will enjoy 
despite its inevitability. Readers will also appreciate the speedy and easily digestible 
storytelling, leavened with the frequent interpolation of rules from The Book and 
generous helpings of dialogue; there may additionally be some secret satisfaction 
in the notion that popularity isn’t worth the getting, so those without it are bet-
ter off as they are. Though Vail’s You, Maybe (BCCB 6/06) is a more successful 
treatment of the same theme, this book may well achieve a level of popularity its 
heroine would envy.  DS
cArey, JAneT Lee The Beast of Noor. Atheneum, 2006 497p
ISBN 0-689-87644-0 $16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Miles and Hanna have always been outsiders in their village; they are Sheens, de-
scendents of the infamous Rory Sheen, who traded his faithful bear hound to the 
soul-collecting Darro on the night of the Wild Hunt in exchange for his life. The 
Darro rarely makes bargains, but he’d seen the strength and loyalty of the dog as it 
fearlessly attacked his ghost hounds, so he turned the man’s betrayal of his protec-
tor into a curse, transforming the dog into Shriker, a shape-shifting immortal hell 
hound. For 250 years after Rory’s death, the Shriker was nothing more than a scary 
tale, but then he mysteriously reappeared in the woods, luring human prey to grisly 
deaths in years with lunar eclipses. Miles vows to find a way to kill the beast and 
break the curse that haunts his family, and Hanna reluctantly finds herself caught 
up in the quest, which takes them into the fairy realm of Oth. A complex blend of 
superstitions and folklore from the Celtic tradition, this tale transforms its many 
borrowings into a world of nightmare and dream, marked by sometimes overly 
ornamental images as familiar as our fears and as strange as our most fantastic 
imaginings. At its center are two devoted teenaged siblings straining in different 
ways against their destinies: Miles wants to pursue magic no matter what the cost, 
and Hanna seeks to deny her talent for magic in favor of living a simple life. They 
counterbalance each other in ways that ensure their survival and negotiate Miles’ 
arrogance and Hanna’s fearfulness into more settled and complex maturities, mak-
ing this a compelling and nuanced exploration of self-understanding as well as a 
suspenseful plot-driven fantasy. The relatively minor thematic currents of mutual 
OcTOBer 2006 • 63
responsibility and savagery constrained by loyalty will play especially well with dog 
lovers who appreciate the dogness of their dogs.  KC 
chArLTon-TruJiLLo, e. e. Prizefighter en Mi Casa. Delacorte, 2006 210p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90344-8 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73325-9 $15.95 
R Gr. 5-9
A car accident has left Chula Sanchez’s father in a wheelchair, Chula coping with 
seizures, Mama and Chula’s older brother, Richie, directing their rage and blame 
at the two victims (Pape was drunk at the time, and Chula improperly seat-belted), 
and the entire family strapped for cash. Pape arranges for a renowned and feared 
Mexican boxer called El Jefe to participate in an illegal local bout, and as narrator 
Chula overcomes her terror of the scarred, silent hulk, she begins to make some 
tentative progress in mustering the self-esteem that’s under constant assault at home. 
El Jefe, however, has earned his dark reputation, and when he kills his opponent in 
the ring, he becomes a wanted man and the Sanchez family more broke than ever, 
and now inveigled in a cover-up. There’s enough extended family and neighbor-
hood drama to launch a telenovela, but twelve-year-old Chula’s pained, insightful 
narration keeps the sprawling plotlines in focus. In her world, El Jefe is a powerful 
force just passing through, and it’s the more immediate dynamic of gang-banger 
brother, petulant mother, impotent father, and school pressure that sets her world 
reeling. There’s also realistic cause for hope in the end; El Jefe is on the run, and 
Richie is off to prison, but the inexorable passage of time brings Mama, Pape, 
and Chula the healing that no boxing miracle could have produced. A glossary of 
Spanish terms is included.  EB
coomBs, kATe The Runaway Princess. Farrar, 2006 279p
ISBN 0-374-35546-0 $17.00 
Ad Gr. 5-7
Meg is one of those feminist princesses who balks at being kept in a tower while a 
contest is underway and refuses to be given away as a prize to the prince who man-
ages to kill the dragon, defeat the witch, and stop the local bandits. Relying on the 
assistance of her servant friends to escape the tower, Meg decides to win the contest 
herself, thus ensuring she will not be someone’s booty. If Meg can convince her 
father to recognize his daughter as an equal, she will be even happier. A telepathic 
dragon baby, a bizarre magical scarf with eyes, and humorous twin princes who do 
everything together and plan to flip a coin for the prize are all almost clever and 
fresh enough to breathe new life into this fantasy. However, feisty nontraditional 
princesses have been for some time a cliché in their own right, and the plot wherein 
the strong girl reshapes her own destiny and wins over her parents (while accumu-
lating a trail of admirers) is all too familiar. While the usual archetypal characters, 
right down to the witch who turns princes into frogs and the loyal-to-the-end 
maid who becomes a best friend, are present and accounted for, they never really 
rise above the standard functionaries. Readers who love their princesses modern 
and bold may nonetheless feel an immediate connection with Meg, and they won’t 
mind too much that they have seen girls like her before.  AS
cushmAn, kAren The Loud Silence of Francine Green. Clarion, 2006 225p
ISBN 0-618-50455-9 $16.00 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Francine’s dream world revolves around Montgomery Clift and the movie stars 
down the road in nearby Hollywood, and her real world revolves around main-
64 • The BulleTin
taining impeccable behavior and a low profile at her Catholic girls’ school. Eighth 
grade brings a new interest in the person of Sophie Bowman, who’s been expelled 
from her last school for disruptive behavior and seems hell-bent to repeat her 
performance at All Saints. Theirs is an unlikely but sincere friendship that opens 
Francine’s eyes to problems of the time (the book begins in 1949) that her parents 
refuse to discuss with her at home—the Cold War, the threat of attack, the spread 
of Communism, and the pernicious responses of Red-baiting and blacklisting. 
The issues are surely worth the fictional exploration, but Francine spends so much 
time bemoaning her lack of courage and gasping at Sophie’s audacious sass with 
the nuns that broader social concerns never quite achieve their intended level of 
importance. The portrait of the All Saints staff—sadistic Sister Basil the Great, ap-
proachable but preachy Sister “Pete” (a librarian, no less)—is a shopworn stereotype. 
Real historical fiction fans should turn to David Almond’s The Fire-Eaters (BCCB 
5/04) for a riveting examination of Cold War fear, but school-story devotees may 
enjoy this as a quick pick.  EB
dArrow, shAron Trash. Candlewick, 2006 [160p]
ISBN 0-7636-2624-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
It’s not surprising that sixteen-year-old Sissy and her younger brother, Boy, identify 
closely with the trash their Arkansas foster parents collect for a living, since they 
themselves have been treated like trash—their biological mother didn’t even bother 
to name them, and her neglect led to their placement in foster care. Eventually fed 
up with the stench of garbage and their foster parents’ verbal and physical abuse, 
Boy and Sissy run away to St. Louis to reconnect with their beloved older sister, 
Raynell. Once there, they find community and inspiration among a group of graf-
fiti artists and defy the law by painting their art and their tags on the walls and 
water towers of the city. Then tragedy strikes when Boy tumbles to his death while 
trying to outrun the police, and Sissy, paralyzed with grief, chooses to remain in 
the city, homeless, when Raynell moves back to Arkansas. The novel’s structure, a 
sequence of poems, mostly free verse, lends itself well both to the power of Sissy’s 
narration and the persistent symbolism of trash that wends its way through the 
book—Sissy not only sifts through trash to survive but eventually finds hope (the 
budding artist finds an art-school brochure) in the garbage can. Though the shifts 
between poetic formats are sometimes disconcerting, Sissy’s voice remains recog-
nizable throughout. Fans of poetry and art alike will no doubt find inspiration in 
this story, while the elements of violence, sibling loyalty, grief, and survival ensure 
that even those readers with little patience for poetry will find themselves absorbed 
in Sissy’s tale.  LG
dAvies, nicoLA Extreme Animals; illus. by Neal Layton. Candlewick, 
2006 [64p]
ISBN 0-7636-3067-5 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
“We humans are a bunch of wimps!” zoologist Davies declares, bemoaning our 
frailty in the face of heat, cold, and other environmental challenges and then going 
on to describe creatures made of sterner stuff than we. Animals that deal capably 
with cold (whether through effective outerwear or specialized internal chemistry), 
that can keep themselves cool in the face of extreme heat, that can withstand G 
OcTOBer 2006 • 65
forces that would squish us flat, or can regroup when chopped up are discussed 
with due admiration and a spoonful of explanation. Ultimately, the author gives the 
Toughest Creature prize to the wee tardigrade, a water bug that protects itself in a 
preservation state wherein it can withstand oven heat, cold of hundreds of degrees 
below zero, extraordinary atmospheric pressure, and myriad other insults. While 
the result doesn’t have the single-minded focus of the author’s Poop: A History of 
the Unmentionable (BCCB 11/04), this is nonetheless a browsable yet savvy work. 
The broad view of organisms and their capabilities helps to decenter the human 
position, reminding readers that Homo sapiens is a fairly limited and specialized 
organism, and the examples of adaptive behaviors and experiments on same are 
cleverly chosen for maximum impact (wood frogs can freeze solid to make it through 
cold temperatures; a live sponge can regroup into a single piece if liquefied in a 
blender). Layton’s irreverently scrawled, digitally colored linework offers genuine 
information in highly informal diagrams and plenty of snickery humor in jokey 
spot art and snarky speech bubbles. This will liven up a biology unit and entice 
browsers looking for a little vicarious extreme experience. An index and glossary 
are included.  DS
defeLice, cynThiA One Potato, Two Potato; illus. by Andrea U’Ren. Farrar, 
2006 32p
ISBN 0-374-35640-8 $16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Mr. and Mrs. O’Grady are mostly content in their poverty—content to share one 
potato for breakfast, lunch, and dinner, content (and skinny enough) to sit together 
on their one chair, content to takes turns with their one coat and one blanket. They 
each pine for a friend, however, to share those little things that women share with 
women and men with men. While digging their last potato, Mr. O’Grady happens 
upon a large pot buried in the field. Tossing the lone potato into the pot, he lugs 
it up to Mrs. O’Grady, only to discover its magical power to duplicate whatever 
is put into it. Even the youngest listener will suspect that the O’Gradys will be 
overcome by greed in the way of these tales, but once they’ve duplicated some 
food, some candles, a little money, and themselves, the satisfied O’Gradys—all 
four of them—decide to bury the pot for someone else to find. They are, after all, 
“beside themselves with joy.” The homely sweetness of this deserving couple is ably 
captured in their ruddy complexions, shy, affable smiles, and gently unruly hair. 
Their elongated, impossibly thin forms provide visual humor as they interact with 
the pot, climaxing in their tumble into it, skinny legs flailing. Indeed, text pairs 
with illustration for the funniest scene in the book—when Mrs. O’Grady greets 
her double in a horrified gasp while Mr. O’Grady grabs his head and says, “Oh 
dear, oh woe. . . . One wife is all I ever wanted.” Sometimes one of something is 
just enough.  KC 
dunmore, heLen Ingo. HarperCollins, 2006 328p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-081853-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-081852-2 $16.99 
Ad Gr. 5-7
Eleven-year-old Sapphire and her older brother are determined to prove that, 
despite the certainty of everyone else, their father did not desert them or die at 
sea. The siblings believe that their father may have been lured into the ocean, pur-
suing the siren calls of the Mer people. Although her brother is the first to make 
contact with a resident of Ingo, the underwater world, Sapphire soon finds herself 
66 • The BulleTin
increasingly drawn towards the ocean, called by voices that no one else can hear. 
Sapphire, dissatisfied with her above-water life, spends as much time as possible in 
Ingo; eventually her divided alliance between the two worlds leads to a grave error 
in judgment, which could mean death for a family friend unless Sapphire is able to 
mediate between humans and the Mer. Dunmore’s rich descriptions of skimming 
along underwater currents and exploring the mysterious world of Ingo are captivat-
ing and elegant. Less successful is an elaborate attempt to connect Sapphire’s father’s 
disappearance with a larger town legend that is awkwardly constructed; this subplot 
distracts from Sapphire’s own coming of age and struggle for balance in her home 
and underwater lives. In addition, the abrupt ending of this British import (the 
first novel in a projected trilogy) leads to cursory, unrealistic resolutions to some 
plot developments and frustratingly open-ended possibilities for others. However, 
fantasy fans who have ever stared into open waters, imagining entire worlds under 
the surface, will find Ingo to be a compelling mix of danger and adventure, and 
they will likely forgive the sudden ending, ready to dive into the sequel.  AS
feinsTein, John Vanishing Act. Knopf, 2006 279p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93592-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83592-X $16.95 
R Gr. 5-8 
Eighth-graders Stevie Thomas and Susan Carol Anderson, whose press credentials 
as up-and-coming sports reporters got them into the Final Four and up to their 
necks in sleazy college basketball intrigue (Last Shot, BCCB 3/05), have now gotten 
assignments at the U.S. Open tennis tournament, and their journalistic skills once 
again get back-burnered while they solve a crime. This time it’s the disappearance of 
high-ranked Russian player Nadia Symanova, who is whisked away in the crowds 
en route to a match at an outlying court, possibly abducted by Russian agents who 
don’t want her defecting and playing for the United States. It doesn’t take Stevie and 
Susan Carol long to smell a rat—this is no political cabal but a straightforward case 
of greed, with the Symanovs and Nadia’s agent faking the crime to get maximum 
publicity and a movie contract. This part of the mystery is wrapped up pretty ef-
ficiently, but there’s a deeper problem left to plumb—whether Susan Carol’s uncle, 
agent for two of Symanova’s rivals, might himself be involved in the scandal. Stevie 
and Susan Carol continue to be a likable pair of teen detectives, well balanced in 
the skills they bring to bear in their investigations and reasonably adept at requisite 
buddy repartee. Feinstein continues to have a ball name-dropping, stirring real-life 
sports journalists and personalities into the fictional broth, and even recruiting a 
pair of characters from his adult mystery Winter Games to serve as the kids’ New 
York guardians and journalist mentors during the Open. With only two sports 
down and so many more to go, readers can expect Stevie, Susan Carol, and their 
laptops to be back in the news soon.  EB
fLeischmAn, sid Escape!: The Story of the Great Houdini. Greenwillow, 
2006 210p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-085095-7 $19.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-085094-9 $18.99 
R* Gr. 6-10
Legendary escape artist Harry Houdini was a master of showmanship and thus, in 
many ways, his own creation, presenting a thorny challenge to biographers trying 
to separate myth from man. For longtime admirer and former professional magician 
Fleischman, the process of looking for answers among “conflicting information, 
OcTOBer 2006 • 67
rubber facts, and howling nonsense” provokes as much fascination as the elusive 
answers themselves. Houdini was a man of contradictions: born Ehrich Weiss in 
1874, he named himself after the great French magician, Robert-Houdin, only to 
attack his idol’s reputation once Houdini’s own career was established. An outspo-
ken critic of spiritualism, the then enormously popular practice of attempting to 
contact the dead, Houdini left a secret code word with his wife so that she could 
recognize him beyond the grave. A gifted escape artist, Houdini nevertheless regu-
larly inflated his reputation by exaggerating and sometimes fabricating his exploits, 
doctoring his own history and even airbrushing other people out of photographs in 
order to keep the spotlight on himself. It’s a rare feat to explode myths and uncover 
unflattering truths about one’s biographical subject matter while retaining a sense 
of awe and admiration. Fleischman not only pulls it off but also does so with an 
engaging direct address, including questions, personal anecdotes, and clever asides 
that gives this inventive biography its fast pace and powerful voice. Fleischman’s 
own early experiences as a professional magician complement his sources—he 
knows how Houdini walked through walls and slipped out of handcuffs, but he 
isn’t telling. Informal and approachable captions supporting the illustrative primary 
source material (including newspaper clippings and photographs) are sometimes 
wickedly funny and other times pointedly thought-provoking, as when Fleischman 
puzzles over Houdini’s appearance at a Klan hall—did they not know Houdini was 
Jewish? Did Houdini not know of their racist views? Fleischman does the story of 
Houdini justice with an accessible, witty, and fascinating ride that is sure to draw 
in the skeptical and the admiring alike. A bibliography is appended.  LG
fLeming, denise The Cow Who Clucked; written and illus. by Denise 
Fleming. Holt, 2006 36p
ISBN 0-8050-7265-9 $16.95 
R 2-4 yrs
One morning, Cow wakes up and emits a gentle cluck instead of her usual moo; 
understandably dismayed at the transmogrification of her voice, she searches the 
countryside to see who has her moo. She cluckingly interviews a dog (“Warf, 
warf”), a bee (“Bzzzzz, bzzzzz”), a cat (“Meow”), and so on, sadly concluding 
each time that “It is not you who has my moo.” Finally she wanders past Hen, 
whose greeting of “Moo, moo” tips Cow off to the perpetrator, and she rights the 
situation. While the unclearness of the mechanism for the repair (and the initial 
tradeoff) may perplex some audience members, this is a diverting barnyard outing 
that takes the basic mismatched-utterance joke, long a picture-book classic, and 
turns it into a satisfying join-in tour of animal sounds; careful repetition in textual 
phrases as well as in the sounds will keep youngsters involved throughout Cow’s 
peregrinations. Fleming’s usual handmade-paper art evinces rich, vivid colors and 
some lively touches in the group of yellow chicks that follow Cow around (well, 
she is clucking) and Cow’s cartoony startled eyes; the darkening colors of the sky 
toward the end of the day mean that the predominantly brown Cow doesn’t stand 
out as well as viewers might wish, but twilight highlights of turquoise and crimson 
help distinguish her from the background. Little lapsitting and rugsitting critters 
will welcome this playful agricultural excursion.  DS
68 • The BulleTin
funke, corneLiA Ghosthunters and the Incredibly Revolting Ghost!; tr. by Helena 
Ragg-Kirkby; written and illus. by Cornelia Funke. Chicken House/Scholastic, 
2006 135p
ISBN 0-439-84958-6 $16.99 
Ad Gr. 3-5
Tom’s fear of his cellar turns out to be justified when a hideous ghostly apparition 
suddenly appears there, threatening him. Nine-year-old Tom is surprised further 
when he meets with Hetty Hyssop, professional ghost-hunter, and learns that his 
ghost, frightening though it may be, is only an Averagely Spooky Ghost named 
Hugo, who was chased away from his usual haunting grounds by an Incredibly 
Revolting Ghost. Hugo desperately wants to go back home, but defeating an 
Incredibly Revolting Ghost is a dangerous task even for professionals; Hetty’s 
knowledge, Hugo’s determination, and Tom’s daring will all be necessary to van-
quish the malignant specter. Tom’s domestic life, including his budding relationship 
with Hetty and his struggles with a bullying older sister, is realistically conveyed; 
these personal details make Tom’s simultaneous bravado and insecurity believable. 
Funke’s exaggerated black-and-white illustrations, particularly her nicely varied 
ghosts, effectively complement the text, and humorous additional materials, such 
as a four-page chart distinguishing the two aforementioned ghost types, are well 
integrated into the story. Unfortunately, the book relies overmuch on exclamation 
points and drawn-out “ghooostly” words to establish atmosphere; the result is a 
veneer rather than a depth of excitement and suspense in the story. In addition, 
there is an inconsistency in the treatment of ghosts (the Incredibly Revolting Ghost 
is characterized as an emotionless, otherworldly entity to be destroyed while Hugo 
gets a full backstory and sympathetic portrayal) that may confuse readers, leaving 
them uncertain about the direction of the forthcoming series. The mix of friendly 
and ominous ghosts, however, may please Eva Ibbotson fans who are searching for 
other mild scares.  AS
gALLo, donALd r., ed. What Are You Afraid Of?: Stories about Phobias. Can-
dlewick, 2006 189p
ISBN 0-7636-2654-6 $15.99 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Renowned anthologist Gallo here compiles ten stories about young people deal-
ing with fears. Contributors are largely familiar names, from Gail Giles and Neal 
Shusterman to Angela Johnson and Joan Bauer; the subject phobias range from 
the well known (Alex Flinn’s “The Door” features an agoraphobic trapped in his 
house during his parents’ vacation, David Lubar’s “Claws and Effect” is narrated by 
a young man whose romantic life is hampered by his terror of cats) to the unusual 
(in Angela Johnson’s “D’arcy,” the protagonist is desperately afraid of string). The 
stories are qualitatively variable, with several of them becoming heavy handed or 
purposive. On the other hand, Flinn’s story vividly depicts the agony of a boy trapped 
in a prison his brain has made for him, while Ron Koertge’s “Calle de Muerte” 
offers some perceptive and sardonic commentary on the phobic community (“So 
there’s a guy afraid of string giving bad advice to another guy afraid of fish”) and 
the ways some people resist any member’s leaving—from a guy who realizes that 
his understanding isn’t diminishing his phobia anyway. Such entries make for psy-
chologically compelling reading that could engage readers with phobias as well as 
those just looking for some thoughtful brief fiction. Each story concludes with an 
extended note about its author, and the book closes with an extensive list of phobias 
and their formal names, plus a list of resources on and for phobics.  DS
OcTOBer 2006 • 69
goodmAn, susAn e. Gee Whiz!: It’s All About Pee; illus. by Elwood H. Smith. Vi-
king, 2006 [40p]
ISBN 0-670-06064-X $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Having previously examined one kind of animal leavings in The Truth about Poop 
(BCCB 6/04), Goodman turns her attention to a more liquid excretion. In her usual 
chatty, pun-laden style and brief titled sections, she explains the biological necessity 
of pee, cultural and historical variations in toilet practices (with particular attention 
to solutions to difficult circumstances), urinary habits among other species, and 
the various uses to which humans have put urine. The tidbits are well chosen for 
maximum appeal or repellency, depending on one’s reaction to the subject (kids will 
understand astronauts’ resistance to hand-chipping frozen pee off the space shuttle’s 
exterior and giggle at the use of pee as reindeer bait), and under the jaunty tone is 
a tacit implication that the current Western anti-pee taboo is a whim of cultural 
fashion more than anything else. Smith’s compact, angular cartoons offer jocular 
interpretations of the historical and biological trivia, with occasional extremely silly 
but helpful diagrams. This is an obvious partner for The Truth about Poop, but it 
could also be read standing—or sitting—alone. The legendary quality of some of 
the tidbits makes the absence of specific notes particularly unfortunate, but an 
afterword describes the author’s research and offers a few resources.  DS
govenAr, ALAn Extraordinary Ordinary People: Five American Masters of Tradi-
tional Arts. Candlewick, 2006 86p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7636-2047-5 $22.99 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Fashioning his text from a series of interviews, Govenar introduces readers to a 
Chinese-American opera performer, a Maine shipbuilder, a Mexican-American 
flower maker, an Iowan rag rug weaver, and a New Orleans Mardi Gras Indian chief. 
Each art or craft is, in itself, fascinating, and each artist/craftsman speaks of his or 
her trade with enthusiastic pride. By drawing material exclusively from interviews, 
however, Govenar limits the scope of each chapter to information the subject is 
inclined to provide, and the resulting essays frequently fall short on background, 
details regarding process, and definition of terms. Readers learn little of the sub-
ject matter of Chinese opera (who are all these women warriors?), the method of 
constructing a ship by hand (how does one bend wooden planking?), the various 
roles of maskers in the Mardi Gras celebrations (what is a Spy Boy, a Flag Boy, a 
Wildman?). Black-and-white and color photographs, many from family and private 
collections, fill in some background as they draw in browsers, but they cannot fully 
compensate for gaps in content. With the two dozen additional suggestions in the 
appended list for further reading, this could nonetheless be a useful starting point 
for exploring American folk and immigrant art.  EB
green, John An Abundance of Katherines. Dutton, 2006 [240p]
ISBN 0-525-47688-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
On the morning after Colin’s high-school graduation, Colin is dumped by his 
beloved girlfriend, Katherine; what’s particularly painful is the inevitability of this 
rejection, since this is the last of nineteen girlfriends, all named Katherine, to break 
up with Colin. Colin’s best friend, Hassan, decides that what’s needed is a road trip, 
70 • The BulleTin
but the trip peters out in Gutshot, Tennessee, where the boys take a job collecting 
oral histories from the employees of a tampon-string factory, and where Colin begins 
to fall for his first non-Katherine, the factory owner’s daughter, Lindsey. Green’s 
prose is witty and high-spirited, but it nonetheless conveys genuine pathos as Colin 
struggles to define himself sans Katherine; he’s also believably grappling with being 
a former child prodigy who, like most prodigies, isn’t translating his precocious 
aptitude into any great achievement. The book’s quirky synthesis of these two is-
sues is Colin’s struggle to create his great theorem of dumpers and dumpees, which 
predicts the duration and fate of any romance between two people—at least until 
he and Lindsey get together. Though the wit sometimes turns brittle and the plot 
loses focus and intensity when the boys hit Tennessee, there’s still enough colorful 
characterization and comedic event to keep readers interested, and they’ll be glad 
to see Colin’s world and possibilities open up beyond Katherines.  DS
gregory, nAn I’ll Sing You One-O. Clarion, 2006 [224p]
ISBN 0-618-60708-0 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
After years in a foster home, twelve-year-old Gemma is finally moving in with 
relatives, but she’s anything but happy about it—she loved her life on the farm, 
her easygoing foster parents, and her foster brothers and sisters, and she’s wary of 
her new uncle Dave, his prissy wife, Moira, and her docile, newly discovered twin 
brother, Garnet. When even the one advantage to her new placement—a chance 
to learn more about her long-gone mother—disappoints, she decides to make 
her way back to the farm by earning herself an angel. To this end she gives all her 
money, cash she finds around the house, and clothing not currently being used 
to a woman living on the streets with her abusive boyfriend, finding sign after 
sign that she’s winning the angelic blessing she hopes—until the impossibility of 
her hopes comes crashing down on her. While the backstory elements are a little 
contrived (readers will be as bewildered as Gemma as to why the foster home had 
to be closed, and the flashbacks to a frightening piece of Gemma’s past distract 
more than enhance), this is otherwise a solid drama touched with some effective 
originality. It’s bracingly clear that Gemma really would be better off where she 
was, but it’s also clear to the reader, if not always to Gemma, that her return is 
sadly impossible and that her place in her uncle and aunt’s household is a valid and 
valuable one. Gemma’s forceful and forthright narration conveys her determined 
character while allowing some widening cracks to reveal her tremendous hurt and 
need. This should be an easy sell to fans of Giff’s Pictures of Hollis Woods (BCCB 
12/02) and other stories about the struggle to accept the family you have when it’s 
not the family you want.  DS
greif, JeAn-JAcques The Fighter; tr. by Jean-Jacques Greif. Bloomsbury, 
2006 [288p]
ISBN 1-58234-891-X $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 10-12
After growing up pummeled and penniless in Poland, Moshe Wisniak immigrates 
to Paris in the 1930s, where he marries, has a child, and makes a name for himself 
as an amateur boxer. Then war breaks out, and the Nazis arrest Moshe—along with 
thousands of other Jews living in France—and take him to Auschwitz, where he 
endures brutal working conditions, starvation, and the capricious cruelty of the 
OcTOBer 2006 • 71
soldiers. When the Nazis discover Moshe can box, they pit him for their entertain-
ment against a dying comrade; unwilling to kill a fellow prisoner but anxious to 
live, Moshe must find a way to appease his captors without becoming a murderer 
himself. Drawn on real Holocaust accounts, this French import pulls no punches 
in terms of vivid, often excruciating details, from the casual brutality of the sol-
diers, to the stupefying horror of the gas chambers, including the poisoned stacks 
of bodies that some prisoners were forced to remove and bury. Though this is an 
adult-focused story, the heroism of Moshe and the many compellingly rendered 
scenes will have undeniable appeal for young adults; unfortunately, the often plod-
ding pace and the meandering narrative arc make the story at times tough going, 
and the final third of the book, when Moshe toils alongside Polish prisoners in the 
coal mines, reads like an extended footnote to the boxing plot that dominates the 
center of the story. Patient readers, however, will be rewarded with an absorbing tale 
of Holocaust resistance, as the many layers of meaning in “fighter” are eventually 
revealed. An afterword with additional historical and biographical information is 
appended.  LG 
gwALTney, doris Homefront. Simon, 2006 310p
ISBN 0-689-86842-1 $16.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Margaret Ann Motley, age twelve, is struggling with many of the problems you’d 
expect for a middle child in an overcrowded Virginia farmhouse in 1942—she can’t 
match older sister Elizabeth for homemaking skills, she can’t abide the ruckus from 
her little twin sisters, she can’t get enough attention from her mother, father, and 
older brother, and she gets entirely too much attention from her querulous, critical 
grandmother. Now another set of relatives descends upon the Motleys, Aunt Mary 
Lee and cousin Courtney, who are no longer safe in their home in bomb-imperiled 
London. Courtney is an immediate sensation at home and in school, upstaging 
Margaret Ann with her fascinating accent, her good looks, and her knowledge of 
the war; soon Margaret Ann’s friends shift loyalties, and even her boyfriend, Bobby 
Holland, is showing way too much interest in Courtney, largely because Margaret 
Ann drives him off with her temperamental outbursts. American entry into the war 
soon means more to the Motleys than an extra set of house guests. Elizabeth marries 
(and loses) her sweetheart; brother Johnny enlists, hastily marries a USO entertainer, 
and sends her (pregnant) to live with his family; Uncle Walter is reported missing 
in action. While many novels have focused on material sacrifices of families on 
the homefront, Gwaltney focuses on the very credible emotional toll this domestic 
upheaval takes on an adolescent. To underscore how displaced Margaret Ann feels in 
her own home, each bedroom-titled chapter loosely focuses on the latest makeshift 
sleeping arrangements in the overtaxed household, an issue with which similarly 
privacy-challenged readers will certainly relate. Margaret Ann—whiny, impatient, 
and acutely aware of her own strengths and shortcomings—is a voice in historical 
fiction worth hearing.  EB
hAhn, mAry downing Witch Catcher. Clarion, 2006 236p
ISBN 0-618-50457-5 $16.00 
R Gr. 4-6
Jen’s father has inherited a mysterious castle in the mountains, and Jen, an adventur-
ous twelve-year-old, can’t wait to explore it. She is less thrilled, however, with Dad’s 
new girlfriend, Moura, whom he has been dating on the sly, and with whom he 
is completely smitten. Already suspicious of Moura (Jen’s certain her hypnotizing 
72 • The BulleTin
perfume is entrancing her father), Jen’s convinced that the mysterious glass ball 
she finds is connected to the woman; after the witch catcher is broken, a quirky 
fairy girl emerges out of the shards and confirms Jen’s suspicions, alerting her to 
Moura’s true witchy self. Now Jen, who had only hoped for a cool new house, is 
burdened with a lovestruck and suddenly distant father, a family of shape-shifting 
and untrustworthy fairies who need rescuing, and the dangerous Moura, who will 
stop at nothing to get what she wants. It is unclear why the witch traps would work 
as well for fairies as witches (Moura kept the fairy family trapped for years before 
Jen’s arrival), but this is a minor confusion in an otherwise carefully developed 
fantasy. Realistically squicky detail (there’s a great evocation of the way it might feel 
to be transformed into an ant), elegant descriptions (the swirls of colors in the glass 
traps are described with particular artistry), and a clever twist that allows the fairies 
to retain their integrity as tricksters all combine to make this fantasy an intriguing 
read. Hahn’s taut, fast-paced writing style works effectively to sweep readers into 
the story and keep them engaged until the fairies go home, Moura is stopped, and 
Jen finally gets her newly appreciated “regular” life back.  AS
hAnTmAn, cLeA I Wanna Make My Own Clothes; illus. by Azadeh Houshyar. Si-
mon, 2006 134p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-87462-6 $9.99 
R Gr. 4-8
 I Wanna Re-Do My Room; illus. by Azadeh Houshyar. Simon, 2006 [144p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-87463-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Clever ideas and craft projects abound in these unassuming books that are the 
first in a series that promises at least one more book on making gifts. In I Wanna 
Make My Own Clothes, Hantman provides step-by-step, easy-to-follow directions 
for revamping and gussying up ready-to-wear t-shirts, jeans, sweaters, and old ties 
into way cool original designs. None of her remakes requires a sewing machine, 
special tools, or adult help, and the hand-sewing instructions are clear and simple. 
Best of all, she provides a chart in the back that starts with what you have (a t-shirt 
that’s too small, or too big, or too plain, too-short jeans, etc.) and directs you to 
the patterns in the book that will revive your look. The room re-do projects are a 
bit more complicated and at least require permissions and a trip to the local thrift 
or hardware store, but they are still ultimately do-able and fun. She shows how 
to make a canopy for a bed, how to play with paint, how to make original and 
changeable artwork. Her tone throughout is chatty and hip without being strained 
or glib; she sounds like your cool older sister back from college ready to help you 
make some changes. The line illustrations lend visual support to the textual direc-
tions, making them even easier to work through (though it would have been nice 
to have photos to give a clear idea of the resulting effects, especially in Room). This 
series is a real boon for Girl Scout troops, birthday parties in need of quick crafts, 
and anyone who wants to beat boredom by getting crafty.  KC 
hArness, cheryL Just for You to Know. HarperCollins, 2006 308p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-078314-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-078313-3 $16.99 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Carmen Cathcart knows how her family must look—with her five little brothers, 
a pregnant mom, and a boisterous dad all crammed into a station wagon, they 
resemble nothing more than unkempt hillbillies. Their short move from a decrepit 
OcTOBer 2006 • 73
farm to a middle-class neighborhood in Independence, Missouri is just one of a 
series of moves prompted by her restless, though not shiftless, father, who can’t 
seem to stay in one place for long. Carmen likes the new place, though, and finds 
a friend in her next-door neighbor, Robin, despite the fact that Robin’s prim and 
cranky mother looks down on Carmen’s rowdy family. Just as they are settling in, 
however, Mama dies giving birth to a girl, and it falls to thirteen-year-old Carmen 
to take care of a new baby and her wild brothers while Dad works second shift. 
This melodrama set in the 1960s is an emotional story, and Carmen’s narration is 
lively and accessible. The characters and plot are clichéd and predictable from first 
to last, though; the heartwarming tale of a plucky, dissatisfied heroine who resents 
her dreamy, impractical mother for having too many kids but then comes to ap-
preciate her after she’s dead is nothing we haven’t seen before. Even the secondary 
characters—a neighborhood bad boy with a heart of gold, elderly, unmarried sisters 
who take a notion to go to the March on Washington (all of the characters have 
enlightened views on race relations), a stylish but flighty unmarried aunt, etc.—are 
all similarly drawn from central casting. Spot sightings of Harry S Truman and 
references to 1960s current events authenticate the setting, however, and the blend 
of mild humor and tender sentiment will appeal to readers who enjoy a consolatory 
family drama and aren’t out for too much novelty.  KC 
hArris, roBie h. It’s NOT the Stork!: A Book about Girls, Boys, Babies, Bodies, 
Families, and Friends; illus. by Michael Emberley. Candlewick, 2006 60p
ISBN 0-7636-0047-4 $16.99 
R 4-8 yrs
What’s the “right” age at which to introduce information on human reproduc-
tion? Harris agrees that’s for individual families to decide, and to give an assist to 
parents who feel “the younger, the better,” she has abridged her presentation from 
It’s So Amazing, BCCB 2/00 (itself pared down from It’s Perfectly Normal, BCCB 
10/94), for an even younger audience. Adults familiar with Amazing  will note that 
the format remains pretty much the same, right down to the curious cartoon bird 
and reticent bee that trade quips on their newly acquired knowledge; language, 
however, is slightly simplified and tidbits of information are deleted (topics such 
as masturbation, homosexuality, and types of twins are introduced, but they re-
ceive less detailed treatment) to shorten the text by some twenty pages. Emberley’s 
cartoon cast, a celebration of demographic diversity, do double duty as helpful 
diagrams of body parts and fetal development, and as examples of loving families 
in action. The developmental bridge between this title and Amazing is considerably 
shorter than the span between Amazing and Perfectly Normal, and although public 
libraries will certainly want to offer all three works, families looking for that one 
good book for their preschoolers might just as well trade up a level to Amazing 
for more complete information, and customize their readalouds to suit their own 
children’s needs.  EB 
hicks, BeTTy Get Real. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2006 [192p]
ISBN 1-59643-089-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Dez and her best friend, Jil, have hit the age when, even though they acknowledge 
that their respective parents are essentially lovable, they are also undeniably em-
barrassing. For neatnik Dez, her messy, Shakespeare-spouting father and equally 
messy platitude-spouting mother aren’t fit for introduction to her larger circle of 
74 • The BulleTin
acquaintance. For Jil, her perfectionist adoptive parents are in imminent danger 
of being upstaged by contact with her birth mother, from whom Jil gets her cute 
blonde looks and a ready-made little sister. Jil’s parents put the best face on a try-
ing situation, allowing Jil to develop this new relationship while hiding their own 
fear and hurt, and Jil insists that everything’s rosy in the newly discovered paradise 
of her birth mother’s home. Jil and Dez haven’t been friends forever for nothing, 
though, and Dez keeps a close eye on the situation and stands ready to bail Jil out 
when things begin to sour. Hicks, who is carving her own niche in nontraditional 
family stories for middle schoolers (Busted!, BCCB 10/04, and others), strikes 
the right balance between adolescent kvetching and affection, and although the 
high point of the serio-comedic action involves a much-used parents-don’t-know-
what-we’re-up-to device, Jil and Dez’s overnight escapade at a college-town movie 
marathon is just the sort of thing a pair of resourceful teens who know how to 
get their stories straight might actually pull off. Readers will probably forgive Dez 
her page of preachy wrap-up (“I think there’s a difference between being a parent, 
and being a mom or a dad”) and simply accept the tacit message that parents are 
entities you can’t live with and can’t live without.  EB 
hoLm, Jennifer L.  Penny from Heaven. Random House, 2006 274p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93687-4 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83687-X $15.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Eleven-year-old Penny is the cherished darling of two very different families. On 
her mom’s side, there’s Me-me, whose cooking is somewhere between vile and 
dangerous, and Pop-pop, who has embarrassing old-man habits, but they adore 
Penny and she them. On her dad’s side, there are Italian aunts, uncles, and cousins 
galore, who all gather at Nonny’s house for wonderful day-long meals every Sunday 
and shower Penny with gifts, trying to make up for the fact that her father is dead. 
During the summer of 1953, Penny divides her time between her two families, 
hanging out with her cousin Frankie and trying to figure out life’s little mysteries 
and a few big ones. It’s an eventful summer—her dog dies, her mom starts dating 
the milkman, and Penny ends up in the hospital facing the potential loss of her 
arm when she gets it caught in Nonny’s wringer washing machine. The shock of 
the summer comes when she finds out how her father really died—in an American 
internment camp during World War II, where he was being detained for owning a 
fancy radio forbidden to Italian Americans at the time. Holm uses bits and pieces 
of her own history to craft this portrait of everyday life in the 1950s: drawing from 
a store of eccentric relatives and family legends, she zeroes in on the concerns and 
preoccupations of the times, from the fate of “Dem Bums” (the Brooklyn Dodgers) 
to fears of polio to the troubling history of Italian Americans as their parent country 
went from allies in the first world war to enemies in the second. It’s undeniably 
a nostalgic and highly personal piece, but it is readable and appealing nostalgia; 
Penny’s family is quirky, big-hearted, and lively, and her adventures will have broad 
appeal for preadolescents, as well as bringing to light a largely neglected piece of 
American history. A family picture album and author’s note follow the text.  KC 
OcTOBer 2006 • 75
humPhreys, chris The Fetch. Knopf, 2006 357p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93292-5 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83292-0 $15.95 
R Gr. 6-9 
Sky’s sleepwalking has always been a concern, since he often awakens to find himself 
in unfamiliar and sometimes dangerous settings. The teen’s recent discovery of his 
grandfather’s journal and runestones, however, suggests that his somnambulism is 
a connection to a parallel world of time travel and communication with the dead, 
a possibility he begins to explore. Sky’s initial excitement about his ability to send 
his “fetch,” or spirit, to inhabit other bodies turns into frightening self-knowledge, 
as he’s startled by the zest with which he takes to the brutality of his Norwegian 
ancestor (a berserker) or the thrill he feels as he experiences the violence of a bird 
of prey whom he inhabits. The struggle of a modern protagonist as he attempts 
to reconcile who he thought he was (an ordinary and peaceful teen) with who his 
grandfather wants him to become (someone willing to sacrifice anything neces-
sary for knowledge) is carefully balanced and thoughtfully explored. Sky’s gradual 
acclimation to the thrill of brute force as he possesses other bodies does not come 
without pangs of guilt, questions of identity, and moral ponderings. Ultimately, 
Humphreys does a remarkable job, in this first entry in the Runestone Saga, of 
balancing a thrilling time-travel adventure with an ethical exploration of human 
decency. Though readers will not have to decide whether they are willing to murder 
a man in order to gain knowledge, as Sky did, they’ll find plenty of resonance for 
ordinary questioning about the degrees of compromise and means vs. ends. An 
author’s note provides context for the Norwegian setting and offers suggestions 
for further reading.  AS
iBBoTson, evA The Beasts of Clawstone Castle; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. Dutton, 
2006 243p
ISBN 0-525-47719-5 $16.99 
R Gr. 4-7
When Madlyn and her younger brother, Rollo, are sent to live for the summer with 
their great-aunt and great-uncle, they quickly fall in love with rough-around-the-
edges Clawstone Castle, and they are fascinated by the mystical white cattle that 
graze on nearby grounds. Unfortunately, Clawstone doesn’t have much in the way 
of tourist attractions (exhibition would upset the cows) and if the elderly couple 
can’t stay afloat financially, they’ll lose both land and cattle to a greedy, conniving 
neighbor. With the help of their reclusive cousin, the intrepid children spring into 
action, recruiting a handful of frightening but friendly ghosts to haunt Clawstone, 
including a jilted bride with a bleeding shotgun wound, a swashbuckling romantic 
with a rat perpetually gnawing at his heart, and a pair of disembodied dancing feet. 
Clawstone does record tourist business until the cattle are diagnosed with Klappert’s 
disease and taken away to be slaughtered; the adults despair, but the children and 
the ghosts suspect foul play. Ibbotson’s flair for gentle parody is spliced here with 
goofy, good-hearted ghosts, to mostly charming effect; a steady, warm heart of 
sympathy for the characters, whether they be alive, dead, or animal, beats steadily 
under the wink-wink, nudge-nudge jocularity. The plot becomes too madcap for 
its own narrative good when it hares off on tangents detailing the backstories of 
quirky tertiary characters, but when Ibbotson focuses on the interactions between 
the ghosts and the children she is at her best—she even creates a sympathetic 
character in the disembodied feet. Hawkes’ full-page pen and ink illustrations add 
further vintage ambience to the story with their old-fashioned borders and hatch 
76 • The BulleTin
and stipple textures. Give this to readers who don’t mind ghostly adventures in their 
quaint English countrysides, or to those who like ghosts with a heart.  LG 
JAcoBs, deBorAh Lynn Powers. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2006 [192p]
ISBN 1-59643-112-1 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-9
Adrian is not psyched about his new high school in the small Canadian town of 
Rocky Waters, and his father’s explanation that the family moved to the Ontario 
outback because he felt “compelled to come here, the place called to him” sounds 
ludicrous—until Adrian meets the girl. Gwen, a no-nonsense journalist-in-train-
ing, has dreamed of his arrival; it seems the two have psychic powers that link and 
intensify as they enter each other’s orbit. The two dance a manipulative minuet 
in which Adrian makes Gwen believe he’s attracted to her when it’s the power he 
wants, and Gwen (knowing he can get inside her mind and feelings) acts in ways that 
impact Adrian, such as dieting to prevent him from feeling full no matter what he 
eats. They learn hard lessons about each other when a series of near-tragedies reveal 
the conflicting motives behind their behaviors, with neither completely innocent 
nor completely guilty; the question is whether they can work together to become a 
force for good. Psychic tension augments mild sexual tension in a straight forward 
narrative style told by both Adrian and Gwen. Characters are memorable more for 
their abilities than personalities, and many are types that have been seen before: the 
high-school girl who sleeps around, the sexy new guy who ends up with the studious 
girl, a pair of cousins/friends where one is prettier than the other. However, Jacobs 
injects interest through the psychic conflict and the thread that connects Adrian 
and Gwen, so readers drawn by the notion of supernatural connections may find 
their story intriguing.  CW
JAcoBson, Jennifer richArd Winnie at Her Best; illus. by Alissa Imre 
Geis. Houghton, 2006 84p
ISBN 0-618-47277-0 $15.00  
Ad Gr. 2-4
Winnie’s friend Zoe is the best speller in fourth grade, her friend Vanessa is the best 
actress, but Winnie doesn’t seem to be the best at anything. Since she has an artistic 
bent, she decides to secretly prepare an entry for the museum’s children’s art contest. 
Meanwhile, she’s assigned a kindergarten reading buddy, John Stuart, a stubborn, 
prickly kid who gradually begins to trust Winnie. Though her entry is selected as 
a finalist in the contest, a family crisis at John Stuart’s house means he needs Win-
nie just as she’s leaving for the announcement of the big winners—what will she 
do? The book overdoes Winnie’s merits and powers—not only does she help John 
Stuart on her own time and skip the award announcement to keep him company 
at the hospital, he saves his mother’s life by employing the reading knowledge he’s 
learned from Winnie—and her painting is a little convenient in both its theme 
(friendship) and its success. Nonetheless, this unintimidating chapter book has 
the same companionable warmth as previous titles about Winnie (Winnie Dancing 
on Her Own, BCCB 11/01), and her solid friendship with her pals is realistically 
balanced against her desire for independent achievement. Geis’ black-and-white 
illustrations strike an unusual note for a chapter book, with trim, elongated lines 
and sturdy pencil strokes adding a touch of sophistication. Whether they’ve known 
Winnie before or not, novice readers will likely empathize with her struggle for 
significance and appreciate Jacobson’s quiet, approachable style.  DS
OcTOBer 2006 • 77
Jenkins, emiLy Love You When You Whine; illus. by Sergio Ruzzier. Foster/Farrar, 
2006 32p
ISBN 0-374-34652-6 $15.00 
Ad 2-4 yrs
Toddlers are not always easy to love, but parents do it anyway, as Jenkins makes 
clear in this direct, affectionate address to an unruly offspring. Regardless of how 
the little one misbehaves, the narrator is right there: “Love you when you unfold 
all the laundry I just folded. . . . Love you, yes, when you are way too loud. . . . 
Love you when you will not share. . . . Love you, even when you say you don’t love 
me.” The text is mostly just an unshaped list of behaviors, and even the enticing 
catalogue of mischief (which helpfully offers some possibilities youngsters may 
not have previously contemplated) may not be enough to keep a squirmy toddler 
absorbed for the book’s full length. The playful portrayals of the behaviors are 
appealing, however, and this could provide some useful reassurance that sunnier 
books don’t offer. Ruzzier, probably best known for his illustrations for Segal’s 
Why Mole Shouted and Other Stories (BCCB 5/04), uses soft and muted watercolor 
tones that quiet the audacity of the actions. His subject creatures are personified 
animals—cats for the mother-child pair—touched with gremlin oddity in their 
slightly otherworldly features; though in at least one instance the behavior is overly 
gentled (“Love you when you hit someone” shows the toddler chucking eggs 
that have hit a bystander rather than actually swatting), the kid is realistic in his 
pendulum swings from gleeful destruction to impotent rages. This doesn’t have 
the satisfaction (and realistic balance of glee and consequences) of Shannon’s No, 
David! (BCCB 9/98), but it might serve as a realistic bedtime peace offering after 
a long day of kid vs. parent battle.  DS
kAABerBoL, Lene The Shamer’s War; tr. by Lene Kaaberbol. Holt, 
2006 [368p]
ISBN 0-8050-7771-5 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
In this fourth book of The Shamer Chronicles quartet (The Shamer’s Daughter, 
BCCB 5/04, The Shamer’s Signet BCCB 5/05, and The Serpent Gift, 9/06), Dina, 
Davin, and Nico return. Dina struggles with her fate, believing it to be inextricably 
tied to her genetic inheritance: of her mother’s Shaming ability and her father’s gift 
for deception and shaping dreams. Davin, haunted by memories of earlier torture 
and plagued with insecurity about previous mistakes, takes on too much respon-
sibility for the lives of everyone around him. Nico faces the biggest challenge of 
the three: the only person who can quash the current brutal regime, he must give 
up the core element of his personality, a commitment to non-violence, if he is to 
succeed. As in the earlier novels, the mystery and tension are effectively heightened 
by frequently changing viewpoints: just as the reader is settling into Davin’s quest 
to save his best friend, the next chapter focuses on Dina, hundreds of miles away, 
who is mired in a swamp. The connections between the protagonists and their 
seemingly divergent paths are made clearer through the interwoven stories; the 
details of each narrator’s particular choices are overlaid with the universality of the 
pain and sacrifices in Kaaberbol’s intricate fantasy world. Although readers will 
mourn the end of this powerful series, all of the prominent plot issues from the 
earlier novels are carefully resolved, and each character receives a proper send-off. 
It is to Kaaberbol’s credit that the villains, complex and mysterious, will be missed 
as much as the heroic, though flawed, protagonists.  AS
78 • The BulleTin
kenAh, kAThArine The Best Teacher in Second Grade; illus. by Abby Carter. Harper-
Collins, 2006 48p (I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-053565-2 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-053564-4 $15.99 
R Gr. 1-2
Luna’s move to a new school mid-year has been eased by the welcoming Mr. Hop-
per, her new teacher, who’s as interested in astronomy as she is. Since she thinks 
everything is better when it’s astronomically flavored, she’s disappointed when 
the class rejects her night-sky idea for their Family Night show and opts instead 
for a circus. Her further attempts to bring heavenly bodies into the circus plans 
(a hula-hooping Luna hopes to appear as “the planet Saturn, with its rings”) meet 
with bafflement from her classmates (“Everyone stared at Luna” is the sad refrain), 
finally causing a hurt Luna to turn her back on her beloved avocation. When the 
news that another class is also doing a circus leaves Mr. Hopper’s class searching for 
an alternative, however, Luna comes to the rescue by suggesting an astronomically 
themed night circus. The title is a bit misleading, since the book really focuses on 
Luna rather than on Mr. Hopper, but it’s all the more welcome for that: Luna is a 
shining star in her own right. Kenah handily conveys her protagonist’s delight in 
her passion as well as her single-mindedness, and there’s a light touch with the point 
about finding space for compromise with the less enthused. The text is sprinkled 
with astronomical references and turns of phrase throughout, but they don’t unduly 
complicate things (“telescope” and “constellation” are the only technical terms likely 
to be unfamiliar to some young readers), and there’s plenty of unobtrusive repetition 
to ease decoding. Carter’s line-and-watercolor illustrations offer homey and casual 
portraits of Luna and her multiracial class (Luna herself has tight curls and honeyed 
skin tones that suggest a variety of genetic backgrounds with equal plausibility). 
This is a prettily turned tale in general, and it will be particularly appreciated by 
youngsters trying to find a classroom place for their own driving passions.  DS
kennen, ALLy Beast. Push/Scholastic, 2006 217p
ISBN 0-439-86549-2 $16.99 
R* Gr. 8-12
Years in foster care have left seventeen-year-old Stephen keenly aware of his limited 
skills and outsider status; in his current placement, the Reynoldses’ jovial tolerance 
barely covers a readily awakened suspicion, and their teenaged daughter, Carol, 
relishes sabotaging Stephen’s reputation whenever she can. Stephen’s behavior is 
genuinely suspicious at times, but it’s for a good reason: years ago, his ne’er-do-well 
father (who’s since done jail time) illegally acquired and gave to Stephen a baby 
crocodile, and the creature is now a savage adult over twelve feet long. Legitimately 
terrified that it will escape and wreak havoc, Stephen has imprisoned it in an old 
pumphouse near the reservoir, and all his money and time go into acquiring meat 
to keep the creature happily fed. This is a highly original, modern-Gothic plot, 
and British author Kennen executes it with moody panache. The book is initially 
cunningly nebulous about the nature of the beast, leaving readers wondering if 
they’re reading fantasy or realism; the revelation of the beast’s actual species could 
have robbed the story of its power, but instead it makes Stephen’s dilemma all the 
keener for its carefully worked plausibility (Stephen’s life as a foster kid about to 
be chucked unceremoniously out into the world is also depicted with rich and 
sad authenticity). The stakes are high, the action is occasionally shocking, and the 
manifest drama is so gripping that it won’t matter if readers don’t catch the symbolic 
OcTOBer 2006 • 79
implications of the savage reptile. Fans of Kevin Brooks and other hard-hitting 
British authors will want to take a bite out of this.  DS
kLAss, dAvid Firestorm: The Caretaker Trilogy.  Foster/Farrar, 2006 289p
ISBN 0-374-32307-0 $17.00 
R Gr. 7-12
Don’t stand out, don’t distinguish yourself in any way that will draw attention—
that’s the advice eighteen-year-old Jack has heard from his parents for as long as he 
can remember. One night he arrives home only to have his father force him back 
out the door on a seemingly urgent midnight ride, plunging Jack into a puzzle he 
can’t stop running from long enough to untangle. It seems, though, that the people 
who raised him are not his parents, and he isn’t from the small town he knows so 
well. Instead, Jack hails from the future, where a prophecy indicates that this is the 
last moment Earth’s ecological balance can be tipped toward the good—but only 
if Jack can find and use the mysterious thing known as “Firestorm.” Jack is joined 
(and then left and then rejoined) by a tricky telepathic canine and a shape-changing 
female warrior, who must get him in fighting condition so he can defend himself 
against agents from the dark side. The book rockets through this action-packed 
adventure with crisp, terse sentences explained by narrator Jack as “a weakness of 
mine. But I still like them. They generate pace. You want pace? I’ll give you pace.” 
Since each step is revealed only as Jack is about to take it, readers will be as unable 
to predict the future as they will be to stop reading until they discover it, and the 
fact that this is only the first book in an intended trilogy makes Jack’s success an 
open question until the very end. Inventive situations and curious characters elevate 
the typical self-discovery/save-the-world plotline, and readers will relish hurtling 
through the adventure alongside Jack.  CW
koss, Amy goLdmAn Side Effects. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2006 [144p]
ISBN 1-59643-167-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Isabelle, known as Izzy, is just a normal fourteen-year-old, balancing friends, crushes, 
schoolwork, and family, when her swollen glands turn out to be Hodgkin’s lym-
phoma and she’s plunged into a world of chemotherapy and hospitalization. This 
isn’t a sentimental story of a beautiful young girl’s losing the battle against disease, 
though: Izzy, like most kids with lymphoma, is cured by her treatment, and the book 
is pragmatically focused on her experience as a diversion from her ordinary life. It’s 
utterly believable that that’s Izzy’s focus as well, and that she doesn’t really address 
the possibility she might die until the chemotherapy is making her sick enough 
to consider the point; it’s also believable that it hits people she knows differently, 
with her mother so grief-stricken she’s an emotional liability, her best friend a loyal 
and sometimes overdefensive ally, and at least one classmate dramatizing the situ-
ation for her own purposes. The physical realities of treatment—the devastation 
that contrasts with the apparent wellness of merely having cancer—are described 
with sympathetic frankness, and Koss also effectively evokes the clubby intimacy 
between young cancer patients on the ward. Though the narrowness of the book’s 
focus makes this a bit of a vivid documentary rather than a novel with a dimensional 
trajectory, it’s a bracingly authentic account of a girl whose illness provides her with 
real-life age-appropriate obstacles rather than cathartic tragedy.  DS
80 • The BulleTin
kurLAnsky, mArk The Story of Salt; illus. by S. D. Schindler. Putnam, 
2006 48p
ISBN 0-399-23998-7 $16.99 
R Gr. 4-8
After their notable success in transforming Kurlansky’s adult work on cod into a 
children’s book (The Cod’s Tale, BCCB 10/01), what could be more natural than 
for Kurlansky and Schindler to have a go at refashioning Salt? Following a brief 
introduction to salt’s chemical composition and its role in human and animal 
health, Kurlansky takes readers on a world tour of the geological milieus where salt 
hangs out, the ancient civilizations that developed large-scale salt production, and 
the culinary and economic value of salt over time. Without the strong historical 
trajectory of The Cod’s Tale, in which the fish was both the object of pursuit and 
the enabler of pursuit itself, The Story of Salt lends itself as willingly to brows-
ers as to serious readers. Sidebars and tasty tidbits range from explosive Chinese 
saltworks (they hadn’t reckoned on the proximity of natural gas), to the heavily 
“sal”-ted Roman vocabulary, to the “ship of state” salt dispensers that graced the 
tables of French kings. Salt itself doesn’t vamp for Schindler as alluringly as the 
more expressive codfish, but the finely detailed ink-scratch and watercolor scenes 
are imbued with a droll humor that will keep pages steadily flipping. Those busty 
French ladies conceal contraband salt fish under their straining stays, and Uncle 
Sam empties his massive salt shaker over the globe, while a host of representatives 
from other cultures and nations regard this expression of U.S. dominance of the 
salt trade with justifiable skepticism. A concluding timeline of “Salt through the 
Ages” actually supplements rather than recaps the text, inviting readers to take 
one last lick.  EB 
LAnAgAn, mArgo White Time. Eos/HarperCollins, 2006 216p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-074394-8 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-074393-X $15.99 
R Gr. 9-12
In this Australian import, Lanagan explores a wide range of topics such as death, 
love, and longing in ten short stories. “The Queen’s Notice” explores the fate of a 
rodent, chosen by the rodent queen for his bravery to be her next mating partner 
but unexpectedly isolated from everything he loves by his newly exalted status. 
Exploring similar themes of isolation but set in a drastically different milieu is 
“The Boy Who Didn’t Yearn,” a tale of a desperately lonely and psychically gifted 
girl who unconsciously creates the perfect boyfriend out of her own desires. “The 
Night Lily” is set in a harrowing war-filled world where a young boy, his family 
dying around him, finds comfort in a giant jellyfish-like creature that lives in his 
room and may or may not be real. What is real or imagined, ambiguous or certain, 
is clearly less the point of these stories, however, than an experimentation with 
writing styles and the multiple meanings of words. As in her previous short-story 
collection, Black Juice (BCCB 3/05), Lanagan’s language and sentence structure 
are impeccable and well crafted. Though the sophisticated vocabulary and complex 
plots will make readers work for their literary payoffs, most of this collection is 
powerful and effective; patient readers with a literary bent will be rewarded with 
intriguing, meaningful stories that explore the beauty and complexity of life, even 
in its rawest moments.  AS
OcTOBer 2006 • 81
Lee-TAi, Amy A Place Where Sunflowers Grow; illus. by Felicia Hoshino. Chil-
dren’s Book Press, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-89239-215-0 $16.95 
Ad 5-8 yrs
Mari and her family have been interned at the Topaz relocation camp for over a 
year, and the little girl hoards her feelings of homesickness and confusion deep 
inside. Although her parents find a measure of satisfaction in their stoic belief that 
things will improve after the war and in the art classes they teach to fellow residents, 
Mari attends her own art class without enthusiasm. “Draw something that makes 
you happy at Topaz” may be the instruction, but Mari “can’t think of anything 
that makes me happy at Topaz.” Eventually, though, drawing pictures of happier 
times back home and meeting a new friend, Aiko, boost Mari’s spirits, and when 
the sunflower seeds she planted in the desert soil sprout, she finally believes that 
“her old life, and whatever her new life would be like after the war, didn’t feel so 
far away.” This is a heartfelt tale, gently fashioned for young listeners, with words 
and pictures offering glimpses of daily life where sun blazed, dust storms blew, 
accommodations were primitive, and privacy was at a premium. It may not be 
equally clear to this audience, though, how artwork, which is implied to play such 
a liberating role in Mari’s development, has any bigger role in her contentment than 
the friendship of another child. Since viewers are treated to few of Mari’s drawings, 
the observation “It was as if, with every drawing she created, Mari found another 
question to ask and the courage to ask it” remains abstract. Watercolor, ink, and 
acrylics on tissue paper are delicately transparent, underscoring Mari’s emotional 
fragility, and the deep brown-black of her hair and wide-set eyes and the red of 
her bandana make her stand out amid the gold and brown shades of drab camp 
life. Opening and closing notes supply family and historical background, and the 
graceful lines of Japanese translation that accompany each block of English text 
will fascinate children who like to “follow along.”  EB
Love, d. Anne Semiprecious. McElderry, 2006 293p
ISBN 0-689-85638-5 $16.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Garnet’s mother has always claimed that Garnet and her sister Opal are her “precious 
gems,” but then she dumps the girls on her sister’s rickety porch in a backwater 
town in Oklahoma while she goes to Nashville to pursue dreams of country music 
stardom. Here Garnet learns that she is at best semiprecious to a woman whose self-
ishness seems unfathomable. When Daddy is injured in a fire on his oil rig, Garnet 
is sure her mother will come get them and take them home, but no dice. Finally fed 
up with living on lies and welfare while awaiting Daddy’s disability checks, Garnet 
tracks her mother down in Music City, only to find that she has been hijacking the 
checks to finance her own failure; formerly meek Aunt Julia then blows into town 
after her wayward niece, puts Mama in her place, and takes Garnet and her sister 
back home to Oklahoma. Set in 1960, Garnet’s story is infused with a compelling 
realism in a time of nascent social change. Her salvation from collapsing under the 
weight of her mother’s betrayal comes in the form of a radical art teacher who shares 
with her the idea that art, which is Garnet’s passion, can be a vehicle for irony, which 
is just what she needs as she tries to sort through her feelings about her situation. 
Though she doesn’t use her art to convey any complex metaphor about the rest of 
her life, Garnet clearly develops an adult vision about the world that includes an 
understanding of truth behind appearances and the necessary compromises and 
82 • The BulleTin
ambiguities that comprise a life. Love’s only misstep in this down-home coming-
of-age story is Garnet’s rather unbelievable appreciation for her mother’s teaching 
her that following your dreams is important no matter what the cost, but there is 
enough irony and contradiction in the insistence that other people are the ones 
paying that cost to mitigate this unfortunate warm fuzzy. An author’s note com-
menting on the artists that inspire Garnet follows the text.  KC
mAccreAdy, roBin merrow Buried. Dutton, 2006 [208p]
ISBN 0-525-47724-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-12
Claudine has spent so many years cleaning up her alcoholic mother’s messes that, 
when her mother suddenly disappears, Claudine’s provision of a neat and plausible 
explanation for her mother’s absence—Mom’s in rehab—is almost second nature. 
However, friends of her mother, particularly her boyfriend Linwood, remain skepti-
cal of Claudine’s story; meanwhile, Claudine’s best friend and fellow support-group 
member, Liz, grows increasingly concerned by Claudine’s obsessive house clean-
ing and list-making. While Claudine has always buried things, both literally and 
figuratively, in trying to maintain an orderly façade, her mother’s disappearance 
ultimately leads Claudine to spiral out of control, cleaning house until her hands 
bleed and posting hundreds of Post-It notes around the house to remind her of 
household tasks. The book is near-relentless in its purposiveness, and the writing 
is sometimes unclear in matters small and large (such as whether Claudine has 
OCD or is neurotically responding to her mother’s disorder). Realistic dialogue 
between Claudine and Liz helps keep the book from becoming pure therapy lit, 
though, and the symbolic burial of Claudine’s mother’s alcoholism by Claudine 
is, if transparent, usually rendered subtly enough to be effective. While the quick 
recovery of the co-dependent Claudine after the discovery of her mother’s death 
and the speedy wrap-up of all the dangling threads are unrealistic, Claudine’s half-
imagined, half-hallucinated confrontation of her mother in a climactic hurricane 
scene is haunting and, after so much secrecy and scrubbing, a welcome if over-the-
top relief. Readers who came for the issues may find themselves reaching for the 
tissues as Claudine finally finds closure with her mother.  LG
mAckALL, dAndi dALey Larger-than-Life Lara. Dutton, 2006 [160p]
ISBN 0-525-47726-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-6
Laney Grafton initially thinks of the new girl as “larger-than-life Lara” because 
of Lara’s severe obesity, and Laney is relieved that Lara takes over Laney’s role as 
prime target of the fourth-grade taunters’ teasing. Laney struggles with a home 
life of insufficiency, her mother absent, her drunken father neglectful and abusive 
by turns, and her older brothers already known troublemakers, which make her 
prime bully-bait; she’s awed at the way Lara seems to respond to cruelty with insight 
and forgiveness, often spontaneously coming forth with touching rhymes about 
her tormentor. When several class members gang up on Lara for an organized 
humiliation onstage at the end of a class performance, though, that’s more than 
even she can take. Laney’s easy-reading if often sad narration is overtly patterned 
upon the narrative structures her teacher has explained to the class, a device whose 
honest self-consciousness brings some freshness to the old “writing assignment” 
explanation for first-person narration; the small movement in Laney’s own family 
OcTOBer 2006 • 83
(her “littlest big brother” comes out to quietly support her in the class play) is a 
gratifying and believable victory for her. What’s not remotely believable is Lara’s 
figurative larger-than-lifeness; she’s as robbed of authentic personhood by the nar-
rative as she is by her tormentors, instead becoming a Christlike figure who takes 
away the sins of the class by sacrificing herself (she refuses to give up the names of 
the prank’s perpetrators and instead leaves school), thus eliciting repentance from 
even the hardest of hearts. This therefore lacks the raw authenticity and penetration 
of Blume’s classic Blubber (BCCB 5/75), but readers may still warm to Laney’s story 
of her own quiet development.  DS
mAcLeAn, chrisTine koLe How It’s Done. Flux, 2006 [336p]
ISBN 0-7387-1029-6 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12 
High-school senior Grace Passedge is a willing believer in romance novels and an un-
willing subject in her Bible-bound father’s kingdom on earth. Grace finds her escape 
at a nearby college, where she meets darkly handsome Michael Irving, a professor 
and the archangel who can help her fall from her father’s grace. They start dating, 
and Michael begins molding Grace into the woman he knows she can become. 
Shortly after they become sexually active, Michael proposes, but Grace’s acceptance 
is more a declaration of independence from her father than an expression of perfect 
bliss. After a pregnancy scare that galvanizes her commitment proves groundless, 
Grace questions her decision to marry Michael, realizing how much of her father’s 
doctrine she has absorbed. Characters are kindly drawn, from the beautiful but 
emotionally flawed Michael to Grace’s lissome best friend and betrayer, Liv. The 
most complete characters besides Grace are Michael’s advice-giving housekeeper 
and Grace’s parents, who all take on shape and heft throughout the story and keep 
the focus on family ties—real or created—rather than the sensational aspects of a 
relationship between a teen and an older man. Numerous Biblical references are 
presented familiarly, as if readers will also know chapter and verse, but MacLean 
avoids proselytizing by letting Grace make the mistakes many teens do. This is a 
novel with enough spice for the regular crowd and enough Sunday for all but the 
most fundamental teens.  CW
mAnushkin, frAn The Shivers in the Fridge; illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky. Dutton, 
2006 [40p]
ISBN 0-525-46943-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
The Shivers family—Grandpa and Grandma, Papa and Mama, and Sonny, the 
youngest—live in a strange cold, dark place, where their lives are punctuated by 
the occasional earthquake, blaze of light, and long-clawed monster taking away 
a neighboring item or two. Things go from bad to worse when members of the 
family begin disappearing one by one, leaving Sonny all alone. What sounds like a 
horrific plot is a comedy from the perspective of the viewer, who will be tipped off 
from the titular get-go that the Shivers are in the refrigerator (and, in fact, they’re 
finally pronounced to be refrigerator magnets who have somehow mistakenly 
ended up inside the fridge). While that perceptival twist is pretty much all there 
is to the story, Manushkin makes the most of it with touches of characterization 
(Grandma, for instance, is a tough old pessimist), amusingly domestic familial 
dialogue (“Sonny, don’t read in the dark,” warns Mama. “You’ll ruin your eyes”), 
84 • The BulleTin
and comedic references to the fridge’s contents (Mama slides into the toasty warm 
Emerald Lake, only to find herself stuck solid when the green Jell-o jells). Zelinsky’s 
artwork challenges the preconception of a fridge’s sterile whiteness with loud, garish 
complements of orange and green predominating, while additional energy emanates 
from doodly scrawl around the edges and layers of media in contrasting color and 
texture; the result is sometimes chaotic to the point of unfocused overbusyness, but it 
brings considerable energy to what might have been considered about as still as a still 
life could get. This will tickle audience funnybones if not palates, and kids may relish 
considering what the food’s-eye view would be from inside their refrigerators.  DS
mArTin, dAvid All for Pie, Pie for All; illus. by Valeri Gorbachev. Candlewick, 
2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-7636-2393-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-5 yrs
Grandma Cat bakes an apple pie for the cat family, who each eat a piece, leaving 
one piece remaining, then nod off into naps. When the still-steaming remaining 
piece of pie coaxes Grandma Mouse and her family from their hole, they divvy it 
up and chow down, leaving only six crumbs. After the mice also succumb to post-
pastry slumber, Grandma Ant smells pie, and the ant family chows down on the 
remaining crumbs. When Grandma Cat wakes up hungry again, all three families 
are game for a pie rerun, and everybody pitches in on the making and the eating. 
Gorbachev’s crosshatchings add cupboard-y accents to the warm watercolor browns 
and oranges of the kitties’ kitchen; the double-page spread is used to diverting effect 
when conveying the perspectives of the mice and ants, viewing the table of larger 
families from below. While there’s a Richard Scarry-esque uniformity to the facial 
expressions of the characters, their cartoony quality ably supports the playfully 
inviting text. Cuddly characters and rhythmic food-centered text ensures youngster 
appeal; the repurposing-of-leftovers theme is reminiscent of Gilman’s folklore ad-
aptation Something from Nothing (BCCB 2/94), with which this might effectively 
pair. On its own, it’s a tasty entry for toddler storytime or a cozy readaloud on 
Grandma’s lap, especially if you have pie at the ready.  LG 
mckissAck, PATriciA c. Porch Lies: Tales of Slicksters, Tricksters, and Other 
Wily Characters; illus. by André Carrilho. Schwartz & Wade/Random House, 
2006 146p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93619-X $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83619-5 $18.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Turning to folklore and family storytelling as her inspiration for these original 
stories, McKissack offers ten humorous, often subversive tales featuring clever, 
silver-tongued protagonists, skilled at using their charm and their wits to get their 
way and to get out of trouble. Memorable characters include Pete Bruce, who 
tricks a baker into feeding him an entire coconut cream pie by questioning her 
culinary skills; Bukka Black, who pretends to be legendary blues guitarist Robert 
Johnson in order to boost his career and finds himself in trouble when the Devil 
himself is fooled; Aunt Gran, who enlists the aid of outlaws Jesse and Frank James 
in order to stave off racist harassment; and Dooley, who wins a lying contest by 
telling the best (and possibly the shortest) lie ever told: “I aine never told no lie 
before.” Crackling dialogue fuels humorous plots, making this collection perfect 
for a classroom readaloud; the consistency of tone links stories across various frames 
OcTOBer 2006 • 85
and narrators. The collection would also make a great curricular tie-in with units 
on African-American history and folklore, or trickster tales generally—it would pair 
well, for example, with Julius Lester’s Uncle Remus retellings or with an examina-
tion of Coyote stories. Carrilho’s stylized digitally produced caricatures reflect the 
exaggerations of the stories themselves, and his affectionately broad draftsmanship 
adds a warm and familiar quality to the figures. Readers who loved The Dark Thirty 
(BCCB 12/92) will relish this similar mix of folklore, history, and expert storytell-
ing. An author’s note explains the family tradition of tale telling on the front porch 
that inspired the collection and provided its title.  LG
mcky, kATie Pumpkin Town!: Or, Nothing Is Better and Worse Than Pumpkins; 
illus. by Pablo Bernasconi. Houghton, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-618-60569-X $16.00 
R 5-8 yrs
José and his four brothers labor on the family’s pumpkin farm, but they make a 
key strategic error: they discard the extra pumpkin seeds by tossing them at the 
edge of the pumpkin field, where the wind carries them downhill and deposits 
them all over town. The next growing season brings the botanical consequence of 
vines winding across roofs, through trees, and over fences, with attached pumpkins 
weighting down structures and dropping on passersby. José and his brothers, real-
izing their culpability, commit a daring midnight raid on the town to sort out the 
problem, literally—the result is one neat pile of pumpkins and another of vines, 
and a grateful collection of townspeople who erect a statue to the mysterious veg-
etable-wrangling boys in gratitude and send them off with a thank-you present of 
watermelon. McKy writes a lively, folklore-touched tale that appreciates the oral 
pleasures of food products and the chaos of plant growth; touches of repetition and 
tasty pumpkin specifics add savor to the tale, and experienced listeners will start to 
giggle in anticipation of the “here-we-go-again” consequences as soon as the nice 
seedy watermelons enter the story ostensibly to tie it up. The madcap collage of 
Bernasconi’s illustrations is perfectly suited to the tale; even the round human faces 
are an effectively synthesized patchwork of collaged bits, giving José and his sibs 
an amiable Frankenstein look that ties in neatly with the notion of creations that 
take an unexpected and independent direction. The glossy photographic pumpkins 
definitely look good enough to eat, and in their radiant, robust health they look 
more than a match for the townspeople. The art doesn’t rest on its collage laurels, 
however; clever compositions and comedic touches ensure the scenes are effective 
narrative art. This has obvious Halloween utility, but it could also make an amusing 
partner for “Jack and the Beanstalk” or an entertaining opener for the ubiquitous 
bean-growing project.  DS
mcmuLLAn, kATe I’m Dirty!; illus. by Jim McMullan. Cotler/HarperCollins, 
2006 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009294-7 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009293-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-7 yrs
Playing all day in the mud and knowing you’ve done a good piece of work for your 
community—is this the perfect job, or what? That’s the lot of Backhoe Loader, 
proud and brawny cousin of the McMullans’ tugboat and garbage truck (I’m Mighty!, 
BCCB 12/03; I Stink!, BCCB 6/02). When local scofflaws ignore the “No Dump-
ing” signs, Backhoe Loader is johnny-on-the-spot with his dipper stick, bucket, and 
86 • The BulleTin
row of chompers (“And that’s just my REAR end”) and his “specialized, maximized, 
giant-sized LOADER BUCKET” up front. A countdown of refuse, from “10 torn 
up truck tires” down to “2 tossed-out toilet seats” and “1 wonky washing machine” 
get tossed in the dumpster, the tree root’s removed, the hole’s filled, and the area’s 
smoothed. Dripping with muck and grinning a toothy metallic smile, Backhoe 
Loader hitches a ride on a flatbed truck, and the only thing that can spoil his day 
is the rainstorm on the back cover that washes away his hard-won coat of grime. 
There’s enough energy here to match the squirmiest preschool group and enough 
pizzazz in the purple, gold, and earthy-slime palette to keep all heads facing forward. 
Add a mudpie craft project for a surefire story-hour hit, and ship off the audience 
with a rousing reprise of “Have a dirty day!”  EB
moonshower, cAndie The Legend of Zoey. Delacorte, 2006 213p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90298-0 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73280-5 $15.95 
Ad Gr. 4-7
According to her journal, Zoey is worn out by her parents’ bickering and separation; 
she’s looking forward to the overnight class trip to West Tennessee to learn about 
the earthquakes that took place in 1811–12 and transformed much of Chickasaw 
Country into Reelfoot Lake. Part Chickasaw and part Choctaw, she will be learn-
ing about her own heritage as well. Prudence Charity Keeler, living and writing in 
her own journal in 1811, is lonely and bored since her father moved her and her 
mother to Chickasaw Country to minister to the Indians; she prays for a friend. 
When a violent storm sweeps Zoey away from her classmates in a flash flood on 
their way to the lake, it takes her back to 1811, where she is apparently the answer 
to Prudence’s prayers. Because of her knowledge of what is about to happen in the 
area, Zoey encourages Prudence to move with her pregnant mother away from lands 
that will soon be under water. In the midst of earthquakes, they set off, delivering 
Prudence’s new twin sister and brother along the way to Kentucky. The plot is 
laden with drama, and the book is realistic about both girls’ domestic dilemmas, 
effectively conveying Zoey’s and Prudence’s emotional responses to their parents’ 
decisions. The narrative itself is clunky, though; the alternating journal entries of 
the two girls are so similar in voice as to be confusing at times, and the situation 
of the pregnant mother, introduced presumably to make Zoey appreciate her own 
mother’s decision to become a midwife, is device-y and not especially credible 
(after three miscarriages, Prudence’s mother successfully delivers healthy preemie 
twins while trekking through an earthquake-ridden wilderness). It is also unclear 
what role Zoey plays in the destiny of her own family; her presence in the past isn’t 
crucial for events to unfold as they should. For readers willing to suspend disbelief, 
however, this is a fast-paced story of a compelling regional history.  KC
moser, LisA The Monster in the Backpack; illus. by Noah Z. Jones. Candlewick, 
2006 40p
ISBN 0-7636-2390-3 $14.99 
R Gr. 2-4
Annie’s new backpack comes with pink and blue flowers, a zipper, and, much to 
her surprise, a monster. After discovering the little backpack monster, Annie then 
negotiates a schoolday with her new companion, who likes to eat her lunch, sleep 
in her boot, and stay in the backpack under Annie’s desk rather than being banished 
to the closet. Annie is tempted to trade her troublemaking backpack for her friend 
Kate’s placid green bag, especially after Annie’s monster rips up her homework 
OcTOBer 2006 • 87
and hurls the confetti all over Annie’s desk in a “parade”; when the tearful monster 
informs an angry Annie that the mess was the “Annie-is-great” parade, however, 
she forgives her endearing if troublemaking new friend. The text is pared down but 
still spirited and funny, with entertaining particulars and one-liners; a few kids may 
note the parallel between the behavior of the monster and that of a little sibling, but 
most will just relish the idea of a secret backpack pal, no matter how mischievous. 
Though the digital art relies overmuch on slightly muddy if sophisticated tones 
and the flat perspective never really gives the stripy little monster his visual due, 
the illustrations’ cartoony lightheartedness is nonetheless appealing. This will be an 
offbeat alternative to easy readers depicting more orthodox friendships.  DS
nemeTh, sALLy The Heights, the Depths, and Everything in Between. Knopf, 
2006 263p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93458-8 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83458-3 $15.95 
Ad Gr. 6-9
Five-foot-ten at thirteen, Lucy Small is accustomed to humor at the expense of 
her name, as is her best friend, Jake Little, who is a dwarf no taller than four feet. 
Junior high brings challenges to their friendship, as Jake grows bitter about his 
divorced mother’s new boyfriend and becomes increasingly interested in hanging 
with the tough crowd; Lucy, meanwhile, is hoping that her peripatetic father will 
return to his family, and she’s developing her own interest in one of the bad boys, 
handsome Gary Geary. The story offers some compelling elements: the depiction 
of a friendship’s changing state is sympathetic yet honest, Lucy’s wishful thinking 
about her father’s return is touchingly naïve, and it’s refreshing to see a friendship 
(and maybe romance) between a good girl and a perceived-to-be-bad boy without 
implications of cheap thrills for the one or reformation for the other. There’s little 
shape to the account, however, since Lucy simply relates what happens during the 
year (and it’s not clear why the story has to be set in the 1970s), and the narration 
is paced steadily but not swiftly. It’s nonetheless a year of some poignant occur-
rences, chronicled with smooth and thoughtful style, and readers will sympathize 
with Lucy’s struggles.  DS
o’Brien, Anne siBLey, ad. The Legend of Hong Kil Dong: The Robin Hood of Korea; 
ad. and illus. by Anne Sibley O’Brien. Charlesbridge, 2006 48p
ISBN 1-58089-302-3 $14.95 
R Gr. 4-7
The Korean folk hero, whose exploits have been captured by seventeenth-century 
writer and social critic Ho Kyun, certainly shares Robin Hood’s mission of cham-
pioning the poor, but his superpowers would make him as much at home in the 
DC Universe as in Sherwood Forest. The illegitimate son of a government official, 
Kil Dong is denied a patrimony, and, having been snubbed in his father’s house, 
he seeks his destiny in a mountain monastery where he learns “the secrets of mar-
tial arts, swordplay, divination, the wisdom of the I Ching, the Book of Changes, 
and . . . the uses of magic.” He survives an assassination attempt, rallies a group 
of peasants-turned-bandits, and begins his life work of training peasant warriors 
to resist the oppression of wealthy officials who drain their subjects of their liveli-
hood. O’Brien presents the tale in comic-book format, lavishing her graphics with 
the same attention to historical accuracy that she accords her text. Kil Dong may 
be a bit doll-like and sweet-faced for the action-hero set, but his boulder-heaving, 
high-kicking, magical trickery are a match for any spandexed, muscle-bulging 
88 • The BulleTin
he-man, and his witty ploys will elicit chuckles and cheers. Small typefaced pas-
sages from the I Ching run up the side of each verso, and closing notes, also in 
graphic-novel-styled frames, offer background on the author’s interest in the tale, 
writer Ho Kyun, emperor Se Jong on whom the fictionalized emperor is based, 
traditional costume and symbols, and sources consulted by O’Brien. WOW!—no, 
make that OMANAH!  EB 
oATes, Joyce cAroL After the Wreck, I Picked Myself Up, Spread My Wings, and 
Flew Away. HarperTempest, 2006 292p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-073526-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-073525-2 $16.99 
R Gr. 9-12
Jenna divides her life into “before the wreck” and “after the wreck,” the wreck be-
ing the dramatic traffic accident that killed Jenna’s mother and nearly killed Jenna, 
leaving their car dangling over the edge of the Tappan Zee Bridge until rescuers 
were able to remove its occupants. After leaving the hospital, Jenna refuses to move 
in with her estranged father and his new wife and son, instead opting to live with 
her mother’s sister, Caroline, and Caroline’s family in a small New Hampshire 
town. Still traumatized and grief-stricken, Jenna resists friendships but finds her-
self intrigued by biker-boy Crow, whose unexpected kindness and understanding 
touches her, and she’s swept up by fast-living bad girl Trina, who happens to be 
Crow’s girlfriend. Jenna’s narration effectively conveys her shock and pain, and 
also the secret guilt—she thinks she may have caused her mother to swerve the car 
into oncoming traffic—that convinces her she’s not worthy of real belonging or 
friendship. The book keeps things realistically tough and challenging by avoiding 
easy answers with new friends or romance: Trina can’t face Jenna after Jenna calls 
the cops to intervene in a party turned vicious assault, and Crow leaves town to 
try to make it work with the mother of his young son. Since it’s believable that the 
accident would have left Jenna with a phobia about bridges, the metaphor about her 
finally crossing one is unforced; readers will understand that the wreck has changed 
Jenna, but they’ll be glad to see her finally moving forward.  DS
PATTerson, nAncy ruTh The Winner’s Walk; illus. by Thomas F. Yezerski. Farrar, 
2006 114p
ISBN 0-374-38445-2 $16.00 
Ad Gr. 2-4
The rest of Case’s family are all winners, but unfortunately he’s not: his efforts in 
the spring talent show go awry, there’s a glitch in his science-fair project, and just 
when he seems to be riding to victory in his class at the horse show, he falls and 
breaks his arm. The fourth-grader is therefore thrilled when Noah, the stray dog 
he finds and adopts, proves to be a whiz at agility events, garnering Case the wins 
he desires as well as the doggy companionship. There’s a problem, though: Case’s 
beloved new pet is skilled because he’s a highly trained service dog, stolen from the 
yard of his mistress; while she’s been able to find another service dog in the ensuing 
months, there is a long list of people waiting to receive a dog just like Noah. The 
book doesn’t really pick up interest until Noah appears on the scene, and that’s 
over a third of the way through the pages; there’s also some stretching to make the 
plot work (Noah’s training doesn’t include agility, yet he’s able to run daunting and 
unfamiliar obstacles successfully the first time out; despite the backlog of people 
waiting for service dogs, Noah’s previous owner is able to get trained and ready with 
a replacement within only a few months). The story effectively mines the revelation 
OcTOBer 2006 • 89
of Noah’s ability for entertainment value, however, with Noah amazing Case by 
helpfully bringing him the ringing phone and tidily putting his own dog dish in 
the dishwasher. Case’s decision to give Noah up is made less purposive and more 
believable by Case’s own physical struggles with his broken arm, which give him 
a personal understanding of the obstacles even a temporary handicap can create. 
Yezerski’s line-and-wash illustrations are sometimes awkward in their draftsmanship, 
but their informal realism adds to the book’s accessibility. This doesn’t have the pure 
doggy drive that caninophiles would wish for, but it’s nonetheless a thoughtful story 
that may elicit some interesting discussion about fairness and sacrifice.  DS
PAuLsen, gAry The Legend of Bass Reeves: Being the True and Fictional Account of 
the Most Valiant Marshal in the West. Lamb, 2006 137p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90898-9 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74661-X $15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
As the subtitle suggests, truth and fiction mingle freely in this account of Bass Reeves’ 
eventful life. Born into slavery, Reeves made his escape and hid out for much of 
his adult life in remote Indian territory until, well after the close of the Civil War, 
he was recruited by a federal judge to serve as a deputy marshal and clean up the 
lawlessness in the region with which he was now intimately familiar. Paulsen sug-
gests to Western-obsessed readers that, while other figures such as Wyatt Earp, Kit 
Carson, and Jeremiah Johnson may have become legends, they were no better than 
criminals themselves; Reeves, he insists, is uniquely worthy of hero status. However, 
he also acknowledges that “most information on Bass in books is based on word of 
mouth. . . . There aren’t many accounts to refer to beyond a few newspaper articles 
and records of the arrests he made,” leaving readers to ponder whether Reeves 
had a few warts himself. None of this stops Paulsen from spinning an engrossing 
fictionalized yarn, though, as he imagines Reeves’ boyhood, his relationship with 
his alcoholic owner, his years spent among the Creek Indians, learning their land 
and avoiding recapture, and the circumstances surrounding some of his most no-
table arrests. Readers with serious interest in crime fighting in the Old West may 
have little patience with this fanciful account, but kids who simply come for the 
Saturday matinee (perhaps a double feature with Theodore Taylor’s Billy the Kid, 
BCCB 9/05) can load them thar finger pistols and git ready ta draw.  EB 
PhiLiP, neiL The Great Circle: A History of the First Nations. Clarion, 
2006 [153p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-15941-X $20.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-10
With a page count that falls short of two hundred, it’s pretty obvious that the “his-
tory” to which the subtitle alludes is severely abridged, at best. Philip’s presenta-
tion, organized into seven chronological chapters, is better described as a series of 
essays on the confrontation of Indian and white cultures within the United States, 
dating back to first contact. After an introduction on early colonial Indian/Euro-
pean relations, meatier chapters highlight Tecumseh’s efforts to unify nations for 
their own defense; the removal of Southeastern nations from their homelands on 
the infamous Trail of Tears; the fate of West Coast nations whose land became 
suddenly desirable after the Gold Rush; the Lakota struggle to retain their land 
on the Plains; and finally, successful efforts to retain or reclaim traditions, land, 
and sacred artifacts. Philip proposes two models for examining the Indian/white 
90 • The BulleTin
conflict—opposing worldviews (circle of interconnectedness for Indians, straight 
line from barbarity to civilization for whites), or “two conflicting ideas about the 
ownership of land”—but neither is pursued with the clarity or vigor to make 
competing philosophies accessible to a middle-school audience. Indeed, Bruchac’s 
family “circle” in Return of Skeleton Man (reviewed above) makes the point more 
concretely. The old-fashioned great men, great battles approach to history has its 
exciting moments, but it’s somewhat staid, leaving readers with little information 
with which to put the people and events into cultural or even cross-cultural context. 
Nonetheless, Philip does include important discussion of divisions within Indian 
leadership about how to counter European incursion, and he makes frequent and 
valuable connections between mythology and attitudes toward land. Copiously 
captioned black-and-white illustrations, sources for quotations, a chapter-by-chapter 
bibliography, and an index are included.  EB
PinkwATer, dAnieL Bad Bear Detectives: An Irving & Muktuk Story; illus. by Jill 
Pinkwater. Houghton, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-618-43125-X $16.00 
R* Gr. 2-4
Irving and Muktuk, the ursine miscreants from Bad Bears in the Big City (BCCB 
3/04), are shocked to find themselves suspects when a shipment of exotic blue-
berry muffins disappears from a dockside warehouse. Determined to clear their 
names, the duo turns gumshoe, trying to uncover the real criminals by following 
their trail. The scent leads the bear pair to the polar-bear enclosure in the very zoo 
where they live, where they find the muffins cleverly concealed; a taste test begins 
to jog Irving’s and Muktuk’s memories, and they realize they have in fact found 
the culprits: themselves (“Because we are bad bears,” says Irving knowingly). The 
charming absurdity that Irving and Muktuk bring to their adventures makes for a 
highly offbeat but entertaining mystery; there’s a tip of the fedora—a pair of which 
the bears steal in order to disguise themselves—to elements of the detective-story 
genre but plenty of allegiance to the pair’s own literary tradition, including plenty 
of phrases (“We are not to be trusted”) that will be familiar to readers of earlier 
outings. Jill Pinkwater balances her sly, sharp-edged draftsmanship for the bears 
with soft, blurry backgrounds and human figures, a contrast that downplays the 
subsidiary characters into obscurity and ensures the bears are unchallenged in their 
star turn. While this will be best appreciated by fans of the felonious pair’s previous 
outings, even novices will snicker at the doofus detectives and the mystery so loopy 
it loops back on itself.  DS
rAwLinson, JuLiA Fletcher and the Falling Leaves; illus. by Tiphanie Beeke. Green-
willow, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-06-113401-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 3-5 yrs
Fletcher the fox is anxious about the changes in his world and especially his favorite 
tree, which is “dull, dry, and brown.” His mother tells him that “it’s only autumn,” 
but a worried Fletcher starts trying to reattach the fallen leaves to the tree, defending 
them from a plundering hedgehog and squirrel. Some friendly birds aid him for a 
time, but it’s a losing battle, and even the last little leaf, which Fletcher desperately 
held against the tree, falls. When Fletcher sees his tree following a cold snap the next 
morning, though, he’s enchanted with its transformation: it’s become a beautiful 
structure shining “with a thousand icicles.” The book’s rather vague on what you’d 
OcTOBer 2006 • 91
think would be the key points here—it never explains that what looks like death 
is only dormancy and the tree will wake again next spring, and it’s not clear what 
weather phenomenon has hit the tree (actual icicles would indicate an ice storm, 
which wasn’t really foregrounded in the text and which could in reality do the tree 
considerable damage). Beeke accumulates gently smudged paints in layers on softly 
granular paper; rich earth tones point up the autumnal theme (and the russety 
little fox suits the palette perfectly) that’s accented and leavened by pink and blue 
tones. The final arboreal reveal is bedecked with a helping of silver glitter icicles 
that will enchant young viewers, and its unexpectedness and placement within an 
otherwise restrained visual narrative makes it an effective emphasis rather than just 
a shiny gimmick. While additional explanation will be necessary, this could be an 
attractive little entry in a unit on seasons, encouraging youngsters to think about 
the subtler beauties of seasonal change.  DS
richArdson, e. e. The Intruders. Delacorte, 2006 196p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90280-8 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73264-3 $15.95 
R Gr. 6-8
Moving into a creepy house and adjusting to a new stepfamily at the same time 
is a lot for Joel to handle. Good-natured and eager to please, Joel tries to mediate 
between his hostile sister and two stepbrothers but makes little progress until har-
rowing evidence that the house is haunted forces the four teens to work together. 
Soon the kids are tracing the origins of their ghosts through old photographs and 
articles, trying to make communication with the dead through spontaneous sé-
ances, and discovering the strengths each of them will bring to the new family—if 
they all manage to stay alive. Terse dialogue and brief but creepy descriptions of 
the hallucinations and dreams of the protagonists establish an urgent pace that is 
perfect for a ghost story; the unsettling atmosphere of the house is developed within 
the first few pages, and the tension doesn’t let up until the ghosts are released in the 
final chapter. Richardson relies on foreshadowing and cliffhangers to create most 
of the fear factor, and this subtlety will satisfy readers searching for a genuinely 
scary (but not overly gory) novel where the protagonists all survive but still face 
gratifyingly daunting obstacles along the way.  AS 
richArdson, nigeL The Wrong Hands. Knopf, 2006 258p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93459-6 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83459-1 $15.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Graham Sinclair was born with large, webbed hands that have made him the butt 
of schoolyard jokes ever since he was a child, and with a secret gift that Graham’s 
mother has encouraged him to cover up, fearing that others will find him freakish. 
Shunned by his peers and neighbors, Graham is eventually sent away to London 
to live with an uncle, where he experiences the relative anonymity of the big city 
as a relief and an escape. It doesn’t last long, however—his decision to use his gift 
to rescue a baby from the wreckage of a plane crash is witnessed by a glamorous 
young tabloid reporter, whose attentions blind Graham to her true motives and 
who convinces him to admit his secret. Alternately cast as hero and pariah by the 
tabloids, Graham must decide what his next move is, and whom he can trust. 
Graham’s secret—his ability to fly—is the subject of subtle hints throughout, so 
the final revelation of his abilities is satisfying albeit not entirely surprising. The 
real pulse driving the story, however, is not Graham’s secret but the way burying it 
92 • The BulleTin
has profoundly stunted his ability to judge character and damaged his relationships 
with potential allies, particularly his mother. While the theme of human flight has 
been treated compellingly in other novels, notably Almond’s Skellig (BCCB 3/99) 
and Murphy’s Night Flying (BCCB 1/01), Graham’s travails give this story a darker 
cast and also a more realistic one—a boy who could fly would indeed need to worry 
about the tabloids and the police. The fact that he must also worry about his so-
called friends and his own parents puts this novel, despite its fantastical subject 
matter, comfortably at home alongside other dark, realistic YA fare.  LG
rosoff, meg Just in Case. Lamb, 2006 246p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90909-8 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74678-4 $16.95 
Ad Gr. 9-12
When David Case’s little toddler brother, Charlie, almost takes a header out of 
an upper-story window, fifteen-year-old David is suddenly overwhelmed by the 
constant possibility of catastrophe. Determined to avoid what he considers his 
inevitable doom, he transforms himself, changing his name to Justin, finding a 
new clothing style, and taking up cross-country running, along the way garner-
ing the attention of a stylish young photographer, Agnes, with whom Justin falls 
in love. He’s finally convinced he’s outrun Fate, whose threatening voice he hears 
in his head, by making his home at the airport; when a freak plane crash almost 
kills him and Agnes, however, he’s devastated to realize that he can’t be safe from 
disaster anywhere. Rosoff, author of How I Live Now (BCCB 9/04), here explores 
a contemporary world of slightly manipulated realism—Fate occasionally interjects 
his/her own commentary, Justin has an imaginary greyhound visible to several of 
his friends, Charlie has a deep wisdom that his limited vocabulary unfortunately 
prevents him from sharing. The fluid, probing narrative is highly readable, and the 
issues of Fate and the fear of catastrophe are intriguing ones. Unfortunately, the 
disparate elements don’t knit together effectively, and the pacing lags after the plane 
crash; the characters are often interesting but not emotionally engaging, especially 
the preternaturally perceptive young children (Charlie and the young sister of a 
friend of Justin’s), who end up an obtrusive device. Norma Howe’s Adventures of 
Blue Avenger (BCCB 3/99) is a more successful novel about the whims of Fate, 
but readers may appreciate this quirky chronicle of a young man’s struggle with 
doom.  DS 
sAge, Angie My Haunted House; illus. by Jimmy Pickering. Tegen/HarperCol-
lins, 2006 133p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-077482-7 $14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-077481-9 $8.99 
R Gr. 2-5
Araminta loves her giant spooky house with its endless rooms and bat occupants, 
and she and her vampire-philic uncle won’t stand for her aunt’s decision to sell 
the place and move to a more normal abode. Therefore, Araminta feels justified in 
her decision to sabotage her aunt’s attempts to sell the home; with the help of two 
affable ghosts who also want the family to stay, she discovers that there are many 
ways to foil a sale, from all-out slime attacks to the more subtle changing of the 
“For Sale” sign. Fortunately, the family that comes to look at the house is just as 
quirky as the current occupants, so instead of Araminta’s family selling the house, 
both families decide to move in together, setting the stage and widening the cast of 
characters for future books in the Araminta Spookie series. Araminta is an appeal-
OcTOBer 2006 • 93
ing heroine who exudes stubbornness, daring, and an imaginative flair for creating 
drama, and her warm relationships with the other members of the household, both 
alive and incorporeal, balance her occasional egocentrism. Pickering’s black-and-
white illustrations are liberally arranged in and around the text, complementing 
both the atmospheric descriptions of the rambling haunted house and the humor-
ous elements of the story. Simple vocabulary, large text, and healthy proportions 
of scary details leavened with light and funny plot twists make this novel an easy 
recommendation for the middle-grades set.  AS
schLiTz, LAurA Amy The Hero Schliemann: The Dreamer Who Dug for Troy; illus. 
by Robert Byrd. Candlewick, 2006 72p
ISBN 0-7636-2283-4 $17.99 
R* Gr. 5-8
It really doesn’t matter whether readers are up on their Iliad or not; anyone with 
an interest in archaeology or in liars and braggarts will be drawn in by this slim 
biography of the hyperimaginative Schliemann, who, thinking beyond the con-
ventional wisdom of his day, dug up the Turkish ruins at Hissarlik on little more 
than a hunch that they held the Homeric city of Troy. His arrogance as an amateur 
historian was matched by his hubris as chronicler of his own archaeological heroics 
and his sloppiness as an excavator, and if he did manage to unearth the site of Troy 
(and for that matter, of related sites at Mycenae and Tiryns as well), it was more a 
matter of luck than skill, since he misinterpreted many of his own findings. Schlitz 
gleefully exposes the warts on Schliemann’s outrageous character, but she does so 
with a sense of humor and the fair admission that he opened the world’s eyes to a 
new understanding of the historical basis for what had long been considered just a 
much-loved myth. Byrd’s detailed black-and-white line-and-watercolor illustrations 
and spot art mirror Schlitz’s light-hearted tone, and the timelines and diagrams 
incorporated throughout the text impart shovels full of information in an engaging, 
economical manner. The text is lively enough to support a classroom readaloud, 
and any ancient history teacher with a little down time to fill will strike gold right 
here. Source notes and a bibliography (but, sadly, no index) are included.  EB
shuLeviTz, uri So Sleepy Story; written and illus. by Uri Shulevitz. Farrar, 
2006 32p
ISBN 0-374-37031-1 $16.00 
R 2-4 yrs
It’s a sleepy world indeed in Caldecott Medalist Shulevitz’s new picture book, or at 
least at first, when a “sleepy sleepy boy in a sleepy sleepy bed” dozes amid a panoply 
of slumbering housewares. When a strain of music floats through the window and 
gets increasingly louder, however, the house begins to stir, with dancing dishes, 
waking cat, and calling cuckoo clock awakening the boy; after an interval of wee-
hour festivity, the music wafts away and boy and house settle back down to sleep. 
The text’s constant reiteration of “sleepy” and careful patterning ensures that even 
the wakeful interlude isn’t too electrifying for bed-bound listeners; this is just a 
bedtime book that slyly spirals its audience down rather than directly tucking them 
in. The art obligingly aids and abets, with everything personified in the moody, 
moony world: cabinet fronts, curtains, and windowsill cactus are as solidly conked 
out as the boy and cat. The music-induced frolic changes the palette from cool 
slates to warm, slant-shadowed ochres suggestive of incandescent light piercing the 
gloom; the revelry culminates in a four-page wordless sequence of hearty partying 
and incipient romance of furniture and china amid dancing musical notes (from 
94 • The BulleTin
which the boy is, rather oddly, absent, so viewers may wonder what he’s getting up 
to while all this goes on). Audiences will adore the rampant yet benevolent animism 
that essentially turns the world into a toy collection, and they might even hit the 
sack earlier in the hopes of participating in their own nighttime house party.  DS
sidmAn, Joyce Butterfly Eyes and Other Secrets of the Meadow; illus. by Beth 
Krommes. Houghton, 2006 [48p]
ISBN 0-618-56313-X $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
In Song of the Water Boatman & Other Pond Poems (BCCB 7/05), Sidman poetically 
treated the world of the pond; now she turns to the ecosystem of the meadow in 
sixteen new poems. Each spread offers two poems in riddle form, ending with an 
encouragement to guess at the identity of the subject; the following spread gives the 
answers and explains more about those particular meadow features or inhabitants. 
Most poems are gently rhymed or lyrical free verse accented with touches of repeti-
tion and soundplay, but a concrete poem and a pantoum also appear. Though the 
riddle aspect of the verses isn’t always successful as a game (some poems offer too 
many possibilities, while in others—such as the one limning a plant’s xylem and 
phloem—the subject is simply too technical for realistic guessing), the poems are still 
eloquent literature, and the explanations will quickly put the subjects into context. 
Krommes exercises such tight control over her scratchboard lines that her images 
resemble wood engraving with their hatch and cross-hatch textures; subdued colors 
and the rhythmic shadings of the black line bring order to what could otherwise 
be overcrowded meadow scenes. This makes an apt partner to Song of the Water 
Boatman, or it could serve on its own as a poetic introduction to this particular 
biosystem or a look at the unusual subjects poetry can effectively treat. A glossary 
of the relevant natural-history terms (and one poetic term) is included.  DS
skeLTon, mATThew Endymion Spring. Delacorte, 2006 [400p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90397-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73380-1 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-8
Twelve-year-old Blake, trapped for long afternoons in the Oxford libraries while 
his mother does research, is shocked when a mysterious blank book throws itself 
to the floor in front of him. In a parallel narrative set in 1452, Endymion Spring 
is happily apprenticed to Johann Gutenberg until the appearance of an ominous 
man carrying priceless paper forces Endymion into leaving his beloved master and 
stealing the dragon-skin paper in order to keep the villainous stranger from using 
its power. Endymion, with the aid of the magic-infused paper, creates a book of 
knowledge that can only be accessed by rare, chosen children and hides it in the 
Oxford libraries; back in the present, Blake is one of those children, and his previ-
ously boring vacation becomes exciting as he tries to solve the riddles that appear 
on the pages and elude a murderous stalker who desperately wants the book. All 
of the clues necessary to solve the rhyming puzzles are skillfully woven into the 
story, allowing for a satisfying interaction between reader and this book that par-
allels Blake’s engagement with his blank book. Unfortunately, the interweaving 
of perspectives (Blake’s story is told in third person, Endymion’s is a first-person 
account) slow the pace and unbalance the narrative with their uneven alternation. 
In addition, elaborately described bibliophilic details such as the feel of old books, 
OcTOBer 2006 • 95
the beauty of endless library shelves, and the workings of early printing presses may 
try the patience of some readers. However, Skelton’s earnest and daring protagonists 
may intrigue readers who are able to imagine the literary, and sometimes literal, 
treasures that could be found in dusty ancient books.  AS
sLAde, ArThur Megiddo’s Shadow. Lamb, 2006 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90945-4 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74701-2 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
News of his brother’s death on a World War I European battlefield sends underage 
Edward Bathe off to lie his way into the army. The Canadian teen is promptly 
shipped off for training in England, where a friend of the family manipulates his 
orders to get Edward assigned to breaking horses, even through he aches to be at the 
front slaughtering Huns to avenge his brother. Edward is destined to see plenty of 
action, though; separated from his comrades and his nurse sweetheart, he’s eventually 
reassigned to the cavalry and sent not to Europe but to Palestine, where he takes 
part in action against the Turks and witnesses atrocities on both sides that disabuse 
him of any lingering notion of the glory of war or the righteousness of revenge. 
This is a standard plot that has been altered many times to fit the war in question, 
but Slade does it justice with patient pacing that maximizes Edward’s growing 
anger over being hobbled in his personal mission, near-palpable descriptions of 
the oppressive heat and filth of his ultimate assignment, and the contrast between 
Edward’s eagerness for battle and his all too believable cowardice when it comes to 
facing a stricken comrade during his recovery. Readers in search of a rousing World 
War I story, but not quite ready for the irony and despair of Spillebeen’s superb 
Kipling’s Choice (BCCB 7/05), should be thoroughly engrossed.  EB
smeLcer, John The Trap. Holt, 2006 [176p]
ISBN 0-8050-7939-4 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
In this taut survival story, alternate chapters follow four days in the lives of Albert 
Least-Weasel (who has, in a single moment’s negligence over a lifetime of hunting, 
gotten his foot caught in a trap just a few yards away from his survival gear), and 
his grandson Johnny Least-Weasel, whose faith in and respect for his grandfather’s 
abilities conflict with his growing concern for the old man, who is late in return-
ing from checking his traplines. While Johnny’s uncle tries to assuage the teen’s 
anxieties and urges him to put off a needless search in the brutal subzero Alaskan 
weather, Albert uses every trick he knows to mine the tree to which he’s chained 
for food, warmth, and protection from the wolves that grow ever bolder as he 
inevitably weakens. Each chapter begins with an excerpt from a Native American 
legend—Johnny’s entries revolve around a young hero who is underestimated by 
his community, and Albert’s around an old man who surprises his neighbors with 
his strength. These hero tales accurately mirror the men’s characters, but in the 
end they do not predict the outcome of the struggle. Johnny reaches and frees his 
grandfather just in time to be with him at death, and Albert’s previous musings 
about how this final episode in his life will be talked about in the community now 
challenge the reader to assess whether Albert was a foolish old man who should 
have retired years ago or a paragon of will to survive; whether Johnny was a loyal 
grandson who did his best for his grandfather or a weak teen who allowed himself to 
96 • The BulleTin
be influenced to delay action against his better judgment. This has all the dramatic 
tension of wilderness adventure stories, with a touch (though less cynical) of Jack 
London’s “To Build a Fire,” and fans of Gary Paulsen and Will Hobbs should find 
this a satisfying challenge.  EB
smiTh, d. JAmes Probably the World’s Best Story about a Dog and the Girl Who 
Loved Me. Jackson/Atheneum, 2006 234p
ISBN 1-4169-0542-1 $15.95 
R Gr. 6-8
The Boys of San Joaquin (BCCB 2/05) are back for another warm and funny slice of 
summer, 1951; this time twelve-year-old Paolo O’Neill, younger brother Charlie, 
and deaf cousin Billy get a paper route together, solve the mystery of the ghost in 
the third-floor window of Mrs. Pinero’s big old house, and take on the case of the 
family’s kidnapped wall-eyed dog, Rufus. Paolo even dips his big toe in a little light 
romance with a girl that knows as much about love as he does. In a warm, nostalgic 
style reminiscent of Richard Peck’s A Long Way from Chicago (BCCB 10/98) or 
Gary Paulsen’s How Angel Peterson Got His Name (BCCB 2/03), Smith spins a fine 
yarn populated by the quirky characters one would expect in a small town where 
one of the O’Neill children is named “Maria-Teresina-the-Little-Rose.” Chapter 
developments are introduced by a paragraph describing the American Sign Language 
motions used to indicate a particular word, phrase, or idea (“The thumb of your 
open hand taps the side of your forehead to mean a dad” ) that figures prominently 
in the ensuing pages. At times Smith’s adult hand intrudes into the narrative when 
character commentary indicates a maturity well beyond the boys’ tender years, but 
for the most part the voices of the young O’Neill boys (and Rufus) ring true. This 
novel offers a promising opportunity for an intergenerational reading experience; 
boys of all ages will have similar stories of the old haunted house in their neighbor-
hood and their first run-in with girls, and they will have a fine time comparing 
escapades.  CW
smiTh, sherri L. Sparrow. Delacorte, 2006 184p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90343-X $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73324-0 $15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
G’ma has been Kendall’s whole world since Kendall’s family was killed in a car 
crash when she was four. Now seventeen, she is repaying the favor by taking care 
of G’ma after her stroke, even though her grades are suffering as a consequence. 
When G’ma dies, Kendall is undone; her only surviving relative, her mother’s sister, 
comforts her on the phone but doesn’t appear in Chicago for the funeral. Faced 
with eviction and the prospect of becoming a ward of the state, Kendall travels to 
New Orleans to seek out her wayward aunt, only to find that she has run out on 
her landlady. The landlady has troubles of her own, though, and Kendall agrees to 
stay on to help care for her daughter, Evie, a girl Kendall’s own age with muscular 
dystrophy and a chip on her shoulder. Kendall and Evie develop a wary but solid 
friendship, calling each other out on self-pity and supporting each other’s dreams. 
Kendall’s situation is tragically credible, and her grief palpates through the novel as 
she learns to expand her definition of family. She is quietly ordinary, by turns guarded 
and vulnerable, shaky and strong. Her gradually developing friendship with Evie is 
played out with subtlety and compassion as these two well-loved but sheltered girls 
open out from being the center of someone else’s universe to figuring out what they 
want for themselves. Smith keeps the narrative well grounded in realistic detail; she 
OcTOBer 2006 • 97
doesn’t neglect the details of state intervention, for instance, nor does she rehabilitate 
the aunt. She does, however, find hope for Kendall despite these obstacles, and she 
shows a keen insight into grief, growing up, and moving on.  KC
ThArP, Tim Knights of the Hill Country. Knopf, 2006 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93653-X $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83653-5 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Narrator Hampton is one of the good guys—gifted and determined on defense, 
shy and gentlemanly around girls, loyal in his friendship with fellow Kennisaw 
Knight, Blaine, who got him started in football back in grade school. Not that 
life is perfect—there’s no dad at home, Mom runs with a new man every month 
or so, and the pressure is on for the Kennisaw Knights to win their fifth straight 
undefeated season and match the record set decades ago in their football-crazed 
Oklahoma town. Just as Hamp’s star is on the rise, though, Blaine is struggling 
with a knee injury that threatens his college prospects, and he’s not taking the 
matter graciously. In fact, nearly all Blaine’s scarcely contained rage gets directed 
at Hamp. He insists that Hamp get a girlfriend worthy of a football player and 
sets him up on a disastrous date with a luscious man-eater. He impedes Hamp’s 
every attempt to get closer to Sara, the one girl with whom he’s comfortable. He 
attributes his own gridiron missteps and inabilities to Hamp’s lack of aggression. 
And, worst of all, he drags Hamp into his own violent confrontations with op-
ponents he blames for ruining his career. Tharp’s somewhat old-fashioned take on 
high-school rivalries and rumbles could play out among Hinton’s Outsiders, and 
Hamp’s “Boy howdy” twang might set eyes rolling north of the Mason-Dixon line. 
There’s a reason this plot is a hardy perennial, though—high-school sport fortunes 
do rise and fall, lovable good girls and tempting bad girls do confuse the teen heart, 
and loyalty and stupidity do occasionally walk hand in hand. Hamp musters the 
sense and confidence to muddle his way through, and for that readers in the stands 
can raise a cheer.  EB
TimBerLAke, Amy That Girl Lucy Moon. Hyperion, 2006 [304p]
ISBN 0-7868-5298-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Sixth-grader Lucy Moon has a reputation to uphold as an outspoken critic of 
injustice: she wears the same yellow and green hemp hat every day in support of 
third-world workers, and she speaks out for animal rights every year during deer-
hunting season in her small Minnesota town. The shift from elementary school 
to middle school, however, has unsettled Lucy—the pressure to identify with one 
narrow subculture has been keen, and it doesn’t help that her friend Zoe is going 
through puberty first. When Miss Wiggins, the richest woman in town, decides 
she’s had enough of the tradition of kids sledding on her property, Lucy Moon 
springs into action, first publicizing the harassment of a couple of unlucky sled-
ders in her own newsletter, then organizing a postcard-writing campaign to save 
Wiggins Hill. Deploying appealingly oddball characters and the claustrophobia of 
small-town living in equal measures, this funny and touching story is also spot on 
in its portrayal of the difficult transition from elementary school to middle school. 
Lucy Moon is an appealing character, her tendency to be self-righteous softened 
by a fierce affection for friends and, as the story moves along, her bumbling yet 
98 • The BulleTin
well-meaning father. The Minnesota setting is meticulously rendered, including 
visceral descriptions of the different kinds of snow and the sound of the lake freez-
ing. Reminiscent of Joan Bauer’s Hope Was Here (BCCB 9/00) in its intricate and 
passionate rendering of a small-town battle against injustice, this book will have 
readers cheering as Lucy Moon grows into her commitment to activism as well as 
keeping their fingers crossed that she’ll grow into a bra as well.  LG
vAn drAAnen, wendeLin Runaway. Knopf, 2006 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93522-3 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83522-9 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-9
It’s been two years since the death of Holly’s heroin-addict mother, and twelve-year-
old Holly has yet to find stability, instead experiencing a series of abusive foster 
homes from which she has fled only to be apprehended and returned. This time 
she manages an effective getaway and heads west to California, traveling as a stow-
away on a train, in a bus luggage compartment, and the back of a truck. Along the 
way she chronicles her experiences and thoughts in a journal given to her by Miss 
Leone, her last teacher, whom Holly didn’t even like but now finds hard to forget; 
journaling makes her consider her troubled past and the challenges she faces as a 
homeless kid, struggling with even more deprivation and danger than homeless 
adults. Van Draanen has a heavy hand in her setup, with elaborate tragedies piling 
up on Holly to a magnitude that Dickens himself would have eschewed; the result 
paradoxically undercuts the depredations of homelessness itself, and the sudden 
happy ending seems more a literary necessity than a plausible conclusion to Holly’s 
journey. More successful is the gritty survival story of Holly’s subsistence: as with 
Holman’s classic urban saga Slake’s Limbo (BCCB 4/75), there’s a certain fascination 
in the logistics of survival and flying under the radar amid civilization. The book 
also starkly depicts the difficulties of homelessness in general and the powerlessness 
of young people who’ve run out of options. The drama may add spice for kids who 
might not stay for the social point, and the book will certainly disabuse readers of 
any illusions about the picaresque freedoms of running away.  DS
vAnde veLde, viviAn All Hallows’ Eve: 13 Stories. Harcourt, 2006 225p
ISBN 0-15-205576-2 $17.00 
R Gr. 6-8
Thirteen (of course) of Vande Velde’s Halloween tales, only one previously pub-
lished, are brought together in this effectively creepy short-story collection. The book 
balances expected horror elements such as werewolves, ghosts, and axe murderers 
with subtler though equally haunting stories about children driven mad by their 
own desires or struggling to survive in a cruel alternate universe. While occasionally 
the theme is only cursorily addressed (as in the psychologically complex “MAR-
IAN,” where a ghost girl, struck by a car and killed in August, enacts revenge on 
reckless teenage drivers), the ominous connotations that surround Halloween will 
effectively draw in and satisfy readers in search of a good scare. Varying lengths, 
from two pages to thirty, and changes in narration style and perspective keep the 
stories feeling fresh and unique, even with the consistency of the theme. In addition 
to giving chills to middle-school readers, this collection will also be helpful for older 
Halloween readalouds, because who doesn’t need a new ghost or crazed-murderer 
story to add to their repertoire?  AS
OcTOBer 2006 • 99
vAughT, susAn Trigger. Bloomsbury, 2006 [304p]
ISBN 1-58234-920-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Jersey Hatch’s failed attempt at suicide has left him with bullet damage on the right 
side of his brain, broken relationships with his family and friends, and no memory 
of why he tried to kill himself. Now home from rehab, and determined to maintain 
a normal life at school and at home, Jersey keeps a memory book, where he not 
only jots down reminders to help him navigate daily life but also begins to keep a 
list of possible reasons for why he shot himself. Though his still-traumatized mother 
grows ever more distant (it was she who found him and cleaned up the blood), and 
Jersey’s former best friend, Todd, is so angry he won’t speak to Jersey, Jersey has other 
allies, including his father and Mama Rush, Todd’s grandmother, who insists that 
Jersey take responsibility for his actions. As he crosses items off his list and talks with 
Mama Rush, Jersey gradually realizes that there wasn’t one big reason for his suicide 
attempt, but rather many small ones—grades, girl problems, sports—and that he’s 
damaged his body and his relationships for nothing. Jersey’s sharp, rhythmic narra-
tion not only conveys the havoc his brain injury wreaks with his speech but injects 
a wry humor into what is otherwise dark material; moreover, many of the words 
and phrases Jersey blurts out provide clues to the mystery of his suicide attempt, 
as the truth slowly unfolds through his muddied perspective. Though teen suicide 
is a oft-chosen theme in young adult realism, Jersey’s fresh voice, combined with 
the mystery elements fueled by his damaged memory, make this addition to the 
subgenre a compelling one. A list of resources featuring crisis hotlines and contact 
information for suicide prevention organizations is appended.  LG 
wALde, chrisTine The Candy Darlings. Graphia/Houghton, 2006 [320p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-618-58969-4 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 9-12
The nameless narrator has been unable to eat candy ever since the death of her 
mother, since she associates sugar with the glucose drip that fed her mother toward 
the end. It’s ironic, then, that her best friend at her new school is Megan Chalm-
ers, a dramatic and eccentric character whose main love in life is candy, and who 
becomes the narrator’s bold protector against the vicious persecutions of the popular 
girls. Megan also relishes the telling of bizarre and often shocking stories, stories 
that may, the narrator eventually realizes, hold clues to Megan’s own mysterious 
life. Walde writes with an intriguing combination of lush texture and cool detach-
ment, and the rich sensual overload of the candy focus is an effective sublimation. 
In contrast, the book touchingly depicts the narrator’s fading family life, where the 
only intimate contact between father and daughter consists of the narrator’s putting 
her sleepwalking father back to bed. Unfortunately, the Megan plot ends up with 
more glitz than impact: the sinister attack of the popular girls is overwritten and 
superfluous, Megan’s stories (which are strong in images but narratively weak and 
unsatisfying) slow down the pace, and the intimations about Megan’s real past point 
to an excessively melodramatic situation but ultimately fall frustratingly short of 
a clear picture. Readers may still relish the edgy intensity of the story of obsession 
and consumption, though, as well as the subtle and emotional depiction of a family 
struggling to survive after loss.  DS
100 • The BulleTin
weATherford, cAroLe BosTon Dear Mr. Rosenwald; illus. by R. Gregory 
Christie. Scholastic, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-439-49522-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 3-5
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 53, for review.
weATheriLL, cAT Barkbelly; illus. by Peter Brown. Knopf, 2006 313p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93327-1 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83327-7 $15.95 
R Gr. 4-7
As a wooden egg, Barkbelly falls from a flying machine into a field and gets kicked 
up by a tractor to hit an old man on the head. The old man takes him home and 
eventually throws him into the fire, where he hatches into a little wooden baby. From 
there, more accidents propel Barkbelly from his comfy life as the cherished son of 
the old man and his wife into a life of amazing and often dangerous adventures. 
His unique physique makes him perfect for jobs that daunt fleshly types—plucking 
hedgehog quills, for instance, and stirring boiling and sputtering vats of jam. He 
learns that getting a bit of him chopped off is no bother—it grows right back—but 
that fire is permanent and deadly. After life as a farmer, a factory worker, and a 
circus performer, he discovers that he isn’t the only one of his kind, and he sets sail, 
first on a merchant ship and then with pirates, to find his home, where a dark, ugly 
secret awaits him. His return to his adoptive parents is no less treacherous, however, 
as he must face the consequences of the accident that sent him away. Within the 
familiar structure of a folktale, Barkbelly’s story fairly crackles with originality in the 
storytelling and the details. Though the length may be a bit daunting for younger 
readers, short chapters and a high-interest, episodic plot make it a good choice for 
a readaloud or readalone that can be stretched out over a period of time. Smudgy 
black-and-white illustrations enhance the “long ago and far away” feeling of the 
setting, and they are plentiful enough to keep visual learners and reluctant readers 
on track with Barkbelly’s underdog exploits. Barkbelly himself is a winning fellow, 
as heroic and fearless as he is loving and vulnerable. Readers with various tastes will 
all find something to latch onto here.  KC 
weLsh, T. k. The Unresolved. Dutton, 2006 150p
ISBN 0-525-47731-4 $16.99 
R Gr. 9-12
Of the 1300 passengers aboard the General Slocum bound for a pleasure outing off 
the New York shore in June of 1905, about a thousand lost their lives when the 
ship caught fire. Most souls have moved on in the afterlife, but fifteen-year-old 
Mallory Meer can’t help but linger among her family, negligent shipping company 
officers, and Dustin Brauer, the young man with whom she had a brief assigna-
tion below decks, and who now stands accused in the Kleindeutschland (Little 
Germany) neighborhood of being responsible for the blaze. As a sort of sleuthing 
spirit, able to inhabit and influence the minds of those she visits, Mallory learns 
the truth concerning culpability for the tragedy, and by inspiring the right people 
to ask the right questions, she eventually manipulates Dustin’s exoneration. The 
ghost story is flawed by the over-convenience and inconsistency of Mallory’s post-
mortem abilities (the absence of notes suggests that there may be a fair amount 
of fictionalization of the official proceedings as well), but her search for the truth 
amid corporate greed, lies, and cover-ups, and rampant anti-Semitism in the 
OcTOBer 2006 • 101
Kleindeutschland community is gripping enough to compensate. Villains and good 
guys are clearly delineated, details of the fire are rendered with grisly poesy, and 
an aura of creepiness pervades the entire novel, making this an inviting choice for 
teen melodrama aficionados.  EB
wiLLems, mo Edwina, the Dinosaur Who Didn’t Know She Was Extinct; written 
and illus. by Mo Willems. Hyperion, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-7868-3748-9 $16.99 
R 5-8yrs
Poor Edwina. Not knowing that she is extinct, the dinosaur happily blends in 
with her town, performing chores that tax those of less-than-dinosaur height and 
spreading carbohydrate cheer with her famous chocolate-chip cookies. Noxious 
know-it-all Reginald Von Hoobie Doobie seeks to put an end to all this foolish-
ness. He knows that Edwina by right should not exist, no matter how tempting 
her chocolate-chip cookies are, and he sets out to prove it. Alas, the only one who 
will listen to his proofs is Edwina herself. One might expect that Edwina would 
be reasoned out of existence, but c’mon, this is Mo Willems—trust humor, charm, 
and a nature inclined toward benevolence to win out over something as fragile as 
reason. One can also trust clean, friendly, energetic art with pure, quiet swaths of 
color; more than any other of his offerings so far, this one is haunted by the ghost 
of Charles Schultz in the facial expressions of the children and the Peanuts pathos 
of the plot. A dependence on pale blues and grays with minimal contrast in hue 
mutes background noise throughout, but especially on pages where the figures are 
black and white and the only color is the blue background. These documentary-
style pages allow Reginald’s frenetic, moody expressivism to take center stage even 
while they emphasize the pale futility of his endeavors. Both the pigeon and Knuffle 
Bunny make cameo appearances for the observant fan, and let’s face it—Willems 
is making fans of us all.  KC 
winTerson, JeAneTTe Tanglewreck. Bloomsbury, 2006 415p
ISBN 1-58234-919-3 $16.95 
R* Gr. 5-7
In an England where time has become a salable commodity and strange temporal 
tornadoes mix the past and present, eleven-year-old Silver takes comfort in the sturdy 
old mansion, Tanglewreck, that keeps her safe and reminds her of her parents and 
sisters who were lost years before. Silver is unaware of an heirloom, the Timekeeper, 
that is hidden in the house, but its presence is known to various others, including 
the dangerous Abel Darkwater, the even more terrifying Regalia Mason, and the 
protective Throwbacks, people who live underground and who are ready to help 
Silver when she needs it. With at least two villains on the hunt for the Timekeeper, 
sudden temporal shifts that leave Silver stranded on the Einstein Line where there is 
no time, and Silver’s ignorance of what the Timekeeper is and how to protect it, the 
stage is set for a breathtaking adventure. Gothic details, sci-fi mania, and hints of 
breathless romance combine beautifully in Winterson’s first novel for young readers. 
In addition, a near-perfect balance of humor and adventure tempers the occasion-
ally intense creepiness and propels readers through the potentially confusing mix 
of eras, settings, and characters necessary in a book about the sudden wobbliness 
of time. Any reader who has ever thought about the weirdness of arranging lives 
around the human divisions of time will be enthralled by this exploration of what 
happens when those constructs are disrupted.  AS
102 • The BulleTin
wrighT, ninA Homefree. Flux/Llewellyn, 2006 [240p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7387-0927-1 $8.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10 
Easter Hutton has never had much of a place to call home; her address changes 
as often as her mother changes boyfriends. This disconnectedness only increases 
after Easter discovers that frequent bouts of daydreaming are actually out-of-body 
experiences, as she astrally projects herself across barriers of time and space. Easter’s 
classmates are judgmental and her mother is distant and self-involved, so Easter’s 
only real confidant is Andrew, a friend from an earlier stint in Atlanta, with whom 
she maintains frequent IM correspondence until Andrew turns up missing. Mean-
while, Easter learns about an underground organization called Homefree that aids 
teens with paranormal abilities in escaping real-world crises and developing their 
psychic gifts. It turns out that Easter has abilities even beyond those she recog-
nizes, abilities that, if harnessed, will help young people like her (and, it turns out, 
Andrew) to survive. Though the astral-projection premise is promising—as is the 
notion of Homefree, a kind of teen crisis organization for the paranormal set—the 
plot quickly falls apart as it toggles back and forth between real-world family crises 
and the often murky machinations of the Homefree authorities; it is never really 
clear, for example, why Easter can’t be informed up front of her psychic ability to 
identify teens in crisis. The paranormal theme is intriguing, however, and Easter 
and her comrades’ escape from some truly dire home-life circumstances into the 
bosom of Homefree provides an undeniable relief. Despite the book’s flaws, fans 
of science fiction that don’t mind a problem-novel bent may just astrally project 
themselves over to the library to pick this one up.  LG
yorinks, ArThur Mommy?; illus. by Maurice Sendak; paper engineering by 
Matthew Reinhart. di Capua/Scholastic, 2006 12p
ISBN 0-439-88050-3 $24.95 
Ad Gr. 2-4
This popup puts Sendak’s illustrations to the paper engineering of Matthew Rein-
hart, using only a one-word story as an adorable toddler toddles down into the evil 
cellar lair of a mad scientist, inquiringly calling, “Mommy?” While the horrors of 
the lab are many, the toddler remains unfazed, plugging up the vampire’s fearsome 
mouth with his pacifier, undoing Frankenstein’s monster with a simple neck-bolt 
removal, unraveling the mummy and pantsing the werewolf until finally he makes 
it to the loving arms of his mother, the bride of Frankenstein. The story itself is 
fairly elementary; the payoff is fairly dubious (it looks like the initial plan was for 
the tyke to punningly call “Mummy,” which would have been more effective) and 
the kid-conquers-monsters plot derivative of Wild Things, while the cinematic 
references are a little over the head of the audience likely to find the brief excursion 
inviting. Sendak creates an enticingly spooky stage set for the toddler’s toddling, 
though, and the paper engineering enhances its impact with touches such as little 
ghouls popping out of various containers (and the mummy spinning as his ban-
dages unravel is a high point). The elaborate construction is, as usual, unlikely to 
withstand vigorous or repeated use, but this is a fairly ephemeral reading pleasure 
anyway; nonetheless, the amusing and elaborate spookiness will attract the atten-
tion of young horror fans.  DS
OcTOBer 2006 • 103
BArr, cATherine Best Books for Children: Preschool through Grade 6; by 
Catherine Barr and John T. Gillespie. 8th ed.  Libraries Unlimited, 
2006 1783p (Children’s and Young Adult Literature Reference Series)
ISBN 1-59158-085-4 $80.00
Updated from the 2001 seventh edition (and 2003 supplement), this new version 
of the classic supplies short annotated entries for over 25,000 titles arranged alpha-
betically by author, within nearly fifty thematic categories from Artists to Zoos. 
Author/Illustrator and Book Title indices add alternative routes to particular titles 
while the Subject/Grade Level index helps users quickly target grade-appropriate 
materials. In addition to bibliographic information and citations, individual en-
tries direct users to professional reviews and note Caldecott and Newbery winners 
(perhaps the next edition will expand the awards to include multicultural honors 
such as the Pura Belpré and Coretta Scott King awards). Out-of-print titles and 
books considered “no longer timely or suitable” were weeded to make space for 
5,000 new entries covering items “published and reviewed from 1985 through 
July 2005.” The authors stick rather conservatively to the Grade 6 cutoff, noting 
that books for advanced sixth grade readers are more likely found in Best Books for 
Middle School and Junior High Readers. Barr and Gillespie also opt not to include 
dictionaries, encyclopedias, resources directed at professionals, and “mass-market 
series [such] as the Nancy Drew and Hardy Boys books.” This is a standard reference 
for a reason, and this edition continues the tradition of providing an abundance of 
information in an easily navigated form.  CW
LimA, cAroLyn w. A to Zoo: Subject Access to Children’s Picture Books; by Carolyn W. 
Lima and John A. Lima. 7th ed. Libraries Unlimited, 2006 1692p (Children’s 
and Young Adult Literature Reference Series)
ISBN 1-59158-232-6 $80.00
The latest edition of this classic reference tool, according to the publisher’s website, 
“adds more than 4,000 new titles published since 2001.” The preface and intro-
ductory essay have been refreshed and new sources added to the reading list at the 
end of the introduction. Main entries are still found in the Bibliographic Guide, 
and when users have only snippets of information they can turn to the Subject 
Heading, Subject Guide, Title and Illustrator indexes to connect the dots. Subject 
headings take us well beyond lions, tigers and bears, to formats (pop-up and toy 
books), activities (photographing, digging, reading) and even careers (beekeepers, 
aerialists, and electricians). In a reference work of this size, it is natural that there 
might be an error or two: for example, users seeking books about Islam are directed 
to “see Foreign Lands–Israel,” which has no books at all on the subject. In spite 
of this, A to Zoo continues to be a one-stop, one-of-a kind reference tool that ef-
fectively reduces the noise of the picture-book aisles so that users can find just the 
right books for the occasion.  CW
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
104 • The BulleTin
cArT, michAeL The Heart Has Its Reasons: Young Adult Literature with Gay/Lesbian/
Queer Content, 1969-2004; by Michael Cart and Christine A. Jenkins. Scarecrow, 
2006 207p (Scarecrow Studies in Young Adult Literature)
ISBN 0-8108-5071-0 
$42.00
Christine Jenkins, member of the Bulletin’s review committee and Associate Profes-
sor at the Graduate School of Library and Information Science at the University 
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, is the co-author of this overview of gay/lesbian 
themes and characters in young adult literature.
hunT, PeTer, ed. Children’s Literature, Critical Concepts. Routledge, 
2006 400p
ISBN 0-41-537228-3 
$945.00
Articles from Bulletin editor Deborah Stevenson and Bulletin reviewer Karen Coats 
appear in this new four-volume compilation examining children’s literature across 
a spectrum of disciplines.
ziPes, JAck, ed. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Children’s Literature. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2006 1,824p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-19-514656-5 
$495.95
Bulletin editor Deborah Stevenson is a senior editor on this four-volume encyclope-
dia covering significant figures, works, and movements past and present and suitable 
for use by researchers ranging from high-school students to professionals.
We DiD iT Ourselves DeparTmenT:
OctOber 2006 • 105
Abuse–fiction: Darrow; Van Draanen
Accidents–fiction: Oates; Rosoff; 
Charlton-Trujillo
Activism–fiction: Timberlake
Adoption–fiction: Hicks
ADVenTuRe: Bell; Bledsoe; 
Kaaberbol; Klass; O’Brien; Smith, 
D.; Winterson
African Americans–fiction: McKis-
sack; Paulsen
African Americans–poetry: Weath-
erford
Alcoholism–fiction: MacCready
Animals: Butterworth; Davies
Animals–fiction: Kennen
Animals–stories: Fleming; Martin
AnTHOlOgieS: gallo
Anthropology: Berkowitz
Appearance–fiction: Mackall
Archaeology: Berkowitz; Schlitz
Art: Hantman
Art and artists: govenar
Art and artists–fiction: Boyce; Dar-
row; Jacobson; love
Art and artists–stories: lee-Tai
Astronomy–fiction: Kenah
Aunts–fiction: Smith, S.
Babies: Harris
Bears–fiction: Pinkwater
BeDTiMe STORieS: Shulevitz
Behavior–stories: Jenkins
BiOgRAPHieS: Fleischman; 
govenar
Biology: Bulion; Davies; goodman; 
Harris; Sidman
Books and reading–fiction: Skelton
Boxing–fiction: greif
Brain damage–fiction: Vaught
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Carey; 
Darrow; gregory; Richardson, e.
Bullies–fiction: Mackall
Careers: govenar
Cliques–fiction: Barnes; Cabot
Clothing: Hantman
Community helpers: McMullan
Competition–fiction: Patterson
Counseling: MacCready
Cousins–fiction: ibbotson
Crime and criminals–fiction: Baskin; 
Bowsher; Boyce; Charlton-Tru-
jillo; Pinkwater; Skelton
Curses–fiction: Carey
Death and dying–fiction: Harness; 
Smelcer; Smith, S.; Walde
Dinosaurs–stories: Willems
Disasters–fiction: Moonshower; 
Welsh
Dogs–fiction: Carey; Patterson
Dragons–fiction: Bell
eSP–fiction: Jacobs, Wright
Ethics and values: Cabot; Cushman; 
Humphreys; Kaaberbol; Mack-
all; Patterson; Richardson, n.; 
Rosoff; Slade; Timberlake
Fairies–fiction: Hahn
Families–fiction: Charlton-Trujillo; 
gregory; gwaltney; Harness; 
Holm; Smith, S. 
FAnTASy: Augarde; Bell; Coombs; 
Dunmore; Hahn; Humphreys; 
Kaaberbol; Klass; Moonshower; 
Richardson, n.; Skelton; Win-
terson
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
106 • the bulletin
Farms–stories: Fleming
Fate–fiction: Rosoff
Fathers–fiction: Dunmore; Hahn; 
Holm; Kennen; nemeth; Walde; 
Fear–fiction: gallo
Flying–fiction: Richardson, n.
FOlK-liKe TAleS: DeFelice
FOlKTAleS AnD FAiRy TAleS: 
O’Brien
Food and eating: Kurlansky
Food and eating–fiction: Pinkwater; 
Walde
Food and eating–stories: Manushkin; 
Martin; McKy
Foster care–fiction: Kennen
Friends–fiction: Boyne; Cushman; 
green; Hicks; Jacobson; Koss; 
nemeth; Smith, S.; Tharp; 
Wright
Future–fiction: Klass
Geography: Bledsoe
gHOST STORieS: Funke; ibbot-
son; Richardson, e.; Sage; Welsh
grief–fiction: Oates
guilt–fiction: Oates
Halloween: McKy; Vande Velde
Health: goodman; Harris
HiSTORiCAl FiCTiOn: Boyne; 
Cushman; gwaltney; Harness; 
Holm; lee-Tai; love; Moon-
shower; nemeth; Paulsen; Slade; 
Smith, D.; Weatherford; Welsh
History, classical: Schlitz
History, U.S.: Armstrong; Moon-
shower; Philip
History, world: Kurlansky, Schlitz
Holocaust–fiction: Boyne; greif
Homelessness–fiction: Van Draanen
HOW-TO BOOKS: Hantman
HuMOR: Berkowitz; Blacker; 
Boyce; Bulion; DeFelice; good-
man; Manushkin; McKissack; 
McKy; Moser; Pinkwater; Smith, 
D.; Willems
illness–fiction: Koss
Japanese Americans–stories: lee-Tai
Jews–fiction: Boyne; greif
Jobs–fiction: Bowsher
latinos–fiction: Charlton-Trujillo
Magic and magicians: Fleischman
Magic–fiction: Augarde
Magic–stories: DeFelice
Marine life: Butterworth 
Monsters–fiction: Moser
Monsters–stories: yorinks
Mothers–fiction: Baskin; Blume; 
Bowsher; love; MacCready
Moving–fiction: Harness
Music and musicians–stories: Shu-
levitz
MySTeRieS: Feinstein; Pinkwater; 
Vaught; Welsh
native Americans: Philip
native Americans–fiction: Bruchac; 
Smelcer
Nature study: Berkowitz; Butter-
worth; Sidman
neighbors–fiction: Blume
Oceans–fiction: Dunmore
Orphans–fiction: gregory; Smith, S.
Outdoor life–fiction: Smelcer
Parents–fiction: Blacker; Hicks
Plants–stories: McKy
Plays–fiction: Mackall
POeTRy: Bulion; Darrow; Sidman; 
Weatherford
POP-uP BOOKS: yorinks
Princesses–fiction: Coombs
Reading aloud: Bulion; McKissack
Reading, beginning: Kenah
Reading, easy: Jacobson; Moser; Pat-
terson; Sage
Reading, reluctant: goodman; 
O’Brien
Relationships–fiction: green; Jacobs; 
Smith, D.
Reporters–fiction: Feinstein
Romance–fiction: Cabot
Runaways–fiction: Darrow; Van 
Draanen
SCARy STORieS: Vande Velde
School–fiction: Augarde; Barnes; 
Baskin; Cushman; Kenah; Moser; 
Timberlake
Schools–poetry: Weatherford
Science: Bledsoe
Seasons–stories: Rawlinson
SHORT STORieS: gallo; lanagan; 
McKissack; Vande Velde
Social studies: Armstrong
OctOber 2006 • 107
SPORTS STORieS: Feinstein; Tharp
Stepfamilies–fiction: Richardson, e.
Storytelling: McKissack
Storytelling–fiction: Blume; Walde
Storytime: DeFelice; Fleming; Martin; 
McMullan; Willems
Substance abuse–fiction: MacCready
Suicide–fiction: Vaught
Summer–fiction: Smith, D.
SuPeRnATuRAl STORieS: 
Barnes; Bruchac; Carey; Jacobs; 
Wright
SuRViVAl STORieS: Smelcer
SuSPenSe: Bruchac; Kennen
Television–fiction: Blacker
Time–fiction: Winterson
Time travel–fiction: Humphreys; 
Moonshower
TODDleR BOOKS: Fleming
Toddlers–stories: Jenkins; yorinks
Trees–stories: Rawlinson
Trucks–stories: McMullan
Voyages and travel: Bledsoe
Voyages and travel–fiction: green
War–fiction: Slade
West, the–fiction: Paulsen
WeSTeRnS: Paulsen
Witches–fiction: Hahn
World War i–fiction: Slade
World War ii: Boyne
World War ii–fiction: greif; gwalt-
ney; Holm
World War ii–stories: lee-Tai
Writers and writing–fiction: Van 
Draanen
