I LLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
II: 
a
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
"""
_ i
i
g
--
"A stunning achievement."*
ScrpOi~1
IVs BY 3AC"P 
CTRC
S"Prelutsky takes 
the familiar concept of
mbled animals to dazzling new heights in this series of
9 poems describing a visit to mythical Scranimal Island...
[inhabited by] bizarre hybrids between vegetables and
amphibians ("The Potatoad"), mammals and
fungi ("The Hippopotamushrooms"), 
/"
and birds and fish. This is Carroll
level poetry with art to match that
sure to provide delight for years."
-Starred 
review /
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books*
I 
.11,. 
t
istrator have never done 
'
his hilarious, inventive cousin to Edward Lear's
and 7nnlnGv" _-t•rr-- 
r-•-no 
/ V4_.-.,r D--.,™...
of madcap are at it again [as they]
scramble up a smorgasbord of flora and
fauna."-starred review / Publishers Weekly
F
$18.89 Lb (0-688-17820-0)
All ages. $16.99 Tr (0-688-17819-7)
THE
BULLETIN
November 2002
Vol. 56 No. 3
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
A LOOK INSIDE
'I
95 
THE BIG PICTURE
Feed by M. T. Anderson
96 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
96 
* A Bit More Bert by Allan Ahlberg; illus. by Raymond Briggs
107 * What WouldJoey Do? by Jack Gantos
108 * Action Jackson by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jordan; illus. by Robert
Andrew Parker
111 * Hoot by Carl Hiaasen
122 * Revenge of the Whale: The True Story of the Whaleship Essex by
Nathaniel Philbrick
132 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
133 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children 's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Jeannette M. Hulick, Reviewer (JMH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette M. Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center fr Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2002 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration from Feed @2002, by M. T. Anderson. Reproduced by permission of the
publisher, Candlewick Press, Inc., Cambridge, MA.
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 95
THE BIG PICTURE
Feed
by M. T. Anderson
Despite the title, this isn't a sequel to the author's Thirsty (BCCB 4/97); it's a
compelling, witty, and seductive dystopia about life in a technocorporate-ruled
future. Titus is a basic teenager, annoyed by SchoolT  and ready to enjoy a trip
with his friends to that traditional break destination, the moon, "except the moon
turned out to completely suck." Okay, not completely-he does meet Violet, a
strange and beautiful girl, but she, Titus, and his friends all undergo a rather trau-
matic experience when a hacker hits their feeds, their brain-implanted connections
that make information, marketing, entertainment, and private conversation avail-
able to them twenty-four hours a day.
After a few days in a moon hospital, Titus grows closer to Violet, and
when the kids return to Earth, the two begin going out. He's drawn to her un-
usual viewpoint and intrigued by her atypical history: a child of impoverished
academics, she didn't get her feed installed until much later in life, and she writes
with her hand and thinks about what happens in other countries. The feed oddity
proves to be particularly significant, because the hacking damages Violet's less-
integrated circuitry, leaving her increasingly prone not just to signal blockage but
to serious neurological deficits, disorders that may well kill her. Highly skilled
technical repair might save her, but her unpredictable consumer history makes her
an unreliable investment in the eyes of the corporate sponsors; therefore no help
will be forthcoming, and Violet will die.
The dystopic view here isn't limited to the world, however; the tragedy
isn't Titus' raging against the system that kills his beloved but his resistance to such
raging. Titus is a Winston Smith drawn to the possibility of life beyond the screens,
but he's essentially a lover of Big Brother (or, more accurately, Big Brother's prod-
ucts) from the start, annoyed by the predictable criticisms of the naysayers: "Of
course, everyone is like, da da da, evil corporations, oh they're so bad, we all say that,
and we all know they control everything. I mean, it's not great, because who
knows what evil shit they're up to. Everyone feels bad about that. But they're the
only way to get all this stuff, and it's no good getting pissy about it, because they're
still going to control everything whether you like it or not." As Violet deteriorates,
Titus becomes increasingly annoyed with her Cassandra tendencies, eventually
separating from her and the possibilities she offers and tellingly thinking at her
death, "I had thought it would feel like a tragedy, but it didn't feel like anything at
all." As with many classic dystopias, the message isn't subtle, but it's not meant to
be; it's the lacerations close to the bone (sometimes literally, as with the fad for
surgically created lesions to mimic the skin condition afflicting popular media
stars) that give this book its bite.
What really puts the teeth in the bite, however, is Anderson's brilliant
satiric vision in the seamless creation of this imagined but believable world. The
96 
* THE BULLETIN
writing is relentlessly funny, clever in its observations and characters and not just
in its inventiveness, but it's also inventive indeed, with Titus' narration establish-
ing a new yet familiar language in a manner reminiscent of A Clockwork Orange.
The familiar raised inflections have officially become questions with no actual
queries, businesses issue edicts in phraseology straight out of Clueless ("We regret
to inform you that our corporate investors were like, 'What's doing with this?"'),
and parents use the old-fashioned "Dude" rather than the up-to-date "Unit." The
details of Titus' world are dead-on credible, just one step beyond the present while
clearly built on it. Readers will snicker about the shirt sale at "Wetherbee & Crotch"
("except it only came in sand, persimmon, and vetch") and the hot feedcast drama
(called Oh? Wow! Thing!, it "has all these kids like us who do stuff but get all
pouty"), all the while recognizing the roots of the grimmer side of Titus' present in
their own.
It's this vision that cunningly allows the book to be cool while question-
ing the consumer pursuit of coolness. When Titus finally hears a faint echo of the
emptiness that Violet tried to warn him of, he muses, "It was like I kept buying
these things to be cool, but cool was always flying just ahead of me, and I could
never exactly catch up to it. I felt like I'd been running toward it for a long time."
It's fitting for a dystopia-and a particularly cynical one at that-that the closest
thing to hope is this breath of discontent. Pessimistic teens will find that darkness
appealing; optimists will be startled to discover that a book about raging against
the machine can be so much fun. (Imprint information appears on p. 98.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
A Bit MoreBert; illus. by Raymond Briggs. 
Farrar, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-374-32489-1 
$16.00 
R* 
2-5 yrs
There is indeed more Bert (of The Adventures ofBert, BCCB 9/01) here, and that's
a fine thing. There are more adventures, of course (Bert gets a bad haircut-from
the book's audience; Bert loses his dog, Bert-but fortunately finds him again),
but there are also slices of everyday life (we meet Bert's mother; we see the familiar
sharing-out of potato chips-and we even get one ourselves). The text has a gentle
wonderment, sort of a domesticated surrealism, that suggests Margaret Wise Brown:
it seems not only interesting but natural that Bert's trip to the police station (to
report the loss of Bert the dog) should reveal several policemen named Bert and
others with pets of that name ("'That's nothing,' the sergeant says. 'I've got six
goldfish ... all named Bert!'"). The sturdy childlike viewpoint and childlike ca-
dence of text and dialogue make the narrative endearingly accessible, and the re-
peated direct inclusion of the reader is comradely and warming rather than
condescending. Briggs' sturdy panels suit the robust pink-cheeked child-man that
is Bert; they fill in a bit more of Bert's world with occasional evocation of cityscape
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 97
and city streets, but they keep the all-important emphasis on Bert's world of fam-
ily, dog, and chips. Bert is one of those characters who immediately seems like
part of the family, and the world is nicer for having a bit more of him. DS
ALVAREZ, JULIA 
Before We Were Free. 
Knopf, 2002 
16 7p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91544-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81544-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
It's 1960, and Anita de la Torre's aunt, uncle, and cousins (the Garcia family from
Alvarez's adult title How the Garcia Girls Lost Their Accents) are abruptly fleeing
their Dominican Republic home to join the rest of the extended family in the
United States, leaving only twelve-year-old Anita and her immediate family on the
clan's compound. Lonely and puzzled by the sudden departure, Anita begins to
piece together the reason for the flight of her relatives-they, along with her par-
ents, are involved in a secret plot to overthrow the country's leader, General Trujillo,
and Trujillo's net is closing in on them. As Anita's innocence crumbles, the danger
to her family escalates sharply: her pretty older sister is sent away to save her from
Trujillo's lecherous clutches, Trujillo himself is found murdered on the family
property, her father and uncle are taken away by secret police, and Anita, her
mother, and her brother are forced to go into hiding, where Anita records her
experiences in her diary. Overall, Anita's voice rings fairly true to her age, growing
a little more introspective and mature as events force her to grow up quickly, and
the fear she feels is vividly expressed: "The panic is stirring inside me, a big black
moth ofscaredness flapping around inside my chest that can't get out." Alvarez's
pacing is swift and sure, and the description of the ever-increasing dangers faced by
the de la Torres is utterly compelling. Fans of Anne Frank's diary will eagerly
devour this fictional story of a family on the run from a fanatical political leader.
JMH
ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN 
The Nightingale; ad. by Stephen Mitchell; illus. by
Bagram Ibatoulline. 
Candlewick, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-7636-1521-8 
$17.99 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Andersen's classic tale of the nightingale that brings a self-absorbed emperor to the
true meaning of beauty has seen many incarnations. Mitchell both translates and
retells, and a detailed source note (with a sample paragraph demonstrating his
changes) explains his process. While this retelling does not particularly enhance
the original, neither does it harm the essential tale, which retains its stately pace.
Visually, this is an elegant piece of bookmaking. Mixed-media illustrations (ink,
gouache, watercolor) based on Chinese art and costume are rendered in a ceremo-
nial, fairy-tale style. Red endpapers feature golden nightingales alternating with
nightingale-shaped clouds; the title pages emulate a traditional Chinese screen
painting, awash in drooping trees and antique gold shadows; the first page is blood
red, with a gold medallion featuring the title bird, the surrounding gold-lined
clouds cradling the opening block of text. The compositions play heavily on the
panel-painting aspect of Chinese art with varying effect; the landscapes are grace-
ful and evocative, but the sometimes overcrowded interiors occasionally lack a
focal point. This doesn't have the impact of such classic versions (Le Gallienne's
adaptation, illustrated by Nancy Ekholm Burkert, BCCB 7/65, sets a high stan-
dard to match), but those seeking a traditional Nightingale with handsome feath-
ers need look no further. JMD
98 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ANDERSEN, 
HANS CHRISTIAN 
The Nightingale; ad. and illus. by Jerry
Pinkney. 
Fogelman, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-8037-2464-0 
$16.99 
R 
6-9 yrs
Pinkney's revisioning of the Andersen redemption tale is much looser, both textu-
ally and visually, than Mitchell's adaptation (reviewed above). The text is unusu-
ally informal and the plot and language are streamlined, making this more accessible
to younger audiences. The setting of a mythical Moroccan kingdom allows Pinkney
wide scope for illustrative drama, and the architecture, landscape, and costume
explode with vivid color and swirl with energy. The decorative ornamentation and
costuming is the stuff dreams are made of, and the personification of Death, berobed
and skeletal, is a memorable image. Unfortunately, all this impact is often diffused
by crowded and unfocused compositions, and the physical proportions of the char-
acters sometimes spin out of control. Still, there's plenty of gorgeous pageantry
here, and younger audiences will appreciate the inviting approach. An extensive
note explains Pinkney's process of retelling and illustrating. JMD
ANDERSON, M. T. 
Feed. Candlewick, 2002 
[240p]
ISBN 0-7636-1726-1 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 95, for review.
ARNOLD, CAROLINE 
When Mammoths Walked the Earth; illus. by Laurie
Caple. 
Clarion, 2002 
[40p]
ISBN 0-618-09633-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
O'BRIEN, PATRICK 
Mammoth; written and illus. by Patrick O'Brien. 
Holt,
2002 
34p
ISBN 0-8050-6596-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
This pair of picture books updates information about several kinds of mammoths,
incorporating data emerging from ongoing research on the famed Jarkov mam-
moth of Siberia and current conflicting theories on mammoth extinction. Arnold's
offering is the more complete, presenting a reasonably detailed look at mammoth
(and related mastodon) ancestry and anatomy and organizing the material into
brief chapters on fossil and frozen remains discoveries. Aiming at the elementary-
school research set, she facilitates navigation with an index and a descriptive table
of contents; unfortunately, Caple's tepid watercolor artwork, which persistently
renders mammoths and humans in a disturbing shade of postmortem blue, under-
mines the book's appeal. O'Brien's title, by comparison, could be termed Mam-
moth-Lite, a skeletal description of the beast and its kin, brief enough to be downed
in one sitting. His observations largely concur with those in When Mammoths
Walked, with the notable exception of O'Brien's assertion that humans hunted
mammoths, a proposition still in question. Although his figures often tend to be
lumpy and disproportionate, his comparative views of mammoth and elephant
features and his diagram of La Brea visually convey information more efficiently
than Caple's dioramic scenes. Neither title will win a beauty contest, but libraries
in need of up-to-date material economically packaged will want to take a look. EB
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 99
BIAL, RAYMOND 
Tenement: Immigrant Life on the Lower East Side; written and
illus. with photographs by Raymond Bial. 
Houghton, 2002 
48p
ISBN 0-618-13849-8 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Bial transports readers a century and more into the past to learn how many Euro-
pean immigrants claimed a tiny, often squalid toehold on American soil in New
York's tenement districts. While the text traces the genesis and evolution of the
buildings themselves and efforts of reformers to raise the bar for living standards,
the extensive gallery of period and contemporary photographs impels viewers to-
ward a more personal understanding of urban immigrant life. Black-and-white
historic scenes (uncredited except for a passing reference to "the City Museum of
New York, which provided a number of striking photographs") invite close exami-
nation of rickety buildings, dim, cramped rooms, and alleys and passageways dense
with activity-from sleeping to laundering-that has necessarily spilled outdoors.
In sharp contrast are Bial's own color photographs of restored tenement apart-
ments, now uninhabited display spaces that soften the past into shabby chicpieds-
a-terre, freshly painted, bathed in golden kerosene lamplight, and chock-full of
coveted flea-market finds. Bial, however, consistently reminds his audience that
even the tidiest apartments housed one or more sprawling families, their belong-
ings, and quite possibly their piecework, all with little air, less light, and no private
toilet facilities. Children who imagine their ancestors stepping from Ellis Island
directly into the American Dream will want to take a look around the old neigh-
borhood. EB
BLUME, JUDY 
Double Fudge. Dutton, 2002 
[160p]
ISBN 0-525-46926-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
This latest title about the Hatcher family picks up where Fudge-a-Mania (BCCB
11/90) left off, with summer over, Pete going into seventh grade, and the incorri-
gible Fudge entering "mixed group" (or "mixed-up group" as Fudge calls it), a
class for advanced kids not yet old enough for "official" first grade. There are
plenty of changes in store, however, for Pete, Fudge, and the rest of their family.
Pete's best friend, Jimmy, moves to SoHo (his artist father buys a studio and plans
to remarry), while Fudge becomes completely obsessed with money, minting his
own currency and dressing up as a miser for Halloween. The Hatchers also unex-
pectedly meet up with Mr. Hatcher's long-lost cousin, Howie, and his eccentric
family, which includes the "Heavenly Hatchers," a pair ofhomeschooled, singing,
dancing twin girls, as well as a four-year-old boy who growls and licks people and
who-like Fudge-is named Farley Drexel Hatcher (Pete quickly dubs him "Mini,"
as in "Mini-Fudge"). Though Fudge still manages to totally exasperate his older
brother, and his gleeful delight in "the green stuff' (and the resultant horror of his
parents) makes for some entertaining moments, it is clear that he's actually matur-
ing just a bit and his experiences with Mini give him a tiny glimpse of insight into
his own past behavior. The plot is rather rambling and episodic (and Fudge's
money obsession is never resolved), but there's still plenty for middle-graders to
enjoy, whether it's Fudge's unabashed frankness (at dinner he announces that he
knows from experience that broccoli makes one's pee smell funny) or the over-the-
top wackiness of Cousin Howie's family. This is a snappy, humorous title that
lends itself to being read aloud, and Fudge fans in need of a fix will find that it hits
the spot. JMH
100 
* THE BULLETIN
CAMPOY, F. ISABEL 
Rosa Raposa; illus. by Jose Aruego and Ariane
Dewey. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202161-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Identified as "South American trickster episodes" on the jacket, these are actually
adapted from Spanish tales Campoy heard from her mother; she's relocated them
to the Amazonian rainforest of Brazil, changing the wolf to a jaguar and giving the
fox the name Rosa Raposa in the process. Informed folktale fans will recognize
standard trickster-tale elements: a trapped Jaguar turns on the animal that frees
him, only to be tricked back into the trap by the clever fox in "A Cry for Help";
Rosa escapes Jaguar by pleading to be tied to a tree to be kept safe from "A Strong
North Wind"; the wily vixen, covered in honey and leaves (and followed by bees),
gains access to the river guarded by Jaguar in "The Green Dress." The pacing of
the storytelling here is consistently problematic: the first two tales are so spare
there is little time to build any momentum or suspense, while the third tale would
benefit from more controlled brevity. Concluding rhymes by Rosa Raposa are a
bit singsong ("Beware ofJaguar's bite./ And if you want to be safe,/ Always tie him
very tight!"), but they do provide closure. Cheerfully cartoony, mixed-media illus-
trations sprawl across the pages in generic green jungle profusion, with Aruego and
Dewey's characteristic endearingly wobbly outlines. Rosa is a plump orange fox
with a bushy tail, a personification familiar from other tales illustrated by these
artists; Jaguar's coat is bright blue with bright yellow swirls, which makes the usu-
ally camouflaged predator impossible to miss. Despite the pacing problems there
is an inherent energy to Campoy's storytelling; young listeners may find a soul
sister in the small but clever Rosa Raposa. A brief glossary of unfamiliar terms is
included at the beginning of the book. JMD
CANNON, JANELL 
Little Yau: A Fuzzhead Tale; written and illus. by Janell
Cannon. 
Harcourt, 2002 
4 8p
ISBN 0-15-201791-7 
$16.00 
M 
7-10 yrs
Little Yau is a Fuzzhead, a race of large catlike creatures that exist in secret along-
side humankind. As an apprentice healer, Little Yau wants nothing more than to
be taken by the Wise Ones to the mountains to learn the great secrets; when she
fails a test of her abilities, she turns for sympathy to her friend, Trupp (from Trupp,
BCCB 5/95). She finds him unconscious, poisoned from something in a human
garden. The Wise Ones recommend a healing herb only to be found in the hu-
man world, so the Fuzzheads disguise themselves as people and search among them
for the remedy; after locating it and thereby saving her friend, Yau is then invited
to the Mountains with Wise Ones, "ready to follow her wildest dreams." This is a
well-intentioned but relentlessly purposive fable, replete with extractable eco-
themes-the danger of overdevelopment, the loss of healing plants, the need for
harmony among species-all of which get a quick glance in this combination of
cautionary and rite-of-passage tale. The flow of the story is unfortunately choppy,
the writing stilted, and the story unfocused, lacking the humor necessary to raise it
above the coy. Cannon's pseudo-naturalistic style features fantastical creatures in
a photographically realistic landscape: the acrylic and pencil illustrations evoke a
southwest desert locale populated by blue-eyed, upright cat-creatures; the human
environment ranges from urban squalid to bare campgrounds littered with ciga-
rette butts. The art does provide some humor (Fuzzheads dressed in human clothes
are taken for human despite their furry faces and paws/claws) that somewhat light-
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
101
ens the precious tone. This is most suitable for hardcore aficionados of Cannon's
created world; audiences in search of real story will want to look elsewhere. JMD
CONLY, JANE LESLIE 
The RudestAlien on Earth. Holt, 2002 
25 6 p
ISBN 0-8050-6069-3 $16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Oluu, a computerized, shape-shifting life form from another planet, is on a field
trip, and after landing "in the hayfield of a dairy farm in northern Vermont," she
takes on the shape of a Border Collie. After the alien puppy meets ten-year-old
Molly Harkin, Oluu breaks all the rules for her visit: she talks to Molly, reveals
herself to Molly's friend, Jack, and forms emotional attachments to both of them.
The first two-thirds of the title follow Oluu in the bodies of various life forms
(dog, bird, fly, pony, cat, mouse) as she explores the Vermont countryside and
begins to question the assumptions of the Wise Ones of her own planet. Mean-
while, Molly tries to cope with Jack's moods, and Jack tries to cope with feelings of
loneliness and isolation. Oluu flees after a misunderstanding with Molly; her re-
turn (in the shape of a fox) inadvertently causes the car accident that leaves Jack
brain-damaged and close to death. Shifting points of view (Molly's, Jack's, Oluu's)
make the short chapters choppy, but the action is strong enough and the charac-
terizations are distinct enough to carry the plot. Oluu's emotional growth is clearly
evoked, and her decision to return to the children for a final farewell is under-
standable. Unfortunately, the humor implied by the title fails to materialize, and
there's a large helping of contrivance in Jack's accident and in Oluu's determina-
tion to clean up the environmentally poisoned Earth; the conclusion-Oluu per-
manently shape-shifts into human-girl form and makes friends with Molly and the
recovering Jack-is also anticlimactic. Still, this is a philosophical and emotion-
ally involving tale that may suit readers who prefer aliens of a more thoughtful
bent. JMD
COREY, SHANA 
Milly and the Macy's Parade; illus. by Brett Helquist. 
Scholastic,
2002 
[40p]
ISBN 0-439-29754-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
A young Polish immigrant whose father works at Macy's Department Store in
Manhattan, circa 1924, Milly enjoys the city's hustle and bustle as it gets ready for
the Christmas holidays; she especially enjoys Macy's, "a giant present waiting to be
unwrapped!" The homesick immigrant adults miss the old country, however, and
the holidays back home ("I love America, but everything here feels different").
Struck with an idea for a holiday celebration, Milly convinces Mr. Macy to inau-
gurate a new celebration, the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade: "And that's how
Milly and Mr. Macy started a new holiday tradition. It looked a little like the old
country, and a little like America, and a little like something entirely new. Who
would have thought that one marvelous idea could give so many different people
something to celebrate together?" Except, of course, it didn't. As the author's
note makes clear, the true elements of this story are that Macy's has an annual
holiday parade that was instigated by some homesick workers in 1924; there was
no Milly, no Papa, and no Mr. Macy, who'd been dead years before the parade was
conceived. Well-intentioned though this wishful thinking might be, it is flatly
purposive and, especially toward the end, overly plotted. Helquist's retro-style
illustrations, however, have a flapper flair that suits the imposed nostalgia of this
102 
* THE BULLETIN
piece. Sophisticated drafting and glossy magazine-style compositions make New
York a fairy-tale city (and Macy's a fairy-tale department store) that sparkles with
holiday glitter and fashion-plate citizens. While the true story of the parade's
origins might have been more effective, this is a shiny package that will be hard to
resist. JMD
COTTEN, CYNTHIA 
At the Edge of the Woods: A Counting Book; illus. by Reg
Cartwright. 
Holt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6354-4 
$16.95 
R 
3-6yrs
This rhyming verse counts the animals that dwell "at the edge of the woods," from
one chipmunk to ten ants. When the counting reaches ten, a bear lumbers into
the proceedings, whereupon the forest crowd, collectively enumerated, beat a hasty
retreat. The text has strong rhythmic appeal ("At the edge of the woods, the
treetops sway./ The sunrise brings a brand new day./ Two spotted fawns come out
to play/ at the edge of the deep, dark woods") and invites participation from audi-
ences with its repetition of the stanza's final line, "at the edge of the deep, dark
woods." Although the scansion isn't always perfect, Gotten displays a masterful
control of language, using sound effects within the lines to create additional acous-
tic appeal. Cartwright's illustrations use solid painted shapes to create a stylized
folk-art woodland scene, with smiling bees and butterflies and wise amber-eyed
foxes set against a crisp background of tailored trees and shrubs. Each spread
helpfully displays its relevant numeral in the illustration, correlating the numeral's
color to that of the number's name in the text. The concept and format are both
tried and true, but it is the understated appeal of the cleverly crafted text that will
capture the attention of young listeners. Libraries will want to add a copy or two
to their counting-book collections. KM
DELACROIX, ALICE 
The Hero of Third Grade; illus. by Cynthia Fisher. 
Holiday
House, 2002 
72p
ISBN 0-8234-1745-X 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Randall is stuck with a pretty dire fate-starting a new school in April following
his parents' divorce-but after initial desperation, he hits on an idea for making
his mark in the classroom: he'll be a secret hero. Specifically, he'll be the Scarlet
Pimpernel (or, as he thinks, "the Scarlet Pimpernel. Sort of"), pointing out his
good deeds in notes signed only with a red flower stamp. Randall's secret deeds
add a certain magic to the classroom, but they also give him a chance to settle in,
check out his classmates, and make some friends. This is sweet yet solid, a percep-
tive and approachable story of middle-grades stresses leavened by the ingenious
notion of the secret superhero; DeLaCroix wisely keeps Randall's heroics believ-
able (he rescues lost homework and finds a misplaced Beanie Baby), so they blend
in smoothly with the rest of his exploits, and it's also credible that they tail off as
Randall becomes more and more a part of the group. This is the kind of unassum-
ing, engaging, and inventive little number that's worth its weight in gold on the
middle-grades shelves, especially if it starts a trend of secret good deeds. Fisher's
lavishly scattered black-and-white line-and-wash illustrations depict a chipper and
amiable multicultural cast eminently deserving of the odd heroic intervention but
fine without it. DS
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
103
DONNELLY, JENNIFER 
Humble Pie; illus. by Stephen Gammell. 
Jackson/Ath-
eneum, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84435-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
This story has a promising beginning: "Once upon a time, and a long time ago it
was, there lived a very bad boy named Theo." Theo is a terror: unkind, disobedi-
ent, stingy, selfish, rude, and just plain awful. Lots of people have theories about
why Theo is so vile, but "only Theo's grandmother knew the truth: The boy was
spoiled rotten!" As his grandmother bakes a pie-a Humble Pie-the greedy Theo
reaches for a cherry and quick as a wink falls in: "Grandmother, get me out!" he
shouts. "'Only you can do that, child,' she said." An angry Theo rolls about the
streets in the pie, almost becoming a meal, until he finally escapes; his heart changed
by his sojourn in the pastry, Theo thereupon becomes a model citizen. Gammell's
pastel, watercolor, and ink illustrations place the story in a quasi-medieval setting,
with wood fires, brick ovens, cow sheds, and characters in peasant garb. Wildly
flying paint drops suggest perpetual motion, and the faces of the characters are
lively and the body language obvious and exaggerated. The story is relentless in
getting its point across, and Theo's change of heart is conveniently quick. Still,
this is a galloping if obvious moral tale; listeners who go along for the bouncy ride
may be happy that, as the pie falls, Theo rises. JMD
DOYLE, MALACHY 
Georgie. Bloomsbury, 2002 
[158p]
ISBN 1-58234-753-0 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-9
Georgie is, to say the least, a troubled kid; at fourteen, he's constantly violent, he
refuses to speak, and he's the terror of his current institutional residence. A move
to another home seems initially more like another betrayal than an improvement,
but there Georgie begins to bond with Tommo, the teacher/counselor who doesn't
fear Georgie and who waits patiently for him to progress at his own rate, and with
Shannon, a girl who takes a liking to Georgie, seeing in him some of her own
suffering and struggle. Doyle hits the heartstrings hard with Georgie's tortured
narration ("I want to be good. Please let me be good, someone. Please let me")
and with the unearthing of his repressed memory about his past (his mother was
murdered), and the traditional appeals of the rescue fantasy will make this compel-
ling reading for many. It's also romanticized and unbelievable, however, with one
month of sweetness repairing years of disturbance (and it's not clear if he's been in
this particular state for the full seven years) and Georgie's peace handled more
heavy-handedly than his rage; Shannon's interspersed narration also detracts from
the impact of Georgie's own voice. Frank's America (BCCB 5/02) is a more subtle
and successful treatment of the same theme, but there's still emotional satisfaction
here for readers not overly concerned with plausibility. DS
DUNLAP, JULIE 
Louisa May &Mr. Thoreau's Flute; by Julie Dunlap and Marybeth
Lorbiecki; illus. by Mary Azarian. 
Dial, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2470-5 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
A series of short excursions with Henry David Thoreau refresh and, ultimately,
inspire seven-year-old "Louy" (Louisa May Alcott), who feels weighed down by
the burden of "endless tasks and doing your duty" imposed by her famously prin-
104 
* 
THE BULLETIN
cipled parents. Thoreau traipses through Azarian's stylized woodcut wilderness
pointing out the beauties of nature to Louy and other neighborhood children,
jotting in his journal, and playing his flute; come spring, Louy "had discovered her
own inner music-a wild melodious river of words that could carry her wherever
she longed to be." This carefully framed portrait of two artists is slightly text-
heavy for younger readers, and though the story rests on solid research (described
in an author's note and demonstrated in a prologue and epilogue), the portraits of
Alcott and Thoreau are thoroughly romanticized (he "charmed the titlarks from
the treetops") and rather untranscendentally elfin. Natural browns, blues, and
greens dominate the well-balanced full-page and double-page woodcut and acrylic
illustrations, which are a bit static but expressive and appropriately organic. Teachers
and students looking for a less fanciful approach to the transcendental circle than
Johnson's Henry Hikes to Fitchburg (BCCB 7/00) may find this useful despite the
contrivance; writers-to-be and others who feel stifled by the expectations of their
elders may find it encouraging. FK
EMBERLEY, REBECCA 
My Animals/Mis animales; written and illus. by Rebecca
Emberley. 
Little, 2002 
22p
ISBN 0-316-17343-6 
$5.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
EMBERLEY, REBECCA 
My Clothes/Mi ropa; written and illus. by Rebecca Emberley.
Little, 2002 
22p
ISBN 0-316-17454-8 
$5.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
EMBERLEY, REBECCA 
My Food/Mi comida; written and illus. by Rebecca Emberley.
Little, 2002 
22p
ISBN 0-316-17718-0 
$5.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
EMBERLEY, REBECCA 
My Toys/Mis juguetes; written and illus. by Rebecca
Emberley. 
Little, 2002 
22p
ISBN 0-316-17494-7 
$5.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
Emberley here offers follow-ups to her last board book series (My Colors/Mis colores,
My Numbers/Mis numeros; My Opposites/Mis opuestos; My Shapes/Mis formas,
BCCB 12/00), which were slightly more sophisticated concept books; these useful
titles are standard "identify the object" board books in English and Spanish. Each
sturdy volume features single objects on white pages (each of the big domestic
animals-goat, horse, cow-take up a whole spread) captioned with the English
word in plain font and the Spanish word in bold font. The objects (animals such
as a turtle, a dog, etc.; clothing such as a hat, socks, etc.; foodstuffs such as ba-
nanas, cereal, etc.; toys such as blocks, paints, etc.) are homely and domestic, and
they lean toward those items young children will find familiar. Emberley's cut-
paper collage is neat and clean, and the compositions are spacious and uncluttered.
Occasionally a simple object is adorned with details to make it stand out (dress-up
clothes with spangles), or a generic list is enlivened by an unusual inclusion (a
skunk). The bilingual elements and the simple but classic collage illustrations
place these very useful titles a cut above the usual board-book fare. JMD
FARMER, NANCY 
The House of the Scorpion. Jackson/Atheneum, 2002 
380p
ISBN 0-689-85222-3 
$17.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Accustomed to a cozy and insular life with only his foster mother, six-year-old
Matteo Alacran is stunned by his encounter with the outside world, which results
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
105
in the discovery that he is a clone, considered to be a "good-for-nothing animal."
It turns out, however, that he's the clone of El Patr6n, the ruler not just of his huge
multigenerational household but of the region of Opium, the drug-driven land
that divides the United States from Aztlin, its southern neighbor. Protected by El
Patr6n, Matt flourishes despite the abhorrence and plotting of almost all of El
Patr6n's household; with the help of a few allies, he grows to be a confident teen-
ager with the hidden hope of succeeding El Patr6n and perhaps even marrying his
friend Maria, the daughter of an American senator. When El Patr6n sickens, Matt
discovers that his confidence has been misplaced: he's not a beloved ready-made
son but merely a well-treated source of spare parts, and he's going to be sacrificed
so that his superannuated progenitor may use Matt's young heart, as he has used
the organs of other clones before Matt, to keep living. If Matt wants to live, he has
to flee beyond the only realm he's ever known. As in The Ear, the Eye, and theArm
(BCCB 3/94), Farmer creates a complicated fictional world that is both plausible
and original. The slow and uncertain evolution of Matt's awareness is dramati-
cally effective and psychologically credible, and it brings with it a rising suspense.
The book does ramble off track occasionally-there's a lot of convenient eaves-
dropping for plot advancement, the final portion of the book (where Matt struggles
in a work camp in Aztlan) squanders some of the narrative tension, and a key and
repeated plot point is unfortunately dependent on a scientific inaccuracy (since
fingerprints are not determined solely by genetics, Matt's fingerprints would not
be identical to those of El Patr6n). A book of this size and generous imagination,
however, can afford to fall short occasionally as it establishes its elaborate vision,
and this is overall a dramatic and compelling narrative. DS
FREEMAN, MARTHA 
The Trouble with Babies; illus. by Cat Bowman
Smith. 
Holiday House, 2002 
121p
ISBN 0-8234-1698-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Last seen adjusting to her mother's remarriage and the move into stepfather
William's small apartment (with his four cats) in Freeman's The Trouble with Cats
(BCCB 4/00), nine-year-old protagonist Holly has moved again (with family and
cats) into a small pink house in another San Francisco neighborhood. There she
meets next door neighbor Xavier (aka Dr. X) when pet cat George escapes into the
yard. Xavier is experimenting with his new invention-a "de-yuckification
device"-inspired by his crush on Annie, the other next-door neighbor, who hates
anything yucky. Holly's first impression of Annie isn't a good one ("As soon as I
saw Annie, I hated her"), but things get better, and the two bond over Dr. X's
yucky crush, Holly's sometimes yucky cats, and Annie's new "yucky baby" sister,
Laura. Early-grade fiction is tough to do well, so Freeman's accomplishment is
particularly laudable. Straightforward, intelligent prose is leavened by accessibly
clever humor, and characterizations are pithy without being underwritten. Even
the adult characters have style, from Holly's fence-leaping stepfather William to
the comedy-writing Jim (one half of Xavier's father-father parental duo), from
Annie's Yiddish-speaking Jewish grandmother to the dancing barristo at the coffee
shop. Holly's narrative is wryly observant without being arch, and her asides have
a quiet little zing that too-fast readers may miss. Smith's capably drafted line
drawings have a scribbly free-spirited flair that complements the lighthearted text.
Those readers for whom Holly is already a friend will appreciate this further domestic
adventure; those who don't yet know Holly need to be introduced as soon as
possible. JMD
106 
* THE BULLETIN
FRIESEN, GAYLE 
Losing Forever. Kids Can, 2002 
24 7p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55337-031-7 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Jes is already bitter about her parents' divorce and her mother's impending remar-
riage ("I never once thought the breakup was my fault. It didn't have anything to
do with me because clearly, if they had thought even once about me, they'd still be
together"), and she's absolutely floored when she's saddled with a new stepsister-
to-be the same age as herself: gorgeous Angela, who insinuates herself into Jes'
mother's graces in ways Jes could never manage. Jes' jealousy increases when An-
gela seems to be coopting Jes' friends as well, especially as no one but Jes seems to
realize that Angela is an operator par excellence. Yearning more than ever for the
family that she's lost, Jes is stunned to find out that the adultery of her beloved
father was actually the main cause of her parents' divorce. The setup of the glam-
orous interloper with feet of very nasty clay isn't a new one, but Friesen uses it very
effectively, both to elicit empathy from the reader and to provide Jes' transitional
strains with a single focus. As a consequence, the various components-the family's
grief over the years-ago death of Jes' younger sister, Jes' uncertainty about romance
(her friend Sam would like to be more than friends with Jes and ends up dating
Angela), her anger at her mother-knit together rather than taking the novel in
too many different directions. The result is a sympathetic and emotional account
of a girl's adjustment to the complexities of her family as well as to change. DS
FUNKE, CORNELIA 
The Thief Lord; tr. by Oliver Latsch. 
Chicken House,
2002 
[352p]
ISBN 0-439-40437-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Orphaned brothers Prosper and Bo have ditched their guardian aunt (who's only
willing to adopt the charming, younger Bo) and have fled to Venice, where they
come under the dubious protection of a teen who carries off daring thefts by night
and herds a small band of street gamins by day. The gang of the "Thief Lord" is
more than willing to assist their leader in his midnight heists, but he seems reluc-
tant to bring them along on any actual jobs, and readers will probably figure out
long before Prosper and Bo do that the young criminal is actually a rich kid pilfer-
ing his parents' goodies. He does, however, get them involved in a plan to help
reconstruct-for unimaginable wealth, of course-a magical merry-go-round sto-
len years ago from an orphanage. Trailed by a gumshoe looking for the siblings,
and most improbably befriended by a would-be burglary victim, the children dodge
their way through a hailstorm of transparent subplots to reach their respective
happy endings. Readers undaunted by page count can find Funke's themes devel-
oped more thrillingly elsewhere-in Dickens' Oliver Twist and in Bradbury's Some-
thing Wicked This Way Comes. This comparatively lightweight (in content, not
ounces) romp has its moments, however, and the social joys of joining what prom-
ises to be a heavily hyped Reading Event may well carry the day. EB
GAIMAN, NEIL 
Coraline; illus. by Dave McKean. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
162p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623744-0 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-380-97778-8 
$15.99 
R* Gr. 4-7
Coraline and her parents have just moved into a big old house that has been di-
vided into several apartments, and Coraline has been meeting a cast of oddball but
friendly neighbors. One strange architectural feature of her new home is a door
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
107
that opens only to reveal a brick wall. Coraline finds this door intriguing, espe-
cially the day she opens it and, instead of the wall, finds a passageway. On the
other end she finds a home identical to her own, complete with two people who
call themselves her "other parents"; the only physical difference between these
people and her real parents is their eyes: "[Their] eyes were buttons, big and black
and shiny." Thus begins a nightmare that doesn't stop until Coraline escapes and,
in a gruesome conclusion, throws her "other mother's" evil disembodied hand
into the pit of a dark well. The nearly candy-coated opening, in which Coraline
blithely explores her new neighborhood, provides a perfect complement to the
creepy, bug-and-rat infested world of Coraline's horrifying experience. Gaiman's
pacing is superb, and he steers the tension of the tale with a deft and practiced
narrative touch. McKean's black-and-white illustrations depict first sunny and
then eerie scenes in an old-fashioned style with spidery and elongated lines. Al-
though this is not for the faint of heart, readers who have long coveted a horror
story that would play to their most vivid fears'will find the unforgettable "other
mother" to be the perfect terrifying villain. KM
GANTOS, JACK 
What WouldJoey Do? Farrar, 2002 
208p
ISBN 0-374-39986-7 
$16.00 
R* 
Gr. 5-7
Joey (ofJoey Pigza Swallowed the Key, BCCB 11/98, etc.) has got his hyperactivity
mostly under control, but he's just beginning to realize that that's not going to be
enough to fix his family ("Your problem is," says his hard-nosed grandmother,
"that you got better, and the rest of the world didn't"). His impulsive father is
now hoping to win back Joey's mother, and though Joey's no fan of his mom's
new boyfriend, he's even unhappier about the frenzy of rage his father's attentions
cause in his mom. His grandmother is now basically his only ally, and she's bug-
ging Joey to become friends with his homeschooling partner, nasty Olivia Lapp
(who's blind but who nonetheless has "twenty-twenty vision for getting me in
trouble"); Joey's more worried about his grandmother's expectations of dying soon,
which are starting to seem more factual than rhetorical. Joey's saga deepens with
every book, with Gantos developing both his character (Joey's genuine creativity
and earnest helpfulness, which, in his family, often turns to mediation and ap-
peasement) and his complex family role (he's clearly going to be the homefront
anchor for his loving but flighty mother). Joey's response to his grandmother's
death is both realistic and tender, while his parents' reaction (which leads to a
macabrely funny tug-of-war with Grandma's body) is, unfortunately, merely real-
istically self-centered. Despite all the obstacles, Joey's managing to make his way,
if not always directly, to okay; Joey's fans will be glad. DS
GOODMAN, JOAN ELIZABETH 
Paradise: Based on a True Story of
Survival. Houghton, 2002 
209p
ISBN 0-618-11450-5 
$16.00 
R Gr. 6-10
Marguerite has been chosen by her uncle to accompany his fleet of adventurers
and settlers on their journey to the New World, where they hope to put down
French roots on Canada's eastern coast and, from there, search for a fabled land of
gold. Marguerite goes willingly, with her own private agenda-to be free of her
father and to start a new life with her lover, Pierre. When she and Pierre are
discovered in a shipboard tryst, she and her companion, Damienne, are marooned
on the Isle of Demons, and loyal Pierre (merely reprimanded for sowing some
natural wild oats) jumps ship to share their abandonment. The three eke out a
108 
* THE BULLETIN
living on the island, but Marguerite loses both her sources of support and strength-
Pierre dies of food poisoning, and Damienne wastes away, probably from tubercu-
losis-leaving the now-pregnant Marguerite to bear her child in solitude. Goodman
bases her fictional account very loosely on the trials of Marguerite de la Rocque,
compressing her heroine's ordeal into a single year, gifting her with a healthy child,
and getting her off the island in better health than her real-life counterpart. A few
anachronisms slip in (no sixteenth-century damsel could describe herself as "mes-
merized"), and the relentless emotional turbulence takes its toll on the prose ("I
was mad with grief. Raving. Insane. Furious.... I howled without cease, tore my
clothes, my hair"). The tale itself, however, is about as romantic as they come, and
readers who dream of being stranded on a desert island (with, of course, their
heart's desire) will find this hard to resist. EB
GRAY, DIANNE E. 
Together Apart. Houghton, 2002 
193p
ISBN 0-618-18721-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Hannah can no longer bear to remain in her parents' house with memories of the
two younger brothers she lost in last winter's blizzard, the great storm of 1888; her
close friend Isaac, who survived the storm with her, cannot live any longer with his
abusive stepfather. Each unaware of the other's actions, they apply for work with
eccentric widow Eliza Moore. She hires them both-Hannah to help in the house
and Isaac to assist in her print shop-and from here an improbable plot spins into
incredibility. Eliza asks Hannah what she should do with her house; when Hannah
suggests she open a resting room for traveling farm wives, the result is an overnight
success. Isaac's stepfather sets the law on Isaac. Isaac hides out in the print shop,
cranking out copies of Eliza's feminist newspaper. Eliza gets in trouble with her
genteel neighbors; wounded gypsies shelter in Eliza's barn; Isaac and Hannah sneak
out for nighttime rendezvous; the sheriff prowls; Isaac's mother hides out from her
husband; working girls put on plays; Hannah purges her guilt; Isaac builds a boat
and, after winning Hannah's heart, sails to New Orleans with his mother to start a
new life that will, of course, include Hannah at some later date. The surfeit of
storylines, each with undeveloped potential, knock about loosely as if waiting for
direction, and Eliza-who could have been a pivotal figure of a kindhearted, for-
ward-thinking woman-is little more than a vague, catalytic presence. Still, only
the gloomiest of readers could deny that Hannah and Isaac's promised future in
the Big Easy looks rosy, and, as Isaac points out, it's unlikely to snow. EB
GREENBERG, JAN 
Action Jackson; by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jordan; illus. by
Robert Andrew Parker. 
Roaring Brook, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2770-3 
$23.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1682-5 
$16.95 
R* Gr. 3-6
The title may suggest a sports figure, but this book features a hero of a different
sort: innovative painter Jackson Pollock. The ever-inventive Greenberg and Jor-
dan have used their usual thorough research as the basis for a fiction-smoothed
narrative of Pollock's days of painting at his Long Island home, focusing particu-
larly on the production of the painting called Lavender Mist. Present tense makes
the evocative you-are-there description of Pollock's routine ("He swoops and leaps
like a dancer, paint trailing from a brush that doesn't touch the canvas") even more
immediate, and the details of his non-painting activities ("He puts down the brush
and goes into the house to help make supper") keep the portrait grounded in
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
109
reality, reminding readers that an artist can be a guy with a dog and a garden at the
same time as being a controversial pioneer of the visual medium. Some biographi-
cal details enhance the text, but only insofar as they flesh out the explanation of
this particular labor (a more detailed biography is included in the back matter); the
result is a closely focused and insightful introduction to Pollock's way of making
art. Parker's line-and-watercolor illustrations are surprisingly simpatico with their
unusual subject: their reliance on uneven, unpolished, and yet oddly graceful line
suits Pollock's driven drips, and their spareness, which seems at odds with their
subject's lush layerings, is well suited to conveying the open landscapes that in-
spired him. Abstract painting in general can be pretty mysterious to kids, and this
will help provide them with context, especially in conjunction with a museum
visit; it will also offer them some insight into that evanescent thing, an artist's
vision. In addition to the biography, end matter includes detailed source notes
that provide more illuminating details, a bibliography, and notes on the featured
art. DS
GRIFALCONI, ANN 
The Village That Vanished; illus. by Kadir Nelson. 
Dial,
2002 
[40p]
ISBN 0-8037-2623-6 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-10yrs
In this original tale set among the African Yao people, a village storyteller gathers
children around to hear the story of their ancestors' bravery when faced with an
imminent raid by black slave traders. The villagers, mostly women, old men, and
children (most of the men are away hunting), must plot an escape, and Njemile,
one of the village women, proposes that they dismantle their houses and retreat
into the forest, obliterating all traces of their settlement. Elderly Chimwala agrees
to stay behind in her lone hut to meet the traders and throw them off the villagers'
tracks; young Abikanile, Njemile's daughter, prays to the gods to secure their safe
passage across the deep river. Their success-a tribute to ingenuity, courage, and
faith-is folklorically heroic, and the intergenerational cooperation magnifies the
triumph. Nelson's scenes, rendered in muted watercolors, fine ink lines, and intri-
cate hatching, depict the jungle as both forbidding and protective and the villagers
as proudly determined, almost regal, amid their predicament. When trickster tales
next appear in the bill, consider including this gripping, elegant title. EB
HARPER, CHARISE MERICLE 
There Was a Bold Lady Who Wanted a Star; ad. and
illus. by Charise Mericle Harper. 
Tingley/Little, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-316-14673-0 
$15.95 
Ad 4-6yrs
This "Bold Lady" is a takeoff on the fly- (and spider-, bird-, cat-, etc.) eating old
woman of traditional lore. Harper's redheaded dame, however, wants something
a bit more exotic than a unique gustatory experience: "There was a bold lady/ who
wanted a star.// I don't know why she wanted a star-/ it seemed too far." To that
end she tries a variety of available transport, from shoes to skates, from bike to car,
from plane to rocket, until she finally succeeds in attaining the twinkly prize: "Now
I know why she wanted the star ... to put in a jar. (So it wasn't so far!)" This
clever notion doesn't actually go far enough: the verse lacks the exaggerated,
universal humor of the traditional romp, the rhythm is often choppy, and the
rhymes are sometimes forced. What makes this title worth a second look are
Harper's acrylic and collage illustrations. Stylized pastoral elements (stick-legged
110 
* THE BULLETIN
cows, cotton-ball trees, etc.) and quirky, sometimes even gravity-defying,
compositions result in pictures with a nouveau-folk art flair that have more than a
touch of whimsy (think Maira Kalman crossed with Giselle Potter). The colors
are intense but not flashy; the standard eight-crayon palette leans predominantly
toward the primary touched with opaque greens, browns, and pinks. The conclusion
(the space-traveling mother gives the star in a jar to her son as a bedtime present)
may not have the cumulative zing of swallowing a horse, but it does have some
ready-made curricular connections. Try the two tales together to encourage further
variants among your listeners. JMD
HARRIS, ROBIE H. 
Hello Benny: What It's Like to Be a Baby; illus. by Michael
Emberley. 
McElderry, 2002 
32p 
(Growing Up Stories)
ISBN 0-689-83257-5 
$16.95 
R* 4-7 yrs
The winning team of Harris and Emberley (It's Perfectly Normal, BCCB 10/94; It's
So Amazing!, BCCB 2/00) are back with another warm, humorous, authoritative
opus on the life cycle, this time following newborn Benny through his first year.
Wrinkled, indignant Benny makes his debut as a howling head set against an angry
orange backdrop, stretching his cavernous mouth into a roaring "Wha-wha-wha-
wh...ah!!", and his parents are right there with kisses and coos: "Benny heard his
mommy's voice and he turned his head towards her. He already knew the sound
of her voice." He steadily learns to respond to visitors, to practice sounds, to lift
his head, turn over, mush his food, crawl, sit, and stumble down the path to
toddlerhood. Harris dogs Benny every step of the way, offering substantial boxed
insets that expand the details of his typical accomplishments and compare the little
guy's progress with a broader range of normal behaviors ("Most babies crawl be-
fore they walk. Some never crawl at all"). By omitting the weekly/monthly time-
line approach common among many baby books, Harris mitigates the anxiety and
the hubris young siblings and their older but not necessarily wiser parents may feel
in comparing their own little tyke against a statistical norm. Emberley keeps the
tone light, presenting a diverse gallery of infants and tots ebulliently marking each
developmental milestone, and their baffled siblings pondering the babies' myster-
ies; there's plenty of knowing humor about babies' habits, whether it be a well-
timed diaper-change squirt of pee or an eating/self-decorating session with a mushy
banana. Oblivious to the miracle of his own growth, droopy-drawered, towheaded
Benny takes on the world at his own speed, and with this loving tribute to new life,
Harris and Emberley give all babies permission to do the same. EB
HASSETT, JOHN 
The Three Silly Girls Grubb; written and illus. by John and Ann
Hassett. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-618-14183-9 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
This revisionist "Three Billy Goats Gruff' features "three silly sisters named Grubb.
They came in three sizes: small, medium, and extra large." One morning the
sisters miss the bus, so off they trot, over the bridge to school: "In a hole under the
bridge hid Ugly-Boy Bobby." The first two sisters "skippity-skip-skip" across the
bridge by promising Ugly-Boy that the following sister's lunch has more donuts.
When sister number three ("big-sized me") arrives, she tells Ugly-Boy, "You may
have my dozen jelly-donuts.... But first I will plant a dozen mushy kisses on your
little-boy nose." Needless to say, Ugly-Boy flees to school in terror ("nowadays,
Ugly-Boy Bobby is called just Robert"). Some adults may tire of the well-worn
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
111
cliche about kissy girls and girl-phobic boys, but primary-grade listeners will be
splitting their sides. Bouncily silly language lends itself to reading or telling aloud,
but to miss the equally bouncy and silly illustrations would be a crime. Strong
curves draw the viewer's eye to the center of the action in every spread. The
roundly cherubic figures of the sisters and their nemesis frolic in a bucolic vale full
of daisies, toadstools, and toads; the contrast between the worm-eating Ugly-Boy
scowling under the bridge and the irrepressible Grubb girls crossing over it ratch-
ets up an already high humor quotient. Cross this bridge as soon as you can find
it. JMD
HIAASEN, CARL 
Hoot. 
Knopf, 2002 
2 92 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92181-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82181-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Roy's quiet life quickly somersaults out of control: one day he's a reluctant new
Floridian, then suddenly he's the target of bully Dana Matherson, reluctant ally of
tough soccer-player Beatrice Leep, defender of Beatrice's snake-handling runaway
stepbrother, sometimes intentional confounder of the local police, and a protector
of burrowing owls (threatened by the planned building of a Mother Paula's All-
American Pancake House on their nesting site). The pedigree of this transition is,
as you might expect, complicated, but it's also elaborately enjoyable, as mild-man-
nered middle-schooler Roy increasingly becomes a participant in the quirky world
he's found himself submerged in. At the same time, the book effectively twists
together what initially appears to be two plot strands, Roy's experiences and the
repeated vandalism of a building site, as it becomes clear that it's Beatrice's step-
brother performing the vandalism in defense of the endangered owls, a defense
that gradually draws in not only Roy but his parents, Beatrice's soccer team, and
Mother Paula herself. The darker undertones (such as Beatrice's stepbrother's
rejection by his mother) add weight and sharpness to the story without undermin-
ing its considerable humor, and they're balanced by a goodly helping of benevo-
lence, especially in the characters of Roy's parents, who break from literary
convention by being smart, understanding, and supportive; the final building-site
showdown may be more predictable than the book's offbeat opening, but it's a
satisfying conclusion. This has a lighter touch than Bloor's Tangerine (BCCB 3/
97) and a more traditional approach than Sachar's Holes (9/98), but the solid,
humorous writing and modestly bizarre world will please fans of both titles. DS
HOBBS, VALERIE 
Sonny's War. 
Foster/Farrar, 2002 
2 1 5p
ISBN 0-374-37136-9 
$16.00 
R Gr. 7-10
Cory's fourteen years in a small California town have been circumscribed by her
parents, their restaurant, and her adored older brother Sonny and his muscle-car-
crazy buddies. Her father's sudden death and Sonny's enlistment in the Army
turn her world upside down; Mom's left with the Ojala Cafe but with little culi-
nary talent to run it, Sonny's just a little too gleeful at the prospect of going to
Vietnam, and Cory is left pretty much at loose ends. A handsome new history
teacher, Lawrence, with strong anti-war convictions directs Cory's attention to
larger world issues. However, Cory's emerging social conscience is wildly entangled
with her infatuation for the passionate, attentive Lawrence, and when he is abruptly
"released" from the staff, Cory follows him to an anti-war rally and finds he is not
the idol she's been worshipping all along. Hobbs is not quite as sure-handed in
112 
* THE BULLETIN
dealing with historical background as she is with character, and at times the Viet-
nam War skulks awkwardly among scenes like a player whose role needs continual
explanation. Still, Sonny's eventual return as a vet who can't go home again rings
true, and the family story is right on the mark, with mother, daughter, and son
struggling their respective ways toward independence, bonded by unbreakable love.
EB
HOWITT, MARY 
The Spider and the Fly; illus. by Tony DiTerlizzi. 
Simon,
2002 
36p
ISBN 0-689-85289-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Oh, the poor inexperienced country fly! What chance does she have against the
suave maneuverings of an arachnid seducer? Why, none at all, despite the at-
tempted ghostly warnings of the Spider's previous meals. DiTerlizzi's reimagining
of Howitt's nineteenth-century cautionary poem is an illustrative tour de force, a
stylistic homage to Gorey, Rackham, and Addams; the black-and-white illustra-
tions have a junior-high-appealing slickness yet remarkable depth and detail, from
border ornamentation to ironic visual touches. A Gothic dollhouse within the
dusty attic of a Gothic mansion makes a clever scene for the Spider's dastardly
doings, and the depiction of the characters is imaginative as well. The oily-haired,
mustachioed Spider (sort of a combination of Clark Gable and Peter Lorre) is the
archetypal villain, a picture of sartorial splendor who changes costume from satin
smoking jacket to tuxedo to great coat and top hat. The flapper fly has big inno-
cent eyes, gauzy wings, and, ultimately, a too trusting demeanor: in the end she
takes her place alongside Spider's other ghostly victims. A concluding missive
from Spider himself warns against expecting carnivores to go against their nature;
brief bios of author Howitt and illustrator DiTerlizzi are appended. Masterful
drafting and artful composition combine in this spookily sophisticated picture
book that offers a macabrely funny look at trusting even the most persuasive of
strangers. JMD
HOYT-GOLDSMITH, DIANE 
Celebrating a Quinceanera: A Latina's 15th Birthday
Celebration; illus. with photographs by Lawrence Migdale. 
Holiday House,
2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1693-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
In this alluring photoessay, preparations for fifteen-year-old Cynthia Anguiano
Cuevas' ritual coming-of-age festivities are seen through the eyes of her worshipful
younger cousin, Ariana. All audience eyes will be fixed on Cynthia as she plans her
fiesta with the help of her mother, aunt, and padrinos (godparents): arranging
food and a hall, fashioning recuerdos (guest favors), hand-delivering invitations,
practicing a traditional dance with her escort and honor court, and, of course,
buying the perfect frothy white gown. Naturally, children will be drawn to the
fairy-tale elegance of the day and the almost impossibly beautiful and handsome
participants, but Hoyt-Goldsmith also offers them substantive background on the
celebration's origin in the forced lifestyle choices of earlier generations of Latinas,
and she covers the religious rites as well as the secular gala. Community involve-
ment in planning and financing is also addressed ("The event is very expensive,
and most families cannot afford to put on such a large party by themselves. So
everyone in the community pitches in to help in some way"). What little girl
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
113
hasn't fantasized the shimmery dress, the sparkling tiara, the garlands of roses, and
the spotlight shining on her for an entire day? Cynthia's debut should be their
dream come true. EB
IBBOTSON, EVA 
The Great Ghost Rescue; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. 
Dutton,
2002 
16 7p
ISBN 0-525-46769-6 $15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Rick Henderson is startled to find his dorm room invaded by Humphrey the Hor-
rible, the rather rosy youngest son of a ghost family fleeing the modernization of
their castle. Being an adaptable lad, Rick soon throws himself into finding a solu-
tion to the dilemma of Humphrey's ghost family and other similarly afflicted Brit-
ish ghosts. On the advice of the school cook's daughter, Rick travels to London to
see the Prime Minister and request a sanctuary for the dispossessed spirits. A lucky
meeting with one Lord Bullhaven provides the wraiths with Insleyfarne, a Scottish
ruin owned by said lord, just perfect for their needs-until Bullhaven proves to be
a villain with his own evil plans for the poor displaced ghosts. First published in
Great Britain in 1975, this title doesn't have the cohesion of Ibbotson's Dial-a-
Ghost (BCCB 9/01), and the succession of events is more than a bit contrived.
Still, the characterizations of the ghosts are comic, and the contrast between
Humphrey the (Not So) Horrible and his family is definitely giggle-provoking.
Despite the uneven progress, the book has wit and humor, two elements that can't
be underestimated in their ability to add sparkle to even a predictable plot, and
fans will therefore welcome this addition to the author's ghostly oeuvre. Hawkes'
detailed but informal linework deftly walks the border between pokerfaced prim-
ness and broad comedy. JMD
KIMMEL, ERIC A. 
The Erie CanalPirates; illus. by Andrew Glass. 
Holiday House,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1657-7 
$16.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Kimmel takes his inspiration for this original rhyming romp from an old folksong,
though apparently not the famous one, about the Erie Canal. Captain Flynn and
his crew have just set sail when they are set upon by buccaneers in a galleon flying
the Jolly Roger. The crew is intent on keeping their pay (and Frank, the mule, is
intent on keeping his hay) and they refuse to surrender, battling the dastardly
villains of the river: "We brawled from Canajoharie,/ From Ilion to Liverpool./
While good Old Frank scuffled on the bank/ With a one-eyed pirate mule,/ A one-
eyed pirate mule." In a riotous conclusion that suits the exaggerated tall-tale elements
of the story, the two ships are caught up in the whirlpool of Niagara Falls. The
pirate ship goes down, but the courageous Captain Flynn (steering by the set of
Frank's ears) sails his vessel right up the falls and brings crew, ship, and mule to
safe harbor in Buffalo. A fully rigged pirate ship attacking a mailboat on a canal
may not have much logic, but it certainly provides some silly sailing fun. Glass'
watercolors feature a cartoony crew of reprobates and sailors, grinning even as they
battle water, falls, and each other; wiggly lines and popping eyes combine into
energetic and funny images that rob the pictures of any sense of decorum. While
original music and lyrics would be welcome, an author's note does explain the
presence (or lack thereof) of pirates on the Erie Canal and mentions a few geographic
liberties Kimmel took to get Captain Flynn's vessel to the falls. JMD
114 
* 
THE BULLETIN
KINDL, PATRICE 
Lost in the Labyrinth. Houghton, 2002 
194 p
ISBN 0-618-16684-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Minoan princess Xenodice, daughter of the royal house of Knossos in Crete, tries
desperately to save her half brother, the Minotaur, from the murderous machina-
tions of Athenian hero Theseus, the captive inventor Daedalus, and Xenodice's
own older sister, Ariadne. When Ariadne discovers she is not to be her mother's
heir, she decides to aid in the murder of the Minotaur and flee with Theseus. The
canny Xenodice places herself in danger to protect her brother, carefully observes
the self-absorbed Ariadne, and weighs the uncertain loyalities of Daedalus, un-
aware that her own father's heart is full of treachery. Kindl's reimagining of the
classical myth has flashes of real insight, but they unfortunately fail to catch fire.
The passion of the legends never fully flames; the plot is too obviously structured,
and the path to the foregone conclusion is too predictably laid out. Xenodice is a
reliable narrator, but there is far more telling than showing here, and the action
that would have ignited some of those sparks is delivered secondhand. Neverthe-
less, the author's take on this legend is unique enough to hold mythology lovers
seeking their own way through the classics. An author's note explains some of the
history behind the legend; a genealogy and a list for further reading are included.
JMD
LAWRENCE, IAIN 
The Lightkeeper's Daughter. Delacorte, 2002 
246p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90062-7 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72925-1 
$16.95 
R Gr. 8-12
It's seventeen-year-old Elizabeth "Squid" McCrae's first trip back to her father's
western Canadian lighthouse since the birth of her daughter (Tatiana, now three),
and although her parents welcome them with all their hearts, the family dynamic
that drove Squid off is unfortunately still very much in play. Squid blames her
father, Murray, who has crushed his little nuclear family while figuratively gather-
ing them to his bosom, for the death by drowning of her brother, Alastair, four
years earlier. Hannah, long cognizant of her husband's possessiveness, still cannot
stand up to him. Murray, unable to keep daughter or son, turns his loving, grasp-
ing sights on Tatiana, who warms to his affection and the wonders of his island
even as she begins to exhibit the same strong affinity to nature that lured her uncle
to his death at sea. During the first painful days of the visit, Squid, Murray, and
Hannah open old wounds as they replay through imperfect and selective memory
the events that led to Alastair's reckless pursuit of whales (was his death willful
suicide or monomaniacal adventure?) and Squid's pregnancy (was the father a pass-
ing kayaker, or perhaps Alastair?). Lawrence cunningly scatters evidence, but ulti-
mately he guards the family secrets, and readers can decide for themselves whether
Alastair's obsession with whale song led directly to his accidental demise, or ob-
liquely, to a darker, mystical encounter between Tatiana and a whale (possibly
Alastair) who has flung himself upon their shore to die. Whatever their conclu-
sion, teens intrigued by family drama will find themselves swept along by the angst-
driven undertow. EB
LORENZ, ALBERT, ad. 
Jack and the Beanstalk: How a Small Fellow Solved a Big
Problem; ad. and illus. by Albert Lorenz with Joy Schleh. 
Abrams, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8109-1160-4 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Lorenz's adaptation of the well-known traditional tale is fairly standard in plot but
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
115
a bit more adventurous in characterization and illustration. The giant's wife takes
a more active part in seeking revenge on the thieving Jack, and Jack is no mere
miscreant but a resourceful maker of small machines (block and tackle, pulleys,
etc.), which he uses to make off with the giant's goods. The mixed-media (water-
color, pen and ink, and colored pencil) illustrations are a seething mass of images.
The oversized spreads are crowded with architectural and other details, from the
Escher-like views of the giant's castle to the creatures in the borders that frame the
images. There is a game-like element to Lorenz's artistic concept-viewers are
invited to seek a hiding Jack in four spreads-as well as a unique approach to
proportion that informs all the visuals. An author's note gives specific sources for
the retelling and provides background information for the illustrations. While
this leans toward visual overload, it is sure to appeal to younger viewers with a taste
for illustrative drama. JMD
MARSDEN, JOHN 
Winter. 
Scholastic, 2002 
[160p]
ISBN 0-439-36849-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Sixteen-year-old Winter returns to her family home, Warriewood, after an absence
of more than a decade. She has no surviving relatives (that she knows of) and no
plan (that she's willing to admit to), just a strong sense of needing to reoccupy the
ranch that is legally hers. Her homecoming is no joyous event, however; the care-
takers have been selling off bits of the estate, a newly discovered great aunt refuses
to see her, and neighbors and advisors drop remarks that lead Winter to realize
that her parents did not die together in a boating accident, as she had believed.
These unsettling developments imbue Winter with purpose-to restore Warriewood
to a productive ranch and to solve the riddle of her mother's demise. Although
Marsden seems to aim for realistic fiction, he lavishes on Winter a set of fantasy
circumstances that strain credibility. There's plenty of money in trust, available
for the asking; a handsome neighbor (who generally appears, a la Prince Charm-
ing, on horseback) woos her; best of all, she's improbably free of guilt and remorse
when she learns of her role in her mother's accidental death. Nonetheless, Marsden
handily transforms Australian farm country into Gothic Central, and readers who
usually delight in decaying mansions will find themselves right at home in
Warriewood: "Why else would I have been so desperate to come back, so desper-
ate to find out the truth about my parents? I'd felt like I was on a quest." EB
MARTIN, NORA 
A Perfect Snow. 
Bloomsbury, 2002 
[144p]
ISBN 1-58234-788-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Ben Campbell resents everything about life in his new Montana town-his father's
unemployment, his mother's discouragement, his younger brother David's volatil-
ity, the chilly reception he meets in his new high school. He is relieved, even
delighted, to be accepted into a group of men and older boys who meet regularly
to discuss their dissatisfactions and to heap blame on any minority group within
sight. Soon Ben joins in sprees of vandalism targeting Jews and homosexuals,
reveling at first in a newfound sense of power, then crashing again into a restive
depression. A chance encounter with classmate Eden Taylor and a forced acquain-
tance (at a mandatory community service project) with Jason Johnson present Ben
with the opportunity for two sincere friendships and awaken in him the real possi-
116 
* THE BULLETIN
bility of turning his life around. However, brother David is now deeply involved
in the hate group's activities, and Ben knows that the only way to disengage his
brother is to come clean regarding his own past crimes. Ben's indoctrination into
the hate group proceeds with the clinical precision of a casebook study, and the
Campbells' status as "trailer trash" pushes the pathos envelope, but the tension
between Ben's desire for redemption and his anxiety to hide his past is thoroughly
convincing, There's no tidy ending here-after Ben's disclosure, Jason is willing to
give Ben a second chance; Eden is going to be a harder sell, but Ben's on the right
track, and he's likely to drag his family along with him on the high road. EB
MATLIN, MARLEE 
Deaf Child Crossing. Simon, 2002 
200p
ISBN 0-689-82208-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Megan is thrilled when Cindy moves into the neighborhood, providing her with a
same-age playmate; soon the two girls are close companions, with Cindy even
learning sign language to share more with her deaf friend. In fact, Cindy's impulse
to help and interpret begins to annoy Megan, and by the time the girls have gone
off to camp together, the relationship is on rocky ground. Once at camp, Megan
strikes up an exclusive friendship with another deaf girl, leaving Cindy to wonder
if she and Megan will ever restore their former amity. Megan is a refreshingly
flawed protagonist-her bull-in-a-china-shop character is miles away from saintly
portraits of the disabled-and the exploration of the friendship is unusually thought-
ful in its assessment of both Megan's and Cindy's frustrations. Unfortunately, the
friendship isn't grounded as well as its obstacles, so the girls seem to be close merely
out of plot convenience; the writing is also lightweight and pedestrian, with a
tendency towards confusing shifts of viewpoint and distracting digressions. Still,
this is an undemanding and accessible story about friendship in the face of ob-
stacles, and young readers struggling with their own complicated comradeships
may find it rewarding. DS
McKAY, HILARY 
Was That Christmas?; illus. by Amanda Harvey. 
McElderry,
2002 
[2 5p]
ISBN 0-689-84765-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
Now that Bella is three, she's really aware of Christmas and eager to experience it
properly. After a big buildup at preschool, Bella's quite excited when Santa turns
up there, but she's bitterly disappointed by the proceedings (he didn't bring a
present for her cat, and there was neither reindeer nor snow), thinking that the
much-ballyhooed Christmas is basically a case of runaway PR. Her mother ex-
plains that there's much more Christmas yet to come, and the family embarks on
Christmasing, traditional component by traditional component (the family has to
"hang up the Christmas nuts for the birds... fix the tree lights ... eat sausage rolls
hot out of the oven" and so on); meanwhile, Bella checks periodically throughout
the preparations to ensure that the big event hasn't passed. The story's a bit lack-
ing in payoff (the text predicts Bella's actual Christmas but never describes it), but
the enumeration of Christmas delights is seductive, and the combination of seri-
ous anticipation and bafflement about the actual event is realistically and sympa-
thetically drawn. Harvey's pencil-and-watercolor illustrations are sometimes overly
pale and wispy, but they treat sturdy Bella and her feline friend, Black Jack, with
tenderness and humor, and they're a nice counteractant to the overly rich ban-
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
117
quets of some holiday illustrations. Those looking for a comfortable introduction
to the holiday and perhaps a jumpstart to some Christmas litanies of their own will
find this a suitable little sugarplum. DS
MOORE, CLEMENT CLARKE 
The Night before Christmas; illus. by Robert
Sabuda. 
Little Simon, 2002 
12p
ISBN 0-689-83899-9 
$24.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Sabuda, creator of The Twelve Days of Christmas (BCCB 9/96) and other paper-
engineering extravaganzas, returns with another holiday confection in cardstock.
This interpretation of Moore's poem makes the protagonists themselves into mice,
which keeps the milieu appropriately fantastical. The play of sculptured white
(occasionally decorated with silver) against colored background continues to be a
major motif, with the pop-ups accented by the appearance of festive holiday colors
through spaces and gaps (including holes for eyes, which makes faces sometimes a
bit haunting) as well as against outlines; when St. Nick finally strides in, the burst
of cheery cherry red is all the more vivid for its contrast with the white. Like
several of Sabuda's previous books, this one hovers in the gap between book and
toy, leaning towards the fragile side of both; the title can neither survive direct
child use nor function well with a group, since the intricacies are lost at a distance.
For closeup sharing under adult supervision, however, it's a marvel indeed, in a
more visually active mode than previous projects: the progression of the clock's
hand to midnight, the in-your-face reindeer leaping from the book into the viewer's
lap, and Santa's cheerful progression up and down the mouse family's chimney are
festive and memorable details, and the final overhead scene of the sleeping village
will enchant the young, especially those addicted to three-dimensional advent cal-
endars. If you can find a place in your collection for a delicate but enticing art-
work, this is a likely candidate-just remember to take it down from that high
shelf to earn its keep come the holidays. DS
Moss, MIRIAM 
Scritch Scratch; illus. by Delphine Durand. 
Orchard,
2002 
[2 6p]
ISBN 0-439-36835-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
This is indeed a lousy book, but don't hold that against it-it's a book about lice.
Specifically, in fact, the lice in Ms. Calypso's classroom, spawned by one little
louse who finds a happy home on Ms. Calypso's head amid her curly hair. Soon
tiny little lice are settling in on heads all over the classroom; the principal, Mr.
Trout, abates the infestation by instructing the parents to use a special comb and
conditioner on their children's hair, but since Ms. Calypso "had no one to help
condition and comb her hair," the lice are soon romping anew. Fortunately, Mr.
Trout steps into the breach and helps Ms. Calypso with her hair, the two fall in
love, and everyone (perhaps even the lice, who appear to be settling in the class-
room next door) lives happily ever after. This is a pretty slender plot, and the text
is rather confusing on the details of transmission and overoptimistic on the details
of eradication. On the other hand, it's pretty funny (especially the singing louse),
and it's a usefully low-key and matter-of-fact approach to a subject that often
makes people blow their tops as well as scratch them. Durand's illustrations em-
phasize absurdity at every turn; her puppetlike people peer about the classroom
with beady Victoria Chess eyes that pop up at almost random locations on their
118 
* 
THE BULLETIN
faces (elongated Ms. Calypso is particularly prone to Picasso-esque ocular align-
ments), her happy louse (who rather resembles a tiny animated potato) sports a
bow on her perky little head, and the endpapers of happy lice life may make kids
more regretful about disposing of their tenants than acquiring them. There are
better books for picking factual nits (such as Caffey's Yikes-Lice!, BCCB 6/98),
but this will help leaven the tension of a classroom visitation, even if it does leave
everybody, infested and uninfested alike, scratching. DS
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Starting with Alice. Atheneum, 2002 
1 8 1 p
ISBN 0-689-84395-X 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
In this latest entry in the Alice series, Naylor gives younger readers a peek at Alice's
elementary-school years, specifically her entry into third grade and her adjustment
to a new home in Maryland. As with other Alice titles, Alice's relationships (with
her family, with friends, and with boys) and her longing for a mother are central to
her narrative. Though initially worried about making new friends ("I wondered if
that would ever be me, laughing with two best friends, our arms around each
other") and snubbed by a trio of snotty girls, Alice quickly comes up with a few
pals: chubby, entertaining Rosalind, socially-on-the-fringes Sara, and next-door
neighbor Donald (about whom Alice has some reservations-"Sometimes I think
Donald Sheavers was dropped on his head as a baby"). The blunt "romantic"
maneuvers of third-grade boys ("Was this what third grade was all about? All this
stupid kissing?"), older brother Lester's first driving lesson, the arrival of a new
kitten, and the marriage and unexpected death of Alice's uncle round out the plot,
giving young Alice plenty of material on which to ruminate. Naylor nails the
nature of third-grade peer relations ("The bad thing about being best friends is you
aren't supposed to like anyone else as much as you like each other"), and her
evocation of Alice's feelings of loss is poignant without being sentimental (for
example, Alice recalls making Christmas cookies with her aunt, when in fact it was
her mother who made cookies with her). Alice's credible (and often humorous)
third-grade voice, her realistic concerns and victories, and the short, episodic chap-
ters make this an excellent choice for middle-grade readers and for classroom read-
alouds; older diehard Alice fans may be motivated enough to pick this up as well,
perhaps to share with their younger siblings. JMH
NEIMARK, ANNE E. 
ThereAin't Nobody That Can Sing Like Me: The Life of Woody
Guthrie. Atheneum, 2002 
122p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-83369-5 
$17.95 
.
R 
Gr. 5-12
It's a Guthrie year, apparently, because on the heels of Partridge's This Land Is
Your Land (BCCB 7/02) comes this second accessible and capable biography.
Neimark relies heavily on Guthrie's own writing for her version and quotes, so
there are some interesting discrepancies between her vision and Partridge's of cer-
tain events, but it's still a detailed and thorough overview of Guthrie's restless and
driven existence, wherein both music and tragedy always seemed to predominate.
While she goes less thoroughly than Partridge into the darker moments of Guthrie's
history, she never glosses over them, and she gives a considerably more detailed
picture of Guthrie's familial and musical legacies; this will also stretch to a younger
audience than the previous title will. Basically, there's a complementarity between
the two that makes them both useful volumes if you're exploring American social
history or music, and one could even use the different views to drive a discussion
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
119
about biographical techniques. Photographs and Guthrie's drawings appear
throughout; endnotes and an index are included. DS
NEWBERY, LINDA 
The Shell House. 
Fickling, 2002 
335p
ISBN 0-385-75011-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Contemporary teenager and amateur photographer Greg stumbles upon a local
historical group restoring Graveney Hall, an eighteenth-century English manor
house almost completely destroyed by fire. He begins a tentative friendship with
Faith, the daughter of the volunteers' foreman, based on their conversations about
God and the nature of religious belief. While Greg struggles with his feelings
about the nature of the divine, he is also struggling with his feelings about Jordan,
a male classmate toward whom he feels something more than just friendship. In-
terspersed among the chapters about Greg's emotional turmoil are chapters limning
the story of World War I soldier Edmund, aristocratic scion of Graveney Hall, and
Alex, his companion in arms and working-class lover. Greg's conflicting feelings
about his sexuality are played out against the passionate but doomed love story of
Edmund and Alex; while Jordan and Greg's relationship teeters on the edge of
consummation, Edmund and Alex's affair is cut short by Alex's death in the war.
The plot threads of this densely woven novel include Greg's growing feelings for
the self-admittedly homosexual Jordan (and his ultimate rejection of them), his
friendship with Faith, and his changing religious convictions. The nearly tragic
accident that puts a young vandal in the hospital and the underlying historical
drama of Edmund and Alex underscore the heavily philosophical dilemmas of the
protagonist. Unfortunately, the pace of the novel is rather stately as a consequence
of the detailed ruminations, the revelation that Edmund set the fire that destroyed
the family manse leans toward the melodramatic, and there is an unfortunate lack
of closure in nearly all the plot threads that is less than satisfying. Still, the con-
temporary characters and their choices juxtaposed against their historical counter-
parts make an intriguing tableau; those readers seeking a painstaking journey through
some complex moral territory may find this a rewarding trip. JMD
NEWMAN, LESLIA 
Runaway DreideLt; illus. by Kyrsten Brooker. 
Holt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6237-8 
$17.95 
R 4-7yrs
The narrator is playing with his "shiny new dreidel" on the first night ofHanukkah
when the thing develops a mind of its own ("It spun round the kitchen and straight
down the hall./ It spun down the carpet and right up the wall"). With a cry of
"Runaway dreidel!" the narrator gives chase, followed by his family and neighbors,
but the toy eludes them, spinning out of the apartment building, along the streets,
and, finally, up into the sky ("At last it stopped spinning a stone's throw from
Mars"). Though the anapestical verse has an appropriately galloping pace, the
story is on the lightweight side, lacking the cumulative interest of tales such as
"The Runaway Pancake," and the author's determined echo of "The Night Before
Christmas" results in some strained rhymes and forced scansion. Brooker's superb
illustrations enhance the proceedings considerably, however. Her flattened
perspectives, earthtoned palette, and askew exuberance recall Chagall's early Russian-
themed paintings, but there's a more overtly comic vision in her three-dimensional
and shiny faces; in addition to the sweeping strokes in the oil paints, texture comes
from interspersed cut-paper and photographic elements, all imaginatively and deftly
employed (photographed fabrics add sharpness to clothes and wall covers, the street
120 
* 
THE BULLETIN
is paved with pieced images of stony surface). Ultimately, the satisfaction here
comes from the visual evocation of this cozy urban world and the chase through it;
youngsters, especially artistic ones, will want to tag along. DS
NEWMAN, 
MARJORIE 
Mole and the Baby Bird; illus. by Patrick
Benson. 
Bloomsbury, 2002 
27p
ISBN 1-58234-784-0 
$16.95 
R 
4-6yrs
When little Mole finds a baby bird, he takes it home and cares for it, and against
the odds the little hatchling thrives ("And the bird didn't die! It grew"). As the
chick grows, however, it inevitably starts wanting to fly, much to the dismay of
possessive Mole, who's determined to keep his beloved bird at home. Finally,
Mole's wise grandfather helps Mole see beyond his own wishes to his bird's needs,
and Mole releases the fledgling ("He saw his bird flying, soaring, free. And Mole
was glad"). The story is predictable, but it's also a quintessential childhood di-
lemma, and Newman tells it with a superb clarity and simplicity that makes it
much more effective than talkier explanations; quiet moley details add piquancy
(the bird lives "in Mole's dark underground room"). The book is refreshing in its
appreciation of the genuine connection between love and possessiveness, so it's
able to be effectively sympathetic about Mole's difficult evolution to a different
kind of love. Benson's portrayal of the little bird is somewhat inconsistent, flutter-
ing between fuzzy chickdom and feathery maturity, and it's a little confusing when
the otherwise realistic bird anthropomorphically helps Mole in his labors. There's
a grave precision in the linework and detailed hatching that suits the story's tone,
however; while the moles are endearingly personified in their actions (the little
mole, for instance, reads aloud to his cherished pet from picture books), they and
the bird remain essentially true to nature in their details. Benson effectively con-
trasts the cozy shades of Mole's house in smaller images with sweeping spreads of
the world beyond, the world to which Mole eventually releases his small charge.
Touching gently but firmly on some tender child issues, this little tale will be
useful in a multitude of situations as both parable and literal truth. DS
NOLEN, JERDINE 
Plantzilla; illus. by David Catrow. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202412-3 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-5
In this epistolary drama, young Mortimer Henryson pleads with Mr. Lester, his
science teacher, to be allowed to care for a classroom plant over summer break.
Mortimer's attachment to Plantzilla borders on the obsessive ("I want Plantzilla.
ONLY PLANTZILLA"), but the Henrysons and Mr. Lester give their inadequately
informed consent to plant and boy's summer alliance. The exchange of letters
among Mrs. Henryson, Mortimer, and Mr. Lester soon reveals that Plantzilla,
thriving under Mortimer's care, is growing wild, in more ways than one: the viney
vegetation is outgrowing its pot, eating meat, and taking on all sorts ofun-plantlike
characteristics. The rising level of hysteria in Mrs. Henryson's letters corresponds
with the jungle-like takeover of the Henryson domicile by Plantzilla; the
disappearance of Grollier (the family dog) is the last straw. Fortunately, Plantzilla
is a kinder, simpler plant than its Little Shop of Horrors predecessor, and, in the
end, it proves itself worthy of Mortimer's lavish affection. Catrow's watercolor
and pencil illustrations have a slightly demented quality that suits this slightly
demented tale. A progressively more sentient (not to mention serpentine) Plantzilla
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
121
runs riot over the pages, intertwining with its adopted family amongst all the family
activities: breakfast, barbecues, musicales, etc. The palette runs heavily to acid
shades of chlorophyll green, touched by Plantzilla's fuchsia blossoms. The
bespectacled-mad-scientist demeanor of the rotund yet diminutive Mortimer
provides an anchoring contrast to the entwining vine-like appendages of his vegetable
charge. Pass this on to students with leanings toward the humorously bizarre.
(P.S. Grollier comes back.) JMD
O'BRIEN, PATRICK 
Mammoth; written and illus. by Patrick O'Brien.
See review under Arnold, p. 98.
OLD, WENDIE 
To Fly: The Story of the Wright Brothers; illus. by Robert Andrew
Parker. 
Clarion, 2002 
48p
ISBN 0-618-13347-X 
$16.00 
R* 
Gr. 3-5
While Samuel Langley of the Smithsonian Institute, cushioned by government
grants, struggles with prototypes of an officially promising flying machine, sibling
bicycle builders Wilbur and Orville tinker with the same dream in their Ohio
shop, taking annual jaunts to North Carolina to test each year's improvements. At
the close of 1903, a fifty-nine-second flight near Kitty Hawk demonstrates that
humans can achieve sustained, powered, controlled flight, and the rest, so it goes,
is history. Material abounds on the Wright Brothers' seminal contributions to
aviation, but Old's presentation is particularly smooth reading, sharply focused on
specific aeronautic challenges and the brothers' harmonious efforts to overcome
them. Short chapters marking their milestones clearly convey how each man's
peculiar outlook, insight, or skill contributed to their joint effort, and how patient
research and experimentation set them on a divergent path from Langley, who too
easily accepted popular but erroneous preconceptions of aerodynamic principles.
Parker's spidery ink lines and watercolor washes in scenes of airy beach and cramped
workroom impart a sophisticated cachet that should convince middle-grade readers
this is no childish picture book; a timeline, index, bibliography, and even specific
source notes for quotations further support the needs and interests of fully
independent readers. Squeeze the overcrowded 620s a bit tighter together-Old's
offering claims a Wrightful place. EB
PfREZ, AMADA IRMA 
My Diary from Here to There/Mi diario de aquf hasta ali;
illus. by Maya Christina Gonzalez. 
Children's Book Press, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-89239-175-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
When Amada finds out that her family is moving from Ciudad JuArez in Northern
Mexico to California, she decides to chronicle the long, hard journey ("viaje ...
largo y duro"). Parallel journal entries in English and Spanish are carefully stacked
up or placed across double-page spreads, documenting Amada's good-byes to her
city and best friend, each stage of the journey (which included time spent with
relatives in Mexicali while her father went ahead to find work), the family reunion
in Los Angeles that was possible after Papa sent their green cards, and Amada's
adjustment to her new home. Amada's narration is straightforward in both En-
glish and Spanish, but it's a lengthy text for both readaloud and readalone use; a
lack of detail and overall flatness of tone further distance the story. The solidity of
most of the figures (except those of Amada's five very lively brothers) reinforces
122 
* THE BULLETIN
this calm tone, while the more dynamic layouts and bright but earthy palette of
the lightly textured illustrations add life and movement. An author's note clarifies
the biographical inspiration for the story and a clear, vibrant map of her journey
appears on the back cover. Pair this with Herrera's The Upside-Down Boy (BCCB
4/00), another bilingual memoir of Mexican-American immigration, or consider
using this as a catalyst for readers to describe or imagine their own journeys. FK
PHILBRICK, NATHANIEL 
Revenge of the Whale: The True Story of the Whaleship
Essex. 
Putnam, 2002 
164p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-399-23795-X 
$16.99 
R* Gr. 8-12
In 1820, Captain George Pollard and a crew of twenty whalers set sail under the ill
omen of a comet. Months later the sorry remainder of the company-Pollard,
four men, and the thoroughly gnawed bones of another-were recovered from
two converted whaleboats off the coast of Chile. The Essex had been, in Pollard's
words, attacked "in a most deliberate manner" by a sperm whale, which seemed to
be fending off the crew's pursuit of other whales in its pod; returning whaleboats
had just enough time to scavenge some supplies from the sinking wreck and re-
equip their vessels to withstand what would become a three-month battle for sur-
vival on the open seas. The story, which inspired Melville's Moby Dick, passed
into history and lore through the writings of survivor and first mate Owen Chase;
subsequent discovery of memoirs of another survivor, cabin boy Tom Nickerson,
allowed Philbrick to draw a more complete picture. Here Philbrick jettisons nearly
a hundred pages of text from his adult opus In the Heart of the Sea, trimming
descriptions without sacrificing content, firmly retaining his unsensationalized ap-
proach to the gruesome realities of survival, and employing a near-clinical tone
that will be familiar to teen readers who have dispatched Junger's A Perfect Storm.
Black-and-white photos and period illustrations, ship's diagrams, a crew list, bibli-
ography, and index are included. This will be a first choice for true-adventure
enthusiasts. EB
PLUM-UCCI, CAROL 
What Happened to Lani Garver. Harcourt, 2002 
307p
ISBN 0-15-216813-3 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Claire, in remission from childhood leukemia, starves herself to
gain the approval of her cheerleading coach, barely copes with her mother's alco-
holism, and depends on her position in the popular crowd and her friendship with
trend-setter Macy to an unhealthy degree. Enter Lani Garver, a deliberately an-
drogynous young man with something of an attitude, whose sole purpose seems to
be to shake up Claire's precariously stable world. Claire's growing friendship with
the enigmatic, clearly homosexual Lani is a source of dismay to her friends in the
insular community of Hackett's Island, so much so that they make active efforts to
dissuade her from associating with him. Lani has become a lifeline for Claire,
however, and she cannot renounce him, not even for Macy. It is Lani who identi-
fies Claire's burgeoning eating disorder, it is Lani who recognizes her musical tal-
ent, it is Lani who shows Claire the larger world, even while he copes with his own
emotional crisis. Lani stands by Claire while she gets the help she needs, and
Claire stands by Lani when her homophobic friends' attempts to part them esca-
late from persuasion to violence. Plum-Ucci (author of The Body of Christopher
Creed, BCCB 4/00) capably captures the intimate social hierarchy of the off-sea-
son fishing community where Claire struggles to belong. Crystalline characteriza-
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
123
tions mean even the briefest portraits are richly drawn, and Claire herself is a reli-
able, stubbornly honest narrator. The relationships in this novel-between Claire
and Lani, Claire and Macy, parent and child, doctor and patient-are eminently
believable, and the result of the extreme homophobia of the island locals is no less
horrifying for being predictable. A mystical subplot involving the existence of
angels (is Lani one?) is less convincingly drawn, but readers who have taken him to
heart will be grateful for the possibility. JMD
PRIMAVERA, ELISE Auntie Claus and the Key to Christmas; written and illus. by
Elise Primavera. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-15-202441-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Sophie Kringle (first met in Auntie Claus, BCCB 12/99, wherein she learned the
meaning of Christmas) returns in this sequel featuring her little brother, Chris.
Now it's Chris' turn to learn the true meaning of the holiday through the well-
meaning machinations of the siblings' favorite relative, Auntie Claus. Far from
being as sure as Sophie about the existence of Santa Claus, Chris is having doubts,
caused by the Santa Claus-ridiculing Ozzie and Pam Spam, twins who have writ-
ten a bestselling book entitled We're Geniuses and Yer Not! Chris' doubts cause
consternation in his holiday-happy family, and his efforts to get on the Bad Boy
and Girl (aka B-B-and-G) List (and thus prove the existence of Santa) exasperate
his now-wiser older sister. Sophie gives Chris the key to Auntie Claus' private
elevator, which drops him off right outside the gates to Santa's workshop. Unfor-
tunately, since he has succeeded in being first on the B-B-and-G List, he can't get
in; he is taken by a bunch of scary-looking snowboys to see "the High Head" of
those who don't believe. At the right moment, some "really strong magic" hap-
pens, and Chris declares his allegiance to Christmas, just like Auntie Claus (sister
to the big guy) knew he would. This sequel is longer even than its wordy predeces-
sor, and it struggles through more plot twists and characters than the already over-
laden tale can sustain. The gouache and pastel illustrations in a Christmas-color
palette (lots of red and white, green and gold) do their seasonal best to energize the
proceedings, however, and compositions are enhanced with sweeping lines and
fantastical holiday touches (even the full moon is Santa in a red hat). Gaudy and
protracted though this somewhat frenetic attempt at holiday cheer may be, it's a
festive production that may appeal to kids who've already embraced Auntie. JMD
RADUNSKY, VLADIMIR 
Manneken Pis: A Simple Story ofa Boy Who Peed on a War;
written and illus. by Vladimir Radunsky. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2002 
30p
ISBN 0-689-83193-5 
$15.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
A little Belgian boy's happy life is turned upside down with the coming of war,
which hammers his beautiful town and separates him from his mother and father.
His most urgent need, however, is a physical one, and to this end he bursts forth
into a golden stream--onto the soldiers of both armies below. This sends the
soldiers of both armies into fits of hilarity and brings about the end of the war
("they dropped their arms and went to sleep. When they woke up the next morn-
ing, there was no more war"). This bears no resemblance to the better-known
origin stories about Brussels' most famous fountain (even in the military-themed
legends, the urination is derision of one side), and it's certainly devoid of historical
realism; instead, it's a rather interesting piece of fablery that uses the real Manneken
Pis as a linchpin. The story is a little too airy, but it's amusingly and dramatically
124 
* THE BULLETIN
told, with some funny authorial asides ("Please forgive him. He was just a little
boy"), and the pee-for-peace will have youngsters rolling in the aisles (though you'll
probably wish to stick to the French, silent-s pronunciation of "pis" if you want to
make it to the end of the book). Radunsky's joyous smears of color have a '60s
energy, contrasting effectively with the severe edges of collage buildings and the
final photographic image of the Manneken itself, adrift in a field of Radunsky's
flowers; the retro air and emphasis on blooms (in text and art) suits the flower-
child sensibility of the title. This will please adults and children for different rea-
sons, but the shared enjoyment may be sufficient to keep both audience's enthusiasm
from being dampened. DS
ROGASKY, BARBARA 
Smoke andAshes: The Story ofthe Holocaust; rev. ed. 
Holiday
House, 2002 
256p 
illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8234-1612-7 
$27.50
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8234-1677-1 
$14.95 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
First published in 1988, this is reorganized, revised, and expanded with additional
photographs and new information, starting with more terms in the opening glos-
sary. The basic coverage is similar to that in the earlier version (BCCB 6/88), but
some important changes reflect recent research of primary sources newly accessible
in East European and Soviet archives, along with changing attitudes toward the
content of young-adult literature itself. An example of the former is the inclusion
of the role of both the regular German army and of "local helpers" who assisted the
SS in killing Jews in occupied countries. An instance of the latter is the addition of
a section on homosexuals as victims of Nazi persecution and of a stark photograph
of the ovens in a crematorium. Also included is a new chapter on the fate of
concentration-camp victims at the end of the war, when aimless forced marches
killed many who had survived much. Names have been added to the Righteous
Gentiles recognized by Yad Vashem, Israel's official Holocaust museum, for their
courage in rescuing Jews during the war. The discussion of other ethnic mass
destruction now includes those murdered in Nanking, Rwanda, and the Balkans
as well as the Native Americans, Armenians, Ukrainians, and other groups men-
tioned previously. Especially notable is the heavily expanded chapter that com-
ments on new hate groups, Internet expressions of racism, and revisionist denials
of the Holocaust. Many more resources are listed in the bibliography, specific
sources are identified for all quotes in the text, and a timeline of events appears at
the end of the book. Photo credits are clearer, and the index is more explicit. As
the Holocaust becomes a standard subject in educational curricula, this new edi-
tion is a must in both school and public libraries. BH
SAN VICENTE, Luis 
The Festival ofBones/El Festival de las Calaveras: The Little-
Bitty Book for the Day of the Dead; written and illus. by Luis San Vicente; tr. by
John William Byrd and Bobby Byrd. 
Cinco Puntos, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-938317-67-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-5
The Day of the Dead, the cheerfully macabre Mexican holiday of remembrance,
receives a breezy poetic and visual treatment in this compact volume. Gleeful
rhythmic and occasionally rhyming verses in English and Spanish detail the per-
egrinations of the skeletons ("They are coming and they are going/ And you see
them passing by") and their enjoyment of the festivities ("Although half a leg is
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
125
really gone/ Still a flower sits upon his head"). Though several explanatory pages
(including instructions for making altars, pan de muerto, and sugar skulls) are ap-
pended to the posthumous pageantry, this is a far cry from the decorous taxidermy
of many texts on holidays; instead, this evokes the spirit of the festival in a way that
kids will appreciate. Unfortunately, it's quite a brief party, barely enough to stretch
into a book, and the factual pages at the end don't explain some of the more
mysterious aspects of the verses (why is one skeleton fleeing to avoid a forced
marriage? What's up with the baby skeleton's mask?). The pictures are so divert-
ing that such concerns may be forgotten, however: jovial blank-eyed skeletons in
fancy dress are ethereal yet solid, formed from a white-line crosshatch that some-
times suggests lace and sometimes wood-grain. The odd bit of collage and tidy
little borders (in bone, of course) add texture and structure, while the earthtoned
colors are enlivened with the occasional splash of sky blue. Full explanations will
have to be found elsewhere (perhaps Ancona's Pablo Remembers, BCCB 12/93, or
Lasky's Days of the Dead, 10/94), but this would be a rollicking way to suck kids
into an actual celebration of the holiday. DS
SCHULMAN, ARLENE 
Cop on the Beat: Officer Steven Mayfield in New York City;
written and illus. with photographs by Arlene Schulman. 
Dutton, 2002 
120p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-525-47064-6 
$18.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-525-46527-8 
$12.99 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Schulman examines the work and life of Steven Mayfield, a New York police of-
ficer whose beat is the Dyckman Houses, a public housing unit in Washington
Heights. Mayfield's an excellent subject for a lot of reasons: as a private citizen,
he himself has been the victim of a violent crime; at forty, he's a twelve-year vet-
eran of the department; he's an African-American on a force with a history of
troubled racial incidents. He's also an interesting guy, who talks freely about the
responsibility he feels, the stresses and strains of the job, and his relationship with
the people he polices. While Schulman's own text is sometimes somewhat flat, she
capably shapes Mayfield's words into a structured and well-paced narrative, wisely
allowing some contradictions to stand, and there are generous contributions from
his coworkers on the force. She also capably evokes the person behind the badge,
giving ample time to discussion of and interview with Mayfield's family and friends,
especially his lifelong best friend, Harry Glenn; a somber September 11 coda re-
ports the death of Glenn (a vice-president in a financial firm) in the Trade Center
tragedy. Overall, this is a thoughtful insight with appropriate depth for its audi-
ence, who may now be having some complicated views of the police force and who
will find this enlightening and perhaps provocative. Photographs are sometimes
small and fuzzy (and their captions stilted), but they suffice to provide some addi-
tional visual information; a glossary and an index are included. DS
SHREVE, SUSAN 
Trout and Me. 
Knopf, 2002 
136p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91219-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81219-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Ben has had trouble in school since first grade (he tried to flush Mary Sue Briggs's
teddy bear down the toilet after she made fun of his lisp) and by fifth grade, he has
acquired, somewhat unfairly, a school reputation as a troublemaker and has been
diagnosed with various learning disabilities. Ben's family is supportive of him,
however: his pharmacist mother refuses to put him on Ritalin (as the school sug-
126 
* THE BULLETIN
gests), his father disputes Ben's diagnosis ("As far as I can tell, most normal boys in
the United States have learning disabilities"), and his older sister is his staunchest
ally and closest friend-until Trout shows up in Ben's fifth-grade class. Trout
shares Ben's problems with reading and with toeing the line at school, and he
quickly attaches himself to Ben. The two become pals and partners in "crime"
(they release a hundred rubber bouncy balls in the halls as classes are changing;
another day they skip school, traveling solo to spend a day in New York), to the
increasing concern of the school faculty and several fifth-grade parents; the result
is pariah status for Trout until Ben publicly stands up for his friend. Unfortu-
nately, some of Shreve's characterizations fall a bit short: Ben is not actually as
sympathetic a character as he seems intended to be, the late (and brief) revelation
of Trout's underlying family issues (his parents are divorced, his mother doesn't
want anything to do with him, and he's an embarrassment to his dad) lacks emo-
tional impact, and the protesting adults are somewhat stereotyped. However, the
ambiguity of Ben's situation is credibly portrayed (is Ben's dad right that Ben has
been misdiagnosed, or is he in denial? Is Ben bad, or just frustrated?), and it's
interesting to see another side to a story that plays out in many schools. JMH
SMITH, LANE 
Pinocchio the Boy or Incognito in Collodi; written and illus. by Lane
Smith. 
Viking, 2002 
42p
ISBN 0-670-03585-8 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Pinocchio's fondest wish isn't turning out quite as he had hoped: since he was
asleep when the Blue Fairy transformed him into a real live boy, he doesn't realize
what has happened, and no one (neither Geppetto nor the well-known but never-
here-named Cricket) recognizes him. A distressed Pinocchio ("My cricket doesn't
talk to me, I can't get a job, and my dad's sick at home from spending the night in
a fish") wanders the town, meeting up with a skeptical girl who's nonetheless in-
trigued by his stories; when he finally wends his way home again, the Blue Fairy
explains the situation (and turns out to be the mother of Pinocchio's disbelieving
companion). The riff on the familiar is entertaining (the opening story-recap is
one of the book's funniest bits, and there are some amusing allusions, especially to
Pinocchio author Carlo Collodi), and the wiseguy humor will suit middle-grades
tastes. The story is fairly flat, however, and the wry witticisms that seem to be the
main point are unfortunately often buried, so that the text basically meanders
away from home and back with little shape or emphasis. The art is a little unfo-
cused as well, with a designerly remoteness to the elaborate scenes, but Smith's
retro-lush vision, suggesting a landscape from a 1960s animated Christmas special
(and indeed, Rankin and Bass, producers of Rudolph, pop up on a signpost), is
happily and loopily festive. There's more style than substance here, but this may
suit kids looking for some smartmouthed and dorky media-related humor for the
holiday season. DS
SPIRIN, GENNADY, ad. 
The Tale of the Firebird; tr. by Tatiana Popova; ad. and
illus. by Gennady Spirin. 
Philomel, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-23584-1 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-lOyrs
Spirin combines elements from several traditional Russian tales for this version of
the classic Firebird story. A firebird is stealing golden apples from a tree in the
tsar's garden, and the tsar's youngest son, Ivan-Tsarevitch, goes questing to bring
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
127
the magical bird back to his father. Accompanied and aided on his quest by a
magical wolf, our hero meets Baba Yaga, conquers evil Koshchei the Immortal,
finds true love, and, finally, retrieves the firebird. Unlike less successful versions of
this tale, Spirin's reimagining does the story justice both in text and pictures. The
storytelling is dramatic and controlled, the language rising and falling in a cadence
that encourages reading aloud. Though somewhat dark, the watercolors are sensu-
ally replete: ornately styled borders echo traditional Russian textile and other de-
signs present in the main illustrations; the window-like shapes of the illustrations
themselves reflect elements of Russian architecture. Detailed and dramatic, with a
golden palette that echoes crown jewels, the illustrations have an adventurous fairy-
tale sweep that will carry readers and listeners to the satisfying happily-ever-after
conclusion. An author's note gives limited sources for this retelling. JMD
STAUFFACHER, 
SUE, ad. 
The Angel and Other Stories; illus. by Leonid
Gore. 
Eerdmans, 2002 
75p
ISBN 0-8028-5203-3 
$20.00 
R 6-10 yrs
Ten tales that reflect on the seen and the unseen, the human and the divine, are
presented in this handsome volume. Gleaning her stories from a variety of tradi-
tional and literary sources, Stauffacher has adapted fragments into longer stories
and longer tales into pieces that can be read in one sitting. Adapted versions of
familiar stories by Leo Tolstoy ("Where Love Is, God Is Also," "What Men and
Women Live By"), Hans Christian Andersen ("The Angel"; "One Hair from a
True Sinner"), and Oscar Wilde ("The Star Child") are included, along with some
from lesser-known sources. Each tale presents a difficulty or dilemma overcome
by faith, grace, and divine intervention, with the morals clearly and distinctly drawn.
The book is designed to give visual weight to the content, with an artistic emphasis
on white space and a pair of attractive illustrations per tale. Gore's acrylic and
pastel art is a trifle over-misty, but there's a soft, dusty edge that adds to the other-
worldly nature of his subjects and their trials. The tales are sometimes sentimental
and often unsubtly didactic, but Stauffacher keeps her prose concise and addi-
tional moral explanation to a minimum. Those seeking more deliberate spiritual
direction in their family readalouds may find something to suit them here. JMD
TCHAIKOVSKY, PYOTR I. 
Swan Lake; tr. by Marianne Martens; ad. and illus. by
Lisbeth Zwerger. 
Neugebauer/North-South, 2002 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7358-1703-0 
$16.50
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7358-1702-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-7
Ah, it's a familiar story: prince meets swan, prince mistakes evil swan for good
swan and breaks good swan's heart, good swan dies-but Zwerger, apparently an
eternal romantic, has used as her source not the familiar version of the famous
ballet but Tchaikovsky's earlier prototype (a stage failure). This means that not
only are the players nameless (Odette is merely the Swan Queen here), but that the
ending is a happy one, with the prince wedded to his beloved Swan Queen, now
freed from the evil sorcerer's spell. The text is compact yet fluid, with an occa-
sional surprising playfulness. The visuals are ballet-conscious indeed, with spot art
of musical staves from the score decorated with thematically relevant elements,
and the various dramatis personae pirouetting elegantly (or stretching in a warmup)
through the pages. Zwerger's soft washes and strong vertical elements are also well
suited to balletic mysticality, and her visual interpretations of the magical compo-
128 
* THE BULLETIN
nents (the maidens' transformation, the storm-ridden entry of the fake Swan Queen)
have a touch of theatrical practicality to them that suggests stage special effects as
much as fairy tale. The spidery font adds an unnecessary challenge to reading, and
youngsters enticed by the pageantry and pleased by the surprisingly happy ending
may be disappointed that Zwerger opted not to illustrate that final joyful union,
but this is still a graceful book that will enchant young balletomanes. A note from
Zwerger is appended. DS
TOMECEK, STEVE 
Dirt; illus. by Nancy Woodman. 
National Geographic,
2002 
32p 
(Jump into Science)
ISBN 0-7922-8204-3 
$16.95 
R 5-8 yrs
A star-nosed mole serves as guide through the netherworld of soil, demonstrating
that dirt is a support for life, not "just something to be cleaned up." The compo-
sition and layering of soil, the creatures that live in it and aerate it, and its uses in
both agriculture and building are covered in concise, kid-friendly text. Line-and-
watercolor pictures in rich tones bordered by (what else?) dirt are not only attrac-
tive-they truly supplement the text. Underground cross-sections detail the
earthworm's contribution to soil enrichment; a shoveled patch of earth exposes
captioned layers from humus to parent material, and "Mole's Soil Map," set beside
the actual scene it represents, displays how each type of soil has a particular role to
play in a mixed use development. The concluding "experiment"-the ol' seeds-
growing-in-a-plastic-bottle demo-is none too original, but it's surely effective,
especially for younger children who haven't been introduced to it yet. At last, kids
can bring grimy paws and muddy duds home with pride. EB
VAN ALLSBURG, CHRIS 
Zathura: A Space Adventure; written and illus. by Chris
Van Allsburg. 
Houghton, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-25396-3 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Well, this certainly has a familiar ring: a couple of bored siblings left to their own
devices find a board game, and once they begin playing they find themselves plunged
into a world they can only exit through the game itself. This time, however, the
siblings are Walter and his little brother, Danny, and the game (chosen in prefer-
ence to a dull-looking adventure calledJumanji) is a space odyssey involving travel
from Earth to the planet Zathura. As the kids play, Walter loses his gravity, almost
sliding off into outer space, Danny gets too much gravity and turns into a human
bowling ball, and a robot determines to destroy them (they're "alien life forms"),
but fortunately Walter slips into a black hole that takes him-and Danny-back
in time to before they started their dangerous game. This is essentially a rerun of
Jumanji in a new location, but the space adventures are sci-fi cool, and some audi-
ences will appreciate the additional tension provided by the thorny relationship
between the brothers. The shadowy black-and-white tones of Van Allsburg's illus-
trations recall 1950s science-fiction films, with their noirish shadows and spookily
reflective surfaces; the eerily even smoky texture of house and boys alike is some-
times monotonous but intriguingly suggests machine-engineering in its regularity,
and the sharp dark outlines are both a vivid contrast and an emphasis of the other-
worldly distance of even the everyday proceedings. The schmaltzy ending (Walter
transforms into a nice older brother) is disappointing, but youngsters may still get
a thrill from this literary blast-off. DS
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
129
VORNHOLT, JOHN 
The Troll King. 
Aladdin, 2002 
216p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7434-2412-3 
$4.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
In the kingdom of Bonespittle, downtrodden trolls are shanghaied into building a
bridge across the Great Chasm so their ruler, wizard Stygius, can attack and con-
quer the land of the fairies. The trolls, powerful in number if not the brightest
beings in the land, are kept in line by an army of ogres and ghouls. Young troll
Rollo, strong, innocent, and courageous, finds himself in charge of a work team of
trolls and discovers his talents for both leadership and magic. These talents make
him useful to wizard Stygius and General Drool, commander of the ghouls, and
Rollo is unwillingly drafted into a reconnaissance mission across the Great Chasm,
where he discovers things aren't quite the way he's been told. Friendship with a
fairy named Clipper seals his fate, and Rollo becomes the triumphant rebel leader
of the trolls. The prose is dense but character motivations are simple (food, sur-
vival) and the worldview is limited, resulting in an imbalance between reading
labors and reading reward. While the chapters have their cliffhanger moments,
the momentum is sometimes interrupted by overexplanation and political theory.
Still, the pace is fairly quick and the fantasy-world scenery is well developed, and
there's plenty of humor to leaven the politics. The final scene, wherein Rollo
embarks on a nearly literal cliffhanging quest, promises more fantastical political
shenanigans in future adventures. JMD
WARING, 
RICHARD 
Alberto the Dancing Alligator; illus. by Holly
Swain. 
Candlewick, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-1953-1 
$15.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Tina has raised Alberto the Alligator ever since he popped out of his eggshell, and
even now that he's a big alligator, the two are inseparable, particularly enjoying a
glamorous tango 'round the room ("although he could never get the footing quite
right"). Their happy domesticity is interrupted by a bathroom accident wherein
Alberto falls down the toilet and, as is the fate of so many fictional alligators, into
the sewers below the city. Attempting to return home, Alberto keeps surfacing in
the wrong toilets, sending the citizenry into a panic ("1,000 ALLIGATORS ON
THE LOOSE, ALL BATHROOMS AT RISK!") and the government into 'gator-
hunting action, until Tina finally guides him home with the siren song of his
favorite tango music. This is a frothy but entertaining riff on the old alligators-in-
the-sewers legend, and the inventive new flush on toilet humor will have kids
rolling in the aisles. Swain's watercolor and colored-pencil illustrations have an
exotic richness to their deep and contrasty hues and their sharp-edged figures.
More impressive still are the creative cutaways (Alberto swimming through the
sewers under various houses of agitated residents) and silly sequences (a row of
thumbnails depicts a frustrated Alberto encountering wrong bathroom after wrong
bathroom), and there's a generous array of visual humor at the expense of the
hapless alligator hunters. This is an enjoyably strange and gleefully entertaining
romp; in case of overenthusiastic audience response, you may want to keep the
plunger handy. DS
WATTS, LEANDER 
Stonecutter. Houghton, 2002 
181p
ISBN 0-618-16474-X 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Apprentice stonecutter Albion Straight reluctantly leaves his beloved master to
take on temporary independent work for a wealthy gentleman in the wilderness of
130 
* THE BULLETIN
1830s New York. His employer's true commission, however, is not what Albion
expected. Instead of merely crafting sills and mantles for John Good's grand new
estate, Albion is expected to carve an intricate memorial deep within a burial cave
for Good's deceased wife, modeling statuary images after his teenaged daughter,
Michal. Good is accustomed to having his retainers hop to his every command,
but Albion sets the work in his own terms. His independent spirit encourages
Michal to plan an escape from her father, and as Good sinks ever deeper into his
obsessions, the two teens undertake a flight that leads to freedom and tragedy.
Watts musters a host of tried and true Gothic elements-particularly a labyrin-
thine mansion, with brooding, half-mad owner and captive maiden-but sets them
marching to Albion's powerful, distinctive voice: "As on the day I first met John
Good ... 
he bore in close to me, as a preacher might to those uncertain folks
sitting on a revival meeting's anxious bench. Tho he did not want repentance, I
thought he desired of me a broken will." Watts supplies the deliciously dank,
oppressive atmosphere; readers can add an overstuffed chair and a gloomy night.
EB
WEITZMAN, DAVID 
Model T. How Henry Ford Built a Legend; written and illus.
by David Weitzman. 
Crown, 2002 
33p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91107-3 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81107-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
"Everybody wants to be someplace he ain't." If Henry Ford's observation accu-
rately diagnosed America's onset of automotive fever, then his Model T was just
the agent to spread the contagion. Weitzman introduces readers not only to the
machine that promised every hard-working American a shot at the open road, but
also the industrial innovations that made its production cost effective and launched
assembly line work on a grand scale. Quotes from Ford's workers convey the
excitement of being part of this new (and relatively well-paid) labor strategy, even
as they hint at the tedium endemic to the system: "It's push and hustle and go.
The man behind may shove his work along to you at any moment-you must not
hold him back." Plentiful black-and-white pictures of machine and line depict the
auto in myriad stages of assembly, and although the workers are often awkwardly
portrayed, captioned scenes and technical diagrams should made wrenchheads
highbeam with delight. EB
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Ruby's Beauty Shop; written and illus. by Rosemary
Wells. 
Viking, 2002 
26p
ISBN 0-670-03553-X 
$15.99 
R 
4-6 yrs
When Louise comes to visit Ruby and Max with her "Deluxe Beauty Kit," Ruby
and Louise are in makeover heaven-Max makeover heaven. The two girl bun-
nies plop a Blond Bombshell Wig on Max's head and gussy him up with lipstick,
rouge, and fake nails. When the girls get distracted making themselves gorgeous,
"Max decided to play beauty shop his way." Bottles of "Rock-around-the-Clock
Hair Color" turn Max a gorgeous Lizard Green (with Sunflower Yellow and Ocean
Blue feet), and a phone call from makeover-seeking Grandma means Max isn't
long alone in his colorful glory. Wells is in top form in this latest entry in Max and
Ruby's adventures. The author's affinity for kid-based glee is playfully evident:
there is something particularly delightful in watching Max render Ruby and Louise's
makeover negligible with his adventurous foray into haircolor. A lime-green Max
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
131
will have viewers giggling, even as they (holy hair dryers!) search for the right flavor
of Jell-O to turn their own hair green. JMD
WOLFF, PATRICIA RAE 
A New ImprovedSanta; illus. by Lynne Cravath. 
Orchard,
2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-35249-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-6 yrs
After a tough Christmas ("The chimneys seemed smaller this year. I must be
getting fatter"), Santa makes a resolution: he's going to become a "new, improved
Santa." The right jolly old elf's sticktoitiveness is certainly impressive, as month
by month, step by step, he makes his way to being a brand new St. Nick: he loses
weight, dyes his hair, changes his wardrobe, updates his turn of phrase, upgrades
his transportation, and so on. All along, however, an amused and noncommittal
Mrs. Claus knows what the audience will too-none of these changes will fly with
the public, and they'll all have to be undone come Christmas. This is as light as a
department-store-display present, but it's a diverting seasonal joke nonetheless,
and kids will giggle at the heretical disparity between Santa's off-season incarna-
tion and his true self. Illustrations are on the bland and predictable side of retro,
missing some opportunities to emphasize that contrast for comic effect, but there's
still plenty of amusement in the modified Santa who surfs the net in his backwards
cap. You can use this one to take Santa 'round the year, to lead into a discussion of
the evolution of our figure of Santa, or just for some seasonal fun. DS
WOOD, DON 
Merry Christmas, Big Hungry Bear!; written by Don and Audrey
Wood; illus. by Don Wood. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2002 
[42p]
ISBN 0-439-32092-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Wood and Wood have created some near-perfect storytime books in the past (The
Napping House, BCCB 9/84, and Heckedy Peg, 12/87, to name two) but none with
the sheer narrative command of one of their earliest titles, The Little Mouse, the Red
Ripe Strawberry, and the Big Hungry Bear. Building on the popularity of the origi-
nal title, the Woods have created a Christmas tale featuring the titular little Mouse
and the (still unseen) big hungry Bear, utilizing the same conversational structure
of the first title. An omniscient voice addresses little Mouse ("Hello, little Mouse.
I see you're ready for Christmas"), who has piles of presents under his tree and who
has apparently forgotten his nemesis from the previous book. After futilely trying
to hide his presents, little Mouse is moved by the plight of the Bear, who never gets
gifts, not even from Santa Claus, and he piles some presents into a bundle and lugs
them off to the cave of the poor neglected bruin. The clashing colors of the palette
result in often garish illustrations, but audiences will appreciate Don Wood's faithful
recreation of little Mouse's cozy household burrow from the first book. The text is
slow and somewhat overlong for its audience, and Mouse's change of heart seems
driven purely by sentimental necessity, but the comforting message is gently deliv-
ered. This lacks the impact of the original, but adults seeking a secular Christmas
story that still conveys some of the spirit of the holiday may find this useful. JMD
132 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
HUNT, PETER Alternative Worlds in Fantasy Fiction; by Peter Hunt and Millicent
Lenz. 
Continuum, 2001 
174p 
(Contemporary Classics of Children's Litera-
ture)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8264-4936-0 
$79.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8264-4937-9 
$24.95
Opening with an introduction not only to this particular volume but to fantasy
literature in general, Hunt outlines fantasy's checkered history, traces its much-
debated place as a literary genre, discusses the moral imperative of alternative world
fantasy, and introduces the three prominent authors that are the focus of this study:
Ursula LeGuin, Terry Pratchett, and Philip Pullman. Coauthor Lenz contributes
chapters on LeGuin and Pullman, discussing the former's The Wizard ofEarthsea
series and the latter's His Dark Materials trilogy. Hunt in turn examines Pratchett,
a world creator of comparable stature (especially in Britain) to LeGuin and Pull-
man but one whose satiric tendencies have sometimes deflected serious literary
criticism. This is an invigorating look at some of today's most prominent fanta-
sists, and fantasy lovers as well as those seeking a handle on the genre will appreci-
ate this approach. Each chapter in this volume concludes with extensive notes and
suggestions for further reading; the LeGuin and Pullman chapters include biogra-
phies of the authors. An index is included. JMD
MATTHEW, KATHRYN I. 
Guide to Recommended Children's Books and Media for
Use with Every Elementary Subject; by Kathryn I. Matthew and Joy L. Lowe. 
Neal-
Schuman, 2002 
407p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55570-431-X 
$55.00
Matthew and Lowe, experienced librarians and teachers, have compiled this vol-
ume to provide teachers and other educators with an accessible resource for iden-
tifying literature and other media for use in the classroom curriculum. Each of
eight chapters focuses on a particular curricular area-Math, Science, English Lan-
guage Arts, Social Studies, Health, Sports, Recreation, and Dance, Art, and Mu-
sic-and provides additional teacher resources. Each chapter gives a general
introduction to the topic, followed by annotated items divided into various sub-
groups, which come with their own introductions and suggested activities. The
annotations, which include complete bibliographic information and recommended
grade levels, are succinct and specific, and the publication dates for recommended
books or other media (videos and CDs) cluster mainly around the mid to late
1990s. Each subject chapter concludes with a list of reference books and teacher
resources (including books, professional organizations, and Internet sites). This is
stodgily designed, but it's a remarkable tool for librarians doing collection devel-
opment in nonfiction, for teachers seeking resources for classroom use, or for
homeschoolers seeking to supplement packaged curricula. A subject index and
author, illustrator, and title index are included. JMD
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
133
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE: Philbrick; Van
Allsburg
Africa-stories: Grifalconi
African Americans: Schulman
Aliens-fiction: Conly
Alligators-stories: Waring
Angels-fiction: Plum-Ucci
Angels-stories: Stauffacher
ANIMAL STORIES: Campoy;
Cannon; Newman, M.
Animals: Emberley My Animals
Animals-poetry: Cotten
Archaeology: Arnold; O'Brien
Art and artists: Greenberg
Automobiles: Weitzman
Aviation: Old
Babies: Harris
Babies-fiction: Freeman
BILINGUAL BOOKS: Emberley;
Perez
BIOGRAPHIES: Greenberg;
Neimark; Old; Schulman
Birds-fiction: Tchaikovsky
Birds-stories: Newman, M.; Spirin
Birthdays: Hoyt-Goldsmith
BOARD BOOKS: Emberley
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Hobbs;
Kindl; Lawrence
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Primavera; Wells
Brothers: Old
Brothers-fiction: Blume; Martin
Brothers-stories: Van Allsburg
Bullying-fiction: Hiaasen;
Camps and camping-fiction: Matlin
Canals-stories: Kimmel
Cats-stories: McKay
Christmas: McKay; Moore;
Primavera; Wolff; Wood
Cloning-fiction: Farmer
Clothing: Emberley My Clothing
Community helpers: Schulman
CONCEPT BOOKS: Emberley
Counseling-fiction: Doyle
COUNTING BOOKS: Cotten
Courage-stories: Grifalconi
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Farmer; Funke
CUMULATIVE STORIES: Harper
Dancers and dancing-fiction:
Tchaikovsky
Dancers and dancing-stories:
Waring
Deafness-fiction: Matlin
Death and dying: San Vicente
Death and dying-fiction: Gantos;
Lawrence; Naylor
Diaries-stories: P6rez
Dictatorships-fiction: Alvarez
Disabilities-fiction: Matlin; Shreve
Divorce-fiction: Friesen;
Dominican Republic-fiction:
Alvarez
Eating disorders-fiction: Plum-Ucci
Ecology-fiction: Hiaasen
Ecology-stories: Cannon
Ethics and values: Anderson;
Donnelly; Farmer; Newbery;
Stauffacher
FABLES: Cannon; Radunsky
Families: Harris
134 
* THE BULLETIN
Families-fiction: Blume; Friesen;
Gaiman; Gantos; Lawrence;
Marsden; Naylor
FANTASY: Cannon; Conly;
Gaiman; Vornholt
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Campoy; Hassett; Lorenz; Spirin
Food and eating: Emberley My Food
Food and eating-stories: Donnelly
Friendship-fiction: Conly; Free-
man; Gray; Martin; Matlin;
Naylor; Plum-Ucci; Shreve
Future-fiction: Anderson
Games-stories: Van Allsburg
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Newbery;
Plum-Ucci
GHOST STORIES: Ibbotson
Giants-stories: Lorenz
Gifts-stories: Wood
Grandmothers-fiction: Gantos
Hanukkah: Newman, L.
Hate groups-fiction: Martin
Health and hygiene: Moss
Heroes-stories: Grifalconi
HISTORICAL FICTION: Alvarez;
Dunlap; Goodman; Gray; Hobbs;
Newbery; Watts
History, U.S.: Bial; Old; Weitzman
History, world: Philbrick; Rogasky
Holidays: Corey; San Vicente
Holocaust, the: Rogasky
Homeschooling-fiction: Gantos
HORROR: Gaiman
HUMOR: Ahlberg; Blume;
Freeman; Hassett; Hiaasen;
Ibbotson; Kimmel; Moss;
Newman, L.; Nolen; Radunsky;
Smith; Waring; Wells; Wolff
Identity-fiction: Smith
Immigrants: Bial
Immigrants-stories: Corey; Perez
Industry: Weitzman
Insects-stories: Howitt
Inventors and inventing: Old;
Weitzman
Jealousy-fiction: Friesen
Latinos: Hoyt-Goldsmith; San
Vicente
Latinos-fiction: Alvarez
Latinos-stories: Perez
Lice-stories: Moss
Lighthouses-fiction: Lawrence
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Vornholt
Magic and magicians-stories: Spirin;
Tchaikovsky
Mammoths: Arnold; O'Brien
Mice-stories: Wood
Moles: Newman, M.; Tomecek
Mothers-fiction: Gaiman
Money-fiction: Blume
Moving-stories: Perez
Music and musicians: Neimark
MYSTERIES: Marsden
MYTHOLOGY, CLASSICAL:
Kindl
Nature study: Tomecek
Orphans-fiction: Funke; Marsden
Owls-fiction: Hiaasen
Parades-stories: Corey
Pirates-stories: Kimmel
Plants-fiction: Nolen
Police: Schulman
POP-UP BOOKS: Moore
Pregnancy-fiction: Goodman
Prejudice-fiction: Martin; Shreve
Rabbits-stories: Wells
Rainforests-stories: Campoy
Ranches-fiction: Marsden
Reading aloud: Blume; Gantos;
Greenberg; Ibbotson; Naylor; Old
Reading, easy: DeLaCroix; Freeman
Reading, reluctant: Ibbotson
Relationships-fiction: Plum-Ucci
Religion-fiction: Newbery
Religious instruction: Stauffacher
RHYMING BOOKS: Cotten;
Harper; Howitt; Kimmel;
Newman, L.; San Vicente
ROMANCE: Goodman; Gray;
Tchaikovsky
Running away-fiction: Funke
Russia-folklore: Spirin
School-fiction: DeLaCroix; Shreve
School-stories: Moss
Science: Arnold; Harris; O'Brien;
Tomecek
NOVEMBER 2002 
* 
135
SCIENCE FICTION: Anderson;
Farmer; Van Allsburg
Secrets-fiction: DeLaCroix;
Lawrence; Marsden
Ships and sailing: Philbrick
Ships and sailing-fiction: Goodman
Sisters-fiction: Freeman
Sisters-stories: Hassett
Skeletons: San Vicente
Social studies: Bial; Rogasky
Soil: Tomecek
Space-stories: Van Allsburg
Spiders-stories: Howitt
Spirituality-stories: Stauffacher
Stars-poetry: Harper
Statues-stories: Radunsky
Stepsisters-fiction: Friesen
Storytelling: Campoy; Hassett;
Spirin
Storytelling-stories: Grifalconi
Storytime: Ahlberg; Campoy;
Cotten; Donnelly; Harper;
Newman, M.; Nolen; Waring;
Wells; Wolff; Wood
SURVIVAL STORIES: Goodman;
Philbrick
SUSPENSE: Alvarez; Gaiman;
Watts
Swans-fiction: Tchaikovsky
Teachers-fiction: Doyle
Teachers-stories: Moss
Teen parents-fiction: Lawrence
Technology-fiction: Anderson
Toys: Emberley My Toys
Toys-stories: Newman, L.
Transportation: Old; Weitzman
Trolls-fiction: Vornholt
Urban life: Bial
Vietnam War-fiction: Hobbs
Violence-fiction: Doyle; Martin
War-fiction: Hobbs
War-stories: Radunsky
Whales: Philbrick
Whales-fiction: Lawrence
Wildlife-stories: Newman, M.
Wizards-fiction: Vornholt
World War I-fiction: Newbery
World War II: Rogasky
Writers and writing-fiction: Dunlap
Yoa're Oly Yoatig Twice
Childres Literature and Film
TIM MORRIS
"Grounding his analyse in trips to the video store and readig
aloud to his son, Morrs makes the question of whethe 
Dr.
Seuss's oobek' is really Lacan's objet petit a ot less scary than
it sounds." -
Publshers Weekly
4 
Hardow. $2495
Writing fiction for Citldren
Stories Only You Can Tell
JUDY K. MORRIS
"[The execises] will help both novices and seasoned authors gain
ins 
t and move forward with their writing." 
Jane Leslie Conly,
author of Crazy Lady, a Newbey Honor sook
Hndooew, $1995
A whole new way to....Captivate a child's
attention and build their character.
It's INCREDIBLE...the only thing more exciting than watching
children learn, is watching them have FUN in the process!
I'm going to let you in on a secret...MAGIC POWER videos teach
the art of magic. Magic has a direct impact on character
development in the following ways: Encourages problem solving,
expands creative abilities, increases digital dexterity, strengthens
social skills, stimulates self confidence and is a unique & flexible
activity.
3 Powerful reasons to check out our report..
#1 Ideal children's activity for one child or a whole class.
#2 A unique and fun way to impact children.
#3 FREE gift just for requesting our report!
To learn more, simply call our TOLL FREE 24 hr. recorded message
line at:
1-888-554-3321 press MAGIC POWER videos.
ROBERT NEWTON PECK
A 
NOVEL
i-" "Western fans are in for a treat with this fast-paced,
satisfying Depression tale of a teenage orphan who
rescues 13 horses from the slaughterhouse and finds
a family in the process.... A funny odyssey, chock-full
of engaging characters ... 
even urban teens may
find themselves drawn by the rip-roaring story and
gentle humor." 
-
Starred review / ALA Booklist
-\lil-
"A fun, folksy read
for fans of Peck's
SA Day No Pigs
Would Die."
S 
-
Kliatt
" 
Ages 12 up.
$16.95 Tr (0-06-623791-2)
$16.89 Lb (0-06-623792-0)
JANE KURTZ AND
CHRISTOPHER KURTZ
PICTURES BY LEE CHRISTIANSEN
j'- 
"Richly colored pastel drawings and precise, surprising
word choices make this story a natural for sharing with a group.
A young vervet monkey, carefully supervised by his mother,
waits impatiently for a safe time to drink at a busy water hole as
the day passes and other animals of the African savanna come
to quench their thirst. . . . This is a must for studies of African
animals or the savanna biome, and a gem for writing teachers."
-
Starred review / School Library Journal
"Vivid artwork complements the elegant text, often extending
it with additional details: the close-up of thundering zebra
hooves and snapping crocodile jaws are particularly
impressive. 
-
ALA Booklist
Ages 3 up.
$15.95 Tr
(0-06-029850-2)
$15.89 Lb
(0-06-029851-0)
SALADINJ
NOBLE P&INCE OF 1ILXM
rrv'DIANE STANLE\'
-c "Stanley focuses on the 12th-century ruler and
crystallizes many of the issues still at the root of conflicts
today. She outlines religious practices, the political
history of the Middle East and of Western Europe, and the
vexed military campaign for Jerusalem, demonstrating
her trademark ability to distill complex topics in terms
accessible to middle-graders. . .. Readers are certain to
be intrigued." 
--Starred review / Publishers Weekly
-- 
"The generally strong telling is more than matched
by the glorious paintings, which mirror the Islamic
artwork of the times. [They
are) some of Stanley's
finest."--Starred review /
ALA Booklist
"Attentive readers--
those who can wrest
their eyes from the
illustrations - will 
Ages 8-12.
learn some history, 
(0-86~88-71354)
some geography, and 
1. 
L
quite a lot about Islam. 
(0-688-17136-2)
as well as about the
life of Salah al-din."
--School Library Journal
`'- 
"A stunning, unsettling picture book that attempts to put
the reader into the heart and mind of an American soldier in
Vietnam. The narrative takes [readers] along on one patrol...
[and] the illustrations brilliantly extend the text's central
question: just who is the enemy -
and why, when he and I
are so alike? Highly effective and very important."
- Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
*- "Short phrases combine power
w 
grace 
.
.
.
as 
r 
aco 
u 
y
highlights 
war's 
absurd 
contradictions 
........
[in 
this] 
unusual 
and 
gripping 
picture
book" 
-
Starred 
review 
/ 
Publishers 
Weekl
"The haunting illustrations and the taut, poetic te:
unite in a powerful rendering of the way any wai
ruptures ordinary lives."- The Horn Book
Ages 8-12. $16.95 Tr (0-06-028363-7)
"1Lt on TL / in 
r\n rfooLCA c\ 
M
|s
-- 
lap 
t 
C liiJl~leisok
=61w
k 111 •,•'/ 
I 11 II I,-I I1"1,-I I/./•.'lfl/-I.o]l 
/
~Y-V·V- 
L·V \VVV 
VYVIV ~L VI 
~p
r~ 
Avialfo 
th 
,7
STOrW:FRO MFmELAE 
C BERSPACE
Connecting Childrn and Narative
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE, JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINE JENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the AUerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget that
children are not simply passive receptacles for whatever
treasure or trash the adult world throws at them but are
lively agents who are continually interacting with their
environment. Children actively create meaning as read-
ers, viewers, and listeners. The 3 9
th Allerton Park Insti-
tute papers emphasize the critical need to connect chil-
dren and narrative as a way to affect their development
ianiN u-D/t15-lu1-o; 
as listeners, readers, viewers, and evaluators of litera-
Number 39; 143 pages; 
ture-and information in all forms.
paper; $21.95*
The Bulletin StoiytellingReview, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSOT
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin StorytellingReviewcontains:
* 
162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
* Price. distributor and orarld 
level infTrmation f'r
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use 
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages;
paper; $14.95*
;r~-~r~BF~ 
I~
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
**.~5-DIGIT 61B2D 
20 
##
4I0590 BCCB 5B03 REM=93
CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
501 E DANIEL ST
CH-AMPI 
'AIG 
L i6120-EM21"
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2002 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccb/
2. 
When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and password.
This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit number but
may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
ll I0008-903
III-M
0008-9036(200211 )56:3;1 -M
i 
t:L'~
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
-
__ 
I
~si
"- 
_· i
·-- 
axr-··:e 
;·: 
r;
