T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
March 2016
Vol. 69   No. 7
Disseminate. Innovate. Collaborate.
A global community of authors, readers, and 
publishing partners align to discover and share 
new knowledge.
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
March 2016
Vol. 69 No. 7
341  the BIg PICture
 
 Up to This Pointe   by Jennifer Longo
342  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
342 • Spirit Week Showdown by Crystal Allen; illus. by Eda Kaban
349 • Summerlost  by Ally Condie
356 • Miracle Man: The Story of Jesus  written and illus. by John Hendrix
373 • Wet Cement: A Mix of Concrete Poems  by Bob Raczka
383 •  Samurai Rising: The Epic Life of Minamoto Yoshitsune by Pamela S. Turner; 
illus. by Gareth Hinds
389  ChILdren’s Book AwArds 2016
393  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
For up-to-date pricing information, please visit the journal webpage at: http://www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/bulletin_of_the_center_for_childrens_books/pricing.html. Volumes available in microfilm 
from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in micro-
fiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should 
be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2016 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Up to This Pointe © 2016 by Noelle Stevenson and used by permission of  
Random House.
March 2016 • 341
the BIg PICture
Up to This Pointe
by Jennifer Longo
Failure is hard. It’s especially hard that most of the kids who dominate in their high 
schools, youth leagues, and art worlds as teens don’t make the cut to be the adult 
stars they were certain they’d be, so they plummet precipitously from youthful glory 
into the shards of ordinariness. Yet despite this being a common youthful experi-
ence, it’s a surprisingly uncommon topic for young adult literature.
Such a fall has recently devastated seventeen-year-old Harper Scott. Harper 
has grown up with the legend of her distant relation, polar explorer Robert Falcon 
Scott, guiding the do-or-die spirit of her family. Initially, that connection seems 
sufficient explanation for her becoming a student biology assistant at McMurdo 
Base in Antarctica, where she’ll be one of the few who spends the winter there. 
Flashbacks, however, reveal that Harper isn’t a scientist but a dancer, consecrated to 
ballet and “the Plan” for her future as a dancer with the same fervor that explorers 
brought to their missions (“For a person to become a ballerina, it is understood you 
are taking on Antarctica. . . . You must be willing to eat your dogs”). It also slowly 
becomes clear that that Plan hit a roadblock that cracked Harper’s life apart, and 
that she’s now trying to figure out her place in the world—starting at the bottom. 
The two seemingly disparate themes synthesize with keen effectiveness 
in this story of a girl who never for a moment thought that her discipline and 
desire wouldn’t get her where she wanted to go. That’s the rule, after all, evident 
in a thousand exhortations about following your dream and wanting something 
enough (“If you work hard your entire life for this one, single dream you have and 
ever will have, then nothing, no one, can stop a person from achieving this dream”). 
Even as Harper encounters rejections from companies before her audition with her 
beloved San Francisco Ballet, she’s crafting the myth of her many setbacks before 
her ultimate success—but what she gets is not a triumphant narrative twist but a 
summary dismissal (“Number 232, you are excused from the barre”). “I’ve wasted my 
entire life for the love of something I can never have,” says a shellshocked Harper, 
“and now I don’t have any idea who I am.”
Longo, author of the delightful Six Feet over It (BCCB 11/14), makes 
Harper a standout character of fire, commitment, and sass (wryly noting her soften-
ing body in Antarctica, she cracks, “Welcome to my ass, Fat”). Harper’s narration 
accentuates the poignancy of her dilemma by making it clear how much she has 
to offer in many areas, not just dance, and how little she realizes that. Her appeal-
ing romantic interludes—with a devoted guy back home and an engaging flirt in 
Antarctica—allow her a little room to explore additional emotional possibilities. 
Even more important, though, is her fiercely loving and fiercely complicated rela- 
342 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
tionship with her best friend, Kate, who has the professional-level talent Harper 
lacks; Harper’s grief and fury blinds her to Kate’s own challenges and almost breaks 
the friendship, but the girls have the courage to come back to each other after 
they’ve faced their changes.
The book is also savvy and detailed about the Antarctic and life on the 
ice, with McMurdo’s combination of industrial site and summer camp vividly 
conveyed. It’s also perfect that the Antarctic ghost/hallucination that Harper chats 
occasionally with is not her relative, Scott, or the plan-intensive Amundsen but the 
third saint of polar exploration, the glorious Shackleton—who may be the greatest 
of them all despite never actually succeeding in setting foot at the Pole. Fans of 
McCaughrean’s The White Darkness (BCCB 2/07) will definitely want a look; even 
determinedly frost-free readers, though, will sympathize with Harper’s upheaval at 
failing to become one of the chosen few. An author’s note includes a lively Antarctic 
bibliography. (See p. 363 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Allen, CrystAl Spirit Week Showdown; illus. by Eda Kaban. Balzer + Bray/
HarperCollins, 2016 [240p] (The Magnificent Mya Tibbs)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-234233-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-234235-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Fourth-grader Mya Tibbs is excited about her Texas school’s Spirit Week, in which 
students pair up to wear different themed outfits each day and compete for VIP 
tickets to the Fall Festival rodeo, a prize Mya desperately wants. Mya promises her 
new best friend, the glamorous Naomi, that they will be partners no matter what, 
but when Mya gets paired with “Mean Connie Tate,” she’s too afraid to pressure 
Connie to trade partners. Naomi not only drops Mya like a hot potato but also 
starts publicly shaming her as a promise-breaker and a liar. Meanwhile, Connie is 
not living up to her nickname at all, and Mya finds herself increasingly liking the 
tall, gruff, artistic girl. Savvy readers will likely figure out Connie’s secret past (she 
was a previous victim of Naomi’s backstabbing at another school) before Mya does. 
While Naomi is a fairly one-dimensional villain, the supporting characters are a 
likable bunch, and Mya and her African-American family are particularly endearing, 
with Mya’s little brother adding some mischief and her parents offering support 
and encouragement. The piquant Western details of this Texas tale also give it an 
March 2016 • 343
enjoyable specificity, and Allen adeptly depicts the desperation that arises when a 
malicious former friend turns against a erstwhile pal. Kids who have had their own 
run-ins with mean girls will particularly relate to Mya’s story.  JH
Andrews, Jesse The Haters. Amulet/Abrams, 2016 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-2078-9 $18.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Wes and Corey are masters at hating on things, scoring high school cool points (at 
least in their own minds) with bitingly clever verbal critiques of music they used to 
(and secretly still do) kind of love. They are not amped to be in the least talented 
group at jazz camp, but they are intrigued by Ash, a girl with a guitar who refuses to 
conform to the jazz sound. After an epic jam session, she convinces them that they 
need to form a band, escape jazz camp, and go on the road, leaving their phones 
behind. Fortunately for the boys, Ash is as rich as she is bold and reckless, which 
keeps things from getting too risky as they take off without a plan. Fortunately for 
readers, Wes has a lively voice that moves smoothly between laugh-out-loud, self-
conscious snark and candid, moving observations about feeling like a plan-B kid, 
adopted from Venezuela by parents who thought they couldn’t have children of 
their own. Ash is just as candid about Corey’s less-than-adequate oral sex technique 
and what she heard when Wes lost his virginity within her earshot. Her revelations 
somewhat mitigate Wes’ jealousy over Ash and Corey’s hook-up, which threatens to 
derail the band even before their first gig. The problem persists until Wes and Corey 
have it out during one fateful night involving a music commune, an unexpected 
betrayal, and an encounter with an angry man with a gun. The trio’s road trip thus 
has all the requisite coming-of-age moments, with virginities and illusions lost and 
friendships, courage, and self-awareness found. Fans of Frank Portman as well as 
Andrews’ own Me and Earl and the Dying Girl (BCCB 5/12) will thoroughly enjoy 
this stylish let’s-get-a-band-together-and-go-on-the-road fiction.  KC
BAldwin, Christopher Little Dee and the Penguin; written and illus. by Chris-
topher Baldwin. Dial, 2016 [128p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8037-4108-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Having just lost her father, Dee desperately needs a family. The group of animals she 
latches on to in this graphic novel, however, most certainly do not need a human 
child—or at least that’s what they initially think. Once she accompanies them on 
globe-trotting adventures, however, and they realize what life will look like for her 
in an orphanage, they decide that a small girl, even if she doesn’t speak, is exactly 
what they need to round out their crew. The irascible vulture, dopey but friendly 
puppy, nurturing bear, and penguin who is trying to get home combine to make a 
perfect family for wild, rule-averse Dee (in a pivotal scene, she steals a jumbo jet and 
loads it up with all the other kids from the Billingsville Orphanage for Unwanted 
Children), whose tears, buoyant smiles, and fervent hugs convey all the animals 
need to know about her. The story begins on a sharply tragic note with Dee’s fa-
ther’s death, and her aloneness seeps into every wordless panel that follows. Once 
she meets up with her new group, however, it’s clear that it’s only a matter of time 
before she settles in for good, and readers will enjoy the rollicking adventure. The 
animals don’t change expressions or veer much from their core personality traits, 
344 • The BulleTin
but they make a great team and their dialogue is lively and entertaining. Fans of 
this graphic novel will be happy to know there are significant archives of the Little 
Dee strips on the author’s website dating back to 2010.  AS
BArton, Chris That’s Not Bunny!; illus. by Colin Jack. Disney Hyperion, 
2016 48p
ISBN 978-1-4231-9086-8 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Ah, the age-old battle between predator and prey: “From high in his perch, Hawk 
waited for his chance.” He sees an opening, dives down onto Bunny, and flies away 
with his prize clutched in his talons—a prize that he drops in rage when he realizes 
he’s grabbed a massive carrot and not a tasty rabbit. Subsequent attacks just net 
him more vegetables—a cucumber (“He hid his bumpy green kill in his nest”) and 
a head of lettuce. Realizing he’s now got a mess of rabbit treats, he tries to use the 
situation to his advantage and tempt the wily critter with the veggies, but once again, 
Bunny is too smart for the overconfident hawk and ends up safely reclaiming his 
produce and leaving the bird with nothing. The comically melodramatic language 
(“Down he sped, a fierce scream at the ready”) recalls the bird adventure in Taylor’s 
Hoot Owl, Master of Disguise (BCCB 4/15), while the pithy text maximizes the 
humorous reversals (“And he screamed, all right. ‘A CARROT?!?’”). Illustrator Jack 
is a Dreamworks animator, and it shows—the digital art has an edgy currency in 
its blend of painterly textures and springy lines against white backgrounds, and the 
strangely square-headed hawk has the appropriate blend of villainy and haplessness. 
Compositions occasionally underplay key details, but kids will find it rewarding 
to go back to see what they missed. Audiences will be delighted to expand their 
trickster bunny knowledge beyond Bugs.  DS
Benoit, ChArles Snow Job. Clarion, 2016 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-544-31886-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
It was only a few years ago that Nick testified against his junior high classmate Zod, 
a kid who sunk a knife into an acquaintance. Now it’s 1977 and Nick’s senior year, 
and Zod’s back in town after serving his time. He’s arriving just when Nick is most 
exasperated with his disaffected parents and most smitten with Dawn, an alluring 
patron at the convenience mart where Nick scrounges for enough funds to leave 
town after graduation. The surprise is that Zod seems to have dropped his grudge 
against Nick, even covering a football bet Nick made in a drunken stupor at a col-
lege party. However amiable Zod appears, though, he has some slimy connections 
with a local drug dealer, the same lowlife to whom Dawn sells sex to earn enough 
money to care for her disabled sister. With Dawn playing the sympathy card and 
Zod calling in favors, Nick agrees to run drugs in one hefty transaction and then 
scoot out of town with Dawn and her sister. The title alone should alert readers that 
there’s a sting in the works, but with every character walking on the shady side of 
the law, there’s a thoroughly entertaining challenge to figuring out who’s the perp 
and who’s the mark. Darker than a caper but breezier than a thriller, this crime 
fiction hits the sweet spot for YAs in search of a quick puzzler.  EB
March 2016 • 345
BrennAn, sArAh rees Tell the Wind and Fire. Clarion, 2016 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-544-31817-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In this homage to Dickens’ A Tale of Two Cities, New York is divided into two realms: 
Light New York, where Light magicians live in a world of opulence and luxury, and 
Dark New York, where Dark magicians live in squalor and desperation. Teenaged 
Lucie managed to flee the Dark two years ago to save her father; her escape along 
with her ability to wield Light Magic has earned her celebrity. By the Light she is 
seen as an innocent who was trapped by the foul Dark, and in the Dark, she’s seen 
as a revolutionary, poised to start a rebellion. Lucie herself has no interest in being 
either; she just wants a quiet life with her boyfriend, Ethan, but unfortunately Ethan 
is part of the Light’s most powerful family, making her dream of a low profile impos-
sible. More complications arrive when Carwyn, Ethan’s illegal doppelgänger, shows 
up, causing trouble for both Ethan and Lucie and forcing her to choose between 
her two worlds. Brennan follows the major plot points of Dickens’ classic, but she 
also uses a skillful hand to explore the themes of that book, particularly its focus 
on the structure of the classes. The relationship between the Dark and the Light is 
interestingly and creepily parasitic, with Light magicians dependent on Dark ones 
to drain their blood of excess magic, and Dark magicians finding power in that 
blood. Lucie is a dynamic and complex character, burdened by oppressive secrets 
from her past and yet fiery and fierce, hellbent on saving those she loves no matter 
the cost. It’s there where she finds similarity with her foes, Ethan’s murderous uncle 
and her own vicious aunt. If Ethan and Carwyn fall to the background, then so be 
it—there’s more at stake here than a love triangle.  KQG
BrumBACh, Andrew The Eye of Midnight. Delacorte, 2016 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99176-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74461-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39069-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
In 1929, a seemingly dull summer the grandfather they barely know quickly turns 
into the adventure of a lifetime for thirteen-year-old cousins Maxine and William. 
When they accompany their grandfather into the New York City on a mysterious 
errand, he is kidnapped, and the cousins’ only hope of rescuing him is to meet his 
elusive contact and recover the package he was meant to keep safe. The contact turns 
out to be a twelve-year-old Turkish girl named Nura, who claims the package was 
stolen by a strange man in white. Suddenly the three youngsters find themselves 
thrust into the heart of a centuries-old battle over a magical mirror that has them 
scouring the city and solving ancient riddles while dodging assassins and escaping 
from gangsters. Combining a 1920s New York setting with ancient Turkish and 
Arabian folklore and history, this novel reads like a young Indiana Jones adventure. 
As smart as it is action-packed, the story drops readers into the battle from the 
very start and keeps a steady pace throughout. All three main characters bring their 
own gifts to the search, and the narrative celebrates both their cleverness and their 
courage. A glossary at the end explains the novel’s many uses of ’20s slang, Arabic 
phrases, and explorer’s jargon, so even the most unfamiliar reader will be able to 
follow along. Though ultimately offering victory to the newbie adventurers, the 
novel also leaves the door open for future quests that middle-grade genre fans will 
want to join.  AM
346 • The BulleTin
CAletti, deB Essential Maps for the Lost. Simon, 2016 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1516-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1519-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Mads’ mother thinks that Mads should skip college and become her mother’s part-
ner in the real estate business, and Mads doesn’t feel she really has any choice. Her 
mother’s emotional fragility frightens Mads, as does her own depression, which she 
personifies as invisible but powerful ogres mocking, berating, and convincing her 
that she is ungrateful and unlovable. A morning swim leads to her bumping into 
the body of a woman who has committed suicide by jumping off a bridge, height-
ening her fears that she or her mother might find themselves in a similar state of 
despair. Fate has other plans for her, however, as she crosses paths with the woman’s 
son, Billy, who doesn’t know that she is the one who found his mom. Electricity 
crackles between these two kindred spirits wrestling with demons that make the 
love they begin to feel for each other seem impossible yet inevitable. Maintaining 
a third-person perspective, Caletti alternates the focus between Billy’s and Mads’ 
inner voices, which are both beset by exclamatory doubts and thrills, creating a fizzy 
energy and an escalating tension as Billy sees a hopeful future beyond his grief and 
Mads forecasts a crushing end where Billy finds out her secret and she suffocates in 
her mother’s obsessive need. The characters’ response to their psychological dam-
age is rendered accessibly concrete through their attempts to rescue abused kids 
and dogs and their joint fascination with E. L. Konigsburg’s From the Mixed-Up 
Files of Mrs. Basil E. Frankweiler; however, if any reader missed the significance of 
those connections, there are plenty of self-reflective passages that are wise while 
remaining realistically teen.  KC
CAmpBell, K. G. Dylan the Villain; written and illus. by K. G. Campbell. Vi-
king, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-451-47642-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
Dylan’s birth as a super-villain, complete with cobalt eye mask, comes as a surprise 
to his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Snivels, but once they’ve adjusted to the idea, they 
take pride in their son’s talents. At super-villain school, however, Dylan pales in 
comparison with icy, blue-haired Addison Van Malice: Dylan can’t best her costume, 
her evil laugh, or her nefarious inventions. However, when he hits the “launch” 
button on her diabolical robot suit, that sends it—and Addison—into orbit just in 
time for Dylan to clinch the “diabolical robot trophy.” There’s a sly hint of social 
commentary in Dylan’s parents’ enthusiastic over-praising of their son (and in his 
subsequent feelings of villain-entitlement), but Dylan’s inability to beat Addison 
at anything scholastic will resonate with plenty of kids who have experienced the 
same situation in a less villainous climate. The muted tones and soft shading of 
the watercolor and colored pencil illustrations give them a stylish, classic look, 
while judicious use of deeper and brighter hues keeps the art stimulating. Humor-
ous details (teacher Miss Slither’s lower body is a snake tail but her human upper 
body dressed in a perky sweater set) will also tickle young audiences. Young fans 
of Disney TV’s The Descendants and kids who adore the cinematic Minions will 
find the villainous Dylan particularly appealing.  JH
March 2016 • 347
CArmAn, pAtriCK Fizzopolis: The Trouble with Fuzzwonker Fizz; illus. by Brian 
Sheesley. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2016 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239390-6 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239391-3 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-4
When Harold Fuzzwonker turns ten, he’s finally allowed into his inventor father’s 
underground lab, where Fuzzwonker Fizz, the soda that “makes the longest burps 
in the history of ever” was created. Harold is stoked to finally be involved in the 
family business, and he’s even more excited when the lab also turns out to be a city, 
Fizzopolis, host to a myriad of fizzy, fuzzy, friendly creatures that Harold is now 
supposed to tend to. One of the “Fizzies,” Floyd, becomes attached to Harold, so 
much so that Harold’s got to take the little guy to school with him or else Floyd’s 
freakout threatens to destroy Fizzopolis. Once out in the world, Floyd goes miss-
ing, and Harold must save him from the evil Snood Candy factory. The premise is 
candy-wrapper thin and about as original as a knockoff of a Wonka chocolate bar, 
but the sheer absurdity of the antics of both Harold and the Fizzies is enjoyable. 
Harold narrates like a kid on a sugar high, energetic, slightly manic, and easily 
distracted, making for entertaining if often chaotic storytelling. The goofy cartoon 
illustrations burst with life (and round, bug-eyed Floyd is especially adorable as he 
bounces from page to page), but they don’t always match the text. Nonetheless, 
this may appeal to kids with a soft spot for sweets and silliness.  KQG
CArter, CAelA My Life With the Liars. Harper/HarperCollins, 2016 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238571-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238573-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
This quiet, carefully paced novel follows Zylynn, who has been rescued from a cult 
by her father. He had left her there years ago with her mother, but when he found 
out the truth about the cult, he was granted full custody; now twelve-year-old 
Zylynn is suddenly out in the world, a place she has been told is full of enemies, 
liars, and unspeakable horrors. She adjusts slowly and tries to keep the Inside close 
to her heart, plotting ways to get back to Father Prophet who will reward her for 
not losing faith. She can’t stop herself from noticing things that seem so much 
better, however, like adequate meals with a variety of foods, clothes that aren’t all 
dingy white, no enforced starvations, punishments, or constant harsh lighting, and 
no drugged tea. Zylynn’s father and stepmother tread carefully, trying to honor 
some of her beliefs while firmly discrediting others; the novel handles that delicate 
dance well, and readers will feel keenly the simultaneous wish to make Zylynn see 
how awful her life was while also allowing her to experience the grief of losing all 
she knew. She gets the gentle salvation she deserves; while the scenes where Father 
Prophet is found out and gets his comeuppance are a bit melodramatic, they fol-
low a familiar real-life pattern, and they don’t overshadow Zylynn’s journey.  AS
CAtAnese, p. w. Donny’s Inferno. Aladdin, 2016 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-4814-3800-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Donny’s life is pretty grim: he has been reduced to hiding in an abandoned building 
after he discovered that his father is a hit man, and now the building has caught 
348 • The BulleTin
fire. Fortunately, he’s been rescued by the gorgeous, mysterious Angela Obscura, 
who whisks him off to Sulfur, a version of hell; Angela needs help navigating the 
upcoming battle between factions who disagree on how hell should be run. There’s 
a lot of set-up of the hellscape and the various monsters that are found in the 
underworld, but this all pays off well once the war between evil and . . . less evil 
(comparatively good?) ignites. Readers will be firmly on the side of Angela and her 
monstrous cohorts, and they’ll also be deeply invested in Donny’s actually finding 
a home; that’s especially true after his father’s reprehensible past lands the man 
down in the Caverns of Woe, removing any hope Donny had of returning to him 
and their shared life. It’s all pretty dark, but Catanese adds levity in effective ways 
through the antics of some of the secondary characters, and he also gives proper care 
to the budding bond between Angela and Donny, suggesting even in the grimmest 
moments that he may land on his feet. Donny may not exactly be free to leave, 
but he is alive and he’s surrounded by creatures who care for him; readers therefore 
won’t be too indignant about the limits to his personal agency, and they’ll be eager 
for the likely sequel to see how Donny and Sulfur are faring.  AS
CAtmull, KAtherine The Radiant Road. Dutton, 2016 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-525-95347-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Clare and her dad are back in Ireland, living in the house where she was born and 
trying to cope with the death of her beloved mother. Clare remembers her mother’s 
stories of fairy folk called the Strange, and she is now learning that those tales were 
true. Finn, a half fairy, is around to help her understand this new reality, but it’s 
still a challenge for her, especially since someone who was expelled from the fairy 
world is now attacking the bridge between the fairy and human world, which will 
result in destruction on both sides. It’s a romantic sort of loss that awaits—the loss 
of love for the fairies and creative connection for the humans—and the flowery, 
floaty language of the novel throughout reinforces this otherworldly, gauzy view 
that these intangibles are greatly important. Dreamy readers and those who ap-
preciate folktale and fairy-tale connections will sink right in, reveling in the languid 
passages and the bits of world building that describe how this connection between 
the worlds came to be endangered.  AS
ChABert, JACK Poptropica: Mystery of the Map; illus. by Kory Merritt. Amulet/
Abrams, 2016 [112p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-2067-3 $12.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Fans of Poptropica, an online role-playing game intended for kids (and which 
numbers Jeff Kinney, of Wimpy Kid fame, among its creators) will find much to 
enjoy in this graphic novel from that world. After a rogue hot-air balloon captain 
strands them on a desert island, Mya, Oliver, and Jorge stumble onto the captain’s 
lost magic map, which follows their commands. The captain who tossed the kids 
over the side wants it back, Erik the Red (yes, the Viking) is hunting them, and 
they’re pretty sure they’re doomed to remain on the island forever. Luckily, the trio 
are determined, and this first volume in an intended series ends on a hopeful note. 
Fans of the game will recognize the pop-eyed humans, the vibrant islands, and the 
quest-focused storylines, but even readers who have never heard Poptropica will 
March 2016 • 349
get the fun right away. There’s not a lot of variation among the characters, either 
visually (given the simple bodies and universal giant-eyed heads) or in their person-
alities, but there is a staggering amount of action to compensate. Both game buffs 
and newbies will likely find this the perfect amount of exposition and action, and 
they’ll cheerfully await the next big adventure for this clever, unruly trio who face 
nose-picking Vikings and imminent peril with equal looks of dismay. The finished 
book will be printed in full color.  AS
Condie, Ally Summerlost. Dutton, 2016 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-399-18719-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-9
A year after Cedar’s father and brother were killed in a car accident, Cedar is 
moving with her mother to her mother’s childhood home town. After following a 
strange boy in a costume one day, Cedar is drawn to the local Shakespeare festival, 
where she gets a job selling programs and concessions. The boy, Leo, has bigger 
plans, though, and he invites Cedar to join him in giving unofficial tours of spots 
that relate to the town’s tragic hero—a woman who became a well-known actress 
before her early death. Cedar is also taking care of her surviving younger brother, 
Miles, as they both try to come to terms with their loss, a loss made more poignant 
by the fact that Ben, her late brother, was disabled, likely autistic, so that Cedar 
had ambivalent feelings about him. Multiple, seemingly random details, includ-
ing a family of turkey vultures that roost outside Cedar’s window, an absurd soap 
opera narrative of a woman buried alive, and Leo’s quest for a trip with his father, 
coalesce into metaphors that help Cedar makes sense of her grief and the life she 
now has to look forward to. Thoughtful, poetic chapter endings guide readers new 
to psychological depth toward meaningful connections between plot events and 
thematic reflections. Along the way, a lovely relationship develops between Leo 
and Cedar that transcends the expected crush, indicating a more profound way of 
relating to a friend.  KC
Cooper, ConstAnCe Guile. Clarion, 2016 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-544-45171-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Everyone in Wicked Ford knows that the worst of the guile—the magical substance 
that gives power, often malicious power, to objects and occasionally people—is con-
centrated in the swamps of the Bad Bayous. Orphaned and with only the company 
of her cat, LaRue, teenaged Yonie makes a living as one of the Bayou’s “pearlies,” 
someone who can detect guile and its effects. It’s really LaRue the cat who does 
all the work, though; as a guile-affected (otherwise known as wily) creature she’s 
able find guile easily—and as a talking cat she also easily relays the info to Yonie. 
A series of increasingly distressing encounters with wily objects leads Yonie and 
LaRue through Wicked Ford’s high society, where secrets about the death of Yonie’s 
parents are revealed; soon girl and cat must trek to a legendary part of the swamps 
to save each other and Wicked Ford. The setting is a blend of Venice’s canals and 
Louisiana’s bogs; the plot is an almost cozy mystery with red herrings aplenty; 
the heroine is as plucky as her sidekick is prickly. Add just a dash of romance and 
you’ve got yourself a fine gumbo of a book that, while satisfying in one gulp, may 
also have readers returning for second helpings.  KQG
350 • The BulleTin
CossAnteli, VeroniCA The Extincts; illus. by Roman Muradov. Holt, 
2016 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-62779-403-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
On the hunt for a job, George reads a posting a for an opportunity at Wormestall 
Farm, heads there, and discovers it’s a special place indeed, secretly inhabited by 
extinct and mythological animals. It turns out the fact he was able to see the magi-
cal sign proves that he has the perfect temperament to help keep the non-ordinary 
animals healthy, hidden, and happy. Prudence, a new girl in town, also lands at the 
farm and becomes George’s friend; Prudence is trying to avoid her evil stepmother, 
who is desperate to win a prized taxidermy award at any cost, and who would 
consider a stuffed basilisk to be a coup. British author Cossanteli has a sharp eye 
for character development, both human and otherwise, in George’s light-hearted 
narration. While the pace drags on occasion, this is a memorable book, and the 
small illustrations add a sense of liveliness to the mix. If you can convince realistic 
animal fans that aurochs and dodos need love too, they’ll enjoy this look at a kid 
who dives into animal care with plenty of spirit, if not much knowledge, and saves 
his town (with some help) while he’s at it.  AS
dAGG, CArole estBy Sweet Home Alaska. Paulsen/Penguin, 2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17203-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
The Great Depression has depleted the last of the Johnson family resources; too 
proud to accept any government aid that smacks of charity, Mr. Johnson considers 
an opportunity to rebuild their lives as farmers in the newly created community of 
Palmer, Alaska, where settlers will be given acreage, a house, and honest work with 
a shining future. Genteel Mrs. Johnson is horrified, but rising sixth-grader Terpsi-
chore is up for the challenge, especially if it means resettling with her best friend. 
She schemes to get her family accepted to the program, only to watch her friend’s 
family drop out; now Terpsichore’s stuck with the results—a train to the west, a 
sea-sickening voyage north, another train to Matanuska, and then . . . well, not 
much. Tents and grand plans abound, but the government program is ill-prepared 
to meet the immediate needs of the invited settlers. Terpsichore, a Laura Ingalls 
Wilder fan, sees herself as a latter-day pioneer, and her new pals coalesce into a 
resourceful crew. Neither mud nor snow nor mosquitoes can prevent them from 
turning their new digs into some semblance of home. Although the cheerful trajec-
tory of Terpsichore’s experience suggests that the community becomes a thriving 
venture, Dagg also makes it clear that the actual Palmer settlement was no picnic, 
and many of its first inhabitants left within the first year. Palmer’s history serves as 
an intriguing backdrop for an episodic tale of a girl for whom the term “plucky” 
was invented. Whether establishing a lending library, growing a prize pumpkin, or 
scrapping with rival popcorn fundraisers, Terpsichore is a cozy fictional friend in 
the tradition of Anne Shirley or, yes, Laura Ingalls. The bound book will include 
an author’s note.  EB
March 2016 • 351
destefAno, lAuren Broken Crowns. Simon, 2016 [272p] (The Intern-
ment Chronicles)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9637-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9644-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Having escaped Internment, their restrictive floating island home (in Perfect Ruin, 
BCCB 12/13), and navigated the perilous political waters of the kingdom below (in 
Burning Kingdoms, BCCB 6/15), sixteen-year-old Morgan and her friends now face 
their greatest challenges yet. Reduced to pawns in a dangerous political game, the 
teens realize that they must wrest control from their two power-mad kings if they 
have any chance of saving themselves. Unfortunately, former ally Princess Celeste 
has returned home to Internment, and her unpredictable brother Prince Azure has 
been sent as a diplomat and political prisoner in her place. Even worse, Internment 
is sinking, spelling certain destruction for both kingdoms if they can’t find a way 
to stop it. With time running out and no capable adults to rely on, the reluctant 
Morgan must wrangle her disparate friends into working together on a complex plot 
that could save the world or finally destroy them all. This third volume of a creative 
and captivating series finds narrator Morgan coming fully into her own, fulfilling 
the potential for heroine status established in previous volumes. The story drags 
somewhat in the beginning as Morgan continues to wallow in indecision on the 
sidelines, but once she dedicates herself to a plan, the novel becomes a page-turner 
as it gallops through to a stunning but ultimately happy conclusion. The narrative 
never returns to some of its compelling side characters, which may disappoint some 
readers, but this has always been Morgan’s story first and foremost, and with this 
final volume, she clearly earns the attention.  AM
douGlAs, helen Chasing Stars. Bloomsbury, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-410-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-411-4 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
After falling in love with a time-traveling operative Ryan Westland and helping 
his team save the Earth’s future (After Eden, BCCB 1/14), sixteen-year-old Eden 
Anfield expects her life to change. She doesn’t expect it to actually end, however, and 
she’s killed for knowing too much. Fortunately, her sweetheart Ryan time-travels to 
avert her death; unfortunately, he is arrested for time-travel crimes he committed 
in order to save her. Suddenly forced to choose between her own time and Ryan’s 
future, Eden leaves behind everything and everyone she knows for the chance to 
defend him at trial. Now she’s trapped in the future, separated from Ryan, and 
caught up in political intrigue that may send him to prison for life. With Ryan’s 
distractingly flirtatious best friend at her side and his lecherous worst enemy on her 
tail, Eden must travel through time and space if she’s going to win a second chance 
at timeless love. The shift in focus from sci-fi romance to escape-plot intrigue may 
disappoint readers who wanted this sequel to follow the passionate path but will 
likely please those who appreciated the first volume’s more suspenseful elements. 
The lovers spend most of the novel apart, but the separation gives Eden room to 
grow more fully into her heroine role. The change in setting, meanwhile, allows for 
well-established if not particularly inventive world building and the introduction 
352 • The BulleTin
of a cast of interesting new characters. Eden’s undeniable chemistry with Ryan’s 
best friend undermines the romance at times, but the reader is never in doubt of 
where her heart truly lies. While more nail-biter than heart-quickener, this novel 
ultimately offers romance fans their happy ending while leaving room for adventure 
seekers to hope for possible sequels.  AM
eAGAr, lindsAy Hour of the Bees. Candlewick, 2016 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7922-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Carol is spending her summer at her grandfather’s ranch in New 
Mexico’s drought-ridden desert. Thanks to a family feud, she doesn’t even know her 
crotchety grandfather, Serge, and she, like her father, isn’t interested in reclaiming 
her Mexican roots. Serge is in the throes of dementia, however, and the family is 
preparing to sell the house and move him to an assisted care facility. The ranch is as 
hot and miserable as Carol feared, but Serge turns out to be a gifted storyteller, and 
he spins a story for her of a magical place where a tree with healing powers granted 
the villagers unnaturally long lives. Lines blur between the tale and reality as Serge 
tells of how his beloved Rosa left the village, taking a bit of the bark of the tree 
with her, which protected her even when she was far away. Her adventure inspired 
others, until they decimated the tree and the lake that nourished the village was 
carried away, drop by drop, by bees. Serge is convinced that if the bees come back, 
the drought will end, and sure enough, Carol is plagued by bees while no one else 
seems to see them at all. Serge’s story is still unfinished when it’s time for him to 
move out, but Carol has become too involved in the tale to let it go, and she takes 
desperate action to ensure that Serge gets to see the restoration of his home as the 
drought breaks. The delicate magic of Serge’s story ties present and past together in 
a beautifully written, affecting story of forgiveness and understanding that enables 
Carol to move forward in her own life, resetting her values and claiming her own 
place in her grandfather’s story. Her sulks, fears, and desires render her credibly 
twelve, and the storytelling ably prepares readers for her less predictable decisions. 
Offering a compelling introduction to Latin American magic realism, this will have 
appeal for middle-school lovers of literary fiction.  KC
fAlAtKo, Julie Snappsy the Alligator Did Not Ask to Be in This Book!; illus. by Tim 
Miller. Viking, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-451-46945-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 5-8 yrs
Even in the era of Facebook, it was bound to happen: a picture-book protagonist 
does not want his existence to be documented into a story. As Snappsy the alliga-
tor shops, cleans, and preps for a party, he’s plagued by a narrator who follows his 
actions while also trying to make them seem more exciting (“What was he doing in 
there? Was he making crafty plans? Was he roasting innocent forest creatures that he 
already had stored in his freezer?”). It turns out that the narrator, a humble chicken, 
is actually angling for an invitation to the party; once she’s there, she has such a 
good time that she attempts to guilt Snappsy into making it a regular thing. While 
the adversarial relationship between narrator and protagonist has appeared before 
in books such as Watts’ Chester (BCCB 11/07), it’s unusual to have the protagonist, 
March 2016 • 353
not the narrator, as the reliable reporter, and the narrator’s eventual joining of the 
cast is a comedic surprise. Snappsy’s irritated and valid criticism via speech balloon 
(“You’re an awful narrator. You’re just describing what you see in the illustrations”) 
adds opportunity for readaloud comedy. Digitally colored ink art, often in tidy 
panels, balances Snappsy’s spare, tie-clad green form with lively backgrounds filled 
with exploration-worthy detail: the little girl looking up in alarm from her Snappsy 
book; the dotted line faithfully tracing Snappy’s return journey from the grocery 
store; Snappsy’s taste for lounging in a fez. Overdocumented youngsters may feel 
some sympathy for Snappsy, and audiences in general will giggle at his battle with 
the overexcited narrator.  DS
fAn, terry The Night Gardener; written and illus. by Terry Fan and Eric Fan. Si-
mon, 2016 48p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3978-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3979-4 $10.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Young William, along with the other residents of Grimloch Lane, is amazed 
when he wakes up one morning to find that the tree outside his window has been 
transformed into a stunning owl topiary. The next morning, another nearby tree 
has been sheared into a cat shape; a rabbit, a parakeet, and a magnificent two-tree 
dragon follow, to the residents’ great delight. When William spots a stranger heading 
into the park one evening, he follows him, suspecting that this is the mysterious 
Night Gardener. The Night Gardener invites William to help him transform the 
park, and the result the following morning is splendid. As the seasons come and 
go, the topiaries lose their shape, but “the people of the small town were never the 
same”—including William, who is last seen creating a small fox topiary with the 
clippers given to him by the Night Gardener. The message about the transformative 
power of art (“Something was happening on Grimloch Lane. Something good”) is a 
powerful one, and the intriguing premise and graceful art are definitely captivating. 
The presence of a mysterious stranger and the impressive topiaries are reminiscent 
of Chris Van Allsburg’s imaginative works as well as Lane Smith’s Grandpa Green. 
The delicately detailed illustrations, drawn in graphite and colored digitally, evoke 
quiet drama through the shadowy greens and grays used for the nocturnal scenes 
(strikingly punctuated with the glow of star-, moon-, and streetlight) and the creams 
and sepias, accented with vivid green and brighter tones, for the daytime tableaux. 
Use this as a springboard to talk about the ways in which art and artists can change 
a community, or simply enjoy the easy elegance of story and pictures.  JH
fAntAsKey, Beth Isabel Feeney, Star Reporter. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2016 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-544-58249-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
On the mean streets of 1920s Chicago, ten-year-old Isabel Feeney sells newspapers 
on the corners, but her big dream is to one day be an investigative journalist like 
her hero Maude Collier, the only woman reporter on the crime beat at the Tribune. 
When Izzie’s best customer, Miss Giddings, is accused of the murder of her fiancé, 
Charles “The Bull” Bessemer, a known mobster, it just so happens that Izzie was 
around the corner when the shots rang out. Now she’s desperate to prove Miss 
Giddings’ innocence and she’s willing to annoy the heck out of a detective, force 
354 • The BulleTin
her heroine Maude to look beyond a good headline, and team up with a mobster’s 
daughter to do so. Fantaskey offers a dark but exciting picture of one of Chicago’s 
most infamous decades: bootlegging mobsters roll in fame and fortune as they 
guard their turf; reporters in smoky offices come up with sensational crime stories; 
and Murderess Row is always a hot topic. Izzie is witty, dramatic, and bull-headed, 
but even her snappy narration gets the book only so far; unfortunately, readers will 
cotton on to the true killer mid-book and the mystery simply fizzles out as we wait 
for Izzie to puzzle out what the audience has long known. Nonetheless, Izzie’s good 
company for youngsters looking to explore the back alleys and speakeasies of the 
Al Capone era of Chicago.  KQG
fitzGerAld, sArAh moore The Apple Tart of Hope. Holiday House, 
2016 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-3561-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Meg and Oscar have been best friends since sensitive, popular Oscar, who has a 
gift for making apple tarts that let people forget their troubles, moved in next door. 
When Meg’s family plans to move to New Zealand for six months, now fourteen-
year-old Meg is devastated to leave Oscar, with whom she has fallen in love; she 
resolves her feeling by telling him so in an undelivered letter that she leaves behind 
in her room. Unfortunately, a girl named Paloma moves in to Meg’s room and, 
after being rebuffed romantically by Oscar, begins a campaign of sabotage against 
him that sends him into such despair that he rides his bike into the icy cold Irish 
sea. Though rescue forestalls his suicide, shame keeps him from acknowledging 
his survival and reentering his life and he hides out with his reclusive rescuer; Meg 
then returns to join the town in grieving the death of her friend. Meg and Oscar 
tell their sides of the story in alternating chapters, so Oscar’s fate is quickly revealed 
to readers, but the lead-up to how it happened and its effects on Meg and Oscar 
unfold slowly and suspensefully. Paloma is effective as a despicably mean girl whose 
presence upsets the gentle amity of the small Irish school community and all but 
destroys Oscar. While mean girl/bullying stories may have become so common as 
to be considered clichéd, this slim, atmospheric narrative with its touch of magic 
will zing the hearts of readers who wish for an Oscar of their own.  KC
fox, JAnet The Charmed Children of Rookskill Castle. Viking, 2016 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-451-47633-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Sent to a boarding school in remote Scotland to avoid the Blitz, twelve-year-old 
Katherine Bateson and her two younger siblings try to be brave and carry on, as 
their parents and country expect. The castle, however, hides untold perils within its 
secret passages and behind its hidden doors, and the children discover evidence of 
a German spy in their midst. Odder still is the beautiful and enigmatic Lady who 
runs the school and the silent, ghostlike children who haunt the castle’s hallways. 
Logical Katherine wants to focus on unmasking the spy, but as the students start 
disappearing one by one, she and American classmate Peter turn their attention 
to the supernatural mystery and uncover an ancient, magical secret that may stir 
powers with Katherine herself. Despite its boarding school setting, this delightful, 
spooky read evokes the spirit of Lewis more than that of Rowling, and fans of the 
March 2016 • 355
Narnia series are certain to love its old-school charms. The Lady and her castle are 
suitably creepy yet fascinating, and while flashbacks to the Lady’s own sad history 
don’t redeem her from villainy, they do give her an intriguing nuance. Katherine, 
meanwhile, is a formidable heroine with powers both intellectual and magical, and 
readers will appreciate her struggle to accept things beyond her understanding. The 
spy subplot is less successful, but the novel brings the two narrative threads together 
nicely in the end. Various loose ends and the continued German threat create room 
for likely sequels, which should thrill both historical mystery and middle-grade 
fantasy fans alike.  AM
frAzier, sundee t. Cleo Edison Oliver, Playground Millionaire; illus. by Jennifer 
L. Meyer. Levine/Scholastic, 2016 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82235-0 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82236-7 $6.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82237-4 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Like her idol, the Oprah-like business diva and talk show host Fortune A. Davies, 
fifth-grade entrepreneur Cleo Oliver has a passion for business. Her latest venture 
is brilliant—offering a Nerf gun tooth-pulling service to local kids (a dollar per 
tooth, plus an extra two dollars to take video of the “extraction”). Sometimes Cleo’s 
singlemindedness gets her into trouble, however, as when she brings the Nerf gun 
to school (forbidden by the school code), uses her dad’s tablet without permission 
to make the initial “marketing video,” and blows off her best friend, Caylee, who 
is having trouble with her father and his new girlfriend. Cleo’s sensitivity to her 
adopted status (brown-skinned Cleo seems to be part of an interracial family) also 
spurs her into a fight with a mean girl at school. These situations and their conse-
quences lead Cleo to some newfound maturity, and she approaches her business 
schemes and her relationships with increased thoughtfulness by the book’s end. 
Cleo is an utterly winning heroine, and the Nerf gun tooth-removal technique 
is pure genius (and certain to inspire some readers to attempt it at home). Cleo’s 
unabashed enthusiasm for her business enterprises will ring true with kids who’ve 
caught the entrepreneurial bug, and her mixed feelings about her adoption and her 
reluctant realization that she has failed her friend are both credibly and sensitively 
handled. Meyer’s monochromatic spot art at the head of each chapter adds warmth 
and humor to the text. The multiple strands—entrepreneurism, adoption, friend-
ship—will ensure that this attracts a broad swath of middle-graders.  JH
Godin, thelmA lynne How to Dress a Dragon; illus. by Eric Barclay. Scholastic, 
2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-545-67846-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-5 yrs
Who knew dragons had so much in common with preschoolers and primary- 
graders when it comes to getting dressed? Like human youngsters, dragons find 
underwear amusing (especially when worn on the head), they find capes irresistible, 
and they prefer their froggy boots over other footwear. Dragons also have special 
considerations, such as preferring to go shirtless (no pesky buttons or snagging on 
horny heads), needing hats that fit neatly between their horns, and finding shorts 
easier than pants because of their big dragon feet. The story is entertaining, and the 
356 • The BulleTin
playful use of language (“You may have to tickle-tackle him to the floor and give 
him belly kisses”) makes this a diverting readaloud. The appealing dragon figure 
who models the scenarios and the prominent featuring of underwear will also make 
this a popular pick with youngsters. The zesty pencil and digital illustrations are 
crisply and attractively composed, and the big, friendly-looking green dragon is 
a cheerful fellow, as is the little brown-haired boy who is patiently trying to dress 
him. The spread featuring nine colorful pairs of briefs and one large pair of “froggy 
superhero” undies (and the underwear-dotted endpapers) will be a particular hit. 
This will be a natural “fit” into a clothing- or dragon-themed storytime, or pair it 
with one of Yolen’s How Do Dinosaurs . . . titles for an humorous comparison of 
books that treat big reptiles like small children.  JH
hendrix, John Miracle Man: The Story of Jesus; written and illus. by John Hen-
drix. Abrams, 2016 40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1899-1 $18.95   
R Gr. 3-6
Hendrix’s retelling of the three years of Jesus’ public ministry is clearly an authentic 
labor of love from the pen and brush of a true believer: “He looked like any other 
man, but he was like none who had ever lived before. This Man was God’s son.” 
Hendrix is, however, focused on what Jesus’ close disciples, casual followers, and 
even enemies must have made of him as he traveled around with a crew of fisher-
man, working miracles, annoying the political and religious elite, and finally facing 
his own execution. Which, in Christian belief, is not finally at all (“But God’s Son, 
Jesus, the Miracle Man, had in store one last glorious miracle . . .”), with a con-
cluding spread wherein Jesus is simply shown walking away through the opening 
of his empty tomb. Hendrix edits and paraphrases the Biblical text, but kids who 
know the story will be delighted to see the familiar words inventively recast as part 
of the illustration design, claiming pride of place as the voice of authority. Each 
episode unfolds with visual distinction. The storm at sea begins with a looming swell 
reminiscent of Hokusai’s Great Wave, but the water is not nearly as threatening as 
the explosive command “BE STILL” that erupts in lightning-bolt font and sizzling 
color on the following page. In contrast, the final Passion is effectively pared down 
to Jesus dragging his cross over the stark white background of a double-page spread, 
followed by a view of Jerusalem embedded in crumbling letters, “It seemed the 
miracle had come to an end.” In his concluding note, Hendrix comments on his 
personal belief, the literary challenge of avoiding “the familiar, well-worn paths,” and 
his decisions on what to include or omit from the telling; notes on research for the 
artwork, as well as Biblical citations for the miracle stories, are also included.  EB
heos, BridGet It’s Getting Hot in Here: The Past, Present, and Future of Climate 
Change. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 231p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-544-30347-8 $17.99   
R Gr. 5-9
It says much about the vastness and complexity of the topic of climate change that 
nearly two hundred pages of illustrated text results in little more than an introduc-
tion. This overview is well organized, however, to lead readers through the basics in 
five broad sections, further divided into chapters. Heos first defines the greenhouse 
effect and the difference between climate and weather, then turns to how Earth 
evolved into a habitat well suited for human life, replete with fossil fuels that both 
advance civilization and threaten it through overuse. The following sections examine 
March 2016 • 357
scientific evidence for global warming and the politics and economics that hobble 
efforts to reduce reliance on fossil fuels. The title concludes with a call to action, 
highlighting several strategies that may mitigate, if not entirely fix, the immediate 
and long-term problem. Heos makes it clear that she adheres to data accepted by a 
majority of scientists, offering nary a polite nod to outlier counterargument. The 
message is: this is happening, folks; what are you going to do about it? Recom-
mendations are not always well supported, but with its glossary, reading lists, and 
extensive bibliography of print and online sources, this will nonetheless be a useful 
foundation for students beginning research into a crisis that may well become their 
inheritance.  EB
hiCKs, fAith erin The Nameless City; written and illus. by Faith Erin 
Hicks. First Second, 2016 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-157-9 $21.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-156-2 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
This sharp graphic novel explores issues of insider/outsides alliances in a situation 
where invaders have been in place long enough to become protectors against even 
more threatening forces. The Nameless City is what insiders call their home, choos-
ing to disregard whatever name is placed on it by whichever most recent occupants 
want to make use of the valuable seaport. Kaidu is an outsider, a Dao who is being 
trained to protect the City, and when he meets Rat, a street kid, they clash instantly. 
An uneasy alliance turns into a friendship, however, and both are committed to 
changing the status quo and helping the adults see that a true collaboration could 
benefit all. It’s an optimistic view, but there are hints that others might see this pos-
sibility as well. The two key protagonists are sharply distinct, and readers will likely 
sympathize with each character’s perspective and struggles, such as Rat’s inability 
to trust and Kaidu’s dreamy pacifism that makes him a wretched fit for his military 
training. The city names, illustrations, clothing details, and character appearances 
clearly reference an historical Asian setting, perhaps alluding to the Silk Road and 
various (often rapidly changing) occupations that marked that region. Motion lines 
and dramatically emphasized fight scenes will grab manga readers, while historical 
fiction fans will likely find this a gripping narrative about how people adapt to, 
quietly fight against, but mostly just endure lives under the control of others. The 
final copy will have full-color illustrations.  AS
JAmieson, ViCtoriA The Great Pet Escape; written and illus. by Victoria Jamie-
son. Holt, 2016 64p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62779-105-2 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-62779-106-9 $7.99   
R Gr. 3-5
GW, Barry, and Boneyard Biter are all doing hard time in the joint—that joint 
being Daisy P. Flugelhorn Elementary School, where they are class pets. One night 
GW manages to bust out of his cage, and he sets off to grab his buddies to make 
a getaway. Prison has made his pals soft, though: Barry the Bunny wants to finish 
the book he’s reading with the first-graders, and Biter—now calling herself Sun-
flower—has resolved her anger issues using helpful advice from kindergartners: “We 
talk a lot about feelings.” Still, GW manages to convince them to escape, but their 
plan is almost thwarted by the fourth-grade pets, Harriet the mouse and her mice 
358 • The BulleTin
minions. The pace and humor of this graphic novel hit the ground running (or 
scurrying) and never relent. The opening scenes of hamster GW, with his oversized 
ears and his adorable buck teeth, seen in shadow as he counts the days he’s been 
locked up in his “cell,” set the stage for a fuzzy, furry criminal romp through the 
school hallways. There’s chubby charm to each figure, all with rotund bellies and 
itsy bitsy arms, and the scene in which GW and Sunflower squeeze poor Barry into 
a roller skate (a clever nod to Jamieson’s previous outing, Roller Girl, BCCB 4/15) 
and send him off zooming down the hallway is not to be forgotten. The speech 
bubbles occasionally take on the square shapes that also serve as cues for GW’s 
narration, which could cause some confusion, but otherwise panel variation and 
full spreads are used to great effect. Readers might give a sideways glance or two at 
their own class pets after reading this one.  KQG
JenKins, emily Tiger and Badger; illus. by Marie-Louise Gay. Candlewick, 
2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6604-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Badger and Tiger are best friends, but can that friendship stay intact through the 
typical sniping (who gets to sit in the chair, who gets the only popsicle, who gets to 
decide what to play) and the occasional physical spat between two young buddies? 
Well, yes, it can. Refreshingly, it’s not thoughtful apologies or adult intervention 
that bring the pair back together, but humor, as Tiger pulls a funny face and makes 
Badger laugh, which breaks the tension and allows the anger to pass. In her brief, 
clear narrative, Jenkins presents, with keen precision, the kind of antagonizing 
behavior in which youthful friends engage: “Tiger puts on Badger’s hat. He sits in 
Badger’s chair. He eats two of Badger’s orange slices. ‘That’s my chair,’ says Badger. 
‘I was sitting there,’ says Badger. ‘I was sitting there before you came.’ Tiger eats 
another orange slice. And another.” While this will make an entertaining readaloud 
selection, the simple vocabulary and frequent use of repetition will put this within 
reach of many novice readers as well. Gay’s art, in watercolor, acrylic ink, acrylic 
paint, and pencil, effectively captures both the motion and emotion of the furry 
friends, with lively body positions and swirly lines conveying movement and mood 
and occasional dark, scribbly anger clouds appearing above each figure’s head to 
add emphasis at times. Pair this with Kirk’s You Are Not My Friend, but I Miss You 
(BCCB 1/15) for a story session about friends making up after a fight, or pair up 
primary-graders to buddy read with it.  JH
Johnson, JAnet sumner The Last Great Adventure of the PB & J Society. Cap-
stone, 2016 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-62370-636-4 $12.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
When her best friend Jason tells ten-year-old Annie that he and his family are 
moving because his dad lost his job, it’s pretty obvious that the neighborhood’s 
elite espionage agency, the PB&J Society, is doomed, since Annie and Jason are 
its only members. Annie’s not about to give up that quickly, though, and she’s got 
more than one plan to get the Society out of this jam. Find Jason’s dad a job? Hm, 
turns out he’s not so keen on two kids helping him out. Sell her appendix through 
the Internet? Legalities might get in the way. Win the lottery? Their state of Utah 
March 2016 • 359
doesn’t have one. Annie’s sure they’ve struck gold when an elderly neighbor lady 
tells them of pirate queen Black Marge and the treasure that might have been buried 
nearby, but Jason wonders if Mrs. Schuster is just a lonely old woman looking for 
company. Annie narrates with spunk and style, and her a do-or-die attitude moves 
the plot along at a nice clip. Unfortunately, nearly all of the characters are made 
from cardboard, from Annie’s bullying older siblings to her hapless dad to Mrs. 
Schuster—who really is just an old lady looking for company—while Jason is just 
plain vanilla boring. The most interesting part, the tale of Black Marge, is given 
limited page count, condensed in favor of more of Annie and Jason’s repetitive 
arguing. The conclusion’s sentiment is only slightly less goopy than an overstuffed 
PB&J, but it’s heartwarming nonetheless, and readers looking for a sweet story of 
neighborly goodwill may leave satisfied.  KQG
KeAtinG, Jess Pink Is for Blobfish: Discovering the World’s Perfectly Pink Animals; 
illus. by David DeGrand and with photographs. Knopf, 2016 42p (The 
World of Weird Animals)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51228-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51227-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Bratz, Monster High, and their ilk have recently demonstrated that how much at-
titude pink can pack, but Nature has been onto this fact for quite a while. Keating 
rattles off seventeen creatures from land, sea, and air whose coloration punches a 
hole in in pink’s girly-girl image. Despite their pastel hue, the amorphous Austra-
lian blobfish, which “lazily drift through the ocean like bloated pink balloons,” 
are startlingly ugly—at least to the non-blobfish demographic. Pygmy seahorses, 
pocked with polka-dot-like pink nodes, use their pink to camouflage themselves 
among coral. Pink fairy armadillos, rarely seen even by researchers, have more 
in common with earth-moving machines than fairy-tale princesses. Each beastie 
gets a double-page spread with a close-up photograph, a brief description, some 
color (ahem) commentary, and a sidebar of data including common and scientific 
names, size, diet, habitat, and predators and threats; Keating also relates how the 
pink specifically functions as an adaptation. End matter includes a glossary of 
words highlighted within the text, a world map with an alphabetized legend of the 
featured animals, and a few resources for further print and online exploration. The 
next title in this new World of Weird Animals series will shift to bloodsuckers, but 
readers intrigued by the pink theme might want to research their way around the 
color wheel on their own.  EB
Khoury, JessiCA The Forbidden Wish. Razorbill, 2016 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-767-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Five hundred years ago, jinni Zahra was trapped in her lamp and left in a buried 
city after she killed Queen Roshana, starting the war between jinnis and humans. 
Aladdin manages to find her lamp and bring it to Parthenia, where he will wish 
on the lamp to kill the vizier and avenge his parents’ death. Zahra, however, has 
been promised freedom by the jinni king if she manages to liberate his son, who 
is imprisoned in the palace; she convinces Aladdin to change his path to revenge 
by becoming a prince, marrying the crown princess, and becoming king—and 
also getting Zahra into the palace in the meantime. Complications arise, however, 
360 • The BulleTin
when Caspida, the crown princess, turns out to be a force to be reckoned with, 
while Zahra finds herself falling in love with Aladdin, a path that she knows will 
only end in misery. Khoury’s sumptuous, vibrant prose is perfectly suited for this 
tale of betrayal and seduction set against the beauty of jeweled gardens, ornate 
palace rooms, and hot, sweeping desert sands. The romance that blossoms between 
Zahra and Aladdin unfolds sweetly, but it’s really Zahra’s long-ago relationship with 
Roshana, depicted in scenes interspersed throughout the novel, that will capture 
readers. When the truth behind the queen’s death is revealed, Zahra’s guilt and her 
fear of loving Aladdin become painfully, palpably clear. Caspida’s connection to 
Roshana and her link to Zahra are also surprises, and instead of pitting the women 
against each other for Aladdin’s heart, Khoury wisely unites them in a fight against 
a common enemy. Gorgeous and complex, this is a wish granted to fans of fantasy, 
romance, or just good storytelling.  KQG
Kletter, Kerry The First Time She Drowned. Philomel, 2016 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17103-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Cassie’s whole life had been about trying to earn the love of her mercurial, emotion-
ally abusive mother. When the abuse became physical, Cassie attempted suicide, 
which provided an excuse for her mother to commit Cassie to two and a half years 
of inpatient psychiatric care until, inexplicably to Cassie, her mother agrees to pay 
for her to attend college. Cassie’s college start is inauspicious, with a bout of pneu-
monia following a nearly fatal swim in an ocean riptide, but she makes a friend, 
attracts a boy, and opens up to a counselor who helps her see that the problem lies 
with her mother’s mental health and some repressed memories rather than her own 
inability to cope. Cassie’s inner life and personal history are richly chronicled, and 
the titular metaphor of drowning is well developed. The details are contrived and 
implausible, though; it’s unlikely that the financially strapped family could afford 
to pay for Cassie’s pricey institutional care, and it’s not clear why, beyond novelistic 
necessity, Cassie refused to participate in therapy that might have resulted in her 
release from the hospital but readily opens up to the counselor at the college. That 
said, Cassie’s emotional arc is compelling, giving readers plenty of clues to target 
her as an unreliable witness to her own experiences while asking themselves how 
they would have responded in similar circumstances.  KC
KoChAlKA, JAmes The Glorkian Warrior and the Mustache of Destiny; written and 
illus. by James Kochalka. First Second, 2016 [126p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-372-6 $19.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-022-0 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
In the third volume of this wacky graphic novel series (The Glorkian Warrior Eats 
Adventure Pie, BCCB 4/15, etc.), the Glorkian Warrior is still certain that he is a 
grand space adventurer, so the addition of four small aliens that want to learn his 
ways is flattering, if irritating. His backpack (the Warrior’s unexpected sidekick) 
advises him to not take on this particular challenge, but before he can commit ei-
ther way, they all find themselves battling the Quackaboodle, a space god who was 
trapped for a thousand years and is now eager to cause havoc. In keeping with the 
former two volumes, the plot is a ludicrous mess, but it’s a fun one, and when the 
March 2016 • 361
Glorkian Super-Grandma shows up offering to turn everyone into instant adults, 
it only gets better (and more ridiculous). The bold illustration color choices add 
instant appeal, with pinks and purples cozying up with turquoise and oranges, all 
against vibrant space backgrounds. The humor level continues to hover between 
sly and slapstick, and the Glorkian Warrior’s complete obliviousness about his own 
limitations (think Inspector Gadget) is particularly amusing in this outing, since 
it’s the kid aliens who are key to saving him. Fans will rejoice at a new book, and 
newbies will do just fine without any context—but they’ll be happy there are a 
couple more series titles to dip into while they wait for the next one.  AS
lAure, estelle This Raging Light. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-544-53429-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Lucille’s mother departs for a two-week vacation “to gather her thoughts,” but 
instead of returning she merely mails seventeen-year-old Lucille $100 and a terse 
note; since Lucille’s father left the family after a violent altercation earlier that year, 
that means Lucille’s on her own in taking care of the house and her younger sister, 
Wren. Lucille grits her teeth, finds a job, and arranges impromptu care for fourth-
grader Wren; mostly she depends on the assistance of her devoted best friend, Eden, 
and Eden’s twin brother, Digby, whom Lucille loves in more than a friendly way. As 
her mother shows no sign of returning, the strain begins to tell on Lucille, but her 
defensive ways make it hard for her to open up and seek the help she needs, even 
when things go from bad to worse. Laure writes engagingly, and Lucille’s narration 
effectively conveys the way her valid fury at the situation splashes onto those who 
seek to help. Her maybe-romance with Digby is tantalizing, and the book limns 
both her uncertainty about his feelings and frustration with that uncertainty. The 
story spins out of control, however, when it throws additional tragedy into the mix 
and then fails to resolve most of the significant threads, so the ramped-up tension of 
Lucille’s situation never achieves any satisfying release and readers will be left with 
important questions (what is up with Lucille’s mother?) unanswered. The notion 
of a teen holding her family together when the adults have let go is still a potent 
one, though, and while readers may wish for more resolution, they’ll sympathize 
with driven and loving Lucille.  DS
leAVitt, lindsey The Pages between Us; written by Lindsey Leavitt and Robin 
Mellom; illus. by Abby Dening. Harper/HarperCollins, 2016 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-237771-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-237773-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
When BFFs Piper (dramatic and personable) and Olivia (super smart and super 
shy) learn they only have one class together their sixth-grade year, they decide a 
notebook, swapped back and forth, will keep them connected throughout the day. 
Soon, social challenges demand they expand their social horizons, and the impos-
sibly close twosome try out various clubs together in an attempt to find twelve 
friends to attend Piper’s birthday party and to get Olivia comfortable with talking 
to people. Of course, what works for one doesn’t necessarily work for the other, and 
the girls find themselves torn between their friendship and new obligations. The 
novel readers hold in their hands is the notebook the girls create, complete with 
362 • The BulleTin
alternating handwriting, drafts of notes to crushes, and supplemental ephemera in an 
invitingly browsable format. However, the necessary conflict takes quite some time 
to manifest, so there’s a lot to wade through in the mean time, and the girls have a 
preternatural maturity when it comes to identifying and solving their problems that 
doesn’t ring true. Still, Leavitt and Mellom have made the girls’ challenges—with 
each other, with their peers, with their families, and with themselves—relatable 
to those readers struggling to navigate the changes that middle school brings.  AA
lenzi, Christy Stone Field. Roaring Brook, 2016 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-069-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Cat is a victim of her perpetually inflamed emotions, which 
turn dark after her mother is killed in an accident that is clearly Cat’s fault. As 
her brother, Henry, tries to rein her in to become the kind of demure, respectable 
woman antebellum times in Missouri demand, she seeks solace in transforming 
natural bits and bobs into ephemeral works of art. One day, while she is pursuing 
her “wild work,” she sees a naked, golden-skinned man creating patterns in her 
father’s sorghum field. Though fever has robbed him of his memory, the two sense 
an immediate, soul-deep connection, and Cat’s father takes the man in, impressed 
with his ability to quote Shakespeare and Whitman. The lusty, intense attraction 
between Cat and the man they call Stonefield is unstoppable despite the mistrust 
of their small-minded neighbors; their mistrust turns dangerous when they discover 
that Stonefield is a mission-reared Creek, since the Muscogee Creeks are refusing to 
take sides in the upcoming War between the States. Lenzi ingeniously reimagines 
the English moors of Wuthering Heights as the rolling hills of Missouri, framing a 
fate for Cat and Stonefield that is even more tragically doomed than that of Cath-
erine and Heathcliff. Stonefield’s rage at being stripped of his past and his future 
and Cat’s fierce resentment toward God and her entrapment into a marriage with 
a preacher spill out in torrential prose that sweeps the reader along in its wake 
of passion and prejudice. While secondary characters Dora, Lu, and Reverend 
Preston are drawn from central casting, Cat’s best friend, Effie, is fascinating as a 
white missionary’s black daughter who plans to study medicine and return to the 
Congo as a doctor; in fact, there are many surprises in this mash-up of Brontë, 
Shakespeare, and multicultural American history. Fans of Civil War fiction and/or 
literary romance with a capital R will enjoy losing themselves in this tumultuous 
tragedy. An author’s note clarifies the intentional inspirations, but avid readers will 
note unnamed ones as well.  KC
london, JonAthAn Otters Love to Play; illus. by Meilo So. Candlewick, 
2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6913-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-8 yrs
Kids who enjoyed London’s introduction to those poop-flinging heavyweight hippos 
(Hippos Are Huge, BCCB 5/15) will be delighted with this return engagement on 
North American river otters. Again a double-layered text presents one narrative in 
larger bold text that follows a year in the life of otter cub siblings complemented by 
smaller-font commentary on physiology and/or behavior. Thus younger children 
may be content to watch the otters cavort in the snow (“Winter doesn’t slow otters 
March 2016 • 363
down. The pups’ fur is thick and warm”) while more skeptical or anxious listeners 
will be reassured to know that “otters have dense fur with protective guard hairs and 
produce an oil that keeps their skin dry.” So’s watercolor illustrations are as supple 
and sinuous as their subject; dark hatching and dashes of delicate outlining give the 
otters a solidity that contrasts well with their translucently rendered surroundings. 
This is a mating-free text that, while doubtless assuaging squeamish adults who 
prefer to dodge that question, obviously omits a significant arc in the otters’ life 
cycle. However, kids content to watch these reliably adorable critters frolic through 
four seasons will be thoroughly entertained as they sharpen their observational skills. 
An index and a brief end note about otters on other continents are included.  EB
lonG, mAtty Super Happy Magic Forest; written and illus. by Matty Long. Scho-
lastic, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-86059-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 2-4
The book delivers on the promises: this forest is indeed super, happy, and magical. 
With Lollipop Pond, the Dancing Fields, Happy Bunnies, Never Ending Picnics, 
etc., the opportunities for superness, happiness, and magicalness are endless. The 
idyll is shattered, however, when the Mystical Crystals of Life, the source of all 
the fun, are stolen. Five intrepid heroes—Hoofius the centaur, Herbert the garden 
gnome, Twinkle the fairy, Blossom the unicorn, and Trevor the mushroom—are 
chosen to retrieve the crystals and restore the Super Happy Magic Forest to its 
absurdly cheerful form. What follows is a fantastically funny journey through 
the tropes of quest stories, including but not limited to The Lord of the Rings, 
The Wizard of Oz, and Super Mario Brothers. The ribbing is clearly done with 
warmth, though, and the various sendups are as affectionate as they are comical. 
Blissful naïveté lies behind Blossom’s steadfast optimism, Herbert will likely write 
a travelogue about his experience, and Trevor the mushroom—well, let’s just say 
that fun guy (ha!) steals the scene on more than one occasion. The art, hand drawn 
and digitally colored, bursts with energy and detail despite its cartoonish lack of 
depth, and visual gags abound. The book’s biggest triumph, however, is that even 
kids with no knowledge of its various pop culture references will still have loads 
of fun with the comic speech-bubble text and the clever art. Each spread sends 
readers on a quest of their own when a character declares a missing item must 
be found (the three-eyed owl is spotted in the Super Creepy Haunted Forest, for 
instance, and a pink teapot is retrieved from Goblin Tower). Kids can also search 
for the orange butterfly that lags behind the group and that eventually reveals the 
true villain. Readers and almost-readers will pore over this, and they’ll find a new 
joke every time.  KQG
lonGo, Jennifer Up to This Pointe. Random House, 2016 [368p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53768-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53767-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53769-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 341.
364 • The BulleTin
loVe, JessiCA In Real Life. Dunne/St. Martin’s Griffin, 2016 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-06471-4 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-7099-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
From eighth grade to twelfth, Hannah and Nick email, text, chat, and Skype each 
other after being online-introduced by their siblings; they’ve just never met face 
to face. Now, in the throes of anger that her “Good Korean Girl DNA” didn’t get 
her the trip to Washington, DC, that she was expecting for spring break, Hannah 
is persuaded by her sister and her best friend that it’s time to go to Las Vegas to see 
Nick’s band play and confess her love, which the girls are sure will be returned. Heavy 
weather is made of Hannah’s reluctance to break both self- and parent-imposed 
rules and a few laws, and then, when she gets to Vegas, she finds that the Nick she 
thought kept no secrets from her has in fact been lying to her about some pretty 
significant things. He’s got a girlfriend, for one thing, and Hannah has to decide 
whether he’s a guy worth fighting for, especially since his girlfriend seems like a re-
ally nice person. The plot follows a shopworn romance pattern, with conveniently 
timed interruptions preventing revelations that might forestall misunderstandings 
and just as conveniently timed interventions that lead to a happy ending for Nick 
and Hannah. Meanwhile, however, readers are treated to a romp through what’s 
possible to do in one night when you are under age, albeit with a passable fake ID, 
in Las Vegas, so this is may be an enjoyable outing for fans of travel romances.  KC
lowitz, lezA Up from the Sea. Crown, 2016 260p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53475-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 987-0-553-53474-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53476-4 $10.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Brief free-verse poems follow Kai, a half-Japanese, half-American boy, as his Japanese 
home is destroyed by the 2011 tsunami. Sheltered in his junior high building and 
surviving on salvage and whatever support can be found, Kai hangs on along with 
his few surviving classmates, hopes desperately but forlornly for news of his mother 
and his grandparents, and tries to keep himself going with a makeshift version of 
his beloved soccer. He also tries to track down his long-estranged American father, 
wondering if he can provide the home and missing piece that Kai has longed for. The 
verse is prosy at times, but the short titled entries are accessibly written, and they 
occasionally offer stark images of the devastation (“They found/ pieces of Grandpa’s 
boat/ crushed like seashells/ against the rocky/ shore”). Kai’s contemplation of his 
mixed-race status, which has made him the target of bullies, is thoughtful and re-
latable, and while he has a valuable visit to the U.S., the book wisely doesn’t make 
America his salvation. The soccer thread is subtle at times—it is, understandably, 
sometimes conceptually as well as literally buried in the wreckage—but it will be 
a point of connection for many young readers, who will understand how love of 
a game can sustain people in the hardest of times. Footnotes explain occasional 
Japanese terms; a brief preface and an afterword explain the earthquake and tsunami 
and describe the author’s experiences as a Tokyo resident during the disaster.  DS
March 2016 • 365
mAnzer, Jenny Save Me, Kurt Cobain. Delacorte, 2016 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52127-6 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52126-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52128-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Nico is fourteen, and she’s ready for some answers. Her solid, unimaginative father 
is so completely opposite to her in temperament that she suspects he’s not really 
her father at all, and when she finds a crate of her mother’s CDs, with a picture 
of her mother standing very close to Kurt Cobain, her obsession with alternative 
music finally makes sense to her; her real father, she thinks, must be Kurt Cobain. 
On the way home from a visit to Seattle, she sees a man who has enough physical 
similarities and furtive mannerisms to convince her that he is actually Cobain, and 
she stows away in his car and ends up in a secluded cabin with a very edgy man who 
fears that he might be accused of kidnapping. Aside from a few slips of the tongue, 
she never confronts him with her suspicions, but he is compelled enough by her 
story to try to help her, and she eventually finds the answers she’s looking for, as 
well as a new understanding of herself. Her chance meeting with a guy who looks 
like Cobain, has his own secrets, and is actually in a position to help her is overly 
convenient, and the plot is burdened with an anticlimactic resolution to the mystery 
and a contrived ending where all is way more than forgiven. For fans of Cobain, 
however, this is a treasure trove of factoids about his life as well as an homage to 
his music. In fact, it would aid comprehension to bone up on Nirvana before or 
while reading given the saturation of allusions and references. Readers who want 
to develop their indie-kid cred may therefore find this a good starting place.  KC
mArCiAno, John BemelmAns Mischief Season: A Twins Story; illus. by Sophie 
Blackall. Viking, 2016 [128p] (The Witches of Benevento)
ISBN 978-0-451-47181-9 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
This first book of a planned series introduces the Janara, mysterious, rarely seen 
witches who can disguise themselves as anyone, appear primarily during mischief 
seasons, and control the weather. The small Italian town of Benevento has a generous 
share of the beings, and Rosa and her twin brother Emilio are determined to stop 
a recent round of Janara trouble, particularly since Rosa is being blamed for many 
of the naughty tricks being played. Their attempts fail, however, until Emilio gets 
some advice that finally restores peace and balance to Benevento. Rosa, Emilio, 
and their friends are typical kids in that they bicker as much as they cooperate, and 
there is a lot of character development packed into this trim novel. Blackall’s warm, 
charming illustrations accent the text, emphasizing Rosa’s prickliness, Emilio’s open 
approach, and the quaint design of the village itself. There is a folktale feel to the 
story, and the knitted caps, old-fashioned clothing, and elfin qualities of Blackall’s 
characters enhance the flavor. End matter for final copy will include a field guide 
and town history.  AS
366 • The BulleTin
mAsChAri, Jennifer The Remarkable Journey of Charlie Price. Balzer + Bray/
HarperCollins, 2016 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238010-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238012-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Nothing has been the same for Charlie since his mother died. His father works 
constantly to avoid being home, leaving Charlie to care for his younger sister, 
Imogen, who looks increasingly tired and somehow faded. When he discovers a 
mysterious trap door beneath her bed, Charlie follows Imogen into a parallel world 
where their mother is alive and well, eager to entertain them and have them stay 
with her. As with the “Other Mother” of Gaiman’s Coraline, however, something 
is off, and Charlie must save his sister from a world where phantoms of the de-
parted feed on the memories of the living. That’s a truly creepy concept that creates 
adrenaline-pumping moments, and it’s an interesting complement to the Gaiman 
or to Auxier’s The Night Gardener (BCCB 5/14). However, an excessive number 
of plot elements (a friend lost in the same world, a dog with uncanny insight, a 
baker who knows more than she lets on), some of which become a little messagey, 
undercut and distract from the chills. Still, readers encountering grief in their own 
lives may find wisdom in the novel’s lessons, which strike an emotional chord in 
their insight and earnestness.  AA
mCCAffrey, lAurA williAms Marked; illus. by Sally Cantirino. Clarion, 
2016 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-547-23556-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Lyla knows that only the best and brightest get to go to University, but it’s tough 
when even relatively small things can get you Marked as a criminal. She does indeed 
get a tattoo that evidences her crime, and life as she knows it seems over until she is 
offered an ethically shaky chance to get her Mark removed. Since life as a Marked 
person offers few possibilities, Lyla must weigh her morality against pragmatism in 
a dystopian world with few good options. Short snippets of graphic novel entries 
featuring the rebellious hero Pirate Jackman break up the text, offering a bit more 
cultural background and a hint of the recreational outlets are available to the driven 
teens. Lyla herself is indecisive and driven by impulse far more than reason, but 
she’s appealingly vulnerable; it’s clear she deserves way better than life has dealt 
her, as do many of those who surround her. If the villains are a bit one-sided, the 
societal framework at least makes this believable, and the gritty, determined people 
trying to find their way are all the more compelling when compared with their 
evil adversaries.  AS
mCGoVern, CAmmie Just My Luck. Harper/HarperCollins, 2016 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233065-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233067-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
It’s a tough fourth-grade year for Benny. He’s searching for a new best friend since 
his old one moved away, his autistic older brother continues to be a challenge, 
and his legendary new teacher is turning out to be not just a letdown but a worry. 
Worst of all, though, is his father’s recent aneurysm and brain surgery, which has 
March 2016 • 367
left him impaired and left Benny feeling not only anxious but guilty, since it was a 
modest collision between the two on the local high school track that precipitated 
his dad’s injury. Benny is a deeply sympathetic narrator, and his distress that of-
ficial appreciation seems to be coming to everybody but him and his fear that it’s 
because he lacks significance are keenly conveyed. There’s way too much going 
on in the story, however, preventing deep focus on any one thing; there’s also a 
purposive touch to the proceedings and especially to the neuroatypical characters, 
who sometimes are overleaned on as plot devices rather than personalities. The 
emphasis on the importance of kindness is valuable, however, and the accessible 
prose helps make this suitable fodder for discussion or an additional choice for fans 
of Lisa Graff’s work.  DS
modesto, miChelle Revenge and the Wild. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 
2016 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-236615-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-236617-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Orphaned at a young age, seventeen-year-old Westie has grown up in a rough-and-
tumble California frontier town full of magical creatures and barely reformed crimi-
nals under the watchful eye of renowned inventor Nigel Butler and his attractive 
young assistant Alistair. She’s still haunted by memories of losing her arm and her 
family to cannibals, and her quick-draw wit and sassy demeanor barely mask her 
insatiable drive for revenge. Unfortunately, personal vendettas must be put aside, 
because the magical wards that protect the townspeople are failing and only Nigel’s 
new invention can fix it, if he can find investors to fund it. Westie reluctantly puts 
on her most sophisticated front to help woo a wealthy visiting family, but she is 
shocked by their likeness to the cannibals she’s been pursuing. Now Westie must 
decide if she’s willing to sacrifice the town and people she loves for her only chance 
at vengeance. Successfully blending elements of fantasy and the western, with shades 
of steampunk and a dash of romance, this entertaining novel is pleasingly creative. 
The revenge plot is the perfect fit for both western and fantasy quest fans, and 
though the plotting is at times uneven and illogical, consistent action, well-crafted 
colloquialisms, and descriptive prose will keep readers engaged from beginning to 
end. Unfortunately, the genre blending also provides the novel’s greatest weaknesses, 
particularly the overcrowded use of magical creatures and problematic stereotypes 
of magical natives. Westie is likewise a mixed success; appealing yet static, she may 
drink, swear, and brawl her way into readers’ hearts, but her frustrating heedless-
ness and constant need of rescue undermine her effectiveness as a heroine. More 
thoughtful readers will sense a novel that doesn’t live up to its potential, but those 
willing to forgive the weak points may enjoy the ride.  AM
montAnAri, susAn mCelroy My Dog’s a Chicken; illus. by Anne Wils-
dorf. Schwartz & Wade, 2016 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38491-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38490-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38492-6 $10.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Little Lula Mae longs for a dog, but since she can’t have one, she’ll just pretend 
that one of her family’s many chickens is a canine companion. She names her 
chosen hen Pookie and happily brags about her new pet, seeing each poultry show 
368 • The BulleTin
of resistance as a wonderful canine characteristic (“She’s a shepherd dog, too,” 
declares Lula Mae when Pookie runs around the other chickens). Pookie’s final 
display of canine prowess is as a “search and rescue dog,” when Lula Mae’s baby 
brother toddles off and Pookie knows where he’s gone—into the henhouse—thus 
finally winning over Lula Mae’s mother and earning permission to dwell indoors. 
The pattern of the plot and the use of repetition make for easy storytelling, and the 
writing is entertainingly folksy. The chicken-as-dog premise will tickle youngsters’ 
funny bones, and Wilsdorf’s lively watercolor and China ink illustrations add to 
the humor as Pookie and the other pop-eyed chickens skitter and scatter across the 
pages. Perky Lula Mae (sporting short brown hair, red overall shorts, and flip flops) 
and the other people look like characters sprung from a classic Jack Kent book. 
Chicken lovers will flock to this, and wannabe dog owners may cast a speculative 
eye at the local fauna after meeting Pookie.  JH
morfit, CAmeron Lucky Boy. Elevate Fiction, 2016 [192p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-9964-6550-2 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Max Buras, age thirteen, is the quintessential middle child. With thick glasses and 
no physique worth mentioning, he’s not as social or swoonworthy as his older sister; 
with good grades and no behavioral problems, he doesn’t command the parental 
attention of his younger brother, Gabe, whose refusal to speak has been variously 
diagnosed by an array of doctors and counselors. Then Max’s distant ne’er-do-well 
relative, Dewey Tomlinson, blows into town. Following the cryptic advice of a 
phone-in psychic, “Uncle” Dewey gloms on to Max as his ticket to a better life—that 
is, to better success as a gambler. As the video poker machines crank out Dewey’s 
winnings and even Max’s overall fortunes improve, they both come to believe that 
“harmonic convergence” is at work and, as long as they remain in touch, their mutual 
good luck is assured. Or maybe not: Gabe starts to speak in Dewey’s presence, and 
it’s Gabe whose birth date aligns with Dewey’s. Just who or what is causing this 
lucky streak? And can it continue when Dewey’s grim secrets are revealed just as 
he’s starting to turn his life around? Morfit observes his characters from a safe nar-
rative distance, but his tone is one of bemusement rather than clinical detachment 
as luck, if luck there is, toys with the Buras/Tomlinson clan but ultimately sends 
them all down the path to a contented future. Or maybe Max and “Uncle” Dewey 
just grow up a little. In this case the fun lies in never quite figuring it all out.  EB
nArsimhAn, mAhtAB Mission Mumbai: A Novel of Sacred Cows, Snakes, and Stolen 
Toilets. Scholastic, 2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-74651-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-74652-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Dylan’s over the moon to accompany his best friend Rohit and Rohit’s parents 
to Mumbai for the wedding of a cousin. The Lals have been a second family to 
Dylan, who befriended their son when they arrived in America, and they give 
much needed attention to the boy, whose wealthy parents’ idea of nurturing is of-
fering up material goodies and little else. Dylan’s an adventurous sort, delighting 
in new foods and new sights, but too often his embrace of all things Indian runs 
ahead of cultural awareness, and the Lals are frequently called on to intervene with 
March 2016 • 369
information (think squat toilets) and even protection (Hindus don’t take kindly 
to kids slapping cows in the street). Dylan suspects this accounts for Rohit’s short 
temper and sullen behavior toward him. The truth, though, runs deeper, as Rohit’s 
paternal aunt, who has been bankrolling the Lals’ American resettlement, now 
wants her nephew back in India for a proper education and will bully her brother 
and his wife into getting her way. The boys’ situation, in which a friendship that 
jogged along well in one setting strains at the seams in another, rings true, and the 
fact that the tension manifests in sulkiness and sniping rather than a set-to aug-
ments the credibility. The madcap Bollywood wedding scene climax is somewhat 
at odds with the book’s tone, but it’s nonetheless amusing, and a little levity and a 
big monsoon are just the ticket for washing the boys’ summer troubles away.  EB
nAylor, phyllis reynolds Going Where It’s Dark. Delacorte, 2016 321p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51243-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51242-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51244-1 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Now that his best friend and former caving partner David has moved to Pennsyl-
vania, Buck carries on alone, disregarding safety to dig deep into the caves around 
their Virginia community, finding in caving a chance to retreat from a world that 
holds him at arm’s length because of his stuttering. This heedlessness means nobody 
knows where Buck is when bullies lower him into a pit within the caving system. 
Now it’s up to Buck to use his skills and ingenuity to get himself out, or at least 
to a place where rescuers might find him. The subplot that revolves around Buck’s 
stuttering is heartfelt and thoroughly developed, and it could have been the sole 
focus of a novel on its own. However, it never quite coalesces with the larger sto-
ryline of Buck’s adventures in caving, and readers who have signed on for a tale of 
danger and adventure may find Buck’s personal drama to be distracting and Buck’s 
mentor, a gruff but tender old man, to be an obvious archetype amid a realistic 
cast. However, there’s enough claustrophobic peril to keep readers involved—and 
to elicit unease in adults if their kids come home unaccountably muddy.  EB
nelson, mArilyn American Ace. Dial, 2016 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3305-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Connor’s boisterous Italian-American extended family is the touchstone of his 
existence. It’s therefore a huge shock when a letter his grandmother leaves after her 
death informs the family that Connor’s father is actually the son of an American 
pilot who was in Sicily during the war; that’s followed by another shock when 
Connor follows the clues to find out that that American pilot was one of the fa-
mous Tuskegee Airmen—and that Connor’s father is therefore half black. Despite 
Connor’s initial sleuthing, the book focuses less on the mystery (Connor never 
pins down his grandfather’s identity or reaches out to possible new family) than on 
the implications for Connor’s identity and on the Tuskegee flyers themselves, with 
Connor’s research into the famous pilots counterpointing his story of his family. 
The story is somewhat on the sketchy side, but Nelson’s famous free-verse poems, 
each a page long and introduced by a title, offer glimpses of Connor’s thoughtful 
exploration of his changed self-concept and of the different way he views aspects 
of the world now that he has, almost literally, skin in the game (“a blackness that 
370 • The BulleTin
has more to do with how/ you see than how you’re seen”). It’s an intriguingly yet 
plausibly low-key response overall, which allows contemplation to take precedence 
over broader emotions. A closing note gives some insight into the author’s develop-
ment of the story.  DS
o’heArn, KAte Valkyrie. Aladdin, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4737-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4739-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Freya doesn’t want to be a Valkyrie: she hates humans and their endless violence, 
she’s bored with Valhalla, and she’s dreading her first reaping. Nevertheless, off she 
goes to her first mission, where she meets Tyrone, a dying man who makes her 
promise she will help his family. Armed with his cell phone and Loki’s assurances 
of assistance (always a sound plan), Freya heads to Earth, where she discovers hu-
mans are much more complex than she ever imagined and that some of them are 
even worth emotional investment. The scenes in Asgard are gripping, with lush 
descriptions of Valhalla and the Bifrost bridge. Unfortunately, Freya on Earth is far 
less compelling, as she flips from being a haughty non-human (with wings hidden 
under a coat) to an insecure, angsty teen depending on what is needed for the plot. 
In addition, there are a number of life or death scenarios where Freya feels compelled 
to break her own rules of non-engagement and step in, and the pattern becomes 
tiresome. Even with the concerns, however, readers who can’t get enough of Norse 
gods and goddesses may find that aspect of the tale satisfying.  AS
pArKs, KAthy The Lifeboat Clique. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2016 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239396-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239399-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Denver Reynolds’ timing couldn’t have been worse. Something of a social pariah 
since she fell out with Abigail, her fellow transplant to LA and best friend since 
middle school, Denver finally decides to flout the high school caste system, crashing 
an A-list party to meet up with an A-list guy who’s been showing interest. Unfortu-
nately, that’s the night a tsunami hits the west coast and obliterates the party house, 
sweeping away Denver’s sort-of date and leaving her adrift on the ocean in a broken 
boat with Abigail, her mean girl sycophants, and one tanned dude who promises 
to be about as useful as oars on a cruise ship. As long as the food and water hold 
out, everyone has energy to keep social distinctions in play, closing ranks against 
Denver for her unforgivable mistreatment of Abigail. Their survival is the most 
obvious and imminent goal, but the heart of the story lies in the reasons behind 
the Denver/Abigail rift and whether their life-or-death predicament will end in 
reconciliation or ruin. Certainly this is pastiche, but Parks knows how to cull the 
best bits from tried-and-true survival, bullying, and frenemy storylines and turn 
them into a compulsive read. Although the message-heavy rapprochement feels 
slightly off kilter for both character and tone, friendship carries the day; it’s safe to 
predict, though, that readers will care more about the drama than its resolution.  EB
March 2016 • 371
pArry, rosAnne The Turn of the Tide. Random House, 2016 294p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86972-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98535-5 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Half-American and half-Japanese, Kai lives in Japan with his parents, who work at a 
nuclear plant; after the 2011 tsunami hits, Kai is sent to stay with American relatives 
while the team at the plant struggles to stabilize the situation. Kai’s twelve-year-old 
cousin, Jet, is a committed sailor, following in the wake of her father, a bar pilot at 
the mouth of the Columbia River. She takes Kai on as a crew as she prepares for 
her first crack at the prestigious Treasure Island Race, but will her resentment of 
her competing classmates and his fear of water prevent their success? The degree to 
which the tragedy of the tsunami, including the deaths of Kai’s grandparents, and 
the tension of the nuclear plant events are swept aside is puzzling and implausible 
(Jet’s parents don’t even address the disaster directly with her), and characterization 
is largely rudimentary. That being said, this is mostly an old-fashioned sporting 
and adventure story, offering an approachable writing style, young people out from 
under adult supervision, a struggle toward a competitive goal, and some dramatic 
and unexpected obstacles; Parry adds interest with details about ship piloting and 
life where sailing is as natural as walking. Readers looking for a genuinely tsunami-
focused story will want to check out Lowitz’s Up from the Sea, reviewed above, but 
those looking for some latter-day Swallows and Amazons maritime adventuring 
may want to climb aboard. End matter provides a glossary and background on the 
maritime details and the tsunami.  DS
peeVyhouse, pArKer Where Futures End. Dawson/Penguin, 2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4160-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
In this complex book, vorpal is a force that allows rare people to transport to the 
Other Place, but over the course of these five novellas that span 100 years of a 
decaying world, readers will learn that it is probably better that this access had 
never happened. Each story references the earlier ones, building the toxic interplays 
between Earth and the Other Place that led to the ruination of both after the two 
get stuck together. Each character faces a specific situation that changes him or her, 
but Peevyhouse also intricately and effectively uses their stories for world building, 
moving from a mostly familiar world in the first story (set “one year from now”) 
to one that is barely recognizable in the later entries. It’s a heady mix requiring 
some patient reading; the result is richly intelligent, though, suitable for fans of 
Sedgwick’s similarly complex The Ghosts of Heaven (BCCB 2/15), and it’s an ambi-
tious look at how something that seems small can build into disaster over time (the 
connections to our own narrowing window to reduce the impacts of pollution will 
be caught by most readers). This is one of those rare gems that truly transcend the 
covers—readers will be left contemplating this world, and many of the characters 
(even if they only get to know them for 50-60 pages in each novella), long after 
they complete the book.  AS
372 • The BulleTin
pittmAn, eddie Red’s Planet; written and illus. by Eddie Pittman. Amulet, 
2015 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-1907-3 $19.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-1908-0 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
In this graphic novel, Red is on a quest to find something better than her crowded 
foster family, but being kidnapped by aliens wasn’t in the plans. Before she can even 
get her footing on the ship that’s snatched her, it crashes on a small planet, leaving 
her stranded with a motley crew of survivors and not many options. The new planet 
is filled with a bazillion small, armless creatures who have insatiable appetites, and 
a grumpy lion(ish) caretaker who is displeased that his solitude has been invaded. 
Red’s pretty persuasive, though, so she’s confident she’ll win him over and manage 
to protect her little team until rescue. The storytelling is rich—these are complex, 
well-developed characters that evolve in organic ways over the course of the book, 
and the backstory of the ship that kidnapped them is intriguing. In addition, the 
range of expressions and vivid action make the end product almost cinematic, and 
there are perfectly timed wordless (or nearly so) scenes that emphasize key moments 
where you can practically imagine the musical choices that would be made if this 
were a movie. Of course, Zita (Hatke’s Zita the Spacegirl, BCCB 1/11) and Hilo 
(Winick’s Hilo, BCCB 11/15) fans will be thrilled to add another space adventure 
to their mix, but the quieter moments of poignant loneliness that Red feels may 
grab realistic fiction fans as well. The final copy will have full color illustrations.  AS
podos, reBeCCA The Mystery of Hollow Places. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 
2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-06-237334-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
The myth of her long-gone mother has shaped seventeen-year-old Imogene’s life, so 
when her father goes missing, she figures he’s gone in search of her mother. Drawing 
on her lifelong love of detective stories—including those written by her father—she 
seeks to solve the mystery of her mother’s whereabouts, certain that will lead her 
to her father. Debut author Podos creates an engrossing mix of detective story and 
family story as Imogene compulsively follows the trail but also begins to realize the 
fantasy that has driven her family narrative; more than the detective stories, it’s du 
Maurier’s Rebecca, Imogene’s favorite book, that’s emblematic of her experience. 
A subplot about Imogene’s possible romance with her best friend’s older brother 
adds spice without taking over the main story; Imogene’s rocky relationship with 
that best friend, whose friendship she tends to dismiss, plays a credibly large role 
as well. This will be an easy sell to anyone who has ever wanted to snoop into their 
own family history.  DS
Quinn, KAte KAryus Down with the Shine. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2016 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-235604-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-235606-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
When Lennie goes to Michaela Gordon’s senior year party with four mason jars 
of her uncles’ infamous moonshine, she just wants to honor her dead best friend, 
March 2016 • 373
Dylan, who always wanted to own the celebration that’s normally reserved for the 
cool kids. Unfortunately, Lennie is unaware that her uncles’ tradition of having the 
drinker of moonshine make a wish on his or her first sip actually works—so she 
wakes up the next morning having granted the wishes of a bunch of drunk high 
schoolers, wishes that include having bat wings, living it up in an endless party, 
and turning everything one touches into Cheetos. Lennie needs to put things 
right, even if that means reversing her own wish that Dylan is alive again. Quinn’s 
previous titles (Another Little Piece, BCCB 7/13, Don’t You Forget about Me, BCCB 
7/14) have involved dark, labyrinthine plots, but here she moves into black humor, 
doing so with with revelry and aplomb. The chaos that ensues after the night of 
wish granting is absolutely absurd (bat kid flies off with a basketball player in his 
clutches, a girl who wanted to be as sexy as a cat is an actual cat, etc.), but the 
tone quickly veers toward menacing when Lennie realizes she’s going to have to 
contact her estranged father (a maniacal, cruel con man who may or may not be 
responsible for her friend’s death) in order to restore order. If the ending ties up 
things a little too neatly, it’s mostly forgivable—you can’t have Cheetos boy going 
around turning everything into neon orange dust forever.  KQG
rACzKA, BoB Wet Cement: A Mix of Concrete Poems. Roaring Brook, 
2016 [48p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-236-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 2-5
Concrete poetry, that staple of language arts curricula and subject of myriad DIY 
assignments, appears in all its cleverness in this slim collection. Raczka’s poems pack 
a double punch, first with the expectedly deft shaping of the verses themselves, 
and secondly with visual twists built into each title. The title to “Hopscotch” is 
rendered in a grainy facsimile of chalk on sidewalk, with the letters rising one 
or two at a time, while the accompanying poem rises a word or two at a time to 
the hopscotcher’s goal: “What/ if we/ could/ hop our/ way/ to the/ high/ BLUE 
SKY?” The words to “Orbiting” circle around the double curves of “the sun” at 
their center, while the facing title arcs “rbiting” around the “o.” The “Icicles” verse 
dangles from the top of the double-page spread, and the inverted letters i in the 
title drop their melting dots. Raczka goes beyond visual showmanship; many of the 
poems also stand up to oral reading and could function as riddles. Lightning, for 
example, is described thus: “From a bad mood sky,/ tears/ then a jagged slashing 
flash of anger,/ ear-splitting,/ obnoxious/ a cloud tantrum.” Even the closing is a 
thoughtful meditation on how poetry cuts verbosity down to size, leaving readers 
with an invitation to “try.” When this title is paired with Raczka’s other collection, 
Lemonade: and Other Poems Squeezed from a Single Word (BCCB 2/11), even the 
poetry-resistant kids are bound to discover something to delight them.  EB
rAppAport, doreen 
Elizabeth Started All the Trouble; illus. by Matt 
Faulkner. Disney Hyperion, 2016 40p
ISBN 978-0-7868-5142-3 $17.99   
R Gr. 3-6
The “Elizabeth” in question is Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and the “trouble” is women’s 
suffrage. In this lively picture-book presentation, Rappaport offers the customary 
nod to Abigail Adams and then turns to the women who did years of heavy lift-
ing to get the Nineteenth Amendment through two houses of Congress, across a 
374 • The BulleTin
president’s desk, and ratified by the states. The emphasis here is on the army of 
determined women—from different walks of life, varying political agendas, differ-
ent races and generations— who soldiered through offhand dismissal, ridicule, and 
physical assault to claim and legally secure the right to vote. If this book somehow 
looks familiar, it’s undoubtedly because Faulkner brings the same visual technique he 
used in Anderson’s Thank You, Sarah: The Woman Who Saved Thanksgiving (BCCB 
2/03). Again a tug-of-war plays out between disenfranchised women and political 
powerhouses, and again Faulkner wryly captures the struggle as most twenty-first 
century kids will regard it—a comedy of errors in which the determined good 
guys (well, women) are literally belittled by the looming, bombastic figures of the 
husbands, ministers, and politicians who seem in retrospect so absurdly benighted. 
Rappaport packs a lot of history into a limited format, and even older students who 
have heard this saga piecemeal may appreciate hearing it again as a single narrative. 
Brief “Trailblazers” bios, a timeline, and lists of selected resources are included.  EB
reiChArdt, mArisA Underwater. Farrar, 2016 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-374-36886-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Panic and PTSD keep Morgan from leaving her apartment; even her junior year 
at school is entirely online. That’s how it’s been ever since the day a mass shooting 
took place at her old school, with Morgan the only person to witness the shooter’s 
suicide. Home visits by a therapist help some, but the real change occurs when 
Evan moves in next door. A surf-loving Hawaiian, Evan reminds Morgan of her 
swimming days, and his cheerful and sympathetic interest begins to breaks down 
her walls. The rescue romance plot is somewhat hackneyed, but Reichardt unfolds 
it compellingly; Evan’s a nice guy but not too saintly, and his representation of 
Morgan’s past freedoms adds an effective layer. Additionally, the exploration of the 
aftermath of a school shooting brings a new dimension to that tragic topic, with 
Morgan’s response utterly believable and her guilty secret (she gave the shooter a 
ride to school that morning) well calibrated for minimal culpability and maximum 
guilt. It’s particularly, painfully believable that her isolation and subsequent self-
involvement have led her to believe her friends all bounced back after the incident 
and that only she still suffers the aftereffects. While this is a tender and appealing 
romance, it would also make a thoughtful complement to the many books about 
school shootings to illuminate the effects that last beyond the horrible day.  DS
ritChie, sCot My House Is Alive!: The Weird and Wonderful Sounds Your House 
Makes; written and illus. by Scot Ritchie. Owlkids, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-77147-136-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs
Who hasn’t been creeped out by something that goes bump—or squeak or rum-
ble—in the night? Although a boatload of picture books reassure kids that it’s not 
a monster, few conjecture factually on what it actually is. Ritchie follows a little 
boy through his round of nocturnal heebie-jeebies, considering what menace each 
sound suggests, and then explaining what is probably causing it. That knocking at 
the door? Could be metal heat vents contracting as the air cools. Gurgling in the 
bathroom? Perhaps a toilet leak due to a loose flapper. Buzzing? Try checking the 
ballast of the fluorescent light. Houses settle, wooden stairs dry out, refrigerators 
March 2016 • 375
defrost—no worries. And even that loud “Whirrr! Grrr! Bang!” might actually 
herald the good news that Dad’s home and closing the overhead garage door. Line 
and watercolor pictures will have viewers giggling at the goofy imaginary creatures 
the little boy conjures before each reveal, from the giant teapot flooding the kitchen 
to the purple rhino in the garage. When those next generation engineers and TED 
Talkers can’t get to sleep, this STEM approach to bedtime stories might just be 
the answer.  EB
riVers, KAren The Girl in the Well Is Me. Algonquin, 2016 [224p]
ISBN 978-1-61620-569-0 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Choosing the mean girls as friends in a new school is rarely a good idea, and it is a 
choice that Kammie now has plenty of time to contemplate: she is literally stuck in a 
well, hoping the girls who have just left her behind actually follow through on their 
promise to find help. Indeed, Kammie has time to think about all sorts of things, 
including the rough series of events that led her to the moment in her life when she 
decided to go through an “initiation” arranged by the most popular girls in school: 
her dad’s arrest for embezzlement, her mother’s deep struggles, her dog’s death, and 
her older brother’s estrangement. It’s a lot for an eleven-year-old, but Kammie’s 
strong, insightful voice as she progresses through a stream-of-consciousness inner 
monologue (punctuated by shouts for help) makes clear that she will indeed find 
her way, should she ever get out of the well. It’s obvious that Kammie’s predicament 
also represents the metaphorical depths of her life, but Rivers never loses focus on 
the fact that Kammie is literally very deep in a well, losing oxygen and physically 
injured. The danger will grab readers quickly, and their inevitable investment in 
Kammie will keep them breathlessly engaged through to the conclusion, perhaps 
even in one sitting if they can get away with it.  AS
roCK, peter Klickitat. Amulet/Abrams, 2016 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-1894-6 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Vivian is troubled by the changes she sees in her sister, Audra, who is becoming 
increasingly rebellious, staying out all night, abjuring city life, and destroying her 
parents’ TVs and computer. Audra also objects to the medications Vivian takes 
to keep her anxiety attacks under control, and since the meds don’t seem to be 
working anyhow, Vivian stops taking them. She’s bolstered instead by a notebook 
in her room that is sending her messages—every time she opens it, more words 
have appeared in the form of aphorisms and precepts that, though random, seem 
to apply obliquely to her circumstances. When Audra entices Vivian to run away 
with her, they end up squatting under a house with Henry, a boy who encour-
ages Vivian’s special sensitivity. Unfortunately, their hideout is discovered, Henry 
and Audra disappear, and Vivian is left on her own, torn between waiting for her 
missing sister and going home. This richly atmospheric, magical realist story poses 
existential questions about displacement, the limits of normal life in cities and 
suburbs, and the disconnection between people who talk past each other, sending 
out messages that may not reach their intended recipients or any recipients at all. 
Vivian’s character arc clearly takes her from anxiety and insecurity to acceptance 
of her way of being in the world as a blessing rather than a disorder, and readers 
will enjoy thinking through the connections to interpret what it all means.  KC
376 • The BulleTin
rollins, dAnielle Burning. Bloomsbury, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-738-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-739-9 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Twelve more weeks. That’s all Angela Davis has to get through before she’s out of 
Brunesfield Correctional Facility for good. Unfortunately, before she can leave, a 
new director takes over the facility. At first, Dr. Gruen seems great—halls are spruced 
up and cleaned, the food gets better, and even the cheap lye soap is exchanged for 
the good-smelling stuff. But then mandatory physicals and shots are instituted; the 
punishments for infractions become harsher; some girls go missing. Something’s 
up, and though Angela desperately tries to stay out of it (twelve weeks, that’s all), 
she can’t turn away when Jessica, a young girl she’s befriended who wields some 
curious powers, is threatened by Dr. Gruen. The dynamics formed among the 
imprisoned girls are just as compelling as the secrets that surround Dr. Gruen. 
The girls have created their own hierarchy based on crime and color, with African-
American Angela, a violent offender, and her pals Cara and Issie the baddest of the 
bad—but in actuality their stories are more heartbreaking than anything. Rollins 
conveys this with compassion but not sentiment, and each girl is allowed to be 
flawed but heroic, imperfect but still deserving of love. Dr. Gruen is easily tagged 
as a villain early on, but the motivations behind her actions twist the plot and send 
the girls, particularly Angela, off to a surprising fate in the closing pages. The story 
of powerless girls shaping their own power is the heart of this novel, and readers 
who enjoyed Suma’s The Walls around Us (BCCB 6/15) will find similar darkness 
and thrill here.  KQG
rossell, Judith Withering by Sea; written and illus. by Judith Rossell. Ath-
eneum, 2016 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-4814-4367-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Stella knows that she can never live up to the expectations of her strict aunts, De-
liverance, Condolence, and Temperance, but she has tried to be as obedient as her 
independent spirit would allow. One strange night, however, Stella sees a murder 
and is then entrusted with a tiny, mysterious bottle, and she realizes that sometimes 
you have to break a lot of rules to do the right thing. Suddenly, Stella’s on the run 
from kidnappers and from the ominous Professor, who knows what evil lurks in 
that bottle, and who will stop at nothing to use its power. Luckily, Stella quickly 
makes a few steadfast friends, who help her save the bottle and find herself in the 
process. Stella’s enigmatic origins are not fully explored in this volume, but there 
are tantalizing hints that will certainly encourage reader interest in a sequel. In the 
meantime, the mystery of the bottle and the zippy pace once Stella ends up with it 
offer plenty for readers to grab onto, and the fact that Stella’s allies are all unusual 
and well developed is a plus. Lemony Snicket fans will appreciate the gothic details 
and the dramatic tone that effectively heightens the tension, even while it is fairly 
certain that, given her intelligence, emerging supernatural powers, and determina-
tion, Stella should be just fine.  AS
March 2016 • 377
sAlAmon, Julie Mutt’s Promise; illus. by Jill Weber. Dial, 2016 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42778-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
After a dog saves his beloved cat, Mr. Thomas simply dubs the mutt Mutt and lets 
her stay on his farm as a guard dog. Ten-year-old Gilbert is the son of the migrant 
workers who work Mr. Thomas’ land, and the boy falls head over heels for Mutt; 
he’s especially thrilled when she has puppies and he gets to name each one—Chief, 
Alegre, Happy, and Luna. When harvest season ends, however, Gilbert must return 
to Florida, and Mr. Thomas gives the puppies away. Chief and Luna end up in a 
puppy mill, but they manage to escape and land in New York, where they both 
find work and love with caring owners (Chief becomes a police dog, while dancing 
Luna becomes an entertainer) and eventually reunite with Gilbert, whose family 
has opened up a restaurant in the city. The direct storytelling has an appealing 
cadence, and the simple sentences and vocabulary are well within the grasp of 
newly independent readers. The pace moves steadily and organically from Mutt’s 
story to that of the puppies, giving their journey a sense of completeness by book’s 
end; Gilbert’s family’s transition from migrants to entrepreneurs is also revealed in 
bits and pieces, reflecting the dogs’ experiences. The figures in Weber’s black and 
white illustrations are naïvely drafted rather than realistic, but their expressions, 
particularly in the puppies, suit the liveliness of the text. An author’s note cites her 
mother’s immigration during World War II as inspiration, so while fans of The 
Incredible Journey and its ilk are the obvious audience this could also be a gentle 
introduction to stories of immigration.  KQG
sAmphire, pAtriCK Secrets of the Dragon Tomb. Ottaviano/Holt, 2016 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9906-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Readers might as well check all disbelief at the door and just embrace this look at 
a nineteenth-century British Mars that has solid hints of steampunk and features 
dangers aplenty to excite a kid hooked on spy tales. Such a kid is twelve-year-old 
Edward, who has been waiting his whole life for something like what he reads in 
Thrilling Martian Tales. Adventure comes in a rush, as a kidnapping, a much-desired 
water abacus, a metal assassin, and a mysterious cousin who may be a good guy, 
bad guy, or just bumbling fool all fall into Edward’s lap (and into the lap of his 
gender-defying little sister who aids him more than he’ll ever admit). Indeed, it 
quickly becomes clear that to save their family, Edward will need the skills of his 
more clever younger sister, his more socially graceful older sister, and his more adept 
cousin, even if he wishes he could be a solo hero like in the stories. The dialogue 
is snappy, and the characterization is historically plausible while still giving room 
for the characters to react to being on another planet. Science fiction meets classic 
adventure tales in this quirky novel, and it’s a real treat to know that it’s the first 
in an intended series. Fans of Reeve’s Larklight (BCCB 2/07) will embrace the 
premise, and readers will happily return for the next entry to see what happens 
next on Mars.  AS
378 • The BulleTin
sChroeder, lisA The Girl in the Tower; illus. by Nicoletta Ceccoli. Ottaviano/
Holt, 2016 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9513-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Violet and her doting mother have been locked in a tower together for years, but 
they exist as best they can on daydreams and the kindness of some of the Queen’s 
staff. The Queen locked them up because she believes Violet will be pivotal in a 
spell to make the Queen beautiful, and she’s been waiting patiently until Violet 
turns eleven, at which point the Queen will use her for the spell and then kill 
her off. The plot is enjoyably replete with elements for fairy-tale lovers—there’s a 
wandering father with a lost memory, a wicked witch, a sweet and lovely heroine, 
and some cursed royalty. Unfortunately, only the Queen/witch has any depth or 
true sparks of personality, and even she’s motivated by uninspiring ambitions; the 
other characters are so staunchly loyal, kindhearted, and noble that they are flat. In 
addition, while a happy ending is, of course, expected, the Queen’s downfall hap-
pens in an unsatisfying rush after so much setup about her dastardly plans. Even so, 
dreamy readers who like stories of girls in towers may still enjoy this gentle novel. 
Occasional black and white illustrations add quite a bit to the text, emphasizing 
the clear love between mother and daughter and the occasional humor.  AS
sheA, BoB Ballet Cat: Dance! Dance! Underpants!; written and illus. by Bob 
Shea. Disney Hyperion, 2016 48p
ISBN 978-1-4847-1379-2 $9.99   
R Gr. 1-2
Ballet Cat (of Ballet Cat: The Totally Secret Secret, BCCB 9/15) is back, and just as 
bossy about ballet as ever. Here she tries to harangue buddy Butter Bear into doing 
high leaps, but Butter Bear fears that the other animals will see her underpants and 
laugh when she leaps. The nearby critters validate Butter Bear’s worries (“That is 
why we came,” states a raccoon, while a mouse claims, “I was promised under-
pants”), but Ballet Cat assures Butter Bear that “if you dance with all your heart, 
the only thing they will see is the beauty of the ballet. They will forget all about 
your underpants.” Butter Bear bites the bullet and leaps, exposing her rainbow-and-
bumblebee underwear, and, sure enough, all that follows is cheers and applause. 
Shea continues to demonstrate exceptional skill at writing beginning-reader texts 
that are both accessible and entertaining, and the inclusion of the underpants humor 
will undoubtedly make this a popular pick among primary-graders. It also makes 
a darned funny readaloud selection, and the expressive figures and candy-colored 
palette will appeal to young audiences, while the clean compositions allow novice 
readers to focus on the text without distraction. Hand this to reluctant readers who 
aren’t averse to a little glitter and frippery, or share it alongside Ji’s No! That’s Wrong! 
(BCCB 5/08) for a playful pair of underwear-themed titles—just be prepared for 
the potential of “revealing” post-read consequences.  JH
sheff, niC Harmony House. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. iSBN 978-0-06-233709-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233711-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Jen and her dad need a new start, which is how they end up in New Jersey taking 
care of Harmony House for the winter. Unfortunately, the death of Jen’s mother 
March 2016 • 379
continues to impact both of them, even in a new location, and Jen’s dad seems to 
be taking his faith into obsessive territory. Jen’s popping random pills to cope, her 
dad’s increasingly creepy, and the house itself has dark, evil history that is manifest-
ing in real life. Even some new friends can’t compensate for this, and a budding 
romance is as mysterious as it is hopeful. The interspersed narratives about the 
dreadful incidents that have happened in the house are gripping and disturbing, 
and they’re a believable source of horror. However, the overt anti-substance bent 
in the novel becomes tiresome and flat; in addition, the pace is uneven, with too 
much forced into the final handful of pages and a heavy reliance on supernatural 
abilities that are never quite fully explained. Nevertheless, this is a quick, jolting 
book, and horror fans seeking a good scare may find some enjoyable dread here.  AS
sinGer, mArilyn Echo Echo: Reverso Poems about Greek Myths; illus. by Josée 
Masse. Dial, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3992-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
Having created the genre of the reverso, a pair of poems whose lines reverse top 
to bottom, in Mirror Mirror (BCCB 4/10), Singer now uses it to examine Greek 
myths, devoting twelve poems to the famous stories. As usual, the poems are pithy 
free-verse vignettes, sometimes with a touch of playful internal rhyme, that are 
often lean and resonant in their own right. The contrast between the two verses is 
especially effective when each conveys a different voice: Demeter says, “I hate the 
thief./ Do not ask that/ I forgive Hades,” while Persephone says, “I forgive Hades./ 
Do not ask that/ I hate the thief”; Icarus and Daedalus have different takes on “We 
burn to fly.” Masse’s acrylics on vellum (which provides woody vertical striations) 
effectively create a slightly stylized fantasy world of mortal and myth together, with 
a palette that echoes the text pages’ design by leaning on gold and blue. Composi-
tions are often clever, with neat quartering sometimes adding a dimension to the 
poetry’s bipartite symmetry. Mythology and Western civ curricula will grab greedily 
for this one (the book wisely includes a few lines of footnote explanation for each 
poem to ensure readers are up to speed), and it will offer pleasure readers plenty 
to enjoy as well. An author’s note gives an overview of mythology and provides a 
list of mythology sources.  DS
spotswood, JessiCA, ed. A Tyranny of Petticoats. Candlewick, 2016 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7848-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Fifteen short stories by notable YA female writers move across the U.S. in geogra-
phy and time, from a seafaring adventure in 1710 to the search for gold in Alaska 
in 1898 to the civil rights movements of the 1960s. The introduction explains 
that each tale centers on a female protagonist in an attempt to give voices to the 
women who have been overlooked by history books because of their gender, their 
race, their sexuality. While a few tales fall into glaring didacticism, the best stories 
utilize their surroundings to great effect. Marie Lu’s “The Journey” depicts a frozen 
tundra so icy, so unforgiving that readers will feel the windburn on their faces as 
they follow a young Inuit girl escaping invaders that have slaughtered her village; 
Mexican tradition and lore come to life in Leslye Walton’s absolute gem of a story, 
“El Destinos,” while Kekla Magoon’s “Pulse of the Panthers” depicts the startling 
380 • The BulleTin
contrast between the civil rights movement in cities and in rural areas with an 
ending that points towards their eventual allegiance. The plots of several of the 
stories could easily be lifted out of the past and into the present without much 
changing, but they’re nonetheless satisfying. Overall, this anthology moves skillfully 
between humor and thoughtfulness as it traverses the many paths taken by women 
throughout American history.  KQG
sprinGstuBB, triCiA Cody and the Mysteries of the Universe; illus. by Eliza 
Wheeler. Candlewick, 2016 [144p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5858-8 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Cody (from Cody and the Fountain of Happiness, BCCB 7/15) is thrilled when her 
best friend Spencer moves right around the corner from her house. When school 
starts though, Spencer bonds with the Spindle, Cody’s former (and in Cody’s eyes 
evil) teacher; he also starts spending time with classmate Pearl, who’s playing a 
duet with him in the school orchestra. Rather than hanging with her best friend, 
Cody’s instead left with two other new neighbors, a pair of bullying sisters. Her 
spirits are boosted when her truck driver dad comes home for a bit and when her 
beloved older brother Wyatt makes some quality time for her. She’s still unsure of 
how to handle the complications in her friendship with Spencer, though, or admit 
that perhaps Molly and Maxie, the bullies, might be feeling as alone as Cody is. 
The plot gets unwieldy at times, but Cody makes some keen observations about 
both herself and those around her. Those insights often lead to more questions 
than answers for her titular mysteries, but she remains more filled with awe and 
wonder than cynicism, making her an endearing heroine for kids just starting to 
puzzle out their own universes. Wheeler’s monochromatic illustrations add depth 
to many of the characters—slouching Spencer as he heads to school, Wyatt’s rue-
ful smiles as he hangs out with Cody—and the homey details complement the 
warmth of the text.  KQG
stAndiford, nAtAlie The Only Girl in School; illus. by Nathan Durfee. Scho-
lastic, 2016 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82996-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82998-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Now that her best friend, Bess, has moved to California, Claire is the only girl left in 
her entire elementary school on tiny Foyes Island, Maryland. This wouldn’t be so bad 
if her other best friend, fellow fifth-grader Henry, hadn’t decided at the beginning 
of the school year that their friendship was over, while another classmate, Webby, 
begins a campaign of bullying against her. She finds refuge in the girls’ bathroom, 
which she dubs her clubhouse, where she reads her favorite books and draws “the 
sad story of my life.” Claire’s school saga is relayed through letters to Bess; while 
this is slightly gimmicky, it’s also credible that in her difficulty, Claire would pour 
out her heart to the only other girl who understands what school is like on Foyes 
Island. Webby’s bullying (and the ignorance of that bullying by the adults), Claire’s 
reluctance to report what is happening, and her resulting sadness will ring true to 
middle-graders; several moments of humor and Claire’s occasionally sarcastic voice 
keep the tension in check. Readers may be a little slower than Claire to forgive 
March 2016 • 381
Henry when he finally comes around, but their reunion is a relief. Durfee’s occasional 
monochromatic illustrations add emphasis and clarity to Claire’s narration. Kids 
dealing with their own loneliness or friendship dramas may especially appreciate 
this, and the unusual premise will draw in other middle-grade readers as well.  JH
strAnd, Jeff The Greatest Zombie Movie Ever. Sourcebooks Fire, 2016 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4926-2814-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Okay, so if you’re going to make the greatest zombie movie ever, what might you 
need? Justin’s pretty sure that he and his two best friends have it covered, since they 
managed to get his crush Alicia to agree to play the lead; never mind the incred-
ibly tight deadline (they have to wrap before the end of the school year) and the 
lack of script, budget, crew, and other roles. What follows is a madcap, gloriously 
absurd adventure in B-movie filmmaking, even if Justin insists right up until the 
end that they can still pull this off and produce an epic, soulful, horror film that 
will stun critics and give him the opportunity to deliver the award speech he has 
already written. Justin’s wild enthusiasm meshes effectively with one friend’s stoic 
practicality and his other friend’s willingness to go along with whatever, as long 
as they’re all getting along. It’s a warm and funny trio, and their friendship is as 
memorable as the movie-making itself. Strand has a keen eye for milking humor 
from circumstances, and each filming scene is outlandishly funny. The fake blood 
is copious and there is occasional tension, but this is mostly a light, breezy look at 
what the sets of our favorite “worst” movies might have resembled and how abject 
failure can still be sublime.  AS
sylVAnder, mAtthieu The Battle of the Vegetables; tr. from the French; illus. by 
Perceval Barrier. Clarion, 2016 48p
ISBN 978-0-544-35942-0 $15.99   
R 6-9 yrs
In this French import, three short stories overlap in an offbeat look at vegetables 
and their misadventures. In the first story, leeks dream of wilder lives, languishing 
in the soil until “Santa’s reindeer” (really a clever hungry cow) tricks them into 
leaving their safe fenced enclosure. The second story features carrots who mock 
the leeks’ credulity before meeting up with their own sticky situation after an ef-
fort to tunnel out lands them in a rabbit warren. Finally, all converge in an epic 
vegetable battle complete with trash talk (“Potato head, wets the bed!”), threats, 
and physical violence. When all is said and done, nothing is left but for the human 
to gather up the remains and make a nice pot of soup. It’s terrific nonsense, and 
young audiences will particularly appreciate the comeuppance of the arrogant car-
rots. The illustrations get a lot done with few lines—there is a remarkable range of 
expressions on the produce. The palette is restrained, with color limited largely to 
the veggies themselves, with an emphasis on oranges, tans, crisp white leeks, and 
shades of green. It won’t do a darn thing in terms of making kids want to eat more 
veggies, but it may inspire some clever imaginings about what happens in gardens 
when no one is around, and it could be a delightful partner to Speed’s epic Brave 
Potatoes (BCCB 6/00).  AS
382 • The BulleTin
thomAs, KArA The Darkest Corners. Delacorte, 2016 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52146-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52145-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52147-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Callie and Tessa were eight years old when they testified at the trial of the serial 
killer known as the Ohio River Monster, who was hanging around their house the 
night Callie’s cousin, his last victim, disappeared. Tessa moved away a year later, 
but now, after ten years, she returns to the small town of Fayette, Pennsylvania, 
because her father is dying in prison and because it’s time to get some questions 
answered. Her father dies before she can see him, but she uses her time in Fayette 
to try to find her sister and her mother, who have both disappeared without a trace. 
She and Callie are also worried that their testimony, which wasn’t as truthful as it 
might have been, could have sent the wrong man to death row, and when a friend 
of theirs is killed in the same way as the other girls, they are convinced that they 
have to set things right. The grim environment and the seedy cast of characters 
are clearly drawn; indeed, the thin, fraying lines between abused and abusers and 
victims and criminals keep the mystery alive until the twisty end. Tessa and Callie 
display a credible post-traumatic exhaustion from having seen too much too young, 
having lived among adults who are varying degrees of dysfunctional, and being 
abandoned by those who might have given them support. Fans of procedural crime 
drama will appreciate the dogged way Tessa pursues clues to the surprising truth 
not only about the serial killer but also about her own family.  KC
thompson, holly Falling into the Dragon’s Mouth. Holt, 2016 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-62779-134-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
As the only European American in his Japanese school, sixth-grader Jason is relent-
lessly bullied, and it’s worse when his teacher changes his han, or group, to one 
that contains all the mean boys and girls in his grade. In school and out, they pick 
on him verbally and physically, while he tries to practice the centering calm he is 
learning through aikido. He begs his parents to send him to the international school, 
but that costs money, so his mother picks up extra classes to teach while Jason cares 
for his little sister, Cora, and the two wander around their Japanese neighborhood 
together. When the bullies take things too far, nearly killing Jason, Cora is the one 
who saves the day by getting help. The novel’s free-verse form effectively employs 
line breaks to highlight Jason’s isolation and the rhythm of his movement around 
the neighborhood, but it lacks language to generate emotion or highlight imagery, 
and the pace of the story drags, making the climactic moment come on too slowly. 
Background information, such as how long the family has lived in Japan, is sketchy, 
making characters other than Jason underdeveloped. However, the story of bullying 
is a sadly recognizable one, and readers may also be interested in the introduction 
to life and schooling in Japan. A glossary and cultural guide are included.  KC
tuCholKe, April GeneVieVe Wink Poppy Midnight. Dial, 2016 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4048-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Poppy’s sleeping with Midnight; Wink thinks Midnight hung the moon; and 
March 2016 • 383
Midnight is the boy in love with both of the girls but unable to decide who—or 
what—he wants. But wait, is that how this love triangle goes? Perhaps Wink has 
mistaken Midnight for one of the heroes in her fantasy books; Poppy’s trysts with 
Midnight might merely be replacement for another boy’s affections; and Midnight’s 
involvement with the girls reveals some pretty serious mommy issues. But even 
that’s a simplistic take on the tangled web these three weave, the strands of which 
slowly come to light after Midnight and Wink leave Poppy for the night in an 
abandoned mansion during a prank gone awry. This twisty, twirly tale is related 
by its three protagonists, and each voice is distinctive. Poppy’s is brash and bold 
with a staccato beat that almost rings in the reader’s ear—until it doesn’t, and the 
transformation to a whisper is deliciously eerie. Wink’s has a dreamy, ethereal quality, 
speaking in riddles or one-word sentences that point to nothing and everything. 
And poor Midnight is earnest and sincere, smart enough to recognize that the girls 
may be using him but starry eyed enough to not care. His narration brings quiet 
but lush descriptions of their rural surroundings (“We sat under the apple trees in 
my orchard, wide sky, fat clouds, fingers tickling the cold water in the tiny curving 
creek, twelve inches wide at the most”). His characterizations of the girls are more 
fickle, changing and distorting with the actions he perceives them to have taken, 
perhaps making him the most devious of the three. With a pace that is languid yet 
compelling and three unforgettable characters, this peculiar psychological thriller 
will have readers retracing the winding paths Wink, Poppy, and Midnight create 
and follow.  KQG
turner, pAmelA s. Samurai Rising: The Epic Life of Minamoto Yoshitsune; illus. 
by Gareth Hinds. Charlesbridge, 2016 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-584-2 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-848-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-10
It’s not often that “biography” and “page-turner” come together in one thought, 
but Turner’s tale of the twelfth-century warrior Minamoto Yoshitsune is just the 
work to draw samurai fans from the manga and movie aisles into the nonfiction 
shelves. Murder and mayhem, intrigue and ritual suicide, family treachery, stolen 
royal regalia—Yoshitsune’s story has it all, as rival Taira and Minamoto families 
vie for control in a power vacuum left by a weak Retired Emperor. Raised in a 
secluded monastery, Yoshitsune ran away and trained to be a samurai at fifteen, 
well past the age when boys usually acquired their skills. Under the aegis of his 
elder half-brother Yoritomo, Yoshitsune won a string of battles against the Taira, 
but instead of lauding his victories, Yoritomo saw his brother as a threat and of-
ten subtly but publicly berated him. This only seemed to make Yoshitsune more 
focused on earning the honor due him, and by the tragic end of his career, he had 
become a popular figure bound for history and legend. Turner navigates the com-
plex family and court relationships with commendable ease, occasionally tossing 
in a wry remark that supplies a touch of comic relief in so gory a tale: “When your 
half-brother sends assassins to kill you, it’s a strong hint that your relationship is 
beyond repair.” Plenty of support is also offered to readers making their first foray 
into the samurai world: a list of characters and places is located before the intro-
duction; timeline, glossary (with pronunciations), and index can be found at the 
end. Annotated chapter notes state whether information is drawn from history or 
legend, and they remark on where traces of Yoshitsune’s adventures can be found in 
384 • The BulleTin
present-day Japan. Hand this to long-faced kids whining that they “have to write 
a history report.” Final art not seen.  EB
VAnde Velde, ViViAn 23 Minutes. Boyds Mills, 2016 [176p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62979-441-9 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62979-561-4 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Zoe doesn’t know why she has the ability to make time go back twenty-three 
minutes, but she’s learned to understand the skill, if not necessarily to make it reli-
ably benefit her. Here are the rules: Zoe can reset to the beginning as many as ten 
times in any one twenty-three minute segment, but only if she doesn’t catch up to 
the present during it, and whichever version is the last becomes the fixed reality. 
When a bank robbery goes horribly awry, Zoe decides to intervene: when replayed 
versions go even worse, she’s worried about her own safety and that of a handsome 
adult stranger who went out of his way to be respectful and kind to her grumpy, 
disheveled fifteen-year-old self. This trim novel is gripping from the start, as the 
robbery occurs right up front, and readers are left to count along with Zoe as her 
attempts slip through her fingers. A teen from a group home with very few models 
of sound decision-making who’s facing a murderous bank robber and the limits 
of time travel, Zoe is a compelling heroine in a tense situation, and flashbacks to 
times her attempts to reboot went badly further enhance the suspense. The apparent 
simplicity of Zoe’s talent is cleverly laid out, and the endless complexity this skill 
actually represents is fascinating. Short chapters, a relatively small page count, and 
few characters make this an ideal option for reluctant readers—they’ll dive in in 
spite of themselves and likely find it hard to put down.  AS
VAnderwAter, Amy ludwiG Every Day Birds; illus. by Dylan Metrano. Orchard/
Scholastic, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-69980-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 2-6 yrs
When a little tyke is ready to make the animal identification leap from “bird” to 
“specific bird,” VanDerwater is ready with a rudimentary field guide. Rhymed 
verses of a few words each point out a salient feature of twenty common North 
American birds: “HAWK hunts every day for prey./ CARDINAL flashes fire./ 
WOODPECKER taps hollow trees./ CROW rests on a wire.” Sleek but detailed 
cut-paper collage close-ups accompany each rhyme, and in most spreads a smidgen 
of background offers of hint of habitat or food source (pigeon perches at a feeder; 
heron wades in the shallows). Children who want more information can find it 
in the back matter, which also serves as an alphabetized index with a thumbnail 
reproduction of each spread and a short paragraph with some attention-grabbing 
data—hummingbirds can use dryer lint to make their nests; nuthatches walk down 
from their tree hole nests headfirst. Depiction of scale and a map of geographic 
range, commonly found in standard field guides, are not included here. Nonetheless, 
Metrano’s avian portraits would be highly useful in group presentations, and they 
are sufficiently precise to help beginning birders put a name to a feathered face.  EB
March 2016 • 385
VerniCK, Audrey The Kid from Diamond Street: The Extraordinary Story of Baseball 
Legend Edith Houghton; illus. by Steven Salerno. Clarion, 2016 40p
ISBN 978-0-544-61163-4 $17.99   
R 5-9 yrs
In the early 1920s the career pickings for girls with baseball aspirations were mighty 
thin, but ten-year-old Edith Houghton was in just the right place at the right time 
to glean an opportunity. Hometown Philadelphia boasted a professional women’s 
team, the Bobbies (named for their trendy hair cuts), the manager was open-minded 
enough to let an elementary-school child try out, and Edith’s parents were on board. 
As shortstop, Edith carried her weight, even in a baggy uniform, among the teens 
and young adults on her team. When the Bobbies were invited to barnstorm their 
way across America and across the Pacific to baseball-crazed Japan, not only did the 
Houghtons agree to send Edith, but her school even accommodated and supported 
her travels. Much of Vernick’s presentation centers on the Bobbies’ adventures in 
Japan, where they played mainly against all-male teams—and (here readers may 
gasp) with male players doing the pitching and catching for the Bobbies. Salerno’s 
mixed-media illustrations are a lively amalgam of action and scenic panorama, 
often with episodes cleverly bleeding across the spreads. An author’s note updates 
readers on Edith’s later work as a scout for the Philadelphia Phillies. Regrettably, 
no sources are offered for the many quotations from Edith herself; photographs of 
Edith in her days as “The Kid” are, however, included.  EB
west, JACQueline Dreamers Often Lie. Dial, 2016 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3863-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
A ski accident leaves Jaye with a fractured skull and hallucinations of characters 
from Shakespeare plays, plus visions of the Bard himself. Regardless, Jaye insists 
that she’s recovered and ready to return to school, and to her role as Titania in her 
high school’s production of A Midsummer’s Night Dream. When she mistakes an 
actual guy for Romeo and tells him that he’s not real, her strange greeting doesn’t 
faze Rob; the two start hanging out, which offends the school’s golden boy, Pierce, 
who’s currently pursuing Jaye. Jaye is also still grieving the death of her father, 
with whom Jaye had a complicated and sometimes toxic relationship. Shakespeare 
and his pals have plenty to say about all this, and though fictive creations of Jaye’s 
mind, they end up leading her to some painful but important truths. West’s use 
of quotes from Shakespeare’s various plays is restrained but perfectly timed, and 
her allowance for the characters to go off script offers both moving and humorous 
moments (Ophelia’s observation about Pierce: “I know how that goes. . . . One 
minute he’s flirting with you, the next he ignores you. . . . It’s exhausting”). The 
concept of memory as a conjured reality instead of the truth is also explored: is 
Jaye’s memory of her father as a demeaning, angry man right or is her sister cor-
rect that Jaye is too quick to villainize? The trajectory of Jaye’s relationship with 
Rob and Pierce is predictable, albeit in keeping with the Bard’s many tragedies, 
but it’s Shakespeare’s characters here that really shine as they come to life in the 
twenty-first century.  KQG
386 • The BulleTin
wilson, John Lost. Orca, 2016 [144p] (Orca Currents)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-1195-9 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Detectives Sam and Annabel are back in their third hi/lo adventure as they again 
attempt to outwit their admiring (but still determined) nemesis, Humphrey Bat-
tleford. The plot is fairly straightforward: Sam and Annabel win a cruise to follow 
the Canadian route of the ill-fated nineteenth-century explorer Sir John Franklin, 
they quickly suspect dastardly deeds are afoot, they save the day and some incred-
ible historical documents in the process. Annabel is snappy and smart, and Sam’s 
easygoing and clever, so they are a good pair, and their work on solving mysteries 
is collaborative and age appropriate. The narrow focus, paired with the short chap-
ters, large print size, and simple vocabulary that is the hallmark of the Currents 
series, makes this book accessible to a wide range of readers. Happily, the gritty 
cover delivers, and a zippy story involving some harrowing adventures makes the 
book worth the read. A brief, approachable author’s note provides a bit of context 
about John Franklin and his expedition into the Northwest Passage, a journey of 
which many U.S. readers are unlikely to have heard, but which is replete with gory, 
chilling details to keep them interested. A short reading list is also included, with 
a wide reading level range represented.  AS
winter, JonAh You Never Heard of Casey Stengel?!; illus. by Barry Blitt. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2016 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97013-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87013-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98748-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
If the answer to the title question is “No, I haven’t” or “Wasn’t he some Yankee?” then 
you’d better read on. Winter unleashes his customary rollicking take, this time on 
the kid whose brief aspirations to dentistry were dashed—a lefty in a right-handed 
dental world—and who turned instead to baseball. That Charles Dillon Stengel 
(“KC” from Kansas City, which of course morphed to Casey) would initially go 
pro with the Brooklyn Dodgers was not much of an accolade—in 1912 they were 
in seventh place, and even they booted him out, as did the New York Giants. More 
a “goofball” than a player, Stengel tried his hand as manager, first for the Toledo 
Mud Hens and some better-known but equally bad teams, then for a couple of 
winners, and finally as a longshot gamble for—cue the brass section—the Yankees. 
Winter revels in the schadenfreude as Stengel, a canny strategist, leads his team to ten 
pennants and seven World Series wins (“Take THAT, you doubters! Who’s laugh-
ing now?!”). Leaving Stengel in his glory days, Winter relegates his more somber 
dénouement to a short note in the end matter, tucked below a glossary and source 
notes for statistics. Blitt’s line and watercolor illustrations are surprisingly muscu-
lar, given the spidery ink lines and translucent paint, owing their success to clever 
caricature, energetic composition, and outright playfulness. Stengel hovers over 
the stadium working his players like marionettes; a nattily suited dog in the press 
corps takes notes when the Yankees hire Stengel because “furniture falls from the 
sky. Clocks stop running. Dogs start speaking Italian and wearing fancy clothes.” 
And that should begin to tell you who Casey Stengel was.  EB
March 2016 • 387
wunG-sunG, Jesper The Last Execution; tr. from the Danish by Lindy Falk van 
Rooyen. Dlouhy/Atheneum, 2016 [144p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2965-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2967-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
This brief, philosophical novel explores the final public execution in Svendborg, 
Denmark in 1853 through various perspectives, allowing for a slow build of opinions 
and cultural leanings that come together to show a moment in history. The book 
moves through the final hours of the life of fifteen-year-old Niels, who is quietly 
facing his fate, focusing on his love for the father who tried all his life to keep him 
and his son safe and fed despite their homelessness. The story then includes narra-
tion by the baker (who will make quite a profit this day), the mayor (who is weary 
of his job, particularly parts like this), and even a fly who Niels imagines wants to 
be a companion and comfort in his cell. The author wisely dispenses with the facts 
pretty quickly, allowing for the circumstances of Niels’ life to be the true focus, 
showing incontrovertibly how his death will be the only actual intended murder 
taking place. Teens tapped into the national discourse on capital punishment will 
doubtless find this intriguing discussion fodder, but regardless of their opinion 
on the death penalty, all will likely be haunted by defeated, damaged Niels who 
deserved so much better than an axe above his neck in front of those who judge 
him without any sympathy or context. The popular Danish author of this import 
(originally published in 2010) explains the background and provides a note about 
what the area looks like now.  AS
zAhler, diAne Baker’s Magic. Capstone, 2016 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4965-2724-0 $25.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62370-642-5 $12.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
A starving young girl, Bee, is pushed by desperation to steal from a baker. Rather 
than punish her, the baker pities the orphan and takes her in, teaching her how 
to bake and coming to care for her. The two discover that Bee has a most unusual 
talent: whatever she is feeling bakes into her food. This becomes very handy once 
Bee gets caught up in a rescue plot to save the local princess from being married 
off solely to benefit her evil guardian, a mage. The obvious love between the baker 
and Bee, who was alone and guarded for so long, is moving, and it develops at an 
authentic pace. Pirates, magical creatures, family mysteries, and a dramatic battle 
with the mage will all keep readers busy, and the constant undercurrent of baking 
provides a firm and tasty grounding. Environmentally aware readers will find the 
ripple effects of the lack of trees in Bee’s realm particularly striking, even if it is 
presented in a fairly light-hearted way, but mostly audiences will just appreciate a 
yeasty and enjoyable fantasy.  AS
zemKe, deBorAh My Life in Pictures; written and illus. by Deborah Zemke. Dial, 
2016 [144p] (Bea Garcia)
ISBN 978-0-8037-4154-6 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-3
Wielding her pencil and pert sense of humor, Bea Garcia documents the world 
around her, describing her annoying little brother (the Big Pest), her parents’ varied 
388 • The BulleTin
reactions to her artistic misadventures, and her crushing sadness when her best 
friend and neighbor, Yvonne, moves to Australia. When an obnoxious boy moves 
into Yvonne’s old house—and Bea’s classroom—Bea struggles to cope, acting in 
ways that are amusing, understandable, and perhaps inadvisable. A charmingly and 
obviously unreliable narrator, biracial Bea makes a welcome, diversifying addition 
to the Judy Moody and Junie B. Jones set, and she’ll elicit both readers’ guffaws 
and sympathies. In her blended visual and textual narrative, Zemke has a gift for 
portraying the trials and tribulations of elementary school, as well as weaving run-
ning gags through Bea’s daily school and home life in both the text and the trim 
Matthew Cordell-esque line drawings. The book smartly avoids an overly tidy end-
ing, eschewing the saccharine for the realistically hopeful and creating a promising 
launch to this new series. Pass this one to aspiring artists, those missing a friend, or 
anyone who could use a laugh as she navigates childhood.  AA
zentner, Jeff The Serpent King. Crown, 2016 [384p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52403-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52402-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52404-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R*  Gr. 9-12
Fellow outsiders Dill, Travis, and Lydia have been navigating the waters of small-
town Tennessee life together; but now, with senior year looming, the future is 
uncertain. Lydia has been planning her escape for years, but she now worries that 
a new start in New York City might mean turning her back on her friends. Travis 
knows he’ll never leave, but he finds escape in a series of epic fantasy novels and 
hope in an online friendship with a fellow fan. Dill fears he has no future at all: 
struggling against a family legacy of madness, the lingering aftermath of his serpent-
wielding preacher father’s arrest, and his Pentecostal mother’s relentless preaching, 
he can only despair as his friends hope and plan. Then unexpected tragedy hits, and 
Dill’s already shaken world goes into a tailspin, forcing him to decide if he’ll give in 
to the darkness for good or find his way toward the light on his own terms. With 
chapters that shift the focus among characters, this novel offers a heartbreaking yet 
ultimately hopeful portrait of three friends and the love/hate relationship they have 
with the insular community they grew up in. The third-person narration manages 
to convey distinct flavor for each deeply personal and introspective storyline, so 
each character emerges as an authentic individual, flawed yet lovable, and readers 
will find themselves drawn by the heartstrings into their complex lives. The small 
community is likewise carefully drawn, a mix of the angry, the desperate, and the 
supportive that avoids drifting into stereotypes. Hand this to fans of Whaley’s Where 
Things Come Back (BCCB 5/11) and readers who want stories of the rural South 
crafted with candor and care.  AM
noTe:
The publisher informs us that the publication of Susan Goldman Rubin’s Sondheim: 
The Man Who Changed Musical Theater, reviewed in the December 2015 issue of 
The Bulletin, has been indefinitely postponed.
March 2016 • 389
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Last Stop on Market Street, written by 
Matt de la Peña and illustrated by Christian Robinson (Putnam). Three Newbery 
Honor Books also were named: The War That Saved My Life, written by Kimberly 
Brubaker Bradley (Dial); Roller Girl, written and illustrated by Victoria Jamieson 
(Dial), and Echo, written by Pam Muñoz Ryan (Scholastic Press).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to Finding Winnie: The True Story of the 
World’s Most Famous Bear, illustrated by Sophie Blackall and written by Lindsay 
Mattick (Little). Four Caldecott Honor Books were also named: Trombone Shorty, 
illustrated by Bryan Collier, written by Troy Andrews (Abrams); Waiting, written 
and illustrated by Kevin Henkes (Greenwillow); Voice of Freedom: Fannie Lou Hamer, 
Spirit of the Civil Rights Movement, illustrated by Ekua Holmes, written by Carole 
Boston Weatherford (Candlewick); and Last Stop on Market Street, illustrated by 
Christian Robinson, written by Matt de la Peña (Putnam).
The Coretta Scott King Book Award for writing goes to Rita Williams-Garcia’s 
Gone Crazy in Alabama (Amistad). Three King Author Honor Books were selected: 
All American Boys, by Jason Reynolds and Brendan Kiely (Atheneum); The Boy in 
the Black Suit, by Jason Reynolds (Atheneum); and X: A Novel, by Ilyasah Shabazz 
with Kekla Magoon (Candlewick).
The Coretta Scott King Book Award for illustration goes to Bryan Collier for 
Trombone Shorty, written by Troy Andrews and Bill Taylor (Abrams). Two King 
Illustrator Honor Books were selected: The Book Itch: Freedom, Truth & Harlem’s 
Greatest Bookstore, illustrated by R. Gregory Christie, written by Vaunda Micheaux 
Nelson (Carolrhoda); and Last Stop on Market Street, illustrated by Christian Rob-
inson and written by Matt de la Peña (Putnam).
The Coretta Scott King/John Steptoe New Talent Award goes to Ronald L. Smith 
for Hoodoo (Clarion). The Coretta Scott King/John Steptoe New Talent Illustrator 
Award is awarded to Ekua Holmes for Voice of Freedom: Fannie Lou Hamer, Spirit 
of the Civil Rights Movement, written by Carole Boston Weatherford (Candlewick).
Jerry Pinkney is the winner of the Coretta Scott King—Virginia Hamilton Prac-
titioner Award for Lifetime Achievement. 
The Pura Belpré Award for illustration goes to Rafael López for The Drum Dream 
Girl, written by Margarita Engle (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt). Three Belpré Il-
lustrator Honor Books were named: My Tata’s Remedies = Los remedios de mi Tata, 
illustrated by Antonio Castro L. and written by Roni Capin Rivera-Ashford (Cinco 
Puntos); Mango, Abuela, and Me, illustrated by Angela Dominguez and written 
by Meg Medina (Candlewick); and Funny Bones: Posada and His Day of the Dead 
Calaveras, illustrated and written by Duncan Tonatiuh (Abrams).
ChILdren’s Book AwArds 2016
390 • The BulleTin
The Pura Belpré Award for writing goes to Margarita Engle for Enchanted Air: Two 
Cultures, Two Wings: A Memoir (Atheneum). Two Belpré Author Honor Books 
were named: The Smoking Mirror, written by David Bowles (IFWG) and Mango, 
Abuela, and Me, written by Meg Medina and illustrated by Angela Dominguez 
(Candlewick).
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most 
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is 
Enchanted Lion Books for The Wonderful Fluffy Little Squishy, translated from the 
French by Claudia Zoe, and written and illustrated by Beatrice Alemagna. Three 
Batchelder Honor Books were also selected: Adam and Thomas, written by Aharon 
Appelfeld, iIllustrated by Philippe Dumas and translated from the Hebrew by Jef-
frey M. Green (Seven Stories); Grandma Lives in a Perfume Village, written by Fang 
Suzhen, illustrated by Sonja Danowski and translated from the Chinese by Huang 
Xiumin (NorthSouth); and Written and Drawn by Henrietta, written, illustrated, 
and translated from the Spanish by Liniers (TOON Books).
The Michael L. Printz Award for excellence in literature written for young adults 
goes to Laura Ruby for Bone Gap (Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins). Two Printz Honor 
Books were also named: Out of Darkness, by Ashley Hope Pérez (Carolrhoda Lab) 
and The Ghosts of Heaven, by Marcus Sedgwick (Roaring Brook).
The Robert F. Sibert Medal for most distinguished informational book for chil-
dren goes to Funny Bones: Posada and His Day of the Dead Calaveras, written and 
illustrated by Duncan Tonatiuh (Abrams). Four Sibert Honor Books were named: 
Drowned City: Hurricane Katrina and New Orleans, written and illustrated by 
Don Brown (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt); The Boys Who Challenged Hitler: Knud 
Pedersen and the Churchill Club, by Phillip Hoose (Farrar); Turning 15 on the Road 
to Freedom: My Story of the 1965 Selma Voting Rights March, written by Lynda 
Blackmon Lowery as told to Elspeth Leacock and Susan Buckley and illustrated 
by PJ Loughran (Dial); and Voice of Freedom: Fannie Lou Hamer, Spirit of the Civil 
Rights Movement, written by Carole Boston Weatherford and illustrated by Ekua 
Holmes (Candlewick).
The Theodor Seuss Geisel Award for most distinguished beginning reader book goes 
to Don’t Throw It to Mo!, written by David A. Adler and illustrated by Sam Ricks 
(Penguin Young Readers/Penguin). Three Geisel Honor Books were named: A Pig, 
a Fox, and a Box, written and illustrated by Jonathan Fenske (Penguin Young Read-
ers/Penguin); Supertruck, written and illustrated by Stephen Savage (Porter/Roaring 
Brook); and Waiting, written and illustrated by Kevin Henkes (Greenwillow).
The Schneider Family Book Award for books that embody an artistic expression of 
the disability experience goes to Emmanuel’s Dream: The True Story of Emmanuel 
Ofosu Yeboah, written by Laurie Ann Thompson and illustrated by Sean Qualls 
(Schwartz & Wade) in the category for young children. Fish in a Tree, by Lynda 
Mullaly Hunt (Paulsen/Penguin) and The War That Saved My Life, by Kimberly 
Brubaker Bradley (Dial) are the winners of the middle-school award. The Unlikely 
Hero of Room 13B, by Teresa Toten (Delacorte), is the winning book in the teen 
category.
March 2016 • 391
The Stonewall Children’s and Young Adult Literature Award, for children’s and for 
young adult books of exceptional merit relating to the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and 
transgendered experience, were given respectively to George, written by Alex Gino 
(Scholastic), and The Porcupine of Truth, by Bill Konigsberg (Levine/Scholastic). 
Two honor books were selected: Wonders of the Invisible World, written by Christo-
pher Barzak (Knopf); and Sex Is a Funny Word: A Book about Bodies, Feelings, and 
YOU, written by Cory Silverberg and Fiona Smyth, illustrated by Fiona Smyth 
(Seven Stories).
The Andrew Carnegie Medal for excellence in children’s video goes to Weston 
Woods Studios, Inc., producer of That Is NOT a Good Idea.
The Laura Ingalls Wilder Award for a substantial and lasting contribution to lit-
erature for children goes to Jerry Pinkney. 
The Odyssey Award for excellence in audiobook production goes to The War That 
Saved My Life, produced by Listening Library, an imprint of the Penguin Random 
House Audio Publishing Group. The book is written by Kimberly Brubaker Bradley 
and narrated by Jayne Entwistle. One Odyssey Honor Recording was selected: Echo, 
produced by Scholastic Audio/Paul R. Gagne, written by Pam Muñoz Ryan and 
narrated by Mark Bramhall, David de Vries, MacLeod Andrews, and Rebecca Soler.
The 2017 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by author and 
literary advocate Jacqueline Woodson.
The Margaret A. Edwards Award for lifetime achievement in writing for young 
adults goes to David Levithan. 
The William C. Morris Award for a book written by a first-time author for young 
adults goes to Simon vs. the Homo Sapiens Agenda, written by Becky Albertalli 
(Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins). Four additional books were shortlisted: Because 
You’ll Never Meet Me, by Leah Thomas (Bloomsbury); Conviction, by Kelly Loy 
Gilbert (Hyperion); The Sacred Lies of Minnow Bly, by Stephanie Oakes (Dial); 
and The Weight of Feathers, by Anna-Marie McLemore (Dunne/St. Martin’s Press).
The YALSA Excellence in Nonfiction Award goes to Most Dangerous: Daniel Ells-
berg and the Secret History of the Vietnam War, by Steve Sheinkin (Roaring Brook). 
Four other books were shortlisted for the award: Enchanted Air: Two Cultures, Two 
Wings: A Memoir, by Margarita Engle (Atheneum); First Flight Around the World: 
The Adventures of the American Fliers Who Won the Race, by Tim Grove (Abrams); 
Symphony for the City of the Dead: Dmitri Shostakovich and the Siege of Leningrad, 
by M.T. Anderson (Candlewick); and This Strange Wilderness:  The Life and Art of 
John James Audubon, by Nancy Plain (University of Nebraska Press).
The Scott O’Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to The Hired Girl, by Laura 
Amy Schlitz (Candlewick).
The Canadian Library Association’s 2015 Book of the Year for Children is The 
Night Gardener, by Jonathan Auxier (Penguin). Two Honor Books selected are The 
392 • The BulleTin
Boundless, by Kenneth Oppel (Harper Collins Canada), and The Swallow, by Chris 
Cotter (Tundra). The Amelia Frances Howard-Gibbon Illustrator’s Award goes to 
Marie-Louise Gay for Any Questions?, written and illustrated by Marie-Louise Gay 
(Groundwood). The Young Adult Canadian Book Award goes to This One Sum-
mer, written by Mariko Tamaki and illustrated by Jillian Tamaki (First Second). 
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Tanya Landman for Buffalo Soldier (Walker).
The Kate Greenaway Medal for distinguished illustration in a book for children was 
awarded to Shackleton’s Journey, written and illustrated by William Grill (Flying Eye). 
The 2016 NCTE Orbis Pictus Award for outstanding nonfiction for children goes 
to Drowned City: Hurricane Katrina & New Orleans, by Don Brown (Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt). Honor books are: Funny Bones: Posada and His Day of the Dead 
Calaveras, written and illustrated by Duncan Tonatiuh (Abrams); Growing Up 
Pedro, written and illustrated by Matt Tavares (Candlewick); Mesmerized: How 
Ben Franklin Solved a Mystery That Baffled All of France, written by Mara Rockliff 
and illustrated by Iacopo Bruno (Candlewick); Swan: The Life and Dance of Anna 
Pavlova, written by Laurel Snyder and illustrated by Julie Morstad (Chronicle); 
and Terrible Typhoid Mary: A True Story of the Deadliest Cook in America, by Susan 
Campbell Bartoletti (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt).
The Center for Children’s Books’ 2016 Gryphon Award goes to goes to Little Robot, 
written and illustrated by Ben Hatke (First Second). Two honor books were named: 
The Long Dog, written and illustrated by Eric Seltzer (Scholastic); and Flutter & 
Hum: Animal Poems/Aleteo y Zumbido: Poemas de Animales, written and illustrated 
by Julie Paschkis (Holt). 
March 2016 • 393
Abandonment–fiction: Laure
Accidents–fiction: McGovern; West
Actors and acting–fiction: West
Adoption–fiction: Frazier
Adventure: Brumbach; Cha-
bert; deStefano; Johnson; Ko-
chalka; Love; rossell; Samphire
African Americans–fiction: Allen; 
Frazier; rollins
Alaska–fiction: dagg
Animals: Keating
Animals–fiction: Baldwin; Cossan-
teli; Jamieson
Animals–stories: Falatko; Jenkins
Antarctica–fiction: Longo
Arguments–stories: Jenkins
Art and artists–stories: Fan
Asian Americans–fiction: Love
Autism–fiction: McGovern
Ballet–fiction: Longo; Shea
Baseball: vernick; Winter
BedtiMe StorieS: ritchie
BiBLe StorieS: Hendrix
BioGrApHieS: Hendrix; turner; 
vernick; Winter
Biology: Keating; London
Biracial people–fiction: Lowitz; 
Zemke
Birds: vanderwater
Birds–stories: Barton
Books and reading–stories: Falatko
Brothers–fiction: Morfit
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Mar-
ciano; Maschari; thompson
Bullies–fiction: Allen; Fitzger-
ald; parks; rivers; Standiford; 
thompson
Castles–fiction: Fox
Cats–fiction: Cooper
Chickens–stories: Montanari
Climate change: Heos
Clothing–stories: Godin
Cousins–fiction: Brumbach; parry
Crime and criminals–fiction: Benoit; 
douglas; McCaffrey; rossell; 
Samphire; thomas; vande velde; 
Wung-Sung
Cults–fiction: Carter
death–fiction: Condie; Quinn
depression–fiction: Caletti
deteCtive StorieS: Fantaskey; 
Wilson
dogs–fiction: Salamon
dragons–stories: Godin
drugs–fiction: Benoit
drug abuse–fiction: Sheff
dystopias–fiction: McCaffrey
Ecology: vanderwater
Environmentalism: Heos
Ethics and values: Brennan; Carter; 
Hicks; McCaffrey; peevyhouse; 
rivers; Wung-Sung
Fairies–fiction: Catmull
Families–fiction: Carter; Condie; 
dagg; Johnson; Laure; McGov-
ern; nelson; Sheff; Springstubb; 
thomas
FAntASy: Baldwin; Brennan; Cat-
anese; Catmull; Cooper; deSte-
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CApS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
394 • The BulleTin
fano; Khoury; Long; Marciano; 
Maschari; Modesto; o’Hearn; 
peevyhouse; Schroeder; vande 
velde; Zahler
Farms–fiction: Cossanteli
Fathers–fiction: Catanese; Manzer; 
West; Zentner
Films and filmmaking–fiction: Strand
FoLK-LiKe StorieS: Schroeder
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: 
Khoury
Food and eating–fiction: Carman; 
Zahler
Food and eating–stories: Sylvander
Foster families–fiction: vande velde
Friends–fiction: Allen; Condie; 
Fitzgerald; Frazier; Johnson; 
Leavitt; narsimhan; naylor; parks; 
Springstubb; Standiford; Strand; 
Zentner
Friends–stories: Jenkins
Gambling–fiction: Morfit
Gardening–stories: Fan
Grandparents–fiction: eagar
GrApHiC noveLS: Baldwin; Cha-
bert; Hicks; Jamieson; Kochalka; 
pittman
Grief–fiction: Condie; Maschari; West
Hell–fiction: Catanese
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: Brum-
bach; dagg; Fantaskey; Hicks; 
Lenzi; Spotswood; Wung-Sung
History, U.S.: rappaport; Spotswood
History, world: turner
Horror: Sheff
Houses: ritchie
HuMor: Barton; Campbell; Car-
man; Chabert; Falatko; Frazier; 
Godin; Jamieson; Kochalka; Long; 
Montanari; Morfit; Shea; Strand; 
Sylvander; Zemke
identity–fiction: Longo; nelson
india–fiction: narsimhan
ireland–fiction: Catmull
islands–fiction: deStefano
Japan–fiction: thompson
Japanese Americans–fiction: parry 
Jinni–fiction: Khoury
Journals–fiction: Leavitt
Language arts: raczka
Latinos–fiction: Salamon; Zemke
Literature, English: Brennan; Lenzi
Magic–fiction: Chabert; Cooper; 
Quinn
MAGiCAL reALiSM: eagar; rock
Mars–fiction: Samphire
Memory–fiction: Kletter; West
Mental illness–fiction: Kletter; rock
Migrants–fiction: Salamon
Missing persons–fiction: Fitzgerald; 
podos
Mothers–fiction: Caletti; Kletter; 
Maschari; podos
Movies–fiction: Strand
Music and musicians–fiction: An-
drews; Manzer
MySterieS: Brumbach; Cooper; 
Fantaskey; podos; rossell; thomas; 
Wilson
Mythology, classical: Singer
Mythology, Norse: o’Hearn
native Americans–fiction: Lenzi
natural disasters–fiction: Lowitz; 
parks
Nature study: Keating; London; 
vanderwater
occupation–fiction: Hicks
orphans–fiction: Baldwin; Zahler
otters: London
parties–fiction: Quinn
parties–stories: Falatko
pets–stories: Montanari
Physical education: Winter
poetry: Lowitz; nelson; raczka; 
Singer
prisons–fiction: rollins
ptSd–fiction: reichardt
rabbits–stories: Barton
Reading aloud: Shea; Singer; Sylva-
nder
Reading, beginning: Jenkins
Reading, easy: Carman; Jamieson; 
Kochalka; Marciano; Shea; Springs-
tubb; Zemke
Reading, reluctant: Keating; vande 
velde; Wilson
relationships–fiction: Andrews; Ben-
oit; Caletti; Fitzgerald; Love
March 2016 • 395
Religious education: Hendrix
revenge–fiction: Modesto
revolution–fiction: Brennan
romance–fiction: Brennan; doug-
las; Khoury; Lenzi; reichardt; 
tucholke
royalty–fiction: Schroeder
runaways–fiction: rock
Sailing–fiction: parry
Samurai: turner
Satire: Long
School–fiction: Allen; Jamieson; 
Leavitt; rivers; Springstuff; Standi-
ford; Zemke
School shootings–fiction: reichardt
School–stories: Campbell
Science: Heos
SCienCe FiCtion: Kochalka; 
peevyhouse; pittman; Samphire
Secrets–fiction: tucholke
SHort StorieS: peevyhouse; 
Spotswood
Sisters–fiction: Laure; rock
Soccer–fiction: Lowitz
Sounds: ritchie
South, the–fiction: Zentner
Space travel–fiction: pittman
Spies and espionage–fiction: Fox
SportS StorieS: vernick; Winter
SteAMpunK: Samphire
Storytelling–fiction: eagar
Storytime: Montanari
Stuttering–fiction: naylor 
Suffrage: rappaport
SupernAturAL StorieS: Cos-
santeli; Fox; rollins
SurvivAL StorieS: naylor; parks; 
pittman
SuSpenSe: rivers
tHriLLerS: tucholke
time travel–fiction: douglas; vande 
velde
trials–fiction: douglas
tricksters–stories: Barton
twins–fiction: Marciano
underwear–fiction: Shea
verSe noveLS: thompson
villains–stories: Campbell
voyages and travel–fiction: Andrews; 
Baldwin; Love; Manzer; Wilson
WeSternS: Modesto
Wishes–fiction: Quinn
Witches–fiction: Marciano; Schroeder
Women’s studies: rappaport; 
Spotswood
World cultures: narsimhan
World War ii–fiction: Fox
Library and Information Science:
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Library Trends ISSN: 0024-2594 / E-ISSN: 1559-0682
Portal: Libraries and the Academy ISSN: 1531-2542 / E-ISSN: 1530-7131
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
To us, the role of libraries and the 
future of information science clicks.
New perspectives  
that are anything 
but elementary.
JHU Press scholarly journal offerings in  
Children’s Literature:
Bookbird: A Journal of International Children’s Literature
ISSN: 0006-7377 / E-ISSN: 1918-6983
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books  
ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Children’s Literature ISSN: 0092-8208 / E-ISSN: 1543-3374
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly ISSN: 0885-0429 / E-ISSN: 1553-1201
The Lion and the Unicorn ISSN: 0147-2593 / E-ISSN: 1080-6563
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
ONLINE REFERENCE RESOURCES
Five outstanding online references from the Johns Hopkins University Press  
deliver seminal works and cutting-edge scholarship to students and researchers.
press.jhu.edu/references
• Flexible search options, powerful results.  Results are ranked and sorted by relevance   
 
or date, with direct links to documents and related materials.
• Intuitive browsing.  Wander through entire volumes without getting lost.
• Reliable usage statistics. COUNTER-compliant usage reports let you track activity  
 
 
according to the most current standard available. Statistics are compiled and ready to  
 
 
download once a month. 
• Always available. Our collections are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week from any   
 
IP-authenticated address. No special hardware or software is required. And we offer full   
 
technical and customer support.
The Early Republic
Critical Editions on the  
Founding of the United States
Primary material documenting the 
actions, debates, and thoughts of the  
First Federal Congress (1789–1791) and 
its members. 
earlyrepublic.press.jhu.edu
Encyclopedia of  
American Studies
Edited by Simon Bronner
Interdisciplinary articles from  
hundreds of scholars cover the history 
and cultures of the United States from  
pre-colonial days to the present.
eas-ref.press.jhu.edu
The Johns Hopkins  
Guide to Literary  
Theory & Criticisim
Edited by Michael Groden,  
Martin Kreiswirth, and Imre Szeman
A comprehensive historical survey of the 
field’s most important figures, schools, 
and movements.
litguide.press.jhu.edu
The Papers of Dwight 
David Eisenhower 
Edited by Louis Galambos, Alfred D.  
Chandler Jr., Daun van Ee, et. al.
Combines the full text of all 21 
volumes—over 14,000 pages—with 
a powerful search engine and 
user-friendly interface.
eisenhower.press.jhu.edu
The World Shakespeare 
Bibliography ONLINE
Edited by Laura Estill and an  
international committee of correspondents
The single largest Shakespeare  
database in the world. 
www.worldshakesbib.org
