I L LINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
01 
0
.aT'^''^M/''
Whale Talk
Chris Crutcher's long-awaited new novel
A Cutter High School bus provides surprising sanctuary to seven
unlikely members of the swim team. Why do they need sanctuary?
Listen. It's all here in this riveting, tragic, funny page-turner of a novel.
' 
"Crutcher's gripping tale of small-town prejudice delivers a frank,
powerful message about social issues and ills."-Starred review /Publishers Weekly
"The veteran author examines how the sometimes cruel and abusive
circumstances of life affect every link in the human chain. Through it all
shines Crutcher's sympathy for teens and their problems."
-Featured review / ALA Booklist
Ages 12 up. $15.95 Tr (0-688-18019-1); $15.89 Lb (0-06-029369-1)
SGreenwillow Books An imprint ofHarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
July/August 2001
Vol. 54 No. 11
A LOOK INSIDE
399 THE BIG PICTURE
Runaway Radish by Jessie Haas; illus. by Margot Apple
400 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
410 * Breakout at the Bug Lab by Ruth Horowitz; illus. by Joan Holub
413 * What You Never Knew about Tubs, Toilets, and Showers by Patricia
Lauber; illus. by John Manders
413 * The Buccaneers by Iain Lawrence
420 * The Many Adventures ofJohnny Mutton written and illus. by James
Proimos
423 * Marco's Millions by William Sleator
428 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
430 ANNUAL AUTHOR AND TITLE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Jeannette Hulick
Melanie Kimball
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children 's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin
ofthe Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6211. E-mail:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2001 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Margot Apple from Runaway Radish ©2001. Used by permission of
Greenwillow Books.
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 399
THE BIG PICTURE
Runaway Radish
by Jessie Haas; illustrated by Margot Apple
Where are the horse and pony books of yesteryear? Not only were there stirring
tales of Olympic-bound girls and horse-taming boys, there were endearing, acces-
sible tales of kids goofing around with their own little fuzzballs, Billy riding down
the trail on Blaze, that allowed the deprived to wallow in the alluring details of
barn perfume and horsey ways. Equibibliophiles nowadays mostly have to resort
to fantasy, which gives them the chance to slay dragons but deprives them of the
homelier thrill of real possibilities.
Stubbornly and almost single-handedly bucking that trend is Jessie Haas,
a knowledgeable equestrienne in her own right who's been contributing not only
longer horse books (Working Trot) but also genuine middle-grade titles for those
not yet into triple-digit pages (Beware the Mare, BCCB 7/93, etc.). Now she turns
her attention to younger readers still, that underserved population that's beyond
easy readers but desperately hoping for pictures, big print, and actual events, and
she's given them the present about which many of them dream: a pony.
Radish is pretty much the quintessential pony, in fact, sassy and smart
and small. He first belongs to young Judy, acting as her most important instructor
("He taught her that if she asked nicely, he would almost always do what she
wanted"), but he's eventually outgrown and replaced by Horton, a full-sized horse
("Radish bit Horton, but Horton didn't care"). He is then passed on to little
Nina, whom he also educates ("The school taught Nina how to ride. Radish
taught Nina other things"), until, inevitably, she also outgrows him and replaces
him with Count, a full-sized horse ("Radish tried to chase Count away. But Count
was too big. He didn't even notice"). Unsuited for retirement, Radish causes a bit
of havoc (he takes off for his old home at Judy's) that brings his former riders
together; Judy and Nina put their heads together, trying to figure out how to keep
Radish from a life as eternal hand-me-down ("But in a few years the next little girl
will be too big too.... Little girls always grow up"), and realize that he'd be perfect
for a summer camp. There he provides the important lessons he has taught Judy
and Nina to years of campers, including, finally, Judy's young daughter.
This is a proper pony book, scratching all the horse-yearning itches just
right. Radish isn't anthropomorphized, and he doesn't need to be-he's a desir-
able and memorable character in his own equine right, whose personality shapes
his owners' schedules and habits ("He made Nina win whether she wanted to or
not. After a while Nina got used to winning. After a while she even learned to like
it") and who enjoys pushing his young charges beyond their limits ("Most of the
time she couldn't even catch him. Radish liked that"). The pony-bonding de-
picted will cause barn rats to sigh in recognition ("She smelled his warm smell.
She listened to him eat") or slaver in envy ("They swam in the pond. Radish was
400 
* THE BULLETIN
the diving board"; "Sometimes she hated everybody, and they hated her too. Then
she went away on Radish"). The smooth-gaited text has a simplicity so deft and
careful that it's easy to underestimate; it will entice young readers trembling at the
move beyond early-reader series, and the rhythm will help make the book a pleas-
ing readaloud (Radish's different pleasurable successes at eluding his owners' au-
thority turn "Radish liked that" into a repeated refrain).
Apple (perhaps chosen for her name, in the absence of capable illustrators named
Carrot) hasn't been known for her equines before, but she takes to the task like a
duck to a horse trough. Her soft pencil illustrations (there's usually one per page)
have Garth Williams textures with Wesley Dennis expressiveness, giving Radish,
the "good bad pony," plenty of perky oomph whether he's gunning with laid-back
ears for an indifferent Count or bouncing down the road; he's got that roly-poly-
pony look even when he's shined up for a show, and it's particularly evident when
he's fuzzed up with his winter coat.
There is, of course, an inherent risk in this kind of book, in that even as it
satisfies it induces yearning (and for parents, even as it satisfies it induces begging).
It's a delicious quandary, and it's nice that young readers will again have a chance
to experience it. (Imprint information appears on p. 408.)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALPHIN, ELAINE MARIE 
Ghost Soldier. Holt, 2001 
[220p]
ISBN 0-8050-6158-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Alexander Raskin is already upset that his divorced father is dragging him down to
North Carolina to visit a widow in whom he has a romantic interest, and Alexander's
distress compounds when he learns that Paige Hambrick is helping Dad find a job
in the area and that her elder child, Nicole, holds as dim a view of Mr. Raskin as
Alexander does of Mrs. Hambrick. Possibly because of the emotional turmoil, or
possibly because of the proximity of Civil War battlefields, Alexander begins to see
ghosts, a phenomenon that hasn't plagued him since his understanding mother
was still in the household. A particular spirit, young Rebel soldier Richeson
Chamblee, attaches himself to Alexander in hopes that an "out-of-timer" can help
him learn the fate of his family and finally rest in peace. Alexander's triple chal-
lenge is touching and at times quite funny as he tries to put the brakes on Dad's
romance, help Chamblee track down family artifacts in the many local history
museums, and appear normal and sane while being verbally badgered by a very
insistent and loquacious ghost. Readers drawn to the ghost plot will not, however,
necessarily find all of the historical research into the Chamblee family quite as
interesting as Alexander does, and the plot strains considerably as the pieces fall
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 401
too neatly in place and Paige Hambrick proves sympathetic beyond reason about
Alexander's visitations. There's much charm, though, in the notion of an invisible
buddy, and smart, observant Richeson Chamblee is just the ghost kids would want
hanging around. EB
ARNOLD, MARSHA DIANE 
Metro Cat; illus. by Jack E. Davis. 
Golden,
2001 
[3 3 p]
ISBN 0-307-10213-0 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Sophie Le Beque is the cover cat for Fancy Cat magazine, and she lives a sheltered,
pampered life. On a rushed and reckless limousine ride, her carrying cage is thrown
from the back seat and down the Paris Metro steps, where Sophie falls into the
rush-hour hustle and bustle of the train station: "Pointy blue heels scrunched her
toes. Scruffy tennis shoes smashed her tail. 'MEOWCH!!' shrieked Sophie." No
more cushions, catnip, and trout for Sophie-she sleeps on the concrete floor and
survives by eating bits and pieces of dropped or discarded eclairs, baguettes, and
quiche. Ultimately, the abandoned cat finds her way to the surface and the sunny
streets of Paris, where she meets Jacques, a street musician. The two join forces:
down in the Metro Jacques plays, Sophie dances, and the many passersby fill Jacques'
hat with coins. The progression of Sophie's adventure is slowed by an overlong
text, and there are lapses of logic that may puzzle listeners (doesn't anyone look for
Sophie? How does she sleep through the whole night in the noisy subway station?
Why doesn't she find the stairway sooner?). Davis' mixed-media (watercolor, acrylic,
colored pencil) illustrations pick up the pace of Sophie's sojourn in the subway
however, and give a sense of time rushing past along with commuters. Composi-
tions and colors are arresting: when the action segues from under to over, the
cat's-eye view of a claustrophobic crowd of passing feet gives way to a wider per-
spective of lighter, airier, above-ground streets. Sophie herself is a roundly solid
ginger cat with femme-fatale eyelashes and zigzag markings, Jacques is a bow-
legged fiddler with a curly moustache and goatee, and the streets of Paris have
never been so clean. Despite the lengthy text, some listeners may think that the
dancing Sophie is the cat's meow. JMD
ARNOSKY, JIM 
Raccoon on His Own; written and illus. by Jim Arnosky. 
Putnam,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22756-3 
$15.99 
R 2-5 yrs
A small raccoon is inadvertently separated from his mother and siblings when the
abandoned rowboat in which he is foraging breaks loose from a mudbank. The
simple text follows the raccoon on his brief voyage, noting other animals he en-
counters, describing his actions, and, in the end, reuniting him with his family a
short way downstream. Arnosky's forays into easy natural science (Rabbits &eRain-
drops, BCCB 3/97, and others) succeed because he keeps his very young audience
firmly in mind and he generally avoids any overt anthropomorphism. His water-
colors do give a rather Disneyesque impression of natural life in the woods-his
raccoons have big dark eyes worthy of a Dondi comic and his alligator has the scary
hide of a sea serpent-but these depictions inject a little emotion into what could
have been a very bland landscape. Despite a palette that leans heavily on acid
greens and yellows, young viewers will be drawn to the uncluttered compositions.
This useful woodland drama is a smooth (and smart) storytime cruise. JMD
402 
* THE BULLETIN
AUCH, MARY JANE 
I Was a Third Grade Spy; illus. by Herm Auch. 
Holiday
House, 2001 
86p
ISBN 0-8234-1576-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Josh has barely recovered from hypnosis into a feline state (in I Was a Third Grade
Science Project) when he and his buddies Brian and Dougie discover an unresolved
and disturbing issue from that escapade-Brian's dog Arful can now understand
and speak Human. Brian's all for hypnotizing Arful back into normal doggy-ness,
but his friends realize that Arful is their shoo-in victory for the upcoming school
talent show. They send Arful on a covert reconnaissance mission to discover what
their nemesis Emily is cooking up for the girls' act (Arful gets it hopelessly wrong),
and they then put together their own ventriloquist act featuring Arful, who again
gets it hopelessly wrong, but this time on stage. Arful and Josh narrate alternating
chapters, and, as one might expect, Arful's contributions are the sprightlier due to
his, well, unique point of view ("I don't like girls. They have a sickening, soapy
smell. It's enough to make me throw my biscuits"). Readers who missed out on
Josh's science-fair disaster can easily catch up in the somewhat overextended open-
ing chapter; from there on it's lots of plain ol' the-boys-versus-the-girls fun. EB
BLOCK, JOEL D. 
Steplivingfor Teens: GettingAlong with Stepparents, Parents, and
Siblings; by Joel D. Block and Susan S. Bartell. 
Price Stern Sloan, 2001 
199p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8431-7569-9 
$13.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8431-7568-0 
$4.99 
R Gr. 7-12
This breezy guide to living in step covers a considerable amount of ground, such as
stressing out over a parent's impending remarriage, jealousy of any number of
players in the drama, dealing with stepsiblings and new half-siblings, and incendi-
ary problems such as attraction to a stepsibling and inappropriate attention from a
stepparent. Doctors Block and Bartell (the first a stepchild himself, and both psy-
chologists) work with stepchildren, and they use both their experience and the
voices of clients for insight into the complexity of step-relationships. The advice is
straightforward and workable, and while the tone is generally optimistic, there's
acknowledgment of some hard facts: sometimes avoidance is a legitimate approach,
and sometimes things don't get better and there are ways to live with that. The
main emphasis, however, is on talking to your parents, stepparents, or somebody
who can help, and there are suggestions aplenty for figuring out what to say and
how. Summary quotes, featured stepkid complaints, lists of solutions, and self-
enlightenment quizzes (quick and painless) help structure and enliven the book;
unfortunately, there are no source lists (not even websites), and there's no index for
quick research by the desperate. Nonetheless, parents may find a look at this guide
useful for their own information, and the main audience-stepkids, whether in
support groups or on their own-will find this both reassuring and helpful. DS
BLOOR, THOMAS 
The Memory Prisoner. Dial, 2001 
132p
ISBN 0-8037-2687-2 
$15.99 
M 
Gr. 6-9
Maddie Palmer went into her house when she was two years old and hasn't come
out for thirteen years. Her younger brother, Keith, is her "eyes and ears," report-
ing the minute details of his day to his housebound-by-choice older sister. Their
lives are shadowed by the Tower Library, a gloomy edifice that looms over the
entire town, and by chief librarian Lexeter, who, by dint of controlling the medi-
cal, criminal, and municipal records, controls the townsfolk. When Keith is cho-
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 403
sen to be apprentice to Lexeter, Maddie becomes obsessed with the library and its
secrets, and she determines to unearth them. Bloor's first novel has promising
elements-the mysterious disappearance of Maddie's councilman grandfather,
Maddie's self-imposed isolation, the brooding Tower Library itself-and his abil-
ity to evoke an atmosphere infused with menace is considerable. The action is
predicated on the mysteries that demand to be solved, and, for approximately the
first two-thirds of the novel, the pace is steady and the suspense is palpable. As
soon as Maddie leaves the house (to save Keith from a homicidal bully), however,
the plot stalls irretrievably. Maddie's taking of the Tower (Library) and her defeat
of Lexeter are sadly anticlimactic, and the solutions to secrets so long hidden are
disappointing. The author implies sinister forces at work in the town of Pridebridge
(similar to Bradbury's evocation of evil in Something Wicked This Way Comes);
unfortunately he is unable to satisfactorily develop or sustain those implications.
Characterizations are initially intriguing but ultimately too shallow to support the
weak conclusion. JMD
BLUMENTHAL, DEBORAH 
Aunt Claire's Yellow Beehive Hair; illus. by Mary
GrandPrd. 
Dial, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8037-2509-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
A little girl journeys into the joys of family history in this well-intentioned picture
book. Annie, the young narrator, explains, "I want to know about the family who
came before me, the ones I see only in pieces, in scattered pictures, family who
can't come to my house or eat with me. I want to reach into the past and bring
them closer to me." To this end, one rainy afternoon Annie and her Grandma
Marilyn search through old shoe boxes, backs of drawers, and old straw baskets
looking for "memorabilia." Ribbons, photos, medals, pieces of lace all elicit stories
of family members past and present: "We work to fit everything together, to make
an album that tells our family's story." GrandPrd's illustrations bring past and
present into focus; her pastels feature smiling relatives from bits of story and memory
reaching from photos and gazing out from within the golden haze of the past. The
story itself is pointedly programmatic, but the message is certainly a worthy one,
and the friendly demeanors of the characters leaven what could be a serious over-
dose of nostalgia. More family stories themselves as opposed to talking about
family stories would have given this title a little more child appeal; still, in the
hands of a properly enthusiastic adult, this may spark some attic rummaging. JMD
BOWEN, GARY 
The Mare's Nest; illus. by Warren Kimble. 
HarperCollins,
2001 
[4 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028407-2 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028408-0 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In mid-nineteenth-century Vermont, an itinerant painter travels from town to
town, offering to paint people's animals. Business isn't great, but he discovers
something interesting: animals are disappearing. He's entrusted by a little girl
with the charge of looking for her mare, Morganna, and as he wanders he finds
that rabbits, cows, and sheep have disappeared-but the thief never takes white
animals. White livestock becomes very valuable, and there's an auction at the state
fair of the theft-proof animals; it soon becomes apparent that the white animals
404 
* THE BULLETIN
are, in fact, the stolen critters, and that they've been altered by their thief, a profes-
sional whitewasher (about whom the other animals had been trying to alert the
artist all along). The rural details are atmospheric, but the story, written to go with
the art, is short on spirit of its own, instead rambling from town to town, painting
to painting; the tidbit that the first letters of the theft sites aggregate to form the
word "whitewasher" isn't sufficient to add excitement. Folk artist Kimble's paint-
ings on wood have some of the sinewy line and green tones of Stefano Vitale's
work, but there is also a personable solidity to the animals portrayed and a lushness
to the Vermont landscape that gives the visuals individuality. The artistic interest
may offer curricular approaches to this title, and some youngsters may be intrigued
by this offbeat historical narrative. DS
BURLEIGH, ROBERT 
Lookin'for Bird in the Big City; illus. by Marek Los. 
Silver
Whistle/Harcourt, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202031-4 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
In this poetic reimagining, the late Miles Davis "narrates" his teenage quest for
Charlie "Bird" Parker among New York's jazz clubs. Bird himself is elusive, but
fictionalized Davis discovers the unique expression of Parker's sax as he soaks up
the ambient noises of the city: "And so I took the ferry/ . . . and heard-/ notes
that clanged like buoy bells,/ and tumbled like the whiteness of the wake,/ 'cause
Bird's horn had those sounds inside it,/ and I wanted them, too." Although this is
not a strictly biographical offering on the order of Jonah Winter's Once Upon a
Time in Chicago (about Benny Goodman, BCCB 1/01), there is just enough plot
for young listeners to follow along to the climactic meeting between the jazz giant
and the aspiring novice, and Bird's whispered "Take yourself a solo, kid" should
evoke empathetic satisfaction missing from more abstract jazz picture books such
as Raschka's Mysterious Thelonius (BCCB 10/97). Los presents an intriguing
sawtoothed skyline, softened by a color-infused haze and turbocharged with neon
blues, purples, golds, and oranges that permeate thrumming subway tunnels, worka-
day ferries, and illuminated storefronts. Davis' trumpet fairly emanates its own
golden aura, the rising young star's instrument in perfect balance with Bird's sil-
very sax. Pair this with Isadora's venerable Ben's Trumpet (BCCB 7/79) for varia-
tions on a musical mentoring theme. EB
CALDWELL, V. M. 
Tides; illus. by Erica Magnus. 
Milkweed, 2001 
3 11 p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-57131-628-0 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57131-629-9 
$6.95 
Ad Gr. 4-8
This sequel to The Ocean Within (BCCB 1/00) documents the second summer
Elizabeth Sheridan spends with her cousins at Grandma's seaside home. Caldwell
offers new readers a recap of the events of last summer when twelve-year-old Eliza-
beth "hadn't been a Sheridan" and fills in subsequent events, such as the ceremony
that made her adoption official. Like the earlier book, this one emphasizes the
comfort the Sheridan children take in Grandma's clear rules and consistently ap-
plied punishments. This year, however, eldest cousin Adam rebels against them.
Bit by bit, he estranges himself from the family that couldn't save him from the
depression that followed the deaths of his two best friends right before their high-
school graduation. Readers share the ever-present tension that poisons the simple
pleasures of this close-knit family, benefiting from Elizabeth's insider/outsider in-
sights into her new family's diverse emotional responses to a situation that seems
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 405
beyond even the wisdom and persistence of the family matriarch. The faltering of
the adults both frightens and empowers Elizabeth, who in a variety of ways saves
the day, after first overcoming her fear of the ocean to rescue the only other dis-
tinct child character, five-year-old Petey. From a literary perspective, the novel
suffers from purposiveness: didactic content-including oceanographic facts con-
veyed in an environmental subplot and cultural data attached to overtly multicul-
tural characters-is too clearly laid out in stilted dialogue and in Elizabeth's inner
thoughts (printed in italics). The situation of these characters is realistic enough,
however, and the emphasis on the ethics of family life may engage serious-minded
readers. FK
CARLSTROM, NANCY WHITE 
What Does the Sky Say?; illus. by Tim
Ladwig. 
Eerdmans, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8028-5208-4 
$17.00 
Ad 4-8 yrs
As the title suggests, this is a rumination on the natural and spiritual in a Q&A
form. The philosophy is admirable, but the poetic text is sometimes hindered by
conceptually difficult or ambiguous language ("What does the sky say on a Satur-
day night before going out with the mountains in orange silk?") and unclear logic
(the autumn sky says, "Sing and you will always find your way home"). The little
girl is a deliberately universalized figure placed in a sentimental landscape of water-
color, pastel, and acrylic illustrations that, along with the omniscient narration,
emphasize her isolation from people to focus on her relation to the cosmos. The
tie to the declaration in Psalm 19 (which follows the text proper) that "the skies
proclaim the work of God's hands" is a bit tenuous as an afterthought, but Sun-
day-school teachers and others may well be attracted to the model attitudes of the
main character, the book's statement of faith, and its overt message that under the
sky's "wide roof... surely there is room for everyone to live in peace." FK
CHOLDENKO, GENNIFER 
Notes from a Liar and Her Dog. Putnam, 2001 
21 6p
ISBN 0-399-23591-4 
$18.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Ant (short for Antonia) MacPherson is an overlooked middle child in a family
where stark favoritism is shown toward her two sisters, Elizabeth and Kate. Ant's
mother basks in their talents (ballet and beauty) in part to keep her mind off of her
fickle husband, whose frequent career upheavals and subsequent "fresh starts" have
kept the family from living in the same place for more than a year. Ant's response
to her mother's negligence and her father's absence (all his jobs seem to involve
plenty of travel) is to avoid telling the truth at all costs, particularly when it's about
something meaningful to her, and nothing is more meaningful to Ant than her
aged Chihuahua-mix dog, Pistachio. When her mother refuses to take Pistachio
to the vet, Ant takes him herself, giving a false name and address so that the bill
won't catch up with her. One of Ant's sixth-grade teachers intervenes and slowly
helps her realize that lying is making her life more complicated than telling the
truth. The happy resolution (Ant's father opts not to change jobs again and her
mother starts to notice her) is somewhat pat, but the strength of Ant's voice will
engage readers despite the slightly flat ending. Choldenko's writing is snappy and
tender, depicting both Ant's bravado and her isolation with sympathy. Although
there are plenty of bad girls out there in middle-grade literature, Ant will win a
following for her unusual candor in the process of lying and learning to live with
the truth. KM
406 
* THE BULLETIN
CHORLTON, WINDSOR 
Woolly Mammoth: Life, Death, and Rediscovery. 
Scholastic
Reference, 2001 
40p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-24134-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Locked within an enormous clod of frozen tundra are the remains of the Jarkov
mammoth, named for the Dolgan (indigenous Siberian) teens who discovered its
protruding tusks on a hunting expedition. Although the woolly mammoth-along
with answers to scientists' many questions regarding its life and demise-is cur-
rently on ice in a Khatanga cave, the tale of its discovery, excavation, and transpor-
tation to safe lodgings provides plenty of interest. Chorlton starts with a somewhat
awkward, occasionally repetitive presentation of background materials on various
kinds of mammoths, but once the researchers arrive on the scene the interest picks
up. Scientists disagree on how much of the mammoth remains below ground and
whether soft tissue is extant, and their disagreements directly influence retrieval
strategies. Once it's determined to remove the estimated bulk of the entire animal,
serious challenges arise ranging from acquiring and powering jackhammers in re-
mote Siberia to finding a helicopter that can convey the great weight hundreds of
miles to Khatanga. The possibility and ethics of cloning are evenhandedly treated,
and the Dolgans' attitude toward the whole procedure is also acknowledged ("They
watch the team's efforts with some amusement, wondering why anybody would
waste so much time digging out an object that has no practical value"). Lots of
scrapbook-style photos document the expedition, effectively drawing browsers into
the action. EB
CLEMENTS, ANDREW 
The School Story; illus. by Brian Selznick. 
Simon,
2001 
196p
ISBN 0-689-82594-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
When twelve-year-old Natalie considers becoming a published author, her enter-
prising friend Zoe becomes her agent. Masquerading under the pen name Cassandra
Day, Natalie produces a manuscript called "The Cheater"; new literary agent Zee
Zee Reisman, aka Zoe, represents her, funneling the manuscript into the receptive
hands of children's book editor Hannah Nelson (Natalie's mom). Neophyte En-
glish teacher Ms. Clayton is persuaded to act as advisor to the "publishing club"
and CRO (chief rental officer) for Zoe's literary agency. There's excellent plot-
ting and insightful character development here, but it's unfortunately undercut by
uneven execution, with intrusive narrator comments and unfettered coincidence
impeding the book's effect. Will kids be sucked in by the possibility of a peer's
work not only being published, but being good enough to get the attention of a
New York publishing firm (with a little help from an agent who is a first-class
player)? The answer will lie in the loyalty of the readership: has the formula
gotten old, or will diehard Clements fans, still grateful for Frindle (BCCB 10/96),
be satisfied by the enormous empowerment he offers his young characters? EAB
COLFER, EOIN 
Artemis Fowl. Talk Miramax/Hyperion, 2001 
277p
ISBN 0-7868-0801-2 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Artemis Fowl is a twelve-year-old multimillionaire genius whose family made its
fortune through skullduggery and chicanery, and the boy is determined to follow
in his ancestors' larcenous footsteps. With the help of Butler (bodyguard, en-
forcer, and family retainer), Artemis gets his hands on a copy of The Book, a Bible
of fairy law and lore. He kidnaps a fairy (Captain Holly Short) and demands a ton
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 
407
of 24-karat gold in ransom; the fairies, apparently no strangers to extortion, send
in an elite strike force to rescue the hostage. Fairy folk notwithstanding, Colfer's
novel is more suspense than fantasy, and the rising action supports the pace. The
paramilitary humor leans a tad toward the adult, but the characters' motivations
are easily recognizable, and readers will appreciate Artemis' growing conscience,
Holly Short's compulsion to heal even the deadly Butler, and the camaraderie of
the ground troops. Opening characterizations appear shallow but are later refined
to include more psychological nuance, and the plot/concept holds together well.
This is an action novel that's bound to build a fan base among more hardware-
oriented fantasy fans. JMD
DIETERLE, NATHALIE 
I Am the King!; written and illus. by Nathalie
Dieterld. 
Orchard, 2001 
26 p
ISBN 0-531-30324-1 
$15.95 
R 
4-7yrs
The king in question is actually Little Louis, a bunny whose mother gives him a
"beautiful golden crown." This goes to his head figuratively as well as literally, and
he becomes a bit of a tyrant, deciding to "change all the laws of his kingdom" (the
king doesn't go to school or take a bath, and he only eats chocolate). Finally his
subjects-er, parents-revolt and send him to his room. Dieterld's oversized pages
show His Rabbity Highness to good advantage: Louis is a plain brown bun, with
lines reminiscent of Matt Groening's lagomorphic Binky, so his reign is all the
more endearing. The pared-down compositions and thickly applied gouache al-
low for a tight and effective focus, and details such as Louis' proclamations to the
monsters that lurk in scary bedroom locales (under the bed, behind the curtains,
and outside the window) make clear that Louis has been yearning to subjugate
some of these subjects for quite awhile. The end (wherein after apparently surren-
dering to anti-king forces Louis becomes a wolf) isn't as well grounded as it might
be, but children will adore Louis' absence of capitulation. This is gleeful and apt
in its depiction of a youngster's happy tyranny, and kids longing to rule the hutch
will revel in it. DS
FLINN, ALEX 
Breathing Underwater. HarperCollins, 2001 
26 3p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029199-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029198-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
The court has sentenced sixteen-year-old Nick to counseling and the writing of a
journal as a consequence of an incident with his girlfriend, which Nick terms "a
slap." Through his journal, he recalls the beginning and progression of his rela-
tionship with Caitlin, until his desire to control her leads him into violence. Inter-
woven with the written flashbacks is Nick's account of his attendance at group
therapy, where he and other perpetrators of domestic violence attempt to under-
stand and redirect their impulses, and his reluctance to accept his exclusion not
only from Caitlin's life but from the life of his best friend, Tom. Flinn's use of
Nick as narrator is unusual and provocative, and there's impact as well as insight in
his long refusal to acknowledge his own culpability; Caitlin's vulnerability to this
unhealthy relationship is also credibly grounded. There's a programmatic side to
much of the narrative, however, with the therapeutic education predictable and
the information about Nick's own abuse at the hands of his father overly pointed.
As a counterpoint to titles such as Sarah Dessen's Dreamland (BCCB 10/00), this
offers a complementary view of the danger possible in relationships. DS
408 
* THE BULLETIN
GEORGE, JEAN CRAIGHEAD 
Nutik & Amaroq Play Ball; illus. by Ted
Rand. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
38p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028167-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028166-9 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Nutik, the WolfPup; illus. by Ted Rand. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
38p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028165-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028164-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
This pair of picture books, spun from the ideas and characters of George's Julie
books (Julie's WolfPack, BCCB 10/97, etc.), relate how Julie's younger brother,
Amaroq, came to adopt wild wolfNutik as a pet (WolfPup) and how the pair, in
pursuit of amusement and a missing football, find themselves far from home at
nightfall (Play Ball). In Nutik, the WolfPup, George accurately captures the heart-
ache of a child who, against his sister's advice, becomes emotionally attached to the
wolf cub he prepares for release into the wild; however, in a wishful and improb-
able twist, Amaroq bravely returns Nutik to his pack, but the wolf rejoins his
human household. For listeners who accept the premise of such an easily domes-
ticated wolf, Nutik &Amaroq Play Ball offers a solid storyline that blends authen-
tic tension (the friends stray further and further from home as day winds to a close)
with an introductory lesson on tracking (Nutik finds the direction home by ob-
serving birds' flight and feeding patterns). 
Gentle anthropomorphization per-
vades both tales ("'Come home. Come home,' they [wolves] howled"; "Nutik
wagged his tale to say 'Yes' in wolf talk"), and Rand's expressive Nutik comes
pretty darn close to cute. Vibrant pencil and watercolor naturescapes convinc-
ingly portray the breadth of subtly undulating land and sweeping sky, however,
and visually demonstrate how Amaroq and his family share rather than dominate
their environment. EB
HAAS, JESSE 
Runaway Radish; illus. by Margot Apple. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
56p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029159-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16688-1 
$15.95 
R* 
Gr. 2-4
See this month's Big Picture, p. 399, for review.
HALL, KATY 
Ribbit Riddles; by Katy Hall and Lisa Eisenberg; illus. by Robert
Bender. 
Dial, 2001 
40p 
(Dial Easy-to-Read Books)
ISBN 0-8037-2525-6 
$13.99 
R Gr. 1-4
Primary-grades professionals will doubtless be familiar with the riddling team of
Hall and Eisenberg, who've produced an eminently readable series of joke books
in the past few years. Here, in a volume appropriately dedicated to Kermit, they
turn to frogs, employing such standards as "Why are frogs such great baseball
players?" (it is, of course, their talent at catching flies) as well as newer material. A
good chunk of the riddles rest solidly on the conflation of frogs and toads, which
will elicit the scorn of picky young naturalists, and frogs seem inserted in rather
than central to a jest or two, but this is still an enticing pondful of jokes. Bender's
art employs layers of cell-vinyl paint on acetate, and the result is a luminous, slightly
creepy style that will draw youngsters who had felt they were beyond frog jokes.
Imaginative details and the gleam of the protruding eyes in every illustration en-
sure energetic effects that'll make kids slow down and look at the pictures. Riddles
are always an easy sell, and the art lifts this title above the mundane in a way that
readers will appreciate. DS
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 409
HOLMES, BARBARA WARE 
Following Fake Man. Knopf, 2001 
228p
ISBN 0-375-81266-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Homer is tired of his widowed mother's refusal to answer questions about his
deceased father, and his rising impatience with her deliberate avoidance gives birth
to rebellious thoughts and, finally, actions. On an unexpected vacation to Maine
Homer finds the first hints to his own history and his first real friend. Friend
Roger acts as mastermind and comic relief, concocting a plan to discover the iden-
tity of "Fake Man," an obviously disguised tourist living in a derelict cabin and
given to mysterious ferry trips. Homer follows "Fake Man" and discovers his true
identity: he is Owen Castle, a famous artist trying to remain anonymous, who
knew Homer's father and who tells the boy the truth about his father's life and
death. The story has a prickly undercurrent of suspense; Homer's stubborn refusal
to take silence for an answer and his dogged determination to discover what he
needs to know propel the action. Most of the novel is told from Homer's point of
view, with intermittent chapters/commentary offered by housekeeper Madeleine,
Roger, and even, in the end, Homer's mother, Catherine. The sometimes inter-
ruptive nature of other characters' interpolations doesn't overshadow Homer's
objective; his voice and his dilemma draw the reader effortlessly into his world.
The revelation about Homer's father is handled with an elegance that makes the
overexplanatory denouement clunky by comparison. Having held her child-char-
acters in gentle hands throughout, Holmes suddenly tosses them aside to concen-
trate on the shallowly developed grownups and their grief, a choice that makes the
conclusion disappointingly programmatic. Still, Homer's is a resonant, believable
voice, and his journey to his own past will sweep readers along. JMD
HONEY, ELIZABETH 
Fiddleback. Knopf, 2001 
[224 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90579-0 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80579-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Like Honey's Don't Pat the Wombat (BCCB 7/00), Fiddleback is narrated-and,
ostensibly, illustrated-by an Australian preteen: this one is a writer-to-be named
Henni, who will be heading into junior high after the Christmas holidays. Her
fast-paced, staunchly un-Americanized text is enlivened by annotations, hand-
lettered lists, letters to God, and charcoal line drawings that quietly segue into
more sophisticated sketches of the landscape and the people that came together so
eventfully during the wild multifamily outback vacation Henni chronicles. Notable
events range from the domestic to the societal (a modern lost boy plaintively follows
the group in an effort to contact one of the campers, his social worker) and the
ecological (a sensitive gully is threatened by a shortsighted lumber man with his
eye on the valuable fiddleback markings of an ancient tree). Oh, and a baby is
born. Strong characterization and an even stronger appreciation for the mundane
keep this walk on the wild side from becoming the script for FernGully IX. Henni's
rhetorical question is just: "Why aren't the good things ever news? FIVE KIDS
HAVE ACE TIME SKINNY-DIPPING IN RIVER." The novel is anchored by
the characters' offbeat humor and their calm steady look at the messier miracles of
life: for example, two chapters focus on the delayed postpartum delivery of the
placenta (aka "play center"), after which all of the assembled-men, women, and
children-"had a good cry." Though its resolution is unrealistically tidy (thanks
largely to an outback codger ex machina), this kid-friendly mixture of back-to-
basics fun, thoughtful asides, and a dash of turbulence will suit many readers. FK
410 
* 
THE BULLETIN
HOROWITZ, RUTH 
Breakout at the Bug Lab; illus. by Joan Holub. 
Dial,
2001 
48p 
(Dial Easy-to-Read Books)
ISBN 0-8037-2510-8 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 1-3
The narrator and his brother, Leo, love their mother's office: she works in the bug
lab. The best part of Mom's office is Max, the hissing cockroach ("When most
people see him . . . they back away. Sometimes they scream"). When there's a
party to celebrate a new endowment for the building, Max the fearsome slips out of
his cage, and the boys have to mount a bug-hunt to find him before he disrupts the
ceremonies; the lady who helps them recover Max proves, unsurprisingly, to be the
honoree who provided the endowment. The plot turns may be expected, but the
entomological theme is an unusual one. The text has a lively buzz and many tasty
insect tidbits, and the vocabulary shrewdly evades complex scientific terms and
offers reinforcement in the form of Leo's fondness for buggy turns of phrase ("And
Mom will be mad as a hornet!"). Holub's watercolor, gouache, and acrylic illustra-
tions have a solidity unusual in an easy reader: the palette is springlike, but there's
a new-wavy spikiness to the characters, and bug eyes, especially on the insects,
evoke echoes of Victoria Chess's beady-eyed beings. Plenty of early readers will
welcome this change-of-pace story about a cockroach on the loose. DS
HUTCHINS, HAZEL 
One Dark Night; illus. by Susan Kathleen Hartung. 
Viking,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-670-89246-7 
$15.99 
R 4-7yrs
On a dark (and soon to be stormy) night Jonathan looks out his bedroom window
and sees two eyes glowing from the branches of a tree outside: "He races down-
stairs and throws open the screen door. 'The stray cat's afraid of thunder!' he tells
his grandparents." The cat slips inside, carrying a newborn kitten. The deter-
mined feline makes a second trip out into the increasingly violent weather; the
boy, anxious for the cat's safety, waits by the open door until she returns with
another kitten. The third time the mother cat is assisted by courageous Jonathan,
who dashes outside "to help them battle through the rain. One boy, one cat, and
a third small kitten-wet as water, black as night." This is a simple, suspenseful
story successfully told, and youngsters will immediately get caught up in Jonathan's
nighttime adventure. Hartung's watercolors are a study in blue and yellow, the
blue shadowy darkness inside and outside made more intense by the contrasting
yellow glow of the electric and (after the storm cuts the electricity) candle light.
Jonathan himself is a freckle-faced hero in pajamas and slippers, who braves storm,
dark, and rain to help the mother cat and her kittens. Include this in any storytime
that needs an added frisson of danger. JMD
JENKINS, A.M. 
Damage. HarperCollins, 2001 
[224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029100-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029099-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 9-12
Austin's got a great life-he's "The Pride of the Panthers," his high-school football
team; he's got good friends; he's got any girl he wants. Since nothing bad has
happened to him, he can't figure out why he doesn't want to get out of bed in the
morning, doesn't want to take the trouble to eat, doesn't really care about anything
that happens. What he thinks he may care about is Heather Mackenzie, the pol-
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 
411
ished, controlled beauty who only goes out with college boys; soon they're dating,
and only Heather, coolly and masterfully sensual Heather, can pull Austin out of
the morass in which he flounders. As he begins to get a glimpse of the vulnerable
girl underneath, wounded forever by her father's suicide, he thinks perhaps he can
confide in her about his possibly suicidal depression and also heal her by making
her realize that neither his nor her father's darkness is a condemnation of her.
Jenkins (author of Breaking Boxes, BCCB 11/97) paints a perceptive and under-
standing portrait of a kid bogged down in a depression that so drains him that he
has little energy to understand or articulate it; Austin's second-person narration
effectively conveys his distance from his happy-party-guy persona and his football
efforts in the face of a new and often-troubling coach. Heather is more than a
mere functionary; the book elicits real sympathy for the pain and betrayal that
causes her commitment to an unshakable cool, and that commitment is evoca-
tively depicted (even when having sex, she is comfortable only when causing Aus-
tin to lose control, furious when he arouses her to the point of surrendering the
upper hand over the situation). More intense than Barbara Shoup's also excellent
Wish You Were Here (BCCB 11/97), this is both a nuanced exploration of a com-
plicated relationship and a sensitive treatment of a young man struggling against a
strong and frightening tide. DS
JENKINS, STEVE 
Slap, Squeak er Scatter: How Animals Communicate; written and
illus. by Steve Jenkins. 
Houghton, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-618-03376-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-3
Jenkins presents an array of animals and their varied ways of communicating, from
screeching to thumping. Although the main text is little more than a catalog of
various purposes and techniques of animal communication, he strengthens the
presentation by organizing the animal behaviors into categories, such as warning
other members of a group about predators, expressing intent (playfulness, domi-
nance, etc.), marking territory, and mating. Each brief description of animal com-
munication is accompanied by an illustration of the animal engaged in the
aforementioned behavior; while these descriptions are clearly written, the overall
textual brevity allows for no more than a sampling of animal activities. Readers
may be puzzled by some of the behaviors described (why does the female orb-web
spider sometimes eat the male, despite his communication of intent to mate?), and
the ending is abrupt, with little sense of summary or closure. The clean lines and
engrossing textures of Jenkins' cut and torn-paper collages are both visually entic-
ing and technically outstanding, however, taking care to replicate animal features
and forms as accurately as possible in an unusual medium. Young readers may go
on to investigate some of the many animal approaches to interaction after tasting
the tidbits offered here. KM
JOOSSE, BARBARA M. 
Ghost Wings; illus. by Giselle Potter. 
Chronicle, 2001 
34 p
ISBN 0-8118-2164-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
The little girl narrator is very attached to the grandmother who keeps her safe from
imaginary monsters, teaches her how to make tortillas, and accompanies her to the
"Magic Circle" where monarch butterflies nest in great numbers. Her grand-
mother becomes "thin as smoke" and dies on the day the butterflies leave, and the
little girl grieves. Her grief is alleviated by the ceremonies associated with the Days
of the Dead and by the return of the butterflies that "carry the souls of the old
412 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ones." While the child narrator's loss will elicit sympathy, the story itself is didac-
tic and predictable. References to the migration of the monarch butterflies and
the Days of the Dead accumulate with awkward purposefulness and add to an
already lengthy, somewhat stilted text. Potter's mixed-media (watercolor, colored
pencil, and ink) illustrations are missing their usual vitality; the colors are washed
out, and the compositions lack variety. Still, the little girl herself is often very
expressive, especially in scenes featuring her smiling, gray-haired grandmother,
and the magic of the monarchs cannot be denied. Notes on the Days of the Dead
and monarch butterflies are included, as is a "Guide to Using this Book" that
features questions and activities about feelings, memories, and butterflies. JMD
KRENSKY, STEPHEN 
Shootingfor the Moon: TheAmazing Life and Times ofAnnie
Oakley; illus. by Bernie Fuchs. 
Kroupa/Farrar, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-374-36843-0 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 7-10yrs
Whereas Dadey's Shooting Star: Annie Oakley, the Legend (BCCB 6/97) courted
the tall-tale crowd, Krensky offers a more traditional but equally satisfying picture-
book biography that candidly touches on some of the more somber aspects of
Oakley's early life-her father's death and her unhappy stay with a harsh farming
couple-as well as her driving ambition to invent herself as an entertainer and the
crowd-pleasing stunts and trick shots that made her a legend. Krensky's text is
peppered with presumably authentic quotes, but although he alludes in a conclud-
ing note to some of Oakley's writing, no specific citations are given. Photorealistic
faces emerge from Fuchs' misty earthtoned paintings, and startling bursts of lumi-
nescence bring featured objects and visages into sharp relief. As both artwork and
textual approach stand in such vivid contrast to Dadey's rollicking rendering, these
complementary views could serve as an inviting and accessible starting point for
discussion of how heroes become larger than life. EB
LAFAYE, A. 
Dad, in Spirit. Simon, 2001 
[176p]
ISBN 0-689-81514-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Ebon's energetic, imaginative, fun-loving father is the life of the family, and when
Dad slips into a coma out of the blue, Ebon, his two siblings, and his mother are
devastated. When a determined Ebon, with the aid of his loyal friend B.J., makes
sure Dad's beloved haunted house is ready for Halloween, he hears a voice direct-
ing him that could only be his father's. Soon his father's presence becomes even
stronger, and he's visible to and joking with all his kids; in spite of a psychologist's
claim that what he's seeing and hearing are the manifestations of grief, Ebon knows
it's his father's spirit. He also realizes that the more palpable Dad's spirit gets, the
harder it is for his body, so he plans a way to get spirit and body together to have
his father home well and in one piece. It's an intriguing plot idea, and LaFaye
makes Dad a glamorous and exciting figure despite his unreliability, so readers will
join Ebon in wanting him back. The somewhat talky narrative doesn't focus well,
however, with themes abandoned (it's never really pursued that Ebon is by com-
parison the normal kid of the family until he finds this special gift of communicat-
ing with his father) and mood uncertain-Dad's quite a blithe spirit upon return,
creating comic consternation, which humor doesn't balance well with the family's
sadness and fear; the logic of the resolution is also somewhat murky. This not-
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 413
quite-ghost story may still suit young readers with a taste for exploration of the
ineffable. DS
LAUBER, PATRICIA 
What You Never Knew about Tubs, Toilets, and Showers; illus.
by John Manders. 
Simon, 2001 
33p 
(Around-the-House History)
ISBN 0-689-82420-3 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Plumbing is lucrative for its practitioners, but it's also historically interesting, and
Lauber (who authored What You Never Knew about Fingers, Forks, & Chopsticks,
BCCB 12/99, in the same series) gives a chipper overview of centuries of glugs,
splashes, and smells. She covers bathing and elimination customs from Stone Age
humans through the fairly bath-happy days in Egypt and Imperial Rome ("The
Ancient World: Clean Is In"), then onto the somewhat more redolent days in
Europe and then our conveniently plumbed lives today, stopping along the way to
address cultures less immediately instrumental in our lavatorial arrangements.
Though some of the fun facts provided aren't so factual (the Millard Fillmore
credit for the first White House bathtub, treated as truth here, was an H. L. Mencken
fiction), there's a good overview of enticing and repelling tidbits, with some clear
points about the roles of technology, medicine, and economics in human habits.
Manders' layered-glaze illustrations provide all the browsable details tittering young
readers could hope for, with dribbles of chamber pots and the odd nekkid rear end
ensuring continued interest (though informative details and diagrams are also a
significant component of the visuals). Kids not ready for Penny Colman's Toilets,
Bathtubs, Sinks, and Sewers (BCCB 2/95) will be happy to make this their bath-
room reading. A bibliography is included. DS
LAWRENCE, IAIN 
The Buccaneers. Delacorte, 2001 [256p]
ISBN 0-385-32736-6 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
With this title Lawrence concludes what is now termed his High Seas Trilogy (The
Wreckers, BCCB 6/98; The Smugglers, 7/99). John Spencer is once again entrusted
with his father's cargo, bound this time for the New World. Commanded by a
coast-hugging captain afraid of the open sea, the Dragon is only a few days out
when she takes aboard a mysterious man named Horn who appears to be the sole
survivor of a shipwreck. Whether Horn is a dreaded Jonah or the Dragon's salva-
tion remains to be seen, but it becomes clear that the man was once involved with
pirate Bartholomew Grace (currently in pursuit of Captain Kidd's legendary bur-
ied treasure), and his prior entanglement eventually puts the entire crew of the
Dragon in harm's way. It takes some fancy seamanship for Lawrence to bring the
plot about, landing the Dragon finally and safely along the shores that nearly wit-
nessed Spencer's demise in The Wreckers. Major characters are hastily disposed,
John's revived romance with Mary fizzles with jarring alacrity, and the wind seems
to have died abruptly in the trilogy's billowing sails. But The Buccaneers still boasts
its share of gruesome and eccentric characters-from the one-eyed gunner who
"couldn't hit the sponge if it was still in the barrel," to the dastardly Grace whose
noseless face has "melted" into a horrifying mask. There's peril aplenty as John
evades Grace and his henchmen and cuts out the prize ship with which they intend
to firebomb the British navy. John Spencer's final literary voyage may not be quite
up to the previous two, but all in all it's still a pretty grand adventure. EB
414 
* THE BULLETIN
LEVY, 
ELIZABETH 
Big Trouble in Little Twinsville; illus. by Mark
Elliott. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
89p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028591-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028590-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Any older sibling will admit to despising a younger sibling at times, but ten-year-
old Eve thinks she has double the trouble, because she has twin redheaded five-
year-old sisters, Amy and May, who invade her space, copy her style, and demand
attention. While Eve's bond with her stay-at-home accountant father helps to
soften the blows, it will not save her from the Twin Convention in Twinsville,
where "singletons" are the exception. Luckily, two sisterly cousins gang up with
Eve for solidarity. Mayhem ensues when Eve encourages the twins to enter the
talent contest with an ear-splitting act, but the cousin singletons come to the res-
cue, masquerading as the Three Stooges Triplets to save the day. Without being
pedantic, Levy's story brings a refreshingly modern family to the forefront. Un-
fortunately, this is a one-joke book, with Eve muttering the same phrase at the
beginning as well as at the end ("I only ordered one"), and the style is facile and
overexclamatory. Nonetheless, the plotting is fast and the tone is breezy, and
beleaguered older siblings may find a hero in the clever Eve. Kids may wish to
pause here for a diverting read. EAB
LEXAU, JOAN M., ad. 
Crocodile and Hen: A Bakongo Folktale; illus. by Doug
Cushman. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
48p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028487-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028486-2 
$14.95 
R Gr. 1-3
Crocodile is hungry, and when he sees plump Hen foraging for food down by the
river, he's all set to indulge his appetite. Hen, however, has different ideas: "'My
Brother, don't eat me,' said Hen. She had so little fear of him that she looked at
him with one eye. She looked at him with her other eye. Then she looked away."
Crocodile doesn't know what to make of the nervy chicken, and he goes away not
only hungry but perplexed by Hen's claim that they are brother and sister. Finally,
he concedes that he and Hen are siblings (because chickens and crocodiles both lay
eggs, explains Lizard); that is why, to this day, Crocodile doesn't eat Hen. Lexau's
simple text conveys the bewilderment of Crocodile and the cool insouciance of
Hen, as well as the obvious humor engendered by their encounters. A concluding
note mentions the pourquoi tale ("Why the Crocodile Does Not Eat the Hen")
Lexau used as her source. Cushman's illustrations feature an impressively toothy,
yellow-eyed crocodile and a plump white hen on the banks of a blue river; appear-
ances by local fauna (monkey, giraffe) add interest to the cartoony compositions.
JMD
LOWELL, SUSAN 
Dusty Locks and the Three Bears; illus. by Randy Cecil. 
Holt,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-5862-1 
$15.95 
R 5-8 yrs
Lowell transports Goldilocks to a wood in the Wild West in this adaptation of the
old tale. Dusty Locks arrives at the cabin of the three grizzly bears ("One was a
little bitty bear cub, just knee-high to a bumblebee. One was a mild-mannered
middle-size mama. And one was a great big humpbacked gray-haired grizzly, nine
feet tall and cross as two sticks") just after they set out for their walk. She lets
herself in and wreaks the usual havoc, eating their breakfast beans, climbing into
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 
415
assorted chairs, and curling up in baby bear's bed. The bears return to discover the
mess and the messer, upon which "the dirty little desperado" runs home to her
mother, who dunks, bathes, scolds, hugs, and kisses Dusty Locks "into a whole
new girl entirely." This latest title doesn't have quite the easy flow of Lowell's
previous reimaginings (Little Red Cowboy Hat, BCCB 6/97; The Elves and the
Bootmaker, 12/97), but the retelling has some tasty turns of phrase. Cecil's acrylics
provide a necessary subtext: Dusty Locks is a disreputable-looking little house-
breaker who, on the dedication page, is pursuing a panicked skunk, and the bears
themselves have pop-eyed demeanors that make them look perpetually surprised.
Listeners with a yen for western regalia may appreciate being regaled with this new
version of an old tale. JMD
MARINO, BETSY 
Emergency Vets. 
Dutton, 2001 
153p 
illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 0-525-46662-2 
$15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-525-46501-4 
$5.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
The Emergency Vets television program has appeal for young and old alike, and
this title capitalizes on that appeal for the young. Eleven-year-old Megan, a sum-
mer intern at the veterinary hospital, tells of the people who work there, the pets
who come in, and their worried owners; she also has a blossoming friendship with
Rick, a boy her own age whose dog is in the hospital. The animal-hospital stories
are inherently absorbing, and viewers of the show will recognize some of the pa-
tients; the solid details of veterinary work will secure the attention of budding vets.
There's also some confusion, however: Megan is a real girl (the niece of the senior
surgeon), but she didn't write this narration and didn't, in real life, have these
experiences, which calls into question the factuality of the rest of the human details
here. Also forced is the plot thread involving an abandoned dog, who ends up
going home with Megan. A more authentically documentary approach would
have served the subject better, but this is an unintimidating extension of the show,
and even non-watchers may appreciate the insight into veterinary medicine. Black-
and-white photographs in an eight-page inset are on the gray side, but they give
faces to the personae. DS
MARTIN, RAFE 
The Storytelling Princess; illus. by Kimberly Bulcken
Root. 
Putnam, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22924-8 
$15.99 
R 
5-9 yrs
A prince determined to marry a princess of his own choosing tells his royal father
he'll never marry unless he's told a story with an ending he doesn't know. Mean-
while, across the sea, a princess determined to marry a prince of her own choosing
sets sail with her royal parents. A storm sweeps the princess overboard, where she
grabs hold of a trunk swept off the deck and eventually makes her way to shore:
"She was lost, hungry, alone. And curious. What was inside the trunk?" The
trunk contains a dry sailor suit and a small pouch of silver coins; the princess dons
the clothes, pockets the cash, and sets off. The happy ending is never really in
doubt: the princess meets the prince and tells him her story, and the two of them
fall in love ("They were each marrying the person they had chosen to marry, but
neither had guessed they were also marrying the very one they'd been destined to
marry from the start"). This original tale has a strong folkloric base, but there are
no fragile folktale females here. Root's pencil and watercolor illustrations eschew
gauzy images in favor of robust ones; full-page and full-spread paintings feature a
416 
* 
THE BULLETIN
believable bunch of bold, natural-looking characters instead of fey fairy folk, and
spot art and ornamental capitals decorate the text pages. Judicious trimming of
the wordy text would result in smoother storytelling, and slightly stronger charac-
terizations (while the princess is obviously a desirable mate due to her adventurous
nature and storytelling prowess, the prince is less clearly so) would make the play-
ers more memorable, but this is a dandy tale for telling or reading aloud. JMD
MORRISON, TAYLOR 
The Great Unknown; written and illus. by Taylor
Morrison. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-395-97494-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In picture-book format, Morrison relates the story of Charles Willson Peale's un-
earthing, reconstruction, and exhibition of a nearly complete mastodon skeleton,
emphasizing its novelty and intellectual impact among early nineteenth-century
viewers who resisted the concept of species extinction in the natural order of God's
"perfect" creation. Morrison doesn't generate much excitement in his, ahem, bare-
bones account ("The skeleton helped to prove the argument that animals could
become extinct. The bones existed, but the animal did not. In 1806, the French
naturalist Georges Cuvier named the animal mastodon, which means 'nipple
tooth'"), and the cramped typeface, occasionally set into stodgy black line boxes,
sits uneasily alongside or amid brawny but static scenes. For a more complete,
albeit less densely illustrated, overview, refer readers to Janet Wilson's The Inge-
nious Mr. Peale (BCCB 6/96), but if brevity is the order of the day, this title will
prove serviceable. EB
MYERS, 
WALTER DEAN 
The Journal of Biddy Owens: 
The Negro
Leagues. Scholastic, 2001 
142p 
illus. with photographs 
(My Name Is
America)
ISBN 0-439-09503-4 
$10.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Seventeen-year-old Biddy Owens is equipment manager for the all-Negro baseball
team, the Birmingham Black Barons. He wants to play baseball, and to that end
he observes the players, practices his game, and writes in his journal about life on
the road. Owens does more than describe the day-to-day trials and tribulations of
a baseball team in the Negro Leagues in 1948; he also describes the lives of south-
ern blacks dealing with Jim Crow laws, the effects of racism in the world at large,
the beginnings of desegregation, and his own journey to self-awareness. Myers
gives Owens an honest but not overly reflective voice; the character's observations
about race, family, and baseball have a concrete specificity that makes them appear
factually as well as emotionally true. Biddy Owens is more interested in baseball
than anything else, but he knows he's not big-league material; stops on the game
route that include encounters with students from all-black colleges such as Spelman
and Morehead give him broader ideas for his future. Myers gives his fictional
main character/journalist a life that informs the history rather than the other way
around. A historical note about the Negro Leagues is appended; an appendix of
black-and-white historical photos of the real-life Birmingham Black Barons is also
included. JMD
NA, AN 
A Step from Heaven. Front Street, 2001 
156p
ISBN 1-886910-58-8 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Even as a little girl, Young Ju understands that there are family tensions, that her
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 417
father is an unhappy man, and that his wife and his mother are hoping for better
things. Young Ju's parents hope to find it by taking their daughter and moving
from Korea to Mi Gook, the United States, which is a "step from heaven." That
step is farther than anticipated, as the hoped-for financial success isn't forthcom-
ing and Young Ju's father continues his abusive ways. As the years go by, Young Ju
grows more Americanized, becoming, along with her brother, the translator of
English and of America for her family and resenting more and more her father's
rigidity and abuse. This is a quietly but effectively told story, with the first-person
present-tense narration broken up into brief titled sections that are more vignettes
than chapters; they're sufficiently connected to create a poignant overview of a life
undergoing extraordinary change as Young Ju loses a country, a grandmother,
and, ultimately, a father (her father, after being arrested for assaulting Young Ju's
mother, leaves her for another woman). Na has a streamlined, unaffected style
that offers childlike focus without being babyish (after wishfully telling her sec-
ond-grade classmates that her very-much-alive younger brother is dead and revel-
ing in the attention, Young Ju says, "I play with my fuzzies, scratch and sniff my
stickers, and think about how nice it is that my brother is dead"). A contemporary
and personal immigrant tale, this will make an affecting counterpoint to well-
worn stories of Ellis Island. DS
NIXON, JOAN LOWERY 
Playingfor Keeps. 
Delacorte, 2001 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-32759-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Nixon's latest mystery opens with a wallop as to-die-for-handsome Enrique (Ricky)
Urbino, talented teen baseball player, is smuggled out of his native Cuba to seek
asylum and a promising career in the United States. As Ricky hides out at a cruise
ship port of call, awaiting another illegal connection, the scene shifts to domestic
skirmishes between sixteen-year-old Rose and her mother. Mom packs Rose off
on a cruise with her meddlesome grandmother, Glory, and her bridge pals, and if
you can't guess that Rose will become embroiled with Ricky's escape on that very
same cruise ship, then you haven't read a heckuva lot of YA mystery novels. Before
Ricky can reach the golden shores, there are myriad plot lines to explore and re-
solve involving a shipboard romance (Rose and Ricky), shipboard friendship/flir-
tation (Rose and Glory's friend's grandson Neil), jealousy (Neil and Cuban
expatriate and consummate flirt Julieta), dead bodies (Ricky is the suspected perp),
and enough Castro bashing on Nixon's part to send chilly U.S./Cuban relations to
the deep freeze. Plotting is predictable, characters are substantial as celluloid (with
frequent allusions to the film Titanic underscoring the cinematic qualities of dra-
matis personae), but teens looking for an undemanding beach read that follows all
the rules will cruise right on through. EB
NORRS, KATHLEEN 
The Holy Twins: Benedict and Scholastica; illus. by Tomie
dePaola. 
Putnam, 2001 
[40p]
ISBN 0-399-23424-1 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 7-10yrs
Saints Francis, Christopher, Valentine, and Patrick seem to hold the monopoly on
picture-book trade, but here the two sixth-century figures who shaped the
development of monastic tradition get their due. With little biographical data to
go on (at least by modern standards of scholarship), Norris bases much of her
418 
* THE BULLETIN
account on the writings of Gregory the Great, with their emphasis on miracles;
Benedict's life lends itself to more complete coverage than his sister Scholastica's.
Even within these constraints, Norris and dePaola present a smooth, reverent, but
happily not stiffly pious tale of close siblings who reluctantly part, come to develop
powerful spirituality within the settings of different monastic communities, and
finally reestablish contact as adults who freely discuss "holy things" as they redefine
and influence the way monastic communities should function. Benedict's Rule
may have had lasting impact, but it's the images of Benedict dwelling in his hermit
cave, thwarting his would-be poisoners, and arguing with his sister that will stick
with the audience. As Benedict takes center stage throughout the text, dePaola
cleverly keeps tabs on Scholastica by incorporating pictures of her convent activities
over the years. Norris could (probably should) have included such helpful
information as the dates of the saints' lives, patron and feast day information, and
a translation of the Benedictine motto, Ora et Labora. An author's note does,
however, expand on Benedict's Rule, and this title will prove overall to be a fine
addition to the 200s collection. EB
ORENSTEIN, RONALD 
New Animal Discoveries. Millbrook, 2001 
64p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-2274-4 
$23.90 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Readers who thought there was nothing new under the sun will have their eyes
opened by Orenstein's discussion of some animals recently identified for the first
time. While most of the new discoveries are insects, they're not included here due
to the sheer volume of their new identifications; there's no shortage of diversity,
though, with subjects ranging from big fish to small frogs, Somalian birds to Viet-
namese deer. Though the text is occasionally a bit disjointed, the book provides
some evocative pictures of searches and discoveries, and it also addresses some of
the touchier issues of species discovery--the requirement of a dead specimen, the
"discovery" of an animal often well-known to the locals if not to the scientists, the
deleterious effect of discovery upon a species. 
Sidebars address matters ranging
from the Linnean system of classification to rediscoveries to scientist careers. Color
photographs are plentiful, lasting even when the animals haven't (the beautiful
saola was unable to survive in captivity), and often providing glimpses of their
habitat, too; thumbnail maps scattered throughout assist in location. There are no
further references (except for the occasional mention in a sidebar), but an index is
included. DS
ORMEROD, 
JAN 
Miss Mouse Takes Off; written and illus. by Jan
Ormerod. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[26p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17871-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17870-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
The heroine of Miss Mouse's Day returns here ready to go, as she and her family
travel to Granny's for a visit. Stuffed toy Miss Mouse provides a useful voice for
projecting the feelings of her young mistress (and for young listeners) as she takes
her first plane trip. The text calmly details the basics of a plane trip, such as
boarding, stowing luggage (make sure Miss Mouse isn't in the overhead bin!),
fastening seat belts, eating meals on trays, and killing time aloft. There's a little bit
of confusion about the speaker, since the account is supposedly by Miss Mouse
but it also refers to her by name at times, but this is still a compact and highly
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 419
accessible introduction to flying with the important message that you need to hang
onto your toys. Ormerod's line-and-watercolor illustrations sometimes emphasize
simplicity at the expense of character, but Miss Mouse's mistress is sweet and par-
ticularly realistic in her poses, as when she studiously concentrates on fastening her
seat belt, and Miss Mouse herself is floppily companionable. The paneled format,
which provides two discrete scenes on many pages, helps examine the experience
without slowing down the pace. This is just the thing for early discussions of
transportation or, more likely, for preflight preparation for new little travelers. DS
PELTA, KATHY 
Rediscovering Easter land. Lerner, 2001 
112p 
illus. with
photographs 
(How History is Invented)
ISBN 0-8225-4890-9 
$23.93 
R Gr. 5-9
It's nearly impossible to consider Easter Island without immediately envisioning
the potent image of massive, stylized stone busts (moai) keeping hollow-eyed vigil
over their spare landscape. As Pelta ably conveys, however, this image-the prod-
uct of archaeological reconstruction-represents only a fragment of the island's
history, and possibly not the most impenetrable mystery the island has to offer.
Operating within the focus of the How History Is Invented series, Pelta spends less
time exploring the usual questions-"What were moai used for?" and "How were
they moved into position?" and more time in examining how the many waves of
Western explorers, exploiters, and expositors encountered the islanders (themselves
immigrants to the region), affected their development, and constructed our cur-
rent understanding of the Rapanui, as the islanders are more properly known.
Although the book's layout is not as visually appealing as Caroline Arnold's Easter
Island (BCCB 4/00), and Pelta sometimes evinces a more benign view of Christian
missionary activity among the Rapanui than many readers will share, coverage is
serious, generally evenhanded, and smoothly presented, making this a fine foun-
dation for readers who enjoy digging up the past. Black-and-white and color pho-
tographs, maps, an index, and source notes are included. EB
PIERCE, MEREDITH ANN 
Treasure at the Heart of the Tanglewood. Viking,
2001 
241p
ISBN 0-670-89247-5 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Hannah is a young healer who lives in the woods with her companions: old Bad-
ger, Magpie, and three orange fox kits. The local villagers fear and revere her; they
come to her for medicine for the sick, aid for the injured, and charms for the
lovelorn. Occasionally, nameless knights pass her cottage, sent by a sorceress queen
to seek the treasure of the Tanglewood; they enter the dark forest and never return.
Hannah falls in love with one such knight, and together they conquer the Wizard
who holds Hannah in magical sway, but not before he turns the young knight into
a fox. Hannah embarks on a quest to disenchant her love; the quest is eventful
only in that Hannah fails to make the connection between herself and the land's
returning fertility, for in the course of her journey Hannah transforms from Brown
Hannah to Green Hannah, from Green Hannah to Gold Hannah, from Gold
Hannah to Russet Hannah, along with the changing seasons. On her love's island
home, the young healer discovers her Ancient Mother, a tree nearly mortally
wounded by the Wizard years before when he kidnapped her "floret," Hannah.
Pierce (author of The Darkangel, BCCB 7/82) fills this exploration of the nature of
the maiden-mother-crone triad with intricately entwining imagery. Unfortunately,
imagery alone isn't enough to carry what is, essentially, an overextended meta-
420 
* THE BULLETIN
phorical journey; the denouement lacks tension and there is little to emotionally
involve readers. Still, fantasy lovers who appreciated the linguistic complexity of
McKinley's Rose Daughter (BCCB 10/97) may travel along with Hannah on her
journey to her roots. JMD
PRESSLER, MIRJAM 
Shylock's Daughter; tr. by Brian Murdoch. 
Fogelman,
2001 
26 6 p
ISBN 0-8037-2667-8 
$17.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Those familiar with Shakespeare's The Merchant of Venice will recall Shylock's
daughter, Jessica, who absconds with her father's money and with her gentile boy-
friend, Lorenzo. The story here focuses not only on Jessica but on her foster sister,
Dalilah (now a servant in the household), and on Shylock himself. Largely oblivi-
ous to her father's troubles, Jessica relishes the Italian social glitter her Ashkenaz
community forbids, but when her clandestine romance turns into marriage and
conversion to Christianity, she begins to regret what she's left behind. Dalilah,
meanwhile, struggles to find her place as Amalia, the woman who has been Shylock's
housekeeper and Dalilah's mother figure, sickens and dies and as Shylock's life is
turned upside down in business as well as at home. As with Julius Lester's Othello
(BCCB 3/95), this is an interesting concept with a problematic execution. Pressler
effectively focuses on the life of Ashkenaz Jews in the Venetian ghetto, contrasting
it not only with the existence of the privileged gentiles but also with the compara-
tive freedom and riches of Sephardic Jews; the sociohistory is, in fact, more inter-
esting than the exploration of The Merchant of Venice. The plot is convoluted and
slow, impeded by the narrative shifts between third-person past (when following
Jessica and Shylock) and first-person present (as Dalilah tells her own story), and
none of the characters evoke more than fleeting sympathy. This sheds a bit of light
on Shylock's side of the issue, but it would really have been more effective as a
straightforward nonfiction treatment. An extensive note about The Merchant of
Venice and its historical realities is appended. DS
PROIMOS, JAMES 
The Many Adventures ofJohnny Mutton; written and illus. by
James Proimos. 
Harcourt, 2001 
42p
ISBN 0-15-202379-8 
$16.00 
R Gr. 2-4
As a little baby, Johnny was left on Momma Mutton's front step: "Momma's
weak eyes and warm heart kept her from even noticing" that her new little bundle
of joy was actually a sheep (Momma is mutton in name only), and she raises him
as a little boy. Johnny passes as a human but marches to his own drummer: when
everybody else brings apples to the teacher, he brings marshmallows; when every-
body else comes as witches and pirates to Halloween, he comes as a runny nose;
rather than following in Momma's steps and becoming a basketball player, he
wants to go in for water ballet. The narrative marches to its own drummer, too-
the stories caper along with a carefree weirdness in plot and style ("He had to use
all his mutton powers to keep from crying") highly unusual in this easy-reader
format, and the warm, fuzzy touches (in the spelling bee, Johnny spells "love" as
"M-O-M-M-A"; his Halloween runny nose ends up making friends with a girl
costumed as a box of tissues) take place on top of such peculiarities that they're
devoid of sentimentality. Even the "be yourself" message ("He doesn't even try to
fit in. I don't like that. He's so him," says an annoyed neighbor) takes on a new
meaning when it's about an ovine schoolchild who's into water ballet. Clearly,
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 
421
this ain't no Henry andMudge -Proimos 
tosses in comic-strip panels and speech
balloons, and there are echoes of George Herriman's Krazy Kat in the characters'
longitudinal eyes and beakily Kilroyesque features; while the text fonts are a bit
scruffy for the most beginning of readers, their dashed-off energy will amuse more
experienced youngsters. Kids resistant to homilies about individuality will none-
theless scarf down this enjoyably odd leg o' lamb. DS
REES, CELIA 
Witch Child. Candlewick, 2001 
[272p]
ISBN 0-7636-1421-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Mary is a witch, like her grandmother before her, which is a dangerous thing in
seventeenth-century England. Though they've largely passed unnoticed and have
never engaged in the sort of destruction that witchhunters claim, Mary's grand-
mother ends up on the gallows and Mary flees to the Massachusetts colonies. She
finds herself in the wilderness settlement of Beulah, where she makes close friends
but also arouses suspicion with her taste for wilderness wandering and her friend-
ship with a young Indian man; as community tensions and jealousy increases (a
spoiled and demanding young woman and her coterie feel slighted in the romantic
stakes) Mary's position grows more perilous, until finally she's the open target of
witchcraft hysteria. Salemesque doings are generally intriguing, and Rees adds a
twist in the notion that Mary is a witch, but it doesn't mean what the community
thinks and the doings that particularly concern the town (maidens dancing about
a fire and trying to curse people with dolls) are performed not by the witches but
by the petulant daughters of the burghers. Mary's witchcraft is rather disappoint-
ingly limited (its manifestations here could really all be wishful thinking); her
ahistorical unorthodoxy of independence and respect for Indians (fair if predict-
able in fiction) seem both more important and more, to her detractors, suggestive
of her evil. That limit results in some thought-provoking ambiguities about her
status, however, and Mary's blend of calm thoughtfulness and desperate need to
conceal herself is suggestive of parallels as well as capably evoked. This will make
both a pleasurable read and an intriguing discussion-starter, perhaps even in com-
bination with Miller's The Crucible. DS
ROCKWELL, ANNE 
Bugs Are Insects; illus. by Steve Jenkins. 
HarperCollins,
2001 
33p 
(Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028569-9 $15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028568-0 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-445203-4 
$4.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
"There's a way," this book helpfully explains, "to tell if something is an insect." It
then counts the ways: insects have an external skeleton (but so do some non-
insects), insects have bodies divided into three parts, and insects have six legs. The
text then explains which kinds of insects can properly be called bugs ("A bug is an
insect with a mouth like a beak and a head that forms a triangle") and which are
actually beetles ("Beetles are insects with a pair of hard wings you can't see through
that hides a second pair of clear wings"). The book goes on to explain some other
insect habits and to entice readers into guessing what in their backyards is an insect
and what isn't. The text seems to be heading for a bullet-points approach it never
quite employs, making it cumbersome, but the elucidation of characteristics is
fairly clear. Jenkins' cut-paper art uses somberer hues than usual, but the illustra-
422 
* THE BULLETIN
tions effectively convey the elaborate machinery of insect bodies. Unfortunately,
there are no captions or diagrams translating the textual principles into the visual,
so some of the concepts are difficult to apply to the artwork or the backyard (the
different body parts are particularly challenging). Still, this is a more straightfor-
ward explanation than others for this age group, and many youngsters will enjoy
just poring over the entomological images. Suggestions for further activities and
research and a key to insects pictured are appended. DS
SALISBURY, GRAHAM 
Lord ofthe Deep. 
Delacorte, 2001 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-72918-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Life has been good since Mikey Donovan's mother married charter fisherman Billy
Monks. Mom's happy, there's now an adoring younger brother, and Mikey gets
along so well with his stepdad that he's deckhand on Billy's Crystal-C. The boat's
been booked for three days by a pair of boorish amateur sportsmen who think they
know more about deep-sea fishing than their guide, and after a first day out that
yielded no spectacular catches, their tempers are running thin. Today's more prom-
ising, with a hard-won prize early on, but the men are after marlin, and when
Mikey fumbles a steering maneuver things go sour. A record-weight mahimahi's
finally hooked, but the men need assistance in landing him, thus disqualifying
them from being named as record holders. They bribe Billy to falsify the records
and, realizing that these men could either make or break his reputation as a charter
captain, Billy goes along with the deceit and draws Mikey in as well. The tension
of pursuing and landing huge game fish is palpably electrifying, matched only by
the tension of the moral dilemma into which Mikey is inveigled-he loves his
stepdad and realizes fully that the family's financial future rests with their patrons,
but deplores both the immorality of the deed and the fact it diminishes Billy's
character and his own. The Hawaiian setting is enticing, the action is gripping,
and Billy and Mikey's ethical equivocation is a sad but realistic barb in the readers'
gills that will trouble (and challenge) them for some time to come. EB
SHANNON, GEORGE, ad. 
More True Lies: 18 Tales for You to Judge; illus. by John
O'Brien. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
64p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029188-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17643-7 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-5
As in his previous collection, True Lies (BCCB 9/97), Shannon has gathered puzzle
tales from around the world and retold them in an accessible and engaging format.
He presents each short story with all the necessary clues before asking the reader to
judge the truth or deceptive intent of a character in the story; a page turn then
reveals the answers. In a brief introduction, Shannon explains that "dictionaries
give us the definitions of words, but their meanings can still be confusing," and he
illustrates this premise in tales that show plain folks around the world making sly
trades and slick deals. Although the structured brevity of these retellings tends to
homogenize the vast array of tales and sources (which are cited in detail at the back
of the book), Shannon's adept translations of jokes and wordplays invite young
puzzlers who might not otherwise look to tricky tales for their introduction into
the world of folk wisdom. O'Brien's pen-and-ink illustrations give the characters
a beady-eyed sameness, but their strength lies in their expansion of the jokes, as in
the story of the old man who claimed "he was as strong as he was twenty years ago"
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 423
(who was just as weak in his youth); the illustration shows the man straining to lift
a barbell with balloons on either end in place of weights. Readers who enjoyed
testing their friends with Shannon's first volume of tales will be eager to get their
hands on this one. KM
SLEATOR, WILLIAM 
Marco's Millions. Dutton, 2001 
[160p]
ISBN 0-525-46441-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Now here's something that doesn't come along everyday-a prequel that far out-
strips the original from which it was spun. IfSleator's The Boxes (BCCB 7/98) was
more than a bit of a muddle, this is as gripping a work of science fiction as most
middle-graders could desire. The science is grounded in astrophysical speculation
concerning a naked singularity and its ability to generate wormholes in time, while
the fiction is a deftly plotted family drama of sibling loyalty. Marco's younger
sister Lilly is regarded as a delicate, overly sensitive child who sees things, but in
this case the hole in her basement leading into a parallel world is no figment of the
imagination. There, insect-like creatures engage in a perilous ritual to appease
their deity, and they require Lilly's services as a medium to approach it. Since Lilly
hasn't her brother's courage, he enters the mysterious realm and makes the en-
counter while Lilly psychically guides him from beyond. Sleator introduces all the
necessary physics briefly and cogently and then allows the action to reveal the
dynamics of the naked singularity as time slows in its proximity and the near-
palpable tension inexorably builds. Readers unfamiliar with The Boxes need to
start here, and if a third volume is in the making, one hopes it will be as satisfying
as this latecomer prequel. EB
SMITH, CHARLES R., JR. 
Loki &Alex: The Adventures ofa Dog and His Best Friend;
written and illus. with photographs by Charles R. Smith, Jr. 
Dutton, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-525-46700-9 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Alex is a young African-American boy and Loki is a young husky-esque little dog,
and together they go off to the playground for some fun. They cavort on various
pieces of equipment from wobbly bridges to slides, play tug-of-war and other games,
and finally return home to a treat and a cuddle. The gimmick here is that the verso
pages in each spread show Alex's point of view (Alex's talking head appears on an
orange background next to his text and over the image he sees) and the recto pages
show Loki's (Loki's head appears a green background under the image, and his
writing isn't as good as Alex's-his pictures are also in black-and-white to indicate
dogs' limited color vision). Though the text is a bit catalogish, this dual view
results in some contradictions that will tickle young viewers ("Loki can be a naughty
dog," says Alex as Loki hunts for snacks in a garbage bag; "Alex loves it when I dig
out my own treats," says Loki), and they'll like it that Loki gets most of the best
lines ("Alex never learns. 
Why doesn't he toss me a treat instead of a stupid
ball?"). The layout doesn't have the electric energy of Smith's sports-themed titles
(Tall Tales, BCCB 5/00), and the contrasting pages could have benefited from
some additional visual connections; the pictures, especially Loki's action-blurred
views of a towering (and photogenic) Alex, will redeem the spreads in the eyes of
youngsters. There's entertaining originality as well as an appealing pair of subjects
here, and kids will definitely want to write their own person/pet narration in re-
sponse. DS
424 
* THE BULLETIN
SPINELLI, EILEEN 
Sophie'sMasterpiece: A Spider's Tale; illus. by Jane Dyer. 
Simon,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80112-2 
$16.00 
R 
5-9 yrs
Spinelli weaves a tale of self-sacrifice and generosity in this fable about a master
spinner who "was no ordinary house spider. Sophie was an artist." Her webs are
splendid, and all who know her expect that someday Sophie will "spin a master-
piece." When she comes of age, Sophie moves into Beekman's Boardinghouse,
but despite her best efforts to spin webs both useful and beautiful, she is feared by
most of the inhabitants. Sophie ultimately finds refuge in the knitting basket of a
young mother-to-be; when the woman runs out of yarn and cannot afford to buy
more, Sophie spins her masterpiece-a baby blanket full of moonlight, lullabies,
and, finally, "her very own heart." Dyer's visual characterization of appealing
arachnid Sophie has a grace and charm that holds this relatively slight, altogether
sentimental story together. The watercolors feature a gamine, humanized Sophie
gamely spinning for landlady, tenants, and cook; the perspectives are often from a
spider's-eye(s) view, emphasizing the enormity of the world compared to the little
spider's own size. Throughout the story Sophie ages; in the end, she is an old lady
spider, her gray hair in braids, her dark cloak somewhat tattered, leaning on a
bobby-pin cane. An adult frame of reference may be necessary to make the spare
text (and Sophie's sacrifice) understandable to the youngest listeners, but readers
and listeners of all ages will appreciate the little spider's tenacity as well as her big
heart. JMD
SPINNER, STEPHANIE 
Expiration Date: Never; by Stephanie Spinner and Terry
Bisson. 
Delacorte, 2001 
[144p]
ISBN 0-385-32690-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Twins Tod and Tessa (from Be First in the Universe, BCCB 2/00) are delighted to
find that Gemini Jack, interplanetary entrepreneur, is back in his spot at the Middle
Valley Mall. Jack isn't back just to make some alien cash-he needs help from the
twins to combat the invasion of planet Gemini by the Vorons, interstellar tourists
who are descending upon his home planet in unmanageable droves. A fading rock
drummer, the preternaturally nice Gneiss twins Nancy and Ned, two ornery
Patagonian goats, and a joke-spouting security guard later, the balance of the uni-
verse is restored and everyone lives happily ever after-at least until the Vorons
invade again. As interplanetary science fiction goes, this is pretty weightless, but
it's also fast and funny. Tod and Tessa are a solid twin team, affectionate but not
disgusting, and the Gneiss twins' goody-goody behavior is satisfactorily nauseat-
ing. Readers seeking sci-fi that's light and funny instead of dark and deep will
appreciate Tod and Tessa's latest close encounter. JMD
STEIG, JEANNE, ad. 
A Gift from Zeus: Sixteen Favorite Myths; illus. by William
Steig. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 2001 
166p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028406-4 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028405-6 
$17.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Steig adapts sixteen classical myths (including the stories of Prometheus, King
Midas, Leda, Arachne, Venus and Adonis, and Orpheus and Eurydice) into tellable
tales with an emphasis on the foibles of gods and men. Human weaknesses-
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 425
greed, envy, lust, vanity, hubris-afflict both mortals and immortals, and, while
the gods emerge unscathed, most of the human characters are not so lucky. The
author embraces the bawdy humor and sexual tragedy of the tales, considering
those humans who were unfortunate enough to become entangled in the lecherous
pursuits of the gods as well as those who were unfortunate captives of their own
desires. Rhyming verse is interjected into the tales to serve as humorous asides to
the action (the Chimaera, for example, "was rampaging about the countryside,
dining on youths and maidens, which she preferred to the old and leathery. 'Old
folks have horrid gristly strips/ that bruise a monster's dainty lips,' she explained.
And as she devoured the youths, she chanted gleefully 'A tender maid for breakfast,/
A toothsome lad for lunch,/ Oh, the succulent flesh/ Of the young and the fresh!/
Crunch, crunch, crunch'"). William Steig's airy line drawings feature imaginatively
proportioned (occasionally bare-buttocked) heroes, cavorting (occasionally bare-
breasted) maidens, and amorous gods in frequently hilarious positions. This is a
witty, sophisticated piece of work, sure to remind adult readers more of Steig's
New Yorker cartoons than Sylvester and the Magic Pebble. JMD
THOMSON, SARAH L. 
The Dragon's Son. 
Orchard, 2001 
18 1p
ISBN 0-531-30333-0 
$17.95 
R* 
Gr. 6-12
Drawing on the earliest surviving versions of Arthurian legends, most of them
Welsh, Thomson weaves a series of complex tales from the first-person perspec-
tives of four less traditionally central characters (who were often absent in later
retellings), spanning narrative time from before King Arthur's birth to just after
his defeat. This unusual approach creates an intriguing portrait of the great king,
which focuses not on the peace and prosperity he brought to the British Isles but
instead on the intense despair felt by family and servants whose interests were
sacrificed or ignored in the process of establishing Arthur's successful reign. In the
third story, for instance, Luned, servant to the broken lady Elen of an abusive and
callous lord, manages to prevent the ascension of an even crueler lord and inad-
vertently conquers the region for Arthur by insisting that Elen marry Arthur's
trusted servant, Owain, while in the process losing her own beloved blacksmith.
The final story shows Medraud, Arthur's eldest son, bent on the vengeance that his
embittered mother Morgan raised him to seek, as he deliberately destroys the peace
of Arthur's kingdom and finally engineers the destruction of Arthur himself. De-
spite the complex structure, Thomson's retellings are straightforward and acces-
sible, eschewing florid language in favor of action-packed storytelling, and
emphasizing the personal losses and sorrows of well-developed characters who are
caught in a time of tremendous change. Characters in each of these four stories
appear in the other tales, creating a rich tapestry of perspectives on the legendary
social changes of Arthur's day. Legend lovers as well as fantasy readers will be
captivated by these stories of Arthurian times as seen through the eyes of lesser-
known players in the pageant. KM
WALTON, RICK How Can You Dance?; illus. by Ana L6pez-Escriva. 
Putnam,
2001 
26p
ISBN 0-399-23229-X 
$13.99 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Walton explores twelve different ways to dance, beginning each dance with the
query "How can you dance when ... " followed by the answer: "How can you
dance when/ Spring is in your shoes?/ Dance like the king/ of the kangaroos."
426 
* THE BULLETIN
Uneven rhythmical chants in red italicized text follow the rhymed quatrains and
encourage audience participation: "Arms, legs,/ Pull 'em in!/ Push 'em out!/ Pull
'em in!/ Push 'em out!" or "Wave your arms wildly,/ Round and round all over."
Though the similes are evocative, they're sometimes a stretch, and the rhythms
aren't as bouncy as the kids will be. L6pez-Escrivai ably illustrates the movement
with acrylics on paper, emphasizing the humor of the text with varying perspec-
tives, expressive lines, and contrasting hues of greens, blues, pinks, and reds. The
cadre of characters, variously engaged in leaping, marching, or slithering along,
provide enjoyable focus. Grab this one to accompany the Hokey Pokey or Twist
With a Burger, Jitter with a Bug. EAB
WHITMAN, SYLVIA 
What's Cooking?: The History of American Food. Lerner,
2001 
88p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-1732-9 
$22.60 
R Gr. 5-8
It's hard to go wrong with food, even when it's seasoned with a generous dose of
marketing and manufacturing history. Whitman starts out with the difference
between the food practices of the European settlers and the Native Americans they
encountered, then goes on to discuss the evolution of home cooking, eating out,
and food shopping, touching on icons ranging from Harvey Girls to Piggly Wig-
gly in the process. The condensation necessary for such a succinct overview is
particularly clear when Whitman hits modern times, racing through McDonald's
and genetically altered crops, but it also helps accentuate the significant and some-
times surprising changes that have occurred in American eating. The book is
particularly good at linking food changes to other changes (rail transport was key
for the establishment of fruit markets, for instance) without losing sight of the
essential gob-smacking pleasure of the subject. Curricular uses obviously abound,
since there are connections here to everything from transportation to health, but
there's enough tasty detail that pleasure readers (especially the sort that read cook-
books for fun) might also want to take a bite. The brown ink makes contemporary
photographs look oddly antique, but it's effective for the text and older images; a
selected biography and an index are included. DS
WINTHROP, ELIZABETH 
Dumpy La Rue; illus. by Betsy Lewin. 
Holt, 2001 
34 p
ISBN 0-8050-6385-4 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Dumpy is a pig who wants to dance, but his vocation isn't exactly encouraged by
his folks: 
"'You're a pig,' said his father. 'Pigs don't dance. They grunt, they
grovel, they snuffle for truffles.'" Dumpy is undeterred, because he is "a pig who
knew what he wanted to do." His enthusiastic dancing about the barnyard attracts
a great deal of attention from cow, horse, fowl, sheep, etc. and, while the other
animals appreciate Dumpy's originality, his family hides in embarrassment. Ulti-
mately, of course, Dumpy's dancing wins everyone over, and "folks would come
from high and low to see this most amazing show: The Barnyard Ballet of Dumpy
La Rue, the pig who knew what he wanted to do." While Winthrop's rhyming
text does go on a bit, the comic antics are consistently amusing. Lewin's watercol-
ors, rendered in a style reminiscent of William Steig's and Sandra Boynton's, im-
bue Dumpy and the rest of the farm animals with a rousing chorus-line energy
that adds a great deal of humor to the sometimes-forced text. Expressive black
outlines give each animal animation and definition, the compositions are clean
and uncluttered, and the background colors alternate between clean white and
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 427
day-and-nighttime shades of blue. While the text may need some editing for a
more rhythmic readaloud flow, the illustrations will carry even the most dance-
challenged listener right along. JMD
ZINDEL, PAUL 
Night ofthe Bat. 
Hyperion, 2001 
[17 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2554-5 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0340-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Dr. Lefkovitz, leading "batologist" on an Amazonian research project, has just lost
(literally) two members of his team when his wisecracking son Jake arrives for a
visit toting his latest science project-an echolocator nicknamed Gizmo that can
retrieve images through the dense canopy foliage. Jake has barely stowed his back-
pack before he's up in the trees repairing walkways; there he discovers the mangled
bodies of the missing men, and Hanuma-indigenous foreman, patient mentor,
and font of ersatz tribal-style wisdom-is snatched up and carried off by a mon-
strous bat. This bat's obviously got some serious issues with Amazonian research-
ers, and in the next dozen or so greased-lightning chapters it returns to munch on
a number of other team members and stage a showdown with Lefkovitz and his
son. Zindel's a little hazy on the "why" of the bat's behavior, dropping suggestions
that range from human transformations (werebats?) to the just deserts of environ-
mental meddlers ("You have to stop them from ruining the Amazon. From killing
the rain forests . . . God, Pops, don't mess with this bat"). Who cares-the real
point here is the blood sucking, bone-crunching, disemboweling, brain-noshing
bat itself and Jake and Gizmo's brave (and ultimately illogical) vanquishing of
same. What librarian hasn't been asked, "Do you got anything gross?" If you have
this title, the answer is emphatically, "Yes." EB
428 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Flinn; Na
African Americans-fiction: Myers
Airplanes-stories: Ormerod
Alaska-stories: George
Aliens-fiction: Spinner
American Indians-stories: George
Animal behavior: Jenkins, S.
Animals: Jenkins, S.; Orenstein
Animals-fiction: Bowen; Lexau;
Marino; Proimos
Animals-stories: Arnosky; Dieterle;
Lowell; Winthrop
Archaeology: Chorlton; Morrison;
Pelta
Art and artists-fiction: Bowen;
Holmes
Art and artists-stories: Spinelli
Australia-fiction: Honey
Authors-fiction: Clements
Baseball-fiction: Myers; Nixon
Bats-fiction: Zindel
BIOGRAPHIES: Krensky
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Bloor;
Caldwell; Sleator; Spinner
Brothers-fiction: Horowitz
Bugs-fiction: Horowitz
Butterflies-stories: Joosse
Cats-stories: Arnold; Hutchins
Civil War-fiction: Alphin
Communication: Jenkins, S.
Crime and criminals-fiction: Bloor;
Bowen; Colfer; Flinn; Nixon
Dancers and dancing-stories:
Walton; Winthrop
Death and dying-fiction: Holmes
Death and dying-stories: Joosse;
Spinelli
Depression-fiction: Jenkins, A.
Divorce: Bartell
Dogs-fiction: Auch; Choldenko
Dogs-stories: Smith
Ethics and values: Choldenko;
Salisbury; Spinelli
Evolution: Morrison
Fairies-fiction: Colfer
Families-fiction: Caldwell;
Choldenko; Honey; Na
Families-stories: Blumenthal
FANTASY: Auch; Colfer; LaFaye;
Pierce; Thomson
Fathers and daughters-fiction: Levy;
Na; Pressler
Fathers and sons-fiction: Holmes;
LaFaye; Zindel
Fishing-fiction: Salisbury
Flying-stories: Ormerod
FOLK AND FAIRYTALES: Lexau;
Lowell; Shannon
Food and eating: Whitman
Football-fiction: Jenkins, A.
Friendship-fiction: Auch; Holmes;
Frogs-riddles: Eisenberg
FUNNY STORIES: Proimos
Ghosts-fiction: Alphin
Grandmothers-fiction: Caldwell
Grandmothers-stories: Blumenthal;
Joosse
Grandparents-stories: Hutchins
Guidance: Block
Health and hygiene: Lauber
HISTORICAL FICTION: Bowen;
Myers; Pressler
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 429
History, U.S.: Krensky; Morrison;
Whitman
History, world: Lauber; Pelta;
Pressler
HORROR: Zindel
Horses and ponies-fiction: Haas
Illness-fiction: LaFaye
Immigrants-fiction: Na
Insects: Rockwell
Judaism-fiction: Pressler
Kidnapping-fiction: Colfer
Korean Americans-fiction: Na
Latinos-fiction: Nixon
Libraries-fiction: Bloor
Mexico-stories: Joosse
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Choldenko; Pierce
Mothers and sons-fiction: Holmes;
Proimos
Music and musicians-fiction:
Spinner
Music and musicians-stories:
Arnold; Burleigh
MYSTERIES: Bloor; Nixon
MYTHOLOGY, CLASSICAL:
Steig
Nature study: Arnosky; Orenstein;
Rockwell
Pets-fiction: Choldenko
Pets-stories: George; Smith
Pirates-fiction: Lawrence
Plumbing: Lauber
Prejudice-fiction: Myers; Pressler
Princes-stories: Martin
Princesses-stories: Martin
PUZZLES: Shannon
Racism-fiction: Myers
Rainforests-fiction: Zindel
Reading aloud: Shannon; Steig
Reading, easy: Eisenberg; Haas;
Hall; Horowitz; Lexau; Proimos
Religious instruction: Carlstrom;
Norris
RIDDLES: Eisenberg; Hall
Sailors and sailing-fiction: Lawrence
Saints: Norris
School-fiction: Auch; Clements
SCIENCE FICTION: Sleator;
Spinner
Science: Arnosky; Chorlton;
Orenstein; Rockwell
Sisters-fiction: Choldenko; Levy
Spiders-stories: Spinelli
Stepfamilies: Block
Stepfathers-fiction: Salisbury
Storms-stories: Hutchins
Storytelling: Lowell; Martin;
Shannon; Steig
Storytelling-stories: Martin
Storytime: Arnosky; Hutchins;
Lowell; Walton; Winthrop
Suicide-fiction: Holmes; Jenkins, A.
Toys-stories: Ormerod
Transportation: Ormerod
Twins-fiction: Levy; Spinner
Urban life-stories: Burleigh
Vacations-fiction: Honey
Veterinarians-fiction: Marino
Voyages and travel: Chorlton
Voyages and travel-fiction: Lawrence
Voyages and travel-stories: Martin;
Ormerod
Witchcraft: Rees
Wolves-stories: George
Women's studies: Krensky
Writers and writing-fiction:
Clements
'1 0
San·-^
430 * THE BULLETIN
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AUTHOR/TITLE INDEX, VOLUME 54
SEPTEMBER, 2000-JULY/AUGUST, 2001
"It's Simple," Said Simon. Hoberman. 262.
24 Hours. Mahy. 154.
6-321. Laser. 228.
ABC Kids. Williams. 87.
Abe Lincoln Remembers. Turner. 239.
Abigail Adams. Wallner. 319.
Ackamarackus. Lester. 268.
Adopting Pets. Gutman. 260.
Adventure of Louey and Frank. White. 282.
Adventures of Minnie. Rosales. 385.
Aesop's Fables. Aesop. 134.
Aesop. Aesop's Fables. 134.
.Ant and the Grasshopper. 134.
Agapanthus Hum and Major Bark. Cowley.
254.
Ahlberg. My Brother's Ghost. 294.
. Snail House. 295.
Air Show. Suen. 354.
Albert and the Angels. Norris. 157.
Albert. Napoli. 312.
Albidaro and the Mischievous Dream. Lester.
185.
Alexander, L. Gawgon and the Boy. 366.
. How the Cit Swallowed Thunder. 4.
Alexander, S. Behold the Trees. 250.
Alice Alone. Naylor. 348.
Alice Walker. Lazo. 26.
Alice-by-Accident. Banks. 7.
Alison, Who Went Away. Vande Velde. 318.
All That Remains. Brooks. 367.
All the Blue Moons at the Wallace Hotel. Stone.
164.
Allen. Dancing in the Wings. 96.
Alligator Ate My Brother. Olson. 158.
Almond. Heaven Eyes. 295.
Alphin. Counterfeit Son. 50.
.Ghost Soldier. 400.
Altman. Lunch at the Zoo. 212.
Alvarez. How Tfa Lola Came to Visit Stay. 296.
.Secret Footprints. 51.
Amato. Word Eater. 5.
Amber Spyglass. Pullman. 193.
American Illustrator. Wilkerson. 320.
American Revolution, 1700-1800. Masoff. 28.
Ammon. Conestoga Wagons. 5
Anaya. Roadrunner's Dance. 135.
Ancient Warfare. Woods. 167.
And Sometimes Why. Farrell. 302.
Anderson, L. Fever 1793. 51.
Anderson, S. I Know the Moon. 212.
Andronik. Hatshepsut. 251.
Anema. Louise Arner Boyd. 97.
Anne Frank and Me. Bennett. 252.
Annie Pitts, Burger Kid. deGroat. 179.
Ant and the Grasshopper. Aesop. 134.
Antarctic Journal. Dewey. 221.
Antle. Sam's Wild West Christmas. 52.
Aquamarine. Hoffman. 224.
Arachne Speaks. Hovey. 264.
Arches to Zigzags. Crosbie. 140.
Aria of the Sea. Calhoun. 137.
Ark in the Park. Orr. 33.
Arkin. Cassie Loves Beethoven. 213.
Armadillo Tattletale. Ketteman. 108.
Armstrong. Spirit of Endurance. 52.
. Thomas Jefferson. 330.
Arnold. Metro Cat. 401.
Arnosky. Raccoon on His Own. 401.
Arrington. Bluestem. 5.
Art of Keeping Cool. Lisle. 186.
Artemis Fowl. Colfer. 406.
Ashabranner. No Better Hope. 296.
Ashman. Castles, Caves, and Honeycombs. 331.
. Maxwell's Magic Mix-up. 366.
Astro Bunnies. Loomis. 229.
At the Sign of the Star. Sturtevant. 199.
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 431
Atlantis. Balit. 7.
Atwater-Rhodes. Demon in My View. 6.
Atwell. Pearl. 296.
Auch. I Was a Third Grade Spy. 402.
Aunt Claire's Yellow Beehive Hair. Blumenthal.
403.
Avi. Christmas Rat. 53.
. Don't You Know There's a War On?
331.
. Prairie School. 331.
Aylesworth. Tale of Tricky Fox. 251.
Azarian. Gardener's Alphabet. 7.
Baby Steps. McCarty. 74.
Baby's Coming to Your House! Thomas. 388.
Bad Dog. Laden. 69.
Bad Girls. Wilson. 283.
Bagdasarian. Forgotten Fire. 176.
Baker. Little Green. 297.
Bald Eagle Returns. Patent. 191.
Balit. Atlantis. 7.
Ballerina! Sis. 353.
Baloney (Henry P.). Scieszka. 352.
Balouch. King & Three Thieves. 176.
Bang. Nobody Particular. 213.
Bangs and Twangs. Cobb. 100.
Banks, K. Howie Bowles and Uncle Sam. 177.
Banks, L. Alice-by-Accident. 7.
Bartell. Stepliving for Teens. 402.
Baskin. What Every Girl (Except Me) Knows.
214.
Bauer. Hope Was Here. 8.
Beany 
and 
the 
Dreaded 
Wedding.
Wojciechowski. 166.
Bear Dogs. Wood. 321.
Bear Noel. Dunrea. 103.
Beast. Napoli. 76.
Beatrice's Goat. McBrier. 230.
Beaverson. Hidden Arrow of Maether. 214.
Bedard. Wolf of Gubbio. 367.
Bedhead. Palatini. 78.
Beet Fields. Paulsen. 79.
Behold the Trees. Alexander. 250.
Belton. McKendree. 53.
Bennett, C. Anne Frank and Me. 252.
Bennett, J. Plunking Reggie Jackson. 214.
Berger. Mummies of the Pharaohs. 297.
Bernard the Angry Rooster. Wormell. 322.
Bertie's Picture Day. Brisson. 216.
Betsy Zane. Durrant. 59.
Beware of the Storybook Wolves. Child. 218.
Bewildered for Three Days. Glass. 104.
Bial. Ghost Towns of the American West. 215.
Bickel. Tiger Math. 31.
Big and Noisy Simon. Wallace. 319.
Big Bad Bunny. Durant. 370.
Big Catnap. Stewart. 121.
Big Jabe. Nolen. 32.
Big, Spooky House. Washington. 201.
Big Trouble in Little Twinsville. Levy. 414.
Bikes for Rent! Olaleye. 381.
Bisson. Expiration Date: Never. 424.
Black Angels. Murphy. 272.
Black Bull ofNorroway. Huck. 339.
Black Soldier. Clinton. 56.
Blackstone. There's a Cow in the Cabbage
Patch. 298.
Blackwood. Shakespeare's Scribe. 53.
Blind Beauty. Peyton. 234.
Blizzard! Murphy. 190.
Block, F. Rose and the Beast. 97.
Block, J. Stepliving for Teens. 402.
Bloor. Memory Prisoner. 402.
Blue Avenger Cracks the Code. Howe. 66.
Blue. DeVita. 334.
Blueprint. Kerner. 67.
Blues Singers. Lester. 342.
Bluestem. Arrington. 5.
Blumberg. Shipwrecked! 252.
Blumenthal. Aunt Claire's Yellow Beehive Hair.
403.
Bo & Mzzz Mad. Fleischman. 335.
Bober. Countdown to Independence. 253.
Bode. For Better, for Worse. 215.
Bonaparte. Chall. 178.
Bonners. Edwina Victorious. 54.
Book of Bad Ideas. Huliska-Beith. 106.
Book! Book! Book! Bruss. 217.
Booth. Panther. 253.
Borden. Day Eddie Met the Author. 298.
.Fly High! 216.
Born in Sin. Coleman. 218.
Boston Tea Party. Edwards. 371.
Bound for the North Star. Fradin. 144.
Bowen. Mare's Nest. 403.
Bowlegged Rooster. Thomas. 165.
Boy Who Stuck Out His Tongue. Tarbescu.
122.
Boynton. Yay, You! 332.
Bradley. Weaver's Daughter. 98.
Brady. Say You Are My Sister. 8.
Brallier. No Sweat Projects: Hairy Science. 177.
. No Sweat Projects: Thumbs Up Science.
177.
Branch. Dear Ellen Bee. 72.
Breakout at the Bug Lab. Horowitz. 410.
Breathing Underwater. Flinn. 407.
Brett. Hedgie's Surprise. 54.
Brides of Eden. Crew. 220.
Brimstone Journals. Koertge. 307.
Brisson. Bertie's Picture Day. 216.
Brooklyn Bridge. Curlee. 369.
Brooks, B. All That Remains. 367.
Brooks, N. Country Mouse Cottage. 135.
Brother Wolf of Gubbio. Santangelo. 195.
Brown, M. Child Is Born. 136.
Brown, R. Holly. 136.
432 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Browne. My Dad. 332.
Brownlow. Little Robots. 178.
Bruchac. Crazy Horse's Vision. 9.
. How Chipmunk Got His Stripes. 254.
Bruss. Book! Book! Book! 217.
Buccaneers. Lawrence. 413.
Buchanan. Hank's Story. 368.
Buddy Is a Stupid Name for a Girl. Roberts.
234.
Bugs Are Insects. Rockwell. 421.
Building Big. Macaulay. 154.
Bully. Caseley. 369.
Bun Bun's Birthday. Scrimger. 314.
Bunting. Riding the Tiger. 368.
.Who Was Born This Special Day? 55.
Burleigh. I Love Going through This Book. 369.
. Lookin' for Bird in the Big City. 404.
.Messenger, Messenger. 98.
Burning for Revenge. Marsden. 112.
Burst of Firsts. Lewis. 308.
Busy Busy City Street. Meister. 231.
Butler. Timon's Tide. 9.
By Lizzie. Eccles. 371.
Byrd. Saint Francis and the Christmas Donkey.
99.
Cabot. Princess Diaries. 137.
Cadnum. Redhanded. 55.
Caged Birds of Phnom Penh. Lipp. 309.
Caged Eagles. Walters. 200.
Caldwell. Tides. 404.
Calhoun. Aria of the Sea. 137.
Captain Bob Sets Sail. Schotter. 36.
Captain Pajamas. Whatley. 40.
Car Wash. Steen. 198.
Carle. Dream Snow. 55.
Carlstrom. What Does the Sky Say? 405.
Carnival of Animals. Fleischman. 180.
Carolina Autumn. Williams. 86.
Casanova. Curse of a Winter Moon. 138.
. Hunter. 99.
Case of the Climbing Cat. Rylant. 119.
Case of the Gasping Garbage. Torrey. 388.
Case of the Missing Monkey. Rylant. 119.
Caseley. Bully. 369.
Casey at the Bat. Thayer. 200.
Cassie Loves Beethoven. Arkin. 213.
Castaways of the Flying Dutchman. Jacques.
266.
Castles, Caves, and Honeycombs. Ashman. 331.
Cat and a Dog. Masurel. 346.
Catching the Wild Waiyuuzee. Williams-
Garcia. 166.
Cats, Cats, Cats! Newman. 274.
Cazet. Never Poke a Squid. 10
Chall. Bonaparte. 178.
Chambers. Quinceafiera Means Sweet 15. 332.
Chandler. Dark Secrets: Legacy of Lies. 217.
Cheaney. Playmaker. 56.
Child Is Born. Brown. 136.
Child Was Born. Maccarone. 72.
Child. Beware of the Storybook Wolves. 218.
.Clarice Bean: Guess Who's Babysitting?
298.
Choldenko. Notes from a Liar and Her Dog.
405.
Chorao. Shadow Night. 333.
Chorlton. Woolly Mammoth. 406.
Christmas at Mud Flat. Stevenson. 121.
Christmas Gift. Jimenez. 148.
Christmas Rat. Avi. 53.
Cinderella Skeleton. San Souci. 80.
Cinderella. Craft. 100.
Cindy Ellen. Lowell. 28.
Circle Opens: Street Magic. Pierce. 382.
Cirque du Freak. Shan. 386.
Cissy Funk. Taylor. 354.
City ABC Book. Milich. 271.
Clarice Bean: Guess Who's Babysitting? Child.
298.
Clark. Where Are You, Blue Kangaroo? 254.
Clay. Rodowsky. 277.
Cleary. To Root, to Toot, to Parachute. 299.
Clements. Janitor's Boy. 10
_ .School Story. 406.
Clever Cat. Collington. 57.
Click, Clack, Moo. Cronin. 12.
Clinton. Black Soldier. 56.
Cloak for the Moon. Kimmel. 305.
Clue of the Left-Handed Envelope. Stanley.
163.
Cobb. Bangs and Twangs. 100.
. Squirts and Spurts. 100.
Coburn. Triumph on Everest. 11.
Cold Feet. DeFelice. 102.
Coleman. Born in Sin. 218.
Colfer. Artemis Fowl. 406.
Collard. Making Animal Babies. 11.
Collier. Uptown. 100.
Collington. Clever Cat. 57.
Collins. Just Imagine. 299.
Colmer. Hornet's Nest. 113.
Colonial Times, 1600-1700. Masoff. 28.
Color of My Words. Joseph. 66.
Coman. Many Stones. 138.
Come With Me. Nye. 77.
Conestoga Wagons. Ammon. 5
Construction Trucks. Imershein. 23.
Coolies. Yin. 242.
Cooper. Fighting for Honor. 219.
Countdown to Independence. Bober. 253.
Counterfeit Son. Alphin. 50.
Counting Kisses. Katz. 227.
Country Mouse Cottage. Brooks. 135.
Cowboy Kid. Eilenberg. 14.
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 433
Cowell. What Shall We Do with the Boo-Hoo
Baby? 219.
Cowley. Agapanthus Hum and Major Bark.
254.
Coy. Vroomaloom Zoom. 178.
Coyote Autumn. Wallace. 124.
Craft. Cinderella. 100.
Crane. Rabbit's Bride. 338.
Crawford. Blueprint. 67.
Crazy Horse's Vision. Bruchac. 9.
Creech. Fishing in the Air. 139.
Crew. Brides of Eden. 220.
Crisp. My Dog, Cat. 139.
.Private Captain. 255.
Crispin. Dewan. 141.
Crocodile and Hen. Lexau. 414.
Cronin. Click, Clack, Moo. 12.
Crosbie. Arches to Zigzags. 140.
Crowther. Robert Crowther's Amazing Pop-Up
House of Inventions. 140.
Crunk. Grandpa's Overalls. 333.
Crutcher. Whale Talk. 300.
Cruz. Separate Sexes, Separate Schools. 57.
Cubes, Cones, Cylinders, & Spheres. Hoban.
147.
Cummings. Face First. 220.
Curlee. Brooklyn Bridge. 369.
Curse of a Winter Moon. Casanova. 138.
Cushman. Matilda Bone. 140.
Cut. McCormick. 188.
Dad, in Spirit. LaFaye. 412.
Damage. Jenkins. 410.
Dancing in Cadillac Light. Holt. 263.
Dancing in the Wings. Allen. 96.
Dangling. Eige. 257.
Dark Secrets: Legacy of Lies. Chandler. 217.
Darkest Corner. Herschler. 183.
Darkness Before Dawn. Draper. 256.
Darkness over Denmark. Levine. 27.
Darrow. Old Thunder and Miss Raney. 101.
Dash. Longitude Prize. 58.
.World at Her Fingertips. 255.
David. Full Moon. 391.
Davis. Friendly Beasts. 101.
Day Eddie Met the Author. Borden. 298.
Deans. Racing the Past. 370.
Dear Ellen Bee. Lyons. 72.
Dear Whiskers. Nagda. 232.
Death at Devil's Bridge. DeFelice. 12.
Death on Sacred Ground. Feder. 258.
Deedy. Yellow Star. 102.
DeFelice. Cold Feet. 102.
. Death at Devil's Bridge. 12.
deGroat. Annie Pitts, Burger Kid. 179.
Demon in My View. Atwater-Rhodes. 6.
Demon in the Teahouse. Hoobler. 374.
Demon's Mistake. Prose. 117.
dePaola. Here We All Are. 13.
. On My Way. 256.
Dessen. Dreamland. 58.
Destination Gold! Lawson. 307.
Destiny. Grove. 18.
Devil in 01' Rosie. Moeri. 272.
DeVita. Blue. 334.
Dewan. Crispin. 141.
Dewey. Antarctic Journal. 221.
Dexter. Driving Lessons. 59.
DiCamillo. Tiger Rising. 300.
Didi and Daddy on the Promenade. Singer. 315.
Dieterld. I Am the King! 407.
Dig Wait Listen. Sayre. 352.
Dirty Laundry Pile. Janeczko. 375.
DiTerlizzi. Ted. 221.
DK Guide to Dinosaurs. Lambert. 25.
Do You Know What I'll Do? Zolotow. 204.
Dog's Gotta Do What a Dog's Gotta Do.
Singer. 121.
Doll People. Martin. 187.
Dollhouse Magic. McDonough. 155.
Don't Pat the Wombat. Honey. 22.
Don't You Know There's a War On? Avi. 331.
Donaldson. Pebble and a Pen. 141.
Dorothy & Mikey. Kasza. 24.
Double Take. Jussim. 305.
Downing. Leonardo's Hand. 222.
Doyle. Hungry! Hungry! Hungry! 301.
Dragonfly. McLerran. 30.
Dragon's Son. Thomson. 425.
Draper. Darkness Before Dawn. 256.
Dream Freedom. Levitin. 110.
Dream Snow. Carle. 55.
Dream Soul. Yep. 168.
Dreamland. Dessen. 58.
Drip! Drop! Seuling. 197.
Driving Lessons. Dexter. 59.
Dumpy La Rue. Winthrop. 426.
Duncan. On the Edge. 13.
Dunrea. Bear Noel. 103.
Durant. Big Bad Bunny. 370.
Durrant. Betsy Zane. 59.
Dusty Locks and the Three Bears. Lowell. 414.
Easton. Life History of a Star. 257.
Eccles. By Lizzie. 371.
Eclare. Handful of Sunshine. 142.
Edelstein. Key Is Lost. 39.
Education of Mary. Rinaldi. 194.
Edwards, M. Zero Grandparents. 301.
Edwards, P. Boston Tea Party. 371.
Edwina Victorious. Bonners. 54.
Egg. Robertson. 235.
Egielski. Three Magic Balls. 13.
Ehlert. Waiting for Wings. 302.
Eige. Dangling. 257.
Eight Animals on the Town. Elya. 179.
434 
* THE BULLETIN
Eight Seconds. Ferris. 60.
Eilenberg. Cowboy Kid. 14.
Eisenberg. Ribbit Riddles. 408.
Elliott. Transmogrification of Roscoe Wizzle.
334.
Ellis. Looking for X. 14.
Elm Tree and Three Sisters. Sommerdorf. 237.
Elsdale. Mac Side Up. 142.
Elya. Eight Animals on the Town. 179.
Emergency Vets. Marino. 415.
Emberley. My Colors. 143.
.My Numbers. 143.
.My Opposites. 143.
.My Shapes. 143.
Emma's Yucky Brother. Little. 343.
Enemy Pie. Munson. 190.
Escape from Heart. Stark. 163.
Esperanza Rising. Ryan. 160.
Every Time a Rainbow Dies. Williams-Garcia.
240.
Everything Book. Fleming. 61.
Everything on a Waffle. Horvath. 263.
Everywhere Babies. Meyers. 380.
Expiration Date: Never. Spinner. 424.
Extra Innings. Peck. 275.
F Is for Freedom. Schotter. 196.
Face First. Cummings. 220.
Fagan. Market Wedding. 60.
Falconer. Olivia. 103.
Falling From Grace. McNichols. 74.
Fannie in the Kitchen. Hopkinson. 374.
Farm of Her Own. Kinsey-Warnock. 376.
Farrell. And Sometimes Why. 302.
Fat Camp Commandos. Pinkwater. 382.
Fearnley. Special Something. 15.
Feathers, Flaps, & Flops. Zaunders. 358.
Feder. Death on Sacred Ground. 258.
Feldman. Jefferson's Children. 152.
Felix Feels Better. Wells. 391.
Ferris. Eight Seconds. 60.
Fever 1793. Anderson. 51.
Fiddleback. Honey. 409.
Field Mouse and a Dinosaur Named Sue. Wahl.
40.
Field of the Dogs. Paterson. 233.
Fighting for Honor. Cooper. 219.
Fighting Ruben Wolfe. Zusak. 284.
Finding Hattie. Warner. 390.
Finn. Very Lazy Ladybug. 335.
Fireflies in the Dark. Rubin. 119.
First Bear in Africa. Ichikawa. 265.
First Day on a Strange New Planet. Yaccarino.
167.
First Mate Tate. Masterman-Smith. 73.
First Olympic Games. Richards. 118.
First Painter. Lasky. 109.
Fishing in the Air. Creech. 139.
Five Creatures. Jenkins. 226.
Five Smooth Stones. Gregory. 303.
Fleischman, P. Lost! 61.
Fleischman, S. Bo & Mzzz Mad. 335.
. Carnival of Animals. 180.
Fleming. Everything Book. 61.
Flinn. Breathing Underwater. 407.
Fletcher. Uncle Daddy. 335.
Floodland. Sedgwick. 278.
Flora the Frog. Isherwood. 107.
Florian. Lizards, Frogs, and Polliwogs. 303.
.Pig Is Big. 143.
Fly High! Borden. 216.
Foggy Friday. Root. 235.
Following Fake Man. Holmes. 409.
For Better, for Worse. Bode. 215.
Forest-Flier. God of Grandma Forever. 373.
Forging Freedom. Talbott. 122.
Forgotten Fire. Bagdasarian. 176.
Fradin. Bound for the North Star. 144.
. My Family Shall Be Free! 336.
Frank O. Gehry. Greenberg. 63.
Frank. Tomb of the Boy King. 258.
Fraustino. Hickory Chair. 259.
Free Fall. Ratcliffe. 383.
Freedman. Give Me Liberty! 61.
Freedom School, Yes! Littlesugar. 229.
Freedom Summer. Wiles. 239.
Freewill. Lynch. 270.
Friendly Beasts. Davis. 101.
Friesen. Men of Stone. 180.
Full Moon. Wilcox. 391.
Gallo. On the Fringe. 371.
Galloway. Too Young to Fight. 62.
Gammell. Ride. 259.
Gantos. Joey Pigza Loses Control. 15.
Garden. Holly's Secret. 16.
Gardener's Alphabet. Azarian. 7.
Gathering Blue. Lowry. 111.
Gauthier. Hero of Ticonderoga. 259.
Gawgon and the Boy. Alexander. 366.
Gay. Stella: Queen of the Snow. 180.
Genius of Leonardo. Visconti. 84.
George Washington & the Founding of a Na-
tion. Marrin. 229.
George, J. Nutik & Amaroq Play Ball. 408.
. Nutik, the Wolf Pup. 408.
George, K. Toasting Marshmallows. 336.
Gershator. Only One Cowry. 181.
Gershon's Monster. Kimmel. 68.
Getz. Purple Death. 144.
Ghost Boy. Lawrence. 70.
Ghost Soldier. Alphin. 400.
Ghost Towns of the American West. Bial. 215.
Ghost Wings. Joosse. 411.
Giff. Nory Ryan's Song. 62.
Gift from Zeus. Steig. 424.
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 435
Gift of the Crocodile. Sierra. 163.
Gilbert. Paper Trail. 16.
Gilded Age. Greenwood. 17.
Gillard. Music from the Sky. 337.
Girl in Blue. Rinaldi. 384.
Girl of Kosovo. Mead. 380.
Girl Who Spun Gold. Hamilton. 145.
Girl with 500 Middle Names. Haddix. 338.
Girlhearts. Mazer. 310.
Girls and Their Horses. 103.
Girls Got Game. Macy. 379.
Give a Boy a Gun. Strasser. 83.
Give Me Liberty! Freedman. 61.
Glaser. Round the Garden. 104.
Glass. Bewildered for Three Days. 104.
God of Grandma Forever. Hogeweg. 373.
Godwin. Doll People. 187.
Gold Dust. Lynch. 111.
Good Mousekeeping. Lewis. 378.
Goodman. Ultimate Field Trip 4. 17.
Goose Chase. Kindl. 306.
Gottesfeld. Anne Frank and Me. 252.
Gracie's Girl. Wittlinger. 241.
Graduation of Jake Moon. Park. 159.
Graham. Max. 181.
Grandpa's Overalls. Crunk. 333.
Granstr6m. Supermom. 309.
. Wash, Scrub, Brush. 309.
Grapes of Math. Tang. 279.
Grave. Heneghan. 261.
Graves. Pet Boy. 337.
Gray. Holding Up the Earth. 105.
Great Gracie Chase. Rylant. 278.
Great Unknown. Morrison. 416.
Greatest. Myers. 312.
Greenberg. Frank O. Gehry. 63.
. Vincent Van Gogh. 372.
Greene. Owen Foote, Money Man. 63.
Greenwald. Stucksville. 182.
Greenwood. Gilded Age. 17.
Gregory. Five Smooth Stones. 303.
Grimm. Rabbit's Bride. 338.
Grindley. New Room for William. 145.
_ Who Is It? 64.
Grossman. Timothy Tunny Swallowed a
Bunny. 222.
Grove. Destiny. 18.
Growing Wings. Winter. 125.
Grump. Wong. 241.
Grutman. Sketchbook of Thomas Blue Eagle.
347.
Guest. Iris and Walter. 145.
Guiberson. Tales of the Haunted Deep. 18.
Guthrie. Howdi Do. 18.
Gutman. Adopting Pets. 260.
Guts. Paulsen. 312.
Gypsies Never Came. Roos. 351.
Haahr. Minstrel's Tale. 182.
Haas. Runaway Radish. 408.
_ Will You, Won't You? 64.
Haddix. Girl with 500 Middle Names. 338.
Hall. Ribbit Riddles. 408.
Hamilton. Girl Who Spun Gold. 145.
Handful of Sunshine. Eclare. 142.
Hank's Story. Buchanan. 368.
Hanley. Seer and the Sword. 223.
Happy Birthday Mr. Kang. Roth. 314.
Harley. Livingstone. 379.
Harris, R. Odysseus in the Serpent Maze. 357.
Harris, T. Pattern Fish. 19.
Hatshepsut. Andronik. 251.
Haunting at Home Plate. Patneaude. 116.
Haunting at Stratton Falls. Seabrooke. 37.
Hautman. Hole in the Sky. 372.
Hayes. Lucy Anna and the Finders. 146.
Heaney. Names Upon the Harp. 260.
Hear That? Janowitz. 304.
Hearne. Who's in the Hall? 183.
.Wishes, Kisses, and Pigs. 373.
Heart of Cool. McEwan. 310.
Heaven Eyes. Almond. 295.
Hedgie's Surprise. Brett. 54.
Heide. Some Things Are Scary. 146.
Helldorfer. Hog Music. 19.
Hellman. Karate Way. 261.
Hello School! Lillegard. 378.
Heneghan. Grave. 261.
Henkes. Wemberly Worried. 20.
Henry's First-Moon Birthday. Look. 269.
Her Father's Daughter. Poupeney. 35.
Here We All Are. dePaola. 13.
Hero of Ticonderoga. Gauthier. 259.
Heroes of Isle aux Morts. Walsh. 320.
Herschler. Darkest Corner. 183.
Hesse. Stowaway. 65.
Hest. Mabel Dancing. 20.
Hiccup Snickup. Long. 269.
Hickory Chair. Fraustino. 259.
Hidden Arrow of Maether. Beaverson. 214.
Hideout. Kehret. 341.
High. Under New York. 304.
Hill. Year of Miss Agnes. 105.
Hindenburg. O'Brien. 33.
Hines. Pieces. 223.
Hirschfelder. Photo Odyssey. 21.
Hite. Stick and Whittle. 65.
Hoban, R. Trouble on Thunder Mountain. 21.
Hoban, T. Cubes, Cones, Cylinders, & Spheres.
147.
Hobbie. Toot & Puddle: Puddle's ABC. 147.
Hoberman. "It's Simple," Said Simon. 262.
. There Once Was a Man Named Michael
Finnegan. 304.
Hoffman, A. Aquamarine. 224.
436 
* THE BULLETIN
Hoffman, M. Starring Grace. 21.
Hofmeyr. Star-Bearer. 262.
Hog Music. Helldorfer. 19.
Hogeweg. God of Grandma Forever. 373.
Hold My Hand and Run. McAllister. 29.
Holding Up the Earth. Gray. 105.
Hole in the Sky. Hautman. 372.
Holeman. Raspberry House Blues. 105.
Holly's Secret. Garden. 16.
Holly. Brown. 136.
Holmes. Following Fake Man. 409.
Holt. Dancing in Cadillac Light. 263.
Holub. Why Do Cats Meow? 224.
.Why Do Dogs Bark? 224.
Holy Twins. Norris. 417.
Honey. Don't Pat the Wombat. 22.
.Fiddleback. 409.
Hoobler. Demon in the Teahouse. 374.
Hope Was Here. Bauer. 8.
Hopkins. My America. 65.
Hopkinson. Fannie in the Kitchen. 374.
Hornet's Nest. Moeyaert. 113.
Horowitz. Breakout at the Bug Lab. 410.
Horvath. Everything on a Waffle. 263.
Hovey. Arachne Speaks. 264.
How Can You Dance? Walton. 425.
How Chipmunk Got His Stripes. Bruchac. 254.
How Many? How Much? 339.
How Murray Saved Christmas. Reiss. 159.
How the Animals Saved the People. Reneaux.
276.
How the Cat Swallowed Thunder. Alexander.
4.
How the Whale Became. Hughes. 147.
How Tia Lola Came to Visit Stay. Alvarez. 296.
How to Be a Real Person (In Just One Day).
Warner. 281.
Howard, E. Log Cabin Christmas. 106.
Howard, G. William's House. 375.
Howdi Do. Guthrie. 18.
Howe. Blue Avenger Cracks the Code. 66.
Howie Bowles and Uncle Sam. Banks. 177.
Huck. Black Bull of Norroway. 339.
Hughes, C. Jack Black & the Ship of Thieves.
22.
Hughes, T. How the Whale Became. 147.
Huliska-Beith. Book of Bad Ideas. 106.
Humpty Dumpty Egg-splodes. O'Malley. 349.
Huneck. Sally Goes to the Beach. 107.
Hungry! Hungry! Hungry! Doyle. 301.
Hunter. Casanova. 99.
Hurry Freedom. Stanley. 198.
Hurst. Through the Lock. 264.
Hurwitz. One Small Dog. 23.
Hutchins. One Dark Night 410.
Hyacinth Hop Has the Hic-Hops. Kenyon. 184.
I Am Arachne. Spires. 387.
I Am Morgan le Fay. Springer. 315.
I Am the King! Dieterl6. 407.
I Believe in Water. Singer. 197.
I Know the Moon. Anderson. 212.
I Love Going through This Book. Burleigh. 369.
I Was a Third Grade Spy. Auch. 402.
I'll Play With You. Siddals. 162.
Ibbotson. Island of the Aunts. 225.
Ichikawa. First Bear in Africa. 265.
If You Take a Mouse to the Movies. Numeroff.
157.
Imershein. Construction Trucks. 23.
. Trucks. 23.
In Every Tiny Grain of Sand. Lindbergh. 153.
In Ned's Head. Jacobsson. 265.
In the Hollow of Your Hand. McGill. 189.
In the House of the Queen's Beasts. Thesman.
388.
In the Time of the Knights. Tanaka. 238.
Inchworm and a Half. Pinczes. 276.
Ingwersen. Transformation. 114.
Interrupted Journey. Lasky. 377.
Into a New Country. Ketchum. 67.
Into the A, B, Sea. Rose. 160.
Iris and Walter. Guest. 145.
Isabella Abnormella and the Very, Very Finicky
Queen of Trouble. Lewis. 71.
Isadora. Nick Plays Baseball. 225.
Isherwood. Flora the Frog. 107.
Island of the Aunts. Ibbotson. 225.
It's Not Easy Being Bad. Voigt. 165.
It's Raining Pigs & Noodles. Prelutsky. 79.
Jack Black & the Ship of Thieves. Hughes. 22.
Jackson. Twin Tales. 225.
Jacobsson. In Ned's Head. 265.
Jacques. Castaways of the Flying Dutchman.
266.
.Lord Brocktree. 23.
Jaffe. Tales for the Seventh Day. 184.
Jakarta Missing. Kurtz. 341.
James Towne. Sewall. 353.
Janeczko. Dirty Laundry Pile. 375.
.Poke in the I. 376.
Janitor's Boy. Clements. 10
Janowitz. Hear That? 304.
Jazzbo and Googy. Novak. 32.
Jefferson's Children. Lanier. 152.
Jenkins, A. Damage. 410.
Jenkins, E. Five Creatures. 226.
Jenkins, S. Slap, Squeak & Scatter. 411.
Jennings. Orwell's Luck. 107.
Jessie De La Cruz. Soto. 237.
Jesus. Wildsmith. 202.
Jimenez. Christmas Gift. 148.
Joey Pigza Loses Control. Gantos. 15.
John Blair and the Great Hinckley Fire. Nobisso.
77.
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 437
Johnson, A. Those Building Men. 226.
Johnson, E. Write Me If You Dare! 148.
Johnston. My Best Friend Bear. 340.
Jones. Year of the Griffin. 149.
Joosse. Ghost Wings. 411.
Jordan, D. Salt in His Shoes. 149.
Jordan, R. Salt in His Shoes. 149.
Jordan, Sandra. Frank O. Gehry. 63.
_ 
. Vincent Van Gogh. 372.
Jordan, Sherryl. Secret Sacrament. 266.
Joseph. Color of My Words. 66.
Journal of Biddy Owens. Myers. 416.
Journey. Stewart. 316.
Judes. Max. 305.
Juice. Watson. 201.
Jussim. Double Take. 305.
Just Imagine. Collins. 299.
Just Like You and Me. Miller. 271.
Kaminsky, J. Poppy & Ella. 24.
Kaminsky, M. Uncommon Champions. 184.
Karate Way. Hellman. 261.
Karr. Playing with Fire. 340.
Kastner. Princess Dinosaur. 340.
Kasza. Dorothy & Mikey. 24.
Kate and the Beanstalk. Osborne. 191.
Katz. Counting Kisses. 227.
Kehret. Hideout. 341.
Keller. Open Wide. 25.
Kelly. William and the Night Train. 376.
Kenyon. Hyacinth Hop Has the Hic-Hops. 184.
Kerner. Blueprint. 67.
Kessler. My Great-Grandmother's Gourd. 150.
Ketchum. Into a New Country. 67.
Ketteman. Armadillo Tattletale. 108.
. Mama's Way. 267.
Key Is Lost. Vos. 39.
Kid Who Invented the Trampoline. Wulffson.
392.
Kimmel. Cloak for the Moon. 305.
. Gershon's Monster. 68.
.Runaway Tortilla. 150.
. Website of the Warped Wizard. 267.
Kindl. Goose Chase. 306.
King & Three Thieves. Balouch. 176.
Kinsey-Warnock. Farm of Her Own. 376.
Kiss the Cow! Root. 195.
Klass. You Don't Know Me. 227.
Klise. Trial by JFry Journal. 306.
Koertge. Brimstone Journals. 307.
Konigsburg. Silent to the Bone. 68.
Kornblatt. Understanding Buddy. 268.
Koss. Stranger in Dadland. 228.
Kraus. Mouse in Love. 108.
Krensky. Shooting the Moon. 412.
Kroeger. Fly High! 216.
Krull. Lives of Extraordinary Women. 25.
Kuklin. Trial. 185.
Kurtz. Jakarta Missing. 341.
Kvasnosky. Zelda and Ivy One Christmas. 151.
L'Engle. Other Dog. 308.
Laden. Bad Dog. 69.
. Roberto the Insect Architect. 151.
LaFaye. Dad, in Spirit. 412.
Lalicki. Spellbinder. 268.
Lambert. DK Guide to Dinosaurs. 25.
Lamp, the Ice, and the Boat Called Fish. Mar-
tin. 230.
Langley. Missing! 109.
Language of Birds. Martin. 73.
Lanier. Jefferson's Children. 152.
Laser. 6-321. 228.
Lasky. First Painter. 109.
. Interrupted Journey. 377.
. Lucille's Snowsuit. 69.
. Vision of Beauty. 26.
Lass. Who Took the Cookies from the Cookie
Jar? 152.
Last Book in the Universe. Philbrick. 192.
Lattimore. Medusa. 70.
Lauber. Purrfectly Purrfect. 153.
. What You Never Knew about Tubs,
Toilets, and Showers. 413.
Lawrence. Buccaneers. 413.
. Ghost Boy. 70.
Lawson. Destination Gold! 307.
Lazo. Alice Walker. 26.
Learning to Swim. Turner. 123.
Leedy. Mapping Penny's World. 27.
Leonardo's Hand. Downing. 222.
Leprechaun Who Wished He Wasn't.
Parkinson. 116.
Lerner. On the Wing. 377.
Lester. Ackamarackus. 268.
. Albidaro and the Mischievous Dream.
185.
. Blues Singers. 342.
_ . When Dad Killed Mom. 342.
Let It Shine. Pinkney. 117.
Let's Count the Raindrops. 378.
Let's Go to the Beach. Van Steenwyk. 389.
Letters and Sounds. 339.
Levine. Darkness over Denmark. 27.
Levitin. Dream Freedom. 110.
Levy. Big Trouble in Little Twinsville. 414.
Lewin. Red Legs. 343.
Lewis. Burst of Firsts. 308.
. Good Mousekeeping. 378.
. Isabella Abnormella and the Very, Very
Finicky Queen of Trouble. 71.
Lexau. Crocodile and Hen. 414.
Life History of a Star. Easton. 257.
Lillegard. Hello School! 378.
Lindbergh. In Every Tiny Grain of Sand. 153.
Lipp. Caged Birds of Phnom Penh. 309.
438 
* THE BULLETIN
Lirael. Nix. 348.
Lisle. Art of Keeping Cool. 186.
Little Gold Star. San Souci. 161.
Little Green. Baker. 297.
Little Robots. Brownlow. 178.
Little Whistle. Rylant. 351.
Little. Emma's Yucky Brother. 343.
Littlesugar. Freedom School, Yes! 229.
Lives of Extraordinary Women. Krull. 25.
Livingstone. Harley. 379.
Lizards, Frogs, and Polliwogs. Florian. 303.
Lizzie at Last. Mills. 75.
Locust Pocus! McKelvey. 379.
Lodge. Shoe Shoe Baby. 110.
Log Cabin Christmas. Howard. 106.
Loki & Alex. Smith. 423.
London, A. White Water. 344.
London, J. Park Beat. 344.
. White Water. 344.
Long. Hiccup Snickup. 269.
Longitude Prize. Dash. 58.
Look. Henry's First-Moon Birthday. 269.
Lookin' for Bird in the Big City. Burleigh. 404.
Looking for X. Ellis. 14.
Loomis. Astro Bunnies. 229.
Lord Brocktree. Jacques. 23.
Lord of the Deep. Salisbury. 422.
Lord's Prayer. 153.
Lost! Fleischman. 61.
Louise Arner Boyd. Anema. 97.
Lourie. Mississippi River. 71.
Love and Other Four-Letter Words. Mackler.
187.
Love to Mami. Mora. 311.
Lowell. Cindy Ellen. 28.
.Dusty Locks and the Three Bears. 414.
Lowry. Gathering Blue. 111.
Lucille's Snowsuit. Lasky. 69.
Lucky 13. Street. 354.
Lucky Pennies and Hot Chocolate with
Grandpa. Shields. 37.
Lucy Anna and the Finders. Hayes. 146.
Lucy Maud Montgomery. MacLeod. 345.
Lunch at the Zoo. Altman. 212.
Luthardt. Mine! 186.
Lynch. Freewill. 270.
SGold Dust. 111.
Lyons. Dear Ellen Bee. 72.
Mabel Dancing. Hest. 20.
Mabela the Clever. MacDonald. 345.
Mac Side Up. Elsdale. 142.
Macaulay. Building Big. 154.
Maccarone. Child Was Born. 72.
MacDonald. Mabela the Clever. 345.
Mack. For Better, for Worse. 215.
Mackler. Love and Other Four-Letter Words.
187.
MacLeod. Lucy Maud Montgomery. 345.
Macy. Girls Got Game. 379.
Madlenka. Sis. 81.
Magic Can Be Murder. Vande Velde. 124.
Magic Pretzel. Pinkwater. 35.
Mahy. 24 Hours. 154.
Making Animal Babies. Collard. 11.
Mama Elizabeti. Stuve-Bodeen. 39.
Mama's Way. Ketteman. 267.
Man-Eating Tigers of Sundarbans. Montgom-
ery. 231.
Mandel. My Ocean Liner. 270.
Manning. Supermom. 309.
.Wash, Scrub, Brush. 309.
.What a Viking! 155.
Many Adventures ofJohnny Mutton. Proimos.
420.
Many Stones. Coman. 138.
Mapping Penny's World. Leedy. 27.
Marco's Millions. Sleator. 423.
Mare's Nest. Bowen. 403.
Marino. Emergency Vets. 415.
Market Wedding. Fagan. 60.
Marrin. George Washington & the Founding
of a Nation. 229.
Marsden. Burning for Revenge. 112.
Martha and Skits. Meddaugh. 112.
Martin, A. Doll People. 187.
Martin, J. Lamp, the Ice, and the Boat Called
Fish. 230.
Martin, R. Language of Birds. 73.
. Storytelling Princess. 415.
Masoff. American Revolution, 1700-1800. 28.
. Colonial Times, 1600-1700. 28.
Master Man. Shepard. 236.
Masterman-Smith. First Mate Tate. 73.
Masurel. Cat and a Dog. 346.
Matas. War Within. 346.
Math Book for Girls and Other Beings Who
Count. Wyatt. 126.
Matilda Bone. Cushman. 140.
Matthaei. Sketchbook of Thomas Blue Eagle.
347.
Max. Graham. 181.
Max. Judes. 305.
Maxwell's Magic Mix-up. Ashman. 366.
Mayer. Twelve Apostles. 29.
Mazer. Girlhearts. 310.
McAllister. Hold My Hand and Run. 29.
McBrier. Beatrice's Goat. 230.
McCarty. Baby Steps. 74.
McCormick. Cut. 188.
McCully. Mirette & Bellini Cross Niagara Falls.
188.
McDonough. Dollhouse Magic. 155.
McEwan. Heart of Cool. 310.
McGill. In the Hollow of Your Hand. 189.
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 439
McKelvey. Locust Pocus! 379.
McKendree. Belton. 53.
McKissack, F. Miami Gets It Straight. 30.
McKissack, P. Miami Gets It Straight. 30.
McLerran. Dragonfly. 30.
McNamee. Nothing Wrong with a Three-
Legged Dog. 31.
McNeil. Sail Away. 74.
McNichols. Falling From Grace. 74.
Mead. Girl of Kosovo. 380.
Meade. Rabbit's Bride. 338.
Meddaugh. Martha and Skits. 112.
Medusa. Lattimore. 70.
Meister. Busy Busy City Street. 231.
Memories of Summer. White. 41.
Memory Prisoner. Bloor. 402.
Men of Stone. Friesen. 180.
Meow Monday. Root. 235.
Messenger, Messenger. Burleigh. 98.
Metro Cat. Arnold. 401.
Meyers. Everywhere Babies. 380.
Miami Gets It Straight. McKissack. 30.
Michelangelo. Stanley. 82.
Michelson. Ten Times Better. 189.
Mikaelsen. Touching Spirit Bear. 347.
Milich. City ABC Book. 271.
Miller, D. Just Like You and Me. 271.
Miller, W. Piano. 75.
_ .Tituba. 112.
Mills. Lizzie at Last. 75.
Mine! Luthardt. 186.
Minor. Pumpkin Heads! 31.
Minstrel's Tale. Haahr. 182.
Mirette & Bellini Cross Niagara Falls. McCully.
188.
Miss Mouse Takes Off. Ormerod. 418.
Missing! Langley. 109.
Mississippi. Siebert. 387.
Mississippi River. Lourie. 71.
Moeri. Devil in 01' Rosie. 272.
Moeyaert. Hornet's Nest. 113.
Monkey King. Young. 322.
Montes. Something Wicked's in Those Woods.
76.
Montgomery. 
Man-Eating 
Tigers 
of
Sundarbans. 231.
Moon & Riddles Diner and the Sunnyside Cafe.
Willard. 356.
Moonpie and Ivy. O'Connor. 349.
Mop's Backyard Concert. Schaap. 196.
Mop's Treasure Hunt. Schaap. 196.
Mora. Love to Mama. 311.
More True Lies. Shannon. 422.
Morris. Parsifal's Page. 311.
Morrison. Great Unknown. 416.
Moser. Three Little Pigs. 272.
Mountain Pose. Wilson. 391.
Mouse in Love. Kraus. 108.
Mummies of the Pharaohs. Berger. 297.
Mummies, Bones, & Body Parts. Wilcox. 41.
Munson. Enemy Pie. 190.
Murdoch. Shylock's Daughter. 420.
Murphy, J. Blizzard! 190.
. Pick & Shovel Poet. 156.
Murphy, R. Black Angels. 272.
. Night Flying. 190.
Murphy, W. Spare Parts. 273.
Musgrove. Spider Weaver. 273.
Music from the Sky. Gillard. 337.
My America. Hopkins. 65.
My Best Friend Bear. Johnston. 340.
My Brother's Ghost. Ahlberg. 294.
My Colors. Emberley. 143.
My Dad. Browne. 332.
My Dog, Cat. Crisp. 139.
My Family Shall Be Free! Fradin. 336.
My Great-Grandmother's Gourd. Kessler. 150.
My Guy. Weeks. 390.
My Numbers. Emberley. 143.
My Ocean Liner. Mandel. 270.
My Opposites. Emberley. 143.
My Race Car. Rex. 35.
My Shapes. Emberley. 143.
My Very Own Room. Perez. 116.
Myers, C. Wings. 156.
Myers, L. Surviving Brick Johnson. 113.
Myers, W. Greatest: Muhammad Ali. 312.
.Journal of Biddy Owens. 416.
Myrtle ofWillendorf. O'Connell. 158.
Mystery on Everest. Salkeld. 11.
Na. Step from Heaven. 416.
Nagda. Dear Whiskers. 232.
. Tiger Math. 31.
Names Upon the Harp. Heaney. 260.
Napoli. Albert. 312.
. Beast. 76.
. Shelley Shock. 114.
Naylor. Alice Alone. 348.
Never Poke a Squid. Cazet. 10
New Animal Discoveries. Orenstein. 418.
New Room for William. Grindley. 145.
Newman. Cats, Cats, Cats! 274.
Newth. Transformation. 114.
Nick Plays Baseball. Isadora. 225.
Nickle. TV Rex. 274.
Night Flying. Murphy. 190.
Night of the Bat. Zindel. 427.
Nikola-Lisa. Year with Grandma Moses. 115.
Nix. Lirael. 348.
Nixon. Playing for Keeps. 417.
No Better Hope. Ashabranner. 296.
No Sweat Projects: Hairy Science. Brallier. 177.
No Sweat Projects: Thumbs Up Science.
Brallier. 177.
440 
* THE BULLETIN
Nobisso. John Blair and the Great Hinckley Fire.
77.
Nobody Particular. Bang. 213.
Nolen. Big Jabe. 32.
Norris, K. Holy Twins. 417.
Norris, L. Albert and the Angels. 157.
Nory Ryan's Song. Giff. 62.
Notes from a Liar and Her Dog. Choldenko.
405.
Nothing Scares Us. Wishinsky. 88.
Nothing Wrong with a Three-Legged Dog.
McNamee. 31.
Novak. Jazzbo and Googy. 32.
Numeroff. If You Take a Mouse to the Movies.
157.
Nutik & Amaroq Play Ball. George. 408.
Nutik, the Wolf Pup. George. 408.
Nye. Come With Me. 77.
O'Brien. Hindenburg. 33.
O'Connell. Myrtle ofWillendorf. 158.
O'Connor. Moonpie and Ivy. 349.
O'Malley. Humpty Dumpty Egg-splodes. 349.
Oberman. Wisdom Bird. 78.
Odysseus in the Serpent Maze. Yolen. 357.
Olaleye. Bikes for Rent! 381.
Old Thunder and Miss Raney. Darrow. 101.
Olivia. Falconer. 103.
Olson. Alligator Ate My Brother. 158.
Olsson. In Ned's Head. 265.
On My Way. dePaola. 256.
On the Edge. Duncan. 13.
On the Fringe. Gallo. 371.
On the Wing. Lerner. 377.
Once Upon a Time in Chicago. Winter. 203.
One Dark Night. Hutchins. 410.
One Riddle, One Answer. Thompson. 317.
One Small Dog. Hurwitz. 23.
Only One Cowry. Gershator. 181.
Only Passing Through. Rockwell. 194.
Onyefulu. Triangle for Adaora. 115.
Open Wide. Keller. 25.
Oranges on Golden Mountain. Partridge. 233.
Orenstein. New Animal Discoveries. 418.
Orgill. Shout, Sister, Shout! 381.
Ormerod. Miss Mouse Takes Off. 418.
Orr. Ark in the Park. 33.
Orwell's Luck. Jennings. 107.
Osborne. Kate and the Beanstalk. 191.
Oswald the Octopus. Yaccarino. 392.
Other Dog. L'Engle. 308.
Other Side. Woodson. 242.
Owen Foote, Money Man. Greene. 63.
Palatini. Bedhead. 78.
. Web Files. 232.
Panther. Booth. 253.
Paper Trail. Gilbert. 16.
Paperwhite. Wallace. 124.
Park Beat. London. 344.
Park, B. Graduation ofJake Moon. 159.
Park, L. Single Shard. 275.
Parkinson. Leprechaun Who Wished He
Wasn't. 116.
Parsifal's Page. Morris. 311.
Partridge. Oranges on Golden Mountain. 233.
Parts. Rotner. 386.
Patent. Bald Eagle Returns. 191.
Paterson. Field of the Dogs. 233.
Patneaude. Haunting at Home Plate. 116.
Pattern Fish. Harris. 19.
Pattison. Wayfinder. 192.
Paulsen. Beet Fields. 79.
. Guts. 312.
. White Fox Chronicles. 34.
Pearl. Atwell. 296.
Pearson. Scribbler of Dreams. 350.
Pebble and a Pen. Donaldson. 141.
Peck, Richard. Year Down Yonder. 192.
Peck, Robert. Extra Innings. 275.
Pedro and Me. Winick. 42.
Pelta. Rediscovering Easter Island. 419.
Perez. My Very Own Room. 116.
Perfect Friend. Price. 80.
Pet Boy. Graves. 337.
Peter and the Blue Witch Baby. San Souci. 120.
Peters. Snitch in the Snob Squad. 276.
Peyton. Blind Beauty. 234.
Philbrick. Last Book in the Universe. 192.
Photo Odyssey. Hirschfelder. 21.
Piano. Miller. 75.
Pick & Shovel Poet. Murphy. 156.
Piece of Heaven. Wyeth. 284.
Pieces. Hines. 223.
Pierce, M. Treasure at the Heart of the
Tanglewood. 419.
Pierce, T. Circle Opens: Street Magic. 382.
. Protector of the Small: Page. 34.
. Protector of the Small: Squire. 382.
Pig Is Big. Florian. 143.
Pinczes. Inchworm and a Half. 276.
Pinkney, A. Let It Shine. 117.
Pinkney, S. Shades of Black. 193.
Pinkwater. Fat Camp Commandos. 382.
. Magic Pretzel. 35.
Players. Sweeney. 199.
Playing for Keeps. Nixon. 417.
Playing with Fire. Karr. 340.
Playmaker. Cheaney. 56.
Plunking Reggie Jackson. Bennett. 214.
Pocket Dogs. Wild. 283.
Poke in the I. Janeczko. 376.
Poppy & Ella. Kaminsky. 24.
Poupeney. Her Father's Daughter. 35.
Powell. Run If You Dare. 383.
Prairie School. Avi. 331.
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 441
Prelutsky. It's Raining Pigs & Noodles. 79.
Preschool to the Rescue. Sierra. 314.
Pressler. Shylock's Daughter. 420.
Price. Perfect Friend. 80.
Princess Diaries. Cabot. 137.
Princess Dinosaur. Kastner. 340.
Private Captain. Crisp. 255.
Proimos. Many Adventures ofJohnny Mutton.
420.
Prose. Demon's Mistake. 117.
Protector of the Small: Page. Pierce. 34.
Protector of the Small: Squire. Pierce. 382.
Pullman. Amber Spyglass. 193.
Pumpkin Heads! Minor. 31.
Purple Death. Getz. 144.
Purrfectly Purrfect. Lauber. 153.
Queen of the World. Yezerski. 126.
Quinceafiera Means Sweet 15. Chambers. 332.
Rabbit's Bride. Grimm. 338.
Raccoon on His Own. Arnosky. 401.
Racing the Past. Deans. 370.
Rain Came Down. Shannon. 162.
Raising the Shades. Wilhelm. 355.
Raschka. Waffle. 350.
Rash. Robots Are Coming. 159.
Raspberry House Blues. Holeman. 105.
Ratcliffe. Free Fall. 383.
Rau. Wells Fargo Book of the Gold Rush. 384.
Read. In Ned's Head. 265.
Red Legs. Lewin. 343.
Redhanded. Cadnum. 55.
Rediscovering Easter Island. Pelta. 419.
Rees. Truth Out There. 118.
_ Witch Child. 421.
Reiss. How Murray Saved Christmas. 159.
Reneaux. How the Animals Saved the People.
276.
Rex. My Race Car. 35.
Ribbit Riddles. Hall. 408.
Richards. First Olympic Games. 118.
Ride. Gammell. 259.
Riding the Tiger. Bunting. 368.
Rinaldi. Education of Mary. 194.
. Girl in Blue. 384.
Rivers. Waiting to Dive. 313.
Roadrunner's Dance. Anaya. 135.
Robbins. Thunder on the Plains. 313.
Robert Crowther's Amazing Pop-Up House of
Inventions. Crowther. 140.
Roberto the Insect Architect. Laden. 151.
Roberts, M. Genius of Leonardo. 84.
Roberts, W. Buddy Is a Stupid Name for a Girl.
234.
Robertson. Egg. 235.
Robins. Max. 305.
Robots Are Coming. Rash. 159.
Rochelle. Words with Wings. 277.
Rockwell. Bugs Are Insects. 421.
.Only Passing Through. 194.
Rodda. Rowan of Rin. 385.
Rodowsky. Clay. 277.
Roos. Gypsies Never Came. 351.
Root. Foggy Friday. 235.
. Kiss the Cow! 195.
. Meow Monday. 235.
Rosales. Adventures of Minnie. 385.
Rose and the Beast. Block. 97.
Rose. Into the A, B, Sea. 160.
Roth. Happy Birthday Mr. Kang. 314.
Rotner. Parts. 386.
Rouffiac. War. 318.
Round the Garden. Glaser. 104.
Rowan of Rin. Rodda. 385.
Rubin. Fireflies in the Dark. 119.
Rumpelstiltskin Problem. Vande Velde. 239.
Run If You Dare. Powell. 383.
Run the Blockade. Wisler. 88.
Runaway Radish. Haas. 408.
Runaway Tortilla. Kimmel. 150.
Ryan. Esperanza Rising. 160.
Rylant. Case of the Climbing Cat. 119.
. Case of the Missing Monkey. 119.
_ Great Gracie Chase. 278.
SLittle Whistle. 351.
. Thimbleberry Stories. 36.
Sacred Places. Sturges. 164.
Sail Away. McNeil. 74.
Sailor Returns. Taylor. 280.
Saint Francis and the Christmas Donkey. Byrd.
99.
Saint Nicholas. Tompert. 83.
Salisbury. Lord of the Deep. 422.
Salkeld. Mystery on Everest. 11.
Sally Goes to the Beach. Huneck. 107.
Salt in His Shoes. Jordan. 149.
Sam's Wild West Christmas. Antle. 52.
San Souci. Cinderella Skeleton. 80.
. Little Gold Star. 161.
. Peter and the Blue Witch Baby. 120.
Sandler. Vaqueros. 352.
Santangelo. Brother Wolf of Gubbio. 195.
Saturday Night Jamboree. Wardlaw. 125.
Say You Are My Sister. Brady. 8.
Say. Sign Painter. 161.
Sayre. Dig Wait Listen. 352.
Schaap. Mop's Backyard Concert. 196.
. Mop's Treasure Hunt. 196.
Schaefer. Snow Pumpkin. 81.
School Story. Clements. 406.
Schotter. Captain Bob Sets Sail. 36.
. F Is for Freedom. 196.
Schwartz. Send One Angel Down. 36.
Scieszka. Baloney (Henry P.). 352.
Scribbler of Dreams. Pearson. 350.
442 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Scrimger. Bun Bun's Birthday. 314.
Seabrooke. Haunting at Stratton Falls. 37.
Secret Footprints. Alvarez. 51.
Secret Sacrament. Jordan. 266.
Sedgwick. Floodland. 278.
Seer and the Sword. Hanley. 223.
Send One Angel Down. Schwartz. 36.
Separate Sexes, Separate Schools. Cruz. 57.
Sergio and the Hurricane. Wallner. 85.
Serpent Slayer. Tchana. 123.
Seuling. Drip! Drop! 197.
Sewall. James Towne. 353.
Shades of Black. Pinkney. 193.
Shadow Night. Chorao. 333.
Shadowed Unicorn. Welch. 86.
Shakespeare's Scribe. Blackwood. 53.
Shan. Cirque du Freak. 386.
Shannon, D. Rain Came Down. 162.
Shannon, G. More True Lies. 422.
Shelley Shock. Napoli. 114.
Shepard. Master Man. 236.
Sherwood. Yolen. 42.
Shields. Lucky Pennies and Hot Chocolate with
Grandpa. 37.
Shipwrecked! Blumberg. 252.
Shiva's Fire. Staples. 38.
Shoe Shoe Baby. Lodge. 110.
Shooting the Moon. Krensky. 412.
Short Takes. Smith. 237.
Shout, Sister, Shout! Orgill. 381.
Shulevitz. What Is a Wise Bird Like You Doing
in a Silly Tale Like This? 120.
Shylock's Daughter. Pressler. 420.
Siddals. I'll Play With You. 162.
Siebert. Mississippi. 387.
Sierra. Gift of the Crocodile. 163.
.Preschool to the Rescue. 314.
.There's a Zoo in Room 22. 81.
Sights. Vance. 317.
Sign Painter. Say. 161.
Silent to the Bone. Konigsburg. 68.
Simont. Stray Dog. 279.
Singer. Didi and Daddy on the Promenade. 315.
. Dog's Gotta Do What a Dog's Gotta
Do. 121.
. I Believe in Water. 197.
Single Shard. Park. 275.
Sis. Ballerina! 353.
SMadlenka. 81.
Sketchbook of Thomas Blue Eagle. Matthaei.
347.
Skinny Melon and Me. Ure. 280.
Slap, Squeak & Scatter. Jenkins. 411.
Sleator. Marco's Millions. 423.
Smith, C. Loki & Alex. 423.
. Short Takes. 237.
Smith, R. Captain Pajamas. 40.
Snail House. Ahlberg. 295.
Snell. Thicker Than Water. 279.
Snitch in the Snob Squad. Peters. 276.
Snow Pumpkin. Schaefer. 81.
Soldier X. Wulffson. 284.
Some Things Are Scary. Heide. 146.
Someday We'll Have Very Good Manners.
Ziefert. 242.
Something Wicked's in Those Woods. Mon-
tes. 76.
Sommerdorf. Elm Tree and Three Sisters. 237.
Song of the Sea. Spencer. 387.
Sophie's Masterpiece. Spinelli. 424.
Soto. Jessie De La Cruz. 237.
Spare Parts. Murphy. 273.
Special Something. Fearnley. 15.
Spellbinder. Lalicki. 268.
Spencer. Song of the Sea. 387.
Spider Weaver. Musgrove. 273.
Spinelli, E. Sophie's Masterpiece. 424.
Spinelli, J. Stargirl. 38.
Spinner. Expiration Date: Never. 424.
Spires. I Am Arachne. 387.
Spirit of Endurance. Armstrong. 52.
Springer. I Am Morgan le Fay. 315.
Squirts and Spurts. Cobb. 100.
Stanley, D. Michelangelo. 82.
Stanley, G. Clue of the Left-Handed Envelope.
163.
Stanley, J. Hurry Freedom. 198.
Staples. Shiva's Fire. 38.
Star-Bearer. Hofmeyr. 262.
Stargirl. Spinelli. 38.
Stark. Escape from Heart. 163.
Starring Grace. Hoffman. 21.
Steen, Sandra. Car Wash. 198.
Steen, Susan. Car Wash. 198.
Steig, J. Gift from Zeus. 424.
Steig, W. Wizzil. 82.
Stella: Queen of the Snow. Gay. 180.
Step from Heaven. Na. 416.
Stepliving for Teens. Block. 402.
Stevenson. Christmas at Mud Flat. 121.
Stewart, L. Big Catnap. 121.
Stewart, S. Journey. 316.
Stick and Whittle. Hite. 65.
Stone. All the Blue Moons at the Wallace Ho-
tel. 164.
Story of Tracy Beaker. Wilson. 321.
Storytelling Princess. Martin. 415.
Stowaway. Hesse. 65.
Stranger in Dadland. Koss. 228.
Strasser. Give a Boy a Gun. 83.
Stray Dog. Simont. 279.
Street. Lucky 13. 354.
Streissguth. War. 318.
Stucksville. Greenwald. 182.
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 443
Sturges. Sacred Places. 164.
.Who Took the Cookies from the Cookie
Jar? 152.
Sturtevant. At the Sign of the Star. 199.
Stuve-Bodeen. Mama Elizabeti. 39.
Suen. Air Show. 354.
Super-Completely and Totally the Messiest.
Viorst. 389.
Supermom. Manning. 309.
Surviving Brick Johnson. Myers. 113.
Surviving Hitler. Warren. 281.
Susan Laughs. Willis. 87.
Sweeney. Players. 199.
Sweet, Sweet Memory. Woodson. 357.
Swollobog. Taylor. 316.
Take It to the Hoop, Magic Johnson. Troupe.
200.
Talbott. Forging Freedom. 122.
Tale of Tricky Fox. Aylesworth. 251.
Tales for the Seventh Day. Jaffe. 184.
Tales of the Haunted Deep. Guiberson. 18.
Tanaka. In the Time of the Knights. 238.
Tang. Grapes of Math. 279.
Tarbescu. Boy Who Stuck Out His Tongue.
122.
Taylor, A. Swollobog. 316.
Taylor, K. Cissy Funk. 354.
Taylor, T. Sailor Returns. 280.
Tchana. Serpent Slayer. 123.
Ted. DiTerlizzi. 221.
Ten Times Better. Michelson. 189.
Thayer. Casey at the Bat. 200.
There Once Was a Man Named Michael
Finnegan. Hoberman. 304.
There's a Cow in the Cabbage Patch.
Blackstone. 298.
There's a Zoo in Room 22. Sierra. 81.
Thesman. In the House of the Queen's Beasts.
388.
Thicker Than Water. Snell. 279.
Thimbleberry Stories. Rylant. 36.
This Next New Year. Wong. 42.
Thomas Jefferson. Armstrong. 330.
Thomas, J. Bowlegged Rooster and Other Tales
that Signify. 165.
Thomas, S. Baby's Coming to Your House! 388.
Thompson. One Riddle, One Answer. 317.
Thomson. Dragon's Son. 425.
Those Building Men. Johnson. 226.
Three Little Pigs. Moser. 272.
Three Magic Balls. Egielski. 13.
Three Pigs. Wiesner. 355.
Through the Lock. Hurst. 264.
Thunder on the Plains. Robbins. 313.
Tides. Caldwell. 404.
Tiger Math. Nagda. 31.
Tiger Rising. DiCamillo. 300.
Timon's Tide. Butler. 9.
Timothy Tunny Swallowed a Bunny.
Grossman. 222.
Tituba. Miller. 112.
To Ride the Gods' Own Stallion. Wilson. 202.
To Root, to Toot, to Parachute. Cleary. 299.
Toasting Marshmallows. George. 336.
Tomb of the Boy King. Frank. 258.
Tompert. Saint Nicholas. 83.
Too Young to Fight. Galloway. 62.
Tooinsky. Turkey Prince. 238.
Toot & Puddle: Puddle's ABC. Hobbie. 147.
Torrey. Case of the Gasping Garbage. 388.
Touching Spirit Bear. Mikaelsen. 347.
Transformation. Newth. 114.
Transmogrification of Roscoe Wizzle. Elliott.
334.
Treasure at the Heart of the Tanglewood. Pierce.
419.
Trial by Jtry Journal. Klise. 306.
Trial. Kuklin. 185.
Triangle for Adaora. Onyefulu. 115.
Triumph on Everest. Coburn. 11.
Trouble on Thunder Mountain. Hoban. 21.
Troupe. Take It to the Hoop, Magic Johnson.
200.
Trucks. Imershein. 23.
True Believer. Wolff. 357.
Truth about Rats, Rules, and Seventh Grade.
Zinnen. 393.
Truth Out There. Rees. 118.
Turkey Prince. Tooinsky. 238.
Turner. Abe Lincoln Remembers. 239.
. Learning to Swim. 123.
TV Rex. Nickle. 274.
Twelve Apostles. Mayer. 29.
Twin Tales. Jackson. 225.
Ultimate Field Trip 4. Goodman. 17.
Uncle Daddy. Fletcher. 335.
Uncommon Champions. Kaminsky. 184.
Under New York. High. 304.
Understanding Buddy. Kornblatt. 268.
Up a Creek. Williams. 240.
Uptown. Collier. 100.
Urban. Waiting for Deliverance. 84.
Ure. Skinny Melon and Me. 280.
Van Steenwyk. Let's Go to the Beach. 389.
Vance. Sights. 317.
Vande Velde. Alison, Who Went Away. 318.
.Magic Can Be Murder. 124.
. Rumpelstiltskin Problem. 239.
Vaqueros. Sandler. 352.
Vaugelade. War. 318.
Venola in Love. Ware. 85.
Very Lazy Ladybug. Finn. 335.
Vincent Van Gogh. Greenberg. 372.
444 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Viorst. Super-Completely and Totally the
Messiest. 389.
Visconti. Genius of Leonardo. 84.
Vision of Beauty. Lasky. 26.
Voigt. It's Not Easy Being Bad. 165.
Vos. Key Is Lost. 39.
Vroomaloom Zoom. Coy. 178.
Waffle. Raschka. 350.
Wahl. Field Mouse and a Dinosaur Named Sue.
40.
Waiting for Deliverance. Urban. 84.
Waiting for Wings. Ehlert. 302.
Waiting to Dive. Rivers. 313.
Wallace, B. Coyote Autumn. 124.
Wallace, J. Big and Noisy Simon. 319.
Wallace, N. Paperwhite. 124.
Wallner. Abigail Adams. 319.
.Sergio and the Hurricane. 85.
Walsh. Heroes of Isle aux Morts. 320.
Walters. Caged Eagles. 200.
Walton. How Can You Dance? 425.
War Within. Matas. 346.
War. Vaugelade. 318.
Wardlaw. Saturday Night Jamboree. 125.
Ware. Venola in Love. 85.
Warner. Finding Hattie. 390.
. How to Be a Real Person (In Just One
Day). 281.
Warren. Surviving Hitler. 281.
Wash, Scrub, Brush. Manning. 309.
Washington. Big, Spooky House. 201.
Watson. Juice. 201.
Wayfinder. Pattison. 192.
Weatherly. William Marshal. 282.
Weaver's Daughter. Bradley. 98.
Web Files. Palatini. 232.
Website of the Warped Wizard. Kimmel. 267.
Weeks. My Guy. 390.
Welch. Shadowed Unicorn. 86.
Wells Fargo Book of the Gold Rush. Rau. 384.
Wells. Felix Feels Better. 391.
Wemberly Worried. Henkes. 20.
Whale Talk. Crutcher. 300.
What a Viking! Manning. 155.
What Every Girl (Except Me) Knows. Baskin.
214.
What Is a Wise Bird Like You Doing in a Silly
Tale Like This? Shulevitz. 120.
What Shall We Do with the Boo-Hoo Baby?
Cowell. 219.
What You Never Knew about Tubs, Toilets, and
Showers. Lauber. 413.
Whatley. Captain Pajamas. 40.
What Does the Sky Say? Carlstrom. 405.
What's Cooking? Whitman. 426.
When Dad Killed Mom. Lester. 342.
Where Are You, Blue Kangaroo? Clark. 254.
Where I Live. Wolfe. 356.
White Fox Chronicles. Paulsen. 34.
White Water. London. 344.
White, C. Adventure of Louey and Frank. 282.
White, R. Memories of Summer. 41.
Whitman. What's Cooking? 426.
Who Is It? Grindley. 64.
Who Took the Cookies from the Cookie Jar?
Lass. 152.
Who Was Born This Special Day? Bunting. 55.
Who's in the Hall? Hearne. 183.
Why Do Cats Meow? Holub. 224.
Why Do Dogs Bark? Holub. 224.
Wiesner. Three Pigs. 355.
Wilcox, B. Full Moon. 391.
Wilcox, C. Mummies, Bones, & Body Parts.
41.
Wild. Pocket Dogs. 283.
Wildsmith. Jesus. 202.
Wiles. Freedom Summer. 239.
Wilhelm. Raising the Shades. 355.
Wilkerson. American Illustrator. 320.
Will You, Won't You? Haas. 64.
Willard. Moon & Riddles Diner and the
Sunnyside Cafd. 356.
William and the Night Train. Kelly. 376.
William Marshal. Weatherly. 282.
William's House. Howard. 375.
Williams, C. Carolina Autumn. 86.
Williams, L. ABC Kids. 87.
. Up a Creek. 240.
Williams-Garcia. 
Catching 
the Wild
Waiyuuzee. 166.
. Every Time a Rainbow Dies. 240.
Willis. Susan Laughs. 87.
Wilson, D. To Ride the Gods' Own Stallion.
202.
Wilson, J. Bad Girls. 283.
. Story of Tracy Beaker. 321.
Wilson, N. Mountain Pose. 391.
Wings. Myers. 156.
Winick. Pedro and Me. 42.
Winter, J. Once Upon a Time in Chicago. 203.
Winter, L. Growing Wings. 125.
Winthrop. Dumpy La Rue. 426.
Wisdom Bird. Oberman. 78.
Wish Master. Wright. 203.
Wishes, Kisses, and Pigs. Hearne. 373.
Wishinsky. Nothing Scares Us. 88.
Wisler. Run the Blockade. 88.
Witch Child. Rees. 421.
Wittlinger. Gracie's Girl. 241.
Wizzil. Steig. 82.
Wojciechowski. Beany and the Dreaded Wed-
ding. 166.
JULY/AUGUST 2001 
* 445
Wolf of Gubbio. Bedard. 367.
Wolfe. Where I Live. 356.
Wolff. True Believer. 357.
Wong. Grump. 241.
. This Next New Year. 42.
Wood. Bear Dogs. 321.
Woods, Mary. Ancient Warfare. 167.
Woods, Michael. Ancient Warfare. 167.
Woodson. Other Side. 242.
. Sweet, Sweet Memory. 357.
Woolly Mammoth. Chorlton. 406.
Word Eater. Amato. 5.
Words with Wings. Rochelle. 277.
World at Her Fingertips. Dash. 255.
Wormell. Bernard the Angry Rooster. 322.
Wright. Wish Master. 203.
Write Me If You Dare! Johnson. 148.
Wulffson. Kid Who Invented the Trampoline.
392.
. Soldier X. 284.
Wyatt. Math Book for Girls and Other Beings
Who Count. 126.
Wyeth. Piece of Heaven. 284.
Yaccarino. First Day on a Strange New Planet.
167.
. Oswald the Octopus. 392.
Yay, You! Boynton. 332.
Year Down Yonder. Peck. 192.
Year of Miss Agnes. Hill. 105.
Year of the Griffin. Jones. 149.
Year with Grandma Moses. Nikola-Lisa. 115.
Yellow Star. Deedy. 102.
Yep. Dream Soul. 168.
Yezerski. Queen of the World. 126.
Yin. Coolies. 242.
Yolen. Odysseus in the Serpent Maze. 357.
. Sherwood. 42.
You Don't Know Me. Klass. 227.
Young. Monkey King. 322.
Zaunders. Feathers, Flaps, & Flops. 358.
Zelda and Ivy One Christmas. Kvasnosky. 151.
Zero Grandparents. Edwards. 301.
Ziefert. Someday We'll Have Very Good Man-
ners. 242.
Zindel. Night of the Bat. 427.
Zinnen. Truth about Rats, Rules, and Seventh
Grade. 393.
Zolotow. Do You Know What I'll Do? 204.
Zusak. Fighting Ruben Wolfe. 284.
~*- 
"Caldecott Medalist Young opts for elegance in this
deceptively simple adaptation of .
.
[the] Buddhist epic,
Journey to the West. In piquant phrases and minimalist collages,
he summarizes the antics of a trickster hero [who] uses his magic
for mischief. 
. .. 
Young's dynamic artwork and his mercurial
transitions mimic Monkey's own shape-shifting, making for
deliciously unpredictable reading."-- Starred review / Publishers Weekly
'*- 
"This visually and thematically rich creation by one of our
finest picture book artists is wonderful both to read aloud and to
peruse and ponder at leisure." -
Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
"The language is lively and rich, and the lushly textured cut-paper
collages, while abstract, beautifully illustrate the action-hero
excitement. Children will be intrigued by this strikingly designed
Buddhist tale." -
Highlighted review / A[A Booklist
All ages. $16.95 Tr (0-06-027919 2); $16.89 Lb (0-06-027950-8)
"Years have passed since the events in Sabriel (1996). The Old
Kingdom is again under threat, this time from a sinister necromancer
bent on freeing an ancient, incredibly evil being. Lirael finds the fate
of the kingdom in her hands and in those of Sameth, teenage son
of Sabriel, [as the two] wage a deadly war to stop the evil forces."
-ALA 
Booklist
"The plot is filled with hair-raising escapes, desperate flights, relentless
pursuits, and magical duels, described in sensual language that makes
the scenes live." 
-Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
"A must-read for fans of the first book, Lirael will also fascinate
readers new to the series." 
-School Library Journal
Ages 12 up. $16.95 Tr (0-06-027823-4); $16.89 Lb (0-06-027824-2)
a HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
'-- "Cole Matthews is a violent offender convicted of
viciously beating a classmate. [As punishment, 15-year-old] Cole
elects to participate in Circle Justice, an alternative sentencing
program based on traditional Native American practices, that
results in his being banished to a remote Alaskan island where
he is left to survive for a year. He expects to escape . .. 
but his
encounter with the Spirit Bear of the title leaves him desperately
wounded . .. 
Mikaelsen's portrayal of this angry, manipulative,
damaged teen is dead on. An adventure story with strong moral
underpinnings." --Starred review / School Library Journal
"Mikaelsen's new novel is the story of Cole's
redemption [as] he learns about himself and his-
anger. Even students with very different 
-
backgrounds will empathize with this
tortured bully."--ALA Booklist
$15.95 Tr (0 380-97744-3);
$ 15.89 Lb (0 06 029149-41 
Ages 10 up. 
~
4
S.LL-StarreLI 
review 
/ 
Kirkus 
ReviewsLi 
L.
-Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
* 
"Set in an ancient civilization, this New Zealand
import is . . . a powerful story of the influence of good over
evil, love over hate, and the potential impact of one person
on a nation's history." -Starred review / ALA Booklist
"This absorbing fantasy . . . [raises] powerful questions
about fate, duty, and courage." -School Library Journal
Ages 12 up. $15.95 Tr (0-06-028904-X); $15.89 Lb (0-06-028905-8)
m HarperCollinsChildren's Books
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
The
FIVE OWLS
A publication for readers personally and professionally
involved in children's literature.
THE FIVE OWLS is a bimonthly
publication devoted to children's
literature, bringing together many
of today's finest books with writers
whose contributions are shaping the
future of children's books. A yearly
bscription is available for $35.00.
THE FIVE OWLS for Parents
Schools, libraries and other institutions that have a subscription
to the magazine can receive free quantities of THE FIVE OWLS for
Parents-it's short on advertising and long on book picks,
parenting information, and child development content that
is of real value to families.
For more information,
call 612-377-2004
or visit www.fiveowls.com
I~ 
bIso 
Hly KrNu from El. (S-m and S.usc . 1955)
S"A toddler's day is charmingly portrayed from the perspective of
her best friend-a doll, Miss Mouse. Morning starts with a cuddle
and story, but quiet beginnings give way to lots of activity. ...
By day's end, both need a bath and are ready for a goodnight
story, a kiss, and a cuddle. The illustrations, in panels of varying
sizes, brim with patterns, detail, and splashes of color. They
capture youthful energy and activities children will relate to. ...
Delightful to look at and wonderful for sharing."
-Starred 
review/ALA Booklist
-j' "Ample picture clues and simple vocabulary make this a solid
choice for children just beginning to sound out words."
-Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly
Ages 2 up. $14.95 Tr (0-688-16333-5); $14.89 Lb (0-688-16334-3)
0 HarperColinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
Keen un 
Teachi-na
--- 
-a--mv
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
* "This funny, touching story of
12-year-old Antonia MacPherson
heralds the arrival of a fresh new
voice in literature for young peo-
ple... Choldenko has a wonder-
ful witty way with words."
School Library Journal
(starred review)
* "Choldenko catches the prickliness
of adolescence. . . Funny, moving,
and completely believable, this is a
infine first novel."
-Booklist 
(starred review)
0-399-23591-4 / $16.99 / Ages 10-14
G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS
A Division of Penguin Putnam Books fo
www.penguinputnam.com r
VU ^^^-- -I -
.' .' .
I 
9~I
r Young Rea
Is 16 1 3z
IF~~g
Universi
1325 Sol
Champa
U.S.A.
RETURN
~r"-"
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2000 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age, or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccb/
2. You will be asked for a username and password, both of which are set
as the four- or five-digit number printed in the upper left-hand corner
of the mailing label on your print copy. When entering, do not
include the letter at the end of this number sequence.
3. The first time you log in, you will be required to change your pass-
word to something other than your username.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only
individual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions. Look for
details later this year.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at our homepage: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
Universit
1325 So~
Champai
U.S.A.
RETURN '
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U .
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
;1
:,·"
J, IL
I
F~" :,
I I008ll 
lll 0 III)4111
0008-9036(200107/08)54:11;1-4
