T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
January 2016
Vol. 69   No. 5
ONLINE REFERENCE RESOURCES
Five outstanding online references from the Johns Hopkins University Press  
deliver seminal works and cutting-edge scholarship to students and researchers.
press.jhu.edu/references
• Flexible search options, powerful results.  Results are ranked and sorted by relevance   
 
or date, with direct links to documents and related materials.
• Intuitive browsing.  Wander through entire volumes without getting lost.
• Reliable usage statistics. COUNTER-compliant usage reports let you track activity  
 
 
according to the most current standard available. Statistics are compiled and ready to  
 
 
download once a month. 
• Always available. Our collections are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week from any   
 
IP-authenticated address. No special hardware or software is required. And we offer full   
 
technical and customer support.
The Early Republic
Critical Editions on the  
Founding of the United States
Primary material documenting the 
actions, debates, and thoughts of the  
First Federal Congress (1789–1791) and 
its members. 
earlyrepublic.press.jhu.edu
Encyclopedia of  
American Studies
Edited by Simon Bronner
Interdisciplinary articles from  
hundreds of scholars cover the history 
and cultures of the United States from  
pre-colonial days to the present.
eas-ref.press.jhu.edu
The Johns Hopkins  
Guide to Literary  
Theory & Criticisim
Edited by Michael Groden,  
Martin Kreiswirth, and Imre Szeman
A comprehensive historical survey of the 
field’s most important figures, schools, 
and movements.
litguide.press.jhu.edu
The Papers of Dwight 
David Eisenhower 
Edited by Louis Galambos, Alfred D.  
Chandler Jr., Daun van Ee, et. al.
Combines the full text of all 21 
volumes—over 14,000 pages—with 
a powerful search engine and 
user-friendly interface.
eisenhower.press.jhu.edu
The World Shakespeare 
Bibliography ONLINE
Edited by Laura Estill and an  
international committee of correspondents
The single largest Shakespeare  
database in the world. 
www.worldshakesbib.org
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
January 2016
Vol. 69 No. 5
239  the BIg PICture
 
  This Bridge Will Not Be Gray by Dave Eggers; illus. by Tucker Nichols
240  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
260 •  The Rose Society  by Marie Lu
264 •  My Seneca Village  by Marilyn Nelson
268 •  Goodnight, Good Dog  by Mary Lyn Ray; illus. by Rebecca Malone
270 •  The Sword of Summer  by Rick Riordan
274 •  The Memory of Light by Francisco X. Stork
280  2015 BuLLetIn BLue rIBBons
285  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $108.00 or electronic $120.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2015 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from This Bridge Will Not Be Gray © 2015 by Tucker Nichols and used by permission 
of McSweeney’s.
January 2016 • 239
the BIg PICture
This Bridge Will Not Be Gray
by Dave Eggers; illustrated by Tucker Nichols
Emanating from this year’s Blue Ribbons discussion (for results, see this issue) is 
the observation that there are a growing number of unruly authors and illustrators 
defying our comfortable notions of how information can be packaged for kids. 
While this presents a challenge to committee members accustomed to slipping 
contenders into longstanding categories, it is a boon to real live child readers who 
appreciate “true stories” but eschew anything that smacks of pedagogy. A thoroughly 
delightful case study in this shake-up is Eggers and Nichols’ take on the Golden 
Gate Bridge, an instructive exposition in which no lengths of cable are measured, 
load bearing is not discussed, and only a single date—1928—makes an appearance.
Eggers opens with two extensions of land facing each other across a bay, 
and the logical impetus to span the water with a bridge. From this simple idea 
rose the first of several controversies. Why build a bridge that would mar the area’s 
natural beauty, especially when boats seemed to work just fine? But in 1928 bridge 
builder Joseph Strauss was hired to design a bridge anyway. Which led to another 
controversy: his design was ugly. Enter Leon Moisseiff, another bridge designer 
with a somewhat more palatable aesthetic sense. With the arrival of yet another 
designer, Irving Morrow, they finally had it just about right: “This bridge, built to 
span this beautiful land against this beautiful sea, had to be beautiful itself.” Now 
for the color: “Isn’t that a strange thing, that a very large group of adults would 
undertake a project of this size, and not have a color picked out?”
Here we reach the central point. Color is one weighty idea, and each 
opinion on the correct color for the bridge reflected the agenda of the nominator. 
Gray was the safe, traditional route: “Gray was a serious color. Gray was a practi-
cal color. Gray was dignified. Who could object to gray?” The Navy and Army, 
concerned with the safety of their ships and planes passing nearby, argued for 
black and yellow or red and white stripes: “This is true. This is a factual book. The 
Army wanted it to look like a candy cane for the same reason the Navy wanted it 
to look like a tiger with jaundice.” Morrow, though, watched the steel beams rise 
above the bay clad in the orange rustproof paint in which all steel made a salty 
sea journey, and he liked what he saw. And people agreed about the “orange steel 
against the green hills, above the blue water, below the blue-and-white sky. . . . For 
some reason, that looks right.”
Stripped down to its essentials, this story is accessible to readers just gain-
ing their footing on the written word. Touched up with spare poesy and flashes 
of irreverence, it is inviting to older readers weary of instructional tone. Carefully 
structured to emulate the unstudied cadence of a speaker carried away with his 
240 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
own enthusiasm (“First there were the cables. No. Wait. First there were the tow-
ers. Of course the towers were first”), it challenges readers to note the stumble and 
compare it with the primly edited, slickly polished prose they usually encounter 
in nonfiction books. And while Eggers shapes his informational text into its sleek, 
playful form, Nichols does the same with his paper collage, set against vivid-toned 
backgrounds in full-bleed, full-spread visuals. At first glance, this is this kind of 
construction that raises the reaction, “Oh, heck. I could do that.” The shapes are 
little more than suggestions of mass and space, and even the paper appears to be 
of humble photo copy and construction stock. But upon closer examination of 
the elegant balance of elements in the compositions, and the neat distribution of 
positive and negative space, it’s clear most of us could never do this after all. Like 
Irving Morrow, Nichols has the eye.
We reach “The End” and puzzle over how to categorize what we’ve just 
read. Was that a picture book, with each inventive spread in beautiful harmony 
the text? We certainly learned a lot, so perhaps it’s better tagged as an information 
book. But what about the intimate tone and conspicuous lack of source notes? 
Inching closer to fiction? Creative nonfiction? Surely we’ll revisit this when Blue 
Ribbons season rolls around next year. Until then, let’s just enjoy. (See p. 249 for 
publication information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
AgArd, John Book; illus. by Neil Packer. Candlewick, 2015 131p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7236-2 $15.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Guyanese-born British poet Agard tells the history of the book by taking on the 
storytelling persona of Book itself. The narrator begins the slim chronicle with the 
origins of writing, then discusses early texts on papyrus and parchment, then notes 
the development of paper and printing up through mechanization and paperbacks. 
Concluding chapters celebrate the library, discuss the history of burning books, 
and acknowledge the contribution of e-books to the great tradition of reading. First 
published in the U.K., this is a genial social history rather than an encyclopedic 
chronicle: Agard describes epochs without mentioning their dates, but he conjures a 
vivid, intriguingly detailed picture of the way the book and its social and economic 
meaning have transformed over the millennia. It’s an approach that’s got an old-
fashioned charm but a contemporary appreciation of narrative voice, and the book 
covers a surprising amount of technical, economic, and cultural change in a highly 
accessible format. Brief chapters and airy layout add to the appeal, while the tone 
and rhythm make the text suitable for reading aloud. Packer’s clever monochromatic 
January 2016 • 241
art includes decorative spot art, ornamental borders, and informative multi-step 
diagrams (the exploration of how sheepskin becomes parchment is particularly 
compact) that remains a spare and supportive partner to the text. This will have 
an easy place in library lessons, and it will also engage the youngsters who want 
nonfiction to read like a story. Relevant quotations and poems, from historically 
and globally diverse sources, are interspersed with the main narrative; a brief list 
of sources is appended.  DS
Arnold, MArshA diAne Lost. Found; illus. by Matthew Cordell. Porter/Roar-
ing Brook, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-62672-017-6 $16.99  
R* 4-6 yrs
In this picture book with only two words of text, a big honey-colored bear plodding 
through a snowy landscape unwittingly drops his long red scarf (“Lost”). It’s picked 
up by a pair of raccoons (“Found”), who play tug of war with the item and then get 
distracted by a snowball fight and run off, leaving the scarf behind (“Lost”). And so 
it goes, as a beaver, weasel, fox, trio of mice, etc. find the dropped item, play with 
it, and then move on. When the scarf springs free and flies to the ground in front 
of all the animals, a frenzy of possessiveness means they each battle to claim the 
item (“Found”), leading to its complete unraveling (“Lost”). Fortunately, kindly 
Bear enlists the animals in a reknitting effort, and they create a scarf just right for 
everybody to share around the campfire circle over marshmallows and cocoa. The 
limited text makes this a breeze for both reading aloud and novice reading alone, 
and the endless stream of animals, most of them mischievously finding a way to turn 
the scarf into a rowdy outdoor game, are gleeful kid proxies. Cordell’s scribbly, rapid 
lines have a Quentin Blake flair, and they imbue his simple landscapes (a few green 
watercolor trees and earth-toned animals are enough to make a winter wonderland 
against which the red scarf stands out brilliantly) with a frantic energy suitable to 
the tale of overexcited and forgetful critters. This would be a funny complement to 
“The Mitten” (such as Aylesworth and McClintock’s clever version, BCCB 1/10) 
or just a lively consolation for winter’s many missing accessories.  DS
BAng, Molly When Sophie’s Feelings Are Really, Really Hurt; written and illus. by 
Molly Bang. Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2015 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-545-78831-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
Sophie, of When Sophie Gets Angry—Really, Really Angry (BCCB 4/99), returns 
with a new predicament. When Sophie’s teacher asks the class to each paint a tree 
that is special to them, Sophie paints her beloved beech tree—but the tree’s actual 
colors don’t convey the feeling the tree gives Sophie. Sophie therefore paints the 
tree a vivid turquoise, adding an orange sky and chartreuse leaves because they look 
good with the turquoise and capture the happiness she wants to express. Then a 
classmate criticizes her picture—“We’re supposed to paint a REAL tree, Sophie. 
You did it WRONG”—and suddenly Sophie is not only sad but also ashamed of 
her picture. Her understanding teacher comes to the rescue, asking just the right 
questions and validating Sophie’s approach to the project; that moment coupled 
with a visit to her beech tree at book’s end offers a balm to Sophie’s tumultuous 
day. This isn’t as taut and imaginative as Bang’s previous title about Sophie, but 
the story does successfully illustrate the emotional experience of feeling criticized, 
242 • The BulleTin
and Bang’s direct, sensitive approach to the topic will make it a useful tool for both 
classrooms and families. Primary-graders will easily sympathize with and relate to 
Sophie’s circumstances, and the text provides both kids and adults with a helpful 
dialogue model for discussing future incidents. Bang’s bold art draws kids into the 
emotional center of the story—a diagonally skewed perspective on the scene of 
Sophie’s initial hurt is particularly effective. Thick, saturated paint in vivid colors 
and vibrantly red linework are eye-catching, and the multicultural cast adds to the 
book’s appeal and usefulness. This is likely to join its predecessor in becoming a 
classroom and family staple.  JH
BeAn, JonAthAn This Is My Home, This Is My School; written and illus. by Jonathan 
Bean. Farrar, 2015 48p
ISBN 978-0-374-38020-5 $18.99  
R 5-8 yrs
A homeschooled young boy introduces readers to the ways in which his house 
(that resembles the house in Bean’s Building Our House, BCCB 2/13) is both home 
and classroom to his family: “See, this is my mom and my sisters. And these,” he 
says as he gestures to the same people, “are my classmates and my teacher.” The 
family’s “classroom” is a cheerfully chaotic living room, filled with plants, books, 
art supplies, pets, a woodstove, and a lot of activity—but the kids also learn in the 
basement, the kitchen, and the great outdoors. Particularly buoyant is the spread 
about art class in which the brief, simple text (“This is our art room. This is the 
world!”) is stunningly amplified by a spacious depiction of a cloud-studded sky 
bordered by a strip of landscape featuring the boy, his family, other students, and 
an art teacher instructing in plein air fashion. Bean certainly paints an appealing 
picture of what homeschooling can be at its best, and his note at the book’s end 
describes his own homeschool experience, complete with youthful photos. The 
art here is looser, and sometimes chaotically so, than Bean’s previous outings (The 
Big Snow, BCCB 11/13) but overall the lively figures and detailed backgrounds 
are joyfully engaging. The simple text and large size would make this an effective 
addition to a school-themed storytime, as well as a useful title for library collections 
and both home and public schools.  JH
Beck, W. h. Glow: Animals with Their Own Night-Lights; illus. by W. H. Beck 
and photographs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-544-41666-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. K-4
Too often the more dazzling nature photographs are reserved for readers in middle 
grades and above. With this dual layered text, Beck invites very young listeners to 
enjoy the stunning view as they learn the rudiments of bioluminescence. The book 
begins with a simple definition of bioluminescence (and a helpful pronunciation 
note for young readers). Beck then offers a spare line or two of large, bold text across 
the top of each page or spread (“They glow to find a friend”) and supplements it 
with a brief paragraph in smaller typeface identifying a featured creature and how 
glowing works to its advantage (“Lanternfish find other lanternfish with the lights 
on their sides. Bioluminescence is the most widely used form of communication on 
the planet”). The photographs, set against black backgrounds, are mainly dramatic 
close-ups of individual animals, but several are larger scenes as notable for their 
artistry as their information. Thumbnail drawings that zero in on the site of each 
January 2016 • 243
creature’s glow are included, along with a bibliography. Beck notes that scientists 
do not understand how and why bioluminescence functions with every species, and 
this little touch of mystery will add to the subject’s overall charm.  EB
Bennett, Jenn The Anatomical Shape of a Heart. Feiwel, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-250-06645-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Bex Adams has an unusual and very definite career goal: she wants to do medical 
illustration, the more precise the better, which means that her ideal subject would 
be a cadaver from the Willed Body lab at the hospital where her mom works. At 
the hospital, she exchanges sparks with a delicious, witty, persistent boy, but Bex 
and Jack have some negotiating to do on their way to a relationship. Bex has plans, 
but Jack has secrets, and every time Bex thinks she’s figured one out, another pops 
up. Nothing he reveals changes her mind, though, and their simmering attraction 
goes from zero to all the way as fast as Jack’s vintage Corvette. Their snappy dialogue 
is preternaturally witty—think John Green—and Bex’s inner thoughts have that 
consistently glib, urbane quality mixed with sparkling description that bookish 
types wish was the kind of narration running through their heads all the time. So 
no social awkwardness here, some frank but poetic fantasies, and lots of steamy 
hopes and dreams that pay off in a big way, with Bex’s interest in literally examining 
humans, including herself, a persistent undercurrent. Interestingly textured side 
characters interrupt and then fill in the gaps between romantic moments—Bex’s 
gay bad-boy brother and the man who reforms him, her hip but flawed mom still 
stinging from the betrayal of her buttoned-down father, and Jack’s schizophrenic 
sister and powerful politician father round out the worlds these two teens have to 
bring together to get to their very, very happy ending.  KC
Bird, FAye My Second Life. Farrar, 2016 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-374-34886-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Ana feels as though she is living a lie: she knows that she is really 
Emma, who died at twenty-two and reappeared as baby Ana six years later. When 
she meets an elderly woman named Frances, a flood of memories returns; Ana 
knows that Frances’ daughter drowned and that nine-year-old Emma was some-
how involved if not responsible. The problem is that she can’t remember exactly 
what happened on the night in question. This one gap in her memory drives the 
mystery here and keeps her returning to visit Frances even though Frances is cruel 
and abusive, clearly blaming Ana for her daughter’s death. While the premise here 
is intriguing, there are too many gaps in logic, and both Frances and Ana’s parents 
accept her reincarnation with implausible alacrity. This blurring out of details from 
ages nine to twenty-two in Emma’s life makes for efficient storytelling but lacks the 
world building that might make Ana’s present situation more engaging, especially 
when readers are asked to believe she is experiencing the anxiety of first love for 
the second time. Nonetheless, it’s a taut, stylish narrative that explores the effects 
of relayed guilt through an original framework; fans of domestic mystery may find 
it intriguing if not fully satisfying.  KC
244 • The BulleTin
BlAckFord, cheryl Lizzie and the Lost Baby. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2016 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-544-57099-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
After being forced to evacuate their urban home due to Germany’s World War II 
bombing of Great Britain, ten-year-old Lizzie and her brother end up in the York-
shire countryside with a grump of a woman named Madge and her silent, distant 
sister Elsie. Meanwhile, Elijah, whose Gypsy family is camped out in the surround-
ing forest, unwillingly leaves his baby sister in a meadow after being threatened by 
an older man of his clan. Lizzie finds the baby and brings her home, and suddenly 
Elsie is well, believing the baby to be the child she lost a year ago. Elijah and his 
family desperately search for his sister and Lizzie knows the infant belongs to them, 
but Madge and the other adults have decided the child is better off with Elsie than 
those “lazy thieves.” The focus of the chapters vary between Lizzie and Elijah, but 
Lizzie is by far the stronger character: pragmatic and with a strong sense of right and 
wrong, Lizzie pretty quickly comes to the decision to somehow get the baby back 
to her mother, despite the wrath Lizzie will likely incur from Madge and perhaps 
the whole town. Elijah is less developed as a character, and his motivation for leav-
ing his baby sister—the event on which the whole book centers—strains credulity. 
However, the prose is precise, direct, and accessible, vividly calling up the drizzly 
fog and green pastures of the countryside without falling victim to overwrought 
descriptions. Lizzie’s questioning of the decision-making of the adults around her 
will likely appeal to young readers learning that being grown up does not necessarily 
translate to being wise.  KQG 
BrAcken, AlexAndrA Passenger. Hyperion, 2016 [496p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-1577-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-1950-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Seventeen-year-old orphan Etta Spencer is shocked to discover she is the last of 
one of four families with the power to time travel. Now she finds herself aboard a 
merchant vessel in 1776, sailing toward a meeting with the families’ ruthless leader. 
There she’s given an ultimatum: recover a treasure hidden by her mother or be 
trapped forever outside her own time. Meanwhile, ship’s captain Nicholas Carter 
is fighting to break ties with the vicious time-traveling Ironwood family but agrees 
to take on one last job for them: helping Etta succeed in her quest. Soon the two 
are jumping from Revolutionary War New York to 1940s London to seventeenth-
century Damascus, all while dodging Ironwood spies and fighting their growing 
attraction to each other. Readers will come for the adventure, stay for the romantic 
tension, and be equally pleased with both. The dual narrative also contributes to 
the novel’s emotional depth, allowing Nicholas to emerge as more than just another 
handsome hero, even as Etta remains the conventional shy heroine pulled from her 
shell. Replete with historical details, this novel is a worthy addition to the growing 
list of time-travel adventure/romance novels and high-stakes cross-continent treasure 
hunts. A series of shocking twists near the end sets up planned sequels that readers 
will wish they could travel into the future to read.  AM
January 2016 • 245
BrAMBles, lindsAy FrAncis Becoming Darkness. Switch, 2015 [496p]
ISBN 978-1-63079-017-2 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 9-12
What if World War II ended because of germ warfare that turned almost everyone 
into vampires and, in the ensuing chaos, the Third Reich took over the world? 
Sophie can attest to the fact that the answer is that everything sort of sucks. Her 
life is severely restricted on a single island dedicated to housing Immune humans 
who resist the vampire taint, although she is still secretly dating a vampire. If it 
weren’t for the fact that Immune blood was fatal to vampires, it’s unlikely a truce 
would have ever happened, but it’s a cold peace at best, and Sophie is well aware she 
is meant to be upping the human population as much as possible, not consorting 
with the enemy. When it comes out that “her” vampire actually also romanced her 
mother and grandmother, the romance becomes even more complicated (and also 
pretty skeevy), but Sophie’s not willing to give up on what she considers to be true 
love, notwithstanding secret vampire overlords, dying family members, and bizarre 
secret plots. There’s less Nazi presence than one might expect, but romance buffs 
will find this hot, seemingly fated love to be pretty swoonworthy, and as that’s the 
bulk of the lengthy novel, there’s plenty of it over which to swoon.  AS
BroWn, JenniFer Shade Me. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2016 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232443-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232445-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Eighteen-year-old misfit Nikki Kill is surprised to be the called to the emergency 
room for wealthy, popular Peyton Hollis, who has been beaten unconscious. At first 
curious to know why hers was the only contact in Peyton’s phone, Nikki quickly 
finds herself drawn into the mystery behind Peyton’s attack, using her synesthesia, 
which causes her to see colors around people and letters, to piece together clues 
Peyton left behind. Her investigation uncovers connections to drug gangs, prosti-
tution rings, and a host of likely suspects, until the only things standing between 
her and a closed case seem to be a blinding attraction to a lead suspect, Peyton’s 
brother Dru, and the interference of young police detective Chris Martinez, who 
wants Nikki off the case for good. Despite tension-building close calls and fight 
scenes, the underlying mystery here is lackluster, with a glacial pace and implausible 
leaps of logic. Romantic elements are equally uneven; the lusty chemistry with Dru 
may be spelled out in colorful detail, but sparks with detective Martinez produce 
more real heat. Still, Nikki is an interesting protagonist, not just for her synesthesia 
and mixed-martial arts skills, but because she’s not a gifted detective. As likely to 
destroy evidence as she is to uncover it, she’s endearingly heedless with a careless 
confidence, and her tenacity may earn respect. Fortunately, this is just the first of 
several planned adventures for Nikki Kill, giving readers reason to hope that she’ll 
only get better with time.  AM 
Buckley-Archer, lindA The Many Lives of John Stone. Simon, 2015 529p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2637-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2639-8 $10.99  
R Gr. 9-12
A British teen named Spark stumbles into an internship that will change her life 
forever in this lengthy, thoughtful examination of what it is like to live for centuries. 
246 • The BulleTin
Spark is told that her job is to organize some old journals, but it’s clear there is 
some weird stuff going on at the mansion where she works, and the three people 
who live there all seem bizarrely old-fashioned and secretive. It turns out that John 
Stone, her employer, is 350 years old or so and was a confidant of Louis XIV. His 
worries about his failing health and efforts to put everything in place before the 
death he believes is coming are compelling, and the journal entries from his time at 
Versailles are captivating, carefully researched historical fiction. Indeed, those almost 
become a separate book within this volume, detailing court intrigues, forbidden 
romances, and political wrangling set within lush descriptions of Versailles in the 
late 1600s. It’s a lot of book, but it comes together well, and if there are slightly 
overwrought conversational declarations on occasion, it’s understandable since the 
protagonists are a dramatic teenager and three people who came of age during a 
time when language was used much differently. Historical fiction fans who enjoy 
some supernatural elements in the mix will likely be well pleased.  AS
BuitrAgo, JAiro Two White Rabbits; tr. from the Spanish by Elisa Amado; illus. 
by Rafael Yockteng. Groundwood, 2015 52p
ISBN 978-1-55498-741-2 $18.95 
 R 7-10 yrs
“When we travel,” says the young narrator, “I count what I see.” As she and her 
father make what seem to be several attempts at a border crossing, they traverse 
a river, ride through a desert atop a freight train along with a multitude of other 
people, and bounce around in the back of a truck, while she counts other people 
and watches the clouds. When she meets a boy along her travels, he gives her a 
box with two white rabbits, which travel with the girl and her father—at least for 
a while. The matter-of-factness of the child narration is poignant as are the expres-
sions and body language of the girl and her father; Dad is wary and becomes more 
rumpled and exhausted as their journey progresses, while the girl is often joyful 
and awed, if occasionally confused (“‘Where are we going?’ I ask sometimes, but 
no one answers”). Digital illustrations employ watercolor-type hues textures with 
black and self-colored crosshatching; intimate domestic scenes with dad and daugh-
ter contrast with the big sky above and desert behind. Subtle details (rusty spots 
on the train, the casual brutality of a soldier) add authenticity without cluttering 
the scenes. The non-literal implications of the dog who accompanies the pair and 
the rabbits eventually released into the desert might go over the heads of younger 
readers, but the picture of the father and daughter’s life in motion, stopping only 
because soldiers or circumstance interrupts their journey, is keenly delineated. A 
closing note from IBBY president and Groundwood publisher Patricia Aldana 
contextualizes the story and the problem of child refugees. Pair this with Tonatiuh’s 
Pancho Rabbit and the Coyotes (BCCB 7/13) to explore the realities and trials of 
the migrant experience.  DS
cerrito, AngelA The Safest Lie. Holiday House, 2015 180p
ISBN 978-0-8234-3310-0 $16.95  
R Gr. 3-5
One day she is Anna Bauman, a Jewish nine-year-old living in the Warsaw ghetto 
with her parents, subsisting on smuggled morsels of food and memories of life 
before the Nazi invasion. The next she is Anna Karwolska, Catholic orphan, an 
identity given to her by the resistance fighters who smuggle her to an orphanage 
and eventually to a family. Though she tries to be one Anna during the day and 
January 2016 • 247
the other at night in her head, the same journey that ultimately saves her life also 
takes her farther and farther from her Jewish roots. Anna, brave and serious, makes 
a compelling heroine; her narration shows her sadness, confusion, and fear in a way 
that reveals her strength of character. Her narration gives voice to an important 
element of the Holocaust, when parents surrendered their children to strangers in 
hopes that it might save the children’s lives. Full of feeling and insight, as well as 
fascinating detail, this novel is as much about the loss of identity as the loss of life. 
Give this to those history buffs ready for a powerful story less commonly told.  AA 
chilton, AndreW s. The Goblin’s Puzzle: Being the Adventures of a Boy with No 
Name and Two Girls Called Alice; illus. by Jensine Eckwall. Knopf, 2016 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52071-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52070-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52072-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
If you’re going to steal a princess as a power bid, best to make sure the dragon help-
ing you understands that it is possible for there to be more than one girl with the 
princess’ name of Alice. While the dragon is mistakenly stealing the non-princess 
Alice, a nameless enslaved boy finds himself presented with the chance to escape his 
master, and he flees. He quickly winds up with a traveling companion, a brilliantly 
developed character who is a trickster, a genius, and also a goblin. The goblin and 
the unnamed boy end up on a heroic quest to save both Alices (Princess Alice has 
now been stolen as well) and ultimately a whole kingdom as the power play of a 
dastardly duke goes into effect. There’s a fantastic mix of feudal sensibilities mixed 
in with some contemporary characters (the Alices in particular are sharply mod-
ern in their crisp assumptions about their own power and worth), and the result 
is a happy mess of historical fantasy with dashes of modern realism. Amid all of 
the questing and saving and trickster plots there is a solid message about brains 
trumping brawn, and about how being smart can mean all sorts of things other 
than being formally educated.  AS
coAkley, lenA Worlds of Ink and Shadow. Amulet/Abrams, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-1034-6 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61312-630-1 $15.54
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
In real life, Branwell, Charlotte, Emily, and Anne Brontë escaped their rural seclu-
sion and their grief over the deaths of their mother and two older sisters by filling 
page after page with the exploits of romantic heroes and heroines in two fictional 
worlds, Verdopolis and Gondal. In this novel, Coakley makes their escape literal by 
imagining that Charlotte and Branwell found a way to cross over into Verdopolis, a 
glittering city of dashing dukes, melancholy wives, and dangerous rogues, and have 
been doing so regularly. Emily discovers their secret and insists that they take her 
and Anne with them, even as now nineteen-year-old Charlotte is trying to figure 
out a way to shut Verdopolis down for good because the characters have taken to 
haunting both her and Branwell in their home. When Emily makes a reckless bargain 
with the demonic force that granted Charlotte and Branwell’s childhood wish, it’s 
up to sensible, timid Anne to save her siblings from their own worst excesses. The 
Faustian fantasy plays out against the backdrop of what were likely real emotional 
248 • The BulleTin
quandaries of the siblings; in addition to their lingering grief over their sisters’ 
tragic deaths, for instance, Charlotte chafes against the limitations imposed by her 
gender, and Branwell is equally oppressed by the expectations laid on him as the 
only boy in the family. Coakley develops her characters according to what is known 
about their real-life models’ personalities, activities, and inclinations, weaving in 
local folklore and drawing readers into a multilayered Gothic drama in which they 
will recognize the seeds of both Jane Eyre and Wuthering Heights; a brief afterword 
indicates the extent of her borrowings. Recommend this to existing Brontë fans as 
well as those headed in that direction.  KC
colFer, eoin Imaginary Fred; illus. by Oliver Jeffers. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2015 48p
ISBN 978-0-06-237955-9 $18.99  
R Gr. 2-3
Fred has always been a loyal imaginary friend, supporting the real children to whom 
he’s attached until they outgrow him and find a human friend of their own. When 
he’s assigned to a boy named Sam, it’s a perfect match, and he thinks this might 
be the friend he can finally stay with forever. When Sam makes friends with a girl 
named Sammi, Fred’s sure it’s time for him to disappear again, but when Sammi 
turns up with her own imaginary friend, Frieda, in tow, a whole new vista opens 
up for Fred. While the plot has the heft of spun gossamer, there’s a sophisticated 
touch to the whimsy that will appeal to kids of an age to read the story on their 
own. Jeffers’ art is, for most of the book, a festival of curly, individual linework 
with Fred appearing in a vivid blue halftone pattern that’s the only color; it’s a 
witty visual conceit, and the illustrations in general have a spare, off-kilter charm. 
Imaginary friends are clearly having a moment just now (see Santat’s Beekle, BCCB 
6/14, Cuevas’ Confessions of an Imaginary Friend: A Memoir by Jacques Papier, 
BCCB 12/15, Harrold’s The Imaginary, BCCB 7/15), and this title is an amusingly 
understated exploration of the concept for kids just beginning to look behind the 
imaginary curtain.  DS
doWnhAM, Jenny Unbecoming. Fickling/Scholastic, 2016 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-90717-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-90732-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Katie took a chance when she kissed her best friend, Esme, and it may have ruined 
her social life. She’s got more important things on her mind, though, when her 
grandmother, Mary, moves in with the family. Katie’s mother, Caroline, is furious, 
having no desire to care for her abandoning mother as dementia sets in. For Katie, 
though, caring for her grandmother gives her an excuse to avoid her school friends 
and their vicious comments. It also presents her with a mystery, as she records Mary’s 
stories before they’re gone for good and tries to help her find the moments in her 
past that might heal her relationship with Caroline. The narrative shifts between 
Katie’s and her grandmother’s perspectives, and between Mary’s troubled past as 
a beautiful, sexually active teenager in 1950s Britain and her confused present as 
a woman haunted by past decisions; it is through Mary’s stories that Katie finds 
the strength to take some risks of her own, eventually coming to embrace her 
sexuality and her right to be happy on her own terms. Rigid Caroline is far easier 
to understand than to like, lending an easy credibility to Katie’s fierce desire to 
January 2016 • 249
take Mary’s side right from the beginning. The narration gains richness from the 
author’s deft portrait of the characters’ limited self-awareness, with gaps in memory 
and stumblings toward insight authentically rendered. The multigenerational story 
of women should appeal to fans of Doyle’s A Greyhound of a Girl (BCCB 6/12), 
and readers will appreciate this family drama that encompasses both pain and 
understanding.  KC
durst, sArAh Beth The Girl Who Could Not Dream. Clarion, 2015 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-544-46497-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-544-46499-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Sophie knows her parents must keep their lives very private because of their prac-
tice of collecting and selling dreams. Her only friend has been Monster, a creature 
rescued from a nightmare who is fiercely protective of Sophie. When her parents go 
missing, her relative isolation becomes a problem, but luckily she has recently made 
a new friend in Ethan, a boy who who seems to take all of the dream exchange/
parents kidnapped business in stride. The sinister Mr. Nightmare, her parents’ 
kidnapper, has a fell purpose planned for the collected bad dreams, and he’s will-
ing to do whatever it takes to achieve it; Sophie, however, is determined to save 
the day, however slim the odds. Consistent humor makes it clear that Sophie will 
come out of this safe, if a bit emotionally battered. The sweet conclusion matches 
the warm tone, avoiding treacle while also offering readers a clear resolution to the 
most painful of the disasters that seemed to be permanent but which, delightfully, 
turned out to be reversible. Young fantasy fans will find much to appreciate in this 
unusual look at the power of dreams, and what can happen when you are one of 
the rare few who can bring them to life.  AS
eggers, dAve This Bridge Will Not Be Gray; illus. by Tucker Nichols. McSwee-
ney’s, 2015 [104p]
ISBN 978-1-940450-47-6 $19.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 2-6
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 239, for review.
escoFFier, MichAël Where’s the BaBOOn?; illus. by Kris Di Giacomo. En-
chanted Lion, 2015 34p
ISBN 978-1-59270-189-6 $17.95  
R 5-9 yrs
This follow-up to Escoffier’s witty Take Away the A (BCCB 1/15) presents another 
playful language arts game. This time a crowd of animals is attending school, and 
each spread of their activities asks a question ending in a word that also contains 
the answer: “Who is the headmaster?” reveals a presiding hamster, for instance, 
and “Who is the clown?” captions a spread where the cow gleefully juggles her 
mouse classmates under the stern eye of the ostrich teacher. The letters from the 
hidden word appear in a contrasting red, standing out easily amid the black text; 
additionally, the illustrations offer clues, sometimes overt (the pig stands in front 
of his painting) and sometimes teasing (only the furry ears and tail of the cat are 
visible behind the castle) that help viewers decode the answer. Mixed-media art is a 
blend of childlike drafting, sophisticated palette, and amusing detail (the mice are 
250 • The BulleTin
particularly entertaining to watch); there’s even a modest trajectory to the day in 
the visuals, as critter pupils arrive, engage in classroom activities, and finally gather 
together for a birthday party, where the baboon bursts out of the box to surprise 
everyone. The Escoffier and Di Giacomo team are proving to be reliable literary 
gamesters, and kids tickled by their last outing will relish this return trip.  DS
Fine, sArAh The Impostor Queen. McElderry, 2016 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4190-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4192-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Elli knew she was going to be the next Valtia, a magical queen, someday, but she’s 
desperately unprepared when that day comes years earlier than she expected. Ad-
ditionally, it’s always a powerfully magic woman who inherits when the previous 
Valtia dies, but Elli doesn’t seem to have any power at all. The elders intend to 
slit her throat to awaken her powers, but she has objections to that plan, so she 
escapes in the night. Having been dressed, fed, trained, and coddled almost her 
whole life, Ellie is truly helpless in the wider world, and she quickly gets into 
trouble. Fortunately, she is saved, and her rescuer takes her to a small, secret village 
that will allow her to survive, learn some skills, and understand her own role in a 
world where ice and fire magic are used to good or horrifying effect. It’s a lot of 
plot, but that’s expected for the setup in the first volume of a new sequence, and 
the story is lively and eventful. Fine intriguingly constructs Elli as a narrator who 
doesn’t believe in her own agency—she acts from a core determination that she is 
fated, indeed prophesied, to play a part in changing the world. Despite this stoic 
heroism, Elli is sort of an endearing mess in her total inability to complete even 
the simplest tasks. While it doesn’t have the dash of Cashore’s Graceling Realm 
(Graceling, BCCB 1/09, etc.) trilogy, readers who appreciated those books will find 
this a similarly promising start.  AS
Fiore, kelly Thicker Than Water. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232473-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232475-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
CeCe’s life has been a downward spiral since the death of her mother. Her father 
remarried quickly, but his dream of an organic seed farm is not paying the bills, and 
her stepmother is losing patience. The real problem, though, is her brother, Cyrus. 
The family pinned their hopes on his soccer career, but when he hurt his knee, that 
pain combined with the grief of losing his mom led to an Oxycontin addiction. 
CeCe’s father refuses to acknowledge the problem, and CeCe herself gets caught up 
in selling Cyrus’ Oxy, rationalizing that the pills she steals are ones he won’t be able 
to swallow, snort, or mainline. When the worst thing happens, CeCe ends up in 
jail, convinced that she is to blame for her brother’s overdose. Alternating between 
the present and the recent past, CeCe’s story unfolds with a measure of suspense, 
but there is little opportunity for readers to see CeCe before she was sad, angry, and 
withdrawn, making her character difficult to connect with, though authentic. Once 
the climax of the story—the true nature of Cyrus’ death—is revealed at trial, it’s 
jarring to go back to the scene and enter into CeCe’s less knowing perspective, and 
there’s no corrective view offered in light of her new knowledge. The reconciliation 
January 2016 • 251
between her and her father is sweet if a little quick, given the emotional languor 
of the rest of CeCe’s narration, but readers will be glad to see some light flickering 
at the end of this very dark tunnel. An author’s note and a resource list for those 
struggling with addiction are included.  KC
gAngsei, JAn Zero Day. Hyperion, 2016 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-2226-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-2263-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
After eight years as a kidnapping victim, sixteen-year-old Addie Webster has finally 
returned to her parents and their new home, the White House. The newly restored 
First Daughter isn’t as free as she seems to be, though; she’s secretly communicat-
ing with her kidnappers, and they have her covertly infiltrating the government’s 
secure information network. Unfortunately, faking a happy homecoming turns 
out to be harder than she realized, especially in the face of national scrutiny, her 
parents’ awkward attempts to reconnect, and the unexpected arrival of her closest 
childhood playmate, Darrow Ferguson, who is secretly spying on his old friend. 
The already fraught mixture of child abduction and domestic cyberterrorism gets 
added levels of drama in this political thriller, as family, friendship, and romantic 
subplots complicate Addie’s plans and undermine her confidence in her quest. 
That last is especially likely to please readers who expect a touch of romance, and 
Darrow balances out the emotionally distant Addie who, as a double agent and a 
victim of Stockholm syndrome, is often difficult to connect with. Of course, the 
real draw is the gripping intrigue, elements of which remain unresolved at the end, 
so readers who enjoy an edge-of-the-seat read with a real-world feel and human 
complexities can happily anticipate future adventures for Addie and Darrow.  AM 
goeBel, Jenny Fortune Falls. Scholastic, 2016 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-81190-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-81192-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Eleven-year-old Sadie is still an Undetermined, who hasn’t yet taken the test that 
will define her as either Lucky or Unlucky; given her track record, though, it doesn’t 
look like she’ll be passing. Her best friend tries to help by giving her a telescope, but 
Sadie promptly breaks the mirror inside of it, essentially dooming herself forever 
(since if she doesn’t pass the test, there’s no retaking it). Thankfully for the reader, 
Sadie’s not just going to slump her way through the remaining novel, accepting her 
fate as an Unlucky who is a burden at best and life-threatening curse at worse. She 
decides to make her own darn luck, and she won’t give up until she saves herself 
and her Unlucky peers. The book veers into some pretty heavy territory on occasion 
(Sadie’s dad’s death, for instance), but the conclusion is warm and satisfying, and it 
gracefully imparts the lesson that no one is fated to a purely lucky or unlucky life, 
even if you are currently on a really good or crummy streak.  AS
252 • The BulleTin
goodMAn, susAn e. The First Step: How One Girl Put Segregation on Trial; illus. 
by E. B. Lewis. Bloomsbury, 2016 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3739-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3741-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-10 yrs
Over a century before Ruby Bridges marched her six-year-old feet into an all-white 
first-grade classroom in Louisiana, four-year-old Sarah Roberts enrolled in an all-
white school in Boston, which kept its schools legally segregated. When she was, 
inevitably, evicted from the classroom, Sarah’s parents brought suit against the city 
of Boston. Attorney Robert Morris, the nation’s second black lawyer and the first to 
file a lawsuit, teamed with white abolitionist lawyer Charles Sumner to argue that 
Roberts’ attendance at the school was supported by the city’s rule that “students 
should go to schools nearest their homes”; Sarah had to pass multiple schools in order 
to attend the nearest African-American school. Morris and Sumner lost the trial, 
but the ire and debate they raised took a turn toward justice five years later, when 
Boston voluntarily desegrated its schools. With little known about Sarah herself, 
Goodman focuses her text on the issues, while the task of personalizing Sarah falls 
to Lewis, who effectively tucks the tiny girl into classroom and courtroom scenes 
that nearly swallow her up, effectively establishing her vulnerability. Goodman’s 
real achievement here, though, is in the end matter, in which she not only expands 
on the lives of the major players but also talks at length of her research process 
and the educated guesses she made to fill in Sarah’s reactions. Although the first 
impulse will be to put this story to curricular use in civil rights units, this could be 
of excellent service as an investigation into how a history book gets written.  EB
grey, Mini Space Dog; written and illus. by Mini Grey. Knopf, 2015 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51059-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51058-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51060-7 $10.99  
R* Gr. 2-4
The irrepressible Mini Grey (author/illustrator of Traction Man Is Here, BCCB 5/05, 
etc.) returns with yet another ebullient picture book–format adventure in this tale 
of intrepid hero Space Dog. After a busy day solving galactic problems in the Dairy 
Quadrant, Space Dog saves an Astrocat from certain doom, despite the fact that 
“Astrocats and Space Dogs are sworn enemies”; sharing space on the S. S. Kennel, 
the two find the experience rather cozy and team up for further adventures. When 
they discover a Moustronaut in trouble, they quickly come to the rescue, despite the 
fact that—of course—“Moustronauts and Astrocats are sworn enemies”; now there’s 
a third resident of the S. S. Kennel and player in the nightly games of Dogopoly. 
Nobody does campy fun for the elementary set like Grey; the tale is redolent of 
the joy of the old serials and of fannishly affectionate satire (adults will particularly 
appreciate the subtext about the cheese planet that, like so much enjoyable schlock, 
is “collapsing under the weight of its own cheesiness”). Opportunities for comic 
melodrama are rife in both the main narrative and the speech bubbled dialogue, 
and the conclusion, where the three decide to keep journeying rather than return 
to a place where they have to be sworn enemies, is crisply executed yet endearing. 
Frenetic full-bleed art in watercolor and colored pencil neatly orchestrates the 
madcap proceedings, incorporating graphic-novel-style sequences, event-crowded 
spreads, and sweeping vistas. Even the endpapers contain entertaining maps and 
January 2016 • 253
photo galleries. Fans of Traction Man will definitely be ready to jet off with this 
intrepid trio, and newbies will want to hop aboard.  DS
griFFin, Adele 
Oona Finds an Egg; illus. by Mike Wu. 
Scholastic, 
2016 [160p] (The Oodlethunks)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-73279-6 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-73280-2 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 2-4
Oona desperately wants a pet, but her young brother Bonk is allergic to most of the 
creatures that populate Woggle, a vaguely prehistoric land of cave-type people. So 
when Oona finds an abandoned egg on Mount Urp, she brings it home and insists 
that she should at least be able to care for it until it hatches. She lovingly makes a 
nest for Egg and becomes preoccupied with what Egg will become. When Egg goes 
missing, a devastated Oona suspects that the new friendship between Bonk and 
the local bully may have something to do with the disappearance of her pet. The 
mysterious contents of the egg drive the plot along, but really it’s the small injec-
tions of modernity that provide the humor: Oona’s dad, for example, is an aspiring 
chef who insists his gourmet farm-to-slab foods are ahead of their time, Mom is an 
ad exec working on the “It’s Not Just a Wheel” campaign, and Oona is reminded 
constantly by both parents to feel her feelings. The dialogue is sometimes forced, 
though, and while the sibling relationship is authentic in its rivalry, it’s also wildly 
simplified in its happy resolution. Black and white illustrations alternate between 
Disney-like figures and primitive cave drawings. Obviously referencing The Flint-
stones, this will appeal to the kids who have been introduced to that cartoon by 
their parents/grandparents and will get a kick out of the modern updates. Griffin 
provides a useful author’s note to separate prehistorical facts from fiction.  KQG 
hAle, kAthleen Nothing Bad Is Going to Happen. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221121-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221124-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Kippy Bushman’s first foray into teen sleuthing (No One Else Can Have You, BCCB 
1/14) did not go well. Unfortunately, when Kippy’s boyfriend is found unconscious 
due to an apparent suicide attempt, a theory Kippy doesn’t buy, she has to put her 
detective hat back on, even as she deals with the panic attacks left from her last 
crack at crime fighting. She enlists the help of Libby, school beauty/evangelical 
Christian/Kippy’s maybe new friend, and Rosa, Kippy’s former anger management 
instructor. The bodies begin to pile up (again), and in a rather gruesome fashion 
(again), and Kippy’s sure the original murderer is behind it, even though he’s cur-
rently in prison. The razor-sharp dark humor that permeated the first book is muted 
here, and probably rightly so: Kippy is clearly traumatized and her formerly witty 
narration is now weighted with anxiety. Libby and Rosa, then, are left to inject 
comic relief (or maybe just relief) that contrasts with disturbing scenes, such as 
one in which Kippy is threatened with sexual assault via deer antler by a deranged 
classmate. Indeed, most of the male characters in the book are either deceiving, 
threatening, or attempting to protect the girls, prompting Kippy and Libby to have 
some useful, if unsubtle, discussions about feminism (gore aside, it’s refreshing to 
254 • The BulleTin
see a YA book that not only mentions the Bechdel test but passes it with flying 
colors). Like its predecessor, this has a Fargo-esque feel, pairing stark violence with 
quirky humor for a heady mix, and the bloody concoction of mystery and laughs 
will satisfy fans of the previous book.  KQG
heApy, teresA Very Little Cinderella; illus. by Sue Heap. Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-544-28223-0 $16.99  
R 3-5 yrs
In this take on the classic tale, Cinderella is a toddler with toddler inclinations: 
when the Ugly Sisters head out to a party and leave Very Little Cinderella with 
the Fairy Godmother babysitter, wee Cindy is having none of it: “I not stay here! I 
want to go toooo!” The Fairy Godmother obligingly escorts Very Little Cinderella 
to the ball, but at midnight a reluctantly departing Cinderella discovers that she 
has, tragically, lost her “lello boot.” Fortunately, the next day brings a Very Little 
Prince (“with his mommy”) to Cinderella’s door with the returned boot, and the 
two mix and match boots, have a playdate, and play “happily ever after.” This new 
entry in Heapy and Heap’s Very Little folktale series (Very Little Red Riding Hood, 
BCCB 10/14) demonstrates that toddler obstinacy is a surprisingly effective way 
of empowering a traditional heroine as well as an amusing addition to an old story. 
Young folktale aficionados will delight in noting the divergence from the tale they 
know, while adults will recognize the authenticity of the toddler response. Heap’s 
line and watercolor art has a festive sturdiness appropriate to the protagonist, and 
the airy backgrounds keep the proceedings orderly but still informal. This would 
be an excellent candidate for sibling sharing, with each kid enjoying at their own 
level, or as a precursor to a book-themed Very Little Ball.  DS
herkert, BArBArA Sewing Stories: Harriet Powers’ Journey from Slave to Artist; 
illus. by Vanessa Brantley-Newton. Knopf, 2015 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75463-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75462-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75464-4 $10.99  
Ad Gr. 2-4
Harriet Powers, born enslaved on a Georgia plantation in 1836, turned to quiltmak-
ing after the Civil War. When a local Cotton Fair sought entries for its craft exhibit, 
Powers entered one of her story quilts, where it drew the eye of an art teacher, Jennie 
Smith. After Smith purchased the quilt and displayed it, appreciative viewers com-
missioned another quilt, which “attracted a lot of attention”; now, a century later, 
Powers is celebrated as a quilt artist. This picture book–style biography supplements 
a storytold main text (“Soon Harriet became a mama; she named her pretty baby 
Amanda”) with factual sidebars (“When Harriet and Armsted decided to marry in 
1855, they had to get permission from the slaveholder”). While some parts of her 
biography aren’t clear, the book smoothly chronicles what’s known about Powers’ 
life and interweaves quotes that add dimension. Brantley-Newton’s art effectively 
combines gouache painting with collaged elements, including incorporations of 
the quilts, but the lively mid-century retro style makes slave life and sharecropper 
poverty into airily pretty scenes, with bright-eyed cheer the norm on most figures. 
The quilts are also depicted in their current faded colors rather than in the more 
vivid tones the text makes it clear they initially possessed. This is still an inviting 
introduction for youngsters not yet ready for Lyons’ Stitching Stars (BCCB 12/93). 
January 2016 • 255
An author’s note explains more about Powers and her quilts; a photograph of the 
artist (and a note about the photograph) and a bibliography are included; a helpful 
key to the squares in each of Powers’ story quilts closes the book.  DS 
hutchinson, shAun dAvid We Are the Ants. Simon Pulse, 2016 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4963-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4965-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Henry has been periodically abducted by aliens since he was thirteen. There is a 
new twist to the usual humiliating experiments, however, when it is made clear that 
it’s up to Henry to choose whether or not to save humanity. Henry is bullied and 
miserable and actually has very little faith in humankind, so he’s pretty sure he’s 
going to just let the world end. His new boyfriend doesn’t magically fix everything, 
but having a boyfriend takes enough of the edge off the gloominess of Henry’s life 
(his home life is just as complicated and troubled as at school) to allow him to 
contemplate a future, but it’s unclear if the aliens will give him another opportunity. 
Interestingly, there’s a very real possibility that none of this is true at all, and that 
Henry is either delusional or a liar who has never been abducted. Hutchinson wisely 
keeps the truth ambiguous while also not really spending time on factuality—real 
aliens or not, Henry has to decide if the world is worth investing in. His approach 
of asking others what they would do with this choice is a useful exercise whether 
or not the fate of the world actually rests in his hands. This is a dark novel, and 
that darkness is further reinforced through the interspersed short chapters detailing 
many ways the world could actually end, but there is a careful overlay of hope that 
keeps things from becoming hopeless, no matter how bleak.  AS
JoBling, curtis Max Helsing and the Thirteenth Curse; written and illus. by Curtis 
Jobling. Viking, 2015 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-451-47479-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
As a monster hunter, Max is used to some rough days of battling creatures, but he 
is completely thrown when his thirteenth birthday suddenly seems to be “kill Max 
in horrible ways” day. It turns out that his birthday triggers a curse, and now all 
of his live-and-let-live policies about monsters might be out the window. Max is 
different than previous Helsings (a history cleverly referred to through interpolated 
journal entries) in that his priority is peaceful coexistence, but there are certainly 
plenty of creatures, like the warlock who placed the curse, that would much rather 
just destroy humanity and take over the world. Luckily, Max has a small group of 
allies who are dedicated to him, and together, they are the right mix of athleticism, 
brains, and cleverness to help him save the world, at least until the next volume. 
While the impressive diversity represented in the human characters isn’t quite ef-
fortless, the result is still important, particularly in fantasy, and the intentionality 
of the casting doesn’t detract from the fact that this is a pretty impressive crew of 
unexpected heroes with complementary strengths. The monsters are magnificent, 
representing a huge range from irksome pests to world-crushing malevolents, and 
they’re presented not only through Max’s interactions with them but also with pages 
from the annotated monster guide. Max is likable, his friends are great, and there 
is an effective mix of humor and horror—that’s plenty to keep readers looking for 
the next installment.  AS
256 • The BulleTin
Johnston, e. k. A Thousand Nights. Hyperion, 2015 325p
ISBN 978-1-4847-2227-5 $18.99  
R Gr. 9-12
A girl determined to save her beautiful sister makes sure that she takes the place 
of that sister as wife to Lo-Melkhiin, who has killed his previous 300 wives. 
The narrator, who is unnamed (indeed, no women in this book are named, in a 
subtextual commentary about women’s roles and power in this historical Middle 
Eastern setting), makes up her survival method as she goes, telling stories, using 
domestic arts and prayers to fight the evil spirit that hijacked Lo-Melkhiin’s body, 
and reminding herself that she is loved and valued, even in the face of the horror 
of her likely death. Astute readers will realize pretty quickly that this is drawing 
from The Arabian Nights, and the quiet rhythm of the story feels timeless, with 
single nights unfolding in unhurried succession. Even with the emergency of the 
protagonist’s impending murder, there are still long, boring days to get through as 
the narrator adjusts to being, essentially, a trophy wife rather than a contributing 
member of a caravan. This is an unexpected gem of a book about storytelling, 
magic, and relationships, and romance buffs in particular will find the conclusion 
immensely satisfying, as hard-won, gradual love has a chance to flourish once the 
wicked force has been defeated.  AS
kAin, JAMie Instructions for the End of the World. St. Martin’s Griffin, 
2015 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-04786-1 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-04785-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
When sixteen-year-old Nicole and her family head out to an isolated house in the 
mountains to prepare for the end of the world, she expects off-the-grid life to be 
hard. What she doesn’t expect is her Cambodian-born mother’s abrupt departure 
only days later or her father’s shocking decision to go after her. Suddenly alone with 
her rebellious sister and a dwindling food supply, Nicole tries to hold the fort as 
her father would expect but quickly finds survival on her own nearly impossible. 
Seventeen-year-old Wolf, meanwhile, is just trying to navigate life and the return of 
his addict mother in the self-sustaining commune next door. These two outsiders 
amongst outsiders are immediately drawn to each other and soon find refuge in 
a friendship and romance neither expected. Split between four distinct narrative 
voices, the novel’s introspective focus is both the source of its power and its greatest 
weakness. The honesty and insightful soul-searching is emotional, but the result 
is an awful lot of ponderous navel-gazing, often implausibly adult in nature. Also, 
while four narrative voices help to round out perspectives on surviving unstable, 
self-destructive parents, the inclusion of Nicole’s sister Isabel and Wolf’s commune-
sister Laurel sometimes serves more as a distraction. Ultimately, though, this is a 
thoughtful story of defining survival on your own terms.  AM
kelley, gretchen Superheroes Don’t Eat Veggie Burgers. Holt, 2016 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-62779-089-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Charlie’s having some seriously rough luck at the beginning of middle school—for 
instance, he was pantsed by a bully when he wasn’t wearing underwear—so when 
January 2016 • 257
a mysterious science teacher gives him a journal and suggests magical things can 
come out of it, Charlie’s game. It turns out there’s something to this whole magi-
cal journal thing: what Charlie writes about comes true, but not always with the 
results that he intended, so it’s now on him to right all the inadvertent wrongs 
that he created with his words. The presentation of the friendship between Charlie 
and his best (female) friend Franki is stellar—rich and deep, even while increas-
ingly complex because of gender and adolescence. Unfortunately, the backstory 
of the magical journal is muddy and ambiguous, and the resolution to the bully 
subplot is far too familiar. In addition, adults are conveniently present or absent 
depending on what the plot needs, and this weakens Charlie’s agency as a fixer of 
his own mess. Even with those weaknesses, this is an appealing look at the power 
of words and what can happen when you, for instance, decide to turn your pesky 
little sister into a dog.  AS
kendAll, grAce, comp. I See Reality: Twelve Short Stories about Real Life. Far-
rar, 2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30258-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Real life can be pretty sweet or a huge bummer; mostly, though, it’s a pendulum 
swing between these two extremes, if this collection is anything to go by. On the 
downside, real life is: taking scalding baths in bleach to please your germ-phobic 
mother after your father dies of AIDS; moving to Harlem after your white father 
beats up your black mother; taking on your criminal brother’s identity after he 
sacrifices himself so that you can avoid deportation back to Mexico; knowing your 
girlfriend will never forgive you even though you stood by her while she had an 
abortion. On the mostly happy side, real life is: finally managing to break up with 
a controlling boyfriend after a few false starts; figuring out that trying to be a slick 
gay stereotype doesn’t work as well as being your frumpy self; getting back together 
with your girlfriend after you’ve both overcome your addictions to Adderall; sur-
viving a school shooting and finally knowing that your girlfriend loves you; and 
making out with your best friends once you and your boyfriend come clean about 
your sexual orientations. These quick, compelling shorts present lots of discussion 
possibilities without the commitment to an extended narrative on one problem. 
The writers (Kekla Magoon, James Preller, Marcella Pixley, etc.) have all earned 
their spots in this anthology via well-received novels; each story has a distinctive 
voice and style, making the collection a great introduction to some of the stronger 
writers of contemporary realism in young adult fiction.  KC 
key, WAtt Terror at Bottle Creek. Farrar, 2016 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-374-37430-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Cort is used to terrible storms in southern Alabama, but when he and his father 
accidentally get separated (Cort’s dad goes to help his estranged wife and then 
another key adult goes to find Cort’s dad), thirteen-year-old Cort is left with two 
neighbor girls during something even bigger: a Category 3 hurricane. A series of 
disasters sends the kids out into the night, on the run from rising floodwaters and 
terrified animals; when they perch in a tree, shivering and exhausted, venomous 
snakes also start taking refuge in the branches. In the background, Key weaves in 
258 • The BulleTin
the family drama that led to Cort’s being abandoned by his earnest but short-sighted 
dad on the night of the storm, adding emotional tension to the mix. Interestingly, 
it is clear that Cort’s fury at his dad is actually what propels him through obstacles 
and allows him to keep going even when he and the girls seem like they aren’t going 
to make it. Survival and wilderness adventure buffs will rejoice at this book that is 
purely in their camp—there’s no magic or romance or fantasy here, just a kid trying 
to keep everyone alive through a couple of the worst days of his life. An author’s 
note details his own experiences with similar storms and indicates the portions of 
the novel that are researchable truth.  AS
keyser, AMBer J., ed. The V-Word: True Stories about First-Time Sex. Beyond 
Words/Simon Pulse, 2016 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58270-522-4 $19.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-58270-521-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 10-12
These seventeen memoirs about first-time sex reveal all: the desire, the emotions, the 
physical sensations, the disappointments, and, for a few, the ecstasy of doing with 
someone else what most of these teen girls, now women writers (ranging from YA 
authors to Scarleteen contributors to adult writers), had been doing with themselves 
for quite some time. There’s an expansive, questioning approach to what actually 
counts as a first time and a balance between heterosexual and queer sex, including 
one transgendered person. Most of the accounts here are written with sensitivity 
and style and sometimes considerable sensuality, and there is a strong emphasis on 
personal agency; even when the sex turned out to be a dubious choice, it was still 
owned as a choice, with only one story hinting at past abuse that is actually healed 
to some degree by a sensitive guy who wants more than just sex. Interstitial editorial 
paragraphs quilt the stories together, and the material contained in the back matter 
goes even further in addressing how girls can approach their developing sexuality 
with knowledge and purpose. A wealth of resources is provided throughout, and an 
interview with a librarian showcases YA titles that are either admirably sex-positive 
or unflinchingly honest in their portrayal of sexual violence and its consequences. 
A brief reassurance for parents is also included, although it’s debatable whether it 
will fully reassure parents who would object to this sort of book in the first place. 
Nonetheless, Keyser writes like your best girlfriend about things that even your best 
girlfriend might shy away from; readers will find solid, nonjudgmental, sex-positive 
answers to questions they may not even know how to ask.  KC 
lArson, kirBy Audacity Jones to the Rescue. Scholastic, 2016 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-84056-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-84062-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Audacity loves the library, which has been a source of comfort and knowledge to 
the eleven-year old since being deposited at Miss Maisie’s School for Wayward 
Girls following her parents’ death. The information she gleans there stokes her 
desire to see the greater world, so when a longtime benefactor to the school arrives 
looking for an orphan for a secret mission, Audie volunteers. As they journey via 
newfangled automobile from Indiana to Washington D.C., sharp Audie begins to 
suspect something nefarious at work. She doesn’t initially see how all the pieces—
January 2016 • 259
a mysterious chauffeur, a cook who requires an orphan present while she makes 
President Taft’s favorite soup—fit together, but the assistance of an uncanny cat 
and a newsboy pal and his grandfather, along with her own smarts, intuition, and 
bravery, bring all to light. Historical fiction delivered with an easy touch, this romp 
through the early twentieth century makes good use of intrigue, action, and place, 
with a touch of magic for good measure. Though there are a few twee elements, 
the likable, fittingly named Audacity charms enough to trump them; for readers 
who like their heroines observant and practical, put this in one hand and Kate 
Hannigan’s The Detective’s Assistant (BCCB 7/15) in the other.  AA
lAWrence, iAin The Skeleton Tree. Delacorte, 2016 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90395-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73378-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97489-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
This begins the way so many survival stories begin: a kid with limited outdoor 
skills (twelve-year-old narrator Chris) barely makes it out alive from a dire accident 
(here a swamped boat); the responsible adult (Chris’ uncle Jack) is gone, stranding 
him in the wilderness (uninhabited coastal Alaska). Chris isn’t alone, but he might 
as well be, since the company of the fifteen-year-old Frank, who had also been on 
the boat, is in ways worse than no company at all. Veering between total silence, 
bossiness, and verbal abuse, Frank seems to know more about their joint voyage 
with Uncle Jack than Chris does and has no intention of letting Chris in on the 
mystery. But staying alive is, of course, the first order of business, and as the boys 
exploit the upstream salmon run for sustenance and an abandoned cabin for shelter, 
Chris finds companionship with a raven that, for its own inscrutable reasons, is 
clearly more comfortable with him than with Frank. Lawrence layers mystery upon 
mystery, teasing readers with the possibility that something supernatural might be 
going on, and he steadily drops clues about the familial relationship that is Frank’s 
to know and Chris’ to find out. Fraught with genuine peril and delicious eeriness, 
this title is the perfect next-read after Paulsen’s classic Hatchet.  EB
lindstroM, eric Not If I See You First. Little, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-25985-9 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-25981-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10 
After losing both her mother and her sight in a car accident when she was seven, 
Parker has survived with the help of her friends and a solid set of unbreakable rules. 
When Scott, her best friend turned boyfriend, violated her trust in eighth grade 
by allowing a bunch of boys to watch them kiss, he broke her rule about betrayal 
and became persona non grata to her. Now, though, Parker’s father has died, her 
aunt’s family has come to live with her, and her high school is full of new students, 
including Scott. Parker thinks she’s doing fine, but her friends know that she is a 
grief volcano looking for a place to erupt; when that eruption finally occurs, they are 
all caught in the flow while Parker finally has to face some truths about the limits 
of her coping skills and her personal vulnerability. Characterization is fantastic—
very few high school stereotypes, and lots of challenged expectations about mean 
girls, pretty girls, blind girls, fat girls, jocks, and coaches. Parker has just the right 
260 • The BulleTin
degree of acerbic wit to be likable even when she’s bitchy, and when she falls apart, 
her insight into her own character is heartbreaking. And Scott?—oh, Scott, may 
your tribe of boys who respect boundaries and learn from mistakes increase. This 
will have broad appeal for readers who need to learn a thing or two about how to 
shepherd themselves and their friends through difficult times.  KC 
lu, MArie The Rose Society. Putnam, 2015 [416p] (Young Elites)
ISBN 978-0-399-16784-3 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R* Gr. 9-12
In the aftermath of a failed revolution, mutual betrayals, and the death of the prince 
she loves (all in The Young Elites, BCCB 12/14), Adelina Amouteru has fled Kenet-
tra to the safety of neighboring Merroutas. There she recruits a new team of young 
Elites, including a thief/mimic, a mercenary/storm-wielder, and her own sister, 
to help her wreak revenge and take the throne of her homeland. Adelina’s former 
crew, meanwhile, finds refuge in distant Beldain under the protection of its new, 
secretly Elite queen, who seeks to invade Kenettra with their help; and Adelina’s 
greatest enemy finds himself torn between love for the queen he’s killed for and 
his hatred for the malfettos (the illness-disfigured, many of whom, like Adelina, 
are gifted with powers). As these formidable foes maneuver around and toward 
each other, alliances shatter, lost friends return from the dead, and the body count 
rises. What no one realizes, though, is Adelina is also at war with her own mind, 
and the whispers and visions that plague her may spell doom for them all. This 
perfectly plotted, inventive sequel more than fulfills the promise of the first novel’s 
epilogue, offering readers a broader world and plenty of international intrigue. More 
interestingly, it masterfully transforms the standard hero’s journey into the story of 
a villain’s ascent. Adelina takes full command of the story here, and the book keeps 
readers on her side, even as she commits ever more terrifying atrocities and falls 
victim to the very fear and fury that give her power. Terrific secondary characters 
Teren and Raffaele shine a little less as a result, but continued use of alternative 
perspectives rounds out the narrative’s nuance and moral complexity. The novel’s 
end finds Adelina in power but far from triumphant, and readers will delight in 
the suspense of waiting for further volumes.  AM
MAtthies, JAnnA Two Is Enough; illus. by Tuesday Mourning. Running Press 
Kids, 2015 40p
ISBN 978-0-7624-5561-4 $15.95  
Ad 4-7 yrs
Some families are big, and some are small; here, in compact rhyme, Matthies cel-
ebrates the joys of a family of two, of a child with one loving adult. Two may not 
be many, but whether it’s for “a snowball fight,” “for a hand-in-hand-hike,” or “a 
back-to-school kiss,” “Two is enough when it’s me plus you.” This is ultimately a 
list, seasonally divided, of enjoyable shared activities and moments, so there’s not 
much tension or momentum. However, the rhyme scans neatly and the couplets 
will trip nicely off the tongue for readers-aloud. Fluid watercolor and colored-pencil 
illustrations follow four family dyads through the seasons; there’s a diversity of 
gender, race, and age (one adult caretaker seems likely to be a grandma) that adds 
value. The art pushes the sweetness too far, with beaming faces at every single turn, 
but the specifics are understandably enjoyable. Ultimately, the book is speaking 
to a crowd that often doesn’t get addressed outside of problem plots, so this will 
January 2016 • 261
be useful for both longstanding and new two-person families; though the book 
may be oversunny, this is a kind of family that’s overdue for getting shone on.  DS
MAttick, lindsAy Finding Winnie: The True Story of the World’s Most Famous 
Bear; illus. by Sophie Blackall. Little, 2015 [56p]
ISBN 978-0-316-32490-8 $18.00
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-8 yrs
A mother, Lindsay, tells her son, Cole, a true story about Canadian veterinarian and 
World War I soldier Harry Colebourn, who bought a bear cub at a train station 
on his way from his Winnipeg home to army training grounds. The bear, whom 
Harry dubs Winnie, becomes an army mascot as the troops head to Britain, but 
when the time comes to ship out to France, Harry sadly but wisely leaves Winnie 
at the London Zoo. There she enjoys visits from a young boy named Christopher 
Robin Milne, sparking his father’s classic tale, Winnie-the-Pooh. Harry returns 
home from war and starts a family, and Lindsay explains to Cole that Harry was 
his great-great-grandfather. The framing story, while extraneous, gives the story an 
appealing, cozy charm, and kids will certainly understand why Colebourn wanted 
to take the bear along, though the ethical issues of doing so are mostly glossed over 
by the book’s romanticizing of Colebourn’s decision (“His head said, ‘I shouldn’t.’ 
His head said, ‘I can’t.’ But his heart made up his mind”). Blackall’s art, in Chinese 
ink and watercolor on hot-press paper, possesses her usual folk-art appeal, and the 
khaki, green, and sepia palette of the Colebourn story is echoed but enriched with 
rosy pinks and shadowy touches in the framing sections. The album that Lindsay 
is reading to Cole is then presented to readers on the closing pages, with photos 
of the real Colebourn and Winnie (and Lindsay and Cole). Pair this with Walker’s 
Winnie: The True Story of the Bear Who Inspired Winnie-the-Pooh (BCCB 3/15) for 
two approaches to the story.  JH
Mcdonnell, pAtrick Thank You and Good Night; written and illus. by Patrick 
McDonnell. Little, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-316-33801-1 $15.99  
R* 4-6 yrs
Little bunny Clement is excited when his friends, Jean (an elephant) and Alan Al-
exander (a bear), show up at his door one evening in their PJs, ready for a sleepover. 
Clement’s caretaker, a human girl named Maggie, serves a snack and lets them have 
their fun, including jumping on the bed, doing the chicken dance, and playing 
hide-and-seek. Yoga, a shooting star, and a night bird’s lullaby bring down the ac-
tion a notch, and Maggie soon tucks them into bed—where it is revealed that the 
trio may actually be Maggie’s stuffed toys (and are most certainly an homage to 
classic children’s books). McDonnell’s storytelling is concise but detailed, and the 
book’s simplicity, gentle rhythms, and easy patterns make it perfect for bedtime 
reading. Names and textual references make a clear connection to time-honored 
tales Goodnight Moon, Winnie the Pooh, and The Story of Babar (Maggie reads them 
“their favorite bedtime stories—stories about a majestic elephant, a brave bear, and 
a quiet bunny”). Visual nods—Clement’s blue-and-white striped pajamas, Alan’s 
red balloon, etc.—cement the connection, and viewers who’ve spent time with 
those classics will be delighted to hunt for other hints in the pictures. McDonnell’s 
solid but energetic linework gives a certain verve to the trio’s activities, while the 
watercolors soften the background, creating a warm, joyful feeling that welcomes 
262 • The BulleTin
audiences just as Clement welcomes his friends. The details keep the pictures 
fresh and original, but never overwhelm the quiet story. Youngsters who love their 
stuffed animals will particularly latch onto this, and parents who want to promote 
nocturnal tranquility (or those with their own fond memories of Pooh Bear) will 
appreciate this little gem as well. JH
Mcgovern, cAMMie A Step Toward Falling. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2015 364p
ISBN 978-0-06-227113-6 $17.99  
R Gr. 8-12
High school senior Emily was an enthusiastic activist (for just about any cause) 
until she failed, running away rather than helping when she saw a student being 
victimized. A school-enforced policy now has Emily, alongside football player Lucas, 
another witness to the event, doing community service at the Lifelong Learning 
Center for mentally disabled and non-neurotypical adults. Narration alternates 
between Emily and Belinda, the special ed student Emily saw being sexually 
molested by a peer; Emily attempts to make emotional restitution for her failure, 
and Belinda chronicles the backstory that led to her being in a vulnerable place. 
McGovern takes what could be preachy contrivance and turns it into a sensitive 
exploration of frailty and strength, setback and recovery. Characterization is strong: 
even as Emily softens toward Lucas and begins to understand the merits of forgive-
ness as well as self-blame, she’s outspoken and occasionally waspish, and Belinda 
is hardier than her overprotective family and school have given her credit for. The 
plot subverts cliché by planning glorious outcomes (an Emily-directed Pride and 
Prejudice starring Belinda, who loves acting and Colin Firth more than anything) 
that realistically founder and then get adapted into surprisingly satisfying alternatives 
(they perform scenes from P&P for the Center students). Ultimately, it’s a story of 
young people reexamining themselves, their preconceptions, and their possibilities, 
and readers will recognize their vulnerabilities and applaud their commitment.  DS
Mcgovern, kAte Rules for 50/50 Chances. Farrar, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30158-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Life in the shadow of her mother’s cruelly incapacitating Huntington’s disease has 
been the norm for seventeen-year-old Rose for the last several years. Now, however, 
the issue has come to the fore: Rose is deciding where to go to college and realizing 
that means leaving her family behind, and she’s approaching the age where she 
can get tested to find out if she has inherited the disease herself. How will it affect 
her family if she leaves—and how will it affect them if she finds out her genetic 
future? Debut novelist McGovern explores this challenging subject with candor and 
sympathy, allowing Rose an honest blend of sorrow and frustration at her mother’s 
illness. Rose’s relationship with Caleb, a boy she meets at a rare disease event whose 
mother and sisters have sickle cell, is unusually authentic in its glitches and un-
certainty; McGovern uses Rose’s naïveté about race (Caleb is African American, 
Rose is white) to illuminate the fact that she’s not used to seeing beyond her own 
problems. The book is a little overstuffed with theme and event, but ultimately 
Rose’s experience is compelling, and it will make many young people consider what 
they would do in her shoes. There are no notes, but the acknowledgments section 
points to Huntington’s disease websites and a source text.  DS
January 2016 • 263
McphAil, dAvid Beatrix Potter and Her Paint Box; written and illus. by David 
McPhail. Holt, 2015 34p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9170-0 $17.99  
R 5-7 yrs
It’s refreshing to see a biography of Beatrix Potter that is accessible to children of 
the age most suited to also enjoy her classic books, and McPhail here focuses his 
pared-down account on the youthful Beatrix’s relationship with her brother, her 
affinity for animals and nature, and her artistic endeavors and the pleasure they 
brought to her from youth to adulthood. The frontload of information on the first 
page will require some adult explanation (“Her parents were wealthy and, like most 
people of their class, were not heavily involved in raising their children”). Once 
that’s out of the way, however, the rest of the text is relatively smooth sailing for 
primary-grade audiences; the descriptions of Beatrix’s interactions with the family 
pets will appeal to readers of animal stories, and independent souls will also ap-
preciate Beatrix’s dismissal of formal painting lessons (“She preferred to paint her 
own way, so the lessons stopped”). McPhail’s cozy illustrations effectively convey 
warmth through soft, sketchy hatching and through the golden light and sepia 
shadows that evoke bucolic summer sun and candlelit interiors. The exaggeratedly 
diminutive proportions of the figures, especially of her parents, are occasionally 
confusing, but overall the illustrations are attractive and inviting. Teachers, librar-
ians, or other adults who enjoy sharing Potter’s books with a young audience will 
find this a useful and gratifying complement to those works, and youngsters with 
a love for animals or painting may find a kindred spirit in Beatrix as well.  JH
MeAd, richelle Soundless. Razorbill, 2015 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-763-9 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Folkloric elements, a romance, and some Chinese cultural references combine in 
this story of a village oppressed beyond endurance. The quest for profits in the city 
below keeps most villagers laboring in mines, gathering metals that, when sent via 
a ropeline down a treacherous mountain, will mean food comes back up to them. 
It’s a pretty terrible life, especially since exposure to the metals has rendered the 
workers deaf for generations and now many are also going blind. When Fei, a quiet, 
thoughtful artist, discovers she can suddenly hear, she and her handsome beloved, 
Li Wei, decide to risk the terrible climb down to seek help for their people. Nothing 
down the mountain is as they believed, though, and the odds are slim that they’ll 
survive long enough to get back home, let alone save anyone. The spellbinding 
passages where an awestruck Fei painstakingly describes what it is like to hear for 
the first time are some of the best moments in the novel, and they’ll likely linger 
with readers. The miracle save by magical creatures is less effective, though, and 
it undercuts the power of the human protagonists. In addition, the book seems 
decorated with rather than embedded in Chinese mythology or culture—with dif-
ferent names, this book would work just as well in a number of other settings. Even 
with those concerns, the urgency of a mission to literally save everyone Fei loves, 
and one undertaken with her sweetheart, makes for a gripping read; additionally 
many readers will appreciate that the story is fully told in one volume, ending with 
a rich conclusion that wraps up all loose ends neatly.  AS 
264 • The BulleTin
Murphy, JiM Breakthrough!: How Three People Saved “Blue Babies” and Changed 
Medicine Forever. Clarion, 2015 [144p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-82183-2 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-8
Less than a century ago, congenital heart defects carried a sentence of doom, and 
cutting into a human heart to repair damage was, in most scientific circles, un-
thinkable. A trio of medical personnel at Johns Hopkins Hospital, driven by the 
desperation of young sufferers and their own commitment to the possible, risked 
their reputations in the first surgery to “replumb” a child’s heart to deliver oxygen to 
her failing system. Dr. Alfred Blalock was regarded as a quiet Southern gentleman, a 
gifted researcher delving into treatment for shock, but not the most nimble surgeon. 
His African-American assistant, Vivien Thomas, was meticulous in the lab and un-
daunted by such obstacles as lack of equipment (surmounted by his inventions) and 
surgical precedent. Dr. Helen Taussig, a pediatric cardiologist and a leader among 
women doctors in mid-twentieth century America, convinced Blalock that heart 
repair was feasible and that his knowledge of the circulatory system would make 
him a fine candidate to invent the procedure. Murphy provides cogent explanations 
of how congenital heart defects occur and the challenges of performing surgery on 
diminutive arteries in a tiny thoracic space. His primary focus, though, is on the 
team itself and the challenges they faced confronting a skeptical and mainly white 
male medical profession. Thomas met with blatant noncooperation and enjoyed 
little credit for his work; Blalock faced censure for defending his black assistant; 
Taussig (who continued to practice as she became deaf) constantly fought turf 
wars over the care for her patients. Focus on the debut operation and its aftermath 
allows readers to examine both the medical and interpersonal dramas in a relatively 
slim volume, and the gallery of black and white photos contextualize the historical 
era. Annotated chapter notes, a bibliography, and an index are also included.  EB
nelson, MArilyn My Seneca Village. Namelos, 2015 87p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-196-0 $21.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-197-7 $12.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-198-4 $9.95  
R Gr. 10 up
Poet Marilyn Nelson has left a major imprint on youth literature in her poetry 
collections and sequences, and here she wields her skills in a collective portrait of 
residents of New York’s Seneca Village, the largely African-American community 
that was destroyed in the 1850s to make way for Olmstead’s Central Park. The 
book spotlights each one-page poem as a drama, introducing it with a scene-setting 
paragraph of prose; each poem opens with the speaker and the date, which advances 
from 1825 to 1855. Precise verse in a variety of forms and rhyme schemes follows 
residents, black and white, as they grow up, marry, mourn the missing, and witness 
bits of history (Frederick Douglass’ speech at a church is amusingly interwoven 
with the squabble of two misbehaving boys in the pews). The collection lacks the 
cumulative impact of Carver (BCCB 9/01) or How I Discovered Poetry (BCCB 3/14), 
but it’s an intelligent and sensitive look at an era and at the interworkings of this 
community. Nelson notes her poetic influences, and many of them—from Edgar 
Lee Masters’ Spoon River Anthology to Gwendolyn Brooks’ Bronzeville poems—will 
make engaging partner reads; so too would be Walter Dean Myers’ place-focused 
January 2016 • 265
short story collection 145th Street (BCCB 3/00) or his historically focused poetry 
in Here in Harlem (BCCB 12/04). A two-page introduction provides explanation 
(and further reading material) about Seneca Village; an extensive concluding note 
describes the forms, styles, and meters of the poetry.  DS
niJkAMp, MArieke This Is Where It Ends. Sourcebooks Fire, 2016 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-4926-2246-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
This brutal novel offers a minute-by-minute account of an hour during which a 
school shooting occurs (followed by a closing epilogue at the following midnight). 
Harrowing first-person narrations reveal the way characters try to understand what 
is happening, where they are in relation to the emergency, and what they can do 
to save those they love. Tyler, the gunman, is a former student whose twin sister is 
among those at school, but even she can’t reach through the wall of pain and fury, 
built up through flashbacks that show his devolution, that propels him through 
this bitter morning. The death count is high, but the violence never becomes 
gratuitous; Nijkamp wisely offers multiple voices that humanize Tyler, even while 
it is clear that whatever brought him to this single day, he is now monstrous. The 
occasional sweeping melodrama in the descriptions of hope and community will 
be easily forgiven, and perhaps even welcome, as readers will need something good 
to which they can cling as the book ends swiftly after the death of more than one 
key character. It is to Nijkamp’s credit that this book on an important subject is 
also readable, gripping, and well balanced.  AS 
nix, gArth Newt’s Emerald. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2015 291p
ISBN 978-0-06-236004-5 $18.99  
R Gr. 6-9
In an author’s note, Nix explains that this tale began as a book within a book, an 
insertion into a contemporary thriller he wrote years ago which was never published. 
Fans of Regency romps and magical fantasy will be glad he resurrected and revised 
it here, as the story of coming-of-age Lady Truthful Newington (affectionately 
nicknamed “Newt”) and her determined quest to retrieve a family heirloom: an 
exquisite emerald with strong magical powers. Truthful’s world is one in which 
young ladies cannot be alone with men without losing their reputations, but it’s 
also one where many people possess special skills, such as casting illusory glamours 
or conjuring storms at will. In true Regency fashion there are miscommunications 
and misunderstandings between the heroine and an attractive young man (the 
oft-infuriating Charles Harnett—if that is really his name), a masquerade ball, a 
deceitful servant, lovely frocks, and even a brief encounter at sea with miscreant 
buccaneers (in which Truthful manages to kick some pirate booty). The magic is 
almost secondary to the plot but is still satisfying, with Truthful and Charles track-
ing and facing down the evil enchantress/emerald thief, Lady Plathenden, as she 
threatens the seaside community with a disastrous tidal wave. It’s clear that this was 
as much a pleasure for Nix to write as it is for readers to read, and there’s reveling 
in arcane language (much of which—but not all—is defined in a brief glossary at 
the end) that will delight wannabe Austen-esque teens. This is formulaic, yes, but 
it’s engagingly well executed; hand this to fans of period Masterpiece Theater sagas 
and Burgis’ Kat, Incorrigible (BCCB 5/11).  JH
266 • The BulleTin
pAul, Alison The Plan; illus. by Barbara Lehman. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-544-28333-6 $17.99 
 R Gr. 1-3
In this cleverly crafted story, a single word changes by a single letter (added, sub-
tracted, or changed) to move the story along in the next frame or page. That device 
tells the tale of a young girl with a plan, to fly to Saturn in the small plane that sits 
unused on her farm; as her dad is busy at the sink with pans, she and her beloved pup 
sneak into Pa’s room and read the album that documents his barnstorming career 
in partnership with the girl’s late mother. Inspired by memories and his daughter, 
Dad preps for a new show with the plane, flying over the plain with daughter and 
dog along, pleasing a cheering audience below, and bringing to fruition at least 
one part of his daughter’s plan. The story is a quiet one, but the changing words 
are cunningly developed, and audiences will enjoy guessing what might come next. 
Lehmann’s clean and orderly line, watercolor, and gouache art carries the bulk of 
the plot, with the changing word pattern punctuating rather than narrating, and 
the simple, streamlined linework, with scenes contained within a further frame, 
makes the necessary components easy for audiences to decode. Period details (such 
as the pump next to the sink) add atmospheric framing, and elements such as the 
dog’s resolutely biped approach to life provide gentle comedy. Though gentle where 
Escoffier’s Take Away the A (BCCB 1/15) is raucous, this offers similar potential for 
an interesting curricular dimension in reading or language arts.  DS
philBrick, rodMAn The Big Dark. Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2016 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-78975-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-78977-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Charlie is handling the unexpected loss of all technology in his New Hampshire 
town with aplomb. In fact, people are doing pretty well in general, other than 
some outlier (but sharply malevolent) characters who view this as the end of the 
world, and therefore a reason to hoard and incite violence. All seem certain that it 
was a solar flare that caused the problem, but mostly folks seem indifferent to the 
why—they are just focused on surviving a brutal winter without proper food, heat, 
or resources. A significant portion of the novel chronicles Charlie’s heroic quest to 
ski fifty miles to get his mother’s medication from a well-supplied hospital, and it is 
this section, gripping and often harrowing, that will likely be the most memorable 
for readers. There are plenty of philosophical questions about human nature and 
our reliance on technology that are elegantly handled with examples but not clear 
answers, allowing room for self-analysis about what one’s own response would be 
to this plausible (if scientifically sketchy) scenario. Ultimately, Philbrick offers a 
surprisingly inspiring take on a global blackout, and one that is perfectly pegged 
to younger readers, who may be aware of the apocalypse trend in YA lit (or even 
snowy survival stories such as Northrop’s Trapped, BCCB 2/12) but aren’t ready to 
dive into most of it yet.  AS
January 2016 • 267
potter, dAvid Abe Lincoln and the Selfie That Saved the Union. Crown, 
2016 [288p] (The Left Behinds)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39061-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39060-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39062-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Narrator Mel and his middle-school companions have barely had time to draw 
breath after righting the course of history at the Battle of Trenton (The iPhone That 
Saved George Washington, BCCB 2/15) before launching themselves via iTime app 
into Washington City, July 1, 1863. Certain that something historical will go wrong 
(bad guy Kurtis, founder of Things Go Wrong, will see to that), they arrive just in 
time to introduce the sixteenth president to the iPhone camera function and to suss 
out that the group’s collective services will be required at Gettysburg, where Kurtis 
intends to change the course of the Civil War and the nation with a resounding 
Confederate victory. Once again, history’s notables confront technology cleverly in 
character. War-crazed and gullible, Tad Lincoln falls for the kids’ cover story that 
the device is a bomb. Abe, faced with his selfie image, opts for a retake that looks 
more confident and commanding than gloomy and defeated, thereby providing 
inspiration at a critical moment down the road. An author’s note supplies factual 
background, and lists of further resources include fiction and nonfiction selections 
nicely suited to the age and interest of Potter’s readers. Readers can guess at the 
time and site of the next installment while this entertaining series recharges.  EB
pounder, siBéAl Witch Wars; illus. by Laura Ellen Anderson. Bloomsbury, 
2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-925-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-926-3 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Nine-year-old Tiga Whicabim is pretty sure she’s dreaming when Fran the Fabulous 
Fairy shows up to tell Tiga she’s a witch, but anything is better than living in Miss 
Heks’ grimy shed, so Tiga decides to follow Fran down the drainpipe to the witchy 
world of Sinkville. It’s no dream: Tiga is most definitely a witch, and she’s been 
entered in the Witch Wars, a televised series of tests that pits Tiga against eight 
other witches to claim the Top Witch position and rule over Sinkville. (Think of 
it as Hunger Games if the participants were cheerful spellcasting kids, the losers 
returned to their homes in a fairy pop of smoke, and the stakes were much, much 
lower, considering that even the most evil witches here are pretty mild-mannered.) 
Tiga may have little actual witch training but with the help of her bumbling pal 
Peggy, she manages to defeat mean girl Felicity, claim the top position, wisely hand 
it over to Peggy, and ensure her own kind of happy ending. The plot’s not really the 
point in this British import, though the various tests are amusing; the secondary 
characters carry the day, giving a wonderful quirkiness to an already goofy tale. Fran 
the Fairy is particularly comical in her obsession with her own celebrity, and Peggy 
provides both charming haplessness and true kindness. The wide-eyed figures of 
Anderson’s multicultural cast have an energetic silliness that complements the bubbly 
humor of the text. Fans of Hale’s Ever After High series (The Storybook of Legends, 
BCCB 12/13) will find this to be an enchanting counterpart to those books.  KQG
268 • The BulleTin
price, chArlie Dead Investigation. Farrar, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30227-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
In this companion novel to Dead Connection (BCCB 9/06), Murray is still figuring 
out how to live with his ability to communicate with the dead. Deeply shy, Mur-
ray prefers hiding out in the cemetery to dealing with the leaving, and he chooses 
to live in a shed on the grounds because he doesn’t want to be near his mess of a 
mother. He takes perhaps too much interest in and comfort from the dead, as they 
ask a lot less of them than living people do—his crush on a recently dead teen 
who was accidentally shot is much safer than his feelings for his living best friend 
(and perhaps more) Pearl, whose father is the caretaker at the cemetery. Within 
chapters, focus shifts frequently from Murray to a deputy who is trying to find 
clues about a several missing homeless people, while also wrestling with his own 
demons, and to Pearl and her father, who want to help Murray more than anything 
else. The resulting mix is a bit choppy, but ultimately the mystery of the missing 
people becomes the primary story, and it is a gripping part of the plot. Paranormal 
fiction fans who like mysteries will find this a treat of a successful combination.  AS
rAppAport, doreen Frederick’s Journey: The Life of Frederick Douglass; illus. by 
London Ladd. Jump at the Sun/Disney, 2015 44p
ISBN 978-1-4231-1438-3 $17.99  
R Gr. 3-5
When you spy a nearly life-sized bust of a notable occupying a large, square, untitled 
book cover, you know that Rappaport has another fine picture-book biography on 
offer. Continuing her format of peppering her narration with quotations from her 
subject, she introduces young readers to the life of runaway slave-turned-activist 
Frederick Douglass, immediately accosting readers with the harsh reality of grow-
ing up in slavery: “Frederick was taken from his mother when he was a baby. . . . 
He heard whispers that a man named Old Master was his father. But he was never 
sure.” While the particulars of Douglass’ story have been covered in children’s books, 
several of which are cited in a bibliography, the seamless insertion of his own words, 
drawn from speeches and autobiographies, are especially poignant: “He ate sitting 
on his naked behind, and with an oyster-shell spoon scooped up cornmeal mush 
out of a trough. ‘The children were called upon to eat, like so many pigs. He that ate 
fastest got most.’” Ladd’s paintings, though a bit stiff and mannered, highlight the 
drama of key moments in Douglass’ life, such as his fight with an abusive master 
and his impassioned lectures to white citizens, many of whom were skeptical of his 
personal claims and abolitionist message. Author and illustrator notes comment on 
their research; a timeline, and lists of adult resources, children’s books, and websites 
are also included.  EB
rAy, MAry lyn Goodnight, Good Dog; illus. by Rebecca Malone. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-544-28612-2 $16.99 
 R* 2-5 yrs
It’s time for bed, and while “the dog knows the click of the lamp when the light 
is turned off” and the other indications that night is here, he’s just not sleepy. He 
roams the house, thinking about the pleasant events of his day and checking on 
the human sleepers, but he’s still not sleepy; well, “only a little. Just a little,” so 
January 2016 • 269
he curls up in his soft bed, dreams of the sun, and soon it’s morning again. Ray 
gently unspools her bedtime story thread; her hushed sentences, carefully varying 
in length, are easy on the drowsy ear and nocturnally evocative (“He also knows 
the quiet that comes: moon quiet”). Malone’s acrylic illustrations are thickly lined, 
softly dimensional, and cozy in moonlit full-bleeds and creamy backgrounded 
vignettes. There’s a Pooh-like cuddliness to the honey-colored pup, with his plush 
simplicity and irresistibly pettable ears. Whether or not audiences catch the kid-
proxy echoes in the dog’s resistance to bedtime, they’ll be enchanted by the pooch’s 
dozy meanderings and eventual sleepy example.  DS
reeve, philip Pugs of the Frozen North; illus. by Sarah McIntyre. Random 
House, 2015 [224p] (Not-So-Impossible Tales)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38799-6 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38796-5 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38798-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
In this newest entry of the Not-So-Impossible Tales series (Cakes in Space, BCCB 
9/15), two new friends, Shen and Sika, and their sixty-six pugs team up to attempt 
to win the Great Northern Race. They have heard that the Snowfather will grant 
the winner’s wish, so they are determined, but not so much so that they forget 
their ethical and moral obligations to their co-racers when many of them stumble 
into trouble. The racing scenarios are gleefully absurd, from the racers themselves 
(polar bears, pink huskies, and robot dogs all reflect personality aspects of their 
quirky owners) to the challenges they face, as in the delightfully oddball section 
where noodle-cooking yetis hypnotize our heroes into perpetual eating. In spite 
of the silliness rampant in this story, there is an undercurrent of tragedy as Sika’s 
grandfather is very old and ill, and her wish to save him is unlikely to be fulfilled. 
Reeve skillfully allows Sika to come to this understanding gradually, and the death, 
when it comes, is tempered with recognition of the rich and full life her grandfather 
led. Cheerful, bouncy illustrations keep things moving and effectively break up 
the narrative, mostly reflecting the text but also adding drama on occasion, as with 
the double-page spread of kraken versus pug dogs that spotlights the cracking ice, 
the massive size of the monster, and the real risk the two small children face. Offer 
this to fans of the earlier two books in the series, and to fans of illustrated novels 
who can handle some solemnity mixed in with their punchy adventure tales.  AS
richArds, JAsMine Secrets of Valhalla. Harper/HarperCollins, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-201009-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223911-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Sometimes, when Ragnarok is coming, you just gotta go with the heroes you have; 
in this case it’s a British kid named Buzz and a visiting American girl, Mary, who 
appear to be the only ones who can save the day. Best to skip right to the chase: Loki 
has escaped his prison and wants revenge, and he’s seeking the Runes of Valhalla. If 
he finds them before Buzz and Mary do, then the world probably ends. Although 
the pace zips along, there is still sturdy attention paid to character development, 
guaranteeing continued interest in the next volume as much to see how Buzz and 
Mary evolve as for the gripping mythological adventure. Readers who don’t know 
270 • The BulleTin
Norse myths can pick up information from the fairly complete portrayals of lesser-
known gods that emerge from their actions, how they are treated by the other gods 
and goddesses, and how they respond to Loki. This is a worthy addition to the 
recent Norse mythology kick, particularly as it includes some aspects and figures 
that have been underrepresented to date.  AS
riordAn, rick The Sword of Summer. Disney Hyperion, 2015 [519p] (Mag-
nus Chase and the Gods of Asgard)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-6091-5 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-1932-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Riordan’s new series featuring Norse gods offers readers a fresh batch of characters 
to explore. Homeless orphan Magnus takes it pretty well when he summons an 
ancient Norse sword, unsuccessfully battles a terrifying creature, and dies. Luckily, 
a Valkyrie scoops him up and whisks him off to Hotel Valhalla where the dead kid 
can prepare for Ragnarok while enjoying some hotel amenities. Unfortunately, 
Magnus is destined for much more important things, end-of-the-world type 
things, so his yoga and buffets are cut short, but so will everyone else’s be unless 
he and a determined small group of allies succeed daunting tasks. Riordan offers a 
terrific cast that is effortlessly diverse—all of the allies stand as independent, well-
constructed characters who each bring entirely different skills, histories, interests, 
and personalities to the group. An additional plus is that the Valkyrie who saves 
him is already spoken for, so for now at least, romance isn’t part of this already full 
mix. Snarky first-person narration and humorous chapter titles serve as effective 
counters to the often dire circumstances in which the protagonists find themselves. 
Riordan fans will be thrilled, and Norse mythology buffs will be pleased to see that 
his focus has shifted to their faves.  AS
rosen, MichAel J. The Tale of Rescue; illus. by Stan Fellows. Candlewick, 
2015 103p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7167-9 $14.99  
R Gr. 2-4
On a small cattle farm in Appalachian Ohio, a cattle dog brings the cows in. Nearby, 
a Floridian family rents a cabin, planning for the young boy to enjoy his first snowy 
New Year. What should be a short walk leads them into disaster, however, when a 
blizzard turns to whiteout and they’re unable to find shelter; hunkering down as 
the drifts mount, they find hope when a dog reaches them. Though unable to rouse 
her master to take action, the dog manages to drive the cattle through the drifts 
to make a path and then lead the family back to the dog’s farm and safety. This is 
gloriously melodramatic sentimental fiction that would make the Victorians proud, 
and it will be irresistible to animal-loving kids who have been able to withstand the 
pull of youthful cynicism. The epilogue, where the nearly grown boy returns to the 
farm, heads off into more conceptual territory, but young audiences will retain the 
satisfying chill of the winter story nonetheless. The book is compact in length and 
accessible in its layout; the text is more sophisticated than its presentation may lead 
some young readers to expect, but it’s eminently well suited to being read aloud. 
Full-page color illustrations, one or two per brief chapter, are luminous watercolors 
evocatively dappled with snow and shadow.  DS
January 2016 • 271
ruBini, Julie k. Missing Millie Benson: The Secret Case of the Nancy Drew Ghost-
writer and Journalist. Ohio University Press, 2015 [136p] (Biographies for 
Young Readers)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8214-2184-0 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
It seems appropriate that the identity of the author of twenty-three of the first thirty 
Nancy Drew books should have remained a mystery for so long. This biography 
begins with the 1980 trial to settle publishing rights for the books produced by the 
Stratemeyer Syndicate, a trial that officially revealed Millie Benson as the woman 
who had written over 130 books for young readers under the pseudonym Carolyn 
Keene and other noms de plume as well as her own name. As an athlete, journalist, 
author, mother, and pilot, Benson is a lively subject for a biography, and Rubini 
fills in the contexts of her early life as the daughter of a small-town doctor in Iowa, 
her college years at the University of Iowa, and her career as a writer and journalist. 
Rubini is careful to separate known facts from speculation, using conditional verbs 
such as “would have” and qualifiers such as “perhaps” to give a sense of the everyday 
activities that Benson likely participated in given the time period. Plentiful illustra-
tions include a facsimile of Benson’s first published story from St. Nicholas magazine 
written when she was thirteen as well as photographs of Benson throughout her life 
and covers from some of her books. While the prose is rather stilted and some of 
the sidebars and factoids seem only peripherally related to the main story, the pace 
is as lively as the subject. Readers will come away with a wealth of knowledge not 
only about the woman herself but also about the history of children’s literature in 
the early to mid-twentieth-century America, and they may even find some series 
beyond Nancy Drew worth investigating. A timeline, lists of Benson’s books and 
awards, glossary, and bibliography are included.  KC 
rudnick, pAul It’s All Your Fault. Scholastic, 2016 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46428-4 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46497-0 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
In the span of one weekend, upstanding, uptight, Christian seventeen-year-old 
Caitlin Singleberry will steal a car, get a tattoo, flash a complete stranger, deep-kiss 
two famous movie stars, foil a hold-up with a gun, get her nose pierced, and get 
arrested, all because of her famous cousin, Heller Harrigan. Heller is a very thinly 
veiled replica of Miley Cyrus, having been a child star on a show called Anna Ba-
nana; now she’s playing the lead in a popular movie franchise based on a series of 
bestselling kids’ books, and she needs to get through promotional interviews and 
appearances without crashing and burning. Her mother and her agent appeal to 
Caitlin, and Caitlin sees it as a mission to prove herself a worthy servant of God; 
Heller, however, seems to see it an opportunity to live up to her name and tempt 
Caitlin into a life of sin. Rudnick has loads of fun with Christian stereotyping, 
but it’s all good-natured and over-the-top silly, and Caitlin is a likable goof. He 
also sends up YA fandom culture with a plethora of knowing winks, including a 
judge who is persuaded to leniency when his granddaughters Katniss, Hermione, 
and Bella are offered tickets to the premiere of Heller’s movie. None of this, then, 
is meant to be taken too seriously; even as critique or satire, it nuzzles rather than 
bites, as Rudnick’s playful mockery of his subject is belied by the form he chooses, 
272 • The BulleTin
which is as made-for-wacky-teen-TV as it gets. Readers who want a breezy break 
from hipster earnestness can’t help but love this.  KC 
schWArtz, AMy I Can’t Wait!; written and illus. by Amy Schwartz. Beach Lane/
Simon, 2015 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8231-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8232-6 $10.99  
R 4-6 yrs
Three narrative strands follow three waiting children: “William was waiting on his 
front stoop. Annie was waiting in her backyard. And, in his house on the corner, 
Thomas was waiting, too.” What are these three youngsters waiting for? William 
is waiting for something special, huggable, warm, and “amazing.” Annie is waiting 
for pal Eddie to arrive, but his tardiness shifts her from curiosity (“Is he getting a 
haircut? Is he eating a pickle?”), to self-doubt (“Did Eddie make a new friend? Is 
she nicer than me?”), to guilt (“I broke his new truck. I lost his ball. And that’s why 
Eddie hates me!”). Thomas is waiting with his grandmother for the birth of a new 
sibling; while he waits, he searches for a suitable girl’s name for the baby, who ends 
up being a boy. A postlude unites all three wait-ers and their friends and families 
at a park; they promise to meet up again the following day, prompting William to 
exclaim, “I can’t wait!” There’s a satisfying range of emotion presented on this very 
familiar kid challenge, and audiences will enjoy predicting and being surprised (or 
not) by the outcomes; the tripartite structure adds freshness and dimension while 
remaining comfortable. The streamlined figures in Schwartz’s cheery gouache and 
pen and ink artwork are tidily positioned against backdrops surrounded by plenty 
of white space, while the crayon-bright hues and patterns add vibrancy. Pair this 
with Willems’ Waiting Is Not Easy or Henkes’ Waiting (BCCB 12/15), or pull it 
out to pass the time while waiting.  JH
shevAh, eMMA Dream On, Amber. Sourcebooks Jabberwocky, 2015 267p il-
lus.
ISBN 978-1-4926-2250-5 $12.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Between making art, fighting with her little sister, and navigating the perils of her 
South London middle school, eleven-year-old Amber (née Ambra Alessandra Leola 
Kimiko Miyamoto) stays pretty busy. But, as she chattily confides in her narration, 
she also wrestles with the persistent sadness of having a father who abandoned his 
wife and daughters, leaving Amber with feelings of hurt and insecurity, as well 
as questions about the Japanese half of her heritage. A frank yet believably self-
conscious narrator, Amber makes an approachable and admirable guide through 
questions of identity encountered by many tween readers. Her candid tone and 
relatable day-to-day challenges (for instance, avoiding a bully or finding a way to 
earn a smart phone) keep her poignant honesty and insight from become saccharine. 
Instead, the final product, with its message of love, self-acceptance, and forgiveness 
(with an inviting layout of big print sprinkled with lots of margin art) is like one 
of those cakes with beets snuck in: sweet, tasty, and surprisingly nourishing. Point 
readers grappling with similar issues to the dedication and acknowledgments pages, 
the former a tender nod to real-life Ambers and the latter a tearjerker of a tribute 
to the author’s own single mother.  AA
January 2016 • 273
sprAtt, r. A. Friday Barnes: Girl Detective; illus. by Phil Gosier. Roaring Brook, 
2016 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-297-2 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
The child of academics who are not terribly interested in parenting, eleven-year-old 
Friday has spent her childhood reading through their vast library, capping it off with 
an obsession with detective books. When solving a scandalous crime earns Friday 
a lucrative reward, she decides to use the money to ditch her folks and attend a 
prestigious boarding school. With her frumpy clothes and sorry social skills, Friday 
stands out against the meticulously and fashionably dressed students of Highcrest 
Academy, but soon she’s the most sought-after student in the joint, solving mys-
teries from stolen homework, purloined desserts, raging Yetis, etc.—all for a steep 
fee, of course. Spratt has her tongue firmly in her cheek with this middle-grade 
homage to genius detectives, even providing her very Holmesian protagonist with 
an ever-underestimated Watson in the form of Melanie, Friday’s flighty but more 
socially skilled roommate and eventual partner in crime-solving. The narrator’s 
comic jabs at adults (the pokes at academics and teachers are particularly amus-
ing) will be appreciated by kids who tire of those know-it-all grownups, and the 
cliffhanger ending ensures that readers will join Friday on her next case. Black and 
white illustrations have a cartoony vibe with the multicultural cast sporting wide 
eyes and sharp angles.  KQG 
steAd, philip c. Lenny & Lucy; illus. by Erin E. Stead. Porter/Roaring Brook, 
2015 40p
ISBN 978-1-59643-932-0 $17.99  
R 4-7 yrs
Young Peter is a worrier, and when he and his father move to their new house, he 
worries about the dark forest surrounding it (“Terrible things hid in the trees”). 
With the aid of his loyal dog, Harold, Peter pulls together bedding from the house 
and creates a big pillow guy he names Lenny (“Guardian of the Bridge”) to “keep 
the dark woods on the other side where they belong.” Then he’s worried Lenny 
is lonely, so he pulls together another bedding person named Lucy, who can be 
Lenny’s friend. As the four of them are gently playing outside, they’re joined by 
Peter’s new neighbor, Milly, and maybe the dark woods aren’t so scary after all. 
Philip Stead’s text for this artistic story of relocation fear is spare yet well chosen, 
with touches of careful repetition adding smoothness. Erin Stead’s art is what really 
brings out the meaning, though, with soft smudgy grays in pencil and printwork 
predominating in the unwelcoming landscape; even inside, Peter stands hemmed 
in huge, colorless floral wallpaper with the woods blocking the only view out the 
window. The woods’ prominence decreases notably from start (Peter and his father 
drive through the thick forest) to end (a few picturesque trees recede to gentle 
misty verticals behind Peter’s and Millie’s houses). This is a delicate and slightly 
strange story, and while its metaphor may not be immediately accessible to young 
audiences, they’ll understand the emotions.  DS
274 • The BulleTin
stork, FrAncisco x. The Memory of Light. Levine/Scholastic, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-47432-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63402-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 7-10
Grieving the loss of her mother without any support from her high-achieving, 
hard-driving sister, father, and stepmother, Vicky Cruz decides to take her life. 
Her efforts fail, however, and she winds up in an inpatient therapy group with 
Mona, an energetic, friendly girl with bipolar disorder; E. M., a hulking brute with 
violent tendencies; and Gabriel, a gentle boy who is likely experiencing the onset 
of schizophrenia. Vicky has things to learn about mistakes, resiliency, and courage 
from each of these characters, as well as from the spiritually minded Dr. Desai, who 
invites the group to spend two weeks at her ranch as part of their therapy. There’s 
a touch of the programmatic to the constellation of patients and their conversa-
tions, but the characters and settings are developed and realized fully enough to 
maintain a strong sense of story, so that the abundant therapy talk comes across 
as not only authentic but necessary for Vicky’s growth arc. The Latino characters’ 
diverse backgrounds and life circumstances contextualize in-group prejudices as 
well as the similarities and interdependency that can help overcome them. Stork’s 
author’s note about his own attempted suicide shines light on why the novel rings 
true; resources for teens in crisis are provided.  KC 
sutcliFFe, WilliAM Concentr8. Bloomsbury, 2016 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-61963-919-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 9-12
In the future, London is burning, as youth riot in the wake of the withdrawal of 
their government-provided behavior-control meds. Riding high on the chaotic 
power of looting and destruction, a small crew of teens takes a City bureaucrat 
hostage in an abandoned warehouse. In the days following the crime, though, 
they quickly find themselves stymied by what to do next and are soon surrounded 
by cops and the media. As the clock winds down to their inevitable capture, the 
teens reflect on the choices they’ve made and the role that meds, a broken society, 
and their own weaknesses played in their downfall. Driven by reflective prose that 
doesn’t short-change tension, this thoughtful and thought-provoking novel offers 
plenty of plot despite that fact that, after the initial crime, nothing really happens. 
Instead, readers will be drawn into the spiral of self-destruction in which main 
characters are simultaneously victims and perpetrators. Narration moves from 
teen to teen, and each distinctive voice creates nuance with a mixture of hard-luck 
histories, dead-end futures, and resignation about the present. The use of quotes 
from research and testimonials about Ritalin makes the connection to contemporary 
controversies unnecessarily heavy-handed, but the story itself never preaches, and 
the real-life connection will likely strike a chord with fans of Young’s The Program 
(BCCB 7/13).  AM
January 2016 • 275
teAgue, dAvid Henry Cicada’s Extraordinary Elktonium Escapade. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-237745-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-237747-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Henry has decided that the best course of action at his new school is to keep a low 
profile, but he’s not succeeding: he wears Elktonium shoes, made from a metal that 
his dead mother discovered (his dad has an obsessive mission to produce something 
wonderful out of this apparently useless metal), he stands up for a bullied kid in 
an oddball, attention-drawing way, and he zaps across dimensions in a magical 
doghouse. His magical traveling connects him to Lulu, a girl who desperately needs 
a friend and ally as her abusive aunt crushes her spirit and forces her into exhaust-
ing labor daily, and he decides to help her. Henry’s obsession with normalcy grows 
wearying, even while it may be understandable (he fears his eccentricity reminds his 
father painfully of Henry’s mother). In addition, the forced quirkiness of the tone 
clashes with the very dark subjects of cancer, crushing emotional abuse, and grief 
that pervade the novel. However, readers able to navigate one path or other—the 
wackiness or the heartfelt journey—may enjoy in this clever if flawed novel.  AS
toWnley, roderick A Bitter Magic. Knopf, 2015 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81650-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81649-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81651-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Cisley was used to her mother’s incredible stage magic (made even more impres-
sive by the fact that her mother actually had supernatural abilities), but she had no 
idea that her mother’s new vanishing act would become permanent. Now Cisley 
is left with her mercenary uncle in a bizarre mansion/tourist trap, uncertain if her 
mother is dead or simply unable to get back. When the twelve-year-old begins to 
make some friends (in addition to her pet lobster) and is punished for it by her 
elitist uncle who doesn’t appreciate her befriending the staff or the local Roma, 
Cisley realizes she must break out of her grief fog and take action to find her own 
powers and her mother. Under the magic is a sweet, poignant sadness in Cisley, 
who doesn’t seem to have any adult who truly cares for her. Her fierce dedication 
to her new friends is therefore tinged with desperation, and the risk of her losing 
those friendships is haunting. The author’s fans will appreciate his usual careful 
development of setting, and this will also please readers with strong motivations 
to see justice served.  AS
turnAge, sheilA The Odds of Getting Even. Dawson/Penguin, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3961-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Mo LoBeau and her Desperado Detective Agency (including best bud Dale and 
newer pal Harm) are back again with another quirky tale of mystery and intrigue. 
This story picks up just after The Ghosts of Tupelo Landing (BCCB 3/14) ends, 
with Dale’s no-’count daddy, Macon Johnson, about to go on trial for his role in 
the kidnapping of Mo’s beloved guardians, Miss Lana and the Colonel. At the last 
276 • The BulleTin
minute the accused escapes, and a series of robberies and an attempted murder 
(of Lavender, Dale’s big brother and Mo’s crush) ensue, all of which point to the 
on-the-lam Macon; but is he the real criminal at work here? Dale is the only one 
clear-eyed enough to see the truth, that Macon is being framed, although Mo and 
Harm come around by the end, as the evidence mounts against other suspects, 
including Flick, Lavender’s rotten racecar rival, and personable (but suspicious) 
reporter Capers Dylan. The mystery element isn’t quite as taut or tense here as it 
was in the previous books, but unraveling it is still entertaining; it’s the characters 
(and the thoughtful exploration of their relationships) that really shine, as well as 
Mo’s strong, sassy narrative voice (“If Tupelo Landing was a country, gossip would 
be our national sport”). The steady pacing of the mystery, a diverting subplot about 
Dale’s dog and her puppies, frequent humor, and the continued development of the 
eccentric and lovable (well, most of them) cast will keep readers whipping through 
the pages. It’s a book best appreciated by those acquainted with the previous titles, 
and those friends of Mo and Co. will relish spending some more time in Tupelo 
Landing.  JH
WAllAce, kAli Shallow Graves. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2016 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-236620-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-236622-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
A year ago, Breezy ended up a murder victim after walking home alone from a 
party where her advances toward her best girl friend were rejected. Now she wakes 
up clawing her way out of her grave and kills with a single touch the man who 
happens to be standing over it. Horrified but also curious, Breezy figures out what 
she has become: she does not need to eat, breathe, or sleep; she cannot be killed; 
she sees dark shadows behind people who have committed murder; and she is able 
to kill those people with a touch. She initially believes that the man showing her 
attention at a rundown café just has a thing for Asian girls, but it turns out he 
leads a cult that hunts monsters; she is tempted when he offers to expel the dark-
ness from Breezy, but the compassion and generosity that have been offered her 
by the other monsters she has met make her question his condemnation. Instead 
of traversing the well-worn path of ghostly vengeance, the story offers a portrait of 
a girl grieving her former life and wrestling with her new existence. While Breezy 
is able to see the monstrous acts of humans, she’s no longer certain of who’s good 
or bad and what those terms means in a world where the flesh-eating ghouls are a 
source of great kindness. In the end, Breezy must reckon both with the monster 
who killed her a year ago and the one who wants to kill her now, if the cult has its 
way. Dark humor laces Breezy’s narration, making this a perfect readalike to Blake’s 
Anna Dressed in Blood (BCCB 12/11).  KQG 
White, J. A. The Thickety: Well of Witches; illus. by Andrea Offermann. Tegen/
HarperCollins, 2016 [512p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-225732-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-225733-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
This third outing for siblings Kara and Taff in the Thickety series (A Path Begins, 
BCCB 5/14 and The Whispering Trees, BCCB 3/15) finds them no closer to safety. At 
January 2016 • 277
least, though, they now have a semblance of a plan to save their possessed father and 
the increasingly grim world from Rygoth, a powerful evil character who is gathering 
witches to help her with a grand takeover. Kara and Taff’s quest is daunting: they 
are seeking a place that isn’t easily found (indeed, it may not exist) where they will 
do something that they aren’t quite sure of in the hopes of saving their dad, and 
if that weren’t hard enough, Kara has lost her magic. Kara flounders without her 
supernatural skills, but her moral compass and unwavering loyalty to her brother 
keep her grounded, and Taff continues to emerge as an intriguing character in his 
own right, particularly when he befriends a witch who struggles to resist the dark 
side. There are simply too many important backstories and plot points that are 
built on here for new readers, but the earlier volumes are well worth visiting first. 
For fans, this is a sharp, moving, intense dive into a lushly described world that 
seems to be headed for a good versus evil showdown in a future volume, and Kara 
and Taff are poised to be right in the middle of it all.  AS
WilleMs, Mo The Story of Diva and Flea; illus. by Tony DiTerlizzi. Hyperion, 
2015 65p
ISBN 978-1-4847-2284-8 $14.99  
R Gr. 2-4
Posh pooch Diva enjoys guarding her ritzy Paris apartment building, but the ap-
proach of unfamiliar feet sends her running for safety. Meanwhile, alley cat Flea 
enjoys his colorful life, wandering the streets and bridges and alleys of the city “just 
to see what there is to see.” Their relationship begins with Flea teasing the timid 
pup, but eventually the two bond over their differences; Flea gradually teaches Diva 
to be bolder and braver, and Diva introduces Flea to such niceties as regular meals 
and indoor living. This short chapter book doesn’t rise to the genius level of many 
of Willems’ other titles, but it is still a solid and appealing story. Gentle humor is 
effectively balanced with a few more thoughtful observations (“[Flea] realized that 
no one had ever bothered to take a picture of him. That was a big thought for Flea. 
Big enough for him to forget where he was for a second”). Stylish design (down to 
the medallioned endpapers and Paris Metro decorative title font) and DeTerlizzi’s 
line and watercolor-style art add considerable appeal: little white terrier Diva (with 
her jaunty crimson bow) eloquently conveys emotions with her wide eyes and alert 
ears, and the lither and leaner, green-eyed, black and white Flea evinces a surpris-
ingly sleek charm. Graceful, precise lines and tidy, trim compositions capably evoke 
the genteel Paris setting as well. Pet lovers will take to this like Flea to a dropped 
piece of salami, and fans of the classic Disney film The Aristocats will feel right at 
home with Diva and Flea.  JH
Winchell, Mike, ed. Been There, Done That: Writing Stories from Real Life. Gros-
set & Dunlap, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-448-48672-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Every aspiring writer has heard the advice to “write what you know.” The problem is, 
most young writers consider their own lives to be boring. In this collection, twenty 
accomplished writers prove that even ordinary events from real life can inspire good 
storytelling. Each writer begins by recounting a memory from real life, and then 
follows that memory with a fictional story that, while clearly showing its seeds in 
the actual event, takes off from that event to create a fully shaped story. While such 
278 • The BulleTin
luminaries as Julia Alvarez, Karen Cushman, and Rita Williams-Garcia turn real life 
into realistic contemporary and historical fiction, others, such as Chris Rylander, 
Matthew J. Kirby and Kate Messner, spin their experiences into fantasies and other 
types of speculative fiction. Editor Winchell divides the stories thematically into 
sections on peer pressure, regrets, surprises, sacrifice, change, and questions about 
the way the world works, offering an explanatory preface that preps readers for the 
topic under consideration by including some of his own related experiences. A range 
of forms is also explored, from verse stories by Margarita Engle and Caroline Starr 
Rose to graphic narratives by Adam Rex and Nathan Hale. Not all of the fiction 
stories have the same level of polish, but that is often the nature of a collection, and 
that variableness can even prove a boon for beginning writers by demonstrating that 
not every piece knocks it out of the park. The individual stories offer good models 
for solitary writers, and the collection as a whole could inspire a bigger project for 
a class or creative writing club.  KC 
yAtes, AlexAnder The Winter Place. Atheneum, 2015 438p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1981-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1983-3 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Tess and Axel have only begun to process the unexpected death of their father when 
their maternal grandparents scoop them up and take them from rural New York to 
Helsinki to live. Though set in real places, the book incorporates fantasy elements: 
Axel is fairly certain that the bear that the siblings saw the day their father died 
was actually their late mother, that his dead parents are now seeking each other, 
and that he can help facilitate their reunion by walking a dangerous ghost path. 
The focus switches from Tess, who is hot-headed and angry, to Axel, who is calm 
and philosophical, and the connective thread of their fierce loyalty to and love for 
each other smoothes the abrupt switches in tone. Fans of folktales and fairy tales 
will find this icy, otherworldly tale to be a rich mix of realistic elements overlaid 
with fantasy creatures and details. A dramatic conclusion invites contemplation 
and effectively leaves things ambiguous in satisfying ways.  AS
ziMMerMAn, virginiA The Rosemary Spell. Clarion, 2015 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-544-44537-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-544-44540-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Thirteen-year-old Rosie has always been part of a literature-loving trio with her best 
friends, fellow middle-schooler Adam and his older sister Shelby. Now, however, 
Rosie can feel Shelby slipping away into the social demands and desires of high 
school. When Rosie and Adam discover a blank journal that has only the name of 
a famous local author written in the cover, they are intrigued and then delighted 
when words begin to appear and disappear on its pages. The pair can’t wait to show 
their discovery to Shelby, but when they read a poem from the journal to her, they 
somehow make her vanish; worse, now no one seems to remember Shelby and their 
own memories of her are slipping away. Their only chance to bring Shelby back 
is to visit the journal’s previous owner, an old woman suffering from Alzheimer’s 
and haunted by her own loss. Rosie makes a sweet but stubborn protagonist, and 
she approaches the disappearance of her friend with a sense of pragmatism that 
balances the more magical elements of the story, making this a compelling blend 
January 2016 • 279
of mystery and fantasy. The themes of memory and, particularly, its loss add a 
melancholy touch to each of the story’s threads and offers chances for discussion 
about how much of our life’s narrative is created by what we remember and what 
we forget.  KQG
CorreCTion:
In our December issue, our review of Isol’s The Menino incorrectly stated the book 
was translated from the Portuguese—it is in fact translated from the Spanish. Our 
apologies for the error.
280 • The BulleTin
BuLLetIn BLue rIBBons 2015
This was an exciting year! Our fiction list is one of our most diverse in many ways—
characters, genres, audience age—which is a challenge when it comes to discussing 
relative merits but a delight in its implications.  This year we had a plethora of 
titles formatted as graphic novels, so we pulled them out into a separate section to 
illuminate them better.  We also had some passionate discussion about genre, which 
may be reflected in next year’s approach to the Blue Ribbons: watch this space. 
Any dissents championing books that didn’t make the list will be on our website 
at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu, as will a downloadable PDF of the list in trifold form.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
FICTION:
Barnhill, Kelly. The Witch’s Boy. Algonquin, 2014. Gr. 5-7
Grieving the loss of his twin brother, Ned joins up with Aine, a thief’s daughter, 
to save two warring nations in this otherworldly novel that examines desperation 
and loneliness with a gently optimistic view. (January)
Brockenbrough, Martha. The Game of Love and Death. Levine/Scholastic. Gr. 8-10
This sweeping, epic tale of personified Love and Death examines risk, loss, and the 
value of human connection through a romance on which high stakes have been 
placed. (July/Aug)
Crowder, Melanie. Audacity. Philomel. Gr. 8-12
In graceful, affecting poetry, this free-verse novel follows the life of Clara Lemlich, 
a key figure in the unionization of garment workers in the early twentieth century. 
(March)
English, Karen. Skateboard Party; illus. by Laura Freeman. Clarion, 2014. Gr. 3-5
Richard’s schoolwork procrastination threatens to prevent him from attending 
his friend’s party in this warm, funny novel that captures the not always flawless 
logic of kids and the trouble they can get themselves into while trying to stay out 
of trouble. (February)
Hardinge, Frances. Cuckoo Song. Amulet/Abrams. Gr. 7-10
Hardinge is a masterful writer, and in her hands the shift from horror tale to an 
impactful family tale of regret, forgiveness, and loss is seamlessly handled. (June)
La˙i, Thanhhà. Listen, Slowly. Harper/HarperCollins. Gr. 6-9
California girl Mia is annoyed when she’s forced to travel to Vietnam to be with 
her grandmother, but new experiences (some good, some not so good) give Mia 
a new perspective in this endearing look at the way family roots often shape our 
present. (March)
January 2016 • 281
Larbalestier, Justine. Razorhurst. Soho Teen. Gr. 9-12 
This sharp-edged, sometimes gory, always enthralling look at the 1930s Australian 
underworld combines realism and supernatural elements in a sexy, frightening, and 
haunting concoction. (June)
Nickerson, Sara. The Secrets of Blueberries, Brothers, Moose and Me. Dutton. Gr. 4-6
The title says it all, really, but those secrets offer both comfort and conflict for Missy 
as she teeters towards the beginning of adolescence. (September)
Reynolds, Jason. The Boy in the Black Suit. Atheneum. Gr. 7-10
Matt finds comfort after his mother’s death by working at the local funeral home 
in this powerful exploration of the varied and sometimes peculiar ways we choose 
to grieve.  (February)
Rundell, Katherine. The Wolf Wilder. Simon. Gr. 5-8
The narrative voice is a surprisingly effective combination of wit and pathos as 
it guides readers through this folkloric tale that follows one headstrong girl and 
her wolves as she tries to find her missing mother during Russia’s 1917 February 
Revolution. (September)
Watson, Renée. This Side of Home. Bloomsbury. Gr. 7-10
Watson effectively manages character and situation to reflect the experience of 
African-American twins Nikki and Maya as they negotiate personal identity and 
desires while their gentrifying neighborhood brings issues of racial injustice and 
privilege to the fore. (March)
Williams-Garcia, Rita. Gone Crazy in Alabama. Amistad/HarperCollins. Gr. 5-8
This final volume in a historical fiction trilogy that perfectly captures the messy joy 
of family will be warmly welcomed by fans and will be a brilliant and irresistible 
introduction for newbies. (May)
PICTURE BOOKS:
Antony, Steve. Please, Mr. Panda; written and illus. by Steve Antony. Scholastic. 
4-6 yrs
Mr. Panda just wants animals to show some manners before he’ll share; listeners who 
have their own strong sense of justice will appreciate this logic while also reveling in 
the black and white animals that set off the vibrant colors of the pastries. (March)
Barnett, Mac. The Skunk; illus. by Patrick McDonnell. Roaring Brook. Gr. 2-4
Mid-century-style illustrations and a formal writing style are the perfect choices 
for this unusual tale of a man and skunk, and some evolving questions about just 
who is following whom. (July/August)
Bond, Rebecca. Out of the Woods: A True Story of an Unforgettable Event; written 
and illus. by Rebecca Bond. Ferguson/Farrar. 6-9 yrs
In this true story, a young boy’s unusual life at a hotel in the Canadian woods takes 
a turn for the dramatic when a forest fire drives everyone, including the forest’s 
animal inhabitats, into the lake for a miraculous shared moment. (September)
282 • The BulleTin
Dubuc, Marianne. Mr. Postmouse’s Rounds; written and illus. by Marianne Dubuc; 
tr. from the French by Yvette Ghione. Kids Can. 4-6 yrs
Fans of Richard Scarry’s work will happily pore over the small details in the cutaway 
views of that reveal the goings-on in the houses of various animals visited by Mr. 
Postmouse. (October)
Escoffier, Michael. Take Away the A: An Alphabeast of a Book; illus. by Kris Di 
Giacomo. Enchanted Lion, 2014. 6-9 yrs
Teachers and parents will love the language arts curricular possibilities of this book 
that plays with the subtraction of key letters from words; the sly comedy will keep 
kids just as interested. (January)
Kennedy, Anne Vittur. Ragweed’s Farm Dog Handbook; written and illus. by Anne 
Vittur Kennedy. Candlewick. 5-8 yrs
Viewers don’t have canines to appreciate the belly-busting humor of this delightful 
guidebook from a dog that gets an A for effort . . . and a treat. (September)
Knudsen, Michelle. Marilyn’s Monster; illus. by Matt Phelan. Candlewick. 5-7 yrs
Monsters aside, this is one of the sweetest (but not overly so), cleverest, kindest 
books about belonging and the benefits of a best friend, beautifully partnered with 
Phelan’s expressive, homey, imaginative illustrations. (May)
Portis, Antoinette. Wait; written and illus. by Antoinette Portis. Porter/Roaring 
Brook. 3-6 yrs
The simple clarity of Portis’ mixed-media art speaks volumes in this picture book 
that employs only three words to tell the tale of a little boy’s desire to explore the 
world at his own speed. (October)
Thompson, Laurie Ann. My Dog Is the Best; illus. by Paul Schmid. Farrar. 3-6 yrs
Thick, penciled lines and soft colors bring the cozy and the clever in this little kid’s 
sweet, funny testimony to the wonders of his dozing dog. (September)
NONFICTION:
Blumenthal, Karen. Tommy: The Gun that Changed America. Roaring Brook. Gr. 
7-10
Descriptions of infamous gangsters and crimes are balanced with a detailed look 
at the inventor of the now notorious Tommy gun and his misgivings about what 
he created. (July/Aug)
Christensen, Bonnie. Elvis: The Story of the Rock and Roll King; written and illus. 
by Bonnie Christensen. Ottaviano/Holt. 5-8 yrs
This affectionately written picture-book biography traces Presley’s early life, when 
he was an awkward, persistent hopeful with no inkling of his future superstardom. 
(July/Aug)
Hoose, Phillip. The Boys Who Challenged Hitler: Knud Pedersen and the Churchill 
Club. Farrar. Gr. 7-10
Movie-ready, edge-of-your-seat narration describes how teens managed to strike 
January 2016 • 283
back against Hitler, even if their country of Denmark was officially reluctant to 
do so. (July/Aug)
Jarrow, Gail. Fatal Fever: Tracking Down Typhoid Mary; illus. with photographs. 
Calkins Creek. Gr. 5-9
This compelling work traces the full story of the notorious typhoid fever carrier, 
using science to explain how deadly a carrier could be while still offering compas-
sion to the woman whose life was forcibly curtailed. (April)
Jenkins, Steve. How to Swallow a Pig; by Steve Jenkins and Robin Page; illus. by 
Steve Jenkins. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. Gr. 3-6
This inventive approach to natural history wittily instructs audiences, in several 
simple, cleanly illustrated steps, how to perform crucial everyday behaviors of 
various animals. (October)
Lowery, Lynda Blackmon. Turning 15 on the Road to Freedom: My Story of the 1965 
Selma Voting Rights March; as told to Elspeth Leacock and Susan Buckley; illus. by 
PJ Loughran and with photographs. Dial. Gr. 4-9
Lowery’s eyewitness narration, accented with photographs, provides an accessible 
and compelling account of the Selma march and will get kids thinking about their 
own roles in current events. (February)
Pizzoli, Greg. Tricky Vic: The Impossibly True Story of the Man Who Sold the Eiffel 
Tower; written and illus. by Greg Pizzoli. Viking. Gr. 5-9
The exploits of conman Robert Miller, who hustled Paris police officers and Chicago 
gangsters in the early twentieth century, are followed in this humorous illustrated 
chronicle that depicts our anti-hero as a bowler-hatted pixelated fingerprint. (April)
Say, Allen. The Inker’s Shadow; written and illus. by Allen Say. Scholastic. Gr. 8-12
This followup to the author/illustrator’s Drawing from Memory recounts his experi-
ence coming from Japan to live on his own in the U.S. as a teen not long after World 
War II; low-key yet telling narration combines effectively with copious illustrations 
to provide a picture of his artistic growth as well as his personal life.  (December)
Sheinkin, Steve. Most Dangerous: Daniel Ellsberg and the Secret History of the Vietnam 
War. Roaring Brook. Gr. 7-12
If a book was ever to show students how history repeats itself, it is this meticulously 
researched, high-stakes thriller that follows the man who exposed the lies behind 
the Vietnam War and became both a hero and a villain to the American public. 
(November)
Tonatiuh, Duncan. Funny Bones: Posada and His Day of the Dead Calaveras; written 
and illus. by Duncan Tonatiuh and with photographs. Abrams. Gr. 2-5
The playful skeletons associated with the Day of the Dead are fleshed out in this 
compelling look at Jose Guadalupe Posada, the nineteenth-century artist who 
made famous the comic cast of skeletons from the holiday’s tradition. (October)
284 • The BulleTin
GRAPHIC NOVELS:
Brown, Don. Drowned City: Hurricane Katrina & New Orleans; written and illus. 
by Don Brown. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. Gr. 5-9
Brown’s spare text relays the facts of the natural disaster and the human error that 
compounded its terrible effects, but it’s the dramatic illustrations that convey the 
true desperation felt by the residents of New Orleans in the wake of the storm. 
(October)
Camper, Cathy. Lowriders in Space; illus. by Raul the Third. Chronicle, 2014. Gr. 5-9
The catchy, slightly fantastical story about animal friends trying to make the per-
fect lowrider becomes memorable gold when paired with unbelievably intricate 
colored-pen drawings. (January)
Simpson, Dana. Unicorn on a Roll: Another Phoebe and Her Unicorn Adventure; 
written and illus. by Dana Simpson. Andrews McMeel. $9.99 Gr. 3-5
Phoebe and Marigold (an egocentric unicorn) have returned for another round of 
best friendship, witty takes on the world, and some minor school problems. Calvin 
and Hobbes fans, take note! (June)
Stevenson, Nicole. Nimona; written and illus. by Nicole Stevenson. HarperTeen/
HarperCollins. Gr. 7-10 
This impeccable graphic novel offers poignancy, mystery, adventure, superheroes, 
shapeshifting, and stunning illustrations, not to mention one of the most memorable 
and appealing protagonists around in brash young Nimona. (July/Aug)
January 2016 • 285
Abuse–fiction: Teague
Accidents–fiction: Bird
AdvenTure: Bracken; Chilton; 
durst; Fine; Jobling; Lu; nix; 
Philbrick; Potter; reeve; rich-
ards; riordan
African Americans: Goodman; nel-
son; rappaport
African Americans–stories: Herkert
Aliens–fiction: Hutchinson
Animals–stories: Arnold; escoffier
AnTHoLoGies: Kendall
Architecture: eggers
Art and artists: Herkert
Art and artists–fiction: Bennett
Art and artists–stories: Bang
Asian Americans–fiction: Kain
Aviation–stories: Paul
Babies–fiction: Blackford
Bears: Mattick
BedTiMe sTories: Mcdonnell; 
ray
BioGrAPHies: Herkert; Keyser; 
Mattick; McPhail; rappaport; 
rubini
Biracial people–fiction: shevah; 
Wallace
Blindness–fiction: Lindstrom
Books and reading: Agard
Bridges: eggers
Brothers–fiction: Lawrence
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Coakley; 
Fiore; Griffin;White
Building: eggers
Bullies–fiction: Kelley; McGovern, 
C.; Teague
Cats–fiction: Willems
China–fiction: Mead
Color: eggers
ConCePT BooKs: escoffier
Contests–fiction: Pounder
Cousins–fiction: rudnick
Creative writing: Winchell
Crime and criminals–fiction: Bird; 
Chilton; Hale; Larson; nijkamp; 
Turnage; Wallace
Current events: Buitrago; nijkamp
deafness–fiction: Mead
death–fiction: Wallace; Yates
depression–fiction: stork
deTeCTive sTories: Brown; 
spratt
disabilities–fiction: Lindstrom; 
McGovern, C.
disasters–fiction: Key
dogs–fiction: Grey; reeve; rosen; 
Willems
dogs–stories: ray
dreams–fiction: durst
drug addiction–fiction: Fiore
emotions–fiction: Colfer
emotions–stories: Bang; schwartz
engineering: eggers
Ethics and values: Hutchinson; Lu; 
McGovern, C.; McGovern, K.; 
rudnick; sutcliffe
Faith–fiction: rudnick
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPs 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
286 • The BulleTin
Families–fiction: Bird; downham; 
Kain; McGovern, K.; shevah
Families–stories: Bean; Matthies; 
schwartz
FAnTAsY: Bracken; Brambles; 
Buckley-Archer; Chilton; Coakley; 
durst; Fine; Goebel; Jobling; Kel-
ley; Lu; Mead; Pounder; richards; 
riordan; Teague; Townley; Wallace; 
White; Yates; Zimmerman
Fathers–fiction: shevah
Fathers–stories: Buitrago; Paul
Fear–stories: stead
FoLKTALes And FAirY TALes: 
Heapy
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: 
Johnston
Foster children–fiction: Blackford
Friends–fiction: Colfer; reeve; Teague; 
Townley; Willems; Zimmerman
Friends–stories: Mcdonnell; schwartz; 
stead
Future–fiction: sutcliffe
Ghosts–fiction: Price
GLBTQ people–fiction: downham
Grandparents–fiction: downham
Grief–fiction: Fiore; Lindstrom;Yates
Gypsies–fiction: Blackford
Health: Keyser
HisToriCAL FiCTion: Blackford; 
Larson; nix
History, U.S.: nelson; Goodman; 
rappaport
History, world: Agard
Holocaust–fiction: Cerrito
HuMor: Colfer; escoffier; Grey; 
Griffin; Hale; Heapy; Potter; 
Pounder; reeve; rudnick; spratt; 
Turnage
Hurricanes–fiction: Key
identity–fiction: Cerrito; McGovern, 
C.
illness: Murphy
illness–fiction: McGovern, K.
imagination–fiction: Colfer
imagination–stories: stead
immigrants–stories: Buitrago
Jews–fiction: Cerrito
Jobs–fiction: Buckley-Archer
Journals–fiction: Kelley
Kidnapping–fiction: sutcliffe
Language arts: escoffier; Paul
Latinos–fiction: stork
Latinos–stories: Buitrago
Libraries: Agard
Light: Beck
Literature, children’s: Mattick; Mc-
donnell; McPhail; rubini
Literature, English: Coakley
Lost and found–stories: Arnold
Magic–fiction: Fine; Johnston; Kelley; 
Lu; nix; Teague; Townley; White; 
Zimmerman
Medicine: Murphy
Memory–fiction: Zimmerman
Mining–fiction: Mead
Monsters–fiction: Jobling; Wallace
Mothers–fiction: downham
Moving–stories: stead
MYsTeries: Brown; Hale; Larson; 
Price; spratt; Turnage
Mythology, Norse: richards; riordan
Nature study: Beck
nazis–fiction: Brambles
night–stories: ray
orphans–fiction: Larson
Parents–fiction: Yates
Paris–fiction: Willems
Pets–fiction: Griffin
PoeTrY: nelson
Presidents–fiction: Gangsei
races–fiction: reeve
racism: Goodman
Reading aloud: Agard; rosen
Reading, beginning: Arnold
Reading, easy: Goebel; Grey; Griffin; 
reeve; Willems
reincarnation–fiction: Bird
relationships–fiction: Lindstrom
rHYMinG sTories: Matthies
roma–fiction: Townley
romance–fiction: Bennett; Bracken; 
Brambles; Brown; Kain
royalty–fiction: Chilton
school–fiction: Goebel; Kelley
school–stories: Bang; Bean; escoffier
school shootings–fiction: nijkamp
Science: Beck
January 2016 • 287
sCienCe FiCTion: Hutchinson
seasons–stories: Matthies
secrets–fiction: Bennett; Lawrence
sex: Keyser
sHorT sTories: Kendall; 
Winchell
slavery: Herkert; rappaport
space travel–fiction: Grey
spies and espionage–fiction: Gangsei
storytelling–fiction: Johnston
Storytime: Bean; Matthies
suicide–fiction: stork
suPernATurAL sTories: 
Buckley-Archer; Price
survivAL sTories: Kain; Key; 
Lawrence; Philbrick; rosen
susPense: Gangsei
synesthesia–fiction: Brown
Therapy–fiction: stork
THriLLers: Gangsei
Time travel–fiction: Bracken; Potter
Toddlers–stories: Heapy
vampires–fiction: Brambles
voyages and travel–fiction: Larson; 
Philbrick
Winter–fiction: Philbrick; rosen
Winter–stories: Arnold
Witches–fiction: Pounder; White
Women’s studies: Keyser
World War ii–fiction: Blackford; 
Cerrito
Writers and writing: McPhail
Writers and writing–fiction: Coakley
Zombies–fiction: Wallace
Library and Information Science:
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Library Trends ISSN: 0024-2594 / E-ISSN: 1559-0682
Portal: Libraries and the Academy ISSN: 1531-2542 / E-ISSN: 1530-7131
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
To us, the role of libraries and the 
future of information science clicks.
