T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
February 2015
Vol. 68   No. 6
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 68 (2015).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $62.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$103.00 (print); $115.00 (online);  
$144.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
February 2015
Vol. 68 No. 6
295  the BIg PICture
 
  Turning 15 on the Road to Freedom: My Story of the 1965 Selma Voting 
Rights March  by Lynda Blackmon Lowery as told to Elspeth Leacock and 
Susan Buckley; illus. by PJ Loughran and with photographs
296  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
304 •  Passenger on the Pearl: The True Story of Emily Edmonson’s Flight from  
Slavery  by Winifred Conkling
307 •  Stella by Starlight  by Sharon Draper
327 •  The Boy in the Black Suit  by Jason Reynolds
331 •  X  by Ilyasah Shabazz with Kekla Magoon
337  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
338  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $103.00 or electronic $115.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2015 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Turning 15 on the Road to Freedom: My Story of the 1965 Selma Voting Rights 
March copyright ©2015 by PJ Loughran and used by permission of Dial Books for Young Readers.
February 2015 • 295
the BIg PICture
Turning 15 on the Road to Freedom: My Story of 
the 1965 Selma Voting Rights March
by Lynda Blackmon Lowery; as told to Elspeth Leacock and Susan Buckley; il-
lustrated by PJ Loughran and with photographs
“By the time I was fifteen years old, I had been in jail nine times.” With that star-
tling opener, Lowery draws readers through a wormhole back to Selma, Alabama 
fifty years ago, and a civil rights episode in which she played a direct role. Many 
readers will have learned about Bloody Sunday in school, and hopefully many 
will have perused the likes of Russell Freedman’s overview, Because They Marched 
(BCCB 1/15). Encountering Lowery’s frontline report of the voting rights protests, 
though, kids will immediately grasp that this eyewitness account is the real deal—a 
once-in-a-lifetime experience seared so vividly into the author’s memory that the 
emotional impact resonates still.
Growing up black in mid-twentieth century Selma, young Lynda Black-
mon knew both the sting of bigotry—family and friends suspected that her mother 
would have lived had she received adequate medical care in the segregated white 
hospital—as well as the support and relative safety of the close-knit community 
in which she was raised (The Ku Klux Klan “rode through areas where they knew 
they could scare people, but they would not ride through the George Washington 
Carver Homes”). By thirteen, she had been stirred by the speeches of Dr. King 
(“We children didn’t really understand what he was talking about, but we wanted 
to do what he was saying”), and by fourteen she was regularly participating in 
well-organized marches with her schoolmates to demand voting rights for their 
parents, many of whom could not march on their own for fear of losing their jobs 
or even their lives. As the pace of the marches accelerated, so did the intensity of 
law enforcement pushback; youth was no longer a protection against being hauled 
off to jail—or even, as in Lynda’s case, being bused out of town and detained in 
a state facility without parental knowledge. Worse was to come: Bloody Sunday 
found Blackmon kneeling with the marchers at the Edmund Pettus Bridge, and 
then suddenly coming under attack. Burned by tear gas and suffering head injuries, 
Lynda was terrified by the brutality, but she was steeled with determination to march 
from Selma to Montgomery two weeks later “to show George Wallace what he had 
done to me. . . . I wanted him to see my swollen face and my bandaged head.”
Lowery’s narrative addresses just the questions a young audience is bound 
to ask. How did kids get out of school to march? Supportive teachers let them out the 
back door, and a rotating system of taking one another’s tests assured everyone who 
wanted to could march without failing school. How did they prepare for inevitable 
296 • The bulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
arrest? Pack bologna or peanut butter sandwiches, cookies, candy, and water (“jail 
food just wasn’t good”), and offer the police a name of a fictional character rather 
than your own. What’s up with all that singing? “Music is something that just stirs 
a person up. Back then songs were emotional tools.” Did they ever want to quit? “I 
was terrified. All I wanted was to go home. . . . I didn’t care if anybody ever voted. 
I just wanted to get home to my daddy so he could protect me.” Of course, Lynda 
didn’t back out after all, and by late March she was back on her feet, with her hot 
links and bologna and clean underwear packed, the youngest marcher to walk all 
the way to Montgomery. It wasn’t a straight shot to eyes-on-the-prize glory, either. 
The very sight of National Guardsmen with their rifles and bayonets—deployed to 
protect rather than confront the marchers—sent her into a breakdown that nearly 
got her dismissed from the ranks, and George Wallace never came out from behind 
the statehouse draperies to see Lynda’s injured face. But she completed the four-day 
trek, she learned how to “respect [fear] and how to embrace it,” and, in August of 
1965, she rejoiced to see her efforts culminate in passage of the Voting Rights Act.
Layout and narrative style make this one of those rare books that is genu-
inely accessible to a broad audience. Loughran’s muscular artwork, interspersed with 
tidily framed black and white photographs, is assertive, dignified, and sophisticated 
enough to have wide appeal. Lowery’s effortlessly intimate conversational tone (Lea-
cock and Buckley’s editorial work is so seamless as to be virtually invisible) brings this 
within range of both struggling and confident upper elementary and middle-school 
readers; the memoir’s function as primary source material recommends it to even 
older students; brevity, compelling cadence, and well-planned chapter breaks will 
make it an excellent readaloud. Even the end matter—background on the voting 
rights issue and a tribute to three people who died and one who was spirited away 
over the month of protests—flows gracefully from the main text. Schools seeking 
the “perfect” book for a One Book/One School reading selection have just struck 
gold. (See p. 319 for publication information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
AmAto, mAry Get Happy. Egmont, 2014 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-522-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-523-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Minerva and her best friend Fin approach life with gusto, and they support each 
other through everything life throws at them. When Minerva gets a package in 
February 2015 • 297
the mail from her estranged father on her sixteenth birthday, Fin is there to share 
her outrage. They put their feelings aside to audition for a job with a company 
that does kids’ parties, where they run into Hayes, a boy from school, and Cassie, 
a beautiful girl who triggers Minerva’s jealousy. Over the course of the next few 
months, Minerva works parties, buys the ukulele she didn’t get for her birthday, 
writes songs, and does some online stalking of her father and of Cassie. A shock-
ing revelation prompts Minerva to confront her father in an extremely public way, 
and when she finds out that her mother has been lying to her, her rage explodes. 
Minerva’s accessibility as a character renders her dramatic breakdown both believable 
and sympathetic, particularly as her mother’s bad behavior is also righteously called 
to account by both her father and her aunt. Her justified anger is complemented by 
her ability to see the humor of everyday situations, and her coping mechanism of 
writing songs forms an important point of connection with teens in similar situa-
tions. Lyrics are included throughout the book, with chord progressions at the end 
and a website where readers can hear the music played on a uke—if you’ve got one 
lying around, leave it out for readers to play with as they follow Minerva’s story.  KC 
Andersen, HAns CHristiAn The Snow Queen; tr. from the Danish by Anthea 
Bell; illus. by Yana Sedova. Minedition, 2014 56p
ISBN 978-988-8240-78-4 $19.99   
R Gr. 2-5
Bell’s translation of Andersen’s classic includes all seven of the “stories” that make up 
the original saga, from “The Fragments of a Mirror,” which explains the origins of 
the shards that eventually distort Kay’s heart and eyes, to “A Little Boy and a Little 
Girl”, which tells of Kay’s and Gerda’s friendship and Kay’s capture by the Snow 
Queen, to the other five stories that cover Gerda’s long journey to find Kay and her 
eventual rescue of him. The storytelling here is crisp but thorough, including the 
slightly rambling bit involving the flower garden, and noted translator Bell does 
not spare readers from some of the more intense details of the original, such as 
the Robber Girl’s threat to knife Gerda if she doesn’t settle down. Sedova’s illustra-
tions are dreamlike, full of cool blues and punctuated with ethereally stylized flora 
and fauna; occasional rugged texturing or spatters of thick snow add some ballast 
to the airiness of the art. Fairy-tale-loving kids and Frozen fans willing to expand 
their horizons beyond talking snowmen will find this a satisfying experience; the 
“seven stories” format would also lend this to a compelling weeklong readaloud for 
families stuck inside during bad winter weather.  JH
Andrews, Arin Some Assembly Required: The Not-So-Secret Life of a Transgender 
Teen; by Arin Andrews with Joshua Lyon. Simon, 2014 236p illus. with 
photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1675-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1677-1 $10.99   
R Gr. 8-12
Hill, KAtie rAin Rethinking Normal: A Memoir in Transition; by Katie Rain Hill 
with Ariel Schrag. Simon, 2014 264p illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1823-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1825-6 $10.99   
R Gr. 8-12
Best to read these two memoirs together, especially if you want both sides of the 
story about the well-publicized romantic relationship the authors shared. Katie and 
Arin were media gold: two transgender teens who found each other mid-transition 
298 • The bulleTin
and fascinated anyone who heard about them, with people new to the concept of 
trans wondering who was the boy, who was the girl, and how things “fit.” Questions 
of gender were always much less muddy for Arin and Katie, and both describe with 
absolute and unwavering certainty that they each knew from as early as they could 
remember that they were born in the wrong bodies. The memoirs follow the same 
format: earliest memories, coming to terms, family and community response, and 
a primary focus on adolescence. The authors throughout view their sexuality as 
predetermined, so there’s not a lot of nuance for readers who are questioning or 
thinking in more fluid terms. There’s no denying, however, a certain thrill in see-
ing how each individual narrative marks key moments in their relationship and its 
unraveling, and readers may find that to be the juiciest part of these two volumes. 
Both memoirs offer extensive further reading resources, many of which address 
concepts of continuums of sexuality and gender fluidity. Ultimately, the voices of 
transgender teens themselves are still relatively rare, and these brash, honest memoirs 
go a long way in filling a gap. A small photograph opens each chapter.  AS
Arnett, mindee Polaris. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2015 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223562-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223564-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Jeth Seagrave and the crew of the spaceship Avalon managed to rescue Jeth’s sister 
Cora from the Intergalactic Confederation, kill the traitorous agent pursuing her, 
and free themselves from a vicious gangster boss (in Avalon, BCCB 3/14). Now, 
with a sizable bounty on their heads and a government assassin on their trail, they’re 
in more danger than ever. Money and allies are in dwindling supply, so Jeth finds 
himself forced into a risky coalition with former enemy Daxton Price. As part of 
the deal, Jeth must lead a makeshift crew of family, friends, and foes to infiltrate 
a top-secret government lab, destroy an interdimensional mining facility, and free 
the Pyreans, a sentient alien race enslaved to power human space travel. The big-
gest threat amid all this might be Jeth himself, when a neural implant places his 
willpower under someone else’s control. All the strengths of the first novel carry 
over in this intense and powerful sequel, from the myriad pacts and betrayals to the 
intricate plans for subversion to the nail-biting near-escapes. An added heft to the 
emotional core of the story makes this space adventure equal parts heart-racing and 
heart-wrenching, and it gives the reader a chance to consider the true meaning of 
leadership and loyalty. Jeth and his friends really come alive here, and the strength 
of their bond is conveyed with a depth that will have readers feeling like part of the 
crew. Those who followed Jeth and friends into the Belgrave Quadrant previously 
will definitely want to buckle up for this edge-of-your-seat science fiction.  AM
Arnold, elAnA K. The Question of Miracles. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2015 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-544-33464-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Moving from sunny California to rainy Oregon is bad enough for eleven-year-old 
Iris, but her real grief is for the loss of her best friend, Sarah, who died in an ac-
cident only a few months ago. She defaults into friendship with geeky Boris, who 
loves Magic: The Gathering and lecturing on obscure subjects, and she finds him 
February 2015 • 299
a surprisingly sympathetic partner in her investigations into ways to communicate 
with lost loved ones. She’s even more intrigued to discover that Boris is being con-
sidered a possible miracle by the Catholic Church, having recovered as an infant 
from birth defects that should have prevented him from surviving; she thinks that 
learning more about his miracle may help her better understand why Sarah died 
when Iris didn’t (“Did the universe love Sarah less than Iris?”). Arnold makes Iris 
a highly compelling protagonist, managing to capture her resentment and anger 
while keeping her sympathetic as well as interesting. Her friendship with Boris 
evolves believably from a blend of annoyance and resignation to genuine apprecia-
tion, and her epistemological journey is realistically knotty and disappointing as 
adult attempts at wisdom repeatedly miss the mark (“It seemed to her that Father 
Santorno’s response was the worst answer she had ever heard”). Iris’ grief for Sarah 
is unusually well captured, touching on the huge importance of the best friend 
relationship and the amputation felt after such a loss. This is therefore a tender yet 
smart story that will resonate with readers who work through their emotions by 
brain as well as heart.  DS
AveyArd, viCtoriA Red Queen. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2015 [400p]
Trade ISBN 978-0-06-231063-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-231065-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Like all other Reds, seventeen-year-old Mare Barrow leads a life of poverty and 
destitution, picking pockets and barely making ends meet for her family, while 
the Silvers—people with stunning supernatural abilities—flaunt their power and 
wealth. A chance encounter with a mysterious stranger lands her the sweet gig of a 
servant’s position in the royal house, until another chance reveals latent superhu-
man powers of her own, to the horror of both Mare and the royal family. Now 
the royals are trying to pass her off as a misplaced Silver, betrothing her to their 
second son to keep an eye on her and perhaps use her as a force to quell a budding 
Red rebellion. Mare has no plans to obey quietly, however, especially after she 
learns of the death of her brother at Silver hands, and she finds a surprising ally 
in the prince as she joins the revolutionary forces as a spy. Readers will be familiar 
with many of the elements here, from the oppressive government to the reluctant 
heroine to the stirrings of rebellion, but Aveyard uses this conventionality to her 
advantage, setting her audience up for a gaspworthy twist that reconfigures nearly 
every character’s role and leaves Mare with no one to trust but herself. The plot turn 
also provides nuance to characters that initially seem two-dimensional and casts 
their previous actions in a more complex light. This blend of fantasy and dystopia 
will be an unexpected and worthy addition to many genre fans’ reading list.  KQG 
Axelrod, KAte The Law of Loving Others. Razorbill, 2015 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-789-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 10-12
Seventeen-year-old Emma goes home from boarding school for Christmas break 
to find her mother in the midst of a paranoid frenzy severe enough to require hos-
pitalization. The revelation of her mother’s schizophrenia rocks Emma’s world and 
sends her skittering through a bewildering mix of emotions and questions: how 
could she not have known? Will she, too, suffer a psychotic break? Are her panic 
300 • The bulleTin
attacks a precursor? Her disorientation sends her into the arms of a boy she meets at 
a friend’s house, who happens to have a brother at the same facility as her mother; 
his empathy is more satisfying than her boyfriend’s, and the two end up sleeping 
together, which adds guilt to her stew of emotions. While Emma’s path through 
this difficult time is littered with credibly impulsive and narcissistic decisions, her 
reflections on her motivations are much more insightful than the acts themselves; 
instead of a high school junior, she reads like a twentysomething who’s had a lot of 
therapy. The posh boarding school and urbane atmosphere in some ways account 
for her attitudes toward casual drug use and open sexuality, but her naïveté about 
her mother’s breakdown is at odds with the close relationship between Emma and 
her mother that the book tries to establish retrospectively. The maturity of her 
reflections does provide helpful context for readers, however, so while Emma as a 
character is ultimately hard to believe in, the situation and vagaries of coping with 
a parent with a serious mental illness are well handled.  KC 
BAng, molly Buried Sunlight: How Fossil Fuels Have Changed the Earth; by 
Molly Bang and Penny Chisholm; illus. by Molly Bang. Blue Sky/Scholastic, 
2014 40p (The Sunlight Series)
ISBN 978-0-545-57785-4 $18.99   
Ad Gr. 2-5 
The latest entry in Bang’s Sunlight Series focuses on the Sun’s role in creating the 
coal, oil, and natural gas that currently dominate our fuel usage. The body of the 
text explains the cycle of oxygen and carbon intake and output among living enti-
ties, and how the slight accumulation of carbons over millions of years has led to 
stores of fossil fuels embedded within the Earth—an accumulation humans are 
now depleting. Bang nuances her explanation carefully to acknowledge the his-
torical vagaries of planetary warming and cooling, and the limits of our certainties 
concerning our altered environment. She is, however, firm in her admonishments 
on the need to control fossil fuel usage. The book divides its audience awkwardly, 
though, with six pages of back matter that amounts, in essence, to a second book 
aimed at an older readership. In this section Bang reprises the main text in more 
technical terms and even addresses components of the discussion that were not 
covered at all, such as the role of geological events in the carbon cycle, the role of 
geothermal energy, aerobic and anaerobic organisms, and the complexity of feedback 
loops within the Earth’s energy systems. The main part of the text is illustrated 
in the series’ signature style of deep blues and texturizing swirls of pin dots and 
tiny geometric motifs; the additional matter, though, is illustrated only with spot 
art and could have been much more effectively presented with the diagramming 
presented for younger readers in the body of the work. Nonetheless, science teach-
ers who have been using this series to supplement their curriculum will be pleased 
that Bang continues to expand her discussion. No source notes or suggestions for 
further reading are included.  EB 
BlACK, Holly The Darkest Part of the Forest. Little, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-21307-3 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-21305-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
The residents of Fairfold have an uneasy alliance with the dangerous Fae that live 
in the surrounding forest: Fairfold natives are protected, but the many tourists who 
February 2015 • 301
visit the small town to get a glimpse of its main attraction, a horned boy sleeping 
in a glass coffin, are fair game for the Fae. Siblings Hazel and Ben have grown up 
knowing to scatter oatmeal beneath their pillow, to carry grave dirt along with their 
cellphones, and to have iron on hand when entering the forest; all the warnings, 
however, didn’t stop Hazel from making a bargain with the Fae seven years ago to 
ensure that Ben gets into an elite music academy. Now the horned boy has woken 
up, a monstrous creature threatens the town, and Hazel’s realizing it’s time to repay 
her debt. Black returns here to the dark faery realm that spurred her initial success, 
and if anything, she’s only gotten better, writing with an elegant, economical preci-
sion and wringing searing emotional resonance from the simplest of sentences. The 
juxtaposition of the dark Fae world, clearly threatening but shrouded in mystery, 
against the quotidian, everyday town of Fairfold, replete with cheap souvenir 
shops and bored teenagers, is captivating, particularly as residents come to realize 
that their détente with the Fae is coming to an end. Most haunting, though, is the 
relationship between Hazel and Ben, a contradiction of affection and envy that 
is saddled with secrets and sacrifices that neither understand entirely. Fans of the 
author’s Valiant (BCCB 10/05) and Ironside (BCCB 9/07) will be pleased to see 
Black back in the realm of faeries.  KQG 
Bolden, tonyA Capital Days: Michael Shiner’s Journal and the Growth of Our 
Nation’s Capital. Abrams, 2015 90p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0733-9 $21.95   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Among those serendipitous treasures unearthed in the Library of Congress archives 
is Michael Shiner His Book, the journal of a Washington D.C. Navy Yard worker 
who began life as a slave, died a free man, and kept a remarkable account, not of 
his own life, but of the places and activities around him. Bolden uses this journal 
as the framing work for her story of the early days of the nation’s capital, from 
roughly the time of its invasion and burning by the British in 1814 (which Shiner 
witnessed as a boy), through its reconstruction, and up until the time of Shiner’s 
own death in 1880. Bolden makes a laudable attempt to balance Shiner’s story 
with the capital’s, but Shiner’s precise vantage point as a laborer means that read-
ers learn more about the details of daily work at the Navy Yard and less about the 
design and construction of the city, despite what the title implies. To redress the 
problem, Bolden includes timelines of D.C. events at the end of each section and 
lengthy quotations that reveal the change in attitudes toward the city as it morphs 
from makeshift meeting places amid a swamp to the formal layout of dignified 
government edifices we recognize today, additions that are informative but only 
tangentially connected to the journal. Period illustrations and maps supplement 
the text; an index, source notes, bibliography, and concluding remarks on Bolden’s 
research and Shiner’s family are appended.  EB
Brown, JAye roBin No Place to Fall. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 354p
ISBN 978-0-06-227099-3 $17.99  
R Gr. 9-12
Between paternal adultery, sisterly drug dealing, and maternal belief that love and 
prayer will fix everything, Amber’s family is pretty dysfunctional. Good girl Amber 
loves them but dreams of another kind of life, one where she can sing her songs and 
escape her small North Carolina town. When a new family moves to town, Amber’s 
familiar friendships become complicated; her gay best friend, Devon, has a crush 
302 • The bulleTin
on the probably straight, certainly arrogant city boy, Kush, while both Kush and 
his live-in cousin Sean seem interested in Amber. Amber herself is hopelessly in 
love with Devon’s brother, Will, but follows her inclination to do something really 
nice for Sean that unfortunately has the potential to ruin her life in more ways than 
one. Through all of her questionable choices and stupid mistakes, Amber remains 
completely sympathetic, with a mellifluous narrative voice that renders her aspira-
tions to become a singer utterly believable. Will turns out to be a pleasant surprise; 
his worthiness as a suitor for Amber is questionable at first, but his patience and 
persistence win the reader over to Amber’s way of thinking. Establishing a firm 
sense of place and using Kush as an obnoxious foil, Brown immerses readers into 
a fully realized world of ordinary, flawed people who respond to situations in ways 
that are painfully credible, highlighting their ability to forgive even awful things, 
and focusing on the big-hearted kindness of people who know that neither holding 
on to hurt nor running away is an option.  KC 
Brown, rACHel mAniJA Stranger; by Rachel Manija Brown and Sherwood 
Smith. Viking, 2014 [432p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01480-4 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Ross runs out of prospecting luck when he’s near Las Anclas, the town that exists 
where Los Angeles used to be before an unnamed natural disaster blighted the world. 
Fortunately for him, people there shelter him and make him part of their commu-
nity, a place where both the Changed (remaining humans who have acquired strange 
abilities or experienced physical mutations) and those unaffected are working hard 
to create a true thriving settlement. Outside seems fairly dreadful, with murderous 
crystal trees and power-hungry people, so Ross is tempted to just take a deep breath 
and call the place home for a bit, if he can shake the unwanted attention of some 
dangerous folks outside the town. The third-person narration focalizes effectively 
through several different teen citizens of Las Anclas; their overlapping relationships 
tie the story together while the different styles and typefaces emphasize the diversity 
of this town created from motley survivors. As characters only know what they can 
see for themselves, there are also clever, albeit frustrating, moments of irony where 
the reader knows more than the speaker. While this at least initially fits into the 
category of apocalyptic dystopia, there is actually a hint of utopia in Las Anclas, a 
genuine yearning for acceptance, inclusion, and peace that will likely resonate with 
readers even after the sci-fi/dystopian details have faded.  AS
Bruel, niCK A Wonderful Year; written and illus. by Nick Bruel. Porter/Roar-
ing Brook, 2015 40p
ISBN 978-1-59643-611-4 $17.99 
 Ad 5-8 yrs 
Bruel takes readers on a strange trip through the four seasons as experienced by a 
little girl, her talking cat, and her massive purple hippo Louise. In Part One, “Winter 
Wear,” she peeks out the door at an inviting wintry snowscape, but before she can 
go outside she is barraged with on- and offstage demands to don layers upon layers 
of outerwear. By the time she reaches the door, it’s already spring, so she climbs 
backwards out of her rigid snowsuit (“So long! See you next year!” she and the 
snowsuit say as they part company). In Part Two, “Spring Splendor,” she’s outside 
weaving a fantastical poem, but when she and her dog attempt to recruit her cat to 
February 2015 • 303
join their imaginary play, he rebels, as every self-respecting cat would: “Cut it out! 
Stop Desist End Halt Cease Quit!” Summer (Part Three, “Summer Sidewalks”) is 
so hot the girl melts into the pavement and is saved by quick-witted Louise, who 
slurps her through a straw into a cup, puts her in the freezer, and retrieves her (now 
a block of ice) and thaws her again outside. Fall (Part Four, “Fall Foliage”) finds the 
girl in dialogue with a tree that is alarmed at the prospect of shedding its leaves, 
but she manages to restore its confidence in the cycle of nature. The absurdity is 
often amusing, especially in the personified inanimate objects (the can of beans has 
its own television show). The pacing is uneven (Spring in particular lags), though, 
and the mood shifts even beyond seasonal reason in the thoughtful but wordy au-
tumnal section. Bruel combines comic book and picture-book layouts, rendering 
his heroine and her animal companions with a heavy solidity that plays comically 
against the airy-fairy unreality permeating her Everygirl experiences. Unfortunately, 
this also gives the figures’ movements a flatness, and the palette borders on garish. 
Books about the seasons are generally as predictable, well, as the seasons, but rely 
on Bad Kitty’s Bruel to elicit a chuckle or two.  EB
BrugmAn, AlyssA Alex as Well. Holt, 2015 [224p]
ISBN 978-1-62779-014-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Australian teen Alex was born intersexed, but her parents decided to rear her as a 
boy. Now, at fourteen, despite the fact that she has both a boy’s and a girl’s voice 
inside her head, she has declared to her parents that she is a girl, and the family 
goes into a tailspin. Some searching reveals an initial, annulled birth certificate 
citing her as female, and she also finds a record of failed daycare placements that 
marked her as a challenging kid and learns that the medication she has been on all 
her life is in fact testosterone. At first, Alex is a bit disorienting as a character; she 
is angry, and when she sees herself in the mirror as a girl, the boy in her is turned 
on and masturbates (in fact he remains something of a jerk when it comes to girls). 
However, the book masterfully shifts reader sympathy toward her and away from 
Alex’s mother once it becomes clear that she has lied to Alex about the purpose of 
her meds, even attempting to slip them in her food. Fortunately, Alex eventually 
achieves détente with her father and within herself, and her striking androgynous 
looks land her a modeling gig that enables her to make her own decisions. The story 
of biological intersex experience is rarely told, and this one is well related, with bal-
anced attention to the challenges it poses for parents, peers, and the intersex person; 
the inclusion of characters who respect the stops, starts, missteps and courage of 
teens negotiating their gender identities adds an additional layer of sensitivity.  KC 
CHerry, Alison For Real. Delacorte, 2014 293p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99086-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74295-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97992-6 $10.99  
R Gr. 8-10
Eighteen-year-old reality-TV fanatic Claire Henderson sees a round-the-world race 
reality show as a chance for some one-on-one time with her older sister, Miranda, 
while Miranda seeks an opportunity to get revenge on her cheating ex-boyfriend, 
also a contestant on the show. Competing and conspiring in front of a camera crew 
quickly gets complicated, especially when the show throws the contestants a roman-
304 • The bulleTin
tic curveball and the race becomes part dating game. Paired with an adorable guy, 
Claire doesn’t mind the twist, but now she’s faced with a dilemma: does she betray 
her sister for a chance at world-class romance? Readers won’t be surprised when 
the answer is no, but like any good travel narrative, this frothy if implausible story 
is all about the journey. Narrator Claire gets most of the attention and character 
growth, but other contestants gain dimension as she learns to see beyond their 
surfaces, leaving only cheater Samir to wallow in irredeemable smarminess. There’s 
the typical meet-cute and flirty banter between Claire and her dating partner Will, 
but this is ultimately a story of sisters. True to its reality-show setting, the novel 
follows its well-loved formula closely, but a few surprises make up for its overall 
predictability. A sunny alternative to A. S. King’s darker, more realistic Reality Boy 
(BCCB 10/13), this will certainly please reality TV fans as well as anyone looking 
for a heartwarming summer adventure.  AM
CoAts, luCy Beast Keeper; illus. by Brett Bean. Grosset & Dunlap, 
2015 [144p] (Beasts of Olympus)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-448-46193-9 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Ten-year-old Pandemonius—better known as Demon—is just minding his busi-
ness, chatting with the chickens of his small Greek village, when the god Pan shows 
up, tells him to pack his things, and carts him off to Mount Olympus. Demon is 
actually a half-god, half-mortal child, and the gods take an interest in their mortal 
offspring if they happen to show a special talent; Demon’s ability to converse with 
animals has caught the attention of Pan, who desperately needs to replace the care-
taker of the Stables of the Gods, i.e., the home of mythological beasts. Despite a few 
nearly fatal encounters with a griffin and a giant scorpion, Demon manages pretty 
quickly to wrangle the beasts, setting up a smooth (and far less smelly) operation. 
His biggest challenge, however, comes when he’s asked by Hera to repair the nine 
heads of her hydra after the creature is defeated by Heracles. There’s an episodic 
element to the chapters of this transitional reader by British author Coats, and the 
quick pace and goofy humor (with plenty of scatological jokes) keep interest high. 
Some of the mythological references and vocabulary may fly over the head of a few 
younger readers, but a helpful pronunciation guide and glossary are available to 
those who would like to know exactly how to say Hephaestus. Beans’ art is zippily 
cartoonish, and fans of Disney’s Hercules drawn by the visual similarities will enjoy 
this lively take on Greek mythology.  KQG
ConKling, winifred Passenger on the Pearl: The True Story of Emily Edmonson’s 
Flight from Slavery. Algonquin, 2015 [176p]
ISBN 978-1-61620-196-8 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
In 1848, a group of more than seventy slaves from the Washington D.C. area 
hired the service of a sympathetic ship captain and made a desperate run for 
freedom aboard the cargo schooner Pearl. Foul weather forced the ship to shelter 
in a protected bay, while the treachery of a black cab driver put the slaves’ owners 
and the law on their trail. The mission was scuttled, and most of the slaves were 
February 2015 • 305
sold South by their disgruntled owners. Conkling traces the atypical experiences 
of the six Edmonson siblings, particularly the youngest, thirteen-year-old Emily 
and fifteen-year-old Sarah, who quickly caught the attention of abolitionists. The 
very real threat of the girls being sold into the New Orleans sex trade made them 
poster children for the abolitionist cause, but even their champions were divided 
on whether raising money to “buy” the girls (which was eventually what happened) 
was the most prudent, or even ethical, way to counter the evil of slavery. Conkling 
is a fine narrator, crafting a compelling opening scene concerning the Edmonson 
mother’s advice on why slaves should never marry, segueing into the tragic escape 
attempt and the last-minute reprieves that kept the girls off the auction block, and 
ending with a family reunion (complete except for one child who was never found) 
that few such families ever enjoyed. Readers familiar with the trials of Solomon 
Northup (Stolen into Slavery, BCCB 4/12) will find this equally involving. Notes, 
bibliography, family tree, and index are included.  EB
CzuKAs, liz Top Ten Clues You’re Clueless. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2014 289p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227242-3 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
It’s Christmas Eve, which means that the high-end grocery store where Chloe works 
will be packed. Fortunately, she’s working with Tyson, her crush, as well as four other 
teens whom she would like to get to know better, given that she has only recently 
moved to town. An inveterate list-maker, she has set goals to learn something new 
about at least three of them and to give Tyson a ride home in hopes of sparking 
a relationship. When it is discovered that someone has looted the donations box, 
suspicion falls on the six of them, and they are asked to stay after work until the 
police arrive. From there, the plot belongs entirely to John Hughes, with each of 
these disparate characters—Gabe, the obnoxious rich boy; Sammi, the hardened 
foster kid; Zaina, the strikingly beautiful Muslim; Micah, the morally upright 
home-schooler; Tyson, the black kid aspiring to college; and Chloe, the slightly 
geeky diabetic—revealing their secrets and learning to trust one another. While 
each character assuredly represents a type, Czukas gives them enough flesh to make 
them interesting and likable incarnations, and Chloe’s bright narrative voice and 
funny lists keep the Breakfast Club scenario from outlasting its freshness date. At 
heart a celebration of teens at work and just a celebration of teens in general, this 
offers a peppy alternative to high-concept realism, perfect for fans of Joan Bauer 
and E. Lockhart’s lighter fare.  KC 
dAle, KAtie Little White Lies. Delacorte, 2014 369p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98960-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74067-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89973-7 $10.99  
R Gr. 10 up
Nineteen-year-old Lou Shepard has changed her last name for her first year at college 
in order to escape the notoriety of a crime that left her beloved cousin in a coma 
and her uncle in prison for killing her suspected assailant. Lou’s alias also facilitates 
her real agenda: to track down and destroy the attacker’s alleged accomplice. With 
the help of one old friend, hacker Kenny, and one new one, aspiring journalist 
306 • The bulleTin
Vix, Lou infiltrates the life of Christian Webb, aka Leo Niles, the guy she thinks 
got away with murder. Pretending to be Christian’s friend turns out to be easy, but 
as the two spend more time together, fighting the desire to be more than friends 
seems impossible. Soon Lou realizes that Christian might just be innocent, but 
violent vigilantes are still on his trail looking for justice. This powerful suspense 
story succeeds largely on the strength of its plotting. The slow, deliberate reveal 
of clues, both to what Lou thinks happened and what really happened, will draw 
readers in, while a series of unexpected plot twists will keep them guessing right 
up until the end. Christian/Leo is a little too earnest and forthright, undermining 
the believability that he ever seemed guilty, but Lou is intriguingly, authentically 
erratic, torn between grief, guilt, rage, and her unwanted affection for the guy she 
wants to hate. The rest of the cast is equally enigmatic in the best way, each with 
their secrets, lies, and hidden agendas. A worthy addition to the growing field of 
New Adult, post–high school fiction, this well-crafted mystery-romance is sure to 
please the sophisticated young adult crowd as well.  AM
dAmiCo, ginA Hellhole. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-544-30710-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12 
Max is nervous about stealing a toy to cheer up his dying mom, but he never 
imagined the consequence of his bad deed. After finding a hole that turns out to 
be a gateway, he is now saddled with a demon from hell who calls himself Burg and 
subsists entirely on a steady supply of junk food. Of course, as happens when devils 
appear at your door, a deal is offered, and before he knows it, overconfident Max 
has further bargained himself onto quite the slippery slope of trouble, all to save 
his beloved mom. He’s got help in the form of Lore, a girl who has tangled with 
(and lost to) demons before, but for much of the story, Max is a guy trying (and 
mostly failing) all on his own to fix his world. A dying mom isn’t usually the stuff 
of great humor, but this novel is unapologetically funny. The snarky Burg (impec-
cably developed as a narcissistic ass with a tiny sliver’s worth of heart of gold), Max’s 
tendency to catch things one step too late but with wry humor, and the absurd 
piling on of events all work to make a quite amusing, if very dark, novel. Fans of 
Damico’s Croak trilogy (Croak, BCCB 3/12, etc.) will be right at home with the 
author’s emphasis on grim topics made sardonic, and horror buffs in general will 
find plenty of scary undertones to this multilayered plot.  AS
de lA PeñA, mAtt Last Stop on Market Street; illus. by Christian Robinson. Put-
nam, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25774-2 $16.99  
R 4-8 yrs
As little CJ bounds out the church doors on Sunday morning, “the outside air 
smelled like freedom,” so he’s more than a little miffed by the fact his grandmother 
has further plans for his day. CJ is something of a whiner, but for every complaint, 
Nana has an answer. Too rainy? It looks like the tree is drinking through a straw. 
His friends get car rides? Well, they don’t get to meet people on the bus. What’s up 
with the blind guy in sunglasses on the bus? “Boy, what do you know about seeing? 
February 2015 • 307
. . . Some people watch the world with their ears.” Their destination only makes 
things seem worse—the “crumbling sidewalks and broken-down doors, graffiti-
tagged windows and boarded-up stores.” Once CJ and his nana settle in to their 
weekly job, working at a soup kitchen, the boy admits he’s glad they came. As in 
Maribeth Boelts’ Those Shoes (BCCB 12/07), this young protagonist comes around 
to realize that poverty is relative, and that while he envies the greener grass on the 
other side of the fence, his life looks verdant to people in true need. Bright colors 
and streamlined shapes keep the urban setting and its denizens cheerful, emphasizing 
the positive message rather than the neighborhood’s seediness; the multicultural, 
multi-age cast of extras underscores the fact that want crosses demographics, and 
that there’s no shame in benefiting from a free meal. CJ is a completely believable 
little guy in both his natural desire to set his own agenda and his tacit admission 
that doing good feels good. This is a lesson that goes down easy.  EB
demetrios, HeAtHer I’ll Meet You There. Holt, 2015 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9795-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Before she can head off to art school and leave her trailer park behind, Skylar’s got 
to finish her stint at the rundown Paradise Motel, keep looking after her flaky and 
now unemployed mother, and generally avoid trouble—especially boy trouble. 
When Josh, former coworker and now Marine, returns from a stint in Afghanistan, 
however, she finds herself helplessly drawn to him. Josh definitely has feelings for 
Skylar, but he’s also fighting some pretty nasty demons in his own head after losing 
several buddies and a leg to the war. The plot is at times contrived, but no matter: 
Skylar and Josh have both character and chemistry in a way that elevates them 
above the wounded warrior and damsel in distress tropes they initially seem to 
be. The development of their romance is gradual, stalled by realistic concerns and 
obstacles, and it’s refreshing to see that in the end, neither must give up or “fix” 
major parts of their identity to have a healthy relationship. Josh is still a hoorah, 
beer-chugging, bro’s man and Skylar is still a feisty free spirit who has a tendency 
to judge and sometimes even condescend to others. They make no huge sacrifices 
(Josh stays in in town while Skylar goes to school) or big gestures, but rather small 
adjustments, meaningful apologies, and tough decisions, giving this romance 
both poignancy and authenticity. Josh’s perspective offers valuable insight into the 
emotional trauma of war, even for a guy who is seemingly handling it well. This 
well-crafted romance is sure to please fans of contemporary realism, and the witty 
dialogue may snag a few John Green fans as well.  KQG 
drAPer, sHAron m. Stella by Starlight. Atheneum, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-9497-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
The Klan may be active in Stella’s Depression-era town of Bumblebee, North 
Carolina, but her close community wraps around her like a warm hug. After she 
and her brother, sneaking out in the middle of the night, see a cross-burning at 
a nearby pond, they alert the men of their neighborhood, who meet and decide 
that they won’t be intimidated. Her mother responds by organizing a community 
308 • The bulleTin
potluck feast, and the storytelling and jokes fly fast and thick, reminding all of them 
that they are strong enough to stand against any enemy. Stella’s father, inspired and 
joined by the pastor and a few other men, registers to vote, taking and passing an 
unfair test and paying an unfair fee, sticking to their purpose. The Klan responds 
by burning the home of one of the men, but the entire black community and some 
of the white people in town pour out enough donations for the family to share. 
Each of the events in the story provides contextual information about everyday life 
in a segregated Southern town in 1932, but in a nonintrusive way, and the third-
person narration of Stella’s thoughts and experiences is accessible and compelling. 
There are no disreputable characters among Stella’s neighbors, and while all of the 
mean-spirited or dubious characters are white, there are also helpful and welcoming 
white store-owners as well, lending some nuance to the overall picture. Despite 
the home-burning and the intimidation, the scenes of actual violence are relatively 
mild, and the stories-within-the-story are cleanly funny or uplifting, making this 
a good choice for a readaloud for younger students.  KC 
dunn, PAtriCiA Rebels by Accident. Sourcebooks Fire, 2014 [320p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4926-0138-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Things haven’t been easy for Mariam, an American-born Egyptian. All she wants is to 
be accepted as a normal American teen, but when she and her best friend, Deanna, 
wind up in jail after a party, her parents send them both to Egypt, thinking that a 
few days with Mariam’s strict sittu (grandmother) will set them straight. Mariam is 
surprised, then, to find that her grandmother is a strong-willed, feminist Muslim 
with a history of activism. They go to the pyramids like tourists, but things really 
start to get interesting when protests begin in Tahrir Square. In the space of five 
days, both girls fall in love with hot Egyptian guys who have the energy to return 
their affections while helping to organize the protests, Mariam’s grandmother re-
unites with an old flame, they participate in the protests, Mariam’s attitude toward 
being Egyptian completely changes, her grandmother suffers a heart attack, and 
Mariam learns to perform Muslim funeral rituals. This crammed agenda leads to 
some abruptness in the narration, with Mariam changing her mind from sentence 
to sentence while her grandmother dispenses some kernel of wisdom with every 
utterance. The readerly whiplash is forgivable given the timeliness of the subject 
matter, however; the fanciful travelogue/romance overlay humanizes the political 
substrate and draws attention to the connections between American teens and 
those involved in the protests by highlighting the commonality of their ages and 
concerns. Mariam’s reconciliation with her heritage via her feisty grandmother is 
clearly contrived to appeal to feminist sensibilities, but such education through an 
appealing character can’t help but have beneficial effects.  KC 
elliott, Jenny Save Me. Swoon Reads, 2015 [288p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-250-06147-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 9-12
Hardened by the experiences of her single mother, Cara is in no hurry to find 
romance, but when she is thrown overboard while whale-watching and rescued 
by a very cute guy, she can’t deny the spark between them. David feels it, too, so 
they are devastated to find out that he is her new student teacher and therefore off 
February 2015 • 309
limits. Meanwhile, Cara’s best friend, Rachel, is determined to find love, so when 
a sketchy boy shows her some attention, she immediately ditches Cara for Ethan 
and undergoes a sinister wardrobe and personality change. At the same time, an 
ethereally beautiful boy named Garren attaches himself to Cara, offering her sup-
port without arousing any romantic feelings. It soon becomes clear that occult 
forces are at work: Ethan and Rachel are demon-possessed through the influence 
of Amber, a girl who is seeking revenge on Cara. As Amber ramps up her evil 
plans, both Cara and David are in danger, but Garren has a plan to save them that 
ultimately reveals his true identity. Compulsively readable, with occult twists that 
will fascinate believers and nonbelievers alike, this romance argues that human 
lovers can triumph against malevolent supernatural forces only with the help of 
benevolent ones, offering an implicit (and sometimes explicit) critique of flirting 
with the paranormal in affairs of the heart. Unfortunately, the language is often 
annoyingly static and repetitive, and the book’s hints at an otherworldly connection 
between some violent transient orcas and the demonic forces on land fizzles to a 
convenient and obvious symbol before disappearing without comment in the final 
scenes. The pacing of the romances, descents into occult behavior, and rescue from 
same is nonetheless remarkably swift, making this a quick, undemanding read with 
striking moral clarity in its gothic elements.  KC 
englisH, KAren Skateboard Party; illus. by Laura Freeman. Clarion, 
2014 115p (The Carver Chronicles)
ISBN 978-0-544-28306-0 $14.99  
R Gr. 3-5
In this new outing about the kids at Carver School, Richard can’t wait to go to the 
bigger kids’ skateboard party and show off the smooth moves he hopes to develop 
by then. However, he’s had some focus problems on his schoolwork—he slacked on 
his part of a group report and missed school the day it was presented, and his scores 
on spelling and math tests have been poor—and now his teacher wants to talk to 
his parents. His delaying of passing on that important message only gets him into 
further trouble, so has he blown his chances at the skateboard party for good? As 
with her Nikki and Deja books (Nikki and Deja, BCCB 2/08, etc.), English gets 
to the heart of kid logic and reality here; Richard isn’t a problem child, just a nice 
guy who loves to please his teacher, dislikes confrontation, and hasn’t quite matured 
enough to grasp the consequences of procrastination (“Why hadn’t he just done 
his report in the first place?” Richard wonders. “That would have been so easy”). 
The warm details of Richard’s African-American family are tempered by the real-
ism of life with a bunch of boisterous boys (as when Richard dribbles soda on his 
sleeping brother’s face). Freeman’s sturdy black and white spot art focuses on kid 
action, but there are also some revealing looks at Richard’s worried face as he tries 
to tackle—or avoid tackling—his obstacles. English continues to earn her place as 
one of the most reliable early-grade authors, and readers who haven’t discovered 
the Carver School kids will find this a satisfying entry point.  DS
fleming, denise Go, Shapes, Go!; written and illus. by Denise Fleming. Beach 
Lane/Simon, 2014 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8240-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8241-8 $10.99  
Ad 3-5 yrs
A little mouse on wheels directs labeled geometric elements to gradually assemble 
themselves into a monkey figure: “Bounce, OVAL, up and down./ Roll, CIRCLE, 
310 • The bulleTin
round and round.” When the mouse accidentally knocks down the assembled 
monkey, sending the shapes flying, they reassemble themselves not as a monkey 
but a cat, who chases the mouse until he makes another monkey out of new shapes. 
The rhyming text is contrived and sometimes awkward, and the ending is puzzling 
(the reassembled monkey’s parts are components that weren’t part of the original 
monkey). Nonetheless, the liveliness of the mouse’s edicts and the visual breakdown 
of the way a larger, complex figure can be crafted by combining individual shapes 
will garner audience attention. The illustrations, which feature backgrounds poured 
by Fleming, cut shapes from handmade paper, and pastel accents, are somewhat 
reminiscent of the work of Lois Ehlert, down to the labeling for each shape. Some 
of the background colors unfortunately don’t offer sufficient contrast to the shapes 
being arranged, making them difficult to distinguish at times. Despite its flaws, this 
might make a diverting precursor to art activities or a useful addition to a study of 
geometric shapes for the preschool or primary-grade crowds.  JH
formAn, gAyle I Was Here. Viking, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-451-47147-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
Cody can’t understand why her vibrant friend Meg committed suicide during her 
first semester at college, so when she travels to Seattle to pick up Meg’s things, 
Cody delves into the reasons behind Meg’s excruciatingly well-planned exit. There, 
she finds Ben, a guitar player with steamy eyes who makes a convenient scapegoat 
when she finds out that he slept with Meg and then ditched her; something about 
him, however, makes it impossible for her to blame him entirely. She also finds an 
encrypted file on Meg’s computer that ultimately points to something much more 
sinister than a disappointing love affair: Meg had found an online suicide support 
group that encourages rather than discourages taking one’s own life. When Cody 
goes undercover to ferret out the person who helped Meg plan her death, she taps 
into a dark place in her own psyche that frightens her but ultimately helps her come 
to terms with the loss of a friend who felt like her better half. Forman sifts through 
Cody’s shifting psychological landscape with a sure and delicate hand, developing 
a character that readers will recognize themselves in. Cody’s envy of Meg’s family 
and exuberant stance toward life, her unwillingness to see anything in Meg that 
challenged her fantasy of her friend’s perfections, and her lack of self-awareness 
regarding her own strength all translate into intimate yet familiar reflections of the 
structures that undergird important friendships. While Cody is somewhat let down 
by the fact that the adults all knew things that it took her trouble and some danger 
to find out, the readers won’t be; the trajectory of her investigation leads her on a 
path to self-understanding that wouldn’t have been possible without it, and brings 
her to Ben in the end, which is exactly where she needs to be. It also highlights 
the seductive potential of yet another way the internet can prey on vulnerabilities, 
making this a relevant book as well as an absorbing one.  KC 
freemAn, mArtHA The Orphan and the Mouse; illus. by David McPhail. Holiday 
House, 2014 220p
ISBN 978-0-8234-3167-0 $16.95  
R Gr. 4-6 
Mary, a mouse and an “art thief” by trade (the mice in her colony covet the post-
age stamp “pictures” found in the office of the human orphanage where they live) 
February 2015 • 311
bonds with eleven-year-old Caro, an orphan girl, when kind-hearted Caro rescues 
Mary from the orphanage cat one night. Their contact brings the threat of an 
exterminator (for which the mouse colony’s loathsome leader blames Mary), so 
the colony abandons their home and leaves Mary there on her own. Meanwhile, 
orphanage caretaker Mrs. George secretly engages in a sideline of baby stealing and 
selling; when Mary witnesses her dealings, the mouse alerts Caro with a carefully 
nibbled newspaper article about a missing baby. Between Mary and a stray mouse, 
Caro and the other orphans, and a few good grownups, both Mrs. George and 
the extermination plans are thwarted, and peace (and the mouse colony—minus 
the leader, who met an accidental death) returns to the orphanage. This is part 
“The Lion and the Mouse” and part Annie, with plenty of Stuart Little (referenced 
throughout) thrown in to boot, and the result is a satisfying and successful mixture 
of orphan- and animal-fantasy tropes. Mary and Caro are both sympathetic hero-
ines, while the swift but careful pacing moves the story along at a gratifying clip. 
McPhail’s occasional monochromatic illustrations occasionally miss the tone of the 
story but are overall a charming addition. Fans of orphan stories, The Borrowers 
(BCCB 11/53), or tales about talking mice will unite over this title.  JH
frey, JAmes Endgame: The Calling; by James Frey and Nils Johnson-Shel-
ton. Harper/HarperCollins, 2014 465p (Endgame)
ISBN 978-0-06-233258-5 $19.99 
 Ad Gr. 7-12
Twelve thousand years ago, humans were given free rein of the Earth and told to 
raise a new generation of Players for each of the twelve original lines of people. 
Those chips have been called in, and the Game has now begun. Only one Player 
will survive, and the rest of the players plus all of humanity (minus the ones who 
are in the winner’s line) are doomed. The puzzles themselves are difficult, and the 
players are busy trying to murder one another before they find three trickily hid-
den keys. Diligent readers with extremely sharp minds for puzzles and teasing out 
clues have an extra incentive to read this novel: a huge gold prize for the person 
who finds it first (and the remaining two books have similar contests promised). 
Unfortunately, the choppy sentences, startlingly flat dialogue, and incomplete 
world-building make the potential reward one of the few compelling reasons to 
read this weighty volume. While some of the characters are intriguing, others are 
caricatures of evil, which may be realistic given the fact that most of these kids 
were raised from infancy to become murderers, but it still makes it impossible to 
truly care about them (and ironically renders them expendable to the reader even 
as the book seemingly protests their disposability). The few clever characters, the 
multiplatform tie-ins, and the gimmick of the prize may still generate interest, 
especially among fans of puzzle-based tales.  AS
HAle, BruCe Big Bad Detective Agency; written and illus. by Bruce Hale. Scho-
lastic, 2015 [128p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-66537-7 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-66538-4 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-74728-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Wolfgang the wolf will fess up to stealing a chicken or two—or maybe twenty—but 
he’s pretty sure the moniker of Big Bad Wolf just isn’t fair. When the Three Little 
312 • The bulleTin
Pigs (who are not little at all but hefty porkers running a construction business) 
accuse Wolf of breaking into their houses, the royal guard gives Wolf until sundown 
to either confess or find the real culprit. He reluctantly teams up with Ferkel, the 
Pigs’ little brother and an aspiring detective, to solve the mystery and clear himself. 
Their encounters with various suspects provide the most giggleworthy moments 
here, especially for readers familiar with the original tales. Hansel and Gretel, for 
example, are not sweet neglected children but surly teenage thieves; Ursula the witch 
is in love with one of the seven dwarfs; Jack of beanstalk fame is more a klutz than 
a trickster; and Puss in Boots is hilariously feline, hissing and glaring disdainfully 
at Ferkel and Wolf as they try to interrogate him. Simple sentences and repeated 
phrases give this easy reader plenty of accessibility, while the occasional challeng-
ing word offers more independent readers an opportunity to stretch their skills. 
Cartoonish black and white art depicts lively critters and a refreshingly diverse 
human population for a fairy-tale world. Readers will be happy to return for Wolf 
and Ferkel’s next big case.  KQG 
HAnlon, ABBy Dory Fantasmagory; written and illus. by Abby Hanlon. Dial, 
2014 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4088-4 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 2-3 
To say that six-year-old Dory is imaginative is an understatement, but her older 
siblings, Luke and Violet, don’t appreciate her inventiveness. When Violet threatens 
Dory with a tale of a sharp-toothed robber named Mrs. Gobble Gracker who will 
be after Dory if she keeps acting like such a “baby,” the fib completely backfires as 
Dory is intrigued by the imaginary villainess: “Is she sneaky? Will I have to battle 
her? Does she wear a long black cape? Is it made out of fur? Is it real fur or fake 
fur?” Dory’s willingness to rescue a bouncy ball from the toilet proves her mettle to 
her siblings, though, and she finally gets to revel in some dramatic group play with 
them. Dory’s palpable longing to be part of her siblings’ activities adds just the right 
amount of heart-wrench to the story, and the family dynamics are humorously true-
to-life. Eye-rolling older sibs will perhaps sympathize more with Luke and Violet, 
but most kids will be greatly amused by Dory’s comic escapades. The numerous 
and highly expressive monochromatic illustrations in childlike pencil style move 
easily from illustration to carrying the story, complete with speech bubbles. Fans 
of Ramona the Pest (BCCB 6/68) will particularly love this, and adults looking for 
a rib-tickling readaloud selection will find Dory fills the bill.  JH
HArwell, Andrew The Spider Ring. Scholastic, 2015 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-68290-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-68291-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Grandma Esme has always been a little bit kooky, especially with her affinity for 
spiders, but seventh-grader Maria finds a refuge from the trials of adolescence—
namely a snotty girl at school—in her visits to her grandmother’s cluttered, old 
house. Maria is devastated when the old woman passes away, but she’s even more 
suspicious, since Esme passes away just days after claiming that the spiders were 
after her. Maria inherits her grandmother’s spider ring and soon realizes it gives her 
control over a specific species of spider, the brown recluse, but she also discovers 
February 2015 • 313
that she is only one of eight such ring holders and the most powerful one—the 
Black Widow—is the likely murderer of Esme and is hot on Maria’s heels. Non-
arachnophobic readers looking for a carefully plotted, well-told introduction into 
the horror genre will find this exactly what they seek. Harwell’s style is direct and 
frills-free, focusing mainly on Maria’s efforts to understand the ring and then de-
feat the Black Widow; the story also includes some pleasingly quotidian elements, 
including Maria’s coping with school bullying and her dealings with her male best 
friend. The comeuppance for the villain has a delightful ew factor, while Maria 
learns that with great power comes great responsibility.  KQG 
HAtfield, rutH The Book of Storms. Holt, 2014 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9998-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Eleven-year-old Danny is used to his parents chasing storms, but when they don’t 
return home after a giant one, he shakes himself out of his fear and decides to 
find them. Aiding him is his brand new magical object, a stick that allows him to 
communicate with elements of the natural world, though Danny is still very much 
on his own as a kid with scarce clues and a desperate longing to find his beloved 
parents. Danny is being sought even as he’s searching, though: Sammael, an evil, 
haunting otherworldly creature wants the stick for himself. The gripping pace and 
complex moral musings (even Sammael experiences his own sort of flawed love 
for an animal companion, and the personification of Death is flawlessly nuanced 
in her uneasy neutrality) pair with a setting that is so vividly described that it be-
comes a character in itself. Readers will eagerly anticipate the next volume in this 
anticipated trilogy, particularly after a breathtaking final chapter that leaves more 
open than it resolves.  AS
HAutAlA, BetH Waiting for Unicorns. Philomel, 2015 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42631-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
In the wake of her mother’s death from cancer, twelve-year-old Talia is forced to 
spend the summer in the Arctic as her whale-researcher father heads out to study 
belugas. Churchill, Manitoba, is a small, secluded town, but it’s also the place where 
her parents met, and Sura, an Inuit friend of Tal’s mom, offers Tal a picture of her 
mother—young, carefree—that Tal has never seen before. A visiting ornithologist 
and his grandson also offer some insight and wisdom on grief and loss, and as 
Tal awaits her father’s return, her emotions thaw with the summer melt and she’s 
finally ready to close the “Mom-sized space” that has distanced her from her father, 
who has shut himself off with grief. Tal’s matter-of-fact narration of her mother’s 
death through flashbacks and memories has a raw simplicity to it, and her pain 
is evident both in the things she chooses to tell as well those she chooses to omit. 
While the secondary cast mainly serves as a vehicle for Tal’s healing, her process 
rings with authenticity—several heart-to-heart talks with her father, for example, 
are followed by both of them returning to their old, isolating habits, and it’s clear 
that their recovery will include a realistic amount of fits and starts. Hautala mines 
the frigid setting for some exquisitely wrought metaphors of sadness and grief, and 
Tal’s reflections on her situation are lyrical and yet still appropriate, given her age. 
314 • The bulleTin
Readers who were touched by Holly Goldberg Sloan’s Counting by 7s (BCCB 9/13) 
will find this to be a similarly moving tale.  KQG 
Hill, KAtie rAin Rethinking Normal: A Memoir in Transition; by Katie Rain 
Hill with Ariel Schrag.
See review under Andrews, p. 297.
HowArd, A. g. Ensnared. Amulet, 2015 404p 
ISBN 978-1-4197-1229-6 $17.95  
R Gr. 9-12
Alyssa Gardner’s last showdown with Queen Red (in Unhinged, BCCB 2/13) ended 
with her mother trapped in a fast-decaying Wonderland and her two loves, Jeb and 
Morpheus, imprisoned in the treacherous mirror-land of AnyElsewhere. Now, in 
a desperate bid to save herself, her kingdom, and the people she loves, Alyssa sets 
out on a final quest, this time with her father in tow. Their first stop: AnyElse-
where, where former rivals Jeb and Morpheus have formed an unlikely bond, and 
from where Jeb seems strangely unwilling to depart. Unfortunately, the Queen of 
Hearts lurks nearby, ready to tear their hearts out for her ally Queen Red, while the 
deposed queen of Wonderland makes her own plans to retake the throne. Further 
complicating her mission is Alyssa’s own reluctance to choose between her nether-
ling and her human destinies. Torn between two worlds, two selves, and two loves, 
Alyssa must find a way to make herself whole enough to defeat Red once and for 
all. Howard’s weird and wonderful trilogy comes to an excellent close in this final 
volume. Still a lively fantasy adventure, this novel sheds the family drama to focus 
more completely on Alyssa’s personal journey, while showcasing the logic puzzles, 
reimagined familiar characters, and playful creepiness that make the series work. 
The ties to Carroll’s fantasy classic are looser here, giving the author more room 
for original, largely successful world-building, and the novel benefits greatly from 
the change of scenery as new horrifying and fascinating characters are introduced. 
Various threads that connect Wonderland’s history to Dodgson and Liddell family 
legacies are tied up nicely, and a satisfying conclusion that will please fans of both 
romantic heroes gives this strong fantasy heroine the happy ending she deserves.  AM
HowArd, J. J. Tracers. Putnam, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17373-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
It’s just another day in Cam’s bad-luck life when a beautiful girl uses him as a 
parkour landing spot, inadvertently destroys his bike, and disappears into the 
New York City subway. With a wrecked bike, Cam loses his job as a bike mes-
senger, making it impossible to repay his loan from the Chinese Mafia. Cam starts 
to see the mysterious girl around town and soon finds himself adopted by her 
crew of fellow tracers, whose illicit activities may provide Cam with a way out 
of all his troubles. Cam settles in to his new life and a romance with dream-girl 
Nikki, but team leader Miller’s friendly façade begins to crack, revealing a dark, 
unpredictable side and a possessive hold over Nikki. Now Cam has to decide if 
he’s out to save himself, or if he’ll risk it all to save his new family. This action 
thriller mostly uses plot-heavy dialogue to link a series of action set pieces, but the 
myriad parkour races and close-call break-ins are described in compelling detail,  
February 2015 • 315
and the underlying narrative of a good boy trying to make good packs a surprising 
emotional punch. Cam is an honorable guy forced into dishonorable situations, 
and readers will share his sense of desperation as they root for him to find a way 
out. The plot follows a well-trodden path to redemption and escape, but the pre-
dictability is part of the appeal, and the novel manages to feel familiar rather than 
stale or overdone. A solid, fast-paced read, this is a fine quick pick for reluctant 
readers, and it will give audiences some cinematic-type thrills while they’re waiting 
for summer action-movie season.  AM
HuBert Adrian and the Tree of Secrets; tr. from the French by David Homel; illus. 
by Marie Caillou. Arsenal, 2014 123p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55152-556-3 $18.95  
Ad Gr. 9-12
This graphic novel translated from French explores sexual identity through Adrian, 
a kid who is stuck in a town and Catholic school where being gay is abhorrent. 
He finds adventure and potential love in Jeremy, a rebel who is willing to explore 
things secretly with Adrian, but when Jeremy’s girlfriend exposes their dalliance, 
Adrian is perhaps worse off than before. The retro color palette and curvy lines 
soften the often-harsh text, providing an effective contrast. The most successful 
panels are wordless, visually capturing the desperation and hollowness that Adrian 
often feels as he moves through days that all blur together. Unfortunately, there’s 
an uncomfortable amount of exposition about coming out and gay identity that’s 
shoehorned into dialogue; the scenes where Jeremy and Adrian are alone are par-
ticularly disappointing, as authenticity is buried under programmatic discussions. 
In addition, the book feels more “important” than genuine, providing emotional 
homework rather than inspiring connection. Even with the tone quibbles, this is still 
a lush, thoughtful graphic novel; quiet readers, wherever they are on the sexuality 
spectrum, may relate to Adrian’s painful reminder that life in the background may 
be safer, but it is also terribly lonely.  AS
isBell, tom The Prey. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2015 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221601-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221604-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
In the post-apocalyptic Republic of the True America, martial law has been im-
posed and survivors have been divided into different camps based on their worth 
to society. Alas, Book doesn’t know he’s in the Less Thans camp, and that when he 
graduates he will not, in fact, become a leader of men but instead will become fodder 
for the human-hunting games of those more privileged. Once Book finds out the 
truth, he seeks escape, even if there is really no other place to go. Book’s narration 
is counterpointed with third-person narration focalized through Hope, describing 
her and her twin sister Faith’s experiences as they are found after hiding for years 
and used in hideous experiments. There are no obvious best-case scenarios in this 
compellingly drawn dystopian future. Unfortunately, while the world-building is 
effective, the character development is less so: Book and Hope fall mostly flat as 
caricatures, respectively, of the quiet kid who must emerge as a leader and the fear-
less chick who doesn’t know how to save herself because she’s spent her life saving 
others. In addition, awkward descriptive phrases and an overreliance on exposition 
disguised as dialogue break the flow of the novel. Nevertheless, the cliffhanger 
316 • The bulleTin
ending and intriguing (if unrelentingly horrible) setting may be enough to make 
readers keep an eye out for the likely sequel.  AS
JAy, stACey Princess of Thorns. Delacorte, 2014 389p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99101-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74322-8 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 8-10
This blend of original fantasy and fairy-tale elements starts with a new end to 
Sleeping Beauty’s story, wherein Beauty sacrifices her own life to save her two chil-
dren as they escape the ogre queen’s dungeon. Ten years later, seventeen-year-old 
Aurora, disguised as a boy, sets out to avenge her mother’s death, rescue her brother 
(who has recently been kidnapped by the queen), and prevent the fulfillment of a 
prophecy that foretells that Aurora’s blood will open the gates to the underworld. 
Meanwhile, Prince Niklaas is trying to avoid his own doomed fate by finding a 
suitable bride to marry him before he turns eighteen and transforms into a swan, 
as his ten brothers before him have. Niklaas and “Ror” meet up on the road and 
pool their resources, with Niklaas firmly believing Ror is a boy until he realizes the 
truth; the two are then faced with yet another curse—one that leaves any man who 
kisses Aurora helpless to her will. The cadre of curses makes for some interesting 
obstacles, and the banter between rakish Niklaas and feisty Aurora is crackling with 
chemistry and wit; both heroes have an appealing mischief that adds levity to their 
curse-ridden circumstances. The pacing is uneven, however; the initial frontload 
of exposition is insufficiently detailed to fully shape the world, and important plot 
points are glossed over in lieu of plentiful dialogue. Rom-com readers might still 
find this satisfying, as the will-they/won’t-they connection between Niklaas and 
Aurora takes center stage and plays out to a well-deserved happy ending.  KQG 
JinKs, CAtHerine A Plague of Bogles; illus. by Sarah Watts. Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-544-08747-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-544-08735-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Bogle exterminator par excellence Albert Bunce (whom readers met in How to Catch a 
Bogle, BCCB 10/13) is called out of semi-retirement to grapple with a fresh string of 
child disappearances in the Newgate Prison area of Victorian London. He has a new 
apprentice, Jem, but as tragedies mount, he must also call upon the services of Ned 
and Birdie, his former helpmates who are now leading more stable lives. They take 
on bogles from drains and crypts and sewers, ventilation ducts and charity school 
larders, but not all monsters are preternatural: Jem also pursues his private agenda 
of taking revenge on Sarah Pickles, the villainess who once sold him for bogle bait. 
Jinks reprises her previous bogle-ish title with lots of action and an undercurrent 
of sly humor, supplying return readers with all the gory monster-vanquishing they 
have come to expect. Best of all, she lays the groundwork for a further entry, with 
one evil human on the loose and a government commission for the bogle hunt-
ers to form the covert Committee for the Regulation of Subterranean Anomalies. 
Sounds like another winner in the works.  EB
February 2015 • 317
JoHAnsson, J. r. Cut Me Free. Farrar, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30023-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Piper and her younger brother Sam were reared off the grid and subjected to vi-
cious, depersonalizing abuse by their parents until the day Sam died, her stepfather 
made seventeen-year-old Piper dig Sam’s grave, and Piper employed the shovel to 
kill both her parents. Armed with some family savings, Piper launches a new life 
as Charlotte, an identity invented by a good-hearted mob son named Cameron, 
whose interest in her soon becomes romantic. As she is learning how to negotiate 
her new life, however, she can’t help but recognize the signs of abuse in a young 
Thai girl she sees in a park, and her bold rescue of nine-year-old Sanda results in 
Piper’s committing yet another murder. When she begins to receive threatening 
messages, she wonders which of the people she thought she killed didn’t stay dead. 
Piper’s and Sanda’s skills and resilience are far-fetched in light of the intensity of 
their abuse, but their bond is heartening, particularly as they work on develop-
ing self-defense tactics and continually check with each other regarding who feels 
safe. Ultimately, then, while not as psychologically resonant or credible as Scott’s 
Living Dead Girl (BCCB 9/08) or Patricia McCormick’s Sold (BCCB 12/06), this 
suspenseful novel focuses attention on the plight of enslaved and abused children 
through an action/adventure plot, drawing on the satisfaction of liberating agency 
and righteous justice outside the law.  KC
King, wesley The Incredible Space Raiders from Space! Wiseman/Simon, 
2015 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2319-9 $16.99
E-book ISBN 978-1-4814-2321-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Jonah’s been dropped onto a spaceship with a crew of other kids and told that he’s 
going to be facing the baddest of bad guys in a few weeks, so he’s got no choice 
except to get it together and be a Space Raider hero. The problem is that the wrong 
Jonah was grabbed; this Jonah has thought of himself as a wimpy loner, and he hasn’t 
actually been destined for greatness. As he’s stuck on the ship for now, Jonah makes 
the best of it, determined to find his shipmates who keep disappearing, even if they 
do all consider him a mistake and outcast. While the big mystery of the ship (who 
the kids are, who the bad guys actually are, and what the secret plot behind it all 
is) is sharp and clever, most of the revelations come awkwardly in an expositional 
rush at the end. In addition, Jonah’s transformation from nobody to universally 
adored hero requires several saves and personality leaps that go beyond straining 
credulity. Even so, readers seeking a swift-moving, exciting romp through a giant 
spaceship full of cool (and creepy) nooks and crannies will be sucked right in, and 
they likely won’t give much thought to the novel’s shortcomings.  AS 
318 • The bulleTin
lAKe, niCK There Will Be Lies. Bloomsbury, 2015 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-440-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-441-1 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
As Shelby Cooper lies badly hurt after an accident, a coyote warns her that two lies 
and a truth will soon end her sheltered, predictable life. Soon after, her formerly 
staid mother packs their belongings into a rental car and tells Shelby that they must 
run: first from the father she thought was dead, then from the police, and finally 
from mysterious dangers her mother won’t explain. As they travel across Arizona, 
donning disguises and conning innocent bystanders, her mother’s behavior becomes 
increasingly erratic and dangerous, until a final, stunning revelation leaves Shelby 
suddenly on her own. At the same time, Coyote returns to lead her on a different 
journey through the Dreaming, where he insists she must defeat the Crone and 
save the Child to prevent the end of the world. As parallels between her waking and 
dreaming life emerge, though, Shelby begins to realize that the child she is saving 
may just be herself. Lake employs a powerful combination of realism and myth to 
craft a resonant story of survival. Shelby, who’s deaf, is a bright, resourceful teen 
despite her previously overprotected life, and her adventure through the Dreaming 
puts her inner strength on full display. The allegorical tale provides hints about 
the primary narrative’s underlying secrets without revealing too much, giving the 
novel the added flavor of a mystery. The story loses some of its momentum in the 
last third, but Shelby remains the solid center throughout, and readers will find her 
unfolding past compelling enough to follow her through to the end.  AM
lAurie, viCtoriA When. Hyperion, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-4847-0008-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Maddie Fynn usually keeps quiet about her gift for predicting 
the day a person will die, but a well-intentioned warning to a woman about her 
son’s imminent death soon lands Maddie at the center of an FBI investigation 
when the child turns up viciously murdered. More death dates foretell the murder 
of local teens, but Maddie’s efforts to save them quickly make her a suspect and 
the center of a community witch-hunt. Maddie finds a reluctant ally in an open-
minded agent, but as they piece together clues to the killer’s identity they find that 
Maddie may be at the center of the case after all. Established adult mystery writer 
Laurie sticks to her strengths here, creating a taut, well-plotted thriller with a dash 
of the paranormal. The strong build-up, including a few twists, keeps the story 
moving, while the surprising resolution and final showdown will have readers on 
the edge of their seats. Though the storytelling is the main draw, Maddie adds her 
own charm as a determined young woman with too many responsibilities, both 
familiarly familial and uniquely supernatural. Descriptions of the murders are only 
mildly gory, so readers wary of horror can get their thrills without the blood and 
guts, and the novel packs in plenty of fast-paced, nail-biting fun, perfect for fans 
of Barnes’ The Naturals series (The Naturals, BCCB 12/13, etc.) or Winnacker’s 
Imposter (BCCB 10/13).  AM 
February 2015 • 319
levine, gAil CArson Writer to Writer: From Think to Ink. Harper/HarperCol-
lins, 2014 295p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227530-1 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227529-5 $6.99  
R Gr. 6-12
In 2009, Gail Carson Levine began a blog that became a writer’s advice column in 
response to her readership. This book represents a best-of collection of the entries 
in that blog, but the posts have been expanded, shaped, and collected into coher-
ent topics ranging from the many ways a writer might schedule her writing time, 
to places to get ideas, to developing character, plot, and other aspects of story, to 
tips on achieving clarity in your prose. In addition to these post gleanings, Levine 
has added chapters on poetry writing and on blogging itself. As with her previous 
writer’s advice book, Writing Magic (BCCB 1/07), each chapter ends with a set 
of prompts for practicing the principles discussed in the chapter, along with her 
two rules, “Have fun, and save what you write!” In this title, however, she quotes 
directly from people who have posted questions to the blog as her impetus for 
each chapter’s subject matter, and while the book may be entered at any chapter, 
the prompts themselves often build cumulatively on the story snippets she uses to 
inspire and illustrate her points. The snippets themselves are marvelously diverse, 
opening the possibilities for writing in a multitude of genres. By the end of the 
book, if a reader has faithfully followed her instruction, he or she will be well on 
the way to becoming a writer.  KC
littlefield, soPHie Infected. Delacorte, 2015 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98983-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74106-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98357-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Carina has lost all of her family after her mother and, years later, her uncle die, 
both in suspicious accidents. She still has her boyfriend, but her connections to a 
corrupt security organization through her family (connections she only recently 
learned the truth about) soon put him in danger as well. In fact, the two have been 
infected with something that seems to be enhancing their senses, but if they don’t 
find an antidote soon, they will die. High-speed chases ensue with various bad 
guys, and the lightning-fast pace keeps things moving. Unfortunately, there’s little 
that hasn’t been seen before, from the “love you forever” teen romance between 
physically perfect characters to the Eastern European villains waiting in the wings 
to the top-secret research that lands in the wrong hands. In addition, awkward 
metaphors and stiff dialogue break the flow of the technology thriller core. Given 
the too-familiar plot, the likeliest audience will be die-hard romance readers who 
get weak in the knees at the idea of a first love that only grows stronger through 
adversity and does indeed seem fated to last forever.  AS
lowery, lyndA BlACKmon Turning 15 on the Road to Freedom: My Story of the 
1965 Selma Voting Rights March; as told to Elspeth Leacock and Susan Buckley; 
illus. by PJ Loughran and with photographs. Dial, 2015 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4123-2 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 4-9
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 295, for review.
320 • The bulleTin
mArrin, AlBert FDR and the American Crisis. Knopf, 2015 324p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75360-9 $27.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75359-3 $24.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75361-6 $11.99  
Ad Gr. 9-12
In the introduction to this ambitious and sprawling biography, Marrin lays out a 
number of questions that arise from the “hard, even morally doubtful decisions” 
that Franklin Roosevelt made throughout his presidency. Teens who are politically 
engaged—or at least aware of national news—will readily discern that understand-
ing FDR will take them a long way toward understanding hot-button questions 
in contemporary governance. As Marrin demonstrates, however, understanding 
Roosevelt is no easy matter. Readers meet the son smothered by motherly love, 
who learns early on to smile broadly and do exactly what he wants. They meet a 
disengaged student, a dilettante career-hopper, an adulterous husband, a charm-
ing but emotionally distant father, and above all, a savvy politician with a gift for 
schmooze and the hubris to believe himself capable of tackling any crisis, including 
the Great Depression and World War II. As in his biography of John Brown (A 
Volcano Beneath the Snow, BCCB 4/14), Marrin refrains from passing judgment 
but presents his subject at his best and worst and guides readers to draw their own 
conclusions. Any reader willing to take on nearly three hundred pages of double- 
columned text, however, is unlikely to need the lengthy chapters of background 
history, which often leave FDR on the sidetrack of his own story. The narrative 
also stumbles and stalls from time to time as Marrin pauses to explain quotations, 
or to include entertaining vignettes that carry the whiff of apocrypha. Although 
this may be a daunting undertaking for students with only casual interest in the 
thirty-second president, the breadth of coverage, notes, bibliography, and index 
will make it a useful resource for researchers.  EB
mArrin, AlBert Thomas Paine: Crusader for Liberty. Knopf, 2014 165p il-
lus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96674-3 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86674-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38605-0 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-9
Marrin’s engaging offering, part biography and part intellectual history, introduces 
a historical figure who’s a lot more interesting and relevant than readers might 
have guessed. There’s plenty to booktalk here, from Paine’s personal life (the failed 
marriage he would never discuss), to his influence in two revolutions (his writing 
may have underpinned the French Revolution, but he barely escaped France with 
his life), to his death (drunken and friendless) and its aftermath (his remains were 
scattered and eventually disappeared). Marrin focuses on three of Paine’s major 
documents, “Common Sense,” “Rights of Man,” and “Age of Reason,” pulling 
meaningful quotations for closer examination that demonstrate why revolutionaries 
loved him, soldiers cheered him, mainstream religion despised him, and presidents 
continue to cite him. Black and white period reproductions enhance the spacious 
layout, and source notes, a bibliography, and index round out the text.  EB 
February 2015 • 321
mArtin, george r. r. The Ice Dragon; illus. by Luis Royo. Tor Teen, 
2014 121p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7653-7877-4 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7653-7924-5 $9.99  
R Gr. 5-8
According to Adara’s family, the winter’s cold seeped into her mother’s womb on 
the night Adara was born, leaving Adara a chilly, emotionless child and killing her 
mother. It’s true that in her seven years Adara has neither cried nor smiled much, 
and most of her affection is saved for the winter creatures—the ice lizards, the snow 
birds—that arrive with the first snowfall and keep her company while her family 
keeps their distance. When a rare ice dragon appears, Adara is able to tame and 
ride the beast herself, an unimaginable feat for even one of the king’s experienced 
dragon riders, much less a girl. War, however, soon threatens Adara’s small village, 
and she and her dragon must defend family and friends, ultimately paying a steep 
price. While set in the same world as Martin’s adult Games of Thrones series, this 
tale, previously published as a short story, has a rhythmic, direct tone that echoes 
an oral narrative, giving the endeavor a folkloric feel and softening some of the 
more heartbreaking elements. Adara is a distant but nonetheless appealing heroine, 
and her struggles with fitting in lend her story a specific entry point for younger 
readers. Blue-inked text is set on creamy white paper, while Royo’s intricate illus-
trations—also in blue ink and wash—perfectly evoke the mood of the plot events, 
from the icy calm of a winter’s night to the frigid tension of the wait for battle. A 
bittersweet ending provides contentment for both Adara and readers, making this 
a harrowing but ultimately rewarding and unusual addition to the genre.  KQG 
mCCArtHy, megHAn Earmuffs for Everyone!: How Chester Greenwood Became 
Known as the Inventor of Earmuffs; written and illus. by Meghan McCarthy. Wise-
man/Simon, 2015 42p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0637-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0638-3 $10.99  
R* Gr. 2-4
Having forayed into inventor biography in her delightful Pop!: The Invention of 
Bubble Gum (BCCB 6/10), McCarthy turns here not only to invention but its 
historiography as she explores the development of earmuffs and of the narrative 
of their invention in her usual droll, compact form. The book begins by chroni-
cling some early ear-protecting duds and patents, then relays the story of Chester 
Greenwood, who “had gigantic ears” and who is widely thought to be the creator 
of earmuffs, despite evidence that versions of such ear warmers existed well before 
he was even born. The text then goes back to question the discrepancies between 
the two narratives (“What do you think really happened?”), dig deeper into patents, 
address the inventors (like Edison as well as Greenwood) whose contribution was 
to improve an existing idea rather than be the first to come up with it, and relate 
the revival and enhancement of Greenwood’s legend years after he died. The result 
takes McCarthy’s already zippy and effective exploration into thought-provoking 
new territory for young readers, cleverly unpicking the story behind the story and 
making the point that innovation rarely occurs in isolation. McCarthy’s familiar 
pop-eyed human (and animal) figures get added comedy from the rhyming round-
ness of their earmuffs, and the running gallery of patents and devices that threads 
through the pages evinces a contagious delight in the Age of Invention. Aside from 
322 • The bulleTin
being an enjoyable outing in its own right, this would be a great opening to kickstart 
kids’ critical thinking by encouraging them to turn the same kind of interrogation 
onto other histories and biographies. An extensive note about McCarthy’s process in 
creating the book, an explanation of patents, and a bibliography are appended.  DS
mCCArty, Peter First Snow; written and illus. by Peter McCarty Balzer + Bray/
Harper Collins, 2015 34p
ISBN 978-0-06-218996-7 $16.99  
R 4-6 yrs
Young dog Pedro arrives (alone and by taxi) at his canine cousins’ house prepared 
for snowy weather, but he doesn’t expect to like it: “Because it is cold. And I don’t 
like cold.” When the next day dawns snowy, Pedro’s snow-happy cousins nudge 
the pup outside. He eschews the pleasures of making snow angels (“I don’t want 
to lie down in the snow. It is cold”) and catching snowflakes on his tongue, but he 
gives sledding a try. Despite a tumble, Pedro enjoys the ride, and when his cousin 
Sancho slyly suggests, “Maybe you would like the snow in the shape of a ball?” 
Pedro enthusiastically joins in the ensuing snowball fight. There’s a hint of possible 
sadness in Pedro’s solo journey to stay with cousins who live far from his home 
and in his reluctance to accept his new environment that tempers the sweetness 
of this story. The easy vocabulary, short sentences, and clean font will also make it 
accessible for some primary-grade readers. McCarty’s illustrations, done in colored 
inks and watercolors on watercolor paper, are as fetching as ever, and the taupe-on-
cream (only the clothing is brightly colored), animal-inhabited world he creates 
is immensely appealing. Floppy-eared Pedro is an adorable, sympathetic little guy 
and the cast of animal characters are winsome overall; fans of McCarty’s previous 
titles will spot bunny Chloe and cat Henry among the group. Use this to bring a 
slightly different perspective to a snowy day.  JH
monir, AlexAndrA Suspicion. Delacorte, 2014 295p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99136-3 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74389-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37250-3 $10.99  
Ad Gr. 7-12
After her parents’ tragic death, Imogen Rockford left her family’s English manor, 
but now at nearly eighteen, she’s been called back to take up the reins of the vast 
estate. Imogen is reluctant, especially since her inheritance results from the seem-
ingly accidental death of her beautiful young cousin, Lucia. Her only joy is an 
expected reunion with childhood friend and first crush, Sebastian Stanhope, but 
upon her arrival, Sebastian is strangely distant. Meanwhile, the head housekeeper 
clings unnaturally to Lucia’s memory, leaving Imogen feeling like an interloper. 
Stranger still, Imogen begins to see ghostly reflections and hear eerie voices around 
the house, and she begins to suspect that something sinister is going on with the 
garden maze, where both her parents and her cousin died. With its layers of mystery 
and hidden dangers, both human and paranormal, this gothic-lite romance deliv-
ers a fast, entertaining page-turner. The set-up is compelling, a potent mixture of 
wish-fulfillment wealth and cursed inheritance, and the entwining narrative strands 
provide plenty of intrigue. The novel ultimately is overly front-loaded, though, with 
the energy dissipating soon after the setup and the resolution underwhelming by 
comparison. The supernatural elements add a spark of extra charm but don’t fit 
organically with the rest of the story, instead seeming tacked-on and underdevel-
February 2015 • 323
oped. Gestures to du Maurier’s classic Rebecca should please gothic romance buffs, 
though, and while Moore’s Amber House (BCCB 11/12) covers much of the same 
ground to better effect, this novel is engaging enough and leaves enough unresolved 
that readers may reach for likely sequels.  AM
myers, e. C. The Silence of Six. 
Adaptive Books/Adaptive Studios, 
2014 [360p]
ISBN 978-0-9960666-2-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Former gray-hat hacker Max Stein has now settled into junior year in high school 
as a soccer player and keeps his distance from former best friend and fellow hacker 
Evan, who respects Max’s decision to withdraw from practices that could result in 
trouble. Now, just before the U.S. presidential election in which cybersecurity is 
a major issue, the candidates are debating at Max’s high school and Evan makes a 
horrifying video appearance during Q&A in which he challenges the candidates 
to answer “What is the silence of six, and what are you going to do about it?” and 
then shoots himself. All the attendees’ electronic devices are promptly confiscated, 
examined, and wiped, but Max has a couple of threads to follow from his hacker 
days that may help him solve the mystery and assuage his own conscience for not 
responding to Evan’s recent attempts to get back in touch. Behind this conundrum 
is an insidious Facebook-style social media behemoth, Panjea, that is backing one 
of the candidates, but Max is hard pressed to connect the dots with corporate and 
government hounds on his tail. Every teen investigator on the lam needs a sidekick, 
and Max has the best—a team of sisters with their own connection to Evan through 
a Deep Web chat group of Anonymous wannabes. Online argot flies fast and furious 
as the teens unholster their devices like Wild West gunslingers, keeping one step 
ahead of the bad guys, whoever they are. The rhythm is occasionally interrupted 
with clumsily inserted definitions of common terms such as Deep Web and RFID, 
but teens who are, or wish they were, wired to the teeth will appreciate a thriller 
that speaks their language.  EB 
nABerHAus, sArvinder Boom Boom; illus. by Margaret Chodos-Irvine. Beach 
Lane/Simon, 2014 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3412-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3413-4 $10.99  
R 2-5 yrs 
Dark stormclouds move in over a set of playground swings, and then a multicultural 
classroom of young children is startled by a loud “BOOM BOOM,” followed by 
a “Flash! Flash!” of lightning. The storm soon subsides, though with a “drip drip” 
and the children race outside to play in the playground puddles: “Splash! Splash!” 
This repeated word pattern continues as the children move from what is presum-
ably spring into summer, with blooming flowers, buzzing bees, and the thrills of 
blowing dandelion fluff. Autumn brings the crunching of leaves and ripe apples, 
while winter serves up swirls of snowflakes and foggy breath and the silence that is 
unique to a snow-draped landscape. The simple text is surprisingly effective, with 
the word choice particularly friendly for reading aloud, while the seasonal depictions 
offer discussion points for classrooms or story hour attendees about nature and 
seasonal change. The brevity of the text puts emphasis on Chodos-Irvine’s stun-
ning mixed-media art, which utilizes textured wallpaper, vinyl fabric, plastic lace, 
324 • The bulleTin
and cut stencils. Vivid colors, elegant compositions, unusual perspectives, and the 
judicious use of white space make the illustrations both highly attractive and bold 
enough to easily share with a group. Use possibilities abound with this title, and 
you’ll definitely want to keep it on hand to celebrate the sound of the seasons.  JH 
niCHols, Amy Now That You’re Here. Knopf, 2014 284p (Duplexity)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75390-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75389-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75391-3 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Eevee Soloman is startled when her slacker classmate Danny Ogden 
appears on her doorstep, begging for help and claiming to be from an alternate 
reality. In his Arizona, his parents are alive, the government uses surveillance and 
brainwashing to control the populace, and a mysterious explosion went off just 
before he woke up in this Danny’s body. Now Danny, Eevee, and Eevee’s best friend 
Warren are out to uncover the secret behind Danny’s multiverse travel and hopefully 
help him get home. Eevee and Danny grow closer, making it harder for Danny to 
imagine leaving: will they fight to stay together or risk their love to save the other 
Danny? This engaging science-fiction romance offers a fast-paced, appealing read. 
The dual narrative voices put the reader in the middle of Danny and Eevee’s deep-
ening attraction and their individual struggles with the situation they face. Both 
teens emerge as likable protagonists worth rooting for, with plenty of believable 
sparks flying between them (though stereotypically nerdy Warren sometimes steals 
the show as the genius sidekick with personality to spare). This novel has a stronger 
science base than many other recent science fiction/teen romance blends, but the 
core story here is still more about personal chemistry than theoretical physics. A 
lack of resolution hints at likely sequels or at a more complete conclusion in the 
planned companion novel set in Danny’s world.  AM
olson, norAH Twisted Fate. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2015 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227204-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227207-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Sisters Allyson and Sydney are nothing alike: Ally is the good girl, baking muffins, 
sailing with their father, and dutifully holding down a part-time job, while Syd is 
the wild child, mostly concerned with smoking pot, skateboarding, and hooking 
up. When Graham Copeland moves in next door, both girls find themselves drawn 
to him—but for different reasons. Ally sees a similarly shy and awkward kindred 
spirit, but Syd’s pretty sure Graham’s a manipulative sociopath with a major secret. 
The girls’ viewpoints alternate with Graham’s, which reveals that he indeed has 
his own issues, while interspersed perspectives from parents, police officers, and 
friends foretell a horrific tragedy. This psychological thriller examines the same 
nexus of wealth, absent parents, prescription drug use, and teenage amorality that 
is explored in Hassan’s Crash and Burn (BCCB 3/13), and it makes some chillingly 
accurate observations about how social media has confused cultivating an identity 
with simply being seen. Unfortunately, there’s an underlying alarmist tone that 
becomes downright finger-wagging in the sections narrated by adults, and this 
ultimately coerces readers toward conclusions rather than allowing them to draw 
their own. The plot twist at the end is a bit gimmicky, but savvy readers who spot 
February 2015 • 325
the clues in the early chapters will feel satisfied—yet still haunted—when their 
suspicions are confirmed.  KQG 
PolonsKy, Ami Gracefully Grayson. Hyperion, 2014 243p
ISBN 978-1-4231-8527-7 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 5-7
Grayson’s sure that if he could just find a way, he could strip off his ill-fitting male 
self and become the girl he was always meant to be. An uncharacteristically brave 
moment during an audition and a forward-thinking teacher willing to take a risk 
means that Grayson lands the role of Persephone in a school play. The ensuing 
controversy doesn’t keep Grayson from the role, but it does shake up the town in 
permanent ways. Grayson is an endearing narrator of his own life as he moves from 
quiet doodler waiting for some magical moment to a determined kid who realizes 
he can just make his own. Unfortunately, there isn’t much depth to the characters 
who surround him, and their flat rejection or immediate acceptance of Grayson 
end up being devoid of realistic complexity. In addition, a resources or further read-
ing list would have been useful, particularly as the young intended audience isn’t 
likely to have read much about transgender preteens before. Nevertheless, this is a 
well-intentioned, warm look at a kid who finds a voice that feels true for the first 
time, and for that reason, many readers may find this to be a memorable read.  AS
Potter, dAvid The Left Behinds and the iPhone That Saved George Washing-
ton. Crown, 2015 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39057-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39056-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39058-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Narrator Mel, along with Bev and Brandon, is stuck at his hoity-toity boarding 
school over winter break. A teacher offers them diversions in the form of field trips, 
but their jaunt to a reenactment of Washington’s crossing of the Delaware goes 
wildly wrong when their phones transport them back to the time of the actual event 
and they discover the stone cold dead body of George Washington in a stable. The 
kids now have several urgent items on their agenda—recharge their phones for the 
return trip, should they ever figure out how to make it, and reverse the fate of the 
future Father of Our Country. First things first—track down Benjamin Franklin 
and beg him to find a way to recharge the phones. If anyone in the eighteenth 
century can appreciate the technology, it’s Franklin, and after much explanation 
and some fiddling with Leyden jars, the kids are good to go. Next, they make a 
trip slightly further into the past to waylay Washington’s assassins and cross the 
Delaware while acting as the general’s bodyguards. Finally, they transport back, only 
to find that the iTime app that’s caused the trouble has been engineered by some 
nefarious guy still on the loose. Sequel, anyone? Let’s hope so, because the concept 
of bringing an iPhone into the past is just too cool to stop at one episode. Mel is 
one very funny narrator, as dependent on his phone (“my precious, my precious”) 
as Potter’s tween and teen readers, and the in-character reactions of the Big Names 
in History to twenty-first century technology are cleverly drawn. This is Magic 
Tree House all grown up, and kids who once loved that time travel conceit will be 
delighted all over gain.  EB
326 • The bulleTin
Prévot, frAnCK Wangari Maathai: The Woman Who Planted Millions of Trees;  
tr. from the French by Dominique Clément; illus. by Aurélia Fronty. Charles-
bridge, 2015 45p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-626-9 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-795-8 $9.99  
R Gr. 2-5
This French picture-book biography chronicles the life and achievements of Wangari 
Maathai, the late Kenyan politician and Nobel Peace Prize–winner. The book treats 
her childhood in colonial Kenya and discusses her 1977 creation of the Green Belt 
movement, her economic/environmental initiative that gave village women a bonus 
for each tree they grow. It also explores her challenge to Kenyan president Daniel 
arap Moi, which resulted in her being jailed several times, and looks at her political 
career following Moi’s fall. While the text tips initially into the romantic a little, 
the coverage overall (though focusing on the professional rather than the personal) 
is much fuller than in previous picture-book biographies of Maathai, contextual-
izing her efforts as political as well as environmental and situating her activism in 
regional and personal history. Full-bleed illustrations feature mixed-media art that 
combines saturated painterly colors in a rich and moody palette with rhythmic and 
delicate pencil-drawn details in foliage and clothing; the elongated figures in wide 
spaces recall those of Jude Daly (Cunnane’s Chirchir Is Singing, BCCB 10/11), 
while the atmospheric intricacies lend a folkloric flavor. Maathai is an important 
activist figure, and it’s useful to have a biography that gives full credit to her politi-
cal significance and can sit alongside treatments of other post-colonial leaders and 
activists. Extensive end matter includes a timeline, an overview (including map) of 
contemporary Kenya, some details about the Kenyan forests, and a list of books and 
websites, with black and white photographs of Maathai scattered throughout.  DS
rex, AdAm Smek for President; written and illus. by Adam Rex. Disney Hy-
perion, 2014 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-0951-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-1057-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Fans of Tip and J.Lo (from The True Meaning of Smekday, BCCB 2/08) will be 
excited to herald their return in this savvy, silly sequel. Alien J.Lo is determined to 
clear his name with his people, and human Tip is feeling rebellious now that her 
mother is back home and acting like a mom with rules and such, so they decide 
to head to New Boovworld aboard Slushious, the Chevy-turned-spaceship that 
carried them around the first book. Upon their arrival, they learn that Smek has 
both a legitimate and a sleazy challenger for president of New Boovworld, and 
J.Lo becomes a pawn in a political standoff. From there, the plot is pretty much an 
extended chase scene, buoyed by Tip’s hilariously deadpan narration of her naviga-
tion through Rex’s goofily clever imaginary world. All the best comic sci-fi tropes 
are here, including galactic dumpster diving, sentient but outwittable weaponry, 
low-gravity bounding, and adorable artificial life-form sidekicks. There’s even an 
appendix that explains the Boovish sport of Stickyfish (a tongue-in-cheek nod to 
Quidditch?). Like its predecessor, this contains some accessible if low-level satire 
of contemporary national concerns, and it will thus serve as a humorous antidote 
to the inevitable civics lessons on offer during election seasons, but readers don’t 
February 2015 • 327
need to make that conscious connection to enjoy the show. While not quite as well 
plotted as the first book, this will nevertheless please fans whose attachment is to the 
characters anyway, especially since Tip and her mom have a rousing heart-to-heart 
reconciliation and J.Lo decides to remain on Earth with his new family after all.  KC 
reynolds, JAson The Boy in the Black Suit. Atheneum, 2015 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5950-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5952-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-10
Matt’s mother was the center of Matt’s heart and the family home; with her passing, 
nothing seems real or important anymore, and Matt’s father seems to be falling 
apart. When Matt’s work-study job falls through and Mr. Ray, his neighbor and 
the director of the local funeral home, offers him a job, he’s skeptical at first, then 
surprised and a little creeped out when he finds comfort sitting in on the funerals 
of complete strangers. He eventually realizes that it’s only at funerals where he can 
find someone who really understands how he feels; watching the reactions of those 
closest to the deceased provides the confirmation he needs to validate his emotions. 
When his father is hit by a car, Matt becomes even closer to Mr. Ray, but when 
Love, a girl that he has been crushing on from afar, stands up at her grandmother’s 
funeral, he finally opens his heart and begins to heal. Reynolds has a fantastic ear 
for the easy, lyrical expressions and idioms of his characters, and his genuine love 
for the African-American Bed-Stuy community is palpable. Matt’s introduction 
to funeral culture is at times predictably heartbreaking, but at other times it’s just 
hilarious, giving a sense of the range of experience. As Love takes him into her 
world, serving at a homeless shelter and wandering through the Botanical Gardens, 
the story takes on a subtly realized shape that gives the realism weight and texture. 
Reynolds’ work here makes him a fine heir to the Walter Dean Myers tradition of 
loving storytelling that captures the heart and humor of multigenerational black 
urban experience.  KC 
roCKliff, mArA Gingerbread for Liberty!: How a German Baker Helped Win the 
American Revolution; illus. by Vincent X. Kirsch. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-544-13001-2 $17.99  
Ad 5-9 yrs
Asked to find a local hero, most youngsters would probably suggest looking in a 
firehouse, police station, or hospital, not a bakery. Here Rockliff serves up a slim 
slice of history in which Christopher Ludwick, a German baker known for his 
tasty gingerbread in colonial Philadelphia, enlists to defend his adopted land and 
volunteers to infiltrate a camp of Hessian mercenaries and possibly lure them to 
the cause of American liberty: “‘And you always have enough to eat?’ the soldiers 
asked. ‘No empty bellies here,’ the baker told them. ‘Not in my America!’” Hu-
mor outweighs context within the text, and adult readers-aloud may well need to 
bone up on background provided in a substantial endnote. Children with some 
foreknowledge of the Revolution, however, will be entertained by the portrayal of 
George Washington, King George, and others as riffs on tawny gingerbread (the 
elegant, crispy Old World variety rather than the rotund Christmas or runaway 
cookie), outlined in thin bands of white “icing.” While this may not convey the 
gravitas of a bloody war for independence, it does provide a wonderful excuse to 
get the gingerbread pans back out for the Fourth of July.  EB
328 • The bulleTin
rosner, Jennifer The Mitten String; illus. by Kristina Swarner. Random House, 
2014 26p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97186-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37118-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98173-9 $10.99  
R 6-8 yrs
The family of young Ruthie Tober produces their small village’s wool supply, and 
Ruthie particularly enjoys dyeing the wool bright colors and using the resulting 
yarn to knit mittens for the area’s children. When Ruthie’s family encounters a 
deaf woman with a baby in need of help, they offer her and her child shelter for 
the night. Bayla, the woman, has a bright blue strand of yarn wrapped around her 
wrist, which intrigues Ruthie, as does the woman’s use of hand signs to communi-
cate with her child. In the night, Ruthie discovers what the blue yarn is for: Bayla 
attaches one end to her baby’s wrist and the other end to her own, so that she will 
be alerted if the baby wakes. Ruthie is inspired by this invention to knit a baby 
mitten attached by a string to a larger mitten for the pair to wear on cold winter 
nights, and she also adds a string between each mitten pair that she has knitted for 
the village’s children, so that the mittens can be threaded through a coat and kept 
from being lost. An author’s note explains that the story was inspired by Rosner’s 
deaf great-great aunt, who lived in a village in Austria in the 1800s and used a 
similar technique for “listening” to her baby at night. The tale itself is sweet but 
not saccharine, and the gentle tone of the storytelling is well matched by the softly 
textured illustrations and muted palette. Creative and compassionate kids will ap-
preciate the innovative problem-solving that both Ruthie and Bayla demonstrate, 
and some may be inspired by the brief sign language glossary in the back to learn 
more about signing.  JH
russell, rominA Zodiac. Razorbill, 2014 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-740-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
There are twelve Houses in this zodiac-based universe, and each planet (like 
Cancer, for example) has only citizens who share physical similarities and distinct 
personality traits; the governance of each planet is also determined by the attributes 
of the planet’s sign. Guardian Rho’s job is very difficult as she struggles with her 
new position (the previous Guardian was killed and so the sixteen-year-old was 
abruptly assigned), a complex love triangle, and the pressing issue of saving the 
universe from a thirteenth house that has long been repressed. Some believe her, 
some don’t, as she travels around warning people and asking for help, but either 
way mass destruction occurs, and much repair, rebuilding, and healing await; worse 
still, the evil force still exists to come back in later volumes. The zodiacal premise 
is clever, and the world building is effective; readers who like following horoscopes 
will revel in spotting characteristics for each planet. Unfortunately, the two boys 
for whom Rho has fallen are not as richly developed as she is, and the resolution 
of the triangle is contrived rather than authentic. In addition, it’s not entirely clear 
who the likeliest audience is for this series, as it would require a devoted interest 
in both astrology and lengthy sci-fi passages about space travel and interplanetary 
battles. For that target group, however, this flawed but still engaging first novel will 
likely spark interest for what will come next.  AS
February 2015 • 329
rutKosKi, mArie The Winner’s Crime. Farrar, 2015 [416p] (The Winner’s 
Trilogy)
ISBN 978-0-374-38470-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
After essentially exchanging her own freedom for the liberation of Herrani ter-
ritory (in The Winner’s Curse, BCCB 3/14), Valorian noblewoman Kestrel finds 
herself caught in a web of intrigue and deceit now that she is the emperor prince’s 
betrothed in the Valorian capital. Meanwhile, Arin, former slave (and almost lover) 
of Kestrel’s and now the ruler of Herrani, is struggling to improve his country’s 
conditions while still secretly pining away for Kestrel. A ball celebrating her en-
gagement reunites the two, but Kestrel remains aloof, assuming a casual cruelty 
that leads Arin to believe he never really knew her at all—which is precisely what 
Kestrel needs him to think if she is going to play the role of spy for Herrani forces 
without his interference. Rutkoski has created two characters nearly burning up 
with chemistry, adding tension by focusing on the impossible situation they find 
themselves in and the stakes that prevent them from being together. The expan-
sion of the world beyond Herrani allows readers to see exactly who would be at 
risk if Arin and Kestrel acted on their feelings; indeed, a calculated risk by Kestrel 
results in the death of nearly an entire tribe of people, a message from the emperor 
that her actions are being watched and have serious consequences. The cliffhanger 
ending of this second installment guarantees an anxious audience for the arrival 
of the third book.  KQG 
ruzzier, sergio A Letter for Leo; written and illus. by Sergio Ruzzier. Clarion, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-544-22360-8 $16.99  
R 5-7 yrs
Leo the weasel is the town mail carrier, a career he enjoys even though it highlights 
the sad irony that no one has ever sent him a letter. When he finds a small migratory 
bird in a public mailbox, he takes it into his care, as it is too small to fly to warmer 
parts on its own. Leo bonds with “Cheep” (named for his only vocalization), and as 
“time goes by,” Leo and Cheep become “a little family.” Leo is saddened, therefore, 
when the other migratory birds pass through town again and Cheep is now big 
enough to join them. Cheep’s departure does result in one positive thing for Leo, 
however—he receives his first ever letter from the bird, which is followed, eventu-
ally, by the return of Cheep himself. Ruzzier writes with a thoughtful simplicity, 
and the story, thematically similar to Dubuc’s The Lion and the Bird (BCCB 7/14), 
provides a useful connection point for kids who might relate to the sad feeling of 
being separated from a loved friend or family member. The carefully controlled 
dappling and mellow hues in the illustrations are cozily appealing, while precise 
and piquant details (a dining room floor has a cracked tile, a crocheted potholder 
hangs on the wall above the stove) add homespun charm as well. Though this book 
is not quite as artistic as Dubuc’s, it would certainly make an interesting companion 
to it, especially for young students learning to compare and contrast literature.  JH
330 • The bulleTin
ryAn, CArrie The Map to Everywhere; by Carrie Ryan and John Parke Davis; 
illus. by Todd Harris. Little, 2014 433p (The Pirate Stream)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24077-2 $17.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24076-5 $9.99  
R Gr. 5-7
Marrill from Arizona wants to save her sick mother, while Fin from an orphanage 
on a grim pirate world wants to find his missing mother; both kids stumble onto 
a ship traveling the Pirate Stream, a magical water source that connects all worlds. 
Luckily, they land with a capable crew and embark on a quest to find a fabled map 
that will, perhaps, give them all they seek. Of course, a powerful map in a parallel 
time/space stream can be devastating in the wrong hands, and Marrill and Fin 
quickly learn that Serth, a terrifying and obsessed wizard, is also seeking the map 
pieces in order to fulfill an apocalyptic prophecy. The pace takes a bit to get rolling, 
but once it does, there’s no catching one’s breath as the kids (and the crew with 
whom they’ve fallen in) risk life and limb to gather pieces and try to stay one step 
ahead of, or sometimes catch up to, Serth. Neither Marrill or Fin have much experi-
ence in making friends, and their tentative but determined efforts at understanding 
how to compromise, risk, and share with a peer is one of the quiet highlights of the 
novel. Fans of The Phantom Tollbooth will appreciate the traveling aspect: each area 
the crew encounters is effectively described as quirky, dangerous, and distinctive. 
Readers will undoubtedly be eager for the next volume to see what happens next 
for both the tortured, haunting Serth and those who are trying to stop him.  AS
sedgwiCK, mArCus The Ghosts of Heaven. Roaring Brook, 2015 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-125-8 $17.99  
R Gr. 8-12
Four short stories, thematically related by images of the spiral form that snakes 
its way through each to obsess a protagonist, flash across time in this thought-
provoking collection. The first tale, in prehistory, follows a young woman who 
wants to become the next magic maker for her clan of hunters. The second story 
involves an adolescent girl who is a scapegoat for a vicious witch-hunting minister 
in rural England. The third concerns an early twentieth century doctor who takes a 
position in an “enlightened” mental hospital and becomes professionally interested 
in a patient with a intense fear of a spiral staircase. A science fiction piece on a space 
flight to colonize an earth-like planet, with a murderer on board who is picking off 
passengers in deep hibernation, ends the collection—or does it? Following the logic 
of a never-ending spiral, Sedgwick encourages readers to enter the book at any story, 
while the sci-fi tale holds the key to interpreting why characters at each twist of the 
time spiral gain insight into the meanings of their lives and deaths. Each tale is a 
small gem of its genre, satisfying in its own right but richer for its connection to 
its fellows. Teens who enjoy fictional speculation on the possibility of multiverses 
will be particularly pleased to tease out implications of the space travels of the 
Song of Destiny, especially if they catch the references to 2001: A Space Odyssey.  EB
February 2015 • 331
sHABAzz, ilyAsAH X; by Ilyasah Shabazz with Kekla Magoon. Candlewick, 
2015 [348p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6967-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 8-12
A fifteen-year-old boy, who has clung to adoration for the father he lost early in life, 
has reason to suspect that the confidence and advice his father once imparted is in 
fact worthless, and the boy begins to doubt that the future holds anything worth-
while. Having watched his mother taken away from her children and his siblings 
separated, he is certain the only chance he has in life requires him to get away—new 
city, new faces, new ambitions. This could be a novel about any adolescent and his 
dark night of the soul, but it’s in fact a powerful, fully credible reimagining of the 
young adulthood of Malcolm Little, who, after reaching rock bottom in prison for 
robbery, will discover a better path and a new identity as Malcolm X. Shabazz, his 
daughter who was only three at the time of his assassination, spins his story from 
collective family memory, speculating on his reasons for living on the criminal 
edge of Boston and Harlem. Malcolm narrates, beginning his tale in 1945 just as 
the boss for whom he’s running numbers comes after him with murderous intent, 
flashing back through chains of events that led him deep into disillusion: “I’m angry 
at the white guards who beat us; at the white cops who put us here; at the white 
slaveholders who tied our ancestors down in the guts of great ships—they caused 
this cascade of terrible things that have led me here.” Interestingly, the story stops 
with Malcolm’s stint in prison, but he has insight into the wisdom of his father, a 
commitment to Allah, and his eyes fixed on the future, and readers know that the 
man is destined for leadership. A timeline and notes on real and fictional characters 
are included.  EB 
smitH, rolAnd Beneath. Scholastic, 2015 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56486-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56488-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-9
Pat O’Toole has always adored his older brother, Coop, the scourge of their over-
achieving parents. Coop, with technophobe tendencies, a diet limited to tuna 
sandwiches, and an obsession with everything that lies below the surface, takes off 
at age eighteen and finally makes contact with Pat months later, sending him a 
small voice recorder and a post box address in New York City through which they 
can exchange messages. It works for a while, but when the messages abruptly stop, 
Pat lies to his parents and heads to the city to ferret out Coop. Spotting a man 
taking mail from Coop’s post office box, Pat gets his first solid lead; it takes him to 
an underground community of “houseless” persons with whom Coop had recent 
contact. He didn’t stay long, however, drawn even deeper underground toward a 
settlement of people of fearsome and deadly repute. Pat’s assisted by Kate, a girl from 
The Deep who claims to know Coop, and who sees in the two brothers her ticket 
out of the dystopian community in which she has been raised by her grandfather—a 
radical Weatherman from the Sixties with plans to wreak anarchy on the surface 
dwellers. Smith sketches out a couple of promising plotlines but never lingers long 
enough to develop them satisfactorily, leaving readers wishing they could spend 
more time investigating the living arrangements of the underground community, 
332 • The bulleTin
and needing more specifics about the threat from (as well as background informa-
tion about) the holdout Weathermen. An ambiguous conclusion leaves room for a 
sequel, but the peril lurking just under the city may be the most rewarding ending 
for thriller fans.  EB
sPringstuBB, triCiA Moonpenny Island. Balzer + Bray, 2015 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211293-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211295-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Flor and her best friend Sylvie are the only eleven-year-old girls on Moonpenny 
Island, a rocky little bit of land in the middle of one of the Great Lakes. This suits 
Flor just fine, and the two friends spend their summers riding bikes, dodging the 
tourists, and avoiding the girls’ chaotic parents. Family drama nonetheless finds the 
pair, and at the beginning of sixth grade Sylvie is shipped off to a boarding school 
on the mainland while Flor must deal with both Sylvie’s absence and her own 
mother’s, who has left the island to care for Flor’s ailing grandmother. The quirky 
little island, with its quiet, Midwestern beauty and mild danger (the rocky terrain 
provides a few scares for Flor), offers a complementary background to Flor’s gentle 
ups and downs, while a few of its residents lend comic relief and/or compassionate 
life lessons. Much in the same vein as Frederick’s Absolutely Truly (BCCB 1/15), this 
will appeal to fans of modern family dramas with happy endings.  KQG
st. ClAire, roxAnne They All Fall Down. Delacorte, 2014 341p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74271-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97700-7 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Kenzie cannot figure out how she got elected to the Hottie List, a group of ten 
senior girls elected by a secret society of guys each year, since she’s a nerd whose 
only claims to fame are her superior Latin language skills and the fact that her 
popular older brother died tragically two years ago. Now girls on the list are dying 
one by one in freak accidents, and Kenzie herself has had two near misses in as 
many days. She is also being courted by the school’s alpha male, whose obscenely 
wealthy grandfather has offered her a full scholarship to a school of her choice if 
she can best an obstacle course he has set up in the woods. Her heart belongs to a 
new boy with a bad reputation, though, and when she learns that the new boy too 
has been lured to town on promise of a chance at the scholarship, she has her first 
real lead; since solving the obstacle course requires a knowledge of Latin, Kenzie’s 
the one on deck for answers. Every time this narrative threatens to go off the rails, 
Kenzie is there to inject some logic, which is a boon for the reader who will likely 
be just as skeptical; her comments immunize the far-fetched plot against critique 
and allow readers to just enjoy the ride. More nearly fatal accidents, more clues, 
and a crazy chase scene complete with zip lines and ancient Roman artifacts make 
for a suspenseful mash-up of Indiana Jones and Pretty Little Liars. Sprinkled among 
the amusing if absurd plot twists are some really clever moments, including the 
final reveal that draws every strange event together into a satisfying, if cynical, 
kind of sense.  KC
February 2015 • 333
stirling, triCiA When My Heart Was Wicked. Scholastic, 2015 [192p]
Trade ISBN 978-0-545-69573-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-69575-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
After her beloved father’s death, high school junior Lacy knows that it is only a 
matter of time before her estranged mother, Cheyenne, swoops in and shatters the 
little bit of peace Lacy has established with her stepmom and their small town. 
Indeed, Cheyenne demands that Lacy come live with her in Sacramento, the city 
where Lacy grew up until she was twelve and where she suffered terrible abuse at 
her mother’s hands. Things are better this time around, but Lacy is still concerned 
that her mother’s bad influence, particularly her dabbling in black magic, will bring 
out the evil side in Lacy that she thought she buried—the side that she is certain 
caused the death of her baby brother years ago. The supernatural element here is 
subtle and nuanced, more akin to magical realism than an overtly supernatural 
story. Lacy proves an unreliable narrator, as she filters everything through a lens of 
self-recrimination, so even the more obvious instances of witchcraft are questionable 
in their actual effect (the spell she casts on a boy who assaults her, for example, is 
never proven to be at fault for his subsequent car accident). This therefore becomes 
more of an examination of the trauma abuse leaves behind than any spooky witch 
story; Lacy clearly sees herself as the evil her disturbed mother has told her to be, 
and her choice between dark and light magic becomes more a choice of perspective 
and identity. The dialogue is occasionally a bit stiff, but Lacy also makes some poetic 
and lyrical observations of grief and pain, and this will likely strike a chord with 
readers who have had their own experiences of victimization and survival.  KQG 
tAK, BiBi dumon Mikis and the Donkey; tr. from the Dutch by Laura Watkinson; 
illus. by Philip Hopman. Eerdmans, 2014 93p
ISBN 978-0-8028-5430-8 $13.00  
R Gr. 3-5
When Mikis’ grandfather gets a donkey, young Mikis becomes smitten, naming 
the creature Tsaki. Tsaki’s not a pet, though, she’s a work animal, and Mikis and 
his grandfather take her up the mountain near their home on the Greek island of 
Corfu and load her baskets with firewood for the family. Overwork leads to injury, 
so Mikis takes Tsaki to a people doctor for an assessment. The doctor prescribes rest, 
a blanket pad, and lighter loads, and Mikis firmly relays the news to his grandpa. 
As Mikis becomes more attached to Tsaki, he gradually insists on more humane 
treatment for her in a number of ways, including taking her to visit a lonely male 
donkey in a nearby field—leading Tsaki to surprise Mikis with a donkey foal a few 
months later (a development hinted at when Mikis’ friend, Elena tells him that 
she and the male donkey were getting along “really, really well”). This is a quiet 
but spirited slice of Greek village life, and Mikis represents a modern attitude to-
ward animal treatment, in contrast to his more old-school grandpa, who initially 
thinks of Tsaki as “a tractor” but who nevertheless comes around to Mikis’ point 
of view. Tak’s descriptions are pithy but evocative, and Mikis is a sympathetic and 
strong character. Hopman’s frequent monochromatic illustrations possess a scribbly 
liveliness that captures the casual motion of rural life. Mikis’ love for Tsaki is both 
palpable and understandable, and animal-loving kids will particularly enjoy this, 
as will those who appreciate getting a glimpse into the lives of kids in other places. 
An author’s note describes the Corfu donkey sanctuary that inspired the story.  JH
334 • The bulleTin
tHomAs, rHiAnnon A Wicked Thing. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2015 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-230353-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-230355-4 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Happily ever after is far from the reality that Aurora wakes up to after spending 
over a century in a curse-induced sleep and finding a stranger at the foot of her 
bed. The stranger, Prince Rodric, is apparently her true love, and her mother and 
father and anyone she knew are now all long dead. Aurora’s awakening offers hope 
to Alyssinia, a kingdom in crisis with a cruel despot for a ruler, rebels growing 
stronger everyday, and allies quickly becoming foes. Aurora’s not sure she’s any sort 
of savior, though, especially as she realizes that the dangerous political games being 
played by Rodric’s parents, the king and queen, are far beyond her skill. Thomas 
offers a compelling take on Sleeping Beauty, especially in her portrayal of Aurora 
as a grieving, isolated girl who finds herself so overwhelmed by her own loss that 
she’s initially unable to care that she’s being used as a political pawn. Her introspec-
tion and stumbling toward understanding makes the pace a bit halting, but it also 
offers authenticity to her development as a character. Several romantic leads are 
introduced besides Rodric, but, refreshingly, in the end Aurora chooses none of 
them, instead fleeing the kingdom with the hopes of returning one day, stronger and 
ready to rule. That decision, along with the reappearance of the cursing witch and 
the continued chaos of the kingdom, lays the groundwork for a sequel and ensures 
that readers will return to see if Aurora does indeed get her happy ending.  KQG 
vAn diePen, Allison On the Edge. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 294p
ISBN 978-0-06-230344-8 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Why wait for the bus in the middle of the night when you can take a shortcut 
through the park? Sigh. It’s just this kind of reasoning that gets so many YA fictional 
characters into trouble. Maddie Diaz witnesses gang members torment and then 
set fire to a homeless man, and when she cooperates with the police investigation, 
she becomes a target herself. While her life hangs in the balance, she manages to 
party with her girls, work her job at McDonald’s, edit the high school newspaper, 
keep up her grades to retain her college scholarship, comfort her mother through 
her divorce, recover from a vicious gang attack, and fall steamily in love with Lobo, 
the mysterious young man who saves her and visits her at night (in a bandana 
mask) in her backyard. Tipped off by the strange behavior of her man-hating dog, 
Maddie identifies Lobo as the brooding, ripped Ortiz from the convenience store, 
but their love must still hurdle a final obstacle—Maddie must free Ortiz, who’s 
been captured by the gang for breaking up their sex-trafficking operation. Plot 
overload? Yes. However, van Diepen shamelessly, even gleefully, runs it like a highly 
condensed soap opera, replete with all the melodrama that makes a soap addictive, 
and delivered with gritty, sassy, guy-objectifying cattiness. Meow.  EB
west, CArly Anne The Bargaining. Simon Pulse, 2015 [416p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-4182-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Penny’s latest foray into juvenile delinquency (punching the daylights out of a 
girl in the high school bathroom) lands her a summer stay with her stepmother, 
a woman with a penchant for rehab projects. The two are going to fix up an old 
February 2015 • 335
house in the North Woods of Washington, but when they arrive they realize that 
the decrepit mansion’s faulty wiring and touchy plumbing are the least of their 
worries. A creepy mural in one of the bedrooms, mysterious nocturnal noises, 
and the appearance of ghostly children outside her window rightly set Penny on 
edge, but the locals are reticent, if not downright hostile, when asked about the 
house’s history. It’s then left up to Penny—who’s got some demons of her own to 
deal with—to figure out what’s going on before she and her stepmom meet the 
same fate as the ghosts. These are familiar tropes, but West massages them with 
gleeful finesse, adding disturbingly vivid images of the twisted, mutated bodies of 
the child spirits that will thrill an audience raised on The Ring, The Grudge, etc. 
The story behind the haunting is equally as chilling, reminiscent of Westall’s The 
Stones of Muncaster Cathedral (BCCB 4/93), and it’s a terrifying reflection on both 
the depths and limits of parental love. Readers should be prepared to sleep with 
the light on after finishing this one.  KQG
williAms, miCHAel Diamond Boy. Little, 2014 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-32069-6 $18.00
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-316-2068-9 $10.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-32066-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
In this loosely connected companion novel to Now Is the Time for Running (BCCB 
10/11), the diamond mines of Zimbabwe take center stage instead of the previous 
book’s soccer and refugee politics. Patson, a fifteen-year-old who is fiercely protective 
of his brainy but distracted father and little sister, is ready to believe the hype about 
the diamonds that are hypothetically just lying around for the taking, especially since 
his stepmother’s brother controls a syndicate in Marange. Things are wretched from 
the start, however, as they barely survive their move to the mining region, they are 
housed in a crowded tobacco shed, and it becomes clear that any diamonds found 
will never really be shared with the workers. Once soldiers arrive on the behalf of 
Mugabe’s government, an already brutal situation becomes horrific, and it isn’t clear 
who will survive an escape attempt. Patson’s narrative voice is naïve but gritty; even 
after losing a leg to a land mine he never loses sight of his ambition to see himself 
and whoever remains in his family safe somewhere far away from diamonds. This 
is a harrowing read, no doubt, and readers unfamiliar with the origins of diamonds 
may leave shell-shocked, but Williams ably weaves in moments of kindness and 
small successes that keep things from feeling completely hopeless. Extensive end 
material offers historical context for the diamond industry in Africa, land mines, 
and the connections to the author’s earlier work. A glossary is also included.  AS
yAnsKy, BriAn Utopia, Iowa. Candlewick, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6533-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
To some people, Utopia, Iowa is just a particularly wholesome and healthy Iowa 
town; to others, it’s a place where residents possess various supernatural gifts (or 
curses, depending on your point of view) as a matter of daily fact. Film-loving, 
mildly troublemaking teenager Jack Bell is in the latter category: he sees dead people 
on the regular, which usually isn’t a big deal, but now beautiful young girls are 
being murdered and turning to him. The local cop, a nonbeliever, is suspicious of 
336 • The bulleTin
Jack’s entanglement, while other townspeople, including Jack’s witch grandmother, 
believe that the deaths are the result of a larger sinister force that’s trying to use the 
girls for a destructive end. Jack’s narration is deceptively low-key and laconic, his 
slightly slackerish disaffection bringing a wry, M. T. Anderson–esque note to this 
blend of noir and supernatural story. Yansky does a fine job of building the magi-
cal realism of Utopia and its combination of inhabitants who believe, those who 
don’t believe, and those who make money off of pretending to believe at the local 
Nirvana College; the Midwestern solidity adds both ironic and unironic charm. 
The picture of Jack’s family, mostly viewed through a subplot about his parents’ 
possibly strained marriage, is appealingly drawn, and the book cunningly pops 
some of the background domestic detail into the foreground in surprising ways as 
the story mounts. Readers building up their nerve for Andrew Smith will find this 
a pleasingly creepy and likably oddball outing.  DS
yolen, JAne A Plague of Unicorns. Zonderkidz, 2014 [208p] illus.
ISBN 978-0-310-74648-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Unicorns are all well and good as glorious, majestic figures, until they start eating 
the abbey’s very best apples. Abbot Aelian is determined to fight off the unicorns, 
enlisting the help of various heroes over the years and defensive strategies, but it takes 
a curious outsider kid (sent to the abbey to spare his parents his endless questions) 
to save the day. The grace of the narrative and the cozy sense that all will undoubt-
edly end well create a warm, readaloud-ready volume. Unfortunately, there’s not 
much tension here: even when things appear to be going wrong, there’s a flatness 
to the tone and a lack of urgency to the problem itself which is, in the end, simply 
the eating of apples. It’s not quite clear if this is single story or a linked collection: 
the original source was a Yolen short story from 1994, and there’s a curious lack of 
connection between the chapters on occasion. Format questions aside, however, 
Yolen fans will recognize and appreciate her capture of the everyday as magical and 
characters who act from a kind, earnest core. Crisp black-and-white illustrations 
accent the text, reinforcing key scenes.  AS
CorreCtion:
In the January issue’s review of Kirstin Cronn-Mills’ Transgender Lives: Complex 
Stories, Complex Voices, we mistakenly referred to the author within the review as 
Cronn-Miller. Our apologies for the error.
February 2015 • 337
Crew, HilAry susAn Experiencing America’s Story through Fiction: Historical Novels 
for Grades 7-12. ALA Editions, 2014 193p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8389-1225-6 $57.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-8389-1992-7 $46.00
U.S. History and American literature teachers revising their lesson plans to ac-
commodate Common Core standards will be thrilled with Crew’s annotated 
bibliography of over 150 historical fiction titles that easily connect to conven-
tional curriculum units. Nine chapters coordinate with the U.S. History Content 
Standards for Grades 5-12, organizing the books according to historical era and 
ranging from “Colonization and Settlement” to “Contemporary America.” The 
books included are targeted at seventh grade and above and also include several 
adult titles for use in upper or A.P. classes, but perhaps most impressive is the list’s 
diversity, both in the multicultural voices represented and in the books’ actual con-
tents. Award winners such as Anderson’s The Astonishing Life of Octavian Nothing, 
Traitor to the Nation (BCCB 11/06) and Ryan’s Esperanza Rising (BCCB 12/00) 
are included, as are lesser known gems such as Edwardson’s Blessing’s Bead (BCCB 
2/10) and Johnston’s Bone by Bone by Bone (BCCB 10/07). Each entry includes 
relevant publication info, award notes, and prompts for discussion along with any 
additional online resources. Educators tasked with creating interdisciplinary units 
on American history would do well to start here. A bibliography and index are 
included.  KQG 
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
338  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Johansson; Stirling
Actors and acting–fiction: Olson
Adventure: Arnett; Aveyard; 
Frey; Howard, J.; Johansson; 
King; Littlefield; Myers
Africa: Prévot
Africa–fiction: Williams
African Americans: Bolden; Conk-
ling; Lowery
African Americans–fiction: draper; 
english; reynolds; Shabazz
Aliens–fiction: Arnett; rex
Animals–fiction: tak
Animals, mythological–fiction: Coats
Astrology–fiction: russell
BiOgrAPHieS: Andrews; Hill; 
Lowery; Marrin FDR; Marrin 
Thomas Paine; McCarthy; Prévot; 
rockliff
Brothers–fiction: Smith
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Black; 
Hanlon
Cats–stories: Bruel
Civil rights movement: Lowery
Civil rights movement–fiction: 
Shabazz
Clothing: McCarthy
Computer hacking–fiction: Myers
COnCePt BOOKS: Fleming 
Conspiracies–fiction: Myers
Contests–fiction: Cherry; St. Claire
Creative writing: Levine
Crime and criminals–fiction: Czu-
kas; dale; Howard, J.; Johansson; 
Laurie; Littlefield; St. Claire; van 
diepen; Yansky 
Current events: Williams
deafness–fiction: Lake
deafness–stories: rosner
death–fiction: Hautala; Monir; 
reynolds
demons–fiction: damico; elliott
disabilities–fiction: Lake
dogs–stories: McCarty
donkeys–fiction: tak
dragons–fiction: Martin
dystopias–fiction: Brown, r.; isbell
Ecology: Prévot
egypt–fiction: dunn
energy: Bang
Ethics and values: Arnold; Brug-
man; de la Peña; isbell; Williams
Fairies–fiction: Black
Families–fiction: Amato; Brown, J.; 
demetrios; Springstubb
Families–stories: McCarty
FAntASY: Andersen; Aveyard; 
Black; damico; Harwell; Hat-
field; Howard, A.; Jay; Jinks; 
Martin; Potter; rutkoski; ryan; 
Sedgwick; thomas
Fathers–fiction: Hautala
FOLKtALeS And FAirY tALeS: 
Andersen
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: 
Hale; Jay; thomas
Food and eating: rockliff
Friends–fiction: Amato; Arnold; 
Czukas; Forman; Freeman; 
Springstubb
Friends–stories: Andersen; ruzzier 
Funerals–fiction: reynolds
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
FeBruary 2015  •  339
Future–fiction: Brown, r.; isbell
gender–fiction: Olson
geology: Bang
ghosts–fiction: West
gLBtQ people: Andrews; Hill
gLBtQ people–fiction: Brugman; 
Hubert
grandparents–fiction: dunn
grandparents–stories: de la Peña 
grAPHiC nOveLS: Hubert
greece–fiction: tak 
grief–fiction: Arnold; Hautala
HiStOriCAL FiCtiOn: draper; 
rosner
History, U.S.: Bolden; Conkling; 
Lowery; Marrin FDR; Marrin 
Thomas Paine; McCarthy; Potter; 
rockliff 
Homeless people–fiction: Smith
HOrrOr: Harwell
HuMOr: damico; Hale; Hanlon; 
Potter; rex
identity–fiction: Brugman
imaginary creatures–fiction: Jinks
imagination–fiction: Hanlon
intersex people–fiction: Brugman
inventors and inventions: McCarthy
islands–fiction: Springstubb
Jobs–fiction: Czukas
JOurnALS: Bolden
Knitting–stories: rosner
Language arts: Levine
Literature, children’s: Howard, A.
London–fiction: Jinks
Loneliness–stories: ruzzier
Magic–fiction: Aveyard; Hatfield
MAgiCAL reALiSM: Lake
Mail–stories: ruzzier
Maps–fiction: ryan
Mental illness–fiction: Axelrod
Mice–fiction: Freeman
Mice–stories: Fleming
Mining–fiction: Williams
Mothers–fiction: Axelrod; damico; 
Hautala; Stirling
Music and musicians–fiction: Brown, J.
Muslims–fiction: dunn
MYSterieS: dale; Hale; Johansson; 
Lake; Laurie; Myers, e.; Olson; St. 
Claire; Yansky
Mythological creatures–fiction: Yolen
Mythology, classical: Coats
Nature study: naberhaus
neighborhoods–stories: de la Peña
new York–fiction: Smith
Orphans–fiction: Freeman
Parents–fiction: Hatfield
Pets–stories: Bruel 
Pirates–fiction: ryan
Political science: Marrin Thomas 
Paine 
Poverty–stories: de la Peña
Prejudice–fiction: Hubert
Presidents, u.S.: Marrin FDR
Prison–fiction: Shabazz
Puzzles–fiction: Frey
Quests–fiction: Howard, A.
racism–fiction: draper
Reading aloud: Andersen; draper; 
Hanlon; Lowery; Yolen
Reading, beginning: McCarty
Reading, easy: Coats; english; Han-
lon
Reading, reluctant: Howard, J.
relationships–fiction: Axelrod; Brown, 
J.; Howard, J.; Hubert; reynolds; 
van diepen
revenge–fiction: dale
romance–fiction: Andrews; Cherry; 
dale; demetrios; elliott; Forman; 
Hill; Littlefield; nichols; rutkoski; 
van diepen
royalty–fiction: Jay; rutkoski; 
thomas
SCArY StOrieS: West
School–fiction: english; St. Claire
Science: Bang
SCienCe FiCtiOn: Arnett; Brown, 
r.; Frey; King; Littlefield; nichols; 
rex; russell
Seasons–stories: Bruel; naberhaus
Secrets–fiction: Amato; Monir
Shapes–stories: Fleming
SHOrt StOrieS: Sedgwick
Sisters–fiction: Cherry; isbell; Olson
340  •  The BulleTin
Skateboarding–fiction: english
Slavery: Bolden; Conkling
Snow–stories: McCarty
Social studies: dunn
Sound–stories: naberhaus
South, the–fiction: Brown, J.
Space travel–fiction: Arnett; King; 
russell
Spiders–fiction: Harwell
Spies and espionage–fiction: rutkoski
Suicide–fiction: Forman
SuPernAturAL StOrieS: el-
liott; Laurie; Monir; Stirling; West; 
Yansky
SuSPenSe: Howard, J.; Laurie; 
Olson
television–fiction: Cherry
time–fiction: Sedgwick
time travel–fiction: Potter
trans people: Andrews; Hill
trans people–fiction: Olson
unicorns–fiction: Yolen
veterans–fiction: demetrios
voyages and travel–fiction: Hatfield; 
Jay; rex; ryan
War–fiction: Martin
Weather–stories: Bruel; naberhaus
Witches–fiction: Sedgwick
Women’s studies: Prévot
Work–fiction: Czukas
World cultures: dunn
Writers and writing: Levine
