I LLI 
NO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
A '-3 U 
I)x
OF THE
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
APR 2 3 1997
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
Also edited by Hazel Rochman
SOMEHOW TENDERNESS SURVIVES" Stories of Southern Africa
$4.50PB (0-06-447063-6)-A Charlotte Zolotow Book
t HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks. 
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
I 
....
THE
BULLETIN
May 1997
Vol. 50 No. 9
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
A LOOK INSIDE
309 THE BIG PICTURE
Floating Home by David Getz; illustrated by Michael Rex
310 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
311 * IAm the Darker Brother: An Anthology ofModern Poems by African
Americans comp. by Arnold Adoff
317 * The Boggart and the Monster by Susan Cooper
320 * In the Swim written and illus. by Douglas Florian
327 * The Snake Book by Mary Ling and Mary Atkinson; illus. with
photographs by Frank Greenaway and Dave King
337 * Whistle Me Home by Barbara Wersba
340 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
342 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (MD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
Susan S. Verner, Reviewer (SSV)
Amy E. Brandt, Graduate Research Assistant (AEB)
Pam McCuen, Editorial Assistant (PMc)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1997 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Michael Rex, from Floating Home ©1997 and used by permission of Henry
Holt and Company.
MAY 1997 
* 
309
THE BIG PICTURE
Floating Home
by David Getz; illustrated by Michael Rex
Maxine's homework assignment is to look at and draw her home in a "new way,"
and in this wish-fulfillment picture book she does just that. She suits up and takes
a shuttle ride to view her home from a completely new perspective-outer space.
The scene shifts from Maxine's neighborhood to the Kennedy Space Center, where
Maxine is preparing to be the youngest astronaut ever to ride on the space shuttle.
The book follows the intrepid eight-year-old as she takes her last shower for two
weeks ("You don't shower in a space shuttle. Water does not fall from the nozzle.
Nothing falls inside a shuttle in space"), breakfasts on cereal and milk, and is inter-
viewed by the press ("'Maxine, why are you doing it?' 'Art,' Maxine told them.
'I'm doing it for art'").
Getz (who interviewed NASA officials and astronauts for background on
this book) does a fine job combining Everykid's space fantasy with the realities of
astronaut life, including the concrete specifics that rivet young readers. Maxine
suits up: the first layer is a huge diaper (""You gotta wear it,' a woman from NASA
told her. 'You could be sitting in your seat waiting to launch for hours. You can't
raise your hand and ask to go'"), followed by thermal underwear so she won't get
too cold, and a cooling suit so she won't get too hot ("The cooling suit had little
tubes of water sewn in the bottom and top. It looked like a Spider-Man cos-
tume"). Finally, "feeling like a hundred pound duck in a diaper, Maxine waddled
over to the van that would take her to the launch pad .... And then she saw the
shuttle. It was alive. Suspended above the pad, the vehicle was lit by dazzlingly
bright xenon lights, as if it were an actor, stage center, ready for his big speech.
And it was breathing. Exhaling steam from its top and bottom, it reminded Maxine
of a dragon."
The text gives a blow-by-blow description of Maxine's physical responses
to the space launch from the feeling of immense pressure as the shuttle blasts off
that increases until it's hard to breathe and impossible to move to the weightless-
ness when she escapes the earth's atmosphere that makes her a little sick. And the
view is spectacular: "There in her window was Earth. It was dazzling, sitting like
a royal-blue gem on black velvet. At its curved edge, on the horizon, was a thin,
bright fluorescent blue band. The atmosphere. She was looking down at the air
she had breathed." Maxine is ready to draw her picture. "But where was her
home? Where was her town, her city, her state?... Someone had forgotten to draw
in the lines! Where were the lines that divided up the continents into countries?.
.. There were no lines. It was just one Earth. It was her home."
Rex's acrylic paintings have a cartoony appeal as the bright-eyed Maxine
cheerfully takes on NASA, the media, and outer space, all with the graceful aplomb
of a very self-possessed grade schooler. The compositions are varied as full-page
310 
* THE BULLETIN
illustrations alternate with three-quarter and half-page pictures, with the occa-
sional vignette to break up large text blocks. The illustrations, like the text, con-
tain those details that enrich and add depth to what could be a much less substantial
story, from the planetary endpapers to all the items floating around the gravity-
free shuttle cabin. The palette is heavy on the blues: blue sky, blue earth, blue
water, all offset by Maxine in her orange suit floating in the white shuttle craft.
Maxine's is the eyecatching, dominant figure in nearly every spread: stocky, pur-
poseful, and cheerful as all get out. The final double-page illustration of Maxine
floating in the cabin, drawing the Earth on her sketch pad as her colored pencils
and globe pencil sharpener float around her, is remarkably satisfying.
More detailed and exact than Byron Barton's I Want to Be an Astronaut
(BCCB 10/88) and with a fantasy element missing from Baird's Space Camp (6/
92), this title serves those early readers who are too old for the former and too
young for the latter. It's a you-are-there, kid's-eye view of a shuttle flight, told
simply and directly in rich language young readers will relish. Getz moves easily
between the different demands of fiction and nonfiction, resulting in an unusually
involving story. The underlying message that there are no borders when you view
earth from space is drawn gently and, within the context of Maxine's story, logi-
cally. And it doesn't hurt that the youngest astronaut in space is a girl. (Imprint
information appears on p. 321.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
INEW DUUKS JFUK OHILUKREN AND I UUNG fEUPLE
ADLER, DAVID A. 
Easy Math Puzzles; illus. by Cynthia Fisher. 
Holiday House,
1997 
32 p
ISBN 0-8234-1283-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Easy Logic Puzzles might be a better title, because there are several types of conun-
drums to challenge young math aficionados and vex tunnel thinkers of all ages.
Standard math word problems are included, as expected: "This board is three feet
long. How many times would you have to cut this board to make 3 shelves each 1
foot long?" Others call for careful listening: "It takes 12 penny candies to make
one dozen. How many nickel candies are in a dozen?" Still others involve trickery:
"How can you divide this pizza into 8 equal slices using just 3 cuts?" (Hint: No
one said you couldn't stack some pieces!) Many of the puzzles are old standbys,
and the black-and-white cartoon illustrations make them seem even more shop-
worn. Still, they'll be new to the youngest readers, who will be kept on their toes
by the variety of puzzle types, and even the most jaded math teachers can keep a
few teasers nearby for class warm-ups and downtime fillers. EB
AITYlvir 
D*,%,r-yrr 
"A-Pv% 
ryyyTTT~lllkT ·'LLr% VfTTXTe'l T)1'1.1%1%lr 
I
MAY 1997 
* 311
ADOFF, ARNOLD, comp. 
IAm the Darker Brother: An Anthology ofModern Poems
by African Americans. Simon, 1997 
208p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-81241-8 
$16.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-80869-0 
$4.99 
R 
Gr. 6-12
Librarians who have considered the earlier edition of this title-in 1968, one of
the earliest young people's anthologies to celebrate African-American poets-to
be a touchstone will find the new edition enriched beyond the original sixty-four
selections to include twenty-one newer poems by stars such as Maya Angelou, Rita
Dove, Audre Lorde, Ishmael Reed, and Etheridge Knight. Rudine Sims Bishop
contributes an intelligent introductory overview ("Notes from a Darker Sister")
and Nikki Giovanni a pithy foreword. The organization of the poems is effective
(though the poem to Rosa Parks is out of sync in the sequence of poems to Satch,
Mahalia, Bird, and Coltrane), but the notes could have been more helpfully ex-
panded: for instance, why not explain that the title of Myron O'Higgins' poem
"Vaticide" means the killing of a prophet (many student dictionaries don't include
the word) in addition to telling who Gandhi was? However, browsers who don't
plug into the more complex poems will find many others accessible, with a range
from searing story to polemical indictment to delicate nuance. Owen Dodson's
musical "Yardbird's Skull (for Charlie Parker)" and Ray Durem's sly "Award [A
gold watch to the FBI man who has followed me for 25 years]" blow through the
mind like a fresh wind. Notes on each poem, brief biographies of the poets, and
indices of titles and first lines are included. BH
ALEXANDER, SALLY HOBART 
On My Own: The Journey Continues. Farrar,
1997 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-374-35641-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
In Taking Hold (BCCB 1/95) the author described the onset of her blindness, its
effects on her life and relationships, and her completion of studies at the Pitts-
burgh Guild for the Blind; here she covers her teaching at the Guild, her struggle
with increasing loss of sight and the diagnosis of a hearing deficit, and her social
and vocational ups and downs. This is a lot more episodic than the previous book,
and young readers may feel distanced by both the adult slant and the Vietnam-era
details. The writing is also weak when it comes to conveying the emotional impact
of many of Alexander's relationships, so that the romantic and interpersonal dra-
mas tend to fall flat. Despite problems in the telling the story is still involving,
with enlightening details and the appeal of peeking into an author's past (includ-
ing her meeting her husband). Those who finished the first book wanting more
will welcome the new addition. DS
APPELT, KATHI 
I See the Moon; illus. by Debra Reid Jenkins. 
Eerdmans,
1997 
[2 4p]
ISBN 0-8028-5118-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
A little girl adrift on the sea in her tiny boat is helped back to safety by moonlight,
starlight, providential wind, and a guiding dove. After contemplating the power
that assists her ("Who told the wind to fill up my sail?"), she realizes that "it's God
who's with me wherever I go." Kids will probably find the literal level of the story
a bit confusing-what's a little kid doing alone on a boat anyway?-so adult assis-
312 
* THE BULLETIN
tance will be required to explain the larger point. The tetrameter couplets are
appropriately simple and make good use of the repeated questions, but the rhythm
and phrasing are inclined to be awkward; readers-aloud tempted by the opening "I
see the moon and the moon sees me" to maintain the jaunty tempo of the song will
be forced to abandon ship quickly. The art is luminescent pastel highlighted with
gold leaf, which is a little on the gift-wrappy side but nonetheless possesses a glit-
tery charm. Despite the flaws, this would make a nice if sentimental theological
bedtime read for kids accustomed to the metaphor. DS
AXELROD, AMY 
Pigs in the Pantry: Fun with Math and Cooking; illus. by Sharon
McGinley-Nally. 
Simon, 1997 
[34p]
ISBN 0-689-80665-5 
$13.00 
M 
5-8 yrs
Mrs. Pig's ailing, so Mr. Pig and his offspring decide to get her back on her feet by
fixing her favorite "Firehouse Chili." Clearly not the math champs Axelrod would
like her audience to become, the Pigs misread or ignore the recipe's measurements
and steps (included in a two-page spread) and predictably produce an inedible,
smoking mess. An appended chart of "Measurement Facts" is intended to help the
audience analyze and "correct" the Pigs' mistakes. However, there is no hint of
how actually to do the required math, and by the time a listener can perform the
multiplication and/or division necessary for the conversions, it's doubtful he or she
would care anything about a picture-book kitchen full of silly pigs. The recipe
itself is imprecise, calling for "6 cups" of beans, but not explicitly stating they
should be canned beans and offering no amounts for the optional ingredients. The
recipe's caveat "Please ask an adult for help!" applies to this title's math problems as
well; it's going to take a lot of adult intervention to get this meal on the table. EB
BAILLIE, ALLAN 
Secrets ofWalden Rising. Viking, 1997 
16 8p
ISBN 0-670-87351-9 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Brendan misses England and he hates his new life in drought-ridden small-town
Australia, which seems to hate him right back. Since his new schoolmates sneer at
the interloper, he spends his time alone, and he's particularly fond of the old reser-
voir, Fedder Lake. As the drought takes its toll on the reservoir, he begins to see
strange things in the water, things which eventually prove to be the drowned town
of Walden. Rumors of old treasure in Walden result in Brendan's pairing up with
his chief tormentor, Bago, for the search, until they encounter another treasure-
seeker, whose desperation has made him very dangerous indeed. This isn't nearly
as good as that other book about antipodean drowned villages, William Mayne's
Low Tide (BCCB 3/93); it takes a long time to get started, and it's unnecessarily
overlaid with a multitude of personal psychodramas. Baillie's excellent at depict-
ing the possibly fantastical elements of Walden's resurrection, however, and at
placing these events in a larger history. The fascination of Brendan's private (or so
he thinks) world and an exciting climax will reward those readers who persevere.
DS
BAIUL, OKSANA 
Oksana: My Own Story; as told to Heather Alexander. 
Random
House, 1997 
4 6p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-679-88382-7 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
As young skating aficionados know, Baiul won the gold at the last Winter Olym-
pics, and the little Ukrainian orphan won a great deal of popular sentiment as well.
MAY 1997 
* 
313
This is a brief first-person account of her life and the development of her skating
skills, culminating in her gold medal. The book isn't up to the standard of fill
Trenary (BCCB 3/90), which used a tight focus to provide genuine insight into
the experience of a top skater. Here a breathless narration skitters over the top of
a life, resulting in a hardcover souvenir brochure (complete with flimsy pages and
pink frou-frou in the design) rather than any real closeness to the glamorous world
that readers will long to know more of. There are enough details about coaching
and costumes and famous friends to lure young ice bunnies, however, and they'll
probably relish flipping through the pages. DS
BARTOLETTI, SUSAN CAMPBELL 
Dancing with Dziadziu; illus. by Annika
Nelson. 
Harcourt, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200675-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
"I remember when my grandmother was round as a loaf of bread and my arms
couldn't fit around her waist. Now Babci's fingers are cold, and the bones float
inside her skin." The melancholy of these opening lines permeates this tale of a
little girl's relationship with her dying grandmother, who reminisces about her
girlhood in Poland to while away the days until she is reunited with her deceased
husband, and can "see Dziadziu in his white shirt again." Many of the Old World
details that comprise Babci's memories will intrigue listeners-chickens' feet were
painted blue so the family could tell their stock from their neighbors'; Grandfather
managed to steal "plenty of kisses," even though Babci's Papa watched them courting
on the porch. Bartoletti threads reminders of Babci's imminent death throughout
the narration, and listeners who might otherwise warm to these cozy vignettes may
find the undertone of sadness oppressive. Even the bright Easter colors of the
linocut illustrations fail to relieve their stiff formality. While this is clearly not the
selection for Grandparents' Day at school, it may well touch a chord with children
facing the loss of their own Babcis. EB
BATEMAN, TERESA 
The Ring of Truth: An Original Irish Tale; illus. by Omar
Rayyan. 
Holiday House, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1255-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
The story of Patrick O'Kelley is a simple one. A peddler accustomed to making his
living by bending, if not totally obliterating, the truth, he makes the mistake of
saying "I can spout better blarney than the king of the leprechauns himself." Well,
quicker then you can say kiss me, I'm Irish, Patrick finds himself in the hall of the
leprechaun king, recipient of a lovely emerald and gold ring. It is the ring of truth,
which, once on his pinky finger, assures that he will never embellish the truth
again as long as he lives. But that doesn't stop him from winning the Donegal
blarney contest, which he does by telling nothing but the plain unvarnished truth
about his encounter with the little people. Bateman's "original Irish tale" is set in
a once-upon-a-time Ireland that is visually represented with such a profusion of
Celtic symbols and imagery that it positively boggles the eye. Celtic knots, Kell-
like illuminated capital letters, ruddy-faced individuals with twinkling eyes, and
hidden fairy folk roam across green and foggy landscapes in a manner that can
only be described as, well, visual blarney. Rayyan's washed-out watercolors are an
overwhelmingly crowded phantasmagoria of Celtic pride, but Bateman's text has a
tellable resonance about it that makes it a worthy readaloud and storytelling choice.
JMD
314 
* THE BULLETIN
BEu, LILI 
The Sea Maidens of Japan; illus. by Erin McGonigle Brammer. 
Ideals,
1997 
32p
ISBN 1-57102-095-0 
$14.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
Kiyomi wants, and indeed is expected, to become an ama like her mother, a sea
diver who harvests fish without the aid of breathing apparatus. Fear of the water,
though, leads her to consider the course her older sisters have taken-"the modern
way of life" at fish canneries in the city. After several years of waiting and practice,
during which Kiyomi becomes more intimately acquainted with the coastal waters
and their denizens, she makes her first deep dive and is guided back to the surface
by the sea turtle she herself had guided to the sea when it was a hatchling. Pale and
trembling from her accomplishment, Kiyomi sits on the beach "among the brave
ama, the sea maidens of Japan." Unusual and dangerous, the fishing technique
itself should captivate a young audience, while Brammer's grainy oil wash paint-
ings of chilly green waters and foggy beaches (to say nothing of the amas' faces,
eerily greased with protective white cream) extend the shivers. A brief author's
note offers more information on two forms of ama diving; a pronunciation guide
is also included. For a perfect pairing, read this along with Jan Andrews' Very Last
First Time (BCCB 9/86). EB
BORTON, LADY Junk Pile!; illus. by Kimberly Bulcken Root. 
Philomel,
1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22728-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
What a relief. Here are some illustrations based not on photographs of adorable
children but on the creative imagining of dynamic characters. These include Papa,
a mechanic with a distinctive philosophy-"Ain't nobody don't need a mechanic"-
that translates into a rusty streak of self-confidence for his shy daughter Jamie, who
helps stack old car parts around their trailer, pushes her brother's wheelchair from
the school bus, and endures the taunts of a boy she finally converts with .. . car
parts! Not to mention Wing, a dog whose ears justify his name so completely that
no further comment is needed or given. Like Williams' Galimoto (BCCB 4/90),
this is a story that celebrates invention inventively: Jamie deals with the bully not
by overcoming him but by challenging him to create something ingenious and to
join her on her own fantastical school bus. The setting is run-down Appalachia,
the viewpoint is a child's world of pain and play, and the art is Kimberly Bulcken
Root's unique translation of understated watercolors, varied perspective, and lively
forms into subtly emotive illustration. BH
BRIGHTON, CATHERINE 
My Napoleon; written and illus. by Catherine
Brighton. 
Millbrook, 1997 
29p
ISBN 0-7613-0106-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
When Napoleon was exiled to St. Helena, he struck up a friendship with Betsy,
the young daughter of his prison-keeper. This account, taken from Betsy's adult
reminiscences, is couched in the form of entries from her diary; it tells of Bonaparte's
arrival, their gambols about the island, and, finally, her return to England. The
story of a special relationship between a child and an adult has its appeal, and
Brighton does a good job of keeping the language simple without losing historical
flavor. The episodic narrative doesn't have much shape, however, and it's doubt-
ful that many youngsters in the U.S. will have enough knowledge of the little
MAY 1997 
* 315
corporal to understand the difference of this slant, or even the context. The water-
color illustrations offer some attractive vistas of the island and its pleasures, but the
absence of modeling in the figures makes them stiff and distant. This is probably
too far from the beaten conceptual path for most kids, but the alternative ap-
proach to a major historical figure may intrigue some. A biographical timeline for
Napoleon is included. DS
BUCKLEY, HELEN E. 
Moonlight Kite; illus. by Elise Primavera. 
Lothrop,
1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10932-2 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10931-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In a monastery overlooking the sea, three forgotten monks lead solitary if spiritu-
ally fulfilling lives until the arrival of two children and their kite. When Anarilla
and Nicholas lose their kite to a tree, the three monks (who have taken a vow of
silence) leave the monastery, retrieve the kite, and go kite flying in the moonlight.
When the children return the next day, they find their kite in "another, smaller
tree"; the next day, there are two kites, one a newly made gift of the monks; and
"so it came about when the wind was right, Nicholas and Anarilla flew the kites by
day and the monks flew them by night." This is all nice enough but the story is
about the grown-ups, and it never communicates or connects to a child's frame of
reference. Primavera's watercolors are attractively whimsical, the deep blue palette
adding richness to the starry night sky while the daylight sky is brought to breezy
life by the colorful flying kites. The characters' body language and facial expres-
sions have vigor and personality, and the final illustration of the moonlit monas-
tery looming over the tiny figures of the monks as they fly kites over the sea makes
a lovely visual conclusion to this comparatively flat story. JMD
BUNTING, 
EVE 
I Am 
the Mummy 
Heb-Nefert; illus. by 
David
Christiana. 
Harcourt, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200497-3 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
An imaginary voice from the past speaks: "I am the mummy Heb-Nefert,/ black
as night,/ stretched as tight/ as leather on a drum./ My arms are folded/ on my
hollow chest/ where once my live heart beat." In this evocation of life in ancient
Egypt, the mummy Heb-Nefert speaks of what it was like to be the beloved wife of
the pharaoh's brother, how they sailed in barges on the Nile, and feasted in gar-
dens while harpists played. And then death: "My golden cat, Nebut, I loved./ She
loved me, too,/ and came with me/ into the silent twilight of the afterlife/ when
day changed to eternity." Heb-Nefert describes the mummification process, her
internment, and her final destination: a glass coffin "under lights in quiet rooms,"
as people pass by and say "This was a person?" She muses, "How foolish that they
do not see/ how all things change and so will they." Bunting's text is deliberately
restrained, with a formality that suits the speaker as she comments with longing
and wisdom on her life, her own passing, and the passage of time. While the
impressionistic tone of Christiana's watercolors is sometimes a little vague, and the
compositions vary in effectiveness, for the most part the paintings are as evocative
and understated as the text as they reflect the golden days of love on a royal barge,
the darkness of the tomb, and the starkness of the mummy wrapped in ancient
linens under museum lights. A clearer sense of chronology would be useful, but
this will intrigue those kids fascinated by Ancient Egypt and even those who aren't.
JMD
316 
* THE BULLETIN
CHERRY, LYNNE 
Flute's Journey: The Life ofa Wood Thrush; written and illus. by
Lynne Cherry. 
Gulliver Green/Harcourt, 1997 
[34p]
ISBN 0-15-292853-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
The life of the ordinary wood thrush is no picnic, what with natural dangers such
as hawks, cats, and raccoons, and when man-made hazards are added, the odds of
extinction increase. That's the message of Cherry, the director of the Center for
Children's Environmental Literature, who walks the reader through Flute's birth,
first migration, and mating season. The didactic story relentlessly drives home the
environmental devastation of suburban sprawl-clear-cut forests, paved over wet-
lands, pesticides on lawns. The illustrations are a bird-lover's delight (although
the token humans remain flat), with detailed watercolors of dozens of species.
Cherry's maps and endpapers help us to locate the various species in North and
Central America and follow their migrations. The author includes a note urging
young ornithologists to help the cause during spring and fall migrations by keep-
ing cats indoors, urging parents not to use pesticides, planting berry bushes and
trees for feeding and nesting, and working to protect mature forests. SSV
CHIN-LEE, CYNTHIA 
A Is for Asia; illus. by Yumi Heo. 
Kroupa/Orchard,
1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33011-7 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30011-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Using the alphabet as a frame, Chin-Lee gives little factoids about various aspects
of Asian life. Each letter is represented by an object or aspect of Asian culture ("A
is for Asia, one third of the earth"; or "D is for dragonboats, sweeping the water";
or "R is for rice, fried, steamed or curried") and is then followed by a brief explana-
tion of the object/aspect's place in its specific culture. Granted, individual cultures
cannot be covered with any depth whatsoever in these brief bits, but Chin-Lee's
cultural snippets have some child appeal, from elephants to kites, from sweets to
yurts, from origami to pandas, even if they occasionally smack of a touristy Asia-
as-exotica approach. Yumi Heo's watercolors are appealingly whimsical and the
varying compositions are energetic as they reflect Siberian sled races, children eat-
ing rice from lacquered bowls, and dancers leaping and spinning to the gamelan.
While this title misleadingly gives the impression of a monolithic Asia, it may still
have its uses in the collection and the curriculum. JMD
COLLARD, SNEED B., III Animal Dads; illus. by Steve Jenkins. 
Houghton,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-395-83621-2 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"Dads do many things" begins this special offering about animal dads of all kinds.
Sticklebacks (architect dads), poison-arrow frogs (a protective policeman-like dad),
and pipefish (dads who give birth) are just three of twenty species represented here
in this animal spin on fatherhood. Simple lead-in phrases ("Sometimes dads play")
accompany short paragraphs chock-full of fun facts, as in the case of dwarf mon-
goose dads: "Mom rarely plays with her youngsters, but Dad often joins in a
playful romp in the dirt." (Is Mom perhaps doing the mongoose laundry?) Cut-
paper collages done in full color enrich the text with plenty of textural interest,
providing dads like the western meadowlark, the gorilla, and the cichlid fish (who
protects his young from enemies by hiding them in his mouth) with the appropri-
MAY 1997 
* 
317
ate feathers, fins, or fur. There are no deadbeat dads here. Even the honor of lion
dads is defended: "Lion dads might seem like lazy dads, but that's not always
true .... Father lions guard the females and cubs and defend the pride's territory
from other lions. All of this can be a lot of work." 
For Father's Day or any day,
this dishes up enough stuff to keep the "my daddy's bigger than your daddy" wars
at bay for awhile. PM
COOPER, ILENE 
The Dead Sea Scrolls; illus. by John Thompson. 
Morrow,
1997 
64 p
ISBN 0-688-14300-8 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
This riveting account of the history, discovery, acquisition, and restoration of the
Dead Sea Scrolls reads like an Indiana Jones adventure because that's what it was
like. Cooper has woven this stranger-than-fiction tale together in seven highly
readable chapters. From the initial discovery of the first seven scrolls by Bedouin
shepherds to the scrolls' computer-generated re-creation in 1991, the book gives
readers a compelling look at the providential (or coincidental, depending on your
outlook) anecdotes which surround these artifacts: e.g., the day in November
1947 that the United Nations voted to create the Jewish state of Israel was the
same day that a Jewish archaeologist from the Hebrew University in Jerusalem
acquired three of the scrolls from an antiquities dealer in Bethlehem. Even the
environment of Judea played a part: "The desert helped 'mummify' the scrolls,
and its inhospitable terrain kept people away." Black-and-white illustrations are
unexciting, but the amount of information given more than makes up for it. An
author's note, a map (unfortunately overly localized), a timeline, glossary, works
consulted, and an index complete this useful and stimulating account for young
scholars. PM
COOPER, SUSAN 
The Boggart and the Monster. McElderry, 1997 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-81330-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
The Loch Ness Monster is kin to the Boggart (see The Boggart, BCCB 3/93). But
Nessie has forgotten the shape-changing shenanigans peculiar to boggarts and lies
asleep and depressed, in the shape of an immense monster, at the bottom of Loch
Ness. Little do Emily and Jessup realize when they befriend a scientist trailing the
Loch Ness Monster that they will soon be rescuing the Boggart's more famous
cousin from the very same scientist and his computerized gadgetry. Sequels can be
tricky propositions, and unfortunately this sequel is more of a proposal than it is a
thoroughly developed story. Whereas the Boggart's mischief and the misdiagnosis
of Emily's extrasensory abilities were skillfully woven together in the earlier tite,
this book tends to be disjointed and unconvincing. Many characters (such as
friend Tommy's reporter father) and relationships (especially Tommy and Emily's
"romance") seem merely stereotypes and plot-fillers, and few are fully realized.
While the prose is characteristically Cooper-graceful, vivid, playful-plot con-
trivances interrupt the flow, including a letter "explaining" the Boggart to the new
owner of Castle Keep, the Boggart's sudden propensity toward speech and family
ties, and the thrice-squeezed cockleshell aiding Nessie's escape. Nonetheless, the
high-speed chase across Loch Ness, suggestive of cops-and-robbers television, deftly
illustrates the tension between modern technology and the Boggart's Old Magic.
There is also an easy camaraderie between the children, the lawyer Mr. Maconochie,
and the Boggart that may satisfy readers enamored of boggartry. AEB
318 
* THE BULLETIN
CUTLER, JANE 
Spaceman. Dutton, 1997 
138p
ISBN 0-525-45636-8 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Fifth-grader Gary has a learning disability that's making his life miserable: his
classmates torment him, his fast-talking teacher keeps admonishing him to "stay
with us, now, Gary," and his hard-body father (divorced from his soft-body mother)
doesn't see any reason why Gary shouldn't be promoted even if he can't read. A
physical confrontation with his chief tormentor results in Gary's transfer to a spe-
cial education class and his meeting with his savior, teacher Ms. Block. Gary's
"specialness" is the crux of his problem and the engine of the plot, but Cutler has
injected what could have been a highly didactic text with compassion and human-
ity. This is more than a bibliotherapeutic approach to dyslexia-Gary is a kid
misunderstood and misplaced, and his dilemma is one with which many children
can identify. JMD
DARLING, KATHY 
Chameleons on Location; illus. with photographs by Tara
Darling. 
Lothrop, 1997 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12538-7 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12537-9 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-6
Table of contents offerings such as "It's Not Easy Being Green," "Reptiles from
Hell" (Hell being the Madagascar location where the Darlings did their chame-
leon research), and "Read My Lipstick" provide an enticing intro to this appealing
entry. This book is fraught with goodies that will keep chameleon experts or
trivialists in business for a long time ("If cornered, a three-pound pardalis will
attack a human. One of the males we studied not only attacked us, he challenged
airplanes every time they flew over his territory"). Brilliantly colored photographs
appearing on every double-page spread are well-captioned, fascinating, funny, ee-
rie, and sure to evoke a response of "Cool." The lively text never gets bogged
down in the details but instead revels in them. There is such a preponderance of
neat stuff here that just when you think you've read the most amazing thing yet
you read something even more amazing. Types of chameleons, color changes and
their significance (see the chart "How To Read Chameleon"), habitat, environ-
mental issues, mating habits, dietary habits, and more are all presented in a way
that produced in an approving test audience cries of "More," "Wow," and "Can I
have that book?" "Chameleon Facts" and an index are included. PM
DARLING, KATHY 
Komodo Dragon on Location; illus. with photographs by Tara
Darling. 
Lothrop, 1997 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13777-6 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13776-8 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Komodo dragons, also known as monitor lizards, "are not dinosaurs. They are not
descendants of dinosaurs either. . . . The ancestors of modern monitor lizards
walked the prehistoric land long before dinosaurs ever set foot on it." And they're
still walking the land on the small Indonesian island of Komodo. Darling and
Darling have taken themselves to this less-than-hospitable island to observe and
photograph the rare lizards in their natural environment. In six brief chapters, the
book covers the habitat of the dragons, their physiology, eating and hunting hab-
its, mating and hatching, and their place in evolutionary history. The conversa-
tional, accessible text is accompanied by some fine color photographs of the dragons
engaged in their natural activities (eating, fighting, mating, etc.) in their natural
MAY 1997 
* 
319
setting. A short list of Dragon Facts (babies are called hatchlings or pups; lizards
can be up to ten feet long and can tip the scales at 400 pounds after a good meal)
is followed by a brief index. The acknowledgments thank a variety of experts on
the dragons for their assistance with the manuscript. JMD
ERLBRUCH, WOLF 
Mrs. Meyer the Bird; written and illus. by Wolf
Erlbruch. 
Orchard, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33017-6 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30017-X 
$14.95 
M 
5-7 yrs
You haven't seen worry until you've seen Mrs. Meyer worry: "She worried about
whether the sun would rise the next day. ... 
It would be so cold! She wondered
if she'd have enough gloves and sweaters .. ." Her husband's assurances that "the
world will keep on turning" play to deaf ears. When an abandoned baby bird
provides her with some real grist for her worry mill, Mrs. Meyer springs into ac-
tion, naming it Lindberg and caring for it in her husband's hat. When the time
comes for Lindberg to fly, Mrs. Meyer carries her maternal obligations to the ex-
treme, going out on the limb and even taking off in flight to demonstrate the
proper aerial moves ("Together Mrs. Meyer and Lindberg flew down over the
meadow, across to the forest, and up to the sky. Later they returned home for a
cup of tea"). Erlbruch's mixed-media scenes are quite glorious, turning the titular
matron's dark imaginings into literal black clouds and aqua shadows that hover
around her, while her husband calmly pursues his Japanese brush painting and
plays his harmonica in bed. It's deft brushwork indeed that can lend the all-too-
substantial Mrs. Meyer a certain airborne grace as she wings her bulky frame over
an ink and collage cityscape. But the textual fantasy is late in coming, and Erlbruch
squanders entirely too much time observing the connubial mismates to capture
the picture-book crowd. While this could garner some chuckles at a marriage-
encounter weekend, as a kids' book it never gets off the ground. EB
FARLEY, CAROL 
Mr. Pak Buys a Story; illus. by Benrei Huang. 
Whitman,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-5178-3 
$15.95 
' 
R Gr. 2-5
In this Korean folktale, Mr. and Mrs. Kim, a wealthy but bored couple, send their
faithful servant to buy a story to enliven their quiet evenings. The well-meaning
but remarkably innocent servant, Mr. Pak, goes to the city with a hundred gold
coins and is immediately taken advantage of by a cunning thief who gulls him out
of the gold with a description of a bird in a field: "He steps carefully. ... He comes
closer ... ." Mystified but sure his employer will be able to explain, Mr. Pak takes
the strange story home. While Mr. Kim is retelling the story for the umpteenth
time, the thief comes to rob the house, but is stopped cold by the voice of Mr.
Kim: "He steps carefully .... He comes closer. .. ." The words of the tale mirror
the thief's movements, and he flees, convinced there is a "terrible magic present."
Huang's acrylic and colored pencil illustrations have a comical tone, and the char-
acters' faces, while simply drawn, are emotionally expressive. Changing perspec-
tive adds variety to the single and double-page compositions while the rich palette
results in warmly colored textiles and verdant fields. Mr. Kim wonders if they
have paid too much for a story they don't understand, but Mrs. Kim replies:
"No. ... The more I hear the tale, the more I wonder, and wonder is a very valu-
able thing." It certainly is. A detailed author's note is included. JMD
320 
* THE BULLETIN
FLORIAN, DOUGLAS 
In the Swim; written and illus. by Douglas Florian. 
Harcourt,
1997 
4 8p
ISBN 0-15-201307-5 
$15.00 
R Gr. 3-6
First there was beast feast (BCCB 7/94), then On the Wing (4/96), and now Florian
turns his attention to the denizens of the deep (and the shallows). His gallery
comprises a score of subjects, ranging from the catfish to the sea horse to the mana-
tee. The format is the same as in the previous volumes, with a watercolor portrait
facing a spare but imaginative verse in a double spread dominated by glossy white
space. The poetry here isn't quite up to the previous standard-there are several
forced rhymes, and the concepts don't always fit their fish as well as one might like.
There is still a creelful of inventive poems, however, and there are some creative
arrangements (the salmon poem appropriately climbs up a ladder) and a refreshing
variety of verse patterns and rhyme schemes. The watercolor art is fittingly liquid,
with sea creatures floating through billows of sunlit or shady hues. You could pair
this with beast feast for a surf 'n' turf poetry event-maybe the kids will want to
guess at what kind of beings the next volume could feature. DS
FOREMAN, 
MICHAEL 
Seal Surfer; written and illus. by Michael
Foreman. 
Harcourt, 1997 
30p
ISBN 0-15-201399-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In spring, young Ben and his grandfather find a seal with her newborn pup, and
they follow the pup's growth and progress through the seasons. They fear that she
was lost in the strong storms of winter, but she turns up again in summer, surfing
with Ben on the waves and saving him when a big one takes him under. Then the
next year, after Ben's grandfather dies, the boy is cheered by the return of his seal
friend with her own pup. It's a pretty story but a rather sentimental one, and the
individual episodes are rarely particularly compelling; the seal rescue is dramatic,
but its anthropomorphism jars against the gentle realism of the rest of the book.
Ben's dependence on crutches is a matter-of-fact part of the book, and the seasonal
motif is lullingly rhythmic. The watercolor art in this oversized picture book varies
from full-page to three-quarter-spread images, and it's vividly aquatic though some-
times too reliant on candy-bright colors. Kids fond of selkie stories may want to
catch this wave. DS
FRANKLN, KRISTINEL. 
Lone Wolf 
Candlewick, 1997 
220p
ISBN 1-56402-935-2 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Perry-and his father left for the Minnesota northwoods after a family tragedy: when
Perry's little sister was killed in a car accident, Perry's parents were torn apart by
grief, guilt, and blame, and his mother left. Now Perry's a home-schooled fifth-
grader, refusing to read any of his mother's weekly letters and spending his time
alone in the woods or with his taciturn father, whom he wishes to emulate. All this
changes when the lively Pestalozzi family moves in next door and Perry is, half
against his will, drawn first into a friendship with Willow Pestalozzi and then into
a closeness with the entire ebullient family. Soon, however, the warmth and open-
ness Perry experiences with his neighbors revives in him the grief and anger that he
and his father have both long denied. Franklin's characterizations are strong, true,
and fair: there are no villains here, as Perry's father begins to realize how hard he
has made things, and he genuinely loves his son; Perry's conflicting desires to stay
MAY 1997 
* 321
what he considers strong and to join the world in feeling are convincingly de-
picted. The northern setting and outdoor details, including a thematically appro-
priate and well-handled subplot about a wolf in the area, add a vivid sense of place.
Readers who appreciated the thoughtfulness and smooth writing of the author's
Eclipse (BCCB 3/95) will enjoy Perry's story. DS
FREEDMAN, RUSSELL 
Out of Darkness: The Story of Louis Braille; illus. by Kate
Kiesler. 
Clarion, 1997 
81p
ISBN 0-395-77516-7 $15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Louis Braille is a significant historical figure and one of the classic subjects of
juvenile biography; this new entry is nicely gauged for a middle-grades audience.
Freedman traces Braille's life from his childhood and early blindness to his atten-
dance at the Royal Institute for Blind Youth, his development of Braille, his struggle
to get it accepted, and to his teaching years, physical decline, and death. The text
is simple and accessible, but it has an old-fashioned flavor, especially in bits of
fictionalized dialogue and in phraseology ("He lived in darkness, but he seemed to
have a sunny disposition"); it's also surprising that reliable historian Freedman has
provided neither notes nor bibliography for his sources. Still, this competently
conveys Braille's pioneering spirit, and kids will be particularly interested in Braille's
youth at the time of his invention and his battle against the establishment for its
acceptance. Occasional full-page soft pencil drawings combine with wide leading
and brevity to reassure easily daunted readers. An index is included. DS
GETZ, DAVID 
Floating Home; illus. by Michael Rex. 
Holt, 1997 
33p
ISBN 0-8050-4497-3 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 309, for review.
GRACE, CATHERINE O'NEILL 
I Want to Be an Astronaut, ISBN 0-15-201300-8; I
Want to Be a Veterinarian; ISBN 0-15-201296-6. 
Each book: Maze/Harcourt,
1997 
4 8p 
illus. with photographs 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
This splashy new series offers kids a peek into the worlds of a variety of professions.
Each book begins with a "Where to Start" section and ends with a "You Can Be
a..." spread and a list of other sources of information, in between describing
various aspects of the job, its history, and famous individuals in the profession.
There are a lot of appealingly presented images of folks at work in their chosen
mdtier, and Astronaut provides some good information about training programs
while Veterinarian offers useful facts about different kinds of veterinary work. Un-
fortunately, the organization in both is poor, with the focus sometimes diffuse
(details about current astronaut's jobs under the "Where to Start" heading) and no
particular shape to the arrangement of chapters. Much of the Veterinarian book
depicts biologists, conservationists, and other non-vets working with animals, mak-
ing pages seem like filler rather than relevant information; the organization lists in
back have useful tidbits about programs and brochures, but mistakenly include
two separate and very different associations as part of the Humane Society of the
United States. There are better books on each of these topics (such as Anne Baird's
Space Camp, BCCB 6/92, Henry Horenstein's My Mom's a Vet, 3/94), but these
do provide a starting place, if a rather carelessly assembled one. DS
322 
* 
THE BULLETIN
GRAVETT, CHRISTOPHER 
The Knight's Handbook: How to Become a Champion in
ShiningArmor. Cobblehill, 1997 
2 9p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-65241-8 
$13.99 
R Gr. 3-5
Following on the heels of The Pirate's Handbook (BCCB 10/95) and The Cowboy's
Handbook (3/96), the series now turns to the heroes of the age of chivalry. As
usual, the format is appealingly bitty, with craft projects ("Making a Knightly
Sword"), sidebars (the "Are You a Chivalrous Knight?" quiz), and period art liven-
ing up the informative text. The subject matter ranges from armor to heraldry to
the crusades, providing brief introductions to all those crucial aspects of knight-
hood without ever losing the quick pace. The crafts aren't as manageable as those
in the previous books, however, and the writing isn't as snappy or clear. The
approach and the visual allure nonetheless makes it an enticing introduction to the
elaborate world of knighthood; pair it with Marcia Williams' KingArthur (BCCB
3/96) or Robin Hood (5/95) for an offbeat introduction to the days of olde. DS
GREENBERG, JUDITH E. 
Getting into the Game: Women in Sports. 
Watts,
1997 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs 
(Women Then-Women Now)
ISBN 0-531-11329-9 
$22.70
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
This latest entry in the Women Then-Women Now series is a history of American
women in sports from colonial times to the present. The history is presented
chronologically, with a rather numbing parade of names and dates, but it's all
essential and welcome material for report writers. The serviceable prose relates
some real howlers from the past: in 1919 the first woman to shed her hose, while
still wearing the traditionally modest bathing garb of the times, was given a sum-
mons for swimming "nude"; in the nineteenth century there was enormous con-
cern that bicycling would lead to prostitution. Greenberg discusses the role of
industrial teams before the Depression, the athletic opportunities offered to women
during wartime, the age-old charge of unfemininity leveled at accomplished fe-
male athletes. The crucial role of Title IX in funding women's sports programs is
explained, as well as how to go about getting a college athletic scholarship. With
revenues from the sports industry now at about $60 billion a year (exceeding auto-
mobile, oil, lumber, and transportation), and its growth continuing unabated, ca-
reers in sports are more and more attractive to young women, and Greenberg
outlines what these jobs are and how to go about landing one. This is a useful, if
unexciting, addition to your sports section. End notes are appended, as are sugges-
tions for further reading and an index. SSV
HANEL, WOLFRAM 
The Goldat the End ofthe Rainbow; tr. by Anthea Bell; illus.
by Loek Koopmans. 
North-South, 1997 
2 6p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-693-8 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-692-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Young Brendan lives with his grandfather on an unnamed coast. Wishing for
bacon and eggs one rainy morning as they eat their potatoes, Grandpa laughingly
says, "We might as well wish for the gold at the end of the rainbow." In the
morning, a rainbow arches from the coast to a small island, and Brendan insists on
rowing over to dig for the gold. No gold is found, and the two dejectedly head for
the boat, but Grandpa catches and releases a leprechaun, who rewards them not
with gold but with a calf, a pig, some chickens, and a bottle of elderberry juice
MAY 1997 
* 323
that, no matter how much you drink, is never emptied. Hiinel's gentle narrative is
engaging but bland, though the young Brendan's innocent belief in gold and lep-
rechauns is easy to accept. While the figures and faces of Brendan and his grandpa
are awkwardly drawn, Koopmans' watercolors of the windswept cabin, the rolling
sea, and the ever-changing sky (reminiscent of a kinder, gentler Stephen Gammell)
are satisfyingly idyllic. JMD
HANSON, REGINA 
The Face at the Window; illus. by Linda Saport. 
Clarion,
1997 
[32 p]
ISBN 0-395-78625-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Set in contemporary Jamaica, this compelling picture book explores stereotypical
misunderstandings and fears about mental disabilities. Young Dora and her friends
are trying to drop mangoes from Miss Nella's tree but Dora misfires her stone and
hits Miss Nella's door instead, bringing the frightening and erratic Miss Nella to
the window. "I hope you didn't look upon her face," Dora's friend says. "Any
time Miss Nella show her face at the window, something terrible goin' to happen."
Dora's terror is confirmed shortly when a torrential rainstorm commences ("De
rain never goin' to end," she said. "And is all my fault"). Dora's Mammy and
Pappy help allay her fears ("Miss Nella not bad at all. I don't understand her
sickness, but it is inside her head"), and in a simple, forthright act of restitution
Dora learns that kindness isn't a cure but it helps. Pastels in a blend of brilliant
jewel tones and black outlines exude the tropical heat and the brooding intensity
of this short, well-paced drama. Though somewhat lengthy for a readaloud, this
could give rise to some thoughtful discussion on a serious subject that isn't often
broached in picture books. PM
HASKINS, JIM 
Spike Lee: ByAny Means Necessary. Walker, 1997 
[144 p] 
illus.
with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8496-8 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8494-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
This compact biography takes a sympathetic yet objective look at controversial
filmmaker Spike Lee. Without glossing over Lee's reputedly thin skin or front-
burner politics, Haskins paints a portrait of a talented, driven, enormously shrewd
writer/director who has affected the course of contemporary American cinema.
Lee is a son of the black middle class, raised in an Italian neighborhood in Brook-
lyn. Both of his parents were college graduates, his mother a teacher and father a
jazz player, yet Spike Lee's films frequently depict the racial rage of poor African
Americans. Haskins describes Lee's creative process from the idea for a film to the
writing of the script, casting, shooting, post-production, and promotion. Lee's
style has been compared to that of confirmed fellow New Yorker Woody Allen, in
that Lee uses an ensemble of actors and crew members in film after film. Each of
Lee's films is critiqued, both by Lee himself (via secondary sources) and by others,
with special attention given to Lee's most successful film to date-Malcolm X
(hence the title). The personal isn't excluded either-readers will find intriguing
details about Spike Lee himself, such as the fact that he chose a New York film
school over one in California because he can't drive. This is a valuable reference to
any young person interested in film and popular culture. SSV
324 
* THE BULLETIN
HINES, ANNA GROSSNICKLE 
Miss Emma's Wild Garden; written and illus. by Anna
Grossnickle Hines. 
Greenwillow, 1997 
24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14693-7 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14692-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
In this intergenerational story, Chloe, a barefooted child, and Miss Emma take a
wander through the older woman's summertime garden. "What's in your garden,
Miss Emma?" Chloe asks, and the little girl's persistent "What else?" refrain con-
tinues throughout the book as their encounters with garden wildlife spring from
nearly every double-page spread. Deer, rabbits, woodchucks, cardinals, a skink
(not a misspelled skunk but a lizard), a squirrel, a nuthatch, a toad, butterflies, and
bees make cameo appearances at just the right moment, all seeming safer than the
titular "wild" would suggest. Acrylic renderings of Miss Emma's Eden show it
flourishing in lush green tones with delicately drawn blooms in a summer bouquet
palette, but Chloe and her friend have unnaturally peachy fleshtones, are stiffly
drawn, and often seem awkwardly plopped into the foliage. For kids who like
languid garden strolls more than a wild jungle tour this could be the ticket, but for
real bouts of spring fever try a Burpee's catalog or Perkins' Home Lovely (BCCB 9/
95). PM
Ho, MINFONG 
Brother Rabbit: A Cambodian Tale; by Minfong Ho and Saphan
Ros; illus. by Jennifer Hewitson. 
Lothrop, 1997 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12553-0 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12552-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
* 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Trickster rabbits have a certain perennial appeal and this one is no exception, but
it is the toothy villain here that steals the show. Crocodile, as dumb as he is fierce,
agrees to ferry Brother Rabbit across the river to some toothsome rice fields if
Brother Rabbit will cure him of his rough, ugly skin. Of course, Brother Rabbit
doesn't have a cure but does have the last laugh at Crocodile's attempts to get
revenge. Even after eating his fill, fooling around, pushing his luck too far, and
finally getting swallowed, Brother Rabbit uses his wits to get back across the river:
"I've always wanted to eat crocodile guts. Now that I'm in his belly, I can eat all
his insides!" At this point we are treated to a look at a major abdominal cavity in
which even Crocodile's ribs look like fangs, yet a discerning viewer may begin to
realize that Brother Rabbit's markings look pretty toothy themselves. In fact, it's
the linear reflections that make these ink-and-watercolor illustrations an outstand-
ing projection of the narrative patterns. The rice field, for instance, is shaped just
like the crocodile; the rice plants-although green-are pointedly sharp; Croc and
Rab's eyes are both demonically orangish (matching the border motifs). These
compositions are alive with innovative motion, mischievous echoes of color, and
quirky perspectives. There's a fine cultural background note but no sources are
indicated. BH
HOBERMAN, 
MARY ANN 
The Seven Silly Eaters; illus. by Maria
Frazee. 
Browndeer/Harcourt, 1997 
40p
ISBN 0-15-200096-8 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Poor Mrs. Peters-her brood's dietary demands are wearing her out. First there's
Peter, who will only drink milk that's warmed to the proper temperature; next
comes Lucy, who insists on homemade pink lemonade; then there's Jack, who
MAY 1997 
* 325
would eat only applesauce; and so on through another boy, another girl, and a set
of twins, all with their own culinary idiosyncrasies. Just when Mrs. Peters is driven
to the edge of distraction, the seven little Peters, in making her a birthday break-
fast, discover that all their favorites together make a wonderful pink cake that
everybody likes and that makes future family repasts a breeze. Maternal readers-
aloud may wonder why Mrs. P. puts up with it all, but both they and the audience
will recognize the roll call of dining requirements. The lively tetrameter couplets
keep things cooking, and youngsters will appreciate the glorious kitchen mess.
The illustrations, colored drawing inks in subdued earth tones and energetic hu-
morous lines, are reminiscent of a more restrained David Catrow. This would be
a terrific time-passer while Junior is waiting for the cookies to come out of the
oven. DS
JENNINGS, DANAANDREW 
Me, Dad, d&Number 6; illus. by Goro Sasaki. 
Gulliver/
Harcourt, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-200085-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The author's memories of his childhood in rural New Hampshire are the basis of
this picture-book offering. Through the eyes of six-year-old Andy, we watch the
unfolding affection and pride of the boy's dad and his friends toward a 1937 Pontiac
coupe which they lovingly restore ("That car was as black and shiny as a raven's
wing and fresh-splashed on its door in bright red paint was the number 6-my
age"). The story works surprisingly well, with its rich, illustrative text celebrating
the hard work ("After working on the car, Dad and I'd trudge toward the house all
greasy and grimy, looking like grubby monsters that lived in a tailpipe"), the ex-
citement of a car race ("Loved how the cars spit fire and whooshed wind as they
jabbed, jostled, and jammed around the track"), and the tense conclusion ("Num-
ber 6 squirmed on the bottom of that steely stack, smushed and twisted and flat-
tened") where Dad survives with only some bruised ribs. Whew. Tinted watercolors
provide a washed-out, time-past feel emphasized with purple accents, and they
lend visual importance to that black car which "sat mangled in the dooryard, look-
ing like some wicked knot in your shoelace that you couldn't untie in a million
years." This is a nostalgic excursion that compels its audience to come along for
the ride. PM
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
The Rolling Store; illus. by Peter Catalanotto. 
Jackson/Or-
chard, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33015-X 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30015-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A young African-American girl tells her white friend a family story of her
grandfather's, about the Rolling Store, a general store on wheels that used to serve
the rural community he lived in "when he was little and the world was young." A
gathering place for the community, the Rolling Store "had it all" from pies and
cakes to "the mystery of unseen things in barrels... and the colors. So many boxes
and baskets of color." The grandfather's memory as reflected in the illustrations is
braided together with the contemporary story of the granddaughter, as she and her
friend string bead necklaces, bake cookies, and make lemonade. Personal history
comes full circle when Grandfather comes home to a heartfelt hug, and the three-
the two girls and the grandfather-walk down the street gathering the community
326 
* THE BULLETIN
around their own rolling store, a little red wagon. Johnson's gentle family story
has a certain nostalgic appeal, and that nostalgia is reflected in Catalanotto's soft,
sentimental watercolors. Everything takes place in an undifferentiated warm, fuzzy
glow, and the generic visuals lack the attention to detail kids find so appealing
about family stories. A clumsily realized regeneration of the Rolling Store is achieved
with the placement of the title page at the book's textual end, with images that
bring the story to its visual conclusion. JMD
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
Wish You Were Here: Emily's Guide to the 50 States; illus. by
Amy Schwartz. 
Doubleday, 1997 
118p
ISBN 0-385-31146-X 
$19.95 
M 
Gr. 2-5
Trekking across the USA with her grandmother over summer vacation, fictional
child Emily comments on the sights in double-page spreads cluttered with cartoon
renderings of landmarks, activities, and state maps. Given the prodigious number
of facts offered, some minor discrepancies aren't surprising: the text indicates that
North and South Dakota came into the union simultaneously, while an appended
chart shows ND entering first; a studious Emily is pictured in the reading room of
the Library of Congress, which only serves patrons over the age of eighteen. More
troublesome, however, are the myriad glitches likely to confuse or mislead readers.
Children familiar with the "authors" Keene and Dixon will wonder about New
Jersey's "Edward Stratemeyer, who created series of books about Tom Swift, the
Hardy Boys, and Nancy Drew." Author Richard Wright is mentioned in connec-
tion with Arkansas, but his portrait appears without explanation in the Mississippi
spread. The statement "[Barbed wire] changed the history of the entire Great
Plains. It allowed ranchers to keep their cattle in and danger out" seems to miss the
whole point of cowboy/homesteader hostilities. Emily's comments are unvaryingly
breezy, even as she describes picnicking on the site of an Indian massacre. An
index and charts of state facts may lure report writers to this title, but the informa-
tion is easily available elsewhere. EB
KURTZ, JANE 
Trouble; illus. by Durga Bernhard. 
Gulliver/Harcourt,
1997 
[34p]
ISBN 0-15-200219-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Tekleh is always in trouble, so his father makes him a game, a gebeta board, to
keep him occupied while he watches the goats. This merely adds new possibilities
for adventure in a sequence of swaps-the board for a knife, the knife for a masinko
(stringed instrument), the masinko for a drum, etc.-until Tekleh comes home
with the goats and a new gebeta board, his father none the wiser. It is young
listeners, of course, who will be all the wiser: curiosity leads to lots of fun and a full
stomach. The author, who heard the story as a child in Ethiopia, has set her
version in Eritrea, in deference to a variant of the story collected there by Harold
Courlander and cited in her source note. Kurtz' text is nicely styled ("The red
smell of spices curled in the air") but rambles a bit, just managing to keep the
folkloric pattern intact (a green lizard that Tekleh stops to play with is irrelevant to
an already extended series of events). Bernhard's earth-toned, organically rounded
compositions are openfaced and often funny in details such as the goats' unobtru-
sive but constant snatching of forbidden mouthfuls, a head-on camel-sneer, and
MAY 1997 
* 
327
Tekleh's reaching slyly into a pot of food belonging to a wedding party. Time and
place will prove no barrier to kids' identification with an inadvertent mischief-
maker. BH
LEVINE, GAIL CARSON 
Ella Enchanted. HarperCollins, 1997 
[24 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027511-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027510-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
In this novel-length Cinderella, the complete tale of everyone's favorite rags-to-
riches maiden comes vividly to life. Levine adopts neither the effusive detail of
McKinley's Beauty (BCCB 12/78) nor the haunting somberness of Napoli's Zel
(7/96), but renders Ella as a sensible adolescent who refuses to roll with life's every
punch and can even appreciate the more comic aspects of her dilemma. The gift
of obedience bestowed upon Ella by a well-meaning fairy has been a perpetual
burden. An offhand remark by a stranger can send her into purposeless activity for
hours and, needless to say, the malicious commands of her selfish stepsisters wreak
even more havoc. But her fairy godmother, the family cook, assures her that she
will someday break the spell, given the right incentive, and even though the threat
of losing her own life proves insufficient to lift the curse, readers can anticipate
that true love for her Prince Charmont is. Levine leaves the familiar motifs in-
tact-wicked stepmother, glass slipper, midnight curfew at the ball-but by estab-
lishing an easy, playful friendship between Ella and the prince which blossoms
gradually into love, she offers readers with feminist sensibilities the assurance that
life with Charmont (the prince you want to bring home to mother) will in fact be
happy, ever after. EB
LING, MARY 
The Snake Book; by Mary Ling and Mary Atkinson; illus. with pho-
tographs by Frank Greenaway and Dave King. 
DK, 1997 
28p
ISBN 0-7894-1526-7 
$12.95 
R* 
Gr. 3-7
Snakes aren't that hard to describe, but the sheer wonder of snakeness, the lithe
reptilian allure, is hard to convey in book form. Bianca Lavies managed it in A
Gathering of Garter Snakes (BCCB 2/94), and here's another resounding success.
Eleven substantially oversized double-spreads and one surprise four-page fold-out
offer astonishing portraits of individual snakes. The shots appear to be from above,
with the snakes confined in a glossy and lidless white box. The result is snake art:
reptiles line the box's perimeter with geometric fidelity, pretzel themselves com-
fortably, or peer into the air echoed by dramatic shadows; the subjects are buffed
and gleaming to the point of iridescence, with intricate patterns and glowing col-
ors fascinating from the aesthetic as well as the zoological point of view. The text
is brief, staying out of the way of the snakes both conceptually and visually (it's
cleverly designed to snake around and constrict from large to small type); a page of
"Snake Statistics" offers the photos in miniature with info about each snake's dis-
tribution, diet, hunting method (with explicit mention of those dangerous to hu-
mans), and length. Kids will also get a kick out of identifying the snakes in the
front and back covers, though the snake in the introduction, who doesn't appear
in the rest of the book, may stump them--or lead them to more research. Even
herpetophobes may find themselves cautiously slithering towards this one; you
won't even have to booktalk it, just open up the foldout and wait for the gasps. DS
328 
* THE BULLETIN
LITTLE, JEAN 
Gruntle Piggle Takes Off; illus. by Johnny Wales. 
Viking,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-670-86340-8 
$13.99 
Ad Gr. 2-4
Pining for piggy puns? Take your pick; just don't expect a porker of a plot. In this
post-Orwellian world (where Animal Farm was apparently a success), young Gruntle
Piggle runs away from her parent's posh city apartment in the Pigs' Digs to see
what life is like down on the farm with Grandpa Streaky Bacon. Her city sensibili-
ties set up some earthy situations that will make kids grin: "Seeing so many nude
animals, all at once, left Gruntle weak in the knees," and when she prissily pro-
poses experiencing the activities that make country life appealing, such as sniffing
manure and rolling in mud, a sheep jeers, "La di da and poop poop to you."
Wales' watercolors keep the spoof from becoming caricature; the Piggies' city has
a 1940s feel with 1990s details and lots of visual puns to extend the text (note the
Pig Latin textbook, the kiddy bank, and Orwell Road). Underneath the humor,
however, contrivances abound. Gruntle has never met her grandhog because of a
family falling-out over reading. The impetus for Gruntle's visit lies, peculiarly, in
a pair ofRollerblades that the back-to-nature grandhog sends her. Gruntle's huffing
and puffing over Grandpa Bacon's rudeness about reading disappears when she
realizes that he probably can't read, hence his opposition. The story wallows to an
end as Gruntle imagines herself saving Grandpa from illiteracy. Heavy hoof aside,
it's a playful pig tale, and one that pun-wise kids will root for. AEB
LOCKER, THOMAS 
Water Dance; written and illus. by Thomas Locker. 
Harcourt,
1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-201284-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Thirteen lushly romantic oil paintings, accompanied by spare, poetic text, offer
viewers a sensuous introduction to the water cycle. The ever-changing atmosphere
is fairly palpable in Locker's more successful spreads: "Drawn upward by warm
sunlight, in white-silver veils I rise into the air. I disappear. I am the mist."
Whitecaps break along a rock-strewn shore, as the evaporating fog shimmers in
diffused sunlight. The dank green-grays of the storm front "carried by winds from
distant seas" are eerily threatening and oppressive. Locker's rainbow, though, is
rigid and opaque, piercing the hillside rather than streaking the sky, and in the
final spread an overly-crimson sunset blazes like technicolor hellfire as the text
sentimentally warbles, "I am one thing. I am many things. I am water. This is my
dance through our world." In an appended section of notes on the water cycle, the
gallery is reproduced in miniature with paragraphs explaining each phase of the
cycle in more detail. Older viewers intrigued by the emotive qualities of stream
and storm may want to move on to Nathaniel Tripp's Thunderstorm! (BCCB 4/
94). EB
McGuIGAN, MARY ANN 
Where You Belong. Atheneum, 1997 
171p
ISBN 0-689-81250-7 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
When her family is evicted from their apartment, Fiona runs away rather than stay
with her grudgingly helpful aunt. Wandering the Bronx streets of 1963, she finds
herself in an African-American neighborhood where she meets Yolanda, a friend
from her old school. With no questions asked, Yolanda gives Fiona temporary
shelter. The rising civil rights movement is the counterpoint to the story of these
MAY 1997 
* 329
two girls whose friendship is considered unlikely if not forbidden by the adults
around them. Fiona's parents make their racism plain in their language and ac-
tions; Yolanda's family looks askance at the two girls, but are generous in their
hospitality; local characters-the patron in the candy shop, the shop proprietor,
the racially enlightened Mrs. Carson-all have preconceptions they project onto
the two girls. The urban setting is nearly a character in itself, affecting the lives
and actions of Yolanda, Fiona, and others through the clear delineation of safe
havens and hidden dangers. While the plot deals with issues, it is not driven by
them. McGuigan's characters are fully realized and emotionally complex, and
they do not lend themselves easily to stereotyping or standard bearing. Any social
commentary is given from the perspective of a young adolescent who has already
received too many hard knocks from an unkind world, and who is seriously ques-
tioning where her loyalties really lie. JMD
MAHY, MARGARET 
The Five Sisters; illus. by Patricia MacCarthy. 
Viking,
1997 
80p
ISBN 0-670-87042-0 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 3-5
A string of five paper-doll sisters, all holding hands, are created on a hot summer
day by a little girl's grandmother. The first sister is given name, face, and voice by
the little girl; then the dolls are lifted by a mischievous wind and sent adventuring.
The paper sisters are found and lost and found again, and each time a paper sister
is given face, name, and voice by a different person. Captured between the pages
of a book for many long years (they make a perfect bookmark), they are discovered
by the first little girl, now grown with a daughter of her own. The tale comes full
circle as the daughter draws the last face gently, gently on the fragile paper. Set to
sail in a paper boat, the dolls are lifted by the same errant wind, and at last come to
their longed-for island of story and adventure. This is a winsome conceit, and
there is enough forward momentum to keep the story moving along. While the
plot isn't riveting, the tale of the five paper-doll sisters-their birth and the evolu-
tion of their characters, so to speak-will appeal to younger children. Mahy's text
is divided into readaloud-length chapters (the longest are six pages) that will make
restfully absorbing bedtime fare. Black-and-white illustrations help bring the pa-
per siblings to life, and they are sure to have listeners asking if their grown-ups can
make paper-doll strings, too. Get out your scissors and start folding. JMD
MAITLAND, BARBARA 
The Bear Who Didn't Like Honey; illus. by Odilon
Moraes. 
Orchard, 1997 
[26p]
ISBN 0-531-09546-0 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Little Bear is not a scaredy cat but rather a "Scaredy Bear! Scaredy Bear!" as his
siblings repeatedly remind him. Our chubby young protagonist is too scared of
the dark to fall asleep, too scared of the water to catch fish, and too scared of bees
to gather honey. Obviously this is a problem for a bear, but in this predictable
story Little Bear overcomes his cowardly status by rescuing a cub in distress. The
cub's grateful mother affirms Little Bear's newfound courage ("'That was a very
brave thing to do.' 'It was?' asked Little Bear. 'But I was scared!'"). Exactly, aren't
most heroes? Of course Little Bear goes on to conquer his bee phobia, discovering
that his hard-won honey "was better than any other honey because he'd got it all
by himself." Hazy watercolor greens and blues provide the backdrop for most of
the forest action, which ends in the shadowy browns of the bear cave where the
330 
* THE BULLETIN
"new" Little Bear joins the family in a well-earned snooze. Plump little bee-bodies
with W. C. Fields noses buzz on the cover and endpapers, and the cuddly brown
bears with teddy-type mugs as well as an engaging if message-driven text give this
tale an amusing quality. Young listeners will enjoy this readaloud offering at bed-
time even if they don't like honey (or bedtime). PM
MARRIN, ALBERT 
Empires Lost and Won: 
The Spanish Heritage in the
Southwest. Atheneum, 1997 
[22 4 p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-80414-8 
$19.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Marrin breathes new life into the litany of explorers, conquistadores, and soldier-
statesmen that comprise the textbook history of the Old Southwest. In his open-
ing chapters he forges beyond simplistic accounts of a facile European rout of the
natives, portraying complex men driven by gold fever, religious zeal, nationalistic
fervor, and an adventurousness born of peacetime boredom who meet their match
in the sometimes fierce, sometimes cunning resistance of indigenous cultures. In
discussing political and military developments after Mexican independence (which,
curiously, receives little attention here), however, Marrin loses some of his objec-
tivity; his sarcastic take on Santa Anna, for example, sounds like a personal ven-
detta: "Preferring not to ride, he went about in a carriage fit for Napoleon himself.
Heaven forbid that His Excellency, El Presidente, should raise saddle sores on his
tender behind!" Still, the stirring battles scenes for which Marrin is noted (Uncon-
ditional Surrender, BCCB 3/94, Virginia's General, 1/94) are much in evidence
here, and history students will find this to be a rich and thought-provoking ac-
count. Period illustrations, extensive endnotes and bibliography, and an index are
included. EB
MARZOLLO, JEAN 
Home Sweet Home; illus. by Ashley Wolff. 
HarperCollins,
1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027353-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027562-6 
$14.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
This rhyming prayer requesting blessings on the earth and its inhabitants is ac-
companied by large, vibrant paintings mirroring the verdant natural world evoked
by the text: "Bless each bee/ Each flower and tree/ Each cloud in the sky/ Each
stalk of rye. ... Bless each ant/ Each cactus plant/ Each dolphin and whale/ Each
little snail. .. ." Marzollo's simple words are given a stately setting by Wolffs full
and double-page illustrations, as a majestic whale swims alongside a dolphin, an
affectionate giraffe nuzzles her young, and the moon rises over an idyllic country-
side. While the text is somewhat repetitive and the compositions are sometimes
cluttered, this is a picture book guaranteed to fill a niche in library collections
looking for simple devotional fare for young children and their caregivers. JMD
MATAS, CAROL 
The Garden. Simon, 1997 
[112p]
ISBN 0-689-80349-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Sixteen-year-old Ruth is a concentration-camp survivor who has made her way
from Poland to Palestine (a journey detailed inAfter the War, BCCB 4/96) and has
settled, along with her boyfriend Zvi, on a kibbutz that is in danger both from the
British and the Arabs during the political maneuvers leading to Israel's founding in
MAY 1997 
* 
331
1948. While Ruth is active in the Haganah, a Jewish defense organization, her
brother Simon fights with a terrorist operation called Irgun. Like the previous
book, this has a representative sense about it, with one Arab friend torn by the
conflict, one villainous Arab leader blamed heavily ("His friends in Germany killed
eighty-eight members of my family"), callous British officials with the exception of
a sympathetic soldier, and a range of Jewish refugees determined to settle their
ancient new land. As a Palmach leader, Ruth takes a heroic role in several fighting
scenes, which maintain suspenseful action throughout this mini-Exodus. The first-
person narrative is sometimes self-conscious, imposing a reportorial or even super-
ficial tone on the events, but the two books together do give a kind of fictional
overview for young readers without the background to enjoy more individualized,
in-depth novels such as Gila Almagor's Under the Domim Tree (6/95). BH
MIcuccI, CHARLES 
The Life and Times ofthe Peanut; written and illus. by Charles
Micucci. 
Houghton, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-72289-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
The familiar peanut is revealed to be much more than one might suspect in this
affectionate portrait of America's old standby. The author explains that peanuts
aren't even nuts at all but legumes (as are peas, beans, clover, alfalfa) that grow in
pods underground. The reader is served lots of mental munchies such as unusual
uses for peanut parts-cat litter, paper, even explosives. We learn the ancient
history of peanut cultivation, how peanuts were introduced around the world from
their native South America, who invented peanut butter and why, how peanuts
came to replace cotton as an American crop, and even a Civil War song about
goobers. The role played in the propagation of the peanut by African slaves is
included, as well as the standard info on George Washington Carver. If the adula-
tory tone sounds a tad commercial, it's offset by the sheer number of handy factoids.
The illustrations are cornball and cartoony yet do the trick, so spread this one
around. Suggestions for further reading are included. SSV
NEITZEL, SHIRLEY 
We're Making Breakfast for Mother; illus. by Nancy Winslow
Parker. 
Greenwillow, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14576-0 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14575-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. K-2
The kids make Mom breakfast and wind up at the local diner in this cumulative
rebus. Toast jelly side down, spilled cereal, and not-so-hot tea inspire mother to
save the day: "You made me breakfast? I'm impressed!/ Let's share this feast and
then get dressed./ We'll put on our jackets and go for a hike,/ Since I don't want to
see what the kitchen looks like." Parker's innocuous, cartoony characters are ser-
viceably depicted in watercolor, pencil, and ink with lots of reds, pinks, and greens,
and the rebus pictures are clearly defined. The repetitive "House That Jack Built"
accumulation works well, and giving the written word first and then subsequently
replacing it with a rebus picture allows kid readers an opportunity to practice,
show off, and play with the words and pictures as well as giving them a chance to
"get it" the second or third time if they missed it the first time around. Pedestrian
illustrations aside, this title is fun and easily mastered, with a number of possible
uses and a wide potential audience. JMD
332 
* THE BULLETIN
O'CONNOR, BARBARA 
Beethoven in Paradise. Foster/Farrar, 1997 
[160p]
ISBN 0-374-30666-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
The Paradise Trailer Park in South Carolina can hardly be considered a cultural
hub, but there junior-high-schooler Martin Pittman and his pudgy, middle-aged
neighbor Wylene share a devotion to music-pop to classical-that amounts to a
kind of secret, double life. Wylene encourages Martin to branch out beyond his
harmonica playing, but he's simply too cowed by his boorish, bullying father's
scorn for his musical passion to take a stand for his art. Wylene procures a violin
for Martin to practice on and Mr. Pittman forces a showdown on the issue, shat-
tering the fiddle but, thankfully, not his son's musical aspirations. O'Connor's
first venture into fiction sparkles with richly drawn characters-emotionally guarded
and tart-tongued, but deeply humane. The fiery confrontation between father
and son is more inevitable than predictable, and the wellspring of neighborly en-
couragement and practical support that hauls Martin up onto his own two feet is a
glowing tribute to community strength. EB
PASTUCHIV, OLGA 
Minas and the Fish; written and illus. by Olga
Pastuchiv. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-79756-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
3-6 yrs
Littlest brother in a family of fishermen, Minas is left home from expeditions
because he cannot swim. His siblings haul back an amazing catch, a huge and
unidentifiable green fish, which talks privately with Minas and grants him his
dearest wishes-to be bigger and able to swim. As they explore the depths, Minas
becomes lonely and asks to return home; once there, he's driven off by his broth-
ers, who no longer recognize him, so he needs help again ("'Fish, fish! . .. Make
me little again! Please make me little!' And the fish did"). Pastuchiv's parable
about the danger of getting your heart's desire crosses the border between gentle-
ness and somnolence, with Minas' transformations far too facile to evoke empa-
thetic shudders. His undersea tour is, however, rendered in a series of watercolor
spreads which become increasingly mysterious and intense with his descent, cul-
minating in an encounter with a truly threatening octopus. Listeners may not
clamor, "Read it again," but many will insist, "Let's see it again." EB
PEARSON, KIT 
Awake and Dreaming. Viking, 1997 
228p
ISBN 0-670-86954-6 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Theo finds life with her flighty and self-centered young mother hard to bear: be-
tween occasional physical abuse, panhandling for money, and constant loneliness
when her mother is off with men, there's little enjoyment. En route to being
dumped at her aunt's house, Theo meets up with the family of her fantasies, the
Kaldors, and somehow magically becomes part of it, attending school and playing
games with her four new brothers and sisters. She's devastated when she awakes to
her old life, but confused when, while trying to fit in with her aunt's quiet life, she
becomes friends with the Kaldors in reality, a reality far less idyllic than her magi-
cal interlude with them. There's too much going on here and it's hard to get a
hold of any of it as a result: the ghostly intervention that caused the realization of
Theo's fantasy is overexplained and the living out of the fantasy is, in fact, rather
MAY 1997 
* 333
dull, as endless amity is wont to be. More effectively depicted is Theo's unhappi-
ness with her mother and her longing for a more nurturing life. This doesn't have
the flow of Pearson's Guests of War trilogy, but readers will be rooting for Theo's
shot at a better life. DS
POMERANTZ, CHARLOTTE 
Mangaboom; illus. by Anita Lobel. 
Greenwillow,
1997 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12957-9 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12956-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Mangaboom is a nineteen-foot giantess with curly red hair, a poofy dress with a
flowered, ruffled hem, and pink satin slippers with yellow bows. She lives at the
top of a tree filled with "hundreds and hundreds of golden mangoes," and she is
friend to Daniel (regular-sized boy, about eight years old). Her auntie, Tia Pepita,
wants Mangaboom to behave like a ladylike giant and not scare off all the eligible
gentleman giants, but Mangaboom is not interested and her aunt's matchmaking
always goes awry. A love letter left in her satin slipper announces the intentions of
Grizwaldo (a gentleman giant who bears a remarkable resemblance to Daniel) who
turns out to love Mangaboom just as she is. This picture-book fantasy is oddly
successful. Pomerantz' text is wordy in the extreme, but Mangaboom and Daniel's
friendship is a center that holds, and the rest of the details-gentleman giants with
odd names and speech patterns, the occasional Spanish phrase, the Spanish duenna-
like costume ofTia Pepita, Mangaboom's avowed penchant for skinny-dipping-
are dropped in like eccentric footnotes. 
Lobel's gouache paintings, while
compositionally uneven, are a remarkable combination of teal greens, sky blues,
rose pinks, and daffodil yellows, suitable to the apparently warm and tropical set-
ting. The lengthy text may limit the audience, but Mangaboom, barely contained
within the page, is a wonder from her red corkscrew curls to her painted pink
toenails. JMD
PRINGLE, LAURENCE 
An Extraordinary Life: The Story of a Monarch Butterfly;
illus. by Bob Marstall. 
Kroupa/Orchard, 1997 
[6 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33002-8 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30002-1 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Pringle recounts the life of a monarch butterfly in this scrupulously researched and
lavishly illustrated book. This seemingly fragile female weighs about one-fiftieth
of an ounce, has a four-inch wingspan, can fly over eighty miles a day, migrates
several thousand miles, and lays hundreds of eggs in her short life. Pringle's pas-
sion for his subject enlivens what might have been just another dry science tome,
and his prose is sprinkled with enticing infobits: monarchs have been in North
America for about two million years; their migration began about 10,000 years
ago after the earth warmed and milkweed spread northward; each year naturalists
capture, band, and track countless monarchs. The reader is also encouraged to
plant a butterfly garden, campaign against commercial development of land along
the migration route and in the winter refuge, and raise monarchs at home. Marstal's
paintings are restrained and detailed where appropriate (the progression of the
chrysalis) but are not above bursting into technicolor decadence in the double-
page spreads (monarchs filling a meadow). In addition to helpful sidebars, there
334 
* THE BULLETIN
are maps showing the migratory paths of the monarch and the location of their
winter colonies in Mexico. The book includes challenging suggestions for further
reading and an index. Combine with Kathryn Lasky's photoessay Monarchs (BCCB
11/93) for an in-depth look at lepidoptera. SSV
ROBB, LAURA, comp. Music andDrum: Voices of War and Peace, Hope andDreams;
illus. by Debra Lill. 
Philomel, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22024-0 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Robb divides her selections into three groups loosely built around the themes of
war, peace, and hope. These twenty-two poems are remarkably evocative, with
works by Carl Sandburg, Langston Hughes, and Eve Merriam interspersed with
the poetry of children of war: a sixteen-year-old girl in Belfast wishing for her lost
childhood, a young Israeli grieving for his dead father, a young Arab with a vision
of the angel of peace. This well-intentioned collection is undermined by the ex-
treme sentimentality of the gauzy, greeting-card-style photography that accompa-
nies it. The poems and the pictures are tonally dissonant, and the pastel colored,
digitally manipulated photos juxtapose oddly with the tragedy and hope played
out in the poetry. The text size is small, and the words tend to be overwhelmed by
the indistinct, oddly nostalgic nature of the photography. Robb's selection of
poems, however, is a strong one, and this may lend itself to curriculum use or as a
springboard to more extensive collections. JMD
Russo, MARISABINA 
Under the Table; written and illus. by Marisabina
Russo. 
Greenwillow, 1997 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14603-1 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14602-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Hannah is the smallest person in her family, so there's just enough room for her
and all of her accoutrements (dolls, blanket, books, family dog) underneath the
table. Whether she's happy or sad, table-bathing in summer or tent-making in
winter, "under the table is a good place to be." This is a cozy tale of a child's secret
hideaway, until the day she picks up her crayons and decorates the underside of
the table with rainbows and smiley faces. When Mama and Daddy discover
Hannah's mural, the story becomes a rather pointed lesson in not drawing on the
furniture. While the episode provides the story with a needed conflict, the par-
ents' dramatic gasps and Hannah's teary, repeated promises to "never do it again"
further emphasize the story's didacticism. Russo's figures are flat and paper-doll-
like, but Hannah's crayon drawings are kid-authentic. The art is bright and blocky,
with patterned shirts and wallpaper and family photos on the wall providing homey
details. Mama and Daddy's solution to the problem-that Hannah draw on pa-
per instead-is fair, and it encourages Hannah (and other like-minded readers) to
keep crawling back under that table. AEB
SCHNUR, STEVEN 
The Koufax Dilemma; illus. by Meryl Treatner. 
Morrow,
1997 
[192p]
ISBN 0-688-14221-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-5
The baseball season opener against arch-rival Ryewood has been scheduled for the
first night of Passover, and eleven-year-old Danny, "the greatest Jewish southpaw
MAY 1997 
* 
335
since Sandy Koufax" (at least according to a family friend), is angry. His mom
insists that Seder dinner is more important than pitching, and she has the story of
baseball legend Koufax, who refused to play on Yom Kippur, to back her up. But
for Danny, baseball takes precedence over religion, and he is afraid that he will lose
his coach's respect if he misses the game. While the baseball writing is smooth and
well-paced, the story has more strikes than runs. Danny's interactions with family
and friends are stiff and unnatural, and overly expository dialogue denies the char-
acters emotional depth. The moral dilemma suggested by the title is reduced to
adult lectures on the importance of religion, Danny's self-sacrificing defiance and
grudging obedience, as well as a super-condensed Seder dinner. Yet readers may
relate to Danny's frustrations, compounded as they are by his parents' recent di-
vorce, and recognize the conflicts that arise when cultural and personal commit-
ments clash. AEB
SONENKLAR, CAROL 
Bug Boy; illus. by Betsy Lewin. 
Holt, 1997 
[112p]
ISBN 0-8050-4794-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Eeks! First in a recent infestation of arthropodic novels came MaryJames's Shoebag
Returns (BCCB 2/97), followed closely by Ralph Fletcher's Spider Boy (4/97), and
now Bug Boy. This iteration of the boy/beast transformation plot features third-
grader Charlie Kaplan, whose mania for insects and arachnids flies right out of
control when a fellow enthusiast gives him a Bug-a-View, which allows Charlie to
trade places with whatever critter crawls into range of its lens. 
As Charlie, Bug
Boy regales the audience with predictable data ("It's important not to catch and
keep praying mantises because they help the environment by eating bugs like fruit
flies, which destroy crops"), and as a bug he encounters predictable threats from
insensitive humans out to squash him. Just when the plot promises to cast Charlie
as a delightfully noxious insect-a bombadier beetle (they spray enemies with "hot
chemicals that explode from their rear ends, with apop")-he's merely transmuted
into a spider, who dodges some shoes and wraps the bombadier into a web in the
sink. Overworked bug puns abound, and readers will probably find Lewin's scribbly
black-and-white pictures a heck of a lot funnier than the text. EB
STERLING, SHIRLEY 
My Name Is Seepeetza." Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre,
1997 
126 p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88899-290-4 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-8
First published in Canada, this is an autobiographical novel about a young girl's
experience when she is sent away from her family ranch to the Indian residential
school in 1959. Seepeetza, called Martha by the nuns, is miserable there: "In class
I get into trouble for daydreaming. In the rec. Edna wants to beat me up because
I have green eyes. White people don't like us because our clothes are old. Sister
clobbers me for making dancing mistakes. The worst is that I get scared to go to
the bathroom in the dark." In diary form she tells of the ups and downs of the
year, with most of the first occasioned by her trips home while school amply pro-
vides the second. The diary entries are resoundingly authentic, with the institu-
tional racism and general corruptness evinced in a thousand quotidian details (the
girls' hair is cut short, unless it happens to be curly, to make them look less Indian)
rather than described. Unfortunately, this authenticity extends to the voice, which
relates incidents without differentiating their degree of importance, and which
336 
* THE BULLETIN
describes the year piecemeal without bringing any particular rhythm or form to
the overall narrative. As a result young readers, especially those lacking a sense of
the historical context, may not acquire enough readerly momentum to carry them
through the book. It's still an intimate and vivid account of an experience poorly
conveyed in American children's literature; use it with other diary-form narratives
to tune kids to the approach, and it may open many eyes. DS
TANAKA, SHELLEY 
Discovering the Iceman; illus. by Laurie McGaw and with
photographs. 
Hyperion/Madison Press, 1997 
(I Was There Books)
ISBN 0-7868-0284-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
After 5,000 years of mummification, Otzi the iceman, found buried in the Alps in
1991, has emerged with more fame than he ever achieved in life. Following the
format of the previous volume in the series, On Board the Titanic (BCCB 9/96),
the book intersperses factual information (Otzi's discovery, the forces that buried
him, the scientific analysis of his body) with a fictional account of how he might
have lived and died. The cornucopia of facts, combined with the gruesome appeal
of Otzi's decomposing visage, makes this an enticing dip into history. The book
covers much the same ground as Don Lessem's The Iceman (BCCB 9/94), how-
ever, and the fictional interlude is flatly written and overly speculative; the art for
the fiction is adequate but uninspired in a style reminiscent of old Time-Life se-
ries. This doesn't offer much new on the subject, but it's nonetheless a nice collec-
tion of the available information for hungry Otzi fans. DS
VANDE VELDE, VIVIAN 
Curses, Inc. and Other Stories. Yolen/Harcourt,
1997 
226p
ISBN 0-15-201452-7 
$16.00 
R Gr. 6-10
This collection often witchy tales has something to appeal to everyone. There's a
tongue-in-cheek saga of a boy who tries to buy misfortune via an on-line service
for a girl who embarrassed him in "Curses, Inc.," a would-be sorcerer searching for
just the right spell in "Boy Witch," and a prince who needs a case of amnesia to
teach him compassion in "Remember Me." Several of the most chilling stories-
"Lost Soul," "Cypress Swamp Granny," "Past Sunset"-have been published in
previous collections. The tone of the collection varies from funny to haunting,
from rueful to gothic, as Vande Velde roams from the familiar environs of fairy
tales to the swamps of the plantation south. Give this one to readers who are ready
for some sophisticated tales of the supernatural. JMD
WADSWORTH, GINGER 
John Burroughs, the Sage of Slabsides. Clarion,
1997 
95p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-77830-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Naturalist John Burroughs was a pioneer of nature writing and an instrumental
figure in the early environmental movement. Wadsworth chronicles his life from
his upbringing in upstate New York to his bank work, his family life, and finally
his devotion to bringing the world of nature to people through his writing. Men-
tion of the famous people (Walt Whitman, Theodore Roosevelt, John Muir) who
knew Burroughs helps convey his impact; quotes from Burroughs' writing give an
idea of his style. The book never really makes its subject comre alive, skirting
emotional depths and leaving questions such as how Burroughs felt about his ap-
parently tempestuous marriage unanswered. (It's also overly optimistic of the au-
MAY 1997 
* 
337
thor to assume that John Muir needs no introduction.) It's still a careful and
detailed account of an important but lesser-sung figure, however, and young read-
ers with an interest in the green movement will find it informative. A bibliography
and an index are included; period photographs appear throughout. DS
WEATHERBY, MARK ALAN 
My Dinosaur; written and illus. by Mark Alan
Weatherby. 
Scholastic, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-97203-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
On moonlit nights, a little girl waits at her bedroom window for her dinosaur to
appear. Subtle visual clues herald his silent arrival: the shadowy shape of his head
against the house, rows of dinosaurs patterning the wallpaper, a glimpse of a tail
through the window. The friendship between the girl and the dinosaur is both
familiar and fearless, if sentimentally depicted. They play hide-and-seek in the
shadows and swim in the river, and when the girl races through the forest on the
gentle dinosaur's back, none of the nocturnal animals is afraid. The girl's narra-
tion is self-conscious, though, and the illustrations glamorize her, with her light-
bathed blonde and pink figure jarring against the dark and mottled landscape of
her fantasy (effectively created with acrylics and metallic paint). The dinosaur is
the too-large-for-the-page stuff of dreams; we catch only glimpses of skin that is
smooth and lichen-patterned green-gold, a head reminiscent of a friendly inflat-
able toy, and a ridged back that is nearly indistinguishable from a distant moun-
tain range. This is a dinosaur to be believed in, especially when the girl comes to
breakfast with leaves in her hair. "I played with my dinosaur last night," the girl
informs her mother. "That's nice," her mother replies. If only she knew. AEB
WERSBA, BARBARA 
Whistle Me Home. 
Holt, 1997. 
108p
ISBN 0-8050-4850-2 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Noli Brown is unhappy and combative, taking swigs from a vodka bottle to get her
through the school day, when she meets TJ at the start of junior year. TJ is hand-
some and sensitive, immediately sought after by all the girls, but he chooses Noli.
She is transformed by the relationship, but she hungers increasingly for a physical
component their relationship doesn't have. A failed seduction attempt makes it
clear to her that TJ is gay, and her anger and hurt cause her first to erupt at him
and then to withdraw from everybody, descending into a morass of booze and
bitterness until she finally comes to terms with her problems with herself as well as
with TJ. This is an unusual but compelling story, and Wersba tells it well: her
present-tense narration is tender and immediate, and Noli's longing and frustra-
tion are depicted with grace and sympathy. Succinct but intense, this is a resonant
story about the hidden agendas of love. DS
WINTHROP, ELIZABETH, ad. 
The Little Humpbacked Horse: A Russian Tale; illus.
by Alexander Koshkin. 
Clarion, 1997 
27p
ISBN 0-395-65361-4 
$14.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
In this traditional Russian rags-to-riches tale simple Ivan, with the help of his
magical humpbacked horse, exposes his elder brothers' dishonesty, becomes the
Tsar's Master of Stables, and completes seemingly impossible tasks for the greedy
Tsar, including bringing him the woman he hopes to marry, the beautiful and
willful Tsarevna. But the Tsar's greed backfires when the Tsarevna falls in love
338 
* THE BULLETIN
with Ivan and tricks the elderly Tsar into a folkloric death (he leaps into a cauldron
of boiling milk because she tells him that will make him young again). Winthrop's
retelling brings out the humor in this dreamy tale in which Ivan, who "loved noth-
ing better than to sleep away the days as well as the nights" is galloped to his
destiny by his humpbacked mount. Koshkin's highly patterned illustrations, in a
rich palette of golds, greens, and reds, are densely and pleasingly detailed without
being overcrowded. Although Koshkin's figures are sometimes stiff, there is move-
ment in the lines of his compositions, and his animals are well drawn and ani-
mated, with the droll little horse always in the center of the action. Attractively
organized into short chapters broken up by full page illustrations and half page
miniatures, this book is a good choice for an episodic bedtime readaloud or even
an undemanding readalone. PMc
WOLF, BERNARD 
HIVPositive; written and illus. with photographs by Bernard
Wolf. Dutton, 1997 
48p
ISBN 0-525-45459-4 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Sara is a young woman with AIDS, and this photoessay explores its effect on her
life and her loved ones, especially her two school-age children, Jennifer and An-
thony. The book describes her recent near-fatal bout with pneumonia, her com-
prehensive physical checkups, her problems with employment and insurance, and
her fears for her children. It then focuses closely on the children, especially Jenni-
fer, examining her worries about her mother, her isolation from her schoolmates,
her struggling with her anger, and her work with a therapist. The text is straight-
forward and accessible, with the medical information succinct and secondary to
the human story. This family focus is a rare one in children's books about people
with AIDS (Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe's Daddy andMe, BCCB 2/94, is an earlier
example) and it's the book's best aspect: it's abundantly clear that this is an ongo-
ing struggle for Jennifer as well as for Sara. The multitude of photographs are clear
and informative but still personalizing, showing a stressed but loving family with
members sometimes cheerful and sometimes shadowed by the strains of daily life.
There are a few pulled punches (the text is evasive about the fatality of AIDS and
about Sara's acceptance of unsafe sex), but kids dealing with any serious parental
illness will recognize the authenticity; other youngsters will get a better idea of
both the ordinariness and the burden of some of their schoolmates' lives. DS
WOOD, FRANCES M. 
Becoming Rosemary. 
Delacorte, 1997 
24 8p
ISBN 0-385-32248-8 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-8
A first novel that refreshes old themes, this story traces twelve-year-old Rosemary's
maturation from a peaceful childview of the North Carolina backwoods in 1790
to a complex perception of the dynamics that transform her community into a
dangerous place. Like other characters in recent fiction about herb-women with
supernatural powers (Napoli's Magic Circle, BCCB 4/93, Furlong's Wise Child, 2/
88 etc.), Rosemary learns that her potential-here inherited from her mother-
could draw the charge of witchcraft. A webbed plot tightens inevitably around
Rosemary's friend, an Italian "Papist" newcomer and her husband, whom the farm
villagers eventually drive away, but the real tension emanates from characteriza-
tion as much as action. We see this protagonist developing against the background
profiles of her oldest sister, whose powers have already made her "strange," and her
other sister, a down-to-earth girl who takes after their father and whose main inter-
MAY 1997 
* 339
est in life is to marry and live a normal life (her romances offer a welcome lightness
of tone). The writing has a silvery quality that stops short of shiny, and young
readers captured by the suspense will find depth here as well. BH
YEP, LAURENCE 
The Case of the Goblin Pearls: Chinatown Mystery
#1. 
HarperCollins, 1997 
179p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024446-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024444-5 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 4-7
Heists by the Powell Street Boys are escalating in San Francisco's Chinatown, and
there has even been talk among politicians of canceling the Chinese New Year
parade. The influential Wong family is determined to flaunt the safety of their
community by allowing daughter Tiffany to wear the priceless "Goblin Pearls"
necklace on Mr. Soo's Lion Salve parade float. When the pearls are swiped right
off Tiffany's neck during the festivities, "Tiger Lil" Leung, erstwhile screen star
and current promoter for Lion Salve, steps in to investigate, with the bungling
assistance of her great-niece (and our narrator), Lily Lew. There's precious little
mystery here; even novice crime-crackers won't have much trouble fingering the
culprits, and Officer Quan's shoddy investigative technique will appall whodunnit
diehards. Yep does scratch beneath Chinatown's gaudy veneer to reveal prejudices
within San Francisco's Chinese community, where children of immigrants who
have moved "up the hill" look down literally and figuratively on the J.O.J.'s (Just
Off the Jet), many of whom struggle for low wages in deplorable sweatshops. But
the social commentary, however apt, cannot rescue the floundering plot, and mys-
tery fans won't consider this much of a gem. EB
340 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Egoff, Sheila et al., eds. Only Connect: Readings on Children's Literature. Third
edition. Oxford University Press, 1996. Paper ed. ISBN 0-19-541024-6. $19.95.
416p.
No mere cosmetic overhaul here-this edition of Egoffs classic anthology is al-
most entirely new, with nearly all the entries penned since the 1980 edition. Sec-
tions deal with a multitude of genres as well as the more general topics of books
and children and recent trends. Authors are strongly represented (Margaret Mahy,
Tim Wynne-Jones, Katherine Paterson, William Sleator, Myra Cohn Livingston,
Uri Shulevitz) but critics aren't shorted either (Peter Hunt, Perry Nodelman, Jack
Zipes). The selections are intelligent, the sources international, and the compila-
tion highly readable. Contributor biographies, a selected bibliography, and an
index are included. DS
Gerhardt, Lillian N., ed. School Library Journal's Best: A Reader for Children's,
Young Adult dr School Librarians; comp. by Marilyn L. Miller and Thomas W.
Downen. Neal-Schuman, 1997. Paper ed. ISBN 1-55570-203-1. $39.95. 474p.
This collection of SLJ articles and columns spans the Gerhardt years from 1971 to
the present. The seven thematic sections each include a panorama of contribu-
tors-there's Ursula Nordstrom on creative talent, Margaret McElderry on Anne
Carroll Moore, Zena Sutherland on book reviews, June Jordan on black English,
and a spectacular multitude more. Each section is chronologically arranged, with
the date of its original appearance right up front, which makes for some interesting
perspectives. While everyone undoubtedly has his or her own suggestions for what
should have been included (where's that editorial threatening to hit Ethel Heins
with a chair?), this will give a useful overview of professional writing of the last
quarter-century and save a lot of time spent on back-issue hunts. DS
Helbig, Alethea and Agnes Perkins. The Phoenix Award ofthe Children's Literature
Association 1990-1994. Scarecrow, 1996. ISBN 0-8108-3191-0. $45.00. 282p.
The Phoenix Award does have the benefit of hindsight, but the prize, given by the
Children's Literature Association to the author of a book that has been deemed
worthy of special recognition twenty years after the original date of publication,
does provide an entirely different kind of literary award and numbers among its
honorees some deservedly estimable works. This collection includes acceptance
speeches from the winners and authors of honor books, biographical sketches and
bibliographies, and original critical essays about the author's work. The result is
sort of a rediscovery handbook, which can alert people to the merits of works they
MAY 1997 
* 341
may have overlooked or give them more fodder for their championing of favorites.
DS
Horning, Kathleen T. Cover to Cover: Evaluating and Reviewing Children's Books.
HarperCollins, 1997. Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024519-0; $24.95; Paper ed. ISBN
0-06-446167-X; $12.95. [160p] Reviewed from galleys.
This is a succinct, highly readable, and eminently useful overview of the fine points
of evaluating and critiquing children's books. Horning's organized, sensible ap-
proach begins with an overview of how children's books are published in the United
States, the physical parts of a book, and categories of children's books. The next
six chapters are devoted to the definition and scope of those categories: non-
fiction or information books; traditional literature (folktales, myths, legends, etc.);
poetry, verse, rhymes, and songs; picture books; easy readers and transitional books;
and fiction. Each chapter offers a concrete methodology for evaluating a children's
book based on the total sum of its parts, from the organization of information for
non-fiction to the narrative style in traditional literature to the partnership of text
and pictures in picture books. Horning's final chapter concentrates on the process
of review writing, from opening sentence to copy editing. Throughout, Horning
augments her approach with many examples from children's literature, with a con-
stant emphasis on the need for extensive reading in the field in order to make a
qualified evaluation. Extensive source notes and bibliography are included. JMD
McGillis, Roderick. The Nimble Reader: Literary Theory and Children's Literature.
Twayne, 1996. ISBN 0-8057-9033-0. $26.95. 230p.
Children's literature professionals and students venturing into academic literary
criticism of children's works haven't had much useful assistance at the introduc-
tory level, and this book ably fills that gap. After an introductory section describ-
ing the history and possibilities of literary theory, McGillis gets to the meat: seven
chapters each addressing a school of literary theory. Using keystone texts (Charlotte's
Web, Where the Wild Things Are, The Mysteries ofHarris Burdick) for cogent speci-
ficity, he discusses each approach's advantages and drawbacks, incorporating sig-
nificant critical examples and analyzing them. The balance of theory and specifics
is excellent, resulting in a useful and understandable entree to criticism. Bibliogra-
phies of children's books and critical texts are included, as is an index. DS
BLOWING OUR OwN HORN DEPARTMENT:
Beckett, Sandra, L. ed. Reflections of Change: Children's Literature Since 1945.
Greenwood Press, 1997. ISBN 0-313-30145-X. $55.00. 203p. Includes Debo-
rah Stevenson's "Ramona the Underestimated: 
The Everyday-Life Story in
Children's Literature." 23-31.
Hearne, Betsy. "Disney Revisited, Or, Jiminy Cricket! It's Musty Down Here!"
The Horn Book Magazine. March/April 1997: 137-146.
Stevenson, Deborah. "Sentiment and Significance: or, The Drowning of the Water
Babies." The Lion and the Unicorn, 21.1 (January 1997): 112-130.
342 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Baillie
Africa-folklore: Kurtz
African Americans-biography:
Haskins
African Americans-poetry: Adoff
Agriculture: Micucci
AIDS: Wolf
Alcoholism-fiction: Wersba
American Indians-fiction: Sterling
Animal life: Collard
Animals-stories: Ho
Anthropology: Tanaka
Appalachia-stories: Borton
Archaeology: Cooper, I.
Arithmetic: Adler
Asia: Chin-Lee
Australia-fiction: Baillie
Baseball-fiction: Schnur
Bears-stories: Maitland
BEDTIME STORIES: Appelt;
Marzollo; Weatherby
BIOGRAPHIES: Alexander;
Baiul; Brighton; Freedman;
Haskins; Wadsworth
Birds: Cherry
Birds-stories: Erlbruch
Books and reading-stories: Little
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Cooper, S.
Brothers-stories: Pastuchiv
Bullies-stories: Borton
Butterflies: Pringle
Cars-stories: Jennings
Chinese Americans-fiction: Yep
Civil rights-fiction: McGuigan
CONCEPT BOOKS: Chin-Lee
Death and dying-fiction: Franklin
Death and dying-stories:
Bartoletti
Dinosaurs-stories: Weatherby
Disabilities: Alexander; Freedman
Disabilities-stories: Foreman
Dolls-fiction: Mahy
Drawing-stories: Russo
Ecology: Cherry; Wadsworth
Egypt-stories: Bunting
Ethics and values: Schnur
Explorers: Marrin
Families-stories: Hoberman
Family stories: Johnson
FANTASY: Cooper, S.; Levine;
Mahy; Pastuchiv; Pearson;
Sonenklar; Wood
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Borton
Fathers and sons-fiction: Cutler;
Franklin; O'Connor
Fathers and sons-stories: Jennings
Fish-poetry: Florian
Fishing-stories: Bell; Pastuchiv
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Bateman;
Farley; Ho; Kurtz; Levine;
Winthrop
Food and eating-stories: Axelrod;
Hoberman
Friends-fiction: Franklin;
McGuigan; Wersba
Games-stories: Kurtz
Gardens-stories: Hines
Geography: Krull
GHOST STORIES: Pearson
Giants-stories: Pomerantz
MAY 1997 
* 343
Grandfathers-stories: Foreman;
Hiinel; Johnson
Grandmothers-stories: Bartoletti
HISTORICAL FICTION: Matas;
Wood
History, U.S.: Marrin
History, European: Brighton
History, world: Tanaka
Homosexuality-fiction: Wersba
Horses-stories: Winthrop
Ice skating: Baiul
Insects-fiction: Sonenklar
Islands: Brighton
Israel-fiction: Matas
Japan-stories: Bell
Judaism-fiction: Schnur
Kites-stories: Buckley
Knights and chivalry: Gravett
Language arts: Neitzel
Learning disabilities-fiction:
Cutler
Literature, American: Wadsworth
Magic-stories: Hanel
Mathematics: Axelrod
Mental illness-stories: Hanson
Monks-stories: Buckley
Monsters-fiction: Cooper, S.
Mothers-stories: Neitzel
Mothers and daughters: Wolf
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Pearson
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Bell
Mothers and sons-fiction: Cutler
Movies and moviemaking:
Haskins
Mummies-stories: Bunting
Music and musicians-fiction:
O'Connor
MYSTERIES: Yep
Nature study: Cherry; Collard;
Darling Chameleons; Darling
Komodo; Pringle; Locker
Peanuts: Micucci
Pigs-stories: Little
POETRY: Adoff; Florian; Robb
PRAYERS: Appelt; Marrin
Puzzles: Adler
Race relations-fiction: McGuigan
Racing-stories: Jennings
Reading aloud: Adoff; Bateman; Bunting;
Collard; Farley; Florian; Mahy; Robb
Reading, reluctant: Darling Chameleons,
Darling Komodo; Gravett; Ling
Religious education: Cooper, I.
Reptiles: Darling Chameleons, Darling
Komodo
Rhyming stories: Appelt
School-fiction: Cutler
School-fiction: Sterling
Seals-stories: Foreman
SHORT STORIES: Vande Velde
Snakes: Ling
Social studies: Chin-Lee; Krull
Sports: Baiul; Greenberg
Storytelling: Bateman; Farley; Ho;
Winthrop
Storytime: Bunting; Farley; Ho;
Hoberman; Maitland
TRICKSTER TALES: Ho
Vocational guidance: Grace
War-fiction: Matas
War-poetry: Robb
Water: Locker
Witches-fiction: Vande Velde; Wood
Women's studies: Greenberg
,/
Ix
Srhr 
Iwe
1997 Newbery
Honor Book
A Girl Named Disaster
by Nancy Farmer
Ages 11 up TR $19.95 0-531-09539-8
RLB $20.99 0-531-08889-8
ALA Notable Children's Book
ALA/YALSA Best Book for YAs
Horn Book Fanfare
National Book Award Finalist
SU Best Book
1997 Caldecott
Honor Book
Hush! A Thai Lullaby
by Minfong Ho
illus. by Holly Meade
Ages 2-6 TR $15.95 0-531-09500-2
RLB $16.99 0-531-08850-2
ALA Notable Children's Book
Horn Book Fanfare
Awards
1997 Caldecott
Honor Book
The Graphic Alphabet
by David Pelletier
All ages TR $17.95 0-531-36001-6
ALA Notable Children's Book
New York Times Best Illustrated
Children's Book
1997 Caldecott
Honor Book
The Paperboy
by Day Pilkey
Ages 4-10 TR $14.95 0-531-09506-1
RLB $15.99 0-531-08856-1
ALA Notable Children's Book
Booklist Editors' Choice
Horn Book Fanfare
.
-* 
Starred in School Library Journal
The Mysteryof
Kinq Xarfu
byDou Cushman
Full-color pictures by the author
"When the Stone Chicken is stolen [from King Karfu's tomb],
famous wombat detective Seymour Sleuth [is] summoned to
Egypt to investigate. The mock Egyptian setting, visual clues,
and secret code make this especially well suited for newly
independent readers."-ALA Booklist
"[With its detective's casebook format], this [is an] inventive
story .. . with a clue-filled olot.
plenty of humor, and an
innovative presentation."-SLJ
Ages 4-8.
$14.95TR (0-06-024796-7)
$14.89LB (0-06-024797-5)
t HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 1002;
~--ii-i
:··: 
·~·, 
.; ;;··i
:: ·
i
: 
::;:
i·
i
Recommended
by Lucy Micklethwait
* "...will convince the most reluctant
art appreciator to 'play in art.'...All
five senses are brought into play.
Readers are urged to imitate the
sounds, interpret the costumes, adapt
the patterns, and act out the stories
of rich and exciting images from
European, Japanese, Persian, and
Native American art."
-School LibraryJournal, starred review
Reproductions. 
ISBN: 0-7894-1003-6
$16.95 * Grades PreS-3
by Hans Christian Andersen
retold by Adrian Mitchell
illustrated by Jonathan Heale
"...a remarkably readable interpretation
of Andersen's tragic fairy tale....The
colored woodcuts have substance,
giving a solid realism to what is
usually interpreted as a gauzily
sentimental love story."
-The Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books
ISBN: 1-56458-310-4 
$14.95 * Grades K-3
)K Publishing, Inc. 95 Madison Avenue
New York, NY 10016 * http:www.dk.com
Available from your regular supplier,
or call 1-888-DIAL-DKP.
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(199705)50:9*; 1-4
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
invites you to visit our newly expanded home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/pubofflbccb
New features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles (this month:
Four-Hankie Reads)
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1996
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Newcomer to Watch-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more ... updated monthly!
