I LLJNOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
-_ 
.e7
`*IT7r~
4
by HELEN BANNERMAN
full-color illustrations by FRED MARCELLINO
* "Change the offensive names and the racist illustrations, and
Bannerman's beloved story of Little Black Sambo is restored to
children for their delight. The names are now Indian, and the setting
is India. Otherwise, the text is the same, and it is a joy to read
aloud... [And with] the clear, funny pictures there's wonderful
comedy in Babaji's confrontations with the big bully tigers..."
-Starred, 
ALA Booklist
*"Marcellino 
provides illustrations far more polished than the
originals, ably capturing both the story's true setting and its glorious
silliness...This remake combines a star illustrator and a story with
proven appeal: You can't beat it." 
-Pointer, Kirkus Reviews
*"Marcellino's 
watercolor paintings project a toy-like quality that
emphasizes the humor [in this perennially popular story]."
-Starred, Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
" "A stylish interpretation...that captures the childlike whimsy and
charm of this long-lived tale." 
-Starred, 
Publishers Weekly
Ages 2 up. $14.95TR (0-06-205064-8); $14.89LB (0-06-205065-6)
taI 
N1iC 
HDI CAPIIUA BiiiriiiiHARPEROLL·S 
PULiSHi
-·t
'8
* k
I;r?
ke
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
November 1996
Vol. 50 No. 3
A LOOK INSIDE
89 
THE BIG PICTURE
Turkey Pox by Laurie Halse Anderson; illustrated by Dorothy Donohue
Over the River and Through the Wood by Lydia Maria Child; illustrated by
David Catrow
Gracias: The Thanksgiving Turkey by Joy Cowley; illustrated by Joe Cepeda
90 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
95 
* Safe Return by Catherine Dexter
97 
* The Kid Who Ran for President by Dan Gutman
116 * Saving Sweetness by Diane Stanley; illus. by G. Brian Karas
117 * The Thief by Megan Whalen Turner
119 * Dazzling Disguises and Clever Costumes by Angela Wilkes
120 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
121 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
Susan S. Verner, Reviewer (SSV)
Amy E. Brandt, Graduate Research Assistant (AEB)
Lisa Mahoney, Graduate Research Assistant (LM)
Pam McCuen, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1996 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Dorothy Donohue, from Turkey Pox ©1996 and used by permission of Albert
Whitman & Company.
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 
89
THE BIG PICTURE
Turkey Pox
by Laurie Halse Anderson; illustrated by Dorothy Donohue
Over the River and Through the Wood
by Lydia Maria Child; illustrated by David Catrow
Gracias: The Thanksgiving Turkey
by Joy Cowley; illustrated by Joe Cepeda
How many times have you grumblingly gone to the library shelf mumbling under
your breath, "Why aren't there any reallygood Thanksgiving picture books?" Well,
grumble no longer, because this harvest season we have a veritable bumper crop of
goodies. 
Turkey Pox opens with a household in blissfully recognizable holiday
chaos-Mom is cooking veggies for dinner, Dad is doing laundry because he needs
a clean shirt, Aunt Imogene is trying to get cousin Fred to finish his bath ("THE
SOAP IS NOT POISON!"), and Charity, ready to go since dawn, is scratching.
But amidst the preparatory hustle and bustle, nobody notices until they're all in
the car and Aunt Imogene shouts (Aunt Imogene always shouts), "OH MY GOOD-
NESS! SHE'S GOT THE POX! STOP THE CAR!" Charity does indeed have
chicken pox, and since chicken pox belongs at home and not at Nana's, home they
go. Charity is heartbroken: "It would be the first Thanksgiving without Nana.
The first Thanksgiving without Nana's turkey." But don't underestimate this Nana.
She arrives via snowplow, hot turkey in hand ("The turkey had spots. Pox. Nana
had dotted its shiny brown skin with cherries stuck on toothpicks. . ... 'I hear
turkey pox is popping up everywhere today'"). Watercolor and colored pencil
illustrations strike just the right note of jolly delirium as Charity's "turkey pox"
make their appearance, one by red one.
Lydia Maria Child's traditional Thanksgiving poem is given a visual
makeover by Catrow's hyperkinetically funny watercolor and ink illustrations. From
the opening interior car scene that introduces Mom, Dad, and the three kids trav-
eling to Grandma's, there is so much going on in each double-page spread that the
reader's mouth can only fall open in dazed delight. While the rural verses go their
verdant way, Baby goes out an open window and joins a Fellini-esque Thanksgiv-
ing Day parade straight out of Mad magazine. Tossed by a horse and caught by a
friendly gorilla, the unfazed toddler takes a hot-air balloon ride and comes in for a
safe landing right in Grandma's cap, bottle balanced on top of his head. Elongated
figures are somewhat grotesque (well, they're not pretty) but the sheer joy of their
arrival, the exuberant hugging, and the turkey-bedecked table (behind which only
90 
* THE BULLETIN
Baby's excitedly waving arms are visible) reflects enviable holiday euphoria. The
final illustration of our Odyssean Baby in his high chair, with an expression of
beatific pleasure and cheeks like a chipmunk, makes a terrific visual climax for that
old but affectionately remembered line, "Hurrah for the pumpkin pie!"
In the third, a less frenetic but entirely satisfying story, Miguel goes to
the train station with his Abuela and Tia Rosa to collect a Thanksgiving present
from his truck-driver father. No, it's not roller blades or a baseball glove-it's a
live turkey. The note says, "Fatten this turkey for Thanksgiving. I'll be home to
share it with you. Love from Papa." Miguel's Abuelo wonders where they'll keep
a live turkey in a NYC apartment, Tia Rosa declares her brother is crazy, and
Miguel says, "I love my turkey. I'm going to call her Gracias." Gracias becomes
Miguel's amiga, and her Thanksgiving fate becomes a source of worry. When
Miguel lights two candles at church, "one for his father and one for Gracias," Tia
Rosa knows they have a problem. But Cowley saves the day. Late for church,
Abuela forgets to tie up Gracias, and in the middle of mass the turkey gobbles her
way down the aisle looking for Miguel. "Padre Jaime smiled. 'God made small
boys and God made turkeys. Stand still while I give you both a blessing.'" Well,
you can't eat a turkey that's been blessed, says a laughing Abuelo. A petting zoo
and Papa's eagerly anticipated homecoming tie this one into a fulfilling Thanks-
giving package. Joe Cepeda has a wonderful knack for making Miguel's multicul-
tural urban neighborhood friendly and cheery, his warm palette reflecting a carnival
of colors from pink and green awnings to purple front steps to bright yellow win-
dows.
These three picture books are not about the origins of Thanksgiving but
are instead about the kind of holiday and holiday accoutrements that young chil-
dren will easily recognize-good smells, great food, traveling to see family, and
thankfulness for being together once everyone gets there. A great line-up for a
holiday storytime, they are as satisfying as Thanksgiving dinner. (Imprint infor-
mation appears on p. 91, 92, and 94.)
Janice Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, NAOMI, ad. 
The Dial Book ofAnimal Tales from Around the World; illus.
by Amanda Hall. 
Dial, 1996 
80p
ISBN 0-8037-2063-7 
$19.99 
R Gr. 4-6
Readers will recognize familiar stories and variants in these nine animal tales: the
Brazilian tale "Magic in the Rain Forest" is very similar to a Cherokee coyote story
about how Coyote lost his eyes, "Sedna and the King Gull" is a mild version of the
usually brutal Inuit story of how Sedna became queen of the sea, and the Austra-
lian "The Greedy Frog" can be found in collections and single-tale volumes. Adler
brings an energy to the text that works well in both written and spoken formats,
making this a solid collection for reading aloud and storytelling. Crayon and
watercolor illustrations are attractively detailed and generously dispersed through-
out with a combination of full-page, half-page, and thumbnail illustrations. Each
page has borders both decorative and thematically or culturally related: musical
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 91
instruments for "The Bremen Town Musicians," lotus flowers for the Indian "The
Rabbit in the Moon," paper lanterns for the Chinese "The Dragon and the Cock-
erel," and feathers for the Cherokee "Grandmother Spider." Adler states that her
retellings are based for the most part on oral tales told to her by members of the
story's culture of origin, and she gives specific notes for each. JMD
ANDERSON, LAURIE HALSE 
Turkey Pox; illus. by Dorothy Donohue. 
Whitman,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-8127-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 89, for review.
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER 
The Dreams ofMairhe Mehan. 
Knopf, 1996 
119p
ISBN 0-679-88152-2 
$18.00 
R* 
Gr. 7-10
The Civil War divides Washington, D.C.'s Irish immigrant community of
Swampoodle. Barroom arguments rage over whether Emancipation will mean
loss of jobs, whether United States' hostilities parallel Ireland's struggle against
Britain, whether discrimination against the Irish creates a kind of kinship between
themselves and the slaves, and most of all, whether any of this is their business or a
cause worth fighting for. Narrator Mairhe, a young barmaid whose beloved brother
Mike is bound to enlist, loathes the war: "Not for anything would I aid and succor
the men who were breaking each other to bits. Mike wanted to break the best
thing of all, now, and that was himself, and I hated him for it." As a young Irish
woman, Mairhe is marginal to the war and American society, and she speaks both
as a "dreamer" or imaginer of her brother's battles and as a resentful victim of the
war's hardships. In a voice imbued with graceful poetry rather than fictionalized
blarney, she shapes her father's homesick dissolution, Mike's soldiering and death,
and the country's misery into a theme of brokenness-broken Union, broken men,
broken crockery, broken family. The limited cast of fictional characters is vividly
realized, and the stellar Walt Whitman (whose recurrent appearances could, in less
skillful hands, strain credibility) shines, but never dominates, in a minor support-
ing role. Artfully melding Mairhe's mundane and dream worlds, Armstrong offers
the battle-weary genre of Civil War fiction a fresh and challenging twist. EB
BYARS, BETSY 
Tornado; illus. by Doron Ben-Ami. 
HarperCollins, 1996 
49p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026452-7 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026449-7 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Three brothers huddle in the storm cellar, worrying about their father out in the
field in the twister's path; Pete, the hired hand, deflects their anxiety with stories
about the pet dog he had when he was a boy. The wary and disoriented Lab,
dubbed Tornado, touched down on his farm in a flying doghouse during a similar
storm and soon showed his mettle at card tricks (well, kind of) and protecting
helpless turtles (well, sort of), but got his comeuppance from Five-Thirty, a stray
cat with an attitude. As in all good dog stories, Tornado was nearly lost but hap-
pily reclaimed and was, naturally, the most remarkable hound ever to grace Tor-
nado Alley. Pete's stories have a homey familiarity reminiscent of Ann Cameron's
Julian stories (BCCB 4/86, etc.), and brief chapters with their self-contained tales
are the right size for readers getting acclimated to novels. Ben-Ami's black-and-
white illustrations, which deftly play light off shadow, are eerie enough to insis-
tently remind readers of the storm just outside the cellar door. EB
92 
* THE BULLETIN
CAMPBELL, LOUISA 
Phoebe's Fabulous Father; illus. by Bridget Starr
Taylor. 
Harcourt, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200996-5 
$14.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Dad's at home practicing his cello, and as Phoebe rides on the back of Mom's bike
doing their Saturday morning errands, pride in her father's talent mingles with
regret that "other dads did other things besides work." While Phoebe and Mom
shop and chatter about the coming evening's concert, listeners begin to gather
hints that Phoebe's father goes way past different-all the way to bizarre. Phoebe
and Mom drop a colossal pair of shoes off at the repair shop, purchase a surprising
amount of fish and bread, and stop at the library to listen to an old recording of
Dad's rendition ofJ. S. Rex's The Fossil Cello Suites. Phoebe seems to be a chip off
the old block, who will soon need heavy-duty strings for her own violin and who
excuses a lapse of courtesy with "But you always say that I'm a little monster."
Visual clues abound throughout Taylor's wackily exaggerated scenes of Cloud Val-
ley, a community that's half idyll, half Twilight Zone, where Phoebe's Donna
Reed-ish, dancing Mom quite comfortably patronizes a mohawked fish monger
and a baker who cooks with dinosaur eggs. By the time Dad is revealed to be a
stegosaurus the story line has stretched a little thin, and as engaging as Taylor's
profusely detailed mixed media pictures are, they contrast oddly with the flat and
somewhat rambling text. EB
CARRICK, CAROL 
Melanie; illus. by Alisher Dianov. 
Clarion, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-66555-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
Blind Melanie peacefully herds her beloved sheep and, in the evenings, spins and
weaves by the fire while her grandfather entertains her with stories. But when her
grandfather tells her of a healer living beyond the Dark Forest who might be able
to heal her blindness, Melanie exclaims (in the saccharine tone that too often over-
sweetens the story), "How wonderful it would be to see your face and to see the
candlelight!" Her questing grandfather finds no healer, however, but a troll who
transforms him into a seagull. Melanie seeks her grandfather through the suppos-
edly terrifying Dark Forest (which appears in the illustrations to be a leafy spot,
dense but not unpleasant, complete with smiling squirrel) and across the troll's
bridge where her very blindness saves her: the troll has no power to enchant those
who cannot see his hideous face. Dianov's illustrations have a deliberate Olde
Worlde quality, with borders that resemble carved stone and gold and silver filigree
dripping with gems and coins. Figures and faces have a stiff, formal quality, almost
as if carved from wood. Although this original story is grounded in traditional
tales, it has little of their bite. Carrick adds melodramatic details that seem out of
place in a fairy tale, and the story's big scares-the Dark Forest and the troll-
aren't very frightening. This bland, slow-moving story provides nice lessons-a
disability may offer advantages at times; contentment is an important virtue-but
the points are sufficiently obvious that a reader hardly needs to be keen-sighted to
spot them. LM
CHILD, LYDIA MARIA 
Over the River and Through the Wood; illus. by David
Catrow. Holt, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-3825 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 89, for review.
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 93
CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL AT YALE-NEW HAVEN, ed. 
Now I Know Better: Kids Tell
Kids about Safety. 
Millbrook, 1996 
96p 
illus. and with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-0109-7 
$15.40
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7613-0149-6 
$7.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-6
Mom's caveat to wear that bicycle helmet probably falls on deaf ears, but other
kids' personal accounts of split heads and crushed bones, replete with gory details,
may hit closer to the mark. Staff from Children's Hospital at Yale-New Haven
selected true accident stories written by children aged five to nineteen, organized
them alphabetically by disaster (axes, guns, sledding, etc.), and then added sidebar
comments on treatment and related issues. The litany of mishaps is comprehen-
sive, and the children's entries retain a ring of authenticity despite probable edit-
ing. The uneasy blend of children's drawings, professional illustrations, and
photographs gives the volume a somewhat cheesy look, and the doctor's com-
ments are often expendable. Still, these modern Struwwelpeter tales may be just
the thing for teachers looking for material to freshen up stale accident-prevention
lectures. EB
CLEMENTS, ANDREW 
Bright Christmas: An Angel Remembers; illus. by Kate
Kiesler. 
Clarion, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-72096-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
There is probably no better time than the season of Christmas for another book
about angels. This holiday offering is told by an angel who reminisces about events
which preceded and surrounded that significant Bethlehem nativity. The double-
page spreads, executed in oils, have an almost eerie quality that is especially effec-
tive in the night scenes of muted blues and browns, where dove-like angels mingle
with a luminous night sky. An author's note at the end of the book authenticates
the artistic details, although observant readers might question why a poor girl like
Mary is shown wearing a gold necklace. Though the book cites as a source the
original nativity story in the gospel of Luke, it takes a great deal of poetic license
with the biblical details. An attempt to explain such esoteric concepts as eternity
and time may leave younger readers either filled with wonder or confused ("And
right now in the day in heaven, it is still that first Christmas night"), and at times
the text just gets too precious ("Our song was like the smile of God. And the light
and the music and the angels were the same thing, and Jesus smiled too"). The
original is probably your best choice, but if your audience is enamored with angels
this might satisfy on a December eve. PM
COONEY, BARBARA 
Eleanor; written and illus. by Barbara Cooney. 
Viking,
1996 
40p
ISBN 0-670-86159-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
"She was born red and wrinkled, an ugly little thing.... The beautiful christening
dress did not help matters much." That this homely child, surrounded by wealth
but graced with only sporadic affection, would grow up to be the wife of a presi-
dent and a political power in her own right is a secret closely guarded until the
closing paragraphs. Referring to her young heroine only as "Eleanor," Cooney
imbues her subject with an Everygirl quality. However, it will be clear even to
readers unfamiliar with Eleanor Roosevelt that this child will be someone impor-
tant, and so it seems strange indeed to withhold such basic information as Eleanor's
94 
* THE BULLETIN
last name. (More so, since many would be intrigued that her maiden and married
surnames are the same.) Cooney spreads her narrative thin, flipping through inci-
dents of childhood loneliness and emotional neglect rather than developing spe-
cific episodes in detail. She ably matches the mood of her naive paintings to her
textual portrayal of Eleanor's early years-the child is as stiff and morose as the
stately Victorian edifices that surround her-but the happier, more "passionately
committed to life" Eleanor of eighteen appears scarcely less rigid. Nonetheless,
hints of a ne'er-do-well father, a strict aunt, glittering parties, and an exotic board-
ing school may inspire the orphan-story set to ferret out more information about
this real-life "poor little rich girl." EB
COONEY, CAROLINE B. 
The Voice on the Radio. Delacorte, 1996 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-32213-5 
$13.45
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Heaven forfend we should hear the last of Janie, the heroine of The Face on the
Milk Carton (BCCB 2/90) and Whatever Happened to Janie. She's now back at
the home of the parents who raised her, periodically visiting her birth family, from
which she was kidnapped, and desperately missing her beloved boyfriend Reeve,
who's away at college. Unbeknownst to Janie, Reeve is making a name for himself
by telling Janie's sensational story, bit by bit, on the air, thus making himself into
a hero and her into a commodity-until she finds out. Cooney is a deft hand with
emotional drama and suspense, and the soap-opera lure ofJanie's story sustains its
luster. This book, however, is contrived even beyond its two precursors; what
with Reeve's instant stardom, hints ofJanie's kidnapper's return, and Janie's inevi-
table discovery piled on top of her past, believability is pretty thin on the ground.
The explorations of morality get a bit pat, and the book seems unaware of the
irony that it's essentially giving its readers what it disdains Reeve for giving his
listeners. Still, it's good to see Janie really starting to grow up at the end, and
nobody who's read the first two will want to miss this installment. DS
COWLEY,JOY 
Gracias: The Thanksgiving Turkey; illus. by Joe Cepeda. 
Scholastic,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-46976-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 89, for review.
CURRY, JANE LOUISE 
Moon Window. 
McElderry, 1996 
170p
ISBN 0-689-80945-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
JoEllen is furious at her mother for remarrying, and she's aiming to get as much
mileage as possible from her sulking while she stays with a distant relative during
her mother's honeymoon. Soon, however, she finds both Granty and Winterbloom,
the old lady's New England castle, enchanting. The latter is literally so: when Jo
climbs out of the round window of Winterbloom's top floor, she finds herself in
the past, and each time she climbs out, the year is different. Eventually she realizes
that the magic is tied up with Winterbloom's first owner, who sees Jo as her new
heir and who wishes her to perform a task that will right a past wrong--but is that
all it will do? The grand old house and time-travel motifs are well-executed here,
and Jo is a pleasingly plucky heroine. The subplot about Jo's resentment at her
changing family seems tacked on, however, and the logistics of the fantasy get
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 95
overcomplicated and confusing. Nonetheless, aficionados of timeslip fantasies set
in atmospheric locations may want to follow Jo on her temporal travels. DS
DESSEN, SARAH 
That Summer. 
Kroupa/Orchard, 1996 
198p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08888-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09538-X 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Haven is fifteen, and she's feeling lost in the eddies of family change: her father,
the local sports reporter, has left her mother and is marrying his colleague Lorna
the Weather Pet (Haven's mother's phrase), and Haven's sister Ashley is putting
the family through pre-nuptial hell preparatory to her marriage to Lewis. The
only thing that seems to bring Haven pleasure is her reacquaintance with Sumner,
her sister's old boyfriend, whom Haven still adores and who represents a happy
and stable long-ago time to her. The story unfolds at a leisurely pace and the plot
is fairly predictable, but this is a well-realized world. Dessen peoples this story
with a variety of original, unforced, and distinctive characters and strengthens it
with quietly rich narration as Haven comes to terms with the fictionality of her
dreams of the past and the necessity of accepting the present. This is reminiscent
of Williams' Kelly and Me (BCCB 3/94) in its summery feel and its voice; fans of
that book should enjoy Haven's story. DS
DEXTER, CATHERINE 
Safe Return. 
Candlewick, 1996 
94p
ISBN 0-7636-0005-9 
$16.99 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
Even Ursula cannot quite explain why she is so troubled this year by Aunt Dana's
annual sea voyage to Stockholm to sell knitted goods made by neighboring island-
ers. Her aunt, with whom she has lived since her parents' death, has always re-
turned before Christmas, and Ursula and Uncle Josefhave always managed smoothly
and amiably. Ursula's worst fears are realized, however, when the ship carrying
Dana and the accompanying island women fails to arrive when expected and many
weeks go by with no news of the Galatina's fate. Dexter's novella is just long
enough to examine the islanders' grief, their reluctant acceptance of the women's
death, and Ursula's superstitious hope that if she can master the intricate "safe
return" knitting pattern her aunt will come safely home, but not so long that it
bogs down in melodramatic handwringing. Even the happy ending unfolds cred-
ibly and the villagers' joyous reunion is affectingly described in spare and sensible
prose: "Grownups would laugh and shout one minute, and the next stop and
clasp their hands and pronounce a prayer, and then they would begin to weep
again." In a concluding note, Dexter cites the source of the true tale of an 1824
Gotland expedition, on which Ursula's story is based. EB
FARISH, TERRY 
Talking in Animal. Greenwillow, 1996 
[160p]
ISBN 0-688-14671-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Siobhan isn't crazy about people: her best human friend, Maddy, is an animal
rescuer, and her best friend of all is her dog, Tree. When the Grace family moves
into the neighboring cottage, Siobhan grudgingly extends her social circle to include
Lester Grace, a girl of her own age. Things get confusing, however, when it turns
out that Lester's father is marrying Maddy, and that Maddy's religious beliefs mean
that she is campaigning hotly against the introduction of condoms into the local
96 
* THE BULLETIN
high school while Siobhan's mother is fighting for it. Just as her few human
friends are betraying her, Siobhan must come to terms with the gradual physical
deterioration of her beloved Tree. Farish has a gift for nuances of character and an
eye for specifics ("Her mother had a powerful voice that did not let up until she'd
made her point. And then she made her point twice more using synonyms"), and
the core subject-a girl's facing the loss of her canine companion and support-is
one dear to many readers' hearts. The writing tends towards the ethereal, however,
with frequent usage of vague antecedents, unexplained events, and unexpected
shifts of attitude, and the effect is both puzzling and alienating. There are also too
many plot elements, so that attention is diverted away from Siobhan's emotional
dilemma with Tree. Readers who appreciated the rather cerebral dog story in
Kevin Henkes' Protecting Marie (BCCB 3/95), however, may appreciate both the
stylistic challenge and the story beyond it. DS
FERGUSON, ALANE 
Tumbleweed Christmas; illus. by Tom Sully. 
Simon,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80465-2 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
It's Christmas Eve. In a desert in the American Southwest stands The Dry Bean
Motel, not exactly a holiday hot spot. Scotty, stranded with his mother when their
car breaks down, is not taking the idea of spending Christmas at the Dry Bean very
well. Jasper, mechanic and proprietor, complete with cowboy hat and big belt
buckle, distracts the disgruntled boy with a. box of old Christmas decorations.
Rummaging through broken ornaments and tangled tree lights, Scotty reads some
old Christmas cards ofJasper's: "Bless your heart, Jasper. I'd still be stuck in that
mud if it weren't for your kindness. Have a very merry Christmas" and "Merry
Christmas, Jasper. I'll never forget the way you helped me, man. Your pal, Spike."
Scotty is pretty quick on the uptake. He gets the message that Christmas is more
than lights and turkey, and his response-a tumbleweed Christmas tree-is heart-
ening. Oil paintings reflect a desert palette in sand browns and clay reds with a
scattering of blue sky, and the Dry Bean itself is a pink adobe with an aqua roof.
The paintings have a rough, unfinished feeling to them that suits the unusual
locale of this holiday story. The conclusion befits the season: one star appears in
the night-blue desert sky, and a man, woman, and baby walk from their broken-
down car to be greeted by the ever-helpful Jasper. The text reads: "The desert
looked like Christmas." JMD
GOLDIN, BARBARA DIAMOND, comp. and ad. 
While the Candles Burn: Eight Sto-
ries for Hanukkah; illus. by Elaine Greenstein. 
Viking, 1996 
60p
ISBN 0-670-85875-7 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
In her introduction Goldin discusses the celebratory customs of Hanukkah, not-
ing similarities and differences around the world and pointing out the themes of
her selected eight tales, including faith, religious freedom, charity, and miracles.
The tales are folkloric, biblical, and original, ranging from a poor man whose faith
in God makes him adviser to a king, to a rabbi who refuses to hide his teaching of
Torah even though it means persecution and death, to a modern classroom in
which students decide to save at least one Torah scroll, confiscated by the Nazis, in
memory of a young Holocaust victim. This is essentially a book designed for
reading aloud, one story for each night ofHanukkah. Greenstein's cheerful, boldly
celebratory scratchboard and watercolor illustrations are generously interspersed
throughout, breaking up large text blocks and adding to an overall attractive lay-
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 97
out. While Goldin gives background information on the holiday, only one of the
stories is actually set during Hanukkah. This is a solid addition to collections
looking for something a little more unusual than typical holiday fare. Detailed
source notes are included. JMD
GRIFFIN, PENI R. Margo's House. 
McElderry, 1996 
122p
ISBN 0-689-80944-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Margo's father is in the hospital after a serious heart attack. Anxious and afraid,
Margo concentrates on the dollhouse and dolls, Butch and Sis, her father made
before his illness. She dreams about the dollhouse, and she finds herself taking on
the persona of the now-live Sis, as she and Butch wallpaper the dollhouse walls.
Margo becomes convinced that her father's spirit or soul is in his workshop, and
that she must, as Sis, find a way to "call" him home. She and Butch traverse the
perilous darkness of the "big people's" house until Butch (who turns out to be
Margo's father trying to forget his responsibilities) saves Margo from a bad fall,
and she wakes up to find that her father has taken a turn for the better. The
premise has promise, but Griffin loads it down with distracting asides about astral
projection, precognitive dreaming, and telepathy. While the fantasy elements don't
quite mesh, the story of this warm African-American family is strong. Margo, her
mother, and her aunts are clearly drawn in their worry over Margo's father, and
the helpless anxiety they feel while waiting for whatever comes is involving and
touching. JMD
GUTMAN, DAN 
The Kid Who Ran for President. Scholastic, 1996 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-590-93987-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
For younger kids than Chris Lynch's Political Timber, reviewed below, this too is
the story of a young man running for office. This young man, however, is twelve,
and the office is the presidency of the United States. With the aid of his friend Lee
Brainard (sort of our candidate's Lee Atwater), Judson Moon becomes the Lemon-
ade Party's presidential candidate; his running mate is his former babysitter, an
elderly African-American lady named June Syers, which makes the ticket "Moon
and June." The Moon-and-June juggernaut is apparently unstoppable, even after
Judson realizes the inappropriateness of his place in the political process and tries
to sabotage his own success-which merely increases it. Gutman breezes through
the unlikelihoods here with insouciance (an amendment forbidding presidential
age restriction is quickly ratified, so it's all legal) and makes this into farce-edged
political satire accessible to middle-graders. He seasons the romp with political
references (Judson gives Nixon's Checkers speech with the names changed) that
will tickle adults but are also sufficiently explained to include the book's real read-
ers; there's also some alarming believability in the phenomenology of Judson's
snowballing campaign and the media joy in turning everything into an event,
whether good or bad. This has intelligence and endearing rowdy dopiness in equal
parts, plus a whole lot of humor both preteen and political (Judson's near-down-
fall is the discovery that in third grade he stole an enemy's term paper on the basis
of American government and disposed of it via a storm drain-in other words, he
threw the U.S. Constitution down a sewer); it also offers genuine suspense, since
readers really don't know how it's going to turn out until the very end. For a broad
variety of kids ranging from Gordon Korman fans looking for a romp to embry-
onic candidates themselves, this should be just the ticket. DS
98 
* THE BULLETIN
HAUTMAN, PETE 
Mr. Was. 
Simon, 1996 
216p
ISBN 0-689-81068-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Told in a series of notebooks, this is the story of Jack, whose introduction to his
dying grandfather consists of the old man's trying to strangle him while shouting
"Kill you ... kill you again." After his grandfather dies, Jack's mother moves the
family up to the old man's house, which proves to have a window through time;
when Jack's parents' terrible marriage takes a tragic turn, Jack heads into another
era for safety and finds himself on the eve of World War II and competing for the
affections of a local girl. Eventually it becomes clear that the girl is in fact Jack's
own grandmother and his romantic rival his grandfather: far from being a light-
hearted Back to the Future plot, however, this relates Jack's grandfather's treacher-
ous Guadalcanal betrayal of his rival, Jack's long withdrawal from the world, and
his eventual trip back into a different part of time to live out his days in a romantic
alliance with his grandmother, who has herself returned from the future to meet
him. The notebook framework and the time-travel mechanics are a little overfussy,
and there are a few glitches (why can Jack not see any of his other selves while other
people can see both of them, and why, if his mother clearly knows about the
window, does he never meet her on his travels?) in addition to the obstacle of
accepting his generation-leaping romance. The story remains compelling, how-
ever, and it has a grim and dangerous edge from start to finish that makes it more
Bradbury-ish than many juvenile time-travel stories. Readers who enjoyed the
psychological and parapsychological darkness of Bowler's Midget (BCCB 11/95)
may appreciate the hard-edged mystery of Jack's saga. DS
HILLERT, MARGARET 
The Sky is Not So FarAway: Night Poems for Children; illus.
by Thomas Werner. 
Wordsong/Boyds Mills, 1996 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-223-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Night: when headlights on the expressway form a giant dragon, shadows provide
cover for games of hide-and-seek, and children snuggle with teddy bears. In this
collection's twenty poems, Hillert explores activities and moods associated with
nighttime, from the excitement of a fireworks display to the joy of dreaming about
a birthday party. Hillert can use sound skillfully, creating aural pictures of rain's
"drip and drizzle" or of a foghorn that "moos a mournful sound" and some images
and phrasings surprise: "shadow birds" sleep in the shadows cast by a tree upon a
bedroom wall; night is "fastened to the sky with stars." Other renderings are too
fuzzy or stale to provide much sensation, as in the description of fireworks as "blos-
soms of brightness" or of a circus that consists of the usual "ladies on horseback"
and "a big dancing bear." While Hillert creates an effective, unified mood in po-
ems like "Rain at Night" and "Night Snow," others ("Nighttime at the Beach,"
"Ice-Skating") are less harmonious, beginning with images that suggest mystery,
but ending with a child eating hotdogs or competing with Dad in skating numbers
on an iced-over pond. Werner's watercolors, gently blended greens, blues, browns,
and purples warmed by the luminous white of moon, star, or house-light, empha-
size nighttime's dreamlike quality and reflect the poems' essential peacefulness.
Off-kilter perspectives, tilted buildings, and floating birthday cakes imbue the paint-
ings with a fanciful mood. Hillert's impressions of nighttime aren't going to keep
anyone up till the wee hours, but they could provide some cozy bedtime reading.
LM
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 99
HOBBS, VALERIE 
Get It While It's Hot. Or Not. Jackson/Orchard, 1996 
182p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08890-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09540-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Four "friends till the end" cope with their high-school junior year. Narrated by
Megan, the responsible one, the story revolves around three of the friends' taking
care of the fourth, Kit, who is pregnant, toxemic, and confined to her bed. Since
her overworked, usually hungover mother is unwilling to assist, it falls to Megan,
Mia, and Elaine to provide Kit with basic daily care, even if it means lying to
parents and cutting school. Hobbs has a good ear for realistic dialogue, and the
relationships between the few adults present and "the girls" ring true. Numerous
subplots slow down Megan's fretful narration-Mia breaks up with her longtime
boyfriend but starts dating Megan's older brother; Kit decides to give the baby up
for adoption and then discovers the birth father is HIV-positive (no, she isn't and
neither is the baby); and Megan's article on teen sex for the high school paper is
deemed too hot to publish by the principal. The necessity of getting the multiplic-
ity of plot lines to converge neatly for a (relatively) happy ending results in shallow
characters that are never fully developed and a lack of emotional nuance that never
quite wins the reader's sympathy, but young adults may find the friends' group
dynamics and the contemporary themes appealing. JMD
HOYT-GOLDSMITH, DIANE 
Celebrating Hanukkah; illus. with photographs by
Lawrence Migdale. 
Holiday House, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1252-0 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Hoyt-Goldsmith does an exemplary job presenting a family-eye view of the Jewish
holiday of Hanukkah. As in her previous holiday photoessays (CelebratingKwanzaa,
BCCB 11/93, etc.), she personalizes the text by turning the narration over to a
young family member, in this case eleven-year-old Leora. In a natural, almost
conversational style Leora gives the history and significance of Hanukkah (includ-
ing information on the Hebrew language and studying the Torah) and describes
celebratory customs at school, synagogue, and home. High-quality color photo-
graphs show an involved family group in a number of settings, and text inserts and
illustrations add relevant information and visual variety to the layout. A glossary
and index are included. JMD
IRWIN, HADLEY 
Sarah with an H. McElderry, 1996 
134p
ISBN 0-689-80949-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
The small Iowa town of LaMond isn't used to outsiders, and Marti has been an
insider there all her life. She finds herself questioning the meaning of that status,
however, when the Irvines become the town's first Jewish family and Sarah Irvine
joins Marti's class. Sarah is beautiful and brilliant and athletic, winning a place
alongside Marti on the basketball team, but jealousy, xenophobia, and anti-semitism
taint her classmates' reaction to her even as the team heads for a state champion-
ship. The account of prejudice and suspicion is subtle and honest, especially as
Marti too is infected by bigotry. The combination of small-town warmth and
small-town insularity is convincingly depicted. Sarah, however, is far too good to
be true, and some of the plot elements (such as the theft and recovery of a valuable
doll collection) don't blend particularly well with the main story; the ambiguous
ending avoids over-optimism but may disappoint some readers. It's still an in-
sightful story of prejudice, however, and that combined with some play-by-play
basketball action will absorb the attention of many young readers. DS
100 
* THE BULLETIN
JAFFE, STEVEN H. 
Who Were the Founding Fathers?: Two Hundred Years ofRein-
venting American History. Holt, 1996 
227p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-3102-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Alert adolescents sifting through election-year rhetoric that would make each can-
didate heir to the true spirit of our hallowed forefathers will find ample evidence
here that all this verbiage is part of a rich American tradition. Jaffe presents the
American Revolution and its participants as an inexhaustible lode of patriotic sym-
bolism and political wisdom, mined by successive generations of statesmen and
interest groups to justify their positions. When the women at Seneca Falls needed
constitutional justification for their demands, Jefferson and his Declaration were
right there to provide it; when the nineteenth-century robber barons looked for a
blessing on their financial pillaging, Alexander Hamilton certainly seemed to be-
stow it. And whenever the Big Names from the Revolution are silent on some
newly emerging issue, another generation of researchers unearths more obscure
"founders" whose valor in the struggle against England provides the proper pedi-
gree. Jaffe makes a compelling argument that young history buffs will have no
trouble following, but the chronological scope and sheer number of examples can
be daunting. Well-chosen (and frequently hilarious) portraits, ads, and political
cartoons illuminate the text so adroitly that readers will wish there were far more of
them. Detailed bibliographic notes are appended. EB
JOHNSON, DOLORES 
The Children's Book ofKwianzaa: A Guide to Celebrating the
Holiday; written and illus. by Dolores Johnson. 
Atheneum, 1996 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-80864-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
This thorough overview of the African-American holiday is organized into nine
chapters (each with an opening proverb), beginning with a brief history of African
Americans in the United States and the origin and history of Kwanzaa. Chapters
on the Secen Principles of Kwanzaa (illustrated by biographical sketches of Afri-
cans and African Americans who embody those principles) and an explanation of
the Kwanzaa symbols are followed by chapters on crafts, gifts to make, recipes, and
program planning. A bibliography and glossary of terms are appended, along with
a blank planning calendar. The writing is a bit dry, but Johnson's enthusiasm is
obvious; the textbook layout of the material is offset somewhat by the black-and-
white block prints generously scattered throughout. While the apparent intent is
to provide a holiday manual for children, in most cases this title will require the
assistance of supervising adults, especially in the execution of crafts, gift-making,
and recipes, some of which optimistically assume a certain level of foreknowledge
and dexterity. JMD
KEHRET,PEG 
SmallSteps: The YearIGotPolio. Whitman, 1996 
179p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-8075-7457-0 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Peg Kehret is a familiar name as an author of middle-grades mysteries, but here she
takes an autobiographical tack in this account of her childhood bout with a near-
fatal case of polio. In 1949, when she was in the seventh grade, Peg Schulze fell ill
and got progressively sicker, switching hospitals when she had trouble breathing
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 
101
on her own. When the disease left her she faced a long course of physical therapy,
which offered no guarantees for walking or even movement. Kehret tells in clear,
unsentimental, and straightforward terms of the terrible pain, fear, and frustration
of that time, deftly conveying her eventual adjustment to the hospital and the
rehabilitation center, where she had friends, daily routines, and easy access, as
opposed to the home where she returned for the occasional awkward and tiring
visit. This is a solid entry in that tried and true genre, the disability drama; the fact
that the protagonist here is a real person who has gone on to write other real books
makes her story all the more absorbing. A prologue and an epilogue round things
out by explaining more about polio, Kehret's crafting of this story, and her later
life, including the fact that she has begun to suffer from post-polio syndrome. DS
KELLER, BEVERLY 
TheAmazon Papers. Browndeer/Harcourt, 1996 
150p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-201345-8 
$12.00
Papered. ISBN 0-15-201346-6 
$5.00 
R Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Iris-ace mechanic, natural athlete, straight-A student, and ap-
parently though illogically a disappointment to her mother because she's not a
cheerleader-embarks on a series of misadventures when said mother goes on a
cruise with cheerleader-type cousin Ellie. With the adults conveniently out of the
way (chaperone Aunt Blanche comes down with the flu), Iris commandeers her
mother's Chevy to go to a pool hall with the hunky but airheaded Foster Prizer.
She winds up in a cast after an encounter with a stiletto heel, the Chevy gets
stripped in the pool hall parking lot, she almost gets arrested for joyriding while
picking up a Dalmatian at the airport, and she ultimately finds love with Byron, a
"big blond Greek god" on a motorcycle. Iris' narrative voice is dryly rueful and
oddly suitable for a bright, unconventional young woman exasperatedly trying to
figure out how she "fits." 
Keller surrounds Iris with characters that, while not
always fully realized, are nearly always funny. Foster and Byron are relegated to
beefcake cameos, for it is really the (presumed) Amazons of the title-Iris, Zelma
of the stiletto heels, the fiercely efficient Fauncine, and even the finally present
Aunt Blanche-who carry the story and the day. Keller's plot barrels along sweep-
ing all logic before it, tying up neatly and conveniently at the end. Even with an
anticlimactic last line, it's still worth a grin. JMD
KIMMEL, ERIC A. 
The Magic Dreidels: A Hanukkah Story; illus. by Katya
Krenina. 
Holiday House, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1256-3 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Jacob drops his brass Hanukkah dreidel down a well. The well goblin gives him a
wooden dreidel, one that spins latkes covered with applesauce and sour cream, to
replace it, but the larcenous Fruma Sarah tricks Jacob and substitutes a plain dreidel
for the magic one. After Jacob has two encounters with Fruma Sarah, the goblin
gives him a dreidel that spins biting fleas, and Jacob gets the magic ones back. In
this original story (first published in Spider magazine), Kimmel has taken the form
and structure of well-known traditional variants ("The Lad Who Went to the
North Wind," "The Donkey, the Cloth and the Table") and grafted a Hanukkah
tale that moves along with the jolly assurance of a folktale. He is enormously aided
in this endeavor by the paintings of Ukrainian artist Katya Krenina, whose expres-
sive characterizations, tipsy perspectives, and energetic compositions raise this tale
from derivative to original. The cold blue palette suits the winter setting, and the
102 
* 
THE BULLETIN
faces have a caricatured liveliness in their sharp planes and shadows that compen-
sates for the occasionally uneven composition. JMD
KING-SMITH, DICK 
The Stray; illus. by Wayne Parmenter. 
Crown,
1996 [12 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-70935-X 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-70934-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Henrietta Hickathrift, age seventy-five, runs away from her old age home to the
seaside. There she meets the Good family-Angela, Eleanor, Rosie, Barney, and
Rowley-who take her home, just as they would a stray puppy. This is an optimis-
tic, sentimental story, and in lesser hands than King-Smith's it would be cloyingly
sweet and thoroughly unreadable. But the author has a sense of humor, a talent
for dialogue, and a flair for creating sympathetic characters, from the eccentric
Henny to the harassed father ("a Good dentist"), even to the stray dog, Sweep,
that Henny ultimately takes in. This is a smooth piece of work with a sequential,
cinematic feel to it that makes you want to see it on the screen. The loving old
woman, the five Good (but not unbelievable) children, the bemused but nice par-
ents, and the grateful black dog all live happily ever after in this cozy modern fairy
tale-they win the lottery. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. JMD
KIRWAN, ANNA 
Juliet: A Dream Takes Flight, England, 1339; illus. by Lynne
Marshall. 
Simon, 1996 72p 
(Girlhood Journeys)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-81137-3 
$13.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-80983-2 
$5.99 
M 
Gr. 3-5
KUDLINSKI, KATHLEEN V. 
Shannon: A Chinatown Adventure, San Francisco, 1880;
illus. by Bill Farnsworth. 
Simon, 1996 
72p 
(Girlhood Journeys)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-81138-1 
$13.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-80984-0 
$5.99 
NR 
Gr. 3-5
Look out, American Girls! Girlhood Journeys dolls are here with their own books,
and they're trying to muscle in on your market share. Shannon O'Brien, an 1880
Irish immigrant, arrives fresh and perky from her trip around Cape Horn; within
a week of landing in San Francisco she has uncrated the family gew-gaws, made
calling cards and window screens with two new friends, and busted up a child
slavery ring. Lapses of believability pepper the tale (Dr. O'Brien figures the Chi-
nese shop sign of an animal vendor must mean "Pets," despite evidence to the
contrary) and stereotypes stretch from the red-headed "colleen" herself, with her
lucky leprechauns and shamrocks, to the sinister Chinaman Mr. Wong, who holds
innocent orphan Mi Ling captive in his store. Appended historical notes remark,
"Most San Franciscans were good people, but a few were greedy and evil," while
ignoring the immigrants' voyages from Ireland to the West and the status of the
Chinese in nineteenth-century California. Juliet Blackwell, a fourteenth-century
English gamekeeper's daughter, fares somewhat better with a smoother tale in-
volving the rescue of a prized hunting bird and the betrothal ofJuliet's best friend,
thirteen-year-old Marguerite. Even this tale, though, is topheavy with data about
falconry, and Kirwan struggles to make the Blackwells seem as middle class as the
O'Briens in a society in which that class didn't exist. The series promises more of
the same for a pre-Revolutionary Parisian and a fifteenth-century Yoruba girl. Buy
the dolls if you want or if you must, but children seeking imaginative sparks for
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 
103
their play would be better served by a Joan Blos or Karen Cushman novel than this
Clones of Many Lands approach. EB
KOERTGE, RON 
Confess-O-Rama. 
Kroupa/Orchard, 1996 
16 5p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08865-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09515-0 
$16.95 
R* Gr. 7-12
Tony's latest stepfather has, like the previous two and like Tony's father, died ("If
Shakespeare had written Tony, there'd have to be a quartet of ghosts in the mall at
Elsinore"), and Tony and his grieving mother have once again moved, this time to
the Los Angeles suburb of West Paradise. Tony is semi-drawn and semi-yanked
into a circle of artists at his new school, most prominently Jordan Archer, who
possesses the artistic talent of her famous father and a forthrightness and neurosis
all her own. This new sense of belonging leads to Tony's desire to make West
Paradise a real home, not just a stopping place on the bereavement trail. Koertge
is a master of tonal balance, blending humor and genuine emotion in a way many
YA authors essay but fail: Tony's quips and the outrageousnesses of the plot are
genuinely funny but never superficial, and his frustration with his stalled mother
and his confusion about Jordan are touchingly and realistically depicted. This is
also the best evocation of teen artistic sensibilities since Brock Cole's Celine (BCCB
12/89), and that applies not only to the fine art of Jordan and her friends but also
to Tony's metier, cooking. Energetic yet precise, this is an offbeat, smart, and
resonant account of a good kid's getting what he deserves. DS
KONIGSBURG, E. L. 
The View from Saturday. Karl/Atheneum, 1996 
16 3p
ISBN 0-689-80993-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
The assembly of a sixth-grade Academic Bowl team doesn't appear to be a likely
candidate for lively fiction, but Konigsburg, through her ability to create believ-
able characters and place them in believable (even if slightly off the wall) situa-
tions, manages to make even an academic competition intriguing, at least at first.
This partial success is achieved by giving each of the four team members (collec-
tively known as The Souls) a distinct voice: Noah tells how he was the best man at
a senior citizens' wedding, Nadia relates her reconciliation with her divorced fa-
ther, and Ethan tells how the three of them became friends with Julian, the new
boy in town. Quiet, bright Julian quietly makes friends with Nadia, Noah, and
Nathan; quietly saves a classmate's dog from a nasty practical joke; and quietly
gives the winning answer in the academic competition. Mrs. Olinski, their paraple-
gic sixth-grade teacher, conducts her class from her wheelchair, and her story in-
termingles with that of the children. Konigsburg nearly keeps her from taking
over the plot, but by the end of the book, the story is no longer about the four
children but about Mrs. Olinski's spiritual enlightenment, which leads to a dis-
mally self-conscious and flat ending. This is one of those books that just should
have ended on page 159, but instead goes on to page 160. A list of academic bowl
questions is appended. JMD
KRENSKY, STEPHEN 
Striking It Rich: The Story of the California Gold Rush; illus.
by Anna DiVito. 
Simon, 1996 
4 8p 
(Ready to Read)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-80804-6 
$14.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-80803-8 
$3.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Universal fascination with get-rich-quick schemes and Cinderella success stories
makes the California Gold Rush an appealing topic for the chapter-book audi-
104 
* THE BULLETIN
ence. Rookie report-writers panning for information will find a satisfying amount
of well-organized material, ranging from the 49ers' trek out West to the transfor-
mation of shanty mining camps into permanent settlements. Those reading for
pleasure will enjoy rough-and-ready details of moldy, bug-infested chow and fron-
tier lawlessness, as well as DiVito's plentiful line-and-watercolor cartoons. Al-
though Krensky overlooks the environmental impact of mining techniques, he
does attend to the varied experiences among different ethnic groups and the run-
away inflation that drove off many gold seekers and turned others toward the more
lucrative and certain enterprise of shopkeeping. While the format suggests a pri-
mary-grade audience, both the text and humorous illustrations commend this title
to slightly older hi-lo readers as well. EB
KVASNOSKY, LAURA MCGEE 
Mr. Chips!; written and illus. by Laura McGee
Kvasnosky. 
Farrar, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-374-35092-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Mr. Chips, a dog-about-town Airedale, enjoys playing dress-up and Parcheesi, but
his favorite activity involves curling up with the cat on forbidden furniture. Fa-
miliar pet-oriented storylines are candidly retold by Ellie, Mr. Chips' human part-
ner-in-play, who recounts the wheedling that brought the dog into the family
("Mr. Chips can smile. . .. Have you ever seen a dog smile?"), as well as his
mysterious disappearance a week before the family is to move 153 miles away.
While visual clues and pointed plot elements make Mr. Chips' whereabouts obvi-
ous to observant readers (he is adopted by a traveling circus), Ellie never seems to
make the connections, nor to worry about the reasons for Mr. Chips's unexplained
departure. All's well that ends well though, with the slurpy canine-kiss reunion
that eventually results. The cartoon-like illustrations extend characterization with
color and line; clear blues, golds, purples, crimsons and greens emphasize the de-
tails of the figures and surroundings. AEB
LASKY, KATHRYN 
True North: A Novel of the Underground Railroad. Blue Sky/
Scholastic, 1996 
267p
ISBN 0-590-20523-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Alternate chapters tell concurrent stories of Lucy, a privileged adolescent in 1858
Boston, and Afrika, a runaway slave in her early teens, undertaking the treacherous
journey from southern Virginia to Canada. As Afrika loses her newborn baby,
eludes (and kills) slave catchers, and entrusts her life to various conductors on the
Underground Railroad, Lucy discovers her grandfather, Pap, is a self-proclaimed
outlaw, defying the Fugitive Slave Laws by helping spirit runaways north. The
two girls' lives converge when, shortly after her grandfather's death, Lucy finds
Afrika waiting in a hollowed-out clock at Pap's "station" and personally helps her
reach the Canadian border. Background is supplied in stilted dialogue ("Our
government officials have become hostile to the founding principles.... So along
with nearly two hundred others who compose the Vigilance Committee, yes, we
break the law"), melodramatic villains infiltrate Lucy's family circle, and an awk-
ward denouement strains to knot up loose ends and to update the girls' stories by
almost sixty years. Nonetheless, Afrika's trek is tensely rendered, often in harrow-
ing detail, and whenever she's the star of the action, she shines brightly indeed. EB
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 
105
LEVIN, BETTY 
Gift Horse; illus. by Jos. A. Smith. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-688-14698-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
When Matt's eccentric Uncle Oliver promises him a horse, cowboy-wannabe Matt
is overjoyed. Matt's parents, confident that Oliver is making empty promises,
don't take the prospect seriously until a Norwegian Fjord Horse shows up in the
former stable that is now their garage. The adults are insistent that Loki can't stay,
but Matt and the neighborhood kids are thrilled and they figure out a plan for
keeping him. Though it has a few twists (Matt doesn't get to keep Loki and
recognizes that the animal's garage-bound life wasn't a good one), this is a com-
fortable and familiar old story. Loki is an endearing guest and his exploits are
authentically equine (though he's inexplicably a non-Fjord color). Unfortunately,
the characters are virtually indistinguishable and the plot even more fluffy and
unlikely than usual for this topic. Still, it's a cheerful and easily read saga of near-
wish-fulfillment, and it might convince a hopeful young reader or two to clean out
the garage. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. DS
LOWRy, Lois 
See YouAround, Sam!; illus. by Diane de Groat. 
Lorraine/Hough-
ton, 1996 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-395-81664-5 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Sam is truly irritated with his mother's "fangphobia" (she won't let him wear the
fake fangs he traded his Etch-A-Sketch for) so he decides to run away-to Alaska,
where animals with "fangs" lie around in furry piles and eat blubber. Visits with
neighborhood friends convince him this is not a good idea, but it's not until big
sister Anastasia shows up and offers him an alternative course of action that all
ends well. Lowry gives a remarkably credible depiction of Sam's mounting anxiety
as no one comes forth to keep him from running off to the frozen North. Of
course, all the neighbors are on the phone to Sam's mother before and after each
visit, and Anastasia certainly isn't going to let him waltz off into the night-still,
there is a certain amount of baby suspense, as Sam tries to figure out how to get
out of the situation he put himself in in the first place. de Groat's black-and-white
line drawings appear throughout. JMD
LYNCH, CHRIS 
Political Timber. 
HarperCollins, 1996 
[17 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027361-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027360-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Gordie Foley's beloved grandfather, former mayor, is now doing fifteen years in
prison for racketeering, but the old man is neither repentant nor resigned to sitting
things out. For Gordie's eighteenth birthday, Foley Sr. gives him his beloved
classic convertible and an obligation: Gordie will run for mayor as the new Foley
candidate. Then follows a whirlwind political baptism as Gordie learns about
fund-raising dinners, political machines, the wiles of the press, and personal conse-
quences all while trying to negotiate his senior year of high school (including a bid
for student-body president). Gordie eventually realizes, however, that his grandfa-
ther is now only a cog in the machine he once controlled and that Gordie has no
choice but to leave the race even at the expense of his grandfather's pride. Lynch
deftly blends Tammany Hall and study hall as Gordie struggles with two cam-
106 
* THE BULLETIN
paigns, the senior year he'd hoped to make a triumph of enjoyable dissoluteness,
and the end of his grandfather's political era. The book is authentic, amusing, and
unpredictable in presenting Gordie only as examining shifts of power and never
really questioning his grandfather's-or the machine's-ethics. The story relies
on tempo rather than depth, however, since the characterizations are inclined to
be slender, and that's unfortunate when the book begins to substitute repetition
for escalation and the pace deteriorates. Lynch is still an energetic and salty writer,
however, and this will get some young candidates' votes. DS
MCDONALD, MEGAN 
My House Has Stars; illus. by Peter Catalanotto. 
Jackson/
Orchard, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08879-0 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09529-0 $15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Nine children from as many cultures describe their homes in prose-poemy de-
scriptive vignettes, beginning with the presumably American girl: "Night is falling
somewhere. And now. And now again. Night is coming to this sky. To houses
everywhere. This house. And there are stars." In each double-page spread, a child
talks about his or her home and its architectural and culturally based characteris-
tics: Carmen (Philippines) talks about sharks and stingrays hanging from poles;
Abu (Ghana) about round walls made of mud; Oyun (Mongolia), about walls
made of wool. Each homely vignette concludes with the words "My house has
stars." Catalanotto's watercolors make good use of the star motif, incorporating
them into glowing night skies that hover over various residencies. Each page's text
is overlaid on a pale, shadowy globe upon which the location of the house under
discussion is circled in reddish-brown, although no geographic location is contex-
tually identified. The conclusion ("Our house, the earth. Our roof, the sky. Our
house has stars") is illustrated with a blue earth in a starry sky and a very small
outline map of the world showing the location of each child's (except the American's)
home, identified by their given name as stated in the text. This is all very pretty in
a foggy sort of way, but the illustrations do not effectively show the home being
described, and the faces of the narrators are often obscured or indistinct. Nor does
this poetic but somewhat shallow overview address the fact that the "exotic" homes
described are not the only kinds of architecture extant in these very living cultures.
JMD
McLAREN, CLEMENCE 
Inside the Walls of Troy: A Novel of the Women Who Lived
the Trojan War. Atheneum, 1996 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-31820-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
An intriguing idea realized with uneven success, this novel begs to be discussed in
comparison with Fleischman's Dateline: Troy (BCCB 3/96)-a stimulating exer-
cise at the junior-high or high-school level. McLaren's fictionalization of the Iliad
has rushed in where angels fear to tread, contradicting some of the classical epic's
most distinctive characteristics. The distance achieved by formality of tone and
conventions of language dissolves in the face of current colloquial speech:
"Cassandra! Over here!" calls her little sister, exclaiming over the wooden horse;
"We need a quiet place to talk," says her brother as Troy begins to fall. The male
perspective on heroic ventures is reversed in a feministically satisfying but cultur-
ally speculative way. Scorning the "marriage market" that makes women pawns in
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 
107
a game of male power-play, Cassandra takes a revisionist view of traditional female
roles ("How could I explain the powerlessness of our sex in words my six-year-old
sister could understand?"). The first-person narration begins in Helen's voice and
continues in Cassandra's, which allows intimate insight into the characters' rela-
tionships but also reduces them from mythical to mundane ("If Menelaus took
Helen away, there would be an emptiness in Troy," reflects Cassandra after six
years of devastating warfare). The two main characters often find themselves ex-
plaining complex dynasties, deities, prophesies, and social customs. On the other
hand, the action of the story is irresistibly dramatic, and in many ways the book is
both informed and informative; it could prove accessible as romantic adventure
for students bored by high-flown similes or textbook histories. BH
MAZER, ANNE 
A Sliver of Glass and Other Uncommon Tales. 
Hyperion,
1996 
[80p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2165-5 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0197-2 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Eleven fantastical stories, most laden with folkloric or mythic overtones, offer some
rich and flavorful mouthfuls. "The Golden Touch" is a retelling of the Midas
myth and "The Six Swans" the narration of the sister who longs to join her en-
chanted avian brothers, while "Call Me Sometime," "Hello Darling," and "Through
the Mirror" are all tales of protagonists who find that reality is a state of mind, and
an easily destroyed one at that. The brevity of these stories will add to their appeal,
but sometimes it necessitates a lot of plotting in a small space, which undercuts the
magic of the fantasy. Mazer's style is at its best in the elegant fairy-tale homages,
but her more original stories are ingeniously conceived as well. Readers who find
longer fairy-tale retellings a bit daunting will appreciate this collection's unusual
combination of intensity and accessibility. DS
MIKAELSEN, BEN 
Countdown. 
Hyperion, 1996 
24 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2207-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0252-9 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Elliot has been awarded the honor of becoming the first Junior Astronaut on an
Endeavour shuttle, but his fierce and mean-spirited competition with his alter-
nate, Mandy, nearly loses him his spot on the mission. In Kenya, Vincent Ole
Tome questions his father's insistence that he become a Maasai warrior, and his
interest in the European-influenced lifestyle of a doctor from his tribe nearly costs
him his place in the engang (family compound). These two confused and defiant
adolescents eventually make contact when Elliot radios from the shuttle to the
Kenyan doctor's ham radio, and the boys begin an internationally monitored ver-
bal battle of cultures that captures world-wide attention. The premise here is
implausible ("Selection [for Junior Astronaut] will not, I repeat not, be based on
exceptional aptitude or ability ... selection will be determined by a national lot-
tery"), and the boys' parallel experiences are overdrawn. If the audience makes it
through shuttle captain Beaman's homiletics on endangered Earth, his lengthy
quotes from Chief Seattle, and the relentless repetition of Vincent's "ways of the
Maasai," they may ponder how Vincent-profoundly ignorant of "spaceboy's"
culture-readily understands Elliot's idiomatic English. Readers with an interest
in astronaut training may enjoy the technical bits; otherwise, scrub this mission.
EB
108 
* 
THE BULLETIN
MILLER, DOROTHY REYNOLDS 
The Clearing: A Mystery. 
Karl/Atheneum,
1996 
119p
ISBN 0-689-80997-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Eleven-year-old Amanda is ecstatic to be spending the summer with her cousins
while her parents are away. What at first seems to be a straightforward summer of
energetic games and social manipulation soon turns mysterious. First, teenage
Cynthia confides in Amanda that she has been engaging in a furtive correspon-
dence, probably with Spook Wade, a local legend popularly supposed to have
killed a young boy. Then Amanda, Cynthia, and Amanda's cousin Nelson begin
to face the fact that the missing boy was, in fact, a victim of someone they know
very well, and they agonize about the appropriate course of action. This is in some
ways less a mystery, despite the subtitle, than a psychological drama, and a well-
tuned one at that: the subtly explored question is less whodunnit than whadowedo.
There are a few too many echoes of To Kill a Mockingbird in plot and structure,
but the book remains fresh, with Miller displaying a gift for low-key but telling
authenticity in details ranging from preteen power struggles to oddball friendships
to the ravages of guilt. The atmosphere and intensity are effective and alluring,
but the book doesn't shoot over the heads of its young readers, who will enjoy this
compelling tale. DS
MINTERS, FRANCES 
Sleepless Beauty; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Viking, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-670-87033-1 
$14.99 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Those who like their fairy tales fractured, versified, and up-to-date will applaud
this latest effort by the team that produced Cinder-Elly (BCCB 4/94). Once again,
the action takes place in New York City among what appears to be Manhattan's
smart set. (Even the witch wears a pillbox hat atop her chicly coiffed hair and a fur
stole about her fashionably thin shoulders.) Although Beauty pricks her finger on
the needle of a record player (presented as a nifty antique), she uses her wits to save
herself and her family from a century of sleep and, to top it off, wins unending
happiness with her favorite rock star. The text's heavy sing-song rhythm and gen-
erally uninventive rhymes ("I couldn't get a manicure,/ I couldn't cut my hair./
Father couldn't shave his face,/ But still he didn't care") burden Minters' verse,
although unconventional details, such as the parents' rule that Beauty may not use
a just-sharpened pencil until someone else has used it twice, add occasional jaunty
charm. Karas' art is the real star. Fanciful curves, backgrounds that seem to con-
sist of thick strokes of richly aged paints, imaginative details (silly faces smile from
Beauty's alarm clock and from plates of hors d'oeuvres), skewed perspectives, and
mysterious colors combine contemporary humor with a timeless quality. Chil-
dren past the usual picture-book age may warm to the irreverent tone and to a
Beauty who listens to rock music on a Walkman. LM
Moss, MARISSA 
The Ugly Menorah; written and illus. by Marissa Moss. 
Farrar,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-374-38027-9 
$14.00 
R Gr. 3-6
Rachel is spending Hanukkah with her grandmother, the first since her grandfa-
ther died. The house isn't the same without him: "Only his reading chair was left
and it seemed lonely and sad to Rachel. She sat in it and tried to feel Grandpa next
to her, but she couldn't." Making latkes with her Grandma, Rachel asks about the
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 
109
menorah, and Grandma points to a plain wooden board with tin cylinders to hold
the candles. Rachel compares it unfavorably to the fancy one at home, until
Grandma tells her the story of how Grandpa made the menorah for her during the
Depression, when they had nothing but each other. As Rachel watches the candles
in the tin menorah flicker, "for the first time since Grandpa died, she felt he was
with her again. She could hear his gravelly voice saying the prayer, she could smell
his pepperminty and woolly smell, she could see his slow, gentle turtle smile in the
glowing candlelight." Moss stays true to the perspective of the young Rachel with
such an unerring eye that the feeling that this is a true family story is very strong.
The naively simple watercolors have a basic charm that lets the story be the most
important element in this blend of tale and text. When Rachel's mother asks why
Grandma still has the old menorah and not a newer, fancier one, the reader satisfiedly
echoes Rachel: "This menorah is very special. And very beautiful." Information
on the religious significance of the holiday is included in a prefatory note. JMD
PEARL, SYDELLE 
Elijah's Tears: Stories for the Jewish Holidays; illus. by Rossitza
Skortcheva Penney. 
Holt, 1996 
63p 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-4627-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
These five original stories featuring the Jewish prophet Elijah are loosely linked to
major Jewish holidays: Succot, Hanukkah, Yom Kippur, and Passover. Pearl
takes artistic liberty with the traditional view of the prophet, creating a family life
for him in "Elijah's Tears" and a sister in "Eliora's Gifts." The common element
in these five tales is the beauty of faith and the blessings found in doing for others:
an elderly couple reaches out from poverty to help an old man with even less than
they (Elijah in disguise) and are rewarded with leaves of gold in "Leaves"; in
"Joseph the Potter," a potter makes a clay bird for a grieving man (again, Elijah
disguised) and is rewarded with artistic inspiration. Penney's delicately humorous
pen-and-ink illustrations lighten the somewhat syrupy text, but Pearl's language is
direct, lending itself to reading and telling aloud. The introduction gives a very
abbreviated picture of the place of Elijah in Jewish tradition; a glossary with pro-
nunciation guide is included. JMD
PECK, RICHARD 
The Great Interactive Dream Machine. Dial, 1996 
14 9p
ISBN 0-8037-1989-2 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Dismayed by his best friend Aaron's total immersion in cyberspace technology,
twelve-year-old Josh still tags along, even when Aaron's experimental program in
virtual reality turns into real-time adventures and dilemmas. It's the answer to a
wirehead's dream-a computer formula that picks up desires from anyone within
a certain radius and fulfills them. The premise is slight but the plot isn't heavy
enough to sink it, as Josh's cheerful first-person narration capers happily over logic
and computer-generated consequences: Aaron and Josh get their wish to be senior
classmen but outgrow their clothes in the process, and as a direct result of the
desires of Nanky-poo, the Shih Tzu downstairs, they wind up friends with a can-
tankerous old woman with a tragic (but ultimately ecstatic) romantic past. It's a
bit shallow, and the one moment of suspense, when the boys discover they're be-
ing "watched" in cyberspace, is quickly and somewhat anticlimactically resolved.
But Peck's humor and pacing keeps the boys-and the reader-moving right along,
up until Aaron's scream of anguish when the power fails and he hasn't saved his
formula. JMD
110 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PINKNEY, ANDREA D. 
Bill Pickett: Rodeo-Ridin' Cowboy; illus. by Brian
Pinkney. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200100-X 
$16.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Bill Pickett is a rodeo legend, famed for pioneering bulldogging (now formally
known as "steer wrestling") and thrilling turn-of-the-century audiences in Wild
West shows. The Pinkneys here trace his life from his birth into slavery to his days
as a Texas cowhand to his increasing fame, describing en route his family life and
his struggles with racism. The text's tone is pleasantly folksy and Pickett's exciting
adventures simply explained (though it seems unlikely that the cowboy's nick-
name of "The Dusky Demon" came, as the text maintains, from "the dusty dirt
cloud that billowed behind him whenever he performed his fearless riding," and
there's surprisingly no mention of the Bill Pickett postage stamp). Brian Pinkney's
scratchboard illustrations use white highlights to give a shimmer of heat and glam-
our to the proceedings as snorting bulls and thundering horses gallop through the
pages. A note about black cowboys and a bibliography are included. DS
PoWELL, RANDY 
The Whistling Toilets. 
Farrar, 1996 
243p
ISBN 0-374-38381-2 
$17.00 
R Gr. 9-12
Stan Claxton, sixteen-year-old part-time tennis coach and all-around good guy, is
trying to find out why his old friend Ginny, nationally ranked junior player, is in
a serious slump. As he coaches her through a local tournament, Stan and Ginny
start re-evaluating their friendship and their futures. After Powell sets up the situ-
ation (albeit a bit slowly) his characters take on a life of their own, events naturally
unfolding within the author's given environment and circumstances. Ginny's par-
ents are pressuring her to be a star, her middle-aged professional coach has con-
fused her with a romantic pass, and she may just opt for a "normal" life out of the
tournament spotlight. Stan, believably adolescent and realistically hormonal, is
torn between his feelings for Ginny and his laid-back attitude toward life in gen-
eral. As narrator, Stan is romantically confused yet ironically aware, with a gently
twisted set of ethics that surface in time for him to do the right thing. A sense of
humor and a distinct voice carry the reader over any overt eccentricities on the part
of main or peripheral characters, who move toward a satisfying denouement with
quirky but determined motivation. JMD
PUSHKIN, ALEXANDER 
The Tale of Tsar Saltan; based on a translation by Pauline
Hehl; illus. by Gennady Spirin. 
Dial, 1996 
26p
ISBN 0-8037-2001-7 
$16.99 
R Gr. 6-10
Tsar Saltan marries the youngest of three sisters because her heart is good, but her
two sisters, along with the tsar's wicked cousin, jealously conspire against her.
Through their treachery the tsarina and her newborn son are set adrift in a barrel,
but are brought to safe harbor by the song of the apparently splendidly fated child.
The tsarevitch saves a swan from a hawk, is granted his every wish, and proceeds to
rule a magical island city as Prince Guidion, alongside his honored mother. Com-
ing of age, he seeks to know his father, the Tsar, and lures him to the island in a
series of magical encounters whereupon all ends happily in reunions and a wed-
ding. Pushkin's tale is crowded with motifs and themes from traditional folklore
and mythology-the mother and child floating in the barrel, the gifted infant
destined for glory, the swan who is really a maiden in disguise--combined in a
dazzling array of plot and circumstance. No less dazzling are Spirin's paintings
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 
111
with their intense romanticism and painstaking detail. Repeated architectural and
decorative motifs provide visual continuity and a backdrop for text blocks and
personalities. Spirin's characters dominate the foreground, and background
cityscapes, skyscapes, and seascapes add a sense of space and distance. His treat-
ment of the characters' fine raiment-the texture of fur, brocade, golden armor-
is sensual and concrete, color and line falling into velvet folds and glowing
ornaments. This picture book deserves an appreciative audience, and it will find
one with junior-high and high-school fantasy lovers if it's properly presented. JMD
RAHAMAN, VASHANTI 
0 Christmas Tree; illus. by Frand Lessac. 
Boyds Mills,
1996 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-237-9 
$14.95 
R 6-9 yrs
Anslem is particularly excited about the advent of Christmas, because this year his
family has decided to get a real Christmas tree. Unfortunately, the trees imported
to his Caribbean island all arrive dry, bristly, and dead, and Anslem, who keeps
hearing Christmas carols on the radio limning the wonders of evergreens and snow,
is deeply disappointed. After a few abortive attempts to make something wonder-
ful out of a dead tree, Anslem resigns himself to Christmas as is-and then realizes
that's special too. The moral is pretty predictable, but the turns the story takes to
get there are lively and vivid, with island traditions and speech patterns infusing
every page ("A big nothing happen. ... I just find out it have more to Christmas
than Christmas tree"). Lessac's folk art is occasionally more awkward than naive,
particularly in the figures and faces, but the depiction of a sun-drenched island
Christmas, where the deep reds and greens are set against balmy turquoise sky and
sea, is warm and inviting. This may make young listeners want to share their own
Christmas traditions-or revise them to include Anslem's. DS
ROSALES, MELODYE, ad. 
'Twas the Night Bfore Christmas: An African-American
Version; ad. and illus. by Melodye Rosales. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic, 1996 
[33p]
ISBN 0-590-73944-1 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
3-5 yrs
Set on a snowbound North Carolina dairy farm in 1904, this rhyming retelling (in
inconsistent dialect) of the holiday classic features African-American characters.
The first illustration, an interior of the house parlor, is compositionally uninterest-
ing, but as the facially expressive characters make their entrance the oil paintings
achieve an animated enthusiasm. Rosales' palette is nearly neon in its celebratory
glow as the awakened Papa, accompanied by a bright-eyed, adorable tot, investi-
gates the unusual nighttime noises. As reflected in his widened eyes and his toothy
grin, Papa is appropriately tickled by the appearance of the jolly Santy Claus, and
there is enough smiling to fill up three Christmas books. The text is contrived, the
anticipated rhythm forced and uneven: "As fast as white lightnin'/ those reindeer
they came,/ An' he whistled, an' a-hollered,/ an' called them by name:/ Now
Dasher! Now Dancer!/ Now Prancer an' Vixen!/ On, Comet! On, Cupid!/ On
Donner an' Blitzen!/ Run top o' the porch!/ Run upside the wall!/ Now, giddy-
up! Giddy-up!/ Giddy-up, y'all!" C. Clement Moore's traditional text of "A
Visit from St. Nicholas," non-traditionally illustrated with African-American char-
acters, would undoubtedly find a solid, lasting place on library shelves, but this
dialect retelling simply does not do the Christmas classic justice, and the result is
parody instead of rejuvenation. JMD
112 
* THE BULLETIN
ROSENBERG, Liz, comp. ed. 
The Invisible Ladder: An Anthology of Contemporary
American Poems for Young Readers. 
Holt, 1996 
210p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-3836-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-12
Poets ranging from Robert Creeley to Nikki Giovanni, Kyoki Mori to W. D.
Snodgrass appear here not only in selections of one or several poems from their
oeuvres, but also in photographs (one of the poet in childhood, one in adulthood)
and brief autobiographical statements about poetry and childhood (with one ex-
ception, apparently original for this book). The poems, nearly all free verse, have
been written in the last thirty years and range from good to excellent, and they're
well-chosen for young interest and emotional impact. Young readers will appreci-
ate the humor of Ruth Stone's "The Nose," the pithy wit of Martin Espaca's "Court-
house Graffiti for Two Voices," and the fast-paced dread of Sharon Olds' "The
Race." Rosenberg's introduction is marred by some misleading assertions and
surprising condescension towards other anthologies and poets (she seems unaware
of the existence of excellent YA poetry anthologies by Paul Janeczko, Ruth Gor-
don, and Naomi Shihab Nye, among others), but her "Ways to Use This Book"
appendix may provide young poets with some good ideas as well as assisting their
teachers. Biographical entries for the poets and an index of first lines are also
included. DS
Ross, GAYLE, ad. 
The Legend ofthe Windigo: A Tale from Native North America;
illus. by Murv Jacob. 
Dial, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1898-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1897-7 
$14.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
WOOD, DOUGLAS, ad. 
The Windigo's Return: A North Woods Story; illus. by Greg
Couch. 
Simon, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80065-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Based on variants of Cree, Tlingit, and Ojibwe tales about a cannibalistic giant,
these two picture-book versions are remarkably similar in story structure. The
plot centers on a village whose people are threatened with extinction (several indi-
viduals have already disappeared) by the Windigo, whom they manage to trap in a
pit and destroy by fire. In the end, the ashes become mosquitoes that still eat us,
bite by tiny bite. Ross, a professional storyteller, has polished her words with
many oral presentations for a clean, cadenced sound. Her tone is more dramatic
and less expository, with an emphatic ending that stresses action rather than expla-
nation. Wood's text is wordier and fictionally elaborated ("My grandfather... what
is a Windigo?" asks one child so that the picture-book audience can find out).
Oddly, the artists for the two books reverse the adaptors' effects: Jacob's illustra-
tions for Ross' simpler text are more crowded in composition, with swirling dot-
and-spiral patterns and heavy texturing. The human figures seem stiffly posed
(either purposefully naive or simply awkward), but the hues are richly layered.
Couch's illustrations for Wood's more complex text are clean, spacious, and subtly
drafted with a slightly impressionistic quality. Smoothly blended browns and reds
dominate the deep-woods scenes. Despite the plot similarities, the two books'
source citations differ radically. Ross' is much more detailed and specific; she
names both the persons and printed sources on which she drew, in addition to
giving some contextual background. Wood refers vaguely to a "white-haired Ojibwe
(Anishinabe) woman" from whom he first heard this "delightful" tale "many win-
ters ago" and refers to "readings," none identified, that led him to "many varia-
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 
113
tions of the same theme"-making it tough for those who want to follow up with
evaluative comparisons. Both versions introduce a child hero who solves the prob-
lem that the elders cannot (Ross, a boy; Wood, a girl). How true this is to tribal
traditions is up for grabs; in printed folklore sources, an adult council member
usually takes the decisive role. Both of these books have merit and offer a perfect
opportunity to observe creative contrasts in the interpretation of a gripping American
Indian pourquoi tale. BH
RUBALCABA, JILL 
Saint Vitus'Dance. Clarion, 1996 
[112p]
ISBN 0-395-72768-5 $13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Melanie is thirteen when her mother starts behaving oddly; though Mrs. Genzler's
actions become the talk of their small milltown, Melanie's father maintains the
pretense that nothing is wrong. Finally he takes his wife to be treated for what he
imagines is alcoholism and discovers that she is suffering from Huntington's Dis-
ease, which means that he and his daughter need to face up to the loss of the
woman they knew. The focus here is less the disease itself than the effects of one
member's puzzling decline on the family; Melanie's struggles with self-conscious-
ness, shame, and anger are touching and convincing. Rubalcaba spares the reader
the usual interpolated lectures on the disease (an author's note gives some simple
facts about Huntington's), which brings the drama to the fore. Some of the
atypicalities of this situation (Mrs. Genzler's disease progresses to death with un-
usual speed, and nobody ever discusses the genetic implications with Melanie-
and the St. Vitus' dance of the title is actually the historical name for an entirely
different disease) raise some questions but may be explained by the book's seeming
placement in the recent past. This is an engaging portrait of a loving family facing
something that is nobody's fault but still everybody's grief. DS
SAN SoucI, ROBERT D., ad. 
Pedro and the Monkey; illus. by Michael
Hays. 
Morrow, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13744-X 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13743-1 
$16.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
Between Caps for Sale and Curious George, preschoolers will be primed for a tradi-
tional simian trickster whose mischief is richly rewarded. They may also recognize
the pattern of "Puss in Boots" in this Filipino variant "which most likely arrived
with colonists from Spain," according to an author's note that carefully cites printed
sources. When the poor but good-hearted Pedro catches a monkey stealing corn,
the monkey begs to be released and promises to snag the neighboring landowner's
daughter for Pedro's wife. By convincing the landowner that "Don Pedro" is so
rich he has to use a rice-measuring box to count his gold, persuading a clothes
merchant to advance credit, and fooling an ogre into abandoning a stolen manor,
the monkey manages to make Pedro rich-and richly wed. The story doesn't have
quite the life-and-death decisiveness of Perrault's version, but it is all the more
playful and clearly focused on the game of money as power. The rather static
acrylic paintings underscore this tonal difference with pastel hues and posed, dream-
like scenes punctuated by bars of traditional design motifs above and below the
text. The characters' consistently pleasant, even complacent, expressions set the
viewer up for a surprise when the ogre turns out to be a page-stopper. Although
clearly European in origin, Pedro and the Monkey will be welcome in collections
114 
* 
THE BULLETIN
and classrooms where Southeast Asian lore is a scarce commodity for the picture-
book audience. BH
SAY, ALLEN 
Emma's Rug; written and illus. by Allen Say. 
Lorraine/Houghton,
1996 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-74294-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
Emma loves her small white rug, seeing images in it that no one else comprehends.
She excels as an artist, winning prize after prize for her work, and when asked
where she gets her ideas, replies "I just copy." While Emma is at the museum
receiving yet another award, her mother comes into her room, spies the beloved
rug, and washes it: "The rug had shriveled. It was ragged. All the fluff was gone.
It was very, very clean." Without the rug as her inspiration, Emma stops making
art, even going so far as to throw away her art supplies, drawings, awards, and,
lastly, the rug. But then she sees "the eyes watching her and the faces of creatures
all around. She knew them from before. She had thought she would never see
again. 'I can see you!' Emma cried with joy." In cogent prose and affecting paint-
ings, Say distills the creative life of a young child. This picture book differs mark-
edly from de Paola's Bonjour, Mr. Satie (BCCB 3/91) and Carrick's Morgan and
the Artist, both of which viewed art and creativity through the adult eye. Say
shows the creative process through the unformed, somewhat superstitious, magic-
oriented mind of a young girl, who believes her inspirations come from the fleecy
rug given to her when she was born instead of from her mind's eye. The quality of
the paintings is uneven, with some compositions much more effective than others.
The intensity of Emma's creative process, however, is consistent throughout, and
her heartbreak at the loss of her inspiration is real. The juxtaposition of the tiny
Emma against her adult surroundings-feet dangling from a chair as she draws,
shyly leaning against a wall next to one of her paintings, looking out the back
window of a huge limousine-sets her as one apart with her art. This is a stunning
springboard for discussion about artistic inspiration and the creative process with
groups of all ages. JMD
SCHMIDT, GARY D. 
The Sin Eater. Lodestar, 1996 
184p
ISBN 0-525-67541-8 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 9-12
After the death of his wife, Cole's father has completely withdrawn not only from
his son, but from the world. Father and son move to New Hampshire to live with
Cole's maternal grandparents, and, with his father locked away in self-imposed
isolation in the hired man's room, Cole relies on his grandparents to help him
regain some semblance of a normal life. Grandpa's stories of family and local
history give a delicate framework to events taking place in the here and now, but it
is stories of the Sin Eater (a spiritual healer, for lack of a better definition) that
fascinate Cole. When his father commits suicide on Christmas Eve, Cole grieves,
but from an angry distance. From an emotionally suspended opening, Schmidt
draws Cole into the living world, deftly evoking a setting, that, while not idyllic, is
peaceful and secure. Schmidt has a gentle hand with big emotions like grief, re-
gret, and faith, as well as a light touch with characterization and humor that keeps
the story moving in spite of the occasionally awkward prose. Much of the charac-
ter development in this title is internal, but Schmidt's use of action and character
vignettes keep it from bogging down in an emotional morass. JMD
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 115
SCHROEDER, RUSSELL 
Walt Disney: 
His Life in Pictures. Disney,
1996 
64p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-5043-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-3116-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
This fall marks the thirtieth anniversary of Walt Disney's death, and the famous
Disney sense of timing is on display here with the release of this photo album.
Drawing on their motherlode of photos and interviews, the Disney folks have
cobbled together a scrapbook celebrating Walt Disney's life in pictures, both the
silver-screen variety and the homespun snapshot. The utterly unselfconscious lack
of objectivity wears a bit thin, but the hokey photos will nonetheless pull readers
in; the format, with its multicolored text, cartoon sketches, and old pictures all
vying for attention, is loud but appealing. Yet when Disney's daughter Diane
Disney Miller, in her introduction, refers to her dad as "the man you've seen on
television," we realize there are by now two generations who've grown up thinking
not of genial Uncle Walt but of Disney Inc., one of the world's most aggressive
international companies. There's undoubtedly a generation gap here; still and all,
this could be just the ticket for kids curious about the animation biz. SSV
Sfs, PETER 
Starry Messenger: A Book Depicting the Life of a Famous Scientist,
Mathematician, Astronomer, Philosopher, Physicist Galileo Galilei; written and illus.
by Peter Sfs. 
Foster/Farrar, 1996 
33p
ISBN 0-374-37191-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Galileo is, of course, the most famous adherent of the Copernican theory of as-
tronomy, known not only for his genius but for his persecution by the Roman
Catholic church. Printed text and cursive notes join in briefly tracing Galileo's life
from birth, through schooling and scholarship to inventions, writing, great fame,
and eventual downfall; quotes from Galileo's own writings and contemporaneous
writings about him add context to the account. This isn't the most factually useful
biography of the great astronomer: included maps show few of the mentioned
cities, the text leaves inconsistencies unexplained (Galileo proudly affirms his cor-
rectness based on what he saw with his own eyes, but the Ptolemaic theory has
essentially the same basis), and the marginal information doesn't always blend
with the mainstream of the chronicle. Art and design are the real draws here: Sfs'
images combine delicate textural hatching with precise drawing and dreamlike
imagery to give the maps and global views the feel of Renaissance geography and
the life scenes the air of a landscape of the mind. Whether Galileo himself would
approve of his story being brushed with the magic it's tinged with here is an inter-
esting question, but it makes for an elegant, if not entirely informative, book. DS
SMALLS, IRENE 
Irene Jennie and the Christmas Masquerade: TheJohnkankus; illus.
by Melodye Rosales. 
Little, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-316-79878-9 
$15.95 
M 
6-8 yrs
"Buts Godmama, I'se gots no family on Christmas Day. 'Ceptin' you, of course,"
says a young girl to the heavyset cook who is taking care of her. Both are slaves
(although that word is never mentioned in the story) on a North Carolina planta-
tion, and Irene Jennie's parents have been "rented out" to help with a neighboring
Christmas party. "Irene Jennie did not know if they would be back home before
Christmas was all over or if they would ever come back at all" (a puzzling state-
ment, since there's no indication that they've been sold). What dries her tears is
116 
* THE BULLETIN
the lively appearance of the Koners, a troupe of lavishly costumed dancers cel-
ebrating a custom that probably originated in West Africa, according to the author's
source citation. Just as the Koners finish their serenade and Irene Jennie's sadness
returns, her mother and father appear because of a miraculous early dismissal by
the Massa. The two arrivals-first of the parade and later of the parents-seem to
happen quite fortuitously. Outside of one illustration in which the protagonist is
shown in tears, the romanticized paintings depict a cheery world of cozy interiors,
picturesque clothing, and smiling faces. Like the special occasion reflected in
Gershom Griffith's pictures for Courtni Wright's Jumping the Broom (BCCB 7/
94), this exception to the generally oppressive life of enslaved African Americans
becomes the rule when presented in a picture book of such limited scope. As with
the McKissacks' Christmas in the Big House, Christmas in the Quarters (10/94), the
effect of this glamorized evocation of Christmas in the quarters is oddly discomfit-
ing. BH
STANLEY, DIANE 
Saving Sweetness; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Putnam, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22645-1 
$15.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Little orphan Sweetness has run away from Mrs. Sump's orphanage, and grim
Mrs. Sump has enlisted the kindly sheriffs help in retrieving her. The sheriff
plods along the cactus-studded plains in search of Sweetness, who keeps turning
up whenever the sheriff is in dire need (short of water, hungry in the night, at the
point of outlaw Coyote Pete's gun) and providing assistance. Each time the sheriff
proudly proclaims he's saved her but doesn't quite get her drift when she com-
plains about returning to the orphanage, so she takes off yet again, until finally he
understands his duty and agrees to adopt her and the other seven orphans. This is
tall-talin' western comedy, filled with sagebrush-flavored imagery ("She fell on me
like Grandma on a chicken snake") and ridin'-the-range dialect ("Now you can't
go around shootin' folks and scarin' orphans, and I's here to arrest you"). Even
more amusing for young listeners will be the sheriffs blindness to Sweetness' total
control over the situation: tying up Coyote Pete with her hair ribbons, she's remi-
niscent of Ogden Nash's Isabel. Karas' usual dot-eyed, spiky-featured figures here
roam a range made vivid by subtle collagic inclusion of tinted and colored photo-
graphs, so that Sweetness lights out amid genuine scrubland and the hand-drawn
townspeople frequent real buildings. An occasional youngster may wonder why
the sheriff has no horse, but that's less important than the fact that he has Sweet-
ness and her seven comrades, a comfy rocking chair, and a terrifically enjoyable
story. DS
STAUB, FRANK 
Children ofYucatdn; written and illus. with photographs by Frank
Staub. 
Carolrhoda, 1996 
48p
ISBN 0-87614-984-0 
$14.96 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The title conjures visions of tourist havens in Cancutn and Cozumel, but Yucatin
refers here to the Mexican state rather than the peninsula, a state less prosperous
than its eastern neighbor Quintana Roo. The photoessay, oddly organized in an
impressionistic style, touches lightly on a range of topics from the Mayan ruins at
Uxmal to coastal fisheries, from a typical day at school to an equally typical day
hawking oranges or religious goods. Staub faces the poverty, limited education,
and constrained opportunities of many of Yucatin's children with unsensationalized
frankness, yet fails to even hint at discrimination against the Maya, which is noted
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 
117
in Guy Garcia's briefer photoessay Spirit ofthe Maya (BCCB 12/95). Quick facts
about Yucatan and a pronunciation guide are appended. EB
SYKES, JULIE 
Shhh!; illus. by Tim Warnes. 
Little Tiger, 1996 
26p
ISBN 1-888444-07-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Santa is full of the Christmas spirit and just can't help singing "JINGLE BELLS!
JINGLE BELLS!," but the reindeer shush him up, telling him to be quiet or he'll
wake the children. The opening pages set the stage for this simple picture book, as
Santa roars and stumbles his way through his Christmas deliveries, being shushed
on every front. Finally all the toys are delivered (without any children being awak-
ened) and he's back home, where he falls into an exhausted sleep. "'MUNCH,
MUNCH, MUNCH!' crunched the reindeer," only to be shushed by a little mouse:
"YOU MUSTN'T WAKE SANTA!" The unaffected text is nicely supported by
big, oversized illustrations in (mostly) bright primary colors. While not exactly
innovative, this sequential tale is a handy storytime book for those looking for
holiday selections for younger listeners, who will have a jolly good time both roar-
ing with Santa (visually reminiscent of Raymond Briggs' Father Christmas, BCCB
11/73) and shushing him up. JMD
TOLAN, STEPHANIE S. 
Welcome to the Ark. Morrow, 1996 
[240p]
ISBN 0-688-13724-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Miranda, a renowned prodigy who created her own language when
she was three years old, is packed off to the "nuthouse." There, against the wishes
of the power-hungry medical director, she becomes part of the Ark, a group-home
project created to "connect" young people who are psychologically alienated by
their exceptional intelligence levels. However, the connections Miranda and Ark-
mates Elijah, Taryn, and Doug make are scientifically unanticipated ones; not
only do they communicate telepathically, but they also share versions of the same
apocalyptic dream: figures on horseback, shadowy horizon, blood-red waters and
all. Unfortunately, an overabundance of thematic threads, psychic phenomena
reduced to slo-mo psychodrama, and incessant, often secondhand, accounts of the
violence heralding the Imminent End make it difficult to buy into this threatening
precognition. The pseudo-electronic format of the book (old-fashioned narrative
interspersed with e-mail memos, internet-relay chat, and newsgroup postings) is
post-Avi inventive, but the computer technology is of a decidedly pre-millennium
flavor. Lacking the dystopian horror of William Sleator's House ofStairs, the book
smolders to an unsatisfying end, the great youth battle against Armageddon de-
feated by teenage immaturity and hospital politics. The characters do return eight
years later to once again wield the sword, but who cares about a campaign rallied
by adults? AEB
TURNER, MEGAN WHALEN 
The Thief. Greenwillow, 1996 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-688-14627-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-9
There is nothing that the thief cannot steal . .
except himself out of the king's
prison. Fortunately, the king's magus assists Gen in this regard, enlisting him to
steal Hamiathe's Gift, a legendary stone that will give the king leverage over neigh-
boring monarchs. As Gen journeys with the magus and his two apprentices,
118 
* THE BULLETIN
Ambiades and Sophos (dubbed Useless the Elder and Useless the Younger by Gen),
toward the temple maze that houses the Gift, Gen's wry humor and pithy com-
mentary convince us to question his cohorts' motives. The ultimate irony is that
we don't question the thief, which makes Turner's expertly foreshadowed but none-
theless surprise ending all the more elegantly effective. An original mythology,
emphasizing the story of Eugenides, the god of thieves for whom Gen was named,
drives the intricate politics of the novel; the intervention of the gods and goddesses
on an incredulous Gen's behalf is deftly incorporated. While the tangle of per-
sonal and national histories and mythologies is occasionally unclear, Gen's wit and
wile overshadow such technicalities. To miss this thief's story would be a crime.
AEB
WARDLAW, LEE 
101 Ways to Bug Your Parents Dial, 1996 
204p
ISBN 0-8037-1901-9 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Steve is a nerdy inventor headed for the Invention Convention
with his oxymoronically named "Nice Alarm" (it taps sleepers gently on the shoul-
der), when his parents cancel the family vacation that was getting him there. Des-
perate to make his trip possible, Steve, now enrolled in a summer writing program,
schemes up a class project to make money-he'll create and sell a "how-to" book
for kids who want to drive their parents nuts. This, combined with his minimum-
wage job at a decrepit miniature-golf course, should be enough to get his inventing
career launched. Steve's sidekick is a bookish hypochondriac who speaks in the
artificially stilted prose common to intellectuals in TV land ("You know my lac-
tose intolerance makes it impossible for me to partake of pizza") and the other
characters, too, fulfill predictable roles rather than develop into anyone we'd ever
care about. As with many sit-com setups, the characters are stock and the situa-
tions predictable, so when Steve and Co. are hauled before the school board we
know it will end well. Grab this one instead of the remote when you want good-
natured entertainment blissfully devoid of commercials. SSV
WAUGH, SYLVIA 
MennymsAlone. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[208p]
ISBN 0-688-14702-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The Mennyms, as most bibliophiles now know, are mysteriously animated rag
dolls who have lived happily, if clandestinely, amid human society for decades;
this is their fourth outing (see The Mennyms Under Siege, BCCB 3/96, etc.). Now
a practical complication has entered their lives: the heirs to the house (who will
inherit it when its current tenants either vacate or pass away) are beginning to
inquire about possession. Just as the Mennyms begin to rise to this challenge, Sir
Magnus, the family patriarch, has an overwhelming premonition that the rag dolls
will soon lose their vitalizing magic-in short, will die--on October 1. Even
more epistemological than the last entry, this Mennym adventure offers some pi-
quant questions about the nature of the family's existence while also bringing to-
gether many of the humans who have encountered the dolls in past books (some of
the most atmospheric scenes are those of familiar human characters attempting to
puzzle out the secrets of the Mennym habitation). Mennym fans may find the
soap-opera reversibility of dire fates a bit too much like cheating, particularly as
the supernatural aspect of the family's situation has always been less convincingly
handled than the pragmatic questions. Waugh's gift for telling detail rarely fails,
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 
119
however, and her evocation of a whole new situation for her characters will in-
trigue followers of the series. DS
WILKES, 
ANGELA 
Dazzling Disguises and Clever Costumes. 
DK,
1996 
48p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7894-1001-X 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-6
Cogent instructions, inviting and illuminating photographs, and reasonable ex-
pectations that stress imagination over skill assure that this entry won't spend much
time shelf-sitting in the crafts collection. Directions for interchangeable costume
components-heads, hats, capes, gauntlets, shirts, and other sartorial addenda-
are rendered in a few broad, numbered steps accompanied by helpful photo de-
tails. Scissors, glue, and tape make up the basic toolkit here, but a few more
complex processes that require adult assistance or supervision with a craft knife or
needle are clearly labeled. Such staples as the pirate, hula dancer, robot, and two-
person horse are joined by some fresher characters-a towel-toga'd Roman em-
peror, an undercover detective, and a particularly fetching evil insect. All costumes
are rated according to the estimated time required to complete them, and the final
"accessories" section, with its beards, jewelry, and spectacles with pop-out eyes
could make satisfying quickie projects in themselves. An index is included. EB
WOOD, DOUGLAS, ad. 
The Windigo's Return: A North Woods Story; illus. by Greg
Couch.
See review under Ross, p. 119.
YOLEN, JANE Milk and Honey: A Year of Jewish Holidays; illus. by Louise
August. 
Putnam, 1996 
80p
ISBN 0-399-22652-4 
$21.95 
R Gr. 4-6
This is a thoughtfully written, attractively designed overview of a year of major
Jewish holidays, beginning with Rosh Hashanah and concluding with Shavuot,
with a closing section on the importance of the Sabbath. Each chapter opens with
a brief history of each holiday, followed by an explanation of various celebratory
customs. Short original poems, stories based on traditional sources, and lyrics and
music for holiday songs are included. August's oil-painted, linoleum-block prints
add a lovely luminosity to the text; her full and half-page paintings and themati-
cally appropriate vignettes help to make this combination of history, religion, and
story (it even includes a Purim play) rich and rewarding. Similar in concept to
Drucker's extensive compendium The Family Treasury of ewish Holidays (BCCB
11/94), this has a warmer, more intimate, and more cohesive execution. The
index is divided into non-fiction, poems, plays, songs, and stories. The notes are
very general, and no sources are indicated. JMD
120 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Holt, David, and Bill Mooney. The Storyteller's Guide. August House, 1996.
Paper ed. ISBN 501-372-5450 208p. $23.95
Prominent figures in the American storytelling revival answer basic questions about
storytelling in this interview style entry in the how-to-tell genre. Each chapter is
organized around a question-How do I find the right stories? What makes a story
strong? How do I memorize and rehearse a story? How do I handle stage fright?
etc.-and followed by the answers of individual storytellers like Connie Regan-
Blake, Len Cabral, Donald Davis, Elizabeth Ellis, Diane Ferlatte, Beth Horner,
Syd Lieberman, Bobby Norfolk, Jay O'Callaghan, Gayle Ross, Jackie Torrence,
Diane Wolkstein, and a multitude of others. Each chapter/question is introduced
by editors Holt and Mooney, and followed by a short summary. In between, the
two columns of print per page contain a tremendous amount of practical informa-
tion (and a few copy-editing glitches-a comma out of place here, an absence of
quotation marks there) communicated in a humorous, conversational style. Sto-
rytelling issues as well as "how to" suggestions are covered in sections on copyright
and fair use, storytelling ethics, recording audiotapes, and censorship. A short list
of storytelling resources and a bibliography is included, along with notes on con-
tributors. JMD
Ross, Ramon Royal. Storyteller. 3rd. ed. August House, 1996. Paper ed. ISBN 0-
87483-451-1. 224 p. $23.95
Ross' approach to storytelling is an eclectic one, covering a wide spectrum of theory
and practice. A chapter on personal-experience stories provides concrete sugges-
tions for setting the tale in time and place, providing necessary details through
memory exercises, and cutting and shaping the tale for telling. Other chapters
give suggestions for using cumulative and migratory tales (also known as urban
legends); collecting (and keeping track of) stories; chorale speaking and reader's
theater; puppetry; story (flannel) boards; singing and dancing (words and music
for traditional songs and directions for "play party" games are included); and even
reading aloud. This title has something for everyone, and Ross' accessible ap-
proach to storytelling techniques has wide applicability in libraries and classrooms
for novice and more experienced tellers. Most chapters conclude with an anno-
tated bibliography of additional readings, detailed notes, and suggestions for fol-
low-up activities. Indexed. JMD
NOVEMBER 1996 
* 
121
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-stories: Stanley
African Americans: Johnson;
Pinkney
African Americans-fiction: Griffin;
Lasky
African Americans-poetry: Rosales
African Americans-stories: Smalls
Africans-fiction: Mikaelsen
American Indians: Staub
American Indians-folklore: Ross;
Wood
Animals-fiction: Adler
Art and artists-fiction: Koertge
Art and artists-stories: Say
Astronauts-fiction: Mikaelsen
Astronomy: Sfs
Basketball-fiction: Irwin
BIOGRAPHIES: Cooney; Kehret;
Pinkney; Schroeder; Sfs
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Armstrong; Lowry; King-Smith
Caribbean-stories: Rahaman
Christmas-stories: Ferguson;
Sykes; Rahaman; Smalls
Civics: Gutman; Lynch
Civil War-fiction: Armstrong
Computers-fiction: Peck
Contests-fiction: Konigsburg
Costumes: Wilkes
Cowboys: Pinkney
Cowboys-stories: Stanley
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Miller
Dinosaurs-stories: Campbell
Disabilities-stories: Carrick
Disabilities: Kehret
Dogs-fiction: Byars; Farish
Dogs-stories: Kvasnosky
Dolls-fiction: Griffin; Waugh
Families-fiction: Armstrong;
Cooney; Dessen; Farish; King-
Smith; Lowry
FANTASY: Curry; Griffin;
Hautman; Mazer; Peck; Tolan;
Turner; Waugh
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Griffin; Rubalcaba
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Campbell
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY
TALES: Adler; Minters;
Pushkin; Ross; San Souci;
Wood
Friends-fiction: Hobbs; Keller;
Koertge; Peck; Wardlaw
FUNNY STORIES: Gutman
Gold Rush: Krensky
Grandmothers-stories: Moss
Grandparents-fiction: Lynch;
Schmidt
Grandfathers-stories: Carrick
Hanukkah-stories: Kimmel; Moss
Hanukkah: Goldin; Hoyt-
Goldsmith
Health: Children's Hospital
High school-fiction: Hobbs
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Armstrong; Dexter; Kirwan;
Kudlinski; Lasky; McLaren
122 
* THE BULLETIN
History, classical: McLaren
History, U.S.: Armstrong;
Krensky; Jaffe; Lasky
Holidays: Pearl; Yolen
Horses-fiction: Levin
Houses: McDonald
Illness-stories: Anderson
Inventors-fiction: Wardlaw
Irish-Americans-fiction:
Armstrong
Islands-fiction: Dexter
Jews-fiction: Irwin
Kwanzaa: Johnson
Latinos-stories: Cowley
LOVE STORIES: Koertge; Powell
Love-fiction: Cooney
MAKE-AND-DO BOOKS:
Wilkes
Mexico: Staub
Monkeys-stories: San Souci
Mosquitoes-stories: Ross; Wood
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Keller; Rubalcaba
Mothers and sons-fiction:
Koertge; Lowry
Mothers and sons-stories:
Ferguson
Motion pictures: Schroeder
Moving-stories: Kvasnosky
Music and musicians-stories:
Campbell
MYSTERIES: Miller
POETRY: Hillert; Rosenberg
Politics-fiction: Gutman; Lynch
Pregnancy-fiction: Hobbs
Prejudice-fiction: Irwin
Reading aloud: Adler; Ferguson;
Goldin; Hillert; Mazer; Minters;
Moss; Pushkin; Rosenberg; Ross
Reading, beginning: Krensky
Reading, easy: Byars; King-Smith
Reading, reluctant: Krensky
Safety education: Children's
Hospital
School-fiction: Irwin; Konigsburg;
Lynch; Wardlaw
SHORT STORIES: Mazer
Sisters-fiction: Dessen
Slavery-fiction: Lasky
SPORTS STORIES: Irwin; Powell
Storytime: Clements; Kimmel; Rahaman;
Stanley; Sykes
Storytelling: Adler; Goldin; Kimmel;
Pushkin; Ross; San Souci
Suicide-fiction: Schmidt
Sweden-fiction: Dexter
Thanksgiving-stories: Anderson; Child;
Cowley
Time travel-fiction: Curry; Hautman
Turkeys-stories: Cowley
Voyages and travel-fiction: Dexter
Voyages and travel-stories: Child
Weddings-fiction: Dessen
Women's studies: Cooney
World cultures: McDonald
World War II-fiction: Hautman
Ir
bq TOM PAXTON
ieu~atedby KAREN LEE CICHMIDT
"Awash with sunny charm, the book could inspire
an audience to break out in song.... Schmidt's sprightly
watercolor and gouache illustrations lend a jaunty air to one
of folksinger Paxton's best-known songs."-Publishers Weekly
"A good time is had by all.... Perfect for story hour
as well as for one-on-one sharing. "-School Library Journal
"A perfect choice for choral reading and dramatic play....
ThP hrnnL nffore mr•n 
nrvi c hil;+;dc frFr i ,c 
,rlr;n- 
,•
Ages 3 and up. 40 pp.
TR $15.00/0-688-13800-4; LE $14.93/0-688-13801-2
*/v, 
MORROW JUNIOR BOOKS
. s 
5 A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
Sy,, 
Y, 
1350 Avenue of the Americas, NY, NY 10019
"o]Lzoo
-*~j~ Starred by SLJ and PW 
Kirkus Reviews pointer*
"In each of these nine selections, mostly female protagonists
experience the highs and lows of adolescence. The world
in which they live is often crude, cruel, and sad.... Deeply
disturbing and touching at the same time...[these are]
well-written stories for a mature YA audience that radiate
empathy, pithiness, and vibrant irreverence."
-School Library Journal
"These small dazzlers explore enduring values and provide a
diverting take on facets of contemporary teen culture."
-Kirkus Reviews
"[Here is] writing with the same sense of wonder that gives
such magic to Weetzie Bat and Block's other novels."
-Publishers Weekly
Ages 12 up. $14.95 TR" (0-06-027211-2); $14.89LB (0-06-027212-0)
Joanna Cotler Books
Francesca Lia Block's recent Weetzie Bat Books include
BABY BE-BOP 
MISSING ANGEL JUAN
$13.95TR (0-06-024879-3) 
$14.89LB (0-06-023007-X)
$13.89LB (0-06-024880-7) 
$3.95PB (0-06-447120-9)
Joanna Coter Books
01 T- 
H*a 
C~llin oA;hifld,/4 
n 
Bc 
slc
ar -
o 
s f 
s 
o
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
' 
Starred by SLJ and PW
Kirkus Reviews pointer +
j
8
a
-a
Y,
*~ 'A treat."
--ALA Booklist (starred review)
*I "Encore, .please!"
--Publishers Weekly (starred review)
* "IA 
lively selfportrait."
--Kirkus Reviews (pointered review)
* "Sparkles with sly humor.'
--School 
Library Journl 
(starred review)
*~~~~~~~- 
KkuReewpone 
'Publishers 
Weekly star
TCell Me A~aih
Rou itkc 
T Wai Borh
byJamiep Lee C?·~.
Akstra~ted 
by La&-aa 
Cornell
"Everyone--including adoptive parents and children longing
for validation of their unique experiences--will embrace this
pitch-perfect celebration of true family values. 'Tell me again'.
is the endearing catchphrase a young girl employs to recount
the creation of their family: the phone call, the trip to the
hospital, love at first sight in the nursery. It's all here,
including a childlike family tree...
Cornell's quirky [full-color] watercolors
Senhance the book's tone and expand
on its humor. "- Kirkus Reviews
"It's hard to imagine a warmer
celebration of the special joys of an
adopted family."--Publishers Weekly
iAges4 48. $14.9STR 
(0-06 024528 X)
$14.8918 (0 06-024529-8)
Joanna cotler Books
Also byjamie Lee Curtis
and Laura Cornell
WHEN I WAS LITTLE
A Four-Year-Old's
Memoir of Her Youth
Ages4 48.
$1 
4.95TR (0 06-021078-8)
$1 
4.89LB 
(0.06.021079-6)
$4.9SPB 
(0-06-443423.0)
~ Kirkus RevieLus 
pointer
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
IMAGINATION AND SCHOLARSHIP:
THt CONTRIBUTION OF WOMEN TO
AMERICAN YOUTh SERVICES AND LITERATURe
EDITED bY KArMN PATRICIA SMITH
LIbRARY TRteos 44l) SPRING 1996
WITn ConTRIbUTIOs5 BY
CaiSTIEM A. JEneMis. MARGARVT 
Bun. LYMt 
S. CoctTT. AMe D. CARLSOM. 
BTSY HItARe.
K*AY . V\AMoectiCT, Amwe LUnIw, AMD JAmt AMet 1AIIIGAM
FOCUSING OM Tlt APPROACtI, ACCOMPLIS1MtNTS, 
AMD DETtRMINATIOM 
or Tilt WOMEN
WHO hAVE •tLPtD TO DEOrmt 
YOUTh SERVICtS AID LITtEATURt IN AMfRICA.
MARGARtT K. MCELDERI
trnt Louist PowER
ZtEA SUTHntLAMD
MItERVA SAMDERS
BERTiA MAMOMY
ALICt JORDA
LUTIE 
t STtAR*S
CAROLIME hEWIMS
VIRGIMIA 
hAVILAMD
AMMN 
CARROLL MOORt
Available from
The Uriversity of Illinois Press / Journals Department
1325 South Oak Street / Champaign, IL 61820
217/333-0950
$18.50
Visa and Mastercard accepted
I 11-0611 
H11 
)03
0008-9036(199611)50:3*;1-0
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
\------ 
----
M--
I
