T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
January 2014
Vol. 67   No. 5
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 67 (2014).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $60.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$100.00 (print); $110.00 (online);  
$140.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
January 2014
Vol. 67 No. 5
253  the BIg PICture
 
  To Dare Mighty Things: The Life of Theodore Roosevelt  by Doreen Rappa-
port; illus. by C. F. Payne
254  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
255 • The Impossible Knife of Memory  by Laurie Halse Anderson
260 • The Country of Wolves  ad. by Neil Christopher; illus. by Ramón Pérez
265 • Five, Six, Seven, Nate!  by Tim Federle
271 • Here I Am  by Patti Kim; illus. by Sonia Sánchez
287 •  Here Comes the Easter Cat  by Deborah Underwood; illus. by Claudia 
Rueda
292  2013 BuLLetIn BLue rIBBons
296  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer (TA)
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Kim Naples, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $100.00 or electronic $110.00; combined print & electronic $140.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00; students, $20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for 
postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available 
in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes avail-
able in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription 
checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin 
of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2014 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from To Dare Mighty Things: The Life of Theodore Roosevelt ©2013 by C. F. Payne and 
used by permission of Disney Hyperion Books.
January 2014 • 253
the BIg PICture
To Dare Mighty Things: The Life  
of Theodore Roosevelt
by Doreen Rappaport; illustrated by Bryan Collier
Surely there must be a muse in charge of connecting subject with biographer—that 
would account for such notable pairings as Isaac Newton with Kathleen Krull (Isaac 
Newton, BCCB 5/06), or Charles and Emma Darwin with Deborah Heiligman 
(Charles and Emma, BCCB 2/09). Now Theodore Roosevelt, whose outsized life 
demands an oversized format, and whose audacious pronouncements demand a 
biographer willing to let him speak for himself, finds his way into Doreen Rap-
paport’s Big Words series, and the matchmaking goddess scores again.
Roosevelt was arguably the most frenetic of U.S. Presidents, and his re-
nowned energy and multitudinous enthusiasms—both personal and political—are 
admirably conveyed in the litany of efforts and accomplishments compressed into 
this fast-moving text. On route to the Big Achievements of TR’s life—San Juan 
Hill, conservation advocacy, and of course the U.S. Presidency—Rappaport can 
only pause briefly at such career highlights as his civil service shake-up (“Republican 
lawmakers . . . sighed with relief when Teddy left”) and his stint as New York Police 
Commissioner (a new set of “Republican lawmakers . . . sighed with relief when 
Teddy left”). The very speed at which political appointments and elected offices 
fly past is a vital characteristic of TR’s life, and if readers are left a bit breathless, 
so much the better.
While the overall tone of the narration could be described as amused awe 
at Roosevelt’s expansive and largely realized progressive agenda, his questionable 
judgment concerning war with Spain over Cuba and his overreach of authority in 
Panama are addressed as well: “Roosevelt wanted to buy land in Panama to build 
a canal connecting the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. Panama’s government refused. 
. . . ‘I took the Canal Zone and let Congress debate; while the debate goes on, the 
canal does also.’” Political bluster and bravado are balanced with attention to TR’s 
domestic life, though, and here readers meet a down-to-earth kid to whom they can 
relate: “He collected animal and bird specimens and created a museum in his room. 
He smelled. The whole house smelled. ‘All growing boys tend to be grubby; but 
the ornithological boy is the grubbiest of all.’” It’s no wonder TR would grow into 
the man known for the rambunctiousness of his White House sojourn: “Evenings 
often ended with pillow fights, wrestling matches, and throwing water balloons off 
the roof. [Wife] Edith said that Teddy was her seventh child.”
A strong current of humor also runs through Payne’s grittily textured 
mixed-media paintings. There’s heroism in the composition of the Rough Riders’ 
254 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
charge up San Juan Hill, but it’s equally clear that Roosevelt was loving every min-
ute of the battle: “The charge itself was great fun. Oh, but we had a bully fight.” 
An inventive spread wryly suggests a touch of ambivalence as outdoorsman Teddy 
approaches his marriage among New York gentility with both feet rooted in a 
Western scene, while his elbow inches across the gutter into a landscape of urban 
townhouses. In a clever political satire that again alludes to Roosevelt’s affinity to 
the West, a tiny TR lassos the money-clutching fist of a Big Trust, and in a scene 
that’s bound to be a reader favorite, the White House is tipped on an angle as the 
Roosevelt kids stilt-walk and leapfrog down the hallway while a pet guinea pig 
sprints off the lower corner of the page.
Appended timeline, quotation sources, and suggestions for further read-
ing will certainly assist readers bent on grinding this title into book report fodder. 
However, considering Roosevelt’s claim, “I don’t think any President ever enjoyed 
himself more than I did,” perhaps the greatest tribute readers can offer him is to 
simply share his delight. (See p. 279 for publication information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
Aesop Aesop’s Fables; ad. by Martin West; illus. by Ayano Imai. Minedition, 
2013 25p
ISBN 978-988-8240-52-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Elegant, spare prose and stunning, imaginative illustrations breathe new life into 
old tales in this collection of Aesop’s fables. The book opens and reads vertically, 
rather than the standard horizontal approach of most picture books; each story 
is illustrated with a full-page scene and smaller, related spot art clustered around 
the text, a layout kept airy by snowy white space, a subtle palette, and a slender, 
refined font. Many of the compositions employ unusual perspectives or intriguing 
details: in “The Lion and the Mouse,” for example, it’s not only the lion hang-
ing in a net; there are also nets containing a fish, a butterfly, and a man reading a 
newspaper. In “The Fox and the Grapes,” a dreamy, Magritte-like scene depicts 
the titular fox hovering above the floor in a forest-green room in which a plate 
floats above a checkered table, clouds drift through the windows, and the grapes 
sprout downward from the ceiling. The selected fables range from the well-known 
(“The Tortoise and the Hare,” “The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse”) to 
the more obscure (“The Ox and the Frog,” “The Stag at the Pool”). The morals  
January 2014 • 255
are interpolated explicitly or implicitly into the fables themselves rather than being 
easily identifiable taglines, but adults and kids with previous Aesop experience can 
easily bridge that gap if they wish, and the pictures are definitely worth the price 
of admission.  JH
Almond, dAvid The True Tale of the Monster Billy Dean Telt by Hisself. Candle-
wick, 2014 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6309-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6725-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Billy Dean is born on the day suicide bombers decimate his home city of Blink-
bonny. Miraculously, he and his mother are unharmed, but his father, for reasons 
of his own, decides that Billy must be reared in secret. Thus Billy grows up in a 
single locked room, attended to by his loving but simple mother; his unbalanced 
father, who visits only occasionally, brings with him stories, lessons, and the belief 
that his miracle child will have preternatural insight given the circumstances of 
his birth and his isolated upbringing. When his father leaves town, his mother 
brings thirteen-year-old Billy out into the world with the help of the local butcher 
and the woman who had served as midwife at his birth; while the butcher offers 
fatherly affection, Missus Malone seeks to exploit Billy, believing, like his father, 
that he has special gifts for communicating with the dead and healing the sick. Sure 
enough, Billy does appear to have some powers, but the mantle of responsibility 
they incur does not rest easily with him, and his father’s mental instability has not 
yet finished inflicting its damage. Billy’s story is told entirely through invented 
phonetic spelling, which, while always comprehensible, slows the reading down 
and enhances the sense of Billy’s vulnerability in a confusing and devastated world. 
His ability to find surreal beauty in strange things, such as the dead mice he lov-
ingly dissects in his room, hearkens back to Almond’s treatment of Skellig (Skellig, 
BCCB 3/99) and Heaven Eyes (Heaven Eyes, BCCB 4/01), and the message is also 
similar: wonder and loveliness can be recovered from the ashes of festering evil. 
Billy’s innocence doesn’t save him from that evil, but his steadfast ability to find 
goodness, beauty, love, and mystery in the darkest places lights the way forward, 
for himself and readers alike.  KC
Anderson, lAurie HAlse The Impossible Knife of Memory. Viking, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01209-1 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
Spending senior year in an actual high school instead of on the road in her dad’s 
rig wasn’t Hayley’s idea; she’s not thrilled about trying to fit in at school, and 
she’s deeply worried about leaving her alcoholic, PTSD-ridden father alone while 
she’s out. School turns out to have its compensations: some good friends, some 
teacherly recognition of her writing talent despite her undisciplined approach, and 
appealing, geeky Finn, who’s trying to convince Hayley to write for his projected 
newspaper—and to go out with him as well. Guarded Hayley gradually falls for 
Finn, even letting him know the truth about her family, but her anxiety about her 
father’s downward spiral begins to take over her life. Anderson depicts with lacerating 
clarity Hayley’s secondhand PTSD, with threat assessment a part of her daily life; 
Hayley’s lucid yet emotional narration ensures the experience is immersive rather 
256 • The BulleTin
than didactic (the book never actually diagnoses her), so readers will begin to share 
her defensive reactions and self-protective thinking. Her father is both infuriating 
and fearfully broken, making Hayley’s blend of frustration and hypervigilance ab-
solutely plausible, while interspersed flashbacks to her father’s wartime experience 
add a further dimension. Anderson never limits her characters to being merely a 
type, and the growth of Hayley’s romance with Finn takes its own interesting path; 
the subplot about her stormy relationship with her father’s ex-girlfriend, essentially 
a stepmother to Hayley, demonstrates the fragility at the heart of her defenses. The 
book offers an eloquent portrait of the effects of both war and family legacies, and 
many readers will find reflections of their own struggle to keep family connections 
while obtaining their independence.  DS
BeAty, dAniel Knock Knock: My Dad’s Dream for Me; illus. by Bryan Col-
lier. Little, 2013 40p
ISBN 978-0-316-20917-5 $18.00   
R 5-8 yrs
A young African-American boy and his father have a morning routine: Papa knocks 
on the door while son pretends to be asleep, until Dad comes to investigate. “Then 
I get up and jump into his arms. ‘Good morning, Papa!’” One day, however, the 
knock never comes; increasingly missing his father as the days go by, the boy writes 
a letter and leaves it on his desk, pleading for his dad to come home (“Papa, come 
home, ’cause I want to be just like you, but I’m forgetting who you are”) and teach 
him the things he’s not yet learned. Two months later, Papa’s return letter explains 
that he won’t be coming home and offers his son advice on growing up. Adapted 
from a piece of spoken-word poetry, the text is both sturdy and expressive (“As 
you grow older, shave in one direction with strong, deliberate strokes to avoid ir-
ritation”), although the tugging at heartstrings seems a little deliberate. Collier’s 
collage and watercolor illustrations blend realism and the imaginative in a highly 
textured world—when the boy writes to his father, he’s seen gliding off over the 
city on a folded paper airplane—and they effectively convey the labor of building 
after a loss as the boy moves through childhood to adulthood (literally becoming 
a builder as well as building his own family). The lack of specifics allows the book 
to reflect parental absence for any number of reasons (travel, incarceration, divorce, 
etc.) and thus makes this a freer-floating counterpoint to Collins’ wartime-absence 
story Year of the Jungle (BCCB 10/13). The intimate nature of the text and the 
detailed visual environment are more suited for close sharing than a storytime, but 
the book’s versatility suggests that it will see extended use.  TA
BenwAy, roBin Going Rogue. Walker, 2014 [320p] (Also Known As)
ISBN 978-0-8027-3604-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Maggie (from Also Known As, BCCB 9/13) has been reveling in the first normal 
year of her life—complete with a best friend, Roux, and a most excellent boyfriend, 
Jesse—after completing an important assignment with the Collective, a private 
covert organization dedicated to fighting corruption throughout the world. Now, 
however, the Collective itself is rotting from corruption, with Maggie’s parents 
and other agents being framed by insiders for thefts they didn’t commit. Need we 
explain that it’s up to Maggie to run a solo mission this time around to defend her 
parents’ reputations and save the lives of family and friends? The spy-caper plotting 
January 2014 • 257
is a bit thinner than that of Benway’s series debut, but what it lacks in intricacy it 
makes up for in strengthened relationships among and characterizations of Maggie, 
Roux, and Jesse. Maggie continues to be a self-deprecatingly funny heroine, and 
her two besties rise well beyond their status as sidekicks to strong, loving friends 
with plausible episodes of balking at involvement with Maggie’s perilous life. Teens 
who appreciate the old school romantic capers in the tradition of Charade and the 
Pink Panther movies will happily nuke a bag of microwave popcorn and settle in 
for an entertaining, kissing-intensive romp.  EB
BisHArA, Cristin Relativity. Walker, 2013 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3468-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3469-3 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10 
Still reeling from her father’s sudden remarriage and the resulting move from San 
Francisco to the rural fields of Ohio, sixteen-year-old Ruby Wright finds herself 
wishing for a different life. When she discovers a portal hidden inside a mysteri-
ous tree that allows her to access alternative realities, Ruby jumps at the chance to 
explore how her life might have turned out: without an unbalanced, violent new 
stepsister, with a caring mother who is still around, with a protective older brother 
she never knew, with her best friend George as more than a friend. As Ruby moves 
between worlds looking for the perfect life, though, she begins to realize that the 
portal may not be as stable as she hoped, and when her mother unexpectedly learns 
that this Ruby isn’t the girl she raised, Ruby must face the truth that in taking a 
life she wants, she may be destroying someone else’s. This absorbing exploration 
of what-ifs offers a pleasing mixture of science and emotional depth. Ruby’s inter-
est in theoretical physics provides plenty of opportunity for readers to learn about 
wormholes, parallel universes, and string theory, but the text as a whole avoids get-
ting bogged down in the details of methodology. Instead, the core story is Ruby’s 
emotional journey as she learns to let go of what might have been and to embrace 
the possibilities in the imperfect life she has. Avoiding both mawkish sentimentality 
and overthinking its premise, this simple, straightforward novel has appeal for fans 
of both science fiction and narratives of personal discovery.  AM
BloCk, FrAnCesCA liA Teen Spirit. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-200809-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223916-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
When her grandmother dies and her mother loses her job, Julie feels lost and un-
certain. She finds some comfort in her new friend, Clark, but her heart still aches 
for her grandmother, and she convinces Clark to help her attempt contact using a 
Ouija board. They release a spirit, but instead of her grandmother’s, it’s the restless 
ghost of Clark’s recently deceased twin brother Grant, who takes over Clark’s body. 
Since Grant was always the confident, assertive twin, Julie finds herself attracted to 
Clark’s body when Grant’s controlling it; his self-assurance brings the sexy to Clark’s 
endearing awkwardness, completing the package. Grant’s intentions, though, are 
not benevolent, and both Julie and Clark have to find a way to let go of the ones 
they love. Block’s sensual language and strong evocation of place embroider this 
tale of unresolved grief with an overlay of subtle and delicate creepiness. This is less 
258 • The BulleTin
agonizing than some of Block’s recent work and less horrific than some evil twin 
stories, but it’s nonetheless haunted with familiar sinister character types, thereby 
coloring reader expectations with a quiet dread. The substantive emotional trajec-
tory, though, is that of a person working through profound loss; neither Julie nor 
Clark is strong or resolute on his or her own, but together they help each other past 
the emotional deadlock that has them in its grip. Block has a knack for compos-
ing supportive friendships that draw on complementary qualities; romance aside, 
Julie and Clark are friends first and last, and that friendship proves the key to their 
ultimate passage through turbulent times.  KC
Bolden, tonyA Searching for Sarah Rector: The Richest Black Girl in Ameri-
ca. Abrams, 2014 76p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-4197-0846-6 $21.96   
Ad Gr. 6-10
When the last of Indian Territory dissolved and Oklahoma became a state, Joseph 
and Rose Rector and their oldest children became entitled to claim land allotments 
as black members of the Creek Tribe. Most of the nonadjacent parcels would be 
sold or used for farming, but young Sarah’s tract was leased to a wildcat oilman 
who hit a gusher. Almost overnight Sarah was rich on royalties from the oil lease, 
and with that wealth came decisions about who should manage her money—an 
issue complicated by the custom of removing guardianship from “ignorant” black 
parents and entrusting it to white businessmen. When Sarah’s exact whereabouts 
temporarily came into question, her story became a flashpoint for angry accusations 
by black leaders and raised the profile of other children whose unexpected wealth 
made them vulnerable to grafters. Sarah’s situation is certainly compelling, and the 
extraordinary circumstances behind her fortune fire the imagination. Unfortunately, 
there’s so little information about the girl herself that she becomes a passive player 
in this drama, eliciting little reader empathy or interest. The complexities of land-
leasing arrangements and guardianships are handled with clarity and considerable 
verve, but the technical focus also buries the more dramatic aspects of the tale. Still, 
Bolden’s remarks on tracking down Sarah’s story will appeal to those who enjoy 
untangling historical mysteries; glossary, index, source notes, and bibliography are 
included.  EB
CApettA, Amy rose Entangled. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2013 330p
ISBN 978-0-544-08744-6 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Growing up isolated and alone on an alien planet, seventeen-year-old Cade has 
had little more than constant Noise in her head for company. One night the Noise 
suddenly stops, and Cade learns the meaning of its cessation: Xan, a boy with whom 
she is entangled at a quantum level, has woken from his fifteen-year coma. A sud-
den, intimate connection to a boy she’s never met proves strangely comforting but 
problematic, especially when Xan is kidnapped by aliens, and now Cade is off on 
a desperate quest to save him. Along the way, she forms alliances and makes a few 
unexpected friends: Lee, the black-market messenger; Rennick, the outlaw alien 
pilot and his living ship Renna; and Ayumi, a spacesick collector of remnants from 
Earth. Together they make their way cautiously to a black-hole-riddled part of the 
universe called Hades, where they hope to unite the entangled pair. This first entry 
in a new series applies an intriguing scientific premise to one girl’s emotional journey, 
and the result is a rollicking space adventure perfect for fans of the cult-classic TV 
January 2014 • 259
show Firefly. The science is light (and sometimes specious) but it works service-
ably enough as a pretext for the plot. The focus here is on action, which picks up 
early and never slows down, and on Cade’s gradual shift from self-defensive loner 
to interconnected friend and compatriot. The slang-heavy writing style is at times 
awkward, but the sense of a space-based vernacular strengthens the world-building 
and adds spice to the narrative palette. The strongest draw is the ensemble cast, 
a quirky, friendly, memorable crew that readers will happily follow into further 
adventures in expected sequels.  AM
CHimA, CindA williAms The Enchanter Heir. Hyperion, 2013 455p (Heir 
Chronicles)
ISBN 978-1-4231-4434-2 $18.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
When Jonah was seven, a mysterious mass poisoning swept through the Thorn Hill 
commune, leaving the adults dead and most of the children either dead or altered, 
their innate magical abilities mutated in unpredictable ways. Jonah himself, for 
instance, can kill with a soothing, bliss-filled touch. Gabriel Mandrake has formed 
a school for the survivors near Trinity, Ohio, where, as readers of the first three 
Heir Chronicles (The Warrior Heir, BCCB 7/06, etc.) will recall, the Weir Council 
has formed a shaky peace among the still suspicious and antagonistic guilds. Now, 
however, wizards are being killed, and Gabriel has assembled a group of young as-
sassins to dispatch the undead spirits of Jonah’s commune, who have also migrated 
to Ohio and are seeking bodies to possess. Jonah excels at this task, but he’s having 
second thoughts about both Gabriel’s motives and his tactics. While compulsively 
readable and full of features that make readers glom on to the paranormal romances, 
this entry has a good many gaps in the world-building that will leave even commit-
ted readers frustrated. New terminology regarding the guilds is introduced without 
explanation, the timeline doesn’t clearly correlate to the other books’, and the ending 
offers no intermediate closure. The romance is also problematic: Emma, a girl who 
somehow survived the Thorn Hill Massacre with no knowledge of the Weir world 
of which her parents were a part, placidly accepts the new information about her 
heritage without so much as a blink and inexplicably falls in love with Jonah while 
he is tying her up and setting out to interrogate her father. These flaws may not 
bother readers previously blinded by sparkly vampires, but as those readers are less 
likely to commit to series as complex as this one, expect some mild disappointment 
along with howling clamors for the next book.  KC
CHristopHer, luCy 
The Killing Woods. 
Chicken House/Scholastic, 
2014 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46100-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-57671-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Emily is positive that her father didn’t kill her schoolmate, Ashlee, in a post-traumatic 
flashback to his war experience, but she’s the only one, especially after he pleads 
guilty to manslaughter. Damon, Ashlee’s boyfriend, is devastated by Ashlee’s death 
and haunted by his inability to remember the events surrounding it due to drugs 
and booze. As narration alternates between the two teens, it becomes clear that 
Ashlee’s death involves what Damon and his friends, including Ashlee, call “the 
Game,” an adrenaline-soaked interval of pursuit and physical combat in the deep 
260 • The BulleTin
woods. Emily and Damon each fear the worst—Emily her father’s culpability and 
Damon his own—yet they’re compelled to seek the truth about Ashlee’s death. 
The technical side of the mystery is murky and implausible (and occasionally 
preachy), but when the story moves into the secrets of the Game (which Damon 
dubs their “own private Fight Club in the woods”) and the shame and doubt of 
the protagonists, it takes off into a creepy and atmospheric psychological puzzler. 
Ashlee is a tantalizing figure, and her sexually charged take on the Game amplifies 
the uneasy and disturbing tone of what’s already a feral pastime. While not as taut 
as the author’s Stolen (BCCB 6/10), the book offers plenty of tension and secrecy, 
making it a satisfyingly escapist piece of realism.  DS
CHristopHer, neil, ad. The Country of Wolves; illus. by Ramón Pérez. Inhabit 
Media Inc., 2013 83p
ISBN 978-1-927095-04-1 $24.95   
R* Gr. 8-12
Two brothers hunting for seal in the Arctic end up trapped on an ice floe that 
carries them far from home, into a strange village. After the pair splits up to look 
for help, the elder brother encounters a strange old woman, who informs him that 
the siblings have come to the Country of Wolves, where wolves shift in and out of 
human form, and that his brother is likely already dead. She offers him her magical 
sagguut—a pole that will point him in the direction of home—and encourages him 
to leave the unsafe place. He escapes, pursued by the wolf people, and is able to 
shoot the leader with an arrow on the trek, which throws the rest of the pack into 
chaos. The brother returns home to his wife and curls up by the fire—only to be 
proven already dead, his decomposing body compelled to make it home one last 
time. Based on an animated short film and adapted from an Inuit tale, this graphic 
novel employs tight language that evokes oral storytelling to produce a tangibly 
creepy atmosphere (“In this light she appeared savage, lupine, inhuman”). This 
effect is enhanced by the illustrations, which employs the thick black lining and 
saturated color of comic books modified by digital effects to create hazy landscapes 
and a luminescent moon and by an often cold-hued palette. The eerie wolf people 
are indistinct, feral shadows with glowing eyes and sharp, ghostlike fangs. A truly 
chilling tale that will entrance fans of both horror and folklore, this is an intriguing 
example of oldest stories translated into newest media. A detailed source note and 
a DVD of the film in both English and North Baffin Inuktitut are included.  TA
CHristopHer, niCHolAs The True Adventures of Nicolò Zen.  Knopf, 
2014 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96738-2 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86738-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89786-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
When malaria wipes out Nicolò’s small Italian village in 1714, the fourteen-year-
old boy makes his way to Venice to find refuge in the Ospedale della Pietà, an 
all-girls orphanage and music conservatory led by Antonio Vivaldi. A pretty dress 
and Nicolò’s high cheekbones allow him to pass as a girl, while his talent with 
the clarinet (a gift passed down from his father and supposedly enchanted by a 
magician) lands Nicolò, now Nicolà, a place in the privileggiate di coro, Vivaldi’s 
January 2014 • 261
elite orchestra. The jig is up when the orphanage’s caretaker, who is also attempt-
ing to hire out some of the girls to Venice’s seedier residents, recognizes Nicolà’s 
more manly qualities and promptly sends him packing. The enchanted clarinet 
and Nicolò’s easy charm then bring him both fortune and fame over the next two 
years as a solo act for some of Europe’s wealthiest nobles, but he remains plagued 
by worries about the beautiful girl he left behind at the orphanage. Decadent with 
period detail as it is, this is still a surprisingly speedy read, and Christopher manages 
to capture both the beauty and the bawdiness of eighteenth-century Venice while 
moving his protagonist through a satisfyingly folkloric tale of gender-bending and 
supernatural music. Nicolò’s memoir-like narration gives equal emotional weight 
to the hallmarks of adolescence—the loss of virginity, a first hangover—as to his 
more grand moments, as in his performance for the archduke of Austria. Nicolò’s 
decision to eventually lose the enchanted clarinet and make a name by his own 
skills, unassisted by magic, is admirable but not overwrought, while his happy 
reunion with his first love provides a tidily romantic conclusion. History buffs, 
aspiring musicians, and armchair travelers will find Nicolò’s adventures just to 
their liking.  KQG 
CokAl, susAnn The Kingdom of Little Wounds; illus. by Pier Gustafson. Candle-
wick, 2013 554p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6694-1 $22.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6907-2 $22.99   
R* Gr. 10-12
Court life in sixteenth-century Scandinavia is brought to exquisite and horrifying 
life in this tale of three fictional women: Isabel, the unstable, syphilitic queen; Ava 
Bingen, the demoted seamstress struggling to improve her station; and Midi Sorte, 
the bitter black slave whose tongue has been cut in half, rendering her mute. Midi 
and Ava tell their own stories, Midi having been taught to write by the court historian 
who has fallen in love with her, and Ava, a favorite raconteur in the palace nursery 
who threads her account with wisps of fairy tales, some of which are expanded 
in interstitial chapters throughout the book. The events at court are recounted in 
richly detailed prose that renders immediate the sights and smells of a time when 
science was deeply intertwined with superstition and politics was a blood sport. 
Queen Isabel has passed syphilis onto her young children, but their symptoms are 
exacerbated by the cures that she and her doctors have devised; Midi and Ava are 
vulnerable to Nicolas, a man with ambitions that he ruthlessly pursues until he has 
nearly achieved his ends. The women endure threats, brutality, rape, and shocking 
invasions of privacy as a matter of course and yet emerge canny and wise, reshaping 
history as the story of their own survival and self-interest in a world where they 
are seen as mere functionaries—if seen at all. The novel demands and rewards full 
immersion in its account of the everyday life, beliefs, and medical practices of the 
royals, and readers will definitely come away with a (dis)taste for the cultural his-
tory of the Renaissance. The author’s note is as playful as it is informative regarding 
what is true and what is fabricated as Cokal skillfully and unapologetically blurs 
the lines between fairy tale and history.  KC 
262 • The BulleTin
dAsHner, JAmes  The Eye of Minds.  Delacorte, 2013 310p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99001-4 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74139-2 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98463-1 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Like most people in his world, sixteen-year-old Michael spends nearly all of his 
free time in the VirtNet, an immersive virtual reality that offers the best of both 
reality and fantasy without any of the consequences. Now, though, a cyber-terrorist 
named Kaine is trapping players in the Sleep, wiping their brains and leaving their 
real-world bodies comatose. Unable to stop him, the government has turned to 
talented hacker/gamers like Michael to fight Kaine’s skills with their own. Their 
curiosity piqued by the challenge, Michael and his two best friends follow a trail 
of underground gossip to the Path, a set of challenges that leads to Kaine’s virtual 
hideout. Just as they begin to succeed against the Path’s obstacles, Michael realizes 
that Kaine is hiding an important secret that connects them, one that might con-
vince Michael to change sides. Strongly reminiscent of Neal Stephenson’s cyberpunk 
classic Snow Crash, this high-intensity science fiction adventure emphasizes suspense 
from its very first scene and never lets up. Fans of video games, especially quest and 
puzzle-platforms like Portal, will revel in the mission-based narrative, while readers 
enjoyed Doctorow’s Little Brother (BCCB 2/08) or Falkner’s Brain Jack (BCCB 9/10) 
will find themselves at home in the hacker-friendly cyber-setting. Characterization 
isn’t deep, but the relationship between Michael and his friends provides plenty 
of playful banter. A last-minute twist subverts everything the reader knows about 
Michael, provides the perfect set-up for expected sequels, and makes for a bomb-
shell ending that will have readers rereading and then coming back for more.  AM
de GrAmont, ninA Meet Me at the River. Atheneum, 2013 376p
ISBN 978-1-4169-8014-8 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Tressa and Luke were in love since childhood, planning to spend the rest of their 
lives together despite the fact that Tressa’s mother, Hannah, was married to Luke’s 
father, and Luke and Tressa shared half-siblings. When Luke drowns, Tressa can’t 
bear the pain and attempts suicide. Though she is saved, her grief lingers, salved only 
by trysts with the shade of Luke, who finds himself able to visit and sometimes even 
touch Tressa. Chapters alternate between Luke’s recollections and Tressa’s present as 
Tressa fights to keep Luke in her life while everyone tells her she has to move on. 
Echoes of Wuthering Heights infuse this tale (Tressa’s grandparents are even named 
Earnshaw), which is richly steeped in a Colorado landscape as wild and enticing as 
Catherine and Heathcliff’s moors. Unlike that classic romance, however, this one 
is ultimately committed to Tressa’s emotional healing. The book tackles the thorny 
issue of suicide from multiple angles, from Tressa’s becoming friends with siblings 
whose father killed himself to an English project on Sylvia Plath, Assia Wevill, 
and Ted Hughes. The complex portrait of Hannah, a woman who refuses to live 
without her own idea of romance and freedom no matter what the cost to those 
who love her, pulls a subtle thread of both understanding and judgment through 
Tressa’s actions. An unfortunate accumulation of final thoughts and perspectives 
mars the power of the ending, but readers will find emotional and psychological 
truth in Tressa’s struggle to let go without forgetting.  KC 
January 2014 • 263
de lA Cruz, melissA Frozen; by Melissa de la Cruz and Michael Johnston. Put-
nam, 2013 [336p] (Heart of Dread)
ISBN 978-0-399-25754-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In the seedy hustle and bustle of post-apocalyptic New Vegas, sixteen-year-old 
Natasha Ketsal finds a perfect hiding spot, dealing blackjack to big rollers while 
keeping her head down and her Mark—the flame-shaped one that marks her as a 
magic-wielder—covered. The voice in her head, however, insists that she find her 
way to the Blue, a mythical paradise where the sun still shines and plants still grow, 
the supposed salvation for anyone looking to escape the frozen, toxic wasteland 
the rest of the world has become. She therefore hires Wes, at nineteen already a 
seasoned former soldier for the RSA (the Remaining States of America), and his 
crew of mercenaries to take her safely through Garbage Country and across the 
poisonous sludge that was once the ocean to the rumored location of the door to the 
Blue. The vivid descriptions of a world gone awry and the threat of an all-watching 
government are familiar dystopic elements, but the appearances of sea monsters, the 
Fair Folk, and magical dwarves are a bit more surprising. The resulting mash-up of 
tropes gives this plenty of cross-genre appeal, and the fantasy element is carefully 
interwoven, with subtle clues hinting at the true identity of the voice Nat hears 
inside her head. Nat and Wes, too, are more complex than they initially appear 
to be; their individual searches for redemption for past wrongdoings are moving, 
particularly when they find forgiveness in each other. The ending gets a bit chaotic 
with an all-out dragon vs. military fight, but a new quest points towards a sequel; 
readers will want to strap on their snowshoes to tag along.  KQG 
demetrios, HeAtHer Something Real. Holt, 2014 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9794-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Formerly known as Bonnie Baker (or, to be technical, Bonnie™Baker) and the 
troubled daughter in the country’s favorite reality series, Chloe is just trying to 
get through senior year unidentified and unconnected to her past. She’s therefore 
horrified to find that her mother and stepfather have committed the family, in-
cluding all thirteen children, to participation in a new series (Baker’s Dozen: Fresh 
Batch) and that the crew are back filming their every move. Since filming and its 
consequences (like her father’s departure from the family) drove Chloe to a suicide 
attempt four years ago, she’s understandably desperate to avoid experiencing the 
trauma all over again. Chloe’s narration paints a lacerating picture of the way she’s 
been shaped and twisted by her lifelong requirement to please the camera, and the 
book effectively captures her sometimes complicated relationship with the show 
and its staff (part of the family one day, gone without a word the next). Her real 
rage, though, is directed toward the adults who’ve essentially sold the kids out to 
fund a dream of a large family (her mother is explicit about the new series being a 
financial decision) and who dismiss Chloe’s very reasonable need for some privacy 
and autonomy as being “camera-shy.” Chloe’s repeated overwrought self-sacrifice 
makes her seem more drama-queeny than damaged, however, and the pacing drags, 
undermining the momentum of the overall story; her romance with a unbeliev-
ably ideal boy is also jarringly at odds with the rest of the book’s thorny emotional 
264 • The BulleTin
realism. The story will still grab readers, though, so pair this with King’s Reality 
Boy (BCCB 10/13) for a discussion of life under the lens—and the irony of our 
absorption with it even in fictional books about its ills.  DS 
douGlAs, Helen After Eden. Bloomsbury, 2013 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-61963-130-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Sixteen-year-old Eden leads a fairly ordinary life in her seaside Cornwall village, 
attending school, studying for exams, and hanging out with friends. When gorgeous 
new guy Ryan Westland appears halfway through the school year, Eden is instantly 
intrigued, but a few things about him don’t add up. Eventually she uncovers a 
shocking truth: Ryan is from the future, on a mission to stop Eden’s best friend 
Connor from making a discovery that will eventually lead to the Earth’s destruc-
tion. Initially heartbroken, Eden is soon drawn into the secret conspiracy to thwart 
Connor’s find in an effort to save humanity. Complicating matters are Connor’s 
unrequited feelings for Eden, Ryan’s growing attraction to her, and Eden’s seeming 
inability to keep a secret. When she hints to the wrong people that she knows more 
about the future than she should, she endangers not just the mission but the lives 
of everyone around her and the future of the Earth itself. What’s on offer here is 
essentially a science fiction version of paranormal romance, as the story focuses on 
the burgeoning relationship between Eden and Ryan more than the underlying 
concept. Fans of the genre will recognize its conventions, including a super-average 
heroine, an extraordinary hero, a love triangle, and otherworldly obstacles for the 
couple to overcome, and they will likely delight in the time-travel take on a narra-
tive they love. Those willing to suspend disbelief and scientific skepticism for the 
joy of the ride will find themselves swept up in Eden’s adventure and excited for 
expected sequels.  AM
downer, Ann Wild Animal Neighbors: Sharing Our Urban World. Twenty-First 
Century Books, 2014 64p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-9021-3 $33.27
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1663-5 $24.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Downer profiles eight species of animals that frequently come into contact with 
urban or suburban humans and explores the reasons why their territories overlap 
with humans, the problems that result, and the efforts being made to solve those 
problems. The animals profiled (raccoon, mountain lion, coyote) are mostly found 
in North America, but a look at jungle crows in Japan and gray-headed flying foxes 
in Australia offers some international fare as well. The content holds obvious appeal, 
and Downer’s presentation is clear and engaging. The story of Adrian, a coyote 
who wandered into a Chicago Quizno’s sub shop will intrigue rural and urban kids 
alike, as will the account of twenty-one alligators being caught in a ten-day span in 
a town in Texas after flood conditions encouraged the gators to become more active 
in their movements. Some of the book’s design is a bit clunky, but the illustrative 
photos are crisp and well chosen, while large sidebars highlight vital statistics and 
other valuable tidbits about each species. An epilogue and map in the back point to 
other significant urban wildlife situations; source and photo notes, bibliographies, 
and an index are also included in this useful and thought-provoking book that 
will be a hit with city-dwelling animal lovers and wannabe wildlife scientists.  JH
January 2014 • 265
FArmer, nAnCy  The Lord of Opium. Jackson/Atheneum, 2013 411p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8254-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8256-2 $12.99   
Ad Gr. 7-12
El Patrón, the ruthless ruler of Opium (in The House of the Scorpion, BCCB 2/02), 
is dead, and suddenly fourteen-year-old Matteo Alacrán, once a disposable clone 
of El Patrón good only for spare organs, is expected to rule in his place. With few 
allies at home, Matt must rely on the reluctant Cienfuegos, who only wants Matt 
to become another El Patrón, while on the borders, foreign armies wait anxiously 
for their chance to end Opium’s drug trade and raid its lush lands to replenish 
their own ravaged ecologies. Matt, meanwhile, wants nothing more than to free 
the workers from their zombie-like servitude and reunite with his beloved Maria. 
He knows that his only hope to save himself and his nation is to explore El Patrón’s 
dark scientific achievements, but visits to various secret laboratories reveal yet more 
dangers: power-mad scientists, violent, mentally damaged clones, and a biosphere 
full of workers with no knowledge of the outside world. Frustrated by his limited 
choices, Matt eventually teams up with Cienfuegos and a young girl named Listen 
to overthrow Opium’s dark past and prove himself a leader for its future. Picking 
up only moments after its predecessor, this narrative offers an intriguing sequel 
that unfortunately doesn’t reach the level of the previous title. Farmer succeeds in 
providing just enough detail to allow unfamiliar readers to follow the plot, but any 
emotional connection to Matt as a character remains grounded in the initial story. 
While Matt continues the worthy thematic struggle of figuring out who he is under 
the shadow of what others want him to be, he eventually becomes little more than 
a vessel by which to explore El Patrón’s vicious legacy, a focus that diffuses energy 
and slows pacing. New characters are compelling, though, and readers who wonder 
how Matt survives the aftermath of El Patrón’s death will likely be relieved by the 
success he finds in the end.  AM 
Federle, tim Five, Six, Seven, Nate! Simon, 2014 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4693-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4696-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
When readers last saw Nate Foster, the Broadway-obsessed, small-town thirteen-
year-old protagonist of Better Nate than Ever (BCCB 2/13), he’d just answered 
a phone call from a casting director with bated breath. Now Nate is on his way 
to live with his aunt Heidi in New York as understudy (well, second understudy) 
to the titular alien in E.T.: The Musical. Facing the disdain of the polished kids 
from performing arts schools, Nate instead befriends Asella, the adult who’s first 
understudy for E.T. When the actor playing Elliott suddenly loses his voice, Asella 
suggests Nate as a replacement and he suddenly finds himself thrust into the lime-
light as the star of the show. While this lacks the relational depth Nate gained with 
his family and Heidi’s roommate Freckles in the first volume, it instead provides a 
plot-driven, exaggerated exposé behind the scenes of a Broadway show that’s sure 
to entertain, and it continues to use Nate’s naïveté and the zany characters of the 
theater for laugh-out-loud levity. A surprise first (well, second) kiss, substantively 
described (like “an ice cube doused in diesel”), gives way to a very tween romance 
(“i like u or whatever too”) with the boy he’d formerly envied, providing additional 
spirit to the tale. Nate’s encore—an extravagant companion to Telgemeier’s Drama 
(BCCB 10/12)—will certainly be applauded by his loyal fan base.  TA
266 • The BulleTin
Foxlee, kAren The Midnight Dress. Knopf, 2013 277p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95645-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85645-7 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81821-3 $9.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Rose Lovell is growing weary of traveling from town to town with her alcoholic 
father. When they land in the Paradise, a trailer park in a small beach town in 
Australia, she decides she might want to stay even if her father moves on. Part 
of her decision comes as a result of making her first real friend, Pearl; Pearl is a 
luminous beauty who talks a mile a minute and who is full of plans to find her 
own father, a Russian with whom her mother had a one-night stand, and move to 
Paris. She’s taking a romantic detour, however, in a flirtation with an older man 
who has seen enough of the world for Pearl to find him exotic. Rose, meanwhile, 
has been persuaded by Pearl to have a dress made for the annual harvest celebra-
tion by an eccentric old lady named Edie. Edie requires that Rose help make the 
dress, and as they design, cut, and sew, Edie shares the stories of her family with 
Rose, who finds her travel-hardened defenses gradually dissolved under Edie’s care 
and Pearl’s ebullience. All of this story emerges in the shadow of the disappear-
ance of one of the girls; each chapter starts with either an unfolding description of 
what happened or an update on the investigation, then shifts to flashbacks of the 
events that lead up to the night of the festival, keeping the mystery taut but also 
reminding readers that Rose’s year of hope and transformation did not end well. 
Rose spends much of her time in the green world of the rain forest and beach that 
make up the edges of the town; her mental and emotional awakening is conveyed 
by her growing physical ability to navigate the terrain, which is described with al-
luring and loving detail. Readers who appreciate layered coming-of-age stories cut 
short by tragedy and tinged with mystery will enjoy this, especially if they have an 
affinity for wild spaces.  KC
GArCiA, kAmi Unbreakable. Little, 2013 305p (The Legion)
ISBN 978-0-316-21017-1 $18.00    
R  Gr. 7-10
While packing up what remains of her life after the recent mysterious death of her 
mother, seventeen-year-old Kennedy Waters suddenly finds herself first attacked by 
a vengeful ghost, then rescued by the gorgeous twin Lockhart brothers, who wield 
demon-hunting weapons. Now she’s on the run with them and two other teens, 
hiding out in warehouses and preparing to fight dark paranormal forces. Along the 
way, Kennedy learns about her family’s ties to the Legion, a secret group charged 
with destroying the demon Andras and the spirits under his control. With only their 
families’ journals as guidance, the teens crisscross the mid-Atlantic region in search 
of pieces of an ancient weapon. Meanwhile Kennedy struggles to come to terms 
with her new life, the very real existence of ghosts, and her undeniable attraction to 
the brooding Jared Lockhart. Offering both thrills and chills with a series of spooky 
ghost stories and lots of gruesome local history, this romance with strong echoes 
of TV’s Supernatural builds a real page-turner out of its scavenger-hunt format. 
Kennedy is no damsel in distress, instead quickly learning to face danger alongside 
the rest of her team. There is a requisite love triangle, but Kennedy is refreshingly 
honest about her feelings, and the strong secondary cast, including a young genius 
inventor and a brash female fighter, help keep the focus on the group rather than 
the romance. This entertaining read is a solid choice for any paranormal fiction 
reader looking for a new series to love.  AM
January 2014 • 267
GiFF, pAtriCiA reilly Winter Sky. Lamb, 2014 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37192-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83892-7 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37193-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Siria spends her nights scanning the winter sky for Sirius, its brightest star and the 
inspiration for her name, which was chosen by the mother eleven-year old Siria 
can barely remember. She also looks for the telltale orange glow of any fires across 
town, as this means her firefighter father must put his life in danger to save others. 
If Pop goes to a fire, so does she, sneaking out of her apartment and biking to the 
blaze to make sure Pop gets through it unharmed. Only her best friend Douglas 
knows about these late-night excursions, though even he doesn’t know about the 
other fires Siria has started chasing: small ones started near an abandoned shed, 
in an old movie theater, and in trashcans by the school. Convinced that she must 
protect Pop and the rest of his crew, Siria soon finds herself out almost every night 
trying to determine the source of these fires, braving smoke, a hungry, wolflike dog, 
and an unknown arsonist to keep her firefighting family safe. With simple prose 
and an appreciation for the growing sense of freedom and responsibility of late 
childhood, Giff creates a gentle and enjoyable read with a light touch of suspense. 
While Siria’s insistence on these dangerous late-night excursions and her reluctance 
to confide in an adult go on a bit longer than believable, the book effectively cap-
tures the mind of a preteen who feels deeply responsible for those around her. The 
mystery element will keep young readers guessing, while the themes of loneliness, 
friendship, and family will resonate strongly. Siria’s late-night sleuthing and realis-
tic friendships—along with a well-worn dog-adoption subplot—also make this a 
potential readaloud for an upper elementary classroom.  AA
HAle, kAtHleen No One Else Can Have You. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2014 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221119-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221122-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
The police in the small town of Friendship, WI, spend most of their time cleaning 
up after T.P.-ing pranksters or luring tree-trapped cats to safer ground, so they’re 
woefully unprepared when the butchered body of the local homecoming queen, 
Ruth Fried, is found in a cornfield. Kippy Bushman, best friend to the victim, 
recognizes the local sheriff’s pinning of the crime on Ruth’s boyfriend as the spite-
filled ploy that it is, and she teams up with Ruth’s brother (handsome but possibly 
crazy) to solve the case. Following in the footsteps of her hero Diane Sawyer, Kippy 
puts her investigative skills to good use—okay, mostly she bumbles her way to the 
solution, but in the end, the streets of Friendship are safe once more. A book that 
opens with the body of a teenage girl strung up to a tree like a deer carcass does not 
easily lend itself to humor, but Hale nimbly manages a satisfying blend of chills, 
suspense, and laughs in this dark comedy. The key is Kippy herself, an odd and 
not-so-bright duck and a girl who is firmly entrenched in her community, making 
her commentary on the local customs more like warm observations than mocking 
jibes. Regional phrases like “you betcha” and “don’tcha know” lend the dialogue 
a Fargo-like flair, while secondary characters, including the sheriff and the victim 
268 • The BulleTin
(whom readers get to know through journal entries) are surprisingly nuanced. Avid 
mystery readers will likely negotiate Hale’s red herrings with ease, but the identity 
of the culprit is not really the point; the satisfaction here is watching Kippy nab 
the bad guy in her own time and her own unique way.  KQG
HuBBArd, Jenny And We Stay. Delacorte, 2014 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98955-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74057-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89943-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
Emily Beam has been sent to boarding school in Amherst to recover from her 
boyfriend’s suicide, but it soon becomes apparent that there is much more to their 
story. Although she and Paul only went out for four months, their relationship has 
left her forever changed, mostly because it came at a time when they were both 
leaving childhood behind but were still tragically unready for the consequences of 
decisions that would force them into adult roles. At a boarding school resurrected 
on the grounds of Emily Dickinson’s alma mater, Emily finds new friends and new 
enemies, but mostly she finds poetry; poems spill compulsively from her pen as she 
sorts through memories and regrets. Her roommate, K.T., becomes a strong but 
sometimes intrusive ally, as does another girl who forces her into situations that 
are uncomfortable but ultimately contribute to the healing she needs. Hubbard’s 
language caresses the reader with both imagistic and sonic loveliness, incorporating 
lines from Dickinson’s poetry that propel Emily’s insights at various moments and 
prompt poems of her own that catch at the throat as they chart her path through 
mourning. Clearly, she’s grieving much more than the loss of Paul; her specific losses 
and their recompense become universally recognizable as the process of growing 
up itself, but as with so much of Dickinson’s poetry, they inspire thoughtful re-
flection more than nostalgic or sentimental tears. Emily is a sharp-witted thinker’s 
girl surprised by feeling, a character worthy of Dickinson’s formidable legacy.  KC
isABellA, Jude Chitchat: Celebrating the World’s Languages; illus. by Kathy 
Boake. Kids Can, 2013 44p
ISBN 978-1-55453-787-7 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 4-7
This slender volume talks about talking (and writing), touching conversationally 
on matters ranging from word origin to slang to language extinction and language 
creation. Each spread focuses on a particular topic, often including a sidebar or 
two and even a short pertinent quiz. Isabella often goes beyond the usual chestnuts 
here, digging into recent material and terms for some intriguing items (the linguistic 
ambiguity known as “crash blossoms,” for instance), and her point of view is less 
Anglocentric than usual (she notes, for example, that monolingual people are a 
global minority, despite the fact that monolingualism is the norm for native English 
speakers). The book is marred, however, by the complete absence of source notes 
for the information; additionally, the compositions are visually awkward, with a 
stodgy layout at odds with the aggressively distorted, hyperreal, and often garish 
digital collage figures. There’s still some genuinely interesting information here in 
a reassuringly modest dose, so kids who come for browsing might well be drawn 
into reading. An index is included.  DS
January 2014 • 269
JAFFe, miCHele Minders. Razorbill, 2014 [400p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-658-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Rationality and control have always been Sadie’s hallmark; she follows rules and 
rejects drama. These qualities, she believes, make her a perfect candidate for the 
Mind Corps Fellowship, an internship where her body will go into stasis and she 
will enter the mind of a person in difficult circumstances in order to learn firsthand 
what such people care about and how they make decisions. Her subject is Ford, a 
boy from a poverty-stricken family in inner-city Detroit whose brother has been 
murdered. When Ford was born, his mother allowed Mind Corps to implant a chip 
in his brain—without his ever knowing—in exchange for health care and financial 
assistance. Now almost an adult, he’s smart but also highly emotional, a contrast 
to the logical Sadie; living inside his head awakens feelings that she can’t control, 
especially when she falls in love with him. When she witnesses Ford commit a 
murder, though, she knows something has gone desperately wrong, but finding out 
what it is means breaking a lot of Sadie’s beloved rules. Jaffe’s speculative aesthet-
ics of the way brains process experience at nonverbal levels is as fascinating as the 
mystery here; Sadie comes to understand how Ford’s vision dims when he senses 
deception, how he relates feelings like betrayal and hope to specific smells, and how 
sexual arousal sets off an entire symphony in his head. As always, Jaffe (author of 
Bad Kitty, BCCB 4/06, etc.) crafts a high-stakes adventure with impeccable pacing, 
and she even manages to inject a little comedy into this harrowing crime drama. 
Her evocative descriptions of the wasteland of inner-city Detroit read like a tragic 
love story as Ford imagines its renaissance, and while the premise of becoming a 
research subject in exchange for health care appears exploitative, there is almost an 
argument for the positive side of Big Brother here. The combination of romance, 
sci-fi, and crime drama makes for a splendidly well-rounded and engrossing story 
with broad appeal.  KC 
JenninGs, pAtriCk Odd, Weird, & Little. Egmont, 2014 [160p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-374-1 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-375-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
When a tiny, wide-eyed kid wearing a hat and a bow tie walks into class, ten-year-
old Woodrow is unsure whether to try to befriend a fellow outcast or be grateful 
that Garrett, the class bully, may have a new target. Toulouse Hulot, the new 
kid, turns out to have a knack for wood-working and reading, two of Woodrow’s 
favorite pastimes, and Woodrow makes a pal of Toulouse. Garrett’s bullying does 
escalate as a result, especially after Toulouse vomits up what appears to be a furry 
rodent in class. With Toulouse at his side, however, Woodrow doesn’t find Garrett 
nearly as intimidating, and although the new kid doesn’t say much other than 
“who” and nod, his moral support is enough to make Woodrow stand his ground, 
overcome his stutter (at least temporarily), and tell the bully off. Those familiar 
with Jenkins’ Guinea Dog (BCCB 6/10) will recognize the author’s tendency to 
inject the ordinary with the absurd; the owl-in-disguise element is surprisingly ef-
fective, taking a standard tale of an underdog’s triumph and giving it a charming 
weirdness that reaffirms the value of being a bit odd. Simple sentence structure and 
270 • The BulleTin
Woodrow’s conversational tone make this easily accessible to newly independent 
readers, while Woodrow’s astute observations of school dynamics—the difference 
between rules made by the adults and rules made by kids, the dog-eat-dog world 
of the playground—will likely strike a chord with plenty of kids who worry about 
their not-so-normalness. The surprise reveal of Toulouse’s avian status at the end 
is undermined by the cover’s giveaway, but readers will likely be charmed enough 
to not give a hoot. (Sorry.)  KQG 
JoyCe, williAm The Mischievians; written and illus. by William Joyce. Moonbot/
Atheneum, 2013 54p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7347-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7348-5 $12.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Two kids are desperate for help when stuff—a sock from a pair, the television re-
mote, car keys—keeps disappearing from their home. Enter Dr. Zooper, famous 
Mischievianologist, whose comprehensive encyclopedia of Mischievians, the little 
creatures responsible for all of these shenanigans, illuminates their plight (and 
constitutes much of the book). Written in a Q&A format, entries detail the lives 
of beings from the Yawn Mower—a wispy green guy who lives inside mouths and 
induces yawning—to the Endroller, a little monster with a suction-cup prosthesis 
that unravels the end of the toilet paper roll. Some entries are significantly cleverer 
than others (an amusingly named Mista Blista is responsible for your achy feet, while 
the sprite who’s eaten your homework is simply dubbed the Homework Eater), 
but the encyclopedia’s creative take on familiar situations will garner enthusiasm. 
The prose is similarly uneven, with an appealing conversational tone clashing with 
awkward sentence structure. The oil illustrations with their retro-inspired palette 
and watery detail evoke Mark Teague’s, and the Mischievians themselves are clev-
erly designed to perfectly match their particular form of roguery. The multiple, 
lengthy entries will likely make this a text kids dive in and out of rather than read 
cover-to-cover, but those looking for a scapegoat for any sticky situation will likely 
find one to blame here.  TA
kAte, lAuren Teardrop. Delacorte, 2013 441p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99069-4 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74265-8 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97631-4 $9.99   
M Gr. 7-10
In the months since her mother was drowned at sea by a rogue wave, seventeen-
year-old Eureka Boudreaux has been understandably depressed, even attempting 
suicide, but, strangely, never crying. Now living with her father and hated step-
mother, Reka hopes that the start of a new school year heralds a return to normal 
life but no such luck: there’s a handsome but mysterious boy following her and 
her normally genial guy pal is suddenly relentlessly vindictive. A few more plot 
twists and a chance encounter with a psychic eventually reveal that Reka has the 
power to raise the lost city of Atlantis with her tears, but what exactly that means 
is never quite clarified, so Reka’s climactic sobbing fit is ultimately unsatisfying. 
Her breaking point is also unconvincing: it’s more convenient than credible that 
she would be moved to tears over the death of her stepmother, and the kidnapping 
of her younger siblings is an obvious plot device. The third-person narration never 
quite realizes how unlikable Reka truly is, and while her grief may excuse some of 
January 2014 • 271
her more self-centered behavior, her constant criticism of others and her inability 
to accept criticism herself is more maddening than sympathetic. Direct readers 
instead towards de la Cruz’s Frozen, reviewed above, for a richer visualization of 
the Atlantis myth.  KQG 
kim, pAtti Here I Am; illus. by Sonia Sánchez. Capstone, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-1-62370-036-2 $14.95   
R 7-10 yrs
In this wordless picture book, a young boy flies with his family to a new country 
and is overwhelmed by the confusing chaos of his new city home. His one link 
to his former life is a big red seed; unfortunately, when he’s leaning longingly out 
the window to peer at a lively girl skipping away below, he drops the seed on her 
head, and she pockets his treasure and scampers off. Setting out after her, he wends 
his way through the city and begins to see it anew as he finds friendly café-sitters, 
cheerful passersby, and a lucky dropped coin that allows him to buy a delicious 
hot pretzel. He eventually catches up to the girl at a park, reclaims the seed, and 
forges a friendship with her, sealed by planting the seed in the ground; the park 
then becomes the favorite spot of the two friends and their families as the year 
goes by, and the boy finally feels rooted. There are similarities here to Tan’s The 
Arrival (BCCB 1/08), both in theme and in device, as the local signs and teacher’s 
words appear incomprehensible to the protagonist; this is, however, a much more 
kid-focused experience. Mixed-media illustrations by Spanish illustrator Sánchez 
incorporate swift, hand-drawn lines, sweeps of saturated reds and translucent aquas, 
soft, smudgy textures, and occasional collaged elements, and the often-paneled result 
has the sophistication of a graphic novel. Some aspects of the kid’s experience will 
take some decoding, but audiences will easily perceive the changing mood as the 
gloomy city becomes more colorful and eventually culminates in the soft green em-
brace of the park. An author’s note explains the story, informing audiences that Kim 
herself came to the U.S. as a child and drew on those experiences in the book.  DS
lArson, sArA B. Defy. Scholastic, 2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-59758-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-59763-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
When a sorcerer attacks Alexa’s small village and kills her family, Alexa cuts her hair 
and poses as a boy to gain admittance into the army and thereby avoid the king’s 
breeding houses, the inevitable fate for any parentless girl in the jungle kingdom 
of Antion. Three years later, she is one of the army’s most prized fighters and part 
of Prince Damian’s elite guard, but even she can’t stop the sorcerer that essentially 
explodes his way into the castle, kidnaps Damian, Alexa, and Rylan, another guard, 
and takes them deep into rebel territory. As she grows closer to the prince during 
their captivity, Alexa finds it increasingly difficult to keep her act as “Alex” up, but 
it soon becomes clear she’s not the only one keeping secrets and that Damian’s 
involvement with the rebels will either topple a tyrant or get Alexa killed. The first 
half of this heroine-centered fantasy suffers from too much introspection on Alexa’s 
part as she goes through the inevitable push-and-pull romance with Damian and 
rebuffs advances from Rylan, who seems to exist only to cause romantic tension 
between the two lovers. Damian’s appeal, however, is undeniable, both as a romantic 
lead and a genuine character: his is actually the much more interesting story, as he 
272 • The BulleTin
has had to pose as a spoiled and petted prince while planning the overthrow of his 
cruel father and as a result, he’s unable to really trust anyone. The unspooling of 
his secrets—and there are many—drives the book’s second half, and the climactic 
scene in which Alexa and Damian confront and kill the men who took so much 
from them is both powerful and narratively satisfying. While lacking the polish 
of Cashore’s Graceling (BCCB 1/09), this will likely still satisfy teens looking for a 
blend of swordplay and romance.  KQG
levy, deBBie We Shall Overcome: The Story of a Song; illus. by Vanessa Brantley-
Newton. Jump at the Sun/Disney, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-1954-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-9 yrs
Levy takes readers on a whirlwind tour of African-American history from slavery 
through President Obama’s election, with highlights on the march toward civil 
rights reflected in the evolving words of the song “We Shall Overcome.” At its 
best, this title directs listeners to take notice of the way new stages in the civil 
rights movement influence subtle changes in the lyrics of the song: “They brought 
a church song, ‘I Will Overcome,’ to the streets. But since they were marching and 
working together, they sang ‘We Will Overcome.’ We, together, will overcome.” So 
powerful was the song, Levy observes, that freedom movements around the world 
adopted it as well, from Bangladesh and South Africa to Czechoslovakia to South 
Korea. Unfortunately, unsourced details of the song’s international performance 
are shuffled into an annotated timeline in the end matter, undercutting the song’s 
supposed impact. Digital and mixed-media artwork sports considerable energy in 
composition, but there’s an awkward flatness in the portraiture. Sources aligned to 
the lyrical change-ups are included, as a list of recordings (several available on the 
internet) and a list for further reading.  EB
mACAulAy, dAvid Eye: How It Works; written and illus. by David Macaulay with 
Sheila Keenan. David Macaulay Studio/Macmillan, 2013 32p (My Readers)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-781-4 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-782-1 $3.99   
R Gr. 2-4
A smart smack in the head with a soccer ball launches this easy reader nonfiction 
discourse on how we see what we see. Given the set-up, the first topic is pretty obvi-
ous: sockets in the skull, surrounding fat, and six muscles that “keep your eyeballs 
from popping out” are the first line of defense for the delicate organ. Explanation 
of how vision actually works is then divided into two parts. First Macaulay traces 
the passage of light through the cornea and pupil, past the lens and vitreous body, 
and onto the retina. After pausing for a review in a kid-styled diagram, he proceeds 
on to the transmission and processing of information to the brain and how correc-
tive lenses correct common problems of vision associated with misshapen eyeballs. 
Discussion of complicated brain function is admittedly reduced to an illustration of 
a hypothetical thought process, but otherwise, material is presented in a well-paced 
text appropriately geared to newly independent readers. A glossary will assist read-
ers retrieve or clarify concepts and the humorous illustrations readers have come 
to expect from Macaulay (the eyeball under construction in the closing spread is 
not only clever, but a great tool for recalling details) will not disappoint. Lists for 
further print and online reading are included.  EB
January 2014 • 273
mArtin, Ann m. The Long Way Home: Second Generation. Scholastic, 
2013 214p (Family Tree)
ISBN 978-0-545-35943-6 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 5-7
In Better to Wish (BCCB 6/13), the first Family Tree book, Martin introduced 
readers to Abby, a girl who grew up in small-town Maine before World War II; this 
second volume in the series focuses on Dana, Abby’s daughter, eight at the start 
of the novel in 1955. Dana loves her busy New York life and the exciting literary 
world that her father, a prominent writer, introduces her to, but when he dies in a 
drunken accident, Dana’s mother moves the family back to Maine. While Dana’s 
twin Julia loves the rural pace, Dana yearns to get back to the city and embark on 
an illustration career, so much so that she stuns the family by leaving as a teenager 
to live with her aunt in the city. As in the previous title, Martin provides snapshots 
of her heroine’s life at intervals of a half-year to a year, sometimes at moments of 
high drama (Dana’s father’s death) and sometimes at moments of significant re-
flections or decisions (Dana’s asking her aunt about coming to live in New York). 
The result is an unusually gradual acquaintanceship with the character that’s more 
common in cinema than juvenile novels, but it’s ultimately engaging. Though the 
long-term view helps cushion the eventfulness, there’s an overgenerous hand with 
melodramatic plot points; additionally, this is very much a second book, dependent 
on knowledge of the first both for understanding and for impact of some occur-
rences (especially Abby’s marriages). Readers who enjoyed the first book’s gentle 
and unhurried unfolding, however, will likely wish to pursue the family saga into 
this new generation.  DS
mCpHAil, dAvid, comp. My Mother Goose: A Collection of Favorite Rhymes, 
Songs, and Concepts; comp. and illustrated by David McPhail. Roaring Brook, 
2013 96p
ISBN 978-1-59643-526-1 $19.99   
R 1-4 yrs
Following the common use of “Mother Goose” to cover a multitude of traditional 
and written materials, McPhail here compiles over sixty verses and seven concept-
based entries in this engaging volume. Familiar poems such as “Pease Porridge Hot,” 
“London Bridge,” and “Little Miss Muffet” rub shoulders with “Rock-a-bye, Baby” 
and “Over the River and Through the Woods” (which appears without credit to its 
author, Lydia Maria Child), while spreads on key subjects such as colors, numbers, 
shapes, the alphabet, and items of dress add point-and-share appeal. The layout is 
inviting and uncluttered, with creamy white backgrounds, occasional simple borders, 
and capitalized first letters of each entry (no titles). McPhail’s cast, depicted with 
soft woodsy tones and gentle hatching, is a mixture of humans and anthropomor-
phized animals, cheerfully interacting in many scenes; though there’s a touch of 
period style in dress and scenery, the kids involved display contemporary liveliness 
and diversity. Some of the vignettes offer their own drama or additional take on 
the story: Little Bo-Peep’s sheep are mischievously hiding on the shed roof behind 
her; a kindly bear reassuringly douses the flame on Jack Be Nimble’s candlestick; 
a dragon heats up the pease porridge hot with his fiery breath. This has gift book 
written all over it, and a pleasing one it will make too, since its value will extend 
past the unwrapping to actual use. An index of first lines and another of concept 
spreads are appended.  DS
274 • The BulleTin
meissner, dAvid Call of the Klondike: A True Gold Rush Adventure; by David 
Meissner and Kim Richardson. Calkins Creek, 2013 167p illus. with pho-
tographs
ISBN 978-1-59078-823-3 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-9
The Yukon Gold Rush of 1897 is revisited here through the experiences of two 
young men who were among the first stampeders to make their way to the Klondike 
after news of gold strikes reached Seattle and San Francisco. Stanley Pearce and 
Marshall Bond, financed largely and speedily by Pearce’s well-to-do father, outfit-
ted themselves in what would have been considered high style—from collapsible 
boats to fur robes—and caught one of the first vessels north from Seattle, hoping 
to reach Dawson City before the region became frozen in for the winter. Just one 
step ahead, it seemed, of the elements and fellow stampeders, the men cleared the 
White Pass (nicknamed Dead Horse) Trail and Lake Bennett before the freeze 
and settled into a cabin in Dawson City in time to investigate possible claims to 
stake. They did everything right, were better equipped than most, had a fair share 
of luck, and yet came away a year later with only life experience to show for their 
efforts, and most of their good humor thankfully intact. Meissner pieces together 
the account mainly from letters, journal entries, and newspaper dispatches the men 
sent back to the States throughout their adventure, and the emotional highs and 
lows of hope and disappointment come vividly through their accessible writings. 
Plenty of period photos, many of notable detail and clarity, augment the text, and 
a bibliography and list of further resources are included. U.S. History teachers will 
appreciate the deft integration of primary sources, but kids who love adventure 
stories will simply appreciate an exciting personal account—topped off perhaps 
with a Netflix viewing of Chaplin’s The Gold Rush.  EB 
meltzer, BrAd I Am Abraham Lincoln; illus. by Christopher Eliopoulos. Dial, 
2014 [40p] (Ordinary People Change the World)
ISBN 978-0-8037-4083-9 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-8 yrs
 
 
 
I Am Amelia Earhart; illus. by Christopher Eliopoulos. 
Dial, 
2014 [42p] (Ordinary People Change the World)
ISBN 978-0-8037-4082-2 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-8 yrs
Comic-book trendiness meets old-school character education in the new Ordinary 
People Change the World series. In each entry, a child version of the title subject 
narrates his or her own life story and directs listeners to embrace the lessons that 
made them great. For Lincoln, standing up against tormenters was key, whether 
they be kids who thoughtlessly abused turtles, bullies who ignored the rules of a fair 
fight, or pro-slavery forces who would keep countrymen in bondage. For Earhart 
the message is “Never let anyone stop you. Whatever your dream is, chase it,” a 
principle she followed despite being told time and again that women were not meant 
to be aviators. Eliopoulos keeps things light with sweetly silly caricatures—tiny 
Lincoln’s pretty adorable in his top hat and tidily scalloped beard; Earhart seems 
cloned from Mo Willems’ Trixie, topped with an aviator hat. There is, however, 
an elephant in this room Meltzer is bent on ignoring: Lincoln was assassinated 
despite, or because of, his integrity, and Earhart’s dreams were doused in a crash 
January 2014 • 275
over the Pacific. A gentle reminder that heroism carries a price would not have 
been amiss here. Telling the whole truth, after all, is also a virtue. Photographs at 
the end of each title offer the audience a glimpse of what the grown-up subject 
actually looked like.  EB
meyer, CArolyn Beauty’s Daughter: The Story of Hermione and Helen of 
Troy. Harcourt, 2013 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-544-10862-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-544-10877-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
As Hermione, Helen of Troy’s daughter, notes in this title’s prologue, this is her 
chance to tell her side of her mother’s story. It is also, however, a recitation of the 
many stories found throughout Greek history and mythology, with Hermione 
inserted, often somewhat clumsily, as observer and narrator. For instance, having 
stowed away to accompany her father, Menelaus, to battle in Troy, she wanders 
through the camp, overhearing Achilles boasting of his prowess, Odysseus lamenting 
how much he misses his home, and an unnamed warrior describing his invention 
of dice for gaming and predicting the future. The narrative is largely plot-driven, 
so that Hermione’s character, particularly her adolescence, is given short shrift since 
the story elides the tedious details of the ten years of the Trojan War during which 
Hermione grows from preteen to young woman, skipping from Helen’s kidnap-
ping and the lead-up to war to its dramatic conclusion. After that the story does 
become more properly Hermione’s, as she is given in marriage to the brutal Pyrrhus 
but escapes to pursue her true love, Orestes, but here again, the events of the plot 
are always foregrounded over emotional development or exploration. Fortunately, 
these particular stories have captured the imaginations of readers for millennia, 
and they hold up well here even without the kind of emotional investment and 
development one might expect from Hermione’s initial insistence that she would 
be at the center of this tale. For readers intimidated by the language of the Iliad, 
this makes a fine companion piece, highlighting the soap opera of relationships 
among the key players and the interventions of the gods into their daily affairs.  KC
monninGer, JosepH  Crash. Scholastic, 2014 [208p] (Stay Alive)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56348-2 $5.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56349-9 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-10
“They were a bunch of kids from a semilame television show who’d had the bad 
fortune to crash in what looked like a complete wilderness.” So thinks one of the 
girls, E, stranded with other cast members in Alaska’s Brooks Range after their plane 
dives into the wilderness. Only five teens and two adults survive after the first few 
days, making shelter and gathering fuel under the direction of Titus, the Eagle Scout, 
and E, the surprisingly practical video star. When rescue fails to appear, will they be 
able to make their way to safety before winter sets in? Monninger is probably best 
known for his nuanced dramas of girls amid nature, like Baby (BCCB 9/07) and 
Hippie Chick (BCCB 10/08), so this speedy, action-focused hi-lo is a very different 
enterprise. His craftsmanship nonetheless often shines through subtly in vivid turns 
of phrase (“Every time you breathed, you sucked in insects”) and telling details 
even as the book keeps the attention firmly on the survival details. The story is so 
276 • The BulleTin
concrete, though, that it’s got some odd gaps, both emotionally (nobody seems 
deeply frightened, depressed, or grief-stricken) and narratively (it’s not explicitly 
clear what happens to one character and if the other characters know). It is still a 
swift and accessible neo-Hatchet for reluctant readers and those more comfortable 
camping than reading.  DS
moses, sHeliA p. The Sittin’ Up. Putnam, 2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25723-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Moses (author of The Legend of Buddy Bush, BCCB 4/04, etc.) returns to rural North 
Carolina in 1940 to tell the story of the passing of the last former slave in a small 
community, the 100-year-old Mr. Bro. Wiley. Bean is on the cusp of manhood, so 
this is the first time he has been allowed to participate in a sittin’ up, and his best 
friend Pole is invited to be a flower girl for the funeral, circumstances that make 
them proud even in the midst of their grief over a man who was like a grandfather 
to them. The first half of the story becomes attenuated with its extended focus on 
spreading the news of Mr. Bro. Wiley’s death and making preparations, but then 
the action picks up with a vengeance at the actual sittin’ up, with a fistfight, a flood 
that forces everyone, including a 400-pound woman and the coffin, onto the roof, 
and the untimely birth of Bean’s baby brother in a boat as they struggle to escape 
the flood waters. Nearly all of the expected Southern stereotypes are present and 
accounted for here: the unfailingly wise and benevolent former slave, the longsuffer-
ing sharecroppers, the fancy stranger who sells liquor to the men and invokes the ire 
of the women, the outspoken woman and her sassy daughter, the dignified teacher, 
the well-to-do undertaker, the well-fed preacher, and the haughty, mean-spirited 
white people. Despite some mild humor in the character depictions, contemporary 
children will likely find Bean and Pole as bland and apple-cheeked as Dick and 
Jane in their unflagging desire to be obedient to the strict and arbitrary rules of 
their parents and to live up to the noble expectations set for them by their elders. 
The real value here is the evocation of the community and the carefully detailed 
description of funeral rites and customs from the time period; the explanations for 
the time-honored rituals for honoring the dead and the young people’s centrality 
in the group-uniting mourning may garner the interest of young readers more ac-
customed to being distanced from old age and death.  KC 
nA, il sunG A Book of Babies; written and illus. by Il Sung Na. Knopf, 
2014 [24p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75291-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75290-9 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75292-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 1-3 yrs
A duck takes a break from its noisy ducklings to guide readers through comparisons 
of different baby animals in this cheerful celebration of families and infants. The 
duck encounters babies who have either “lots of brothers and sisters” (a school of fish 
fry) or none at all (a baby monkey), babies who can walk at birth (a zebra foal) and 
those who “need a little help” (a lion cub), babies who are carried in a mother’s—or 
father’s—pouch (kanga joeys and baby seahorses), babies with fur (polar bear cubs), 
and babies with scales (lizard babies). As nighttime falls, though, all the babies need 
January 2014 • 277
to go to sleep, even the sleepy ducklings to whom the parent duck now returns. 
Na’s text is short and sweet, and pint-sized animal lovers will love the parade of 
various fauna; the cozy ending (in which one of the duck parents sleeps with one 
eye open to keep an eye on things) will satisfy little ones as well. Painterly textures 
(swirly spirals scratched through a background of rusts and browns make up the 
male lion’s mane, for example) provide rich depth to the scenes, and the dynamic 
mixed-media illustrations are both vibrant and warm. The succinct, rhythmic text 
and large, inviting illustrations make it an excellent choice for sharing with toddlers 
and young preschool audiences.  JH
pinkney, Jerry, ad. The Tortoise & the Hare; ad. and illus. by Jerry Pinkney. Lit-
tle, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-0-316-18356-7 $18.00   
R* 4-7 yrs
Continuing his swath through legend after his Caldecott-winning The Lion and the 
Mouse (BCCB 2/09), Pinkney here tackles Aesop’s famous fable of the tortoise and 
the hare, setting the story in a vivid Southwestern landscape of cactus, streaming 
sun, and wide-open country. Aside from Coyote’s spoken “On your marks . . .” call, 
the only text is the famous moral, “Slow and steady wins the race,” which winds 
in part and full through the tortoise’s scenes to describe, promise, and summarize. 
Pinkney’s note explains he first heard this tale as an Uncle Remus tale, and indeed, 
his richly characterized animals here recall his illustrations for Julius Lester’s Uncle 
Remus retellings (The Last Tales of Uncle Remus, BCCB 2/94, etc.). Sassy touches 
of clothing personify the competitors and their teeming audience (Tortoise sports 
a denim cap and a jaunty neckerchief, while Hare is a fan of checks, even loaning 
his checkered scarf to Coyote for a finish flag), yet the anthropomorphism blends 
seamlessly with the naturalistic detail as Hare springs with power and grace over 
fallen objects and Tortoise clambers determinedly over rocky ground. Fine detailing 
has the dimension of Steve Jenkins’ cut-paper work, with the gleaming geometry of 
Tortoise’s shell as inviting as Hare’s creamy golden fur, but the scope of the illustra-
tions makes the book a compelling distance show as well. This adaptation ends 
on a nice comradely note, with Hare bestowing his checkered scarf on a pleased 
Tortoise; don’t miss the closing endpaper, where the victory party is in full swing. 
While this is an oft-retold tale in picture-book land, Pinkney’s version is faithful 
to the original while offering a lively and imaginative take on the ancient Greek 
version of “You snooze, you lose.”  DS 
pitCHer, AnnABel Ketchup Clouds; written and illus. by Annabel Pitcher. Little, 
2013 261p
ISBN 978-0-316-24676-7 $18.00   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Zoe seeks to unburden her guilty conscience, and she chooses an unusual method: 
writing letters from the shed in her English garden to a death-row inmate in Texas. 
In these letters, she confesses that she too killed somebody, and as the months go 
by and her letters to her silent correspondent become more revealing, the story of 
her guilt and the events that led up to it becomes clear. Zoe at first became involved 
with Max, a boy in her class, but mostly she enjoyed making out with him and 
drawing his attention; it was his older brother, Aaron, with whom she felt a genu-
ine and electric connection. When Max discovered her relationship with Aaron, 
tragedy ensued. Pitcher (author of My Sister Lives on the Mantelpiece, BCCB 10/12) 
278 • The BulleTin
draws a sympathetic and credible picture of a conflicted girl; Zoe’s ambivalence 
about Max, who brings her a fairly pleasing relationship all the more rewarding 
for being a sure thing, will particularly speak to many readers making their own 
relationship assessments. The device of the convict letters, however, is superfluous 
and distracting, with her correspondent’s pending execution awkwardly brushed 
aside so Zoe can talk about boys; the scenario of Max’s accidental death, for which 
Zoe feels responsible, is strained, and the book ends on unsatisfying, inconclusive 
note. Zoe’s conversational narration and the book’s suspenseful withholding of her 
secret may nonetheless appeal to readers, and they’ll be drawn along with Zoe to 
consider notions of guilt and culpability.  DS
pope, pAul Battling Boy; written and illus. by Paul Pope. First Second, 
2013 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-805-7 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-145-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
In this graphic novel, the city of Acropolis is under attack by a series of nightmar-
ish monsters, and when their only hope, the heroic Haggard West, is killed in 
action, it seems the city is doomed. Enter the otherwise unnamed Battling Boy, 
the thirteen-year-old son of gods on his first mission to save innocents from the 
forces of evil. Armed with a guidebook to monsters and a collection of t-shirts that 
channel animal powers, Battling Boy defeats his first foe (with a little help from 
his father) and becomes the city’s new hero. Meanwhile, West’s teenage daughter 
Aurora is picking up where her father left off, experimenting in his secret science 
lab, practicing with his high-tech weapons, and training to be a hero in her own 
right. A chance encounter with monsters shows them both how unprepared they 
are, though, forcing them to realize that they may need to work as a team. This first 
volume in a series introduces compelling new heroes designed to please middle-
school readers. Drawing on a mixture of tropes both classic and cutting-edge, the 
narrative offers an introduction to the darker side of superhero comics for fans who 
want moral and narrative complexity but aren’t quite ready to tackle the pervasive 
gloom of Frank Miller’s Batman sagas. The illustrations are crisp and bright, with 
most scenes tightly focused on dialogue or battle (though the book is tastefully 
light on actual gore). The central figure is Battling Boy, preternaturally gifted but 
still recognizably adolescent and wanting to prove himself capable. Aurora likewise 
stands on the line between adolescence and adulthood, and though she’s not the 
star of the show here, she stands ready to emerge into full heroine status in future 
volumes.  AM
powell, pAtriCiA HruBy Josephine: The Dazzling Life of Josephine Baker; illus. 
by Christian Robinson. Chronicle, 2014 100p
ISBN 978-1-4521-0314-3 $17.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Factual and yet poetic, laced with a sadness and sensuality too sophisticated for 
most primary graders, and with a text too whimsical for biography report writers, 
this take on the life of early twentieth-century entertainer Josephine Baker defies 
convention as boldly as its subject did. The book positions Baker right where she 
was happiest—on stage—dividing her life into acts introduced with a few props 
January 2014 • 279
on the floorboards bordered by a proscenium curtain. On comes the spotlight for 
“The Beginning, 1906-1917,” when little Tumpy was raised in poverty, soaking 
up her mother’s vaudeville dreams (“I didn’t have any stockings . . . I danced to 
keep warm”). By thirteen she’d hit the road with the Dixie Steppers, getting her big 
chance to dangle above the stage as Cupid and revel in the audience’s appreciation 
of her clowning. Success in America was always hobbled by Jim Crow, but Paris 
embraced her and she lit up the City of Lights (“The Black Pearl climbed down a 
palm tree, wearing a skirt of bananas and a necklace of shells. She wiggled like a 
serpent, slunk like a panther, and boxed like a kangaroo. Mais oui”). While Powell 
celebrates Baker’s triumph on stage and Robinson matches every superlative with 
punchy colors and doll-like figures at once slinky and naïve, it is clear that demons 
of poverty and bigotry impelled much of that on-stage ferocity and that comedy 
masked great sadness. Unlike Jonah Winter’s Jazz Age Josephine (BCCB 2/12), this 
title brings readers right up to Baker’s bittersweet end, with bills to pay, adopted 
children to support, and a comeback in her late sixties. Author and illustrator notes 
are included, as well as quotation sources and a short bibliography. You can bet that 
middle-schoolers will know that the best stuff is on YouTube, and Baker’s banana 
dance is just a search term away.  EB
prAHin, Andrew Brimsby’s Hats; written and illus. by Andrew Prahin. Simon, 
2014 40p
ISBN 978-1-4424-8147-3 $15.99   
R 5-7 yrs
Brimsby, a squat, furry little creature, is an accomplished milliner who loves to 
chat with his best friend, a badger, over a cup of tea. When his friend goes off to 
realize his dream of becoming a sea captain, Brimsby is lonesome. He tries to start 
a conversation with some birds in a nearby tree, but they are too busy shoveling 
snow out of their nests and trying to keep the fires alight in their tiny woodstoves. 
Struck by an idea, Brimsby returns the next day with a custom-made hat to top 
each nest, thus keeping the birds’ abodes warm and dry. The birds, freed from 
their labors, now have time for conversation and befriend Brimsby, and they all 
visit the badger for tea when he’s ashore. Handling the loss of a friend who moves 
away is a common theme in picture books, but this is a fresh and offbeat take that 
helpfully highlights kindness and proactive problem-solving. Subdued, slightly 
retro shades of blue, gray, green, and brown are highlighted with pops of brighter 
pink and scarlet, and the smooth color application and crisp edges of the digital 
illustrations give a clean, ordered feel to the cozy milieu. The small print and trim 
size may make this a challenge for group sharing, but it would be perfect for an 
armchair or bedtime reading session. Pair this with Moore’s A House in the Woods 
(BCCB 12/11)—another delightful book about homes, friendship, and problem-
solving—or simply snuggle up with a cuppa, a kid, and this title.  JH
rAppAport, doreen To Dare Mighty Things: The Life of Theodore Roosevelt; illus. 
by C. F. Payne. Disney Hyperion, 2013 [48p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-2488-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 3-5
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 253, for review.
280 • The BulleTin
reedy, trent Divided We Fall. Levine/Scholastic, 2014 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-54367-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-54369-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
A rising senior who recently enlisted in the Idaho National Army, Daniel Wright 
finds himself called up by the governor to quell a riot in the state capital that has 
erupted in response to President Rodriguez’s controversial push for a Federal Iden-
tification Card. Daniel accidentally discharges his weapon during the riot, setting 
off what the media immediately dubs the Battle of Boise, and now Daniel is both 
acclaimed as a hero and execrated as a murderer by opposing political camps. While 
he wrestles with his personal demons over whether his stray bullet actually killed any 
of the protesters, the broader situation escalates: the Idaho governor closes the state 
borders, the federal government attempts to capture the governor, and an uneasy 
standoff puts the entire nation on edge. Before the first volume of Reedy’s new tril-
ogy concludes, the Idaho Army National Guard is called up by the president, and 
Daniel and his fellow guardsmen must decide to which polity they owe their loyalty. 
Reedy skillfully stages his drama in a near future that’s a direct heir of our current 
domestic political fractures and technological probabilities, lending the scenario 
both immediacy and credibility. The sturdy framework is undermined by a prosaic 
secondary cast, from Daniel’s liberal, brainiac girlfriend, to his anxiety-disordered 
mother, to his we-got-your-back-dude buddies who improbably tag along on life-
endangering rides. Nonetheless, this is a crew of hard-drinking, rodeo-riding, gun-
loving teens who don’t generally figure as good guys in YA action lit, and they will 
undoubtedly win fans as they head into a second title and an uncertain future.  EB 
roBinson, miCHelle How to Wash a Woolly Mammoth; illus. by Kate Hind-
ley. Holt, 2014 [24p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8050-9966-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
“Does your woolly mammoth need a bath?” It probably does, and while the process 
of mammoth-washing is actually quite simple, the logistics can be tricky, as the 
mammoth-owning young girl in this picture book discovers. Thirsty mammoths 
may empty the tub as quickly as you can fill it, while luring them into the bath in 
the first place is quite the feat (“When all else fails, there is always cake”). Tummy 
scrubbing is a ticklish task and heaven forbid you get shampoo in their eyes, as that 
will apparently send them running amok into the yard and up a tree. Getting the 
runaway mammoth down involves “a very STRONG trampoline” and a lot of mud, 
and results in another bath—this time one in which the little girl joins in—and the 
last step is a satisfying “Throw in the towel and SNUGGLE!” Robinson excels at 
playing out an absurd premise to amusing effect (as in What to Do if an Elephant 
Stands on Your Foot, BCCB 9/12) and this scenario provides plenty of laughs. The 
art is a treat: thin, dark outlines and subtle, judicious application of color and pat-
tern keep the bathtime action neat and tidy yet comic. The freckle-faced little girl 
in her mustard-colored, hooded slicker and red boots is an attractive foil for the 
enormous, shaggy brown mammoth. The mammoth’s small, pop eyes and darker 
topknot of hair beam with humor, especially when he sports various shampoo-
January 2014 • 281
lather hairstyles. Use this to perk up a bath time storytime or pair it with What to 
Do if an Elephant Stands on Your Foot for an amusing “what if” story session.  JH
rotH, susAn l. Parrots over Puerto Rico; written by Susan L. Roth and Cindy 
Trumbore; illus. by Susan L. Roth. Lee & Low, 2013 44p
ISBN 978-1-62014-004-8 $19.95   
R 6-9 yrs
In this cross-disciplinary picture book, Roth and Trumbore trace the history of the 
Puerto Rican parrot, the only parrot indigenous to the United States and its ter-
ritories, linking the bird to the history of the island itself. The book examines the 
ways humans have affected the environment for the parrot, from the early Taíno 
people to European settlers to the current populace. The parrot nearly became 
extinct by the mid-twentieth century due to habitat destruction and competition 
from invasive species and both historical and contemporary efforts to protect the 
parrot are described. The book is notable for its parallel treatment of both social 
and ecological histories, offered in engaging and descriptive prose—hardly a page 
goes by without the refrain of the parrots’ call (Iguaca!). The paper and fabric col-
lage illustrations are lush with texture, using fine detail to show off the verdant 
landscape and dramatic unfolding of events; the book’s vertical format highlights 
the flight of the birds over Puerto Rico, with visual depictions of the parrots and 
their lives displayed above text about the island’s development and colonization. 
This can certainly serve as a crossover between social studies and science classrooms, 
but the story’s vivid enough to stand on its own as a grand environmental narrative. 
An afterword includes photographs and additional information about conservation 
efforts, while additional back matter includes a timeline and bibliography.  TA 
sAnderson, BrAndon Steelheart. Delacorte, 2013 386p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99121-9 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74356-3 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81839-8 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-12
When a mysterious force causes certain humans to develop Epic superpowers, they 
quickly became super-villains, ravaging the country in their fight for territory and 
killing anyone who gets in their way. Ever since David’s father became their victim 
ten years ago, David has studied the Epics, discovering their weaknesses and plot-
ting revenge against their seemingly immortal leader, Steelheart. Now, at eighteen, 
David joins the Reckoners, underground vigilantes who travel the country taking 
out one Epic at a time. They are in Chicago to kill one of Steelheart’s sidekicks, 
but David wants them to risk it all for the chance to take down the leader himself. 
With David’s arsenal of knowledge, they strategize to lure out the elusive Steelheart, 
decimating his security forces and slaying the Epics who support him. Not every-
thing is simple, though, and David and his comrades soon learn that some Epics 
are actually slaves, while some humans might be more Epic than they seem. Known 
best for his high fantasy series, Sanderson offers up something different here: an 
entertaining take on near-future science fiction that turns superhero conventions 
on their head. Action-packed and overflowing with imaginatively rendered vil-
lains, the narrative convincingly places humans in the role of hero and celebrates 
knowledge and strategy over superpowers. David’s story will have special resonance 
for teen readers as he tries to prove his worth to more experienced adults who want 
to keep him on the sidelines, and he emerges as a relatable mixture of capability 
282 • The BulleTin
and naïveté. Managing to offer both a satisfying ending and enough loose ends 
for expected sequels, this novel is a solid read for comic-book fans who wonder 
what would happen if Superman and the X-Men turned out to be despots.  AM
sAx, Aline The War within These Walls; tr. from the Dutch by Laura Watkinson; 
illus. by Caryl Strzelecki. Eerdmans, 2013 175p
ISBN 978-0-8028-5428-5 $17.00    
R Gr. 10 up
In this fictional memoir, a young Jewish man known only as Misha recounts his 
experience in Warsaw from the German invasion of 1939 through the Warsaw 
Ghetto Uprising of spring, 1943. “I had never felt so Jewish before,” Misha remarks 
as relocated Jews are crammed into his city, and he initially regards them more with 
resentment than sympathy: “Like dirty water, they kept pouring into the mouth 
and nostrils of the ghetto. Until it would be impossible for us to breathe.” Food 
supplies dwindle and when Misha’s sister is lost in one of their nighttime raids, 
he despairs of saving his starving parents on his own. When deportations begin in 
1942, and rumors of the true fate of deportees circulate throughout the ghetto, 
Misha is primed to take any risk, so when a man introduces himself as Mordechai 
Anielewicz and urges Misha to join the armed resistance, he’s ready and willing. 
Misha’s narration is tense and terse, his clipped sentences pared down to the 
pinched poetry of a man whose worldview has become as emaciated as the bodies 
of his neighbors. The book design underscores this reduction to elemental needs, 
with slate-blue text on cream background sporadically switching to a stark word 
or phrase of simple cream on blue with startling effect. Strzelecki’s ink and pencil 
illustrations, also in deep slate and gray, recall woodcuts, depicting both moments 
of private sorrow and public violence. This translation from Sax’s original Dutch 
will be a powerful addition to the Holocaust collection in high school libraries. An 
historical note on the real Mordechai Anielewicz is appended.  EB 
sCott, elizABetH Heartbeat. Harlequin Teen, 2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-373-21096-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
“I am Emma, seventeen. I live with my stepfather. My mother is dead. Inside her is 
a baby.” Such is the purgatory of Emma’s existence as the former hypercompetitive 
student now sleepwalks through school and visits the ICU, where her brain-dead 
mother will remain on life support long enough to carry Emma’s unborn half-
brother to safe delivery size. Emma’s driving force is her hatred for her stepfather, 
Dan, who, she believes, made his decision about her mother’s fate solely to ensure 
the arrival of his child, and Emma’s previously close relationship with Dan only 
makes her feel more betrayed by their distance now. The one person who seems to 
understand Emma’s agony is Caleb, a classmate whose self-destructive and criminal 
behavior stems from his own family tragedy. Scott is a versatile and capable writer, 
and here she creates a romance where the relationship ties in directly with a more 
central family drama. Emma’s rage against her stepfather is believable in its shifts 
from cold and punitive to white-hot and screaming, but it’s also credible that this 
focused fury operates as her main emotional response to a horrible and deeply 
conflicted situation; the book is especially effective at depicting the torturous limbo 
of the grieving in such a situation. Caleb is a little idealized, but that just makes 
the romance of the romance sweeter, and the sorrow that brings Emma and Caleb 
January 2014 • 283
together is sensitively handled. Ultimately, there are two love stories: that of Emma 
and Caleb, and that of Emma’s family finding its way to reconstruction, and for 
both, the poignancy sharpens their sweetness.  DS
sHeA, BoB Buddy and the Bunnies in: Don’t Play with Your Food!; written and illus. 
by Bob Shea. Disney Hyperion, 2014 34p
ISBN 978-1-4231-6807-2 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
There’s no pretense when Buddy the Monster arrives on the scene: “I’m going 
to eat all you bunnies!” he announces. The bunnies, however, cleverly insist that 
they were just about to make cupcakes, and they play hide-and-seek with Buddy 
until the treats are baked, at which point Buddy eats five cupcakes—and then 
four more—making him too full to eat the bunnies. Each day he returns, and 
each day the ever-growing group of bunnies distracts Buddy; finally the bunnies 
remind Buddy that he shouldn’t play with his food—and suggest maybe they can 
be friends instead. Shea has gained acclaim with boisterous silly/scary protagonists, 
as in Dinosaur vs. Bedtime (BCCB 10/08), and he hits the same tone with Buddy, 
a furry Sweetums-esque blob of ochre and orange stripes whose exclamations will 
induce plenty of chuckles, especially if read aloud (“Hey, guys! Hop in my mouth 
so I can eat you!”). The illustrations, digitally rendered with rough, oil pastel-
inspired outlines and autumnal hues of fuchsia, forest green, and violet, augment 
the exuberance, their shifting viewpoints (one picture looks out from Buddy’s 
mouth at the rabbits) adding energy. The bunnies—white thumbprints with ears 
and arms—are both cute and abstract, which adds to their growing goofiness as a 
group actor. Youngsters will love being in on the bunnies’ sly ways, and this would 
also pair well with Willems’ Leonardo the Terrible Monster (BCCB 2/05) for a 
friendly monster readaloud.  TA
sHeldon, dyAn One or Two Things I Learned about Love. Candlewick, 
2013 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6665-1 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6911-9 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Hildy doesn’t have a whole lot of experience in the romance department, so when 
she meets Connor, she is more than ready to find out what she’s been missing. 
Connor seems perfect at first, with his devastating smile and his propensity to 
stage dates as full-blown romantic events. Soon, however, he’s texting every hour, 
and then even more often, and he’s showing up to pick her up at work, yoga, and 
her grandmother’s house, even though she isn’t sure whether she ever gave him her 
grandmother’s address. Hildy’s simply flattered, but her parents, her grandmother, 
her older male coworker Ely, and her pragmatic friend Nomi all question Connor’s 
overzealous attention, which Hildy staunchly defends until she just can’t anymore. 
The diary format keeps the reader firmly inside Hildy’s viewpoint as Connor goes 
from ideal boyfriend to jealous stalker, but the book provides enough reported 
conversation, particularly from Nomi, to give readers perspective on what’s really 
happening. The negative opinions start to feel programmatic, however, especially 
when Hildy’s enthusiasm and excuses for Connor’s behavior persist in the face of 
the clues her friends and family are giving her. Particularly unbelievable are the 
attentions of Ely, a college-age boy who seems almost as zealous as Connor but just 
in a different way, as he’s determined to act as a wise older brother to Hildy. The 
284 • The BulleTin
high-energy narration, though, is reminiscent of that of Georgia Nicolson (from 
Rennison’s Angus, Thongs, and Full-Frontal Snogging, BCCB 5/00), and the warm 
antics of Hildy’s close circle of friends leaven this cautionary tale that readers will 
enjoy visiting even as they cringe at Hildy’s naïveté.  KC
stAniszewski, AnnA The Dirt Diary. Sourcebooks, 2014 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-8636-0 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Money’s been a little tight in Rachel’s house since her dad took off a few months 
ago, and now that her mom has a new side job as a maid, Rachel is expected to 
help—especially if she wants to replenish the three hundred bucks she took out 
of her college fund. Now Rachel has access to the bedrooms of the wealthiest and 
most privileged kids in her eighth-grade class, giving her plenty of ammo against 
the queen bee whose main extracurricular activity is to torment Rachel. Of course, 
with great knowledge comes great responsibility, and Rachel is faced with the 
choice to behave ethically or to use the juicy tidbits she gathers along with socks 
and underwear to land herself the hot boy and embarrass her bully. Rachel’s voice 
is, for better or worse, entirely teen authentic in its self-centeredness, from her 
certainty that she is the most victimized kid in her whole school to her inability to 
see how her actions affect other people. She’s therefore often unlikable, but it’s in a 
surprisingly lovable way: her cluelessness is more from lack of life experience than 
malevolence, and she genuinely believes her planned trip to Florida to bring her 
father back will repair her family. The plot trajectory is familiar—Dad does not, 
in fact, return, and instead Rachel learns who she can and cannot depend on—but 
there is still heart and humor here, so readers looking for a heroine as flawed as 
themselves will commiserate with Rachel.  KQG 
stewArt, BArBArA The In-Between. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2013 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-250-03016-0 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-03017-7 $7.12
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Ellie and her family are moving to a distant town, and fourteen-year-old Ellie is 
ready for a new life, leaving behind her social ostracism and suicide attempt. On 
the way there, however, they suffer a terrible accident that changes Ellie’s life. 
When she first awakes after her head injury, she finds that her mother has died, 
leaving her alone with her depressed father; it’s then that Ellie meets Madeline, the 
beautiful, fiercely loyal friend who becomes Ellie’s everything. A later awakening, 
however, reveals that experience to have been only Ellie’s hallucinated perception 
in her brain-injured state: it’s actually Ellie’s mother who survived, not her father. 
Madeline, however, returns to be Ellie’s mainstay and more (“She completes me”), 
and Ellie realizes that Madeline is actually Ellie’s twin, who disappeared in utero; 
as Madeline’s actions become dangerous, however, Ellie begins to spiral down into 
isolation and self-destruction. Mood and style make this story: Stewart keeps read-
ers off-balance, never pinning Madeline down as either a supernatural presence 
or a product of Ellie’s disordered mind; to Ellie, Madeline is absolutely real, while 
the rest of the world sees Madeline’s destructive actions—assaulting one of Ellie’s 
friends, for instance—as Ellie herself in the grip of something troubling. Mad-
eline’s seductive, insistent pull on Ellie is deeply creepy, and there’s an additional 
January 2014 • 285
disturbing layer as Ellie’s excuses for Madeline’s behavior begin to sound like those 
of an abused lover (“She’s not trying to be mean, but someday everyone will see 
that I’m a fake”). There’s an inventive touch in the culmination, which involves 
Ellie’s mother’s current pregnancy (again twins, with one lost prior to birth) and 
which will have readers tensely guessing as to Ellie’s self-destruction or survival. 
Somewhere between Dead Ringers and Suma’s 17 & Gone (BCCB 3/13), this is 
a dark and uneasy psychological tale that delivers just the disturbance readers are 
looking for.  DS
stoop, nAoko Red Knit Cap Girl to the Rescue; written and illus. by Naoko 
Stoop. Tingley/Little, 2013 36p
ISBN 978-0-316-22885-5 $17.00   
R 4-6 yrs
Constructing a glider out of newspaper with an attached towline, Red Knit Cap 
Girl and her forest friends White Bunny, Bear, Squirrel, and Hedgehog rescue a 
polar bear cub stranded on an iceberg that has drifted near their shore. After ask-
ing the Moon for advice about what to do next, Red Knit Cap Girl and her pals 
make a sailboat from the same newspaper, and she and White Bunny escort the 
cub home, braving a storm at sea on the way. After witnessing the northern lights 
and finding Polar Bear Cub’s mother, Red Knit Cap Girl and White Bunny “flew 
off into the starry sky.” The use of present tense (“It is a windy day in the forest. 
Red Knit Cap Girl and her friends are playing together”) gives this fanciful story an 
immediacy and voice reminiscent of the narration that children engage in during 
pretend play. The color palette (warm russets, cerulean blues, soft tans, and creamy 
whites) and the woodgrain of the plywood backgrounds provide a warm, organic 
feel to the acrylic, ink, and pencil illustrationss. Minimal facial detail and simple, 
rounded shapes give the figures a toy-like appeal, and indeed, Red Knit Cap Girl’s 
adventures may inspire some fresh pretend play with stuffed animals.  JH 
strAsser, todd No Place. Simon, 2014 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5721-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5723-2 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Responding to a sharp spike in homelessness, a community mayor establishes a 
temporary tent village, Dignityville, with basic sanitation, a heated dining tent, 
and a few electrical generators. This barely registered as a blip on high school senior 
Dan Halprin’s local news radar until his parents both lost their jobs and the house, 
and now the family is moving with their camping gear to Dignityville. Dan tries 
to keep his school life cranking along normally, and he confides his status only to 
his closest friends, but word leaks out. Pity and charity, he finds, are not easy to 
take, and even when friends try to include him in activities, he simply can’t afford 
to run with the old pack. Socializing, however, becomes the least of his worries 
when a local businessman afraid of declining real estate values has a Dignityville 
organizer brutally attacked, and then orchestrates an opportunity to destroy the tent 
village in one stroke. Dan figures out the players in this drama, but that may not 
be enough to secure justice for his homeless neighbors. The ham-fisted messaging 
makes the book read more like a polemic than a novel, with characters weighing 
in on the homeless question as if reading from scripts. Nonetheless, teen readers 
who recognize that their own families may be just a paycheck or two away from a 
similar fate may rightly regard this as a gripping horror story, with fall from social 
grace as terrifying as cold nights and hungry mornings.  EB 
286 • The BulleTin
tiernAn, CAte Darkest Fear. Simon, 2014 [368p] (Birthright)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8246-3 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8245-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Five years ago, Vivi was horrified when her parents revealed the family secret: as 
haguari, descendants of an ancient shape-shifting race originating from Brazil, 
they can transform into jaguars. Having spent much of her adolescence refusing 
to recognize her heritage and learn from her parents, now eighteen-year-old Vivi 
is therefore woefully unprepared when they are brutally murdered and she finds 
herself living with a distant cousin, who rents out his large New Orleans house to 
fellow human/jaguar hybrids. Vivi comes to understand and eventually embrace 
her jaguar nature, but now she’s in more danger than ever before as she learns that 
someone—likely the same person who killed her parents—is hunting and ripping 
out the hearts of other haguari. The plot relies on too many contrived misunder-
standings (Vivi’s romance with a boy stalls several times based on frustratingly vague 
comments) or seemingly illogical actions from the characters (it’s unclear why her 
cousin and friends remain mostly unconcerned after their house is attacked) to 
move the sputtering pace along; the book also suffers as a first in a series, estab-
lishing quite a bit in regards to Vivi’s heritage and the murders but offering little 
resolution. Vivi, however, is credible first as a teenager trying to establish herself 
beyond her parents’ expectations and then as a grieving girl, lost in her guilt, and 
her experience will likely ring true with teens struggling to reconcile the tradition 
of their families with their need for independence. The pursuit of the bad guys 
amps up the action near the end, and the possibility of a steamy romance for Vivi 
in the future might entice readers to revisit these big cats in the sequel (or to go on 
to Klause’s Blood and Chocolate, BCCB 7/97).  KQG
touGiAs, miCHAel J. The Finest Hours: The True Story of a Heroic Sea Rescue; by 
Michael J. Tougias and Casey Sherman. Ottaviano/Holt, 2014 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9764-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
As blizzard conditions enveloped Cape Cod on February 18, 1952, whiteout snow 
squalls and sixty-foot waves meant the Coast Guard was in for a nerve-wracking 
night. No sooner had the men from Chatham Station returned from securing fishing 
boats to their moorings than the alert was raised that not one but two oil tankers 
had both split in two offshore. In this adaptation of his adult work The Finest Hours: 
The True Story of the U.S. Coast Guard’s Most Daring Sea Rescue, Tougias recounts the 
rescue efforts—successes and tragedies—by Coast Guard lifeboat teams that braved 
the waters to give the crews of the Fort Mercer and the Pendleton a slim chance of 
survival. The author unquestionably knows how to spin a suspenseful yarn, fol-
lowing the perilous attempts by the Coast Guard to retrieve men clinging to four 
different ship sections, often without power or communication devices and tossed 
near drifting shoals, while upping the emotional ante with background on some 
of the lead rescuers. Although the text focuses mainly on the rescue itself, results 
of the official inquiry are included, as well as a robust selected bibliography and 
updates on the Pendleton rescuers who were awarded the Gold Lifesaving Medal. 
True adventure readers appreciate a dark and stormy night as much as any gothic 
fan; just add thick wool socks, a heavy sweater, and a mug of hot chocolate.  EB 
January 2014 • 287
underwood, deBorAH  Here Comes the Easter Cat; illus. by Claudia Rue-
da. Dial, 2014 [80p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3939-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 5-7 yrs
An unseen narrator converses with a disgruntled cat, who holds up his end of 
the communication with signs, props, and with facial expressions, about the cat’s 
jealousy of the Easter Bunny’s popularity. When the narrator suggests that the cat 
become “the Easter Cat” and hand out goodies as well, the cat takes to the notion, 
planning to travel by motorcycle in order to beat the Easter Bunny at finishing his 
rounds and to wear a sparkly suit and top hat to trump the E. B.’s vest ensemble. 
Before the cat can zoom off, however, the Easter Bunny himself kindly shows up 
with a chocolate egg for the cat. The Easter Bunny’s evident tiredness inspires Cat 
to add a sidecar to his motorcycle, allowing the bunny to nap while Cat delivers 
the rest of the eggs. In each spread, Underwood’s streamlined text, humorous in its 
slightly parental tone, faces Rueda’s ink and colored pencil drawings. Cat’s nonver-
bal communication will intrigue the same kids who like cracking the picture-talk 
code of Runton’s Owl and Wormy books; Cat’s signs and facial expressions are 
cheekily amusing, sometimes contradicting the narrator (he holds up a poster of 
hearts while sticking out his tongue in disgust as the narrator states, “Well, of course 
everyone loves the Easter Bunny”). Pair this with Shea’s Unicorn Thinks He’s Pretty 
Great (BCCB 7/13) for a silly story session about jealousy, add it to an Easter or 
cat storytime lineup, or tuck it into a cat-lover’s Easter basket.  JH
vAlentine, mAdeline The Bad Birthday Idea; written and illus. by Madeline 
Valentine. Knopf, 2013 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81332-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81331-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81333-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
Ben’s “No dolls allowed” rule bans little sister Alice and her toys from joining in 
the games Ben plays with his toy robot. Alice therefore requests the new Roboy 
2000, which Ben also covets, for her birthday, but when Ben sneakily opens and 
plays with the gift before Alice’s party, he breaks it. To atone, Ben gives Alice his 
own beloved robot toy, and this time when Alice asks if he will play with her, Ben 
warmly assents. Valentine’s clear, succinct text is effective at conveying the complex-
ity of some sibling interactions: it is clear that Alice chooses the Roboy because she 
desperately wants to play with Ben, even though he takes it as a taunt. Additionally, 
the brevity of the text will put this within range of kids who can work their way 
through primary-level easy readers. The graphite, gouache, and colored pencil art 
on watercolor paper is warm and affectionate, and the simple figures resemble 
Schultz’s early Peanuts characters. Freckled Ben’s apprehension, shame, and regret 
are palpably communicated through his facial expressions and body posture. This 
would be a strong family readaloud, an excellent partner for Hoban’s classic A 
Birthday for Frances (BCCB 1/69), or even a useful classroom story to share, as the 
relationship and jealousy issues easily transfer to friendships as well.  JH 
288 • The BulleTin
vAuGHt, susAn Insanity. Bloomsbury, 2014 [300p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59990-784-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-59990-839-7 $10.40
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Located near the Devil’s Backbone, the Lincoln Psychiatric Hospital has its share 
of secrets and ghosts, and no one knows that better than the folks who work there. 
One of them, Forest, is working double shifts to save up enough money for college, 
and she begins to share visions with one of the patients. College student Darius is 
starting as a security guard when he realizes that the ghost of his serial murderer 
grandfather is likely not resting in peace. Trina, Darius’ girlfriend, is no stranger 
to the supernatural, having been raised by witches, but even she is shocked by the 
depraved spirits haunting Lincoln. And Levi—well, Levi has worked at Lincoln 
the longest, as the tattooed and ghostly guardian who shepherds souls into the 
next life, and he’s beginning to realize that the power behind Lincoln’s hauntings 
may be more than he can handle alone. The overarching story of the group’s ef-
forts to control Lincoln is broken up into four stories, each from the perspective 
of the individual teen (or in Levi’s case, spirit); the structure works to maximize 
the thrills, with each vignette having a different monster/ghost to combat while 
offering a more fully realized portrayal of the characters and their relationships to 
each other. Vaught mines a wealth of local history and urban legends to achieve 
her scares, from the common but still frightening child-killing ice cream vendor 
to the real-life figures of the Harpe brothers, arguably the U.S.’s first serial killers, 
and six-year-old Carl Newton Mahan, the youngest person to be tried for murder 
in the States. Some of the metaphysical elements, especially the moments of time 
travel and crossing over, are a bit muddy on the details, but this is still a cinematic 
ghost story that requires only a dark and stormy night to complete the mood.  KQG
wAlker, melissA Ashes to Ashes. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2013 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-207734-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-207736-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Callie has always dulled her pain over losing her mother with daredevil stunts, 
and after her dad gives her a fast BMW, she’s simultaneously testing its limits and 
answering her cell phone when suddenly she’s broadsided and pulled into another 
dimension. She’s greeted by a set of glowing teenagers and informed that the most 
handsome one, Thatcher, is to be her guide through a way station on the road to the 
afterlife, an intermediary place from which she can help the living gain peace with 
her death. Thatcher is cautious and uptight, though, and Callie comes to prefer the 
company of a group of wild teen ghosts who have a different idea of the purposes 
and potentials of haunting, and who are using her mysteriously strong energy to 
possess humans. Callie may struggle to understand the reasons behind Thatcher’s 
rules, but readers will know immediately that she is making all the wrong choices 
with her afterlife, and this is what drives the suspense here: will her reckless decisions 
and misplaced trust lead her to a fate worse than—or at least subsequent to—death? 
A gentle didacticism aimed squarely at risky teen behavior pervades the story as 
Cassie learns to appreciate her father’s style of care, and her glaringly bad judgment 
will have readers shaking their heads; the lure of an after-death romance on top of 
January 2014 • 289
the tried-and-true premise of a teen’s imagining what will happen to friends and 
family after her death, though, will keep readers enthralled. Walker has chosen a 
perfect setting in Charleston, SC, where ghosts are a matter of course and steamy 
summers heighten the gothic atmospherics of teens courting danger. The ending 
is a bit of a tease—sequel, or just a wink to resist closure? Either way, readers will 
be intrigued by this entry in the paranormal romance genre.  KC 
wAller, sHAron BiGGs A Mad, Wicked Folly. Viking, 2014 [448p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01468-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Seventeen-year-old Victoria Darling’s decision to pose nude for an art class sets 
London’s society ablaze with gossip in 1909, and she is immediately brought 
home from her Parisian finishing school to quell the scandal and begin to rebuild 
her reputation. Vicky, however, would much rather focus on her art than ladylike 
behavior, and she begins the arduous (and in her case, necessarily discreet) process 
of applying to the Royal College of Art, an endeavor that eventually leads Vicky 
to throw in her lot with the suffragettes. A budding romance with a working-class 
police officer complicates matters further, and Vicky is soon forced to decide between 
her artistic and romantic passions and the comfortable life her father’s wealth will 
afford her. An author’s note and bibliography reveals Waller’s extensive research, 
and she builds on the facts with a storyteller’s flair, deftly incorporating historical 
details (the gossip surrounding King Edward’s love life, the grassroots strategizing 
of the suffragettes) into this compelling coming-of-age tale that’s as good as any 
British period drama. Vicky is ahead of her time but not anachronistic (her initial 
suspicion of the suffragettes, for instance, is highly plausible), and her romance 
with the cop is sweet but refreshingly not always the focus. Her ultimate decision 
to follow her heart may not be terribly surprising, but the Edwardian world here 
is so immersive and Vicky so likable that readers will want to put on the kettle on 
and settle in for a lovely read.  KQG 
wieBe, JoAnnA The Unseemly Education of Anne Merchant. BenBella, 
2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-939529-32-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
From the minute sixteen-year-old Anne Merchant arrives at Cania Christy, an 
elite boarding school off the coast of Maine, she realizes there is something not 
quite right about the eerie, fog-ridden place. The withered and decidedly creepy 
headmaster assigns her a Guardian, a sort of bodyguard/helicopter peer who will 
grade her every move according to her prosperitas thema, the guiding principle of 
her education assigned by the school. Anne’s directive is to “look closer” and when 
she does so, she finds a secret: Cania Christy’s students are actually dead, and their 
grief-stricken parents pay exorbitant “tuitions” (e.g., the supermodel wife of one 
father must gain 400 pounds, an oil mogul must agree to no fewer than seven oil 
spills a year) to allow their children the chance to earn a second chance at a mortal 
life. Readers clued into the various allusions to Faust and the more general hints 
that something paranormal is going on here will find the revelation of the school’s 
secrets not terribly surprising. Wiebe wisely makes Anne’s discovery not the climax 
of the story but part of her larger experience of realizing that no one here can be 
290 • The BulleTin
trusted, but the logic gets a bit muddied when Anne realizes that she is not dead 
but merely in a coma and that only she has the power to put a stop to the Me-
phistophelean headmaster’s bargaining. The evil characters—and Mephistopheles 
is only one of many and arguably not the worst—make this a wickedly enjoyable 
entertainment, while the gloomy, spooky atmosphere provides enough spine tingles 
to satisfy readers looking for a decent scare.  KQG 
woods, BrendA The Blossoming Universe of Violet Diamond. Paulsen/Penguin, 
2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25714-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Eleven-year-old Violet doesn’t look like her mother or her sister; they both look 
white, while she resembles her black father, who died in a traffic accident before she 
was born, and whose parents are estranged from Violet and her family. Discovering 
that her grandmother is showing her art at a nearby Seattle gallery, Violet decides 
it’s time she met her father’s mother. The surprise encounter is rocky at first, but her 
new Bibi quickly thaws and asks if Violet can come stay with her in Los Angeles for 
a week. It’s a momentous week for Violet, as gaps in her understanding of herself 
get filled and her heart warms to her grandmother. When tragedy strikes, Violet 
becomes even more important to Bibi, and it’s clear that Violet’s world and her 
sense of self have expanded. Violet is a winning protagonist, full of questions and 
full of hope. She’s believably complex: though eager to have adventures with her 
grandmother and meet her father’s people, she finds herself homesick as well, and 
she has no intention of leaving behind the people who have loved and supported 
her all her life just to explore this side of her family. She is angry when she finds 
out that it was a careless moment in her mother’s driving that cost her her father, 
but she also knows that it hurt her mother as much as it hurt her, and she realizes 
that loving the people you have is more important than lamenting the ones she’s 
lost. Her self-conscious reflections enable readers to parse the symbolism behind 
her name and see how her experiences are helping her grow into a person who fits 
it—a sometimes shy, sometimes sparkly and strong person to whom many readers 
will relate.  KC 
zuppArdi, sAm The Nowhere Box; written and illus. by Sam Zuppardi. Candle-
wick, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6367-4 $15.99   
R 3-6 yrs
George’s younger brothers just won’t leave him alone, so he shouts that he’s going 
“nowhere! And you can’t follow me!” before taking off. He discovers that the giant 
cardboard box from a recently delivered washing machine is just the trick to take 
him Nowhere—an empty space where the box can become a roller coaster, rocket 
ship, and all kinds of other nifty, imaginative things. After a bit, though, George 
realizes that Nowhere is a somewhat lonely place and decides to head back to play 
with his younger siblings. George’s plight will be familiar to kids dealing with exas-
perating brothers and sisters or a budding sense of introversion, and his isolationist 
escapism is treated both gently and enthusiastically. Zuppardi’s untidy illustrations 
in acrylic and pencil are kid-inspired with their scratchy, repeated outlines and 
thick, unevenly applied coloration; cardboard is used in the presentation of George’s 
imagined worlds in Nowhere, giving the pictures a rough, three-dimensional 
January 2014 • 291
whimsy and providing a clever nod to the box itself. George—whose red striped 
shirt and boxy imagination are reminiscent of Watterson’s Calvin of Calvin and 
Hobbes in iconicity if not in nature—and his brothers are little more than glorified 
stick figures with huge heads, yet they are strikingly expressive with just a few facial 
details. Bound to appeal to a wide range of kids because of its celebration of both 
collaborative and solitary play, this could be used in a storytime about siblings or 
imagination—or, when paired with a title like McCarty’s Chloe (BCCB 9/12) and 
some sizable cardboard, an introduction to the fun that can be had with boxes.  TA 
292 • The BulleTin
BuLLetIn BLue rIBBons 2013
Congratulations, authors and publishers: you presented us with one of the strongest 
fiction categories in years; tough work for us, but in a gratifying way, and it’s left 
us with one of our longer fiction lists. On the nonfiction front, we saw a particular 
focus on American history, while picture books were a wonderfully motley crew, 
ranging from the moving to the mooing. So pass these around and read up, and 
find your downloadable PDF in trifold format (and any reviewer championing of 
books that didn’t quite make the list) at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu.
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
FICTION:
Dowell, Frances O’Roark. The Sound of Your Voice, Only Really Far Away. Atheneum. 
Gr. 5-7 (September)
Dowell continues her nuanced and honest exploration of middle-school dynamics 
in this third installment of the series that follows friends Kate and Marylin (The 
Secret Language of Girls, BCCB 7/04, The Kind of Friends We Used to Be, BCCB 
5/09) as the now seventh-graders negotiate new and changing relationships. 
Hassan, Michael. Crash and Burn. Balzer + Bray. Gr. 8-12 (March)
The voice of Steve Crashinsky, aka Crash, an ADD, hard-partying teen who’s sur-
prisingly become a hero, is chillingly authentic as he relays his high school experi-
ences complete with sex, pot, and apathetic adults in this provocative indictment 
of contemporary cultural values. 
Haydu, Corey Ann. OCD Love Story. Simon Pulse. Gr. 8-12 (September)
Witty, endearing, and as the title suggests, a bit compulsive, narrator Bea finds herself 
falling for a similarly obsessive guy in her therapy group in this compassionate but 
optimistic examination of neuroses. 
 
Madison, Bennett. September Girls. HarperTeen. Gr. 9-12 (July/August)
This utterly unconventional supernatural romance features Sam, a jaded seventeen-
year-old boy whose summer fling with an otherworldly girl forces him to his 
reconsider his ideas of love and adulthood. 
 
Medina, Meg. Yaqui Delgado Wants to Kick Your Ass. Candlewick. Gr. 8-12 (March)
Brutally honest but ultimately hopeful, this examination of bullying follows high-
schooler Piddy, whose torment at the hands of another girl leaves wounds both 
physical and emotional. 
 
January 2014 • 293
Moskowitz, Hannah. Teeth. Simon Pulse. Gr. 9-12 (February)
Love, loyalty, and sacrifice are deftly explored in this ungothic gothic novel that 
depicts the plight of Teeth, a defiant human/fish hybrid, and his growing and 
complicated friendship with a human teen. 
Rosoff, Meg. Picture Me Gone. Putnam. Gr. 5-8 (December)
A perceptive young girl on a road trip with her father is torn between her desire to 
learn her father’s secrets and her wish to remain protected in this elegantly written 
coming-of-age tale. 
Rowell, Rainbow. Fangirl. St. Martin’s Griffin. Gr. 8-12 (November)
Nuanced characterization of Cath, an introverted freshman more comfortable in 
the world of fan fiction than her in her new college dorm, lends complexity and 
warmth to this humorous romcom. 
Sloan, Holly Goldberg. Counting by 7s. Dial. Gr. 5-8 (September)
Deftly sidestepping cloying lessons about individuality and resourcefulness, Sloan 
presents a sensitive look at a quirky girl who has always been unconditionally 
accepted by her parents, and who must adjust to how to live without them after 
their unexpected deaths.
Smith, Sherri. Orleans. Putnam. Gr. 7-10 (March)
In a futuristic and fever-ridden New Orleans flooded by hurricanes and walled 
off from the rest of the country, a girl struggles not only to survive but to save her 
beloved friend’s baby.
Sternberg, Julie. Like Bug Juice on a Burger; illus. by Matthew Cordell. Amulet/
Abrams. Gr. 2-3 (May)
Homebodies in particularly will enjoy this compassionate but pragmatic story that 
follows young Eleanor as she endures a trip to summer camp.
Timberlake, Amy. One Came Home. Knopf. Gr. 5-8 (February)
Sharpshooting, counterfeiting, a smart protagonist, and a compelling mystery—
what more could you ask out of a book about a nineteenth century Wisconsin girl 
out to find her missing sister, and discovering herself along the way?
Yang, Gene Luen. Boxers; Saints; written and illus. by Gene Luen Yang, color by 
Lark Pien. First Second/Roaring Brook. Gr. 8-12 (November)
The complexities of political and religious conflict are made personal in this power-
ful set of companion graphic novels that takes a look at China’s Boxer Rebellion 
from two different sides. 
NONFICTION:
Bolden, Tonya. Emancipation Proclamation: Lincoln and the Dawn of Liberty; illus. 
with photographs. Abrams. Gr. 5-9 (February) 
Bolden places the famous Civil War document in historical and cultural context, 
chronicling the events that led up to it and explaining its effects, in this compel-
ling investigation.
294 • The BulleTin
Brown, Don. The Great American Dust Bowl; written and illus. by Don Brown. 
Houghton. Gr. 4-7 (October)
Brown employs a graphic novel format and his inimitable storytelling style in this 
vivid, evocative exploration of the causes, experience, and legacy of the Dust Bowl.
Joffo, Joseph. A Bag of Marbles; ad. by Kris; illus. by Vincent Bailly, tr. by Edward 
Gauvin. Graphic Universe. Gr. 6-10 (November)
This graphic-novel-styled memoir chronicles the experiences of Jo and Maurice 
Joffo, Jewish brothers in World War II France who move around the country evad-
ing the grasp of the Nazis and the collaborating French forces.
Rusch, Elizabeth. Eruption!: Volcanoes and the Science of Saving Lives; illus. with 
photographs by Tom Uhlman et al. Houghton. Gr. 5-9 (September)
Striking photographs, thoughtful description of the people who live near volcanoes, 
and gripping international science stories make this outing an exceptional entry in 
a the field of natural disaster books. 
Sandler, Martin W. Imprisoned: The Betrayal of Japanese Americans during World 
War II; illus. with photographs. Walker. Gr. 5-9 (July/August)
This thorough, well-illustrated overview poignantly chronicles the experience of 
Japanese Americans in internment camps and in heroic military action.
Sheinkin, Steve. Lincoln’s Grave Robbers; illus. with photographs. Scholastic. Gr. 
6-10 (January)
Nineteenth-century period atmosphere infuses this riveting and bizarre true story 
about a group of small-time criminals’ plan to make their fortune by seizing the 
late president’s remains and holding them for ransom.
Stone, Tanya Lee. Courage Has No Color: The True Story of the Triple Nickles, America’s 
First Black Paratroopers. Candlewick. Gr. 5-9 (January)
Any story this amazing deserves a rich book packed with illustrations, plenty of 
end matter, and solid storytellling; Stone delivers in this gripping account of the 
first all-black parachute infantry company from World War II. 
Winter, Jonah. You Never Heard of Willie Mays?!: illus. by Terry Widener. Schwartz 
& Wade. Gr. 3-5 (February)
Even readers who imagine themselves indifferent to baseball will be absolutely 
captivated by this rousing story of Willie “Say Hey” Mays, one of the sport’s great-
est all-around players.
PICTURE BOOKS
Bean, Jonathan. Big Snow; written and illus. by Jonathan Bean. Farrar. 4-8 yrs 
(November)
Homey illustrations enhance this irresistible story of a kid who can’t wait for the 
slowly falling snow to accumulate and turns all his chores into snowy imaginings.
January 2014 • 295
Browne, Anthony. One Gorilla: A Counting Book; written and illus. by Anthony 
Browne. Candlewick. 3-7 yrs (January) 
Animal portraits of astonishing detail and individuality reflect our connection with 
our simian relatives in this volume that is both counting book and tacit narrative 
about the primate family.
Bunting, Eve. The Cart That Carried Martin; illus. by Don Tate. Charlesbridge. 
5-8 yrs (December)
Low-key you-are-there text and streamlined unfussy watercolors brim with subtle 
emotion in this story of Martin Luther King’s funeral procession through Atlanta.
Collins, Suzanne. Year of the Jungle; illus. by James Proimos. Scholastic. 5-7 yrs 
(October)
This intimate and authentic picture book draws on Collins’ own childhood experi-
ence in the story of a young girl’s difficulty in dealing with her father’s absence in 
the Vietnam War.
Jenkins, Emily. Water in the Park; illus. by Stephanie Graegin. Schwartz & Wade. 
5-8 yrs (July/August)
People, dog, and water watching—there isn’t much else one could one want out of 
a day at the park, particularly when it’s offered with intricately detailed illustrations 
and poetic yet plainspoken narration. 
LaRochelle, David. Moo!; illus. by Mike Wohnoutka. Walker. 4-7 yrs (November)
This madcap tale of a cow engaged in an illicit road adventure depends entirely on 
her speech for text and demonstrates just how much comic variety can be extracted 
from the simple word “Moo.”
Morales, Yuyi. Niño Wrestles the World; written and illus. by Yuyi Morales. Porter/
Roaring Brook. 4-7 yrs (September)
Although he may only be a luchador in his own mind, young Niño is still a force 
to be reckoned with in this exuberant, warm picture book that celebrates lucha 
libre (and Niño’s excellence as a big brother) with gusto.
 
Scieszka, Jon. Battle Bunny; by Jon Scieszka and Mac Barnett, and Alex; illus. by 
Matthew Myers but mostly Alex. Simon. Gr. 1-3 (December)
Both a sendup of saccharine period picture books and a tribute to kid invention, 
this deliciously comic outing follows young Alex’s savage textual and illustrative 
transforming of a treacly bunny tale into a saga of a thwarted attempt at world 
rabbit domination.
Snicket, Lemony. The Dark; illus. by Jon Klassen. Little. 5-7 yrs (June)
Dramatic gouache and digital illustrations emphasize the potential power of the 
dark to frighten, even while the text alludes to the ways in which children and make 
peace with it as a potentially helpful (or at least harmless) aspect of life. 
Abuse–fiction: Almond
Accidents–fiction: Stewart
Actors and acting–fiction: Federle
ADVENTURE: Benway; Capetta; 
Dashner; Garcia; Larson; Meiss-
ner; Meyer; Monninger; Reedy; 
Sanderson
African Americans: Bolden; Levy; 
Powell
African Americans–fiction: Moses; 
Woods
African Americans–stories: Beaty
Anatomy: Macaulay
Animals: Downer
Animals–stories: Aesop; Na; 
Pinkney; Prahin; Stoop
Art and artists–fiction: Waller
Babies–stories: Na
Baths–stories: Robinson 
BIOGRAPHIES: Bolden; Meltzer; 
Powell; Rappaport
Birds: Roth
Birds–fiction: Jennings
Birthdays–stories: Valentine
Boarding school–fiction: Hubbard; 
Wiebe
Brothers–fiction: Christopher, Neil
Brothers–stories: Zuppardi
Brothers and sisters–stories: Valen-
tine
Bullying–fiction: Jennings
Cats–stories: Underwood
Civil rights movement: Levy
Cloning–fiction: Farmer
Conspiracies–fiction: Reedy 
Crime and criminals–fiction: Chris-
topher, L.; Farmer; Foxlee; Giff; 
Hale; Jaffe; Sanderson
Dance and dancers: Powell 
Death–fiction: Bishara; Moses; 
Pitcher; Walker; Wiebe
DETECTIVE STORIES: Hale
Disasters: Tougias
Disasters–fiction: Almond; Moses
Dystopias–fiction: de la Cruz
Easter–stories: Underwood 
Ecology: Downer; Roth
EPISTOLARy NOVELS: Pitcher
Ethics and values: Christopher, L.; 
Farmer; Jaffe; Pinkney; Reedy; 
Walker
FABLES: Aesop
Families–fiction: Bishara; Demetrios; 
Scott; Staniszewski; Stewart; 
Tiernan; Woods
FANTASy: Almond; Bishara; Chi-
ma; Cokal; de la Cruz; Jennings; 
Joyce; Larson; Tiernan; Vaught
Fathers–fiction: Anderson; Christo-
pher, L.; Giff
Fathers–stories: Beaty
FOLKTALES AND FAIRy TALES: 
Christopher, Neil; Pinkney
Friends–fiction: Federle; Foxlee; Jen-
nings; Sheldon
Friends–stories: Kim; Prahin; Stoop
Funerals–fiction: Moses
Games–fiction: Christopher, L.; 
Dashner
Ghosts–fiction: Garcia; Vaught
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
January 2014 • 297
Gods and goddesses–fiction: Pope
Gold Rush: Meissner
Grandparents–fiction: Woods
GRAPHIC NOVELS: Christopher, 
Neil; Pope
Grief–fiction: Block; de Gramont; 
Hubbard; Kate; Pitcher; Scott
Guilt–fiction: Pitcher
Health: Macaulay
HISTORICAL FICTION: Chris-
topher, Nicholas; Cokal; Martin; 
Moses; Waller
History, U.S.: Bolden; Levy; Meiss-
ner; Meltzer; Rappaport; Tougias
History, world: Isabella
Holocaust–fiction: Sax
Homelessness–fiction: Strasser 
HORROR: Christopher, Neil
Hospitals–fiction: Vaught
HUMOR: Federle; Joyce; Robinson; 
Shea; Underwood
Identity–fiction: Demetrios
Imagination–stories: Stoop; Zup-
pardi
Immigrants–stories: Kim
Inuit–fiction: Christopher, Neil
Jaguars–fiction: Tiernan
Jealousy–stories: Underwood 
Jews–fiction: Sax
Journals–fiction: Sheldon
Language arts: Isabella
Latinos–fiction: Farmer
Legends–fiction: Kate
Letters–stories: Beaty 
Linguistics: Isabella
Literature, classical: Meyer
Literature, English: de Gramont
Literature, world: Wiebe
Magic–fiction: Christopher, Nicholas
Mental illness–fiction: Almond
Mixed-race people–fiction: Woods
Monsters–stories: Shea 
MOTHER GOOSE: McPhail
Mothers–fiction: Martin; Stewart
Moving–stories: Kim
Music and musicians: Levy
Music and musicians–fiction: Chris-
topher, Nicholas
MySTERIES: Benway; Christopher, 
L.; Foxlee; Giff; Hale; Stewart 
Nature study: Downer; Na; Roth
NURSERy RHyMES: McPhail
Parrots: Roth
Play–stories: Zuppardi 
POETRy: McPhail
Possession–fiction: Block
Poverty–fiction: Strasser
Prehistoric animals–stories: Robin-
son
Presidents: Meltzer; Rappaport 
Post traumatic stress disorder–fic-
tion: Anderson
Puerto Rico: Roth
Rabbits–stories: Shea
Reading aloud: Giff
Reading, easy: Joyce; Macaulay
Reading, reluctant: Monninger
Relationships–fiction: Anderson; 
Benway; Capetta; de Gramont; 
Demetrios; Hubbard; Meyer; 
Pitcher; Sheldon; Stewart; Strasser 
Romance–fiction: Block; Chima; 
Douglas; Larson; Scott; Walker; 
Waller
Royalty–fiction: Cokal; Larson
School–fiction: Benway; Jennings; 
Staniszewski; Wiebe
Science: Macaulay
SCIENCE FICTION: Bishara; Ca-
petta; Dashner; Douglas; Farmer; 
Jaffe; Sanderson
Secrets–fiction: Pitcher 
Sharing–stories: Valentine
Shipwrecks: Tougias
Soldiers–fiction: Reedy
Songs: Levy
Spies and spying–fiction: Benway
Stalking–fiction: Sheldon
Storytime: Pinkney
Suffragettes–fiction: Waller
SUPERNATURAL STORIES: 
Block; Chima; de Gramont; Gar-
cia; Kate; Tiernan; Walker; Wiebe
Superpowers–fiction: Sanderson
SURVIVAL STORIES: Monninger; 
Tougias
298 • The BulleTin
SUSPENSE: Stewart
Television–fiction: Demetrios
Time travel–fiction: Douglas
TODDLER BOOKS: McPhail
Twins–fiction: Block; Martin
Venice–fiction: Christopher, Nicho-
las
Voyages and travel: Meissner
Voyages and travel–fiction: de la 
Cruz
War–fiction: Meyer; Pope
Wolves–fiction: Christopher, Neil
Women’s studies: Cokal; Meltzer; 
Powell; Waller
WORDLESS BOOKS: Kim 
Work–fiction: Staniszewski
World War II–fiction: Sax
Writers and writing–fiction: Hub-
bard
