T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
February 2013
Vol. 66   No. 6
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Published by  
Th e Johns hopkins University press
essential.
Deborah stevenson, Editor
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 66 (2013). 
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $58.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$98.00 (print); $105.00 (online); 
$137.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
February 2013
Vol. 66 No. 6
281  the BIg PICture
 
 Teeth  written and illus. by Hannah Moskowitz
282  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
285 •  Emancipation Proclamation: Lincoln and the Dawn of Liberty  by Tonya 
Bolden
296 •  The Price of Freedom: How One Town Stood Up to Slavery  by Judith Bloom 
Fradin and Dennis Brindell Fradin; illus. by Eric Velasquez
299 • The Fire Horse Girl   by Kay Honeyman
313 • One Came Home  by Amy Timberlake
315 • You Never Heard of Willie Mays?!  by Jonah Winter; illus. by Terry Widener
318  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
319  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $98.00; combined print & electronic $137.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2013 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Teeth ©2013 and used by permission of Simon Pulse.
February 2013 • 281
the BIg PICture
Teeth
by Hannah Moskowitz
A boy lies in bed at night on an isolated rocky island, listening as the waves crash 
loudly against the shore—but not loudly enough to drown out the screaming that 
rings out across the sea every night. A mysterious girl lives in a secluded mansion 
that she almost never leaves, fascinating the boy. A monstrous secret from the past 
is enfleshed as a being that threatens the heart of the island. Those are some old-
school gothic elements, but Moskowitz brings them into arresting modernity in 
this breathtaking, heartbreaking, wholly original tale.
Sixteen-year-old Rudy, our narrator, isn’t a particularly gothic kid; he was 
mostly a thoughtless young guy with a fondness for mild bullying and getting laid 
until his five-year-old brother, Dylan, became horribly, incurably ill with cystic 
fibrosis. Now he and his family have come to this distant place in hope that the 
island’s silver Enki fish, reported to be curative, can heal Dylan, and it actually 
seems to be working. Diana, the daughter of the island matriarch, is the only other 
teenager on the island, and Rudy strikes up a flirtation with her out of lust, out of 
boredom, and out of interest in her vast library. 
But the relationship that really changes Rudy’s life is another one. The 
swiftly swimming guy who Rudy occasionally spots in the distance turns out to be 
someone—something very different up close: “webbed fingers, the scrawny torso 
patched with silver scales, and a twisted fish tail starting where his hips should be, 
curling into a dirty fin. A fish. A boy. The ugliest thing I have ever seen.” Despite 
being a fish-human hybrid, profane, prankish Teeth (as he calls himself for his pointy 
fish teeth) proves to be excellent company for a lonely human guy, and he and Rudy 
gradually become friends. Teeth, however, has a mission: he wants to free the Enki 
fish, and his attempts at sabotage make him the target of the fishermen, who beat 
him nightly with cruel and lethal intent. A horrified Rudi initially throws his lot 
in with his friend, but then the fish scarcity sends his beloved little brother back 
into a literally suffocating downspiral. The friends realize they’re at an impasse: the 
fishing that Teeth aims to prevent is the only thing keeping Rudy’s brother alive. 
That’s not even plumbing the full depths of this lacerating story about 
love and caretaking, guilt and complicity, liberation and isolation. Moskowitz 
writes Rudy’s narration with authentically conversational roughness and subtle 
craft, and characters are interestingly faceted. Rudy is deeply devoted to his family 
and especially to Dylan, but he also fears that the miracle of the fish means he’ll 
be exiled to this island for the rest of his life. Diana, the girl who knows about life 
only from books, is coolly intriguing. Teeth himself is fascinatingly depicted: no 
282 • The bulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
lithe silver mermaid, he’s a doomed chimera; the result of bizarre human/fish sexual 
congress, he struggles on land or at sea. Under his brash insouciance, he’s innocent 
and longing and desperately in need, and his friendship for Rudy evolves into truly 
moving involvement with Dylan’s fate as well. But the ethical quandary the two 
friends face is utterly implacable: since Teeth is half-Enki fish, they’re weighing the 
value of Teeth’s brothers against Rudy’s. 
While Moskowitz clearly knows her literary context (even Diana’s library 
adds resonance), she’s never enslaved by it. This is an ungothic gothic, a harshly 
unmagical work of magical realism, with more in common with Chris Lynch than 
“The Little Mermaid,” and no matter what readers are expecting, they’re certain 
to find surprises. They’ll also find poignant exploration of some of life’s hardest 
questions, like what you sacrifice for those you love and what price is too much to 
pay for freedom. Between the provocative questions, the warm and weird friend-
ship, and the blurring of the edges of reality, readers will be hooked. (See p. 307 
for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Arnold, Tedd Dirty Gert; written and illus. by Tedd Arnold. Holiday House, 
2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2404-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
“Little Gert loved eating dirt,” Arnold explains in this cheerfully absurd rhyming 
story about a girl who loves nothing better than to wallow in and slurp up the soil. 
Even as a baby, Gert loved the ground, and nothing her parents could do would 
dissuade her (“As years went by, they’d try and try,/ But could not civilize her”). As 
she plays in the rain one day, the water causes her to root and blossom, an event 
that makes her quite the media celebrity and scientific puzzle. Unfortunately, all the 
attention begins to take its toll (“First came her wilt/ and then her tilt!/ Her fame 
had jeopardized her!”), so her level-headed parents chase off the sensation-seekers 
and responsibly trim, fertilize, and care for their little plant. This is a gratifyingly 
goofy story almost entirely bereft of message (save the transgressive pleasures of 
mucking about in muck); Arnold’s tightly rhymed, originally structured verses are 
all the more ludicrous for their polysyllabic precision (“Out came the sun/ Oh, 
wow! What FUN!/ It photosynthesized her!”). Line and watercolor–style digital art 
features Arnold’s trademark tone-on-tone squiggled hatchwork in the backgrounds 
and bulging golf-ball eyes on the huge-headed humans. Additional comedy comes 
from Gert’s fan club of worms, who comment on the situation in small ground-
February 2013 • 283
level speech balloons. Use this in pairing with Cronin’s Diary of a Worm (BCCB 
10/03) for a celebration of the soil, let novice readers pore over it on their own, or 
just share it for a raucous readaloud.  DS
Asim, JAbAri Fifty Cents and a Dream: Young Booker T. Washington; illus. by Bryan 
Collier. Little, 2012 42p
ISBN 978-0-316-08657-8 $16.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
This picture-book biography focuses on the early years of the nineteenth-century 
African-American leader who worked to advance the status of freeborn and eman-
cipated black citizens in the United States. The main body of text deals specifi-
cally with Washington’s efforts at learning to read and his determination to attend 
the Hampton Institute, while most of the information about the prominent and 
controversial figure Washington would later become is relegated to author notes 
and addenda. There’s much to appeal to a primary-grade audience in the story of 
a little boy who is denied formal education, but who listens in at the school house 
window, teaches himself his letters, and ultimately walks and works his way across 
the state of Virginia to attain the schooling he craves. Unfortunately, the tone of 
the presentation is so rife with awestruck mythologizing and Collier’s magnificently 
arresting mixed media compositions are so symbol-laden that Washington seems 
oddly distant and difficult to approach. Washington’s age progression from child-
hood through late teens is challenging to follow within the illustrations, as is the 
depiction of his educational progress, which backpedals from self-taught reader 
(“Booker went to work on his ABCs, tracing the strange marks as they danced across 
the page. Soon they began to make sense. . . . At last, he could read”) to emergent 
reader in a “tiny, crowded [school]room. . . . ‘A an apple. B a bird.’”  Although the 
significance of Washington’s storied career may elude children who hear nothing 
beyond the main text, those lucky enough to view this work with the guidance of 
an engaged adult will be privileged to meet a most remarkable man.  EB 
bAskin, norA rAleigh Surfacing. Candlewick, 2013 [208p]
Trade ed. 978-0-7636-4908-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6361-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Two things define Maggie’s life: the drowning of her older sister, Leah, when 
Maggie was a little girl, and people’s mysterious urge to tell their deepest secrets 
to her. Now she’s a teenager, dealing with her water unease by becoming a cham-
pion swimmer, isolated by people’s quickly regretted intimacies, and aiming all 
her longing toward an older boy, Matthew. She’s so focused on Matthew that her 
relationship with kind and affectionate Nathan is mostly just a means to gaining 
the sexual experience she’s sure will finally allow her to win the approval that she 
craves from Matthew. Baskin limns her protagonist with quick, clear strokes; the 
third-person narration limits itself largely to Maggie’s own knowledge, so Maggie’s 
unawareness of her dysfunction is a plausible characteristic that leaves readers to 
extrapolate her feelings from her behavior. The eternal struggle of her relationship 
with Leah, whom Maggie experienced first as a bossy older sister and then as the 
silent, absent center of the family, is compellingly explored, and the interwoven 
flashbacks focalized through Leah add dimension. Unfortunately, they also enhance 
the choppiness of the episodic narrative, and the chronological skipping around 
284 • The bulleTin
makes it hard to get a fix on the emotional trajectory; as a result, the revelation of 
family secrets surrounding Leah’s death seems less conclusive than spontaneous. 
The relationships remain memorable, though, and it’s an affecting portrait of the 
extent of the aftershocks from a family tragedy.  DS
beAn, JonAThAn Building Our House; written and illus. by Jonathan Bean. Far-
rar, 2013 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-374-38023-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
All but the most rabid adult DIY fans will shudder at the idea of building a house 
in their spare time, but children who follow the stages in this remarkable enterprise 
will think it’s a fabulous idea. The young daughter of the featured parents supplies 
the matter-of-fact narration, explaining how the trailer for their temporary housing 
is pulled near the site, water and electricity are hooked up, and the work of collect-
ing stones for the foundation and staking out the footprint begins. Winter rudely 
intervenes, but warm weather means the foundation can be excavated and lined, 
lumber measured and trimmed, and a frame raising party hosted for family and 
neighbors. The installation of an old fashioned stove keeps the work proceeding 
apace during one more winter and the family is in their newly completed home 
by springtime. The narrator, who considers herself integral to the success of the 
project, explains each step carefully, but as the audience takes in the wonderfully 
detailed, often humorous cartoon-styled pictures, they see what her words don’t 
describe as well as what they do. Stating “My brother helps Dad carry the tools” 
doesn’t quite capture the fact that the little guy “holds” the hammer while Dad 
holds him, nor does she mention that while Mom and Dad toil and sweat, she and 
her brother splash in a wading pool. Bean includes a note about his own parents’ 
experience in house building, and although he admits he has only “vague memories 
of ladders and a cement mixer,” he certainly will impel a few eager listeners to ask, 
“Can’t we do that too?”  EB
berne, emmA CArlson Never Let You Go. Simon Pulse, 2012 [240p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4017-3 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4018-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
A year ago, Megan drunkenly made out with the boyfriend of her best friend, 
Anna, but the girls subsequently made up, and now they’re spending the summer 
working on at a farm together. Anna immediately sets her sights on Jordan, another 
summer worker, but he resists her aggressive overtures and prefers Megan instead. 
Though Megan tries to resist, not wanting to hurt Anna again, the attraction 
between her and Jordan is too strong. Once again, Anna appears to forgive, but 
that appearance quickly dissolves into psychotic revenge. The problem, in terms 
of plot and character development, is that Anna’s descent from normal teen into 
crazed woman scorned happens entirely too quickly, lacking sufficient hints and 
warning signs of her instability. All of the pieces are in place, including a mysterious 
incident that caused a rift between Anna and her aunt, but the narrative doesn’t 
draw the elements together into a sense of threat or foreboding that raises Megan’s 
or the reader’s suspicions; even when horrible things start to happen, Anna has to 
explain herself and what she’s done, since Megan is taken completely by surprise. 
February 2013 • 285
The romance between Jordan and Megan is compelling, though, and the climax 
is action-filled and reminiscent of some of romance’s best villainesses gone wild 
(think Alex Forrest in Fatal Attraction); readers who persevere past the lead-in may 
still enjoy the payoff.  KC
blAkemore, megAn FrAzer The Water Castle; illus. by Jim Kay. Walker, 
2013 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2839-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6 
When his father suffers a stroke, Ephraim Appledore-Smith moves with his fam-
ily to Dad’s ancestral home, the Water Castle, in a tiny Maine town. The town is 
also rumored to be home to a legendary Fountain of Youth, searched for tirelessly, 
but seemingly fruitlessly, by Ephraim’s own ancestors. Desperate to help his dad, 
Ephraim becomes convinced that the magic water exists and begins his own search, 
locating secret tunnels under the castle as well as a hidden laboratory used by his 
eccentric ancestor, Orlando Appledore. Alternating with Ephraim’s story is young 
Nora Darling’s tale from the early 1900s, as she assisted Orlando with his search and 
his experiments with the water. The novel suffers from an overload of plot threads 
(besides the quest for immortality, there’s also an old family rivalry subplot and a 
class project about the North Pole), and many of the characters are underdeveloped. 
Middle child Ephraim is credible in his longing to excel like his siblings and in his 
urgent desire to help his father recover, though; the mysteries surrounding the water 
are compelling and the twist of science involved is original. The central question of 
the water’s efficacy is ultimately answered, while a few elements are left intriguingly 
unresolved. Although not on the level of Babbitt’s Tuck Everlasting (BCCB 2/76), 
this would make a natural pairing with that classic title.  JH
bolden, TonyA Emancipation Proclamation: Lincoln and the Dawn of Lib-
erty. Abrams, 2013 120p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-4197-0390-4 $24.95   
R* Gr. 5-9
Among the most contentious issues addressed in American History classes are 
Lincoln’s attitudes toward the nation’s African Americans, free and enslaved, 
and whether the vaunted Emancipation Proclamation actually freed anybody. 
Bolden tackles these questions in a richly illustrated overview of the lead-up to the 
Proclamation, organizing and reiterating information already familiar to many 
middle-schoolers, while introducing material that will probably be eye-opening to 
students who have taken their textbook’s version of history at face value. Divided 
into three sections, the books examines the growing body of laws and policies that 
set the stage for Secession; competing moral arguments and wartime exigencies 
that impelled and restrained Lincoln from issuing an unconditional declaration of 
freedom for all slaves; and the final revision of the startlingly amended Proclama-
tion and its ultimate reception within various African-American and Abolitionist 
communities. The first and third chapters are written largely from the point of 
view of African Americans awaiting action from the White House, and Bolden 
imparts the tension that must have been palpable among those whose futures hung 
in the political balance. The middle chapter, which covers the fits and starts of the 
process, allows readers to track the political pressures on Lincoln and form their 
own nuanced judgment on his performance. A wealth of period illustrations are 
286 • The bulleTin
provided, including a remarkable set of juxtaposed political cartoons by Rebel and 
Union supporters that depict Lincoln writing the Proclamation, as well as docu-
ments with sections of illuminating commentary. An annotated timeline, glossary, 
source notes, selected bibliography, and index are appended.  EB
brACken, AlexAndrA The Darkest Minds. Hyperion, 2012 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-5737-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-5932-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R  Gr. 9-12
A mysterious disease has killed most of America’s children, and those few who 
survived have developed stunning new powers, including telekinesis and mind 
control. Suddenly terrified of its own children, the government rounds up the 
young survivors, confining them in camps where they are strictly monitored and 
controlled. Sixteen-year-old Ruby, imprisoned since her tenth birthday, has been 
keeping secret the true extent of her mind-control powers. Rescued by the Children’s 
League, she quickly realizes that the League has plans of its own for her future and 
escapes her rescuers, joining up instead with a ragtag group of fellow fugitives led 
by would-be hero Liam. On the run from government agents, bounty hunters, 
League members, and even other runaways, Ruby and her companions search for 
the Slip Kid, the leader of an underground safe house for kids. The Slip Kid turns 
out also to have an agenda, and Ruby is faced with deciding how much she will 
sacrifice for her future and her freedom. Heart-wrenching but completely riveting, 
the novel pulls no punches, creating a bleak world where the best that children can 
hope is to escape those who would imprison or manipulate them is the best that 
children can hope for. Resisting the urge to overexplain, Bracken carefully employs 
hints and flashbacks to reveal essential background information, and the gradual 
revelation of the story’s many secrets ratchets up the anxiety. The resolute harsh-
ness, though, is tempered by genuine emotional connections between the survivors 
and playful banter between friends; a blossoming romance emerges between Ruby 
and Liam but never overshadows Ruby’s personal emotional journey. Fans of the 
darker elements of Collins’ The Hunger Games (BCCB 11/08) and Shusterman’s 
Unwind (BCCB 2/08) will want to pick up this inventive new take on the science 
fiction survival story.  AM 
brAnFord, AnnA Violet Mackerel’s Remarkable Recovery; illus. by Elanna Al-
len. Atheneum, 2013 [128p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3588-9 $14.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3589-6 $5.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3590-2 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-3 
Violet Mackerel (from Violet Mackerel’s Brilliant Plot, BCCB 10/12) is alarmed to 
find that her sore throat means that she must go to the hospital for a tonsillectomy. 
As she waits for surgery, her anxiety is assuaged by a lovely older lady who’s a fellow 
patient, and who promises to meet Violet for tea after their recoveries. Unfortu-
nately, Violet doesn’t know how to get in touch with the lady—until she hears the 
woman’s voice on a call-in radio show and calls in herself to leave the woman a 
message (and also wangles an opportunity to try out her new and improved post-
op singing voice on the air). Their reunion proves to be even more serendipitous 
February 2013 • 287
than they had realized, since the lady turns out to be the midwife who actually 
helped deliver Violet years ago. The story’s crucial coincidences are believable, and 
Violet is a truly charming kid to whom many young readers will relate. Her habit 
of creative thinking and theory formation, evident in the previous book as well, 
makes her a useful model as a problem-solver. Here she creates “The Theory of 
Giving Small Things”: if someone has a problem and “you give them something 
small like a feather, or a pebble, or a purple lozenge, that small thing might have 
a strange and special way of helping them.” The gentle humor, numerous illustra-
tions, short length, and large type will make this very accessible to novice chapter 
book readers; the skillful writing and concise but detailed characterizations make 
it worth their time. Final art not seen.  JH
breen, sTeve Pug & Doug; written and illus. by Steve Breen.  Dial, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3521-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Pug and Doug, two anthropomorphized dogs, are best buds, sharing a love for 
movies, polka music, and bird-watching. When a couple of misunderstandings lead 
Doug to think that Pug is tired of their friendship, he is crushed. Pug, however, 
quickly clears up the confusion, explaining that a photo of the two was accidentally, 
not purposely, thrown away; Pug’s diary entry, “I’m really sick of old Doug” was 
unfinished and was supposed to read “I’m really sick of old Doughnuts”; and Pug 
was rushing off not to hang with another friend but to pick up Doug’s birthday gift. 
While the setup is a stretch, kids who roll their eyes at more blatantly instructive tales 
of friendship will find this story’s casual approach and distinctive details much more 
palatable, and the book makes a natural intro to a discussion of friendship-related 
miscommunications and mishaps. Elements of both the text and the illustrations 
(executed in watercolor, acrylic, colored pencil, and Photoshop) successfully convey 
Pug’s and Doug’s likability and individuality. Floppy-eared, lavender-gray Doug 
with an elongated head, dressed in T-shirt, jeans, and Chuck Taylors, is a pleasant 
visual contrast to the cream-colored Pug in his slightly more tailored plaid shirt, 
tweedy pants, and sensible brown oxfords. Numerous clever illustrative details add 
a welcome layer of humor to the text, and kids will especially enjoy the visual joke 
that closes the book.  JH
bromley, niCk Open Very Carefully: A Book with Bite!; illus. by Nicola 
O’Byrne. Nosy Crow/Candlewick, 2013 [28p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6163-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
What starts out as a retelling of “The Ugly Duckling” goes quickly awry when 
the narrator spots a sinister spiky tail on the text page (“There’s something in this 
book that shouldn’t be here!”). After another hinting spread, a page turn reveals a 
crocodile (“A really big scary one!”), who’s chowing down on text letters and ruin-
ing the story. The Ugly Duckling, who is all that’s left of the original story, draws 
the audience into the action, exhorting viewers to rock the book to lull the croc to 
sleep, to draw on him in fuchsia crayon to make him less scary, and to shake him 
out of the book when he finally wakes up. This is so engagingly interactive that 
it would make a fabulous app, and even in book form it will appeal to kids who 
relish the game-playing aspect (and, alas for library copies, the crayoning-on-pages 
288 • The bulleTin
aspect). The playful tone and accessibility make this particularly appropriate for 
kids who have a ways before they’re ready for Wiesner’s The Three Pigs (BCCB 
5/01) or Scieszka’s The Stinky Cheese Man (BCCB 10/92). The visuals are key to the 
enjoyment here, with the watercolor figures of the Ugly Duckling (in a red bobble 
hat) and the lurid and oversized crocodile (with digitally enhanced teeth) floating 
against the pale pages as the text careens and arrows point across the spreads. Watts’ 
Chester (BCCB 11/07) or Schwarz’s There Are Cats in This Book (BCCB 12/08) 
are still the titles to beat in this area, but kids who’d rather play with a book than 
read it will embrace the opportunity.  DS
brown, don Henry and the Cannons: An Extraordinary True Story of the Ameri-
can Revolution; written and illus. by Don Brown. Roaring Brook, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-266-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
 It’s winter of 1775, and the British occupy Boston. General Washington and his 
troops, however, have the offensive advantage in the surrounding hills, ready to 
“rain cannonballs on the British soldiers’ heads”; or at least they could if they had 
any artillery. Portly, sedentary bookseller Henry Knox, who’s read a fair deal about 
military tactics, convinces the general to let him bring in the heavy guns from Fort 
Ticonderoga, which had been seized from the enemy months previously. Here 
Brown presents Knox’s daunting journey as both an epic adventure and a winning 
tale of a most unlikely hero. Winter itself plays a duplicitous starring role, one 
moment driving wind and icy water into the row boats tugging the cannons across 
Lake George, the next moment delivering a hard freeze to help horses and oxen drag 
the guns “over frosty trails and across frozen rivers.” Line and watercolor paintings 
in icy aquas and snowy whites reinforce the shivery setting of this urgent mission, 
and although the stakes are deadly serious, the flight of the Redcoats at the sight 
of the cannon arrayed on the hilltop provides a touch of humor. The picture-book 
format directs this at a young audience, but upper elementary history teachers 
should welcome this title as a springboard or supplement to a Revolutionary War 
unit. A brief bibliography of adult print resources is included.  EB
bruChAC, JAmes, ad. Rabbit’s Snow Dance: A Traditional Iroquois Story; ad. by 
James and Joseph Bruchac; illus. by Jeff Newman. Dial, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3270-4 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Long-tailed Rabbit’s got a hankering for the “tasty leaves and buds” that grow in 
the treetops, so even though it’s summer, he decides to sing his snow song (“‘EE-
OOO!’ Thump! Thump! ‘EE-OOO!’ Thump! Thump! ‘YO, YO, YO! YO, YO, 
YO!’”) to create a bank of snow that will elevate him to the right height to grab his 
snack. Rabbit quickly gets carried away, however, and soon the subsequent snowfall 
has covered not only the ground but other animals as well. A satisfied and now 
tired Rabbit falls asleep on a branch, and while he sleeps, the snow melts; the next 
morning, he steps off the branch and plummets to the earth, losing bits of his long 
tail in the tree along the way. The chastened (and now short-tailed) Rabbit learns 
to wait for winter before singing his snow song again, and the bits of tail he left in 
the tree became what we now know as pussy willows. The Bruchacs’ retelling of 
this traditional Iroquois tale is measured in pace yet informally conversational. The 
picturesque language (“Azikanapo. That word means it will snow foot wrappers, great 
February 2013 • 289
big flakes of snow”) makes it a pleasure to read aloud while the sonorous repeated 
phrases (“I will make it snow, AZIKANAPO! I will make it snow, AZIKANAPO!”) 
invite audience participation. With sweeping inky brush strokes and strong hori-
zontal lines, Newman’s watercolor, gouache, and ink illustrations are intriguing in 
their angular stylization. The Bruchacs offer no note about the origins of this tale, 
but the story is definitely worth a readaloud session and could be a useful addition 
to a unit on pourquoi tales.  JH
burleigh, roberT Look Up!: The Story of the First Woman Astronomer; illus. by 
Raúl Colón. Wiseman/Simon, 2013 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-5819-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8110-7 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 7-9 yrs
Burleigh introduces Henrietta Leavitt, a nineteenth-century woman determined to 
study astronomy at a time when “almost all astronomy teachers and students were 
men.” Although she graduated from college and secured a job in an observatory, 
Leavitt was confined to working with a group of other women doing calculations 
of star positions in photographs taken by male colleagues. Careful observations, 
however, led Leavitt to discover minute changes in the apparent brightness of 
certain stars over time, which in turn led to methods of determining how far a star 
is from Earth. This is a useful overview of a lesser-known scientific contributor, 
and Burleigh as usual writes with smooth clarity. The information is somewhat 
scanty, though (concluding notes mention that little is actually known about Lev-
itt’s life), and the titular claim of Leavitt as “first woman astronomer” is tempered 
by mention of Caroline Herschel, born a century earlier, “who discovered eight 
comets.” Colón’s grainy, somewhat dreamy colored-pencil illustrations depict 
a rather somber-looking woman examining astral images that viewers can’t see, 
making the significance of her work difficult to understand for a young audience. 
This therefore falls considerably short of being inspirational, but it will help fill in 
the picture about women’s early contributions to the sciences. A collection of end 
matter includes quotes about the stars, brief notes about Leavitt’s life and discoveries 
and about other early female astronomers, a glossary, and a compact list of websites 
and titles for more exploration.  EB
buzo, lAurA Love and Other Perishable Items. Knopf, 2012 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97000-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87000-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98674-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Amelia is a fifteen-year-old girl living in Sydney, Australia, working at a grocery 
store and trying to figure out romantic relationships. Chris is a twenty-one-year-
old university student, working at the same grocery store and nursing the wounds 
of thwarted love. Amelia finds Chris sophisticated, witty, and otherwise perfect; 
even though she knows there isn’t a chance for them, she’s still helplessly smitten. 
They talk literature and feminism, and he finds himself wanting to teach her and 
to learn from her as well. This isn’t the kind of book where anything actually hap-
pens: instead, it’s a completely character-driven story of two people with similar 
perspectives on life but at two different stages in their understanding. Chris is 
290 • The bulleTin
every bit as romantic and starry-eyed as Amelia, but the stars in his eyes have been 
dimmed by bad relationships and dismal economic prospects (he’s living with 
his parents and trying to parlay his degree in sociology into a career). Amelia, on 
the other hand, is just starting to learn about life and love through literature, her 
parents’ less-than-perfect union, and her friend’s interest in obnoxious boys their 
own age. Parties, wishes, dreams, kisses, occasional sex (for Chris, not Amelia) 
and misunderstandings engender wistful and sometime hilarious musings that 
readers will find utterly honest and reflective of their own experiences. Perspective 
alternates between Amelia’s straightforward, sometimes angsty narration of her 
everyday experiences and feelings and Chris’s more witty and stylized entries in his 
diary, which he bequeaths to Amelia as he leaves for a year in Japan, offering an 
open end of possibility for this thoroughly ordinary, thoroughly likable pair.  KC
CArriger, gAil Etiquette & Espionage. Little, 2013 [320p] (Finishing 
School)
ISBN 978-0-316-19008-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R  Gr. 7-12
Mademoiselle Geraldine’s Finishing Academy for Young Ladies of Quality was 
supposed to tame fourteen-year-old Sophronia Temminnick, but it turns out to 
be an altogether different kind of school. Now Sophronia is learning not only 
handkerchief manipulation and the language of fans but also intelligence-gathering, 
knife-throwing, and drink-poisoning. While Sophronia remains a rule-breaker, 
socializing with the sooties who work in the boiler room and scaling the porches 
and riggings of her balloon-based boarding school in the sky, she’s also trying to 
make friends, keep manipulative, social-climbing classmates at bay, and learn to 
be a lady as her mother expects. When flywaymen (highwaymen of the air) attack 
the school, looking for a priceless prototype that is supposed to be hidden there, 
Sophronia and her classmates use their new skills to defend themselves and un-
cover a conspiracy. Best-selling adult author Carriger brings her adventure-driven 
steampunk sensibility successfully into the young adult literature market here, 
and the combination of girl-power adventure, Victorian fashion, and steampunk 
aesthetic brings likely popularity not just with fans of steampunk but also followers 
of Bray’s Gemma Doyle trilogy (A Great and Terrible Beauty, BCCB 5/04), Wrede’s 
Sorcery and Cecilia (BCCB 9/03), and Godbersen’s Luxe novels (The Luxe, BCCB 
2/08). Readers will enjoy rushing headlong through a series of misadventures with 
Sophronia and her various compatriots in this thoroughly entertaining first of a 
proposed series.  AM 
Chen, JusTinA Return to Me. Little, 2013 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-316-10255-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Moving away from her Washington home seems to be a logical part of Reb’s life 
plan; after the summer, she’ll start at Columbia University, studying to be a cor-
porate architect in the family firm, while her family moves to New Jersey for her 
father’s new job. All that unravels upon their arrival on the East Coast, when her 
father announces that he’s leaving the family to be with another woman, forcing 
Reb to question everything she thought she knew about her life. She travels with 
her mother and brother to Hawaii, searching for peace and perspective with her 
February 2013 • 291
eccentric grandparents—and pushing away her beloved boyfriend back home. 
Chen writes with trembling if sometimes overwritten tenderness of a girl’s coming 
into her own and figuring out what she wants in the face of crisis. Reb’s narration 
is emotional and anguished yet reflective as she begins to reconsider everything 
she has previously taken for granted. Romance fans will appreciate her eventual 
reunion with Jackson, while realists will find the epilogue, which has the couple 
later parting ways, to be an authentic touch. The running theme of Reb’s family gift 
of premonition never really pays off either literarily or psychically, though, and the 
book handles the exploration of values ham-handedly, with wild unsubtlety in the 
polarity between the family’s shallow old life and their new devotion to a creative 
healing retreat with Reb’s mom’s family. Readers will nonetheless appreciate the 
encouragement to question their roads and embrace their artistic sides, along with 
the reminder that even bad change can bring good consequences.  DS
CoCCA-leFFler, mAryAnn A Vacation for Pooch; written and illus. by Maryann 
Cocca-Leffler. Ottaviano/Holt, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9106-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
Vacation can be bittersweet if you’re leaving a friend behind, and so it is for young 
Violet, whose beloved dog Pooch is staying with Violet’s grandparents while she and 
her parents go to Florida. After an enjoyable day at the beach, Violet realizes with 
horror at nightfall that the special bag she packed to go with Pooch instead came 
with her to Florida; when she calls her grandfather in guilt and desperation, she’s 
relieved (and a little wistful) to find out that Pooch has been having a grand time 
without her on his own vacation. Cocca-Leffler hits squarely on the youthful attach-
ment to pets, with its blend of responsibility, projection, and love, and the anxiety 
of separation here; the narrative is carefully structured, with parallels between kid 
and dog, neatly repetitive outlines of Violet’s activities, and back-and-forth dialogue 
adding rhythm to the story. Bright touches of patterned fabric collage add further 
liveliness to the light-filled gouache scenes, with compact split-screen vignettes al-
lowing viewers to see Pooch’s and Violet’s vacations simultaneously; while faces are 
minimally suggested, Violet’s a dark-haired charmer who could credibly belong to 
various ethnic backgrounds. This will be a usefully light-hearted way to approach 
separation anxiety of all kinds, and the book’s small size makes it perfect to tuck into 
a bag for reassuring worried young travelers who miss their own furry friends.  DS
Cooke, luCy A Little Book of Sloth; written and illus. with photographs by Lucy 
Cooke et al. McElderry, 2013 [64p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4557-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4558-1 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 3-5
Move over, pandas—there’s a new adorable wild animal on the picture-book scene. 
Sloth aficionado Cooke casts the sloths of Costa Rica’s sloth sanctuary (which she 
dubs “Slothville”) in an adorable photoessay that combines vivid images of the 
photogenic residents with lively information about sloths in general and individual 
residents. The British author/photographer writes with affection and playfulness, 
taking a bloggishly jokey tone in personifying the sloths and imagining their re-
sponses (“After his trip to the sloth salon, Mateo looks even more like a puffball, 
292 • The bulleTin
which kind of annoys him”). There’s also plenty of genuine, humorously phrased 
information about the sanctuary’s methods of meeting sloth needs (for instance, 
since baby sloths depend on cuddling with their mothers, orphans get a stuffed-
animal companion) and sloth characteristics in general (“It takes them four weeks 
to digest one meal and their stomach contents make up two thirds of their body 
weight”). Cooke composes her shots for maximum effect and minimum clutter, 
with each spread centering on her stunning photographs. The appealingly soft 
sloths pose with careless, fuzzy grace and an obliging willingness to look at the 
camera. The text’s sophistication makes this suitable for a slightly older group than 
usual for cuddly photoessays, but kids with patience for the book’s longer length 
will enjoy listening to it as a readaloud, and plenty of youngsters will be happy 
just to flip through the images of an unfamiliar but deeply cuddleable collection 
of creatures. A brief note provides the URL for the sanctuary and for the author’s 
Sloth Appreciation Society.  DS
Cooney, CAroline b. Janie Face to Face. Delacorte, 2013 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99039-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74206-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97997-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 7-10
Though it’s been over twenty years since The Face on the Milk Carton (BCCB 2/90) 
chronicled fifteen-year-old Janie Johnson’s discovery of her history as a kidnapped 
child, time moves slowly in the world of fiction, and Janie, in her seventh and 
supposedly final book, is here only just going to college, where she’s determined to 
distance herself from the lurid story of her past. She seems to be managing it, deftly 
juggling her birth family and her Johnson parents and finding a new romance with 
a young man removed from the whole saga. When it turns out that her new flame 
is actually a paid researcher for a book on Janie’s story, though, she’s shocked out 
of her denial, and she decides to reaffirm what’s important to her by reconnecting 
with (and getting engaged to) her high school boyfriend, Reeve—but does the past 
harbor one more sinister blow for Janie? Cooney is a master of potboilers, but the 
story is mostly just reheated at this point: the back-and-forth of Janie’s emotions 
about her families and Reeve just recapitulates previous go-rounds, and her speedy 
decisions to marry Reeve and embrace her birth name seem like just another spin 
of the revolving door rather than any emotionally stable conclusion. The plot of 
Janie’s kidnapper’s renewed interest in her is more energetic, but the kidnapper’s 
portrayal is one of flat villainy that’s a stark contrast to the complexity of the rest 
of the characters. Those individual sketches of the ensemble members, so much 
Cooney’s hallmark, remain interesting here, but ultimately Janie herself seems to 
be just flotsam in the plot currents rather than an evolving character. While sheer 
momentum will likely propel Milk Carton fans to this title, Janie may finally be 
past her sell-by date.  DS
CrompTon, lAurie boyle Blaze (Or Love in the Time of Supervillains); illus. by 
Anne Cain.  Sourcebooks Fire, 2013 [304p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-7343-8 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Chauffeuring her younger brother and his soccer teammates is not how seventeen-
February 2013 • 293
year-old Blaze wants to spend the precious remaining months of her high school life; 
she’s rather spend it with comic books, especially the characters she herself draws. 
Things start looking up when the team’s gorgeous coach starts catching a ride with 
his players, and Blaze goes overboard trying to win him, ignoring signs of his shallow 
intentions and her brother’s warnings about his womanizing history. When their 
brief but intimate relationship unravels, Blaze casts Mark (aka Mark-the-Shark) as 
the supervillain in her comic, and Mark retaliates by posting indecent photos of 
her online. Suddenly the focus of vicious gossip and abuse online and at school, 
Blaze turns again to comics and to an alter ego, The Blazing Goddess, this time 
in hopes of saving herself. Chock-full of lessons that touch on all the hot-button 
issues surrounding teens and technology, including sexting, cyberbullying, and slut-
shaming, the novel is often programmatic, tipping into afterschool-special territory. 
Compensations include the book’s playful, if uneven, use of comic-book language 
and tone and by its effective portrayal of Blaze as a girl who is more than merely 
the sum of her problems and bad decisions; additionally, her amusing, endearing 
carpool charges (the “Mighty Cretins”) are serious scene-stealers. Readers trying 
to balance life’s responsibilities with a desire for independence or those struggling 
to navigate teen life online will likely find a kindred spirit in Blaze, while comic-
book fans might enjoy seeing the art form infuse a non-graphic narrative. Final 
illustrations not seen.  AM
dATlow, ellen, ed. After: Nineteen Stories of Apocalypse and Dystopia; ed. by Ellen 
Datlow and Terri Windling. Hyperion, 2012 370p
ISBN 978-1-4231-4619-3 $16.99   
R  Gr. 7-12
In this collection of nineteen stories, all published here for the first time, Datlow 
and Windling present an outstanding array of dystopian and post-apocalyptic 
tales for a young adult audience. The editors focus on stories that pick up after an 
initial disaster, relating how young survivors face what happens next. The result is 
a powerful assortment of stories that depict characters struggling for psychologi-
cal, moral, and even physical survival (and not always succeeding). Readers will 
recognize many of the contributors, most of them well-known writers for youth 
(Carrie Ryan, Garth Nix, and Jane Yolen) and for adults (Nalo Hopkinson). The 
true draw of this collection, though, is the strength of the included stories. These 
layered, emotional narratives mirror the contemporary world’s horror and devasta-
tion, but many also retain glimmers of its hope and humanity. Reveling in darkness 
and ruin, they range from the heart-wrenching (Gregory Maguire’s tale of a young 
man’s hopeful entry into an essay contest that he wins, only to become fodder for 
a heartless space program), to the horrifying (Susan Beth Pfeffer’s cold recount-
ing of systematic child-slaughter under a series of ruthless regimes). Others offer 
glimpses of hope found in true emotional connections, like Carrie Ryan’s story of 
two teens who find friendship in the aftermath of a monster-apocalypse. Strong 
in tone, writing, and character, this collection makes an excellent companion read 
to Buckell’s Diverse Energies (BCCB 12/12). Together these excellent collections 
offer plenty of meat to the science fiction–loving, apocalypse-hungry reader.  AM
294 • The bulleTin
donAldson, JuliA Tabby McTat: The Musical Cat; illus. by Axel Schef-
fler. Levine/Scholastic, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-545-45168-0 $16.99   
R 5-7 yrs
“Tabby McTat was a busker’s cat/ With a meow that was loud and strong,” and he 
and his owner, Fred, the guitar-playing busker, are perfectly happy in their partner-
ship of meowing and singing for money. One day, however, Tabby wanders off and 
meets Sock, a lovely black female cat with one white paw; when Tabby returns, Fred 
is gone, having been injured by a mugger and taken to the hospital. Tabby is at a 
loss until Sock suggests that he come and live with her people, Prudence and Pat. 
Tabby settles into his new life, even having kittens with Sock, but he continues to 
look for Fred, and he eventually finds his old pal in a new location. Though their 
reunion is sweet, Tabby knows he will miss his new life too much to go busking 
again with Fred; fortunately, Tabby’s son leaps at the chance to join Fred in a busker’s 
life, and all is good. Donaldson’s well-tuned rhyming verse lilts along smoothly and 
surely (“So up and down . . . and all over town/ . . . He wandered a whole week 
long,/ For many a morning and afternoon,/ By the light of the sun, and the light 
of the moon,/ Till he heard a familiar song”), and the take on the lost-pet story 
is original and compelling. Scheffler’s vibrantly colored illustrations are carefully 
drafted and detailed but casual in tone, and his pop-eyed figures (particularly the 
fuzzy, striped Tabby and the bohemian Fred) are depicted with plenty of humor 
and affection. Cat lovers are the obvious audience for this tale, but adults looking 
for a mellifluous readaloud selection may also find this the cat’s meow.  JH
engle, mArgAriTA The Lightning Dreamer: Cuba’s Greatest Abolitionist. Har-
court, 2013 [194p]
ISBN 978-0-547-80743-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Award-winning verse novelist Engle turns her attention to the life and writings of 
Gertrudis Gómez de Avellaneda, the nineteenth-century feminist and abolitionist 
author. Familiarly known as Tula, Avellaneda, born to a wealthy family in Cuba, 
had a rebellious, restless nature and a desperate love for poetry and stories. Engle 
follows Tula from 1827, when she was thirteen and on the brink of being settled 
into an arranged marriage, to 1836, when she arrives with her family in Spain 
and begins her literary career. During those early years, Tula reads and spins tales 
of vampires and ghosts while she develops strong views about the enslavement of 
people, including women forced into loveless marriages. Refusing to marry the 
man her stepfather has chosen for her, she is sent away to the country, where her 
fertile imagination grows and the seeds for her first and best-known novel, Sab, 
are sown. Engle provides multiple perspectives on Tula’s influences by giving voice 
to her mother, her brother, and the family cook, as well as inventing voices for the 
fictional characters of Sab, who may have been inspired by actual people. In these 
poems, their longings for freedom, their fears, their loves, and their heartaches 
are elegantly crafted through images that make the island of Cuba and its people 
vividly real and connect them to the hearts of contemporary readers. Particularly 
effective are the voices of Caridad, the cook, who both inspires and is inspired by 
Tula’s fearlessness, and Manuel, who escorts his sister to secret readings even when 
he knows that her love for abolitionist poetry could get the entire family arrested 
and even executed. Readers who never knew the power of poetry will be inspired by 
February 2013 • 295
both the story and the verse in which it is told. An historical note, bibliography, and 
samples of Avellaneda’s writings (in Spanish and in translation) are included.  KC 
Federle, Tim Better Nate Than Ever. Simon, 2013 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4689-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4690-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
The lights of Broadway have always been a beacon of hope for perpetual outcast 
Nate Foster, and when the creators of E.T.: The Musical announce an open casting 
call, eighth-grader Nate is certain that he has finally found a way to escape his pro-
vincial life for the big city. With the help of his pal and fellow show-tune aficionado, 
Libby, Nate devises a plan to make it to New York and back without having to alert 
his conservative parents, but things go awry when Nate gets a callback (he wasn’t 
prepared for actual success) and Libby has to cover for him back home. From his 
obsession with the first franchise restaurant he sees in New York (“the Cadillac of 
Applebee’s”) to his infectious enthusiasm for city-life (“A cab honks and then another 
one does . . . everything is so flipping jubilant here”), Nate is the quintessential 
starry-eyed small-town boy in the Big Apple. The outrageousness of his rookie 
mistakes as a newbie to both the concrete jungle (he asks a homeless woman to 
make change) and the competitive auditioning scene (he reads all the parts for his 
audition, making it an impromptu one-man show) are made additionally hilarious 
by his matter-of-fact, rapid-fire narration and endearing unawareness. Between 
the hijinks and the humor, however, Nate reveals himself to be a kid who accepts 
that he is a disappointment to his conventional family and yet still remains solidly 
himself, optimistically certain that there is a place for guys like him somewhere in 
the world. There’s plenty of substance to go along with the razzle-dazzle here, so 
sit back and enjoy the show.  KQG
ForsTer, miriAm City of a Thousand Dolls. HarperTeen, 2013 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212130-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212131-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Established as a safe haven for the orphaned girls of the Bhinian Empire, the City of 
a Thousand Dolls transforms casteless, unwanted infants into highly skilled young 
women to serve as wives or apprentices to the highest bidder. Abandoned at age 
six, Nisha has spent the last ten years as the assistant to the City’s matron, enjoy-
ing the security offered by the City’s walls. That calm is abruptly shattered when 
Nishi’s fellow novices start turning up dead and it’s up to Nishi, with her access 
to the City’s multiple training houses, to find the killer. The mystery here is a fine 
one, complete with red herrings galore and plenty of wrong turns, and the concept 
of the City is well executed, highlighting the ways in which the expectations of 
gender and caste keep the girls safe while prepping them for a life of servitude and 
exploitation. Ultimately, though, any indictment of the role that gender plays in 
defining society is undercut by the revelation of the killer as a jealous bride-to-be, 
and the solid mystery is unfortunately complicated by several subplots involving 
forbidden romances, cat-human hybrids, and a convoluted backstory regarding 
Nishi’s heritage. As Nishi must choose between remaining within the cloistered 
safety of the City or taking her chances with the outside world, her dilemma will be 
296 • The bulleTin
familiar to teens looking toward adulthood; readers who relish the opportunity to 
see adolescent angst placed within a fantastical, dystopian setting may find plenty 
to consider here.  KQG
FrAdin, JudiTh bloom The Price of Freedom: How One Town Stood Up to 
Slavery; by Judith Bloom Fradin and Dennis Brindell Fradin; illus. by Eric Velas-
quez. Walker, 2013 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2166-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
The Fradins celebrate an episode of collective action in which the citizens of Ober-
lin, Ohio put their lives on the line in 1858 to save a slave sheltering within their 
community. The story begins with the flight of John Price and two companions, 
who run away from their masters in Kentucky and find refuge with Quakers in 
Ohio. Price eventually decides to linger through the winter in Oberlin, until he 
could make his way into Canada after the ice on Lake Erie thawed. The pace and 
tension augment when a slavecatcher nabs Price and an Oberlin College student 
who witnesses Price’s plight musters the community. A large posse of citizens travel 
to the neighboring town where Price is being held and, despite their pacifist lean-
ings, come ready to fight to bring Price back home to Oberlin. Velasquez’s paintings 
have the cinematic flair of frontier adventures—not the B-Western variety, but the 
provocative showdowns in which the righteous suspend a deeply held conviction 
for a greater good. A family is bribed with a gold coin to betray Price; the Oberlin 
student walks straight-faced past the kidnapped slave, cannily disguising his own 
outrage; and pistol-toting Oberlinians creep up the hotel stairs to ambush Price’s 
captors. Information about the fate of the rescuers, all of whom served jail time for 
breaking the law, takes pride of place at the episode’s conclusion, right under a full-
spread photograph of the heroes—notably black and white, young and old. Lists 
of adult and children’s print resources and a selection of websites are included.  EB
grine, Chris ChickenHare; written and illus. by Chris Grine.  Graphix/Scho-
lastic, 2013 [160p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-48508-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Rotman’s Teen Boat! (BCCB 6/12) gave us a hero who was both adolescent boy 
and fancy yacht; now Grine’s aptly titled graphic novel features a portmanteau 
protagonist with the ears of a bunny and the legs of a fowl. The story opens on an 
icy northern landscape with ChickenHare and pal Abe (a bearded turtle) about to 
be sold to Mr. Klaus, an evil taxidermist who traffics in bizarre and exotic animals. 
Outwitting Klaus and a few of his dimwitted henchman is easy with the help 
of fellow prisoners, witch-girl Meg and her pet monkey (or demon) Banjo, but 
ChickenHare knows he has to stop Klaus’ brutality once and for all. The quirky 
main character and his similarly strange friends will likely appeal to youngsters 
looking for a laugh; while some of the darker humor edges more toward horrific 
than amusing (the villain is served up as dinner at the book’s close), the overall tone 
is mischievously jokey. The plot itself is predictable and the characters one-note, 
but the simple absurdity of the premise may be enough to please its audience. Ad-
ditionally, ChickenHare gets a few excellent zingers in at the expense of Klaus (who 
looks remarkably like an evil twin version of Santa) that guarantee chuckles. The 
February 2013 • 297
cartoonish artwork recalls Jeff Smith’s work in Bone, and the sequential layout of 
panels along with the focused close-ups and dialogue-rich text make this an easy 
pick for readers just discovering the graphic-novel format.  KQG 
hArringTon, kim The Dead and Buried. Point/Scholastic, 2013 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-545-33302-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Senior year has brought Jade to an upscale Boston suburb, where her family has 
just been fortunate enough to move. She’d rather be in her old home, especially 
when she finds out that her new house only sold so cheaply because that’s where the 
reigning queen of last year’s junior class suffered a fatal accident—or was murdered. 
In fact, Jade has become aware of Kayla’s chilling and manipulative presence, and 
she’s horrified when Kayla takes over Jade’s beloved little half brother with a threat: 
if Jade doesn’t find Kayla’s killer, the ghost will keep Colby forever. This is cheesily 
written good ghostly fun, complete with poltergeist mischief, freezing drafts, and 
a young child’s unknowingly portentous reports. Jade’s negotiation of the school 
social dynamics has some interesting touches, including her friendship with the 
ultimate nerd and her quasi-friendship with Kayla’s former second-in-command; 
those dynamics, Kayla’s secret diary, and some upfront hints will allow some genre 
veterans to guess the murderer up front but never make it too obvious. Unfor-
tunately, the relationship with Donovan, Kayla’s ex and Jade’s immediate crush, 
is formulaic to the point of being ludicrously predictable, and the fact that their 
romance is overtly based on her pity (“I wanted to fix him,” she says longingly, 
and refers to him as a “broken boy”) is creepier than Kayla’s ghostly antics. The 
spooky details remain entertaining, though, and the hat-tips to Rebecca (openly 
acknowledged in the book) will add interest for knowledgeable gothic fans.  DS
hAsAk-lowy, Todd 33 Minutes; illus. by Bethany Barton. 
Aladdin, 
2013 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4500-0 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4502-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7 
In exactly thirty-three minutes, Morgan Sturtz is going to kick Sam Lewis’ butt. 
They weren’t always at odds—in fact, as of last Friday, Sam and Morgan were best 
buds, but that was before Sam committed an act of such treachery that a lunchtime 
throw-down was decidedly called for. Narrated by whiz-kid Sam as the clock ticks 
on, the story walks readers through an average day in middle school as Sam endures 
a torturous social studies class, a rousing cafeteria food fight, a fake (or maybe real) 
fire alarm, and finally an encounter with Morgan that changes the landscape of 
their friendship and Sam’s middle-school experience forever. The dissolution of 
friendships between preadolescent girls has been extensively covered by the likes of 
Audrey Vernick (Water Balloon, BCCB 10/11) and Frances O’Roark Dowell (The 
Kind of Friends We Used to Be, BCCB 5/09), and here Hasak-Lowy gives readers 
a similarly thoughtful examination of relationships between boys with a deft and 
compassionate hand, all while keeping the humor and tone squarely targeted at 
tween guys. Nerdy Sam is likable but also a bit self-important, while Morgan may 
be the obvious instigator but doesn’t otherwise seem like a bad guy. Readers will 
quickly recognize that the demise of this relationship falls at the feet of both boys 
298 • The bulleTin
as the pressures of middle school and changing identities simply become too much 
for their friendship to endure. The sophisticated narrative structure balances Sam’s 
account of the thirty-three minutes (which actually turns into an hour and half) 
with his memories of past times with Morgan in flashbacks that give readers clues 
to what exactly is going on with the boys now. Witty and wise, this will appeal to 
boys looking for both laughs and guidance.  KQG
heilbroner, JoAn A Pet Named Sneaker; illus. by Pascal Lemaitre. Random 
House, 2013 [48p] (Beginner Books)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97116-7 $12.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97580-5 $8.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98112-8 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. K-2
Poor Sneaker is an unwanted snake until a boy named Pete walks into the pet 
store and promptly takes the orange reptile home. The next day Sneaker slithers 
into Pete’s backpack and follows the boy to school, where he quickly charms Pete’s 
initially skeptical peers and is soon reading, spelling, and writing right along with 
the students. When Sneaker accompanies Pete to the local pool, he is dismayed to 
see a “No Pets” sign but, he heroically ignores it to save a little boy who has fallen 
into the deep water. Soon Sneaker is holding court as a pool lifeguard, and all pets 
are welcome at the pool. The plot wanders just a tad, but overall this is a delightful 
easy reader in the classic tradition (both textually and illustratively) of P. D. East-
man and Syd Hoff. Short, crisp sentences and a cheerful, friendly tone work in 
harmony to sturdily support a novice reader. Lemaitre’s buoyant art deftly balances 
planes of digital color in retro hues such as teal or gold with plenty of restful white 
space, outlining figures and objects in swift, casual black lines. Sneaker’s expressive 
face and slightly crocodilian head make him an appealing serpentine hero, and the 
depiction of Sneaker and Pete playing “I Am a Necktie,” “I Am a Hat,” and “I 
Am Handcuffs” is sure to win over even those most reluctant to give reptiles their 
due. Partner this with Tomi Ungerer’s Crictor (BCCB 9/58) and Randy Siegel’s My 
Snake Blake (BCCB 7/12) for a terrific trio of pet snake stories; brave souls with 
access to a pet snake could pair this title with said snake’s classroom or library visit 
for maximum thrills.  JH
henry, Jed Cheer Up, Mouse!; written and illus. by Jed Henry. Houghton, 
2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-68107-8 $12.99   
R 3-5 yrs
Poor Mouse is clearly down in the dumps, looking dejected even in the face of a 
shower of flower petals and a tune played by a squirrel on a walnut-shell violin. His 
woodland friends rally around him, each trying a different method to cheer him 
up—the crow takes him flying, the frog plops him into the water for an impromptu 
swim, the mole stuffs him underground to do some therapeutic digging, the badger 
tries to feed him pink grubs. When their overenthusiastic efforts leave Mouse sad-
der than ever, it is the little chipmunk who finally gives him what he really needs: 
a hug. Young kids who are just beginning to practice empathy themselves (and, as 
here, with sometimes less than successful results) will likely relate to this tale, and 
though the message is a bit simplistic, it is age-appropriate. Henry’s brief text is clear 
and poetic (“Splash and paddle, wash and wade—Cheer up, Mouse!”) and follows 
February 2013 • 299
a satisfyingly predictable pattern without being repetitious. The mixed-media il-
lustrations (watercolors, pastels, colored pencils, and digital media) are warm and 
woodsy, with rich greens and browns predominating in the hues of the animals’ fur 
and skins and in the forest background. Figures and landscapes have a controlled 
but softly brushy look, and the cinnamon-colored mouse, with his white tummy 
and pink ears, nose, and toes, is both cute and appropriately vulnerable. This might 
be fun to partner with Alborough’s Hug and/or Schmid’s Hugs from Pearl (BCCB 
1/11) for a squeeze-filled storytime.  JH
hirsCh, JeFF Magisterium. Scholastic, 2012 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-29018-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46988-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
A century ago, a mysterious explosion tore the world in two and rendered the area 
beyond the Rift an uninhabitable wasteland, or at least that’s what sixteen-year-
old Glenn Morgan, living in a technologically advanced society, has always been 
told. When her genius father claims to have invented a device that will allow him 
to travel beyond the Rift, government agents come to arrest both Glenn and her 
father. Accompanied by her best friend, Kevin, Glenn is on the run; forced across 
the Rift, she finds the reported wasteland to be a mirror-world where magic works 
and technology does not, populated by fantastical creatures and rural villages. As 
Glenn and Kevin travel across the countryside in search of a safe place to cross 
back into their own world, they get caught up in the long-standing battle to con-
trol the magic of the Magisterium, and Glenn learns that her connection to the 
world beyond the Rift is stronger than she could ever have believed. A compelling 
example of genre-blending, the novel draws its strength from its contrasting science 
fiction and fantasy worlds. Unfortunately, the storytelling is often choppy, with 
the plot unfolding as a series of episodes that provide Glenn and her companions 
with knowledge about the Magisterium and its history. Glenn herself never fully 
emerges as a fully engaging character, and she is often outshone by her sidekick/
love-interest Kevin and her housecat-turned-feline-warrior Aamon. Still, readers 
looking for a novel that incorporates everything they love about these two disparate 
genres may still entertained by this first installment of a proposed series and look 
forward to Glenn’s future cross-world adventures.  AM
honeymAn, kAy The Fire Horse Girl. Levine/Scholastic, 2013 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-545-40310-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Jade Moon’s family attributes her headstrong personality to being born most 
unluckily under the fire sign in the Year of the Horse. Unmarriageable within her 
Chinese community in 1923, seventeen-year-old Jade rejoices at the opportunity 
to accompany her father and a handsme family friend, Sterling Promise, to the 
United States, where she is convinced she’ll live a more fulfilling life. It’s only 
during their detention at Angel Island that she uncovers an intricate net of deceit 
and bribery that culminates in “paper son” Sterling Promise receiving his landing 
papers. To avoid returning to China with her father, Jade Moon steals Sterling 
Promise’s papers, disguises herself in his clothing, and enters San Francisco under 
his identity. She doesn’t last a day before being taken under the wing of a tong 
300 • The bulleTin
leader and trained to run numbers for his gambling business. Eventually she realizes 
that the “protection” of the tong comes at a steep price, and the freedom she hopes 
to find eludes her. By then Sterling Promise has gained entry and begun to work 
for a rival tong. Will the attraction between the couple prevail, or is the depth of 
their mutual treachery insurmountable? Obvious love-story conventions point, of 
course, to a happy conclusion, but the twists and turns along the way make for 
pretty involving reading. Honeyman enriches the standard feisty-girl-in-disguise 
fare with plausible details about tong domination of gambling and prostitution, and 
she offers a nuanced look at the tongs, organizations that once provided order and 
support to an immigrant community until being overrun by corruption. Historical 
notes are appended.  EB
Johnson, ChrisTine The Gathering Dark. Simon Pulse, 2013 [512p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3903-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3905-4 $9.99   
R Gr. 8-10
Keira has always dreamed of escaping her small town in Maine and attending Juil-
liard. Then she meets Walker, and she is drawn to him despite herself. However, he 
proves to be a problem in ways she didn’t anticipate; not only does he interfere with 
her focus on the piano, she begins to have disturbing hallucinations whenever he 
is around. By the time the truth comes out—that she is the experimental progeny 
of parents from two different worlds and Walker has been sent to find her so that 
she can be killed—she is hopelessly in love with Walker and he with her. She’s a 
target because the cross-breeding of people from Darkside, an alternative universe 
composed of dark matter, with people of baryonic matter has destabilized Darkside; 
she’s also the one who might just have the power to set things right if she can find 
the courage to use it properly. Johnson is adept at maintaining an air of menace 
and suspense while infusing sexual tension into the mix; she keeps the heat between 
Keira and Walker at a constant simmer while danger atmospherically lurks. Like 
Claire in Johnson’s Claire de Lune (BCCB 5/06), Keira is a strong, well-developed, 
character, and her struggles with the unsettling events in her life—her new knowl-
edge of multiple universes and her identity, and her heady first love—are credibly 
played out with a combination of uncertainty and bravado. While the swooning 
sometimes interrupts the danger plot, supernatural romance fans are in it for both 
kinds of action, and they’ll find plenty of it here.  KC  
kirk, dAniel Ten Things I Love about You; illus. by Daniel Kirk. Paulsen/
Penguin, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25288-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 4-6 yrs
Rabbit is making a list of ten things he loves about his best bud, Pig, beginning 
with “Number 1—I love Pig because he is very pink.” Rabbit continues to add to 
his list, pestering Pig at every turn to share another list item or ask for help, and it 
seems as though Pig may soon lose his temper with Rabbit’s incessant interruptions 
and his cheerful oblivion to Pig’s frustration. Pig, however, is actually working on 
his own list of things he loves about Rabbit, and their solid friendship ultimately 
trumps the simmer of Pig’s annoyance. Though the devoted Rabbit’s clueless an-
noying of his friend is deadpan funny, there’s not much substance here beyond the 
list-making, and Pig’s sudden climactic turn from irritated to grateful rings false. 
February 2013 • 301
Kirk’s digitally enhanced illustrations employ roughly edged painted plywood panels 
bordered by soft brown. Pink Pig in his turquoise shirt, brown pants, and tennies 
offers a note of bright color, as does the gray Rabbit’s bright red shirt. The two 
pals are slightly stiff in their poses, but they are nonetheless cartoonishly cute little 
guys, and the textured look of the painted wood panels has visual appeal. Better 
friendship books abound, but the list-making aspect of this one may inspire kids 
to take a keener look at the charms of their own buddies. Rabbit’s and Pig’s lists 
appear on the book’s closing pages and may provide a useful starting point for a 
classroom or family project of listing a friend’s or family member’s good points.  JH
lAbAn, elizAbeTh The Tragedy Paper.  Knopf, 2013 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97040-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87040-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98912-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
The traditions of the Irving School are relatively benign—an annual game of some 
sort for the seniors, the passing on of a “treasure” of some kind from graduating 
seniors to the juniors who will move into their rooms, and a senior English paper 
that explores the true nature of tragedy in literature and in life. Last year, however, 
the game ended in an actual tragedy, and the “treasure” Duncan receives from Tim 
Macbeth is a full accounting of the events that led up to the fateful night. Tim 
is a self-conscious albino who meets Vanessa on their way to school and begins a 
doomed relationship with her—doomed because, as the most beautiful girl at Irving, 
she is naturally dating the most popular boy, even though he’s predictably shallow. 
Vanessa seems to genuinely like Tim, but she will only meet with him clandestinely 
and won’t give up her public relationship and reputation for him. Heretofore, 
Duncan has only known the sad outcome of the night of the senior game, but Tim’s 
recitation of the details provides the full context for the tragedy as it unfolds from 
order to chaos to order, revealing the tragic flaws of the heroes that result in their 
destiny. Although the book is highly literary in its exploration of tragedy, there is 
no tie to the Scottish play other than through the character names, but there are 
shades and echoes of The Outsiders, Ethan Frome, and The Great Gatsby in form, 
plot, and language, which may help readers trace the characteristics of tragedy in 
those books. Mostly, though, this is an engaging tale told by a boy rendered an 
outsider by his appearance, full of passion and almost unrequited love, signifying 
the heartbreaks and melodramas of high school.  KC  
lAnCAsTer, mike A. The Future We Left Behind. Egmont, 2012 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-410-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-411-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
In this companion to Human.4, scattered bits of data and corrupted files have been 
compiled to unveil a brave new world on the brink of revolutionary change, a change 
that many believe was predicted a thousand years before by the legendary Straker 
tapes, a sort of audio Nostradamus. Peter Vincent has been raised to believe that 
those who believe in the Straker tapes are delusional; when he falls head over heels 
for Alpha, a self-professed Strakerite, he is forced to reexamine his assumptions, 
especially when she shows him evidence that the human “upgrades” mentioned in 
302 • The bulleTin
the tapes are real and that another upgrade is looming. Desperate to prevent the 
prophesied change, Peter uncovers a vast conspiracy to cover up the reality of the 
Straker tapes, a conspiracy led by his own father. Told through layers of unreliable 
narration, the story explores the limits of human memory and the perils of relying 
on networks and technology to store and access humanity’s collective knowledge. 
This truly thought-provoking outing gives the reader plenty of big questions to 
grapple with, including how you know what you know, the line between science 
and faith, and the very nature of humanity. The characters are less well realized 
than the concepts, but there’s still plenty of passion between Peter and Alpha. Fans 
of Anderson’s Feed (BCCB 11/02) will recognize the challenge to technological 
overreliance, and they’ll find this stimulating read well worth contemplating.  AM
lArson, deborAh Jo One Frozen Lake; illus. by Steve Johnson and Lou Fanch-
er. Minnesota Historical Society, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-87351-866-6 $16.95   
R Gr. 2-4
Library shelves may creak and strain under the weight of football and basketball 
books, and groan and sag under stress from baseball books, but how much space is 
allotted to ice fishing? Larson gives fans of this literarily underrated activity their due 
in this affectionate and stylish tribute, which follows the bone-chilling expeditions of 
a young boy and his grandfather to entice a fish—any fish—up through the frozen 
crust: “One frozen lake./ Two fishing friends./ Three bundles packed with/ Line, 
lures, and snacks./ Four frosty inches./ Five hours pass./ Not one fish.” The author 
wisely adapts the counting-book format, relying on the number scheme only to 
establish a rhythm to her text and serve as a reminder to her audience that the fish 
run on their own time, not the fishermen’s. Several trips to the lake, mugs of hot 
chocolate, hands of (what else?) Go Fish, and a variety of lures later, the boy gets 
a bite and hauls up a ten-inch “keeper.” Remorse overcomes ambition, however, 
and the fish is dropped down the hole to elude fishermen another day. Johnson 
and Fancher’s mixed-media artwork is a delight, capturing the simultaneous action 
above and below the ice-and-water line. Human characters are depicted with cozy 
realism, while their ice huts boast whimsical walls of flannel-shirt plaids and yel-
lowed newspaper articles; fish that could have been clipped from naturalists’ and 
anglers’ manuals of bygone days glide regally beneath the surface. Kids from balmier 
climes who are unlikely to experience ice fishing themselves may nonetheless agree 
that winter may have more to offer than Santa’s visit.  EB
leAThers, philippA The Black Rabbit; written and illus. by Philippa Leath-
ers. Candlewick, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5714-7 $14.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Little Rabbit is alarmed one bright sunny day to find a large black rabbit follow-
ing him: “Rabbit ran. But the Black Rabbit was right behind him.” What Rabbit 
doesn’t understand, but what child viewers will quickly comprehend, is that the 
Black Rabbit is his shadow, which explains why he can’t outrun it and why it doesn’t 
follow him into the dark, sunless forest. The Black Rabbit comes in quite handy, 
however, when a wolf chases Rabbit, only to be frightened away by the enormous 
rabbit shadow as they emerge into the sunlight. Tiny white Rabbit with his short, 
stumpy legs, big eyes, and exceptionally long ears is an endearing little guy; his fear 
February 2013 • 303
of the silent, looming Black Rabbit is palpable in both the short, tightly focused 
text and the illustrations, rendering the happy ending a satisfying relief. The simple 
compositions and minimal but atmospheric background detail of Leathers’ subtly 
variegated artwork keep the focus squarely on Rabbit, his shadow, and Wolf. This 
would be useful for a number of educational purposes, from using as an example 
for making inferences (it’s never stated in the text that the Black Rabbit is Rabbit’s 
shadow) to introducing the science topic of light and shadow. It could also be suc-
cessfully paired with Asch’s Moonbear’s Shadow for a shadow-themed storytime.  JH
mArkel, miChelle Brave Girl: Clara and the Shirtwaist Makers’ Strike of 1909; 
illus. by Melissa Sweet. Balzer + Bray, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-180442-7 $17.99   
R 7-9 yrs
The subject of this picture-book biography is Clara Lemlich, a woman familiar to 
older students of the fledgling American labor movement, but not exactly a well-
known name to younger elementary children. Markel ably brings to life the plight 
of immigrant garment workers and Clara’s courageous advocacy by first focusing 
on the injustices likely to capture reader attention—the preference of employers 
to underpay a child rather than hire an adult, penalties for workers arriving late or 
soiling cloth with blood spots, workshop doors that remain locked until employees 
are checked for stolen goods each evening. Once the oppressive working conditions 
are made clear, Clara’s union activism makes perfect sense: “She lights up chilly 
union halls with her fiery pep talks. Her singing lifts the spirits of the picketers.” A 
substantive note about the early twentieth-century garment industry provides ad-
ditional background, including brief mention of the devastating Triangle Shirtwaist 
fire that would further incite the industry the following year. Even without benefit 
of this information, though, children will enhance their understanding of workers’ 
and strikers’ conditions through Sweet’s watercolor illustrations, which strongly 
hint at the claustrophobic atmosphere of the immigrant steamship, the crowded 
tenements, the jammed workrooms, the confining jail cell, and the teeming union 
hall in which Clara made her stand.  EB
mArkle, sAndrA What If You Had Animal Teeth!?; illus. by Howard McWil-
liam. Scholastic, 2013 [32p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-48438-1 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
“So you’ve lost your front teeth,” says the book in its opening page. “What if an 
animal’s teeth grew in, instead?” That’s the premise of this delightfully creepy and 
genuinely informative text on dentition and early biology, which goes on to offer 
ten different dentally notable animals as models for a kid’s new smile. Each spread 
includes a toothy close-up photo of the animal in question (great white shark, 
rattlesnake, crocodile) along with a quick overview of their particular dental advan-
tages and an additional fun fact; facing that page is a gloriously lurid, cartoonish 
image of a kid with that animal’s teeth, accompanied by a small caption breezily 
explaining the benefits. It’s a hilarious and instructive combination that makes it 
clear just how variable and individually suited this aspect of anatomy is, and the 
art takes the concept and runs—well, chomps—with it. Egregiously toothy kids 
loom dauntingly into view, sometimes in fish-eye focus, ready to use their new 
choppers to best effect: the rattlesnake-fanged poindexter calmly routs advancing 
304 • The bulleTin
bullies, the elephant-tusked little guy uses them to hold up the family car as his 
dad changes a tire; a girl neatly slices bat-decorated wrapping paper with her pointy 
vampire-bat teeth. With their mischievous insouciance, the saturated pigments 
and comically exaggerated portraiture recall Dan Santat (Buckley’s Kel Gilligan’s 
Daredevil Stunt Show, BCCB 10/12); while in one instance the more over-the-top 
elements wander uncomfortably close to stereotype, the cast is notably diverse and 
generally enjoyably exaggerated. Tired of cutesy tooth fairy books? Here’s a dental 
book with some real bite.  DS
mCAlpine, gordon The Tell-Tale Start; illus. by Sam Zuppardi. Viking, 
2013 [224p] (The Misadventures of Edgar & Allan Poe)
ISBN 978-0-670-78491-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Apparently, there’s simply no end to the dastardly plots to rule the world that are 
inspired by quantum physics. In this middle-grades mystery debut, mad scientist 
S. Pangborn Perry, PhD, riffs on “quantum entanglement,” a scientific concept that 
explores the strange behavior of some subatomic particles to remain connected in 
spite of distance. Couldn’t this phenomenon also work between twins? Especially 
between twins as creepily connected as Edgar and Allan Poe, the great-great-great-
great grandnephews of the American master of creepiness? And since no distance 
is too great to affect the bond, couldn’t one dead twin be used to communicate 
from beyond the grave? And wouldn’t this allow somebody to control the world? 
Determined to find out, Perry has been following the Poes since childhood, and 
now he lures them and their kindly aunt and uncle (guardians since the untimely 
and—egad!—orchestrated deaths of the twins’ parents in a rocket launch) to a 
phony tourist attraction where he’ll commit the murder and commence the ex-
periments. The devilishly clever twins, though, prevail—as well they must if they 
are to reach Volume Two of the series. This opening act is a loose-jointed affair 
that painstakingly exposes its clues and explains its jokes, while bumbling through 
wacky school mayhem and near-tender family bonding. Serious mystery fans will 
have no patience with the premature revelations, but struggling readers who need 
guidance through the genre may appreciate the checkpoints along the way. Perry’s 
on the loose and the original E. A. Poe is sending misspelled messages from the 
Great Beyond, so check your fortune cookies and license plates for hints of what 
lies ahead.  EB
meng, CeCe Bedtime Is Canceled; illus. by Aurélie Neyret. Clarion, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-63668-9 $16.99   
R 5-7 yrs
When Maggie and her brother write a note saying, “Bedtime is canceled” to avoid 
going to sleep, a gust of wind carries the note to the desk of a newspaperman, and 
the notice makes the headlines of the next day’s paper. Texts and emails go flying 
as people pass the message on and an exciting all-nighter of activity follows, much 
to the dismay of parents everywhere. The repercussions—sleepy parents mess up 
meals and tired teachers dismiss students late—prompt Maggie and her brother to 
send a new note directly to the newspaper: “Bedtime is not canceled!” Once again 
the news travels fast and everyone goes happily to bed—well, “almost everybody.” 
The closing page shows Maggie and her brother penning a new missive: “Cleaning 
up bedrooms is not allowed!” This is straight-up child-centered wish fulfillment, 
February 2013 • 305
and primary-graders will chortle not only at the concept of putting one over on the 
gullible adults but also at the humorous results; the principal at Maggie’s school, 
for example, is so shocked at the news that “she poured her morning coffee into 
her purse, combed her hair with her toothbrush, and dried her face with her calico 
cat.” Meng’s writing is clear, direct, and funny, and Neyret’s digitally created illus-
trations have an appropriately comic and cartoonish tone, with towheaded Maggie 
and her brother giving each other sly smiles while goggle-eyed adults react to the 
news or sleepily walk around with their pants on backward. While this might not 
be a suggestion you want to plant during actual bedtime reading, the book may 
be entertaining as a bedtime-themed storytime selection.  JH
meshon, AAron Take Me Out to the Yakyu; written and illus. by Aaron Me-
shon. Atheneum, 2013 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4177-4 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4178-1 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 1-3
A Japanese-American boy with family in two countries describes the customs that 
surround baseball in America and Japan. In America, he’s a fan of the fictional 
Pigeons and dons his blue team shirt, grabs his pop pop’s hand, and rides off to 
the stadium in a station wagon; in Japan, he’s decked out in Cicada red and rides 
with Ji Ji to the game “in a short red bus that turns into a train.” A giant blue 
foam hand and a giant red plastic horn help him cheer his teams, while hot dogs 
and peanuts or noodles and edamame fill his belly. The American pitcher throws 
a 95 mph fastball, while his Japanese counterpart clocks in at 153 kilometers per 
hour. The seventh-inning stretch features “Take Me Out to the Ball Game” or a 
team anthem and balloon release. Both outings end with snacks and a hot bath 
provided back home by his grandmother (“What a wonderful day!”). There’s no 
pronunciation guide or additional information, but much of the Japanese vocabulary 
becomes clear in context, and a glossary of baseball and “other fun” words is also 
included. The chunky font, candy-colored cartoon pictures, and Japanese pop-art 
style will have plenty of appeal for newly independent readers, and an author’s note 
adds more comparative detail about game rules and stadiums. Baseball-obsessed 
primary-schoolers will relish this offbeat addition to the meager beginning-reader 
sports collection.  EB
meyer, mArissA Scarlet. Feiwel, 2013 [464p] (The Lunar Chronicles)
ISBN 978-0-312-64296-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
When the Toulouse police refuse to pursue any leads regarding Scarlet’s missing 
grandmother, eighteen-year-old Scarlet takes matters into her own hands, following 
a tip from a streetfighter named Wolf that eventually leads her to the Parisian den 
of a notorious crime organization. Meanwhile, Cinder, the cyborg mechanic whom 
readers last saw rotting in a New Beijing jail cell for treason against the Empire 
(in Cinder, BCCB 2/12), has escaped and commandeers a rogue spaceship, piec-
ing together information about her unknown past and the recent revelation that 
she is the rightful heir to the Lunar throne. The two stories converge in a brilliant 
climax that places Cinder, Scarlet, and Wolf in the grasp of the evil Lunar queen, 
who threatens to take over Earth with the help of her genetically engineered army. 
306 • The bulleTin
Meyer manages an impressive balancing act here, introducing a new character and 
storyline alongside the continuation of Cinder’s story while maintaining reader 
investment for both along the way. The sci-fi elements are stronger than the fairy-
tale allusions this time out, but the story remains just as absorbing; as the characters 
journey from the streets of New Beijing to the French countryside, the world is 
more fully developed, raising the stakes of the fallout of a Lunar invasion. The 
romance between Wolf and Scarlet, two hardened and stoic creatures unfamiliar 
with either tenderness or sentiment, unfolds with a quiet simplicity that makes 
for a poignant contrast to the often violent and ugly landscape they are forced to 
inhabit. Readers will be thrilled to discover that this steampunky fairy-tale/sci-fi 
mashup promises two more installments.  KQG 
miller, kirsTen How to Lead a Life of Crime. Razorbill, 2013 [358p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-518-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Flick’s father is about as bad as they come, presenting the façade of a Wall Street 
success story while abusing his family in private. Certain that Dad is responsible 
for the deaths of his brother and mother, Flick has been living on the streets and 
biding his time until an opportunity presents to bring Dad to justice. Flick gets 
his break when he’s recruited by the director of the Mandel Academy, an exclusive 
school (and Dad’s alma mater) that specializes in preparing young men and women 
to become the ruthless elites who call the shots on a national level. All Flick has 
to do is graduate from the program within two terms and the director will release 
to him all the evidence needed to have Flick’s father convicted. Flick is able and 
determined, rising quickly to the top of his class. It’s the kill-or-be-killed social 
order within the school that he needs to master, though, and as Flick discovers 
each new obstacle in his path, it looks like he’ll never make it out alive, much less 
avenge his sibling and mother. Unlike the more humorous teen-criminal-in-training 
tales seen as of late, this never veers from a hellish survival story; unfortunately, it’s 
marred by the dissonant note of the brother’s frequent apparitions in the guise of 
Peter Pan, and a jarring and somewhat absurd major theme that strays into mad-
scientist territory. Despite the overblown plotting, Miller has crafted a thriller with 
the speed and thunder of a runaway train, and readers are unlikely to jump off 
until it finally hits the brakes.  EB
mirAndA, megAn Hysteria. Walker, 2013 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2310-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
After a harrowing night that left Mallory’s violent boyfriend dead by her hand, 
Mallory is haunted by the idea that Brian’s spirit is still with her. His mother, 
however, is the real danger, as she has started stalking Mallory, so Mallory’s par-
ents ship her off to Monroe, the boarding school her father attended. There she 
encounters Reid, the son of her father’s best friend, who’s known her forever and 
wants to start a relationship with her, despite Mallory’s concerns about her newly 
troubled life. Bigger problems are afoot, however, as the headmaster’s son, Jason, 
is working some sinister plot of his own involving a trio of popular girls who have 
taken an immediate dislike to Mallory. When Jason dies, the girls use Mallory’s 
past to frame her for his murder; fortunately, she has a loyal best friend, Colleen, 
February 2013 • 307
who helps her figure out what’s going on and finally put the past behind her. Taut 
suspense and a mystery that has both psychological and sleuthing intrigue keep 
pages turning as Mallory tries to remember exactly what happened the night she 
killed Brian as well as the reasons she was attracted to him in the first place. While 
it’s a bit coincidental that two murdered guys turn up in her presence, there’s an 
underlying theme of girls getting rid of their abusers that gives the plot coherence, 
and the psychological-thriller genre requires a few extra dead bodies here and there 
anyway. Readers who like ghosts that turn out to be phantoms in the brain and 
who appreciate suspense tinged with danger and romance will enjoy this.  KC 
miTChArd, JACquelyn What We Saw at Night. Soho Teen, 2013 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61695-141-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61695-142-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Afflicted with xeroderma pigmentosum, essentially a fatal allergy to sunlight, sixteen-
year-old Allie and her fellow sufferers, Rob and Juliet, rule the night in the small 
Minnesotan town where their clinic is located and where they struggle to come 
to terms with an illness that will likely kill them before middle age. At daredevil 
Juliet’s behest, the trio has recently taken up the extreme sport of nocturnal parkour, 
scaling cliffs and leaping buildings in the middle of the night. Allie is having the 
time of her short life until she witnesses what appears to be a murder and is drawn 
into a web of lies so thick that she’s unable to tell hero from villain, especially when 
it comes to the two people she thought she knew better than anyone, Juliet and 
Rob. Allie’s illness serves primarily to locate her as witness to nefarious goings-on 
she’d otherwise never see, but it also acts to insulate her and her friends from the 
sunlit world, making her hesitancy to confide what she saw to a “daytimer” entirely 
believable. As the book goes on, however, Allie’s voice grows less authentic, and 
by the time she is conveniently inspired to pursue criminology studies, she ends 
up sounding more like a forensic scientist than a teen whose life is threatened by 
both an illness and a serial murderer. Still, a small town and the machinations of 
its less than pleasant residents are always intriguing, and an ending featuring a 
dead (maybe?) friend and a killer on the loose promises more suspense in future 
installments.  KQG 
moskowiTz, hAnnAh Teeth. Simon Pulse, 2013 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6532-9 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4946-6 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4947-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 281, for review.
murphy, mAry A Kiss Like This; written and illus. by Mary Murphy. Candle-
wick, 2012 28p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6182-3 $12.99   
Ad 1-3 yrs
A variety of animals, from giraffes to fish to elephants, kiss in this salute to different 
kinds of smooches, ending with “Now there’s only one kiss missing . . . Your kiss! 
Like this!” The kiss descriptions are amusing, but they don’t always make sense 
(How can the giraffe’s kiss be “tall”?), and illustrations sometimes don’t match 
308 • The bulleTin
the text (the illustration of the bee’s “fuzzy and buzzy” kiss, for instance, doesn’t 
indicate fuzziness or buzziness). There’s still lots of enjoyment to be had and plenty 
of attractive animal parent-and-child pairs to imitate in Murphy’s trademark il-
lustrations, which sport the sweet, strong colors and design simplicity of decorated 
sugar cookies; half-page flaps provide additional fun as toddlers can flip the flaps to 
reveal each kiss (“A mouse kiss is quick and small . . . // like this!”). The illustrations 
will carry well to a laptime or storytime crowd, but plenty of parents will find this 
equally enjoyable for a bedtime snuggle session as well.  JH
pATTerson, JAmes I Funny: A Middle School Story; written by James Patterson and 
Chris Grabenstein; illus. by Laura Park. Little, 2012 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-316-20693-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Billing himself as “the sit-down comic,” middle-schooler Jamie Grimm isn’t about to 
let the fact that he uses a wheelchair stop him from being a stand-up comedian; it’s 
his intense fear of public speaking that may prevent him from fulfilling his dream. 
Fortunately, with the encouragement of his loving uncle and few kooky friends, 
Jamie tries his act at Ronkonkoma’s Funniest Kid Contest and lo and behold, he 
wins. The video of his performance goes viral, he lands a few more gigs, and the 
laughs keep coming. Life is not all giggles and guffaws, however, as Jamie still has 
to deal with daily harassment from his bullying foster brother, he can’t for the life 
of him figure out how to talk to girls, and he has yet to truly come to terms with 
the accident that landed him in the wheelchair and left him without his parents 
and sister. Surprisingly unsentimental and not at all patronizing, this is a poignant 
but humorous story of moving on and finding joy in less than joyful moments. 
A connoisseur of comedy, Jamie mines a host of stand-up legends for his material 
(some of whom will be familiar to middle-school audiences while others will no 
doubt necessitate a few Google searches). His commentary about his disability feels 
particularly authentic, and while his condition is part of his story, it is not the defin-
ing aspect of it—the focus instead lies on Jamie overcoming his fears rather than 
his disability. In the end, Jamie is still in a wheelchair, still dealing with bullies, and 
still missing his folks, but he is managing to make himself and a few others laugh, 
and readers will find that to be more than enoughPark’s cartoony spot illustrations 
add visual humor that matches the text’s jokey, feel-good tone.  KQG
rush, JenniFer Altered. Little, 2013 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-316-19708-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Convinced that her father’s scientific pursuits must have some noble purpose, 
home-schooled teenager Anna has never really questioned the ethics of Dad’s ex-
perimenting on four genetically altered teenage boys in the basement laboratory of 
their New York State farmhouse. Instead, she has spent the last five years befriending 
three of the boys and falling in love with the other (easy to do when the boys are 
designed to be physically gorgeous but manage to maintain their existential angst). 
When operatives from a secret organization show up to claim the boys, Sam—the 
object of Anna’s affections and the group leader—stages an escape, bringing Anna 
along with them. As she and Sam discover more about the boys’ true identities, 
Anna begins to realize that her memories aren’t matching up with reality and that 
February 2013 • 309
the boys may not have been her father’s only experiment. Readers are catapulted 
into the action of this riveting pseudo-science thriller almost immediately—a good 
thing too, as the quick pace leaves little time to question some of the premise’s more 
unbelievable points. Anna’s clearly naïve view makes her a complex protagonist, 
and the reliability of her narration is called into question once readers realize that 
she too is being manipulated by outside sources, adding another layer of intrigue 
to an already suspenseful ride. Her obsession with Sam borders on clinginess, but 
a superbly designed plot twist adds nuance to this characteristic and makes her 
relationship with all four of the boys even more complicated. The guys are hot, 
the romance steamy, and the action fierce—what more could a girl want?  KQG 
sAunders, kATe Magicalamity. Delacorte, 2012 305p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98968-1 $19.99  
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74077-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98928-5 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
It’s unusual to discover that your mother has been bewitched into a jar of tomatoes 
and your father is now living as a bat, but that’s exactly what happens to poor Tom 
Harding, a supposedly normal eleven-year-old boy who discovers he’s not so normal 
after all. It turns out that Dad, unbeknownst to mortal Mom, is a fairy (making 
Tom a demisprite) and that before he joined the human world, Dad got into some 
trouble in the Realm: namely, he’s charged with the murder of a member of the 
fairy world’s most powerful family. Tom knows his father is no killer and sets off to 
clear Dad’s name but somehow manages to stir up a fairy revolution in the process. 
Despite his sudden status as an anything-but-ordinary kid, Tom is a bit of a bore, 
and his tendency to complain and yearn for normalcy makes the magic of the fairy 
world difficult for readers to appreciate. The bulk of the amusement here comes 
in the form of Lorna, Iris, and Dahlia, Tom’s trio of bickering fairy godmothers 
who help him on his mission and who manage to make even the most mundane 
event of teatime into a dramatic, hilariously absurd affair; their backstories of 
secret rebellions, forbidden romances, and rogue spellcasting make Tom’s tale pale 
in comparison. The world is nonetheless imaginative, and readers looking for a 
quick, magical romp will find it here.  KQG 
sChmid, pAul Perfectly Percy; written and illus. by Paul Schmid. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-0-06-180436-6 $17.99   
R 3-6 yrs
Little Percy, younger brother of Pearl of Hugs from Pearl (BCCB 1/12), absolutely 
loves balloons. Since he’s a porcupine, this is a problem: “HAPPY little porcu-
pines with balloons are soon SAD little porcupines. The balloons always go POP! 
And Percy’s happiness pops with them.” Percy is determined to find a solution, 
however, and after a false start or two, he’s got it: an upended cereal bowl makes 
a fine helmet, covering his uppermost prickles and thus keeping his balloons 
(relatively) safe. Sure, there may not be much substance to this plot, but Percy’s 
can-do approach to problem solving is a useful model for little ones, and he’s an 
endearing protagonist. Schmid’s pencil and Photoshop illustrations are stunning 
in the simplicity of their compositions, with the porcupine figures (white bodies 
with black pencil line quills radiating outward) skillfully posed against solid pastel 
backdrops, while slight, smudgy white halos around the black pencil outlines add 
310 • The bulleTin
further eye-pleasing contrast. The sight of wide-eyed, pink-nosed little Percy sadly 
contemplating his collection of deflated balloons (each with a quill stuck through 
them) or smiling triumphantly with the still-dripping bowl on his head will pro-
voke plenty of porcupine love and sympathy from child and adult readers alike. 
While this could prompt a brainstorming session for a problem-solving lesson 
(“What else could Percy try to keep his balloons safe?”), or be happily combined 
with the aforementioned Hugs for Pearl, Percy also stands alone quite well on his 
own little feet.  JH
sedgwiCk, mArCus Midwinterblood. Roaring Brook, 2013 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-800-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
This collection of seven short stories, inspired by the epic final painting by turn-
of-the-century Swedish artist Carl Larsson, is set on a remote Scandinavian island 
where the inhabitants appear to remain ageless in part due to an odd native flower 
that resembles a dragon. The first vignette opens in June of 2073 and features Eric, 
a young journalist whose investigation into the mysteries of the island brings him 
closer to Merle, an island resident who is strangely familiar to Eric. The story ends 
with both Merle and Eric facing down a sacrificial knife and the crazed island leader 
who wields it, an authorial choice that ensures that readers will be sufficiently in-
vested in the two main characters to follow the remaining six tales, which trace the 
connection between Merle and Eric back through the centuries, eventually ending 
with the original sacrifice that set their fate in motion. The concept of two souls 
connected over space and time has obvious romantic appeal, and each individual 
story here is stunningly developed, offering up a different iteration of love and 
linking Eric and Merle in surprising but poignant ways: in one lifetime, they are 
mother and son, in another siblings, and in still another, a young girl and an old 
man who never meet but who manage to change each other’s lives nonetheless. 
Sedgwick’s prose is unadorned yet melancholic, and the stories all share a sense of a 
bleak desperation touched with just the slightest bit of hope, an effect that is most 
apparent in the concluding tale that reveals the ultimate fate of the two lovers. If 
readers require more heartache after that, an author’s note chronicling the artwork 
that inspired the stories will guide them to an equally compelling tale of the real-
life painter and his subject.  KQG
shepherd, megAn The Madman’s Daughter. Balzer + Bray, 2013 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212802-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212804-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
When the infamous Dr. Moreau fled to his tropical island to avoid scandal and 
prosecution, he left behind a wife and daughter; now his wife is dead and his daugh-
ter, Juliet, is living a pauper’s existence one shaky step away from the streets. When 
she finds Montgomery, her father’s old assistant, in London, she insists that he take 
her to her father. Always drawn to Montgomery, Juliet warms to him even more 
during the voyage; however, the castaway they pick up, Edward, vies with Mon-
gomery for her affection. Once on the island, Juliet is confronted with her father’s 
strange and horrible experiments and must also confront her own fascination with 
his work, even though she knows that it is a cruel abomination. Unfortunately, an 
February 2013 • 311
overemphasis on Juliet’s conflicted romantic feelings for her two would-be suitors 
displaces the opportunity to really ratchet up the horror here; the premise of Dr. 
Moreau’s island itself creates an anticipation of a terror that never materializes despite 
some desperate chase scenes and just-short-of-grisly revelations. Still, Shepherd 
develops aspects of her source material in ingenious ways, teasing out threads from 
the original and then twisting them in surprising but logical ways into a story that 
updates the original for a young adult audience by giving the younger, previously 
minor characters more substantive roles. Familiarity with The Island of Dr. Moreau 
is necessary to see the cleverness of this reworking, but readers with no knowledge 
of Moreau’s chimeras will be able to follow the plot handily and may even find 
it all the more freshly frightening for their lack of background knowledge.  KC  
singer, mArilyn Follow, Follow: A Book of Reverso Poems; illus. by Josée 
Masse. Dial, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3769-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
With Mirror, Mirror (BCCB 4/10), Singer introduced the cunning poetic “reverso,” 
a free-verse poem that creates a very different meaning when the order of the lines 
is reversed. This volume brings fourteen new poems, with an introduction and a 
valedictory bookending a dozen folktale-themed verses. Hans Christian Andersen is 
particularly well represented as the source of nearly half the poems (“Birthday Suit,” 
for instance neatly captures the disparity of the emperor’s and trickster’s thoughts 
in “The Emperor’s New Clothes”), and his tales are joined by other classics such 
as Aesop’s “The Tortoise and the Hare” (“Ready, Steady, Go!”) and “The Three 
Little Pigs” (“Can’t Blow This House Down”). It’s a form at its best for illuminat-
ing contrasting viewpoints: in the Pied Piper poem, “Follow Follow,” one verse 
tells of the town’s brushoff of the piper while the other conveys the piper’s chilling 
vengeance; in “Your Wish Is My Command,” Aladdin and the genie in the lamp 
have very different ideas of freedom. Each full-page image is divided down the 
middle to mirror the poems, and the acrylic art is bursting with luminous blues, 
sunny yellows, and verdant greens. The delicate striations suggest painting on wood, 
especially in gold-touched details that resemble gilt-enhanced carvings. These are 
delightful to read and read aloud, and they’re a curricular dream for discussions of 
poetry, folklore, and point of view. A note about poetic form and a collection of 
brief notes about the tales are appended.  DS
skuse, C. J. Rockoholic. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2012 358p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-42960-3 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-47004-9 $18.99   
R Gr. 7-10
British teen Jody has always been difficult, the kind of girl who starts food fights 
at funerals and causes traffic accidents trying to rescue doomed turkeys. She gets it 
from her grandfather, who was himself a bit of a handful, arranging his own death 
by crashing his wheelchair at high speed through the window of a sex shop to avoid 
more suffering through late-stage cancer. Jody’s best friend, Mac, has always been 
her anchor, but even he is stymied when she accidentally kidnaps Jackson Gatlin, 
the lead singer of her favorite band, a scenario that is oddly plausible given that 
Jackson is stoned and dazed following his concert and eager to get away from his 
thuggish manager. Jody can’t imagine her luck at having the world-famous Jackson 
312 • The bulleTin
all to herself, but his diva demands and disgusting detox process strip away all of 
her naïve romantic fantasies and leave behind a guy who seems more like a needy 
brother than a larger-than-life hero. Mac, on the other hand, assumes more he-
roic proportions as Jody slowly begins to realize that the boy she thought was her 
comfortable, reliable gay BFF might not be gay after all, and may be more than a 
BFF. Skuse deftly exposes the seedy side of fame and fan culture as she takes read-
ers from mosh pit to recovery room, and then through the unpleasant process of 
Jackson’s detoxification, his well-founded fears of an out-of-control manager, and 
the persistence of an unscrupulous press. Through it all, Jody emerges as more hap-
less and naïve than her worldly pose suggests, and her trials with Jackson help her 
break out of the grief-induced malaise that has plagued her since her grandfather’s 
diagnosis. Spirited, engaging characters in a situation that holds up even when the 
fantasy of it breaks down will give readers lots to think about as they enjoy Jody’s 
unprecedented predicament.  KC
sTrAsniCk, lAuren Then You Were Gone. Simon Pulse, 2013 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2715-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2717-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Adrienne doesn’t understand why her best friend, Dakota, ditched her abruptly 
two years earlier. Since then, Dakota has become a rising indie rock star while 
Adrienne has moved on to an L.A. teenagerhood of hip, permissive parents, pseudo-
sophisticated midweek supper parties where everyone gets drunk, and midday sex 
with her attentive boyfriend. When Dakota goes missing and everyone assumes 
she’s committed suicide, Adrienne descends into an obsessive spiral of memories 
and attempts to recapture Dakota by dressing like her and getting involved with her 
ex-boyfriend. In the end, she rescues Dakota, whose affair with a teacher has gone 
wrong, but she has to come to terms with the fact that she doesn’t really like her 
formerly beloved friend any more and that much of her recent life has been lived in 
reaction to their friendship and its ending. Strasnick’s evocation of L.A. landmarks 
and hipster pastimes along with her exploration of dark themes in a somewhat 
dreamy style suggest a Francesca Lia Block homage, but Block’s is a singular talent, 
so this novel suffers by comparison. Indeed, Strasnick’s otherwise down-to-earth, 
grounded characters don’t match their affected and pretentious activities, making 
them read as not wholly credible for their age, even in L.A. Adrienne’s character 
arc is well handled, however, and her moves from grief and obsession to reluctant 
self-understanding and ultimate liberation will resonate with anyone who’s ever 
been caught up in the charisma of a destructive friendship.  KC
TAvAres, mATT Becoming Babe Ruth; written and illus. by Matt Tavares. Candle-
wick, 2013 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5646-1 $16.99   
R 6-9 yrs
How can an author make the umpteenth picture book about Babe Ruth justify its 
shelf space? By finding the right angle on the legend and trimming the larger-than-
life figure down to a guy a kid might want to shake hands with. Tavares rightly 
assumes that his audience is already convinced of Ruth’s baseball stature, and he 
focuses his attention narrowly and successfully on the slugger’s youth at Saint Mary’s 
Industrial School for Boys, and his ongoing relationship with the school even after 
February 2013 • 313
he had achieved celebrity in his career. An incorrigible troublemaker, young George 
was brought to school by his exasperated father in hope of the boy’s reform. George 
doesn’t exactly embrace the routine or the discipline, but he does learn everything 
power-hitter Brother Matthias can teach him about baseball. The rest is history—
recruitment to the Orioles minor league team, off to the Red Sox, and on to the 
Yankees and a life of glamour and excess. Those years are largely sidebar to Tavares’ 
main story, which returns to Ruth’s generous fund-raising after a major fire at St. 
Mary’s, and his visits to the school and his mentor. Though subtle in color, Tavares’ 
illustrations are often big and brash in composition, with plenty of close-ups of a 
beaming Babe holding forth on the field, in parades, or as the avuncular center of 
adoring boys’ attention. Viewers who look closely, however, will notice that Brother 
Matthias makes a significant number of appearances too—a reminder that Ruth 
didn’t achieve his success all by himself. An author’s note comments further on 
Ruth’s career, and a table of stats and a bibliography are also included.  EB 
TimberlAke, Amy One Came Home. Knopf, 2013 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96925-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86925-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98934-6 $10.99   
R* Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Georgy Burkhardt refuses to believe that the tragic remains 
being buried in the graveyard of her small Wisconsin town really belong to her 
beloved and runaway older sister, Agatha. Determined to find Agatha, Georgy sets 
out during a hot summer in 1871 to follow the trail, armed with her grandfather’s 
rifle and a horse—well, a mule—belonging to Billy McCabe, Agatha’s former 
beau. Unfortunately, she’s also accompanied against her will by Billy, who won’t 
let her go alone and who’s long been a teasing thorn in Georgy’s side. As Georgy’s 
search continues, she begins to find Billy a solid companion, but she also finds an 
intertwined collection of secrets and a considerable amount of trouble. Timberlake 
builds original plotting atop the classic foundation of a journey, flirting with clichés 
only to subvert or ground them. Readers won’t be sure whom to believe about 
Agatha, and they may also see, as Georgy does not, how much Georgy’s dream of 
running the family store with her sister is Agatha’s nightmare. Georgy’s narration 
is innocent, eager, and rich with appropriate small-town period formality, moving 
smoothly from comic adolescent petulance to raw plainspoken loss: “There is noth-
ing so final as turning around.” The book additionally brings to atmospheric life the 
deluge of the passenger pigeon flocks, roosting in colossal numbers and supporting 
an entire industry of “pigeoners,” and also vividly portrays the foreboding tinder-
dry Midwestern setting, where drought crisped the land so that the slightest spark 
could—and does—ignite the countryside. With its historical backdrop, enjoyable 
narrative, and endearing heroine, this will appeal both to fans of Philbrick’s The 
Mostly True Adventures of Homer P. Figg (BCCB 1/09) and Kelly’s The Evolution of 
Calpurnia Tate (BCCB 7/09).  DS
Tubb, krisTin o’donnell The 13th Sign. Feiwel, 2013 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-312-58352-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Jalen Jones has never quite bought into the astrological nonsense 
that her grandmother adores, but when Jalen accidentally unlocks the thirteenth 
314 • The bulleTin
zodiac sign, shifting the personalities of everyone around her, she’s forced to re-
consider her stance. A woman claiming to be Gemini shows up on Jalen’s doorstep 
and informs her that unless Jalen wants the personality changes to be permanent, 
she has to put the cosmos back in order. To do that, Jalen has to defeat the Keepers 
of the eleven other zodiac signs, then find and return the Keeper of the thirteenth 
sign to the heavens. Oh, and, the thirteenth Keeper has magical healing properties 
that would cure Jalen’s beloved grandmother’s cancer, but Jalen would have to pay 
for such powers with her own life. Oh, and, she has to restore order and make that 
decision in the next twenty-three hours. It’s a lot to pack into a middle-school fan-
tasy; the pieces don’t always mesh, and the ailing grandmother and missing father 
subplot is over the top. Mostly, though, this is an engaging, fast-paced adventure 
through both the streets of New Orleans and the astrological map of the sky. Tubb 
skillfully blends campiness and creepiness, imbuing the various Keepers with 
wonderfully snarky attitudes while calling on the darker aspects of NOLA’s more 
haunted areas to chill the atmosphere. Character development is at a minimum, 
relying mostly on the zodiac for the defining traits of both Jalen and her supporting 
cast. Nonetheless, readers whose daily routine involves checking their horoscopes 
will be similarly intrigued by Tubb’s interpretation of the stars.  KQG
wAlTon, k. m. Empty. Simon Pulse, 2013 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5359-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5360-9 $9.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Since Dell’s father left, Dell has eaten her way to 286 pounds, and her mother has 
disappeared into a haze of prescription medication. Aside from her loving little 
sister, everything seems to be a hopeless cause: Dell’s weight gets her kicked off the 
softball team, her best friend, Cara, is transitioning to the popular crowd without 
her, her long-time crush rapes her when they are both drunk at a party, and his 
girlfriend spreads the rumor online that Dell raped him instead. Even though 
Cara remains by her side, Dell realizes that the shallowness of her relationship 
with Cara means that she has no one to really talk to about serious things; more 
profoundly, she realizes that she has no idea how to talk about emotions even if 
she did have someone to confide in. When a moment of anger results in a broken 
toe, she stumbles into her mother’s stash of painkillers and the ultimate way out of 
a life she can’t see as getting any better. Suicide as a result of bullying has become 
a hot topic in YA lit, and Walton offers a sensitive portrayal of the circumstances 
that lead to Dell’s fatal decision. She carefully shows the good and the bad in Dell’s 
life and patiently explores those moments where the bad outweighs the possibility 
of hope for something different in Dell’s mind. Moreover, she is fair in depicting 
Dell’s self-understanding: Dell knows that her decisions are not all the fault of the 
people around her and that there are people who want to help, but what she misses 
is that no one in her life has helped her acquire the basic skills of helping herself. 
Her thought processes evoke empathy without necessarily validating her despair, 
making this a book to recommend to parents as well as their teens for facilitating 
self-examination and open lines of communication.  KC
willner-pArdo, ginA Prettiest Doll. Clarion, 2012 234p
ISBN 978-0-547-68170-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Olivia has been on the pageant circuit her entire life, but at thirteen, she’s beginning 
February 2013 • 315
to wonder if there is anything more to her than just being pretty. When she meets 
Dan, a boy who’s physically underdeveloped for his fifteen years, she realizes that 
they are judging each other by appearances and challenges him to see beyond her 
beauty. Dan has left home because his mother wants him to start growth hormone 
therapy, and he’s not sure he wants to. Similarly, Olivia balks at her mother’s pushy 
attempts to make her sing as her pageant talent, and she decides to join Dan as 
he continues on his journey to Chicago. Though deceptively simple in both style 
and plot, Dan’s and Olivia’s mirrored stories have a structurally elegant parallelism 
that highlights questions about appearance and parental expectations and makes 
them accessible to the target audience. Even though they experience their bodies 
as confining in different ways, Olivia and Dan both recognize that pretty matters 
for girls as much as tall for boys, and they also come to understand that parents do 
not always act in their children’s best interest. Both problems are in some respects 
unsolvable, and Willner-Pardo avoids both convenience and contrivance in her 
resolutions for her characters, with each protagonist balancing resignation and 
rebellion. The story is straightforward, with an ending that seems at first blush a 
tad anticlimactic, but the larger themes are eminently discussable, making this a 
good choice for a junior-high book group.  KC
winTer, JonAh You Never Heard of Willie Mays?!; illus. by Terry Widen-
er. Schwartz & Wade, 2013 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96844-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86844-3 $17.99   
R* Gr. 3-5
If Winter’s last baseball title found him stunned that kids might not know Sandy 
Koufax (You Never Heard of Sandy Koufax?!, BCCB 2/09), now he’s downright 
aghast that they could be ignorant of Willie “Say Hey” Mays. He sets this to rights 
in a rollicking biography that establishes the New York Giants legend as one of 
baseball’s greatest all-around players, while gently reminding fans of the often 
unsung ways in which he advanced respect for black players, who had just broken 
into the major leagues. Winter throws himself heart and soul into the persona of 
a diehard Giants fan, and his narration runs at the pace and style of an old-timer 
who just can’t say enough about Mays’ glory days when the player was “flyin’ round 
the bases so fast that his hat would fly off, chargin’ line drives hit to shallow center 
field like his life depended on it, usin’ his classic ‘basket catch,’ his glove held out 
like he was askin’ for a cookie.” Widener’s paintings sing perfect counterpoint to 
the text, whether Mays is a the young boy posing just like his hero, Joe DiMaggio, 
or a seasoned player on his knees tracking the path of the ball he’s just released, or 
the pro playing stickball with his young fans in Harlem. Ticket-stub insets offer 
sidebar information as Mays’ story advances, and a glossary of baseball terms teams 
up with notes on stats and broadcaster quotes in the end matter. Even adults who 
are indifferent to baseball will likely be so drawn into Mays’ story and Winter’s 
rousing text that they’ll want to gather up a crowd just to read this one aloud.  EB
316 • The bulleTin
yolen, JAne Bad Girls: Sirens, Jezebels, Murderesses, Thieves & Other Female 
Villains; written by Jane Yolen and Heidi E. Y. Stemple; illus. by Rebecca 
Guay. Charlesbridge, 2013 164p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-185-1 $18.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-585-5 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Mother/daughter team Yolen and Stemple ponder the question of just what makes 
a bad girl bad. Bad press? Bad breaks? Bad boyfriends? Bad, bad nature? The mis-
deeds of two dozen notorious dames from throughout history are the fodder for 
these brief, breezy prose bios, each of which is followed by a one-page dialogue 
between the authors, rendered in comic-book format. Yolen and Stemple make an 
honest effort to lay out the life stories in as neutral terms as possible, saving their 
analysis of what went wrong for the interlude pieces, intergenerational conversa-
tions that are set in a place or during an occasion that hearkens to the subject’s 
story. They chat about Anne Boleyn’s affairs while enjoying tea near the Tower of 
London, discuss Countess Bathory’s blood-soaked quest for youth during pedicures 
and brow waxing at a day spa, debate the Wild West felonies of Belle Starr while 
shopping for boots (yes, Heidi, definitely the over-the-knee lace-ups with studded 
heels!). Yolen tends to favor the more broad-minded, charitable view of the ladies’ 
motivations, while Stemple generally takes a more censorious stand. Readers may 
find themselves aligning with one of the authors, but they won’t be able to easily 
dismiss the opposing argument offhand. Guay’s comics are key to developing the 
intellectual workout offered by the authors’ conversations, and her glamorous full-
page portraits of the bad girls opening each chapter capture the mystique that keeps 
the women in the spotlight over decades, or even millennia. An index is included, 
and short bibliographies are appended for each chapter, with enough material readily 
accessible online to guide teens who want to know more.  EB
young, JAneT ruTh My Beautiful Failure. Atheneum, 2012 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-5489-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4669-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Last year (in The Opposite of Music, BCCB 4/07), Billy’s father disappeared into a 
debilitating and frightening depression that disrupted the family. He’s recovered 
now, but Billy, now a sophomore, is still wary, especially when his father throws 
himself into his art with a passion that looks like mania to Billy. Meanwhile, 
Billy has decided that his experience has prepared him to be a phone counselor at 
Listeners, a hotline for people in crisis. The hotline has specific rules about how 
to handle callers, but Billy comes to find these restrictive, especially when he gets 
a repeat caller named Jenney. He and Jenney develop an empathetic connection, 
which Billy imagines has romantic potential, but just as he misreads his father’s 
reinvigorated mental health, he misreads the depth of Jenney’s disturbance until 
it’s too late. Caught between the emotional extremes of people he cares deeply for, 
Billy struggles with the limits of his own power to help people; ultimately, his big-
gest struggle is to learn how to accept the frailty of both himself and others. The 
psychological suspense is taut throughout as readers see Billy’s dad’s behavior through 
Billy’s memories of the previous year and his fears for his father. Billy’s perspective 
on Jenney is more obviously skewed, but it’s no less poignant and suspenseful, as 
February 2013 • 317
his fantasies begin to interfere with his ability to really listen to her. The emotional 
resonance here is complex and multifaceted, melancholy even where there’s hope 
and hopeful in the midst of melancholy; readers will be thinking about this one 
long after they close the book.  KC
318 • The bulleTin
pullmAn, philip, ad. Fairy Tales From the Brothers Grimm: A New English Ver-
sion. Penguin, 2012 406p 
ISBN 978-0-670-02497-1 $27.95
For two hundred years now, the Grimm collection of fairy tales has been influencing 
both the literary and popular cultures of the Western world, and noted author and 
fantasist Pullman selects fifty of his favorite stories to retell in celebration of the 
bicentennial of the Grimms’ initial German publication of Children’s and Household 
Tales. After providing a brief recap of the history behind the original collection, 
Pullman states that his aim with this anthology was to produce a version of the 
stories that is as “clear as water,” a task in which he succeeds quite well. The stories 
are uncluttered, carrying only the most essential details, with simple, elegant prose 
that relays the briskly paced plots with ease, making the stories themselves easily 
adaptable and thus a storyteller’s dream. Any changes Pullman makes are minimal, 
and indeed, his characteristic voice almost gets lost in the simplicity of the tales 
until the reader reaches the notes appended to each story. Besides including the 
tale type and a list of similar stories from around the world, Pullman offers a bit 
of commentary, discussing his own opinion of the specific story, its examination 
by other scholars, and in some cases, providing a more satisfactory conclusion 
for stories he found to be unfinished (his gruesome ending for “Thousandfurs” is 
particularly delightful). The selected stories range in familiarity, with well-known 
tales like “Cinderella” and “Snow White” making appearances alongside less popular 
stories such as “Hans-My-Hedgehog” and “Jorinda and Joringel.” This will be a 
valuable resource to both storytellers and scholars alike, and it may also be useful 
in a high school curriculum.  KQG
Blowing our own horn DeparTmenT:
At the ALA Midwinter Conference in Seattle, CCB Affiliate and GSLIS Assistant 
Professor Carol Tilley gave the 2013 YALSA Past Presidents’ “Trends in YA” lecture, 
entitled “Comics: A Once-Missed Opportunity.”
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
February 2013 • 319
Abuse–fiction: Miller
Actors and acting–fiction: Federle
Adventure: Carriger
African Americans: Asim; Fradin; 
Winter 
Animals: Markle
Animals–fiction: Grine
Animals–stories: Bruchac; Murphy
AntholoGies: datlow
Appearance–fiction: Willner-Pardo
Astrology–fiction: tubb
Astronomy: Burleigh
Baseball: tavares; Winter
Baseball–stories: Meshon
BedtiMe stories: Meng
BioGrAPhies: Asim; Burleigh: 
engle; Markel; tavares; Winter; 
Yolen
Biology: Markle
Boarding schools–fiction: Carriger; 
laBan
Books and reading–stories: Bromley
Broadway–fiction: Federle
Brothers–fiction: Moskowitz
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Meng
Cats–stories: donaldson
Celebrities–fiction: skuse
Chinese Americans–fiction: honey-
man
Civil War: Bolden
Comics–fiction: Crompton
ConCePt BooKs: larson
Construction–stories: Bean
CountinG BooKs: larson
Creative writing: singer
Crime and criminals: Yolen
Crime and criminals–fiction: Car-
riger; Cooney; Grine; harrington; 
Miranda; Miller; Mitchard; saun-
ders; skuse; strasnick
Crocodiles–stories: Bromley
Cuba–fiction: engle
death–fiction: Baskin
dentistry: Markle
depression–fiction: Walton; Young
disabilities–fiction: Patterson
dogs–fiction: Breen
dogs–stories: Cocca-leffler
ducks–stories: Bromley
dystopias–fiction: Bracken; datlow
emotions–stories: henry
esP–fiction: Chen
Ethics and values: Blakemore; 
Crompton; engle; Fradin; lan-
caster; Moskowitz; Willner-Pardo; 
Yolen
Families–fiction: Blakemore; Chen; 
saunders; Walton; Young
Families–stories: Bean
FAntAsY: Forster; hirsch; saun-
ders; sedgwick; tubb
Fathers–fiction: shepherd
Fear–stories: leathers
Fishing–stories: larson
FolKtAles And FAirY tAles: 
Bruchac; Meyer; singer
Friends–fiction: Berne; Branford; 
Breen; Buzo; donaldson; hasak-
lowry; Mitchard; skuse; stras-
nick
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CAPs 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
320 • The bulleTin
Friends–stories: henry; Kirk
Gambling–fiction: honeyman
Ghosts–fiction: harrington
Grandparents–fiction: tubb
Grandparents–stories: larson 
GrAPhiC novels: Grine
historiCAl FiCtion: engle; 
honeyman; timberlake
History, U.S.: Asim; Bolden; 
Brown; Fradin; Markel
horror: shepherd
hospitals–fiction: Branford 
houses–stories: Bean 
huMor: Arnold; Breen; Bromley; 
Federle; hasak-lowry; heilbro-
ner; Meng; Patterson; schmid
identity–fiction: Chen; Cooney; 
rush
illness–fiction: Blakemore; Mitchard; 
Moskowitz
immigration–fiction: honeyman
Japan–stories: Meshon
Jealousy–fiction: Berne
Journals–fiction: Buzo
Kidnapping–fiction: Cooney
Kisses–stories: Murphy
labor movement: Markel
Literature, English: shepherd
Magic–fiction: hirsch; saunders
Mice–stories: henry
Military history: Brown
Music and musicians–fiction: John-
son; skuse
MYsteries: Cooney; Forster; 
harrington; McAlpine; Miranda; 
Mitchard; timberlake
Mythical creatures–fiction: Mos-
kowitz 
Nature study: Cooke; Markle
Performers–fiction: Patterson
Pets–fiction: heilbroner
Pets–stories: Cocca-leffler; donald-
son; Kirk 
PoetrY: singer
Porcupines–stories: schmid
Presidents: Bolden
Problem-solving–stories: schmid
rabbits–stories: Kirk; leathers
Reading aloud: Cooke; singer
Reading, beginning: heilbroner; 
Meshon
Reading, easy: Branford
Reading, reluctant: Markle; McAl-
pine
relationships–fiction: Baskin; Buzo; 
Chen; Crompton; laBan; sedg-
wick; strasnick
revolutionary War: Brown
rhYMinG stories: Arnold; 
donaldson 
romance–fiction: Berne; har-
rington; Johnson; lancaster; 
Meyer; rush; shepherd
runaways–fiction: Bracken; Willner-
Pardo
school–fiction: hasak-lowry; 
laBan;Miller
Science: Burleigh
sCienCe FiCtion: Bracken; 
hirsch; lancaster; Meyer; rush
secrets–fiction: Blakemore; rush
separation–stories: Cocca-leffler
short stories: datlow; sedg-
wick
sisters–fiction: Baskin; timberlake
slavery: Bolden; Fradin
sloths: Cooke
snakes–fiction: heilbroner
snow–stories: Bruchac
steAMPunK: Carriger; Meyer
suicide–fiction: Walton; Young
suPernAturAl stories: 
Johnson; Moskowitz
survivAl stories: Miller
susPense: Cooney; Miranda; 
rush
swimming–fiction: Baskin
teeth: Markle 
theater–fiction: Federle
toddler BooKs: Murphy
trees–stories: Arnold
twins–fiction: McAlpine
vacations–stories: Cocca-leffler
verse novels: engle
voyages and travel–fiction: timber-
lake
Women’s studies: Burleigh; engle; 
Forster; Markel; Yolen
World cultures: Meshon 
Zoology: Cooke
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, 
E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
ONLINE REFERENCE RESOURCES
Five outstanding online references from the Johns Hopkins University Press  
deliver seminal works and cutting-edge scholarship to students and researchers.
press.jhu.edu/references
• Flexible search options, powerful results.  Results are ranked and sorted by relevance   
 
or date, with direct links to documents and related materials.
• Intuitive browsing.  Wander through entire volumes without getting lost.
• Reliable usage statistics. COUNTER-compliant usage reports let you track activity  
 
 
according to the most current standard available. Statistics are compiled and ready to  
 
 
download once a month. 
• Always available. Our collections are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week from any   
 
IP-authenticated address. No special hardware or software is required. And we offer full   
 
technical and customer support.
The Early Republic
Critical Editions on the  
Founding of the United States
Primary material documenting the 
actions, debates, and thoughts of the  
First Federal Congress (1789–1791) and 
its members. 
earlyrepublic.press.jhu.edu
Encyclopedia of  
American Studies
Edited by Simon Bronner
Interdisciplinary articles from  
hundreds of scholars cover the history 
and cultures of the United States from  
pre-colonial days to the present.
eas-ref.press.jhu.edu
The Johns Hopkins  
Guide to Literary  
Theory & Criticisim
Edited by Michael Groden,  
Martin Kreiswirth, and Imre Szeman
A comprehensive historical survey of the 
field’s most important figures, schools, 
and movements.
litguide.press.jhu.edu
The Papers of Dwight 
David Eisenhower 
Edited by Louis Galambos, Alfred D.  
Chandler Jr., Daun van Ee, et. al.
Combines the full text of all 21 
volumes—over 14,000 pages—with 
a powerful search engine and 
user-friendly interface.
eisenhower.press.jhu.edu
The World Shakespeare 
Bibliography ONLINE
Edited by James L. Harner and an  
international committee of correspondents
The single largest Shakespeare  
database in the world. 
www.worldshakesbib.org
