U
I LLJNOI S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
I 
r
Ai
.v;·
5
j=a School Library Journal and Publishers Weekly star
"Elvin Bishop's story,
begun in Slot Machine
continues, but there
is no need to read
that book first. Here
readers meet Elvin
during the opening
weeks of his freshman
year of high school,
a time when his
friendships undergo
the tests of changing
perceptions of
important....
This is a funny,
insightful, and wholly
engaging novel that
addresses many of
the worst fears of
adolescent boys
without preaching."
-Starred review /School
Library journal
"Witty and knowing, this novel will have readers hoping Lynch
writes another Elvin Bishop story soon."
-Starred review / Publishers Weekly
"Pudgy, frantic Elvin takes a hilarious, roller-coaster plunge into
Young Adulthood." -Kirkus Reviews
Ages 12 up. $15.95TR (0-06-028040-9); $15.89LB (0-06-028210-X)
Chris Lynch's first Elvin Bishop novel
SLOT MACHINE
Ages 12 up. $14.89LB (0-06-023585-3); $4.95PB (0-06-447140-3)
il HarperCollins Children's Books
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022 
www.harperchildrens.( :om
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
July/August 1999
Vol. 52 No. 11
c ...,
..
~i'' 
?,
~L=pi
.sr. 
t
··
A LOOK INSIDE
377 THE BIG PICTURE
Anna ofByzantium by Tracy Barrett
378 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
383 * Peanut Butter Party: Including the History, Uses, and Future ofPeanut
Butter written and illus. by Remy Charlip
385 * The Boy on the Beach written and illus. by Niki Daly
386 * The Birchbark House written and illus. by Louise Erdrich
391 * The Smugglers by Iain Lawrence
396 * Darkness, Be My Friend by John Marsden
396 * Swine Lake by James Marshall; illus. by Maurice Sendak
408 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
410 ANNUAL AUTHOR AND TITLE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (MD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Janice N. Harrington, Reviewer (JNH)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1999 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by David Bowers from Anna ofByzantium ©1999. Used by permission of
Delacorte Press.
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 377
THE BIG PICTURE
Anna of Byzantium
by Tracy Barrett
Regard the halo above the head of the lovely young woman on our cover with a
measure of skepticism; in light of her story, it may be more a wishful than a mer-
ited accoutrement. In this liberally fictionalized story of Anna Comnena, daugh-
ter and designated heir of eleventh-century Byzantine emperor Alexius I, the
protagonist engages with her closest family members in a battle of will and wit for
control of the throne-a battle which we realize from the start she will lose. Writ-
ing from a remote mountain convent, Anna reflects ruefully on the missteps that
led to her exile, and thereby involves readers in a gripping saga of alliances, in-
trigues, deceits, and treacheries worthy of a place among the tragic myths.
While Alexius and his men-at-arms are off on the first Crusades, the women
and children back home fiercely promote their own interests in the governance of
the realm. Anna Dalassena, who was responsible for putting her warrior son Alexius
on the throne, is his most trusted advisor and de facto regent in his absence. She
recognizes Anna Comnena's aptitude for statesmanship and begins to instruct her
granddaughter in her own style of ruthless politicking, certain that she will be able
to control the next empress as handily as she controls her son. Empress Irene,
Anna's mother, is a devout Christian who exerts little power at court (and that
mainly through the loving indulgence of her husband); she opposes her mother-
in-law's influence over Anna at every turn and fruitlessly warns Alexius during his
infrequent appearances at home that their daughter is turning into a cold, amoral
young woman under his mother's tutelage. Prince John, the younger brother
whom Anna has despised since his birth, is an ignorant, temperamental sneak who
senses that Anna Dalassena is the power broker within the family and deliberately
drives a fatal wedge between his sister and grandmother.
Anna Comnena comes of age amid these rivalries, freely turning to her grand-
mother for instruction, ignoring the more temperate messages of her mother and
the family's tutor Simon, and underestimating the cunning of brother John. Con-
fident that the throne is hers upon her father's death, she recklessly boasts to Si-
mon about her intention to overthrow Anna Dalassena's power and about her
childhood attempt on her baby brother's life (actually, no more than a prayer to
the pagan gods to strike him down). John overhears her harangue, reports the
treasonous talk to Alexius, and in one swoop has her removed from succession and
himself designated royal heir. From that day forward, Anna tries to maneuver
back into her father's good graces; when that last hope evaporates upon Alexius's
death, Anna and her mother conspire unsuccessfully to poison John at his corona-
tion feast, entangling innocent Simon and Anna's personal slave, Sophia, in their
378 
* THE BULLETIN
machinations. The plot is discovered, Irene suffers a complete mental collapse,
and John mercifully spares Anna from execution, sending her instead into exile.
Knowledge of Anna's lineage is essential to understanding power plays between
the ruling Comnenus (Alexius and Anna Dalassena) family and the vanquished
Ducas (Irene) family, now tenuously allied through the royal marriage. Whereas
many historical fiction writers would scurry to construct elaborate explanatory
dialogues or extensive notes, Barrett cleverly delivers a far more entertaining les-
son through venomous barbs hurled among lead characters. Anna Dalassena re-
viles the Empress Irene and her vanquished family: "If the Ducas family knew
how to rule, how did [Alexius] take over the throne from them?" Irene ridicules
her mother-in-law's "barbarian" roots: "I, after all, was raised in a palace, not in an
Armenian goatherd's tent." Wickedly delightful though this asperity may be, Barrett
never loses sight of the fact that in the triumph of either royal lies the welfare of
their subjects.
Although separated from contemporary readers by foreign custom, social rank,
and almost a millennium of Western history, Barrett's protagonist nonetheless
commands YA empathy. Anna is a loving daughter, who questions whether her
parents' teaching is adequate guidance for her own life; an able student, who mas-
ters the content of her lessons before realizing their meaning and purpose; a fa-
vored child, who is bitterly jealous of the meteoric ascent of a sibling; a disappointed
adolescent, who is unable to fathom the decades ahead and believes that life's best
opportunities have passed her by. But teen readers who tend to cast elements of
their own lives in equally tragic light can take heart from the concluding pages of
Anna's tale. She begins to find solace and tranquility in small daily tasks, softens
her contempt of those lower born, and turns her historian hand to what will be-
come her great life's work, writing TheAlexiad, a tribute to her father's reign (which
in real life now serves as a major source of information about Byzantine history).
Perhaps she earned that halo after all. (Imprint information appears on p. 379.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADA, 
ALMA 
FLOR, ad. 
The Three Golden Oranges; illus. by Reg
Cartwright. 
Atheneum, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80775-9 
$16.00 
R 
7-10 yrs
At the behest of their mother, Sara, three brothers seek their wives and their for-
tunes in this lengthy retelling of a traditional Spanish folktale. A wise woman
sends Santiago, Tomis, and Matfas on a quest to a far-off garden, warning them to
work together and return directly to her with "three golden oranges on a single
branch" in order to obtain the wives they desire. The two elder brothers ignore the
old woman's advice, but Matfas pays attention and frees the lovely Blancaflor, her
sisters, and her mother from a sorcerer's evil spell. Blancaflor's sisters turn down
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 379
the proposals of the two older brothers, but Blancaflor ("It is a woman's right to
choose whom she wants to marry, don't you think?") decides to marry Matfas, and
they "returned to the little white house next to the sea, where they filled the
windowsills with potted geraniums, and Sara's heart with joy." The momentum
sometimes bogs down in the details, and the text lacks the storytelling verve neces-
sary for a crisp delivery. The formal language is leavened by the humor and dash
of the oil illustrations, however, which feature dark-eyed, near-monumental char-
acters in a sunny green countryside spotted with white, stucco-roofed villas. Styl-
ized geometric design elements inform the varied compositions, and the overall
impression is that of a land where the sun shines from a consistently blue sky onto
perpetually verdant fields. Ada's note adds cultural context, although no specific
sources are given. JMD
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER 
Pierre's Dream; illus. by Susan Gaber. 
Dial, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-1700-8 
$15.99 
R 
6-9 yrs
In beautiful Provence lives a "lazy, foolish man named Pierre" who has "no job, no
interests, and no hobby besides sitting under the olive trees in the afternoon, thinking
of dinner." One day Pierre, exhausted from this taxing schedule, is napping under
the trees when the Grand Circus des rtoiles pitches its tents and prepares for its
show. Pierre, convinced that what he sees upon awakening is actually a dream,
faces down a lion, prances across the high wire, acts as ringmaster, and engages in
a variety of other death-defying feats, periodically murmuring "Very realistic" at
the manifestations of what he considers merely a naptime illusion. This is an
entertaining inversion of the old fantasy-that's-really-a-dream idea, and Armstrong's
text gives a dreamy flavor to the proceedings without foregoing the exotic plea-
sures of the circus delights and the humor of Pierre's misperception. Gaber's acrylics
make much of the lush green of Southern France, with mottled frescoesque tex-
tures that fill the spacious landscapes with light and softly sculpted people who
have an appropriate air of slight unreality; motion effects and creative perspectives
(a trapeze-dangling Pierre is depicted from above with tigers and audience reduced
to miniature below) never dazzle at the expense of the mood. Between this and
Priceman's Emeline at the Circus, reviewed below, it's a festive time for picture
book circuses; pass out the peanuts and let the show begin. DS
BARRETT, TRACY 
Anna ofByzantium. 
Delacorte, 1999 
209p
ISBN 0-385-32626-2 
$14.95 
R* Gr. 7-10
See this month's Big Picture, p. 377, for review.
BAT-AMI, MIRIAM 
Two Suns in the Sky. 
Front Street/Cricket, 1999 
223p
ISBN 0-8126-2900-0 
$15.95 
R* Gr. 7-12
Chris is a fourteen-year-old Catholic girl living a circumscribed life in the small
town of Oswego, New York; Adam is a fifteen-year-old Jewish refugee assigned to
the refugee shelter at Fort Oswego the summer of 1944. Chris is filled with yearn-
ing-for love, for experience, for a future that Oswego simply cannot offer. Adam
is also filled with yearning-for safety, for freedom, for romantic love. They see
each other across the barbed wire fence of the refugee camp and eventually in class
at the local high school. Their relationship is tinged with tragedy as the two, so
different, fall in love against the express wishes of Chris' bigoted Irish-American
father and the implied wishes of Adam's long-suffering mother. Bat-Ami captures
380 
* THE BULLETIN
the startled awareness of young adolescents in love for the first time, the awareness
of two individuals who, briefly, exist only in relation to one another. Told in the
alternating voices of Chris and Adam, the story has the intimate tone of confes-
sion, interspersed occasionally with facsimiles of official documents related to the
refugee situation. Each chapter opens with quotes from real Oswego refugees,
from Oswego residents who witnessed the camp, or from Shakespeare's Romeo and
Juliet, allowing echoes of history and tragic love to resonate in this tale of romantic
destiny. The gestalt of world events is reflected in the small-mindedness of those
town residents who are prejudiced against the religion and race of the refugees and
resent their presence. Day-to-day life on the homefront is documented without
awkwardness, melding smoothly with the characters' voices, but always the rela-
tionship between Adam and Chris is foremost. Poignant, passionate, and bitter-
sweet, their story is a moving reminder of the power of first love. An author's note
and extensive acknowledgments give historical context and specifics about Bat-
Ami's research. JMD
BEATON, CLARE 
One Moose, Twenty Mice; written and illus. by Clare
Beaton. 
Barefoot Books, 1999 
32p
ISBN 1-902283-37-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
From one to twenty, this book counts animals ranging from the titular moose
(one) through tigers (a half-score) through monkeys (a baker's dozen) to mice (as
promised, twenty). There's a catch to this countup, though: a big orange cat stalks
his way through the book, so each spread's text not only enumerates the critters
counted therein but also asks "Where's the cat?", who makes his presence fully felt
in the last spread when he can't resist the lure of the mice. 
The illustrations-
applique fabric, stitchery, and beadwork that give a collage effect-are comfort-
ably tactile and they offer some clever effects, such as the dark felt "shadow" that
gives some numerals an illusion of three-dimensionality; the hide-and-seek feline is
sometimes just a curling tail, sometimes a peering green eye, sometimes some deli-
cate mittened paws dancing along the top of the page until his final mouse hunt.
The constructions often seem to be more about their creation than illustration,
however, with a multitude of chachkes confusing the counting issue, compositions
sometimes busy and unfocused, and colors losing impact from an overuse of con-
trast. Young viewers will nonetheless find the fuzzy menagerie endearing, and
they'll giggle through the rollicking kitty hunt. DS
BELL, WILLIAM 
Zack. Simon, 1999 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-82248-0- 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
An extra-credit research project is all that stands between senior Zack Lane and a
failing grade in history. He decides to trace the origins of a box of artifacts he
found buried in the yard of the family's new home and, with the help of the cura-
tor of a local museum, learns that an ex-slave (who won his freedom by fighting for
Britain in the Revolutionary War) had once owned the property. The discovery
prompts Zack, biracial Canadian child of a Rumanian Jewish father and an Afri-
can-American mother, to explore the rift on the maternal side of his family, which
no one will discuss. A clandestine road trip to Mississippi leads him to his grand-
father, who welcomes him cordially as a dark-skinned stranger and, in the course
of their conversations, reveals a deep-seated bigotry against whites. Zack returns to
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 
381
his family more than willing to share his mother's lingering bitterness against the
father who cut her off upon her marriage: "Now I know why you and your father
are apart .... 
He's no better than a redneck or a skinhead." The artifact-in-the-
yard motif is a handy contrivance, and Zack's written report (which improbably
wins a history prize despite its lack of documentation and frequent asides directed
to Zack's teacher) awkwardly breaks the tale in two. Zack's condemnation of his
grandfather's bigotry also seems overdrawn, given the fact that the grandfather's
response to indignities suffered over his long lifetime has apparently been limited
to harsh verbiage rather than violent reprisal. At the heart of the novel, though, is
an involving road story replete with teen-pleasing details such as police harass-
ment, a storm-damaged truck, and a basketful of white lies and clever dodges to
keep parents in the dark concerning his mission; that's probably enough to lure
YAs along for the ride. EB
BRISSON, PAT 
Sky Memories; illus. by Wendell Minor. 
Delacorte, 1999 
71p
ISBN 0-385-32606-8 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
The ten-year-old narrator of this short novel begins her story on an ordinary day
that her mother encourages her to see as "regular-wonderful." Mother and daugh-
ter capture the scene by gazing upwards until they are ready to make a "sky memory,"
squeezing hands and saying "click" once they decide they are "really seeing every-
thing." The story goes on to describe the changes that take place in the lives of this
mother and daughter starting the "very next day" when the daughter tells us "my
mother found out she had cancer." This accessible narrative handles its emotional
subject with restraint, communicating the difficulties of this tragic situation from
the point of view of the girl who has to deal with the disruption of the rich family
life she shares with her single mother. In clear, concrete language Emily describes
her feelings during her mother's illness and her sadness after her mother's death ("I
was still so tired when I woke up that it seemed as if my body was held to my
mattress with sacks of sand"). Full-page watercolors with an airbrushed quality
illustrate each sky memory, softening the effect of the brief word pictures describ-
ing the physical deterioration of Emily's mother while emphasizing the theme that
memories can mitigate the pain of loss. FK
BURCHARD, PETER 
Lincoln and Slavery. 
Atheneum, 1999 
[208p] 
illus. with
photographs.
ISBN 0-689-81570-0 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Two years before his death, Lincoln promoted the idea that blacks were inherently
inferior; he supported efforts to return African Americans to Africa; and, as Burchard
reports, he was also one of our greatest and most enigmatic presidents. The author
looks at the complexities behind the Lincoln myth, recounting Lincoln's political
career, his social and racial beliefs, his reputation with his contemporaries, and the
effect of his leadership on emancipation and the future of African Americans. Flu-
ent and engaging language, historical anecdotes, excerpts from primary sources,
and unfamiliar information (e.g., Lincoln defended a slaveholder and helped blacks
emigrate to Panama) maintain interest, and the glimpses of the men and women
of Lincoln's day (Charlotte Forten, Frederick Douglass, Fanny Kemble, and So-
journer Truth) are especially compelling. The book gives a balanced presentation
of Lincoln's strengths and flaws, showing him to be a man of his times: "I am not,
382 
* THE BULLETIN
nor have ever been, in favor of making voters or jurors of negroes." Burchard
fictionalizes Lincoln's feelings and reactions, but he tempers his novelistic style
with frequent use of excerpts from Lincoln's speeches and writings and from news-
papers of the day. This in-depth focus on Lincoln and slavery complements Russell
Freedman's Lincoln: A Photobiography (BCCB 1/88) and Albert Marrin's Com-
mander in Chief Abraham Lincoln and the Civil War (BCCB 1/98) and provides
a sharp image of a multifaceted leader. Clearly captioned illustrations, historical
facsimiles, maps, and photographs are interspersed throughout the text, which
closes with an informative afterword, engrossing endnotes, and extensive bibliog-
raphy. An index will be included in the bound book. JNH
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
Rundown. 
Viking, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-670-88377-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Sixteen-year-old Jennifer Thayer, angry at her older sister's eternal family
prominence (worse now in the face of her upcoming wedding), makes a dangerous
bid for attention by falsely claiming to have fought off a would-be-rapist while out
running in the Berkeley hills. And it works: the police are eager to use Jennifer's
information to convict a serial rapist, her parents are protective and anxious to
compensate (her father buys her the horse she'd have killed for in her preteen
days), and her old boyfriend comes back to town. Pressure builds as the stakes get
higher, but only her sister suspects the truth, and Jennifer is not sure how far she's
prepared to take this and how it's all going to end. Cadnum sets up an intriguing
and unusual situation and plays it out fairly credibly. Jennifer's periodic
contemplation of how differently various stages would have gone had this been
happening to her sister operate ambivalently, possibly strengthening her claim to
family-leftover status but also calling her narrative reliability into question, especially
in light of the book's suggestion that it's her father, who may be having an affair,
with whom she's really angry. The story takes some odd turns toward the end (a
detective believes that Jennifer's mother is abusing her) and the wrap-up, wherein
Jennifer calls the police (presumably to confess) after taking an overdose of pills,
doesn't match the satisfying complexity of the rest of the novel. The strangeness of
the situation is nonetheless vividly evoked, and readers will puzzle over their stand
on the matter in a way that would make this a provocative companion to Walter
Dean Myers' very different Monster (BCCB 5/99). DS
CAHOON, HEATHER 
Word Play ABC; written and illus. by Heather
Cahoon. 
Walker, 1999 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8684-7 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8683-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
This alphabet takes a sportive approach: B is for "bare feet," but the feet are bear
(Teddy, to be precise) as well as bare; P is for "pantry," which features an oak
festooned with saucepans. Other entries flirt with metaphor ("night-light" cap-
tions a flock of fireflies) or literal interpretations of the metaphoric (the weeping
willow's tears drip piteously into the stream below it). Though diverting, the
result lacks the focus of Cathi Hepworth's lexical games in Bug Off (BCCB 9/98),
and some examples are cleverer than others (and some are simply unsuccessful).
Cahoon's art is more consistent: her smudgy black line, cloudy washes of color,
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 383
and sturdily humorous figures recall the work of Will Hillenbrand. Each spread is
united with crossover from one letter's illustration to the other, and the openings
are also visually connected, in their attractive layout, by thick bottom borders that
anchor the color schemes. Though the book doesn't always pull off its conceptual
gamesmanship, the fluid visuals and pleasurable brain ticklers may still add some
welcome frivolity to language arts. An appended glossary provides the real defini-
tions of the included terms. DS
CHARLIP, REMY 
Peanut Butter Party: Including the History, Uses, and Future of
Peanut Butter; written and illus. by Remy Charlip. 
Tricycle, 1999 
32p
ISBN 1-883672-69-4 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
There's something primally appealing about peanut butter, and kids seem to bond
with the stuff emotionally as well as physically. Charlip gives the goo its festive
due, with unusually feasible yet still whimsical activities such as Art Gallery Fun
(how to make a landscape, seascape, or abstract dreamscape out of basic foodstuffs:
"Try a cheese moon, sour cream hills, coconut snow, fettucini window trim"),
Monsters You Can Eat (sculpting clay made from PB and other edibles), and a
Peanut Butter Play (chunky and smooth face off), with peanutty songs and jokes.
Each spread offers a peanut gallery, pardon the puns, on the left side, where a
diminutive collection of kids offer bits of peanut-butter wisdom in verbatim quotes
from real kids (the pleasure one child takes in "sticking a plastic straw in a jar of
peanut butter and squeezing wiggly strings into your mouth" will inevitably prove
contagious). The right-hand pages offer lighthearted creations and descriptions of
the various projects, which are sometimes hampered by confusingly phrased or
placed captions and occasionally seem more filler than filling, as with the Quiet
Time All by Yourself Party, where one engages in Zen contemplation of a jar of
peanut butter. There's a touch of Hole Is to Dig spontaneity here, however, that
sandwiches pleasingly with the creative approach to playing with your food; this is
as close as you'll get to a book that sticks to the roof of your mouth. DS
CLEMENTS, ANDREW 
Workshop; illus. by David Wisniewski. 
Clarion,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-85579-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-8 yrs
Clements and Wisniewski pair up for a look inside a woodworker's studio. The
text on each two-page spread personifies and explains a different tool: ruler, axe,
saw, hammer, anvil, grinder, chisel, shears, knife, screwdriver, drill, pliers, wrench,
and toolbox. As each tool is named and its purpose described, a woodworker and
an assistant use it to assemble part of a project that eventually proves to be an
amusement-park carousel. Wisniewski's cut-paper illustrations and collage ably
illustrate Clements' spare, poetic text: "Saw is a biter./ Tooth after tooth,/ saw rips
away by bits./ Saw turns boards to dust." The strong and woody palette on parch-
ment background brings the warmth and rigor of the workshop to light. The
papercuts are most effective demonstrating motion, as in the sparks flying off of
the grinder, and the illusion of motion, as in the carousel horse's manes, but the
almost still-life pictures often need more energy or the depth of landscape to shine.
Clements' metaphorica' text ("Grinder wears away. / The blade, the bolt, the
chain- 
/ grinder does not care") may sometimes be lost on young listeners when
there is so much activity co absorb on the page, and it's confusing that occasionally
384 
* 
THE BULLETIN
more than one tool is pictured in a spread. Look elsewhere for detailed informa-
tion on woodworking, but offer this as a unique introduction to the world of wood
and art for budding artisans. EAB
CONFORD, ELLEN 
Annabel the Actress: Starring in Gorilla My Dreams; illus. by
Renee W. Andriani. 
Simon, 1999 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-689-81404-6 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Annabel wants "to be a movie star someday. Or at least a soap opera star." To that
end she studies how actors act, on television and in the movies, and practices
emotions in front of the mirror. Her first opportunity to make it big comes when
she's hired to be a gorilla at five-year-old Dennis' birthday party. Annabel doesn't
have a gorilla costume, but that doesn't stop her because she's confident of her
abilities (when told that Dennis likes big gorillas, Annabel retorts "I am an ac-
tress. . .. I will act tall"). On her way to the party in a safety-pinned gorilla suit
and a borrowed mask Annabel is waylaid by her lifelong enemy, Lowell Boxer,
who takes off with her headgear. But Annabel will not be defeated-not only does
she pull off the birthday party with triumphant ingenuity, but she gets the gorilla
mask back from the easily suggestible Lowell. Divided into five acts, this easy
chapter book introduces a new continuing character. Annabel (who appears to be
about nine years old) is an invincibly enthusiastic actress-to-be, and Conford's
smartly funny characterization of her heroine is reflected in the energetic, motion-
filled black-and-white line drawings. The sprightly-and-spunky Annabel is sure to
find a receptive audience. JMD
CRETZMEYER, STACY 
Your Name IP Renee: Ruth Kapp Hartzs Story as a Hidden
Child in Nazi-OccupiedFrance. Oxford, 1999 
[240p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-19-513259-9 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Cretzmeyer reconstructs the Kapps' experiences from 1942 to 1946 as the Jewish
family flees from Toulouse to the tiny hamlets around Albi, always just a step
ahead of the French police and, later, the Gestapo. Although Mr. Kapp's service
in the French Foreign Legion should have placed his family legally beyond the
reach of Vichy authorities, they are in fact driven from one home to the next until,
without income or reasonable hope of safety, they find themselves totally depen-
dent on the protection of sympathetic gentile neighbors and Resistance workers.
These events are ostensibly seen through the eyes of Ruth, who, as an adult, would
become Cretzmeyer's French teacher in the United States. Ruth learns from her
earliest days at school to pass herself off as French Catholic, assuming the name
Renee in public, taking refuge in churches, avoiding any reference to her Jewish
heritage. Although her plight is undeniably compelling-particularly her inno-
cent excitement at the arrival of Marshal Petain (she cannot understand why her
Jewish relatives do not share her enthusiasm) and her residence as an "orphan" at a
Catholic school that shelters Jewish children-frequent change of voice between
the child Ruth and an omniscient narrator proves a cumbersome device. Five-
year-old Ruth's ability to recount lengthy adult conversations is also less than con-
vincing. Nonetheless, readers moved by the Anne Frank diary and Reiss' The
Upstairs Room will want to add this to their reading list. Family photos, a map,
and historical notes are included. EB
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 385
DALY, NIKI 
The Boy on the Beach; written and illus. by Niki Daly. 
McElderry,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82175-1 
$16.00 
R 3-6yrs
The boy on the beach is having a good old time racing around the sand, splashing
in the surf, and pretending to be a pirate in an abandoned, half-buried boat. Sit-
ting among the "sand dunes [that] rise like monster waves ... the boy on the beach
feels lost and alone" and calls out for his mom and dad. A lifeguard ("cool as a
coke and copper-tanned") piggybacks the boy to the Lost and Found, where his
parents wait. The text captures the kid's adventurous spirit, and the watercolors
capture the busy sun-bleached beach. Sun and surf lovers lounge under red, striped,
and flowered umbrellas, and the boy on the beach can barely contain his exuber-
ance at "sandy toes . .. sun-cream nose . .. camera smile-click! And off he goes
... castle-bashing ... sea-pool splashing, wet, wet, wet. ... " Nearly transparent
washes of color infuse the blue sky, blue water, and white dunes with sunlight.
More than a list of things to do on a day at the beach, this is an exhilarating
adventure complete with excitement, danger, and rescue. Use this with Marie
Gay's Stella, Star ofthe Sea (BCCB 5/99) for an inspiring seaside storytime. JMD
DESPAIN, PLEASANT 
The Emerald Lizard: Fifteen Latin American Tales to Tell in
English and Spanish/La lagartija esmeralda: 
Quince cuentos tradicionales
Latinoamericanos; tr. by Mario Lamo-Jimenez; illus. by Don Bell. 
August House,
1999 
[184 p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-87483-551-8 
$21.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87483-552-6 
$11.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Fifteen tales from as many cultures are presented in English and Spanish in this
accessible collection. DeSpain's spare, streamlined style lends itself to reading and
telling aloud in stories from Guatemala, Ecuador, Peru, Haiti, etc.; the tone varies
from humorous to meditative, and the selection provides a simple introduction to
a variety of tale-types. As in Olga Loya's previous collection (Momentos magicos/
Magic Moments, BCCB 4/97) the tales are told in both languages in their entirety
(as opposed to one page in one language, one in another), allowing uninterrupted
flow whether reading in English or Spanish. Bell's black-and-white illustrations
(full-page ink and wash and smaller scratchboard spot art and borders) break up
the large-type text blocks and add a certain naive folksiness to the proceedings.
Sources and collection information for the tales are included. JMD
DINGUS, LOWELL 
The Tiniest Giants: Discovering Dinosaur Eggs; written and il-
lus. with photographs by Lowell Dingus and Luis Chiappe. 
Doubleday,
1999 42p
ISBN 0-385-32642-4 
$17.95 
R Gr. 4-8
This description of the expedition that led to the 1997 discovery of tens of thou-
sands of dinosaur eggs in Patagonia is a timely addition to dinosauriana. Though
the authors-two of the scientists involved in the expedition-reveal a perhaps
surprising truth of science when they state that "we didn't find any of the things
we were looking for," readers will nonetheless learn much about the realities of
field research here as well as about dinosaur eggs. Only the third chapter of five
details the actual expedition, the other chapters extending the chronological narra-
tive in both directions. Early chapters explain the historical and geographical back-
386 
* THE BULLETIN
ground of Patagonia and give a refreshing attention to a variety of practical mat-
ters, such as the necessity of finding funding for the expedition and the difficulties
of transporting supplies. Later chapters explain what scientists learned from these
fossils when they got them back to the laboratory and give equal attention to the
"years of hard detective work" ahead. Illustrations include photographs, maps,
line drawings, and visual information in a variety of other forms in a layout that is
clear and engaging. While the narration falls into cliche at times, the photos of
real scientists at work-male and female, Argentinian and American-make this
story come alive. A glossary reviews vocabulary and the suggestions for further
reading highlight age-appropriate sources. By the end, the reader will have a much
more complex understanding of the thrill a paleontologist feels when "suddenly
something on the ground catches your eye." FK
ERDRICH, LOUISE 
The Birchbark House; written and illus. by Louise
Erdrich. 
Hyperion, 1999 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7865-2241-4 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0300-2 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 4-8
Seven-year-old Omakayas (which means "Little Frog") and her family follow the
ways of their people, the Anishinabe, on the Island of the Golden-Breasted Wood-
pecker in Lake Superior. On the surface, the story of Omakayas is the story of any
girl growing up: she envies her beautiful older sister, adores her father, is exasper-
ated by her five-year-old brother, tries to get out of hated chores, and wonders
about her future. The deeper story of the Anishinabe and their struggles to main-
tain their way of life is the richly textured infrastructure of this deceptively simple,
lyrically written novel. Erdrich divides Omakayas' story into four seasons, begin-
ning with the summer of 1847 and the family's move from their winter cottage to
their summer birchbark house. As the seasons pass, Omakayas takes care of her
adored baby brother, Neewo, and learns herb lore from her grandmother; she
meets two bear cubs and their mother and discovers her calling as a healer; she
cares for her family when smallpox breaks out, and she mourns the death of Neewo
and others in their community. The details of everyday life are unobtrusively and
skillfully woven into the text; the encroachment of white settlers into Indian land
has clearly had impact but that encroachment is still held off by geographic isola-
tion and deliberate choice. The relationships among the family members, be-
tween the family and their community, and between the community and the land
come through clearly here in an emotionally involving style that will draw readers
into the world and worldview of Omakayas and her family. The acknowledg-
ments state that this novel, which provides a cultural counterpoint to the Little
House titles, is the first in a series retracing Erdrich's own family history. JMD
FLEISCHMAN, PAUL 
Weslandia; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. 
Candlewick, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-0006-7 
$15.99 
R Gr. 2-4
Wesley, "an outcast from the civilization around him," is a worry to his mother
and father: "He had no friends, but plenty of tormentors. Fleeing them was the
only sport he was good at." Despite these difficulties, Wesley is smart and well-
adjusted. In his solitude he creates a new civilization built around a mysterious
crop grown from seeds blown in by a wind from the west. Towering blossoms give
way to magenta fruits, and Wesley finds a purpose for every part of his plant: he
eats the fruit, drinks the juice, boils, fries and roasts the root tubers, wears cloth
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 387
woven from the stalks' inner fibers, and uses the oil from the seeds as insect repel-
lent and suntan lotion. His garden becomes his domain, complete with new time-
keeping devices, a new counting system, and new sports, which he plays with his
curiously delighted former tormentors. This story about a nonconformist creating
his own reality resonates with imagination and humor. From the opening spreads
Wesley is depicted as a bright-eyed, amiable character, and his natural creativity is
reflected in Hawkes' vivid recreations of Wesley's altered environment, lush illus-
trations that have a realistic whimsy reminiscent of David Wiesner. While the
transformation of Wesley's tormentors into followers is a denouement rosier than
Wesley's flowers, this unusual story will act as a solid bridge to discussions starting
with the phrase "If I ran the world ...
" JMD
GIOVANNI, NIKKI, ed. 
Grand Fathers: Reminiscences, Poems, Recipes, and Photos of
the Keepers of Our Traditions. Holt, 1999 
[25 6 p]
ISBN 0-8050-5484-7 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
This companion to Giovanni's Grand Mothers (BCCB 12/94) is a multicultural
patchwork quilt of almost fifty pieces, most composed for this collection. The
majority are prose reminiscences, but a significant number are poems, and Giovanni
also includes one drawing and one woodcut (both by illustrators with whom she
has collaborated previously), one song (by Mari Evans), several recipes, and a number
of black-and-white photographs. Among the names here are Rita Dove and Lori
Marie Carlson, but most contributors are neither well-known writers nor authors
for children in particular; a significant number are not professional writers at all.
Consequently, though the quality of writing is generally competent, it is inconsis-
tent. Contributors range from a sixteen-year-old to a number who are grandpar-
ents themselves, including one who can "reach back" 100 years through her
memories of an ancestor born in slavery and also look forward through her grand-
children to a "future world of technology and multiracialism." The result is a
work that Giovanni hopes will "encourage young people to solve some of their
family's mysteries," though neither the selections themselves nor her organization
and presentation of them consistently address the needs, experience, or interests of
youth. However, with assistance, this anthology of individual voices sharing their
impressions of grandfathers-good, bad, and indifferent-may provide a useful
variety of models for young readers and writers. FK
GOURLEY, CATHERINE 
Good Girl Work: Factories, Sweatshops, and How Women
Changed Their Role in the American Workforce. 
Millbrook, 1999 
96 p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-0951-9 
$23.40 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Gourley presents a well-organized overview of girls' and women's struggles in the
workplace, from the shops and cottage industries of colonial times to the immedi-
ate aftermath of the devastating Triangle Shirtwaist Company fire of 1911. Al-
though famous names, places, and events necessarily spring up (Mother Jones, the
Lowell mills, the garment workers' strike of 1909-10), the spotlight shines here on
unsung "girls" whose testimonies to daily drudgery and endangerment are culled
from letters and diaries, exposes, and public documents. Gourley examines the
details of a wide range of labor experiences and their occupational hazards-fin-
gers and ankles slashed from oyster shucking, skin burnt from citrus processing,
limbs crushed at laundry mangles, lungs inundated with lint from spun threads,
388 
* THE BULLETIN
fingernails dissolved from toxins in shoe factories. Perhaps even more signifi-
candy, she incorporates these specifics into the broader account of how public perception
of "good" (i.e., submissive) girls transmuted into "bad" (i.e., intractable) girls as
the young women organized in labor actions. Although no bibliography is in-
cluded, quotes are documented in concluding notes; period photos and an index
are provided. EB
GOWER, TIM 
This Book Bites!: Or, Why Your Mouth Is More Than Just a Hole in
Your Head. Planet Dexter, 1999 
64p 
illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-44081-4 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
If you rock the optical-illusion book cover, the larger-than-life teeth chatter. Yep,
it's one heckuva gimmick, and it accurately sets the tone for this yucked-up cruise
through the ol' oral cavity. Though this is mostly trivia and corny gags, there's a
little science slipped in, and browsers may inadvertently find themselves learning
the scoop on tooth decay, the many uses of spit, the miseries of malocclusion, and
the mechanics of chewing. Gower debunks a few mouth myths along the way-
tongue rolling does not appear to be an inherited trait; a cold beverage will make
the pain from a hot chili pepper worse (try rice or bread instead)-and passes along
some truly kid-useful advice ("Some orthodontists offer covers that slip over braces,
protecting your lips. If you want one, but don't think your smooching habits are
any of your orthodontist's business, tell him or her you play tuba in the school
band"). Don't look here for the kind of organizational coherence to support an A+
science report; just enjoy the tasty little "Did ya know?" tidbits. EB
HANEL, WOLFRAM 
Rescue at Sea!; tr. by Rosemary Lanning; illus. by Ulrike
Heyne. 
North-South, 1999 
60p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7358-1046-X 
$13.88
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7358-1045-1 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Paul's father is a volunteer lifeboatman, and when a violent storm rakes the coast,
he sets out to rescue a boat in trouble. With the reluctant permission of his mother,
Paul accompanies his father and witnesses the rescue, from the ponies hauling the
lifeboat into the pounding surf to the dangerous boat-to-boat transfers. Though
the lifeboat returns and triumphantly brings the boat's crew to safety, dog-loving
Paul sees a frightened pooch left aboard the doomed ship and determines to rescue
him. The story is spun out a trifle longer than it needs to be, but it's enticingly full
of adventures, heroism, and literal Sturm undDrang, rolling along accessibly with
a doggy reward at the end (the fishermen agree that Paul can keep his hard-won
prize). As it did in Midnight Rider (BCCB 10/95), Heyne's art has a scope and
drama rare in easy readers, and her personable patch-eyed pup is infinitely desir-
able, well worth the rescue, without being sweetened into an unrealistic cartoon.
With its touch of wildness and canine appeal, this will make an absorbing stepping
stone for young pups not quite ready for Gary Paulsen. DS
HEHNER, BARBARA 
First on the Moon: What It Was Like When Man Landed on the
Moon; illus. by Greg Ruhl and with photographs. 
Hyperion/Madison Press,
1999 
4 8p 
(I Was There Books)
ISBN 0-7868-0489-0 
$16.99 
R Gr. 3-6
As with other books in the Madison Press copublications, this one balances factual
explanation of a historical event with fictionalized accounts of someone present.
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 389
The device is more effective than usual here, however, because it describes the
reactions of Jan Aldrin, daughter of astronaut Buzz Aldrin (and resource for this
volume), as her father became one of the first travelers to the moon. The result is
a compact and capable account of life in space and life back home during one of
the most celebrated events of the twentieth century. Sidebars and diagrams ex-
plain matters ranging from flight trajectory to space meals to the composition of
the three-stage Saturn V rocket (a particular boon to the less technical) while the
text smoothly details the progress of the astronauts and the waiting of their fami-
lies back home. Human-interest tidbits, such as Jan's visits to her quarantined
father ("She could see her father through the window of the trailer and talk to him
by telephone"), expand the audience beyond the aeronauts, and the browsable
format will entice readers of various levels (though the paintings are not only as
bland and stiff as old textbook art but also superfluous, since they add little to the
views provided by included photographs). Got a kid you want to shoot off into
space? Hand him/her this. An epilogue, timeline, glossary, and brief list of recom-
mended reading round out the account. DS
HILL, ELIZABETH STARR 
Bird Boy; written by Lesley Liu. 
Farrar, 1999 
56p
ISBN 0-374-30723-7 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Young Chang is mute, but that doesn't stop him from connecting with the family's
cormorants, birds that help them earn a living fishing on the Li River in southern
China. In fact, it seems that Chang's awkward squawks and squeaks are akin to
the sounds of the cormorants; they apparently understand him perfectly, and he,
them. When his father puts him in charge of a new cormorant egg and the hatchling
that emerges, Chang takes his task seriously. Bullying neighbor Jinan, however,
convinces him to leave his watch with the promise of a ride on Jinan's new bike;
while Chang rides, Jinan steals the baby cormorant. In finding and defending his
chick (which he nurses back to health), Chang also finds the confidence to with-
stand Jinan's aggressive bids for attention. Hill has written an excellent little novel
here, showing an uncanny ability to be right where kids are. Beginning chapter-
book readers will identify with Chang and his desire to do grownup things. The
text is quietly spare and the plot's sturdy exposition is old-fashioned-in a good
way. Hill allows kids to see not only the distant world of cormorant-diving and
river life but also Chang's world of nonspeaking communication, and she light-
handedly offers a worthwhile moral to boot: "And Chang had found trying made
all the difference." Charcoal and wash illustrations expand the story with rosy-
faced river kids and elegantly precise cormorants. EAB
HITE, SID 
Cecil in Space. 
Holt, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8050-5055-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
It's the summer before senior year, narrator Cecil Rowe is license-less after twice
failing his driver's test, and the only happenings in the tiny hamlet of Bricksburg,
Virginia that relieve his boredom are his crush on flirtatious Ariel, visits to his
schizophrenic aunt at the mental hospital, and pondering whether his best friend
Isaac might indeed be responsible for the vandalizing of the town welcome sign,
which has caused a local stir. Cecil is quite right-nothing much does happen in
Bricksburg, Virginia, and the main source of interest for this slim novel is the
genial, American Graffiti-esque flow of these minor events. Cecil predictably sees
390 
* THE BULLETIN
the error of his infatuation with Ariel, crazy Aunt June's ramblings turn out to be
far less histrionic than the reader might hope, and the revelation of the culprit
behind the vandalism is nothing short of a fizzle (a midlife-crisis fling on the part
of Ariel's father). Still, beach-bound YA readers might do worse than spend a few
hours soaking up Cecil's wry account of how he spent his summer vacation. EB
JOHNSON, SCOTT 
Safe at Second. 
Philomel, 1999 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-399-23365-2 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Edgeview High School junior Paulie Lockwood has made a life out of tailing and
supporting his closest friend Todd Bannister, a senior pitcher courted by college
recruiters and pro scouts; the only future Paulie can really imagine is becoming
Todd's "personal assistant" when he signs a major league contract and begins his
certain rise to baseball legend. However, fate throws Todd a nasty curve when a
rogue line drive during scrimmage play hits him in the eye; a prosthesis restores
Todd's good looks, but his emotional devastation cannot be so easily masked.
Loyal Paulie considers it his duty to keep up Todd's spirits and guide him back
into the game, but he soon discovers that neither quiet devotion nor in-your-face
admonitions are enough to pull Todd through the stages of depression, anger,
false hope, and resignation he simply must face on his own. There's no heroic
comeback tale here-Todd attempts to reclaim his spot on the mound, but he is
stymied at every turn by a resentful coach, the ascent during his absence of several
other competent pitchers, and a crippling sense of overcaution that keeps him
from burning pitches into the strike zone with his former abandon. Paulie, for his
part, must reinvent a vision for his own future that does not include Todd. It is a
measure ofJohnson's craft that he can deprive these two worthy young men of the
future they covet yet convince his readers that the unimagined life beyond the
diamond may still hold some charm. This title should join the starting lineup in
any YA baseball collection. EB
KAY, VERLA 
Iron Horses; illus. by Michael McCurdy. 
Putnam, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-23119-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
With clipped verses that mimic locomotive rhythm and scratchboard double spreads
that recall period engravings, Kay and McCurdy offer a primary-grade introduc-
tion to the construction of the Transcontinental Railroad. The opening illustra-
tion of a steam train that had reached the end of the line demonstrates the impulse
for connecting existing track ("Huffing, puffing,/ Smoking stacks./ Screeching,
stopping,/ End of tracks"). Robber barons and politicians wrangle, road crews are
assembled, and the mammoth project begins. Throbbing rhymes serve more as
captions to the pictures; visual explications of the challenges of terrain and weather
are more powerful than "Granite mountain,/ Tunnel through./ High Sierras,/ Flow-
ers, blue." But the illustrations can be a bit misleading as well, showing coopera-
tive gangs of Chinese and European laborers rather than segregated crews, and a
tender piled with oak logs while the engine stack belches black coal smoke. A
concluding author's note and map clarify some of the cloudier points in the text,
and children who can interpolate the somewhat disjointed scenes will enjoy chuggin'
on through. EB
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 391
LAWRENCE, IAIN 
The Smugglers. 
Delacorte, 1999 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-385-32663-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
John Spencer's brush with death in The Wreckers (BCCB 6/98) has not dimin-
ished his enthusiasm for a seafaring life, and he happily agrees to take charge of the
cargo on his father's new schooner, the Dragon. Sailors who know the Dragon,
though, swear she is cursed ("Death she'll bring you, and I'll promise you that. It's
the way of a ship that was christened with blood"), and only a highly suspect crew
of four can be enlisted to make what should be a short and simple trip along the
coast to London. The captain, as it happens, is a smuggler, who makes an un-
scheduled stop for contraband in France; but after a series of life threatening ad-
ventures, John Spencer delivers the villains into the hands of British customs men
and exorcises the "ghost" of the Dragon. A corpse that bobs eerily in the ship's
wake, a dastardly captain who communes with his dead son, a wizened old inn-
keeper who waits vigilantly for the return of her long-gone husband, a pistol-pack-
ing highwayman who abhors blood, and a rakish sailor who is terrified of water
shine among a cast that could have sprung from R. L. Stevenson. As in The Wreck-
ers, Lawrence pitches the action fast and furious; cunningly devised cliffhanger
chapter endings virtually mandate that the novel be devoured in a single sitting.
EB
LAWRENCE, MICHAEL 
Baby Loves; illus. by Adrian Reynolds. 
DK, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-7894-3410-5 
$9.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
The androgynous baby of the title loves a lot: Mommy and Daddy, breakfast,
Teddy, kitty, Granny, hat, bathtime, sunshine, and other components of early
existence. In each spread, Baby loves that particular subject "more than anything
else in the world except" the item featured on the next spread following the page
turn. Though the catalogue gets awfully lengthy for its tiny toddler audience,
many of the favorites will have readily available real-life counterparts that allow the
readaloud to expand into a game, and the refrain has a roundly satisfying final
twist when it's made clear that "Mommy and Daddy love Baby more than any-
thing else in the world. . . Anything at all!" Reynolds' illustrations are blander
cousins to Helen Oxenbury's, with simplified lines and emphases on primary col-
ors; Baby is no sweet cipher, however, demonstrating a taste for loving things to
distraction (breakfast is upended on Baby's head, Teddy loses an arm, and Daddy's
nose is seriously endangered) that adults will recognize ruefully as genuine toddler
affection. Trim the chant down by skipping the spreads that don't apply, and let
your ever-lovin' baby rip-er, enjoy. DS
LEFT HAND BULL, JACQUELINE 
Lakota Hoop Dancer; written by Jacqueline Left
Hand Bull and Suzanne Haldane; illus. with photographs by Suzanne
Haldane. 
Dutton, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45413-6 
$15.99 
R Gr. 3-6
This biographical photoessay features Lakota hoop dancer Kevin Locke (Tokeya
Inajin) in a survey of his life's work and his art form. Beginning with a description
of one of Locke's hoop dancing performances, the text segues easily into a discus-
sion of Locke's cultural roots, his family history, and his commitment to preserv-
ing Lakota culture. The text is interspersed with numerous color photographs-of
392 
* THE BULLETIN
Locke dancing, of the landscape where he lives and works, in the process of hoop
making, etc.-that give readers a sense of Locke's connection to his physical envi-
ronment and the way that connection nurtures his artistic process. The discussion
of how Locke learned hoop dancing is a bit slight, occasionally items are men-
tioned in the text that are not reflected in the photographs, and the glossary is
limited, but altogether this provides an informed, insightful look at one individual's
passion for and celebration of his art. JMD
LE GUIN, URSULA K. Jane on Her Own: A Catwings Tale; illus. by S. D.
Schindler. 
Orchard, 1999 
42p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33133-4 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30133-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Jane is one of the winged cats whose adventures have been chronicled in Catwings
(BCCB 9/88) and its sequels. Now she's feeling fettered by the predictability of
life at Overhill Farm, and she ignores the warnings of her family ("If human beings
saw cats with wings, they'd put us in cages in zoos") to seek the excitements of the
city. She flutters through an open window and thrills an opportunist, who doesn't
quite cage her in a zoo but still puts her on display-for the news media and for
advertising dollars. Though Jane is royally cosseted, she eventually chafes at the
restriction and makes a break for it, finally ending up in a cozy home with her
mother and her mother's loving owner. This is a pretty standard alien-on-show
plot, and the story is more episodic than climactic, with Jane's final home seeming
really not that different from her first. Le Guin's precise and fluid style remains
effective, however, and makes the story of the flying feline an engaging entry-level
fantasy. Schindler's artwork contains his usual tracery of hatching and crosshatch-
ing, giving the catwings a crisp and straightforward realism that ensures a sophisti-
cated look. The plot doesn't quite soar, but this will still set fans of the previous
volumes purring. DS
LESLIE, AMANDA 
Flappy Waggy Wiggly; written and illus. by Amanda
Leslie. 
Dutton, 1999 [24p] 
(A Peekaboo Riddle Book)
ISBN 0-525-46182-5 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-4 yrs
The format here is straightforward-a big text block obscures most of an animal
while the words ask the critter's identity ("Who has a waggy yellow tail and a sticky
licky tongue?"); opening a flap reveals the subject, covering the text block with the
riddle-ee's missing part and providing the answer ("dog"). The answers are hinted
at outrageously, so even the teenies won't be stumped (the canine face, panting
tongue, wagging tail, and "woof" explanation don't leave the dog much mystery),
but that's the point-as the series title says, this is a "Peekaboo Riddle Book" and
the emphasis here is on the peekaboo. A toothy crocodile, floppy-eared elephant,
curly-whirly-tailed pig, and their ilk offer young viewers plenty of playful pleasure
if not genuine surprise (though the duck's blue tail feathers may give pause to
youngsters unfamiliar with mallards), and the final noisy spread appropriately fea-
tures a bumptious toddler in the gallery of beasts. The riddling questions run to
rhyme, onomatopoeia, and flavorful adjectives, which join with bestial vocaliza-
tions to make for a gleefully participatory readaloud. Though the colors get a bit
overiwhelming in the text lettering (and the character spacing can be somewhat
disorienting), the intensely hued illustrations employ black crayony lines and strong
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 
393
contrast for simplicity and impact. This high-spirited menagerie will be just the
thing for biped zoo babies. DS
LEVITIN, SONIA 
The Cure. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 1999 
184p
ISBN 0-15-201827-1 
$16.00 
R Gr. 7-10
In the not-so-distant future all passion has been extinguished, music is forbidden,
cloning has taken the place of sex, and serotonin shakes are the drink of choice.
Gemm 16884, a member of this antiseptic if orderly society, is having disconcert-
ing dreams that include music, dancing, and singing. Picked up by the Leaders for
his deviant behavior, Gemm's choice is either recycling (death) or the cure, a vir-
tual trip to the past where he will experience music-associated distress so painful
that his desire to make music will be forever banished. Gemm chooses the cure,
and this is where the story really begins. Gemm 16884 virtually become Johannes,
a sixteen-year old Jew, gifted flautist and son of moneylender Menachem, in four-
teenth-century Strasbourg. In a society riddled with rabid anti-semitism, he and
his family struggle for both survival and dignity. Levitin's characterizations are
substantial, from the naive, maturing Johannes to his wiser more knowledgeable
father, from persecuted Jew to privileged gentile. The details of day to day life
provide the backdrop for an emotionally nuanced family drama set within a mael-
strom of historical events-the persecution and later the murders of Jewish com-
munities blamed for the spread of the ever more deadly plague-that play out with
mounting suspense until the horrifying and chilling conclusion. Gemm's return
to his own time, his resultant healing and promotion to the powerful position of
Elder (from which he hopes to effect positive change), is a weak addenda to the
riveting historical fiction previously forged, but readers still reeling from the im-
pact of Johannes' story will hardly quibble. A historical note and bibliography are
included. JMD
LEWIN, TED 
Touch and Go: Travels of a Children's Book Illustrator. Lothrop,
1999 
6 7p
ISBN 0-688-14109-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 9-12
In a series of vignettes, Lewin gives brief, nearly photographic impressions of vari-
ous peoples he has met on his travels throughout the world. Incidents of illegal
money changing, a boy's being beaten for not selling his grandfather's wares, a
woman selling fry bread for gas money, etc., provide a touristy approach to cul-
tures and individuals that is unsatisfactorily sketchy and ultimately limited. The
titles of the chapters give the locations of each encounter, which references at least
provide some geographic specificity. The insert of color photographs and Lewin's
art is reproduced on poor quality paper, and as a result the pictures look like a
faded bulletin-board display. While this sort of scrapbook approach might be
interesting to informed adults, there is little here to appeal to younger readers, as
Lewin provides little context for his impressions or remarks. JMD
LINDQUIST, SUSAN HART 
Summer Soldiers. 
Delacorte, 1999 
[224 p]
ISBN 0-385-32641-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The only neighborhood father not to enlist for military duty in the summer of
1918 is Jim Morgan's dad, who sees no need to prove his heroism but prefers to
394 
* THE BULLETIN
stay on the ranch with his beloved horses and to help the surrounding families
tend and market their sheep. However, war fever runs high in the community,
and the local bullies-the elder Thornton brothers-keep public sentiment sim-
mering against the Morgans. The neighborhood alliances and aggressions, which
parallel the European belligerence, are seen through the eyes of narrator Joe
Farrington, a close friend ofJim whose own father goes missing in action. Twelve-
year-old Joe, Jim, and their friends manage to hold their own against the Thornton
boys and prove their mettle on a sheep drive; although Mr. Morgan demonstrates
his own bravery unequivocally, losing his life rescuing a ship's cargo of horses,
many of his neighbors flatly refuse to soften their condemnation of his unpatriotic
"cowardice." Lindquist provides a glimmer of hope for Mr. Farrington's return
but realistically leaves the sting of hometown hostilities unassuaged. Amid the
bounty of World War II novels, the first War to End All Wars remains somewhat
underserved; Lindquist offers a thoughtful, well-crafted tale of the other homefront.
EB
LISLE, JANET TAYLOR 
The Lost Flower Children; illus. by Satomi
Ichikawa. 
Philomel, 1999 
[112p]
ISBN 0-399-23393-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
After the death of their mother, nine-year-old Olivia and five-year-old Nellie are
taken to live with their Great-Aunt Minty by their traveling salesman father. Olivia
has been taking close care of Nellie, who, bossy to begin with, has become increas-
ingly demanding. It is up to Olivia to educate Great-Aunt Minty about Nellie's
rules for behavior, and Great-Aunt Minty, elderly but no slouch, catches onto the
dynamic between the two girls pretty quickly. Nellie clings to Olivia, tyrannically
proclaiming that they need no one else, just each other; it is only after Olivia reads
Nellie a story about a party of children turned into flowers in Great-Aunt Minty's
garden that Nellie begins to take some interest in expanding their closed emo-
tional circle. Minty unobtrusively and compassionately unfolds the petals of the
girls' grief, allowing the work of reclaiming the garden and the search for a
countercharm to release the flower children to work their magic on the two sisters.
Lisle's finely balanced tale takes place in a neglected garden choked with weeds, a
place wherein the two sisters, no less caught in a spell than are the lost flower
children, find an outlet for their own wildly overgrown grief. The reality of the
girls' own emergence and the magical possibility of freeing the enspelled flower
children combine into a delicate blend of realism and fantasy that will charm read-
ers. JMD
LUNGE-LARSEN, LISE, ad. 
The Legend of the Lady Slipper: An Ojibwe Tale; ad. by
Lise Lunge-Larsen and Margi Preus; illus. by Andrea Arroyo. 
Houghton,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-395-90512-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
During a winter blizzard, an Ojibwe girl risks her life to find the herbs that will
save the lives of her sick family and neighbors. Her courage, wits, and determina-
tion bring success and, in the spring, "ma-ki-sin waa-big-waan" (lady slippers),
grow in the footsteps of her treacherous journey. This pourquoi tale smoothly
integrates Ojibwe words and phrases into an accessible narrative that draws its
metaphors from the natural world and uses strong action verbs to maintain inter-
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 395
est: "Falling snow stung her face. 'Mash-ka-wi-zin,' it hissed, 'Be strong.' The girl
bent her head and stalked like a bear into the storm." Watercolor illustrations in
complementary reds and oranges, blues and greens, and a subdued palette sugges-
tive of winter, fill a mix of double- and single-page spreads. Curving lines give a
sense of movement, and subtle patterning adds texture, but excessively stylized
dot-eyed human and animal figures are more toylike than expressive. Strong con-
trasts and shading are minimized, which gives the oversimplified illustrations an
uninteresting flatness. Ojibwe motifs and cultural artifacts (wigwams, clothing,
baskets, etc.) are shown throughout. A courageous heroine, regional interest, and
Native American lore may give this a place in elementary school curricula. Source
notes list thirteen separate titles covering the Ojibwe, Native American plant lore,
or wildflowers, including the three sources which form the basis for this adapta-
tion. A prominent foreword identifies the lady slipper, its habitat, and growing
pattern. JNH
MCMAHON, PATRICIA 
One Belfast Boy; illus. with photographs by Alan
O'Connor. 
Houghton, 1999 
54p
ISBN 0-395-68620-2 $16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Don't knock on this door expecting an optimistic account of innocent children
struggling for peace in a tragic arena of adult politics. 
McMahon's
photodocumentary, which follows a boy around his walled Catholic neighbor-
hood, Turf Lodge, in Ulster, exposes instead the entrenched mistrust and the cy-
clic violence and vengeance that touch nearly every aspect of eleven-year-old Liam
Leathem's life. The opening chapter sets the current configuration of Northern
Ireland into historic perspective; the focus then shifts to Liam's daily rounds of
school and his passionate hobby, boxing. Although Liam takes no active part in
the street warfare between Catholics and Protestants, reminders of confrontation
envelop him, from the political song "What about Ulster? What about Sinn Fein?"
now taken up by children as a street chant, to his friends' fascination with an
"accident" between an IRA black cab and a joy rider (which, they casually predict,
will undoubtedly bring about a counterattack), to his own chilling poetry submis-
sion for school: "I am a tank. I have a machine gun./ Bang bang bang. I kill a wee
nun." He trains hard in the boxing ring, setting his sights on a city meet that takes
him beyond the walls of Turf Lodge. There he does his best and is confident he
has won, only to hear the decision fall to his opponent: "Didllose because I'm from
TurfLodge?. . . Liam's anger begins to grow." Plentiful color photos present an
unglamorized view of Liam's milieu, although most are too small for the kind of
group sharing which the text seems to command. Powerful and provocative-let
the questions fly. EB
MARKLE, SANDRA 
After the Spill: The Exxon Valdez Disaster Then and
Now. 
Walker, 1999 
32p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8611-1 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8610-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
It's been a decade since the famous oil spill, and the world's attention has generally
moved on to newer disasters. Markle starts with a brief overview of the accident
and its ensuing cleanup attempts, addressing not only environmental effects ("The
oil killed the unborn baby salmon, greatly reducing the population of future pink
salmon") but also elfects on the area economy ("A number of people in fish pro-
396 
* THE BULLETIN
cessing plants moved away and took other jobs") and even on the neighboring
town ("It was a boost to the economy to have so many people in Valdez, but it was
also hard for such a small town to support so many people"). While there are
useful bits of information both about recovery and problems with same, the text
sometimes confuses or provokes questions that it doesn't answer (How can Prince
William Sound be "once again a good place for eagles to fish" if the fish are as
damaged as the book suggests? Is every tanker now escorted by a SERVS vessel?
What kind of cleanup efforts are still in place?). Photographs vary in effectiveness,
and greater assistance in contrasting oil damage with healthy land and animals
(whether it be with paired images or explanations of a picture's features) would
have been helpful. Still, this is a useful reminder that it ain't over just because the
fanfare's moved on, and readers will leave the book with a greater understanding of
the different kinds of impact such an event can have. A combined glossary/index
is included. DS
MARSDEN, JOHN 
Darkness, Be My Friend. Houghton, 1999 
26 9p
ISBN 0-395-92274-7 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Airlifted out of the Australian war zone to a safe haven in New Zealand, Ellie and
her four remaining mates (from Tomorrow, When the War Began, BCCB 4/95, et
al.) have just spent five months recovering from their harrowing, heroic sorties as
amateur guerrilla fighters. However, occupying forces are now firmly entrenched
in the Wirrawee area, and only guides intimately familiar with the region stand
any chance of leading a troop of Kiwi saboteurs through the bush to the new
enemy airstrip. Physically weak and emotionally drained, the Aussie teens reluc-
tantly agree to accompany the mission, with the barely expressed hope of finding
their families again. Often horrified by their own proven capacity for violence, the
teens now tend to hesitate at the brink of action, making costly mistakes that result
in two abortive sabotage attempts and possibly in the disappearance of the Kiwi
soldiers. Although this volume delivers the same edge-of-the-seat action of the
previous titles (notably, a break-neck bareback ride through enemy fire and a rag-
ing brush fire set to drive off approaching soldiers), the failures and self-doubt that
dog the teens through Darkness now compel readers to reflect on the limitations of
emotional endurance and the price of loyalty. The conclusion finds the friends
stranded once again in the outback region they've dubbed Hell, and it's clear this
war is far from over. Thank goodness. EB
MARSHALL, JAMES 
Swine Lake; illus. by Maurice Sendak. 
Di Capua/Harper-
Collins, 1999 
4 0p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205172-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205171-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
In this previously unpublished story by the late great James Marshall, a hungry
wolf looking for a meal stumbles onto the Boarshoi Ballet's production of Swine
Lake ("Leaping, swirling, bowing, juicy pigs") and considers this an opportunity
for prime pickings. Though initially slavering over the porky dancers, the wolf
gets caught up in the story, becoming so besotted with the ballet that he returns
the next night and leaps in at the strategic moment to play the role of the horrible
monster. Though the ending is quite abrupt (the wolf receives fine reviews and
dances with pleasure), it's refreshing to see not just a twist on the folkloric wolf-pig
relationship but a genuinely new and imaginative direction, and Marshall's text
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 397
has some savory bits that young readers will find tasty. While the illustrations
aren't Sendak's most luminous (the compositions more often seem crowded than
replete, and there are some continuity problems in the colors, as in the blue of the
wolfs coat), his love of stage design results in a delightful production of Swine
Lake; diverting details abound, especially in placards and signs ("Pigs do fly!" the
New York Times raves about the ballet) but also in well-dressed porkers and the
operatic, stage-struck wolf. Kids looking for an offbeat theatrical story will want
to poke their snouts into this. DS
MASUREL, CLAIRE 
Too Big!; illus. by Hanako Wakiyama. 
Chronicle, 1999 
36p
ISBN 0-8118-2090-4 
$13.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
At a carnival with his father, Charlie wins a stuffed dinosaur at the ball-pitch booth.
Big Tex the dinosaur (who looks a lot like the Flintstones' Dino, only with blue
and white stripes) is five times Charlie's size, but Charlie doesn't mind, although
everyone else has reservations. Declaring Big Tex TOO BIG for outings to the
park, grocery store, baseball game, and circus, Charlie's caregivers convince him to
take along one of his other, smaller stuffed toys (all of whom are pleased to go).
But when Charlie has to go the doctor's office, it's Big Tex who bravely stands
forth while the other toys hide in drawers, behind the bed, and in back of the
curtains. In Masurel's small drama, Charlie's stuffed toy friends are comfortingly
alive (as every young child knows, of course) and act their parts with unsentimen-
tal efficiency. Wakiyama's oil illustrations play against their medium with a pal-
ette of light, airy colors that suit the realistic magic of this domestic fantasy. Charlie's
delight in winning the huge dinosaur is evident in his expression and body lan-
guage, as is the adults' chagrin when they view the huge toy. Big Tex's benevolent
worthiness is never in doubt, however, and young listeners will happily recognize
that justice is served in the final illustration, when a boy and his dinosaur go to the
movies. JMD
MORPURGO, 
MICHAEL Joan of Arc of Domremy; illus. by Michael
Foreman. 
Harcourt, 1999 
[122p]
ISBN 0-15-201736-4 
$23.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
There's something millennial about the Maid of Orleans, which is perhaps why
we're getting a spate of books about her these days (Diane Stanley'sJoan ofArc and
Josephine Poole's Joan ofArc, both BCCB 9/98) as well as several movies. As in
Morpurgo's earlier books on legendary figures (Robin ofSherwood, BCCB 1/97,
etc.), he provides a contemporary frame, here a modern girl devoted to Joan of
Arc, living in Orleans, and bitterly disappointed when another girl is chosen to
impersonate Joan in a ceremonial procession. Joan's story then unfolds, focusing
on the little white sparrow she cherishes as mascot, but otherwise fairly orthodox
in following her rise from obscurity, her military triumphs, and her eventual mar-
tyrdom. Morpurgo draws on historical sources and packs a fair amount of detail
into his account, which is inherently dramatic. However, he relies extensively on
dialogue for exposition, which stagnates things considerably, especially at the start
of Joan's story when she explains herself to her bird in large chunks of soliloquy;
combined with the extraneous framework, the effect is enervation of the story and,
particularly at the slow beginning, a distancing of the events. Foreman's watercol-
ors emphasize the pageantry of Joan's exploits; his fondness for blue and red, pre-
398 
* THE BULLETIN
sumably to suggest the French flag, often suggests a carousel as well with all of the
art's snorting caparisoned steeds of medieval warfare. This doesn't have the cre-
ative imagination of Barbara Dana's Young Joan (BCCB 4/91), but readers look-
ing to expand the story from Stanley's biography may wish to ride alongside. DS
PALADINO, CATHERINE 
One Good Apple: Growing Our Foodfor the Sake of the
Earth. Houghton, 1999 
4 8p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-85009-6 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Starting with the history of pesticides in the U.S. and Rachel Carson's famous
opening salvo in the war against them, this title then focuses largely on recent
issues in food and agricultural safety, documenting important developments such
as the Kids Committee that "concluded that the legal limits on pesticide residues
did not guarantee protection for children." The book goes on to describe alterna-
tive techniques of farming (such as encouraging pest-eating insects) and distribu-
tion (such as community supported agricultural organizations that eliminate the
need for crops to survive hard travel). Paladino's clear partisanship occasionally
results in some overly sweeping statements ("Organic farming is our best hope for
growing food in a way that does not harm the earth or ourselves"), and the book is
relatively quiet on the important connection between consumer expectation and
agricultural practice, but ultimately this is an effective combination of analysis and
advocacy. Specific examples help flesh out many larger points, whether it be pes-
ticidal effects on birds or the challenges of farming sans chemicals. A lavish collec-
tion of photographs brings not only food but pests, pest eaters, and farms themselves
into colorful reality; a detailed list of suggested activities/gardening sources, a sub-
stantial bibliography including both technical and lay publications, and an index
are included. DS
PIERCE, TAMORA 
Protector of the Small: First Test. 
Random House,
1999 
[2 2 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98914-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88914-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Ten-year-old Keladry of Mindelan wants to be a page (in preparation for becom-
ing a knight) and, according to a ten-year-old yet-to-be-tested royal proclamation,
she has that right. Despite the doubts of the royal training master and his public
dislike of female warriors, Keladry is given one year's probation to prove herself.
She endures hazing by the older boys, unfair treatment by teachers and trainers,
homesickness, and doubt but in the process makes friends and proves her worth to
her male counterparts. While this opening title for a new series stands firmly on its
own, those readers familiar with the Song of the Lioness Quartet (Lioness Ram-
pant, BCCB 2/89, etc.) will recognize some recurring characters. Pierce spins a
whopping good yarn, her plot balanced on a solid base of action and characteriza-
tion. Keladry is a promising continuing character-a girl and proud of it, she has
no desire to disguise herself as a boy or to pretend to be one; she believes in and
acts on the ideals of chivalry all knights are supposed to hold sacred, and, although
she has a strong sense of justice that is ultimately educational to those around her,
she manages not to be a pompous prig. Readers with a soft spot for heroines the
like of Menolly from McCaffrey's Dragonsong trilogy will warm to Keladry and,
while waiting for the sequels, may be inspired to seek out other of Pierce's notable
heroines. JMD
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 399
PIERS, HELEN 
Who's in My Bed?; illus. by Dave Saunders. 
Cavendish, 1999 
20p
ISBN 0-7614-5046-7 
$15.95 
R 
2-4 yrs
Shades of "The Old Lady and Her Pig"! The little gray donkey wants to go to bed,
but he can't because Pig's in his bed. Pig is in Donkey's bed because Dog is in his
bed; Dog is in Pig's bed because Hen is in Dog's bed; and Mouse is in Hen's bed
and Beetle is in Mouse's hole, all because Donkey stepped on Beetle's burrow.
Beetle digs a new burrow after Donkey promises to be more careful, and all the
animals happily go to their rightful abodes. This simple cumulative tale has mul-
titudinous opportunities for participation-individual listeners will want to lift
the sturdy recto flaps that reveal the displaced animals, and group listeners will
join in with vociferous oinks, brays, clucks, and squeaks, as required. Saunders'
compositions are balanced to the front, that is, the animal characters take up most
of the foreground, which makes this a handy title for group viewing. Scratch-
board-style hatching adds depth and interest, and the animal characters have semi-
realistic but expressive demeanors. Ham it up for storytime, and find out where
your toddlers like to nap. JMD
PRICEMAN, MARJORIE 
Emeline at the Circus; written and illus. by Marjorie
Priceman. 
Knopf, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-97685-X 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-87685-5 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
The ever-so-knowledgeable Ms. Splinter takes her second graders to the circus,
making the trip an educational opportunity by discoursing on the origins of the
elephant, the habits of the llama, the etymology of the word "clown," the mecha-
nism of the trapeze, and so on. Contrasting with the informative lectures, how-
ever, are the exploits of Emeline, who wanders away from the group and gets
shanghaied, via the trunk of an inquisitive elephant, into the circus. Emeline
tumbles with the clowns, gallops along with the equestriennes, escapes doom in
the hippo's jaws when the strongman snatches her up, engages the tiger in a snarl-
off, and swings on the trapeze until it lands her back amid her classmates. The
layout achieves a tightrope walker's balance, setting the tightly controlled circle
containing a book-wielding Ms. Splinter and her obedient pupils (in changing
colors from page to page) against a white background with festive dividing bor-
ders, while three-quarter spreads display the full pageantry of the circus. And
pageantry it is, with a riot of saturated colors punched up with sharp black lines in
a manner reminiscent of Raoul Dufy as well as Ludwig Bemelmans, whose Madeline
seems to be happy kin to Priceman's Emeline; the three-ring effect here, however,
is all its own, with continuous action in the foreground and background as well as
the sideshow of Ms. Splinter's lectures. Having cleverly found its way around the
plot problem of most circus picture books, this title offers a rollicking production
suitable for airing under any Big Top. DS
SANSONE, ADELE 
The Little Green Goose; tr. by J. Alison James; illus. by Alan
Marks. 
Neugebauer/North-South, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7358-1072-9 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7358-1071-0 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
In an inversion of "The Ugly Duckling," a goose with the parenting instinct begs
his chicken acquaintances for an egg to hatch but suffers disappointment until the
farm dog brings him a huge dug-up egg. Mr. Goose patiently sits on the egg and
400 
* THE BULLETIN
receives his reward when "wonderful green goose"-a dragon-emerges from the
shell. Mr. Goose and his baby are happy together until farmyard bullies taunt the
odd gooselet with his adopted status; after a search for his real mother, who would
look just like him, the baby comes back to Mr. Goose ("I'm not your mother, I'm
your father") and the familial love that defines parenthood. While the messages
aren't entirely consistent (if a dragon can be a goose why can't Mr. Goose be
mother as well as father?), this is an entertaining twist on the Andersen tale and the
story of belonging is tenderly related. Marks' line and watercolor art employs soft
squiggly charcoal and cloudy splotches of color, keeping things gentle while still
making the little green goose a charming and scaly individual who towers over his
avian daddy. Though a bit programmatic, this will pair well with picture books
about that other misplaced waterfowl (such as Pinkney's The Ugly Duckling, BCCB
3/99); kids will enjoy the contrast and, of course, the dragon. DS
SEULING, BARBARA 
OhNo, It's Robert; illus. by Paul Brewer. 
Front Street/Cricket,
1999 
[12 8 p]
ISBN 0-8126-2934-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Robert Dorfman is stressed: he hates math, his homework needs to be neater, and
he thinks his best friend Paul might be the Scribbler, the person who's defacing
their classroom library books with magic markers. Trying for some stress-free rec-
ognition, Robert becomes a "Super Helper," assisting the art teacher, carrying in-
strument stands for the music teacher, and becoming classroom library monitor.
Seuling writes about primary-school crises with an easygoing humor and in a con-
versational style that readers just tackling chapter books will find both amusing
and encouraging. Robert's classroom worries aren't the stuff great tragedy (or even
bad melodrama) is made of, but his successful completion of the school year has a
reassuring ring that grade-schoolers will appreciate. Black and white full-page
drawings and spot art feature a homogenous but expressive cast of cartoony char-
acters that will help new readers feel secure with this foray into longer chapter
books. Seuling has a light hand with her messages (try hard, play nice, be respon-
sible) and they never get in the way of the reader's enjoyment of the ambitious but
thoughtful Robert and his satisfying success story. JMD
SHIPTON, JONATHAN 
What If; illus. by Barbara Nascimbeni. 
Dial, 1999 
[26p]
ISBN 0-8037-2390-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
A little boy gazing out his window on a rainy day lets his imagination wander
though a series of adventures that a break in the weather could bring: "What if it
stopped raining and you went outside, and down at the end of the garden you
found... a sunflower as tall as a skyscraper!" Atop the sunflower could be a new
friend who teaches you to tumble in the clouds and shows you exactly where the
storms begin. You could dry your soaking clothes over a desert, dripping on the
camels, until your cloud melts and you scoot back to the sunflower and bravely
make the "best jump you've ever done." And at the bottom of the sunflower you
could discover a secret door that leads to an underground staircase ... 
Such bold
speculation demands an equally bold visual realization, which Nascimbeni ably
supplies in her rich-hued, thickly outlined acrylic and collage illustrations. With
wide-set eyes, a broad belly, and a shock of red hair, the narrator investigates the
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 
401
world from many angles-marveling at a towering sunflower from the tipsy lawn,
pondering the rooftops from a leafy perch, contemplating the sea while sandwiched
between storm clouds and at nose level with a lightning bolt. The open red door
that leads straight down into the grassy hill should tantalize viewers with the promise
of further mysteries, and in case it's just a little too scary down those stairs,
Nascimbeni has comfortingly provided the soft glow of yellow light and a door
handle for quick egress. EB
SLEATOR, WILLIAM 
Rewind. 
Dutton, 1999 
[128p]
ISBN 0-525-46130-2 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Deeply hurt and angered by his parents' seeming insensitivity, Peter runs out into
the street and is killed by an oncoming car. That's just the start of his story. A
voice informs him he has another chance to begin his life again at any point he
chooses and to make any changes he feels will lead him away from the fatal acci-
dent. After a couple of false starts that result in repeated deaths, Peter finally
realizes that his ever-sulky, retiring attitude around his parents may have as much
to do with his fated demise as more obvious problems-his parents' announce-
ment that he is an adopted child, and their disinterest in his artistic talents-and
finds the way to outwit karma. Sleator creates in eleven-year-old Peter a protago-
nist to attract the sympathies of a younger audience than his usual middle school
coterie, with fantasy plotting accessible to readers new to the genre. The multiple
lives premise is far more beguiling, though, than its clunky execution with forced
dialogues and a cast of one-dimensional, preposterously gullible characters. This
may not be sci-fi at its finest, but children not quite ready for The X-Files can find
a few age-appropriate thrills here. EB
SONENKLAR, CAROL 
My Own Worst Enemy. 
Holiday House, 1999 
151p
ISBN 0-8234-1456-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Eve is starting at a new school in the middle of eighth grade. Her father thinks Eve
should "turn over a new leaf" and make a "fresh start"; Eve, charged by her mother
to help her laid-off father rebuild his self-esteem, determines to cooperate. She
dresses like a "normal girl" and manages to make friends with the popular girls in
her class, essentially reinventing her smartmouthed sweatshirt-and-jeans self. The
cost proves too high, however, when Eve realizes that, in order to be the kind of
daughter she thinks her parents want, it means she has to lie, cheat, and deny her
"self" in ever more damaging ways. Eve's travails at home and at school are punc-
tuated by "vents" in her notebook (a la Harriet the Spy)-she vents all her frustra-
tion, anger, and confusion at the multiple roles she's supposed to play and the
manner in which she is supposed to play them, and she does so with flashes of real
wit and humor (the piece entitled "You Are What You Wear. Not" is particularly
cutting). Eve's first-person narration has a veneer of exasperation that occasionally
wears thin enough for readers to see her real dilemma and to sympathize with her
difficulties, even as they recognize that the cumulative effect of Eve's mountain of
lies is the inexorable movement from the peaks of popularity to the valley of the
weird (which, in this case, is a good thing). Eve is sometimes a little too self-aware,
and the pace flags occasionally while she comments acerbically but extensively on
her environment. Still, this is a humorous story with wit, pathos, and heart, mak-
ing it a discussion-starter for both genders. JMD
402 
* 
THE BULLETIN
STEVENS, JANET 
Cook-a-Doodle-Doo!; written byJanet Stevens and Susan Stevens
Crummel; illus. by Janet Stevens. 
Harcourt, 1999 
4 8p
ISBN 0-15-201924-3 
$17.00 
R 
7-10 yrs
Like most technical manuals, cookbooks are terrific at instructing people who al-
ready know what they're doing and arcane as all get-out when it comes to explain-
ing things to complete novices. Stevens entertainingly attempts some mediation
here with the story of Big Brown Rooster, a descendant of the Little Red Hen but
blessed with more helpful friends than she was, who decides to make strawberry
shortcake. As the main story details the labors of Rooster, Turtle, Iguana, and Pig,
sidebars offer explanations of terms and procedures ("Always crack an egg into a
small bowl before you add it to the other ingredients in case the egg is bad or shell
pieces fall in"). The balance is quite effective: the Stevens sisters keep the narra-
tion funny and well-leavened, with recurring jokes about piggy Pig (whose exper-
tise lies in tasting) and a slapstick disaster lying in wait when Iguana tips the
completed shortcake onto the floor (don't worry, they make more). The explana-
tions are generally clear and specific (though there are no instructions provided for
the often tricky horizontal slicing of the cake), avoiding descent into the over-
technical and keeping a light touch throughout. Fibrous beige paper provides a
homey background for the mixed-media depictions of the critters' culinary efforts,
and the goofily amiable expressions and thematically appropriate adornments (Turtle
wears a saucepan on his head and Iguana an oven mitt) makes the cast endearingly
comic; process is discernible but less prominent in the illustrations, and kids may
be thrown by the backwards-calibrated oven-temperature knob. Overall, it's a
tasty and joyous romp that comes a lot closer to culinary realism (despite the over-
optimistic promise in the narrative's assessment that the result "looked just like the
picture of the strawberry shortcake in the cookbook") than most cookbooks for
this age group and promises messy kitchen fun. Bon appdtit! DS
SWINBURNE, STEPHEN R. 
Once a Wolf: How Wildlife Biologists Fought to Bring
Back the Gray Wolf illus. with photographs by Jim Brandenburg. 
Houghton,
1999 
48p
ISBN 0-395-89827-7 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-8
Opening with a history of the longstanding view of wolves as stealers of children
and killers of livestock, Swinburne discusses the battle of American cattle ranchers
and dairy farmers to eliminate the wolf from the American Northwest. With the
emergence of a new philosophy of environmental and ecological stewardship in
the mid-twentieth century, however, a movement to return the wolf to its natural
habitat began. Canadian wolves, tranquilized and transported to Yel)~wstone
National Park, became the subjects of intensive study. The book relates discover-
ies regarding the wolf s life cycle and habits and how they changed the image of the
wolf from a vicious natural-born killer to a necessary element in a balanced wilder-
ness. Brandenburg has already shown consummate skill in photographing these
shy subjects (To the Top ofthe World, BCCB 11/93), and these crisp color photo-
graphs showing wolves in their natural environment are exceptional. Swinburne's
text adds suspense and excitement to the story of the wolves' return, bringing
home the personal commitment of the biologists who lobbied for the restoration
of the wolf to Yellowstone. This is an involving study of an attempt to restore an
altered ecosystem, an ongoing experiment the description of which makes fasci-
nating reading. A map, list of sources (print and electronic), and an index are
included. JMD
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 403
THESMAN, JEAN 
The Tree ofBells. 
Houghton, 1999 
232p
ISBN 0-395-90510-9 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Thesman follows the fortunes of the Devereaux women, introduced in The Orna-
ment Tree (BCCB 3/96), as they run their boarding house and pursue a host of
social causes in 1920s Seattle. Bonnie makes a cameo appearance and then takes
off for China as a medical missionary's assistant, leaving Clare at center stage. At
sixteen and on the verge of graduation, Clare is both awed by and envious of
Bonnie's single-minded pursuit of a medical career (and, if the truth be known, of
her apparently devastating effect on the eligible bachelors in their circle of ac-
quaintances). As Clare gradually comes to admit that her own interests take a
domestic turn, she fears that her humbler aspirations will disappoint her activist
elders. She does, however, share their passionate concern for the poor, and she
becomes closely involved in the protection of an abused boy who takes refuge with
them, only to return to his father. Thesman convincingly captures the attitudes of
the reformer set as embodied in the Devereaux clan-compassionate, yet slightly
patronizing of the settlement house clients they serve. Seeds of romance between
Bonnie and handsome widower Reynolds and between Clare and gruff war vet-
eran Younger now begin to bear fruit, and readers who have developed an affec-
tion for the Devereaux family and their boarders will hang their own wish on the
bell tree for the saga to continue. EB
TOLSTOY, ALEKSEI 
The Gigantic Turnip; illus. by Niamh Sharkey. 
Barefoot
Books, 1999 
4 0p
ISBN 1-902283-12-0 
$15.95 
R* 
3-5 yrs
So, how many great big enormous turnips do you need on the library shelf? Make
room for this one, because Niamh Sharkey's drolly comic illustrations are going to
make this version the new storytime favorite. The retelling itself is a rollicking
rendition of Tolstoy's original, with a rhythmic accumulation of helpful farm ani-
mals: "six yellow canaries, five white geese, four speckled hens, three black cats,
two pot-bellied pigs, and one big brown cow," not to mention the helpful little
mouse that finally gets that gorgeous but gigantic turnip out of the ground. Sharkey's
illustrations depict a cheerfully crooked little house on a rolling green hill spotted
with wildflowers and curling grassy fronds; the jolly participants in all this silliness
have a lively demeanor stylistically depicted a la Lane Smith. Sharkey's visual style
has a wholesome flair that makes these illustrations bounce with energy and cheer.
The imaginative compositions pay little heed to natural law as characters defy
gravity, careening off turnips and down hillsides with little more than laughter as a
cushion against mishap. A fine combination of illustration and text, this turnip is
going to be the new staple crop for the storytime crew. JMD
TOMEY, INGRID 
Nobody Else Has to Know. 
Delacorte, 1999 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-385-32624-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
When his doting grandfather lets fifteen-year-old Webb take the wheel on the way
home from school, their lives are forever changed: a distracted Webb crashes the
car, injuring himself and his grandfather-and disabling for life a ten-year-old girl
who had been riding her bicycle on the shoulder. Initially, concussion prevents
Webb from remembering the accident, so he accepts his grandfather's lie about
being the driver as the truth, as does everyone. Soon, though, memory of his own
404 
* THE BULLETIN
culpability returns, and he must grapple with his conscience as he receives acco-
lades as the injured track star hero and his adoring grandfather begs him to keep
the secret. Tomey's writing tends to be pedestrian, and Webb's emotional quan-
dary disappears for long stretches of time, which suggests that a hostile classmate's
unflattering assessment ("You don't know the first thing about compassion. All
you know is how to be cool, how to have a good time") is more accurate than the
book seems to realize. The author deepens the portrait effectively, however, by
suggesting that Webb's grandfather's motivations for his sacrifice aren't as simple
as they appear and by noting that Webb's coming clean really isn't going to get his
grandfather, who was the responsible adult, off the hook. Ultimately, this is an
accessible narrative that, despite some flagging moments, may involve readers in
its ethical drama. DS
TURNER, ANN 
Red Flower Goes West; illus. by Dennis Nolan. 
Hyperion,
1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2253-8 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0313-4 
$14.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"Clem, you can ask me to leave my home and friends, but this flower came from
Mother's garden. Where I go, this flower goes too." Only under that condition
will the narrator's mother agree to drag her family across the continent to the
California gold fields. During the long journey to follow (which seems, rather
improbably, to be made without guide or fellow travelers), their scraggly geranium
Red Flower gradually assumes the status of a good-luck talisman; they anxiously
monitor its condition, certain that if the flower can make it past swollen rivers and
through blazing deserts and over jagged mountains, they will too. As Ma tamps its
resilient roots into California soil, she concludes hopefully, "Red Flower will grow
new leaves and buds. And so will we, so will we." Turner's all-too-brief poetic
journey West lacks the emotional development of her previous offering, Missis-
sippi Mud (BCCB 6/97), or any hint of the strain of resettlement movingly de-
tailed in Eve Bunting's Dandelions (BCCB 9/95). However, Nolan's illustrations,
softly mottled in blue-greens and grays and sparingly brightened with splashes of
red geranium blossom, effectively suggest the vastness of the land they traverse;
black-eyed oxen steal the show, establishing a visceral connection with the viewer
as they stare defiantly off the page. EB
WEEKS, SARAH 
Regular Guy. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 1999 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028368-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028367-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 3-6
Guy is convinced that he and weird Bob-o, born on the same day in the same
hospital, were switched at birth because weird Bob-o's parents are so normal and
Guy's are so, well, weird (his mother dresses in day-glo spandex pants and lucite
shoes, and his father's favorite party trick is snorting an oyster up his nose and
having it come out his mouth). With the aid of Guy's best friend, Buzz, Guy and
Bob-o switch places for the weekend in order to break the news to their respective
parents, but Guy discovers that quiet and normal may not be all it's cracked up to
be. Dialogue-driven and fast-paced, this title is more slick than substantive, and it
reads more like the script for a movie of the week than a novel. The humor is solid
if slapstick, however, and the underlying message is painless. In a sitcom-worthy
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 405
conclusion Guy's true parental heritage is finally revealed, he learns to appreciate
his weird folks, and even Bob-o gets a chance at redemption. Funny, fast, and
facile, this is an easy booktalk and a good response to the question, "Got anything
that'll make me laugh?" JMD
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Streets ofGold; illus. by Dan Andreasen. 
Dial, 1999 
[40p]
ISBN 0-8037-2149-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
According to the author's note, this unusual picture book is based on The Promised
Land (1912), a memoir by Mary (born Masha) Antin, who emigrated from Russia
to America in 1894 at age twelve. Brief quotations from Antin's account of her life
accompany each page of Wells' "shortened and simplified" first-person narration,
which details the oppression of Jews in Russia, where "our fathers were told what
kind of work they could do," "our brothers were stolen by the Czar's army when
they were still little boys," "only short-nosed Jewish boys could attend school,"
and "Jewish girls are not allowed" to attend school at all. Once Masha gets to
America, the narration focuses in a conventional way on the educational opportu-
nities she found there. Wells also transmits what was presumably Antin's unques-
tioning acceptance of the need for assimilation when her first-person narrator tells
us without comment that "my name was changed to an American name, Mary, so
that I would fit in with everyone else." However, the story does not gloss over the
squalor of the Antins' Boston home, where she has to beware of the "thieves and
dope addicts" in the alleys. The interesting textures and perspectives of the warm,
realistic full-page oil paintings facing each page of text evoke the old and the new
country with appropriate nostalgia but without cliches. Illustrations in the sec-
tions of the book set in Russia emphasize the closeness of Masha and her father
while Mary's growing independence is emphasized in the latter section. Paintings
and a map of their journey by land and by sea provide a transition between these
sections and visually convey the vastness of the distance from Russia to America.
FK
WILLARD, NANCY 
The Tale I Told Sasha; illus. by David Christiana. 
Little,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-316-94115-8 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
A poetic evocation of a land where all things lost are found, this versification has
an Alice in Wonderland quality that serves it well. Willard's rhythmic stanzas fol-
low a little girl as she steps through a shadowy door to follow her lost yellow ball,
chasing it "through painted trees" and across "the Bridge of Butterflies" until the
King of Keys returns it to her. While the narrative line is occasionally obscure, the
understanding that imaginary journeys are sometimes the most rewarding is easily
grasped. Christiana's watercolors have a romantic, moody quality that reflects and
expands the text, the compositions somewhat reminiscent of Marvin Bileck's illus-
trations for Rain Makes Applesauce in their fluid, circular complexity. Everything
possesses anima in this poetic imaginary world: the clock has a human face,
Gammellesque trees twist to the sky, a shimmering web declares its mission ("'I
gather cows and coins,' it sang, 'and travelers from the western shore'"). Perspec-
tives are askew, and gravity has no meaning as strangely hatted characters and
oddly distorted objects float through the pages. Willard's language is lyrical and
intriguing, and the concluding stanza ("A hundred pencils, swift as rain,/ writing
406 
* THE BULLETIN
on sheets of beaten gold/ would not be quick enough to hold/ the strange adven-
tures/ shadows hide") is the perfect lead-in to a group activity. Use this with a
creative writing class and see if they can take you on some imaginary journeys of
their own. JMD
WITTLINGER, ELLEN 
Hard Love. 
Simon, 1999 
227p
ISBN 0-689-82134-4 $16.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old John Galardi has just produced the first issue of his zine,
"Bananafish," inspired by a zine called "Escape Velocity" written by Marisol, a
self-described "Puerto Rican Cuban Yankee Cambridge, Massachusetts, rich spoiled
lesbian private-school gifted-and-talented writer virgin looking for love." John
hies himself to Boston to drop off the issue with the ulterior motive of meeting
Marisol, whose zine and writing intrigues him. The two meet and become writing
buddies, John finally making a connection that brings him out of the emotional
isolation he embraced when his parents divorced. Despite his best intentions and
despite Marisol's obvious lack of romantic interest, as their friendship progresses
John falls hard. Marisol has the almost impossible task of letting John down easy
while taking advantage of her own escape velocity by going to New York with
some new friends before she leaves for college. Characterization is strong through-
out; Marisol and John are complex and fully dimensional, while peripheral charac-
ters (parents, possible stepfather, friends) are more vignettish than stereotypical.
John's first-person narration reflects a sensitive personality with a tough, judg-
mental veneer; the prickly Marisol's catalytic breach of his emotional walls is ac-
complished with rhetorical retreats and skirmishes of snappy dialogue. The format
of the book is laid out like zines, with a cut-and-paste, photocopied look that
increases the verisimilitude of the action. Wittlinger doesn't go for the sappy wrap-
up: Marisol does leave, John's self-absorbed, irresponsible father stays that way,
and John himself still has a long way to go, but readers will close this book con-
vinced that, by the end, John is at least facing the right direction. JMD
WOOD, TED 
Ghosts ofthe West Coast: The Lost Souls ofthe Queen Mary and Other
Real-Life Hauntings; written and illus. with photographs by Ted Wood. 
Walker,
1999 
48p 
(Haunted America)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8669-3 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8668-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
In this entry in the Haunted America series, Wood examines locales such as the
Winchester Mystery House, the Hotel del Coronado, and the Queen Mary, report-
ing with a happy taste for the uncanny and with blissful credulity all the creepy
stories connected with said structures. The book is more interested in effect than
fact, as there's never any research outside of hearsay on the ghosts' history, and the
stories often peter out quickly rather than developing atmospheric sweep or real
chills. The reading is easy and benign, however (as, generally, are the ghosts, who
restrict themselves to frightening people at worst and at best tidy and perfume
their romantic abodes), and the topic is of perennial appeal. The photographs pull
out all the stops, with the already picturesque locations enhanced by dramatic
lighting as well as the series' trademark ghost presences, who shimmer obligingly
at windows or flutter down corridors. The layout gets a bit busy with the borders,
photo-captions, scrawled title fonts, and faux-aged paper, but it's nonetheless a
scenic thematic tour of the coast (including helpful maps in case readers want to
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 407
search the specters out for themselves). Especially for reluctant readers looking to
expand from or prepare for Daniel Cohen, this offers cinematic charms with an
attractive if wishful veneer of fact. DS
XUAN, YONG-SHENG 
The Dragon Lover and Other Chinese Proverbs; written and
illus. by Yong-Sheng Xuan. 
Shen's, 1999 
32p
ISBN 1-885008-11-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
An English-language text accompanied by Chinese calligraphy retells five brief
fable-like narratives. Lively writing and proverbial messages unfamiliar to West-
ern readers may engage browsers. At times, however, the text is overwritten: "Bask-
ing beside its seaside friends on the smooth, glistening sand, the clam quickly
opened its shell to take in the sun and fresh sea air." The moral of each story
appears in the closing line, but in "The Dragon Lover" the meaning stays obscure.
Single-page spreads featuring elaborate papercuts, framed by calligraphy and icons,
illustrate each story. Each tale is matched with a different cutting style, the papercuts
set against warm, multicolored blocks, textured paper, or a neutral background.
While the layout is crowded and the presentations uneven, the craft itself is still
essentially intriguing. The images in the opening tale, "The Lazy Farmer," reflect
a modernist aesthetic: sharp lines, minimal texture, and blocky compositions.
The traditional sharp-patterned cuttings of "The Musician and the Water Buf-
falo" in black paper give way to the unconnected, vibrant, watercolored papercuts
of "The Crane and the Clam," where a rainbow-tinted crane and multicolored sea
creatures are set against white paper, textured like a wave-washed beach. 
Source
notes are minimal but helpful to interested readers. 
Use with Carmen Lomas
Garza's Magic Windows/Ventanas migicas (BCCB 5/99). JNH
408 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Acting-fiction: Conford
ACTIVITY BOOKS: Charlip
ADVENTURE STORIES: Hinel;
Lawrence, I.; Marsden
Agriculture: Paladino
Agriculture-stories: Tolstoy
Alaska: Markle
ALPHABET BOOKS: Cahoon
American Indians: Left Hand Bull
American Indians-fiction: Erdrich
American Indians-stories: Lunge-
Larsen
Animals-stories: Leslie; Piers;
Sansone
Archaeology: Dingus
Art and artists: Clements
Arts and crafts: Charlip
Astronauts: Hehner
Aunts-fiction: Hite; Lisle
Babies-stories: Lawrence, M.
Ballet-fiction: Marshall
Baseball-fiction: Johnson
Beaches-stories: Daly
BIOGRAPHIES: Burchard;
Cretzmeyer; Left Hand Bull;
Lewin; Morpurgo; Wells
Biology: Gower
Birds-fiction: Hill
Blacks-fiction: Bell
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Barrett
Bullies-fiction: Fleischman
Carousels: Clements
Cats-fiction: Le Guin
Cats-stories: Beaton
China: Xuan
China-fiction: Hill
Circuses-stories: Armstrong;
Priceman
CONCEPT BOOKS: Beaton;
Cahoon
COOKBOOKS: Stevens
COUNTING BOOKS: Beaton
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Cadnum; Tomey
Current events: McMahon
Dancers and dancing: Left Hand
Bull
Dancers and dancing-fiction:
Marshall
Death and dying-fiction: Brisson;
Sleator
Dinosaurs: Dingus
Dinosaurs-stories: Masurel
Disabilities-fiction: Hill
Dogs-fiction: Hinel
Dreams-stories: Armstrong
Ecology: Markle; Swinburne
Environmental studies: Markle;
Paladino
Ethics and values: Bell; Cadnum;
Johnson; Levitin; Lindquist;
McMahon; Thesman; Tomey
FANTASY: Le Guin; Levitin;
Lisle; Pierce; Sleator; Willard
Farms-stories: Piers
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Sonenklar
Fathers and sons-fiction: Hinel;
Lindquist
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Ada; DeSpain;
Marshall; Tolstoy
Flowers-stories: Lunge-Larsen
Food and eating: Charlip
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 409
Food and eating-stories: Stevens;
Tolstoy
Friendship-fiction: Hill; Johnson;
Masurel; Seuling; Sonenklar;
Weeks; Wittlinger
Friendship-stories: Shipton
FUNNY STORIES: Priceman;
Weeks
GAME BOOKS: Leslie
Gardens-fiction: Fleischman
Ghosts: Wood
Grandfathers: Giovanni
Grandfathers-fiction: Bell; Tomey
Grandmothers-fiction: Barrett
Health: Gower
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Barrett; Bat-Ami; Erdrich;
Lawrence, I.; Lindquist;
Thesman; Turner
History, European: Morpurgo
History, U. S.: Burchard;
Gourley; Hehner; Kay; Turner
History, world: Barrett
Holocaust: Cretzmeyer
Homosexuality-fiction: Wittlinger
Illness-fiction: Brisson
Immigration: Wells
Ireland: McMahon
Jews-fiction: Levitin
Jews: Cretzmeyer; Wells
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Pierce
Labor unions: Gourley
Language arts: Cahoon
Latin America-folklore: DeSpain
LOVE STORIES: Bat-Ami
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Brisson
Oceans-stories: Daly
Orphans-stories: Sansone
Parents-fiction: Sleator; Weeks
Parents-stories: Sansone
Photography: Lewin; Wood
POETRY: Willard
PROVERBS: Xuan
Reading aloud: DeSpain
Reading, easy: Brisson; Conford;
Hanel; Le Guin; Marshall
Reading, reluctant: Conford;
Hehner; Lewin; Weeks; Wood
RIDDLES: Leslie
School-fiction: Seuling; Sonenklar
Sisters-fiction: Cadnum; Lisle
Slavery: Burchard
Social studies: McMahon
Space travel: Hehner
Spain-folklore: Ada
Storytelling: Ada; DeSpain; Lunge-
Larsen; Tolstoy
Storytime: Beaton; Daly; Leslie;
Masurel; Piers; Shipton; Tolstoy
Summer-fiction: Hite; Masurel
Toys-stories: Masurel
Trains-poetry: Kay
Transportation: Kay
Voyages and travel-fiction: Lawrence, I.;
Willard
Voyages and travel-stories: Shipton;
Turner
War and warfare-fiction: Marsden
Wolves: Swinburne
Wolves-fiction: Marshall
Women's studies: Barrett; Gourley;
Morpurgo
Woodworking: Clements
World cultures: Lewin
World War I-fiction: Lindquist
World War II: Cretzmeyer
World War II-fiction: Bat-Ami
Writers and writing-fiction: Wittlinger
410 
* THE BULLETIN
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AUTHOR/TITLE INDEX, VOLUME 52
SEPTEMBER, 1998-JULY/AUGUST, 1999
10 Minutes till Bedtime. Rathmann. 143.
26 Fairmount Avenue. dePaola. 349.
6th Grade Nickname Game. Korman. 103.
A Is for Amos. Chandra. 197.
ABC Disney. Sabuda. 145.
ABC Pop! Isadora. 354.
Abigail Takes the Wheel. Avi. 343.
About Twins. Rotner. 292.
Abraham's Battle. Banks. 273.
Ada. Three Golden Oranges. 378.
Adler, C. Not Just a Summer Crush. 50.
Adler, D. Babe & I. 342.
.Shape Up! 4.
Adventures of Blue Avenger. Howe. 240.
Aesop. Fox and the Rooster. 5.
. Hare and the Tortoise. 369.
After the Spill. Markle. 395.
Agapanthus Hum and the Eyeglasses. Cowley.
275.
Agee. Sit on a Potato Pan, Otis! 194.
. Who Ordered the Jumbo Shrimp? 124.
Ahlberg. Mockingbird. 51
Aiken. Dangerous Games. 230.
Albertina the Practically Perfect. Fowler. 59.
Alexander. Gypsy Rizka. 270.
Alice on the Outside. Naylor. 359.
Alien for Rent. Duffey. 199.
Aliki. Marianthe's Story One. 160.
. Marianthe's Story Two. 160.
. William Shakespeare & the Globe. 271.
All Is Well. Litchman. 21.
Allan. Jesus' Day Off. 125.
Allison. Hear These Voices. 194.
Almond. Skellig. 231.
Amazing Frecktacle. Venokur. 36.
Ancona. Charro. 306.
Andersen. Ugly Duckling. 231.
Anderson, J. Monkey Tree. 125.
Anderson, L. No Time for Mother's Day. 271.
Angel of Mill Street. Weller. 150.
Angels Turn Their Backs. Buffie. 90.
Anholt. Billy and the Big New School. 307.
.Stone Girl, Bone Girl. 195.
Anna All Year Round. Hahn. 352.
Anna of Byzantium. Barrett. 379.
Annabel the Actress. Conford. 384.
Anson's Way. Schmidt. 327.
Ant Bully. Nickle. 212.
Antle. Lost in the War. 5.
Archbold. Ghost Liners. 6.
Arlene Sardine. Raschka. 27.
Armageddon Summer. Yolen. 40.
Armstrong. Pierre's Dream. 379.
.Shipwreck at the Bottom of the World.
195.
Arnold. Pumpkin Runner. 86.
Arnosky. Mouse Letters. 307.
.Mouse Numbers. 307.
Aronson. Art Attack. 6.
Art Attack. Aronson. 6.
Ashwater Experiment. Koss. 356.
Ask the Bones. Olson. 290.
At Her Majesty's Request. Myers. 211.
Atwater-Rhodes. In the Forests of the Night.
272.
Auch. Frozen Summer. 161.
Aunt CeeCee, Aunt Belle, and Mama's Surprise.
Quattlebaum. 361.
Aunt Minnie McGranahan. Priggers. 325.
Aunt Nancy and Cousin Lazybones. Root. 144.
Autumn Leaves. Robbins. 179.
Avi. Abigail Takes the Wheel. 343.
. Perloo the Bold. 87.
Babbitt. Ouch! 161.
Babe & I. Adler. 342.
Baboon King. Quintana. 362.
Baby Dance. Taylor. 330.
Baby Loves. Lawrence. 391.
Bach's Big Adventure. Ketcham. 318.
Backwater. Bauer. 344.
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 411
Bacon. Finn. 87.
Bad Guys. Glass. 13.
Bad. Ferris. 129.
Baer. Walk the Dark Streets. 161.
Ballard. Ghost Liners. 6.
Band of Angels. Hopkinson. 204.
Bandit's Moon. Fleischman. 94.
Bang. When Sophie Gets Angry-Really, Re-
ally Angry. 272.
Banks. Abraham's Battle. 273.
Barn Cat. Saul. 111.
Barrett. Anna of Byzantium. 379.
Bartlett. Seal Island School. 231.
Bartoletti. No Man's Land. 343.
Bat Summer. Withrow. 333.
Bat-Ami. Two Suns in the Sky. 379.
Batty Hattie. Nielsen. 290.
Bauer. Backwater. 344.
Bawden. Off the Road. 51.
Beard. Twister. 308.
Bearer of Gifts. Steven. 147.
Beaton. One Moose, Twenty Mice. 380.
Beatrix Potter. Malam. 175.
Beautiful Place on Yonge Street. Trembath. 331.
Beauty Queen. Glovach. 201.
Beaver. Rounds. 363.
Bechard. If It Doesn't Kill You. 344.
Bechtold. Buster. 232.
Bedard. Sitting Ducks. 52.
Bee and Jacky. Coman. 54.
Beeler. Throw Your Tooth on the Roof. 88.
Beetle and Me. Young. 260.
Beetle Boy. David. 198.
Behaving Bradley. Nodelman. 25.
Behind the Mask. Thomas. 148.
Beil. Fire in Their Eyes. 273.
Bell. Zack. 380.
Belton. Ernestine & Amanda: Mysteries on
Monroe Street. 7.
Benjamin McFadden and the Robot Babysit-
ter. Bush. 9.
Benson. Bound for America. 239.
Bernier-Grand. In the Shade of the Nispero
Tree. 232.
Best. Last Licks. 308.
Beware and Stogie. Haas. 60.
Beyond the Mango Tree. Zemser. 222.
Bible Stories for the Young. Grindley. 203.
Bible. Bible Stories for the Young. 203.
. Noah and the Great Flood. 200.
. To Every Thing There Is a Season. 88.
Big Head! Rowan. 180.
Biggest, Best Snowman. Cuyler. 128.
Billy and the Big New School. Anholt. 307.
Birchbark House. Erdrich. 386.
Bird Boy. Hill. 389.
Bird Talk. Jonas. 317.
Bitton-Jackson. My Bridges of Hope. 309.
Black Cat. Myers. 210.
Black Geese. Lurie. 321.
Black Hoops. McKissack. 246.
Blacklock. Pankration. 344.
Blackstone. This Is Soccer. 274.
Bless Us All. Rylant. 216.
Block. I Was a Teenage Fairy. 7.
Bloomability. Creech. 54.
Bodett. Williwaw! 345.
Bodkin. Crane Wife. 52.
Bodnar. Tale of a Tail. 89.
Bone Keeper. McDonald. 245.
Bones. Simon. 31.
Bookworm's Feast. Lewis. 244.
Borden. Good Luck, Mrs. K.! 345.
BoshBlobberBosh. Lewis. 136.
Boston Tea Party. Kroll. 19.
Bottner. Marsha Makes Me Sick. 196.
Boudalika. If You Could Be My Friend. 89.
Bound for America. Haskins. 239.
Bowl of Fruit. Dunbar. 349.
Boy of the Deeps. Wallace. 297.
Boy on the Beach. Daly. 385.
Boynton. Dinosaur's Binkit. 126.
Boys Lie. Neufeld. 250.
Braun. My Goose Betsy. 346.
Brave Margaret. San Souci. 327.
Breaking Rank. Randle. 362.
Brian's Return. Paulsen. 251.
Bridges Are to Cross. Sturges. 147.
Bright Freedom's Song. Houston. 170.
Brisson. Little Sister, Big Sister. 233.
. Sky Memories. 381.
Brokaw. Leaving Emma. 233.
Broken Chords. Gilbert. 131.
Bronco Busters. Herzig. 61.
Brooks. Each a Piece. 90.
. Vanishing. 309.
Brothers. Thompson. 113.
Brown. One Giant Leap. 126.
Browne. Voices in the Park. 52.
. Willy the Dreamer. 8.
Bruchac. Heart of a Chief. 126.
.When the Chenoo Howls. 8.
Buffie. Angels Turn Their Backs. 90.
Bug Off Hepworth. 15.
Building. Cooper. 275.
Bumblebee, Bumblebee, Do You Know Me?
Rockwell. 255.
Bunting. I Have an Olive Tree. 310.
Burchard. Lincoln and Slavery. 381.
Burleigh. Home Run. 9
Burning Up. Cooney. 163.
Busby. Tales Too Gross to Be True. 91.
Bush. Benjamin McFadden and the Robot
Babysitter. 9.
412 
* THE BULLETIN
Butler. Hermit Thrush Sings. 274.
Byrd. Finn MacCoul and His Fearless Wife.
233.
Cadnum. Heat. 92.
. Rundown. 382.
Cahoon. Word Play ABC. 382.
Calabro. Perilous Journey of the Donner Party.
274.
Calling All Toddlers. Simon. 217.
Calmenson. Teeny Tiny Teacher. 53.
Campbell. Papa Tembo. 10.
Candy Corn. Stevenson. 329.
Canning Season. Carlson. 234.
Captain Kate. Reeder. 214.
Captain Underpants and the Attack of the Talk-
ing Toilets. Pilkey. 325.
Carbone. Stealing Freedom. 162.
Carlson. Canning Season. 234.
Carolina Crow Girl. Hobbs. 353.
Carter. Dustin's Big School Day. 234.
Casebook of a Private (Cat's) Eye. Stolz. 367.
Caseley. Losing Louisa. 196.
Cassandra-Live at Carnegie Hall! Hopper. 17.
Cast Two Shadows. Rinaldi. 28.
Cat Up a Tree. Hassett. 98.
Cat Up a Tree. Isaacs. 101.
Catching Fire. Gorrell. 314.
Cazet. Minnie and Moo Go Dancing. 10.
. Minnie and Moo Go to the Moon. 10.
Cecil in Space. Hite. 389.
Cendrillon. San Souci. 181.
Century Farm. Peterson. 253.
Cerullo. Dolphins. 197.
Chambers. Marisol and Magdalena. 162.
Chandra. A Is for Amos. 197.
Changing Tunes. Napoli. 24.
Charlie Is a Chicken. Smith. 113.
Charlip. Peanut Butter Party. 383.
Charlotte. Lunn. 21.
Charro. Ancona. 306.
Checkers. Marsden. 66.
Chiappe. Tiniest Giants. 385.
Child's Treasury of Nursery Rhymes. Denton.
164.
Choi. New Cat. 310.
Christelow. What Do Illustrators Do? 311.
Christian. Dancin' in the Kitchen. 96.
Christmas Is Coming! Masurel. 107.
Cinnamon's Day Out. Roth. 28.
Circle Dogs. Henkes. 99.
Circle of Magic: Briar's Book. Pierce. 253.
Circle of Magic: Daja's Book. Pierce. 142.
City by Numbers. Johnson. 282.
Clara Schumann. Reich. 326.
Clements. Landry News. 346.
.Workshop. 383.
Clemesha. Trashy Town. 335.
Clever Cowboy. McAllister. 137.
Clinton. I, Too, Sing America. 127.
Clockwork. Pullman. 143.
Close to a Killer. Qualey. 213.
Cobb. You Gotta Try This! 311.
Cobtown Christmas. Van Nutt. 149.
Cohen. Down in the Subway. 53.
Coleman, E. Riches of Oseola McCarty. 235.
Coleman, M. Weirdo's War. 92.
Coman. Bee and Jacky. 54.
Come All You Brave Soldiers. Cox. 311.
Come Along, Daisy! Simmons. 30.
Come On, Rain! Hesse. 281.
Coming Evil. Vande Velde. 36.
Conditions of Love. Pennebaker. 252.
Conford. Annabel the Actress. 384.
.Diary of a Monster's Son. 347.
Conly. While No One Was Watching. 11.
Cook-a-Doodle-Doo! Stevens. 402.
Cool Melons-Turn to Frogs! Gollub. 202.
Cooney. Burning Up. 163.
Cooper. Building. 275.
Coppelia. Fonteyn. 167.
Cormier. Heroes. 11.
Cornelissen. Soft Rain. 127.
Cougar. Griffith. 239.
Count Karlstein. Pullman. 71.
Counting to Christmas. Tafuri. 113.
Cow of No Color. Jaffe. 134.
Cowboy Ghost. Peck. 252.
Cowboy with a Camera. Worcester. 221.
Cowley. Agapanthus Hum and the Eyeglasses.
275.
. Red-Eyed Tree Frog. 235.
. Rusty, Trusty Tractor. 236.
Cows in the Kitchen. Crebbin. 54.
Cox, C. Come All You Brave Soldiers. 311.
Cox, J. Third Grade Pet. 198.
Coxe. Hot Dog. 196.
Crack in the Clouds. Levy. 136.
Craft. King Midas and the Golden Touch. 236.
Crane Wife. Bodkin. 52.
Crawford. Halinka. 178.
Crazy Crawler Crane. Cuetara. 55.
Crebbin. Cows in the Kitchen. 54.
Creech. Bloomability. 54.
Creepy Countdown. Huck. 62.
Creepy Riddles. Hall. 61.
Cretzmeyer. Your Name Is Renee. 384.
Crews. You Are Here. 163.
Crist-Evans. Moon over Tennessee. 347.
Crossing the Delaware. Peacock. 26.
Crummel. Cook-a-Doodle-Doo! 402.
Cuetara. Crazy Crawler Crane. 55.
Cullen. Mightiest Heart. 92.
Cummings. Talking with Artists, Volume
Three. 276.
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 
413
Cuneo. Mary Louise Loses Her Manners. 312.
Cure. Levitin. 393.
Curlee. Rushmore. 236.
Currie. Newest and Coolest Dinosaurs. 164.
Cutler. Song of the Molimo. 55.
Cuyler. Biggest, Best Snowman. 128.
Daly. Boy on the Beach. 385.
.Jamela's Dress. 347.
Daly-Weir. Tales Too Funny to Be True. 91.
Dance for the Land. McLaren. 247.
Dance. Jones. 171.
Dancin' in the Kitchen. Gelsanliter. 96.
Dangerous Games. Aiken. 230.
Daniels. Feet in the Gym. 348.
Dark Lord of Derkholm. Jones. 102.
Darkness, Be My Friend. Marsden. 396.
Darling. You Gotta Try This! 311.
David. Beetle Boy. 198.
Davis. Enormous Potato. 56.
Day My Dogs Became Guys. Markoe. 248.
De Young. Letter to Mrs. Roosevelt. 237.
Deep Waters. Herman. 100.
DeFelice. Nowhere to Call Home. 237.
Del Negro. Lucy Dove. 12.
Demi. Kites. 348.
Denenberg. Journal of William Thomas
Emerson. 93.
Denton. Child's Treasury of Nursery Rhymes.
164.
dePaola. 26 Fairmount Avenue. 349.
DeSpain. Emerald Lizard. 385.
Desimini. Sun & Moon. 165.
Dewey. Navajo Summer. 93.
Diakit6. Hatseller and the Monkeys. 199.
Diary of a Monster's Son. Conford. 347.
Dig a Tunnel. Hunter. 317.
Dillon. To Every Thing There Is a Season. 88.
Dingus. Tiniest Giants. 385.
Dinosaur's Binkit. Boynton. 126.
Disappearing Alphabet. Wilbur. 151.
Dive! Earle. 350.
Do You Want to Play? Kolar. 356.
Dog with Golden Eyes. Wilbur. 39.
Dolphin Luck. McKay. 358.
Dolphins. Cerullo. 197.
Don't Read This! 238.
Doodle Dandies. Lewis. 20.
Door Near Here. Quarles. 71.
Down in the Subway. Cohen. 53.
Dragon Lover. Xuan. 407.
Dragon of Lonely Island. Rupp. 145.
Drake. Kids Guide to the Millennium. 105.
Dreamtime. Hollyer. 169.
Dressed for the Occasion. Miller. 322.
Drive. Wieler. 332.
Drummer Boy. Turner. 114.
Duffey. Alien for Rent. 199.
Duggleby. Story Painter. 165.
Dunbar. Bowl of Fruit. 349.
. Panda's New Toy. 349.
. Secret Friend. 349.
Durbin. Wintering. 276.
Durrant. Turtle Clan Journey. 277.
Dustin's Big School Day. Carter. 234.
Each a Piece. Brooks. 90.
Earle. Dive! 350.
. Hello, Fish! 350.
Eboch. Well of Sacrifice. 277.
Echewa. Magic Tree. 278.
Edith Shay. LaFaye. 136.
Edwards. Honk! 56.
Egielski. Jazper. 94.
Ehrlich. When I Was Your Age, Volume Two.
351.
Eisenberg. Creepy Riddles. 61.
Elbaz. If You Could Be My Friend. 89.
Emberley. Three. 128.
Emergency! Masoff. 209.
Emma's Magic Winter. Little. 65.
Emeline at the Circus. Priceman. 399.
Emerald Lizard. DeSpain. 385.
Emperor's Old Clothes. Lasky. 244.
Empress of Elsewhere. Nelson. 140.
English. Nadia's Hands. 278.
Enormous Potato. Davis. 56.
Erdrich. Birchbark House. 386.
Ernestine & Amanda: Mysteries on Monroe
Street. Belton. 7.
Ernst. Stella Louella's Runaway Book. 129.
Escape from Shangri-La. Morpurgo. 139.
Ewing. Party Girl. 57.
Exploding Ants. Settel. 257.
Exploring the Deep, Dark Sea. Gibbons. 279.
Extreme Elvin. Lynch. 208.
Face in the Mirror. Tolan. 34.
Fairy's Mistake. Levine. 320.
Family Haggadah. Schecter. 257.
Farmer Brown Goes Round and Round. Sloat.
295.
Fashion through the Ages. Knight. 205.
Feet in the Gym. Daniels. 348.
Fenner. King of Dragons. 166.
Ferris. Bad. 129.
. Love Among the Walnuts. 57.
Fiedler. Lucky Me. 58.
Field. Magic Words. 58.
Finn MacCoul and His Fearless Wife. Byrd.
233.
Finn. Bacon. 87.
Fire in Their Eyes. Beil. 273.
Fire Truck. Sfs. 183.
First on the Moon. Hehner. 388.
Fisher. To Bigotry No Sanction. 279.
Fishing for Methuselah. Roth. 110.
414 
* THE BULLETIN
Flake. Skin I'm In. 166.
Flapjack Waltzes. Wilson. 39.
Flappy Waggy Wiggly. Leslie. 392.
Fleischman, P. Weslandia. 386.
Fleischman, S. Bandit's Moon. 94.
Fleming, C. Westward Ho, Carlotta! 12.
. When Agnes Caws. 200.
Fleming, D. Mama Cat Has Three Kittens. 129.
Fletcher. Flying Solo. 12.
. Relatively Speaking. 312.
Florian. Laugh-eteria. 279.
Flying Solo. Fletcher. 12.
Fonteyn. Coppelia. 167.
Forbidden Love. Nash. 359.
Ford. My Day in the Garden. 238.
Foreign Exchange. Glenn. 313.
Fourth Wise Man. Summers. 148.
Fowler. Albertina the Practically Perfect. 59.
Fox and the Rooster. Aesop. 5.
Framed in Fire. Patneaude. 324.
Frank Was a Monster Who Wanted to Dance.
Graves. 352.
Freeman. Polyester Grandpa. 167.
French. Oliver's Fruit Salad. 59.
Friendship Ring: If You Only Knew. Vail. 75.
Friendship Ring: Not That I Care. Vail. 148.
Friendship Ring: Please, Please, Please. Vail. 75.
Friesen. Janey's Girl. 95.
Frontier Merchants. Stanley. 74.
Frozen Summer. Auch. 161.
Galvin. Within Reach. 178.
Game Day. Young. 152.
Gantos. Joey Pigza Swallowed the Key. 95.
Gardner. What's So Super about the Supernatu-
ral? 200.
Garland. My Father's Boat. 13.
Garner. Well of the Wind. 96.
Garza. Magic Windows. 312.
Gate in the Wall. Howard. 316.
Gay. Stella, Star of the Sea. 313.
Geisert. River Town. 351.
Gelsanliter. Dancin' in the Kitchen. 96.
Gerrard. Roman Twins. 59.
Gershator. When It Starts to Snow. 130.
. Zzzng! Zzzng! Zzzng! 60.
Gerstein. Noah and the Great Flood. 200.
. Victor. 130.
. Wild Boy. 131.
Get Real. Suzanne. 220.
Ghost Liners. Ballard. 6.
Ghost of a Hanged Man. Vande Velde. 75.
Ghosts of the West Coast. Wood. 406.
Gibbons. Exploring the Deep, Dark Sea. 279.
Giblin. Mystery of the Mammoth Bones. 201.
Gieth. I Miss You, I Miss You! 254.
Gift for Abuelita. Luenn. 174.
Gigantic Turnip. Tolstoy. 403.
Gilbert. Broken Chords. 131.
Gilliland. It's About Time! 281.
Gilson. Tales Too Scary to Be True. 91.
Giovanni. Grand Fathers. 387.
Girls Together. Williams. 332.
Glass Mountain. Wolkstein. 259.
Glass. Bad Guys. 13.
Glenn. Foreign Exchange. 313.
Glovach. Beauty Queen. 201.
Goble. Iktomi and the Coyote. 167.
Gold Fever! Schanzer. 364.
Goldin. Journeys with Elijah. 280.
Gollub. Cool Melons-Turn to Frogs! 202.
Gone from Home. Johnson. 102.
Good Enough to Eat. Rockwell. 215.
Good Girl Work. Gourley. 387.
Good Liar. Maguire. 247.
Good Luck, Mrs. K.! Borden. 345.
Gordon. When JFK Was My Father. 238.
Gorrell. Catching Fire. 314.
Gourley. Good Girl Work. 387.
Gower. This Book Bites! 388.
Graeber. Nobody's Dog. 14.
Grand Fathers. Giovanni. 387.
Grandpa's Gamble. Michelson. 288.
Grant. White Horse. 132.
Graves. Frank Was a Monster Who Wanted to
Dance. 352.
Green Mango Magic. Hossack. 134.
Green Mist. Sewall. 365.
Green Thumb. Thomas. 368.
Greene, C. Sunflower Island. 202.
Greene, J. Hanuman. 241.
Greenwald. I Miss You, I Miss You! 254.
Gregory. Valentine for Norman Noggs. 203.
Gretz. Rabbit Food. 352.
Griffin. Other Shepards. 97.
Griffith. Cougar. 239.
Grimes. Jazmin's Notebook. 14.
Grimm. Ouch! 161.
Grindley. Bible Stories for the Young. 203.
Grunter. Jolley. 355.
Guess Whose Shadow? Swinburne. 296.
Guiberson. Mummy Mysteries. 203.
Guthrie. This Land Is Your Land. 97.
Gypsy Rizka. Alexander. 270.
Haas. Beware and Stogie. 60.
. Unbroken. 239.
Hahn. Anna All Year Round. 352.
Haldane. Lakota Hoop Dancer. 391.
Halinka. Pressler. 178.
Hall. Creepy Riddles. 61.
Halperin. Once Upon a Company. 14.
Hamanaka. In Search of the Spirit. 280.
Hamilton, J. Special Effects. 15.
Hamilton, V. Second Cousins. 97.
Han. Rabbit's Tail. 353.
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 415
Handful of Beans. Steig. 218.
Hanel. Rescue at Sea! 388.
Hansen. Women of Hope. 168.
Hanuman. Jendresen. 241.
Hard Love. Wittlinger. 406.
Hare and the Tortoise. Ward. 369.
Harness. Mark Twain and the Queens of the
Mississippi. 168.
Harper. Telling Time with Big Mama Cat. 98.
Harry and Lulu. Yorinks. 370.
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone. Rowling.
110.
Haskins. Bound for America. 239.
Hassett. Cat Up a Tree. 98.
Hate You. McNamee. 321.
Hatseller and the Monkeys. Diakitd. 199.
Haunted Sister. Littke. 64.
Hautman. Stone Cold. 99.
Hawes. Rosey in the Present Tense. 314.
Hazen-Hammond. Thunder Bear and Ko. 315.
Hear These Voices. Allison. 194.
Hearne. Listening for Leroy. 99.
Heart of a Chief. Bruchac. 126.
Heat. Cadnum. 92.
Heaven. Johnson. 135.
Hehner. First on the Moon. 388.
Heide. It's About Time! 281.
Heinz. Nanuk. 132.
Hello, Fish! Earle. 350.
Henkes. Circle Dogs. 99.
Heo. One Sunday Morning. 315.
Hepworth. Bug Off! 15.
Here Comes the Train. Voake. 149.
Herman. Deep Waters. 100.
Hermit Thrush Sings. Butler. 274.
Heroes. Cormier. 11.
Herzig. Bronco Busters. 61.
Hesse. Come On, Rain! 281.
.Just Juice. 133.
Hesser. Kissing Doorknobs. 16.
Hickman. Susannah. 100.
Hill, E. Bird Boy. 389.
Hill, P. Voice from the Border. 16.
Hirano. Spring Tone. 334.
Hite. Cecil in Space. 389.
Hive for the Honeybee. Lally. 284.
Hobbs, V. Carolina Crow Girl. 353.
Hobbs, W. Maze. 169.
Hodges. Up the Chimney. 133.
Holeman. Mercy's Birds. 169.
Holes. Sachar. 29.
Hollyer. Dreamtime. 169.
Holt. Tigers, Frogs, and Rice Cakes. 316.
Home Run. Burleigh. 9
Homesteading. Patent. 141.
Honk! Edwards. 56.
Honoring Our Ancestors. Rohmer. 256.
Hopkins. Lives. 316.
. Sports! Sports! Sports! 204.
Hopkinson. Band of Angels. 204.
Hopper. Cassandra-Live at Carnegie Hall! 17.
Hopping. Wild Weather: Blizzards! 170.
Horace and Morris but Mostly Dolores. Howe.
240.
Horvath. Trolls. 205.
Hossack. Green Mango Magic. 134.
Hot Dog. Coxe. 196.
Hottest Coldest Highest Deepest. Jenkins. 170.
House on Hound Hill. Prince. 70.
House with No Door. Swann. 220.
Houston. Bright Freedom's Song. 170.
How I Spent My Last Night on Earth. Strasser.
219.
How Santa Got His Job. Krensky. 18.
Howard. Gate in the Wall. 316.
Howe, J. Horace and Morris but Mostly
Dolores. 240.
Howe, N. Adventures of Blue Avenger. 240.
Hubbell. Pots and Pans. 17.
Huck. Creepy Countdown. 62.
Hunter, C. Talking with Tebd. 174.
Hunter, M. King's Swift Rider. 134.
Hunter, R. Dig a Tunnel. 317.
Hurwitz. Llama in the Library. 241.
I Have an Olive Tree. Bunting. 310.
I Like Your Buttons! Lamstein. 284.
I Love Trucks! Sturges. 258.
I Miss You, I Miss You! Pohl. 254.
I Once Was a Monkey. Lee. 285.
I Was a Teenage Fairy. Block. 7.
I'm Not Who You Think I Am. Kehret. 243.
I, Too, Sing America. Clinton. 127.
Ice Cream Larry. Pinkwater. 361.
Ice Story. Kimmel. 205.
If I Forget Thee, O Jerusalem. Wolf. 116.
If It Doesn't Kill You. Bechard. 344.
If You Come Softly. Woodson. 77.
If You Could Be My Friend. Boudalika. 89.
Iktomi and the Coyote. Goble. 167.
In Aunt Lucy's Kitchen. Rylant. 181.
In Care of Cassie Tucker. Ruckman. 72.
In My Enemy's House. Matas. 248.
In My Momma's Kitchen. Nolen. 360.
In Search of the Spirit. Hamanaka. 280.
In the Forests of the Night. Atwater-Rhodes.
272.
In the Moonlight Mist. San Souci. 294.
In the Shade of the Nfspero Tree. Bernier-
Grand. 232.
Ingold. Pictures. 62.
Invisible Princess. Ringgold. 255.
Iqbal Masih and the Crusaders against Child
Slavery. Kuklin. 103.
Iron Horses. Kay. 390.
416 
* THE BULLETIN
Isaacs. Cat Up a Tree. 101.
Isadora. ABC Pop! 354.
Issa. Cool Melons-Turn to Frogs! 202.
It Is a Good Day to Die. Viola. 37.
It's About Time! Heide. 281.
It's My Birthday, Too! Jonell. 282.
Jaffe. Cow of No Color. 134.
.Way Meat Loves Salt. 101.
Jake and the Copycats. Rocklin. 144.
Jake Johnson. Seymour. 294.
Jamela's Dress. Daly. 347.
James. Little Green Goose. 399.
Jane on Her Own. Le Guin. 392.
Janey's Girl. Friesen. 95.
Jay. Swimming Lessons. 17.
Jazmin's Notebook. Grimes. 14.
Jazper. Egielski. 94.
Jendresen. Hanuman. 241.
Jenkins. Hottest Coldest Highest Deepest. 170.
.Top of the World. 281.
Jesus' Day Off. Allan. 125.
Joan of Arc. Poole. 27.
Joan of Arc. Stanley. 32.
Joan of Arc of Domremy. Morpurgo. 397.
Joey Pigza Swallowed the Key. Gantos. 95.
John Pig's Halloween. Waldron. 76.
John Willy and Freddy McGee. Meade. 176.
Johnson, A. Gone from Home. 102.
. Heaven. 135.
. Maniac Monkeys on Magnolia Street.
242.
SOther Side. 171.
. Wedding. 242.
Johnson, D. Sunday Week. 354.
Johnson, Scott. Safe at Second. 390.
Johnson, Stephen. City by Numbers. 282.
Jolley. Grunter. 355.
Jonas. Bird Talk. 317.
Jonell. It's My Birthday, Too! 282.
Jones, B. Dance. 171.
Jones, C. Yukon Gold. 355.
Jones, D. Dark Lord of Derkholm. 102.
Jordan. Raging Quiet. 356.
Joseph. Jump Up Time. 172.
Journal of James Edmond Pease. Murphy. 93.
Journal of Joshua Loper. Myers. 249.
Journal of William Thomas Emerson.
Denenberg. 93.
Journeys with Elijah. Goldin. 280.
Jukes. Planning the Impossible. 243.
Jump Up Time. Joseph. 172.
Jumping into Nothing. Willner-Pardo. 297.
Jungle Dogs. Salisbury. 216.
Just Juice. Hesse. 133.
Just Like Floss. Lewis. 104.
Kalman. Next Stop Grand Central. 243.
Kaplan. One More Border. 172.
Kay. Iron Horses. 390.
Kehret. I'm Not Who You Think I Am. 243.
. Shelter Dogs. 283.
Keller. Scrambled States of America. 62.
Kelly. About Twins. 292.
Ketcham. Bach's Big Adventure. 318.
Kevin and His Dad. Small. 328.
Khadige. If You Could Be My Friend. 89.
Kids Guide to the Millennium. Love. 105.
Killer's Cousin. Werlin. 38.
Kimmel, Elizabeth. Ice Story. 205.
Kimmel, Eric. Sword of the Samurai. 283.
. When Mindy Saved Hanukkah. 173.
Kinderlager. Nieuwsma. 177.
King Midas and the Golden Touch. Craft. 236.
King Midas. Stewig. 258.
King of Dragons. Fenner. 166.
King's Swift Rider. Hunter. 134.
King. Quinceafiera. 63.
Kissing Doorknobs. Hesser. 16.
Kitaq Goes Ice Fishing. Nicolai. 177.
Kites. Demi. 348.
Kitoto the Mighty. Mollel. 108.
Knight. Fashion through the Ages. 205.
Knowlton. Nativity. 102.
Kolar. Do You Want to Play? 356.
Koller. One Monkey Too M • 
38.
Korman. 6th Grade Nickname Game. 103.
Koss. Ashwater Experiment. 356.
. Trouble with Zinny Weston. 18.
Kraft. Sensational Trials of the 20th Century.
135.
Krensky. How Santa Got His Job. 18.
Krishnaswami. Shower of Gold. 319.
Kroll. Boston Tea Party. 19.
. Robert Fulton. 283.
Krull. Lives of the Presidents. 19.
. They Saw the Future. 357.
Kuhn. Not Exactly Nashville. 20.
Kuklin. Dance. 171.
S Iqbal Masih and the Crusaders against
Child Slavery. 103.
Kurtz. Storyteller's Beads. 20.
Kvasnosky. Zelda and Ivy and the Boy Next
Door. 357.
La lagartija esmeralda. DeSpain. 385.
LaFaye. Edith Shay. 136.
. Strawberry Hill. 319.
Laird. Secret Friends. 206.
Lakota Hoop Dancer. Left Hand Bull. 391.
Lally. Hive for the Honeybee. 284.
Lamm. Prog Frince. 206.
Lamo-Jim6nez. Emerald Lizard. 385.
Lamstein. I Like Your Buttons! 284.
Landry News. Clements. 346.
Lanning. Rescue at Sea! 388.
Lasky. Emperor's Old Clothes. 244.
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 417
Last Licks. Best. 308.
Last Snake in Ireland. MacGill-Callahan. 246.
Laugh-eteria. Florian. 279.
Lawrence, I. Smugglers. 391.
Lawrence, M. Baby Loves. 391.
Layton. Smile if You're Human. 285.
Le Guin. Jane on Her Own. 392.
Leaving Emma. Brokaw. 233.
Lee. I Once Was a Monkey. 285.
Left Hand Bull. Lakota Hoop Dancer. 391.
Legend of the Lady Slipper. Lunge-Larsen. 394.
Lena. Woodson. 298.
Leo Cockroach... Toy Tester. O'Malley. 360.
Leopold. Once I Was. 207.
Leslie. Flappy Waggy Wiggly. 392.
Lesser. Spots. 320.
Lester, A. Quicksand Pony. 63.
Lester, J. What a Truly Cool World. 207.
. When the Beginning Began. 285.
Let My People Go. McKissack. 137.
Letter to Mrs. Roosevelt. De Young. 237.
Levin. Look Back, Moss. 64.
Levine. Fairy's Mistake. 320.
. Princess Test. 320.
Levitin. Cure. 393.
.Singing Mountain. 173.
Levy, C. Crack in the Clouds. 136.
Levy, J. Totally Uncool. 207.
Lewin. Touch and Go. 393.
Lewis, H. Winnie Mae. 104.
Lewis, J. P. Bookworm's Feast. 244.
. BoshBlobberBosh. 136.
. Doodle Dandies. 20.
Lewis, K. Just Like Floss. 104.
Like Likes Like. Raschka. 292.
Lincoln and Slavery. Burchard. 381.
Lincoln Murder Plot. Zeinert. 334.
Lindquist. Summer Soldiers. 393.
. Wander. 105.
Lisle. Lost Flower Children. 394.
Listening for Leroy. Hearne. 99.
Litchman. All Is Well. 21.
Littke. Haunted Sister. 64.
Little Cliff and the Porch People. Taulbert. 259.
Little Green Goose. Sansone. 399.
Little Shopping. Rylant. 181.
Little Sister, Big Sister. Brisson. 233.
Little. Emma's Magic Winter. 65.
Lively. One Two Three Jump! 358.
Lives of the Presidents. Krull. 19.
Lives. Hopkins. 316.
Llama in the Library. Hurwitz. 241.
Lobel. No Pretty Pictures. 65.
Lockie Leonard, Scumbuster. Winton. 369.
Long Way from Chicago. Peck. 69.
Look Back, Moss. Levin. 64.
Look-AlikesT
. Steiner. 32.
Looking Back. Lowry. 174.
Looking for Alibrandi. Marchetta. 287.
Lorbiecki. Sister Anne's Hands. 105.
Lord of the Fries. Wynne-Jones. 260.
Losing Louisa. Caseley. 196.
Lost Boy and the Monster. Strete. 367.
Lost Boys ofNatinga. Walgren. 37.
Lost Flower Children. Lisle. 394.
Lost in the War. Antle. 5.
Lost Temple of the Aztecs. Tanaka. 184.
Loud Emily. O'Neill. 69.
Loudness of Sam. Proimos. 291.
Lourie. Rio Grande. 286.
Love among the Walnuts. Ferris. 57.
Love. Kids Guide to the Millennium. 105.
Lowry. Looking Back. 174.
Lucky Me. Fiedler. 58.
Lucky Thing. Schertle. 364.
Lucy Dove. Del Negro. 12.
Luenn. Gift for Abuelita. 174.
Lum. What! Cried Granny. 245.
Lunge-Larsen. Legend of the Lady Slipper. 394.
Lunn. Charlotte. 21.
Lurie. Black Geese. 321.
Lynch, C. Extreme Elvin. 208.
_ Whitechurch. 286.
Lyons. Talking with Tebe. 174.
MacDonald. Pickin' Peas. 22.
MacGill-Callahan. Last Snake in Ireland. 246.
Maestro. Story of Clocks and Calendars. 322.
Magic Tree. Echewa. 278.
Magic Windows. Garza. 312.
Magic Words. Field. 58.
Maguire. Good Liar. 247.
Mahy. Summery Saturday Morning. 23.
Malam. Beatrix Potter. 175.
Mama Cat Has Three Kittens. Fleming. 129.
Maniac Monkeys on Magnolia Street. Johnson.
242.
Marchetta. Looking for Alibrandi. 287.
Marianthe's Story One. Aliki. 160.
Marianthe's Story Two. Aliki. 160.
Marisol and Magdalena. Chambers. 162.
Mark Twain and the Queens of the Mississippi.
Harness. 168.
Markle. After the Spill. 395.
Markoe. Day My Dogs Became Guys. 248.
Marrin. Terror of the Spanish Main. 209.
Marsden. Checkers. 66.
. Darkness, Be My Friend. 396.
Marsha Makes Me Sick. Bottner. 196.
Marshall. Swine Lake. 396.
Martha Walks the Dog. Meddaugh. 139.
Martin, J. Snowflake Bentley. 138.
Martin, P. Memory Jug. 107.
Marvin Redpost: Class President. Sachar. 293.
Marx. Meet My Staff. 138.
418 
* THE BULLETIN
Mary Louise Loses Her Manners. Cuneo. 312.
Mary on Horseback. Wells. 184.
Mary Veronica's Egg. Nethery. 211.
Masada. Miklowitz. 108.
Masada. Waldman. 76.
Masoff. Emergency! 209.
Masurel. Christmas Is Coming! 107.
.Too Big! 397.
Matas. In My Enemy's House. 248.
Maynard. Rock River. 66.
Maze. Hobbs. 169.
Mazer. Wild Kid. 108.
McAllister. Clever Cowboy. 137.
McCaughrean. Pirate's Son. 22.
McCully. Mouse Practice. 208.
. Outlaw Thanksgiving. 66.
McDonald. Bone Keeper. 245.
McKay. Dolphin Luck. 358.
.Where's Bear? 175.
McKee. No More Strangers Now. 106.
McKinley. Stone Fey. 22.
McKissack, F. Let My People Go. 137.
McKissack, F., Jr. Black Hoops. 246.
McKissack, P. Let My People Go. 137.
McLaren. Dance for the Land. 247.
McMahon. One Belfast Boy. 395.
McNamee. Hate You. 321.
McPhail. Mole Music. 321.
McVeity. On Different Shores. 106.
Meade. Willy and Freddy McGee. 176.
Meddaugh. Martha Walks the Dog. 139.
Meet My Staff. Marx. 138.
Mei Fuh. Schaeffer. 29.
Mei-Mei Loves the Morning. Tsubakiyama.
331.
Meister. Tiny's Bath. 287.
Memory Jug. Martin. 107.
Menick. Muffin Child. 67.
Mercy's Birds. Holeman. 169.
Merriam. Ten Rosy Roses. 288.
Metzger. Missing Girls. 210.
Michelson. Grandpa's Gamble. 288.
Mightiest Heart. Cullen. 92.
Mikaelsen. Petey. 67.
Miklowitz. Masada. 108.
Miller, B. Dressed for the Occasion. 322.
Miller, S. Winning Every Day. 23.
Mills. Standing Up to Mr. 0. 68.
Minnie and Moo Go Dancing. Cazet. 10.
Minnie and Moo Go to the Moon. Cazet. 10.
Missing Girls. Metzger. 210.
Mockingbird. Ahlberg. 51
Modarressi. Monster Stew. 24.
Mole Music. McPhail. 321.
Mollel. Kitoto the Mighty. 108.
_ 
Shadow Dance. 176.
. Song Bird. 210.
Monkey Tree. Anderson. 125.
Monster Stew. Modarressi. 24.
Monster. Myers. 323.
Montgomery. Snake Scientist. 289.
Moon over Tennessee. Crist-Evans. 347.
Moonstones. Thesman. 33.
Morgenstern. Secret Letters from 0 to 10. 68.
Morpurgo. Escape from Shangri-La. 139.
.Joan of Arc of Domremy. 397.
Morris. Squire, His Knight, & His Lady. 248.
Moses and the Angels. Sobel. 217.
Mosier. My Life as a Girl. 323.
Moss. True Heart. 289.
Mouse Letters. Arnosky. 307.
Mouse Numbers. Arnosky. 307.
Mouse Practice. McCully. 208.
Mouse, Look Out! Waite. 115.
Muffin Child. Menick. 67.
Mummy Mysteries. Guiberson. 203.
Murphy, J. Journal ofJames Edmond Pease. 93.
Murphy, S. Wind Child. 249.
Muscles. Simon. 31.
My Angelica.Williams. 221.
My Bridges of Hope. Bitton-Jackson. 309.
My Day in the Garden. Ford. 238.
My Father's Boat. Garland. 13.
My First Riddles. 24.
My Goose Betsy. Braun. 346.
My Heart Is on the Ground. Rinaldi. 215.
My Life as a Girl. Mosier. 323.
My Name Is Georgia. Winter. 116.
My Own Worst Enemy. Sonenklar. 401.
My Worst Friend. Petersen. 70.
Myers, C. Black Cat. 210.
Myers, W. At Her Majesty's Request. 211.
.Journal of Joshua Loper. 249.
. Monster. 323.
Mystery of the Mammoth Bones. Giblin. 201.
Nadia's Hands. English. 278.
Namioka. Ties That Bind, Ties That Break. 323.
Nanuk. Heinz. 132.
Napoli. Changing Tunes. 24.
. Sirena. 140.
Nash. Forbidden Love. 359.
Nativity. Knowlton. 102.
Navajo Summer. Dewey. 93.
Naylor. Alice on the Outside. 359.
SSang Spell. 176.
. Sweet Strawberries. 250.
Nelson. Empress of Elsewhere. 140.
Nethery. Mary Veronica's Egg. 211.
Neufeld. Boys Lie. 250.
Never Trust a Dead Man. Vande Velde. 297.
New Cat. Choi. 310.
Newest and Coolest Dinosaurs. Currie. 164.
Next Stop Grand Central. Kalman. 243.
Nickle. Ant Bully. 212.
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 419
Nicolai. Kitaq Goes Ice Fishing. 177.
Nielsen. Batty Hattie. 290.
Nieuwenhuizen. Baboon King. 362.
Nieuwsma. Kinderlager. 177.
Nine Man Tree. Peck. 142.
No Dragons for Tea. Pendziwol. 290.
No Man's Land. Bartoletti. 343.
No More Strangers Now. McKee. 106.
No Pretty Pictures. Lobel. 65.
No Time for Mother's Day. Anderson. 271.
No, David! Shannon. 30.
Noah and the Great Flood. Gerstein. 200.
Nobody Else Has to Know. Tomey. 403.
Nobody's Dog. Graeber. 14.
Nodelman. Behaving Bradley. 25.
Nolen. In My Momma's Kitchen. 360.
Normandin. Spirit of the Cedar People. 140.
North American Rain Forest Scrapbook.
Wright-Frierson. 370.
Not Exactly Nashville. Kuhn. 20.
Not Just a Summer Crush. Adler. 50.
Not My Dog. Rodowsky. 256.
Novak. Robobots. 324.
Nowhere to Call Home. DeFelice. 237.
Nye. What Have You Lost? 251.
O'Malley. Leo Cockroach ... Toy Tester. 360.
O'Neill. Loud Emily. 69.
Odd Velvet. Whitcomb. 185.
Off the Road. Bawden. 51.
Oh No, It's Robert. Seuling. 400.
Ohmi. In Search of the Spirit. 280.
Oliver's Fruit Salad. French. 59.
Olson. Ask the Bones. 290.
On Different Shores. McVeity. 106.
On the Home Front. Stalcup. 32.
Once a Wolf. Swinburne. 402.
Once I Was. Leopold. 207.
Once Upon a Company. Halperin. 14.
One Belfast Boy. McMahon. 395.
One Giant Leap. Brown. 126.
One Good Apple. Paladino. 398.
One Monkey Too Many. Koller. 318.
One Moose, Twenty Mice. Beaton. 380.
One More Border. Kaplan. 172.
One Sunday Morning. Heo. 315.
One Two Three Jump! Lively. 358.
Other Shepards. Griffin. 97.
Other Side. Johnson. 171.
Ouch! Babbitt. 161.
Our Neighbor Is a Strange, Strange Man.
Seymour. 216.
Out of the Wilderness. Vanasse. 296.
Outlaw Thanksgiving. McCully. 66.
Over the Edge. Tessendorf. 184.
Paladino. One Good Apple. 398.
Panda's New Toy. Dunbar. 349.
Pankration. Blacklock. 344.
Papa Tembo. Campbell. 10.
Park. Psssst!: It's Me... the Bogeyman. 25
Partridge. Restless Spirit. 141.
Party Girl. Ewing. 57.
Patent. Homesteading. 141.
Patneaude. Framed in Fire. 324.
Paulsen. Brian's Return. 251.
. Soldier's Heart. 26.
Pawns. Roberts. 179.
Paye. Why the Leopard Has Spots. 109
Payne. Seventeenth Child. 28.
Peacock. Crossing the Delaware. 26.
Peanut Butter Party. Charlip. 383.
Peck, Richard. Long Way from Chicago. 69.
Peck, Robert. Cowboy Ghost. 252.
.Nine Man Tree. 142.
Pendziwol. No Dragons for Tea. 290.
Pennebaker. Conditions of Love. 252.
Perilous Journey of the Donner Party. Calabro.
274.
Perloo the Bold. Avi. 87.
Pete's a Pizza. Steig. 146.
Peters. Revenge of the Snob Squad. 27.
. Romance of the Snob Squad. 253.
Petersen. My Worst Friend. 70.
Peterson. Century Farm. 253.
Petey. Mikaelsen. 67.
Petty Crimes. Soto. 31.
Peyton. Snowfall. 212.
Pfetzer. Within Reach. 178.
Philip. War and the Pity of War. 109.
Pickin' Peas. MacDonald. 22.
Pictures. Ingold. 62.
Pierce, R. It's About Time! 281.
Pierce, T. Circle of Magic: Briar's Book. 253.
. Circle of Magic: Daja's Book. 142.
. Protector of the Small. 398.
Pierre's Dream. Armstrong. 379.
Piers. Who's in My Bed? 399.
Pilkey. Captain Underpants and the Attack of
the Talking Toilets. 325.
Pinkney. Ugly Duckling. 231.
Pinkwater. Ice Cream Larry. 361.
.Rainy Morning. 254.
Pioneer Girl. Warren. 150.
Pirate's Son. McCaughrean. 22.
Planning the Impossible. Jukes. 243.
Pohl. I Miss You, I Miss You! 254.
Polyester Grandpa. Freeman. 167.
Poole. Joan of Arc. 27.
Pots and Pans. Hubbell. 17.
Powell. Tribute to Another Dead Rock Star.
291.
Powling. Roald Dahl. 175.
Pressler. Halinka. 178.
Preus. Legend of the Lady Slipper. 394.
Priceman. Emeline at the Circus. 399.
420 
* THE BULLETIN
Prigger. Aunt Minnie McGranahan. 325.
Prince. House on Hound Hill. 70.
Princess Diana. Stammers. 74.
Princess Test. Levine. 320.
Private Lily. Warner. 38.
Prog Frince. Lamm. 206.
Proimos. Loudness of Sam. 291.
Propp. When the Soldiers Were Gone. 213.
Protector of the Small. Pierce. 398.
Psssst!: It's Me... the Bogeyman. Park. 25
Pullman. Clockwork. 143.
. Count Karlstein. 71.
Pumpkin Runner. Arnold. 86.
Purple Mountain Majesties. Younger. 78.
Qualey. Close to a Killer. 213.
Quarles. Door Near Here. 71.
Quattlebaum. Aunt CeeCee, Aunt Belle, and
Mama's Surprise. 361.
Quicksand Pony. Lester. 63.
Quinceafiera. King. 63.
Quintana. Baboon King. 362.
Rabbit Food. Gretz. 352.
Rabbit's Tail. Han. 353.
Raging Quiet. Jordan. 356.
Rainy Morning. Pinkwater. 254.
Raisel's Riddle. Silverman. 217.
Raising Sweetness. Stanley. 218.
Raising Yoder's Barn. Yolen. 151.
Randle. Breaking Rank. 362.
Raschka. Arlene Sardine. 27.
.Like Likes Like. 292.
Rathmann. 10 Minutes till Bedtime. 143.
Ray. T. F. Letters. 28.
Red Flower Goes West. Turner. 404.
Red-Eyed Tree Frog. Cowley. 235.
Reeder. Captain Kate. 214.
Regular Guy. Weeks. 404.
Reich. Clara Schumann. 326.
Relatively Speaking. Fletcher. 312.
Rescue at Sea! Hanel. 388.
Restless Spirit. Partridge. 141.
Revelation of Saint Bruce. Seymour. 73.
Revenge of the Snob Squad. Peters. 27.
Rewind. Sleator. 401.
Rice. Seventeenth Child. 214.
Riches of Oseola McCarty. Coleman. 235.
Riddle Road. Spires. 329.
Rimshots. Smith. 328.
Rinaldi. My Heart Is on the Ground. 215.
Ringgold. Invisible Princess. 255.
Rio Grande. Lourie. 286.
River Town. Geisert. 351.
Roald Dahl. Powling. 175.
Robbins. Autumn Leaves. 179.
Robert Fulton. Kroll. 283.
Roberts. Pawns. 179.
Robins. Teeny Tiny Woman. 72.
Robobots. Novak. 324.
Rock River. Maynard. 66.
Rocklin. Jake and the Copycats. 144.
. Strudel Stories. 326.
Rockwell, A. Bumblebee, Bumblebee, Do You
Know Me? 255.
Rockwell, L. Good Enough to Eat. 215.
Rodowsky. Not My Dog. 256.
Rohmer. Honoring Our Ancestors. 256.
.Magic Windows. 312.
Roman Twins. Gerrard. 59.
Romance of the Snob Squad. Peters. 253.
Root. Aunt Nancy and Cousin Lazybones. 144.
. What Baby Wants. 180.
Rose's Are Red, Violet's Are Blue. Tripp. 368.
Rosen. Rover. 363.
Rosenberry. When Vera Was Sick. 180.
Rosey in the Present Tense. Hawes. 314.
Roth, R. Fishing for Methuselah. 110.
Roth, S. Cinnamon's Day Out. 28.
Rotner. About Twins. 292.
Rotten Teeth. Simms. 145.
Rounds. Beaver. 363.
Rover. Rosen. 363.
Rowan. Big Head! 180.
Rowling. Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone.
110.
Rubinstein. Under the Cat's Eye. 111.
Ruckman. In Care of Cassie Tucker. 72.
Rundown. Cadnum. 382.
Rupp. Dragon of Lonely Island. 145.
Rushmore. Curlee. 236.
Rusty, Trusty Tractor. Cowley. 236.
Ryden. Wild Horses I Have Known. 293.
Rylant. Bless Us All. 216.
. In Aunt Lucy's Kitchen. 181.
. Little Shopping. 181.
Sabuda. ABC Disney. 145.
Sachar. Holes. 29.
. Marvin Redpost: Class President. 293.
Safe at Second. Johnson. 390.
Salisbury. Jungle Dogs. 216.
San Souci, D. In the Moonlight Mist. 294.
San Souci, R. Brave Margaret. 327.
. Cendrillon. 181.
Sang Spell. Naylor. 176.
Sansone. Little Green Goose. 399.
Saratoga Secret. Sterman. 183.
Satellite Down. Thomas. 33.
Sathre. Slender Ella and Her Fairy Hogfather.
294.
Saul. Barn Cat. 111.
Savage. Summer Hawk. 363.
Say. Tea with Milk. 364.
Schaeffer. Mei Fuh. 29.
Schanzer. Gold Fever! 364.
Schecter. Family Haggadah. 257.
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 421
Schenker. Secret Circle. 73.
Schertle. Lucky Thing. 364.
Schmidt. Anson's Way. 327.
Schroeder. Tale of Willie Monroe. 365.
Schwartz. Ask the Bones. 290.
Scieszka. Squids Will Be Squids. 112.
Scrambled States of America. Keller. 62.
Seal Island School. Bartlett. 231.
Sebastian. Winter. 333.
Second Cousins. Hamilton. 97.
Secret Circle. Schenker. 73.
Secret Friend. Dunbar. 349.
Secret Friends. Laird. 206.
Secret Letters from 0 to 10. Morgenstern. 68.
Seidler. Silent Spillbills. 182.
Sensational Trials of the 20th Century. Kraft.
135.
Settel. Exploding Ants. 257.
Seuling. Oh No, It's Robert. 400.
Seventeenth Child. Rice. 214.
Sewall. Green Mist. 365.
Seymour. Jake Johnson. 294.
. Our Neighbor Is a Strange, Strange
Man. 216.
. Revelation of Saint Bruce. 73.
Shadow Dance. Mollel. 176.
Shakespeare. Tales from Shakespeare. 112.
Shannon. No, David! 30.
Shape Up! Adler. 4.
Shelter Dogs. Kehret. 283.
Shipton. What If? 400.
Shipwreck at the Bottom of the World.
Armstrong. 195.
Shower of Gold. Krishnaswami. 319.
Shulevitz. Snow. 182.
Sierra. Tasty Baby Belly Buttons. 366.
Silent Spillbills. Seidler. 182.
Silverman. Raisel's Riddle. 217.
Simmons. Come Along, Daisy! 30.
Simms. Rotten Teeth. 145.
Simon, F. Calling All Toddlers. 217.
Simon, S. Bones. 31.
. Muscles. 31.
. Tornadoes. 295.
Singing Chick. Stenmark. 219.
Singing Mountain. Levitin. 173.
Sirena. Napoli. 140.
Sfs. Fire Truck. 183.
. Tibet. 146.
. Trucks Trucks Trucks. 328.
Sister Anne's Hands. Lorbiecki. 105.
Sit on a Potato Pan, Otis! Agee. 194.
Sitting Ducks. Bedard. 52.
Skellig. Almond. 231.
Skin I'm In. Flake. 166.
Skinner. Thundershine. 366.
Skurzynski. Spider's Voice. 257.
Sky Memories. Brisson. 381.
Sleator. Rewind. 401.
Slender Ella and Her Fairy Hogfather. Sathre.
294.
Sloat. Farmer Brown Goes Round and Round.
295.
Smalls. Kevin and His Dad. 328.
Smart Dog. Vande Velde. 114.
Smile if You're Human. Layton. 285.
Smith, C. Rimshots. 328.
Smith, J. Charlie Is a Chicken. 113.
Smugglers. Lawrence. 391.
Snake Scientist. Montgomery. 289.
Snake That Lived in the Santa Cruz Mountains.
Yamane. 222.
Snow. Shulevitz. 182.
Snow, Snow. Yolen. 77.
Snowfall. Peyton. 212.
Snowflake Bentley. Martin. 138.
So Say the Little Monkeys. Van Laan. 35.
Sobel. Moses and the Angels. 217.
Soft Rain. Cornelissen. 127.
Soldier's Heart. Paulsen. 26.
Something Beautiful. Wyeth. 151.
Sonenklar. My Own Worst Enemy. 401.
Song Bird. Mollel. 210.
Song of the Molimo. Cutler. 55.
Soto. Petty Crimes. 31.
Special Effects. Hamilton. 15.
Spider's Voice. Skurzynski. 257.
Spires. Riddle Road. 329.
Spirit of the Cedar People. Normandin. 140.
Sports! Sports! Sports! Hopkins. 204.
Spots. Lesser. 320.
Spring Tone. Yumoto. 334.
Squids Will Be Squids. Scieszka. 112.
Squire, His Knight, & His Lady. Morris. 248.
Stalcup. On the Home Front. 32.
Stammers. Princess Diana. 74.
Standing Up to Mr. O. Mills. 68.
Stanley, D. Joan of Arc. 32.
. Raising Sweetness. 218.
Stanley, J. Frontier Merchants. 74.
Star of Luis. Talbert. 330.
Stealing Freedom. Carbone. 162.
Steig, J. Handful of Beans. 218.
Steig, W. Pete's a Pizza. 146.
Steiner. Look-AlikesTM. 32.
Stella Louella's Runaway Book. Ernst. 129.
Stella, Star of the Sea. Gay. 313.
Stenmark. Singing Chick. 219.
Sterman. Saratoga Secret. 183.
Steven. Bearer of Gifts. 147.
Stevens. Cook-a-Doodle-Doo! 402.
Stevenson. Candy Corn. 329.
Stewig. King Midas. 258.
Stolz. Casebook of a Private (Cat's) Eye. 367.
422 
* THE BULLETIN
Stone Cold. Hautman. 99.
Stone Fey. McKinley. 22.
Stone Girl, Bone Girl. Anholt. 195.
Story of Clocks and Calendars. Maestro. 322.
Story Painter. Duggleby. 165.
Storyteller's Beads. Kurtz. 20.
Strasser. How I Spent My Last Night on Earth.
219.
Strawberry Hill. LaFaye. 319.
Streets of Gold. Wells. 405.
Strete. Lost Boy and the Monster. 367.
Strudel Stories. Rocklin. 326.
Sturges. Bridges Are to Cross. 147.
.I Love Trucks! 258.
Summer Hawk. Savage. 363.
Summer Soldiers. Lindquist. 393.
Summers. Fourth Wise Man. 148.
Summery Saturday Morning. Mahy. 23.
Sun & Moon. Desimini. 165.
Sunday Week. Johnson. 354.
Sunflower Island. Greene. 202.
Susannah. Hickman. 100.
Suzanne. Get Real. 220.
Swann. House with No Door. 220.
Sweet Strawberries. Naylor. 250.
Swimming Lessons. Jay. 17.
Swinburne. Guess Whose Shadow? 296.
SOnce a Wolf. 402.
Swine Lake. Marshall. 396.
Switchers. Thompson. 34.
Sword of the Samurai. Kimmel. 283.
T. F. Letters. Ray. 28.
Tafuri. Counting to Christmas. 113.
Talbert. Star of Lufs. 330.
Tale I Told Sasha. Willard. 405.
Tale of a Tail. Bodnir. 89.
Tale of Willie Monroe. Schroeder. 365.
Tales from Shakespeare. Shakespeare. 112.
Tales Too Funny to Be True. Daly-Weir. 91.
Tales Too Gross to Be True. Busby. 91.
Tales Too Scary to Be True. Gilson. 91.
Talking with Artists, Volume Three.
Cummings. 276.
Talking with Teb6. Lyons. 174.
Tanaka. Lost Temple of the Aztecs. 184.
Tasty Baby Belly Buttons. Sierra. 366.
Taulbert. Little Cliff and the Porch People. 259.
Taylor, A. Baby Dance. 330.
Taylor, M. Through the Eyes of Your Ances-
tors. 330.
Tea with Milk. Say. 364.
Teeny Tiny Teacher. Calmenson. 53.
Teeny Tiny Woman. Robins. 72.
Telling Time with Big Mama Cat. Harper. 98.
Ten Rosy Roses. Merriam. 288.
Terror of the Spanish Main. Marrin. 209.
Tessendorf. Over the Edge. 184.
Thanksgiving with Me. Willey. 115.
Thesman. Moonstones. 33.
STree of Bells. 403.
They Saw the Future. Krull. 357.
Third Grade Pet. Cox. 198.
This Book Bites! Gower. 388.
This Is Soccer. Blackstone. 274.
This Land Is Your Land. Guthrie. 97.
Thomas, J. Behind the Mask. 148.
Thomas, R. Green Thumb. 368.
_ 
.Satellite Down. 33.
Thompson, J. Brothers. 113.
Thompson, K. Switchers. 34.
Three. Emberley. 128.
Three Golden Oranges. Ada. 378.
Through the Eyes of Your Ancestors. Taylor.
330.
Throw Your Tooth on the Roof. Beeler. 88.
Thunder Bear and Ko. Hazen-Hammond. 315.
Thundershine. Skinner. 366.
Thunderwoman. Wood. 333.
Tibet. Sis. 146.
Ties That Bind, Ties That Break. Namioka. 323.
Tigers, Frogs, and Rice Cakes. Holt. 316.
Tiniest Giants. Dingus. 385.
Tiny's Bath. Meister. 287.
To Bigotry No Sanction. Fisher. 279.
To Every Thing There Is a Season. Bible. 88.
Tolan. Face in the Mirror. 34.
Top of the World. Jenkins. 281.
Tornadoes. Simon. 295.
Tolstoy. Gigantic Turnip. 403.
Tomey. Nobody Else Has to Know. 403.
Too Big! Masurel. 397.
Totally Uncool. Levy. 207.
Touch and Go. Lewin. 393.
Trapped between the Lash and the Gun.
Whitmore. 220.
Trashy Town. Zimmerman. 335.
Tree of Bells. Thesman. 403.
Trembath. Beautiful Place on Yonge Street. 331.
Tribute to Another Dead Rock Star. Powell.
291.
Tripp. Rose's Are Red, Violet's Are Blue. 368.
Trolls. Horvath. 205.
Trouble with Zinny Weston. Koss. 18.
Trucks Trucks Trucks. Sis. 328.
True Heart. Moss. 289.
Tsubakiyama. Mei-Mei Loves the Morning.
331.
Turner. Drummer Boy. 114.
. Red Flower Goes West. 404.
Turtle Clan Journey. Durrant. 277.
Twister. Beard. 308.
Two Suns in the Sky. Bat-Ami. 379.
Ugly Duckling. Andersen. 231.
Un regalo para Abuelita. Luenn. 174.
JULY/AUGUST 1999 
* 423
Unbroken. Haas. 239.
Under the Cat's Eye. Rubinstein. 111.
Up the Chimney. Hodges. 133.
Vail. Friendship Ring: If You Only Knew. 75.
. Friendship Ring: Not That I Care. 148.
. Friendship Ring: Please, Please, Please.
75.
Valentine for Norman Noggs. Gregory. 203.
Van Dyke. Fourth Wise Man. 148.
Van Laan. So Say the Little Monkeys. 35.
. With a Whoop and a Holler. 35.
Van Nutt. Cobtown Christmas. 149.
Vanasse. Out of the Wilderness. 296.
Vande Velde. Coming Evil. 36.
. Ghost of a Hanged Man. 75.
. Never Trust a Dead Man. 297.
. Smart Dog. 114.
Vanishing. Brooks. 309.
Venokur. Amazing Frecktacle. 36.
Ventanas maigicas. Garza. 312.
Very Shy Dog. Bechtold. 232.
Victor. Gerstein. 130.
Viola. It Is a Good Day to Die. 37.
Voake. Here Comes the Train. 149.
Voice from the Border. Hill. 16.
Voices in the Park. Browne. 52.
Waite. Mouse, Look Out! 115.
Waldman. Masada. 76.
Waldron. John Pig's Halloween. 76.
Walgren. Lost Boys of Natinga. 37.
Walk the Dark Streets. Baer. 161.
Wallace. Boy of the Deeps. 297.
Walter Wick's Optical Tricks. Wick. 77.
Wander. Lindquist. 105.
War and the Pity of War. Philip. 109.
Ward. Hare and the Tortoise. 369.
Warner. Private Lily. 38.
Warren. Pioneer Girl. 150.
Way Meat Loves Salt. Jaffe. 101.
We Had a Picnic This Sunday Past. Woodson.
40.
Wedding. Johnson. 242.
Weeks. Regular Guy. 404.
Weirdo's War. Coleman. 92.
Well of Sacrifice. Eboch. 277.
Well of the Wind. Garner. 96.
Weller. Angel of Mill Street. 150.
Wells. Mary on Horseback. 184.
. Streets of Gold. 405.
Werlin. Killer's Cousin. 38.
Weslandia. Fleischman. 386.
Westward Ho, Carlotta! Fleming. 12.
What a Truly Cool World. Lester. 207.
What Baby Wants. Root. 180.
What! Cried Granny. Lum. 245.
What Do Illustrators Do? Christelow. 311.
What Have You Lost? Nye. 251.
What If? Shipton. 400.
What's So Super about the Supernatural?
Gardner. 200.
When Agnes Caws. Fleming. 200.
When I First Came to this Land. Ziefert. 41.
When I Was Your Age, Volume Two. Ehrlich.
351.
When It Starts to Snow. Gershator. 130.
When JFK Was My Father. Gordon. 238.
When Mindy Saved Hanukkah. Kimmel. 173.
When Sophie Gets Angry-Really, Really An-
gry. Bang. 272.
When the Beginning Began. Lester. 285.
When the Chenoo Howls. Bruchac. 8.
When the Soldiers Were Gone. Propp. 213.
When Vera Was Sick. Rosenberry. 180.
Where's Bear? McKay. 175.
While No One Was Watching. Conly. 11.
Whitcomb. Odd Velvet. 185.
White Horse. Grant. 132.
Whitechurch. Lynch. 286.
Whitmore. Trapped between the Lash and the
Gun. 220.
Who Ordered the Jumbo Shrimp? Agee. 124.
Who's in My Bed? Piers. 399.
Why Leopard Has Spots. Paye. 109
Wick. Walter Wick's Optical Tricks. 77.
Wieler. Drive. 332.
Wilbur, F. Dog with Golden Eyes. 39.
Wilbur, R. Disappearing Alphabet. 151.
Wild Boy. Gerstein. 131.
Wild Horses I Have Known. Ryden. 293.
Wild Kid. Mazer. 108.
Wild Weather: Blizzards! Hopping. 170.
Willard. Tale I Told Sasha. 405.
Willey. Thanksgiving with Me. 115.
William Shakespeare & the Globe. Aliki. 271.
Williams, C. My Angelica. 221.
Williams, M. Tales from Shakespeare. 112.
Williams, S. Girls Together. 332.
Williwaw! Bodett. 345.
Willner-Pardo. Jumping into Nothing. 297.
Willy the Dreamer. Browne. 8.
Wilson. Flapjack Waltzes. 39.
Wind Child. Murphy. 249.
Winnie Mae. Lewis. 104.
Winning Every Day. Miller. 23.
Winter. My Name Is Georgia. 116.
. Sebastian. 333.
Wintering. Durbin. 276.
Winton. Lockie Leonard, Scumbuster. 369.
With a Whoop and a Holler. Van Laan. 35.
Within Reach. Pfetzer. 178.
Withrow. Bat Summer. 333.
Wittlinger. Hard Love. 406.
Wolf. If I Forget Thee, O Jerusalem. 116.
Wolkstein. Glass Mountain. 259.
424 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Women of Hope. Hansen. 168.
Wood, N. Thunderwoman. 333.
Wood, T. Ghosts of the West Coast. 406.
Woodson. If You Come Softly. 77.
. Lena. 298.
. We Had a Picnic This Sunday Past. 40.
Worcester. Cowboy with a Camera. 221.
Word Play ABC. Cahoon. 382.
Workshop. Clements. 383.
Wright-Frierson. North American Rain Forest
Scrapbook. 370.
Wyeth. Something Beautiful. 151.
Wynne-Jones. Lord of the Fries. 260.
Xuan. Dragon Lover. 407.
Yamane. Snake That Lived in the Santa Cruz
Mountains. 222.
Yolen. Armageddon Summer. 40.
. Raising Yoder's Barn. 151.
.Snow, Snow. 77.
Yorinks. Harry and Lulu. 370.
You Are Here. Crews. 163.
You Gotta Try This! Cobb. 311.
Young, K. Beetle and Me. 260.
Young, R. Game Day. 152.
Younger. Purple Mountain Majesties. 78.
Your Name Is Ren&e. Cretzmeyer. 384.
Yukon Gold. Jones. 355.
Yumoto. Spring Tone. 334.
Zack. Bell. 380.
Zeinert. Lincoln Murder Plot. 334.
Zeitlin. Cow of No Color. 134.
Zelda and Ivy and the Boy Next Door.
Kvasnosky. 357.
Zemser. Beyond the Mango Tree. 222.
Ziefert. When I First Came to this Land. 41.
Zimmerman. Trashy Town. 335.
Zzzng! Zzzng! Zzzng! Gershator. 60.
Saying goodbye to some-
one you love is always
hard. Saying goodbye
when someone you love
dies is perhaps the hardest
thing of all. With simple
text and evocative illustra-
tions, this book explores
the pain and grief of say-
ing goodbye. Even more
important, The Goodbye Boat provides a message of hope that
sadness will ease and that death is not the end.
THE GOODBYE 
BOAT
Written by Mary Joslin
Illustrated by Claire St. Louis Little
SITeach
Teaching
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
Every issue of Teaching K-8
S3--·- 
0 
provides informative articles on
ITF si 
' 
the cutting edge of education.
ou'll also find insightful
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
rorn't· rmce rllt on 
thi 
Il 
-Alh l
l.JVrlIt L 
CLttO3 
VUL 
IA Lttt- 
¥ 
tII~ 
•.
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
TeachngK-8
>x 54808, Boulder, CO 80322-4808
-8793
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
II
S"An emotio
of love, rec
in rural err
of the centu
IL 4L La e Lurn
-Publishers Weekly (starred review)
"[A] beautifully written novel, which has
fresh and utterly believable dialogue and a
wonderful cast of characters." -ALA Bookst
*"Children will unabashedly claim it as
their own." -The 
Horn Book (starred review)
"This cheery romp is perfect for toddlers."
-School 
Library journal
"Imbued with the roar of machines
_a .
.
.
.
.
. _ 
m
opportunities for souna effects,
s will gun toddlers' motors."
e Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
3 up. 24 pp. 
* RTE $14.95/0-688-16276-2
reenwillow BookS A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.williammorrow.com
M
ales
of
Hope
and
WILLIAM
BRADFORD
Plymouth's
Faithful Pilgrim
Written by Gary D. Schmidt
"Schmidt paints a warm and
cohesive picture of William
Bradford."
-
KIRKUS REVIEWS
Ages 10 and up * 211 pages
63 photos
Hardcover 
ISBN 0-8028-5151-7
* $18.00
Paperback 
ISBN 0-8028-5148-7
S$10.00
At your bookstore,
or call 800-253-7521
FAX: 616-459-6540
E-mal: sales@eerdmoas.com 
A
PRINCESS
KA'IULANI
Hope of a Nation,
Heart of a People
Written by Sharon Linnea
A photobiography of the most
beloved figure in Hawaiian his-
tory and her heroic fight for
Hawaiian independence
Ages 10 and up * 252 pages
S97 photos
Hardcover 
ISBN 0-8028-5145-2
S$18.00
Paperback • ISBN 0-8208-5088-X
1 $10.00
0.22 
EERDMANS BOOKS
T 
for Young Readers
Si 
Grand Rapids/Cambridge
impnintofWM. B. BFERDMANS PUBLISHING CO.
%uuragdC
"Will fascinate kids."
"A year after the Great Crash,
Frankie's widower father has lost
everything and commits suicide.
The girl is to go to live with her
aunt in Chicago, but... disguises
herself as a boy, and hops a freight
to freedom ... Those seeking out
tales on unfamiliar aspects of the
Depression -
or a different kind
of survival story -
will find it
engaging." -Kirkus 
Reviews
"A solid addition to the growing
body of fiction for middle graders
set during this time period."
-*School Library Journal
*"DeFelice's 
historical novel
is so real, we feel every bump
of the train. The smooth, vivid
writing makes the reader feel
the unfolding events and the
nitty-gritty details right along
with the characters."
-Starred, 
Booklist
"The theme of running away as
a rite of passage plays out well,
bringing Frances more painful
loss but also courage and resolve
as she returns to the prospect
of a real home. The story is a
good adventure, presenting
Nowhere to
Call Home
by Cynthia
DeFelice
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
New 
from 
the 
Ceter 
fo 
Childen's
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling audio-
and videotapes
EDITED BY JANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Add to your library this vital compendium of
material not regularly reviewed in other pub-
lications. Designed to be a tool for selection
and collection development, the first volume
of The Bulletin Storytelling Review contains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of
tapes by storytellers such as Joe Bruchac,
Len Cabral, Donald Davis, Barbara
McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and Laura
Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level infor-
mation for each review
* Ordering information for each distributor
listed
* An index that allows readers to search for
tapes by type of story or possible use
>0-
7K 1K
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages; paper; $14.95
plus shipping
Available now from The Graduate School of
Library and Information Science Publications
Office, University of Illinois at Urbana-Cham-
paign, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL
61820 * Phone: (217) 333-1359 * Fax: (217)
244-7329 E-mail: puboff@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
* http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff (Prepayment
required: VISA, MasterCard, American Ex-
press, Discover, and checks payable to "The
University of Illinois"; students, bookstores,
and wholesalers receive a ten percent dis-
count.)
0 36I 
1I I8)ll :1111 
1 llI
0008-9036(199907/08)52:11*; 1 -R
t r~~
.#
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
r· 
~:
WA
:~:: 'F~6~1Y"~
