T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
November 2006
Vol. 60   No. 3
A Look InsIde
T  h  e   B  u  l  l  e  T  i  n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
November 2006
Vol. 60   No. 3
111  The Big PicTure
 
 The Runaway Dinner  by Allan Ahlberg; illus. by Bruce Ingman
112  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
112  • The Astonishng Live of Octavian Nothing, Traitor to the Nation:  The Pox  
 
 Party by M. T. Anderson
117  • Boo’s Dinosaur  by Betsy Byars; illus. by Erik Brooks
126  • River Secrets  by Shannon Hale
148  • Moses:  When Harriet Tubman Led Her People to Freedom  by Carole Bos- 
 
 ton Weatherford; illus. by Kadir Nelson
151  • Dizzy  by Jonah Winter; illus. by Sean Qualls
154  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
155  suBjeCt And use Index
110 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only.  Recommended for the   
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Loretta Gaffney, Reviewer (LG)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann
Melissa Zilic
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $80.00; combined print & electronic $112.00; multiple 
institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $50.00; 
students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $13.20 per subscription for postage; 
subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $9.35. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm 
from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in 
microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks 
should be made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals 
Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. 
FAX: 410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.
edu/journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: 
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2006 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Bruce Ingman from The Runaway Dinner  ©2006.  Used by permission of Candle-
wick Press.
novemBer 2006 • 111
the BIg PICture
The Runaway Dinner
by Allan Ahlberg; illustrated by Bruce Ingman
There’s no shortage of food-escape stories in children’s literature, but most of them 
belong to the ever-expanding family of “The Gingerbread Boy” variants, which 
have allowed just about every baked good around the planet to hit the road in one 
picture book or another. In The Runaway Dinner, however, the estimable British 
author Allan Ahlberg eschews both folklore and specific food focus, instead creat-
ing an invitingly absurd tale of an entire dinner, from the food on the plate to the 
plate and even the table beneath it, on the lam.
It all starts with an unsuspecting and ordinary boy (“Banjo, his name 
was,” the narration says musingly, “yes, Banjo Cannon”), who sits down, knife and 
fork in hand, ready to dig into his dinner sausage. However, the sausage (“Melvin, 
his name was”) darts off the plate, followed by vegetables, utensils, plate, table, 
and chair, and Banjo, being a “hungry little boy,” of course follows his fleeing 
victuals, while his parents and cat come pounding after Banjo, and the whole lot 
of them go traipsing through the park. Some dinner elements escape, disappear 
down bystanders’ throats, become part of other park pastimes, and otherwise bow 
out of the chase, and a tired Melvin-the-sausage finally slows down sufficiently 
for Banjo to have him within his reach—only to be told by his mother, “Don’t 
eat that, it’s been on the ground!” Banjo does at least get to return home to a nice 
plum pie, “named Joyce on this particular occasion,” but then it looks like Joyce 
too has wanderlust . . . 
What makes this tale so hilarious isn’t just the footloose and fancy-free 
foodstuffs, though. Ahlberg, who has demonstrated a knack for blending the quo-
tidian with the absurd in works ranging from the Gaskitt family chronicles (The 
Woman Who Won Things, BCCB 6/02) to his Bert stories (The Adventures of Bert, 
BCCB 9/01), here uses the mundane to take a funny story into the loopy strato-
sphere. It’s not just a sausage, it’s a sausage named Melvin, a trio of peas named 
Percival (eaten by a pigeon), Paul (eaten by a duck), and Peter (who disappears, 
to be found by keen-eyed audience members); it’s sweetly ludicrous details like 
Melvin’s dutiful waiting for the “Walk” signal before bolting across the crosswalk 
into the park, the athletic table’s effect on some admiring park benches, and the 
French fries’ slipping off to watch a baseball game. The constant personification of 
the inanimate objects is funny enough in its own right, but Ahlberg also has an ear 
for names that are humorous without being desperately comedic. His storytelling 
style is confiding and personal, laden with oralisms, but he relates the events with 
a dry matter-of-factness that’s sure to tickle audiences.
The text finds a perfect partner in Bruce Ingman’s illustrations; the naïve, 
childlike draftsmanship of the acrylic daubs keeps oversophistication at bay, sug-
112 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
gesting instead some nursery rhyme gone strange in its procession of spider-legged 
comestibles, implements, and furniture all trotting merrily over the sidewalks and 
through the park. The elemental faces adorning tidbits and tableware are no less 
detailed than those on the people; in fact, many human extras appear in back view 
or line drawings only, making it clear that peas outrank picnickers in this landscape. 
Movement is constant throughout but decorous, befitting the pace of vegetables, 
and the text contributes as much as the illustrations, with shifts in font size and 
layout paced with strategic line breaks. 
The appeals here are numerous—there’s food, there’s a folklorically cu-
mulative chase, there are sentient objects—and they’re all wrapped up in a tale with 
an intoxicating blend of down-to-earth and eccentric charm, which is bound to 
make this roundly popular with readaloud audiences. They'll find it so hilarious, 
in fact, that it will likely leave them returning with breathless hope to their own 
dinner tables, prodding their meals in fond and forlorn hope of adventure. (See 
review, p. 112, for publication information.)
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
AhlBerg, AllAn The Runaway Dinner; illus. by Bruce Ingman. Candlewick, 
2006 40p
ISBN 0-7636-3142-6 $15.99    
R 4-7 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 111, for review.
Anderson, M. T. The Astonishing Life of Octavian Nothing, Traitor to the Nation: 
The Pox Party. Candlewick, 2006 351p
ISBN 0-7636-2402-0 $17.99   
R* Gr. 8-12
West African princess Cassiopeia, pregnant and enslaved at fourteen, was brought to 
the American colonies, where she resides with her son, Octavian (our narrator), in 
the house of Mr. Gitney. Gitney, a member of a consortium of science enthusiasts 
(the Novanglian College of Lucidity), affords them a life of astonishing privilege 
and comfort; Cassiopeia is celebrated for her beauty and acts as hostess at his soirees, 
and Octavian is given a classical education that would be the envy of well-to-do 
white children. Make no mistake though, they are slaves, and as Gitney’s chattel 
they are the subjects of the College’s studies into the mysterious nature of “Homo 
Afri.” Through minute observation of every observable aspect of his subject’s lives, 
Gitney hopes to establish that Africans are as fully human as Caucasians, but the 
scope of the consortium’s research takes a malicious turn when hostilities escalate 
between the British and Patriots. The ensuing economic crisis forces Gitney to 
accept a new benefactor, Mr. Sharpe, who is bent on making the consortium’s 
research profitable and on proving that Africans are a debased race. The setting, 
Boston on the eve of the Revolution, is more than a piquant backdrop. The for-
novemBer 2006 • 113
tunes of Boston directly affect Octavian—from the smallpox inoculation “party” 
(deviously hosted so that slaves of the gentry can be kept under observation when 
rumors of uprising circulate) that claims his mother’s life, to the slaves’ faith in the 
British Army to offer them freedom in exchange for military service. Octavian’s 
narration (supplemented by fictional documentation), at first glance dense and 
somewhat arcane, nonetheless quickly draws readers into its almost musical flow, 
and the relentless action and plot turns are powerful motivators. Throughout the 
tense, heart-wrenching plotting, Anderson continually addresses a host of Big 
Themes, e.g.: Can there be love where there is no freedom? Do scientists discover 
only what they expect to find? Will everyone abandon their integrity for the right 
price? A second volume will pick up Octavian’s adventures as he flees to the British 
side with a renegade member of the College.  EB
BATeson, cATherine The Boyfriend Rules of Good Behavior. Holiday House, 
2006 181p
ISBN 0-8234-2026-4 $16.95   
R Gr. 6-9
Life changes for Millie when first her household breaks up—her mother’s friend, 
Sheri, and Sheri’s son move in with Sheri’s new boyfriend—and then her mother 
takes a new job in a distant town, forcing Millie to move away from her friends. Just 
when Millie’s settling in at her new school, Mum throws Millie another curve by 
falling for a co-worker, forcing Millie to deal for the first time with a boyfriend in 
her mother’s life. This isn’t really a problem novel, though, so much as a chronicle 
of Millie’s year of change, and it’s a quietly effective one. Bateson (author of Rain 
May and Captain Daniel, BCCB 9/03) writes with offbeat Australian charm that 
ensures the quotidian details of Millie’s life are never dull. Millie’s discussions with 
her friends on the topic of parental boyfriends are funny and brutally honest, 
and the book is stronger for avoiding contrived drama: Millie takes fairly readily 
to Mum’s boyfriend, who encourages her nascent photography skills, while her 
own brief crush on a boy in her class dies an early but natural death. The book's 
everyday-life appeal and generally upbeat and pragmatic viewpoint will make it a 
welcome alternative to darker dramas of teenagers in upheaval.  DS
BeATy, AndreA When Giants Come to Play; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. Abrams, 
2006 32p
ISBN 0-8109-5759-0  $16.95   
Ad 4-6 yrs
Anna’s a lucky girl, because sometimes a pair of giants comes to play with her. To-
gether they enjoy games of hide and seek (Anna hides in a giant’s pocket), marbles 
(the giants use a soccer ball as marble), and catch (Anna is tossed back and forth 
between giants); there are also quieter pleasures, such as picking peaches (the giants 
pull the trees out of the ground) and playing dolls with Anna’s sister (in a witty 
reinterpretation of the phrase, the giants aren’t playing with dolls but playing with 
Anna’s sister as a doll). The text sometimes wanders off amid pretty phrases when 
additional giant action would be more desirable; this is also more a sequence of 
scenes than a story, with a fairly arbitrary ending (Anna’s excited this time because 
the giants might stay, but honestly, a giant visit seems cause enough for celebra-
tion in its own right). Hawkes puts an absurdity into his soft-textured charcoal 
and acrylic illustrations that cuts the sweetness of the text and offers a tempered 
boisterousness that gets straight to the basic thrill of having a pair of humongous 
playmates. While the giants’ pop-eyes sometimes push their demeanors from friendly 
114 • The BulleTin
to freaky, the oversized pair generally sports beaming kidlike countenances while 
little Anna seems easygoing and self-possessed, much the savviest of the three. 
It’s too bad these characters weren’t offered more of a story, but fans of Nolen’s 
Big Jabe (BCCB 9/00) and other gigantic tales may appreciate this account of a 
maximum-size day out.  DS
Beddor, FrAnk The Looking Glass Wars. Dial, 2006 358p
ISBN 0-8037-3153-1 $17.99   
M Gr. 7-10
Trading on the public imagination that has embraced the “real” stories behind 
beloved childhood fantasies such as Peter Pan and The Wizard of Oz, Beddor 
undertakes to reinvent Wonderland. Seven-year-old Alyss Heart witnesses the 
death of her mother in a blood-soaked coup by her aunt Redd and plunges into 
the Pool of Tears with her faithful bodyguard, Hatter Madigan. Separated from 
Madigan en route, Alyss ends up in Victorian England, where she eventually finds 
herself in the improbable position of adopted daughter of the Liddells and fiancé 
to Prince Leopold, while Madigan travels the globe for thirteen years in search 
of her whereabouts. When he does find her, they return to Wonderland to lead 
the loyal resistance in overthrowing the vicious Redd. If this story were even the 
least bit self-conscious, it might achieve the level of mediocre camp, but Beddor 
manages to strip the Wonderland of anything like self-reflexive wit, opting instead 
for an attempted pathos that utterly misses its mark. Readers are supposed to feel 
sorry, for instance, for the dead playing-card soldiers, remembering that they were 
“beings who laughed, cried, or rejoiced, or had loved ones waiting for them at 
home.” Writing is slow and talky yet the characters and scenes have videogame 
sensibilities: the Cheshire cat is transformed into a hypermuscular, nine-lived as-
sassin, Redd’s playing-card soldiers have a metal carcass that renders them nearly 
invincible (their transformation is illustrated, just to add to the pain), and Hatter 
Madigan is morbidly efficient with his cadre of ninja-like weaponry concealed in 
his hat and cuffs. Meanwhile, Alyss and her Wonderland sweetheart, Dodge, are 
as dully two-dimensional as Carroll’s characters are wittily so. As a result, Beddor 
misses his audience entirely: Alice fans will be awash in misery and betrayal, fantasy 
fans won’t find characters to care about, and gamers likely won’t make the nearly 
400-page commitment to noninteractive slow-paced thrills.  KC
Berkeley, Jon The Palace of Laughter: The Wednesday Tales No. 1; illus. by Brandon 
Dorman. Andrews/HarperCollins, 2006 427p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-075508-3 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-075507-5 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Miles Wednesday has escaped the orphanage where he was left as an infant, and 
he lives quite contentedly on his own with his stuffed bear, Tangerine. When a 
tiger shows up near the barrel Miles calls home and observes that Miles smells of 
the circus, Miles is determined to find out whether the tiger was a dream—he 
talked, after all—or does in fact belong to the strange circus that has rolled into 
town. Sneaking into the circus, Miles meets an intriguing young performer named 
Light, who is being held captive by the evil circus master, who threatens Miles as 
well. Miles gives the circus master the slip and sets Light free, and they set off to 
find her companion, who has been taken to a mysterious place called the Palace of 
Laughter. Berkeley handles his complicated fantasy plot with quiet dexterity, pulling 
in odd characters and surprising twists that all become necessary and useful in his 
novemBer 2006 • 115
theatrical climax. Miles has his most familiar antecedent in Huck Finn; like Huck, 
he inhabits contradictions that are nicely accessible to a young audience. He enjoys 
living alone in his barrel, for instance, but longs for a friend, and while he is not 
above lying and fighting, he has a keen moral compass and a strong sense of loyalty 
and justice. Most chapters start with a précis of Miles’ immediate conditions and 
circumstances, as in “Miles Wednesday, sleep-muddled and blanket-warmed,” or 
“Miles Wednesday, bruised, bemused and bearless,” keeping readers focused through 
the long but well-paced narrative. Provocative loose ends leave unfinished business 
for a sequel, and the characters are well constructed and likable enough to ensure 
that readers look forward to another Wednesday tale.  KC 
Block, FrAncescA liA Psyche in a Dress. Cotler/HarperColllins, 
2006 116p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-076373-6 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-076372-8 $15.99   
R Gr. 9-12
If the gods of Greek mythology lived today, entrenched in Californian culture and 
modern day mores, how would they be different? Block explores this question in 
this verse novel wherein Psyche, manipulated by her father and abandoned by her 
mother, finds her contemporary Eros in a man who creeps into her bed at night 
and, despite their passionate relationship, refuses to reveal himself. After Psyche 
glimpses Eros and he leaves her, she recognizes that she can only win him back by 
undergoing significant struggles, a purgatory, to remedy her sin. All of the gener-
osity, cruelty, and creativity of the Greek gods and goddesses are present, but now 
Hades is a sadistic and obsessive businessman, Aphrodite’s obsession with her own 
beauty is tempered only by her appreciation of her successful clothing line, and 
Orpheus falls prey to a different siren, heroin. The first-person narration in the 
poems conveys Psyche’s agonized, and sometimes skewed, perspective faithfully; 
these evocative free-verse poems are interspersed with equally lyrical prose descrip-
tions that provide back stories for the complex characters. Psyche’s journey towards 
reconciliation with Eros is viscerally painful; true love comes easy to no one in this 
elegant novel. Readers who have suffered at the confusing and sometimes brutal 
altar of teenage relationships will find the suggestion that a perfect instant can be 
as meaningful as a lifetime of unconsidered contentment to be a powerful idea, 
and they will also take comfort in Psyche’s eventual romantic reconnection. The 
glimpses into the various characters may pique some readers’ interest in mythology, 
but most will be content to let Block’s cast exist as they are, flawed, otherworldly, 
and independent of their earlier iterations.  AS
Bloor, edwArd London Calling. Knopf, 2006 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93635-1 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83635-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 7-10
Legacies have been the bane of thirteen-year-old Martin’s life: he’s called Martin (his 
middle name) after his grandfather, whose achievements are the family benchmark 
and his personal curse, and he’s bullied at school by Hank Lowery, great-grandson 
of the school’s founder, General “Hollerin’” Hank Lowery. Martin learns more 
about both scions when an antique radio left him by his late grandmother proves 
to open a time portal, allowing Martin to go back to London during the Battle of 
Britain; there he roams the street with an East End boy named Jimmy and overhears 
116 • The BulleTin
information that suggests the heroes of the past were not so heroic, information 
that Martin is determined to bring to light in the present. This is an interesting and 
complex concept, but its parts never really come together: Martin’s home dramas 
are foggily depicted, with little emotional impact, and the shift of focus to Jimmy’s 
story squanders the energy the school story needs for its conclusion without bring-
ing in any suspense of its own. The London plot heedlessly and implausibly throws 
together West End and East End developments, and Jimmy is more an expository 
device for history and geography than a believable East End kid. Martin’s travels 
and growing closeness with his alcoholic father offer some genuine human develop-
ment, but it’s largely overshadowed by the dull overarching plots. Readers will be 
better off with the author's classic Tangerine (BCCB 3/97).  DS
BogAerT, hArMen MeynderTsz vAn den Journey into Mohawk Country; il-
lus. by George O’Connor and Hilary Sycamore. First Second/Roaring Brook, 
2006 144p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59643-106-7 $17.95   
R Gr. 5-12
In 1634, an employee of the Dutch West India Company volunteered to find out 
the reason beaver-pelt trade at Fort Orange (present-day Albany) was taking a nose-
dive. Bogaert and two companions, Willem and Jeromus, took a six-week journey 
to meet with their former Indian suppliers and learn the truth behind rumors of 
a new trading alliance that seemed to be undercutting business. O’Connor takes 
Bogaert’s terse record of the journey and creates not only a literal pictorial render-
ing of their adventures in graphic-novel format but fleshes it out with credible, if 
speculative, subplots that play out only in the full-color sequential art. Graphic-
novel format is, admittedly, an unusual choice for reproducing a colonial document, 
but O’Connor brings it off with panache. Working within the comic-book idiom, 
star-of-his-own-story Bogaert is the bright-eyed, Doonesbury-esque sharp guy, his 
sidekicks are tall-and-lean and short-and-round, and most of the workaday Indians 
encountered are heavy-browed and solemn, except when they’re snickering or fore-
head-slapping over the white guys’ ineptitude on the trail. Arenias, the Sinneken 
leader who ultimately saves their financial bacon and guides them back to Fort 
Orange, gets the role of superhero with his pumped-up muscles, brilliant-toothed 
smile, unshakable benevolence, and possession of the beautiful, loving wife whom 
Bogaert has been lusting after. O’Connor’s particular skill lies in taking a snippet 
of the translated historical journal (e.g., “We came at one hour into the evening 
to a cabin one half mile from the first castle. No one was there but women”) and, 
while remaining true to the known course of events, launching a visual backstory 
(e.g., in which Willem gets himself a girlfriend) rife with humor or tension. The 
1634 encounter captures a moment in early Indian/white contact when, although 
disease had insinuated itself into native communities, the two races still met as 
equals at the pelt bargaining table, confused and skeptical of each other’s customs, 
but knowing a good deal when they saw one. Notes on geography and sources are 
included, as is a glossary of terms.  EB
Brown, don The Notorious Izzy Fink. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2006 [160p]
ISBN 1-59643-139-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-8
Red-haired Sam Glodsky, son of a Jewish father and Irish mother, has one foot in 
each of two worlds in 1899 New York, with various street gangs either accepting or 
novemBer 2006 • 117
targeting him, depending on how they choose to identify his cultural roots on any 
given day. Izzy Fink, though, is his sworn enemy, a streetwise scrapper who never 
passes up an opportunity to raise his fists to Sam. When a shipload of cholera-
stricken immigrants is quarantined in the harbor, gangster Monk Eastman enlists 
the aid of both boys to heist a prize racing pigeon from the vessel and insists they 
work the job together. When the pigeon is successfully delivered, Izzy takes the 
credit; when the pigeon turns up with a broken wing, Izzy’s life isn’t worth a wooden 
nickel and he begs Sam’s help in spiriting him away from the vengeful Eastman. 
Much of the early story reads like little more than a set-up to the extended chase 
scenes on tenement rooftops and in underground dives, and Brown doesn’t make 
much of the inherent tension of a looming cholera epidemic. Ambient details of the 
gritty immigrant ghettos and children’s desperation and resourcefulness in scraping 
up a few penny’s worth of work each day are involving, though, as are the salty 
language and the mingling of such real life characters as Eastman, muckraker Jacob 
Riis, pathologist Hermann Biggs, and corrupt Police Chief Devery in the fictional 
mayhem. A closing note supplies needed background, biography, and observations 
on the problem of accurately capturing street kids’ colloquialisms.  EB
ByArs, BeTsy Boo’s Dinosaur; illus. by Erik Brooks. Holt, 2006 [48p]
ISBN 0-8050-7958-0 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 1-3
When a dinosaur follows dinosaur-loving Boo home, she understandably wants 
to keep it, and she’s thrilled that her parents grant her permission. Having a dino-
saur colors Boo’s days—her library books are chosen with the dinosaur in mind, 
she jumps on the bed so that the dinosaur can see her through the window—but 
eventually her pet must move on, leaving an understanding but sad Boo enriched 
by the possession of the dinosaur’s magic cape. Though early readers are literal-
minded enough that they may be confused by the book’s bald denial of the dino-
saur’s imaginary status and his appearance in the illustrations in light of his clear 
membership in Boo’s make-believe world, this is an enticing topic that makes for a 
change from usual easy readers about pairs of friends. In fact, the real focus here is 
Boo’s relationship with her older brother, Sammy, who’s her frequent companion, 
exasperated audience for her flights of fancy, and ally against the grownups; siblings 
in particular will recognize the authenticity of their exchanges. As she did in My 
Brother, Ant (BCCB 02/96), Byars cleverly uses the strictures of the easy reader 
to humorous advantage, threading repetition through the dialogue for believable 
and funny sibling exchanges, ensuring the streamlined text percolates along. The 
cartoon-flavored illustrations make pig-tailed Boo awfully cute, but her inclina-
tion to stump around in oversized galoshes attests to her mettle, and the doe-eyed 
dinosaur is even higher on the cute scale. Beginning readers will find it hard to resist 
this simply written yet funny early reader with its dinosaur bonus.  DS
chAe, in seon How Do You Count a Dozen Ducklings?; illus. by Seung Ha 
Rew. Whitman, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-8075-1718-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Mama Duck is taken aback to find she’s laid a full dozen eggs, each of which turns 
into a sunny little duckling. Twelve is a large number for an anxious mother to count 
quickly, so she sorts the ducklings into six groups of two so she only has to count 
118 • The BulleTin
to six; she subsequently pares down her counting further by sorting her offspring 
into four groups of three, then three groups of four, and finally two groups of six. 
A hungry old wolf hears the “one, two” count and figures he’s a match for two 
ducklings, but he’s routed by the defensive dozen. The text in this Korean import 
vacillates rather disconcertingly between verse and prose, but it waddles perkily 
along nonetheless; the reiteration of the numbers adds rhythm and structure and 
also provide some appealing possibilities for arithmetic curricula. Rew’s mixed-media 
illustrations are the real showpiece here: figures are drafted with characterful ink 
lines and texture-rich chalky pigments, then cut and layered against swaths of paper 
background. Each little golden duckling is an individual, so viewers will relish find-
ing their favorites in spread after spread (the grumpy kid with the downy flat-top 
is likely to be first recognized). This would pair nicely not only with other ducky 
stories but also with a ducky song—perhaps “Six Little Ducks” sung twice?  DS 
clArk, JoAn Snow; illus. by Kady MacDonald Denton. Groundwood/House 
of Anansi, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-88899-712-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Snow is indeed a wondrous thing, so Sammy is thrilled one morning to find “thick 
snow falling” outside his window; what’s more, it goes on and on for days, only 
stopping after a month. Sammy ventures out daily into the snow-covered world, 
where houses are snow mountains topped with smoke curling from their chimneys, 
and imagines all the fascinating scenes that might be taking place under the disguis-
ing blanket of snow—until finally the snow disappears, leaving Sammy imagining 
the spring to come. The prose style’s quiet simplicity is stealthily inviting, mirror-
ing the soft invitation of a snowfall, and the story evokes exactly that promise of 
transformation snow always seems to offer; unfortunately, the literal fulfillment 
of the wonderment lacks the suppressed excitement of the suspense about what 
might be, and the plot flattens into a vignette of imagined scenes that provides 
little payoff. Denton exerts superb control over her art, moving from soft-toned 
watercolors with casual yet careful line in the indoor scenes to drama in the outdoor 
views; touches of charcoal and oil up the palette ante, and raw scratchboard effects 
and fresco-esque textures of dappled cross-media reactions add luminous richness 
(the view of the Northern Lights, with their streaky verticals shooting through a 
rainbow night sky, is a grand depiction of that strange phenomenon). Perkins’ Snow 
Music (BCCB 12/03) still reigns supreme among books of snowy worlds, but this 
delicate fantasy will please many young snow fans.  DS
coleMAn, JAneT wyMAn Secrets, Lies, Gizmos, and Spies: A History of Spies and Es-
pionage; by Janet Wyman Coleman and The International Spy Museum. Abrams, 
2006 113p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8109-5756-6 $24.95   
Ad Gr. 6-10
This breezy compendium of espionage describes incidences of spying through the 
ages and across the globe, on the way showcasing spying tools and techniques ranging 
from cipher rings to suicide-pill eyeglasses. The book is divided into sections, with 
a spread or two on several topics, events, or people related (sometimes tangentially) 
to the section focus; pithy quotes, sidebars with informational tidbits, and images of 
artifacts, devices, or participants add browsable flavor to the spreads. The material 
itself is juicy and intriguing, laced with quotes from the figures chronicled, even as 
novemBer 2006 • 119
the book makes an overall case for the strategic necessity of espionage. Unfortunately, 
the organization is difficult to discern from mere context, and there’s neither table 
of contents nor index to help; the writing is sometimes unclear and information 
often doled out awkwardly, with references appearing pages before their explana-
tion. It’s still an appealing subject in a lively format, and it would be a natural 
partner to Newcomb’s The Master Spy Handbook (BCCB 1/06) and Janeczko’s 
Top Secret: A Handbook of Codes, Ciphers, and Secret Writing (BCCB 5/04), which 
will provide readers with the how-to to go with the history here. A glossary and a 
timeline open the book.  DS
deAcon, Alexis While You Are Sleeping; written and illus. by Alexis Deacon. Far-
rar, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-374-38330-8 $16.50   
Ad 2-4 yrs
In this nocturnal narrative, bedside toys confirm what most people already suspect: 
when kids sleep, toys get active. In fact, they have quite the mission, checking 
the room out thoroughly for unspecified nasties, rearranging the covers for the 
sleeper’s comfort, ensuring their charge doesn’t wake when Santa passes through 
the house. The text is somewhat vague, especially in its conclusion, but there’s a 
pleasing management of rhythm in the phraseology; audiences will particularly 
enjoy the confidential feeling of the first-person plural address and the touches 
of humor (“Bedbugs won’t bite. We squish them flat”). Pages in soft browns and 
smoky pastel shadings over the strokes of paint confer a sleep-blurred nebulousness 
on the illustrations; while this effect is thematically appropriate, it also distances 
the action and makes the button-eyed toys often creepily blank (the sock monkey, 
bear, and elephant in fact look quite sinister as they loom over the wide-eyed new 
toy lion), so the intimacy of the text is unfortunately diluted. Slow Loris (BCCB 
5/02) remains the author’s superior look at surprising nighttime adventures, but 
this may be welcomed by little ones who can only sleep if the toybox residents are 
snuggled in alongside.  DS
delAney, JosePh The Last Apprentice: Curse of the Bane; illus. by Patrick 
Arrasmith. Greenwillow, 2006 467p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-076622-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-076621-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
In The Last Apprentice: Revenge of the Witch (BCCB 10/05), Thomas took up his 
position as apprentice to Mr. Gregory, known in the community as “the spook” 
for his trade of seeing off ghosts, ghasts, boggarts, and witches. Upon the death of 
his brother, a priest whose condemnation of the spook’s trade led to long estrange-
ment between the two, Mr. Gregory must travel to Priestown for the funeral. 
Thomas must travel with him, because the spook has another reason for travel to 
Priestown: the settling of unfinished business with a former god, now turned evil 
spirit, known as the Bane. In Priestown the two become swept up in the persecu-
tion of the feared Quisitor, who rounds up and executes people on suspicion of 
witchcraft, aided by his followers amid the clergy; when Thomas finds that his 
friend Alice and Mr. Gregory have both been seized and sentenced to death, he 
determines to save them and to join Mr. Gregory in fighting the Bane. The plot 
is a little more labyrinthine in this sequel, and the pace consequently meanders 
a bit as well, but Delaney continues to create a convincing world in this agrarian 
England-like country where fighting supernatural evils is just another skilled trade. 
120 • The BulleTin
The stakes are higher in this outing, with considerably more gruesomely violent 
fates for victims of both human and supernatural depredations; there’s more than 
gore here, though, with tense and suspenseful questions surrounding Alice’s loyalty 
(she’s a witch who’s willingly dealing with the Bane with the ambitious intention of 
overpowering it) and Thomas’ willingness to sacrifice himself for the cause and for 
his friends (some new and tantalizing revelations about his mother’s supernaturally 
touched history hint at more plot developments to come on the family side as well). 
Readers are better off starting with the first title, but fans of the young apprentice 
will relish the chance to see him expand in his powers and face off with more evil 
things that go bump in the night.  DS
dePAolA, ToMie Christmas Remembered; written and illus. by Tomie 
dePaola. Putnam, 2006 88p
ISBN 0-399-24622-3 $19.99   
Ad Gr. 4-8
In fifteen brief chapters, dePaola reminisces about Christmases from childhood to 
adulthood that were celebrated in a host of places and with an extensive circle of 
family, neighbors, and friends. Promoted as a book “for all ages,” the collection does 
indeed feature a handful of tales that will resonate with young listeners, particu-
larly those who recognize members of the dePaola clan from 26 Fairmount Avenue 
(BCCB 6/99). After a couple of fairly generic descriptions of tree trimming and 
holiday decor, several entries touch on such inviting topics as the dePaola television 
set (only the second in their town) and Tomie’s TV-watching date; Tomie’s holiday 
job making Christmas candies; Nana Fall-River’s misunderstandings about the car-
olers and partygoers who descended on the household at Christmas; a miraculous 
answer to a prayer for monastery bells. Later chapters that focus on dePaola’s adult 
years, however, are less likely to hold children’s attention: Christmas shopping, 
apartment decorating, dining at the Plaza Hotel, hosting Australian friends over 
their first cold-weather Christmas. Readers who associate dePaola the artist with 
doll-like figures, static composition, and smooth surfaces may be surprised by the 
variety in these full-page illustrations, spot art, and page borders. Photorealistic 
candies and art supplies, collage candles glowing in a richly textured window frame, 
a comically monumental 1947 television console, and a tenderly drawn portrait 
of Nana are unexpected delights. Still, the selections are overall so strongly skewed 
to adult experience that kids can be forgiven if they prefer the glow of their own 
Christmas lights.  EB
durAnT, AlAn Burger Boy; illus. by Mei Matsuoka. Clarion, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-618-71466-9 $16.00   
R 4-7 yrs
“If you don’t watch out,” Benny’s mother warns her hamburger-loving son, “you’ll 
turn into a burger one day.” Mom clearly knows best, since Benny’s excess soon 
transforms him into a giant burger. This means he has to flee from an accrual of 
interested dogs, vengeful cows, and hungry boys, all the while shouting, “I’m not 
a burger, I’m a boy!” After the Bigga Burgers guy puts the bulky burger on display, 
Mom comes to the rescue, retrieving her boy and feeding him veggies until he’s 
back to normal. Unfortunately, Benny’s now overindulging in the veggies . . . Just 
about every kid has heard the “You’re going to turn into a . . .” tease about a favorite 
food, and they’ll be tickled by this freewheeling interpretation of the notion. Durant 
grills his text to perfection, seasoning his short, snappy sentences with repetition, 
cumulation, and exclamation. Matsuoka’s mixed-media art recalls Brian Karas with 
novemBer 2006 • 121
its childlike vigor, dot eyes, and disproportionately teeny limbs, but it’s got plenty 
of charm of its own in the landscape enlivened with cut-paper design elements and 
its absurd animals (the blocky cows are particularly entertaining, but don’t miss the 
sugar-pink rabbit, who foresightedly joins in the Benny chase and gets his payoff 
when Benny finally starts transforming into a carrot). Add this to a health and 
nutrition discussion to make the "you are what you eat" point, or just offer it as a 
refreshing change from endless variants of "The Gingerbread Boy."  DS
enThoven, sAM The Black Tattoo. Razorbill, 2006. [512p]
ISBN 1-59514-114-6 $19.99 
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
The everyday cruelties and agonies of Hell, orchestrated by a jaded emperor who 
thinks he has seen it all, are shaken up by the arrival of an ages-old demon, the 
Scourge. This demon, during his millennia of entrapment by the Brotherhood of 
Sleep (a secret human organization created specifically to stop the Scourge), has 
planned out every detail that will lead to the end of the universe, and Hell is the 
entryway to his goals. The key ingredient the Scourge lacks is an able-bodied hu-
man host upon whom he can literally tattoo his shadowy self, and this is where 
fourteen-year-old Charlie, disillusioned with his life, feeling alone in spite of his 
supportive best friend, Jack, and aching for power and adventure, comes in. Through 
flattery, coercion, and threats, the Scourge uses Charlie to get himself closer to the 
sleeping dragon whose awakening will end the universe. The admittedly complex 
and over-the-top plot (by the way, the expanse of Hell is but a tiny growth on the 
dragon, and, bored with the Earth and its inhabitants, God has taken a position 
as Hell’s librarian and archivist), works to a surprising degree: the exploited and 
beleaguered creatures of Hell are as well developed and intriguing as the equally 
tortured humans, including Jack and the surviving members of the Brotherhood, 
who join forces to save Charlie. Enthoven establishes a breakneck pace: readers are 
introduced to the Scourge immediately, with the first death following soon after, 
and on the last page emigrants from Hell appear, complicating Jack and Charlie’s 
lives before they really get a chance to be ordinary again. Fantasy and horror fans 
alike will find this consuming and substantial novel well worth the time invest-
ment.  AS
Fisher, cATherine Corbenic. Greenwillow, 2006 281p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-072471-4 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-072470-6 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-9
Cal has been seeking escape from his alcoholic, mentally ill mother for years, so 
when he is invited to live in South Wales with his respectable uncle Trevor, Cal 
is on a train within a few days. This perceived direct path towards a peaceful and 
productive future takes an abrupt turn when Cal exits the train early and finds 
himself at a train station in a parallel world. Cal has found Corbenic, known in 
Arthurian legends as the “Castle of the Grail,” and he must decide in an instant 
whether to fulfill his transworld destiny of reversing the curse put on Corbenic, or 
whether, as Cal has always feared, he is beginning to hallucinate like his mother. 
Fisher’s rich, descriptive writing style and creative approach to alternative worlds 
work well in establishing the fascinating wasteland that is the Grail’s home. Cal’s 
journey contains key elements from the Arthurian legend of Perceval’s quest for 
the Holy Grail, including a willingness to forgo familial bonds to pursue higher 
122 • The BulleTin
aspirations. The early focus on Cal’s troubled relationship with his mother and his 
struggle towards independence is weakened through Fisher’s inclusion of Arthurian 
artifacts that eventually appear in Cal’s real life: the well-constructed ambiguity that 
allowed for dual readings as a psychological exploration or a legend retelling is lost 
in the second half of the novel. The resulting Grail story, stripped of the intriguing 
layers, is occasionally overcomplicated in the attempts to force it into a modern 
setting. Arthurian fans may still revel in the carefully researched medieval castles, 
battles, and characters, and they will be pleased with the successful mirroring of 
Cal’s life with that of Perceval.  AS
ForeMAn, MichAel Mia’s Story: A Sketchbook of Hopes and Dreams; written and 
illus. by Michael Foreman. Candlewick, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-7636-3063-2 $15.99   
R 6-9 yrs
Mia lives in a tiny, ramshackle village on the outskirts of a large city in Chile. Her 
father harvests scrap and anything salvageable from the big dump that separates 
her village from the city and takes his refurbished treasures into the city to sell, 
returning one day with a puppy for Mia. Mia and the puppy become fast friends, 
but then the puppy wanders away. Mia sets out on the family horse to find the 
wayward pup but finds instead a small patch of beautiful wildflowers high in the 
mountains. She brings a bunch home and soon has a thriving crop, which changes 
the family business from scrap to flower sales. Foreman gives an air of authenticity 
to this simple, inspirational tale by depicting it as notes from a travel journal. Scraps 
of paper, pencil sketches, and jottings in a font meant to resemble handwriting 
intermingle with and bloom into delicate watercolors that take the reader into Mia’s 
world. Though Foreman’s technique lays a romantic haze over the setting, it is still 
clear that Mia is both mired in extreme poverty and surrounded by breathtaking 
natural beauty. This study in contrasts continues into the depictions of the city 
as the generator of a perpetual dark cloud when seen from the top of the pristine, 
snowy mountain, and a colorful mass of friendly people and beautiful architecture 
when viewed from up close. Thus the settings create an especially apt vehicle to 
convey the theme of the book—hope in the midst of adversity and loss, and the 
importance of dreams to sustain people in difficult circumstances.  KC 
Funke, corneliA When Santa Fell to Earth; tr. by Oliver G. Latsch; illus. by Paul 
Howard. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2006 [176p]
ISBN 0-439-78204-X $15.99 
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 3-5
A nasty storm spooks a flying reindeer pulling a strange-looking caravan through 
the night skies in early December; frantic, he breaks loose, sending the caravan 
careening to the ground. Goaded by his classmates into knocking on the door of 
the caravan that has mysteriously appeared on their street in the night, shy and 
discontented Ben is welcomed by Niklas and his entourage, which includes two 
portly and rather fussy angels and a host of ill-tempered elves. Niklas, as it turns out, 
is one of the last real Santas, banished from Yule Land by the greedy (what else?) 
Gerold Geronimus Goblynch, who has taken to filling orders from parents rather 
than dealing with children’s wish lists, and who is requiring payment up front for 
Christmas presents. With the help of Ben and a lonely girl named Charlotte, Niklas 
saves Christmas (again, what else?) and restores it to its former sentimental glory. 
Thinly imagined, this scant story depends on caricatures and overplayed notions 
novemBer 2006 • 123
of what constitutes Christmas magic. The plot itself, though it follows a traditional 
narrative arc, is nonetheless choppy and underdeveloped. Despite some comical 
touches here and there and genuinely winning illustrations of grumpy elves and 
terrorizing nutcrackers, this story will leave Funke fans, as well as others seeking a 
bit of Christmas warmth, cold.  KC
gersTein, MordicAi The White Ram: A Story of Abraham and Isaac; written and 
illus. by Mordicai Gerstein. Holiday House, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-8234-1897-9 $16.95   
R 6-9 yrs
From the time God created animals in the Garden of Eden, He entrusted the 
white ram with a special, if unspecified, task: “Wait here until I call you.” And so 
the ram waited patiently in one place as Adam and Eve were expelled from the 
garden, other animals left with them, and “stars were born and stars died.” When 
the time came, the white ram knew what to do, and he resisted four temptations 
of the “evil one” to reach the mountain and stand ready to take the place of Isaac 
when God put Abraham to the test. “[T]he ram lay down on the altar and his soul 
flew into God’s hands”; from his remains were made the mortar for the Temple, the 
foundations of Jerusalem, the strings of King David’s harp, a cape for the prophet 
Elijah, and the shofars that heralded the Ten Commandments and will ultimately 
“call the children of Israel home.” A brief opening note explains the origin of this 
tale in Jewish Midrashim and urges viewers to look for openings in the clouds in 
the accompanying pictures which indicate the face and hands of the Almighty 
since, according to tradition, He may not be portrayed. Despite the simplicity of 
the tale—to say nothing of its well-known ending—Gerstein manages to create 
considerable tension and forward momentum through the contrast between the 
initial scenes of the ram’s stolid patience and the ensuing headlong rush to carry out 
his mission against all odds. The youngest listeners, who will certainly be relieved 
at Isaac’s release, may nonetheless be unprepared to embrace the triumph in the 
ram’s willing self-sacrifice; indeed, Gerstein has made the beast so gentle and lov-
able that it might seem one heartache has been exchanged for another. Those of a 
more thoughtful bent, though, will listen to the shofar with a fresh appreciation 
for the white ram that “grazes in the fields of heaven.”  EB
going, k. l. Saint Iggy. Harcourt, 2006 260p
ISBN 0-15-205795-1 $17.00   
R Gr. 9-12
Iggy Corso shares the common demographic of so many teens in YA Fictionland: 
a drug- and booze-soaked father, a meth-dependent absentee mother, and a high 
school that has no place for an outcast who always seems to stumble into trouble. 
Iggy is not your average street hardened anti-hero, though, but a surprisingly in-
nocent young man with only a paltry reserve of social skill. At the nadir of his 
academic career—facing a board hearing and possible expulsion for approaching 
a teacher who mistakenly thought he intended her harm—he knows he needs a 
plan and, inspired by a newspaper story of a guy who saves a little kid’s life, he 
simply needs to find direction on how to become a hero. The only elder he can 
think to consult is Mo, a twenty-year-old college dropout who was once assigned 
as Iggy’s mentor, but who now leads a chemically altered existence, convincing 
himself that he has righteously eschewed bourgeois banality. Mo takes Iggy with 
him to visit Joan, Mo’s well-to-do mother, to tap her for some money; Joan ends 
up taking Iggy under her wing, treating him like the son Mo won’t allow himself to 
124 • The BulleTin
be, and it looks for a few breath-catching moments that Iggy might have found his 
salvation. But Mo is entangled with a drug dealer demanding payment, and Iggy 
is streetwise enough to know that Mo can’t handle this alone, and his intervention 
leads to tragedy. Or does it? Going, who fashioned an equally unlikely schlumpf into 
an engaging protagonist in Fat Kid Rules the World (BCCB 06/03), leaves readers 
with the disturbing possibility that Iggy’s death may not be tragedy but the ironic 
fulfillment of his only goal. There’s an artless kind of poetry to Iggy’s narration, 
and double spacing between paragraphs makes the present progressive action fly 
by, while Iggy, his plan, and his ultimate release are bound to trouble the mind for 
some time to come.  EB 
gooBie, BeTh Hello, Groin. Orca, 2006 [224p]
ISBN 1-55143-459-8 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Dylan Kowolski tells herself she’s straight—she even has the perfect boyfriend, 
the handsome, funny, and caring Cam—but her body whispers a different story, 
especially around her best friend, Jocelyn. Fearful of what her parents and class-
mates will think, Dylan hides her desire for other girls and tries to muster sexual 
attraction to Cam, but she can’t bring herself to sleep with him. After designing a 
controversial library display and sharing a spur-of-the-moment, drunken kiss with 
a girl from a different high school, Dylan finds it even harder to lie to her friends, 
her family, and herself. This exploration of teenaged lesbian sexuality is realistically 
fraught with self-doubt and conflicting desires; that Cam is a genuinely nice guy, 
compatible with Dylan in every way except that he’s, well, a guy, makes Dylan’s 
confusion and attraction to her best friend, Jocelyn, all the more compelling. The 
community itself presents an intriguing patchwork of characters; though there are 
the requisite homophobic jocks (both male and female) who maintain an atmo-
sphere of compulsory heterosexuality through intimidation and innuendo, most 
of the young people simply accept homosexuality as part of the landscape, and 
both Dylan and Jocelyn find support within their families when they begin dating 
each other. This novel is a compelling and joyful exploration of the importance 
of the body and sexuality, challenging the divisions often maintained between 
the physical, the mental, and the emotional. While Dylan’s belief that living as a 
lesbian means abandoning her dream of having kids may have many readers (in 
this age of increasingly visible gay and lesbian parents) scratching their heads, this 
coming-out narrative is nevertheless a moving celebration of the joy that comes 
from living and loving honestly.  LG 
green, donnA hAyden Dream Job Profiles: The Young & Successful Share Their 
Secrets. Graphia/Houghton, 2006 180p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-618-56320-2 $7.99   
R Gr. 7-10
If you think you know career books—dry enumerations of educational require-
ments, job descriptions, and salary expectations, coupled with exhortation con-
cerning the value of staying the course in school—it’s time to think again. Green 
presents the fruits of her interviews with ten under-thirty entrepreneurs who 
measure their success in terms of doing exactly what they love to do, from interview-
ing Hollywood stars, to training assistance dogs, to rescuing manatees. Some are 
probably familiar names—videogame pundits Mike Krahulik and Jerry Holkins, 
better known as their comics alter egos Tycho and Gabe, and name-in-the-news 
novemBer 2006 • 125
Jason West, mayor and gay-rights advocate from New Pfaltz, New York. Others 
make waves within their own professions—up-and-coming makeup artist Sabrina 
Rinaldi and astronomer Zoe Learner. Some have gotten a boost from education or 
a lucky break, but all exhibit the same tenacity in pursuing their interests and in 
developing a broad network of mentors and people in the biz who can help them 
up the ladder. Green doesn’t settle for “Follow your dreams” platitudes; in a snappy, 
chatty text she analyzes each subject’s game plan, suggests related routes within 
the same profession, and gives solid advice about how to take the first step. And 
that first step may be, realistically, a baby step: says Ryan McCallum, past general 
manager of a women’s pro basketball team, “I did the grunt work and busted my 
butt for three years so I could finally get noticed by some human resources person.” 
Somehow, that kind of advice is easier to take from a twentysomething than from 
the school guidance counselor.  EB 
griMes, nikki Welcome, Precious; illus. by Bryan Collier. Orchard/Scholastic, 
2006 32p
ISBN 0-439-55702-X $16.99   
Ad  6-24 mos.
In this song of welcome to a newborn, Grimes transforms simple sensory experiences 
into evocative imagery to share with a very young audience. As an adoring black 
couple takes their infant on an outing, the baby is by turns jubilant, attentive, and 
downright hesitant at the wealth of experience his parents beckon him to notice, 
from smells, sounds, and colors to caresses and nuzzles. The text is overly sweet 
in its unending adulation, but the specific images add interest, and overjoyed new 
parents will likely find its sustained celebration appropriate. Collier’s deeply satu-
rated colors complement the sensual feast the words offer the viewer. Some of the 
drafting is stiff, however, with the figures frozen in the awkward positions of amateur 
photographs, and the father’s participation tends to be ambiguous and peripheral. 
This will undoubtedly turn up wrapped in pastel paper and curly ribbons at quite 
a few christenings, but it will also find its way home in the library bags of parents 
and grandparents eager to get their babies off to an early start with books.  KC 
hAArsMA, PJ The Softwire: Virus on Orbis 1. Candlewick, 2006 262p
ISBN 0-7636-2709-7 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Johnny, called JT by his friends, has lived in a spaceship headed toward the planet 
Orbis 1 all of his life. Even though all of the adults died hundreds of years ago, 
the preset, automatically triggered births of two groups of children result in a 
few hundred thirteen- and eight-year-olds who have been raised by Mother, the 
internal computer on the spaceship. The politically powerful traders of Orbis 1 
are expecting thousands of adults, whom they sponsored, but most are content to 
accept the children instead as indentured servants who will work off the debts of 
their parents. JT in particular has high value: he is a “softwire,” which means that 
he can mentally interact with computers, including the central computer through 
which all functions of Orbis 1 are routed. The general mistrust of strangers leads 
most to assume that JT is responsible for a dangerous virus that is disrupting the 
central computer, but in fact JT may be the only being alive who can save the planet. 
Sci-fi fans will hone in on the cool details of the novel, including the pimped-out 
spaceship on which the children grew up, the array of aliens, and the mysterious 
and cleverly described virus who takes the form of a small girl. Unfortunately, the 
overarching lessons of not prejudging strangers and embracing diversity are rather 
126 • The BulleTin
heavy-handed, with events frequently relying on diverse strangers resolving their 
various differences on the spot. In addition these morals are not supported through 
the story: if JT had followed these goals and not relied on his healthy skepticism of 
strangers, he would likely have died. In spite of these issues, this intergalactic space 
romp will appeal to readers who like their villains conquerable, heroes idealized, 
and obstacles surmountable.  AS 
hAle, shAnnon River Secrets. Bloomsbury, 2006 290p
ISBN 1-58234-901-0 $17.95   
R Gr. 8-12
In this companion novel to The Goose Girl (BCCB 11/03) and Enna Burning 
(BCCB 11/04), a secondary character, Razo, now takes center stage as his home 
region of Bayern recovers from the brutal war with the nearby Tira. In the hopes 
of preserving the fragile peace, ambassadors and guards are sent from each region 
to promote goodwill: Razo, seventeen, awkward, and unsure of his future, is 
surprised to have been chosen as part of the group sent to Tira. He is even more 
shocked to learn that he has been selected to be the only spy in the guard. Indeed, 
Razo often underestimates himself: he doesn’t know that his observational skills 
are uncanny, he is unaware that his slingshot skills are unrivaled, and he thinks 
himself to be unappealing to women even while having obvious admirers. As ten-
sions heighten between the two regions, Razo’s abilities may be all that prevent an 
all-out resurgence of war. As in the earlier novels, Hale’s impeccable writing style 
and dedication to detail result in a rich, fully developed world, right down to the 
salty pungency of the Tiran olives and the vibrancy of the Bayern clothing (the 
fondness for which convinces the residents of Tira to make peace as much as all of 
the goodwill meetings). Fans of the unforgettable Enna will not be disappointed 
with this new volume: Enna’s struggle with her fire-speaking gift is still very much 
a focus in this novel, even as Razo narrates his own wryly told adventure. Hale’s 
imagined world is danger-filled: gruesome deaths are alarmingly frequent, attempts 
on lives more so, and even talents or gifts are double-edged as potential curses if 
used incorrectly. It is to the author’s credit, therefore, that she has also created a 
landscape and characters with enough beauty, depth, and complexity to keep readers 
eagerly anticipating visits. Maps of the region and town are included.  AS
hiMMelMAn, John Chickens to the Rescue; written and illus. by John 
Himmelman. Holt, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-8050-7951-3 $16.95   
R 4-8 yrs
The Greenstalk farm is blessed with some seriously civic-minded poultry. On 
Monday, when Mr. Greenstalk drops his watch down the well, it’s “Chickens to the 
rescue!”, arranging a down-the-well plunge and watch retrieval; on Tuesday, Mrs. 
Greenstalk is too tired to make dinner, so it’s “Chickens to the rescue!”, fluttering 
through the kitchen, flailing through the fridge, and frying up a tasty meal (not 
chicken) for the lady. Each day of the week, chicken intervention saves situations 
ranging from dog-eaten homework to lost sheep, until Sunday, when the chickens 
take a rest (though it looks like the pigs are aiming to substitute). Though the plot 
doesn’t build much before its final pivot, the array of emergencies dives happily 
into the absurd (the duck drives off in the truck, a strong wind blows the cow up 
into the tree), and it’s comic that the family becomes so accustomed to the chicken 
intervention that there’s indignation when the flock doesn’t appear. The real en-
ergy comes from the pencil-and-watercolor illustrations, featuring a couple dozen 
novemBer 2006 • 127
unlikely poultry heroines who perform their maneuvers with a flurry of feathers, 
a helpful range of accoutrements, and a considerable amount of exertion—no 
smooth action chickens, these. Use this to repair barnyard reputations besmirched 
by Doreen Cronin’s Click, Clack, Moo (BCCB 9/00), or just to introduce an enjoy-
ably weird kind of hero.  DS
holT, kiMBerly willis Part of Me: Stories of a Louisiana Family. Holt, 
2006 208p
ISBN 0-8050-6360-9 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 5-7
When Rose’s papa leaves in 1939, her Cajun momma takes her and her brother and 
sister to their grandfather’s home in the Louisiana Bayou. There fourteen-year-old 
Rose must quit school and pass for seventeen so that she can get a job to help support 
the family. She applies to drive the bookmobile, and she and a librarian take books 
to folks in the outlying communities. Fast forward to Rose’s son, Merle Henry, who 
loves to hunt and dreams of one day trapping a mink, but whose more pressing 
concern is learning to dance so that he can impress Lily Bea. Switch scenes again, 
and meet Annabeth, Merle Henry and Lily Bea’s daughter (the dancing apparently 
worked). Annabeth is having trouble fitting in to her new school, and is grieving 
the loss of a boy who was becoming a friend until he drowned. Deciding that she 
can emulate his courage, she finds her voice and stands up to the school’s mean girl. 
Another time leap, and we encounter Kyle, Annabeth’s slacker son who discovers the 
joy of reading when he takes home a book about a boy wizard and finds he shares 
that interest with a homeless man. Finally we are back to Rose, who, at eighty, has 
written her memoirs. Rose’s initial story makes a strong start to these generational 
vignettes of a Louisiana family, so much so that the abrupt shift to Merle Henry 
comes as a stinging disappointment. The remainder of the family scenes pale in 
comparison, and Kyle’s story comes off finally as downright trite, the literary entry 
in the chicken-soup-for-the-soul genre. Despite this weakness, it is interesting to 
see how the love of books weaves in and out of and shapes one family’s history. 
The form and premise offer good promise for a living history project as well, so it 
may be useful for creative writing and social studies units.  KC
hoPkinson, deBorAh Into the Firestorm: A Novel of San Francisco, 1906. Knopf, 
2006 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93652-1 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83652-7 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Nick Dray has just made his way alone from the cotton fields of Texas to the “Paris 
of the Pacific,” but so far the doors of San Francisco have remained closed. He 
makes a tenuous connection with a young man in Chinatown, who directs him to 
the shabbiest section of the city and suggests places he might seek employment, 
but he’s certainly not the only poor kid looking for a job. He finally talks his way 
into a trial run with eccentric stationer Pat Patterson, who entrusts him to mind 
the shop and his dog, Shake, while he travels on business to Oakland. Hours after 
Patterson leaves, the ground begins to heave and Nick, determined to keep his new 
employer’s trust, is hard pressed to keep the looters out and the dog in tow, and to 
deliver a pregnant neighbor lady and her voluble little daughter to safety outside 
the fire zone. The story unfolds like pretty standard adventure fare, with its spunky 
twelve-year-old orphan hero, charming dog, and epic disaster, but Hopkinson 
128 • The BulleTin
comments in a closing note that it is based on an account of a boy who “braved 
a soldier’s gun to rescue business records and his employer’s dog.” Characters run 
through their paces a little too neatly, nobody of any importance to the tale suf-
fers too badly, and by the end Nick is conveniently set for life with the generous 
Pat Patterson. While this may not be quite the thriller the fiery cover art suggests, 
middle graders in search of quick, entertaining historical fiction—ideal for book 
reports—should take a look.  EB 
hursTon, zorA neAle, comp. The Three Witches; ad. by Joyce Carol Thomas; 
illus. by Faith Ringgold. HarperCollins, 2006 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000650-1 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000649-8 $15.99   
R 6-9 yrs
You’d think witches would know better than to mess with sibling pairs after “Hansel 
and Gretel,” but these three witches haven’t learned; they go after our protagonists, 
a brother and sister, while their grandmother is away from their cabin in the woods. 
The sibs elude the trio of hungry witches by running into the woods and climbing 
up a tree; though the witches chop at the tree, the girl utters an incantation that 
causes the woodchips to blind them while the boy calls for his trio of dogs. Just 
as the tree is about to fall and deposit the kids in the claws of the hungry witches, 
Grandma looses the boy’s tied dogs, who turn up in the nick of time to deal with 
the witches. This tale is chock-full of recognizable motifs and appealing elements, 
so audiences will warm to it immediately. The narration is largely straightforward 
and uninflected, which helps ensure that the story’s delicious gruesomeness doesn’t 
become overwhelming, as does the speedy ending that leaves the dogs’ dismember-
ment of the witches to the audiences’ imagination; there’s plenty of energy in the 
repeated phrases (the witches scarily howl, “O-ooo! Whyncher, whyncher!”, the girl 
entreats the woodchips, and the boy keeps calling his dogs), which will offer terrific 
possibilities for drama in a readaloud or storytelling. The illustrations, thick, strong-
hued paints on canvas in Ringgold’s flat, naïve style, are static yet expressive, and 
the horrific trio of witches and the heroic trio of dogs are particularly vivid. While 
this offers some obvious possibilities for Halloween, there’s no reason to limit such 
a splendid witch-smiting to a single season when you can use this to raise hairs all 
year ’round. Notes on the tale and on Hurston herself are appended.  DS
isAAcs, Anne Pancakes for Supper!; illus. by Mark Teague. Scholastic, 
2006 40p
ISBN 0-439-64483-6 $15.99   
R 4-7 yrs
In this revision of Little Black Sambo, Toby and her parents are taking their horse-
drawn wagon to town when a bump sends Toby flying through the air and into 
the thick of the forest. There she faces off, sequentially, with a wolf, a cougar, a 
skunk, a porcupine, and a bear, fending off their Toby-dining plans each time with 
an article of her clothing, leaving each critter strutting off in its new finery and 
bragging, “Now I’m the grandest beast,/ West or East.” Once the vain animals catch 
sight of one another, it’s a chase around a maple tree until they melt, and the tree 
immediately turns the “golden brown puddle” into syrup, greatly relished by Toby 
and her parents at their roadside pancake supper. While this doesn’t have the sheer 
storytelling verve of Lester’s Sam and the Tigers (BCCB 7/96), the tight patterning 
of the plot and the animals’ rhyming speech make the story a tasty readaloud; the 
impromptu pancake feast seems a bit unlikely, but it’s not worth quibbling about 
novemBer 2006 • 129
such a lip-smacking conclusion. Teague’s oil paintings set the story in snowy New 
England, but his bulging hills, gnarly trees, and contrasty palette recall mid-America 
painter Thomas Hart Benton. The oversized animals, often filling the pages in 
closeup, are monumental even as they’re comic, so Toby’s facedowns seem genuinely 
courageous. With its grand scale and catchy text, this will be an enjoyable storytime 
entry, and it would be a welcome assistant in keeping hungry kids occupied while 
the pancakes are frying.  DS
Jenkins, eMily Toys Go Out; illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky. Schwartz & Wade/Ran-
dom House, 2006 117p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93604-1 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83604-7 $16.95   
R 6-9 yrs
The life of toys remains a perennially absorbing topic for children’s literature; here 
Jenkins (author of That New Animal, BCCB 3/05) examines a cozy collective of a 
buffalo named Lumphy, a stingray named StingRay, and a ball named Plastic, all 
belonging to the Little Girl. Self-contained yet connected chapters tell of exploits 
such as the trio’s trip to Show and Tell, Plastic’s important questions about her 
nature, and the group effort to get their beloved owner a worthy birthday present. 
There’s a heavy fragrance of A. A. Milne to the narrative, not just in concept but 
in style and in details such as Plastic’s fondness for Pooh-like “hums,” but the book 
has a cuddly sturdiness all its own. The toys’-eye view of domestic life is evoked 
with imaginative charm that generally avoids coyness, suggesting an animism even 
beyond many youngsters’ conception (even the bathroom towel and the clothes 
washer are personable conversationalists) while touching on familiar realities of life. 
This offers the same kind of serial readaloud possibilities as Fine’s Jamie and Angus 
Stories (BCCB 10/02), and fans of that book’s toy-centered goodness will settle 
right in with the Little Girl’s loyal friends. Zelinsky’s soft-textured but meticulously 
detailed illustrations in pencil are appropriately toy-centered in their viewpoint, 
and their gentle friendliness mirrors the tone of the story.  DS 
Johnson, MAureen Devilish. Razorbill, 2006 263p
ISBN 1-59514-060-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-12
Senior year at St. Teresa’s Preparatory School for Girls is shaping up to be everything 
cynical Jane Jarvis loves to hate: more catty comments from the socially overinflated 
A3s (yes, they made up their own nickname), more hand-holding for best friend 
Allison and her fragile ego, and the added pressure of the “yearly celebration of 
sisterhood” known as Big-Little Day. Jane knows that she’ll be lucky to get a Little 
(freshman) interested in her, and the chances of Allison grabbing one are slim to 
none. As expected, after the mad rush Jane is Little-less, Allison has publicly barfed 
from the pressure, and Jane finds her hiding in a bathroom stall reflecting on the 
damage this will add to a reputation already dented by being stood up at the junior 
prom. Enter Lanalee, a new student at St. Teresa’s who can out-cool the cool A3s 
with a single sharp retort and who becomes Allison’s Little, transforming Allison 
overnight. Unfortunately, it seems that Allison has made a literal deal with the Devil 
through his minion Lanalee, and, when Jane discovers what Lanalee is about, she 
must find a loophole fast or surrender her own soul and Allison’s as well. There are 
stock elements here (crazy old nuns, rickety buildings, and horrendous gym suits), 
but quirky characters and fresh handling keep the humor front and center and 
the results surprising. Buffy fans will appreciate the tongue-in-cheek supernatural 
130 • The BulleTin
wrestling match between good and evil, and readers who enjoyed 13 Little Blue 
Envelopes (BCCB 10/05) and The Bermudez Triangle (BCCB 11/04) will enjoy 
Johnson’s new blend of domestic realism and sly supernatural action.  CW
kAslik, iBi Skinny. Walker, 2006 [256p]
ISBN 0-8027-9608-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9 up
Giselle Vasco is a first-year medical-school student when her anorexia roars out of 
control, sending her first to the hospital and then home to her mother and sister 
instead of continuing with her studies. At home, she’s in a turmoil of memories 
about her family, especially about her demanding Hungarian father, now dead, 
who suspected her paternity (he began an affair with her mother when she was 
engaged to another man); she also embarks on a serious relationship with Sol, an 
old acquaintance turned new love, yet through it all she must negotiate with her 
shadow other self who insists that the way she can prove her worth is to demon-
strate her control over the physical constraint of hunger. Interwoven with Giselle’s 
narration is that of her fourteen-year-old sister, Holly, rebellious student but star 
athlete, terrified by her sister’s decline and furious at what it’s doing to the family. 
Canadian author Kaslik’s style is descriptive and meditative yet appropriately high 
tension, and she depicts with bitter clarity the way life goes on around anorexia 
but never without it, as even when Giselle can manage to eat she can’t manage to 
do it without checking in with herself on every bite. The rich, individual specifics 
of the Vasco family broaden the story beyond Giselle’s disorder. Holly’s narration 
sounds too much like Giselle’s, however, evincing implausible sophistication for an 
eighth-grader; the book also tries to fit too much in, between the snippets of medical 
textbooks that punctuate moments, the protracted details of Giselle’s parents’ history, 
a brief (and unsettling) flirtation between Holly and Sol, and Giselle’s surgery for 
endometriosis. Despite those flaws, readers may find themselves absorbed in this 
emotional and compellingly written chronicle of two sisters’ experiences.  DS
koJA, kAThe Going Under. Foster/Farrar, 2006 121p
ISBN 0-374-30393-2 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Homeschooled siblings Hilly and Ivan have always been exceptionally close, and 
Hilly’s decision to volunteer for the high-school literary magazine is a shock to 
older brother Ivan, who thought their cozy dyad of Ivan as pilot and Hilly as 
copilot would always exist. Soon Hilly is hiding her diary, dealing alone with her 
grief over a friend’s suicide, and excluding Ivan in other subtle ways that infuriate 
him but help Hilly find herself as a separate person. Entrenched power dynamics 
remain, however, as Ivan takes control of his parents’ vague plans for therapeutic 
intervention and selects a psychiatrist who quickly draws Ivan in as a co-conspirator 
against Hilly. Hilly, confused by her suddenly hostile brother, must endure ses-
sions with a manipulative, narcissistic doctor who will seemingly stop at nothing 
to use her private writings to further his career. The wildly divergent viewpoints 
of Hilly and her brother are conveyed successfully through alternating narratives, 
with frequently overlapping events that highlight the way the same instance can 
be perceived in dramatically different ways. Readers privileged with both perspec-
tives will recognize the irony in the frequently antipodal responses of the siblings 
that actually help the psychiatrist create tension. Unfortunately, the obsessive quest 
of a psychiatrist who is hell-bent on retrieving one depressed girl’s journal is so 
novemBer 2006 • 131
unrealistic and poorly conveyed as to become a distraction from the complicated, 
and much more intriguing, relationship between Hilly and Ivan. Because a sinister 
psychiatrist torments the two protagonists, their independent and symbiotic melt-
downs seem contrived instead of unfolding as a natural result of siblings moving 
towards adulthood. Still, readers who have scrawled their own angst into diaries 
will respond to Hilly; they will sympathize with her fierce will and painful struggle 
towards independence and selfhood.  AS
kuMin, MAxine Mites to Mastodons: A Book of Animal Poems; ed. by Liz Rosenberg; 
illus. by Pamela Zagarenski. Houghton, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-618-50753-1 $16.00   
R Gr. 3-6
Pulitzer Prize-winning poet Kumin returns to children’s literature with this collec-
tion of nineteen poems about the animal world large and small, contemporary and 
long-gone. Verses have fairly brief lines, and many fall into traditional couplets or 
ABAB rhyme schemes, but they derive more sophistication than usual for this sort 
of anthology from Kumin’s contemplative tone, her predilection for enjambment, 
wherein the flow of sentence carries beyond the rhymed word, and a frequent 
use of consonance or assonance that adds a subtle texture. The result is therefore 
thoughtfully lyrical where someone like Douglas Florian is sharply witty, making 
this a satisfying read for those just outgrowing but still enjoying beast feast (BCCB 
7/94). Zagarenski’s mixed-media illustrations are a skillfully balanced explosion 
of colors and textures: thick, soft dark lines demarcate the edges of the painterly 
fields of the animals’ bodies, counterpointed by crisply drawn details on subsidiary 
components and sometimes delicate, sometimes humorous collage elements ranging 
from leaves to printed paper. Many poems would make enjoyable readalouds as 
well as readalones, perhaps to entice animal-loving kids into reading more of the 
collection on their own.  DS
le guin, ursulA k. Voices. Harcourt, 2006 341p
ISBN 0-15-205678-5 $17.00   
R Gr. 7-10
Memer is a siege child, conceived through the rape of her mother by an Ald soldier 
during the conquest of their peace-loving city of Ansul seventeen years ago. Since 
then, reading and writing have been forbidden by the occupying Alds, who destroyed 
all the books save the ones in a secret room in Oracle House. To this room only 
Memer and the Waylord, the master of Oracle House, have access by way of a magi-
cal spell that reveals the door in an otherwise solid wall. There the Waylord teaches 
Memer to read, and begins to suspect that she is the one who can read the Oracle, 
the city’s greatest treasure, and one that had been thought lost forever. Though the 
Alds believe writing to be demonic, they cherish oral stories and invite an itiner-
ant storyteller, Orrec, to the city, a move that proves their undoing. As Orrec and 
his wife, Gry, learn more of the restrictions of the Alds, their sympathy for Ansul 
grows, and Orrec’s skills as an orator are enlisted to foment an ultimately successful 
rebellion. Le Guin’s skill in creating an utterly credible alternative world is in full 
force here; she neglects no detail in her cosmography, from history and political 
structure to daily customs. Memer is a sympathetic character from the start, and 
her sure and steady growth in the understanding of differences both reconcilable 
and irreconcilable and the complications of conquest is masterfully understated. 
The narration gives equal time to exposition, character development, and violent 
action; the cultural compromises, enforced cooperations, daily dangers, and complex 
132 • The BulleTin
emotions of life under occupation will have relevance for readers’ understanding 
of political exigencies in our own time, while the strong characters ensure personal 
engagement with the story. Readers who enjoy this book will want to pick up its 
companion, Gifts (BCCB 10/04), but it stands on its own as well.  KC 
levine, gAil cArson Fairest. HarperCollins, 2006 326p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-073409-4 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-073408-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
In a fantasy region where beauty and singing are valued above wealth, intelligence, 
or political power, fifteen-year-old Aza is one for two. Gifted with an almost legend-
ary singing talent, she is all too aware of the fact that her lack of traditional beauty 
is viewed with sympathy at best, and distrust and scorn at worst. Therefore, Aza’s 
acquiescence to the bullying (and overwhelmingly beautiful) new queen can be 
forgiven: Aza is not used to being part of the royal court and longs to be accepted, 
even if it means being drawn into a shady plan to trick the kingdom into thinking 
the queen is a wonderful singer by having Aza throw her voice while the queen 
lip-syncs. Of course, tricks and illusions do not last forever (the queen’s beauty 
comes from a potion, and the singing stunt is found out), and Aza must adopt a 
new confidence and sense of worth or she will take all the blame and lose her hunky 
new boyfriend, the prince. The mid-story inclusions of a lushly described hidden 
gnome world and an irascible magic creature who lives in a mirror offer temporary 
detours from Aza’s central quest towards self-discovery, but Levine is adept at jug-
gling even convoluted subplots while still allowing her affable, headstrong heroine 
center stage. Fans of Levine’s earlier novels, in particular Ella Enchanted (BCCB 
5/97), will be delighted at the subtle overlaps between stories (Lucinda, giver of 
obedience to Ella, is also the fairy responsible for the questionably beneficial beauty 
potion). Aza is a worthy addition to the growing list of tough fantasy girls who use 
their talents wisely, never wait for someone else to save them, and, if there is any 
time left over in their busy lives, always get their man.  AS
leviThAn, dAvid Wide Awake. Knopf, 2006 221p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93466-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83466-4 $16.95   
R Gr. 9-12
In the “near future,” the first gay Jewish presidential candidate, Abraham Stein, has 
just been elected. Duncan, sixteen, gay, and Jewish, is absolutely thrilled, until the 
governor of Kansas, the state that decided the election, announces that he is going 
to require a recount. What seems at first a dismissible opposition quickly becomes 
heated and the inevitable confrontation occurs on a grand scale, as members of both 
parties pour into Kansas to protest and offer support with their presence. Duncan’s 
life changes in a week as he defies his parents for the first time, has his first real 
“future” discussion with his boyfriend, and plays a role in what ends up being one of 
the most important political moments in decades as the governor, caught in shady 
political maneuvering, concedes the fact that Stein’s victory in Kansas was legitimate. 
The dynamics of teenage love—the intense physical passion, the usually misguided 
belief in permanence, and the fierce arguments that could end everything in an 
instant—are all carefully and powerfully explored through Duncan’s relationship 
and those of his friends. In fact, the complex personal dynamics almost overshadow 
the presidential focus of the novel, and the relationships are certainly more color-
novemBer 2006 • 133
ful than the occasionally overlong speeches and political debates. Readers who 
have been paying attention to the past six years of politics, however, will recognize 
contemporary overlays, and they will empathize with Duncan’s (and Levithan’s) 
passionate opposition to injustice and deceit in life or politics.  AS 
liBBy, AlisA M. The Blood Confession. Dutton, 2006 389p
ISBN 0-525-47732-2 $18.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Erzebet has been prized for her beauty since birth; her father commissions portraits 
of her throughout her prepubescence, but the one that matters will be the one of 
Erzebet the young woman, which he will take to the Emperor in hopes that he will 
want to add the girl, as well as her portrait, to his collection of beautiful things. 
Though Erzebet balks at the prospect of an arranged marriage, she doesn’t let it 
bother her overmuch; instead she spends her time devising schemes to protect her 
beauty, ward off a birth curse that says she will either die young or never die, and 
please her forbidden friend, Marianna, a peasant girl from the village. The girls are 
inseparable, despite deeply felt differences in belief—Marianna is a devout Chris-
tian, while Erzebet has become enamored of a presence called Sinestra, who tempts 
her to break all allegiance with God in order to claim her independence from her 
curse and live forever. At Sinestra’s urging, Erzebet takes to bleeding her servant 
girls and bathing her face in their blood to preserve her beauty and youth, but it’s 
not enough. Soon Erzebet is devising ways to fill a bathtub with fresh blood—three 
fully drained girls is enough—to take full-body blood baths, and looking to initiate 
Marianna’s daughter into the mysteries of her beauty regimen. Though this version 
is unflinchingly gory in its own right, Libby considerably tames the story of the real 
Countess Bathory, who managed to kill over 600 girls in sixteenth-century Hungary 
to Erzebet’s handful. The author explores in great detail the obsessive motivations 
of this young woman—her descent into a densely realized heresy and a despicable 
practice that seems utterly rational and justifiable in her blood-saturated vision. 
A grisly, ghastly tale (down to the dramatic bloodstain along the bottom of the 
pages) of a woman obsessed with preserving her youth and beauty in an age before 
Botox, this searing portrait challenges young women to confront the dark side of 
the desire for a flawless face.  KC 
loizeAux, williAM Wings; illus. by Leslie Bowman. Kroupa/Farrar, 2006 138p 
ISBN 0-374-34802-2 $16.00   
R Gr. 3-6
The summer of 1960 is one of change for ten-year-old Nick and his widowed 
mother, and the agent is a surprising one: a mockingbird chick. Nick finds the lost 
chick and tends her with fierce protectiveness, naming her Marcy and diligently 
feeding her worms and cleaning up after her; as she grows and flourishes, he becomes 
profoundly attached to the little bird, conducting serious conversations with her and 
imagining her contribution to the discussion. When Nick has to leave her behind to 
go away on vacation, however, he’s afraid that an increasingly independent Marcy 
won’t wait around for his return. This is an old-fashioned story that could have been 
written in the era it describes, but it’s none the worse for that: the story is solid, 
the writing is unobtrusively thoughtful, and the book is broadly accessible. Kids 
may not necessarily put together Nick’s struggle to let go of the bird he can never 
really own with his thoughts of his dead father as a new man gradually becomes 
part of his mother’s life, but they’ll still sympathize with his desire to hold onto his 
beloved Marcy. Though the faces are sometimes ungainly, Bowman’s soft, smudgy 
134 • The BulleTin
black-and-white art captures the gangly grace of a prepubescent kid. With its short 
chapters and compelling subject, this would be an effective older readaloud as well 
as a readalone for chapter-book readers ready to move beyond Pericoli’s bird story, 
The True Story of Stellina (BCCB 4/06).  DS 
lunge-lArsen, lise Noah’s Mittens: The Story of Felt; illus. by Matthew 
Trueman. Houghton, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-618-32950-1 $16.00   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Audiences are doubtless familiar with Noah and his ark, but Lunge-Larsen’s pourquoi 
story focuses on Noah’s inventive qualities right from the start. When he’s confronted 
on the ark with sheep who’ve gotten trapped in their coats as the wool fibers locked 
together, he shears them. After the passengers all disembark, Noah is chilled to the 
bone in the snow; remembering the felted fleeces, he retrieves them, cuts out warm 
swathes of cloth, and burrows his hands into them, making felt mittens. The story 
never really manages to make the trivial matter of this story into something that 
deserves this much attention, and the plot cries out for explanation at several points 
(if the sheep are kept warm in the snow by their regular wool coats, why was their 
felted version such a big deal? Why is it news to Noah that sheep’s wool regrows 
after being sheared?). The real pleasure here lies in Trueman’s arresting, fantastical 
illustrations, which combine a strong design sensibility in elements such as the 
changing character of the abstracted sun and the use of wood frames to indicate 
scenes aboard the ark, but which also offer vivid and creative portraiture for Noah 
and, especially, the animals; an oil glaze adds texture, often appropriately woolly, 
to the mixed-media images, and the big blunt heads, oversized eyes, and expressive 
poses of the sheep give them a definite scene-stealing ability. With the lively art to 
draw viewer interest, this could work in concert with other tales of clothing (such 
as dePaola’s Charlie Needs a Cloak, BCCB 6/74) or winter warm-ups.  DS 
luPicA, Mike Miracle on 49th Street. Philomel, 2006 246p
ISBN 0-399-24488-3 $17.99   
M Gr. 4-7
Lupica may not be the world champion of cliché deployment, but with this feel-good 
holiday offering he’s at least a contender. Twelve-year-old orphan Molly Parker reads 
her mother’s parting letter (single mom just died of cancer) naming her real father 
(Boston Celtics superstar Josh Cameron), and against the wishes of her guardian 
(Mom’s wealthy best friend from college) she teams up with her best friend (homely 
but loyal wisecracking Sam) to convince Josh he’s her dad. Josh is encouraged by 
his housekeeper (feisty, wisecracking, grandmotherly African-American Mattie) 
and his teammate (jolly, wisecracking L. J.) to give her a chance, and now it’s a 
race against time (the guardian’s family is moving to LA with Molly in six weeks) 
and obstacles (Josh’s avaricious agent) for Molly to convince the self-centered icon 
with a well-hidden heart of gold that he should take her in. Of course he does at 
the climax on the final page, a not-by-chance meeting at the ice rink at Rockefeller 
Center (Lupica furnishes the perfect snowfall while readers supply their own string 
section), and Molly’s off to a happy future of an indeterminate nature. Lupica’s 
sportswriting acumen never really comes into play, since the basketball angle (and, 
for that matter, the Christmas story as well) is more scenery than substance. Improb-
abilities accrue at an alarming rate. Josh the media-savvy superstar, for example, 
brings this twelve-year-old up to his apartment, evidently without a second thought 
about paparazzi and lawsuits; likewise, he agrees to Molly’s request that he forego 
novemBer 2006 • 135
a DNA test and simply comes to believe that she’s his daughter. Molly, who has 
never played basketball, is naturally a natural, whomping L. J. at H-O-R-S-E and 
becoming the overnight sensation on her school team. This may pass muster with 
readers who favor sentimentalized Christmas stories, but sports enthusiasts would 
probably rather find a copy of Lupica’s Travel Team (BCCB 11/04) or Heat (BCCB 
5/06) under their tree.  EB
lynch, chris Sins of the Fathers. HarperTempest, 2006 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-074038-8 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-074037-X $16.99 
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Drew is an average thirteen-year-old schoolboy, a lifer at his Boston parochial school 
despite his father’s allergy to priests and his own indifferent commitment to Catholi-
cism. He spends most of his time with his buddies: Skitz, a misfit doofus whose 
mouth runs with no internal editor, much to the dismay of the school faculty, and 
Hector, a quiet tower of strength, a good guy, and a stellar altar boy who’s “one of 
the best friends Jesus H. ever had.” The arrival of a new priest, whom Drew refers 
to pseudonymously as Father Mullarkey, stirs things up: the new father is a colorful 
and freewheeling Jesuit, an irreverent hippie who takes a shine to Drew and who’s 
largely shunned by the school’s other priests. Father Mullarkey’s openness gives 
Drew a new view of the priesthood and religion, but there are indications that the 
new father has—and brings—his own set of problems. The center of this book is 
the relationship between the three boys, and Lynch depicts with utter fidelity and 
understanding their bond, wherein pounding on a friend is a mark and prerogative 
of friendship but speaking about hurt is almost impossible. There’s also a sad and 
canny exploration of the way jocular familiarity with an issue—in this case, priestly 
sexual abuse—can blind people to its real occurrence; Drew’s gradual realization 
of the cause for Hector’s increasing distance is credible, as, unfortunately, is the 
unwillingness of Father Mullarkey to intervene. This is less a story with consequent 
trajectory than the chronicle of a friendship (and the resolution doesn’t really resolve 
anything so much as affirm the central and necessary importance of that friend-
ship), but it’s a shrewd picture of the different ways authorities can fail kids and 
the value of comradeship in retaining your own strength. That’s a message that will 
have meaning for a lot of readers, and they’ll recognize something of themselves in 
Drew and his friends.  DS
MArcus, leonArd s., ed. The Wand in the Word: Conversations with Writers of 
Fantasy. Candlewick, 2006 202p
ISBN 0-7636-2625-2 $19.99   
R Gr. 7 up
Thirteen popular fantasy writers, including heavyweights such as Ursula Le Guin, 
Lloyd Alexander, and Jane Yolen, and new favorites Garth Nix, Nancy Farmer, and 
Franny Billingsley, talk about writing fantasy in conversation with Leonard Marcus. 
Each chapter focuses on one author and includes photos, marked-up draft pages, 
a selected reading list of the author’s works, answers to common questions (What 
sort of child were you? Do you know when you start writing a book how it will 
end?), and questions specific to each author that afford insights into his or her life. 
Interviews evince individual character and offer intriguing details about authors, 
such as Brian Jacques’ early stage writing in local Liverpudlian dialect, and young 
Terry Pratchett’s scheme to get more reader’s tickets to check out extra library books. 
136 • The BulleTin
It will make a great gift for fantasy lovers both young and old, and it could also 
enliven booktalks and literature classes (several older authors discuss the impact of 
World War II and acquaintanceships with J. R. R. Tolkien and C. S. Lewis, which 
would make their sections useful in cross-disciplinary history-literature projects). 
Readers will enjoy the peek behind the scenes in interviews that add depth and 
dimension to our images of writers whose work has already given us so much. An 
index is included.  CW
MArTin, Ann M. On Christmas Eve. Scholastic, 2006 [144p]
ISBN 0-439-74588-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-6
It’s Christmas Eve of 1959, and nine-year-old Tess is absolutely certain that Santa 
is on his way. After all, last Christmas she held firm to her belief, even when older 
sister Evvie clearly thought by now she should know better. The stakes were too 
high for her to give way to doubt, because her friend Sarah’s father was hospital-
ized with cancer, and Tess needed to meet with Santa personally to request that he 
restore Mr. Benjamin’s health. Her resolution paid off: the world filled with magic 
just after midnight as animals gathered outside, the family dog began to talk, 
and Santa himself showed up right on time, sack in hand. He listened patiently 
to Tess’s plea but gently explained that some gifts were simply beyond his power. 
And indeed, Mr. Benjamin did pass away in the new year, leaving Sarah and her 
mother struggling with their grief. Now, a year later, Sarah is ready to celebrate 
again, and Tess sees her friend’s revived spirits as the true gift from Santa. Martin 
begins well, focusing realistically on the girls’ limited understanding of the severity 
of Mr. Benjamin’s condition, on the neighbors’ efforts to keep Sarah involved in 
holiday preparations, and on Tess’s plans for her Christmas Eve ambush. When she 
steps beyond the family-and-friends storyline and into Christmas fantasy, however, 
the flavor shifts from bittersweet to treacly, and Tess’s realization that “Christmas 
and Santa are all about hope” feels more like an authorial insight—a moral to the 
story—than a nine-year-old’s response to an urgent, unfulfilled wish. Nevertheless, 
readers whose own faith in Santa is still a fresh memory will empathize with Tess’s 
need to believe.  EB
MArunAs, nAThAniel Manga Claus: The Blade of Kringle; illus. by Erik 
Craddock. Razorbill, 2006 80p
ISBN 1-59514-134-0 $12.99   
Ad Gr. 4-8
Fritz the elf has a bad attitude problem that he’s about to take out on Santa Claus. 
Denied a promotion in Santa’s workshop, Fritz casts a spell on a ninja nutcracker 
and orders it to wreak a little havoc. He intends to then spring upon the scene, 
whack the nutcracker, save the day, and impress the boss, but the plan goes badly 
awry. Ninja nutcracker lands in the furnace, sparks carry the spell to a stockpile of 
teddy bears, and soon the entire North Pole operation is under attack. With worker 
elves locked in the bathrooms, the terrifying teddies head off to the power turbine, 
but Santa is having none of it. Armed with a pair of swords presented to him by a 
dear friend and sensei when the samurai class was abolished in Japan, Santa takes 
on the bears in a single-handed martial-arts display worthy of the Hong Kong silver 
screen. Beneath the rowdy antics of this graphic novel lies yet another well-worn 
tale of the Christmas that nearly wasn’t. Craddock’s artwork offers few surprises: 
demonic elves and possessed teddy bears in ninja jackets look about like you’d expect 
novemBer 2006 • 137
them to, from the pointy shoes (elves) to the menacing half-moon eyes (bears), and 
the graytone and red color scheme manages to look crowded and muddy in spite 
of the crispness of the lines. Still, this is just the satisfying venture to delight kids 
who cringe at holiday sweetness but are still suckers for a happy ending.  EB
MccAughreAn, gerAldine Father and Son: A Nativity Story; illus. by Fabian 
Negrin. Hyperion, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 1-4231-0344-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-10 yrs
As Mary lies sleeping after giving birth to her son Jesus, her husband, Joseph, has 
an anxious night worrying about how he can possibly fill his role as earthly father 
to a divine child: “How can I teach him the Scriptures? It will be like reading a 
book he wrote himself!"; "What games shall we play, boy, you and I? I mean, how 
can you rough-and-tumble with someone who pinned the ocean in place with a 
single, tack-headed moon?” Joseph’s concerns are ordinary and specific, citing just 
the activities that children will recognize as parental responsibilities and pleasures, 
and McCaughrean’s poetic phrasing perfectly befits the image of the man so many 
will come to call Saint. Negrin’s illustrations, though, impair the text's effectiveness. 
The page design is appealing, with a wide side panel enclosing the narration and 
subtle motifs of birds and flowers above and below, but the drafting is awkward 
and the color choice tends toward overilluminated garishness. A golden blaze of 
holiness nearly obliterates Joseph and jaundices the Baby; limbs are often too bulky 
and heavy to support the lighthearted activities the scenes depict. Still, Joseph is 
too frequently relegated to the back of the stable in Christmas observations, and 
McCaughrean offers a refreshing, imaginative perspective on the carpenter entrusted 
to raise a King.  EB 
MccAughreAn, gerAldine Smile!; illus. by Ian McCaughrean.  Random 
House, 2006 [128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93640-8 $16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83640-3 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
When a photographer’s plane crashes in a desolate landscape, he’s rescued by two 
local kids, Sutira and her brother, Olu, and taken to their village. There he tries to 
explain to the isolated and untechnologized community, which survives by hunting 
and eking out what living they can through their livestock and agriculture, who 
he is. His instant-print camera is a miracle to the village, and Flash, as the book 
dubs the stranded photographer, offers to use his remaining frames, ten in all, for 
whatever the village chief chooses. The chief in turn suggests that Flash select the 
images himself, and the photographer then goes on an odyssey of visual meaning 
wherein he must decide what pictures would be most worthwhile. This unusual 
story by respected British author McCaughrean has the thoughtfulness of a fable 
combined with the plainspoken accessibility of middle-grades domestic realism. 
While the setup suggests a survival story, this is actually a vivid exploration of the 
notion of significance and of the value—and limitations—of capturing an image 
for retention; Flash’s pictures feature, for instance, the village’s precious, single 
remaining cow, from a vantage point that displays her sides bulging with the calf 
to come; Sutira’s young cousin, Tixa, captured on film before she dies of “wilting 
sickness”; the elaborate stone paintings of the village’s ancestors, fading now after 
138 • The BulleTin
generations of sun but still likely to last longer than their photographed image. 
Despite the book’s obvious awareness of explorer clichés and consciousness of 
the scenario’s unlikelihood (the villagers all speak English, a fact that even Flash’s 
rescuer scoffs at), there’s an air of generic exoticism to the villagers and their ways, 
but the setup depends on the isolation of the village, and their customs are credibly 
envisioned. The art limits its depiction to the photographs described in the story, 
so its cartoonishly literal style is thematically suitable as well as inviting to timid 
readers. With its streamlined, easy-chapter text and thought-provoking subject, 
this would make an intriguing readaloud for older audiences as well as a chapter 
book to take readers off the literal and literary beaten path.  DS
MonTgoMery, sy Quest for the Tree Kangaroo: An Expedition to the Cloud Forest 
of New Guinea; illus. with photographs by Nic Bishop. Houghton, 2006 80p 
(Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 0-618-49641-6 $18.00   
R Gr. 5-10
The Matschie’s tree kangaroo is one of only ten tree kangaroo species on the planet, 
found only in New Guinea. Scientist Lisa Dabek studies this rare animal, travel-
ing through the Papua New Guinea cloud forest (cool-temperature rain forest) to 
document and track the resident population; author Montgomery (Search for the 
Golden Moon Bear: Science and Adventure in the Asian Tropics, BCCB 12/04) and 
photographer Bishop traveled with Dabek on one expedition, hiking through the 
New Guinea wilderness, with its extraordinary flora and fauna, and participating 
in the capture, examination, and release of several tree kangaroos. The book fo-
cuses rather more on the quest than the kangaroos, so readers may wish for a little 
more information on the animals (how many are estimated to be still living in the 
wild? Are they technically endangered?), but there’s plenty of evocative description 
of their habitat, thoughtful exploration of the role the locals play in conserving 
the animals, and revealing information about the rigors of this kind of scientific 
project. Bishop’s photography is stunning portraiture, whether of animals—the 
tree kangaroo is marketably adorable—people, or the dense and lushly beautiful 
cloud forest. Though this is longer and more challenging than previous texts in 
the Scientists in the Field series, it has the same personal focus and as-it-happens 
eventfulness that will absorb young animal lovers. Back matter includes additional 
notes about conservation, advice from Lisa Dabek on youthful involvement, tree 
kangaroo resources, a glossary of New Guinea’s Tok Pisin language, author’s and 
illustrator’s notes, and an index.  DS
MurPhy, clAire rudolF Children of Alcatraz: Growing Up on the Rock. Walker, 
2006 64p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-9578-1 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-9577-3 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Through most of the many iterations of the island in San Francisco Bay—Indian 
food-gathering grounds, lighthouse, military post and prison, maximum security 
federal penitentiary, and temporarily reclaimed Indian land—children have been in 
residence. Murphy draws largely on primary sources to sketch some of the peculiar 
pleasures and unique risks of coming of age on an island that draws public scrutiny 
and public misunderstanding. Murphy admits that testimony from the earliest years 
is difficult to come by, and her chapters on antebellum years are little more than 
outlines. Once the prisoners—military and civilian—come into play, though, the 
action picks up a bit. Readers are certain to revel in details of playing on forbidden 
novemBer 2006 • 139
walkways that hang precariously over the cliffs; sneaking gumballs to prisoners, 
who then use them as slingshot ammunition against the guards; telling whoppers to 
mainland reporters, who then pass the tall tales on to their reader verbatim; learning 
that an inmate has been spying on a pair of amorous teenagers and reporting their 
activities to the girl’s father. A wealth of black-and-white photographs lends the title 
a family-album look as they underscore the very ordinariness of the island children, 
those whose white parents kept the light and the prison, and those whose Indian 
parents protested U.S. government injustice. Unfortunately, none of the episodes 
is covered in much depth, and some fairly substantial questions are left in the air: 
How is fresh water brought to the island? How do prisoners arrive by train when 
photos clearly show the island completely surrounded by water? Where did these 
children go to school? What happened to the children during the 1946 prisoner 
siege? What happened to the children as “federal marshals with guns stormed up the 
hill” to clear the island in 1971? There’s enough tantalizing material here, though, to 
keep readers involved, or provide background for those coming from Choldenko’s 
Alcatraz-set Al Capone Does My Shirts (BCCB 3/04) and one can safely predict that 
many teachers will be reading book reports about life on “the Rock.”  EB 
nelson, BlAke Paranoid Park. Viking, 2006 180p
ISBN 0-670-06118-2 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-12 
Visiting the edgy skate park Paranoid Park is an impulse that changes the nameless 
narrator’s life, as does meeting homeless skateboarders and hopping a train with a 
skater named Scratch, who is headed for the next town on a unique kind of beer 
run. If a private security guard on the train hadn’t seen them both and started 
brutally beating Scratch with his nightstick, the narrator would never have gone 
to Scratch’s aid by knocking the guard to the ground. Unfortunately, he does, and 
the guard is then dragged under the train and sliced in two across the tracks. The 
narrator is able to get away and clean everything but his conscience; when a police 
officer shows up at his high school and starts asking questions, his guilt intensifies, 
and he believes it’s only a matter of time until they come for him. Subplots about 
the narrator’s parents divorcing, his losing his virginity to the wrong girl while 
falling for the right girl, and his interactions with skating friends from school are 
simply yet effectively written as a backdrop for the incident and its Poe-like echoes 
in his head and heart. An opening quote from Dostoevsky’s Crime and Punishment 
foreshadows the psychological tenseness of this teen drama, and Nelson’s style feeds 
that drama by tending toward the stark without being abrupt, effectively suggesting 
the unquiet mind of a boy working his way through a haze of regret, horror, and 
responsibility. Although the ending is a bit neat, teens will embrace the narrator’s 
dilemma, his difficulties with family and friends, and the spare prose that moves 
the story along like the steady beating of a human pulse. Pair this with a retelling 
or adaptation of Crime and Punishment or Poe’s “The Telltale Heart” for lively 
discussion.  CW
niMMo, Jenny The Snow Spider: The Magician Trilogy, Book One. Scholastic, 
2006 [144p]
Paper over board ed. ISBN 0-439-84675-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
The usual pall on Gwyn’s birthday (it is also the anniversary of his older sister’s 
disappearance) is lifted when he turns nine. On that birthday, his grandmother 
offers him five strange gifts, which, when thrown to the wind, will show Gwyn 
140 • The BulleTin
whether or not he is a magician. As a result, the young boy learns he is indeed magi-
cally inclined, and a gossamer spider moves into his room and weaves mysterious 
images only he can see. Gwyn’s determination to focus his emerging wizardry on 
bringing back his sister seems successful when a silvery girl from unknown origins 
suddenly appears, bearing a strong sibling resemblance and easing his parents’ 
grief. However, Gwyn is only beginning to exert control over his magic and, after 
inadvertently releasing a powerfully dark force, he realizes that rather than solving 
his family’s problems, he could be endangering them all. Gwyn, overeager and well-
intentioned, is a likable protagonist, and readers will root for him even as he makes 
questionable choices. In addition, the blame, guilt, and discomfort experienced 
in a family when a member suddenly dies (or disappears) are painfully realistic 
and well conveyed. Unfortunately, the fantasy plot is not as well developed as the 
characters: where or what is this alternate world from which silvery beings appear? 
Is his sister actually dead or just missing? Why, if the fifth gift was so desperately 
dangerous, did his grandmother offer it without warning? Ultimately, the lack of 
resolution and preponderance of plot weaknesses overshadow the powerful family 
story, although the fact that this is the first book in a trilogy may explain some of 
the gaps. Nimmo’s talent for creating affable boy protagonists, as seen in her popular 
Charlie Bone series (Charlie Bone and the Time Twister, BCCB 12/03, Charlie Bone 
and the Invisible Boy, BCCB 9/04, et al.), may keep readers engaged with Gwyn 
and anticipating the final two volumes.  AS
PeArsAll, shelley All of the Above. Little, 2006 240p
ISBN 0-316-11524-X $15.99   
R Gr. 5-8 
Inspired by their math teacher, Mr. Collins, a group of middle-school students 
meets every day after school to build the world’s largest tetrahedron in the hopes 
of breaking the world record recently set by a more privileged school. They are at 
first glance an unlikely bunch, but as each takes a turn at narration and the story 
progresses, it becomes clear that the tetrahedron project means a great deal to them 
in different ways. James Harris III, a troubled kid with an attitude, brims with an 
untapped artistic ability; Rhondell, a plain-faced, quiet girl, has college aspirations 
she doesn’t dare to voice; Sharice’s cheerful front hides the truth about life with her 
neglectful foster mother; and Marcel, who resents all the hours he puts in working 
at his father’s barbecue joint, enjoys having a lofty project to call his own. While a 
not-so-subtle didacticism about the virtues of perseverance sometimes overshadows 
the story, the characters’ voices are fresh and believable, and the folksy neighborhood 
ambience—including settings at local businesses such as Willy Q’s Barbecue (recipes 
are included) and the Style R Us salon—is affectionately rendered. Moreover, the 
friendships the students forge along the way and the eventual rescue of Sharice from 
her increasingly dire circumstances will have readers cheering. Headpiece portraits 
introduce the chapters and visually identify the speaker, suggesting that most of the 
characters are African American. An author’s note reveals the inspiration for the 
story in a real-life quest by an urban middle school in Cleveland.  LG
PennyPAcker, sArA Clementine; illus. by Marla Frazee. Hyperion, 
2006 [144p]
ISBN 0-7868-3882-5 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Clementine is an ebullient third-grader who, despite her best intentions, repeatedly 
novemBer 2006 • 141
ends up in hot water, whether it’s for actions at school (“Someone should tell you 
not to answer the phone in the principal’s office, if that’s a rule”) or interactions with 
her friend Margaret (“It is very hard to color hair with a marker, let me tell you”), 
but who ultimately ends up secure in the love of her patient and understanding 
parents. There’s a contrived scare towards the end of this everyday-life story, with 
Clementine misunderstanding several overheard adult conversations and becom-
ing convinced that her parents are giving her away because she’s difficult, and the 
stream of adorable malapropisms grows a little tiresome in its adult-pandering 
(Clementine’s moan about “the heartbreak of sore irises” is too retro a reference to 
be successful, let alone credible). She’s therefore more a character for youngsters to 
laugh at rather than with, but there’s plenty of goofy humor in her eager and well-
intentioned disasters and her pell-mell narrative style; Pennypacker’s gift for unerring 
detail (Clementine’s main fear is pointy things) and touches of creative phrasing 
add further energy, and there are gentler elements, such as Clementine’s grief for 
her late cat, that round out her persona somewhat. Frazee’s ink drawings are quirky 
and robust, showing a Clementine fizzing with a variety of emotions from scene to 
scene but always in the thick of the action, while occasional art from Clementine 
herself adds her own viewpoint to the visuals. Clementine’s adventures and peppy 
voice would make this an appealing readaloud, and readers looking to move up 
from Junie B. Jones may find Clementine a source of similar humor.  DS
PreluTsky, JAck Behold the Bold Umbrellaphant and Other Poems; illus. by Carin 
Berger. Greenwillow, 2006 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-054318-3 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-054317-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-7
Having previously introduced us to Scranimals (BCCB 10/02), Prelutsky now 
continues his tour of the portmanteau animal kingdom with seventeen more po-
ems about combinative creations. In addition to the titular Umbrellaphant (who 
always stays dry in the rain), verses cover the Ballpoint Penguins (who “do little 
else but write and write”), the Lynx of Chain (which “makes resounding clanging 
sounds”), and the Shoehornets (who “choose/ To help with shoes”), among others. 
Prelutsky’s verses scan superbly, as usual, and the ideas remain clever; his multi-
plicity of forms and tightly knitted lines, spiced up with droll turns of phrase and 
touches of polysyllabic absurdity, keep the energy flowing from poem to poem. 
Berger’s collages treat each poem individually rather than linking them together in 
an underlying narrative, as Sís did with Scranimals; her palette of recurring browns 
and gray-touched hues and her copious employment of reclaimed paper objects, 
especially black-lined images and text-printed snippets, recalls Stinky Cheese-era 
Lane Smith with its cool sophistication. This collection offers a multitude of pos-
sible uses: the verses would make tasty readalouds individually or collectively, they 
could add creative zing to a language-arts lesson, and, of course, poetry fans will 
simply enjoy its linguistic pleasures.  DS
PurMell, Ann Christmas Tree Farm; illus. by Jill Weber. Holiday House, 
2006 32p
ISBN 0-8234-1886-3 $16.95   
R 5-8 yrs
The narrator is a lucky kid come the holiday season, since his grandfather runs a 
Christmas tree farm. The boy shares with the audience the process of harvesting 
142 • The BulleTin
trees for buyers and operating the stand, going on to explain the planting, tending, 
and growth of the salable forest. Since it’s an explanatory narrative rather than a 
story, it’s a bit short on conflict or drama, but Purmell decorates the account with 
seasonal atmosphere and attractive particulars. Weber brings a folk-art naïveté to 
her mixed-media illustrations, while a light touch on the paints and trim, austere 
lines keep scenes crisply festive. This will be a solid and inviting introduction to 
what is, for many youngsters, a key part of the holiday season, and adults will ap-
preciate its subtle reminder of the extensive preparation behind the seasonal frenzy. 
End matter provides further details on lore and facts about Christmas trees, plus 
a timeline.  DS 
recorviTs, helen Yoon and the Christmas Mitten; illus. by Gabi Swiatkowska. Fos-
ter/Farrar, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-374-38688-9 $16.00   
R 5-8 yrs
Little Yoon, the Korean immigrant who stubbornly resisted assimilating into 
American school life in My Name Is Yoon (BCCB 4/03), is now about to turn the 
tables on her parents. She comes home from school and regales her family with 
tales of Santa and strong ideas on adopting some new holiday customs. Her parents 
attempt to explain that “we are not a Christmas family. Our holiday is New Year’s 
Day,” but Yoon puts her foot down—literally. When stomping and crusading 
to get in on the Christmas action don’t appear to be paying off, she reminds her 
father of his own arguments: “You have also told me that America is our home 
now. Are we not both Korean and American?’” She may not have a stocking, but 
she hangs her red mitten at the foot of the bed and puts her faith in Santa. In the 
morning, she has a new red dress and a red and white “piece of the North Pole,” 
which her classmates later inform her is a peppermint stick. Swiatkowska again 
captures Yoon in her many moods—mulish, mischievous, merry—and projects 
her imaginings into her surroundings. As the teacher speaks of Santa bringing 
presents, Yoon sees the red-clad man and his elves as Korean acrobats, bounding 
around with their gifts; her dreams of the North Pole are constructed of fanciful 
wooden toy structures that march across an icy landscape outside her bedroom 
window. Scenes are richly textured with swirls and dabs and scratches, and Yoon 
is consistently luminous with her bright attire, inky hair, and riveting eyes. Even 
Santa skeptics and outright nonbelievers will be charmed as Yoon and her family 
embrace a new and delightful tradition.  EB
reiss, Mike Merry Un-Christmas; illus. by David Catrow. HarperCollins, 
2006 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-059127-7 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-059126-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Noelle drags herself through another Christmas Day, a dreary affair filled with heaps 
of toys, a pony, a huge turkey dinner with five kinds of pie, and a serious case of 
ennui. “Now, don’t think that Noelle is a spoiled brat”—she and her family just 
happen to live in Christmas City, where the holiday is celebrated 364 days of the 
year. She cheers up with the approach of August 16th, though, when the whole 
city celebrates un-Christmas. Kids go to school and actually see their friends, the 
TV runs shows like Oprah and Gilligan’s Island, there are TV dinners instead of 
turkey, the big fat guy with the sack is delivering the mail, and the mayor turns off 
novemBer 2006 • 143
the tree so that citizens can see the stars. Noelle is one happy camper as Mom tucks 
her into bed: “‘I wish it could be Un-Christmas every day.’ ‘Oh, I bet you’d get 
tired of it after a while,’ said her mother.” Catrow throws himself into the humor 
with eye-sizzling pictures of a garage bulging with bicyles, a fence straining to hold 
back ponies, and family groaning with disappointment at the Christmas dinner 
spread. This is the perfect antidote for kids on holiday overload, or a Christmas in 
July selection for summer reading clubs.  EB
riPslinger, Jon Derailed. Flux/Llewellyn, 2006 [258p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7387-0888-7 $8.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Star linebacker Wendell Stoneking (“Stony” to everyone but his guidance counselor, 
Mr. Duval) isn’t worried about life after high school. After propelling the football 
team to State, Stony doesn’t look forward to anything beyond a steady job in the 
quarry, like the one his father holds. Failing American Lit will propel him straight 
off the team, though, so Mr. Duval insists that Stony avail himself of the school’s 
peer-tutoring program. Stony figures he’ll convince his tutor to do his homework 
for him, but Robyn, a brainy transfer student who has a son and a few too many 
secrets, won’t let him off the hook so easily. Stony finds himself increasingly drawn 
to Robyn, as well as to her son, Logan; then Robyn’s abusive boyfriend, recently 
released from prison, finally tracks Robyn down, and Stony is caught up in a har-
rowing series of events as he does everything he can to protect Robyn and Logan. 
The wistful rendering of small-town Iowa life—a fishing trip taken by Stony, Robyn, 
and Logan has especially vivid, evocative detail—and the quest of a working-class 
kid to circumvent a grim future are compelling, as Stony gradually awakens to life’s 
possibilities. Unfortunately, the story veers into melodrama as soon as Robyn’s ex 
enters the picture, and the thrill of the over-the-top race to conclusion (featuring 
Logan’s kidnapping and Robyn’s near-rape) is muddied by stilted dialogue, most 
of it in the service of explaining why the protagonists never call the police. For a 
subtler rendering of the limitations and attractions of small-town Midwestern life 
and a similarly poignant romance between damaged people, Will Leitch’s Catch 
(BCCB 11/05) will fill the bill; less patient readers, however, will enjoy this novel’s 
careening ride.  LG 
roBerTs, kATherine I Am the Great Horse. Chicken House/Scholastic, 
2006 401p
ISBN 0-439-82163-0 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-12
The great horse of the title is Bucephalas, famed steed of Alexander the Great, who 
recounts the story of his life and campaigns under his famous master. In Roberts’ 
heavily fictional conception, Bucephalas carries Alexander from boyhood and 
throughout his relentless twenty-year campaign eastward across Asia. Along the way 
he is tended by Charmeia, his groom, who got the job initially by passing herself off 
as a boy named Charmides; secretly Alexander’s half-sister (her mother was raped 
by King Philip as a young soldier), Charm shares with Alexander and Bucephalas a 
psychic horse bond, which links the trio together unto death. Bucephalas’ narration 
is humorous in its detached equine perspective, as he characterizes most humans 
and their actions in light of their horsey equivalents and returns to favorite tropes 
such as lists, inventories, and the totting up of the score after each battle. The darker 
side of Alexander’s crusade is frankly acknowledged as well, as he tramps farther 
144 • The BulleTin
and farther into Asia for less and less concrete reason, becoming increasingly savage 
along the way. The character of Charm, though, spoils the story: with her preteen-
like behavior and pony love, anachronistic views and status, and endless ability to 
get forgiven for malfeasance, she would be at home in fantasy fan fiction (though 
the fantasy elements of the book are more effective in connection with Bucephalas 
than with Charm), but she’ll be a jarring interference to readers with a taste for a 
detailed four-hundred-page narrative of bloody classical warfare. Those willing to 
overlook that weakness and travel with Alexander may find it worth following in 
Bucephalas’ hoofprints.  DS
schliTz, lAurA AMy A Drowned Maiden’s Hair. Candlewick, 2006 389p
ISBN 0-7636-2930-8 $15.99   
R* Gr. 5-9
Nine-year-old Maud is beside herself with happiness when the elderly Hawthorne 
sisters pass by younger, prettier orphans at the Barbary Asylum in favor of her plain, 
undersized self who, as the matron assures her new guardians, is too ill-behaved to 
be recommended. Despite the clothing and attention with which they shower their 
new “special child,” it soon becomes evident that “Aunt Hyacinth” and her sisters 
have an agenda beyond a late-in-life yearning for motherhood. They are in the 
sham spiritualism business, and Maud is just tiny enough and tart enough to join 
them as an added special effect for their seances. Starved for a home and affection, 
Maud tries to convince herself that Aunt Hyacinth will come to love her in time, 
but as the deceptions grow deeper and ever more money is at stake, Maud (and 
even Hyacinth’s sisters) begin to balk at shamelessly fleecing the despondent mother 
of a drowned girl about Maud’s age. Schlitz has an impeccable feel for the gothic 
orphan tale—the vulnerable little girl at the mercy of a nefarious guardian—and 
spins neither a tribute nor a parody, but a deft entry in the genre. Maud, though, 
is no wincing heroine; she enters willingly into the shadowy gimmickry, just as 
determined in her own way as Aunt Hyacinth to get what she wants. Her personal 
story does have the requisite happy ending (poor orphans must, after all, be adopted 
by good people eventually), but Maud remains prickly and a tad calculating right 
to the close. Add a deep armchair, a cup of tea, and a rainy night to send readers 
off into orphan story heaven.  EB
schorr, MelissA Goy Crazy. Hyperion, 2006 344p
ISBN 0-7868-3852-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Rachel Lowenstein lives in a world of trumped-up expectations. She’s got the typical 
high-school blues of trying to figure out how to break in to the So Very clique, but 
hers are complicated by the fact that she is Jewish, and though her family isn’t really 
into the whole Orthodox thing, they play by at least some of the rules, leaving her 
to wonder how far she can push the limits. More than anything, she craves some 
really interesting sin in her life to repent of during the High Holidays, but alas, she 
is stuck in good-girl mode, at least until she spies Luke Christiansen of the New 
Testament name and the Catholic school pedigree. Smitten, she ignores her bubbe’s 
warning to stay away from the goyim and begins dating the delectable Luke, even 
though he turns out to be a depressingly bad kisser. Meanwhile, she continues her 
feud with the good Jewish boy next door, who has somehow developed a hot bod 
that makes him not only acceptable to Jewish mothers everywhere, but to their 
daughters as well. Rachel’s critiques of high school (including a hilarious diatribe 
against Title IX), Judaism, and boy/girl relationships are chock full of laugh-out-
novemBer 2006 • 145
loud irreverence as she stresses her way through adolescence under the influence 
of a faith that “encourages agitation.” Her obsession over her parent’s imaginary 
reaction to her goyfriend is soundly deflated by her mother’s common-sense reac-
tion, but her comically overblown hysteria to that point keeps pages turning for 
every girl who’s ever wanted an off-limits boy.  KC 
schreck, kAren hAlvorsen Dream Journal. Hyperion, 2006 250p
Library ed. ISBN 1-4231-0105-7 $15.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Livy Moore’s nightly dreams are as strange and unsettling as the 
central fact of her life: her mother lies on a hospital bed in the living room, dy-
ing of cancer. Livy sleepwalks through life, afraid to be with her mother, repulsed 
by the paraphernalia and process of dying, and distant from school and friends. 
When she briefly resurfaces, she discovers best friend Ruth is now hanging with the 
popular crowd, and Livy is pulled along in their wake until another medical crisis 
with her mother reclaims her from them. When her mother comes home for what 
everyone knows is the last time, there is time enough for a shared mother-daughter 
adventure. Though Livy’s mother dies, Schreck points Livy toward the future, and 
readers will be comforted by her understanding that life goes on and that dreams 
and memories can help the healing begin. Avoiding melodrama, Schreck expresses 
genuine emotion and sweetness in this story as Livy’s father fights hopelessness and 
exhaustion to care for his dying wife while he unconsciously neglects his daughter, 
and Livy guiltily avoids her mother even while hearing her mother’s voice in her 
head. The poignancy of her home situation is leavened by secondary plotlines about 
reclaiming an old friendship, and Livy’s peers and their boredom with small-town 
life. Schreck’s characters grow and change, and she respects the sadness of a parent’s 
death while leaving the door open for future happiness.  CW 
seeger, lAurA vAccAro Black? White! Day? Night!; written and illus. by Laura 
Vaccaro Seeger. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2006 20p
ISBN 1-59643-185-7 $16.95   
R 4-8 yrs
Sandwiched between the endpapers’ “beginning” and “end” are eighteen flippable 
pages which convert a term into its opposite. Each page features a one word ques-
tion and a peep hole through which an image appears. “Over?” hovers on hot pink 
card stock above a picture of a dolphin leaping over the waves. Flip up the page and 
that same dolphin is now rocketing along “under!” a strata of currents in a deep 
sea. Some entries use color to startling effect: “nothing?” sits on a stark white page 
beneath an inky black square; flip to reveal a brilliant “something!”—Van Gogh-ish 
black vase with yellow flowers on a red table against a blue backdrop. Others tease 
viewers who know what the upcoming opposite must be but can’t predict how Seeger 
will ever manage the conversion: “sad?” is two dot eyes and a downturned arc of 
a mouth; the “happy!” that lurks beneath is a near-life-size smiling face on which 
the previous “mouth” and “eyes” are now a nose and a pair of freckles. “Addition?” 
presents the equation 2 + 2 = 4, and the image beneath expands our view of the 
plus sign into a number four, as in 4 - 2 = 2 “subtraction!” The paper engineering 
is simple enough and the stock sturdy enough to withstand repeat visits. No doubt 
there’s a language-arts lesson here for the taking, but expect it to be trumped by 
the sheer inventiveness of the presentation.  EB
146 • The BulleTin
shiMko, Bonnie Kat’s Promise. Harcourt, 2006 272p
ISBN 0-15-205473-1 $17.00   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Kat has heard about her mother’s family—how her grandparents disowned her 
mother when she became pregnant and then left everything to their other daughter, 
Paulina, upon their death; how Paulina never forgave Kat’s mother for marrying 
Paulina’s boyfriend. Kat’s father, who proved to be an abusive alcoholic, died years 
ago, so the death of Kat’s mother from cancer means thirteen-year-old Kat must 
now live with Aunt Paulina. Since Kat resists Paulina’s possessive manipulations 
(“I’d like you to call me Mother now”), she must find affection elsewhere, and she 
bonds with the sympathetic housekeeper, Nettie, and the kindly writer next door, 
who shares a home with his mentally disabled grandson; she also finds friendship 
with a schoolmate, Beamer, and Beamer’s warm family. Drama’s not over for Kat, 
however: she discovers that Nettie is actually her father’s mother, housekeeping for 
Paulina just to get contact with Kat, and that relationship is all that stands between 
Kat and disaster when Paulina’s new live-in boyfriend forces his attentions on Kat. 
This book is so filled with luscious melodrama (there’s also Nettie’s prison term 
for killing her husband, Beamer’s pregnancy scare, and Beamer’s parents’ breakup) 
that it really just should have enjoyed itself and surrendered to the genre, since 
there’s definitely pleasure to be found in the Little Princess-style tale of a beautiful 
and virtuous orphan defending herself against a cruel rich relative in gleaming furs. 
Unfortunately, the trajectory of the plot is jumpy, and the slow pace detracts from 
the drama without really allowing much in the way of nuanced exploration; some 
interesting characters, like Beamer, get buried in the series of events, while less ef-
fective characters—such as the neighbor’s predictably portrayed grandson—take 
up needless space. Fans of the soaps and other event-packed narrative may still find 
the heightened drama here piquant and Kat’s eventual finding of a good home with 
her grandmother a well-earned relief—for both protagonist and reader.  DS
sieger, Ted The Fourth King: The Story of the Other Wise Man; written and illus. 
by Ted Sieger. Candlewick, 2006 [48p]
ISBN 0-7636-3121-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-9 yrs
With the fine-print nod on the title page verso to Henry van Dyke, whose “The 
Story of the Other Wise Man” inspired this effort, Sieger offers a similar storyline 
that both simplifies and, in an important way, truncates the original. In smooth, 
slightly solemn prose, a star-gazing king (here named Mazzel) packs his most valu-
able possessions, a star map and a crystal, and sets off with his camel Chamberlin 
to meet up with the Magi and find the new king born in Bethlehem. Along the 
way he stops to perform good deeds that leave him both short of time and bereft 
of treasure, and by the time he reaches the stable, the Holy Family is gone: “And 
then, in the depths of my despair, the most wonderful thing happened. I heard 
a voice speak softly. ‘King Mazzel, you have not come too late! You were always 
with me.’” He lives happily from then on as a shepherd, tending both sheep and a 
flock of children he rescued from their slavemasters along his journey. The formal 
language of the text is oddly mismatched with the cartoonish figures of kings and 
camels, who are dot eyed, skinny limbed, and long of nose (or snout). Although 
listeners who are unfamiliar with the van Dyke tale will probably be satisfied with 
an ending that promises a long and happy life for good King Mazzel, it sorely 
undercuts the deeper message of the original that finds the fourth king at Calvary, 
novemBer 2006 • 147
giving the last of his treasure and his life just as he finds the object of his quest at 
the Crucifixion. This is an acceptable introduction to the modern Christian fable, 
but readers in search of a closer retelling of the van Dyke story will prefer Summers’ 
The Fourth Wise Man (BCCB 12/98).  EB 
sleATor, williAM Hell Phone. Amulet/Abrams, 2006 [256p]
ISBN 0-8109-5479-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10 
High-school junior Nick has always been a good, hardworking kid, and all he 
wants is a cell phone so that he can talk to his girlfriend, Jen. He doesn’t have a 
lot of money, though, so when he finds a quirky used model without caller ID, 
he purchases it without batting an eye. However, the phone soon becomes more 
trouble than it’s worth, as Nick receives unwanted calls ranging from the threatening 
(a man named Fleck) to the disturbing (a woman sobbing for help). When Fleck 
threatens to hurt Jen, Nick reluctantly agrees to do his bidding, following instruc-
tions that result in Fleck’s escape from hell, a place with Dantean levels featuring 
medieval tortures, an impenetrable bureaucracy, and near-constant bad karaoke. 
Nick is quickly caught up in a scheme where he’s no longer sure whom to trust, 
and an adventure that ultimately lands him in—you guessed it—hell. While the 
premise of the cell phone from hell is a promising one, and the action-packed story 
line hoists just enough momentum to propel the reader through implausibility, the 
narrative is ultimately too convoluted to support what might otherwise have been 
a rollicking, hellacious romp. Shout-outs to Dante notwithstanding, Sleator’s hell 
hath no internal logic—there’s no consistency, for instance, to the rules for arrival 
or departure. However, those who enjoy Sleator, even when he phones it in, will 
probably have few complaints, nor will those in search of an action-packed horror 
story featuring the always intriguing and creepy setting of hell.  LG
sPencer, kATherine Saving Grace. Harcourt, 2006 [256p]
ISBN 0-15-205740-4 $15.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Grace and her parents are still in shock from the death of her older brother, Matt, 
in a car accident this past summer; while her parents find solace in the church 
and its related support groups, Grace won’t turn to a God who robbed her of her 
beloved brother, and she’s left to struggle through a tough junior year alone. She 
turns her back on her old friends and takes up with the popular crowd, finding 
alcohol and the attentions of an older boy to be an insulation against the pain she’s 
tired of feeling. Somehow, though, her strange classmate Philomena is always there, 
offering quiet support and seeming to understand what Grace is experiencing. This 
is a fairly predictable adjustment-to-loss drama, and the characterization of the 
popular crowd is hackneyed and didactic. The plot twist about Philomena, who’s 
apparently sent from Heaven to look out for Grace, is an interesting one, but it 
doesn’t combine well with the rest of the book, and the book leaves unaddressed 
the obvious question of why Heaven sent somebody to save Grace but not Matt. 
The subject is nonetheless an absorbing one, and the book is understanding of the 
way that parents finding their own comfort may not notice that their remaining 
child is being left behind. This isn’t up to the standard of sibling-loss titles such as 
Wallace-Brodeur’s Blue Eyes Better (BCCB 3/02) or Rivers’ Surviving Sam (BCCB 
6/02), but its unusual twist and sincere sympathy may keep readers involved in 
the family drama.  DS
148 • The BulleTin
sTeele, J. M. The Taker. Hyperion, 2006 350p
ISBN 0-7868-4930-4  $15.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
The SATs have fulfilled Carly’s worst fears: her results were disastrous, and her 
parents are horrified at the possibility that she may not make it into Princeton, as 
tradition requires. Even to get into the SAT prep class of her parents’ choice, she 
needs to bring her scores up, so she begins tutoring with geeky neighbor Ronald 
Gross. Her real plan, however, is to sign on with a mysterious figure known only 
as “The Taker,” who promises to take the exams in her place and get her a Princeton-
serviceable score. Carly’s narration effectively conveys the panic of a girl who’s 
largely been coasting and who’s now facing the consequences, and the shadowy 
figure of the Taker adds suspense and a touch of menace. Ultimately, though, the 
plot can’t make its contrivances work effectively: it’s one thing to set Ronald up as 
a hottie-in-the-rough to whom Carly is drawn, but the behaviors the book wants 
to explain away as acceptable indications of his devotion to Carly in reality range 
from arrogant to creepy; Carly’s stratospheric scores on the test retake are so im-
plausible that some readers may wonder if somebody secretly did take the second 
test on her behalf. Readers looking for a more serious exploration of the SATs will 
do better with Fredericks' Crunch Time (BCCB 2/06), but those looking for a 
diversion may enjoy this soapy version of the nerd-makes-good and girl-triumphs-
over-temptation plots.  DS
wAllner, AlexAndrA Lucy Maud Montgomery: The Author of Anne of Green 
Gables; written and illus. by Alexandra Wallner. Holiday House, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-8234-1549-X $16.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Anne Shirley has been the intimate friend of generations of readers; hence interest in 
her creator is likely to remain strong. In simple if sometimes choppy prose, Wallner 
plucks the more well-known incidents and quotations from Montgomery’s life and 
letters to include. She emphasizes Maud’s passion for writing no matter what other 
obligations confronted her. Though she talks about Maud’s disappointments, rejec-
tions, and legal problems with her publisher, she soft-soaps or leaves out many of 
her other adult difficulties, such as her husband’s serious depression (Wallner says 
only “Ewan’s spirits were low and he needed care”) and the death of Montgomery’s 
second son at birth. Her naïve illustrations, though more informational than beau-
tiful, appropriately emphasize the outdoors in a sandy, pastel palette, and capture 
the full range of landscapes available in Prince Edward Island, from tree-lined 
paths to cultivated gardens to ocean vistas. Wallner exercises a delicate humor in 
Maud’s facial expressions; clearly visible are her anger at housework, her sadness at 
the rejection of her stories, and her dissatisfaction with the movie of Anne when all 
around her are enjoying it. While the book’s audience will mostly be too young to 
be fans of Montgomery’s achievements, they may find some interest in this portrait 
of an unusual and persevering writer. A list of Montgomery’s works, source notes, 
and a bibliography are included, though the bibliography doesn’t include all of the 
biographical accounts of Montgomery that are currently available.  KC
weATherFord, cArole BosTon Moses: When Harriet Tubman Led Her People to 
Freedom; illus. by Kadir Nelson. Hyperion/Jump at the Sun, 2006 40p
ISBN 0-7868-5175-9 $15.99   
R 6-9 yrs
Most elementary students will hear of Harriet Tubman early in their school careers; 
novemBer 2006 • 149
this luminous picture book that focuses on her spiritual motivations will help them 
flesh out their imaginative impressions of this strong heroine. Starting with her deci-
sion to escape from the Maryland plantation on which she lived, the book follows 
her perilous journey north and her decision to go back to help as many people as 
she could to find safety and freedom. Each decision she makes is punctuated by a 
prayer for guidance and comfort. Weatherford does a masterful job of depicting the 
kinds of conversations a woman who has memorized a lot of scriptural references 
might have with God; as Harriet offers up her fears and questions, God responds 
by personalizing a bit of scripture for her situation. God’s voice is in all caps in a 
shade lighter than the background; the composite result is a remarkably effective 
portrayal of the heartening, calming dialogue that bolstered Harriet in her times of 
need. In Nelson’s powerful compositions dramatic landscapes figure prominently, 
with low-angle views allowing the spreading skies to suggest heavenly viewpoint; 
the harsh lines of Harriet’s face combine with postures of vulnerability to render 
her character complex—dignified, determined, and strong in her supplication 
and submission to a will larger than and yet fully attuned to her own. An author’s 
note fills in the biographical detail that edges this moving portrait of the “Moses 
of her people.”  KC 
Why DiD the ChiCken Cross the roaD?; written and illus. by Jon Agee, Tedd 
Arnold, and Harry Bliss, et al. Dial, 2006 40p
ISBN 0-8037-3094-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Fourteen illustrators deal with the age-old question of the chicken’s motivation in 
traversing the boulevard, with wildly diverse results. Some artists depict traditional 
answers to the riddle (Tedd Arnold goes with “To show the possum it could be 
done”), some further explore the question (Mo Willems’ chicken sweats under the 
third-degree from the cops as to his motives), while others offer visual or visual-
dependent explanations (David Catrow’s bird pleasurably sits down to a juicy burger 
at Lou’s Across the Road Diner, while Chris Raschka’s hen ends up face to face 
with the Sphinx, who says, “You tell me”). Though the sophistication level of the 
humor and the success of the jokes varies, there are plenty of humorous punchlines 
offered, and the broadening of the concept will tickle readerly imaginations as well 
as funnybones. The chicken/road theme provides cohesion throughout the varied 
styles of the spreads, but it’s intriguing to see the variation of the interpretations, 
from David Shannon’s chaotic loud-colored vision of farm animals driving their 
red convertible through the green light to Chris Sheban’s softly textured twilight 
comedy of a pair of baseball-playing birds who’ve just broken a window. Despite 
the unevenness of the treatments, kids will likely get a giggle out of the idea, and it 
could translate into a finger-lickin' good art or language arts assignment.  DS
willey, MArgAreT A Clever Beatrice Christmas; illus. by Heather M. 
Solomon. Atheneum, 2006 40p
ISBN 0-689-87017-5 $16.95   
Ad 4-8 yrs
In the latest of the Clever Beatrice titles (Clever Beatrice and the Best Little Pony, 
BCCB 10/04, etc.), Beatrice is questioned by a trio of Santa skeptics about the 
reality of St. Nick. After all, sleigh bells often jingle in the night, and neighbors have 
been known to sport long fur coats and soft white beards. Not only does Beatrice 
know Père Noël exists, she proposes to obtain the proof—a bell from his sleigh, a 
button from his coat, and a snippet of his beard. She stays up on Christmas Eve, 
150 • The BulleTin
talks Père Noël into letting her fix his sleigh bell, his loose button, and his untidy 
beard, and clips the goods with a pair of scissors. Père Noël sees through her ruse, 
commends her cleverness, and leaves her a pair of skates and a kitten with his own 
blue eyes. The story is a little slow (the details of Christmas preparations are lengthy), 
and Beatrice’s acclaimed cleverness isn’t all that impressive, depending as it does on 
Santa’s indulgence and a propensity for modest vandalism. Solomon again creates 
a lovely watercolor backdrop for the tale, a northerly wonderland that’s as warmly 
domestic as a Norman Rockwell and as comically sassy as a Julie Vivas. Wide-eyed 
children (and wide-haired Beatrice) take part in a host of intriguing French-
Canadian Christmas customs—baking and icing the yule log cake, trimming the 
tree with natural decorations, attending an outdoor potluck feast, and processing 
with lighted candles to midnight Mass. This isn’t up to the standard of Beatrice’s 
previous outings, but viewers may delight in the seasonal details and appreciate the 
suggestion that Santa is infinitely forgiving of yourthful trespasses.  EB 
wilson, kArMA Sleepyhead; illus. by John Segal. McElderry, 2006 32p
ISBN 1-4169-1241-X $15.95   
R 2-4 yrs
The “Sleepyhead” of the title is a beloved teddy bear, escorted firmly but lovingly 
through the bedtime ritual by the kitty to whom he belongs. Close-coupled rhym-
ing verse covers both the cat’s injunctions (“Your teeth are brushed, your book is 
read./ Go to sleep. It’s time for bed”) and the teddy’s valiant delaying tactics (“One 
more book, says Sleepyhead”), until finally sleep inevitably wins out and silences the 
little guy (“Not a word says Sleepyhead”). The text is a little overlong for a poem 
with no real story, but it’s lullingly hypnotic with its rhyme, repetition, and inclu-
sion of familiar bedtime touchstones. Segal’s watercolor scenes offer figures with 
softly washed planes of pigment with crisp self-colored edges, giving an appealing 
paper-collage effect as the kitty and his/her charge enact the bedtime drama against 
airy white space. Most of the particulars of that drama come from the illustrations, 
as it’s Segal’s scenes that create the characters and add a fantasy element, with the 
teddy and kitty wandering through a landscape clearly inspired by the household’s 
bedtime stories as sleep grows closer and closer. This could encourage youngsters 
to prepare for bedtime by tucking in their own teddies or just send them off to 
sleep with a dreamy valedictory.  DS
winTer, JonAh The 39 Apartments of Ludwig van Beethoven; illus. by Barry 
Blitt. Schwartz & Wade, 2006 40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93602-5 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83602-0 $15.95   
R Gr. 3-5
This facetious “biography” of Beethoven focuses on the great composer’s home life, 
specifically the fact that Beethoven lived in no fewer than thirty-nine apartments 
during his adult life in Vienna and that he owned several pianos, which had no 
legs since Beethoven preferred sitting on the floor as he played. Winter takes this 
as the germ of his story, in which he fictionalizes the details of Beethoven’s apart-
ment-dwelling and moving habits, pokerfacedly describing artifacts that suggest 
neighbors’ annoyance with his banging on the keyboards (“Bits of paper with the 
German words for ‘SHUUUUUT . . . UP!!!’ have been discovered”) and conceiving 
of elaborate arrangements that would maneuver the heavy pianos into the old-fash-
ioned upper-floor apartments. While some readers will undoubtedly mistake the 
satiric historiography for a factual account, it’s a dryly comedic piece of fiction, with 
novemBer 2006 • 151
some nice humorous touches in the supposed documentation; the mundane focus 
also is genuinely effective in making audiences consider the challenges of day-to-day 
life as—or next door to—a musical genius. Blitt’s line-and-watercolor illustrations 
have a sculptural formality to their line but exaggerate things for comic effect, with 
Beethoven himself a squat figure with the mien of a furious baby; though the pale 
colors somewhat dilute the effect of the comedy, making the Rube Goldbergian 
contraptions funnier in the text than in the illustrations, there’s a trim drollery to 
the proceedings. This might be used with de Paola's Bonjour, Mr. Satie (BCCB 
3/91) for a pair of amusing fictional takes on artistry, or as a light-hearted entry in 
a music-appreciation unit.  DS
winTer, JonAh Dizzy; illus. by Sean Qualls. Levine/Scholastic, 2006 48p
ISBN 0-439-50737-5 $16.99   
R* 6-10 yrs
Youngsters who can’t tell swing from bebop will nonetheless embrace Winter’s 
energetic take on Dizzy Gillespie: bullied squirt who takes out his frustrations with 
his fists; young Turk who clowns his way right out of a job; jazz innovator who 
rewrites the rule book with sounds nobody ever expected to emerge from a trum-
pet. Freewheeling verse peppered with rogue rhymes traces his life from childhood 
years when “he took all the anger he felt inside/ and blasted it out through the end 
of his horn,” through his early career testing the patience of fellow musicians in 
swing bands (“On certain nights,/ he’d elbow the piano man/ off the bench/ and 
play the keyboard with his left hand/ and the trumpet with his right”), and on to 
his emergence as a featured artist with an entirely new sound: “It was like he had 
taken a wrecking ball/ and SMASHED IN/ The House of Jazz.” Qualls’ acrylic, 
pencil, and collage artwork just can’t keep still, blasting streams of liquid sound 
from horns, unleashing angels and doves to accompany the trumpeter, upsetting 
the staid horizontal and vertical lines of stage performances with Dizzy’s diagonal 
antics. Stylized faces register a playmate’s taunting, a father’s rage, a colleague’s 
critical disapproval, all in sharp visual contrast to Dizzy’s own expressions of as-
surance and pride, perhaps serenity, as he settles into his signature sound. Even 
the primary color scheme plucks an emotional chord—reds of anger and hot jazz 
are cooled into pinks and mauves; blues add a counterpoint of sadness behind the 
clowning; in the closing spread yellow gold boasts a triumpant Dizzy in crown and 
halo, who “still shoves the angel Gabriel out of the way/ and shows him how to 
play/ Bebop.” Pair this with Anderson’s Strange Mr. Satie (BCCB 9/03), a story of 
a very different rule-breaking musician, to demonstrate that not all dead musicians 
are dull musicians.  EB
wolFson, Jill Home, and Other Big, Fat Lies. Holt, 2006 [224p]
ISBN 0-8050-7670-0 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Maybe, hopes eleven-year-old Whitney, her new foster parents will “just happen to 
like superfunny, hyper, loudmouthed kids who are messy and small for their age.” 
The reality of the McCrarys’ isn’t quite so wonderful—their son, Striker, derides 
Whitney as “Termite,” and it turns out that the McCrarys have, like many in the 
community, turned to foster care as a way to bring in extra money since the massive 
layoffs at the timber company that was the linchpin of the local economy. Whitney 
nonetheless settles in, finding a secretly kindred spirit in the irreverent Mr. McCrary; 
her boundless curiosity finds a focus in the natural world around her, an interest 
152 • The BulleTin
that’s encouraged by her new science teacher and that, she’s stunned to realize, is 
shared by Striker. What, though, will happen to the forest Whitney loves and the 
foster children who have found homes in town when the timber company calls back 
its workers? Whitney’s ebullient presence helps lift this above the standard foster-kid 
drama; her constant flow of malapropisms seems appropriate to a kid who grabs at 
everything impulsively and rarely has time for follow-through or solid grounding, 
while her neat justifications are a credible defensive maneuver. The book offers a fair 
look into a timber-dependent community’s bitterness about environmental issues, 
but it’s also evocative in conveying the richness of the ecosystems that lumbering 
can destroy. The foster-child drama is a perennial favorite, and its fans will find 
Whitney a welcome addition to the lineup.  DS
woods, BrendA My Name Is Sally Little Song. Putnam, 2006 182p
ISBN 0-399-24312-7 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Sally May Harrison knows exactly who she is—a slave on a Georgia plantation. 
Though her master is benevolent, the work is still hard, and Sally uses her gift for 
making up songs to comfort her through beatings and long, hot days in the cotton 
fields. When her father learns that their master is going to sell her and her brother, 
the family decides to escape, traveling south through the Okefenokee Swamp to 
Seminole land. They evade pursuers and survive a brief fever only to run afoul of 
an alligator, who delivers such a vicious bite to Mama that she dies the next day. 
Two young Seminole hunters find them and bring them to their camp, where 
Papa is eventually welcomed into the tribe and given a Seminole name. Woods 
skates through some pretty emotional and frightening scenes—the flight through 
the woods, the fever that grips Papa and Sally in the swamp, Mama’s death—in a 
manner too condensed for intense realism; her spare prose makes escape, travel, 
and finding a new life seem considerably easier than it was. Her focus on Sally’s 
identity development remains strong and credible, however. Sally’s resistance to 
being absorbed into the culture of the friendly Seminoles is realistic, as is the fact 
that she is won over by being encouraged to play as well as work. Sally Little Song 
finally accepts her new name and her new identity as neither slave nor free; she 
emerges as a stoic little soul inured to hardship, her gift for poetry enabling her to 
manage, critique, and cope with her difficult experiences.  KC
yAng, gene luen American Born Chinese; written and illus. by Gene Luen Yang; 
color by Lark Pien. First Second/Roaring Brook, 2006 233p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59643-152-0 $18.95   
R Gr. 6-10
Raised in San Francisco’s Chinatown, Jin Wang moves to a new neighborhood and 
a new school in third grade, where he quickly realizes that he’s an oddball among 
Anglo-American classmates. Further complicating his life is the arrival of a Tai-
wanese student who latches onto him for companionship and sticks like a burr on 
through junior high. The picture of dorkiness in his huge eyeglasses, Robo Happy 
shirt, hiked-up pants, and cowlick, Wei-Chen Sun turns into Jin’s closest friend and 
greatest embarrassment, both a cheerleader and a stumbling block to Jin’s efforts 
to fit into mainstream school life and win the blonde girl of his dreams. Weaving 
around and ultimately converging with the seriocomic story of Jin’s coming-of-age 
problems are two related tales that comment on issues of identity. In the first, the 
Chinese legendary Monkey King, banished from the gods’ dinner party because he 
is a monkey, perfects his skills and disciplines to the point where he claims to have 
novemBer 2006 • 153
transcended his monkeyness. As “The Great Sage, Equal of Heaven,” he’s ready 
to take on all comers including the creator god Tze-Yo-Tzuh, but he is ultimately 
punished, humbled, and redirected to the understanding that his freedom will only 
come through acceptance of his true nature. The last piece of the narrative triad is a 
sitcom, “Everyone Wuvs Chin-Kee,” complete with laugh track, in which broadly 
stereotyped Chin-Kee turns up on an annual visit to Americanized cousin Danny 
and, in a series of classroom episodes that play out Jin Wang’s worst nightmares, 
turns Danny’s social life into a shambles. The graphic-novel format is particularly 
well suited to managing the flow of three simultaneous storylines, and the action 
sequences of the Monkey King’s tale and the over-the-top satire on the portrayal of 
immigrants in American pop culture settle right into their spacious frames on the 
generously white bordered pages. Compositions are tidy and the palette is softly 
muted, so that even the strongest colors in the action scenes never reach the intensity 
of a visual assault. Kids fighting an uphill battle to convince parents and teachers 
of the literary merit of graphic novels would do well to share this title.  EB
young, AMy Belinda and the Glass Slipper; written and illus. by Amy Young. Vi-
king, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-670-06082-8 $15.99   
R 6-9 yrs
Though Belinda (from Belinda the Ballerina, BCCB 4/03) is grandly sized, she’s a 
talented ballerina, so she wins the role of Cinderella over petite little Lola. Jealous 
Lola locks Belinda in a closet on opening night and goes on instead; after the Fairy 
Godmother (well, the dancer playing the part of the Fairy Godmother) releases 
Belinda, the two ballerinas dance it out onstage, with only Belinda successfully fit-
ting into the glass slipper. The Cinderella-within-Cinderella plot is that rare thing, 
a genuinely new twist on an old tale, and the ballet theme, with its ruffly French 
phrases (“Belinda pirouetted out of reach . . . protected herself with a well-executed 
battement . . . and she escaped with a stunningly brilliant tour en l’air”), has the 
same pink princessy appeal as the Cinderella story itself for a double-dip of girly 
goodness, with enough humor to keep things from cloying. The illustrations fea-
ture a bevy of attenuated ballerinas who seem to be crafted from pipe cleaners save 
for their round, solid heads; though the predominance of pastel shades undercuts 
the punch of some scenes, the visuals still offer delicate comedy that works with 
rather than against traditional ballet aesthetics. Ballet-lovers, Cinderella fans, and 
the many who are both will warm up to this tale that takes folkloric rivalry onto 
the dance floor.  DS 
154 • The BulleTin
Jones, diAnA wynne The Tough Guide to Fantasyland. Rev. ed. Firebird/Pen-
guin, 2006 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-14-240722-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys
Most libraries have a travel section filled with guidebooks to places familiar and far 
away, but no real-world guidebook (it’s a nice joke that the imprint for this book 
appears to be “Firebird Travel”) is as wry or inventive as the Tough Guide that 
serves as a mixture of glossary and handbook for Fantasyland, with alphabetical 
encyclopedia-style entries covering key and cliché aspects of fantasy writing. First 
published ten years ago in the UK, this classic has been given a few new parts, a 
good varnish, and a new set of wheels. Entries include everything from bards to 
black arts, quests to tree homes, and jumping around is more satisfying than mak-
ing a linear trip from start to finish. This will leave fantasy fans of various ages in 
stitches, and teachers or librarians hoping to inspire teen writers will appreciate 
the way Jones pokes gentle fun at the fantasy genre while providing quite a list of 
appurtenances within it.  CW
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
November 2006 • 155
Abuse–fiction: Lynch
Adventure: Berkeley; enthoven; 
Marunas
African Americans: Weatherford; 
Winter Dizzy
African Americans–fiction: Ander-
son; Woods
African Americans–stories: Grimes
Animals: Montgomery
Animals–poetry: Kumin; Prelutsky
Animals–stories: Gerstein; Isaacs
Appearance–fiction: Libby
Archaeology: Schlitz
Architecture: Mannis
Arithmetic: Chae
Art: Why Did the Chicken
Art and artists–fiction: Mac-
Cullough; McCaughrean Smile
ArthurIAn LIterAture: 
Fisher
Asian Americans–fiction: Yang
Asian Americans–stories: recorvits
Aunts–fiction: Shimko
Babies–stories: Grimes
Basketball–fiction: Lupica
BedtIMe StorIeS: deacon; 
o’Connor; Wilson
BIBLe StorIeS: Gerstein
BIoGrAPhIeS: dePaola; Mannis; 
Wallner; Weatherford; Winter 
Dizzy 
Biology: Montgomery
Birds–fiction: Loizeaux
Birds–stories: Chae; himmelman
Books and reading–fiction: holt
Brothers–fiction: Lawrence
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Byars; 
ehrenhaft; Koja; MacCullough; 
nimmo
Careers: Green
Cheating–fiction: Steele
Chickens–stories: himmelman
Christmas: dePaola; Purmell
Christmas–fiction: Funke; Lupica; 
Martin; Marunas 
Christmas–stories: McCaughrean 
Father; recorvits; reiss; Sieger; 
Willey
Circuses–fiction: Berkeley
Clothing–stories: Lunge-Larsen
Computers–fiction: haarsma
ConCePt BooKS: Seeger
CountInG BooKS: Chae
Crime and criminals–fiction: Brown; 
Libby; nelson
dancers and dancing–stories: Young
dating–fiction: Goobie
death–fiction: ehrenhaft; Lawrence; 
MacCullough; Schreck; Shafer; 
Spencer
dinosaurs–fiction: Byars
disasters–fiction: hopkinson
doctors–fiction: Koja
dogs–fiction: Lawrence
ducks–stories: Chae
eating disorders–fiction: Kaslik
ecology–fiction: Wolfson
Environmental studies: Montgom-
ery
Ethics and values: Bloor; Cooney; 
delaney; Funke; Going; Levithan; 
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
156 • The bulleTiN
Lynch; McCaughrean Smile; nel-
son; Sieger; Steele; Wolfson
Faith–fiction: Cooney; Schorr; 
Spencer
Families–fiction: Cooney; holt; 
Kaslik; Shimko
FAntASY: Beddor; Berkeley; Bloor; 
delaney; enthoven; Fisher; hale; 
Le Guin; Levine; nimmo; rob-
erts; Sleator
Fathers–fiction: Bloor; Cooney; 
ehrenhaft; Lupica
Fathers–stories: McCaughrean Father
FoLK-LIKe tALeS: Lunge-Larson
FoLKtALeS And FAIrY tALeS: 
Gerstein; hurston; Young
Food and eating–stories: Ahlberg; 
durant
Foster care–fiction: Wolfson
Friends–fiction: Going; Lynch; Mar-
tin; Schreck; Yang
Friends–stories: Beaty 
Future–fiction: haarsma
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Goobie; 
Levithan
Giants–stories: Beaty
Grandmothers–fiction: Shimko
GrAPhIC noveLS: Bogaert; 
Marunas; Yang
Growing up–fiction: ripslinger
Halloween: hurston
hell–fiction: enthoven; Sleator
hIStorICAL FICtIon: Ander-
son; Bogaert; Brown; holt; hop-
kinson; Libby; Loizeaux; Martin; 
roberts; Woods
History, classical: Schlitz
History, U. S.: Bogaert; dePaola; 
hopkinson; Murphy; Weather-
ford
History, world: Coleman; Schlitz
horror: Libby
horses–fiction: roberts
huMor: Ahlberg; Byars; durant; 
himmelman; Pennypacker; reiss; 
Schorr; Why Did the Chicken; 
Winter 39 Apartments; Young
Identity–fiction: Goobie
Imagination–stories: Clark
Immigrants–stories: recorvits
Islands: Murphy
Jews–fiction: Schorr
Knights and chivalry–fiction: Fisher
Language arts: Prelutsky; Seeger; 
Why Did the Chicken
Latinos–stories: Foreman
Literature, children’s: Beddor; Mar-
cus; Wallner
Love–fiction: Block
Magic and magicians–fiction: 
nimmo
Mothers–fiction: Bateson; Schreck
Moving–fiction: Bateson; Winter 39 
Apartments
Music and musicians: Winter Dizzy
Music and musicians–fiction: Levine; 
Winter 39 Apartments
Mythology, classical: Block
native Americans–fiction: Bogaert; 
Woods
orphans–fiction: Berkeley; Lupica; 
Shafer; Shimko
Pets–fiction: Loizeaux
PoetrY: Kumin; Prelutsky
Politics–fiction: hale; Levithan
PoP-uP BooKS: Seeger
Prisons: Murphy
racism–fiction: Anderson
Reading aloud: Kumin; Loizeaux; 
Pennypacker; Prelutsky
Reading, easy: Byars; Pennypacker
relationships–fiction: Levithan; 
MacCullough; ripslinger; Schorr
Religious education: Sieger
rIddLe BooKS: Why Did the 
Chicken
royalty–fiction: Levine
SCArY StorIeS: hurston
School–fiction: Johnson; Lynch; 
Pennypacker; ripslinger; Yang
Science: Montgomery
Science and scientists–fiction: An-
derson
SCIenCe FICtIon: haarsma
Sisters–fiction: Kaslik
Slavery: Weatherford
Slavery–fiction: Anderson; Woods
Snow–stories: Clark; o’Connor
Spies and spying: Coleman
Storytelling: hurston
November 2006 • 157
Storytelling–fiction: Le Guin
Storytime: Ahlberg; Beaty; durant; 
hurston; Isaacs; Purmell; reiss; 
Willey
SuPernAturAL StorIeS: del-
aney; Johnson
SurvIvAL StorIeS: Shafer
SuSPenSe: nelson
telephones–fiction: Sleator
tests–fiction: Steele
therapy–fiction: Koja
time travel–fiction: Bloor
toddLer BooKS: Grimes
toys–stories: deacon; Jenkins; 
o’Connor; Wilson
trees: Purmell
uncles–fiction: Shafer
urban life–fiction: Brown
voyages and travel: Montgomery
voyages and travel–fiction: ehrenhaft; 
McCaughrean Smile; roberts
War: Coleman
War–fiction: Le Guin; roberts
Winter–stories: Clark; o’Connor
Witches–fiction: delaney; hurston
Women’s studies: Mannis
World cultures: Foreman
World War II–fiction: Bloor
Writers and writing: Marcus; Wallner
