T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
November 2012
Vol. 66   No. 3
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Published by  
Th e Johns hopkins University press
essential.
Deborah stevenson, Editor
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 66 (2013). 
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $58.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$98.00 (print); $105.00 (online); 
$137.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
November 2012
Vol. 66 No. 3
129  the BIg PICture
 
 This Is Not My Hat  written and illus. by Jon Klassen
130  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
136 • Island: A Story of the Galápagos  written and illus. by Jason Chin
137 • The FitzOsbornes at War   by Michelle Cooper
159 • The Giant and How He Humbugged America  by Jim Murphy
160 •  H.O.R.S.E.: A Game of Basketball and Imagination  written and illus. by 
Christopher Myers
167 •  Beyond Courage: The Untold Story of Jewish Resistance During the Holocaust  
by Doreen Rappaport
176  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
177  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $98.00; combined print & electronic $137.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2012 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from This Is Not My Hat ©2012 by Jon Klassen and used by permission of Candlewick 
Press.
November 2012 • 129
the BIg PICture
This Is Not My Hat
written and illustrated by Jon Klassen
In Klassen’s brilliant I Want My Hat Back (BCCB 11/11), a large and disgruntled 
bear searches for his hat, stolen from him by an unrepentant rabbit. Here Klassen 
flips the storyline and presents a thief’s-eye view of a hat theft, as the tiny fish 
narrator confides on the opening pages, “This is not my hat. I just stole it.” He 
goes on to explain that he purloined it from a much bigger fish who was asleep, 
then proceeds to helpfully describe where he’s now headed (“I am going where the 
plants grow big and tall and close together”) and why he took it: “I know it does 
not belong to me. But I am going to keep it. It was too small for him anyway. It 
fits me just right.” 
What the tiny fish doesn’t know (and what Klassen cleverly portrays 
through the illustrations) is that the bigger fish has awakened, has overheard the 
little fish’s narration, and is now after him. As the tiny fish thief heads into the 
thicket of plants, the larger fish silently tails him. While the little bowler bandit 
confidently claims from offstage, “Nobody will ever find me,” the larger fish is 
shown slipping into the plants as well. A page turn reveals . . . nothing but the 
thickly growing plants. What’s going on in there? The following spread shows only 
the tail of the larger fish as he heads out of the plants and off the page, but the final 
spread presents the satisfying answer as the big fish is now soundly asleep with the 
minuscule hat perched atop his giant head and the tiny fish nowhere to be seen. 
This is picture-book storytelling at its best, as Klassen’s minimalist il-
lustrations, rendered digitally and in Chinese ink, are not only gorgeous but also 
absolutely integral to the understanding of the story’s plot. There’s a hint of Leo 
Lionni’s art in Klassen’s illustrations, as the splotchy gray-brown fish float in an 
inky matte black sea sprinkled with Matisse-like water plants in pale neutral tones. 
The hat—a tiny derby in the palest of blues—and a wide-eyed crab in muted reds 
provide some notes of color, and spatters of white bubbles accent each fish. Subtle 
details add drama and humor, with the larger fish’s increasing umbrage adroitly 
depicted through the simple but highly effective change of his eye shape from circle 
to narrowed oval; the crab is not only witness but informant, mutely pointing a claw 
in the direction taken by the hat thief. Page layout effectively paces the story: wide 
full spreads that make the most of the book’s long rectangular trim size and sport 
the text in surtitles above the visuals are interspersed with more staccato spreads 
of art opposite text page; the climactic events speed into a suspenseful glide in a 
sequence of textless full spreads. 
The naughty fish thief and his comeuppance, the stunning pictures, and 
the thrill of knowing more than the narrator will make this appealing to kids of a 
130 • The bulleTiN
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
wide range of ages and interests. The book is also remarkably useful, as the text-
picture relationship (and textually unexplained disappearance of the tiny fish) is 
perfect for teaching about inference, while the tightly focused art, simple vocabulary, 
and short sentences printed in large type make this perfect for novice readers as 
well. This is, quite simply, an outstanding book—and that ain’t no fish tale. (See 
p. 151 for publication information.)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer
Aesop The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse; ad. and illus. by Helen 
Ward. Templar/Candlewick, 2012 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6098-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys    
R 5-8 yrs
Sonorous descriptive language (“He knew the insect-filled fields of summer and the 
ripe, rich orchards of autumn”) provides plenty of appeal in this elegant retelling 
of Aesop’s classic fable in which a country mouse decides that the rich city ways 
come at too high a cost. The watercolor art is sumptuously idyllic, with both rural 
and urban locales looking pretty darn lovely, from the verdant meadows and freshly 
harvested golden fields of the country to the bright lights, finely ornamented archi-
tecture, and well-heeled residents of the city. The bright-eyed, naturalistic mice are 
beautifully rendered, and their sleek coats (red-brown for the country mouse and 
chocolate for the town mouse) practically invite petting. Although the focus here 
is clearly on the mice, there’s a pleasantly nostalgic, early-twentieth-century look 
to the clothing, vehicles, and décor of the human world as well. A few illustrations 
provide enjoyable moments of sly humor or anticipation, such as when the town 
mouse declares that the city is free of “dangerous wild animals” as the two mice 
are shown passing a sleeping fawn in the country, and when the mice, gorging on 
the mouthwatering offerings of the dessert table in the town mouse’s home, are 
spotted by a disapproving, party-hat-wearing pet pug. While some kids may think 
the country mouse is missing the boat (that dessert table is awfully tempting), 
nature-loving youngsters will especially appreciate his choice.  JH
AkbArpour, AhmAd That Night’s Train; tr. from the Persian by Majid Saghafi; 
illus. by Isabelle Arsenault. Groundwood, 2012 [96p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-169-4 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
A motherless child befriends a teacher on the train, and the teacher promises to 
call upon the girl at the week’s end. The teacher, however, never does visit, and 
November 2012 • 131
the little girl, Banafsheh, is disappointed and angry. The teacher relays the events 
of their meeting to her class as a story that she is writing, and her students eagerly 
suggest various conclusions to the tale, including the death of both the little girl 
and the teacher. The teacher considers these options, but it takes a letter from the 
inspiration of her previous book to spur her towards a more emotionally satisfy-
ing ending. With quiet, steady prose and without condescension, Iranian author 
Akbarpour successfully introduces readers to the complicated dynamics that exist 
among the author, the text, the reader, and the creative process. The youngest 
readers will want to mimic the teacher’s students, trying to guess and perhaps even 
writing their very own ending to the story. Older readers, however, will likely enjoy 
their first experience with “meta” thinking here, and they will wonder both at the 
teacher’s and Akbarpour’s motivation while considering the blurred line between 
truth and storytelling. The story holds little action but provides plenty to think 
about, and it would serve as a useful readaloud in the classroom, particularly as a 
springboard for journal writing.  KQG
Allen, kAthryn mAdeline A Kiss Means I Love You; illus. with photographs by 
Eric Futran. Whitman, 2012 24p
ISBN 978-0-8075-4186-9 $15.99   
R 1-4 yrs
In rhyming photo-illustrated text, this book introduces young children to the 
meanings behind various types of body language: “A kiss means I love you, a wave 
means hello,/ a smile means I’m happy, a tug means let’s go!” Many different actions 
are considered here, from cheering to “shushing” to clapping (cynics may quibble 
that “a reach” doesn’t always mean “let’s share”), and the book ends with a yawning 
segue into bedtime, in which a kiss once again is featured: “A kiss means I love you. 
I love you . . . good night.” The smooth, simple text, solidly kid-centric concepts, 
and clear, inviting photos make this incredibly useful to parents, teachers, and 
librarians. Although a few of Futran’s photographs could have used better lighting, 
the thoughtfully composed images, full-bleed extreme close-up shots of an attrac-
tive multicultural cast of youngsters, effectively convey the textual concepts. This 
would be perfect for toddlers and preschoolers who love the photographic books 
of Margaret Miller but who are ready for a bit more textual meat, it would also be 
a great choice for families or groups with both babies and somewhat older kids: 
the littlest ones will love looking at all the faces, while the older ones can imitate 
and expand upon the body language concepts.  JH
Arcos, cArrie Out of Reach. Simon Pulse, 2012 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4053-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4055-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
Rachel and her beloved older brother, Micah, have always been allies against their 
controlling, restrictive parents, so Rachel covered for Micah when he first started 
taking meth. Now that he’s disappeared following an unsuccessful stint at rehab, 
she follows an elusive email to nearby Ocean Beach in San Diego to search for 
him, accompanied by Micah’s friend Tyler. As Tyler and Rachel follow a series of 
dwindling leads (starting with the cryptic email that directed Rachel to Ocean 
Beach to begin with), they share bittersweet reminiscences of Micah and explore 
their own connection while delving deeper into the underworld of the drug culture. 
132 • The bulleTiN
Arcos paints a complex, honest, devastating portrait of what it means to watch 
someone you love turn into a stranger; it’s clear that Micah struggled for a long 
time before he turned to meth, but no single factor is blamed, and Arcos avoids 
both sensationalism and easy answers. This is Rachel’s story, though, not Micah’s, 
as she deals with her role as the “perfect” child (itself a lie), her growing connec-
tion to Tyler, her inherited family legacy of addiction and mental illness, and her 
grief and guilt over Micah. The result is an empathetic, highly readable tale that 
captures the messy dynamics of sibling relationships, the pain and powerlessness 
of addiction from a loved one’s perspective, and, in an open ending that brilliantly 
mingles loss and hope, the necessity of letting go. Less didactic and more nuanced 
than Ellen Hopkins’ Crank, this is a delicately written debut with considerable 
substance and wide appeal.  CG
Atinuke The No. 1 Car Spotter and the Firebird; illus. by Warwick Johnson 
Cadwell. Kane Miller, 2012 94p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-61067-052-4 $5.99   
R Gr. 2-4
No. 1 (from the No. 1 Car Spotter, BCCB 11/11) is back, and he and his small 
African village are facing new problems. There’s a leopard prowling around and 
stealing goats, and No. 1 must find a way to protect his family’s livestock; the rising 
waters make the road through the village impassable, so No. 1 finds a way to help 
people across; when Mama Coca-Cola (mother of No. 1’s best friend) hates her new 
house so much that she threatens to stop making her succulent akara, No. 1 comes 
up with an ingenious solution. No. 1 is developing a clear character type now: while 
he’s an ordinary kid with regular embarrassments and flaws (he’s an utter failure at 
defending the goat flock with a slingshot as the other boys do), he’s Mr. Ingenuity 
when it comes to solving village problems (he deters the leopard by garbing a decoy 
goat in a shirt covered in fiery hot sauce). It’s that quality that finally gets No. 1 a 
close encounter with the Pontiac Firebird he’s lusted after as it drives through the 
village; it turns out the car is driven by a professor, who’s interested in the inventive 
village boy. No. 1 therefore remains an immensely appealing protagonist, and the 
comfortable domesticity of his village makes even the bickering affectionate and 
warm. Cadwell’s monochromatic illustrations bring a pleasing contemporary edge 
to their amiable cartoon vignettes.  DS
bAng, molly Ocean Sunlight: How Tiny Plants Feed the Seas; written by Molly 
Bang and Penny Chisholm; illus. by Molly Bang. Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2012 40p
ISBN 978-0-545-27322-0 $18.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Following up her energy-based science picture books My Light (BCCB 3/04) and 
Living Sunlight (BCCB 4/09), Molly Bang, along with co-author Penny Chisholm, 
turns her attention to the seas. Starting with the sun (“All ocean life depends on 
me”) and basic concepts of photosynthesis, the book then explores the crucial role 
of marine plant life, explaining that even though you don’t see phytoplankton 
(formerly known as algae), it’s absolutely vital (“HALF the oxygen you breathe 
every day . . . is bubbling out of all the tiny phytoplankton floating in your seas”). 
Bang and Chisholm then explain the oceanic food chain, including the ways that 
creatures consume energy when they’re living too deep for phytoplankton or the 
sun’s rays. It’s a thorough but accessible explanation of an ecosystem-cycle that most 
kids won’t have thought much about previously, and the details of creepy lightless 
November 2012 • 133
life and nutritious “marine snow” (tiny flakes of “poop and mucus, carcasses and 
guts”) bring the ewww appeal. The splendid illustrations counterpoint sun-yellow 
with sea-blue (occasionally mixing them into green), and the visual depiction of 
the sun’s energy transmission makes the sea’s surface a world of luminescent beauty. 
Who-eats-whom sequences (a killer whale begins to chomp down on a seal who’s 
biting down on one of a flock of penguins, who are swallowing up fish, who are 
chowing down on phytoplankton) vividly bring the message home on many of the 
spreads. A six-page epilogue, dense with more sophisticated information and keyed 
to thumbnails from the illustrations, answers questions the text might raise.  DS
bArrett, Judi Santa from Cincinnati; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. Atheneum, 
2012 48p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2993-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2994-9 $12.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Santa skeptics and true believers will be in full agreement on Barrett’s picture book 
biography of Santa Claus: this tale of the big guy’s origins is pure malarkey. Here 
Santa is a toy-obsessed boy in mid-twentieth-century Ohio with a tinkerer father 
who teaches him everything he knows in their basement workshop. Stuffed reindeer 
toted in a pillowcase, a penchant for emulating Dad’s beard by gluing cotton balls to 
his face, an interest in efficient doorstep delivery systems as a newspaper carrier, and 
a kind heart for sharing his creations all point to Santa’s coming career. He meets 
his dream girl, the future Mrs. Claus, at college; a realtor directs the newlyweds to 
a spacious domicile/workspace in the frozen north, they hire a staff of elves, and 
the rest is bogus history. The fun here is in the contrast between Santa’s deadpan 
narration and the pictures—especially the mock-scrapbook photos—that track 
this Christmas megastar on his rise. There is a strong likelihood, however, that 
youngsters will spend so much time noting the obvious holes in Santa’s story that 
the details of business development will be lost along the way. This title may not 
have “Christmas Classic” written on it, but after the fiftieth holiday re-reading of 
The Polar Express, this could be an entertaining diversion.  EB 
bennett, nic Dead Cat Bounce. Razorbill, 2012 345p
ISBN 978-1-59514-469-0 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Four years ago, Jonah Lightbody’s emotionally distant father, a trader at the London 
firm Helsby, Cattermole, took Jonah to the office on Take Your Child to Work day. 
There twelve-year-old Jonah was rescued from utter boredom by the exuberant 
Baron, an ultra aggressive hotshot trader who’s the antithesis of Mr. Lightbody. By 
the end of the morning, the Baron has put Jonah to work entering trade data in 
the computer and has invited him back for more. Dad is livid and forbids it, which 
only makes Jonah more determined to return. Little does Jonah know that there’s 
some ugly history between his father and the Baron, and that the next four years 
of the Baron’s clandestine mentoring are merely a set-up to lure the now sixteen-
year-old Jonah into the firm and use him as a cover for a wildly illegal trading scam. 
Bennett sets his tale at the height of the banking meltdown/bailout crisis and spins 
a first-rate thriller around an evil global organization, Apollyon, that exploits (or 
possibly orchestrates) disasters and crises to manipulate the stock market and make 
a killing. It’s a high-stakes game, and the lives of the two-bit players like Jonah and 
his father are completely expendable, as they learn when Apollyon has them tracked 
134 • The bulleTiN
by hit men all the way to a remote conservation park in Africa, where an explosive 
showdown sets the stage for a sequel. Teens who consider playing National Stock 
Market Simulation the highlight of their school day, or anyone who enjoys a good 
conspiracy theory, will devour this.  EB
blAck, birdie Just Right for Christmas; illus. by Rosalind Beardshaw. Nosy 
Crow/Candlewick, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6174-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
When a king spies a bolt of beautiful red cloth for sale on Christmas Eve day, he 
snaps it up to be made into a cloak for the princess. The castle seamstress puts the 
leftover fabric outside the back door, where the kitchen maid finds it and takes 
it to make a jacket for her mother. Her scraps are, in turn, used by Bertie Badger 
to make a hat for his pa, which leaves enough for Samuel Squirrel to use to make 
a pair of gloves for his wife. The last scrap flies out the squirrel’s window and is 
found by Millie Mouse, who makes it into a scarf for “little Billy.” Just as the 
clothes (and the sewers) diminish in size as the story goes on, so do the wrappings 
get less and less extravagant, but no matter—everyone is delighted with their gifts: 
“Each present was so soft and red and Christmassy and felt just right . . . just how 
Christmas should feel.” This British import is obviously stitched from the same 
cloth as the Yiddish folktale “Something from Nothing” (as in Gilman’s Something 
from Nothing, BCCB 2/94), and the Christmas-themed riff on the story works 
quite well. Simple language and repeated phrases (“snipped and sewed . . . and 
snipped and sewed”) make this well-suited to its young audience and to reading 
aloud. Bearshaw’s mixed-media pictures depict a world of rustic coziness in which 
animals walk upright and coexist happily with the human characters. The cheer-
ful, painted-looking figures are mixed with occasional snippets of digital or paper 
patterns for clothing or backgrounds, and small, specific details (a piece of a sewing 
pattern, a red fez on the badger) add further visual interest. Pair this with Taback’s 
Joseph Had a Little Overcoat (BCCB 3/00), enjoy it as a fresh, low-key Christmas 
tale, or give it as a gift along with needle and thread and a bundle of red cloth.  JH
bryAn, Ashley Who Built the Stable?: A Nativity Poem; written and illus. by Ashley 
Bryan. Atheneum, 2012 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0934-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5458-3 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Myriad Christmas stories invite readers to imagine the experiences of extras in 
the Nativity drama—from the Wise Man who never arrives at Bethlehem, to the 
animals who share their home with the Baby, to last year’s youngster who gathers 
the myrrh that would become a valuable gift from the Magi (Park’s The Third Gift, 
BCCB 1/12). Here Bryan crafts a simple story of a boy who helps his carpenter 
father build a stable that will shelter the sheep when he guides them back from 
their pasture. Observing an extraordinary star and a pair of weary travelers, the boy 
senses that this coincidence demands an offer of hospitality: “‘Oh, come with me!’ 
the boy exclaimed./ ‘My stable’s a warm place./ My animals will welcome you,/ 
I’ll sweep and clear a space.’” The next morning the boy checks on the travelers 
and recognizes in their newly arrived baby a kindred spirit destined to become 
November 2012 • 135
a carpenter and a shepherd like himself. Swirls of primary and secondary colors 
fashion a fantastical land that incorporates floral and architectural elements from 
diverse locales and cultures, encouraging viewers to imagine their own space in the 
universal tale. In a sensitive inversion of standard Nativity scenes, light does not so 
much emanate from the baby as it serves to swaddle the rich toffee and chocolate 
tones of Jesus and his family. Bryan’s poem is reprinted in continuous text at the 
story’s end, which will facilitate group reading by older children.  EB
busby, cylin Blink Once. Bloomsbury, 2012 290p
ISBN 978-1-59990-818-2 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
West is a confident, athletic guy who loves riding his mountain bike with his best 
friend, Mike. When he wakes up in a hospital after a biking accident, he has a 
hard time understanding what’s happening to him until Olivia, the beautiful girl 
from the room next door, comes to his room and tells him he’s paralyzed. As West 
drifts in and out of consciousness, he’s aware of all that is happening to him, but 
the only person he seems to be able to communicate with is Olivia, first through 
blinking, then through writing on a white board. West and Olivia become closer 
until they fall in love, and she is distraught when she learns he will be having a 
surgery that will take him away from her. When he recovers and comes back to 
visit her, though, he finds that things were not at all what they seemed to be, and 
he must come to terms with some haunting realizations. Readers will be captivated 
by the melodrama here—the poignancy of young lives interrupted by tragedy, and 
the growth of love in the midst of uncertainty and loss. West’s recovery is almost 
as hard on him as his accident was, with his newfound knowledge that there is 
more to life than science and medicine can understand. Readers looking for a fresh 
twist on paranormal romance will find West and Olivia’s story sweet, tragic, and 
thought-provoking.  KC
cAbAtingAn, erin A Is for Musk Ox; illus. by Matthew Myers. Porter/Roaring 
Brook, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-676-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-3
There’s trouble right from the start in this jokey not-really-an-alphabet book—a 
die-cut chomp of the apple on the cover reveals an eager musk ox peering out at 
the viewers. Much to the dismay of the officious zebra, who’s apparently entrusted 
with the smooth unfolding of the story, the musk ox decides this alphabet book 
should “do something different.” The chipper ox starts making nearly every letter 
about musk oxen (for A, “Musk oxen are awesome! Plus, we live in the Arctic, 
which includes some of Alaska”), even when it initially seems like it’s not (“J is for 
joseph”—because that’s the musk ox’s name). Even the musk ox’s concession of 
“Z is for zebra” turns out to be an excuse to show an embarrassing baby picture of 
the zebra. While Bingham’s Z Is for Moose (BCCB 4/12) still takes this year’s cake 
for disrupted alphabets, this is an amusing anti-authoritarian romp that’s weirdly 
replete with solid and interesting information about musk oxen. Myers’ art ramps 
up the absurdity, with a style that combines cartooning’s freewheeling caricature 
with saturated painterly pigments to make the figures into goofy shiny toys. The 
staple comedic contrast between the cheerfully unflappable character and the 
driven-to-distraction counterpart plays out visually with the zebra’s pipestem legs 
136 • The bulleTiN
and bouncing eyebrows contrasting with the musk ox’s contented solidity. Even the 
layout is comedic, with a faux-paper sign carefully positioning the musk ox’s new 
entry name over the old one. This is best suited for youngsters who’ve moved on 
from alphabet books entirely and who will get a kick out of chaotic disarrangement 
of the old familiar formula.  DS
cAmpbell, k. g. Lester’s Dreadful Sweaters; written and illus. by K. G. Camp-
bell. Kids Can, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-1-55453-770-9 $16.95   
R 6-9 yrs
When Cousin Clara comes to stay with Lester’s family, she very kindly makes young 
Lester a sweater. And what a sweater: mustard yellow, ornamented with purple 
pom-poms, and sporting holes in the wrong places, the garment horrifies orderly 
Lester, who quickly ensures that it suffers “an unfortunate accident.” This hideous 
sweater is followed by many more, each of which poor Lester destroys, until he is 
forced to wear a feathery one to a classmate’s party and the hired clowns rave over 
it. Lester quickly arranges a meeting between the clowns and Cousin Clara, and 
“on the spot, Cousin Clara was offered a job, knitting for the whole troupe”—and, 
fortunately for Lester, traveling with them as well. Although this story is a little 
contrived, its basic premise—homemade gifts that secretly appall the recipient—is 
one to which many folks can relate, and fashion-conscious kids will commiserate 
with poor Lester and his hideous knitwear. Campbell’s subtly humorous, soft-edged 
pencil crayon illustrations are well suited to the faux serious tone of this wacky story. 
Ginger-haired Lester is a sympathetic guy as he positively droops in his malformed 
sweaters while his classmates recoil in horror or disparagingly point at the sight. 
Particularly arresting is the scene in which Lester is literally caught “red-handed” 
(his hands and scissors drip with blood-red yarn) as he annihilates a pile of sweat-
ers while his horrified parents look on. Pair this with Barnett’s Extra Yarn (BCCB 
1/11) for a sweater-centric storytime, or share it with kids as the holiday season 
approaches for a humorous look at gift-giving gone wrong.  JH
chin, JAson Island: A Story of the Galápagos; written and illus. by Jason 
Chin. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-716-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 2-5
Chin follows up his explorations of Redwoods and Coral Reefs (BCCB 12/11) with a 
treatment of that most historic of ecosystems, the Galápagos Islands. It’s a chronicle 
of a life cycle that takes the ecological long view, starting six million years ago with 
the birth of a volcanic island, following it through “Childhood” (“Five Million 
Years Ago”), “Adulthood” (“Three Million Years Ago”), and “Old Age” (“One 
Million Years Ago”), when the island finally “sinks below the waves forever.” What 
this really is, though, is a visually eloquent, marvelously compact explanation of 
evolution, focusing on the islands that first set the concept in motion for Darwin 
(who appears in an epilogue). The art is masterful in its combination of realism 
and artistic flow; the layout complements sweeping full-page, full-bleed landscapes 
with carefully controlled panel sequences that provide additional focus on a process 
or creature, so the evolution of larger finches’ beaks, for instance, is clearly dem-
onstrated and explained. The reasons why the Galápagos are a great biological lab 
are made clear, and the examples of evolution are effectively illustrative. This will 
November 2012 • 137
be superbly useful as a science text, but readers in general, especially animal lovers, 
will be lured in by the accessible format and crystal-clear explanations. End matter 
includes an overview of Darwin’s experience on the islands, a brief encyclopedic 
description of the place, and an explanation of species unique to the Galápagos; 
endpapers include a gallery of species and a map.  DS
cochrAne, mick Fitz. Knopf, 2012 [192p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95683-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85683-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89773-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-12
Fitz has spent much of his fifteen years playing “CSI Mom and Dad,” as he terms it, 
trying to figure out what his father meant to his mother and how his dad could just 
walk away when Fitz was only a baby, leaving only support checks in his place. Now 
Fitz is going after the answers: armed with a gun bought from a low-life classmate, 
he kidnaps his father away from his high-powered law practice for a day of finally 
giving Fitz what he needs. But what, exactly, is it that he needs, and what happens 
if he doesn’t get it? This sounds a little like Chris Lynch territory, but there’s less 
of Lynch’s dark bite here and more anxious bewilderment as Fitz seesaws between 
the hurt and anger of a lifetime and his ordinarily good-kid existence. That wild 
vacillation adds both rawness and incongruity as father and son go through an often 
enjoyable day out together, going to the zoo, visiting the café where Fitz’s parents 
met, and ending up on Fitz’s front porch while Fitz jams with his band—until angry 
Fitz seesaws back up again. Cochrane has a fine hand with character, getting double 
mileage out of Fitz’s focused and sustained assessment of his father, which conveys 
information about them both. The unresolvable inconsistency of Fitz’s dad being 
on the one hand a considerate and interesting guy and on the other being weak 
enough to choose flight is laid bare as a human conundrum. There’s both poignancy 
and taut suspense here, and the book will be eminently discussable for book clubs 
and classrooms; additionally, a lot of readers will relate to Fitz’s combination of 
long-simmering resentment and painful yearning.  DS
cooper, michelle The FitzOsbornes at War. Knopf, 2012 [464p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97050-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87050-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97404-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
The third installment of Sophie’s journals (following A Brief History of Montmaray, 
BCCB 11/09, and The FitzOsbornes in Exile, BCCB 4/11) begins in September 
1939, when England declared war on Germany. As exiled royals who had to leave 
their (fictional) island kingdom when the Nazis invaded, the Montmarays decide 
that they too will make a declaration of war, officially signed by King Toby. The 
next few years see Toby, Simon, and their good friend Anthony joining the RAF 
while Veronica, Sophie, Aunt Charlotte, and Julia take various posts in the civil 
service, and Henry stews and sulks about having to go to boarding school. Their 
varied positions allow Sophie to tell a nearly complete story of the domestic side 
of war, which tended to level classes (almost) through rationing and indiscriminate 
bombs, and she manages to suspend Aunt Charlotte’s campaign to get her nieces 
138 • The bulleTiN
and nephew advantageously wed. Sophie is the perfect narrator for a young per-
son’s account of the war: she’s intelligent and politically aware (though, like most, 
entirely unaware of the Holocaust taking place), yet she’s insecure about her own 
prospects for romance and what else her future might hold, if in fact they have a 
future beyond the war. As she suffers wartime losses, including the deaths of friends 
and Toby’s being classified as missing in action, she also records the smaller frustra-
tions of privation, the uncertainties of first kisses, and the guilt of being happy in 
love when so many people are suffering. Stunning griefs come to the Montmaray 
family as well, but they ultimately find a way to reclaim their beloved home, creat-
ing effective closure for this fascinating and thoroughly engrossing family portrait. 
An author’s note reveals the extensive research that has been distilled into this 
eminently readable account.  KC
cowley, Joy Stories of the Wild West Gang; illus. by Trevor Pye. Gecko, 
2012 357p
ISBN 978-1-877579-21-9 $16.95   
R Gr. 4-5
The prim and proper parents of only child Michael are horrified at the outrageous 
behavior of the West family, Michael’s aunt, uncle, and cousins on his mother’s side. 
Middle-grader Michael, though, is captivated by the Wests’ freewheeling approach 
to life and the fun that ensues. Ten stories (most of which appear to have been 
previously published individually or in smaller anthologies in New Zealand) about 
Michael’s adventures with the Wests are collected here, each of which is told in a 
series of numbered, chapter-like passages. Cowley is a dab hand at characterization 
and humor, and readers will long remember figures such as the shiftily entrepre-
neurial Royce, Michael’s cousin and classmate who’s always looking to make a buck 
without actually doing any work, and Grandadda, Uncle Leo’s lively Irish father, 
who has an artificial foot and who loves his whiskey so much he’s not above sneak-
ing off to do a bit of busking in order to earn enough for a pint or two. The stories 
themselves are tightly crafted and expertly paced; a particular highlight is “The 
Wild West Gang and the Wonky Fence,” which draws on the classic urban legend 
about a dog digging up a buried pet rabbit. Pye’s simple and straightforward black 
and white illustrations (one illustration appears at the beginning of each story) gain 
depth and texture from hatching. The intended middle-grade audience may balk 
at the size and heft of this collection’s densely printed 350-plus pages, but those 
willing to tackle it in the more bite-size pieces of each story may well get hooked 
enough to finish the entire thing on their own. As a classroom or family readaloud, 
this would be an absolutely stellar selection, and the page count might actually be 
a plus, as kids will surely keep requesting “just one more Wild West story.”  JH
cox, suzy The Dead Girls Detective Agency. HarperTeen, 2012 [368p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-202064-2 $8.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219010-9 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
One minute Charlotte gets a hard push from behind on a subway platform, and the 
next she’s waking up in a hotel lobby, where a girl named Nancy helpfully informs 
her that she’s dead and that she will need to stay in the hotel until she can find her 
November 2012 • 139
murderer. If she succeeds, she will receive a key that will open a door to the next 
phase of eternity, but since no one who has ever gone through the door has ever 
returned, details about what’s on the other side are rather sketchy. As Charlotte gets 
her bearings, she learns that she and Nancy have company in this motel of myster-
ies, namely a stylish, somewhat shallow girl named Lorna, a surly, disgruntled girl 
named Tess, and the inevitable brooding-but-dateworthy dead guy named Edison. 
Nancy and Lorna, with the reluctant help of Tess, help the newly murdered solve 
their cases so that they can pass on, but they themselves either can’t solve their 
own or have decided that they prefer to stay on this side of the door for personal 
reasons. Charlotte’s case unfolds in a rather humorous high school romance plot, 
as she watches her supposedly loving and loyal boyfriend accept the consolation 
of no fewer than three cheerleaders; in fact, despite the grim circumstances, this 
is a mostly light-hearted and comic take on murder and mayhem, with copious 
Ghostbusters references and an afterlife romance for Charlotte in the offing. The 
logic is frustratingly inconsistent, however, with the ghosts’ abilities bafflingly 
variable, and the plot takes too many detours on the way to solving Charlotte’s 
murder. Nonetheless, crossover fans of detective fiction and fantasy will find these 
blithe spirits appealing.  KC
creech, shAron The Great Unexpected. Cotler/HarperCollins, 2012 226p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-189232-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219013-0 $9.99   
M Gr. 5-7
Naomi has been raised by Nula and her husband Joe since Naomi was three and 
her father died trying to defend Naomi from an attacking dog. The attack left 
Naomi with a damaged arm and plenty of inner scars as well, but she loves Nula 
and Joe and has become a part of the town of Blackbird Tree. When an unusual 
boy, Finn, suddenly shows up in town, Naomi feels the stirrings of first love, but 
she fears that Finn might be more interested in her best friend, Lizzie, a chatterbox 
orphan who hopes (in vain) that her foster parents will soon adopt her. Meanwhile, 
in Ireland, old Sybil Kavanagh concocts a plan for revenge against an unknown 
party with the help of her faithful companion, Pilpenny, and her solicitor, Mr. 
Dingle. Eventually the two stories converge, as Joe dies, leaving Nula and Naomi 
alone, and Sybil dies and leaves her large estate to Naomi and Lizzie as long as 
they allow Pilpenny, Lizzie’s aunt, and Nula (Sybil’s estranged sister) to live there 
as well. There is a certain appealing pathos to Naomi’s complicated memories of 
her past accident, and some adolescents might be intrigued by the hazy, slightly 
magical aura that surrounds the character of Finn. There is a lot going on here, 
though, and the large cast of secondary characters, whiplash-inducing alternating 
storylines, and a tone that vacillates between mystical and realistic may collectively 
frustrate and confuse young readers. Lizzie’s nonstop blathering seems meant to 
be charming but comes off more as annoying, and the multiple connections that 
pop up like mushrooms among the various characters are just too numerous to be 
believable. Readers searching for a small-town tale touched with magic should turn 
instead to Barnhill’s Mostly True Story of Jack (BCCB 10/12). JH
140 • The bulleTiN
crossAn, sArAh Breathe. Greenwillow, 2012 373p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211869-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211871-4 $9.99   
R Gr. 9-12
In an environmentally devastated future marked by severely depleted oxygen levels, 
the remaining humans, their numbers vastly reduced, live in pod cities. There the 
population is divided into rigid, brutal social strata: Premiums are the privileged 
few who can afford the extra oxygen needed for things like exercise and sex, while 
auxiliaries live in constant breathlessness. And then there’s the Resistance, who know 
that the powerful company Breathe doesn’t just manufacture oxygen, it manufac-
tures its scarcity as well. Quinn, a goodhearted Premium, and Bea, his auxiliary 
best friend who believes she can reach Premium status with enough hard work, are 
leaving the dome for a camping trip (air tanks and all) when Alina, a Resistance 
member on the run after she steals tree cuttings, uses them to get through security. 
Out in the desolate world, Quinn and Bea are drawn into the Resistance as they try 
to help Alina reach its headquarters. The narration rotates among the three teens, 
each of whom experiences a distinct and compelling character arc. Bea, defined by 
her compassion, finds strength in rage as she realizes that the system she’s worked 
so hard to ascend is a lie. Quinn, who’s led an easy life and knows it, struggles with 
his own weakness (“I want to promise to die for the cause, but who knows what 
I’d do at the end if I were starving and desperate?”), while Alina relearns the idea 
of friendship and becomes disenchanted with the Resistance’s means. With short 
chapters, tight pacing, and expertly sustained tension that makes the most of the 
trio of narrative viewpoints, this joins the ranks of Roth’s Divergent (BCCB 5/11) 
and Wells’ Partials (BCCB 5/11) as a provocative, character-driven, and action-
packed dystopian series opener to watch out for.  CG
dAly, niki The Herd Boy; written and illus. by Niki Daly. Eerdmans, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8028-5417-9 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
 “You have to be awake, and you have to be brave, to be a herd boy.” Malusi, who 
watches his grandfather’s sheep and goats in the African countryside, knows this 
well, and he enjoys his work—and his chance to tussle with his friend and col-
league, Lungisa. Yet he’s also a serious boy, and he’s unfazed by his friend’s laughter 
when he says he wants to grow up to be president. When a clearly venerable and 
accomplished gentleman in a shiny car witnesses Malusi’s diligent care of his flock 
and hears of the boy’s aims, he mentions his own sheep-herding past and applauds 
Malusi: “A boy who looks after his herd will make a very fine leader.” American 
audiences probably won’t recognize Nelson Mandela unaided or get the same 
impact from his benediction that South African author Daly’s home crowd will, 
but this is an evocative picture-book treatment of a way of life unfamiliar to many 
youngsters. Daly keeps the child focus strong, his streamlined present-tense narra-
tion never becoming annoyingly overexplanatory, while Malusi, with his yearning 
for a dog and his delight in roughhousing, is relatable as well as admirable. Daly’s 
springy, loose-limbed line adds vigor to the wide-open landscapes, dappled with 
earthtoned digital hues dominated by the olive green and sand of the veldt. The 
open sky is a palpable presence atop the sweeping horizon line, adding a subtle 
message as well as a vivid evocation of broad rural space. Kids will be intrigued by 
November 2012 • 141
Malusi’s bucolic lifestyle, and they’ll understand the importance of the validation 
of his dream even without additional information, while some adult explanation 
could add to the impact. An author’s note and a glossary of the included Xhosa 
and Afrikaans words are included.  DS
dickinson, peter Earth and Air: Tales of Elemental Creatures. Big Mouth, 
2012 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61873-058-9 $17.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-61873-038-1 $14.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61873-039-8 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R  Gr. 9 up
Noted fantasist Dickinson concludes the cycle of elemental stories he began with 
Robin McKinley in Fire (BCCB 11/09) and Water (BCCB 7/02) in a solo out-
ing with tales of earth and air spirits. Aside from the sci-fi influenced final story, 
“The Fifth Element,” the five preceding tales evoke an old-world flavor of magic, 
incorporating pieces of Greek mythology and European folklore, sometimes placing 
archetypal beings in the modern world of cars and email. Appropriately, the two 
tales focusing on earth creatures, “Troll Blood” and “Wizand” (yes, that is the right 
spelling), are characterized by densely loaded prose and deal with themes of love, 
lust, and possession. Without McKinley’s more adolescent-focused contributions, 
the stories lean more toward a new adult audience, though the two animal-centered 
stories, “Ridiki” and “Scops,” will appeal to pet-friendly readers, particularly dog 
lovers. These stories are nonetheless thoughtful and provocative, and they will find 
an audience among Dickinson’s usual fans.  KQG
ellen, lAurA Blind Spot. Harcourt, 2012 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-547-76344-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Roz’s congenital macular degeneration has never posed a problem until Mr. Del-
lian, the Special Education teacher, decides to enroll all students with IEPs in a 
Life Skills class. His intentions may be good, but his methods are clumsy, as he 
counters Roz’s stubborn resistance with more of his own, insisting that she speak 
up for herself and then punishing her when she does. He partners her with a wild 
girl in the class named Tricia, whose emotional instability is likely related to a drug 
addiction. When Tricia goes missing and later turns up dead, Roz tries to piece 
together the story of Tricia’s life and death, and she finds mysterious gaps in her 
own experience that all seem related to her new boyfriend, Jonathan. Savvy readers 
will immediately suspect that a party drug is involved, but Roz herself conveniently 
doesn’t make the connection until it’s too late for Tricia. While the books give 
full props to people functioning well with their disabilities, each character has a 
dominant trait, and that trait is consistently overblown, rendering the characters 
more caricatured than nuanced and well drawn. Mr. Dellian, for instance, is too 
domineering and controlling, crossing the lines of believability in his responses 
to Roz. Heather, her new best friend, is overly pushy and chipper, and Greg, the 
longsuffering boy who is willing to wait for Roz to get over the two-timing, po-
tentially dangerous Jonathan, is one of those perfect high school guys—desperately 
good-looking, smart, generous, mature, unfailingly patient and supportive—that 
only exist, alas, between the covers of a book. The mystery plot works well, though, 
142 • The bulleTiN
with sinister characters implicated in Tricia’s complicated problems, and Tricia 
herself proving an unreliable witness as well as a sympathetic victim. Elements of 
the problem novel commingled with a potential murder mystery will be a draw for 
fans of ripped-from-the-headlines drama.  KC  
Ferris, Jeri chAse 
Noah Webster & His Words; illus. by Vincent X. 
Kirsch. Houghton, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-547-39055-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-4
Children may not initially warm to the man largely responsible for filling their 
plate with the spelling and grammar lessons they have to finish before they can have 
their fun in art, music, and gym. However, the focus in this engaging picture-book 
biography is not on dry pedantry but Webster’s belief that a unified system of spell-
ing and grammar, with an emphasis on American vocabulary, would strengthen the 
newborn states into a cohesive nation. His story begins before the Revolutionary 
War, when young Noah led his own personal rebellion against the family business 
of farming and chose a scholarly path. War and politics shaped his view of what 
children should learn, and soon he was producing a series of schoolbooks, nota-
bly a trio launched by the famous “blue-backed speller.”  His magnum opus, the 
dictionary with which most readers will associate him, occupied him for nearly 
two decades, and the finished product emerged as a sort of second declaration of 
independence—this time from the chokehold of British speech. Ferris cleverly 
incorporates a sophisticated vocabulary into the text, pausing to insert a definition 
straight from—what else?—Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 9th edition, wherever a 
word may prove challenging. Kirsch’s jolly cartoons, reminiscent of G. Brian Karas 
in their loose, energetic lines and wry expressions, are quirky enough to secure the 
respect of students who consider themselves past picture book age. A timeline, 
biographical note, and bibliography divided into primary, secondary, and websites 
(including sites featuring the “blue-backed speller”) are included.  EB
FlAke, shAron Pinned. Scholastic, 2012 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-05718-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46984-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Autumn and Adonis are both stuck, but in vastly different ways. Autumn, who 
probably has a learning disability, isn’t doing well in her classes; Adonis was born 
without legs. Despite their disabilities, both teens have skill sets that make them 
feel strong and proud—Adonis is wicked smart, while Autumn is unbeatable on 
the wrestling mat. Autumn is also convinced that she and Adonis would make 
the perfect couple. Her persistence is at times humorous and at times pathetic as 
a condescending and arrogant Adonis regularly rejects her bold advances, but she 
steadily chips away at his resistance. As Autumn suffers disappointment at being 
pulled from the wrestling team for bad grades, Adonis reluctantly learns the humil-
ity of falling for a girl who doesn’t fit his ideals. The ups and downs of their slowly 
developing relationship reveal a subtle, affirming vision of the wisdom and compas-
sion of seeing beyond what people present to each other on the surface. As usual, 
Flake is a perceptive and sympathetic creator of contemporary African-American 
teens. The alternating narrative voices of Adonis and Autumn clearly point out 
November 2012 • 143
their differences in intelligence; that is, Adonis is undeniably book-smart but is 
sorely in need of an education of the heart, while Autumn understands people and 
persistence even if her language use is nonstandard. Autumn’s heart carries the day 
here, and readers will feel with her as she leads Adonis to a better understanding 
of what really matters.  KC 
Fleming, cAndAce Oh, No!; illus. by Eric Rohmann. Schwartz & Wade, 
2012 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94557-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84271-9 $17.99   
R 3-6 yrs
This story really begins on the book’s endpapers, as a tiger creeps up on an unsus-
pecting frog and begins to chase him. The songlike text begins as the frog, now 
fleeing for his life, falls into a hole: “Frog fell into a deep, deep hole./ Ribbit-oops! 
Ribbit-oops!/ Frog fell into a deep, deep hole. Ribbit-oops!/ Frog fell into such a 
deep hole,/ he couldn’t get out to save his soul./ Croaked Frog, “Help! Help! I can’t 
get out! Oh, no!” This cadence continues as a mouse, loris, sun bear, and monkey 
each end up tumbling into the hole themselves, and each phrase ends with the 
animal crying, “Oh, no!” Just as Tiger looms over the critters, ready to pounce, 
“the ground bumble-rumbled and began to shake./ BA-BOOM! BA-BOOM!” It’s 
Elephant to the rescue, and while his trunk scoops everyone out, his thunderous 
footsteps shake Tiger right into the hole, where he too, asks for help getting out. 
“Oh, no!” say the other animals in triumph, and walk away, leaving only Tiger’s 
paws visible as they cling to the lip of the hole. Fleming’s rhythmical stanzas are 
generally smooth and lively, and the patterned text and repeated phrases will make 
this very useful to those who work with the preschool and primary-grade crowd. 
Rohmann’s relief-print illustrations are simple but stunning; muted tones of jungle 
greens, browns, and blues prevail, making the orange of the tiger’s coat pop vividly 
from the background, and the blocky outlines and detailing of the printing process 
give an appealing hand-crafted feel to the art. Pair this with LaRochelle’s It’s a Ti-
ger! (BCCB 9/12) for a tiger-themed storytime or incorporate it into a classroom 
jungle unit.  JH
Fleming, denise underGROUND; written and illus. by Denise Fleming. Beach 
Lane/Simon, 2012 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5882-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5883-3 $12.99   
R 3-6 yrs
Spare poetic text describes the multitude of activities that can be found taking place 
beneath the soil: “Creatures dig/ and run around./ Past highways and byways./ 
Squirm-ways and worm-ways./ Digging furrows and burrows,/ round roots and 
bones,/ rocks and stones.” A rhyming refrain (“Low down./ Way down./ Under-
ground”) opens and closes this introduction to animal life under the dirt, and a 
closing spread helpfully names and describes the various creatures that are depicted 
throughout the book. The information presented in this end matter is brief and 
concise in accordance with its youthful audience, and the thumbnail illustrations 
will prove immensely useful to readers, who may have some trouble identifying 
a few of the animals pictured on the previous pages. It can occasionally be a bit 
tricky to find the burrowing creatures amid the earth they inhabit, so viewers will 
appreciate additional time for closer exploration; the intriguing inclusion of “copy 
144 • The bulleTiN
transfer elements, such as a photocopied key, toy car, or wrench that are “hidden” 
in the soil, also add further reward for poring over the pages. Despite the slight 
visual confusion of some pictures, this is a very serviceable and age-appropriate 
introduction to studies of underground fauna, and a fine book to share before go-
ing outside to dig in the dirt.  JH
FrAzee, mArlA Boot & Shoe; written and illus. by Marla Frazee. Beach Lane, 
2012 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2247-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5706-5 $12.99   
R 5-8 yrs
“They eat dinner out of the same bowl. They pee on the same tree. At night, they 
sleep in the same bed.” Yet terrieresque brothers Boot and Shoe spend their days 
on the opposite sides of the house, Boot on the back porch, Shoe in front, a sys-
tem that works just fine until a troublemaking squirrel begins to taunt the pups, 
sending them whizzing around the house in a squirrel-chasing frenzy. Boot ends 
up on the front porch and Shoe on the back, and they’re mutually alarmed by the 
absence of the usual dog for the place; after fruitless searching and a long wait, the 
two finally rediscover each other by the pee tree, and they have a joyous reunion. 
Though the resolution is a bit of a letdown after the exciting windup, there’s an 
enjoyably folkloric tinge to the symmetry here, and the dogs’ habits (including 
their giggleworthy pee spot) are not only humorous but realistic enough to ensure 
interest from animal lovers. Frazee’s art, her familiar feathery black pencil lines with 
quiet gouache tints, ramps up the textual mirroring, with the brothers symmetri-
cally arrayed in many thumbnails and spreads (culminating in the side view of the 
house showing Boot and Shoe perched comfortably at each end). That structural 
orderliness accentuates the effect of the squirrel-induced chaos, which peaks in a 
double-page spread showing both dogs and squirrel in seething sequence along the 
paths of their frenzied chase around and over the house. Dog lovers will recognize 
the frenzied chase, and any kid who’s been startled by a shift in the routine will 
sympathize with the pair of pooches.  DS
FreedmAn, russell The Boston Tea Party; illus. by Peter Malone.  Holiday 
House, 2012 40p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2266-1 $17.95   
R Gr. 4-6
Before Washington’s crossing of the Delaware River, before the shots “heard round 
the world” at Lexington and Concord, came that first iconic act of American 
rebellion—dumping imported tea into Boston Harbor to protest a system of 
Parliamentary taxation that British colonists in America considered illegal. A brief 
introduction sets the background in this picture book retelling of the event, and 
then Freedman turns to the days between the tea ships’ arrival and the Tea Party. 
Efforts on the part of the self-styled Sons of Liberty to allow the ships to return to 
England with their cargo intact failed, and their ultimate solution was to destroy 
the tea itself rather then pay the tax. Freedman draws from witness and participant 
accounts (compiled, as he explains, long after the Tea Party itself), neatly integrat-
ing quotations that bring emotional immediacy to the evening’s activities. Paired 
with Malone’s dusky, detailed watercolor renderings, the primary source material 
establishes that the disguised colonists acted with more disciplined determination 
than is often credited. While a few questions remain unanswered, that’s largely 
November 2012 • 145
because this simplified overview wisely skims over the arcane financial problems 
of the East India Company and the British Tea Act of 1773. The take-home mes-
sage of “No taxation without representation” comes through loud and clear, and 
interested readers can use the timeline, indexed terms, and leads in the bibliography 
to pursue the genesis of the Tea Party in more depth.  EB 
gAy, kAthlyn Food: The New Gold. Twenty-First Century, 2012 96p illus. 
with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-4607-4 $31.93
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-0145-7 $23.95   
R Gr. 5-9
The plethora of news stories concerning the American obesity epidemic, world 
hunger, and the economics of modern agriculture are bound to leave any thinking 
teen dazed and confused. Here Gay offers a slim introduction to some of the most 
urgent issues regarding food production and distribution. Chapters are concise 
and cogently organized, beginning with an overview of the current causes of world 
hunger, and then turning to the growth of the factory-farm system, the hazards 
associated with industrial-scale farming, the influence of climate change on crop 
growth, the controversy over genetically modified and engineered foods, the United 
States system of consumer protection, the intersection of food and politics, and 
the organic and locavore movements. Although some lip service is paid to the pros 
and cons of each issue, it’s clear from both her text and sources that Gay urges 
skepticism, at the very least, of most of the touted benefits of huge agribusiness, 
genetic modification, and heavy farm subsidies. Students who have already looked 
into some of these issues will find the treatment here a little thin, but those who 
are taking a first look at the food on their plates and wondering just what it is and 
how it got there will find pertinent questions to ask and valuable paths to explore. 
Color photographs, source notes, a glossary, a bibliography, and lists for further 
reading are included.  EB
griFFin, pAul Burning Blue. Dial, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3815-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Recovering from a recent acid attack that left much of her face burned and scarred, 
former teen beauty queen Nicole Castro is barely holding back her tears as she waits 
in the school shrink’s office, while sixteen-year-old Jay Nazarroo, awkward loner 
extraordinaire, is thinking of something to say. He somehow manages the right 
words and the two strike up a friendship, bonding over their now shared status as 
freaks. As his affection for Nicole grows, Jay becomes intent on finding out who 
exactly attacked Nicole and why, but his hacking skills and investigative queries are 
turning up answers he’s not quite ready to deal with, especially when they point in 
the direction of Nicole. Having done gritty realism in Ten Mile River (BCCB 9/08) 
and doomed romance in Stay With Me (BCCB 11/11), Paul Griffin here takes on 
another genre, giving readers a taut, disturbing thriller anchored with moments 
of incredible poignancy and emotional resonance. All the elements are there—a 
beautiful girl looking for a hero, a damaged kid with savant-like investigative skills 
and considerable curiosity, a list of suspects a mile long, and a tankful of red her-
rings. Jay’s narration is all teenage boy, but his desire to help Nicole is more than 
just hormones or even the need to feel needed: he can’t figure out how to exist in 
146 • The bulleTiN
a world where an act this horrendous could possibly be random. It turns out to be 
very deliberate indeed, and the eventual revelation of the mastermind of the acid 
plot is quite the twist. While the mostly mild moments between Jay and Nicole 
don’t provide the swoony romance of Stay with Me, readers will nonetheless be 
swept up in this thoughtful, well-paced mystery that will have hearts racing.  KQG 
hArris, robie h. Who’s in My Family?: All About Our Families; illus. by Nadine 
Bernard Westcott. Candlewick, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3631-9 $15.99   
Ad 2-5 yrs
Harris follows her engaging tot-level discussion of body parts, Who Has What? 
(BCCB 10/11), with a look at family diversity. Large-type prose explanation of 
family differences and similarities runs across each text spread (“Children are born 
into their families or adopted into their families. And most children live with and 
grow up in their families”), while the depicted preschoolers discuss their families 
and feelings in cartoon word balloons. The descriptive lists are a little overwhelm-
ing, and the children’s dialogue is often overstated and even cloying (“Our family 
and friends have happy times”; “It’s tons of fun when all the kids play together”), 
and it’s Westcott’s pictures that carry the day once again by simply showing the 
myriad configurations—gender, ethnic, age, racial variables—that families can 
manifest. Nonetheless, both the message and the models should help adults start 
a conversation about their own families and provide children warm reassurance 
that “children and grown-ups and their families really do love one another!”  EB  
hAston, meg How to Rock Break-Ups and Make-Ups. Poppy/Little, 
2012 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-316-06826-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-8
Even though the orthodontia and glasses that precipitated her fall from queen bee 
status (in How to Rock Braces and Glasses, BCCB 11/11) are a thing of the past, 
Kacey’s trying very hard not to revert to her previous mean-girl ways. Unfortunately, 
there’s a lot in her life that needs fixing, and pranks and schemes are her knee-jerk 
solution to everything from her friend Paige struggling to win the election for class 
president to crushing on her bandmate Zander to dealing with Zander’s old friend 
Stevie, an insufferable it-girl who has just moved to town. Worst of all, her mother 
has started dating for the first time since her divorce from Kacey’s father, and her 
new boyfriend is Stevie’s dad. Readers won’t be surprised at how spectacularly awry 
Kacey’s plans go, as her propensity for crafting elaborate schemes far outstrips 
her ability to pull them off, but the journey to chaos and back is energetic and 
pleasantly eccentric. The various relationships are drawn with specificity, humor, 
and empathy, and the treatment of friendship, family, and dating issues is sensitive 
and deft, particularly when it comes to Kacey and Stevie’s ways of dealing with 
their divorced parents. Kacey’s friendship with Stevie, burgeoning as the girls try 
to thwart their parents’ romance, cleverly underscores how alike the two of them 
are (though not always for the best), and, as in the first book, Kacey is sympathetic 
even when she is far from likable. Hand this to tweens in search of sitcom-ready 
feel-good fun.  CG
November 2012 • 147
hAworth, dAnette A Whole Lot of Lucky. Walker, 2012 292p
ISBN 978-0-8027-2393-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
You’d think winning the lottery would solve all your problems in an instant, but 
sixth-grader Hailee finds out it isn’t that easy. She has to go to a posh new school, 
for one thing, a circumstance that she did not foresee or desire, but her parents 
want her to have a better education than they had. Her new cell phone also brings 
new conflict with her parents, as she immediately becomes addicted to texting 
and checking her Facebooks updates. Her biggest challenges, though, are moral 
ones—now that she has access to the popular girls who live in the big houses, will 
she continue to do what she knows is right for her, like joining the Library Club, or 
sacrifice her principles to earn the favor of girls who don’t share her values? Hailee has 
a fresh, quirky outlook, peppered with wryly humorous observations that ring both 
wise and age-appropriate. Her direct questions to the reader as she ponders moral 
questions create a friendly intimacy, and readers will be gratified that she doesn’t 
always make bad choices, even when it’s tempting to do so. She’s got a down-home 
relationship to church on Sundays that threads through her decision-making in 
ways that many readers will relate to, and the changes that the lottery win makes in 
her daily life are small enough to insert a healthy dose of reality into that cherished 
fantasy. She also bookishly sets her emotional troubles in the context of familiar 
middle-grade novels, a trait that amps up both her likability and her credibility. 
Readers will definitely feel as though they have made a new friend in Hailee.  KC
homer The Odyssey; ad. by Gillian Cross; illus. by Neil Packer. Candlewick, 
2012 176p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4791-9 $19.99   
R Gr. 4-8
Odysseus’s fateful voyage home from the Trojan War is retold here in vivid yet 
straightforward prose suitable for a late elementary/middle-school audience. Noted 
author Cross follows the story closely and incorporates dialogue, short paragraphs, 
and pithy description to keep the pace lively. The significant scenes are depicted in 
full-color spreads by Packer, and nearly every page has some spot art that pulls out 
an important element of the text. Packer’s illustrations are a mix of two-dimensional 
stylized figures, silhouettes, and symbols, classically flavored but with a decidedly 
contemporary twist. He doesn’t employ linear perspective but instead uses the size 
and placement of the objects to convey the important relationships and emotional 
tenor of the scene. His technique complements the oral storytelling, the magical, 
and the even humorous aspects of the epic by keeping it several steps removed 
from realism. Whether used as a readaloud or a readalone, this offers an accessible 
introduction to an important work whose allusions stretch far and wide; fans of 
graphic novels, mythology, and really great storytelling will be glad to have this in 
their repertoire.  KC  
hosFord, kAte Infinity and Me; illus. by Gabi Swiatkowska. Carolrhoda, 
2012 34p
Library ISBN 978-0-7613-6726-0 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-58013-997-7 $12.95   
R 6-10 yrs
So innocuous-looking a symbol, that recumbent numeral eight. But for the little 
girl Uma, pondering the deep night sky (during a bout of sleeplessness brought 
148 • The bulleTiN
on by the excitement of a new pair of red shoes), the concept of infinity is elusive, 
intimidating, and even a little bit scary. The next day she asks classmates, relatives, 
and acquaintances how they would express their understanding of infinity, and 
their range of answers, from sensible to poetic, provides the child—and readers of 
any age—a way to master the idea. For Grandma, infinity is a family extending 
limitless generations into the future. For Uma’s friend Samantha, it’s a racetrack 
you can drive around forever. For the school cook, it’s endless divisibility: “In your 
mind . . . could you cut that tiny piece of noodle in half forever?” Uma’s own at-
tempt at imagining infinity begins with something she’d like to do forever—have 
recess—and ends with the vague worry that eternal recess might be a paradox: “If 
there’s no school before recess, and no school after recess, is it really recess anymore?” 
Uma admits that these thoughts make her head hurt, and her pleasure at having 
Grandma notice and compliment her new red shoes brings her (and audiences’) 
musings back down to stable, solid, comforting Earth. Swiatkowska’s imaginative 
artwork combines the free-wheeling, slightly eerie absurdity of Monty Python 
animations, the formality of nineteenth-century decorative patterning, and the 
playful nerdiness of Leonardo da Vinci–styled inventions. For math and language 
arts teachers in search of curricular common ground, ∞ marks the spot.  EB
hurley, tonyA The Blessed. Simon, 2012 405p
ISBN 978-1-4424-2951-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2953-6 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Emotionally and psychologically broken, Agnes, Cecilia, and Lucy are drifting 
through life without purpose or direction until they are drawn to a ruined church 
in Brooklyn, where the alluring Sebastian reveals that they are incarnations of 
saints, young women martyred violently for their faith. When outsiders, includ-
ing a well-meaning journalist and dark forces from their pasts, seek to intervene 
and separate them, the trio retaliates in a showdown of spectacular and visceral 
violence. This is a highly original premise, and the blend of religious iconography 
and psychological thriller is certainly intriguing. The book makes readers wait for 
nearly 300 pages before the real action comes, however, and even then it leaves a 
frustrating number of questions unanswered; the girls are so committed to their 
surrender to Sebastian that they’re difficult to relate to and ultimately unsympa-
thetic. Nevertheless, this creepy blend of horror and suspense, fraught with sexual 
tension and carnage, may intrigue readers who are looking for a dark paranormal 
romance with a heavy helping of gore.  AM
JArzAb, AnnA The Opposite of Hallelujah. Delacorte, 2012 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73836-1 $16.99
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90724-8 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89408-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Caro has grown up around her sister’s absence, ever since Hannah, eleven years 
older, became a nun and immured herself in a contemplative order. Now Hannah’s 
left the convent and returned home, and Caro, a high-school junior, is so thrown 
by the situation she can’t even tell her friends what’s happened. She even lies to 
Pawel, the cute new boy who’s becoming her boyfriend, about where Hannah has 
spent her years away. At the same time, Caro begins to wonder what drove Han-
November 2012 • 149
nah and what makes her so unhappy now, and she begins to delve into her sister’s 
long-buried secrets. This is an original premise, and Caro’s conflicted feelings about 
the sister who seemingly turned her back on the family are plausible. The portrayal 
of Hannah herself, frail, sad, and occasionally determined, is poignant and cred-
ible. Narrator Caro is so unrelievedly unpleasant in her selfishness and her brutal 
dismissal of her sister, however, that it’s hard to invest in her; while it’s probably 
plot convenience that makes the family suppress truth so fiercely, the result is a 
dysfunctional family that seems to be projecting all its difficulties on poor Han-
nah, who’s the only one who ends up getting any treatment. There’s nonetheless 
some thoughtful discussion of faith and commitment here, and many readers will 
recognize the trials of loving someone with a vocation, religious or otherwise.  DS
Jenkins, emily Lemonade in Winter: A Book about Two Kids Counting Money; 
illus. by G. Brian Karas. Schwartz & Wade, 2012 40p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95883-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85883-3 $16.99   
Ad 4-6 yrs
The day is frigid and snowy and boring, but Pauline and younger brother John-John 
have a perfect plan—a lemonade stand. Unmoved by parental dissuasion, they col-
lect their quarters, troop off to the grocer’s for lemons, limes, sugar, and cups, and 
set up business. They aren’t exactly besieged by customers, and after each sale they 
try to hype their product with better advertising (loud shouting), entertainment 
(cartwheels), slashed prices (50 cents down to 25 cents), and decorations. They 
do sell out, but sadly it’s at a loss. There is just enough money in the till to buy 
themselves the perfect winter treat, though—popsicles, of course. The premise is 
amusingly realistic, from the customers drawn more by cute kids and novelty than 
a hankering for cold drinks, to the bottom line in red ink. Karas’ pictures make 
the lemon and lime touches all the more inviting against the dull brown and blue-
gray backdrop. As appealing as the storyline may be, the title’s overall utility as a 
money-counting book is limited, first by its focus on quarters as the sole currency, 
and second by the rather heavy burden on young listeners to keep track of the 
income and switched prices as the tale proceeds. Jenkins introduces other coins in 
a chatty endnote (“Nickels are the most confusing of the coins. They kind of look 
like quarters, but they’re not. I wish they were purple or something”) that limits the 
discussion of the dollar to its paper iteration. It all amounts to a pleasant and good-
hearted effort, but woe betide the kid who fishes a Sacagawea out of his pocket.  EB
keenAn, sheilA As the Crow Flies; illus. by Kevin Duggan. Feiwel, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-312-62156-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-8 yrs
Crows don’t get a lot of love in picture books, so it’s nice to see some attention paid 
here to these clever and familiar birds. In rhyming text, Keenan describes the daily 
activities—mostly scavenging, stealing, and gathering together in a group roost—of 
crows from the birds’ point of view. The verse is unfortunately uneven; while some 
turns of phrase are clever (“Watch the sly way we finagle/ a big piece of the pigeon’s 
bagel”), too often the rhythms chop and change, impeding the scansion and making 
reading aloud smoothly a challenge. The text is sometimes evocative, though, and 
it contains some handy opportunities for teaching vocabulary (“corvid,” “cache,” 
etc.). An author and illustrator’s note at the end briefly touches upon why crows 
150 • The bulleTiN
are worthy of more attention than they receive, but kids may find themselves want-
ing even more information as some things, like the huge gathering of crows in the 
book’s end, are described in the text but not really explained. Duggan’s illustrations 
employ subtle watercolor-style tints textured with pastel-like graininess, and the 
slightly smudgy edges and adroit use of light and shadow as the day turns into night 
give the crows a pleasant hint of mystery. Adults who have seen Hitchcock’s The 
Birds may twitch a bit at the spread in which numerous crows ominously perch 
in a cemetery, but kids will likely be unfazed by such a corvid cluster. Despite its 
shortcomings, this could be useful as an introduction to a nature study lesson or 
as a poetic part of a bird-themed story session.  JH
kimmel, eric A. Hiss-s-s-s! Holiday House, 2012 154p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2415-3 $16.95   
R Gr. 4-6
Middle-grader Omar is so convincing with his pleas for a pet snake that his 
ophidiophobic mother finally acquiesces, allowing Omar to proudly bring home 
a beautiful corn snake. Trouble ensues when the snake inevitably escapes and 
Mom ends up heading to the hospital after hitting her head as she recoiled in fear 
upon discovering a reptilian surprise in her purse. Now aware of the acuteness of 
his mother’s phobia, Omar sadly decides to return the snake to the breeder, but 
his mom instead insists that the snake stay so she can confront her fear head on. 
Although the densely packed small print of the text may intimidate some readers, 
those who get past that will find a rewardingly informative pet story. The subtly 
included details of Oregon-dwelling Omar’s Lebanese heritage add a fresh twist 
to this old story of an unwelcome pet; particularly powerful is his mother’s revela-
tion at the book’s end that her snake phobia stems from the snake tattoo on the 
arm of a militiaman who invaded her Lebanese childhood home during a civil 
war. The colorful local snake breeder (“Snake Dude”) and Omar’s equally lively 
buddy, Samkatt, add further interest and humor, but the focus here is clearly on 
practical snake care information and the serious commitment that pet ownership 
should require. Fans of pet-themed fiction, as well as those who wouldn’t touch a 
book about puppies but might pick up one about snakes, will find Omar’s story 
quite sssatisfying.  JH
king, mArtin luther, Jr. I Have a Dream; illus. by Kadir Nelson. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2012 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95887-8 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85887-1 $18.99   
R 6-10 yrs
Excerpts from Dr. King’s 1963 landmark speech at the March on Washington 
for Jobs and Freedom are movingly illustrated here by Kadir Nelson. The inter-
pretation is literal (King’s “four little children” are readily identifiable); the scale 
is often monumental (the hope of being “able to work together, to pray together, 
to struggle together” is represented by a pair of larger than life black and white 
grasped hands); and the compositions are riveting (the force of the single phrase 
“From every mountain, let freedom ring” is underscored by the double-page spread 
close-up of King’s impassioned delivery). End matter presents the speech in its 
entirety for older readers, but paring the text down to its most notable lines makes 
this title accessible to youngsters who are just beginning to comprehend the civil 
rights leader’s stature. Follow Christine King Farris’s March On! with this tribute 
November 2012 • 151
to her brother’s oration for a powerful Black History Month presentation. A CD 
with a recording of King giving the speech is included.  EB
kinsey-wArnock, nAtAlie True Colors. Knopf, 2012 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96099-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86099-7 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89706-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Eleven-year-old Blue has been happy enough on the Vermont farm where she is 
being raised by Hannah, the woman who found her as a baby on her doorstep. The 
farm work is hard, and there’s not a lot of extra money, but Blue’s days are so full 
that she has little room for discontent. She has always especially looked forward to 
summers, because then a nearby house is rented by the well-to-do Tilton family, 
whose daughter Nadine has become her only close friend. This summer, though, 
Nadine seems to have undergone a personality change, prone to arrogance and social 
insults. Confused by her friend’s behavior, Blue is further troubled by turning up 
some evidence that could lead to discovering who her real mother was—a secret 
that it turns out everyone in town knows except her. The novel’s early 1950s set-
ting reinforces the old-fashioned feel of the orphan-story plot, and readers familiar 
with the tropes will be way ahead of Blue in figuring out her parentage. There’s a 
touch of Gantos’ Dead End in Norvelt (BCCB 9/11) in the small-town dynamics 
and the protagonist’s foray into exploring her community’s past for the local paper, 
but apart from the quest to identify her mother, Blue’s story is fairly uneventful. 
Still, tweens whose own friendships have inexplicably hit the rocks will empathize 
with Blue and hope for similarly happy endings.  EB
klAssen, Jon This Is Not My Hat; written and illus. by Jon Klassen. Candle-
wick, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5599-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 4-9 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 129, for review.
klise, kAte Homesick. Feiwel, 2012 [192p]
ISBN 978-1-250-00842-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
The tiny Missouri town of Dennis Acres may not be significant or glamorous, but 
it’s always been Benny’s beloved home. Now that his mother has left his hoarder 
father and fled town, though, twelve-year-old Benny is finding his own house a 
source of strife, as his father’s all-consuming obsession is tough for Benny to deal 
with on his own. The townsfolk do their best to help, and they hatch a plan to lure 
Benny’s dad out of the house long enough to clean it out—a task that suddenly 
seems easy by comparison when a tornado lays waste to the town. As she did in 
Grounded (BCCB 1/11), Klise concocts a small Missouri town of warm, weird 
cohesion and sets it in the recent past (1983, in this case). It’s clear just how much 
Benny needs the townsfolk as his father spirals further into his world of found objects 
that are, he’s sure, amazingly valuable; Benny’s frustration and helplessness at this 
mistaken priority are credibly, palpably conveyed. The small-town characteristic of 
152 • The bulleTiN
knowing everybody’s business is believably both curse (his father’s junk is used as 
an example of a town embarrassment in class) and boon (since everybody already 
knows, he doesn’t suffer the fear of being found out). The post-tornado resolution 
is completely implausible, though, between the town’s being freely given a house 
for every resident, Benny’s dad’s swift curing, and Benny’s mother’s return to town; 
the book also overplays Benny’s father’s foretelling of the computer revolution, in 
predictions that are, with exaggerated irony, considered ridiculous by everyone else. 
It’s Benny’s quandary that really makes the book come alive, though, and readers 
will heave a sigh of relief when his life finally changes for the better.  DS
kormAn, gordon Ungifted. Balzer + Bray, 2012 280p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-174266-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221860-5 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 7-9
The plot is pure Korman: hyperactive, heedless Donovan Curtis whacks a school 
statue of Atlas with a stick, which sends the huge metal globe on Atlas’s shoulders 
rolling into the gym during a basketball game, which lands Donovan in the super-
intendent’s office, where his name is mistakenly entered by the irate administrator 
onto a list of candidates for the district’s middle-school gifted program. Thus begins 
Donovan’s short-lived career in the Academy of Scholastic Distinction, where he 
flounders through the program while teachers and fellow classmates try desperately 
to identify just where his outstanding academic talent lies. Donovan knows very 
well he doesn’t belong, but his eyes have been opened to the perks and privileges 
and stellar facilities enjoyed by the gifted kids, while the rest of the district makes 
do with a substandard curriculum, shabby surroundings, and an antagonistic staff. 
Donovan’s predicament is as much satire as typical school-hijinks tale, and middle-
school readers will recognize the irony as the Academy’s staff, absolutely certain 
their recruitment protocol is unimpeachable, insist that Donovan must therefore 
have some academic depths yet to be discovered and plumbed. The lunacy, which 
revolves around Donovan’s shallow yet indispensable contribution to his team’s 
robotics competition, goes over the edge, though, with a subplot in which his 
gifted class studies his pregnant sister to get “hands-on” mandated credit in Human 
Growth and Development. While the school’s administrative dysfunction is just 
believable enough to keep the story rolling, field trips to the sister’s doctor visits 
(“We were at a pelvic exam!”) exceed the limit of credibility. Nonetheless, kids 
who relish Korman’s brand of subversive mayhem will want to give this a go.  EB
krovAtin, christopher Gravediggers: Mountain of Bones.  Tegen/HarperCol-
lins, 2012 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-207740-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-207742-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Sixth-grade daredevil Ian Buckley strays off the designated path during a class hike 
when he sees a twelve point buck; his best pal, film buff PJ, follows with camera 
in hand, while nerd Kendra treks after to scold the two boys back to the group. 
Unfortunately, the trio is soon lost, and when night falls, it becomes clear that an 
impending rainstorm and wild animals may be the least of their worries: pursued 
by zombies hungry for their flesh, Ian, Kendra, and PJ tackle mountainous terrain, 
endless underground tunnels, and the witch who seemingly controls the reanimated 
November 2012 • 153
corpses. For a zombie book, this is far lighter on the gore than many, but it still 
maintains a quick pace and a level of suspense that will please readers looking 
more for a genuine scare than a putrefied bloodbath. Narration alternates among 
the kids, broadening the book’s appeal, and each of the voices has a distinctive, 
if stereotypical, flair (jock Ian tends towards sports metaphors, egghead Kendra’s 
contribution are peppered with vocab words, etc.). The eventual revelation of the 
witch’s true purpose adds an interesting twist, and the kids’ unwitting entry into a 
world of zombie hunters promises further installments.  KQG 
lAnge, erin JAde Butter. Bloomsbury, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-780-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Marshall has always struggled with his weight, but a bullying incident that earned 
him the nickname Butter plunged him into a shame spiral that now has him tipping 
the scales at 423 pounds. After a particularly humiliating day in the cafeteria, Butter 
posts a website in which he promises to eat himself to death on New Year’s Eve and 
stream it live on the internet. Suddenly he’s in with the popular guys in his class, 
who are betting on everything from what the menu will be to whether or not he’ll 
really go through with it. His newfound popularity even allows him the chance to 
get to know Anna, the classmate he’s been internet friends with, in person. As his 
deadline approaches, he struggles with his ambivalence: he’s not actually suicidal, 
and he knows his new friends don’t really care about him; however, hanging out with 
them and doing normal high-school things is fun. Ultimately, whether he makes 
good on his threat or not, his new popular life will end, one way or another, on 
New Year’s Eve. Butter is the quintessential outsider, with an understandable chip 
on his shoulder. He’s not always likable, but he directs his anger in ways that will 
speak to the deepest frustrations of teen readers. His exasperation with his mother is 
particularly well conveyed, as her efforts to be supportive end up merely one more 
source of grief for Butter. His father’s response is affecting as well; he has stopped 
talking to his son because he doesn’t know what to say, and in truth, there is nothing 
he can say that Butter hasn’t already heard and internalized as a marker of failure 
and shame. Butter needs a catastrophe to shake him out of his fatalistic attitude, 
and he gets it; readers will find his story engrossing and thought provoking.  KC
leAvitt, mArtine My Book of Life by Angel. Ferguson/Farrar, 2012 246p
ISBN 978-0-374-35123-6 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
After the death of her mother, Angel escapes to the mall. There she meets Call, 
who has “candy” to help her feel better, and then uses her addiction to trap her 
into sex-work with him as her pimp. He claims to love her, but what keeps Angel 
in the life are the drugs and the fact that she is too ashamed to go home. After 
several girls, including Angel’s friend Serena, mysteriously disappear from the 
streets, Angel decides she has to get clean and go home. She’s forestalled, however, 
when Call kidnaps an eleven-year-old girl and forces Angel to take her out with 
her. Angel is determined to protect the younger girl, so she works twice as hard to 
make enough money for two and comes up with a plot that can get them off the 
streets and safely away from Call. The verse-novel form is particularly successful 
here as it hints at more than it says yet manages to convey the sordid machinations 
of Call’s ambitions. More effectively, though, the haunting, spare language links 
154 • The bulleTiN
Angel’s story to the tragic loss of innocence that characterizes Paradise Lost, a book 
that she reads aloud at the request of one of her clients. Angel’s descriptions of her 
repetitive circuit through the city, Vancouver in the 1980s, and her dope-sickness 
take on dimensions of nearly-but-not-quite lost beauty, innocence, agency, and 
hope. Powerful moments of brutality exist alongside equally powerful moments 
of insight in this exceptionally moving portrayal of life on the street. An author’s 
note describes the real-life circumstances on which Angel’s story is based, making 
her heartrending story even more immediate and tragic.  KC
l’engle, mAdeleine A Wrinkle in Time: The Graphic Novel; ad. and illus. by 
Hope Larson. Ferguson/Farrar, 2012 392p
ISBN 978-0-374-38615-3 $19.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Madeleine L’Engle’s Newbery Award–winning classic survives the adaptation process 
with all its most important elements intact in this remarkably faithful graphic novel. 
Rendered in colored panels of simple blue, white, and black, the memorable story 
of Meg Murry, Charles Wallace Murry, and Calvin O’Keefe’s adventure across space 
and time is conveyed with all the intellectual and emotional impact of the original 
novel. As the three young people meet an eclectic cast of characters, travel to the evil 
planet Camazotz, and battle the Black Thing to save Mr. Murry from the clutches 
of IT, the content of the panels connects directly to descriptions found in L’Engle’s 
text. Larson effectively differentiates between story action and flashbacks, and her 
focus on character’s faces expresses the value of personal thought and feeling to 
the overall story while maintaining plot movement. Meg’s thoughts and musings, 
which carry the emotional core of the story, are presented alongside dialogue that is 
pulled verbatim or with minimal trimming from the novel. While the palette places 
limitations on the interpretation of the otherwise colorful characters (for instance, 
the man with red eyes does not have red eyes). This works well as an introduction 
to L’Engle’s fantastical quintet for a new crop of readers interested in the following 
the adventures of the Murry clan on their first imaginative journey through the 
space-time continuum.  AM
legrAnd, clAire The Cavendish Home for Boys and Girls; illus. by Sarah 
Watts. Simon, 2012 344p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4291-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4293-1 $9.99   
R Gr. 5-8
With its pristine streets and manicured lawns, Belleville is quite the perfect little 
town, and twelve-year-old Victoria Wright, with her golden curls and outstanding 
academic report, is one of its most perfect residents. The idyll starts going sour, 
however, when Victoria’s best friend Lawrence—a musical prodigy whose dreamy 
nature makes him an outcast in Belleville—goes missing, and the grownups seem 
to be retroactively erasing his existence altogether. Upset at the loss of her friend, 
Victoria goes looking for answers. Her nosiness lands her in the Cavendish Home 
for Boys and Girls, where she meets Mrs. Cavendish herself, a stunningly beautiful 
woman with a knack for whipping—sometimes literally—Belleville’s “degenerate” 
children into shape. The combination of the Stepford-like town and the atmospheric 
home provide a deliciously creepy backdrop to this precise blend of dark humor 
and genuine horror. A bossier and more ambitious version of Clover Twig (Clover 
Twig and the Magical Flying Cottage, BCCB 9/12), Victoria is nonetheless oddly 
November 2012 • 155
endearing, and readers with their own color-coordinated planners will thrill to 
see her leadership skills and sheer determination save the day. That her nemesis is 
an adult possessed of a more exaggerated version of her own drive for perfection 
makes the plot somewhat purposive, but the lesson is cleverly disguised with so 
many narrow escapes and nightmarish bad guys that readers are unlikely to notice. 
Watts’ dot-eyed figures in the digitally rendered black and white illustrations have 
a retro feel to them, but the slightly off proportions and repeated use of silhouettes 
match the book’s macabre tone.  KQG 
leonArd, niAll Crusher. Delacorte, 2012 323p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74354-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81789-6 $10.99   
R Gr. 9 up
Life has been on the grim side for Finn Maguire, a seventeen-year-old dropout 
clinging to his fast-food job and living in London with his washed-up-actor dad. 
Then he comes home to find his dad’s head bashed in, and the detective in charge 
clearly considers Finn the police’s best suspect. Determined to clear his name, Finn 
investigates, armed with a background as a boxer, a generous helping of wily smarts, 
and an even more generous helping of foolhardiness. He plunges into the amoral 
and savage world of the Guvnor, a London crime boss with connections in all social 
strata, while trying to figure out which of his father’s secrets would have caused 
someone in the Guvnor’s organization to kill him. This has classic noir elements 
ranging from a long sequence of twists and double crosses, through a full suit of 
wild cards, to a plethora of punch-ups and a steadily rising body count. Leonard 
excels at a grim intensity leavened by occasional humanity (Finn’s dad’s drinking 
buddies really adored their old friend, and Finn finds release—for a while—in 
bedding Zoe, who isn’t as tough as she initially seems), and the unlikelier plot 
turns fit the sensibility well enough that their logical strain doesn’t really matter. It’s 
unusual for a YA take on this genre to retain so many of its hard-edged elements, 
but this one does so with success and even flair, making Finn a melancholy and 
blood-spattered hero worth watching.  DS
mAdoniA, kristen-pAige Fingerprints of You. Simon, 2012 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2920-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2922-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 10-12
Lemon knows her mother loves her, but she also knows that Stella makes lots of bad 
decisions, mostly with men, which has led to mother and daughter being constantly 
on the move. In Virginia, Lemon decides it’s time to start experimenting with sex, 
and she follows her mother’s lead in choosing casual, irresponsible partners. When 
she and her mother move yet again, this time to West Virginia, Lemon is pregnant 
with the baby of a tattoo artist she has no intention of ever seeing again. Since 
she’s considering raising her own child without a father, Lemon begins to wonder 
if she missed out by not having her own father around. Joined by her new friend 
Emmy, she takes a Greyhound to San Francisco to finally meet her father. The 
trip is relatively smooth as roads to self-discovery go, and even though Lemon gets 
off to a rough start with her dad, she is ultimately not disappointed. The novel is 
entirely character-driven, so it’s helpful that the characters are complex, fully drawn 
people who make mistakes, change, grow, and remain likable through it all. Lemon 
156 • The bulleTiN
is, of course, at the center, and her uncertainty about her own talents, interests, 
boundaries, and goals will speak to readers asking the same questions about who 
and where they want to be. Her parents are patient, but then they have to be since 
they don’t have the moral high ground to tell her how she should live and what 
her decisions should look like. Their compassionate responses subtly aid Lemon in 
her quest to bury the small resentments that have haunted her unconventional life; 
ultimately it is up to Lemon to learn to take them as they are, forgive their flaws, 
and love them as she learns to love and accept herself.  KC  
mArkel, michelle The Fantastic Jungles of Henri Rousseau; illus. by Amanda 
Hall. Eerdmans, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-0-8028-5364-6 $17.00   
R 6-10 yrs
“Henri Rousseau wants to be an artist. Not a single person has ever told him he is 
talented.” No matter; he launched his new career at the age of forty. He couldn’t 
afford lessons. No matter; he taught himself. He couldn’t afford to travel. No mat-
ter; he pulled exotic landscapes from his imagination. He couldn’t win over the 
critics. No matter: “His paintings now hang in museums all over the world.” In 
this charming picture-book biography Markel portrays the famous late-blooming 
artist as an eccentric amalgam of dreamy naïveté and raw determination, whose 
eventual success had less to do with winning over naysayers than allowing the art 
world to catch up with his progressive vision. Illustrator Hall quotes rather than 
slavishly imitates Rousseau’s visual style, adding strong surrealistic touches of her 
own. A panel of stern critics, several of whom are rendered as jungle beasts, glower 
down at a tiny figure of Rousseau hauling a cart full of canvases; the elderly, white-
smocked artist rides a tiger over the jungle treetops, trailing a rainbow of paints 
from his brush tips. A brief author’s note extends the historical content, and a pair 
of appended diagrams identifies the avant-garde notables included in party scenes. 
Pair this with Anderson’s Strange Mr. Satie (BCCB 9/03) or Winter’s Gertrude Is 
Gertrude Is Gertrude Is Gertrude (BCCB 1/09) for a tour of the wild side of the 
belle époque.  EB
mArtin, Ann m., ed. Because of Shoe and Other Dog Stories; ed. by Ann M. Martin; 
illus. by Aleksey and Olga Ivanov et al. Holt, 2012 261p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9314-8 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
This ode to the canine condition consists of nine original short stories by Martin and 
eight other authors. Entries feature dogs who catch crooks, dogs who save people, 
dogs who get lost, and even a boy who turns into a dog temporarily. Several of the 
stories in this collection are unfortunately rather pedestrian and mediocre, but a few 
stand out as stellar. In “The God of the Pond” by Valerie Hobbs, Bertha the dog 
saves her girl by reaching out to a sworn enemy; in the poetic prose of Margarita 
Engle’s “Trail Magic,” the narrator finds comfort from a search and rescue dog as he 
heads out on a poorly planned mission. The standout is Matt de la Peña’s “Things 
People Can’t See,” in which a dog “too ugly to be a hundred percent dog” helps 
scholarship-kid Chico find his place in a ritzy private school. Affectionate mono-
chromatic illustrations by Olga and Aleksey Ivanov (and the authors themselves 
in some stories) add further kid appeal to this title, whose big print and inviting 
subject provide broad accessibility. Readers may want to skim through the weaker 
November 2012 • 157
tales of the first half, but the second half will satisfy like a handful of Milk Bones 
after a rousing game of fetch.  JH
mcbride, lish Necromancing the Stone. Holt, 2012 344p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9099-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Having discovered that he’s a necromancer and defeated Douglas, the evil necro-
mancer who was trying to kill him in Hold Me Closer, Necromancer (BCCB 12/10), 
Sam is now trying to settle into his new life, no easy feat when your power hinges 
on blood sacrifice and you can’t even bring yourself to eat meat. He’s kept busy 
managing Douglas’ estate (which he inherited), trying (and failing) to learn to fight, 
and enjoying his relationship with girlfriend Brid, the fantastically tough werewolf 
girl he met in Douglas’ dungeon. Then Brid’s father, Brannoc, is murdered and she 
becomes pack leader, which threatens both Sam and Brid’s relationship and Sam’s 
standing in the community. McBride expands on the world introduced in the first 
volume as Sam adjusts to the leadership role that’s been thrust upon him, first as 
a member of the Council that governs the local supernatural subculture, then as a 
key operator in the investigation of Brannoc’s death. Sam may be one of the most 
likably hapless heroes in speculative fiction: he’s amiable, good-hearted, and in 
completely over his head, making him impossible not to root for as he forges ahead 
with a dogged persistence and an unconventionally (for a necromancer) empathetic 
approach that (mostly) cancels out his ineptitude. The recycling of Douglas as 
a villain leeches some of the urgency that drove the first book, but between the 
sparkling dialogue, the warm but fraught relationships, and the assured balance 
of hilarity and horror, readers will be thrilled to re-enter McBride’s world.  CG
mcdonnell, pAtrick The Monsters’ Monster; written and illus. by Patrick Mc-
Donnell. Little, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-316-04547-6 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Even though they look like semi-cuddly critters, “Grouch, Grump, and little Gloom 
’n’ Doom thought they were monsters,” so they try to act as atrocious as possible. 
To end their ongoing argument about who is the most monstrous monster of all, 
they cooperatively create a huge, Frankenstein-like creature, which becomes animate 
after—naturally—being struck by a lightning bolt. Their creation’s polite and sunny 
outlook throws the trio at first, but the creature’s inspired gift of warm jelly donuts 
and a quiet day at the beach soon convert them from pugnacious monsters to peace-
ful ones. Though rowdier kids may be disappointed by the tame ending, many 
children will relate to both the monstrous behavior (“their ten favorite words were 
No, No, No, No, No, No, No, No, No, and . . . No!”), and the cheerful kindness. 
McDonnell’s text is succinct and snappy (“Grouch got some tape, tacks, staples, 
and glue. Grump found some gunk, gauze, and gobs of goo”), and an enthusiastic 
reader-aloud can easily make the most of the occasional moments of melodrama 
(“The monster started to twitch. ‘He’s alive, ALIVE!’ the little terrors exclaimed”). 
McDonnell’s illustrations possess more scope and substance than in his Mutts 
comic, and he effectively utilizes a limited palette of grays, browns, and muted 
reds for most of the book, employing a broader color spectrum at more powerful 
or pleasant moments (such as the monster’s sudden animation or the crew’s day at 
the beach). Scratchy black outlines, dynamic poses, and short radiating lines that 
indicate motion or emotion keep the art energetic, and the quartet of monsters is 
158 • The bulleTiN
more cute than creepy. Stock up on jelly donuts and serve them up along with this 
for a not-so-scary monster readaloud.  JH
mcdowell, beck This Is Not a Drill. Paulsen/Penguin, 2012 216p
ISBN 978-0-399-25794-0 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10 
Seniors Emery and Jake spend several French classes each week teaching rudimentary 
vocabulary to first graders. They enjoy working with the children, but it’s not always 
easy to keep focused on the lessons while ignoring their former romance that ended 
in an abrupt breakup. Today they have a much bigger problem: a pistol-toting father, 
Mr. Stutts, evades the school’s lax security and bursts into the classroom to collect 
his son, Patrick, whom he is about to lose in a custody battle. The teacher soon 
crashes into a diabetic coma, so it is up to Emery and Jake to protect their eighteen 
charges while slyly feeding information to the SWAT team assembled outside the 
building. Emery and Jake contribute alternating views of the action, a technique 
that would have been far more effective if the pair did not so frequently pause to 
discuss their own backstory in the midst of the hostage crisis. Stutts, an Iraq War 
veteran suffering from PTSD, is treated as a complex, sympathetic villain: “I know 
he’s a monster—I’m terrified of what he might do. But he’s also a wounded soldier, 
and I can’t forget that.” McDowell promptly tips readers off to three impending 
deaths, but each death is more a matter of sadness and inevitability than outright 
horror. Plenty of skeptics will wonder why Stutts didn’t just exit through a back door 
or window when he had the chance, but thriller fans willing to suspend disbelief 
will simply roll with the unfolding drama.  EB
mcneil, gretchen Ten. Balzer + Bray, 2012 294p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211878-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211880-6 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Meg doesn’t really understand why Jessica, the most popular girl in school, has 
included her in the invitations to spend a weekend at Jessica’s Washington island 
home, but since Minnie, Meg’s best friend wants her to go, she agrees, just as she 
always does. In fact, keeping Minnie happy has been Meg’s project ever since Min-
nie was diagnosed as bipolar. As a result, Meg can’t let her heart go where it wants 
to, since Minnie likes the same guy as Meg. Now they have even bigger problems, 
though, as the ten partiers are completely cut off from the mainland by a fierce 
storm and begin dying one by one. Is the first death really a suicide? Is the second 
an accident? Who will be the next to die, and what gruesome form will the death 
take? When Meg finds the journal of Claire, a girl who was bullied into suicide a 
year earlier, she begins to piece together what’s happening; each person at the party 
had committed some wrong against the dead girl, at least from Claire’s perspective. 
If Hannah from Thirteen Reasons Why (BCCB 11/07) had had a more murderous 
streak and a willing accomplice, then this would be that book, clear and simple, 
as each bully cleverly gets his or her just deserts. Instead, it’s clear that Claire and 
her accomplice were at least part-time residents of crazytown, since some of the 
bullying she experienced was a result of her own overwrought imagination. This 
leaves a few characters, including Meg and thoroughly worthy heartthrob T. J., off 
the hook as guilty bullies and turns them into sympathetic victims, which is what 
teen horror stories of this type need to wring the maximum amount of gasps and 
nail-chewing out of readers. Don’t expect any life lessons here, but don’t expect to 
put it down once you’ve picked it up, either.  KC 
November 2012 • 159
moore, kelly Amber House; by Kelly Moore, Tucker Reed and Larkin 
Reed. Levine/Scholastic, 2012 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-43416-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46973-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
After the death of their estranged grandmother, sixteen-year-old Sarah Parsons and 
her little brother accompany their mother on her return to the old family estate, 
Amber House, to settle finances and prepare to sell the house. Already a bit of an 
ice queen, Sarah’s mother is particularly cold and distant at her childhood home, 
and Sarah can understand why: although the spectacular mansion is both enormous 
and filled with luxury, the shadowy halls and dusty rooms are unsettling, to say 
nothing of the strange noises heard at night and the occasional echoes of child-
ish laughter through the home. Things get even creepier as Sarah investigates the 
history of house with the help of two neighbors—both, of course, handsome and 
mysterious guys—and discovers that the sins of her ancestors may have cursed the 
house, a suspicion she thinks is confirmed when her brother inexplicably falls into 
a coma. Swift plotting combines with vivid, cinematic prose to make this gothic 
tale compulsively readable, and an unexpected ending elevates the story beyond 
the genre. Fans of ghost stories will appreciate the classic elements here, from the 
disembodied voices to the ancestral home with a sordid past, but they will also be 
pleasantly surprised by the time-bending element that comes into play in the latter 
half. Relationships are well developed, particularly Sarah’s mix of animosity toward 
and sympathy for her mother, while the romance between Sarah and a neighbor boy 
begins simply enough but is then organically revealed to be a fateful, life-changing 
connection that will leave readers swooning. Complex, elegant, and haunting, this 
is a book that deserves to be read in one sitting.  KQG 
murphy, Jim The Giant and How He Humbugged America. Scholastic, 
2012 112p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-439-69184-0 $19.99   
R* Gr. 5-10
Who doesn’t love a brash, ambitious hoax—just as long as it doesn’t result in a lost 
financial investment? Murphy follows nineteenth-century America’s near-frenzied 
fascination with the Cardiff Giant, an over-seven-foot-long lifelike human form 
unearthed by well-diggers on Stub Newell’s New York farm in 1869. Seamlessly 
integrating thoughtful social history with delightful bamboozlement, Murphy 
unveils the scheme that would simultaneously tweak the noses of Biblical literalists, 
arouse heated discourse among underinformed “scientific experts,” and make the 
perpetrators (and a few creators of audacious knockoffs) a mountain of money, 
much of it actually quite legal according to law of the period. Chapters are short 
and clearly organized, font is large and leading wide, illustrations are plentiful, and 
an introductory “Cast of Characters” list is included, making this already enticing 
topic accessible to a wide spectrum of readers. A brisk, chatty narrative style creates 
a comfort zone even for readers who don’t dabble much in nonfiction: “Yes, Stub 
Newell was lying! But he wasn’t as big a liar as George Hull. Hull had the unique 
ability to look a person straight in the eyes and say convincingly that he was being 
absolutely honest when in truth he was stealing the person blind.” Source notes, 
an index, and a selected bibliography are included.  EB
160 • The bulleTiN
myers, christopher H.O.R.S.E.: A Game of Basketball and Imagination; written 
and illus. by Christopher Myers. Egmont, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-60684-218-8 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-5
If you own a basketball, you’ve played Horse, the court equivalent of follow-the-
leader: “Right, we call it ‘ghost’ where I come from. But the game’s the same. You 
start.” And thus begins a wild round of one-upmanship in which each of two friends 
plans his opening shot. The bald dude starts off modestly enough: “I’m going to 
skyhook this ball clear across the court into that basket, with my eyes closed, stand-
ing on one foot, over my left shoulder.” Not to be outdone, the headbanded dude 
orchestrates a shot that involves climbing up 437 flights of stairs and calculating 
wind speed, and then “I will stand on one tiny tiptoe, balance myself on the topmost 
corner of the 437-story building, and shoot a perfect layup, with my left . . . foot.” 
And they’re just getting started. Of course, neither gets around to actually taking a 
shot, but they don’t care and neither will the reader, because it’s all about talking a 
little good-humored smack. The only thing stretchier than Myers’ lanky buddies is 
their imagination, and the literal renderings of their outrageous plans (how about 
an airborne tongue dunk? Or a trip into space, with a cameo by Neil deGrasse 
Tyson?) are as hilarious as the patter. In a closing note Myers explains this work 
is inspired by games of Horse played with his photographer friend, Kambui, and 
this tribute to friendship incorporates snippets of Kambui’s photographic medium 
with Myers’ painting. The freewheeling format and broadly popular topic makes 
this eminently saleable as either a readalone or readaloud, and kids familiar with 
Myers’ illustrations of Zora Neale Hurston’s whoppers in Lies and Other Tall Tales 
(BCCB 1/06) will welcome his latest venture into hyperbole.  EB
nAgdA, Ann whiteheAd Kevin Keeps Up; illus. by Chris Russo. Holiday House, 
2012 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2657-7 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr.2-4
Middle-grader Kevin is miserable when he learns that his kind teacher, Mrs. Steele, 
is going away for a while and that the sub will be Mrs. Beezer. Mrs. Steele un-
derstands how hard it is for Kevin to focus and pay attention in class, while Mrs. 
Beezer just thinks he’s a lazy goof-off. As Kevin struggles to complete his research 
project on cheetahs and to stay out of trouble, he manages to befriend the school’s 
resident cat, to come up with an original idea for a graph for his project, and to 
garner sympathy from his P.E. teacher, who suggests running as a way to help Kevin 
increase his mental focus. Although a considerable plot contrivance (the reason for 
Mrs. Steele’s leave is so that she can visit her husband, who is studying cheetahs in 
Africa) strains credulity, the characters and their interactions, though simplified, are 
believable. Kids with similar teacher experiences may find it particularly truthful 
(if frustrating) that Mrs. Beezer never does ease up on Kevin. The nature of Kevin’s 
issues is left oddly unstated in the book, despite the fact that cover copy indicates he 
has ADHD, and adults may wonder why Kevin seems to have no IEP. The subtlety 
with which his difficulties are presented is rather refreshing, though, and while it 
may be simplistic to suggest that running will somehow fix things, it’s nice to see 
an option for help that isn’t pharmaceutical. Russo creates convincingly kid-like 
black and white spot art and faux writing samples, presented as Kevin’s drawings 
November 2012 • 161
and schoolwork. Many kids will relate to Kevin’s problems with schoolwork and 
classroom behavior, and others may find that reading Kevin’s point of view makes 
them look at their fidgety classmates with a little more understanding.  JH
o’brien, John Look . . . Look Again!; written and illus. by John O’Brien. Boyds 
Mills, 2012 64p
ISBN 978-1-59078-894-3 $18.95   
R Gr. 3-6
This intriguing title offers a series of brief skit-like sequences that tell a visual joke 
or play on words in a spreadful of panel illustrations; for instance, “The Pizza” 
features a pizza chef who carefully cuts and eats a slice of pizza, whereupon the now 
Pac-Man-shaped pie gobbles up the pizza chef. Each of the six sections follows a 
particular protagonist or set of protagonists (“The Dairy Farmer,” “The Clown”), 
and each section offers five titled mini-stories. As with any revue-styled collection, 
the entries vary in success, with some falling flat, but there are plenty of humor-
ously punchy sketches. The style of comedy ranges from the witty (the chef who 
fishes the letters “f l y” out of the customer’s alphabet soup—because there’s a fly 
in his soup, geddit?) to the surreal (the woodsman brings what looks like a log to 
the base of the tree, but it turns out to be the tree’s shadow, which he then unrolls 
and sits in) to the enjoyably corny (the “Three-Ring Circus” features a clown who 
answers the phone after three rings). The limited text—many sequences are entirely 
wordless, and there’s never text beyond speech balloons and story titles—makes 
this appealing for reluctant readers, and there’s overall a sophisticated air of cun-
ning playfulness that evokes cartoonists such as Gahan Wilson and Gary Larson. 
The line and watercolor illustrations are crafted with exactitude; hatching textures 
some elements while rhythmic pigmented dappling brings order to others. That 
controlled style and the tidy domesticity of the scenes enhances the contrasting 
weirdness of the events. Use this to draw the artists into language arts and to give 
the word-weary a break.  DS
o’connor, sheilA Keeping Safe the Stars. Putnam, 2012 299p
ISBN 978-0-399-25459-8 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Home-schooled by their aging grandfather since their mother died, siblings Pride, 
Nightingale, and Baby have been taught to be fiercely independent, beholden to 
nobody for help. Now an attack of encephalitis has suddenly sent Old Finn into 
long-term hospital care in Duluth, and the three siblings are at odds over how to 
survive on their grandfather’s terms. At thirteen, Pride feels she should take com-
mand, but her propensity to tell tall tales and outright lies has drawn unwanted 
attention to the popcorn and pony-ride business they hope will sustain them until 
Old Finn comes home. Nightingale, the ethical and studious sibling, is more realistic 
about their need for help, but she’s too reclusive to venture willingly beyond their 
cabin. Baby, a warm-hearted six-year-old, tries his best to comply with his older 
sisters, but he can’t always help blurting out clues as to their true circumstances. 
The children try to dodge the notice of well- and ill-wishing adults, until a cache 
of letters from Old Finn’s former flame in Duluth supplies the connection the 
children need to reach their grandfather and accept the support they need. Tales 
of children terrified of the foster care system are nothing new, and the plotting 
here is so carefully orchestrated that readers will easily predict the missteps the 
siblings will make and the characters who will eventually bail them out. Excerpts 
162 • The bulleTiN
from adult love letters, the 1970s setting, and the children’s repetitive musings on 
their grandfather’s prognosis may further alienate young readers. The orphan-story 
crowd, though, will be pleased to follow the bumpy road to their happy ending.  EB
pAtent, dorothy hinshAw Dogs on Duty: Soldiers’ Best Friends on the Battlefield 
and Beyond. Walker, 2012 [48p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8027-2845-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
One of our leading nonfiction chroniclers of animal life, Patent here provides a 
photoessay on “MWDs”—military working dogs. She starts with the history of 
dogs in twentieth-century American warfare, with sidebars focusing on specific 
“Hero Hounds,” and then goes on to explore the contemporary military programs 
involving dogs. The book describes the puppy-raising program at Lackland Air 
Force Base in Texas, the training the young dogs undergo, and their work in war 
zones; there are also brief descriptions of medical treatment for dogs who have been 
injured or who suffer from PTSD. Patent remains a smooth and capable writer, 
bringing her narrative energy by focusing on individual voices and experiences. 
There are some questions left unanswered (what’s the casualty rate for serving dogs, 
for instance?), and it can be difficult to make out the spidery font against dark red 
and blue backgrounds, but audiences there for the doggy immersion won’t mind. 
A plethora of photographs, some quite arresting (a dog and his parachute-wearing 
human partner leaping out of a plane; a Special Forces dog with bristling high-tech 
vest galloping through splashing water), are the real heart of the book, with most 
spreads displaying more image than text. A timeline of dogs in war and a glossary are 
included; a list of further resources and an index will appear in the bound book.  DS
pAul, FionA Venom. Philomel, 2012 [448p] (The Secrets of the Eternal 
Rose)
ISBN 978-0-399-25725-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Fifteen-year-old contessa Cassandra Caravello has been afforded a life of luxury and 
privilege in Renaissance Venice, but as her impending nuptials to a boy she hardly 
knows loom closer, Cass is feeling more and more suffocated by the expectations 
that accompany her status. A small act of rebellion in the form of sneaking out 
one night leads her into a world of danger: she discovers the mutilated corpse of a 
courtesan and is subsequently threatened by the girl’s murderer. The city’s corrupt 
guard is of no help to Cass, and she finds that her only protection comes from 
Falco, a devilishly charming artist whom she happened to meet shortly after finding 
the body. The two begin to investigate the murder themselves, but as more girls 
go missing and Falco’s behavior becomes increasingly erratic, Cass is torn between 
keeping silent and believing Falco’s obvious lies or possibly naming the boy she has 
fallen in love with as the killer. The trope of a high-born lady falling in love with a 
bad-boy commoner has certainly been done before, but the mystery element here 
broadens the story’s appeal. Additionally, Paul provides her characters with a depth 
that is not commonly seen in the genre. Both Cass’s aunt and fiancé are surprisingly 
sympathetic, despite their role in limiting Cass’s freedom, and while Falco is often 
a cad, he also manages to challenge Cass’s worldview (when she’s not occupied 
with steamy fantasies of him). The murderer’s identity is fairly predictable, but 
November 2012 • 163
his connection to Cass and his compelling backstory is a surprise. A flood of satin 
gowns, painted ladies, and stifling corsets complement the Venetian background, 
and readers will want to join Cass and Falco’s nighttime wanderings through the 
misty canals.  KQG
peAcock, cArol Antoinette Red Thread Sisters. Viking, 2012 231p
ISBN 978-0-670-01386-9 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-7
It’s the dream of the girls at China’s Tong Du orphanage to find real families, but 
Wen can’t bear the thought of being parted from her best friend and spiritual older 
sister, Shu Ling. When eleven-year-old Wen is adopted by an American family, 
she promises Shu Ling that she’ll make sure her friend gets adopted as well. Wen 
gradually settles in with the McGuires, but she’s devastated to realize she may not 
be able to honor her promise to Shu Ling, who will soon age out of adoptability 
according to Chinese policy. The foregrounding of Wen’s friendships, including her 
growing closeness with an American classmate, adds a new dimension to the familiar 
adoption story. Without belaboring the point, Peacock (herself an adoptive parent 
of Chinese-born kids) makes clear how much of an unfair gamble the adoption 
process can be; what helps Shu Ling most is Wen writing a compelling description 
for her on a website and advocating for her in the blogosphere. Overall, it’s a fairly 
gentle treatment of a tough subject, and the prose, though occasionally stodgy, has 
an old-fashioned, accessible simplicity of style. Even preteens who can’t grasp the 
magnitude of an international uprooting will relate to the pain of separation from 
one’s best friend, and they’ll rejoice at Wen and Shu Ling’s hard-won reunion.  DS
peArce, JAckson Fathomless. Little, 2012 291p
ISBN 978-0-316-20778-2 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Lo is not sure how long she has been with her sisters under the ocean, but the 
pull she feels toward the surface makes her believe that perhaps she had a life be-
fore—before she was a creature of the sea, before she lost her soul, before her only 
means of escape was to take the life of a mortal and claim their soul as her own. 
Meanwhile, on land, Celia is all too aware of every minute she spends with her 
overbearing, manipulative sisters, and the psychic ability she shares with them is 
all that remains of their strained relationships. When an accident brings Celia and 
Lo together, Celia realizes her power to see the past may do some good and help 
Lo recover her memories. As her visions become increasingly disturbing, however, 
it becomes clear that Lo’s past will put Celia’s present and future in danger. Pearce’s 
reimagination of Andersen’s “The Little Mermaid” brings a shadowy, underwater 
world into the mythology of fairy-tale wolves and dark witches she established 
in Sisters Red (BCCB 9/10) and Sweetly (BCCB 10/11). Familiarity with the two 
previous books isn’t necessary to understand the events here, but it certainly lends 
some emotional weight to Lo’s predicament; it also adds a sense of urgency to the 
final scene in which the girls narrowly escape the wolfish Fenris and their sadistic 
partners. Regardless of the specifics of the fairy tale she is adapting, Pearce writes 
some stunningly poignant dialogue for adolescent girls, and here she offers up her 
most complicated portrayal yet, giving readers two protagonists who are a blend of 
selfish, giving, and vulnerable and to whom teen readers will readily relate.  KQG
164 • The bulleTiN
pinFold, levi Black Dog; written and illus. by Levi Pinfold. Templar/Candle-
wick, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6097-0 $15.99   
R 5-8 yrs
When the Hope family wakes up one morning, they’re stunned to see “a black 
dog the size of an elephant” outside their house. While Mr. and Mrs. Hope and 
the two older children close the curtains and cower inside, the youngest Hope, 
known as Small, fearlessly marches out to meet the humongous pooch. Singing a 
taunting rhyme, she entices him to chase her, darting under the bridge, through 
the playground slide, and back home through the cat flap in the door. With each 
obstacle negotiated, the dog shrinks somewhat, until finally he’s a regular dog-sized 
dog in the Hopes’ house, where he clearly has become the new house pet. This is a 
surreal yet enjoyable excursion, with the touch of menace mitigated by perky Small’s 
fearless perspective (“You are such sillies,” she tells her quailing family as she heads 
out the door), and there’s a folkloric flavor to the text, with patterned dialogue and 
repetition adding structure. The delicately painted illustrations maintain the balance 
of homeyness and weirdness; the Hopes’ house has the picturesque overstuffedness 
of an old-fashioned dollhouse, an effect that’s enhanced by the figures’ waxy, pale 
tones. While there’s definite impact in the quick views of huge dog bits through 
the windows, the scruffy pooch himself looks more interested than threatening. 
The toylike elements and white framing help keep the feel playful, while thumbnail 
vignettes in brown monochrome capture smaller scenes. This will be a nice bridge 
between folklore and David Wiesner for audiences who are developing their taste 
for the strange and unexpected.  DS
pinkwAter, dAniel Bushman Lives!; illus. by Calef Brown. Houghton, 
2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-547-38539-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
After seeing a painting at Chicago’s Art Institute that leaves him “happy and buzzy,” 
seventeen-year-old Harold Knishke decides he wants to be an artist. Sure, he’s 
never really drawn more than stick figures, but that doesn’t stop him; fortunately, 
the members of the artsy scene of Chicago’s beatnik era seem more than willing 
to help. Harold begins by taking drawing classes from a taxidermist, then finds a 
mentor in a muralist who camouflaged entire villages during World War II, sets up 
a workshop in a translucent mansion, and eventually sets sail for a hidden island 
in Lake Michigan in search of both a missing gorilla (the titular Bushman) and an 
artistic adventure. Pinkwater’s trademark wackiness is on full display here, but the 
amiable absurdity effectively serves a secondary purpose of leavening a treatise on 
the nature of art with wit and self-referential mockery. Young readers may have a 
problem immediately identifying and relating to the 1950s beatniks, but the au-
thor’s commentary on the gatekeepers of the art world will sit well with those both 
awed by and suspicious of today’s hipsters. Plenty of teens will recognize the issues 
that Harold confronts—subjectivity of taste, the lure of selling out—as he tries to 
figure out what art is. The parade of eccentric characters Harold meets is undeniably 
entertaining, and the conversations he has with them are often provocative and 
direct, pondering the reasons and motivation behind creation but in an accessible 
and often humorous manner. Framing all of this is a love letter to Chicago and 
Windy City residents, and fans will particularly welcome the inclusion of bits of 
historical trivia, geographic landmarks, and general appreciation.  KQG
November 2012 • 165
prAtchett, terry Dodger. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 360p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-200950-0 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-200949-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219015-4 $9.99   
R* Gr. 7-10
On a stormy night in a reimagined Victorian London, a young woman tumbles 
from a carriage, pursued by thugs intent on delivering a sound thrashing before they 
drag her back. Help comes from two quarters: a shabby but gallant young man rises 
out of the sewer wielding a crowbar and a set of brass knuckles that he uses to chase 
away the miscreants, while a pair of gentlemen, Mr. Dickens and Mr. Mayhew, set 
about helping the young woman. Thus Charlie Dickens makes the acquaintance 
of Dodger and engages him in uncovering the mysteries that have led to the young 
woman’s present predicament. An expensive ring on her finger indicates that she is 
foreign and important, but she’s unwilling to explain her situation to anyone but 
Dodger, and even then she withholds her name, calling herself Simplicity when 
it is clear that she is anything but. Taking up Simplicity’s cause leads Dodger into 
the company of the wealthiest and most powerful people in London, including 
Benjamin Disraeli, Sir Robert Peel, and Angela Burdett-Coutts. Pratchett weaves 
fact and fiction seamlessly here, altering both while keeping the flavor of the city 
vibrantly real. Dodger, for instance, achieves fame and fortune when he avoids a 
fatal haircut by disarming Sweeney Todd, and he takes a young Joseph Bazalgette 
on an enlightening tour through the London sewers. Dickens himself takes out 
his notebook whenever Dodger says something particularly interesting about, say, 
a “bleak house,” or when noting his “great expectations” for Dodger’s prospects, 
and other such sly jokes abound. The genius of Pratchett is that readers need not 
understand all of the clever witticisms and subtle allusions in order to appreciate 
the exciting plot twists. Getting the jokes, however, adds a wealth of pleasure for 
alert and knowledgeable readers; an extensive author’s note offers suggestions for 
those who have been inspired to learn more about Victorian London, real and 
imagined.  KC
pringle, lAurence Ice!: The Amazing History of the Ice Business. Calkins Creek, 
2012 74p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59078-801-1 $17.95   
R Gr. 5-9
Sometimes the unlikeliest topics prove unexpectedly fascinating. Kids who embrace 
that truism will want to take a look at this slice of American commercial history 
that examines how people coped before the days of electric food refrigeration, and 
how a population that became hooked on cool drinks, ice cream, and convenience 
demanded a commodity that Nature alone couldn’t fully supply. The focus here is 
on Rockland Lake in New York state, the first large-scale supplier of ice to a mas-
sive urban area. Science and engineering shake hands with geography and history 
in the details of how water freezes and melts; how the tools of ice harvesting were 
developed; how harvested ice was transported over hills and down rivers in a rela-
tively low-tech environment; how ice was priced and distributed to an ever more 
dependent populace; and how high demand following a mild winter or a local fire 
could result in riots. Sidebar information and period illustrations are engrossing, 
from the 1862 ad for Bunn’s Corpse Preserver, to the 1901 Cochichewick Lake 
Ice Company schedule of prices that allows modern readers to calculate the best 
delivery deal. A bibliography and index will assist students who would like to de-
166 • The bulleTiN
velop this topic into a research project, but most readers will be content to thank 
their stars that the ice in their soft drink didn’t have to be scraped clean of horse 
urine on the way to the glass.  EB
prose, FrAncine The Turning. HarperTeen, 2012 246p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-19966-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219028-4 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
In this contemporary treatment of Henry James’ famous The Turn of the Screw, Jack 
is going to a remote island for the summer to nanny a couple of kids, hoping to 
earn enough money to enable him to attend a pricey college along with his beloved 
girlfriend, Sophie. The children, Miles and Flora, prove to be quiet and odd, and the 
cook, Mrs. Gross, tells Jack about their attachment to a pair of previous employees, 
Lucy and Norris, who engaged in disturbing psychological mind games and died 
in violence after leaving the island. Jack then begins to see both Norris and Lucy, 
but are the visions a figment of his imagination, an artifact of his sudden illness, 
or a genuine and threatening ghostly visitation? Prose creates some compelling 
contemporary analogues to James’ set-up, and Jack is a great patsy, with a hearty 
cluelessness that makes him seem doomed from the get-go. His disintegration is 
effectively conveyed, with his change particularly marked by his increasingly accus-
ing and frantic tone toward Sophie. The epistolary format undercuts the chill factor 
by distancing it, though, and the original story’s famous ambiguity ends up being 
more of a muddle here, leaving readers confused rather than intriguingly mystified. 
Adele Griffin’s Turn of the Screw update, Tighter (BCCB 5/11), is therefore a more 
successful freestanding read, but this will certainly divert readers with a taste for 
spooky happenings on lonely islands, and it would be interesting to read James, 
Griffin, and this title together.  DS
pyron, bobbie The Dogs of Winter. Levine/Scholastic, 2012 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-39930-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46985-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-9
In the aftermath of the fall of the Soviet Union, life is a struggle for many poor 
Russians. Five-year-old Mishka (his nickname from his mother) has been ejected 
from his home by his mother’s brutal boyfriend, who has apparently killed Mishka’s 
mother, and he’s struggling to survive on the streets of Moscow rather than end up 
in the city’s legendarily savage orphanages. Initially connecting with a crowd of street 
kids who eke out a living in one of the city’s railroad stations, gentle Mishka is upset 
by their violence and immorality, and he’s increasingly drawn to the friendly yet 
cunning dogs that are also scavenging to survive. Soon he forsakes human company 
entirely and becomes part of the dog pack, helping them find food and benefiting 
from their warmth and protection. As a note explains, Pyron bases her story on a 
real child, one of Moscow’s many street children in the 1990s, who lived for two 
years with a pack of dogs (a story also explored in Eva Hornung’s adult title Dog 
Boy). She’s used that story to create a compelling and highly original fiction, with 
Mishka’s experiences somewhere between Holman’s Slake’s Limbo (BCCB 4/75) 
and The Jungle Book (indeed, the police trying to catch him call him “Mowgli”). 
The underlying picture of the street kids is a grim and affecting one: having few 
acceptable options, they take refuge in drugs and drink and survive by prostitution 
November 2012 • 167
and violence—or they don’t survive at all. Mishka’s life with the dogs is actually less 
feral-seeming than theirs; there’s considerably more affection (he even embraces an 
elderly dog as a substitute for his kindly late grandmother) and loyalty in the dog 
pack, and the dog characters are as vivid as Mishka’s human acquaintances. The book 
flirts with fantasy in Mishka’s communication with his dog compatriots, but even 
that could be easily construed as his own interpretations. An absorbing account in 
its own right, this could also partner with Gerstein’s Victor (BCCB 12/98) for two 
very different looks at (purportedly) wild children. An extensive bibliography about 
feral children and Russian child poverty in general as well as the book’s particular 
inspiration is appended.  DS
rAppAport, doreen Beyond Courage: The Untold Story of Jewish Resistance During 
the Holocaust. Candlewick, 2012 [240p] illus. with photographs.
ISBN 978-0-7636-2976-2 $22.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-12
“Even as a Jew, growing up in a Jewish household, I had only ever heard that ‘Jews 
went like lambs to the slaughter’ during the war.” This, as Rappaport explains in 
her introduction, was once a prevailing view and the starting point for her own 
research, an exploration that led her to uncover a wealth of true stories that testify 
to many forms of Jewish resistance under the Nazi regime. The stories are organized 
here into chronological sections, covering Hitler’s rise to power in the mid-1930s; 
German expansionism during the war; ghetto life and the “final solution”; transit, 
labor, concentration, and death camps; and partisan activity throughout Europe. 
The content of many stories will be generally familiar to many readers—the 
heartbreaking family decisions to send children away in the Kindertransport; the 
Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, the planned escape from the Sobibor Death Camp. Less 
acclaimed but equally compelling are tales of the Jews who built entire communities 
deep in wilderness areas of Eastern Europe, Jewish workers in German factories 
who quietly sabotaged war materials, teenage Jewish girls in Greece who defied 
deeply entrenched gender roles to fight with the resistance. Rappaport’s engrossing 
storytelling will entice many teens to read cover-to-cover, while the organization 
and rich supporting features will guide teen researchers to specific topics, and the 
brevity and substance of individual entries will be valued by history teachers for 
classroom oral readings. A wealth of black and white photographs enhances the 
presentation, with images ranging from the bravado of freedom fighters posed 
with their weapons, to the despair of victims awaiting execution, to the solidarity 
of survivors at post-war reunions. A timeline, source notes for quotations, sources 
aligned by chapter and section, a pronunciation guide for many personal and place 
names, and an index are included. Consider this a required purchase for young 
adult nonfiction collections.  EB
reeF, cAtherine The Brontë Sisters: The Brief Lives of Charlotte, Emily, and Anne.
Clarion, 2012 231p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-57966-5 $18.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Although readers may not encounter the work of the Brontë sisters until high school, 
this biography for middle-schoolers introduces a fascinating, close-knit family with 
lively imaginations who liked nothing better than to run free on the moors that 
surrounded their home and make up stories and poems about imaginary kingdoms. 
168 • The bulleTiN
Their mother died when they were quite young, leaving their care to an aunt and 
their ambitious father, Patrick Brontë. He wished his girls to have an education, but 
the school he chose was a dismal failure; the teachers dispensed harsh treatment, 
even when the girls were ill, and this led to the deaths by tuberculosis of two of 
the five Brontë sisters, leaving Charlotte, Emily, Anne, and brother Branwell on 
their own. More schools were tried, but the girls and their brother preferred their 
remote home, and none succeeded at finding jobs they liked. Branwell became 
addicted to alcohol and drugs, and while the girls attempted to be governesses 
and teachers, they eventually returned home and began to write and publish their 
work under the pseudonyms of Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell. Reef’s narration of 
the family’s fates and fortunes highlights the closeness of the siblings, their failures 
whenever they strayed too far from one another, and the tragedy of their early 
deaths. She places their writing in the context of both its time and the sisters’ own 
preoccupations, and she gives extensive plot summaries as well as detail on how the 
works were received. Photographs, portraits, movie stills, and drawings also provide 
context and will inspire readers to pick up one of the novels of these important, if 
not prolific, authors.  KC
ryAn, cArrie, ed. Foretold: 14 Stories of Prophecy and Prediction. Delacorte, 
2012 351p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98996-4 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74129-3 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98442-6 $10.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Ranging from delightful romances to humorous science fiction narratives, from 
dark fantasies to cautionary tales, these fourteen original stories offer a range of 
takes on the idea of prophecy. Predictions in these stories come from oracles, leg-
ends, a sham fortune-teller, real fortune-tellers, a cult leader, a wily grandmother, a 
crime-obsessed teenager’s own inner drama, and a nasty teacher. They are fulfilled 
sometimes by magic, sometimes by effort and hard work, and sometimes by the 
conscious or unconscious acts of the tellers, but always in surprising and canny 
ways. All of the stories are successful in terms of high interest and craft, but several 
rise above the others as simply outstanding. Among these, readers will find Saundra 
Mitchell’s “The Chosen One,” a well-plotted and beautifully written piece about 
a girl who embarks on a quest to save her sister’s life, and in so doing fulfills an 
ambiguous prophecy in a clever way and, thanks to her sister’s own ingenious 
plotting, receives her heart’s desire as well. Another compelling entry, Malinda Lo’s 
seemingly traditional story of the birth prophecy of a princess that foretells she will 
destroy her father’s kingdom when she finds her true love, offers a surprising twist. 
Most of the prophecies are redemptive in some way, but some serve up revenge 
and darkness; given that, it’s easy to predict that all readers will find something to 
latch onto here.  KC
sAndler, mArtin w. The Impossible Rescue: The True Story of an Amazing Arctic 
Adventure. Candlewick, 2012 163p illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5080-3 $22.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5969-1 $22.99   
R Gr. 6-10
When an unexpectedly early freeze leaves eight whaling vessels crushed or trapped 
along Alaska’s northern coast in September of 1897, Captain Benjamin Tilton of 
November 2012 • 169
the Alexander, which had barely escaped a similar fate, apprises officials and jour-
nalists in San Francisco of the circumstances of the whalers and calls for a rescue 
mission. President McKinley responds by setting in motion a truly audacious rescue 
attempt: a rescue cutter will travel as far north as possible, and from there rescuers 
will begin an extensive Overland Relief Expedition that would start by dogsled 
along the Alaskan coast; then, after convincing two reindeer herders to give up 
their animals, the team would drive the reindeer up to Point Barrow. There they 
would provide sustenance for the survivors until their ships were released from the 
ice or the men could be transferred to the rescue vessel. The focus here is on the 
heroic efforts of a handful of men: Charlie Brower and Edward McIlhenny, who 
sheltered the seamen as best they could at Point Barrow; Captain Francis Tuttle, 
who commanded the rescue ship Bear through the winter ice; David Jarvis, Samuel 
Call, and Ellsworth Bertholf, who made the overland trek; and Charlie Artisarlook 
and Tom Lopp, who released their herds at great sacrifice and financial risk. The 
ordeal of the rescuers, whose mission was roundly considered as a suicidal folly, is 
portrayed in nose-numbing, frostbitten detail, and the contrast between the hyper-
organized rescuers and the undisciplined men they ultimately saved makes the feat 
even more extraordinary. Black and white photographs, mostly taken by Samuel 
Call, bring the punishing landscape to life. Appended material includes sketches of 
the subsequent careers of the main players, a timeline of the yearlong mission, source 
notes, bibliography, and index. No true adventure fan should miss this one.  EB
schulmAn, l. b. League of Strays. Amulet/Abrams, 2012 274p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0403-1 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Starting her senior year at a new school leaves lonely Charlotte Brody with few 
chances to make new friends, especially when the popular girl who long bullied her 
transfers as welll. Charlotte is therefore intrigued when intense, charismatic Kade 
Harlin invites her to join his League of Strays, which proves to be a secret group of 
loners with dreams and ultimately plans for payback against unfair teachers and the 
popular clique. Despite misgivings about Kade’s intentions and the group’s increas-
ingly cruel schemes, Charlotte plays along with her new crowd, drawn in by the sense 
of empowerment she gains from acting out and by Kade’s attention. When acts of 
vandalism escalate to facilitation of a hate crime and then to plans for assault and 
possibly murder, Charlotte’s initial trepidation intensifies and she finds the strength 
first to speak out and eventually act to stop Kade. A solid psychological thriller, 
this novel will find a fan base with readers who enjoy their vigilante justice with 
a heavy helping of vengeance. Charlotte’s narration capably serves dual functions 
as both an exploration of her motives in joining the league and the story’s moral 
compass, and Kade is successful as a frightening sociopath. Regrettably, the other 
strays are sympathetic but never emerge as more than stereotypes of high school 
outsiders, and Charlotte’s moralizing conclusion that retribution is not the right 
course is ultimately false and hollow, since the story’s draw comes from vicarious 
enjoyment of watching seemingly heartless bullies be punished. Readers looking for 
a suspenseful read about the power and destructive force of bullying would therefore 
be better served with Giles’ Shattering Glass (BCCB 5/02) or Cormier’s classic The 
Chocolate War (BCCB 7/74), but those who can’t get enough of comeuppance tales 
may appreciate Charlotte’s flirtation with vengeance.  AM
170 • The bulleTiN
siegel, mArk Sailor Twain: Or, the Mermaid in the Hudson; written and illus. by 
Mark Siegel. First Second, 2012 400p
ISBN 978-1-59643-636-7 $24.99   
R Gr. 10 up
It’s 1887 and the reading public is all agog over the reclusive writer C. G. Beaver-
ton, who has just released a volume of history and lore of the Hudson River Valley. 
Among the anecdotes are tales of persons mysteriously drowned in the river over 
the past centuries, and in particular, those lured to their deaths by mermaids. This 
is of vital interest to two men aboard the steamship Lorelei—the current owner, 
Dieudonné Lafayette, a womanizer whose older brother was lost upon the river; 
and Captain Twain, who has actually rescued an injured mermaid, nursed her back 
to health, and fallen in love with her. Lafayette enters into correspondence with 
Beaverton, trying to get additional information on how to recover from a mermaid’s 
spell, and the author agrees to make a public appearance aboard the Lorelei. It’s 
then that the revelations begin to roll. Beaverton, to the horror of her readership, 
turns out to be a woman; Lafayette has been seducing women because he believes 
loving seven at once will release him from a mermaid’s thrall; Twain is drawn into 
the mermaid’s kingdom as her last best hope of breaking her father’s curse, which 
has locked her heart away until a mortal man loves her of his own free will. This 
mature fantasy graphic novel deftly blends humor, pathos, eroticism, and social 
critique as it explores the soul-splitting powers of love and lust. That the legend of 
the siren and her intoxicating song should play out on the Hudson rather than the 
Rhine or the Danube makes it all the more potent for American readers. Siegel’s 
illustrations underscore the multiple themes of deceit and deception: softly blurred 
charcoal riverscapes transform the Hudson into a proving ground for dark magic, 
and the doe-eyed characters are nowhere near as innocent as they look. You’re never 
too old for a well-told fairy tale.  EB
spinelli, Jerry Third Grade Angels; illus. by Jennifer A. Bell. Levine/Scholastic, 
2012 [160p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-38772-9 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46960-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Incoming third-grader George (“Suds”) Morton is looking forward to being an 
“angel” this year, according to his school’s playground rhyme: “First grade babies, 
second grade cats, third grade angels, fourth grade rats!” His cool new teacher, 
Mrs. Simms, capitalizes on this notion, offering her students the chance to earn 
cardboard haloes for exceptional behavior, and Suds’ competitive nature kicks in as 
he determines to be the first one in the class to get a halo. When he unexpectedly 
saves a puppy from getting hit by a car after school hours, he writes a letter to his 
teacher to ensure that he gets credit for the act. Another classmate, Constantina, 
witnesses it as well, however, and when she also writes a note to the teacher recom-
mending that Suds get the first halo, the teacher awards it to Constantina for her 
selflessness. While the questions Suds raises—Why be good if no one sees it? Are 
you really a “good loser” if you’re still upset on the inside?—are worthy ones for 
middle-grade discussion, the dialogue about these issues is sometimes contrived 
and artificial. The book also ends somewhat abruptly with Mrs. Simms revealing 
to Suds why she gave Constantina the halo, and readers may feel cheated that Suds 
never gets his own halo before the resolution. Still, the quick pace and the book’s 
November 2012 • 171
brevity make this lesson go down easily, and Spinelli does a decent job of capturing 
third-grade thoughts and emotions. Fans of Suds from Spinelli’s Fourth Grade Rats 
will likely want to catch up here on Suds’ prior year. Final art unseen.  JH
spinner, stephAnie Alex the Parrot: No Ordinary Bird; illus. by Meilo So. Knopf, 
2012 40p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96846-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86846-7 $17.99   
R Gr. 2-4
This slender picture-book biography chronicles the life of Alex, the African grey 
parrot whose ability to learn language challenged scientific beliefs and made him 
a popular and beloved figure. The book begins with Irene Pepperberg’s acquisition 
of Alex in 1977 and describes the process she used to teach him and the behavioral 
testing he underwent. It also describes Alex in his daily life as he began putting short 
phrases together and dealt imperiously with the lab assistants and a new young par-
rot; it’s that parrot, Griffin, with whom Pepperberg has worked since Alex’s death in 
2007. Spinner is a veteran author who tells Alex’s tale with verve and accessibility, 
highlighting details (like his delight in the word “No” and his sibling rivalry) that 
make the bird into a particularly kid-appealing character. Animals always seem to 
bring out the best in Meilo So (as in her illustrations for Prelutsky’s Beauty of the 
Beast, BCCB 1/98); her mixed-media art varies from intricately crafted portraits of 
Alex that give tactile, designerly significance to each of his feathers, to freewheeling 
outlines of humans and a vivid, ’70s-inspired palette that uses Alex’s gray as an 
anchor for a near-psychedelic rainbow of hues. Many kids convinced of the wisdom 
of their dogs or cats won’t have thought about birds, and Alex’s lively character here 
makes him both an interesting subject and an effective ambassador for his kind. 
There is no bibliography or notes, but Spinner’s author’s note is a compelling and 
heartfelt musing on humanity’s desire to communicate with animals.  DS
steggAll, susAn Red Car, Red Bus; written and illus. by Susan Steggall. Frances 
Lincoln, 2012 28p
ISBN 978-1-84780-184-5 $17.99   
R 3-7 yrs
The Number 17 bus pulls up to its stop. People get on. People get off. The bus 
heads to the next stop. People get on. People get off. If you’re looking for more 
plot than that, too bad. But if you love to people watch, trailing the Number 17 is 
right where you’ll want to be. From the opening to the closing endpapers, viewers 
observe from an across-the-street vantage point the passengers as they queue up for 
their ride into town. Not everybody will make it on time to the big red Number 
17. One mother and child in particular keep just missing it, but fortunately there’s 
a friendly little red car coming right behind whose driver retrieves the little boy’s 
dropped teddy bear and offers the exhausted pair a lift into town. As the bus nears 
the town center, the buildings get more crowded and the traffic gets heavier—and 
more colorful: “Orange truck, orange van, yellow van, yellow car, red car, red 
bus.” A passing shower sends umbrellas up and folks scurrying, and the Number 
17 heads out of town, followed by its route buddy, the 17A (red, of course). The 
cut-paper illustrations are marvelously detailed, right down to the teeny address 
numbers, which kids can count (odds only) by twos. Emergent readers will also 
appreciate the repetition and cumulative predictability of the lengthening line of 
colored vehicles that head bumper to bumper through the town center. Get out 
the Matchbox™ cars for an imaginative reenactment.  EB
172 • The bulleTiN
stewArt, sArAh The Quiet Place; illus. by David Small. Ferguson/Farrar, 
2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-374-32565-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Moving north from her Mexican home is daunting for young Isabel, who’s strug-
gling to adjust to the new language and country. She writes brief letters to her 
beloved aunt Lupita back in Mexico, giving compact vignettes of her family life 
and her gradual adjustment, and apprising her aunt of her ongoing search for a 
quiet space (“for me and my books”) that would be hers alone. Those letters, one 
on each spread, serve as the anchor for a story that unfolds more fully in Small’s 
panoramic full-spread line, watercolor, and pastel scenes. In those tableaus, Small 
evinces a photographer’s eye for the best perspective and framing: the view of Isabel 
slumping mournfully in the backseat of the car, clutching her beloved teddy bear 
(who accompanies her in nearly every picture) as she gazes back at what she’s losing, 
will strike a chord with every youngster who’s undergone relocation. The visuals 
also demonstrate Isabel’s shy interactions with the other kids in her neighborhood 
(she and her mom have a cake-baking business, so she drops off pastry at several 
parties), with subtly growing warmth that culminates in her own well-attended 
birthday party. The 1950s setting provides an excuse for some glorious touches of 
pattern and design, but Isabel’s quiet place, a wonderful warren constructed from 
giveaway boxes and decorated with imaginative art and craft by Isabel herself, is 
the star of the show in its foldout reveal. It’s such a fascinating place, in fact, that 
viewers may wish they’d seen a little more of its creation and interiors, but they’ll 
still revel in the “Ta-da!” moment and seize the opportunity to pore over the details 
of Isabel’s designs. Kids will understand Isabel’s yearning to find her own place, 
both within the community and with her quiet spot, and they’ll definitely start 
making big plans for the oversized Amazon boxes.  DS
stone, tAmArA irelAnd Time Between Us. Hyperion, 2012 368p
ISBN 978-1-4231-5956-8 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
When time-traveler Bennett appears in sixteen-year-old Anna Greene’s high school 
in 1995, she finds herself unexpectedly drawn to the mysterious new student. What 
she doesn’t know is that Bennett has traveled back from 2012 on a personal mission 
that leaves no time for making friends. Living by a strict rule about noninterference 
that prevents involvement with Anna, Bennett actively avoids her until a dramatic 
moment of violence forces him to use his gifts to protect her. Afterwards, the bond 
between them grows quickly as he whisks her away to exotic locations and gradually 
shares his secret gifts and hidden reasons for enrolling in her school. When a different 
kind of tragedy strikes, Anna pressures Bennett to use his gifts to change the past 
in violation of his rules, and the implications of his actions threaten to tear them 
apart forever. This intense but ultimately gratifying romance offers a compelling 
story of love, fate, and consequences that extends itself beyond a simple relationship 
narrative. The measured, piecemeal revelation of Bennett’s many secrets effectively 
unfolds the layers of mystery. At the same time, the teens’ struggle to decide how, 
when, and why to use Bennett’s gifts lend the story a more serious tone and raises 
intriguing questions about the ethics of making choices that affect other people’s 
lives. As a romantic pair, Anna and Bennett are convincing and likable; initially 
drawn to each other’s unique gifts, they learn to appreciate even the most normal 
November 2012 • 173
things about each other. A smart, thoughtful story with plenty of sigh-worthy mo-
ments, this novel is the perfect choice for readers who want a romance that leaves 
them with something to think about when it’s over.  AM
telgemeier, rAinA Drama; written and illus. by Raina Telgemeier. Graphix/
Scholastic, 2012 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-32698-8 $23.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-32699-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Seventh-grader Callie is having a grand old time designing complicated set pieces 
for her school’s upcoming production of Moon over Mississippi, but soon the drama 
backstage threatens to overshadow the play and may even cause an early curtain 
call. Bickering stars, a tight budget, and too few helping hands amp up the tension 
as opening night looms closer, and Callie’s anxiety is further complicated by her 
multiple love interests and their confusing signals. Does eighth-grader Greg only 
want to hang out with her when his friends are gone? Is the hot and talented new 
guy really gay? And why is Callie’s best guy pal acting so darn weird? With the same 
warmth and keen eye for middle-school details that marked her memoir, Smile 
(BCCB 3/10), Telgemeier’s new graphic novel offers up a standing ovation-worthy 
depiction of the theatrics of adolescence, both on and offstage. Drama geeks will 
zero in on Callie’s insider references to stage terms and musicals, while even the most 
performance-averse kid will relate to her struggles to identify the true motivations 
of those around her and negotiate relationships with kids just starting to figure 
themselves and other humans out. The panels follow a conventional layout, and 
the cartoony, bouncy art, which features a multicultural cast, has an Archie-style 
sensibility with touches of manga. Color illustrations not seen.  KQG 
tJong-khing, thé 
The Birthday Cake Mystery; illus. by Thé Tjong- 
Khing. Gecko, 2012 24p
ISBN 978-1-877579-10-3 $17.95   
R 6-10 yrs
The story of this wordless picture book (imported from the Netherlands and illus-
trated by Indonesian-born Tjong-Khing) unfolds on the title page: the female half 
of a clothes-wearing dog couple is plagued by a fly while her male counterpart is 
putting the finishing touches on the titular birthday cake. The next spread widens 
the view, showing a handful of small cube-like cottages and their inhabitants, all 
busy outdoors with various activities. The female dog launches an attack on the 
fly that topples numerous objects onto her partner’s cake, a pig mother scolds her 
child for spilling a can of paint (and doesn’t notice—but a raccoon does—that her 
necklace is hanging temptingly out of her purse), a bear takes photos, and a child’s 
birthday party is in progress. “Reading” Tjong-Khing’s line-and-watercolor art is an 
utterly absorbing activity. There are multiple storylines to follow, and all of them 
offer the viewer something engaging and entertaining. The “mystery” of the title 
probably refers to the unknown birthday celebrant (which is revealed at the book’s 
end), but there’s also a crime to be solved: the case of necklace theft is eventually 
cracked by the pig parents, thanks to the bear’s photographic evidence and other 
clues. Each spread also reveals a new development in ongoing subplots: the poor dog 
who keeps having unfortunate things happen to his cakes, the bunny child having 
a tantrum, the two rats or mice who keep picking on a squirrel child. The thinly 
174 • The bulleTiN
outlined animals and objects are dynamically posed against a verdant background 
of meadow and forest, and the numerous small, significant details, as well as the 
challenge of following the story threads, will keep viewers poring over the pictures 
for quite a while. This will hold great appeal for many children (and their adults), 
especially those who enjoy Richard Scarry, Mitsumasa Anno, or Arthur Geisert and 
those who hate to read and/or write but love to draw.  JH
truemAn, terry Life Happens Next. HarperTeen, 2012 [144p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-202803-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-202808-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Readers of Stuck in Neutral (BCCB 6/00) will recall its protagonist, fourteen-year-
old Shawn McDaniel, whose cerebral palsy renders him completely incapable of 
voluntary movement or communication, and whose father almost killed him in 
a presumed act of mercy. Though still shaken by that event, Shawn is more con-
cerned with two other developments: his crush on his younger sister’s best friend; 
and the arrival of his forty-something cousin, Debi, who has Down syndrome. 
Initially, Debi finds Shawn a puzzle, and her beloved dog, Rusty, is hostile to him, 
but soon it appears that Debi and Rusty see Shawn more deeply than anyone else. 
Shawn’s situation remains absorbing, and his doomed romantic interest will elicit 
sympathy from many readers who feel just as invisible as Shawn to the objects of 
their yearning. The fact that it’s Debi and not the lovely Ally who achieves a con-
nection with Shawn is nicely underplayed, and the book is direct and compelling 
about the meaning of such recognition to Shawn. The notion that Debi observes 
more about Shawn than his deeply devoted family is implausible, however, and 
the spiritual aspect of their relationship—with Debi appearing to him whole and 
able during his seizure-induced altered mental states—is superfluous to his more 
interesting conscious reexamination of his perceptions about and valuing of other 
people. There’s still plenty to discuss here, though, and those struck by the first 
book will want to follow this new chapter in Shawn’s life.  DS
vizzini, ned The Other Normals. Balzer + Bray, 2012 387p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-207990-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-207992-3 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 6-8
After nerdy Perry fills out a test wrong and is bumped from his normal school-
related summer commitment, his divorced parents decide he should go to summer 
camp with “normal” kids because he’s not “socially progressing.” When he meets 
a ferrule (the race of his avatar in the game Creatures and Caverns, which he plays 
obsessively) in the woods by the camp, he’s whisked away to the parallel World 
of the Other Normals (on which, it turns out, the game is based), where he’s told 
that he must help rescue their kidnapped princess. Every person on Earth has a 
“correspondent” in the World of the Other Normals to whom they are linked, 
and if Perry kisses the princess’ correspondent, a girl named Anna who attends the 
dread summer camp, it will somehow enable the princess’ freedom. Perry is epically 
awkward, especially around girls, and Vizzini captures his oblivious incompetence 
and misguided attempts at rectifying it with snappy banter, while the quest action 
is enjoyably filled with the bizarre creatures, barely surmountable obstacles, and 
complementary teamwork. Ultimately, though, the book smacks of anti-gaming 
November 2012 • 175
didacticism, disapproving of the pastime and pathologizing Perry’s play (it’s por-
trayed as an addiction Perry must get past to live his life), which may turn off its 
most likely fan base; the humiliating awkwardness gets emphasized to a painful 
degree, undercutting the humor. Archer’s Geek Fantasy Novel (BCCB 4/11) and 
Pratchett’s Only You Can Save Mankind offer more positive, psychologically nuanced 
portrayals of games-turned-reality, but Vizzini’s take on the subject is imaginative 
enough to interest their fans.  CG
176 • The bulleTiN
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
mArcus, leonArd s. Listening to Madeleine: A Portrait of Madeleine L’Engle in 
Many Voices. Farrar, 2012 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-374-298975  
$27.00
Marcus, noted children’s-literature scholar and sometime GSLIS adjunct lecturer, 
offers up yet another provocative and multifaceted portrait of a well-known chil-
dren’s author, this time training his keen eye on A Wrinkle in Time author Madeleine 
L’Engle. A writer whose dramatic personality has sparked nearly as much discussion 
as her religious mediations and works of science fiction, L’Engle is here remembered 
as friend, matriarch, mentor, and icon, in a series of interviews with L’Engle’s most 
intimate acquaintances as well as editors, librarians, and teachers who have been 
impacted by her work. Former Bulletin editor Betsy Hearne discusses her 1998 
interview with L’Engle during which they talked about the balance between family 
and professional obligations; Christine Jenkins, former CCB director, shares a story 
about her mostly unpleasant run-in with the writer at an ALA conference. Marcus’s 
selected interviewees range from the devoted fan to the less than enthusiastic critic 
and the resulting portrait is unexpectedly complex, a far cry from the usual soft-
focus posthumous homage, and it will likely offer new insights to both scholars and 
readers who have enjoyed (or disliked, for that matter) her work.  KQG 
Blowing our own horn DepT.:
kumAsi, kAFi, ed. Ask Your Librarian: Letters to Youth. Smashwords, 2012
E-book ed. free at: https://www.smashwords.com/books/view/155184/
Kate McDowell, GSLIS professor and former Bulletin reviewer, contributes a 
response in this collection of questions modeled after the popular Ask-a-Librarian 
format. With the aim of facilitating greater interaction between young people and 
the library world, Kumasi gathered questions regarding libraries from youth between 
the ages of thirteen and eighteen and then called upon practicing librarians and 
youth services scholars for answers. Questions range from specific (how do I get 
my librarian to update the nonfiction collection?) to general (why should I come 
to the public library?) and touch on the pressing concerns facing the library world, 
including issues of multiculturalism and inclusion as well as the presence and use 
of digital information.  KQG 
November 2012 • 177
Abandonment–fiction: Cochrane
Accidents–fiction: Busby
Actors and acting–fiction: Telgemeier
ADHD–fiction: Nagda
Adoption–fiction: Peacock
ADveNTure: Sandler
Africa–fiction: Atinuke
African Americans: King
African Americans–fiction: Flake; 
Myers
Agriculture: Gay
AlPHABeT BooKS: Cabatingan
Animals: Chin; Spinner
Animals–stories: Cabatingan; Frazee; 
Tjong-Khing
ANTHoloGieS: ryan
Appearance–fiction: Griffin; lange
Arctic: Sandler
Art and artists: Markel
Art and artists–fiction: Pinkwater
Basketball–fiction: Myers
Behavior–stories: legrand
BioGrAPHieS: Barrett; Ferris; 
Markel; reef
Biology: Bang; Chin; Spinner 
Birds: Keenan; Spinner
Birthdays–stories: Tjong-Khing
Brothers and sisters: reef
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Arcos; 
l’engle
Bullies–fiction: Schulman
Carpentry–stories: Bryan 
Cerebral palsy–fiction: Trueman
Christmas–stories: Barrett; Black; 
Bryan
Clothing–fiction: Black
Clothing–stories: Campbell; Klassen
Communication: Allen
CoNCePT BooKS: Jenkins
Conspiracies–fiction: Bennett
Consumer education: Gay
CouNTiNG BooKS: Steggal
Cousins–fiction: Trueman 
Crime and criminals–fiction: Ben-
nett; Cochrane; ellen; Griffin; 
leavitt; leonard; McNeil; Paul
Death–fiction: Cox
Dictionaries: Ferris
Disabilities–fiction: ellen; Flake; 
Trueman
Disasters–fiction: Klise
Dogs: Patent
Dogs–fiction: Martin; Pyron
Dogs–stories: Frazee; Pinfold
Down syndrome–fiction: Trueman 
Drug abuse–fiction: Arcos; leavitt
Dystopias–fiction: Crossan
ePiSTolAry FiCTioN: Prose; 
Stewart
Ethics and values: Crossan; 
Haworth; lange; Spinelli; Stone
FABleS: Aesop
Faith–fiction: Jarzab
Families: Harris
Families–fiction: Arcos; Cowley; 
Creech; Klise; o’Connor
Families–stories: Pinfold
FANTASy: Dickinson; l’engle; 
Pearce; ryan; Siegel; vizzini
Fathers–fiction: Cochrane; leonard; 
Madonia
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
178 • The bulleTiN
Fathers–stories: Bryan
Feral children–fiction: Pyron
Finance–fiction: Bennett
Fish–stories: Klassen
FolK-liKe TAleS: Pinfold 
FolKTAleS AND FAiry TAleS: 
Black; Pearce
Food and eating: Gay
Friends–fiction: Kinsey-Warnock; 
Myers; Peacock
Frogs–stories: Fleming, C.
Gaming–fiction: vizzini
GHoST STorieS: Busby; Moore; 
Prose
Grandfathers–fiction: o’Connor
GrAPHiC NovelS: l’engle; 
Siegel; Telgemeier
Hiking–fiction: Krovatin
HiSToriCAl FiCTioN: Cooper; 
Kinsey-Warnock; leavitt; Paul; 
Pinkwater; Pratchett; Stewart
History, U.S.: Ferris; Freedman; 
King; Pringle; Sandler
History, world: rappaport
Holocaust: rappaport
Horror: Hurley; Krovatin; 
legrand
Hostages–fiction: McDowell
HuMor: Atinuke; Barrett; 
Cabatingan; Campell; Cowley; 
Frazee; Haston; Klassen; Korman; 
legrand; McDonnell; Myers; 
Pinkwater
immigration–fiction: Peacock
industry: Pringle
iraq War: Patent
Jews: rappaport
Language arts: Akbarpour; Ferris; 
Hosford; o’Brien
latinos–fiction: Stewart
Literature, children’s: l’engle
Literature, classical: Homer
Literature, English: Pratchett; reef
Marine life: Bang
Mathematics: Hosford; Jenkins
Mermaids–fiction: Pearce; Siegel
Mice–stories: Aesop
Military studies: Patent
Monsters–stories: McDonnell
Mothers–fiction: Kimmel; Madonia; 
Moore
Moving–stories: Stewart
MySTerieS: Cox; ellen; Griffin; 
leonard; McNeil; Paul; Pratchett; 
Tjong-Khing
Nature study: Bang; Chin; Fleming, 
D.; Keenan; Spinner
Neighbors–fiction: Klise 
oceans: Bang
orphans–fiction: Creech; Kinsey-
Warnock
Parents–fiction: Haston
Phobias–fiction: Kimmel
Physical education: Nagda
Popularity–fiction: lange
Post-traumatic stress disorder– 
fiction: McDowell 
Prostitution–fiction: leavitt
Reading aloud: Akbarpour; Ati-
nuke; Cowley; Myers
Reading, beginning: Klassen; Steg-
gall
Reading, easy: Atinuke; Myers
Reading, reluctant: Martin; o’Brien
relationships–fiction: Cox; Flake; 
Griffin; Haston; Jarzab; McBride
relatives–stories: Campbell
revenge–fiction: McNeil; Schulman
revolutionary War: Freedman
rHyMiNG STorieS: Bryan; 
Fleming, C.; Fleming, D.; 
Keenan
romance–fiction: Busby; Paul; Stone
royalty–fiction: Cooper
rural life–stories: Daly
russia–fiction: Pyron
Saints–fiction: Hurley
School–fiction: Haston; Haworth; 
Korman; McDowell; Nagda; 
Spinelli; Telgemeier
Science: Chin; Fleming, D.; Pringle
SCieNCe FiCTioN: Crossan
Secrets–fiction: Creech; Jarzab; Stone
Ships and sailing–fiction: Siegel
SHorT STorieS: Dickinson; 
Martin; o’Brien; ryan
Sisters–fiction: Jarzab
Snakes–fiction: Kimmel
November 2012 • 179
Social studies: Harris; King
South Africa–stories: Daly
Storytelling–fiction: Akbarpour
Storytime: Fleming, C.; McDonnell
SuPerNATurAl STorieS: Mc-
Bride; Moore; Prose
SurvivAl STorieS: Pyron; Sandler
SuSPeNSe: Bennett; ellen; Hurley; 
McNeil; Schulman
Teachers–fiction: Spinelli 
Teen pregnancy–fiction: Madonia
Tigers–stories: Fleming, C.
Time travel–fiction: Stone
ToDDler BooKS: Allen
Transportation: Steggal
venice–fiction: Paul
voyages and travel–fiction: Homer; 
l’engle; Madonia
War–fiction: Cooper
Wealth–fiction: Haworth
Werewolves–fiction: McBride
Winter–fiction: Jenkins
WorDleSS BooKS: Tjong-Khing
World cultures: Daly
World War ii–fiction: Cooper
World War ii: rappaport
Writers and writing–fiction: Pratchett
Zombies–fiction: Krovatin
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Published by  
Th e Johns hopkins University press
exploring literature 
for children.
David L. russell, Ferris sTaTe UniversiTy; karin e. 
Westman and naomi J. Wood, Kansas sTaTe UniversiTy, 
Editors 
The Lion and the Unicorn, an international theme- and 
genre-centered journal, is committed to a serious, 
ongoing discussion of literature for children. The 
journal’s coverage includes the state of the publishing 
industry, regional authors, comparative studies of 
significant books and genres, new developments 
in theory, the art of illustration, the mass media, 
and popular culture. It is especially noted for its 
interviews with authors, editors, and other important 
contributors to the field, as well as its outstanding 
book review section. 
Published three times a year in January, April, and September. 
Volume 37 (2013). ISSN 0147-2593; E-ISSN 1080-6563.
the lion and the unicorn
a criTical joUrnal oF children’s liTeraTUre
annUal individUal sUbscripTions
$40.00 (print); $45.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbscripTions
$125.00 (print); $135.00 (online); 
$175.00 (print & online)
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde and Lydia Kokkola, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, 
E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP,
MANAGEMENT, AND CIRCULATION, 10/1/12
Title: Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books. Pub. No. 0008-9036. Frequency: Monthly 
(except August). Eleven issues published annually. Subscription price: $98.00 institutions, $55.00 
individuals. Location of office of publication: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218. Headquarters of publisher: Same. Publisher: The Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218. Editor: Deborah 
Stevenson, University of Illinois, 501 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Owner: 
University of Illinois, 501 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820-6601. The purpose, function, 
and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status for Federal Income tax purposes 
have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Extent and nature of circulation 
Av. no. copies 
Actual no. copies
 
each issue 
single issue pub.
 
preceding 12 months nearest to filing date
A. Total no. copies printed 
1,590 
1,510
B. Paid circulation, mail subscriptions 
1,138 
1,171
C. Total paid distribution 
1,194 
1,229
D. Free distribution 
29 
30
F. Total distribution 
1,223 
1,259
G. Copies not distributed 
367 
251
H. Total 
1,590 
1,510
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete. William M. Breichner,
Journals Publisher.
