T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
September 2007
Vol. 61   No. 1
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
September 2007
Vol. 61 No. 1
3 
 the BIg PICture
 
 Diamonds in the Shadow  by Caroline B. Cooney
4 
 new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
6 
 • Little Rat Makes Music  by Monika Bang-Campbell; illus. by Molly Bang
36  • Nini Here and There  written and illus. by Anita Lobel
57  • Leaves  written and illus. by David Ezra Stein
59  • Billy Tartle in Say Cheese!  written and illus. by Michael Townsend
61  • Parrotfish  by Ellen Wittlinger
63  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons 
64  suBjeCt And use Index
2 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann
Melissa Zilic
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $80.00; combined print & electronic $112.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $50.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $13.20 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.35. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2007 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Jan Greune from Diamonds in the Shadow ©2007.  Used by permission of Delacorte 
Press.
SepTemBer 2007 • 3
the BIg PICture
Diamonds in the Shadow
by Caroline B. Cooney
Foreign strife can be a challenging subject for fiction; it’s hard to avoid turning a 
serious story into a dishing out of literary vegetables, but to take the plot too far into 
the entertainment direction seems cheaply opportunistic. Veteran author Cooney 
manages to walk the line between the two, effectively combining a thrilleresque 
plot about blood diamonds with a serious yet accessible exploration of geopolitics 
and human resilience. 
Since the protagonist, Jared, is a privileged Connecticut kid who prides 
himself on “being a rather annoying teenager,” he’s predictably affronted when his 
do-gooder mother volunteers their home, including Jared’s own room, to house 
a family of four African refugees, parents with a son and daughter. The arrival of 
the Amabo family forces Jared to consider world affairs and cosmic questions of 
justice that he’s avoided so far, but he also finds himself increasingly suspicious of 
their story. His suspicions are justified: these aren’t actually the Amabos but refugees 
used as pawns to smuggle diamonds, but they’re caught up in a web of victimiza-
tion, criminality, and blackmail that means no one, not even Jared and his family, 
can escape untouched. 
Geopolitically speaking, Cooney has made some interesting decisions 
in her plotting. The story justifies the vagueness about African locations with the 
Amabos’ need for deception, but the contents of the author’s note suggest that it’s 
a deliberate technique to make the narrative representative of more than just the 
diamond controversy: the note talks about her hosting of refugees from Sierra Leone 
during that country’s recent civil war, yet its main focus is the war in Darfur and 
the refugee dilemma in neighboring Chad. The story itself is also less concerned 
with the diamonds as objects than the human price paid during internecine con-
flict, a price dramatically illustrated up front by Andre Amabo, whose hands were 
savagely cut off by the rebels. The book refuses to reduce the situation to a simple 
tale of good and evil, though, striding immediately into the ethical ambiguities of 
the situation with the refugee society representative’s illusion-puncturing assertion 
that “you are probably not saving the innocent, because in a civil war, nobody is 
innocent.” The Amabos’ sinister pursuer, separated from them by bureaucracy 
but determined to retrieve his valuable property, is a frightening and effective vil-
lain, but they’re beset internally as well, with silent young Alake an outcast in the 
pretend family for her forced alliance with the militia, a past for which even she’s 
unable to forgive herself.
The contrast between their experiences and that of their privileged hosts 
is absurdly extreme, but the book intelligently acknowledges the reality of that gulf. 
4 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
Jared and his fluffy little sister, Mopsy, make terrific audience surrogates, modeling 
believable responses ranging from distaste to ignorance to heedless benevolence. 
They’re cleverly crafted, since their personalities advance plot and exposition, but 
they’re also credible as fully drawn, normal yet multifaceted characters, which makes 
their encounter with the horrors of the world particularly thought-provoking as they 
find their comfortable views of faith and humanity shaken. Yet Cooney complicates 
the picture of America with a backstory involving a church fundraiser and family 
friend who gambled away nearly a million donated dollars, setting the issues of trust 
and betrayal up from the beginning and emphasizing their universality. 
Ultimately, this isn’t a nonfiction exploration of postcolonial African un-
rest but an absorbing story. As such, it’s less a deliverer of facts than of proximity; 
the book takes a problem whose impact is hampered by its distance and brings it 
up close and personal to its readers. Even kids who’ve never heard of Darfur will 
find the dramatic story an eye-opener, while their more aware classmates will ap-
preciate this personalized approach to a vast problem. (See p. 13 for publication 
information.)
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Abdel-FAttAh, RAndA Does My Head Look Big in This? Orchard, 
2007 [352p]
ISBN 0-439-91947-9 $16.99  
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Australian-born Amal, a Muslim of Palestinian descent, has decided to take the 
plunge and become a full-timer, which is what she and her Muslim friends call girls 
who wear the hijab, or head scarf, whenever they will be in the presence of males 
outside their immediate family. She makes a good case for her decision: not only 
does it make more sense to her to base your fashion sense on Allah’s injunction to 
dress modestly than on what some “ugly fake-tanned old fart in Milan” says is in 
this year, but it also draws attention away from teen obsessions like cleavage and 
shoulder-to-hip ratios. The downside, as she quickly discovers, is that she has to 
become a spokesperson for her faith in an age (2002) when “Muslim” has become 
shorthand for “terrorist.” With her fiery temper and quick wit, Amal razors through 
illegitimate conflations of religion, culture, and pathology, but she is still resolutely a 
teenaged girl—that is, while she understands her religious motivations for adopting 
the hijab, she is not yet ready to completely divorce herself from its cultural aspects. 
She recoils from the prejudices it engenders, but she enjoys feeling part of an elite 
club. Nor is she ready for the change of heart her decision portends: she flirts from 
beneath her veil and treats it as much as a fashion accessory as a religious symbol, 
spending hours putting together color-coordinated outfits and adjusting the curve 
of the scarf just so. But as bad hair days get replaced by bad hijab days, she steadily 
SepTemBer 2007 • 5
grows into an increasingly mature and nuanced understanding of what it means 
to be a Muslim woman, helped by the positive example of her stylish, professional, 
devout mother and the negative examples of her assimilation-obsessed aunt and her 
best friend’s tradition-strictured mother. Self-conscious and self-aware, funny and 
feisty, Amal turns into a pretty good spokesperson for her faith after all.  KC
AndeRsen, hAns ChRistiAn The Princess and the Pea; ad. and illus. by Rachel 
Isadora. Putnam, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-24611-1 $16.99 
 Ad 5-7 yrs
In this familiar Hans Christian Andersen tale, a prince seeks a true princess with 
whom to share his kingdom; after he rejects a sequence of hopefuls, a promising 
candidate arrives, claiming princesshood. The queen decides to put her to the 
famous pea test; the girl passes with flying colors; she and the prince are wed and 
live happily ever after. Isadora’s adaptation is simplified, with the true princess the 
first to undergo the mattress test, and the story moves rather hastily from her trial 
to her success. The African setting for the tale brings a new slant, though, and 
Isadora’s mixed-media illustrations are vivid and dramatic. Incorporating both bits 
of paper painted by her own hand and textured scraps of printed paper, the art 
provides rich textures and lively variety. Skin tones are nuanced shades of brown 
oil paints while fabrics (both garments and the mattresses) are a wild assortment 
of preprinted patterns, from stripes and leopard spots to flowers and geographic 
forms. This version doesn’t really bring much to the story itself, but there is lots 
to look at in each spread, and young listeners will definitely want a chance to pore 
over the compositions after hearing the tale.  HM
ARonson, sARAh Head Case. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2007 [176p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-214-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
All that’s left of Frank Marder is a head, or, at least, following the car accident where 
his drunken driving killed his girlfriend and an elderly pedestrian, his head is the 
only body part the spine-injured teen can feel or move. Now he’s home from the 
hospital, watching his parents battle over the burden of his new state, antagonizing 
his only remaining friend, and following the outrage over his action in the local 
blogosphere. This starts out sounding like a cautionary tale, but it’s more a moral 
and personal exploration. Aronson pulls no punches in her documentation of the 
deprivation of Frank’s state: he describes his grief over the loss of a sex life that had 
only just started; the constant reminders of helplessness when somebody walks away 
from him, forgetting he’s stuck where he’s put; the inability to read or to eat without 
assistance. The moral dimension adds emotion, as if any further were needed, and 
Frank’s monitoring of the reaction to his own behavior, as commenters clamor to 
send him to jail, is a believable element in a world where the Internet has rendered 
eavesdropping unnecessary. While the end offers only the slightest shift to hope-
fulness, that limitation renders the movement believable in a way that a grander 
epiphany wouldn’t. Daredevil readers will be made thoughtful by Frank’s account, 
and they’ll vividly imagine themselves into Frank’s immobile shoes.  DS
6 • The BulleTin
bAng-CAmpbell, monikA Little Rat Makes Music; illus. by Molly Bang. Har-
court, 2007 48p
ISBN 978-0-15-205305-5 $15.00   
R Gr. 2-3
She’s been a sailor (Little Rat Sets Sail, BCCB 5/02) and a rider (Little Rat Rides, 
4/04), and now Little Rat is following her own muse, appropriately enough, in 
music. Though she’s initially daunted to discover that playing the violin isn’t as 
easy as it looks, she gradually develops proficiency, blossoming under the additional 
tutelage of an older student, with whom she eventually publicly performs a duet 
that finally sounds to Little Rat like the beautiful music that beckoned her to the 
instrument. Our protagonist has by now become the poster rat for the struggles 
of novices in any pastime, yet each experience is a little different, with her main 
demon here that of many youngsters: practice. This title is particularly good at 
documenting the frustrating incrementalism of skills acquisition, and the extent of 
Little Rat’s exasperation (“Tantrums are not music,” says her mother firmly. “They 
hurt our ears”) is authentic; there’s still room for humor, though (Little Rat’s mid-
lesson fart will, for some readers, be the high point of the book). Bang recreates 
her tidy, colorful, and deeply anthropomorphized animal world (while the sartorial 
rules remain somewhat nebulous, it’s still a kick to see Mama Rat out in nothing 
but earrings and smart Mary Janes), adding nifty ratty touches such as a bust of 
the Rats’ favorite composer (Mozrat, of course) and imaginative interpretations of 
Little Rat’s struggles. Young musicians will especially appreciate this understanding 
treatment of their conflicted joys, while Little Rat fans will just be glad to see their 
heroine out, about, and achieving.  DS
bARshAw, Ruth mCnAlly Ellie McDoodle: Have Pen, Will Travel; written and 
illus. by Ruth McNally Barshaw. Bloomsbury, 2007 170p
ISBN 978-1-58234-745-5v$11.95   
R Gr. 3-5
Ellie, nearly twelve, is displeased about being stuck on a family camping vacation 
with her very uptight aunt and uncle and their three extremely annoying children. 
First of all, it isn’t really camping, since they are staying in a cabin and not tents, 
and secondly, she simply cannot tolerate her cousin Eric (whom she refers to as 
“Er-ick”), “a nose-picking, booger-slurping, bug-infested parasite.” Her trials and 
tribulations are recorded, both textually and pictorially, in the pages of her secret 
notebook (she depicts Eric as a reptilian monster), and her sarcastic wit makes for 
a entertaining read of summer vacation gone awry. In addition to recording the 
day-to-day proceedings, Ellie’s notebook is also a tool for expressing her strong (and 
often hilarious) opinions about what exactly is going on at Higgins Lake Camp; she 
creates character sketches, comic strips, plans for revenge, and lists of wilderness 
survival tips. The episodes move along at a steady pace, with mini-conflicts coming 
up and getting resolved along the way. There is no great reconciliation between 
Ellie and her cousins, but there are moments of positive collaboration, making for a 
much more realistic depiction of growth than if everything ended happily ever after. 
Barshaw’s pen-and-ink illustrations come at a fast and furious rate, both pairing 
with text and standing in for narrative description, and the wealth of illustrations 
makes this a strong candidate for reluctant readers. This is a quick and funny read 
that will be hugely enjoyed by kids who thought they were alone in finding their 
extended families crazy.  HM 
SepTemBer 2007 • 7
bAueR, mARion dAne Killing Miss Kitty and Other Sins. Clarion, 
2007 167p
ISBN 0-618-69000-X $16.00   
R Gr. 7-10
In a series of five interconnected short stories, Bauer explores significant emotional 
moments in the life of Claire, a young girl growing up in the 1950s. Living in a 
small town in northern Illinois, Claire learns about racism firsthand when she meets 
and befriends a black girl her own age; Dorinda is staying with her father as he does 
some troubleshooting for the local cement mill, but she remains hidden away from 
the prying eyes of a town hostile to blacks. Claire negotiates friendships and faith 
as she goes to a new school and realizes that she doesn’t fit in with the popular girls, 
but she doesn’t believe in the same things as the girl who does offer her friendship. 
She comes to terms with the hard truth that though her mother killed her hissing, 
violent, uncivilized cat, she herself was the one who betrayed Miss Kitty by try-
ing to trade her in for a dog. She revisits the faith issue in her own tradition and 
learns that one can sin with abandon even after confirmation. Finally, she falls in 
love, and she learns that love for another girl isn’t the kind that goes public in the 
’50s. Bauer’s subtly lyrical prose lifts these stories above the quotidian scenes of 
small-town family life that they describe; they possess a quiet thoughtfulness and 
a strong sense of voice that define the personality of Claire in each of the stages of 
her life. Author’s notes precede and follow the stories, oddly at once emphasizing 
and distancing the autobiographical sources of the stories, as if Bauer were wary of 
revealing too much; true or not, the stories resonate with an emotional clarity and 
force that will speak to young readers across the years.  KC
bee, williAm And the Train Goes…; written and illus. by William Bee. Can-
dlewick, 2007 26p
ISBN 0-7636-3248-1 $15.99   
R 2-5 yrs
All aboard! This splendidly baroque train is leaving the station, making its own 
rhythmic and inviting locomotive sounds (“Chuff-chuff, chufferty-chuff,” “Click-
erty-click, clickerty-clack”) as cars of various passengers and cargo offer their own 
audio effects (the businessmen chant, “Time is money, time is money,” the chickens 
cluck, “Cluck-cluck, cluckerty-cluck”). Finally we flash back to the station, where 
the station parrot nimbly runs through a reprise of all the sound effects and phrases 
from the train. Though the text missed a terrific opportunity by failing to make its 
sound effects cumulative or regular enough for audiences to begin joining in first 
time through, this will be a performance showpiece as a readaloud, and one could 
certainly add in a choral “Woo-woo!” or other element for audience interaction from 
the get-go. Illustrations are high impact (and somewhat reminiscent of Emberley’s 
Drummer Hoff, BCCB 1/68), with the ornate train an Albert Memorial on rails 
and the carefully regularized computer-designed lines keeping the visual rhythm 
precise; deep hues, especially of a complementary red and green, add both heft and 
toylike appeal as the dry oddity of the human figures provides humor. This will be 
a rattling good trip for train-minded youngsters not yet able to muster interest in 
the willpower of Watty Piper’s Little Engine That Could.  DS 
binghAm, kelly Shark Girl. Candlewick, 2007 276p
ISBN 0-7636-3207-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
A sunny day at the beach changes everything for fifteen-year-old Jane when a 
shark takes off a good portion of her arm. Her brother’s fast thinking saves her 
8 • The BulleTin
life, but she is then ushered into an unfamiliar world of physical pain, emotional 
loss, unwelcome celebrity, an uncertain future, and the general weirdness of be-
ing a teenaged girl with only one arm. Through poems, conversations, letters, 
and newspaper articles, the many facets of Jane’s story unfold in an emotionally 
convincing journey of recovery. She grieves her loss, indicts her own choices, and 
seeks comfort in her friendship with a young boy who is handling the loss of his 
leg much more gracefully than she the loss of her arm. Especially compelling is the 
subtle alienation she feels from a particular friend, who keeps suggesting that she 
change her hair, her makeup, her look, etc.; on the one hand, she has forgotten 
that this friend has always been bossy like that, but on the other hand, both girls 
are trying in their own way to take some sort of clumsy control over the fact that 
Jane is now physically different through no fault of her own. In this contemporary 
descendant of Voigt’s Izzy, Willy Nilly (BCCB 5/86), Bingham does a fine job of 
keeping Jane utterly ordinary; she is no Bethany Hamilton, has no desire to go on 
talk shows or be Inspiration Girl, or even to get back into the water. She wants, 
instead, to try to regain her ability to do the simple things she loves, like drawing 
and cooking. Through Bingham’s carefully controlled trajectory of healing, how-
ever, these everyday accomplishments become inspiring all by themselves, and the 
honesty of Jane’s negative emotions render her eventually positive outlook entirely 
believable and triumphant.  KC 
blACk, holly Ironside: A Modern Faery’s Tale. McElderry, 2007 323p
ISBN 978-0-689-86820-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Following on the previous two novels in the series (Tithe, BCCB 10/05, Valiant, 
BCCB 1/03), Black returns to the faery world, unveiling her hauntingly dark vi-
sions at a gripping pace. This third novel focuses primarily on Roiben, awaiting 
his coronation to the Unseelie Court throne, and Kaye, a changeling who lives in 
the everyday world but finds that her ability to disguise her true self is diminishing 
rapidly. The two protagonists are also embroiled in a passionate romance, though 
Roiben, to protect Kaye and keep her from the escalating war between the Seelie 
and Unseelie courts, invokes a rule about lovers staying apart until one has proven 
their love through a task and assigns her a seemingly impossible quest: show him a 
faery who can lie. Even obstinate Kaye may not be able to accomplish this mission, 
and it is uncertain if there will be any stable faery court in which to announce her 
victory if she does. There is too little exposition for this novel to stand alone, as new 
readers will likely be so confused that the intended emotional impact will be dulled, 
but established fans will be right at home in the intricate worlds the author carefully 
unveiled in the earlier volumes, and they will be pleased with the attention given 
each of the key protagonists with whom they’ve already connected. Black’s impec-
cably employed literary quotes at the beginning of each chapter complement this 
gorgeous fantasy perfectly and may inspire readers to pursue some of the poets and 
authors referenced. Kaye and Roiben, true star-crossed lovers, are each memorable, 
well-developed characters in their own rights, and their intense connection, created 
out of both darkness and light, is easily one of the most compelling romances in 
contemporary YA fantasy.  AS  
SepTemBer 2007 • 9
blAke, miChel Baby’s Day; illus. with photographs by Trish Gant. Candlewick, 
2007 14p (Easy-Open Board Books)
ISBN 0-7636-3368-2 $5.99   
R 1-2 yrs
An adorable African-American toddler displays, for the edification of lapsitting 
toddler compatriots, fourteen of the more important accouterments of babydom. 
The little guy himself is crisply photographed in black and white, while the featured 
objects are tinted in rich color—yellow teether, red chair, blue diaper, multicolored 
stacking cups, and creamy stuffed bunny propped against him as he enjoys a well-
earned snooze. Older viewers may note that several objects make their way from 
one photo, where they appear in gray tone, into other shots, where they take the 
spotlight, and board-book veterans may even be ready to perceive that the nouns 
in chunky font are directly connected with the objects of interest on the pages. 
Staggered page widths, with outer pages wider than inner, are designed to make 
this an “easy-open” board book, but the outer “pages” seem much easier to flip 
than the inner ones. That’s not likely to bother tots in the least: left-to-right book 
layout hasn’t yet registered as a concern, and after mastering the finer arts of sock 
removal and toilet-paper unrolling, board-book manipulation won’t prove much 
of a challenge.  EB
bRAdley, Alex Hot Lunch. Dutton, 2007 [272p]
ISBN 0-525-47830-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
It all starts when Molly is partnered with perky Cassie for a writing assignment; 
Molly, a sardonic outsider, resists the teaming but can’t resist needling Cassie, and 
the discord escalates into a lunchroom food fight. When the ex-hippie principal 
of their crunchy-granola private school assigns the girls to work together in the 
cafeteria, their continued hostilities drive away the head of the cafeteria, Mrs. Zetz, 
and most of her staff; the principal then solves the situation by putting Molly and 
Cassie in charge of the cafeteria until such time as the students deem their food 
better than Mrs. Zetz’s. Narrator Molly is a creature seen often in life but rarely in 
books, the smug and judgmental outsider who’s convinced that her disaffection 
proves her superiority; while the book makes the case that her meanness covers up 
insecurity, it’s also clear she simply finds it enjoyable, and readers will likely take 
a certain pleasure in her unfettered snarkiness. There’s a survival-story element of 
appeal to watching the girls attempt to keep themselves afloat in the kitchen, and 
several secondary characters, such as nerdy but endearing Clyde, who turns out 
to be a whiz at making desserts, are savory additions. Unfortunately, the plot is 
overcomplicated, with an in-house saboteur and a final head-to-head with Mrs. 
Zetz, as well as contrived not only in its initial set-up but also in the girls’ eventual 
championing of good nutrition as a cafeteria cause, and Molly is less amusing 
when she predictably softens up. The premise is still an appetizing one, however, 
and many readers will look down at their dubious lunch trays and think that they 
too could do better.  DS
bRAdley, kimbeRly bRubAkeR Leap of Faith. Dial, 2007 185p
ISBN 0-8037-3127-2 $16.99v   
R Gr. 5-8
After Abby Lorenzo is thrown out of public school for stabbing a classmate in the 
arm, her only choices are “alternative” school, home school, or a church-affiliated 
10 • The BulleTin
school, so St. Catherine’s is her last chance for a semi-normal sixth-grade educa-
tion. She flourishes academically in her new roost, makes a couple of friends, 
and discovers she has some dramatic talent, but success at school doesn’t begin 
to address the resentment she feels toward her neglectful, workaholic parents, 
whose unwillingness to believe she was being sexually harassed by the principal’s 
son had led directly to the knifing and her subsequent expulsion. The best way 
Abby can devise to get her religiously ambivalent parents’ attention—and a bit of 
revenge into the bargain—is to convert to Catholicism, so she makes as much fuss 
as possible over attending Sunday Mass and taking evening classes to prepare for 
Baptism. The single drawback to the plan is her utter lack of belief in Catholic 
creed, but as she gropes her way awkwardly toward forgiveness, faith, it seems, 
seeks her out. It’s refreshing to find a fictional Catholic school that isn’t a den of 
repression, neuroses, or molestation, and to witness a portrayal of an adolescent 
stumbling her way realistically toward a spiritual awakening. Add Bradley’s generous 
helpings of humor and deft pacing that reels out the backstory of Abby’s former 
school torments, and you have a fast-moving novel with special appeal for readers 
of Christian tradition who would very much like to believe in “Jesus’ promise that 
life wasn’t going to suck forever.”  EB
buRleigh, RobeRt Napoleon: The Story of the Little Corporal. Abrams/American 
Federation of Arts, 2007 48p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8109-1378-3 $18.95   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Many middle-schoolers will probably find the name Napoleon to be recognizable 
but not necessarily meaningful. To redress that situation, Burleigh offers this lushly 
illustrated introduction that traces Bonaparte from his less than auspicious child-
hood on Corsica, through his rapid rise in the military, to his positions as First 
Consul and then emperor, and ultimately to his decline, exiles, and lonely passing 
on St. Helena’s. The epic tale is rather thinly told, omitting such basic background 
as who was running France during the Little Corporal’s rise to power, neglecting 
to mention that it was Lord Nelson who routed the French as Napoleon fled hast-
ily from Egypt, and even skipping over the lively debate concerning the cause of 
Napoleon’s death. What the title lacks in textual detail, though, it makes up for 
in illustrations, boasting a gallery of masterworks that interpret key moments in 
Napoleon’s career. Layout is spacious and attractive, with generous font size and 
leading, plenty of margin framing artwork to advantage, and a subtle creamy 
background and lower colored border suggestive of French period textiles. Descrip-
tive captions include the title and artist of the work and generally add a niblet of 
information about the piece itself (“Napoleon’s house on Corsica was not as richly 
furnished as the picture suggests”) or historical background (the book explains that 
David’s painting “showing him heroically crossing the Alps on a prancing horse” is 
incorrect because “Napoleon actually crossed the mountains on a mule!”). Section 
headings comprise quotations from Napoleon that offer insight into his character 
and make it clear that he was as mighty a spin doctor as a conqueror. Comparative 
maps, quotation sources, and a select bibliography are included.  EB
CAstelluCCi, CeCil Beige. Candlewick, 2007 307p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3066-9 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Two weeks in Los Angeles with her estranged punk rocker father “the Rat” seems 
like an interminable sentence to Katy, who’d rather be with her mother on an ar-
SepTemBer 2007 • 11
chaeological excavation in South America. The Rat’s old band, Suck, is poised to 
make a comeback, and everyone is somehow immersed in the music scene, leaving 
musically disinclined Katy not only bored, but looking hopelessly naïve and igno-
rant. The Rat does what he can in his unpracticed fashion to make her feel at home, 
setting her up with Lake, the daughter of a band member, as a temporary pal. But 
Lake is trying to get her own girl band launched and has neither the time nor the 
sympathy to make Katy feel welcome—she can make herself useful with the band 
or get the heck out of the way. Polite, Canadian Katy provides a comedic contrast 
to the world of punk rock, and popular author Castellucci gives her heroine an 
enjoyably readable voice. There’s absolutely no mystery to what direction this saga 
will take, though—of course, Mom can’t come home as scheduled; of course, Katy 
will finally get to like her grubby father and his goofy but tenderhearted girlfriend; 
of course, Lake and Katy will become best buds—and contrivance becomes just 
silly with Katy’s sudden leap onto the stage to sing backup for Lake (whose band 
members have deserted her just before their debut appearance). YAs in search of 
funnier or edgier musical fare should therefore cue up Korman’s Born to Rock (BCCB 
4/06), Going’s Fat Kid Rules the World (BCCB 6/03), or Cohn’s Nick and Norah’s 
Infinite Playlist (BCCB 6/06), but Katy’s sardonic take on the summer’s events will 
draw middle-schoolers along for quick, undemanding read.  EB 
CheAney, J. b. The Middle of Somewhere. Knopf, 2007 218p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93790-3 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83790-6 $15.99   
R Gr. 4-7
After a tragicomic encounter with a frantic squirrel lands her mother in the hospital, 
Ronnie Sparks has to reevaluate her plans for the summer. She is resilient, emphati-
cally so since reading a self-help book on supersizing her life through affirmatizing 
her attitude, rowing her flow, and gaming her goals, but her great and wonderful 
plans are often confounded by her hyperactive little brother, Gee. When Ronnie’s 
mother guilts her wayward grandfather, currently a wind prospector, into taking 
Ronnie and Gee with him in his RV in search of potential sites for wind farms in 
Kansas so that she can recover in peace, what could have been a dream come true 
for the RV-enamored Ronnie turns into a nightmare of constantly saving Gee from 
disasters of his own making. Much is made of Gee’s inability to control himself; as 
he gets himself into one dangerous situation or another, everything is forgiven as 
an inevitable symptom of his ADHD rather than treated as a problem that could 
in any way be treated or solved. Finally, though, Pop reaches his limit and turns 
toward home, whereupon the disappointed Gee gives him the slip at a gas station 
and the adventures continue. While older sibs with similar burdens may grow 
impatient with Gee’s problems with impulse control, Ronnie is the poster child for 
forbearance; even though her patience is sometimes laced with grim humor, her 
fortitude puts a modern inflection on what constitutes true grit. Fortunately, her 
caretaking is finally recognized and rewarded by her gruff and selfish grandfather, 
and she is able to realize some of her big dreams and gain a genuinely affirmative, if 
not entirely supersized, perspective on her life. The road trip through all the quirky 
roadside attractions of Kansas is an added bonus to the Newberyesque plot.  KC
12 • The BulleTin
CoFFelt, nAnCy Fred Stays with Me!; illus. by Tricia Tusa. Little, 2007 
32p
ISBN 0-316-88269-0 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Our young narrator is a joint-custody kid, staying sometimes with her mom and 
sometimes with her dad, but her dog, Fred, always stays with her. Wonderful 
companion though Fred may be, he’s a bit of a nuisance, barking and messing up 
houses until both parents forbid his presence. Our girl takes a firm stand, however, 
and with parents pitching in on the problem-solving, Fred is soon an improved 
canine citizen. Some of the underlying implications are a little sadder than the 
story (and one wonders why nobody thought to involve Fred and his mistress in 
a little obedience training), but this is both truthful and understatedly touching 
in its attestation to the importance of a loyal pet; the matter-of-fact text makes 
the most of simple parallel structures to convey the narrator’s parallel existences. 
Tusa’s art is unobtrusively, thoughtfully excellent: pudgy, grinning Fred would be 
a comedy turn in another setting, but here his cheerful presence lifts the book 
as it does his mistress’ days; the meticulously subdued palette, in a rich range of 
earthtones from ochre to rust, adds a serious undertone to the cavorting of girl and 
dog; compositions cleverly keep the adults obscured and focus even more firmly 
on the two comrades. Even kids with just one home will recognize the importance 
of Fred’s loyal support, and they’ll appreciate anew the company of their own 
animal—perhaps even toy—friends.  DS
Cohn, RAChel Naomi and Ely’s No Kiss List; by Rachel Cohn and David 
Levithan. Knopf, 2007 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94440-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84440-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Naomi and Ely grew up across the hall from each other in their New York apart-
ment building; inseparable friends from the start, they even weathered Naomi’s 
father’s indiscretion with one of Ely’s lesbian mothers. Now that they’re in college 
(though still living at home), Naomi finds it increasingly difficult to reconcile her 
public role as gay Ely’s straight best friend with her secret desire to be his romantic 
partner, a dilemma that kicks their friendship into estrangement when Bruce, whom 
Naomi is currently dating, becomes Ely’s new boyfriend. The complexities of this 
kind of gay/straight alliance aren’t a subject that’s been tackled much in literature 
for young people, and Cohn and Levithan (authors of Nick and Norah’s Infinite 
Playlist, BCCB 6/06) do it full and intelligent justice: Naomi is desperate under 
her cool exterior (“He was supposed to belong to me in the Happily Ever After”), 
shorting boyfriends and possible boyfriends as she yearns for the unattainable, while 
Ely wrongly attributes her rage to his trespass, not to the fact that he’s apparently 
finally finding genuine love with someone other than her. A constellation of char-
acters, ranging from Ely and Naomi to several of Naomi’s romantic objects past 
and present to a college friend, narrate the story, allowing for a fuller picture of all 
the characters. Naomi and Ely are both vividly drawn, cool, edgy Manhattan kids 
with tenderness just below their fashion-forward exteriors; Naomi is particularly 
skillfully introduced, with her hopeless yearning in her own voice eliciting reader 
sympathy that stays even as she’s demonstrated to be a manipulative diva. Essentially, 
this is the story of a long-needed breakup, one that will bring both participants 
strength and maturity as they let go of habit to see each other more honestly. Even 
SepTemBer 2007 • 13
readers who long for the pair’s glamorous downtown lifestyle will sympathize with 
the vulnerable young people living it.  DS
Cooney, CARoline b. Diamonds in the Shadow. Delacorte, 2007 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90278-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73261-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
Cotten, CynthiA Fair Has Nothing to Do with It. Farrar, 2007 154p
ISBN 978-0-374-39935-1 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Michael has been looking forward to the family’s annual visit to his 
grandparents’ farm and, especially, time spent alone with his grandfather, but the 
family arrives at the farm only to learn that Grandpa has just died of a heart attack. 
A grieving Michael finds refuge in anger, refusing to participate in the funeral pro-
ceedings or to talk about how he feels. After the family returns to the city, Michael 
begins to take drawing lessons from Mr. Andrews, a retired art teacher, in exchange 
for yard work. This begins a friendship that has a strong impact on Michael, espe-
cially when he learns that Mr. Andrews has cancer; Michael is thus able to have a 
second chance at addressing his emotions and at experiencing the grieving process 
that he largely avoided with his own grandfather’s death. Ultimately, this explains 
the emotional life of a preteen boy who needs men in his life and who resents their 
absence: Michael’s relationship with his father is punctuated by disappointment, his 
relationship with Grandpa is strong but ends suddenly, and while Mr. Andrews has 
a great deal to offer, Michael is hesitant to get too close. The subject is a poignant 
one, and Michael’s reaction to his situation is understandable. However, the story 
is purposive, and Michael is a largely unlikable character, relentlessly focused on 
his own perceived victimization and indifferent to the needs or feelings of others, 
though this portrayal is somewhat redeemed in the novel’s conclusion, wherein 
Michael finally musters his strength to face Mr. Andrews. Those willing to see Mi-
chael through to the end might just find themselves identifying with his reluctant 
grieving process.  HM   
CRoCkeR, nAnCy Billie Standish Was Here. Simon, 2007 281p
ISBN 978-1-4169-2423-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
As evidenced by her name, William Marie Standish wasn’t exactly the child her 
parents wanted. She was the only one they could have, however, so her mother 
decides that the only thing for it is to ignore the disappointing girl-child as much 
as possible. Stuck in small-town Missouri with all its limitations in the 1960s, Billie 
feels invisible until she has a conversation with her elderly neighbor, Miss Lydia, 
who immediately discerns Billie’s need for love and attention and sets out to fill 
it. Unfortunately, Miss Lydia’s adult son, Curtis, has some perverse needs of his 
own: he rapes eleven-year-old Billie. Miss Lydia, herself a victim of sexual abuse, 
takes control of the situation; she advises Billie not to tell her parents, “mistakes” 
her son for a burglar and kills him, and shepherds Billie through the aftermath of 
exams and pregnancy tests. She also helps Billie figure out the intricacies of love 
and trust as Billie develops a crush on classmate Harlan, who comes to value Miss 
Lydia during the course of their high school years almost as much as Billie does. 
14 • The BulleTin
Crocker manages what could be an emotionally overwrought situation with grace 
and credibility. The polish on Harlan’s knight-in-shining-armor suit is a bit high; 
for a teenaged boy, he is preternaturally perceptive and understanding about Billie’s 
secret, but the empathy for both Billie and Miss Lydia is so strong by the time he 
arrives in the narrative that readers will brook nothing less. Miss Lydia is a wonder-
fully cagey old lady, cajoling Billie’s suspicious mother with her convincing flattery, 
and teaching Billie the importance of camouflage as well as intimacy in negotiating 
difficult personal relationships. While Miss Lydia’s solution to Billie’s problem may 
not pass muster in today’s therapeutic culture, her responses work for the place and 
period. With its grim circumstances and solid emotional core, this coming-of-age 
narrative hearkens back to old favorites like Hunt’s Up a Road Slowly.  KC 
Cullen, lynn I Am Rembrandt’s Daughter. Bloomsbury, 2007 307p
ISBN 978-1-59990-046-9 $16.95   
R Gr. 6-9
As she explains in her concluding note, Cullen offers a “what if?” explanation for 
a mystery in Rembrandt’s personal life: why, as a widower, he never married the 
mother of his out-of-wedlock daughter, Cornelia. Here Cornelia tells her own story, 
tracing through memory and present progressive narration her efforts to keep her 
irascible father in line and financially solvent, her dewy-eyed romance with a wealthy 
young art dealer, her more mature appreciation and, eventually, love for her father’s 
apprentice, and her ultimate discovery that Rembrandt was not her natural father. 
There’s enough interest in Cornelia’s love life and Rembrandt’s antisocial behavior 
to interest readers who don’t know or care a fig about the master’s artwork, and 
the tolling of the plague bells through the novel adds an element of menace that 
speeds the plot along. And that’s a good thing, because interpolated chapters themed 
around specific Rembrandt’s paintings suggest that both style and content are of 
great importance, but no reproductions of these paintings are offered. Besides a 
historical note, lists of characters (real and fictional) and paintings that appear in 
the novel are included, and readers who want to experience Rembrandt’s artwork 
through Cornelia’s eyes may be inspired to track down some reproductions.  EB  
dAtlow, ellen, ed. The Coyote Road: Trickster Tales; ed. by Ellen Datlow and 
Terri Windling; illus. by Charles Vess. Viking, 2007 [544p]
ISBN 978-0-670-06194-5 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
Contributions from twenty-six authors explore tricksters through myriad lenses, 
cultural perspectives, and storytelling styles in this intriguing anthology. Though 
most selections are stories, there are a few poems in the mix, such as Carolyn 
Dunn’s “Coyote Woman,” about a sultry and nurturing trickster who cannot be 
tied down by patriarchal notions of female decency. Even with most of the stories 
set in the United States, there is striking variety within this geographical bound-
ary: the historical one-room schoolhouse haunted by a ghost who doesn’t care for 
diagramming sentences in “Uncle Bob’s Visit” is worlds away from Holly Black’s 
contemporary take on the devil’s-fiddle challenge (now an eating contest involv-
ing gummy frogs) in “A Reversal of Fortune.” The benefit of drawing from such 
a range of authors, each of whom brings different interpretations of tricksters to 
this assignment, is that everything including animals, humans, spirits, and toys 
take their turn, all but guaranteeing that every reader will find a sample that fits 
their expectations of tricksters perfectly. Stories do depart somewhat from folkloric 
SepTemBer 2007 • 15
tradition in the number of times tricksters get bested, which results in a very un-
tricksterly inflation of the human position. Although the stories easily stand alone 
with short author notes, the editors offer extensive context for the evolution and 
history of trickster tales through an introduction, prologue, and wide-ranging list 
of further readings.  AS
deming, sARAh Iris, Messenger. Harcourt, 2007 209p
ISBN 0-15-205823-0 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 5-7
As a loner seeking invisibility at her extremely unfriendly school, twelve-year-old 
Iris has always found company in reading; she is particularly excited, therefore, to 
discover that a mysterious package left at her door is a mythology collection with 
her name attached. When she dives in, Iris discovers writing in the margins, clues 
that direct her to various places around Pennsylvania where immortal deities have 
taken up residence. After visiting a few of them and hearing their stories, Iris realizes 
that she herself has a strong connection to the mythological world and uncovers a 
key fact that will change her life forever: her mortal father may not be her biologi-
cal father. The stories of the fallen deities are elegant and haunting as they describe 
their path from worshipped to lovelorn and, in Poseidon’s case, cooking in a crab 
shack. However, Iris’ own journey is awkwardly built on the realization of the same 
clichéd dreams of many children who wish for different parents or imagine that 
their schools (and their social status within them) could miraculously improve. In 
addition, Iris’ shift from isolated girl to self-possessed inter-world traveler who excels 
at detective work and matchmaking feels jarringly unrealistic, even in a fantasy. 
Although the mortal side of the story may not be memorable, Deming’s careful 
exploration on the characteristics of the gods and goddesses that might actually lead 
them to various contemporary jobs in the U.S. remains an intriguing endeavor. 
Young mythology fans awaiting the next installment in the Percy Jackson and the 
Olympians series by Rick Riordan (The Lightning Thief, BCCB 10/05, etc.) will 
likely find this to be a worthy read-alike.  AS
denise, AnikA Pigs Love Potatoes; illus. by Christopher Denise. Philomel, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-24036-2 $15.99   
R* 3-6 yrs
This bouncy rhymed story mixes food, family, and counting as a potato snack 
expands into a feast. First “ONE pig wants potatoes,” so Mamma starts to cook 
up a snack for her hungry youngster; then the pig numbers increase one by one as 
the little pig’s brother, sister, father, neighbor, trio of friends, and Mamma herself 
swell the ranks of the potato-eaters (and Mamma sensibly throws one more potato 
in for good measure, making for a total of TEN potatoes). The rhyme is enjoyably 
silly, bubbling along in compact trimeter couplets, and the message of cooperation 
that underlies the potato pig-out (the kids and Papa peel the spuds, and everybody 
helps clear at the end) is tactfully incorporated. Christopher Denise’s acrylic and 
charcoal illustrations are a modest little feast in their own right, and his personified 
piggies exude personality in a multitude of cunning little touches: the kids teeter on 
their trotters like wobbly preschoolers, little brother peeps owlishly from behind his 
huge round glasses, the potato-peeling turns into a playful peel-fight culminating 
in Papa’s wearing the peels as a toupee. It’s an enchanting picture of bucolic family 
cheer, but its essential humility is in keeping with the earthy food that starts it all. 
This might make for a pleasing picnic readaloud, or a useful distraction during 
food prep—so long as there’s no pork on the menu.  DS
16 • The BulleTin
desAix, deboRAh duRlAnd Hidden on the Mountain: Stories of Children Shel-
tered from the Nazis in Le Chambon; by Deborah Durland DeSaix and Karen Gray 
Ruelle. Holiday House, 2007 275p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8234-1928-9 $24.95   
Ad Gr. 5-8
During the Second World War, thousands of refugees, mostly children, found safety 
in the isolated mountain village of Le Chambon-sur-Lignon in the southern part 
of France. With their town once a refuge for Huguenot Protestants persecuted by 
Catholics, the people of Le Chambon felt a particular bond with the persecuted 
Jews under the Nazi regime and subsequently opened their homes, farms, and lives 
to the needs of this refugee population. DeSaix and Ruelle, upon learning about the 
history of the region, traveled throughout the United States and Europe collecting 
stories from survivors of the war who spent time in Le Chambon. This collection of 
stories offers first-hand accounts of the children of Le Chambon, and the cumula-
tive work includes a rich assortment of voices, memories, and details about the war 
years in this mountainous region. Some of the presentation details are questionable: 
the interviews are turned into seamless present-tense accounts that suggest journal 
entries, and the format is at times extremely choppy, often with no more than a 
few sentences following a header with basic information (each interview starts 
with the age of the speaker at the crucial historical moment, the month and year, 
and the place). Much more effective are the intermittent historical chapters, which 
offer research into the era and profiles of individuals who were affiliated with Le 
Chambon. Those who have been introduced to this story in Meltzer’s Rescue (BCCB 
6/88) will appreciate an opportunity to delve into it more fully, and it could also 
be effectively used in tandem with Weapons of the Spirit, the film documentary on 
Le Chambon, to provoke further understanding and discussion. Maps, a timeline, 
stock and personal photographs, and extensive end matter (glossary, pronunciation 
guide, recommended reading, bibliography, source notes, index) further contribute 
to the usefulness of this text for research purposes.  HM  
deukeR, CARl Gym Candy. Houghton, 2007 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-618-77713-6 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Mick Johnson is a promising running back, and his father, a third-round draft choice 
who partied his way out of an NFL career, has been relentlessly promoting him 
ever since he could hold a ball. Now a high-school varsity player in his freshman 
year (he was held back in kindergarten so he would be a year older and bigger than 
his classmates), Mick sees or imagines competition around every corner, and he’s 
always on the lookout for a way to give himself an edge. First, it’s protein drinks 
and vitamins coupled with strenuous workouts at the school gym; from there it’s 
a better gym with a personal trainer, who introduces him to low doses of steroids. 
Embarrassed by the side effects of swollen breasts and skin breakouts, Mick gives 
the pills a rest, but as soon as he feels himself losing speed and stamina, he’s up to 
“stacks” and ultimately injections. Yes, he’s the best thing Shilshole High School’s 
ever seen, but he’s also caught in a cycle of self-deception and ’roid rage that leads him 
to the brink of tragedy. Although readers can see Mick’s doom coming from a mile 
away, those familiar with Deuker’s work will know that nothing is as predictable as 
it seems. Certainly Coach will catch him; no, the state of Washington doesn’t allow 
drug testing of high-school players. Surely Mick will turn his dad’s hidden pistol on 
SepTemBer 2007 • 17
a competitor in a moment of rage; no, the gun will play quite a different role. His 
mother’s Bible has to be the key to his reformation; no, in a devilishly dark twist, 
the Good Book is as unreliable a narrator as Mick himself. Deuker continues his 
run as premier author of provocative YA sports novels, and what could be better 
than kicking off the 2007 football season with this riveting title?  EB
deVitA, JAmes The Silenced. Eos/Geringer/HarperCollins, 2007 504p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-078464-5 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-078462-1 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-9
The Zero Tolerance Party has already taken her mother away, and Marena knows that 
if she pushes the rules too far, they will “disappear” her as well. However, Marena 
is also aware that if she doesn’t fight the increases in governmental control then she 
is not honoring her mother’s legacy. Even while surrounded by guards, attending 
school led by officers, and locked at night in a quasi concentration camp, she is able 
to shake the status quo by committing acts of vandalism and forcing others around 
her to question their choices and lives. When it becomes clear that she is not only 
risking her own life but also those of her father and younger brother, Marena won-
ders if the potential benefits outweigh the horrifying costs. This surrealistic and grim 
world, wherein children are recruited to spy on their parents, lobotomized resisters 
are turned into unquestioning guards, and painting a rose can get you murdered, 
is hauntingly well developed, serving as the perfect challenge for the irascible and 
resolute Marena. Several elements of the story may remind the reader of the secret 
resistance movements against Nazi rule, and the author’s notes indeed describe the 
strong influence that Sophie Scholl, a member of the White Rose group formed 
to fight the Nazi regime, had on his conception of his protagonist. Although the 
morals about tolerance and respect for independence are rather heavy-handed at 
times, there’s ample compensation in the compelling protagonist, terrifyingly real-
istic (sometimes only slightly exaggerated) setting, and gripping pace. Sci-fi buffs 
are the likely audience, but there are also strong curricular tie-in possibilities with 
lessons on World War II or resistance movements.  AS
doyle, bRiAn Pure Spring. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2007 158p
ISBN 978-0-88899-774-6 $16.95   
R Gr. 6-9
In this latest chapter in the life of Doyle’s Martin O’Boy (see Boy O’Boy, BCCB 
3/04), Martin is now fifteen, and he’s found a job, working as a helper on a deliv-
ery truck for Pure Spring beverages. He loves the company and the product, and 
he’s instantly smitten with Gerty McDowell, the attractive daughter of one of the 
company’s customers. Unfortunately, he’s assigned to driver Randy, who not only 
discomfits Martin with streams of bigotry and salacious talk, but he also rips off 
the Pure Spring customers, including Mr. McDowell; honest Martin wants to put 
a stop to the thieving, but Randy keeps him compliant by threatening to expose 
Martin’s underage status (he claimed to be sixteen) to the company. With his 
straightforward and uninflected compact sentences, Martin reads like a Heming-
way narrator, but one of a tender and hopeful mind and an abiding interest in 
humankind despite his setbacks. Some of those setbacks are referred to in passing 
or described in flashback, as with the institutionalization of Martin’s mentally 
disabled brother and the death of Martin’s parents in a car crash, events gradually 
revealed over the course of the story. Doyle’s affection for communities, especially 
mid-century Ottawa, again shines through here, with Martin bolstered by a net-
18 • The BulleTin
work of caring friends and deeply saddened at letting down his kindly employer (a 
historical note testifies to the reality of the company and its civic-minded owners). 
Such a benevolent literary creation wouldn’t leave its hero hanging, and readers 
will rejoice to see Martin’s wrongs righted and Martin himself back on track with 
Gerty McDowell at his side.  DS
dRAke, sAlAmAndA Dragonsdale; illus. by Gilly Marklew. Chicken House/
Scholastic, 2007 [288p]
ISBN 0-439-87173-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
As the daughter of the head of Dragonsdale, a stable for dragons, Cara has grown 
up tantalizingly close to her goals as she has been mucking barns and caring for the 
creatures her whole life. Unfortunately, it seems that her dreams of flying a dragon 
and competing in tournaments will never come true as her father, still heartbroken 
over his wife’s death during a dragon flight years before, has forbidden her to ever 
ride. However, Cara can’t ignore what she feels is her destiny, especially when 
her beloved Skydancer, a dragon with whom she has an established trustbond, 
is sold to a cruel and spoiled master. Nicely varied black-and-white illustrations 
complement the text; although most of the drawings are small and directly reflect 
the story, occasional full-page spreads add intricacy and emotional impact to the 
details given. The descriptions of dragon agility tournaments and speed tests are 
exhilarating, adding the risks and thrills of flight to the usual racing excitement. 
Unfortunately, life on the ground is considerably less suspenseful, and readers 
familiar with any of the myriad horse series will be able to predict the exact chain 
of events that leads to Cara getting everything she ever wanted. In addition, the 
villains are entirely one-dimensional and unredeemable, which, while enabling their 
satisfying comeuppance, doesn’t add much drama or depth to the novel. However, 
as this is ultimately a story of a girl and her pony—er, dragon, the characters of 
Cara and Skydancer, fiercely loyal and dedicated to each other, may satisfy many 
young animal lovers. A map and an interview with the fictional author (a young 
dragon rider herself) add to the fantasy fun.  AS
dRApeR, shARon m. Fire from the Rock. Dutton, 2007 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-525-47720-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
1957 in Little Rock, Arkansas, is a traumatic time and place for Sylvia Patterson 
and her family. Racism inflects many aspects of their daily lives, erupting in pain 
and violence when a dog trained to attack blacks bites her little sister, and when 
her brother is beaten and thrown onto their porch for refusing to quietly accept 
harassment from a bunch of thugs. Sylvia’s biggest challenge, however, is that she 
has been chosen to be on the list of students who will integrate Central High in 
the fall. Her friends and family give her mixed signals; her brother wishes he were 
on the list, but he is too hotheaded; her little sister can’t understand why she would 
even want to go to school with whites; her father and mother are both scared and 
proud; her friend Lou Ann accuses her of being uppity; and her boyfriend fears 
losing her. Sylvia must decide for herself whether she will step forward and change 
the world, even if it means being constantly challenged and belittled, or stay in a 
place where she will be affirmed so that she can become a strong, proud woman 
who works for peace and justice as an adult. Alternating with third-person narra-
SepTemBer 2007 • 19
tion of events, Sylvia’s journal entries and poems reveal her to be remarkably yet 
credibly articulate and self-possessed for an eighth-grader, demonstrating why she 
was chosen to represent the best and brightest of her class but also demonstrating 
her sensitivity to and awareness of the implications of her decision. Ultimately, 
Draper paints a believable and compelling picture of warm, supportive family life 
amid the violent conflicts of the times.  KC 
ellis, Ann dee This Is What I Did: Little, 2007 [176p]
ISBN 0-316-01363-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-9
“A year ago, in seventh grade, I was fine,” says Logan, recalling his closeness with 
his friend Zyler and their burgeoning friendship with Cami, a girl Logan really 
liked. Now he and his family have moved to a new house and town to escape the 
shadow of a traumatic event involving Zyler and Cami; as Logan struggles with 
bullying by his new classmates and tentatively makes a connection with Laurel, 
a girl with a taste for palindromes, he begins gradually to reveal and to deal with 
his history. This is an original story, and it’s told in an offbeat and original style, 
with thirteen-year-old Logan’s narration appearing in brief, one-sentence thoughts 
structured in sections delineated by thematically relevant thumbnail artwork and 
punctuated by palindromic notes between Laurel and Logan. It’s actually a highly 
accessible format that also adds effectively to the tension, enhancing the tautness of 
Logan’s account and lending a certain verisimilitude in its unpolished and choppy 
relation. The bullying is depicted with more nuance and sophistication than usual, 
with the book tacitly noting the social physics of victimization as Logan moves from 
likely target (rumors have followed him to his new school) to an outcast whose 
tormenting is tacitly approved and sometimes abetted by adults. Logan’s reluctance 
to address his past is believable as well as suspenseful, and the event—Zyler shot 
his abusive father to stop his sexual assault of Cami, while a frightened Logan fled 
and refused to help his friend—is a dramatic and credible source of Logan’s guilt. 
Reluctant readers will particularly appreciate the blend of provocative story and 
approachable format, while readers in general will find much to discuss in this 
thoughtful story.  DS
Felin, m. sindy Touching Snow. Atheneum, 2007 234p
ISBN 1-4169-1795-0 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Karina and her siblings suffer regular “beat-ups” from the Daddy, the enormous 
man their mother had married so that she could live in the suburbs and not in 
the violent inner city where many other Haitian immigrants have ended up in 
the 1980s. But the Daddy carries more violence within him than could possibly 
exist on any street, and after one particularly brutal beating that leaves Karina’s 
sister Enid near death, someone (his own brother, it turns out) turns him in to the 
authorities, until a pressured Karina tells lies that allow him to come home. The 
head of a local community center takes an interest in their family, and Karina takes 
an interest in his daughter, Rachael. As she and Rachael explore their feelings for 
each other, Karina grows more confident in herself, knowing that she can be strong 
in ways her mother cannot be; the Daddy’s decision to punish her for her love for 
Rachael is the last decision he ever makes. Karina’s narration makes it hard to get 
a bead on her at first—she’s clearly smart and verbally acute, and yet her teachers 
threaten her with special ed status and she is socially awkward, especially around 
20 • The BulleTin
a popular girl in her class. As her story unfolds, however, it becomes clear that her 
odd behaviors, including fainting spells as well as chronic underachievement, are 
a result of the abuse she is suffering daily at home. Her awkwardness resolves itself 
as well as her sexuality becomes more than a confused feeling for her. Themes are 
subtle but powerful here; for instance, the director of the community center, in 
trying so hard to be culturally sensitive to Haitian family dynamics, utterly misses 
the difference between corporal discipline and dangerous abuse, making such 
sensitivity seem absurd on its face. Karina’s fatal action is made to seem tragically 
inevitable, not to mention just, given the ineffectiveness of adults, even when they 
can no longer look the other way.  KC
Fine, Anne Jamie and Angus Together; illus. by Penny Dale. Candlewick, 
2007 102p
ISBN 0-7636-3374-7 $15.99   
 R 4-7 yrs
As fans of The Jamie and Angus Stories (BCCB 10/02) will recall, Jamie is a little boy 
and Angus is his constant companion, a toy Highland bull. Six chapters document 
adventures such as Jamie’s fending off of a little girl who plays far too roughly with 
Angus and his development of his own drawing style (he has a nice line in “angry 
eggs with beetling brows and fine mustaches”), as well as his eventual struggle 
with the possibility that he’s outgrowing Angus. This has the same welcoming 
coziness as the previous title; though the stories are a little more scattered in topic, 
audiences will still understand Jamie’s reliance on his quiet friend, and they’ll be 
particularly pleased with the final story’s message that such loyal comrades need not 
be left behind. This would make a nice snuggly readaloud for bedtime or a rainy 
day diversion, and audiences will enjoy the softly realistic illustrations, appearing 
in generous helpings of spot art as well as full-page vignettes, that have the same 
sturdy pettability as Angus himself.  DS
FlAke, shARon g. The Broken Bike Boy and the Queen of 33rd Street; illus. by 
Colin Bootman. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2007 [144p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-0032-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Queen takes her name very seriously, treating the world as though they were her 
subjects and expecting royal treatment in return, which does not go over well with 
her schoolmates or her mother (who “didn’t like how grown-up and stuck-up I 
was acting. Only, I can’t help it if I’m cute and smarter than most kids my age”). 
Queen’s attention-getting tendencies meet their match in her new classmate Leroy, 
who smells terrible and who tells tremendous lies about where he comes from—or 
so Queen thinks. When Queen decides to follow Leroy home to uncover the truth, 
she meets Cornelius, Leroy’s older neighbor and co-conspirator in creating truth, 
and she learns a major lesson in the importance of treating others kindly as well 
as recognizing the different forms that truth can take. This latest novel from the 
author of Bang! (BCCB 12/05) maintains the strong characterizations and dialogue 
of her previous works. The storyline is somewhat fragmented, however, and the fact 
vs. fantasy issue ends up confusingly blurring the categories rather than creatively 
interpreting them. Still, Queen is pretty amusing if you don’t have to live with her, 
and Flake fans will no doubt want to delve into this latest offering. Reviewed from 
an unillustrated galley.  HM 
SepTemBer 2007 • 21
FleisChmAn, John Black and White Airmen: Their True History. Houghton, 
2007 [160p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-56297-4 $20.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-10
Herb Heilbrun and John Leahr were in the same third-grade classroom in Cincin-
nati, but neither paid a bit of attention to the other: Herb was white and John was 
black. Both became pilots in World War II; both were stationed in Italy and flew 
missions to the north; both participated in two of the same sorties to bomb synthetic 
oil factories. They never met there either, because Tuskegee fighter pilots were kept 
segregated by the military from the white bomber pilots they escorted into battle. 
Years later, retiree Heilbrun “crashed” a Tuskegee Airmen’s reunion and met Leahr; 
about a million shared memories later, the pair hit the road to lecture a new genera-
tion on the realities of the color line that divided servicemen and servicewomen 
six decades ago. Fleischman reconstructs their story from interviews and reference 
sources, and the bulk of the text is devoted to the engrossing details of the two 
pilots’ parallel military careers and their actions in battle. Woven throughout are 
Fleischman’s own observations on the cruel ironies of Jim Crow laws and customs, 
which could make soldiers mortally dependent on each other and yet never afford 
them so much as a mutual greeting. Fleischman’s commentary is occasionally repeti-
tive and a bit heavy handed, but the power of Leahr’s and Heilbrun’s alternating 
stories, illustrated with personal photographs and period documents, handily trumps 
that concern. Teens who followed the cooperative civil rights efforts of John Lewis 
and Jim Zwerg in Ann Bausum’s Freedom Riders (BCCB 4/06) will find reason to 
ponder just how much difference two decades can make.  EB  
Fleming, denise Beetle Bop; written and illus. by Denise Fleming. Harcourt, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-15-205936-1 $16.00   
R 3-5 yrs
Beetle-centered couplets informally catalogue a raft of buzzing bugs, focusing 
on insect attributes that youngsters will readily recognize (“Blue beetles, black 
beetles/ hide-in-the-crack beetles”) or that make for particularly sonorous reading 
aloud (“Buzzing beetles, humming beetles,/ steadily drumming beetles”). The text 
is somewhat slight, but it’s festive and deliciously noisy, and it’s a subject sure to 
resonate with audiences who are often at eye level with such creatures. Fleming’s 
fiber art, in its usual rich hues and textures, sticks to fairly strict natural history 
rather than opting for personification; the illustrations gain sympathy for their 
subjects by often putting the beetles in clear jeopardy from predators, but they’re 
otherwise presented in magnificent realism, with camouflage eyes peering out at 
the viewer even more intently than real ones. Also realistic is the “where’s beetle?” 
element of some of the spreads, wherein kids will need to look sharp to find the 
hidden bugs, and the closeup views will arouse the same fascination and repulsion 
as a real creepy-crawly. This could be pulled out to good use in any surprise beetly 
situation or as a preparation for a viewing of the local wildlife.  DS
22 • The BulleTin
FRAnCo, betsy Summer Beat; illus. by Charlotte Middleton. McElderry, 
2007 34p
ISBN 978-1-4169-1237-8 $15.99   
R 4-6 yrs
This onomatopoeic tribute to summertime follows a day in the life of best friends 
Em and Joe. From the opening, wherein Em’s skateboard goes “Clackity-clack” on 
the sidewalk, to the closing notes of crickets singing “Treet-treet, treet-treet” high 
in a tree, each spread offers abundant sound effects and summer adventures for the 
two friends. Franco presents a wide assortment of seasonal activities—jumping in 
the sprinkler, tossing water balloons, lighting sparklers—and young listeners are 
sure to relate to the abundant options for summer fun. While the rhymed verse 
is occasionally stretched to fit the required cadence (“Whoosh pumf, Whoosh 
pumf./Tossing water balloons around./ I throw to Joe. Pop! Spltt!/ Our yellow bal-
loon smacks the ground!”), a practice read will easily fortify readers-aloud against 
scansion traps. Middleton’s mixed-media artwork incorporates drawing, collage, 
and computer media to depict the wholesome neighborhood setting. Illustrations 
beam with summer energy as Em’s golden braids constantly flap about and bicycle 
handlebar streamers blow in the breeze. The playful language and opportunities to 
make sounds like the subject matter make this a great candidate for summertime 
reading programs, and little listeners will likely have an activity or two to add to 
Em and Joe’s list.  HM
gAimAn, neil InterWorld; by Neil Gaiman and Michael Reaves. Eos/Harper-
Collins, 2007 239p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-123897-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-123896-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Fourteen-year-old Joey had no idea that his utter inability to navigate was actually 
a sign that he is destined for greater things. After taking a wrong turn in his city 
and suddenly slipping into an alternative form of his Earth, Joey learns that all of 
his navigational talent lies in traveling between dimensions. Unfortunately, it is a 
dangerous time to be a Walker, one who is aware of and can travel between dimen-
sions, as the Hex and Binary, two evil groups that seek to conquer all worlds, are 
each growing in power and setting their sights on using the Walkers for their own 
nefarious purposes. After being rescued from the bad guys, Joey joins a resistance 
force; even as he struggles to survive a mentally and physically grueling boot camp, 
however, Joey is distracted by the fact that every member of the small army with 
whom he is training is an alternative version of himself, drawn together from par-
allel worlds. Joey is far from the perfect hero: even though his Walking skills may 
be unequaled, his decision-making abilities are flawed, he can’t seem to keep out 
of life-threatening situations, and for a while his only friend is a sentient bubble. 
Joey’s weaknesses are effective, as readers will sympathize with his errors and imagine 
their own responses to being faced with numerous more perfect and better-evolved 
versions of themselves. The lightning pace, flashy descriptions, and the movie-ready 
twist of having all of the characters essentially being the same person will all be 
appealing to television and film fans, evoking the timing and strong images of a 
visual production. And as in any good sci-fi movie, the open-ended conclusion 
will leave readers demanding a sequel to see what happens to Joey (and all of his 
other incarnations) next.  AS
SepTemBer 2007 • 23
gAimAn, neil M Is for Magic; illus. by Teddy Kristiansen. HarperCollins, 
2007 260p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-118645-5 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-118642-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-8
Representing almost twenty-five years worth of Gaiman’s writing, this creepy anthol-
ogy contains nine of his own favorite short stories, a poem, and a segment from an 
upcoming book that works nicely as a stand-alone tale. The homage of the title, a 
nod to Ray Bradbury’s earlier collections of short stories for children (R Is for Rocket; 
S Is for Space), is perfect given the impressive alchemy of dark fantasy, horror, and 
science fiction for which both authors are famous. Swindlers, shapeshifters, ghosts 
and even the realistic and often-laughable shortsightedness of adults are all repre-
sented in the pleasingly varied stories, most of which weave comfortably between 
the mundane and the fantastic. A black-and-white illustration emphasizing the dark 
atmosphere accents each entry. Though a few tales follow familiar paths, Gaiman’s 
impeccable eye for chilling details, implicit trust in his readers to be able to handle 
complicated (and effective) narrative coils, and the sense of despair and pessimism 
that is left to linger rather than saccharinely lightened for the young audience make 
this a standout among the ubiquitous anthologies for this age group.  AS
gAntos, JACk I Am Not Joey Pigza. Farrar, 2007 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-374-39941-2 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Don’t let the title worry you, Joey fans; Joey’s not going away anytime soon. While 
the all-too-plausible lunacy of Joey’s parents (who have reconciled following 
Joey’s dad’s winning of a nice lottery payout) has resulted in the family renaming 
themselves the Heinzes and Joey’s being reimagined as Freddy, the better to start 
a whole new life together, our narrator is still classic Joey Pigza underneath. He 
alone of the former Pigzas is reluctant to leave behind the old life, where he was 
progressing in sixth grade, and he’s wary of this new life, despite his release from 
school (his parents found not sending him easier than explaining where Freddy 
Heinz came from) and the stream of high-priced toys (Joey and a paintball gun are 
a match made in hell). This is a development in the Joey saga that’s unexpected yet 
somehow typical; it’s utterly credible that Joey’s dad would find the pop culture of 
wishful thinking to be irresistible, and the book’s general satire of that approach 
is tempered by understanding of its appeal. As usual, however, it’s Joey who’s the 
most interesting element, and Gantos is wise and subtle in his exploration of his 
hero’s identity dilemma (“I understood that not being myself was bad for me. . . . 
I had become someone I didn’t know and someone I couldn’t say no to”) without 
losing sight of the classic Joey, who rides a refrigerator box off a rooftop. Joey is 
increasingly established as the seismometer of the family, with his agitation a sign 
of the movement upon their faultlines; readers won’t want to miss the earthquake, 
but they’ll be glad to see the ground settling again beneath him.  DS
gARden, nAnCy Hear Us Out!: Lesbian and Gay Stories of Struggle, Progress, and 
Hope, 1950 to the Present. Farrar, 2007 230p
ISBN 978-0-374-31759-1 $18.00   
M Gr. 7-12
Veteran author Garden here chronicles lesbian and gay history in the United States 
through twelve short stories (two previously published). The stories are arranged 
chronologically, a pair to a decade’s (beginning with the 1950s), each decade sec-
24 • The BulleTin
tion introduced by a historical essay highlighting issues, successes, and setbacks the 
GLBTQ community faced. Stories cover everything from coming out to finding 
love to (in disturbing contrast to the collection subtitle) a double suicide by a gay 
couple who feel they have no other options. There are no stories featuring bisexual, 
transgender, or self-identified queer characters, and between the emphasis on lesbian 
characters (only two are exclusively about gay male characters), the fact that they’re 
almost invariably middle-class white girls, and the repetitiveness of the voices and 
goals, the collection is disappointingly predictable and homogeneous, two undesir-
able attributes in a collection designed to reach teens across the sexuality spectrum. 
The historical essays are more successful, but they’re a small part of the book, and 
their strongly adult focus dulls the overall immediacy and accessibility for a teen 
audience. Although there are no source notes for each essay, Garden makes note of 
specifically helpful titles in her introduction; these resources are part of the further 
reading list, which includes several excellent YA and adult books, websites, and 
magazines, though a handful of out of print or extremely dense titles are question-
able choices. Whether gay, straight, questioning, or curious, teens will be much 
better served by such excellent anthologies as Jane Summer’s Not the Only One or 
Levithan and Merrell’s The Full Spectrum (BCCB 7/06).  AS
gAtes, susAn Beyond the Billboard. Harcourt, 2007 210p
ISBN 978-0-15-205983-5 $16.00   
R Gr. 6-9
Growing up in the secluded, private world of a swamp that borders a large city, twins 
Firebird and Ford are very different. Ford adopts the fierce loyalty of his father, a 
traditional eel fisherman, to the swamp and his equally ferocious disdain for the 
city, while Firebird yearns to see the places and live the life advertised on the huge 
billboard that hides their home from prying eyes and marks the border of their 
lives. Their grandmother and father have spun an elaborate family mythology of 
their connectedness to the swamp and their independence from the city, making 
Ford feel self-righteous and Firebird guilty. One night, though, Firebird follows 
her grandmother out of the swamp, through storm drains and abandoned subway 
tunnels, and into the heart of the city to discover a disconcerting secret—the eelskin 
purses she makes as a hobby are being sold as designer accessories for exorbitant 
sums. Independently, Ford follows his father and finds that he is dumping the 
skinned eels they work so hard to catch rather than taking them to the smokery, 
which Ford later learns has closed. The twins share their disturbing information, 
but they are still willing to rationalize their father’s and grandmother’s motives until 
tragedy strikes, first with their father contracting malaria, and then with a freak 
storm that floods the swamp and brings down the billboard, ending their way of 
life and exposing all of the secrets that have encased their lives. The setting of this 
fascinating and original coming-of-age story lends a surreal dimension to the miasma 
of lies the adults have constructed to keep the children close to home. Characters 
have a distinct yet universal quality that gives the work the aura of a folktale, with 
an environmental subtext that adds a cautionary dimension. The result is something 
a bit out of the ordinary yet recognizable in its theme of needing to seek your own 
truths beyond what your parents have sold you.  KC
SepTemBer 2007 • 25
geRshAtoR, phillis Sky Sweeper; illus. by Holly Meade. Kroupa/Farrar, 
2007 34p
ISBN 0-374-37007-9 $16.00   
R 4-7 yrs
“It was the Flower Keeper’s job to sweep up the springtime plum and cherry blos-
soms in the temple garden,” and young Takeboki not only executes his charge but 
exceeds it, going on to sweep and clear the garden through the four seasons year after 
year. While he’s occasionally distracted by thoughts of love or travel, he focuses on 
his core principle: “The monks need a temple, the temple needs a garden, and the 
garden needs a Flower Keeper.” When he dies, his earthly contributions are finally 
recognized, and he brings his talent to sweeping the skies into beautiful displays. 
Though some of the implications of the story are a little questionable (could he 
really not have kept the garden so beautifully if he’d gone home to a family?), this is 
a prettily told tale that draws strength from its fable-like structure. Meade’s mixed-
media art plays against expectation, offering blocky collage and sharp linework 
(especially in delineation of facial features) that keep the proceedings concrete or 
lean toward a modernist abstraction. There’s a touch of pourquoi tale to the story 
that suggests some possible partners for the book, but it would also serve as an 
introduction to a garden exploration or just a sweetly philosophical readaloud. An 
author’s note explains her inspirations for the story.  DS
giles, gAil Right Behind You. Little, 2007 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-316-16636-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
“On the afternoon of his seventh birthday, I set Bobby Clarke on fire.” Kip, the 
narrator, was then nine, and his action cost Bobby his life and nearly destroyed his 
own. After he spends five years in a psychiatric institution for young offenders, he 
and his family try to make a new life, first in Indiana, where Kip, now known as 
Wade, upends his family’s life again when he drunkenly reveals his past to a friend, 
and then in Texas for a final try at a normal life. There Kip falls for a girl with her 
own dark secrets, but can he risk trusting her with the truth? This is an arresting 
premise, and Giles never shrinks from the inherent horror of Kip’s youthful action, 
reminding readers of the devastation in its wake even after we’ve been on his side 
for the length of a book. The psychodrama component, with Kip involved with 
therapists at every stage and his crime clearly rooted in family issues, is solid but 
not overcomplicated, and the element of melodramatic suspense keeps the tension 
as high as the readability. The story is particularly perceptive in its depictions of the 
secondary characters’ responses, ranging from the devoted commitment of Kip’s 
stepmother, who joins the family in spite of its history, to the mixed feelings of 
betrayal and disappointment of Kip’s closest Indiana friend, who received lies in 
return for his trust. The story-behind-the-headlines flavor gives this a voyeuristic 
appeal, while the capable writing and sympathetic yet troubled protagonist will 
suck readers right into the action.  DS
goldFingeR, JenniFeR p. My Dog Lyle; written and illus. by Jennifer P. 
Goldfinger. Clarion, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 0-618-63983-7 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
The adoring narrator is aware that Lyle “may look like an ordinary dog to some 
people,” but she’s got a list of Lylian virtues that demonstrate his wonderfulness. 
26 • The BulleTin
Each spread describes a new Lyle characteristic (“Lyle cries when he hears a siren. 
He worries that bad things are happening somewhere”) introduced by adjectives 
that accumulate with each newly described Lyle feature, so by the end he’s a “snug-
gly, smart, howling, burping, slurping, stinky-pink, bouncing, shaky, bellyachy, 
smooshed-nose, on-the-go, sneaky, scaredy dog.” The cumulative element provides 
structure that shapes what’s otherwise essentially an affectionate catalogue, and 
there’s homely humor in the narrator’s detailing of Lyle’s magnificence (when he 
“jumps up again and again to look over the hedge . . . it looks as if he’s on a tram-
poline. Boing! Boing!”). Oil and acrylic illustrations make Lyle the center of every 
composition, many of them portraits wherein floppy-eared, piebald Lyle looks 
straight out at the viewer amid his latest exploit (the view through the bowl of Lyle 
lapping in the toilet will be a particular favorite); since audiences will probably 
want to pretend Lyle is their very own, it’s just as well that the pig-tailed narrator 
limits her appearances. Lindenbaum’s Boodil My Dog (BCCB 12/92) remains the 
gold standard for this sort of book, but Lyle’s a lovable mutt indeed, and listeners 
will understand and share his mistress’ pride.  DS
gRAhAm, bob “The Trouble with Dogs. . . ” Said Dad; written and illus. by Bob 
Graham. Candlewick, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3316-5 $12.99   
R 5-8 yrs
In this sequel to “Let’s Get a Pup!,” Said Kate (BCCB 9/01), Kate and her parents 
are largely content with their shelter acquisitions, huge, placid Rosy and small, 
obstreperous Dave. Since Dave’s uncontrolled energy is a bit of a problem, they 
seek help from the Pup Breakers service, but they then find that they miss the old 
troublemaking Dave; fortunately, it’s hard to keep an ebullient pup down, and Dave 
not only bounces back but charms the martinet dog-trainer with his effusiveness. 
While the notion of manners taking away a dog’s—or person’s—essential spark isn’t 
a new one (and it’s a lot less appealing in real life than in books), this is a vivacious 
and endearing story rich with affection for both the human and animal members 
of its subject family. Graham has a splendid ear for the laconic storytelling phrase 
(Dave embarks on a particular string of mischief “just to show it could be done”), 
and it does make sense that a crisply obedient Dave wouldn’t really fit into this 
easygoing, contentedly lackadaisical crowd. The line-and-watercolor illustrations 
quietly emphasize the happily higgledy-piggledy nature of the family, with shoes 
and toys scattered about their living space, and technical effects such as sequential 
spot art and shifts into monochrome are deftly employed. Ultimately, this is about 
the joy of sharing space with dogs, and animal-loving youngsters will revel in the 
poochness of it all and yearn for their own Dave and Rosy equivalents.  DS
gRAndits, John Blue Lipstick: Concrete Poems. Clarion, 2007 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-618-56860-3 $15.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-618-85132-1 $6.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
High-schooler Jessie struggles with many of the traditional trials of her age group, 
such as annoying assignments, a pestiferous younger sibling, fatuous peers, and 
her own seesawing emotions; on the bright side, she’s got the loyal friendship of 
best pal Lisa and her beloved cat, Boo Boo Kitty. Jessie’s experiences are related 
in a series of thirty entries with text laid out and illustratively enhanced for maxi-
mum visual impact: in “Bad Hair Day,” the lines form the wiry and frantic hairs 
SepTemBer 2007 • 27
on a head; “Go Look in the Mirror!” places the main portion of its words inside 
a mirror frame—and in mirror writing; “The Secret” offers a point-to-point map 
of the dissemination of a tidbit that shouldn’t have been told to anybody in the 
first place. While the entries are absolutely prose rather than poetry, and it would 
have helped tremendously to have an up-front clue that this is a narrative series 
rather than a collection of discrete elements, the sequence is genuinely clever and 
effective. The concrete concept is often wittily employed (the word-constituted 
cheerleaders are particularly amusing) and it retains the point of view of narrator 
Jessie, while entries that are smartly conceived in other ways are amusing as well: 
“The Name-Your-Rock-Band Chart,” exactly what it sounds like, will be utterly 
irresistible, and there will be much cackling over the flyer promoting a fictional 
compliments business in “Girls” (guarantee includes “no ironic tone of voice” 
and “no behind-your-back-denials”). Design is friendly and accessible, with black 
complemented by a cool peacock blue that offers contrast in both typeface and 
shaded backgrounds, and the multiplicity of fonts (identified on the last page) are 
thoughtfully employed. This has enough acuity to appeal to fans of sophisticated 
poetry and enough energy to draw those who find the sophisticated stuff merely 
dull, and it will undoubtedly inspire a multitude of curricular uses.  DS
gRey, mini Ginger Bear; written and illus. by Mini Grey. Knopf, 2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-94253-X $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-84253-5 $15.99   
R 6-9 yrs
Horace would usually just roll cookie dough “over the floor and furniture until it was 
deep gray and fluffy,” but this time, with the help of his mother and a bear-shaped 
cookie cutter, he creates Ginger Bear. After Horace goes to sleep, prevented by cir-
cumstances from eating his new cookie, Ginger Bear awakens and whips up a batch 
of pastry friends, with whom he puts on a delicious kitchen circus. Unfortunately, 
the family dog evinces an insalubrious interest in the circus, and Ginger Bear barely 
escapes with his life; he then realizes that it’s a dangerous world for a cookie, and 
he finds a safe home in a bake-shop display window along with other decorative 
not-for-eating elements. While closer inspection reveals that the plot has more holes 
than a lace cookie, the combination of humorous telling (the food circus, narrated 
in the style of a circus promotion, will be particularly well received), delicious topic, 
and enticing detail will certainly tempt audience appetites, and modest yet plucky 
Ginger Bear is an endearing if odd hero. Grey’s art, primarily watercolor enhanced 
with other media (a note assures that “no cookies were harmed in the making of 
the pictures”), radiates a sturdy cheer that belies its inventiveness: careful shading 
adds intriguing texture; strong and varied compositions emphasize the focus and 
structure the pacing; entertaining fanciful details (from a toothbrushing diagram 
to a sequence of countable toy sheep to an elegantly patterned wallpaper) add 
dimension. Youngsters will have to weigh the trauma of the dog-savaged cookies 
against the fairy-tale pleasures of a sparklingly decorated cast of edible friends, but 
in the end they’ll find it hard to resist the eponymous hero. It would just be wrong 
to serve this up with gingerbread men—but it’s tempting.  DS
28 • The BulleTin
hAhn, mARy downing Deep and Dark and Dangerous: A Ghost Story. Clarion, 
2007 187p
ISBN 0-618-66545-5 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Ali’s summer starts promisingly enough: away at her grandparents’ old lake cottage 
in Maine, she’s babysitting her beloved little cousin, Emma, while her artist aunt 
paints, and she’s planning to uncover the secret her mother’s keeping about her 
childhood at the cottage. She’s soon distracted by the annoying Sissy, a local girl who 
leads little Emma into bratty and dangerous behavior and repeatedly gets Ali into 
trouble as a consequence, and Ali eventually realizes that Sissy isn’t just a persistent 
kid—she’s a ghost. Readers will easily guess Sissy’s true identity (she’s actually the 
ghost of a childhood friend of Ali’s mother and aunt, who covered up the fact that 
they were present at her death), and she’s too corporeal to be really creepy; the book 
also winds down rather disappointingly from its fairly early dramatic high point. 
Hahn is still a polished yarnspinner, though, and there are some intriguing ele-
ments here, such as Ali’s peer’s-eye insight into her mother through Sissy’s accounts 
of their exploits; the book also plays effectively on middle-grade anxieties such as 
being unfairly blamed and out of one’s depth. While this isn’t up to the author’s 
classic Wait Till Helen Comes (BCCB 10/86), it’s got a compact and approachable 
shiveriness that would make it an easygoing vacation read.  DS
hAll, bARbARA The Noah Confessions. Delacorte, 2007 215p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90346-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73328-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Expecting a car for her sixteenth birthday, Lynne is disappointed when all she 
gets is a battered old charm bracelet that once belonged to her deceased mom. 
By way of explanation, her father also gives her a long letter that Lynne’s then 
sixteen-year-old mother wrote to a boy named Noah, which plunges Lynne into 
her parents’ Southern Gothic past, a past utterly alien from the posh L.A. lifestyle 
she has always enjoyed. She learns that her mother’s father was a social climber, an 
arsonist, and a murderer, and that her parents’ first connection was through the 
tragic disappearance of the initial owner of her birthday bracelet—a wild young 
girl, a cousin of Lynne’s father’s, who babysat for Lynne’s mother and got too close 
to her grandfather’s secrets. She also learns how her father tried unsuccessfully to 
rescue her mother from her circumstances, but he was only able to give her the 
courage to eventually break away from a past that threatened to engulf her in a cycle 
of lies and denial. Indeed, Hall depends overmuch on the crazy Southern woman 
motif—Lynne’s two grandmothers and one great grandmother all succumb to some 
form of insanity—but the train wreck of their past is too fascinating to look away 
from. Lynne’s response to the revelations is random yet dramatically appropriate 
for an L.A. girl suddenly confronted with ghosts that threaten her genetic stability; 
she tests her own mettle against the sea and ends up nearly drowning in a surfing 
accident. Her near-death experience brings her into contact with her mother, who 
offers some affirmations on how she should live that empower Lynne to help her 
dad lay his own ghosts to rest. The life-affirming ending thus balances the bone-
chilling melodrama of dark family secrets; fans of Carol Plum-Ucci will appreciate 
this dramatic and emotional story.  KC
SepTemBer 2007 • 29
hAlpin, bRendAn How Ya Like Me Now. Farrar, 2007 201p
ISBN 978-0-374-33495-6 $16.00   
R Gr. 7-10
Eddie has become the supreme enabler since his mom disappeared into a bottle 
of OxyContin following the death of his father. After a year of holding everything 
together, Eddie has mixed feelings about living with his artsy aunt and uncle and 
his cousin Alex while his mother goes into rehab; he wants to enjoy being a kid 
again, but he’s not sure if he can make it work in the funky experimental school 
in downtown Boston where Alex has already established a firm place as a lovable 
screwup. Halpin ably captures the complex emotions of a boy trying to find his 
way through traumatic circumstances, particularly the guilt he feels about hating 
the mother who refused to share his grief, loved getting high more than she loved 
him, and still uses him as a motivator for getting her life back together. The new 
school environment is also a place of confusion for Eddie; it is a place where the 
scholarly diligence he uses as a hedge against emotional chaos is acknowledged and 
even rewarded by his fellow students, but it is also the first time he has had to deal 
with an urban racial mix where he is the minority. Alex emerges as a fully imagined 
character in his own right—despite the fact that he leads with his hormones and 
has some academic deficits, he resents not being taken seriously for the gifts he does 
have. The boys’ slowly developing friendship is delicately and credibly handled as 
they forge an understanding of each other’s needs outside of well-meaning adult 
interventions. Everything comes together with a solid click here: readers will find 
the setting of an alternative school modeled on a corporation intriguing, the sec-
ondary characters recognizable without being stereotyped, and the plotting creative 
and well balanced.  KC 
hAnson, mARy How to Save Your Tail: If You Are A Rat Nabbed by Cats Who Really 
Like Stories About Magic Spoons, Wolves with Snout-Warts, Big, Hairy Chimney Trolls 
. . . and Cookies, Too; illus. by John Hendrix. Schwartz & Wade, 2007 93p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93755-2 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83755-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 2-5
A descendent of The Arabian Nights, Hanson’s sparkling fractured fairy-tale novel 
features Bob the Rat, who avoids imminent death by cats Brutus and Muffin by 
distracting them with tales of his family’s adventures near and far. Chapters alternate 
between the tales that Bob tells and the present encounter between Bob and the cats; 
in the end, Bob finally avoids his ultimate fate as kitty dinner by recalling a spell 
he saw in the fairy godmother’s spell book which allows him to escape unscathed 
to another kingdom. Bob’s stories contain clear fairy-tale elements (for example, 
the mighty giant Puss-in-Boots falls to his death off the beanstalk, leaving behind a 
boot, into which Bob’s great-great-grandpa moved with his wife and where together 
they had so many children they didn’t know what to do), and young readers and 
listeners will get a big kick out of identifying their sources. The stories are com-
bined and intertwined in ways both surprising and hilarious, and there is plenty 
of inspiration here for older students to try their hand at writing a fractured fairy 
tale of their own. While a continuous readaloud offers the best means of sharing 
the full frame story of Bob and the cats, the individual tales (“Sherman and the 
Beanstalk,” “The Three Rats,” “The Chimney Troll,” “The Wood Fairy,” “Bob’s 
Slipper”) could also be shared in isolation. Hendrix’s pen-and-ink illustrations offer 
further detail and description to the stories, and the expressive facial compositions 
add loads of appeal to the already appealing narrative. An illustrated family tree is 
included, as is a map of the kingdom.  HM
30 • The BulleTin
hARAzin, s. A. Blood Brothers. Delacorte, 2007 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90379-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73364-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
There’s nothing unusual about Clay dropping in, after his late night shift as a 
hospital orderly, to visit his friend Joey in the shed where they often hang out; it’s 
unprecedented, though, that Joey is there naked and incoherent, as well as being 
armed with a garden hoe, with which he attacks Clay. Clay subdues Joey, knock-
ing him onto the floor; then he dials 911, informs emergency techs and police of 
the situation as best he can, and follows the ambulance to the hospital, where a 
week-long ordeal begins for Joey, his family, and Clay. When the drug-test reports 
roll in and Joey slips into an irreversible coma, Clay comes under suspicion of 
drugging his best friend, who a few days previously had taken up with Clay’s old 
girlfriend. Clay spends the week trying to get to the bottom of Joey’s uncharac-
teristic behavior, as well as juggling both a demanding work schedule and feeble 
but well-intentioned efforts to help Joey’s grieving parents, who put the blame 
squarely on his shoulders. Assistance and moral support come from an unlikely 
source—the grouchy, hard-nosed police chief who has ample evidence that Clay is 
not responsible for Joey’s fatal hematoma, and who relies on the teen’s assistance in 
shaking information loose from the tightlipped high-school crowd. Harazin depicts 
the three milieus—hospital, hard-partying high school, and police station—with 
convincing authority, and the result is a mystery story that successfully melds the 
appeal of hospital dramas and police procedurals with the sturdy friend-with-a-
dirty-secret plotline. An author’s note on PCP (which contributed directly to Joey’s 
death) and resources for information and assistance comes as a bit of a surprise, 
considering the very undidactic tone of the novel. No one who follows Clay and 
Joey’s journey through hell will need a further lecture.  EB 
hARpeR, suzAnne The Secret Life of Sparrow Delaney. Greenwillow, 
2007 [368p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-113159-8 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-113158-X $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-9
Fifteen-year-old Sparrow Delaney is determined to ignore her psychic abilities, 
even though she’s the seventh daughter of a seventh daughter, lives in the renowned 
spiritualist community of Lily Dale, New York, and has not one but three eccentric 
spirit guides of her very own. She therefore keeps her talents to herself and studiously 
avoids all family “consultations” with visitors in search of dead pets and relatives. 
Offered the chance to attend a high school different than the one her six sisters 
attended, Sparrow welcomes it as a complete break from her family tradition, only 
to discover a very cute but very pushy male presence named Luke that won’t leave 
her alone until she agrees to help him. Meanwhile, she’s paired for a class project 
with the lovely but surly Jack, who doesn’t realize what he’s asking when he insists 
they do their research on the paranormal. There’s a connection between Luke and 
Jack that slowly but surely pushes Sparrow out of her nest and onto the Lily Dale 
stage, where she admits her talents so she can help a family solve a painful mystery. 
Both Sparrow’s and Jack’s families are dealing with absent or missing members but 
this serious subject matter is given light-hearted but respectful treatment, and the 
resolution acknowledges loss in its varying degrees while affirming that life goes 
SepTemBer 2007 • 31
on. The humor emanates from a quirky cast of characters ranging from psychic 
Grandma Bee, who practices judo on her granddaughters, to ghostly Luke, who 
fills Sparrow’s locker with blue Jell-O in an effort to convince her to help him. 
Teens will be caught up in the mystery while they enjoy Sparrow’s angst about new 
schools, cute boys, new friends, and family embarrassment. For those who enjoy 
psychic connections in their mystery/thrillers and want to try something on the 
lighter side, balance the darkness of Sykes’ For Mike (BCCB 5/98) with the tender 
touch of Sparrow Delaney.  CW
hAutmAn, pete All-In. Simon, 2007 181p
ISBN 978-1-4169-1325-2 $15.99   
R Gr. 9-12
When readers left teenage poker phenom Denn Doyle at the conclusion of No 
Limit (previously titled Stone Cold, BCCB 11/98), he had turned his back on family 
and friends and given whatever was left of his heart to Lady Luck. Now he’s in Las 
Vegas, and she’s deserted him; more precisely, he’s met a new flame, dealer Cattie, 
and she’s rigged the cards against him and left him broke. Denn can take a bad beat 
in stride, but he really needs to know why Cattie turned against him, and as he 
struggles his way through a series of low stakes games to work his way back to the 
big time, he discovers Cattie’s connection to Artie Kingston, the man he humiliated 
at the poker table back in Fairview. Clearly there’s going to be a showdown, and it 
comes at the novel’s climax, when Artie and Denn are the last two seated at a $1.2 
million dollar winner-take-all tourney in Artie’s new makeshift casino. Hautman 
again delivers a deliciously high-anxiety novel, bounding among several points of 
view and flashing between past and present to reconstruct the sucker plays and the 
gritty determination that brought Denn to face off with his nemesis. The three 
protagonists could have strolled right off the pages of Dashiell Hammett: Artie, the 
snarky sleazebag; Denn, the cool customer with a hairline chink in his emotional 
armor, and Cattie, the dame who done him wrong. This drama, however, is solidly 
rooted in the twenty-first-century Vegas that teens recognize from TV tourneys 
and their own get-rich dreams, and poker fans and mystery buffs alike will want 
to buy in.  EB 
heARne, betsy Hauntings and Other Tales of Danger, Love, and Sometimes 
Loss. Greenwillow, 2007 211p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-123911-3 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-123910-6 $15.99   
Gr. 5-9
[Note: Books by recent or current Bulletin staff are given a descriptive annotation 
rather than a review and code rating.]
Fifteen stories tell of myriad hauntings; some in the long-ago past, and some in the 
present day; some in Ireland, some in the United States, and some in no earthly 
place.  DS
hoRVAth, polly The Corps of the Bare-Boned Plane. Farrar, 2007 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-374-31553-5 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9 up
Jocelyn and Meline, teenaged cousins, find their lives upended and intertwined 
after their four parents lose their lives in a train crash. Now the girls are living with 
their uncle Marten, an eccentric scholar who lives on an island off the Canadian 
32 • The BulleTin
coast. Fed up with Uncle Marten’s poor providing, the girls force him to hire a 
housekeeper and cook, Mrs. Mendelbaum, and she in turn hires a butler, the 
courtly Humdinger. As the peculiar household swells, Meline becomes increasingly 
focused on a plan: she and Jocelyn will escape by assembling a plane from wartime 
wreckage on the island and flying it out. Horvath moves beyond her usual flirtation 
with the gothic to a serious embrace of it here, starkly depicting the isolated island, 
with its cluster of four alternating narrators plus the observing Humdinger, and 
its tragic, symbolic history of doomed people forced to fly without sufficient aid 
and crashing as a consequence. This haunting story is balanced with the author’s 
usual detached and quirky humor breaking out in slyly witty turns of phrase, in the 
Yinglish fumings of temperamental Mrs. Mendelbaum, and even in the distance 
between the characters that also is the book’s key conflict. Taut and weird and sad 
and funny, this is a contemporary orphan story to pique the interest of those tired 
of the classics and to broaden the horizons of those just starting to move past A 
Little Princess.  DS
huRwitz, JohAnnA Mostly Monty; illus. by Anik McGrory. Candlewick, 
2007 86p
ISBN 978-0-7636-2831-4 $15.99   
R 5-8 yrs
First grade is a daunting obstacle for Monty, whose severe asthma has kept him 
from socializing with other kids and who “wished he was someone else and not 
Monty.” Five compact chapters chronicle Monty’s gradual blossoming as he finds 
a pet that won’t aggravate his asthma (a caterpillar), reclaims a teddy bear discarded 
by a neighbor, earns a niche as a finder of lost items at school, and heads up a club 
devoted to the study and support of kangaroos. Hurwitz displays her well-honed 
skill at addressing general kid concerns through vivid and specific scenarios: shy 
little Monty, “who could go for days without anyone noticing him,” is believable 
both in his hesitancy and his growing confidence (his delight at his role of finder is 
particularly endearing and authentic). The text is reassuringly simple, which should 
invite novice readers, but the book will be most effective as a readaloud; though the 
events are gentle without being bland, there’s enough drama per chapter to keep 
listeners absorbed. Black-and-white watercolors, in spot art and full-page views, 
make the cast endearingly rumpled as well as strongly individual.  DS
Jenkins, steVe Living Color; written and illus. by Steve Jenkins. Houghton, 
2007 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-618-70897-0 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
The well-known author-artist of Actual Size (BCCB 5/04) and other compelling 
picture-book natural histories here turns to the eye-catching topic of color. Each of 
seven colors gets a spread or two featuring animals in that color, who roam the page 
in Jenkins’ trademark graceful collage art while brief blurbs explain what advantage 
that color provides for that creature. The phraseology is immediate and inviting: each 
color section opens with a straightforward lead-in (“Red says . . . ”; “Blue says . . . ”), 
and the animal descriptions are headed with a catchy sentence ending that interprets 
the color’s meaning (“Just ignore me”; “Do you find me . . . attractive?”). While the 
occasional description heading doesn’t match up to the explanation, the galleries 
are both entertaining and informative, filled with lively and digestible tidbits about 
animal behavior and practices. The illustrative vignettes particularly excel at dem-
SepTemBer 2007 • 33
onstrating camouflage advantages (the crab spider on the yellow flower is almost 
an optical illusion), and the design on the oversized pages carefully balances the 
various elements, keeping the spreads uncrowded. This will easily lure browsers in 
a range of ages, and it would make a lively entry in a biology unit—or even as a 
different approach to color in art class. A concluding spread provides an overview 
of important facts about coloration, and the book appends a multipaged key to the 
included animals that provides vital stats on represented species.  DS
kAtz, AlAn Don’t Say That Word!; illus. by David Catrow. McElderry, 
2007 34p
ISBN 978-0-689-86971-6 $16.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Oh, the injustice of it all. When Michael comes through the door, Mom asks him 
what happened in school, and all he does is tell the truth: “We laughed and Ms. 
Grant wasn’t happy./ She threatened to punish the group./ As she called, ‘Go in, 
make it snappy!’/ she stepped in a pile of dog . . . ” Before the poor kid can even 
finish his thought, Mom cuts him off with a terse “Don’t say that word!” And so 
it goes with each indelicate account of the day’s events, which requires listeners 
to substitute the appropriate (well, inappropriate) rhyming term for the dangling 
ellipse. It will take a bold storytime leader indeed to invite a rowdy group of rug 
sitters to chime in with the inevitable “booger,” “burp,” “butt,” or “barf,” but par-
ents of a zanier or more tolerant bent might actually be willing to join in the fun. 
Unfortunately, Katz strains pretty hard to bring his rhymes around to the punchline, 
and there’s really no trajectory to Michael’s patter beyond the excuse to give voice 
to an off-limits noun. Catrow’s hyperactive watercolors compel close examination 
for random sight gags (the portrait of a somber relative glares down on Michael in 
disapproval; a copy of a previous Katz/Catrow title spills out of the toy closet) and 
for visual extensions of Katz’s prose (the inescapable “-art” rhyme has clench-faced 
Michael roiling the bath water with a bubbly “brriip” that upends his toy tugboat). 
Katz actually manages some closure when Mom has the last intolerable word that 
sends Michael over the edge: “Today was a sea of great dramas./ I hope there are 
calm days ahead./ Run along—put on your pajamas./ It’s late and you should be 
in . . . ”  Please! Anything but that.  EB 
kAtz, kARen Peek-a-Baby; written and illus. by Karen Katz. Little Simon, 
2007 14p
ISBN 1-4169-3622-X $6.99   
Ad 1-2 yrs
A gleeful baby hides under a flap in each spread of this lift-the-flap board book. 
Simple text walks listeners through the game (“Who’s under the umbrella? Is that 
you?”), naming the concrete object behind which Baby lurks, but ultimately this is 
all about the reveal, and kids will relish tracking down the multiracial cast of babies 
secreted behind clothes and furnishings. Jan Ormerod’s conceptually similar board 
book Peek-a-Boo! (BCCB 2/98) is a more successful effort, since the high-voltage 
colors and multiplicity of loud patterns here result in somewhat overcomplicated 
if cheerful visuals, and the flaps’ thinness will make it a challenge for little fingers 
to pry them up without wreaking havoc on the paper. Nonetheless, this will likely 
tickle teensy pre-readers, who will enjoy the book-centered game and will probably 
be inspired to act out the scenes by hiding behind their own curtains, hats, and 
laundry—so be ready.  DS
34 • The BulleTin
kennedy, mARlAne Me and the Pumpkin Queen. Greenwillow, 
2007 [192p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-114023-5 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-114022-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
It was Mildred’s late mother who was the Pumpkin Show Queen, presiding over 
the big pumpkinfest in Circleville, Ohio, when she was in high school. Since her 
mother’s death, Mildred has become obsessed with the pumpkin-growing contest 
at the show, trying to grow a monster fruit that will take first place and beat out 
annoying farmer Grover Fernhart. Now she’s eleven, and she’s determined that this 
will be the year; with her father, good friend Jacob, and even demanding Aunt Ar-
lene behind her, how can she fail? While this plot will be familiar to fans of Bauer’s 
Squashed (BCCB 10/92), this younger-aimed story has plenty of charm of its own. 
The tale is inevitably touched with humor, but Kennedy creates a sympathetic and 
serious voice for Mildred, and the story is generally imbued with goodwill. Though 
Grover Fernhart is an annoyance, Mildred’s real antagonist is nature (technical details 
about pumpkin propagation and growth are slipped in at credible junctures), and 
what she’s really trying to achieve isn’t just the winning of the contest but a response 
to the loss of her mother (“I think by tending to her pumpkins,” says Aunt Arlene, 
“she was tending to her grief”). This is an old-fashioned book in the nicest possible 
way, with sturdy solidity, well-crafted writing, and an effective emotional subtext 
supporting a heroine whose victory readers will cheer.  DS
keRR, m. e. Someone Like Summer. HarperTempest, 2007 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-114100-3 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-114099-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Annabel Brown isn’t quite sure what her dad will think of her budding relationship 
with Esteban Santiago; as a contractor, Mr. Brown hires lots of Latinos and he is 
known for treating them with respect, but whether or not he’ll go for his daughter 
dating one of his workers is another story. The chemistry between Annabel and 
Esteban is too strong to resist, however, and they begin a relationship that is intense 
in every way but physical (Esteban hits the brakes whenever things threaten to go 
too far, eventually revealing his fear that American girls are too promiscuous for 
his Dominican values). Problems intensify when Esteban loses his home in a raid; 
Annabel finds out that he is in the country illegally, and Esteban has to make some 
hard choices to keep his dignity and secure the future he wants for himself. Kerr has 
never been shy about pushing an agenda in her fiction; unfortunately, this novel 
(whose characters previously appeared in a short story in Singer’s anthology Face 
Relations, BCCB 10/04) reads at times like talking points in search of a context. 
Besides chronicling the many problems faced by undocumented workers in this 
country, as well as the various reasons they choose to leave the homelands they 
love and long for, she manages to bring green burial, opposition to the Iraq war, 
and green card soldiers into a love story that even Annabel finally has to admit was 
based more on physical attraction than shared values and mutual understanding. 
Readers thus have a lot of gaps to fill in to make this into a touching and tragic 
romance, but the appeals of forbidden love and parental disapproval should draw 
readers, and their gaining of a sympathetic perspective on the complex dynamics 
of the immigrant problem is more of a sure thing.  KC  
SepTemBer 2007 • 35
klugeR, JeFFRey Nacky Patcher and the Curse of the Dry-Land Boats; illus. by 
David Elliot. Philomel, 2007 374p
ISBN 978-0-399-24604-3 $18.99   
R* Gr. 6-9
In a town full of poor folks and ne’er-do-wells, Nacky Patcher and Teedie Finn are 
the least of their brethren, Nacky a failed thief and Teedie an aspiring one. Their 
fortunes take a miraculous turn, however, when they come upon a disassembled 
ship in the Yole Lake, an inland sea left over from an ill-advised attempt to change 
the landscape many years before. If they can build the ship, they figure, they can 
break the age-old curse that keeps Yole enshrouded in poverty and under the thumb 
of the greedy town master, whose favorite seasonal hobby is pitching people who 
are behind in their rent out of their homes. Fortunately for Nacky and Teedie, 
even those people who don’t believe in curses are desolate and desperate enough 
to try anything to keep their homes, so the whole town pitches in for their share 
of the impossible dream. Situating the story somewhere between dense realism 
and magical fantasy, Kluger has structured the plot of his wonder tale so that each 
piece fits like the pieces of the ship itself, and he has peopled it with full-fledged, 
endearing characters whose fates readers will come to care deeply about. The result 
is a canny piece of storytelling, utterly original yet homey and familiar, that plays 
to many tastes (his finesse with language and consummate skill at world-making 
also make this an excellent choice for an absorbing readaloud). Spot art comple-
ments the text, but the pictures spun by the words create a compelling vision all 
on their own.  KC
liChtmAn, wendy Do the Math: Secrets, Lies, and Algebra. Greenwillow, 
2007 [192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-122956-3 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-122955-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Eighth-grader Tess believes that math can help solve pretty much any of life’s prob-
lems, even calculating the odds of five people in her history class getting perfect 
scores on a test no one ever aced before, and the probability that her mother’s co-
worker (Rob) was involved in the recent death of his wife. She saw classmate Richard 
copy the U.S. Constitution test, so she is 100% sure he and his friends cheated; Tess’ 
friend Sammy also made a perfect score, though, and Tess knows Sammy is smart 
enough to have done it without help. She also knows that her mom won’t go to the 
police about Rob because her few suspicions aren’t worth getting a good friend in 
trouble. In the midst of all this, Tess discovers that someone has been talking, and 
her mom is confronted at the grocery store by rumors about Rob’s connection to 
his wife’s death. Tess calls on every mathematical concept she knows to deal with 
the cheaters at school, allay her suspicions about Rob, and earn back her mother’s 
trust. Lichtman cleverly incorporates all sorts of math into a story about the value 
and power of telling the truth, and narrator Tess has some shining moments, such 
as her friends’ nicknames: Sammy is s5 (Sammy to the fifth power) because she 
is so dramatic, while always positive Miranda is |m| (absolute value Miranda). 
Unfortunately, the diagrams and concepts are more interesting than the characters 
and story: Tess herself is overearnest and didactic in the exploration of her moral 
dilemmas, and serious situations are resolved too neatly, leaving readers distanced 
from both characters and action. Nonetheless, librarians interested in collaborating 
36 • The BulleTin
with math teachers may find good use for this book, as would those working with 
character development in the schools. Just don’t expect rocket science.  CW
lobel, AnitA Nini Here and There; written and illus. by Anita Lobel. Green-
willow, 2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-078768-6 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-078767-8 $16.99   
R 3-6 yrs
Cats aren’t generally big fans of travel, and the eponymous Nini is no exception: 
when her house is thrown into packing turmoil, she sulks, thinking she’s being left 
behind, but it’s almost worse when she’s bundled into the carrier. After a sequence 
of dreams about voyaging, she finds herself at a new place, a country house that, 
upon inspection, proves to be rather a nice place to be. Nini is sufficiently authentic 
in her felinity (cat-owners will recognize her stubborn insistence on sitting atop 
the object of human interest) to make this an enjoyable cat story in its own right, 
but it’s also a comforting tale about travel and moving for little ones in general, 
with compact matter-of-fact sentences softened by descriptive touches. Lobel is the 
mistress of saturated hues in watercolor (here touched with gouache), whether it 
be in the geometric view of the city house façade, the softer organic shapes of the 
country, or the chaotic rainbow of packing preparation that bridges the two. Gray 
tabby Nini is depicted with almost photorealistic detail, even as she’s “bouncing 
on the back of an elephant” in her dreamscape, and her closeups looking directly 
at the viewer add intimacy. This is a gentle tale of voyage and homecoming that 
will entice stay-at-homes as well as travelers.  DS
loCkhARt, e. Dramarama. Hyperion, 2007 311p
ISBN 978-0-7868-3815-8 $15.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Sadye and Demi, both way too dramatic and extravagant for their small Ohio 
town, were best friends from the moment they met, and they expect their summer 
at theater camp to be the perfect experience for the two to share. Unfortunately, 
Sadye is soon disappointed to find that Demi simply doesn’t need her the way he 
used to when she was his only ally and admirer. She also faces two realizations at 
camp: she is far too opinionated to take unquestioned direction from instructors, 
and she isn’t as talented as she thought. Down a best friend and her dreams, Sadye 
is fortunate indeed that she is so irascible and obstinate, as a weaker girl would 
crumble. Sadye’s first-person narration reflects the raw emotional upheaval she 
undergoes, made all the more intense by her occasional vulnerability, rare mo-
ments when she can’t gloss the truths in her life with the usual protective sardonic 
veneer. In addition, although there is a bit of “straight girl in love with her gay 
best friend” familiarity to the dyad, Demi and Sadye are impeccably developed and 
multilayered characters, and their friendship, built originally on desperation and 
solidarity, evolves throughout the novel in authentically imperfect ways. Although 
the detailed descriptions of drama-camp exercises, play productions, and references 
to musicals will likely only thrill theater aficionados, the key focus of the novel is 
the exploration of the ways in which friendships wax and wane, and this aspect is 
likely to draw in even readers who don’t know a thing about Guys and Dolls, jazz 
hands, or Liza Minnelli.  AS
SepTemBer 2007 • 37
long, ethAn Stop Kissing Me!; written and illus. by Ethan Long. LB Kids/Little, 
2007 30p
ISBN 978-0-316-00143-4 $10.99   
R 2-5 yrs
The demented duck that sent comical mixed messages in Long’s Tickle the Duck! 
(BCCB 2/06) is back, and he’s out to woo a pink poodle with his slobbery kisses. 
The dripping doggy wants no part of it: “Are you crazy?! Don’t kiss me again!” Once 
she realizes that it’s misguided affection rather than pure annoyance that impels his 
smack attacks, however, she responds with her own drenching “Burgle gurgle 
Shlurgle SSSSSSSSSSmack!!!”, a confession of love, and the sensible suggestion that 
“next time, we just hug instead!” Each double-page spread consists of little more 
than a green background, the two wildly expressive, roly-poly-eyed characters and 
their cartoon bubble dialogue, and puddles and plops of blue drool. For readers 
who can’t quite wrap their lips around Long’s onomatopoetic text, a push button 
in the exposed upper corner of the book unleashes the appropriately kissy sound 
effects. Preschool and kindergarten teachers with an irrepressible smoocher in the 
room might offer this as a gentle, effective lesson for the perpetrator, and comic 
comfort to the victim who’s been hit by the buss.  EB
luCAs, dAVid Whale; written and illus. by David Lucas. Knopf, 2007 26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-94338-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-84338-8 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Joe’s little seaside town is wrecked when a huge whale miscalculates its aquatic 
gymnastics and bellyflops on top of the townsfolk’s homes. Though the whale is 
fatalistic (“You may as well chop me in pieces. I would make a magnificent fish 
pie”), a determined Joe leads the townsfolk in the Rain Song, and the rain pours 
down with such force it floods the land, freeing the whale. Unfortunately, it also 
strands the flooded-out townsfolk on the whale’s back, but the whale drinks enough 
of the seawater to lower the ocean again and enlists the help of an army of birds 
and sea creatures to set the swamped and broken town back to rights. While the 
ending tails off abruptly, the text deftly blends simple, straightforward sentences 
with stylistic elements of fairy tale and fable (guidance on the Whale’s rescue comes 
from an Owl who gets a message from the Wind, who has spoken to the Sun, who 
spoke to the Moon, who spoke to the Innumerable Stars), and audiences will par-
ticularly appreciate the story’s generosity with the appealing concept of surprising 
transformations, offering as it does three in total. Line-and-watercolor illustrations 
have a trim order, controlled palette, and taste for panels and vignettes appealingly 
suggestive of early twentieth-century comic strips, but the whale evinces genuine 
grandeur in his blue, squiggly-hatched magnificence that dominates most spreads 
in which he appears. The toylike red-roofed town seems sufficiently like a tan-
trum-wrecked playscape to evoke sympathetic familiarity rather than horror, and 
its shell-bedecked final incarnation will be a glittering thing of wonder to young 
viewers. Audiences taken with (or just approaching readiness for) the mysticism 
and animal subject of Kipling’s Just So Stories will be drawn to this tale of a mis-
adventuring leviathan.  DS
38 • The BulleTin
mACdonAld, AlAn Trolls, Go Home!; illus. by Mark Beech. Bloomsbury, 
2007 128p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-59990-077-7 $14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59990-078-5 $5.95   
R Gr. 2-4
It’s always a change when new neighbors move in, and the quiet British town of 
Biddlesden is in for a true shock with the recent arrival of the Troll family. The trio 
roaring at dawn and bringing in cow patties to encourage a good stink turn out 
to be actual trolls from Norway who have decided to give suburban life a chance. 
Unfortunately, their attempts to purchase young goats have folks assuming they 
eat children, no one appreciates their roaring and stomping, and, despite his best 
attempts, young Ulrik Troll simply doesn’t fit in at his new school. Although it would 
have been nice to see them accepted just as a neighborly gesture, Ulrik’s eventual 
feat of heroism (he saves his classmates from a rampaging goat during a field trip) 
ultimately succeeds in turning around town opinion on the new arrivals, and the 
Trolls are finally welcomed as true residents. Beech’s exaggerated black-and-white 
illustrations, splotchy scrawls suggestive of Quentin Blake’s work, play on the 
oddities and unpleasant nature of the humans (who scowl more than they smile, 
wear dreadfully unflattering clothes, and pick their noses) as much as they do the 
trolls. In fact, the drawings will likely inspire empathy, highlighting the poignant 
loneliness and desire to belong that marks the Troll family’s early days in their new 
home. The quick pace, small cast of characters, and easy humor of the text and 
illustrations will certainly draw in middle-graders, and if they absorb the lessons 
about accepting differences and recognizing the weirdness of seeking standardized 
normalcy, so much the better.  AS
mAdden, keRRy Louisiana’s Song. Viking, 2007 278p
ISBN 978-0-670-06153-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
The tragedy that sunk its teeth into the Weems family at the end of Gentle’s Holler 
(BCCB 6/05) isn’t ready to let loose of them yet: Daddy may have survived the car 
accident, but he’s not the man he used to be. He can’t remember ordinary words, 
he no longer plays his banjo, and the only one of his ten children that he seems 
to know is Emmett, whose guilt and wanderlust keep him up at Ghost Town, the 
amusement park where he works. As Mama tries her best to keep the family afloat 
financially, Livy Two writes her songs, frets about her family, and pines for days 
past. In the spirit of TV’s The Waltons, each member of the Weems family emerges 
as a distinct character, likable for his or her own individual traits and talents. 
Madden continues her paean to mountain life, painting a warm and enveloping 
portrait of a family who love their secluded mountain home in North Carolina 
in the 1960s, and yet they are not untouched by the world around them. Fans of 
Patricia MacLachlan, Ruth White, and Laura Ingalls Wilder have a new voice to 
add to their favorites list.  KC 
mAny, pAul Dad’s Bald Head; illus. by Kevin O’Malley. Walker, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-8027-9579-X $15.95   
R 5-8 yrs
Dad’s got a healthy crop of hair just about everywhere on his body except his head, 
which features a disappointingly scraggly assemblage of sproingy leftovers. Still, 
Pete is more than a little freaked out when, during their morning ritual of slather-
ing each other with shaving cream, Dad doesn’t stop with his beard but shaves his 
SepTemBer 2007 • 39
entire head. Mom loves the new look immediately, but it isn’t until Pete notices 
how silly various men in the neighborhood look as they try to compensate for their 
follicle challenges that he decides that a bald dad is better than a toupeed dad, or a 
combover dad, or even the mulleted, shaggy, hippie, short-back-and-sides dad of 
hairs past that his mom shows him from old picture albums. The vivid art features 
an arresting technique of brush and ink overlaid with digital coloring that makes the 
energetic compositions pop (though there’s occasionally a disconcerting mistiness to 
the colorfield) even while they remain friendly and accessible. O’Malley’s extreme 
(and kind of gross, in a comedic way) closeups of stark black hairs sticking out of 
cheeks, chins, and shins, and his droll visual jokes throughout the text, including 
the playful endpapers featuring outrageous ’dos, slyly set the stage for the superiority 
of the shiny pate. Young readers coming to terms with their own fathers’ dubious 
grooming choices will appreciate both the humor and the sensitivity with which 
the topic is approached.  KC
mARsden, CARolyn Bird Springs. Viking, 2007 124p
ISBN 978-0-670-06193-8 $14.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Gregory, his mother, and his baby sister just arrived in Tucson after leaving the 
Navajo reservation, and they are living in a transitional shelter until Mom can find 
work. Dad took off a few weeks prior, and the seemingly neverending drought on 
the res meant that the family had to leave their tiny community of Bird Springs in 
hopes of finding something better and more sustainable. At school, Gregory finds 
himself in an art-therapy class led by Ms. Daniels, who encourages the students to 
get in touch with their feelings, and he’s befriended by Matt, a fellow fifth-grader of 
questionable motives. Gregory’s greatest support is his imaginary friend, Joey, who, 
like Gregory, is a ten-year-old Navajo boy dealing with unfamiliar circumstances. 
Marsden (author of Moon Runner, BCCB 3/05, etc.) returns to her frequent topic 
of kids outside of the mainstream, and while Gregory’s story is largely the familiar 
fish-out-of-water tale, it is presented here with eloquence and emotional strength. 
Gregory’s development is believable as he comes to terms with his mixed feelings 
about his father, whom he misses desperately and yet remembers as an abusive figure. 
The imaginary-friend theme, atypical for a book at this age level, really works here, 
and the moment at which Gregory is able to let Joey go is a powerful one; that 
loss is counterbalanced by gain as Matt turns out to be not so much questionable 
as hardened by the circumstances in his own life, and the two boys come to count 
on each other. The ending is realistically hopeful rather than happy, a limitation 
that readers will understand even as they sympathize with Gregory’s struggle to 
move forward.  HM
mAthews, ellie The Linden Tree. Milkweed, 2007 [180p]
Trade ed. ISBN 1-57131-673-6 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57131-674-4 $6.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Despite the constant pull of chores and hard work, there is a sweetness to Katy 
Sue’s life on an Iowa farm in the late 1940s, a sweetness that is threatened when 
meningitis claims the life of her beloved mama. Nobody overreacts or underreacts 
to the tragedy; they all just react, their grief a dull shared ache that occasionally 
erupts into tears when individual triggers propel them into a full awareness of their 
loss. At those times, they support one another, and they have the further support 
40 • The BulleTin
of Papa’s childhood friend, Jake, an ornithologist with a sprightly sense of humor, 
and Aunt Katherine, their mother’s sister, who moves in to help out and eventu-
ally wins Papa’s grieving heart. Woven into the gently moving story of the family’s 
grief and recovery is a loving portrait of the rhythms of farm life at mid-century; 
Christmas traditions, favorite foods, the remaking of old clothes, a spell with a 
kindly itinerant handyman, Grange suppers, and an orchard wedding add to the 
texture and warmth of the narrative. Anticipating a taste for Willa Cather, readers 
who enjoy Patricia MacLachlan, Ruth White, and L. M. Montgomery will find 
themselves happily at home here.  KC  
mCelligott, mAtthew Bean Thirteen; written and illus. by Matthew 
McElligott. Putnam, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-24535-0 $15.99   
R 7-10 yrs
This creative mathematical concept book focuses on the dilemma landed by a 
pair of beetles when Flora, the less superstitious of the two, opts to gather thirteen 
rather than the typical twelve beans (“‘I’ll pick one more,’ said Flora. ‘DON’T DO 
IT!’ shouted Ralph”). When they try to divide the harvest into two piles, there is 
inevitably one left over; when they decide to invite April over and divide the beans 
into three piles, there is still one left over; same when they add Joe to the guest list 
and opt for four piles (“Bean thirteen is trouble,” Ralph insists). In the end, six 
bugs sit down to eat, everyone takes what they want from the bean pile, and there 
is just the right amount of beans. The concept here is both original (you don’t 
often meet a superstitious insect) and amusing, especially the interplay between 
Flora and Ralph. What is especially impressive is how fluidly the story shifts from 
the rigid structure of needing to count out the beans to the satisfying solution of 
allowing the guests to eat their fill, a solution that proves effective and pleasingly 
spontaneous. McElligott’s comic illustrative style uses dramatically thick outlines 
to define fields of earth-toned colors. The bugs themselves have few facial details, 
but their huge emotive eyes carry the weight of expression. This will be lots of 
fun to share both with groups of students just exploring multiples and those who 
simply like a good bug story; be sure to have at least thirteen beans on hand to 
demonstrate the concept.  HM 
mCnAmARA, mARgARet How Many Seeds in a Pumpkin?; illus. by G. Brian 
Karas. Schwartz & Wade, 2007 36p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-94014-6 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-84014-1 $14.99   
R 6-8 yrs
When Mr. Tiffin lays out three pumpkins and challenges students to guess which 
has the most seeds, tall Robert naturally chooses the biggest, and short Charlie 
the smallest. There’s only one sure way to find out, and soon the class is garbed 
for messy action, disemboweling pumpkins atop newspaper, collecting the guts in 
pails, and ready to count seeds the next day. Three teams group the seeds of their 
assigned pumpkin by twos, fives, and tens, and—wouldn’t you know it—the smallest 
pumpkin has the most. Mr. Tiffin’s not done yet, though: why guess when you can 
predict? And so the class compares features of the three pumpkins and determines 
that more ridges indicate more seeds. This is just the sort of inviting activity to 
get teachers thinking, “We could do that,” and Karas’ enthusiastic, organized, and 
remarkably neat crew of round-headed urchins make it look pretty easy (veteran 
teachers will recognize that Mr. Tiffin’s cleaning and roasting those seeds on his 
SepTemBer 2007 • 41
own time, and that it’s a heckuva miraculous class that can keep the seeds on the 
newspapers and activity table, not on the floor). Still, hands-on learning is the way 
to go, and any class that hears this book will want to try out the experiment. So be 
extra nice to the custodian, and dive right in.  EB
miChAels, Rune Genesis Alpha. Seo/Atheneum, 2007 193p
ISBN 1-4169-1886-8 $14.99   
Ad Gr. 7-9
Finding out that you are actually a clone of your older brother, created so your 
cells can cure him of a deadly disease, is never easy. Add in the fact that the older 
sibling, Max, is now being arrested for a horrible murder, and thirteen-year-old 
Josh’s life is looking grim indeed. At first, Josh and his parents are certain of Max’s 
innocence, but the more time Josh spends with Rachel, the murdered girl’s younger 
sister, who has taken up residence in his garage, the closer he comes to admitting 
Max’s probable guilt. As the two damaged younger siblings try to uncover proof 
through Max’s online-gaming archives and chat logs, the press is turning against 
Josh’s whole family, and it becomes clear that whether or not Max is guilty, the fam-
ily will never be the same again. Josh, worshipping younger brother turned into a 
wracked and haunted shell of his old self, is an unforgettable protagonist, inspiring 
empathy as the only true innocent in the novel. Unfortunately, Josh is surrounded 
by caricatures: Max oozes charm and barely disguised rage; Josh’s parents are bland 
and obedient, hoping to cover up their past choices to protect their doctor as much 
as themselves; and Rachel’s mere presence in the family garage, undetected and 
unmissed, is an impossibility that weakens her character. In addition, the focus of 
the novel, the ethical ponderings about whether a clone is doomed to exhibit the 
exact same behaviors as the original person, seems an old-fashioned cliché. However, 
even if science fiction buffs may have seen this before in Farmer’s The House of the 
Scorpion (BCCB 11/02), the terse and powerful sentences, realistic dialogue, and 
gripping pace will certainly keep many readers engaged and invested in seeing Josh 
find the beginnings of his own identity.  AS
monningeR, Joseph Baby. Front Street, 2007 [160p]
ISBN 978-1-59078-502-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-12
Foster care is nothing new to fifteen-year-old Baby, but she’s startled by her new 
placement in rural New England with Fred and Mary Potter, a quiet older couple 
whose main passion is the raising and racing of sled dogs. Initially resistant Baby 
is soon a convert to the joys of running sled dogs, and she’s particularly smitten 
with snow-white Laika, a young bitch. When Baby’s boyfriend, Bobby, comes to 
finally spirit her away, she finds herself taking Laika, who is increasingly unwel-
come and unhappy amid Baby’s aimless and shadowy existence. Monninger takes 
a fairly standard foster-kid plot and revivifies it through his spare and finely honed 
style. Baby’s voice has more than a touch of Hemingway to it, yet there’s a taut 
contemporaneousness to the combination of Baby’s alienated account and the 
interpolated stories of dogs, especially Laika’s namesake; the symbolism of Baby’s 
canine experience is quiet and unobtrusive, with events and stories operating ef-
fectively on the manifest level as well. The New Hampshire winter cold is also a 
constant presence, with the season a very different force in different situations; the 
descriptions of dog-sledding, the sheer joy of adrenaline in the frosty air, the blur 
of dogs in motion, and the heady thrill of pack participation are keenly observed. 
42 • The BulleTin
Readers may not be surprised that Baby finally grows sufficiently beyond Bobby’s 
thrall to know what’s good for her, but they’ll find the trip warming beneath its 
crisp exterior.  DS
moRRow, bRAdFoRd Didn’t Didn’t Do It; illus. by Gahan Wilson. Putnam, 
2007 32p
ISBN 0-399-24480-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Kids will scratch their heads and get their tongues tangled as they attempt to sort 
through this silly tale of kid contractors named after contractions who set out to 
build a tree house. They’ve got their plans and supplies, but when they find their site 
already occupied by a family of birds, Didn’t won’t do what Couldn’t shouldn’t, or 
is it that Doesn’t won’t do what Wouldn’t shouldn’t, or maybe that Can’t doesn’t do 
what Shouldn’t won’t—whatever the case, the treehouse never gets built. A strange 
stylistic blend of Jose Aruego and Edward Gorey, the knobbly, big-headed cartoon 
kids with boiled egg eyes are helpfully outfitted with identifiers on their clothes to 
keep them straight, and they have distinct personalities as well. Wouldn’t is perpetu-
ally grumpy, for instance, while Couldn’t has a positively frightening number of 
teeth that she puts to good use chewing through the plans. Despite the relatively few 
words and the clarity of what it going on storywise, this book remains as dizzying 
visually as it is verbally; it will require a vigorous shake to clear the head at the end 
before one goes compulsively back to the beginning to figure it all out.  KC 
muRAwski, dARlyne A. Face to Face with Caterpillars; written and illus. with 
photographs by Darlyne A. Murawski. National Geographic, 2007 32p (Face 
to Face with Animals)
Library ed. ISBN 1-4263-0053-0 $25.90
Trade ed. ISBN 1-4263-0052-2 $16.95   
R Gr. 3-5
Usually a human-caterpillar face-off is a pretty uneven encounter, but Murawski’s 
dramatic closeup photos of these surprisingly elaborate creepers give readers a 
chance for serious inspection. Though this has more than just the title in com-
mon with Charlesbridge’s imported Face to Face natural history series (Tracqui’s 
Face-to-Face with the Lady Bug, BCCB 10/02), it’s more sophisticated and dra-
matic. Lively prose (“Imagine what it’s like to grow up as an insect”) touches on 
Murawski’s photographic travails as well as covering important caterpillar topics 
such as diet and self-defense, and sidebars on subjects such as “How to Find Cat-
erpillars” and “How to See Like a Caterpillar” add browsability. Mostly, though, 
kids will just page through and peer at the riveting photographs, picking up the 
odd tidbit about stinging spines and toxic vomit along the way. Ultimately, this is 
an inviting intermediate step for kids not ready for the details of the Scientists in 
the Field series (Sy Montgomery’s The Tarantula Scientist, BCCB 4/04, etc.) but 
still intrigued by the natural world. End matter offers suggestions for creating and 
protecting butterfly habitat and observing caterpillars, plus a compact overview 
of facts (including a habitat map keyed to book mentions), a glossary and list of 
further resources, and an index.  DS
SepTemBer 2007 • 43
muRdoCk, CAtheRine gilbeRt The Off Season. Houghton, 2007 277p
ISBN 978-0-618-68695-7 $16.00   
R Gr. 7-10
In this sequel to Dairy Queen (BCCB 9/06), readers catch up with D. J. Schwenk, 
who has become a force to be reckoned with on her high-school football team. She 
even scores on an interception from Brian Nelson, the quarterback from the rival 
team whom she trained the previous summer and who holds her heart, if not her 
hopes. Things seem to be going her way on that front, however, when Brian starts 
hanging around the farm on weekends and they learn how to kiss without blood-
shed, a feat they couldn’t seem to master in the earlier book. Readers with more 
experience than D. J. will catch on more quickly than she that Brian isn’t interested 
in going public with their relationship, so these little makeout sessions engender 
a feeling of foreboding that turns out to be distressingly on the mark. Meanwhile, 
though, more important things take precedence: the Schwenck farm is in danger 
of bankruptcy, D. J. injures her shoulder and must choose between football, which 
she loves, and basketball, which might enable her to go to college on scholarship, 
and finally, D. J. and her family watch in horror as her older brother Win takes a 
hit in a televised football game and doesn’t get up. D. J. flies to Seattle to find her 
stubborn brother refusing to come to any kind of terms with his spinal cord injury, 
giving doctors the silent treatment and disallowing visitors. As D. J. struggles to 
find some way to get through to him, she continues her slow but steady progress 
toward making sense of the complex emotional terrain she must learn to navigate 
beyond the ball fields and corn fields where she feels at home. Though D. J. is an 
enormously likable character, the impact of this book is carried through the action, 
making it appealing for those who don’t appreciate a good deal of introspection. 
Insight continues to emerge slowly and believably for D. J., but emerge it does; 
her hard-won lesson is that most lessons are hard won.  KC   
nelson, blAke They Came from Below. Tor/Doherty, 2007 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-765-31423-9 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Emily and Reese are looking for some cute guys to pass the time with during their 
summer on Cape Cod, and they’re intrigued with two extraordinarily good-looking 
boys named Steve and Dave. The guys, who seem to know every language there 
is, claim to be students, but the real interest factor is how good they make people 
feel and how compulsively touchable they are. They eventually reveal to Emily 
that they are looking for her marine biologist father, hoping he might help them 
locate a strange sea organism that washed up on shore and was taken away from 
the beach for study; it turns out that the boys are connected to the organism and 
that they are members of a super-long-lived race that moves from planet to planet 
as each becomes unable to sustain life, and it looks as though it might be time for 
them to leave the Earth. Nelson couches his cautionary tale in a fast-action plot 
complete with chase scenes, narrow escapes, and mild romance. The message gets 
muddy, however, since Steve and Dave don’t plan to save the world or even to 
warn it; they seem to want only to preserve their own species, and in the process 
they intervene on a local level, with small healings and the introduction of a new 
philosophy. Nonetheless, their gentleness and need make them appealing even to 
readers who can’t feel their hypnotic touch, and the possibilities of their philosophy 
are worth consideration.  KC    
44 • The BulleTin
o’mAlley, keVin Gimme Cracked Corn & I Will Share; written and illus. by 
Kevin O’Malley. Walker, 2007 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9685-1 $17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9684-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-9 yrs
A warning to those who regard the pun as the most ignoble form of humor: do 
not enter. O’Malley has borrowed the skeletal plotline of the Jewish folktale “The 
Rabbi’s Dream,” recast it with a pair of chickens (well, roosters, actually) and a 
pig, and set the chickens on a pun-intensive journey to find the treasure trove of 
corn that is supposedly buried under a pink pig in a faraway barn but is really back 
home in the coop. Chicken and George make plenty of stops along the way, all of 
which are blatant opportunities to unleash another groaner: “As they walked past a 
basketball court, they heard the referee call a foul. But he wasn’t talking to them.” 
If there’s a clean joke about a chicken, an egg, or corn, it’s probably in here, and 
listeners will find considerable satisfaction in anticipating the upcoming punchlines. 
Unfortunately, the jokes run out of steam a couple of pages short of the conclusion, 
and the final “corny dream” line just isn’t a worthy culmination to O’Malley’s previ-
ous lineup of chuckles. The ink line and computer-colored pictures have a dense, 
muddy tone that’s at odds with the goofiness of the quest, and the delicacy of fine 
pen hatching is overpowered by the heaviness of the hues. Still, you’ve got to love 
the deadpan expressions on Chicken and George as they play straight man and 
punster, and kids with the classic elementary school sense of hilarity will concur 
that it’s never a good idea for chickens to travel on “Fry-day.”  EB
pAlAtini, mARgie The Cheese; illus. by Steve Johnson and Lou Fancher. Tegen/
HarperCollins, 2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-052631-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-052630-0 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-4
So the cheese is, as the song requires, standing alone, and the rat thinks that’s a 
darned shame (“What’s the point of a hunk of cheese being left out and lonesome 
when it can be enjoying the company of a perfectly fine rat like me?”). On the way 
to enjoy the cheese, the rat is joined by the cat, then the dog, then the farmer’s 
child, then the farmer’s wife, and finally the farmer, at which point the momentum 
is so great that the collective opts to have a party. Though the story gets somewhat 
confusing just at the end (the rat brags of his unexpected virtue in a way that 
suggests that he’s nobly eschewing the cheese, rather than just, as the illustrations 
show, joining the party), this is otherwise an amusing riff on a nursery favorite 
that’s heretofore largely escaped reexamination. Touches of characterization (the 
dog is a clueless bonehead) and amusing turns of phrase (the child is “completely 
unshushable”) add comedy, and there’s sly humor in the repeated consideration of 
the cheese’s standing-alone status and everybody’s initial tendency to blithely accept 
same (“The song says ‘The cheese stands alone,’ and that’s that”). Johnson and 
Fancher add print and collage textures, tonally blended into their backgrounds, to 
dappled paints, while bristly hatching and caricatured lines (and a sporty taste in 
clothing) make the animals cleverly yet broadly comedic. Readers will particularly 
relish picking out the textual echoes and counterpoints in the words tucked into 
the art (“Dell rules! Farmer farmer party!” in the antepenultimate spread) as well 
as following the sly and antiheroic rat. The text of the song is appended in case of 
SepTemBer 2007 • 45
mnemonic emergency, and since there’s plenty there to question beyond the cheese’s 
final stance, this might be an entertaining invitation for youngsters to interrogate 
the old chestnut on their own.  DS
pAley, sAshA Huge. Simon, 2007 259p
ISBN 1-4169-3517-7 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Wellness Canyon, a posh weight-loss camp, is April’s mecca—she’s saved her own 
money for over a year for her shot to get away from her mother’s unhealthy habits 
and whittle her body down to the slender girl within. At Wellness Canyon April 
rooms with Wil, who has an attitude as big as her appetite for Snickers. Wil’s fitness-
guru parents, embarrassed by their overweight daughter, have sent her to Wellness 
Canyon as a last resort since Wil has alienated all of the personal trainers they have 
hired. The girls butt heads from the beginning, and their animosity intensifies as 
they both set their sights for the same guy—a jock attending camp to achieve a 
training weight that will attract college football scouts. When he plays them both for 
fools, they unite to publicly humiliate their common enemy and develop a tenuous 
friendship that becomes unexpectedly real for both of them. Though the premise 
promises insight and empathy for readers struggling with their own body images, 
this is a fairly predictable exploration, with characters lapsing into stereotypes 
without emotional heft. April is pathetically optimistic and eager to be noticed by 
the popular girls (yes, there are even cliques in fat camp), and her success in losing 
weight earns her a temporary but exhilarating spot in their circle before she comes 
back around to realize who her true friends are. Wil is all prickles, spines, and cut-
ting remarks, but she at least has the insight to see that being thin doesn’t change 
who you are inside, so it’s almost disappointing that, despite her intention to gain 
weight to spite her parents, she ends up losing enough weight by accident to make 
them cry with joy at the sight of the “new” her. Generously proportioned readers 
looking for genuine empowerment will be better off with Mackler’s The Earth, My 
Butt, and Other Big Round Things (BCCB 10/03), but the pleasures of plus-sized 
summer soap opera may be enough to satisfy readers.  KC 
pow, tom Captives. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2007 185p
ISBN 1-59643-201-2 $17.95   
R Gr. 7-10
Both the travel agencies and the State Department bulletins assured the Phillips 
family that their Caribbean vacation destination was tourist friendly. Nobody 
could accuse them of being foolhardy travelers lurching into trouble, yet they and 
the Deschamps family were kidnapped by a small group of activists protesting 
the machinations of an American nickel-mining company exploiting their island 
and the corrupt political leaders benefiting from private financial arrangements. 
The ordeal ended in a bloodbath that wiped out not only the activists but also the 
teenage Deschamps daughter, Louise; now Tony Phillips has written a book based 
on the diary he kept during their captivity, and his son, Martin, is facing the fact 
that his father’s version of the story doesn’t square with his own, either in fact or 
in emotional reaction. Pow divides his tale into two sections—the first composed 
mainly of Tony Phillips’ freshly edited diary, and the second of Martin’s review 
of the ordeal, in which it becomes clear that all parents misunderstood Martin’s 
relationship (actually, lack thereof) with Louise, Louise’s brief affair with one of 
her captors, and the full background of the hostage-takers’ lives that led them to 
violent action.  The dual-perspective approach is effective, and the action is tense 
46 • The BulleTin
(even through the outcome has been revealed up front). Though the explanations 
don’t effectively explore the corporate/political machinations on the island, kids 
who simply come for the tale of two teens caught in an international nightmare 
will be too engrossed in the what to worry about the why.  EB 
poweRs, J. l. The Confessional. Knopf, 2007 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93872-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83872-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
High-school junior Mac Malone is found stabbed to death on his front lawn, and 
there’s a long list of people who might have been pleased to do the deed. It could 
have been Bernie Martinez, the quick-tempered Mexican kid Mac sent to the hos-
pital with a broken arm. Could have been the kid Mac was in debt to for drugs. 
Possibly it was the guy whose girlfriend Mac was having sex with, or the creepy 
loner who had heretofore been “invisible” to his fellow classmates at their El Paso 
Catholic school. Or it could just as easily have been someone in the community, 
angered by an inflammatory letter Mac wrote to the newspaper about the city’s 
celebration of Cinco de Mayo despite a Mexican suicide bomber’s destruction of 
the U.S.-Mexico bridge a year before. As the ensemble cast alternately relate pieces 
of the story and try to figure out who committed the murder, they expose the 
complex web of mistrust and outright hostility among the Anglos, Mexicans, and 
Mexican-Americans who uneasily share the local turf. Powers confronts issues of 
anti-immigrant prejudice and antiterrorist hysteria with brutal honesty, describ-
ing a world not often depicted in literature for young people. Unfortunately, the 
book never fully integrates these social concerns with the murder mystery. Indeed, 
it takes the easy way out by exposing the murderer as a garden-variety wacko—an 
Anglo teen so troubled and foul-mouthed (if his hapless efforts at kidnapping and 
“interrogation” aren’t sufficient tipoffs, certainly his obscene parody of the “Hail 
Mary” should be) that he is a too, too obvious suspect. While this may not be the 
most tautly plotted of mysteries, it should appeal to YAs who like their school 
stories dark and their characters burdened with dirty secrets.  EB  
pRelutsky, JACk In Aunt Giraffe’s Green Garden; illus. by Petra Mathers. Green-
willow, 2007 64p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-623869-2 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-623868-5 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Twenty-eight poems from the children’s poet laureate offer whimsical snapshots 
of people, animals, and brief occurrences. This is Prelutsky for younger audiences, 
with the compact verses musing rather than snappy and the subjects simple: a 
goose and a duck drive around the country; a Kansas City girl frolics in a foun-
tain; a couple dances in Spokane. The verses are a little uneven, but most of the 
poetry has a pretty particularity (the verses are rife with place names from Maine 
to La Jolla) and a gentle circular or episodic tendency that recall nursery rhymes. 
Full-page paintings and vignettes in Mathers’ saturated watercolors illustrate the 
verses; the art sports her usual combination of rich tones and otherworldly flatness, 
which here eminently suits the modest strangeness of the poetry by suggesting a 
benevolent world of kindergarten-level magic realism. Use this for a step up from 
Opie’s Here Comes Mother Goose (BCCB 12/99) or as a source for quick poetical 
counterpoints in a storytime.  DS
SepTemBer 2007 • 47
pRéVost, guillAume The Book of Time; tr. by William Rodarmor. Levine/Scho-
lastic, 2007 [224p]
ISBN 0-439-88375-X $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Sam Faulkner’s widowed father is so unreliable that Sam lives with his grandparents, 
and now his father has disappeared—again. After twelve days, Sam returns to the 
antiquarian bookshop that serves as both his father’s business and home to search 
for clues, and he discovers a mysterious stone statue with a circular hole at the top, 
which he fills with a coin he finds near it. Suddenly, fourteen-year-old Sam finds 
himself ricocheting through time, from the Middle Ages to Viking days, the battle-
fields of World War I France to the tombs in ancient Egypt. He finally bounces back 
home and realizes that his father is trapped in time; worse, he’s a prisoner of the 
infamous Vlad the Impaler (Count Dracula). This French import has enough plot 
and historic detail in each destination to create distinctive moments without over-
whelming the central story of Sam’s struggle to find his father. The style is everyday 
colloquial with exclamatory touches, making this an accessible and quick-moving 
read. Although Sam exhibits a little too much self-possession at times, he is still 
believably a teen as he attempts to avoid a school bully, recall history lessons, and 
even sneak the use of a calculator in a different century. Time-travel fans will jump 
headlong with Sam into his big adventure, and they will be hoping for a sequel to 
finally resolve the mystery of his father’s disappearance.  CW
RAbin, stAton The Curse of the Romanovs. McElderry, 2007 [288p]
ISBN 1-4169-0208-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 6-9
Yes, we’re talking those Romanovs: the book is narrated by the Tsarevitch Alexei, 
writing in 1916 of the unease of a Russia at war, the threats to his family, and the 
controversial importance of Rasputin, who is seemingly the only one who can 
quell the bleeding of Alexei, who has hemophilia. The wild events surrounding 
the murder—here attempted murder—of Rasputin have an even wilder conse-
quence, sending twelve-year-old Alexei into America in the year 2010, where he 
meets Varda, a girl who’s not only a budding scientist but also apparently a distant 
relation of the Romanovs. When Alexei discovers the fate of his family back in 
1916, he’s determined to return, but what can he and his new American friend 
do against the Russian Revolution? The straightforward historical fiction of the 
opening is interesting if a bit densely informative; the book jettisons its focus and 
cohesion, however, when it dives into the time-travel plot, which has a superficial 
mood of wacky hijinks and giddy plot contrivance totally at odds with the stately 
sophistication of the historical narrative. Ironically, Varda is less credible than 
Alexei, especially in her hollow and unbelievable dialogue and her wildly variable 
knowledge levels, but Alexei does manage to out-absurd her with his final text 
message to her of “ILUVU4EVA.” Interested readers will be better off with some 
of the more readable adult treatments of the Romanov dynasty, or just poring 
through Brewster’s Anastasia’s Album (BCCB 1/97). The author includes extensive 
end matter discussing various historical matters, the liberties she has taken with 
historical fact, and hemophilia and its transmission; a partial list of sources and 
websites is included.  DS
48 • The BulleTin
RinAldi, Ann Come Juneteenth. Harcourt, 2007 246p
ISBN 0-15-205947-4 $17.00   
R Gr. 7-10
Rose, called Sis Goose, is technically the property of Luli Holcomb’s Aunt Sophie, 
but the light-complected young woman has been raised by the Holcombs since 
she was a baby and treated as a member of the family, particularly cherished as a 
sister by Luli and as a lover by Luli’s brother Gabe. Her legal status can never be 
far from her mind, however, since Aunt Sophie insists on twice-yearly visits dur-
ing which she halfheartedly tries to groom Sis Goose for household service, just in 
case she may be required to sell her. While Luli, her parents, and siblings find this 
treatment despicable, they are in deep denial over their even more hurtful treatment 
of the girl they claim to love—keeping from her the truth that slaves have been 
emancipated by President Lincoln since 1863, fully two years ago. When the Civil 
War draws to an end and Yankee troops occupy their Texas ranch, the disdainful Lt. 
Heffernan wastes no time in disclosing the family’s lies, and a distraught Sis Goose 
unwisely turns her loyalty to the Yankees. Heffernan is no gentleman, though, and 
he abducts Sis Goose, who’s pregnant with Gabe’s child; Gabe and Luli follow in 
pursuit, but their final encounter ends in tragedy. There’s plenty of melodrama 
here, but it’s intrinsically tied to the historical reality that Texas slaveholders, largely 
isolated from affairs of “the States,” did manage to keep their servants ignorant of 
the Emancipation Proclamation and their farms running on unpaid labor. Rinaldi 
creates in the Holcombs characters of considerable depth, who shower genuine 
affection on Sis Goose while protecting their financial interests, and who consider 
themselves benevolent and open-minded, even as they offhandedly ignore the 
way their love for Sis Goose affects the slaves who don’t share her privileges. This 
title explores many of the same questions of love and freedom posed in Mildred 
Taylor’s The Land (BCCB 10/01), and readers will be left pondering the limits of 
the Holcombs’ culpability.  EB
Robb, don Ox, House, Stick: The History of Our Alphabet; illus. by Anne 
Smith. Charlesbridge, 2007 48p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-57091-609-0 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-57091-610-6 $7.95   
R Gr. 4-8
What a tormented alphabet we have: letters have, over their lifetime, been stretched, 
truncated, inverted, pilfered, abandoned, and readopted; Sinaitic people, Phoeni-
cians, early and classical Greeks, and Romans all claim paternity; it can’t even 
identify a birth date, having origins from 1500 B.C. to seventeenth century C.E. 
It does make fascinating reading, though, as Robb’s brief introduction on picto-
grams, phonetic symbols, and ancient Mediterranean culture segues into focused 
encounters with individual and groups of related letters that now form our Ro-
man alphabet. Each double-page spread presents the object the letter is thought 
to originally represent, the way the shape of the letter morphed over the centuries, 
and the way its pronunciation was adapted by various cultures. There’s a wealth of 
detail here, and readers will be forgiven if their memories can’t quite sort the finer 
points of aleph and zed by book’s end. Robb keeps tight control on the floodgates 
of data, though, by interjecting generous sidebars on bigger picture issues such as 
the pesky relationship between vowels and consonants that share the same letter, 
various options for ordering words on a page (boustrophedon—backward and 
forward “as the ox plows”—looks like a class project waiting to happen), and the 
SepTemBer 2007 • 49
fact there’s no compelling reason why the ABCs ended up in the order they did. 
Smith’s cheerful gouache paintings include some perfunctory scenes and artifacts 
from the ancient world, but they perform their most valuable service in clearly 
demonstrating the mutations of the letters themselves. A closing chart summarizes 
some of the data included in the text, and a list of resources including children’s 
books and websites make this as useful for report writers as it will be entertaining 
for recreational readers who revel in Did you know?s.  EB 
Robson, ClAiRe, comp. Outside Rules: Short Stories about Nonconformist 
Youth. Braziller/Persea, 2007 178p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-89255-316-7 $9.95   
R Gr. 7-10
As Robson indicates in her introduction to this highly readable story collection, 
nearly everyone has some claim to outsider status. That doesn’t mean, however, 
that everyone embraces that status to the same degree. These fourteen stories (most 
previously published but few well known) are not about the teens who brandish 
their style like an in-your-face freak flag but about ordinary kids who are finding 
their own idiosyncratic ways through the complex expectations of their families 
and societies. An overweight girl, for instance, uses her thin, graceful, disapproving 
mother’s ostentatious love for the dance against her as she learns comedic stunts 
and pratfalls. A displaced boy calls out for the attention he has lost in the after-
math of his brother’s tragic accident. A girl learns that she must let go of the care 
and protection of her twin brother with Down’s Syndrome. Another girl struggles 
to hide the symptoms of her mental illness from her best friend. The collection 
is broadly multicultural, and the stories are consistently insightful, original, and 
discussion provoking in addition to being well written. The stilted subtitle may 
make this a hard sell to genuine nonconformists, but the lyrical prose, subtle yet 
effective symbols, and complex emotional and moral conundrums found in these 
stories make it worthy of both book group and classroom.  KC
RogeRs, gRegoRy, illus. Midsummer Knight; illus. by Gregory Rogers. Porter/
Roaring Brook, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-1-56943-183-6 $16.95   
R Gr. 2-4
A rotund bear wearing an iron knight’s helmet floats peacefully down a lazy river. 
His craft bumps the shore, and he sets off into the forest. Bees whose honey he 
thinks to raid chase him to a mysterious door in the base of a large tree, and his 
adventures begin. Observant and knowing readers of this wordless picture book 
will note that he passes through a fairy ring to get to the door, and hence they will 
be less surprised than he when he finds himself in a fairy world on the other side 
of the tree. Fortunately, he has shrunk to fairy size (well, extra-large fairy size), and 
he proves more than a match for the corrupt steward (who looks an awful lot like 
Shakespeare) who has taken the king and queen prisoner and is looting the royal 
treasury. Trickery, escape, clever tracking, and a doozy of a swordfight see things put 
to rights, and the happy bear returns triumphantly through the tree to his normal 
size. This captivating sequel to The Boy, the Bear, the Baron, the Bard (BCCB 12/04) 
contains sly intertextual references to the first book, but it stands alone in terms of 
its story. Readers looking for references to Shakespeare’s play other than the inclu-
sion of the bard himself and the fairyland setting will be disappointed, but that’s 
all that will disappoint them. Rogers is a masterful visual storyteller, keeping things 
interesting through the play of light and shadow and the shifting of perspective as 
50 • The BulleTin
the bear moves through his adventure while maintaining a clear narrative line that 
even those inexperienced in the reading of sequential art can follow. Perhaps it’s 
his eyes, perhaps his subtle bear-y mouth, but the bear exudes a sense of capable 
serenity no matter what the circumstances that marks him as a particularly strong 
yet endearing hero, while the round-headed little boy fairy who enlists his aid in 
the first place is just plain endearing.  KC  
RosenthAl, mARC Phooey!; written and illus. by Marc Rosenthal. Cotler/Harp-
erCollins, 2007 [34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-075249-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-075248-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
A bored young boy kicks a can into the air, an action that starts into motion a 
chain of slapstick events—which he, mired in his whining about the tedium, walks 
through without noticing. Though the story is less focused, darting back and forth 
between our protagonist and the events he’s caused, this echoes Armstrong and 
Smalls’ Once upon a Banana (BCCB 12/06) in its playfully sequential plot with a 
frame-by-frame enumeration of disasters. There’s a nice blend of domestic event (a 
dog chasing a cat) and random strangeness (a pair of pirates walk the small-town 
streets) that adds to the absurdity of the proceedings. With their rubbery figures 
and smoky-touched colors, the illustrations recall the Reys, and the explosion of 
exclamations and sound effects links it to the comic-strip tradition of the same era. 
Since those interjections constitute the sole text, the book will entice reluctant read-
ers with its ease and playfulness, and kids will get a giggle out of the protagonist’s 
Mr. Magoo-like walk through the chaos he’s creating.  DS
Ruby, lAuRA The Chaos King. Eos/HarperCollins, 2007 325p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-075259-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-075258-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-7
In this sequel to The Wall and the Wing (BCCB 4/06), Gurl has taken up her old 
name, Georgie, and a challenging new life with her loving but oblivious parents 
(the richest people in the world). Her old friend Bug is also trying to establish a 
new life: the impressive flying champion is now considered advertising gold, but 
he is still haunted by his criminal father’s legacy. Worst of all, the two formerly 
close pals have fallen out of touch, each fearing the new role will put off the old 
friend. So they suffer alone, Georgie at her snobby new school, and Bug under the 
blatantly self-serving tutelage of his manager, until increasingly odd events lead 
them both to believe that the magical pen they thought was well hidden has been 
found and is now being used to influence the world. Thank goodness for bizarre 
incidents, as Bug and Georgie together are hilarious, freewheeling, and foolhardy, 
and with their combined talents and strong friendship, they are easily a match for 
chaos. Though a few of the oddball characters from the earlier novel wear a bit thin 
under repetition, most of the humor is still fresh and quirky. In addition, Ruby’s 
impeccable knack for developing characters with whom readers will identify and 
empathize complements the absurdity nicely to form a novel that is both amusing 
and emotionally taut. As an unexpected sequel (the earlier volume seemed to wrap 
up all loose ends), this is a rare treat: an update that requires little exposition and 
is nearly as memorable and ironic as its predecessor.  AS
SepTemBer 2007 • 51
sAndell, lisA Ann Song of the Sparrow. Scholastic, 2007 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-439-91848-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-9
This novel in free-verse poems explores the early days of pre-Camelot Arthur through 
the first-person perspective of sixteen-year-old Elaine, one of his followers. Elaine, 
the only girl in a war camp, is secretly in love with Lancelot, enamored with her 
role as healer and nurse to her hundreds of adopted brothers, and fearful, as they 
all are, that escalating tensions may mean that these men will never return to their 
families. The addition to camp of the stunning but aloof Gwynivere as Arthur’s 
betrothed, with whom Lancelot is immediately besotted, only causes more turmoil 
in Elaine’s life, pushing her to a desperate choice to secretly follow the men into 
battle. The paths to true love and peace may each be far rockier than expected, 
but Elaine is a stubborn, if foolhardy, protagonist, ready to shed the gendered 
limitations placed on her and play an active role in her pursuit of both. There is 
an elegance and romance in the economy of Sandell’s free verse that pairs well with 
the chivalry, austerity, and patriotism that guides every action of these characters. 
If Elaine’s end-of-book discovery of her “other” true love in Tristan may be a bit 
too convenient, there is still undeniable chemistry and powerful intensity in their 
pairing, described in sweeping and breathless language that will make any romance 
fan swoon. Even with the feminine perspective and heavy emphasis on love, the 
effectively creepy descriptions of the prophesying Merlin, the terse metaphors of 
blood and war, and the undeniable masculinity of the camp are effective selling 
points to extend the audience. An author’s note provides references about the liter-
ary Elaine, on whom this character was based, and a list of recommended readings 
suggests the trove of literature and myth awaiting teens interested in exploring 
Arthurian legends further.  AS
sChlitz, lAuRA Amy Good Masters! Sweet Ladies!: Voices from a Medieval Village; 
illus. by Robert Byrd. Candlewick, 2007 86p
ISBN 978-0-7636-1578-9 $19.99   
R* Gr. 6-9
What Schlitz sets out to do is ambitious enough—create a set of readers theater styled 
monologues (and a couple of pieces for two voices) about medieval occupations, so 
that every student can have a starring role in a class production. She surpasses that 
goal with her achievement—a vivid, convincing portrait of medieval adolescence, 
where teens who will probably never travel beyond the fields outside the walled and 
gated town have already begun their life’s work. Some, like the scion of a knightly 
family fallen on hard times, are on their way down in the world; others, like beggar 
Giles, look forward to freedom if they can but survive in town for a year and a day. 
Several guard personal secrets: beefy, uncomely Taggot will probably never leave her 
father’s anvil, but she dreams about the lord’s nephew; pilgrim Constance hopes 
for a cure at St. Winifred’s Well; Barbary, who has seen enough of her stepmother’s 
misery to dread a future that includes marriage and childbirth, covertly flings dung 
at the lord’s privileged daughter and allows the village boys to take the blame. Each 
player has a distinctive voice, and roles are rendered in free verse, simple prose, 
or a variety of rhyme schemes.  The emotional palette is equally varied, from the 
rueful comedy of the miller and doctor’s sons, who are learning the deceptive tricks 
of their trades, to the tentative friendship between a Christian girl and Jewish boy 
who meet at the river, delight momentarily in their common interests, and then 
52 • The BulleTin
draw away from each other in shame at having nearly denied their respective faiths 
by crossing a forbidden social line. Schlitz offers performance hints, definitions, 
and pronunciation tips in sidebars, and longer explanations about such customs as 
pilgrimage, agriculture, and falconry in additional insets. Although she states the 
pieces can be read in any order, she has already positioned them to allow several 
stories to intersect, subtly underscoring the closed nature of village society.  Spa-
cious layout and generous font size facilitate readalouds, and the handsome design, 
embellished with Byrd’s medieval-esque illustrations, vignettes, and borders, will 
draw readers who approach the presentation as a collection of related poems to be 
enjoyed independently. A bibliography of Schlitz’s sources is included.  EB
sChmidt, gARy d. The Wednesday Wars. Clarion, 2007 264p
ISBN 0-618-72483-4 $16.00   
R Gr. 5-7
Holling Hoodhood is the only Presbyterian at Camillo Junior High, a condition that 
would have no significance at all except for the fact that, on Wednesdays, Catholic 
and Jewish kids are dismissed early for religious instruction, leaving Holling as the 
lone remaining student in Mrs. Baker’s seventh-grade class. She’s as perplexed as 
he as to how “the class” should proceed, and they settle uneasily into a routine of 
reading successive Shakespeare plays, which Holling interprets as a sure sign that 
Mrs. Baker hates him. Nonetheless, over the course of the school year—as divided 
into monthly chapters and narrated by Holling—they form a bond of friendship 
that sees him through rough patches at home with his bombastic father and flower-
child sister and Mrs. Baker through the ordeal of awaiting news of her husband, 
who has just gone MIA in Vietnam. Mrs. Baker would feel right at home in the 
same faculty room with other such 1960s paragon teacher types as Sandy Dennis 
and Sidney Poitier, and it’s no surprise that Holling comes to appreciate Shake-
speare as deeply as he does Mrs. Baker, but running plotlines of both the manic 
and tender varieties—from rats behind the ceiling tiles to strained attitudes toward 
a Vietnamese classmate—keep the story racing along. Fans of the author’s Lizzie 
Bright and the Buckminster Boy (BCCB 7/04) may be pleasantly surprised to see 
Schmidt’s lighter, even sillier side.  EB
sChRAg, ARiel, ed. Stuck in the Middle: Seventeen Comics from an Unpleasant 
Age. Viking, 2007 210p
ISBN 978-0-670-06221-8 $18.99   
R* Gr. 7-12
Sixteen comic artists offer glimpses into the almost universally awkward junior-
high experience in this perceptive and frank anthology. The agonies depicted 
cover the merely embarrassing, such as Jim Hoover’s “A Relationship in Eight 
Pages,” which highlights the fickle nature of preteen love, to the truly scarring, as 
with Gabrielle Bell’s haunting “Hit Me,” an exploration of the seeming ease with 
which students torment and bully one another. Although a few of the stories have 
an adult sensibility or nostalgic tone (Bordeaux’s entry even has an aging narrator 
depicted, chiming in opinions about her teenaged self), most carry an immediacy, 
timelessness, and rawness that make them highly accessible to current teens. The 
clear intention of the collection is to reinforce the truth that these anxiety-laden 
years are finite, and that the authors (most of the stories are either directly or 
implicitly autobiographical) lived through them as well; those lucky few readers 
who currently love or once adored their junior-high years may only see themselves 
reflected in the backgrounds. Even within the black-and-white illustrations, there 
SepTemBer 2007 • 53
is an impressive range of styles from Schrag’s own text-heavy, crisply drawn entry to 
Enright’s minimalist contribution featuring a protagonist that remarkably resembles 
a Weeble. In a brilliant nod to the vulnerability of this age, almost all of the brief 
contributor profiles are accompanied by mostly inelegant middle-school photos of 
the authors. Although this collection may not have the power to change or prevent 
bullying, ostracism, and the small and significant humiliations of these years, it 
at least offers flawless dark humor, snarky observations, and even the occasional 
success as compensation.  AS 
sChwARtz, Amy Starring Miss Darlene; written and illus. by Amy Schwartz. Por-
ter/Roaring Brook, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 1-59643-230-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-9 yrs
The lure of the footlights draws Miss Darlene, a charming hippo, to theater class, 
and she’s thrilled at the opportunity to tread the boards. Things don’t always go as 
she intends—as the Flood in Noah’s Ark, she trips over her costume and douses the 
audience with her pan of water; in the science-fiction play, she transposes portions 
of her lines; and as Sleeping Beauty, she falls so soundly and truly asleep that she 
can’t be awakened—but the local critic always praises her performances for their 
creative brilliance. Though the critic’s particular love for Miss Darlene begs for a 
comic explanation that never arrives, the rest of the show is rife with jokes pitched 
perfectly for primary-grade guffaws (audiences will particularly relish her spooner-
ized cries of “The world has landed! . . . The aliens are ended! We have to give up 
hope! We mustn’t begin again!”). Clipped sentences keep the action moving while 
allowing novice readers to take frequent breathers, and the separation of the events 
into three chapters (or acts) provides further structure and reassuring opportunities 
for interim success. Trim, slender line and delicate shades of watercolor are festive 
yet restrained, conveying a poker-faced primness that contrasts humorously with 
the spectacle of an animal acting troupe. This will perform entertaining double 
duty as readaloud or readalone, and it provides a splendid dramatic counterpoint 
to ballet stories such as Young’s Belinda the Ballerina (BCCB 4/03).  DS
sCieszkA, Jon Cowboy & Octopus; illus. by Lane Smith. Viking, 2007 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-670-91058-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Ah, the legendary friendship of the cowboy and the . . . octopus? Okay, it’s certainly 
a new pair of buddies, but they’re solid friends for all that, as readers will see in seven 
brief stories chronicling their interactions. Dimwitted, literal-minded Cowboy, a 
descendant of the silly protagonists of noodlehead folktales, is both straight man 
and source of humor here: he’s confused by a “broken” seesaw (Octopus shows him 
that it works better with two), he cracks up at the wrong part of the knock-knock 
joke (“Lettuce can’t knock on a door”), and he gives Octopus the honest truth about 
his new hat (“Your new hat looks like something my horse dropped behind him”). 
Though this would certainly make an entertaining readaloud, its simple vocabulary, 
episodic nature, and skewed sense of humor make it particularly effective as an early 
reader. Illustrations offer Smith’s usual cornucopia of realia, drawing/painting, and 
collage or faux-collage; in fact, the art opens the story and explains the framework 
as Cowboy is cut out of a book of paper “Western Heroes” and Octopus out of the 
comics, and old paper and newspaper borrowings keep them company throughout. 
54 • The BulleTin
Newly jaded youngsters will cheerfully throw over old easy-reader friend pairings 
to hang with this edgily whimsical twosome.  DS
seRRAno, FRAnCisCo The Poet King of Tezcoco: A Great Leader of Ancient Mexico; 
tr. from the Spanish and ad. by Trudy Balch and Jo Anne Engelbert; illus. by Pablo 
Serrano. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2007 36p
ISBN 0-88899-787-6 $18.95   
R* Gr. 5-8
Despite the ruthless destruction of indigenous codices during the sixteenth-century 
Spanish conquests, later descendants and historians were able to gather information 
on one of the last of the great Aztec rulers, Nezahualcoyotl, and collect many of 
his poems. This retelling, translated and adapted from Serrano’s Spanish, presents 
the life of the warrior king from his boyhood, in which he saw his father murdered 
by enemies, through his perilous rise to kingship, and on to his establishment of 
a flourishing city-state governed by law and graced by monumental architecture, 
ambitious civic planning, and cultivation of the arts. Nezahualcoyotl’s story is as 
likely to appeal to devotees of legend and mythology as to fans of history, and his 
larger-than-life adventures have quite probably expanded through generations of 
storytellers’ art. Indeed, some readers may recognize in Nezahualcoyotl’s preoc-
cupation with death some emotional kinship with Gilgamesh, and the tale of the 
king’s devious courtship of his future wife bears striking resemblance to David’s 
cabal against Uriah the Hittite. There are enough particulars of Nezahualcoyotl’s 
achievements, however, to tilt this account to the side of history, and the inclusion 
of many of the king’s poems—delicate musings on the nature of death; the fleeting 
beauty of life; and the mysterious “One who invents himself,” the power behind the 
lesser gods—provide humanizing insight into the complex ruler whose laws now 
seem so rigid, but whose heart seems so vulnerable. Pre-conquest art inspires Pablo 
Serrano’s rounded figures, formal compositions, abstract and representational motifs, 
and ritualized portrayals of violence, and both text and illustration are set against 
what appears to be a roughly plastered background. A map, chronology, glossary, 
and reading list complete the presentation. With the bulk of children’s literature 
on pre-conquest Mexico focused on archaeology and human sacrifice, this gripping 
tale of troubled hero will be an essential addition to the library collection.  EB
shARenow, RobeRt My Mother the Cheerleader. Geringer/HarperCollins, 
2007 289p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-114897-2 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-114896-5 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Louise Collins is thirteen years old when her mother pulls her out of school and 
becomes a “cheerleader”—one of the New Orleans women dressed up in their 
finest and gathering at William J. Frantz Elementary to protest the integration of 
schools in the Ninth Ward in 1960. Meanwhile, Louise takes over much of the 
work of running her mother’s boarding house with the help of an elderly black 
woman named Charlotte. Louise knows that some of the boarders get extra benefits 
from her very pretty mother, so when a suave yet kind man with New York license 
plates shows up to rent a room, she is both interested and jealous as her mother 
kicks her Southern hospitality up a notch. It all goes wrong when he shows up 
at the school protest, where he’s pegged for being a Northern agitator and a Jew, 
crimes for which he is ultimately murdered, leaving Louise desolate. His murder, 
however, wakes Louise’s mother up to her own culpability, giving Louise some 
SepTemBer 2007 • 55
small cause for hope. The intractable despair of crimes that go unanswered weighs 
heavily on the plot here; Sharenow is unflinching in his portrait of bull-headed 
Southern bigots who punish women with brutal rape, men with immolation, and 
children with vicious threats in an attempt to pass their own dismal limitations on 
to future generations. Louise offers a candid yet sympathetic perspective on her 
flawed mother, and in doing so she helps readers understand, at least in part, the 
other side of the familiar Ruby Bridges story.  KC 
shAskAn, kAthy How Underwear Got Under There: A Brief History; illus. by Regan 
Dunnick. Dutton, 2007 48p
ISBN 978-0-525-47178-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Kids who have just passed the stage of irrepressible giggles but haven’t lost sight 
of underwear’s inherently amusing properties will snap up this lighthearted but 
thoughtful discourse on dainties. Eschewing the standard chronological treatment 
of fashion trends, Shaskan devotes the bulk of her text to nine practical uses for 
undergarments: protection (from offenses such as scratchy flora and hurtling base-
balls), warmth (perforated buckskin longjohns), modesty (“lead-lined underwear, 
impenetrable to x-rays”), cleanliness (saves on laundry), support (from bras to 
sock garters), shaping (corsets for women and men), exaggeration (codpieces and 
inflatable bras), status (hoops, crins, and panniers), and statement-making (from 
bra-burning to political put-downs). Although title and contents pages are tricked 
out in lingerie pastels and girly script font, text provides both genders with adequate 
coverage ,and Dunnick’s watercolor cartoons (and a few period photos and adver-
tisements) catch just about everybody in a moment of deshabille. Shaskan won’t 
allow even a peek at her sources, so kids will have to take her word for everything 
(are the Russians really developing underwear-eating bacteria to solve astronauts’ 
laundry problems?) or launch an undercover investigation of their own.  EB
spinelli, eileen Someday; illus. by Rosie Winstead. Dial, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-8037-2941-4 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
The whimsical protagonist in this book of big dreams has one foot planted firmly 
in the here and now and one in the realm of possibility. Someday she’ll be a famous 
painter, but today she’ll help her father paint the shed; someday she’ll be a noted 
paleontologist, but today she’ll unearth treasure from the couch cushions. Each 
someday possibility spins out in richly invented detail, as she imagines lunching at 
the White House, swimming with dolphins, capturing Olympic gold, and sleeping 
under an Egyptian sky. The corresponding everyday activities feel as important as 
the adult possibilities, and the ending scene, wherein she awaits the first flight of 
two baby owls outside her nighttime window, creates an elegant and magical closure. 
Winstead’s airy paintings touched with collage accentuate both the hope and the 
humor of the young girl’s bravura; the loose strokes that define her agile, slightly 
bucktoothed figure give her the impression of being finished and in potential at the 
same time. Viewers with their own high hopes will find their everyday play more 
inspiring than ever after seeing it through this girl’s eyes.  KC
56 • The BulleTin
spinelli, eileen Summerhouse Time; illus. by Joanne Lew-Vriethoff. Knopf, 
2007 218p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94061-3 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84061-6 $12.99   
R Gr. 3-5
From eleven-year-old Sophie’s point of view, there is no greater time of year than 
Summerhouse Time, when the extended family all gathers in a rented pink cottage 
on the ocean for a few weeks of sun and fun. Spinelli’s free-verse novel begins several 
weeks before this most anticipated event, introducing the characters, highlighting 
the preparations, and offering hints of the impending conflicts. At the top of Sophie’s 
list of upcoming excitements is the chance to see her beloved older cousin Colleen 
and tell her about the boy who has caught Sophie’s attention. Not all is as perfect 
as Sophie hopes, however: fourteen-year-old Colleen is distant and angry, opting to 
have her own room rather than share with Sophie, and Dad is not himself, prone 
to long periods of silence and to removing himself from the group. While these 
two conflicts are interwoven into the events (it turns out Colleen is bearing guilt 
because she stole some candy from the grocery store and that Dad is experiencing 
panic attacks), the story mostly focuses on the playful, summer-centered episodes 
of a big, noisy family gathered together. There is great appeal in Sophie’s sweet 
young voice as she narrates the events that make Summerhouse Time what it is, and 
middle-grades readers will readily identify with her evocative descriptions of family 
dynamics. Lew-Vriethoff’s expressive sketches are sprinkled throughout the text, 
offering further emotional exploration of the stories as they unfold. This would 
make a great end-of-year readaloud as well as a helpful back-to-school introduction 
to writing personal narrative.  HM
steAd, RebeCCA First Light. Lamb, 2007 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94017-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84017-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Chapters alternating points of view chronicle the intertwined lives of two teens: 
twelve-year-old Peter, who is accompanying his scientist parents on a trip to Green-
land, and fourteen-year-old Thea, a member of Gracehope, a secret society built 
under the ice, who has long been plotting to see the world above. The two first meet 
when they join forces to save Thea’s best friend, who loyally accompanied her on her 
forbidden quest to the surface and who is now trapped in the ice. After saving him, 
the pair moves on to questions, revelations, and confrontations, and both realize that 
their lives will be irrevocably different from having met. The elegant descriptions 
of the unforgiving world of Greenland are impressive, as ice, snow, and wrench-
ing winds are somehow made so appealing as to entice the reader to want to visit. 
However, the convoluted and somewhat unconvincing mythology of Gracehope is 
confusing to the point of obfuscation, and the familial connection between Peter 
and Thea (they turn out to be cousins) seems forced rather than fated. In addition, 
although the later chapters are effectively terse and dramatic, the first third of the 
novel unfolds at such a glacial pace that readers may need coaxing to stick around 
for when it gets exciting. Fans of DuPrau’s earnestly environmental Books of Ember 
series (most recently, The Prophet of Yonwood, BCCB 5/06) may still find much to 
enjoy here as fantasy melds with messages about the destructive ecological impact 
humans have on the world. Indeed, after readers have become engaged with the 
SepTemBer 2007 • 57
residents of Gracehope, the eventual unveiling of its certain doomed fate because of 
global warming will likely evoke a strong emotional response and may even inspire 
a few readers toward environmental activism.  AS 
stein, dAVid ezRA Leaves; written and illus. by David Ezra Stein. Putnam, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-24636-4 $15.99   
R 2-4 yrs
A little bear is enjoying his first autumn until the leaves start to fall, and he can’t 
manage to put them back on their branches. The sleepy bear takes armfuls of the 
fallen leaves into a cave, where he dozes off as the temperatures drop and winter 
settles in; in the spring, the bear awakes to find buds heralding new leaves on the 
trees, and he welcomes in the new season. Though the story tails off a bit at the end, 
the text is barebones simple yet tender (“Are you okay?” the bear queries the fallen 
leaf), gently wrapping its sentences across page turns in a poetic rhythm. Illustrations 
gain energy from exuberant yet spare scrawls of linework; the watercolor hues are 
understandably earth colored, but they’re further unified by a smudgy undertone 
in the greens and yellows as well as the browns. There’s character aplenty in the 
bear’s dancing joie de vivre, and the silent inclusion of other animals reminds view-
ers that the bear shares his world in all seasons. More effective than many flashier 
stories of seasonality, this will remind youngsters of the reliability of the cycle and 
provide them with a cuddly proxy to walk them through it.  DS
st. JAmes, JAmes Freak Show. Dutton, 2007 298p
ISBN 978-0-525-47799-0 $18.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Billy Bloom is a fiercely independent seventeen-year-old headed for serious trouble: 
rather than downplaying his eccentricities in his new ultra-rich and conservative 
school, he goes all in, showing up for the first day in full pirate regalia. Still reeling 
from his mother’s rejection after she found him in drag (resulting in his current stay 
with his old-money Southern father), Billy is fully aware that shoving boundaries 
will almost certainly not end well, though it is also clear that he wouldn’t mind 
being the ambassador for all gender nonconformists either. Things get even more 
dangerous than he expected, however, when a preplanned attack results in Billy 
being put into a coma with several broken bones. While no one would fault Billy 
if he acquiesced to conformity, few who’ve followed his saga will be surprised to 
learn that he emerges even more determined to force the world (or at least his 
own piece of it) to embrace difference. As Billy acknowledges himself to be an 
unreliable narrator early on, it is occasionally difficult to sort out the truth from 
his frequently exaggerated takes on reality. Of course, this is exactly the point, as 
accepting his version as his truth requires two things of the reader: a recognition 
of Billy’s jaded but ultimately optimistic worldview as a valid one, and a willing-
ness to dive into the stream of consciousness of a self-proclaimed “twinkle queen.” 
Billy himself is memorable and, behind the sarcastic wit, touchingly vulnerable; 
readers will find him admirable as well as sympathetic. Although comparisons with 
Levithan’s gaytopia Boy Meets Boy (BCCB 9/03) will be rampant and certainly apt, 
St. James’ novel will likely emerge as groundbreaking, daring, and memorable in 
its own right.  AS
58 • The BulleTin
sulliVAn, edwARd t. The Ultimate Weapon: The Race to Develop the Atomic 
Bomb. Holiday House, 2007 182p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8234-1855-8 $24.95   
R Gr. 6-10
Sullivan ably blends science, political history, and social history in this overview 
of U.S. efforts to create a weapon to stop Hitler in his tracks, an effort that was 
ultimately redirected to bring World War II to a definitive end in the Asian the-
ater of war. Sullivan covers U.S. enlistment of the world’s leading physicists, the 
uneasy relationship between Manhattan Project science director Oppenheimer and 
military director Groves, the construction of three massive, secret cities where the 
uranium and plutonium bombs were invented and assembled, the world-changing 
test at Alamogordo, and the devastating deployments at Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 
Although many readers will pick up this title with some prior knowledge of the 
Los Alamos site of operations, many will find that the information about life in 
makeshift industrial cities of Hanford, Washington and Oak Ridge, Tennessee 
breaks new ground. Sullivan concludes with a substantive discussion of reaction 
among the scientific community to the unleashing of destructive nuclear power, 
and debate within the political community as to whether bombing an essentially 
defeated nation was morally justifiable.  A wealth of black-and-white photographs 
are included, as are a bibliography, list for further reading, glossary of terms, source 
notes, and an index. This should quickly become the go-to book for middle-school-
ers researching this facet of World War II.  EB
teitelbAum, miChAel The Scary States of America. Delacorte, 2007 [416p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90348-0 $12.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-385-73331-3 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
The frame for these fifty scary tales told as true is the labor of twelve-year-old Jason 
Specter, who intends to provide a national clearinghouse of the paranormal, and 
who has acquired these spooky tales via emails and visitors to his website, scarys-
tatesofamerica.com. Each eerie anecdote represents young Jason’s choice of the best 
story coming from that particular state, and it is introduced by a factual tidbit that 
begins, “What I learned in history class . . . ” while the stories themselves begin, 
“A story you won’t find in your textbook.” Many of the tales are well-worn classics 
suitable for any location (the book kicks off in Alabama with a standard “vanishing 
hitchhiker” tale) while others draw on genuinely local lore (Indiana is represented 
by a story about a bridge that is indeed rumored to be haunted), all in a breezy gee-
whiz style that makes for undemanding reading. The persona of Jason introduces 
the book and each story and ends the book with a short postscript, thus providing 
a narrative framework and creating a touch point for young readers, who may well 
buy the teller’s verisimilitude even if they’re experienced enough to be skeptical 
about the tales. Unfortunately, the mystery that is Jason is fresher than the tales he 
tells, which have little or nothing to do with the fast facts that precede them, and 
most of which already exist on the Web or in urban legend or scary-story books. 
Nevertheless, young readers will likely enjoy revisiting alien abductions, hitchhiker 
stories, and phone calls from inside the house, as they indulge their continuing 
fascination with unearthly and paranormal delights. They will seek this one out as 
much for the familiar scares as for the chance to see if they recognize the facts and 
stories chosen for their particular state.  CW
SepTemBer 2007 • 59
townsend, miChAel Billy Tartle in Say Cheese!; written and illus. by Michael 
Townsend. Knopf, 2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93932-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83932-0 $15.99   
R* Gr. 2-4
Tomorrow is picture day, which means Billy has to get a haircut. His initial dread 
turns to excitement when he realizes he could get his hair styled into pink spikes 
like his cartoon hero Supermonkey, but, alas, conspiracy between barber and mother 
results in a boring normal haircut. Fortunately, as he’s leaving the barber, he notices 
that the complimentary lollipops have an intriguing effect, and on picture day he 
manages to liven up the images by getting his whole class to suck on purloined 
pops—which gives their teeth glowing color as they smile for the photographer. 
The story, reminiscent of Calvin and Hobbes mayhem, unfolds in comic-strip panels 
that effectively juggle their multitude of elements and palette of high-voltage colors 
with strategic design. Billy’s a bit high-voltage himself, running his mouth and his 
imagination constantly (he blithely updates inanimate objects on his plans) in a way 
that young readers will recognize; his adventurous take on reality fits the comic-strip 
medium perfectly, joining with the straightforward physical comedy of his exploits 
to add energy to what could otherwise be a simple account of an ordinary school 
event. Share it anytime, but it’ll be particularly well received on picture day—just 
wait until after chances of sabotage have passed.  DS
tRondheim, lewis Tiny Tyrant; tr. from the French by Alexis Siegel; illus. by 
Fabrice Parme. First Second/Roaring Brook, 2007 124p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59643-094-X $12.95   
R Gr. 3-8
In this illustrated collection of eight translated French stories, King Ethelbert rules 
as much by whim as by moral or regal standards; this lack of perspective can be 
excused, though, since he’s only six. Ethelbert is living out most kids’ fantasies: every 
royal desire, from meeting Santa to winning all contests automatically to receiving 
sundaes six times larger than himself, is immediately fulfilled. Although the Prime 
Minister tries to rein in some of his excesses, even she is ultimately powerless when 
Ethelbert is determined. The stories, each illustrated comic-book-style with panels 
set against multi-hued backgrounds (a different shade for each entry), are stand-
alone episodes in the monarchy of Portocristo, although an ongoing competition 
between Ethelbert and his much wealthier cousin Sigismund provides continuity, as 
does Ethelbert’s absolute disinterest in personal growth or change. The adventures 
of the tiny king are outrageous and humorous on their own, and the brief stories 
pair beautifully with Parme’s equally exaggerated and amusing illustrations, in a style 
clearly inspired by 1960s television animation such as The Rocky and Bullwinkle 
Show. Parme’s giant-headed cartoon king, crown miraculously balanced way back 
on his head to make room for his impressive pompadour, suggests a character so 
lively and visually memorable that he could easily be the focus of his own animated 
short. Young readers will thrill to see their id-inspired impulses all fulfilled through 
Ethelbert, while older graphic-novel fans will appreciate the subtle political humor 
played out through the hapless adults who must endure their tyrant king.  AS
60 • The BulleTin
VeRe, ed The Getaway; written and illus. by Ed Vere. McElderry, 
2007 36p
ISBN 978-1-4169-4789-9 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
The masked mouse has swiped the cheese, and now he’s on the lam from the police. 
Desperate, he enlists the help of readers and listeners to warn him with a whistle 
if they spy Ace Lawman Detective Jumbo Wayne Jr., the elephant who’s the long 
arm (well, trunk) of the law in these parts. As the cartoon mouse zooms on his 
yellow motor scooter through the photographed landscape of Vere’s clear line il-
lustrations, viewers have several opportunities to sound the alert for what appears 
to be Detective Wayne. Those eyes high up in the dark . . . oh, it’s one of the feral 
cat bikers that have been terrorizing the neighborhood. The huge feet . . . no, it’s 
an upstanding rhino citizen. The trunk snuffling deep beneath the manhole cover 
. . . only a tourist anteater from New York. But of course evildoers always come 
to a bad end, and just when the mouse finds the perfect hill on which to relax 
and devour his ill-gotten gains, he finds he’s on the hat of Wayne himself. Vere 
employs several tricks to keep the youngest members of the audience on track, 
from the direct, breathless banter of the mouse (think of Mo Willems’ pigeon), to 
the dotted lines that trace his progress, to the hot colors on cartoons and dialogue 
bubbles that keep the characters from getting lost in the scenery. Adults will better 
appreciate a few elements than kids; nonetheless, this should catch the fancy of 
fans of Pinkwater’s Irving and Muktuk or any miscreants who enjoy aiding and 
abetting a criminal.  EB
weAVeR, will Defect. Farrar, 2007 [208p]
ISBN 0-374-31725-9 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
David is a physical oddity: he has distinctive ears and facial features, as well as 
extra folds of skin that connect his arms and torso; when he extends these flaps 
of skin, he can glide. Hazy memories of cold examination tables suggest that his 
troubled mother consulted the medical profession when he was young, but he never 
underwent surgery and, at fifteen, he has finally come to terms with his odd body. 
His latest and most promising foster family is the Trotwoods, who stand behind 
him when his abnormal appearance incites school disturbances, then transfers to 
an alternative school, where he finds a friend in a free-spirited girl named Cheetah 
and begins to settle into a contented life. Then he crashes into a tree during gliding 
practice, and subsequent attention leads to discovery of his wings, which brings him 
back into contact with the doctors who examined him in his youth. When David 
is given the option of surgery—both to remove his wings and to create a more 
normal facial appearance—he faces a difficult decision. Weaver tantalizes readers 
with glimpses of examination rooms, David’s early life in New York City, and his 
odd physique, creating a slow reveal that invites understanding of and sympathy 
with David’s cynical attitude before knowing the full extent of his deformities. This 
sets up a very real conflict at the novel’s end, when he must choose between looking 
like—and perhaps becoming—someone else, or keeping his very own freak show 
alive. His cynicism makes the ending seem a bit sentimental and naïve, but this is 
a small issue in a touching story that has a lot to say about whether we wear our 
bodies or they wear us.  CW
SepTemBer 2007 • 61
winteR, JeAnette Angelina’s Island; written and illus. by Jeanette Winter. Foster/
Farrar, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-30349-5 $16.00   
R 6-9 yrs
Angelina and her parents recently immigrated to New York City, and every day 
she asks her mother if it is time to go home to her beloved Jamaica yet. She misses 
the sounds and look and feel of Jamaica, as well as the tropical fruits, the warm 
sand, the rainbow-colored birds and, perhaps most of all, her grandmother, yearn-
ings expressed in a series of lyrical parallels that contrast Angelina’s view of the 
shortcomings of New York with the abundant beauty and richness of her island 
home. The story turns when Mama learns of a Carnival celebration to be held in 
Brooklyn; soon the young girl is getting fitted for a costume and learning a dance 
with a group of other children, and participating in the Carnival parade proves 
to be just what Angelina needs to feel at home on her new island. Winter’s bold 
graphic style perfectly suits the strong emotions and exuberant colors of Angelina’s 
ponderings; the West Indian characters are depicted as inky black with simple line 
details showing faces, clothes, and accessories in brilliant shades of pinks, blues, 
purples, and greens. A single boxed illustration sits on each page, set against a 
jewel-toned field of color. Those illustrations depicting the New York of her frus-
trations are set in tones of gray, black, and taupe and lack the splashes of tropical 
color reserved for Jamaica. Though the solution is a little easy, this is an effective 
perspective on adjusting to a new country, and even the youngest listeners will 
likely relate to the simple presentation of Angelina’s longing for home. An author’s 
note provides information about the annual Carnival celebration held in Brooklyn 
each September.  HM
wittlingeR, ellen Parrotfish. Simon, 2007 294p
ISBN 978-1-4169-1622-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Angela has never felt comfortable as a girl, and not long after she gets everyone 
used to the idea that she is a lesbian, she realizes, after spending time on GLBTQ 
websites, that this label doesn’t quite fit her either. Finally recognizing that she is 
transgendered, Angela changes her name to Grady, starts dressing in masculine 
clothing, and binds her breasts as the first steps in her transition to becoming 
male. His only friend isn’t handling any of this well, leaving Grady only his mostly 
supportive family as allies. School ranges from awkward to dangerous as students 
react to Grady’s changes, though things become remarkably better after Grady’s 
resolute calm and willingness to take the higher road earns him a few friends. 
Even with such a revelatory and life-changing experience as Grady’s, however, 
mundane and small problems still crop up, and eventually his focus is as much on 
getting his father to stop turning their home into a gaudy Christmas attraction 
and trying to find the perfect gift for his brother as it is on seeking affirmation in 
the animal world (the title refers to the fact that some parrotfish can change their 
genders to balance population densities). It is in these humorous and endearing 
everyday moments, not the expository discussions of what is means or feels like to 
be transgendered, where this book shines as a compelling and richly detailed story 
about all of the elements that make up one teen’s life. Of course, readers exploring 
their own sexuality or gender identity will find the informational aspects of the 
novel immensely helpful, but the sardonic asides, the exasperating parents, and the 
sweeping drama of high-school dances will also make this book strongly appealing 
to teens who consider themselves outside of the GLBTQ spectrum. References, 
resources and websites are included.  AS
62 • The BulleTin
wulFFson, don The Golden Rat. Bloomsbury, 2007 [176p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-000-1 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
It’s little wonder that sixteen-year-old Baoliu stands convicted of the murder of his 
vacuous stepmother; since his father’s recent remarriage he has swiped his deceased 
mother’s jewelry from her room, spurned all lessons by his tutor, and shamed his 
family through his open defiance of his father. The judge is willing to commute 
his death sentence if he confesses to the crime and agrees to a life of enslavement, 
but Baoliu insists on his innocence. This leaves his family with one last chance at 
clemency: through the twelfth-century Chinese legal custom of ka-di, another man 
is paid to be beheaded in his place (the money will be a boon to his impoverished 
family) and Baoliu plummets in status to a “golden rat,” a disinherited outcast left 
to make his own way in the world. While struggling for meager daily rations and 
shelter, he and an equally needy new friend go on a quest to prove his innocence and 
solve the mystery of why an old family retainer would have sacrificed his life for the 
young man. The riveting premise and details of the harsh medieval Chinese legal 
system promise a ripping tale, but so much time is devoted to plotting and so little 
to character that readers never quite connect with the distraught Baoliu. Moreover, 
stiff and occasionally anachronistic dialogue (“‘Could you give someone a message 
for me?’ ‘Sure. No problem,’ said the guard”) break the tension of Baoliu’s desperate 
flight. Nonetheless, the sheer drama of the ka-di plot line will drive middle-schoolers 
along, and this will be a quick, diverting read for kids unprepared to invest their 
reading time in the Hooblers’ richer Asian crime dramas in the Judge Ooka series 
(The Ghost in the Tokaido Inn, BCCB 9/99, et al.)  EB
SepTemBer 2007 • 63
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
Cullum, CARolyn n. The Storytime Sourcebook II: A Compendium of 3500+ New 
Ideas and Resources for Storytellers. Neal-Schuman, 2007 489p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55570-589-8 $75.00
Occasionally, staff at school and public libraries need assistance invigorating sto-
rytime or developing new programs, and Cullum offers an updated and expanded 
version to accompany her 1999 Storytime Sourcebook (BCCB 2/00) that will help 
with the task. Though this looks like a second volume, it’s really a useful revision of 
the first: the program topics, nearly 150 of them, have stayed the same, picture books 
and other resources published prior to 1995 have been replaced by newer materials, 
and the author has added more current music, video (DVD and videocassettes), 
and movement recommendations. The topical tie-ins for each program have been 
updated, and Cullum has added recommended lists of reference and picture books 
along with a special new picture books list entitled, “Classic ‘Not To Be Missed’ 
Picture Book Titles.” There are updated lists of publishers and distributors of both 
videos and music, and the plethora of indices include picture book authors, titles, 
music/movement, crafts, activities, and songs. As in the earlier volume, there are 
no suggestions for telling stories, and only citations (rather than the text itself) are 
provided for fingerplays and songs, which necessitates an extra step for busy staff 
using the book to assemble a program. In addition, simple navigational aids such 
as side tabs or meaningful headers would have helped users negotiate the 489-page 
volume. Even with these limitations, this is a useful work, especially for paraprofes-
sionals planning programs or staff looking to augment their children’s collections 
with an array of resources equally at home with a single reader or an excited group 
of toddlers ready for a storytime romp. CW
64  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction:  Felin
Accidents–fiction:  Aronson; Bing-
ham
Actors and acting–fiction:  Lockhart
Actors and acting–stories:  Schwartz
Adventure:  rogers; ruby
African Americans:  Fleischman
African Americans–fiction:  draper; 
Flake; rinaldi
Africa–stories:  Andersen
Animals:  Jenkins
Animals–fiction:  drake
Animals–stories:  Lucas; Stein; vere
AnthoLogieS:  datlow; robson
Appearance–fiction:  Paley; Weaver
Arctic–fiction:  Stead 
Art and artists–fiction:  Cullen
Art: grandits; Jenkins
ArthuriAn Legend:  Sandell
Athletes–fiction: deuker
Babies–stories:  Blake
BiogrAPhieS:  Burleigh; Serrano
Biology:  Jenkins; Murawski
Blacks–stories:  Winter
BoArd BookS:  Blake; katz, k.
Books and reading–fiction:  deming; 
Pow
Brothers–fiction: Michaels
Brothers and sisters–fiction:  Che-
aney; Murdock
Building–fiction:  kluger
Bullies–fiction:  ellis
Campers and camping–fiction: Bar-
shaw; Lockhart; Paley
Cats–fiction:  hanson
Cats–stories:  Lobel
Cheating–fiction:  Lichtman
Chickens–stories:  o’Malley
China–fiction:  Wulffson
Civil War–fiction:  rinaldi
Clothing:  Shaskan
Clothing–fiction: Abdel-Fattah
Contests–fiction:  kennedy
Counting BookS:  denise
Cousins–fiction:  halpin; horvath
Crime and criminals–fiction:  
Cooney; Crocker; giles; hara-
zin; Lichtman; Michaels; Pow; 
Wulffson
Crime and criminals–stories:  vere
Current events:  Cooney; Pow
death–fiction:  Cotten; horvath
disabilities–fiction:  Aronson; Bing-
ham; Madden
diseases–fiction:  rabin
divorce–stories:  Coffelt
dogs–fiction:  Monninger
dogs–stories:  Coffelt; goldfinger; 
graham
dragons–fiction:  drake
dreams–fiction:  kluger
dreams–stories:  Spinelli Someday
drug abuse–fiction:  halpin
ecology–fiction:  gates; nelson; 
Stead
Ethics and values:  Aronson; Bauer; 
Cooney; deSaix; deuker; devita; 
doyle; draper; ellis; Flake; ger-
shator; giles; Lichtman; Mac-
donald; Michaels; nelson; Paley; 
St. James; Weaver
Faith–fiction:  Abdel-Fattah; Bradley, 
k.;
Subject and uSe Index
keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
July/AugusT 2007  •  65
Families–fiction:  Barshaw; dem-
ing; gantos; hall; horvath; Pow; 
Spinelli Summerhouse; Wittlinger
FAntASy:  Black; datlow; dem-
ing; drake; gaiman Interworld; 
gaiman M; Macdonald; nelson; 
Prévost; Stead
Farm life–fiction:  Mathews
Fathers–fiction:  Castellucci; Cullen; 
Madden; Prévost; Wilson
Fathers–stories:  Many
FoLk-Like tALeS:  gershator; 
Lucas
FoLktALeS And FAiry tALeS:  
Andersen; hanson; isadora; 
teitelbaum
Food and eating–fiction:  Bradley, A.
Food and eating–stories:  denise; 
grey; Mcnamara
Foster care–fiction:  Monninger
Friends–fiction:  Bradley, A.; Castel-
lucci; Cohn; doyle; ellis; hara-
zin; kluger; Lockhart; Marsden; 
Paley; ruby; Scieszka; Wilson
Friends–stories:  Fine
gambling–fiction:  hautman
games–fiction:  hautman
games–stories:  katz, k.
gardening–stories:  gershator
gardens and gardening–fiction:  
kennedy
gays and lesbians–fiction:  Bauer; 
Cohn; Felin; garden; Lockhart; 
St. James
ghoSt StorieS:  hahn
grandparents–fiction:  Cheaney
grAPhiC noveLS:  Schrag; 
trondheim
grief–fiction:  Cotten; horvath; 
kennedy; Mathews
growing up–fiction:  Bauer
guilt–fiction:  Aronson;ellis
hair–stories:  Many
Health:  Bradley, A.
hiStoriCAL FiCtion:  Bauer; 
Crocker; Cullen; doyle; draper; 
Madden; Mathews; rabin; rin-
aldi; Schlitz; Schmidt; Sharenow; 
Wulffson
History, European:  Burleigh; de-
Saix; Schlitz
History, U.S.:  Sharenow; Sullivan
History, world: Serrano
holocaust:  deSaix
homesickness–stories: Winter
huMor:  Barshaw; gantos; gold-
finger; graham; grey; hanson; 
katz, A.; Long; Many; Mcelli-
gott; Morrow; o’Malley; Palatini; 
rosenthal; ruby; Schwartz; 
Scieszka; townsend; trondheim; 
vere
identity–fiction:  gaiman Interworld; 
Wittlinger
illness–fiction:  Cotten
immigrants–fiction:  kerr
immigrants–stories:  Winter
insects:  Mcelligott; Murawski
insects–stories:  Fleming
islands–fiction:  horvath
Jews:  deSaix
kisses–stories:  Long
knights and chivalry–fiction:  San-
dell
Language arts:  grandits; Morrow; 
robb
Latinos–fiction:  kerr; Powers
Lies–fiction:  Flake
Literature, English:  Sandell
Marine life–stories:  Lucas
Mathematics:  Lichtman; Mcelligott
Medieval life–fiction:  Schlitz
Mental illness–fiction:  hall
Mexico:  Serrano
Military history: Fleischman; Sul-
livan
Mothers–fiction:  halpin; Sharenow
Moving–stories:  Lobel
Music and musicians–fiction:   
Bang-Campbell; Castellucci
Muslims–fiction: Abdel-Fattah
MySterieS:  harazin; harper; 
hautman; Powers; Wulffson
Myths, classical:  deming
native Americans–fiction:  Marsden
Nature study:  Jenkins; Murawski
nursery rhymes–fiction:  Palatini
orphans–fiction:  horvath
Physical education:  deuker
Pigs–stories:  denise
Poetry: Prelutsky
66  •  The BulleTin
Seasons–stories:  Stein
Secrets–fiction:  gates; giles; hall
Sexuality–fiction:  Wittlinger
Short StorieS:  Bauer; datlow; 
gaiman M; garden; hearne; 
robson; Schrag; teitelbaum
Slavery–fiction:  rinaldi
Social studies:  Cooney
SPeCuLAtive FiCtion:  gates
SPortS StorieS: deuker; Mur-
dock
Stepfamilies–fiction:  Felin
Storytime:  Bee; Fleming; Franco; 
Prelutsky; Stein
Summer–fiction:  hahn; Spinelli 
Summerhouse
Summer–stories:  Franco
SuPernAturAL StorieS:  
harper
teachers–fiction:  Schmidt
time travel–fiction:  rabin; Prévost
toddLer BookS:  Blake; katz, 
k.; Stein
toys–stories:  Fine
trains–stories:  Bee
transgender people–fiction:  Wit-
tlinger
transportation–stories:  Bee
tricksters–fiction:  datlow
vacations–fiction:  Barshaw; hahn; 
Spinelli Summerhouse
voyages and travel–fiction:  Cheaney
voyages and travel–stories:  Lobel
Whales–stories:  Lucas
WordLeSS BookS:  rogers
Work–fiction:  doyle
World War ii:  deSaix; Fleischman; 
Sullivan
PoP–uP BookS:  katz, k.
Prejudice–fiction:  Powers; St. James
Princesses–stories:  Andersen
racism:  Fleischman
racism–fiction:  draper; Powers; 
rinaldi; Sharenow
Readers theater:  Schlitz
Reading aloud:  hanson; kluger; 
Schlitz; Scieszka; Spinelli, Sum-
merhouse; teitelbaum
Reading, easy:  Bang-Campbell; 
Fine; hurwitz; Macdonald; 
o’Malley; rogers; rosenthal; 
Schwartz; Scieszka; townsend
Reading, reluctant:  Barshaw; ellis; 
grandits; Jenkins; rosenthal; 
Shaskan
refugees–fiction:  Cooney
relationships–fiction:  Bradley, A.; 
Cohn; Crocker; Murdock
Religious education: Abdel-Fattah; 
Bradley, k.
rhyMing StorieS:  denise; 
Fleming; Franco; katz, A. 
romance–fiction:  Black; kerr; 
Sandell
royalty–fiction:  rabin
royalty–fiction: trondheim
runaways–fiction:  Monninger
SCAry StorieS:  gaiman M; 
hearne; teitelbaum
School–fiction:  Bradley, A.; Bradley, 
k.; halpin; harper; Marsden; 
Schmidt; Schrag; townsend; 
Wilson
School–stories:  hurwitz; Mcnamara
Science:  Mcnamara; Sullivan
SCienCe FiCtion:  devita; 
Michaels
