I LLIN
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
..~I
~·s 
"
r''
,1; 
*i,-·;·
Newbery medalist Sharon Creech's
"wise and witty" new novel
"Having lived in 13 states
in 12 years, Dinnie has
been traveling all her life;
but it's still a shock when
she finds herself [at] the
American School in
Switzerland, where her
uncle Max is headmaster.
During a thoroughly
broadening year [there],
Dinnie gradually loses her
sense of being insulated
from the world. Fresh,
smart characters in a
picturesque setting
[populate] a thoughtful
younq person's life-chanqinq
odyssey [in] a story to stimulate both head and heart."-ALA Booklist*
"Will keep readers turning the pages and regretful to reach the last one."
-Kirkus Reviews
Ages 8 - 12. * $14.95 TR 0-06-026993-6 * $14.89 LB 0-06-026994-4
Joanna Cotler Books
Also by Sharon Creech
ABSOLUTELY NORMAL CHAOS 
CHASING REDBIRD
$14.95 TR 0-06-026989-8 
$14.95 TR 0-06-026987-1
$14.89 LB 0-06-026992-8 
$14.89 LB 0-06-026988-X
$4.95 PB 0-06-440632-6 
$4.95 PB 0-06-440696-2
Joanna Cotler Books
PLEASING THE GHOST 
WALK TWO MOONS
$14.95 TR 0-06-026985-5 
1995 Newbery Medal
$14.89 LB 0-06-026986-3 
$15.95 TR 0-06-023334-6
$4.50 PB 0-06-440686-5 
$15.89 LB 0-06-023337-0
$4.95 PB 0-06-440517-6
$16.95 Aud 0-694-70-051-7
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022 
http://www.harperchildrens.com
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
December 1998
Vol. 52 No. 4
A LOOK INSIDE
123 THE BIG PICTURE
The Fourth Wise Man by Susan Summers; ad. from a story by Henry Van
Dyke; illus. by Jackie Morris
124 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
126 * Dinosaur's Binkit written and illus. by Sandra Boynton
134 
* The King's Swift Rider: A Novel on Robert the Bruce by Mollie Hunter
141 
* Restless Spirit: The Life and Works ofDorothea Lange by Elizabeth
Partridge
143 
* 10 Minutes till Bedtime written and illus. by Peggy Rathmann
146 * Pete's a Pizza written and illus. by William Steig
148 * The Friendship Ring: Not That I Care by Rachel Vail
153 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
154 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
__
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edulpuboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1998 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Jackie Morris from The Fourth Wise Man @1998. Used by permission of Dial
Books for Young Readers.
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
123
THE BIG PICTURE
The Fourth Wise Man
by Susan Summers; ad. from a story by Henry Van Dyke; illus by Jackie Morris
For children marking the advent of Christmas, Chanukah, or Eid ul-Fitr, the road
to celebration can seem endless. With its potent reminder that a journey well trav-
eled is as fulfilling as the destination, this elegant recasting of Henry Van Dyke's
The Story ofthe Other Wise Man promises to be the jewel among this trade season's
holiday offerings.
Artaban, friend of the Magi of renown, shares both their Zoroastrian dedication
to astronomy and their discovery of the star that heralds "the birth of a great teacher
who was to be born among the Jews." The four agree to rendezvous in Babylon
and proceed west with a well-supplied caravan, but before Artaban reaches the
others, he stops along the road to aid a dying stranger and thus misses the meeting.
He sells a sapphire, the first of his three jewels, to finance the trip on his own, but
in Bethlehem he again provides help to the needy, coming to the assistance of a
young mother by bribing a soldier with a ruby to save the mother's son from the
slaughter of the innocents. For years Artaban seeks the King "among the poor and
the lowly, the sorrowful and the sick," leading a life of good works until, on the
very day the King's life ends, he ransoms a slave girl with his last pearl and dies in
her arms with God's own blessing, "Peace be with you, Artaban. ... As often as
you did these things for the least of my children, you did them for me."
Adults in charge of guiding children of differing faiths through the holidays
find few alternatives to the secularism of Rudolph or the spiritual, if not titular,
neutrality of Dickens' A Christmas Carol. Summers offers in this tale of self-sacrifice
a most seaworthy vessel in which to navigate the tempestuous sea of interfaith
observances. Certainly Christianity impels the story, from the opening, "In the
days when Augustus Caesar ruled the Roman Empire and King Herod reigned in
Jerusalem," with its reference to Luke's gospel, to the closing words of God that
paraphrase the Last Judgment in Matthew's gospel. The parallel life that inspires
Artaban's thirty-three year quest remains, however, discreetly in the background
of the action; it is Artaban's sanctified journey that is central. The protagonist's
Zoroastrian faith is far enough removed from the religious experience of most
listeners (this will, no doubt, be an introduction, particularly for younger children)
as to render him an Everyman who transcends sectarian bounds. If Christians read
the parable of the Good Samaritan into Artaban's first encounter with a dying
man, Jews will as surely recognize that it is with Aaron's blessing that the young
mother sets him back on his journey, and Muslims will anticipate the Pillar Zakat
in his dedicated almsgiving. That Artaban derives wisdom and encounters grace
124 
* THE BULLETIN
from the stars and in the streets, from rabbis and rabble consistently overshadows
any narrowly religious details in the telling of the tale.
Morris supplies images that ably match the grace and power of Summers' text.
Her jewel-toned palette serves as a constant visual reminder of the literal and figu-
rative price ofArtaban's mission. In the opening spread, Artaban surveys from his
balcony a city crowned with tear-shaped domes of ruby red and sapphire blue and
a landscape that hints at regions beyond the Persian border. Deep sapphire tones
dominate hills and sky until the first gem is sold; then the sky turns red and even
the earthen walls of Bethlehem take on a ruddy hue until Artaban pays off a crim-
son-cloaked soldier with a ruby "glistening in his palm like a great drop of blood."
With only a pearl left in his pouch, the white-robed Artaban himself provides the
focus for most of the remaining scenes, until the closing spread reunites the three
colors at his death.
The geographical length and chronological span of Artaban's travels are artfully
conveyed through the strong horizontal composition of the double-page bleeds.
In a pivotal spread that marks the passage of decades, panels depict Artaban feed-
ing the hungry, clothing the naked, and comforting the dying, as his hair progres-
sively whitens and his skin subtly grays. Figures evince a solid, nearly sculptured
aspect, and each act of mercy is cast in a monumental pose reminiscent of classic
religious statuary.
If peace on Earth remains elusive at the turn of the year, the story of Artaban
assures us that good will toward men is well within our grasp. (Imprint informa-
tion appears on p. 148.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AGEE, JON 
Who Ordered the Jumbo Shrimp? and Other Oxymorons; written and
illus. by Jon Agee. 
di Capua/HarperCollins, 1998 
80p
ISBN 0-06-205159-8 
$12.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Having polished off the palindromes (in Go Hang a Salami, I'm a Lasagna Hog,
BCCB 10/92), Agee now turns his attention to the unexamined oxymorons of
everyday language. As in the previous book, each entry has a page or a spread with
an entertaining dramatization, the figure of speech essentially serving as caption.
This doesn't have the lunatic piquancy of the palindrome compilations; it's argu-
able how oxymoronic some of the examples are ("daybed," "living legend"), the
contradiction in some is deliberate ("accidentally on purpose"), and some are rather
obscure phrases ("girly man" probably won't ring a bell with most middle graders).
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
125
There are still quite a few amusingly wacky-or on-target-interpretations, how-
ever: the "lengthy brief" that has the attorney standing amid a sea of papers while
the courtroom snoozes, the art gallery's "black light" that carefully focuses its inky
beam to blot out the revealing bits of a nude portrait, the "industrial park" with
kite-flying and dog-walking going on amid the manufacturing. While it doesn't
have the sheer effervescent humor of its predecessors, it's still a diverting entree
into some of the wilder reaches of language arts. DS
ALLAN, 
NICHOLAS 
Jesus' Day Off written and illus. by Nicholas
Allan. 
Doubleday, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-385-32620-3 
$7.95 
R 3-7 yrs
Redeeming the world is one heck of a job, and everyone would agree that a little R
& R is in order for the Redeemer. After the usual schedule of miracles ("No one
could figure out how they were done") and telling "marvelous stories, all for free,"
Jesus takes his doctor's advice and has a day to himself-juggling the halo, pic-
nicking, donkey riding. Later, suspecting that "the day had been wasted, and he'd
helped no one," Jesus is driven by guilt up the mountain to consult with Dad,
"who knew everything, and always had the right thing to say." Assured by the
voice of God that everything he had passed or touched had benefited from his
presence, Jesus has a good night's sleep, knowing there was "a lot more good work
to be done." Although cover art featuring a juggling Jesus promises little more
than low-budget silliness, the watercolor cartoons inside sport sly humor that will
commit Bible School lessons to memory as Jesus picnics on five loaves and two
fishes, tells stories on the mount to an appreciative audience ("I told you he was
good"), and jauntily treads the surface of the sea. While this title may not find
favor among the strictly orthodox, its upbeat message of Christ's good works will
be welcome in homes and Sunday schools where children are encouraged to know
Jesus as a friend. EB
ANDERSON, JANET S. 
The Monkey Tree. 
Dutton, 1998 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-525-46032-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
After her grandmother's death, Susanna moves with her family into the old lady's
house-where Uncle Louie, who has refused to leave his room for the last twenty
years, still lives. Devastated by a friend's abdication, Susanna has lost faith in
herself and in her art, so she's reluctant to settle in and to reach out to eager neigh-
bor Melody. She does begin to develop a relationship with Uncle Louie, who
shares her love of the beautiful, but she becomes troubled by his increasing limita-
tions-and by her own. Anderson writes Susanna's point of view in an intense
third-person stream of consciousness full of fragmentation and self-questioning,
which makes for a believable evocation of a sensitive girl struggling with change.
The plot collapses in a heap at its climax, however, when Uncle Louie, taken out-
side, has a crisis and then Susanna's brother falls off of a ladder and breaks his leg;
nor does the book make it sufficiently clear what the difference is between Louie's
bizarre self-imposed exile and his apparently now-pathological decline. Susanna's
worldview is compellingly depicted, however, and readers will sympathize with
her hurt and confusion. DS
126 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BOYNTON, 
SANDRA 
Dinosaur's Binkit; written and illus. by Sandra
Boynton. 
Little Simon, 1998 
14p
ISBN 0-689-82203-0 
$9.99 
R 2-4 yrs
Binkit, bickie, snuggy, blankey-whatever the household jargon, Dinosaur is not
going to sleep without it. As poetic verses of hilarious mock solemnity summon
him to bed ("Dinosaur O Dinosaur,/ you fuss and fret and yawn./ It's time to
brush your dino teeth and put your p.j.s on"), he undertakes a frantic quest for his
missing binkit. The birds concealed behind a flap in the tree query, "What's a
binkit?" Kids know, and they will empathize with Dinosaur's plight. Nor is the
binkit under the bed behind the lift-up square of fleecy red coverlet. And just
when Dinosaur stretches his cardboard jaws to howl "I NEED MY BINKIT!", a
little boy in a footed sleepsuit offers a fuzzy yellow "handkerchief' and-joy!- the
beloved binkit's back. The board-book set will be delighted with Boynton's menu
of tactile treats-from the slick mylar crescent moon, to the eminently strokable
bits of nappy fabric securely embedded in the heavy stock. Dinosaur is just about
as cute as an olive-green reptile gets, with his panicky round eyes and cozy red
jammies. If a giggle's allowed on the naptime agenda, leave Pat the Bunny on the
bookshelf and grab this instead. EB
BROWN, DON 
One Giant Leap: The Story ofNeilArmstrong; written and illus. by
Don Brown. 
Houghton, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-395-88401-2 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Brown, author of Alice Ramsey's Grand Adventure (BCCB 10/97) and Ruth Law
Thrills a Nation (BCCB 12/93), has a knack for succinctly and successfully telling
the stories of those with a yen for travel to faraway places. He has done it again
with this evocative biography of astronaut Neil Armstrong. The author traces
Armstrong's love of things that fly, from 1932 when he sat on his father's shoulders
and "watched airplanes race," to his first airplane ride (his father was nervous, but
"Neil was fearless. Neil was delighted"), to his learning to pilot rocket-powered
airplanes. Although Neil Armstrong did lots of normal everyday things (mowing
the lawn, joining the school band, working in a bakery), he never lost his passion
for things that fly-he even had a repetitive dream about "hovering." It's hard to
go wrong with a story that ends with "one small step for man, one giant leap for
mankind," and Brown leads readers unerringly to that joyful walk on the moon
("'Isn't this fun!' Neil said"). The sense of Armstrong as a boy growing into his
childhood dream is strong in the well-constructed text, and that feeling is extended
through watercolors with an airy sense of lightness that suits the emotional tone.
Illustrations in a palette of cool blues and sands gently unfold the story and enfold
the reader in a quietly inspirational rendition of a life's dream achieved. JMD
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH 
The Heart ofa Chief. Dial, 1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8037-2276-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
The problems of Bruchac's latest hero are all too clear: "Mom's death. Dad's
drinking." Chris also possesses a loyalty to his grandfather and great-aunt's Native
American traditions that often conflicts not only with mainstream culture but also
with some political factions in his own tribe, which plans to put a casino on a
peaceful island at the heart of the reservation. The problem with these problems is
that there's no conflict onstage. From his first day of sixth grade at Rangerville
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
127
Junior High, Chris solves his dilemmas with a wisdom that meets little resistance.
An English teacher welcomes Chris' challenge of The Sign of the Beaver's ending
with Indian exile ("We did not go away. We're still here"); his classmates welcome
his leadership, along with Indian council rules, in a special group research project.
While there are explanations of contemporary issues, there's no experience of them.
What keeps the novel from becoming a tract are the dynamics between Chris and
his Indian buddies-probably the most fully developed conflict in the book-as
well as scenes like a moving telephone call with his father, or a retreat to his
grandfather's car without tires, where his little sister and grandfather visit when
they want his company. Chris is justified in raising these issues and he wins, which
is a heartwarming combination. BH
CLINTON, CATHERINE, comp. 
I, Too, Sing America: Three Centuries ofAfrican
American Poetry; illus. by Stephen Alcorn. 
Houghton, 1998 
128p
ISBN 0-395-89599-5 
$20.00 
R Gr. 6-9
Clinton has assembled a selection of poetry that spans three centuries of African-
American history. The title poem by Langston Hughes is followed by a brief
introduction in which Clinton discusses the contributions of African-American
poets to American letters. The body of the book itself is a chronological arrange-
ment of poems; each poem or selection of poems is preceded by a short biography
of the poet that, in addition to basic biographical information, gives a sense of the
time in which he or she lived and wrote. Twenty-five poets in all are represented;
selections include the poetry of slaves such as Lucy Terry and abolitionists such as
Frances Ellen Harper; the poems of historic literary figures such as W.E.B. Du
Bois, James Weldon Johnson, and Paul Laurence Dunbar reach from the past to
resonate with voices of the Harlem Renaissance such as Langston Hughes and
Countee Cullen and echo beside the modern voices of Maya Angelou, Amiri Baraka,
Nikki Giovanni, and Rita Dove. Glossy paper, full-page illustrations, running
headers and footers, and other details make this an elegant-looking volume. Alcorn's
uneven but often powerful compositions will draw viewers despite the surprisingly
lackluster palette. Full-page sepia-toned textile patterns are a repeated design ele-
ment, but the color is washed out and the patterns themselves lack the context
necessary to make them relevant. Some of the poetic selections are puzzlingly
nonrepresentative of the writers' best work, but they reflect a struggle for an indi-
vidual sense of self, an anger at recognized injustice, and a love of freedom both
artistic and material that is inspirational in tone and effect. JMD
CORNELISSEN, CORNELIA 
Soft Rain: A Story of the Cherokee Trail of
Tears. Delacorte, 1998 
115p
ISBN 0-385-32253-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Soft Rain's father and brother were out in the corn fields on the day the soldiers
burst into Soft Rain's North Carolina home and ordered her and her mother to
gather their belongings instantly and join the march to the stockade. Bad food,
worse weather, disease, and anxiety for loved ones quickly reduce the numbers of
the Tsalagi (Cherokee) evacuees; although Soft Rain and her mother survive the
rigors of the forced encampment, her beloved cousin and playmate succumbs to
fever. When the Tsalagi from the region have been assembled, the forced march
continues West, with confusion, exhaustion, and hostile elements as constant com-
panions along the route. The poignancy of this bleak chapter in history should
128 
* THE BULLETIN
rivet even the most callous readers, but unfortunately Cornelissen allows episodes
to fly past with little examination; a litany of troubles rather than a narrative of
emotional depth results. Truncated conversations in clipped sentences augment
the general choppiness of Soft Rain's story, and the self-conscious dialogue adds
little to the story's overall impact. Although readers with prior understanding of
the Cherokee's travails may find the new puppy/new home/reunited family end-
ing uncharacteristically rosy, children who simply accompany Soft Rain on her
trek will be mightily relieved by the promise of a hopeful future. A brief note on
U.S.-Cherokee relations is included. EB
CUYLER, 
MARGERY 
The Biggest, 
Best Snowman; illus. 
by Will
Hillenbrand. 
Scholastic, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-590-13922-3 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
When BIG Mama, BIG Sarah, and BIG Lizzie all tell Little Nell she's too small,
Nell heads off to the snowy woods to play with her friends Reindeer, Hare, and
Bear Cub, who join with her in building a huge snowman; when her family sees
she's built the "biggest, best snowman that ever was," there are kisses and reevalu-
ation all around. Some plot points don't make a whole lot of sense (why, for
instance, is Nell hoisted to the top of the snowman at the end rather than taken in
for the "BIG yummy lunch" her mother promises?), but Cuyler has an engaging
storytelling style with an offhanded charm that keeps the animal companions from
cloying and makes the little girl's snowy project an enticing one. Hillenbrand's
wide frozen landscape looks to be a big fluffy playground, and the cast is person-
able without being cutesy (sulky BIG Lizzie, resentfully trudging outside, offers an
entertaining counterpoint to pert Little Nell). Kids tired of being too little will
understand Nell's impulse, and everybody will want to go romp in the snow. DS
EMBERLEY, ED 
Three: An Emberley Family Sketchbook; written and illus. by Ed
Emberley, Rebecca Emberley and Michael Emberley. 
Little, 1998 
64p
ISBN 0-316-23506-7 
$17.95 
M 
6-9 yrs
Ed, Rebecca, and Michael Emberley (the first the father of the second and third)
are talented creators of children's books, and here their individual contributions
are combined in book form for the first time. Ed's section is a series of short,
sometimes page-long pieces, including an autobiography, some meditations on
"three," craft tips, and a triple-threaded telling of three three-focused stories: "The
Three Little Pigs," "Goldilocks and the Three Bears," and "The Three Billy Goats
Gruff." After her autobiographical spread, Rebecca offers up some of her poems
illustrated with collage art. Michael too turns to poetry in his illustrated section,
including some popular verselore such as "Three Baby Monkeys Jumping on the
Bed" and "Row, Row, Row Your Boat." The end result is head-scratching
bemusement, since there's no continuity or clear goal to the book, and readers
who get interested in one aspect will get frustrated with its quick replacement by
another. Ed's computer-graphic art has more heart than most in that medium,
Rebecca's designs are elegant, and Michael's visual versatility quite impressive, but
the stories are easily found in more useful books, and the original poems are unre-
markable and at times amateurish and awkward. The Emberleys have produced or
contributed to many worthy books; far better to go back to one of those than to
bog down in the confusion here. DS
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
129
ERNST, LISA CAMPBELL 
Stella Louella's Runaway Book; written and illus. by Lisa
Campbell Ernst. 
Simon, 1998 
34p
ISBN 0-689-81883-1 
$16.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
It's a knell of doom with which many people are familiar: "Stella's library book
disappeared, as if in a magic act." This particular library book, however, has been
traveling along; first Stella's brother Sam picked it up (leaning against his stuffed
bear, he opines he liked the bears in the book); the postman found it buried in the
mail (he liked where they go on a walk); golden-haired little Tiffany Anne liked
the little girl and passed the book onto the police; and so on, until the book even-
tually ends up back at the library, having given each of its conveyors a pleasure
appropriate to their tastes and activities. The string of stops on the book's journey
is a diverting sequence, and little patrons will get a kick out of the compilation of
hints that reveal Stella's misplaced volume as Goldilocks and the Three Bears. Ernst's
line-and-pastel illustrations have a smooth luminosity of color rare with that me-
dium; though the people get generic and some of the spreads are more cluttered
than joyously chaotic, the art still evinces a loopy lightness, with its cumulative
crowd of book-borrowers chasing Goldilocks all over town, appropriate to the silly
story. A library-oriented romp, this will be a bouncy cure for overdue-phobia. DS
FERRIS,JEAN 
Bad. Farrar, 1998 
182p
ISBN 0-374-30479-3 
$16.00 
R Gr. 7-10
Dallas loves "skating"-courting various kinds of danger-with her friends, until
she falls through thin ice when their attempt to stick up a convenience store lands
her in jail and her friends deny all involvement with her. Her father admits his
inability to control her (her fun-loving mother died in a car crash years ago) and
she's sent off to a correctional facility for six months, where she meets girls with
troubles and obstacles greater than hers but also with more in common with her
than she's initially willing to admit. There's a fair amount of babes-behind-bars
stock characters here, albeit scaled down for a junior facility: there's the persistent
starter of fights, the white supremacist, the mother missing her baby (Dallas' room-
mate Shatasia), and the nasty warden who gets her comeuppance, among others.
Ferris gives most of these characterizations some strength, however, especially in
the context of their relationships: Dallas and Shatasia form a tight friendship that
looks likely to last beyond their release, but Dallas and her father may never work
things out (the book offers a strong suggestion that the discord is due to willful
refusal on both sides to abandon the habits of a lifetime despite some clear possi-
bilities for rapprochement), and she's by no means guaranteed to stay out of trouble.
With enough of a pulpy edge to attract readers' interest and enough solid writing
to keep it, this will go over well with those who enjoy melodramas with a gloss of
respectability. DS
FLEMING, DENISE 
Mama Cat Has Three Kittens; written and illus. by Denise
Fleming. 
Holt, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-5745-5 
$15.95 
R* 
2-5 yrs
There's a layabout in every family, and in Mama Cat's family, it's Boris: "Mama
Cat has three kittens, Fluffy, Skinny and Boris. When Mama Cat washes her
paws, Fluffy and Skinny wash their paws. Boris naps," and naps, and naps, no
matter what else is going on in the lush green grass around him. Fleming's text is
130 
* THE BULLETIN
right on humorous target, as Mama Cat and her good kitties walk the stone wall,
sharpen their claws, chase leaves, and dig in the sand-and Boris naps. Boris'
supine feline personality will make little listeners giggle, but Fleming's mixed-
media illustrations will make them sit up and take notice. The round and furry
balls of kitten chase after their majestic black-and-white mother, through neon-
lime grass set against a sunny yellow sky, across a rough stone wall, into sandy
patches with red star flowers, in compositions of engaging form and balance. The
large, round shapes of the cats dominate the double-page spreads, and the sense of
constant motion (except for Boris, of course, who is the picture of contented kitty
somnolence) is enhanced by the textured surface of Fleming's illustrations. This is
a close-to-perfect dance of text and illustrations, where the success of one depends
upon the success of the other and the two combine to make an eminently satisfy-
ing whole. JMD
GERSHATOR, PHILLIS 
When It Starts to Snow; illus. by Martin Matje. 
Holt,
1998 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-5404-9 
$15.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
A simple rhyming text carries the reader lightly through the "question and answer"
format of this low-key but involving book, from the opening query ("What if it
starts to snow?/ What do you do?/ Where do you go?") to the repetitive responses
of various fauna encountered by the protagonist ("'I keep watch.'/ says the shiny
black crow./ 'Caw Caw Caw/ when it starts to snow'") to the final verse ("I can't
sleep/ when the snow wants to play/ Three cheers for snow!/ hip hip hurray!").
Gershator leads listeners and readers through a crowded winter landscape, featur-
ing a mouse, cat, crow, goose, beaver, fish, and other creatures as they respond to
the original question by telling how they seek shelter, their responses sometimes
punctuated by their traditional accompanying sound, whether caw, honk, or moo.
Matje's gouache and colored-pencil illustrations are balanced and clean, the strong
geometric curves of his animal figures set against a cool gray background. The
little-boy protagonist, dressed in green with a red hat and scarf, is the only hot spot
of color, and, with his pointy hat and pointy nose, he looks like an elf slipping
mischievously through the trees. The bright white snowflakes are satisfyingly fat
and ever-present, and the child's glee in the "brand-new snow/ coming down/
coming down" is contagious. Gershator's rhyming text has echoes of Brown Bear,
Brown Bear, What Do You See? in its rhythmic structure and patterns, and her
story will make a cozily satisfying lapsit for that toddler fascinated by both snow-
flakes and animal noises. JMD
GERSTEIN, MORDICAI. 
Victor: A Novel Based on the Life of the Savage of
Aveyron. 
Foster/Farrar, 1998 
258p
ISBN 0-374-38142-9 
$17.00 
R Gr. 9-12
This and The Wild Boy, reviewed below, are two very different treatments of the
same story-that of the "Savage of Aveyron," a "wild boy" found in the forests of
France at the end of the French Revolution. This treatment is an historical novel
of depth and complexity in which Gerstein speculates on the life of the "savage"
known as Victor and his teacher, Jean-Marc-Gaspard Itard. The book begins with
a letter from Itard to the Minister of the Interior, explaining that Victor's story is
less "an account of a student's progress, and more the history of his teacher's fail-
ure." The life story that follows is told in remarkably fresh language, from the
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
131
opening scene of Victor being carried into town strung on a pole to the closing
scene describing the older Victor and his progress through Paris ("Wind. Windy.
The leaves are flying. The light is blowing away. The wind is blowing the sun
away. The wind is blowing Victor away. Away. Away with the wind and the light
and leaves. Victor is a good boy"). In between is the multilayered story of two
lives, the life of the man who spent years attempting to connect Victor to the so-
called civilized world and the life of Victor himself, voiceless and unheard. Gerstein
also presents the story of educational and sociopolitical philosophies that demanded
either the education or incarceration of this wild child and gives readers a conclu-
sion rife with open-ended questions about the nature of humanity, the soul, and
our place in the universe. The prose balances between the poetic and the clinical,
and Gerstein does not shy away from Victor's awakening sexual desires and Itard's
inability to deal with them. The omniscient point of view allows a look into the
minds of all the characters, even Victor, whose thought processes remain
unplumbable to his teacher, but are a jolting, visceral experience for the reader.
JMD
GERSTEIN, MORDICAI. 
The Wild Boy: Based on the True Story of the Wild Boy of
Aveyron; written and illus. by Mordicai Gerstein. 
Foster/Farrar, 1998 
45p
ISBN 0-374-38431-2 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-5
This is a picture-book version of the Savage ofAveyron's story, much simplified in
text but beautifully evoked in watercolor illustrations. From the "wild boy" of the
title, covered with dirt, his hair matted and tangled, to the bathed, curried, and
dressed child who learns to recognize letters and affection, Gerstein's boy is always
on the verge of escape, the outline of his body barely containing him. There is a
rustic beauty in the illustrations of Victor standing at the edge of a cliff, rolling
naked and joyous in the snow, and snuggling against the soft velvet of Madame
Guerin's (Itard's housekeeper and ultimately Victor's caretaker) velvet dress. The
picture-book text is, of necessity, simpler, but it still communicates the pathos of
the boy's situation. Although Victor learned to conduct himself relatively well in
polite company, he never learned to speak, and, according to Gerstein's works, it is
debatable whether or not he was better off out of the woods than he was in them.
Under the picture of a young Victor standing in his dark bedroom, looking out the
window, the text reads: "And if the doctor looked back in on him when the moon
was full, Victor was always gazing up into it, perfectly still, bathed in silver light."
Readers, older and younger, will wonder if he would not have been happier if left
under the wild moon. JMD
GILBERT, BARBARA SNow 
Broken Chords. Front Street, 1998 
188p
ISBN 1-886910-23-5 $15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Clara is a seventeen-year-old technical virtuoso on the piano, and it is very likely
she will win the prestigious Nicklaus Competition and a scholarship to the Juilliard
School of Music. Her parents have made enormous sacrifices to prepare Clara for
this achievement, and she herself has dedicated untold hours to practice and per-
formance. When Clara sprains her wrist shortly before the competition and lives
a normal high school student's life for a few weeks, she fearfully realizes how easily
she could leave the piano behind. Her budding romance with Marshall, another
competition participant and a passionately committed artist, sets her lack of pas-
sion in stark relief. Clara wins the Nicklaus Competition, but the next day she
132 
* THE BULLETIN
turns it down, and Marshall wins by default. This is no sacrifice-your-art-and-get
your-man story, though-Marshall, accepting the scholarship and going to New
York, tells Clara he cannot love her if she doesn't play. Gilbert strikes a tense
balance between Clara and her parents, Clara and her piano, Clara and the world,
getting inside the mind of a talented young woman who is only just questioning
the life everyone assumed she'd pursue. Characterization is strong, with even the
relatively minor characters of Clara's best friend and younger brother solidly real-
ized. Descriptions of artistic expression are difficult at best, but Gilbert communi-
cates the joy and style of the piano playing and even implies a simple definition of
artistic passion when Clara replies to Marshall's question about why she gave up
the Nicklaus: "Marshall, I could imagine my life without it." Marshall's rejection
of Clara after she decides not to play is like a punch in the stomach, but she stays
firmly on her feet. JMD
GRANT, CYNTHIA D. 
The White Horse. Atheneum, 1998 
157p
ISBN 0-689-82127-1 
$16.00 
M 
Gr. 9-12
Raina is sixteen, one of a passel of neglected and abused children of an addict
mother; she's now homeless and the satellite of her junkie boyfriend. Miss Johnson
is the forty-five-year-old teacher of an Independent Study program at a continua-
tion high school, bitter about the infertility that cost her her marriage, afraid of her
inability to help the troubled kids she sees, and touched by the power of Raina's
writings about her life. When Raina discovers, after her boyfriend's death, that
she's pregnant, she turns to the teacher she's begun to trust, but she must still fight
against the false promise of her mother's apparent but destructive desire to have
her back in the family. This is composed of some well-trodden fictional ground-
Miss Johnson goes back to Up the Down Staircase and Raina's predecessors range
from Go Ask Alice to Melvin Burgess' Smack-and suffers in comparison to others
of its ilk. Miss Johnson's first-person narration is stilted, and Raina's writing,
sounding as it does like the rest of the novel, isn't convincing as an individual
voice. Though the book has at heart a real fear for the Rainas of this world, there's
a purposiveness and a sentimentality to the account (there's much labored fore-
shadowing of a revelation of a past tragedy and a jarring everything's-happy end-
ing) and to the interpolated poetry that keeps this from being the sensitive and
realistic exploration of Grant's other work (Uncle Vampire, BCCB 11/93). Teens
will appreciate this as they do sensational cable-TV movies-for the entertain-
ment value of the dark side, not for empathy with struggling against it. DS
HEINZ, BRIAN J. 
Nanuk: Lord of the Ice; illus. by Gregory Manchess. 
Dial,
1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2195-1 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-2194-3 
$15.89 
R Gr. 3-5
Illustrator Gregory Manchess captures the brilliance of light against the rugged
arctic landscape as Heinz, author of The Wolves, narrates another story of the hunt.
After a short introduction, Heinz begins his narrative with Nanuk, the polar bear,
who scents natchik (seals) on the breeze. A second narrative follows a boy hunter
(Inuk) leading his pack of dogs to Nanuk thirty miles away. Alternating between
the two stories, Heinz documents Nanuk's triumphs with natchik and ugruk
(bearded seal) until he meets Inuk. Wielding first a lance, then a harpoon, Inuk
attempts to kill the polar bear. He fails and, as the mighty bear slips into the water,
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
133
the boy pauses to honor his opponent: "Amidst the furious yelping of his dogs, the
hunter raised his hands high into the air and shouted praises to the great bear's
courage." While the language is often florid with some noticeable linguistic glitches,
some of the poetic images evoke the sense of an old-fashioned adventure tale. Bold
brushstrokes define the world of ice and snow and its inhabitants who must sur-
vive in this icy and often deadly world. Deep blues and browns are illuminated
with strokes of yellow and white, creating a luminescence fitting for a lord of the
ice. EAB
HESSE, KAREN Just Juice; illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. 
Scholastic,
1998 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-590-03382-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Juice Faulstich is her daddy's girl, like him happy working with her hands-and
like him, she realizes, in her inability to read. Papa's inability has left Juice's family
with a big problem, because he has ignored the tax bills he couldn't read and the
house is on the block for back taxes, and, with Papa out of work and Mama expect-
ing a new baby to join Juice and her three siblings, getting the money isn't going to
be easy. Hesse paints a sympathetic and understanding picture of Juice, whose
embarrassment at her ignorance initially prevents her from rectifying it, and whose
closeness with her father makes her uneasy about separating from him by gaining
a skill he doesn't have. Though the story isn't without sentimentality, the book
depicts the Faulstich family's out-of-the-mainstream existence without whitewashing
(the family really doesn't have any excuse for their tolerance of Juice's continual
truancy) and without finding the need to create villains (the people expecting pos-
session of the Faulstich home only appear from a distance and evoke resentment
but not blame). This is a look at a contemporary American existence many readers
won't know about, and they'll appreciate Juice's strength and determination in the
face of adversity. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. DS
HODGES, MARGARET, ad. 
Up the Chimney; illus. by Amanda Harvey. 
Holiday
House, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1354-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
In this adaptation of Joseph Jacobs' "The Old Witch," Hodges retains some in-
triguing elements, from the witch's "long-tailed bag" to the rhymes from a chase
scene in which the witch pursues the heroine heading home with the bag of money:
"Apple tree, apple tree, hide me,/ So the old witch can't find me;/ If she does, she'll
pick my bones,/ And bury me under the marble stones .... Tree of mine, tree of
mine,/ Have you seen a girl/ With a willy-willy wag, and a long-tailed bag,/ Who's
stole my money, all I had?" The girl has been kind to the apple tree, which pro-
tects her, and when her unkind sister travels the same route the tree helps the witch
instead. Richard Chase's "Gallymanders, Gallymanders" is a lighter, more acces-
sible retelling than this somewhat stodgily faithful one. Harvey's illustrations have
some sly modernizations and imaginative compositions, but the watercolors are
generally pale and the witch stiffly conventionalized. This is a story that still may
fly best in an oral telling, with the book offered afterwards as backup for kids who
want to take home a copy of what they've just heard. BH
134 
* THE BULLETIN
HOSSACK, SYLVIE 
Green Mango Magic. Avon Camelot, 1998 
[128p]
ISBN 0-380-97613-7 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Maile's circumscribed life among the Hawaiian sugar-cane fields suddenly expands
when the plantation manager's niece from the mainland, who is recovering from
cancer, arrives for the summer. Although Brooke is quite willing to be friends and
her bald "chemo head" causes her little embarrassment, her presence does shift the
balance of Maile's prior friendships, and Brooke's mother's snobbishness makes
Maile self-conscious about her humbler island lifestyle. Beneath Maile's concern
for her new friend's health is an even more troubling problem-Maile's estrange-
ment from her widowed father, who has remarried and has tried without success to
draw his daughter back into his life. Hossack skillfully incorporates the fertile but
sparsely populated island terrain, which dictates that preteen friendships depend
on a network of adults to convey them from place to place. Her multilayered tale,
however, is thinly developed at all levels, and Maile's reconciliation with her fa-
ther-although satisfying-is abruptly and facilely accomplished. Children inter-
ested in the back side of island life but not yet ready to take on Graham Salisbury's
more challenging work (see Shark Bait, BCCB 12/97) might like a taste. EB
HUNTER, 
MOLLIE 
The King's Swift Rider: 
A Novel on Robert the
Bruce. HarperCollins, 1998 
241p
ISBN 0-06-027186-8 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Hunter has written a rousing piece of historical fiction based on the battle of Rob-
ert the Bruce to free Scotland from English rule. Martin and his older brother join
the campaign against the English; narrator Martin proves to be an intelligent ob-
server, a skill soon put to good use by self-crowned king of Scotland Robert the
Bruce. Martin becomes "the king's swift rider," part spy, part communicator, part
agitator, and all loyal servant. Hunter makes sense out of the chaos of war, limning
the battle scenes with a controlled ferocity that never degenerates into the sensa-
tional and providing readers with a sense of the strategic genius that was necessary
for Scotland's much smaller army to defeat the substantially larger, better-equipped
English one. Martin is an articulate character whose descriptions of the Scottish
heroes give them humanity and dimension. There are moments of true pathos
contained within and outside the battle scenes, and the conclusion, in which Mar-
tin, now Abbot of Melrose Abbey, receives the heart of Robert the Bruce in a silver
box from the hands of his officer brother, is only one of them. A list of dramatis
personae, an historical map of Scotland, and a diagram of the deciding Battle of
Bannockburn is included. JMD
JAFFE, NINA, ad. 
The Cow ofNo Color: Riddle Stories andJustice Talesfrom Around
the World; ad. by Nina Jaffe and Steve Zeitlin; illus. by Whitney Sherman. 
Holt,
1998 
162p
ISBN 0-8050-3736-5 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-8
If you are looking for tales to open up a discussion of moral questions, this is a
good place to start. Jaffe and Zeitlin have compiled twenty-three stories from
around the world that deal with mutable ideas of justice and mercy, and they've
expanded them with both discussable questions and deliberately debatable conclu-
sions. The book is divided into seven sections, each with a title that explains its
contents: Poetic Justice, Bringing Wrongdoers to Justice, Forgiveness and Mercy,
DECEMBER 1998 
* 135
Settling Disputes, Deciding Ownership, Cosmic Questions, and You're It. Each
tale has a short introduction, and most tales are interrupted to ask questions (of
varying degrees of thoughtfulness and difficulty) of the reader or listener. The
stories include familiar variants-the wise character who tricks a trickster with his
own trick, the greedy man whose soul is saved by one righteous action, the thief
undone by his own words-but not all of them are ethically simple or even ulti-
mately solvable. Some, like "The Flask," present an impossible situation with
unacceptable solutions, solely to stimulate what is bound to be heated discussion.
Sherman's black-and-white line drawings have a stark gracefulness that comple-
ments the tales' form and structure; the tales themselves are simply told with little
embellishment. Extensive source notes and a bibliography are included. JMD
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
Heaven. 
Simon, 1998 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-689-82229-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Marley is fourteen, a contented resident of Heaven, Ohio, when her life changes
completely-she discovers that the people she knew as her parents are actually her
aunt and uncle, and the drifting uncle to whom she periodically sends money is
actually her father. Her world is rocked ("Maybe the one big lie makes everything
a lie") and she struggles, with the help of her friend Shoogy, her babysitting client
Bobby and his baby, Feather, and finally her loving parents, all of them, to under-
stand what that means in terms of her life and identity. Johnson, author of Toning
the Sweep (BCCB 5/93) and Humming Whispers (4/95), resembles a stiller Sharon
Creech in her fluid evocation of the intricacy of daily life and adolescent contem-
plation thereof. While some of the factual aspects of the story leave questions
unanswered (why, for instance, did Marley's parents change her first name?) and
some seem a bit stretched (the large cash settlement resulting from the death of
Marley's birth mother in an accident in a faulty car), Marley's world is sharply
realized. The book offers its other characters nice moments, too, such as Marley's
brother's search for his own birth certificate upon hearing the news about Marley
("Just making sure, I guess," he says). The theme of not being who you think you
are has both relevance and appeal; this unmelodramatic and thoughtful explora-
tion of the topic will satisfy adolescent readers grappling with similar questions.
DS
KRAFT, BETSY HARVEY 
Sensational Trials of the 20th Century. 
Scholastic,
1998 
216p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-37205-X 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Kraft examines major trials both criminal and civil: Sacco and Vanzetti's, the
Scopes "Monkey" Trial, Bruno Hauptmann's for the murder of the Lindbergh
baby, Julius and Ethel Rosenberg's, Brown vs. the Board of Education, the Watergate
trials, John Hinckley, Jr.'s, and, of course, those of O. J. Simpson. Despite the
title, her focus isn't solely on the courtroom; this means readers get a good over-
view of the background of the case, but it also means that in some places, such as in
the Watergate chapter, the trial itself seems a brief afterword to the description of
the events leading up to it. The Scopes chapter is the best one in the book: Kraft
shatters the Inherit the Wind misconceptions and makes clear the importance and
extent of the trial publicity; the discussion of the sensationalism surrounding other
trials is less effective but does succeed in making the point that attendant fuss is by
136 
* THE BULLETIN
no means a recent phenomenon. Though the book misses a great opportunity to
make some larger points about the connections between and common aspects of
these trials, these are serviceable condensed accounts of some significant twenti-
eth-century events. Black-and-white photographs appear throughout; an index
and a chapter-by-chapter bibliography, though no specific notes, are included.
DS
LAFAYE, A. 
Edith Shay. 
Viking, 1998 
183p
ISBN 0-670-87598-8 
$15.99 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Katherine Lunden has always set her sights beyond the role of Wisconsin farmer's
wife that fate seems to dangle before her, and when an opportunity presents itself
to escape family constraints, the sixteen-year-old hops a train to the big city. Arriving
nearly penniless in post-Civil War Chicago with a new identity purloined from a
piece of abandoned luggage, Katherine-now-Edith Shay scrapes by on menial labor
until dressmaker Aeslynn O'Dell trains her to be a seamstress and offers her a
glimpse of what life as a self-supporting woman might mean. Although "Edith"
learns through a letter that her parents have disowned her, this first taste of
independence leaves her thirsty for more, and she embarks on an odyssey to
Richmond, via Philadelphia, to discover what she can make of her life. Unlikelihood
works its way into the plotting as Edith's misadventures are continually tidied up
by big-hearted women, who always seem to be just around the corner in every
town. Likewise, her family's forgiveness is handily won without so much as a visit
from the errant daughter. Although LaFaye seems to suggest that the independent
life is the way for a proper young heroine to go, O'Dell and Edith's other mentors
interject frequent husband-hunting tips resonant of The Rules. Girls who dream
of ditching the old homestead for a flutter with personal freedom will, nonetheless,
eagerly follow Edith's engaging account of her cross-country trek. EB
LEVY, CONSTANCE 
A Crack in the Clouds and Other Poems; illus. by Robin Bell
Corfield. 
McElderry, 1998 
40p
ISBN 0-689-82204-9 
$15.00 
R Gr. 3-7
Levy, author of I'm Going to Pet a Worm Today (BCCB 2/92) and other poetic
contributions, looks here mainly at the natural world, examining ocean waves and
tightly packed ears of corn, fallen trees, and cats in the mist. Lyrical and deftly
observed, her verses are simple yet inventive, sometimes using concrete effects
("Cowscape" gives a cow-by-cow impression of driving past a grazing herd), some-
times quietly rhymed ("Cricket Nights" is a hymn of affection and irritation to the
song of the lowly cricket), sometimes free verse ("At the Ballet" is a brief imagistic
sentence). The combination of familiarity and refreshed viewpoint makes her
work some of the best for new readers of poetry, and both classrooms and indepen-
dent readers will benefit from sharing her look at the world. Personable line-and-
wash spot art adds character without impeding the poems' vision. DS
LEWIS, J. PATRICK 
BoshBlobberBosh: Runcible Poems for Edward Lear; illus. by
Gary Kelley. 
Creative Editions/Harcourt, 1998 
40p
ISBN 0-15-201949-9 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
In sixteen poems, Lewis offers poetic biography of and homage to the inimitable
Edward Lear; in verses in various forms, the book treats his childhood ("Born in a
Crowd"), his famous encounter on a train with a gentleman who denied Lear's
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
137
existence ("The Earl of Derby and The Book ofNonsense"), and the viewpoint of
Lear's beloved pet ("Old Foss [the Cat] Recalls His Life with Mr. Lear") as well as
providing nonsensical Lear-inspired limericks and other poems. The verses are a
bit more sweetly whimsical than Lear's angular nonsense, but they're enjoyable
evocations of the poet's classic contributions and Lewis has often caught his
forerunner's tone. Kelley's oversized oils skew in the other direction, with somber
browns and grays and weightily modeled figures adding a grimness that under-
scores even the presumably happy children bearing their beloved poet aloft. Ulti-
mately this is more likely to succeed with older readers, even adults, who already
know some of the Learian saga, as the poems make connections to real events but
don't necessarily explain them (Lewis' appended notes often describe the aspects
of Lear's life that inspired a poem, but they rarely make clear where the fact-based
portion ends and Lewis' invention begins). This would work particularly well in
tandem with Lear's own poetry or with another poetic homage such as Willard's A
Visit to William Blake's Inn (BCCB 12/81). Sources are included in the endnotes.
DS
McALLISTER, ANGELA 
The Clever Cowboy; illus. by Katherine Lodge. 
DK Ink,
1998 28p
ISBN 0-7894-3491-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Clever Cowboy's talents aren't confined to ropin' and ridin'-"He could cook a
dish of chili beans so hot that your socks would jump off and dive in the creek." A
pancake-tossing contest in Yippeeville gives him the chance to show off his culi-
nary skills and to vie for the prize telescope, which he reckons would help his old
Ma look for "long-lost sister Kate." His toss is a little too successful, though,
landing on the sun and blocking out the daylight; now he musters all his ingenuity
to rig a catapult to the sun, which an escaped convict willingly volunteers to man-
or, actually, to "woman," since the convict turns out to be Kate herself. The
capering and hyperbolizing are choppy and disjointed, but the book nonetheless
manages to rollick along like episodes from a cowpoke's sweet but restless dream.
Lodge empties her whole bright paint box for the manic, gravity-defying scenes
that feature a pink-cheeked, dapper Clever Cowboy in his ten (no, make that
twenty) gallon hat and a stock cast ofYippeeville characters that may conjure memo-
ries of Blazing Saddles in adult readers; while the action is enjoyable, the disorder
of the compositions is often more confusing than high-spirited. This West is too
wild for bedtime fare; wait until it's time for the little buckaroos to saddle up and
ride. EB
McKISSACK, PATRICIA 
Let My People Go: Bible Stories Told by a Freeman of Color
to His Daughter, Charlotte, in Charleston, South Carolina, 1806-16; by Patricia and
Fredrick McKissack; illus. by James E. Ransome. 
Schwartz/Atheneum,
1998 
134p
ISBN 0-689-80856-9 
$20.00 
R Gr. 3-6
Charlotte Jeffries Coleman, a fictional African-American abolitionist, writes of the
Bible stories her father told her when she was a child in South Carolina. Incidents
in the young Charlotte's life-the death of one young slave, the escape of another,
the story of her parent's courtship-all are catalysts for Price Jeffries' retelling of a
familiar Old Testament Bible story to the young Charlotte in order to enlighten
her about both the injustices and the beauty she sees around her. The incidents
138 
* THE BULLETIN
that set up the Bible stories (Cain and Abel, Moses and the Exodus, Ruth and
Naomi, etc.) are deliberately constructed as thematic mirrors and they at first seem
cumbersome, but the relationship between Charlotte and her father overcomes the
somewhat programmatic quality of the frame. Simply stated, the retellings of the
Bible stories shine. Price Jeffries' language rolls with a surprising, fierce splendor
that embodies the solid faith he passes on to his daughter. The spot art for each
title heading is graceful and delicate, and the full and half page paintings reflect
and amplify the text. If occasionally the drafting of the figures and the articulation
of their expressions is a bit awkward, the sweep of the illustrations overall is still
dramatic. The McKissacks include notes on each incident in the fictional
Charlotte's life, relating it to the historical events or persons that inspired it; there
is a bibliography for both the opening stories and the Bible stories. This is an
unusual combination of history, commentary, and Bible story that will lend itself
to a wide variety of uses within curriculums and collections. JMD
MARTIN, 
JACQUELINE 
BRIGGS 
Snowflake Bentley; illus. 
by Mary
Azarian. 
Houghton, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-395-86162-4 
$16.00 
R* Gr. 2-4
It's hard to know what strikes creative fire into someone's heart; it's even harder to
explain it in a way young children can understand, but Martin does a fine job of it
in this picture-book biography of Wilson Bentley, self-taught scientist and pho-
tographer. Bentley grew up in Vermont, "in the days when farmers worked with
ox and sled and cut the dark with lantern light," and he loved snow. When his
mother gave him an old microscope, he began to more closely observe snowflakes,
studying the icy crystals and their beautiful, intricate patterns. His attempts to
draw the fragile crystals resulted in failure, but he finally managed to photograph
them after months of experimenting. His efforts were viewed with some disdain
("Snow in Vermont is as common as dirt"), and he gave away his snow-crystal
pictures or sold them for a few cents until, in his later years, his photographs were
recognized for the artistic and scientific marvels they are. Azarian's hand-colored
woodcuts are just the right complement to Martin's text: the single and double-
page spreads are outlined in black, with repeating vertical blue borders (on the
right or left or both sides of the frame), decorated with snowflakes, and framing
masterfully balanced compositions and figures that stretch the art of woodcuts
with their vigor and sense of motion. The borders serve a double purpose, provid-
ing a recurring motif and a place for more detailed exposition of incidents in
Bentley's life. The writing is poetically understated, with an attention to domestic
detail that will attract young readers to this life story of a gentle eccentric. JMD
MARX, PATRICIA 
Meet My Staff; illus. by Roz Chast. 
Cotler/HarperCollins,
1998 
[40 p]
ISBN 0-06-027484-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Lucky Walter: for all the unpleasant tasks (kissing Aunt Winnie, sending thank
you notes, practicing piano, eating lima beans, and so on) that any sane kid blanches
at and for little niceties that make life easier, he has a capable staff member as-
signed. The obliging Last Place Larry loses to Walter at every sport and game; the
Laughers convulse at every joke he cracks; Sir Yes, But provides convincing expla-
nations for the merit of Walter's every deed--except on the staffs day off, when a
DECEMBER 1998 
* 139
desperate Walter is on his own. The text drags its concept out, and it doesn't have
the punch of Dan Yaccarino's similarly themed IflHada Robot (BCCB 9/96), but
it's got inventive and giggly fancy behind its poker-faced tone. Chast's spiky,
doodly line-and-watercolor illustrations expand the textual concepts with speech
balloons and myriad amusing specifics (the Candy Sorter and Remover is well-
supplied with charts to ensure that none of the dreaded green candy reaches Walter's
lips). There's an adult edge to the humor here, but kids will nonetheless envy
Walter his corps and will get a kick out of creating their own Tables of Organiza-
tion. DS
MEDDAUGH, SUSAN 
Martha Walks the Dog; written and illus. by Susan
Meddaugh. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-395-90494-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When Martha the conversant canine "walks the dog," she really just means going
out by herself for a promenade, socializing with her doggy friends. A new feature
on her route is a big, fierce, snarling dog named Bob, who lunges at all and sundry
and stops only when he hits the end of his chain. When Martha has had enough
one day and gives Bob a thorough tongue-lashing, she discovers to her dismay that
his chain has snapped and that he's after her-until a Martha-coached parrot chimes
in with the admiring compliments that Bob has been waiting to hear ("Good dog!
Good dog!") and thereby soothes his savage breast. The insouciant line-and-wash
illustrations set off dialogue with cheerful speech balloons from civil humans and
dogs and with flying bark-marks when they're reduced to hurling woofs or impre-
cations. The book doesn't have the fluid exuberance of the other Martha titles,
and the story depends on more contrivance, with the breaking chain, interceding
parrot, and bully's change of heart, than it can support. Nonetheless, kids will still
enjoy-and understand better than they let on-the little protagonist whose big
mouth gets her into trouble she can't handle. DS
MORPURGO, MICHAEL 
Escape from Shangri-La. Philomel, 1998 
[192p]
ISBN 0-399-23311-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Cessie is delighted when her long-lost paternal grandfather arrives
on the family doorstep, but, while her mother adjusts to the newcomer with com-
passionate rapidity, her father is another story altogether. After grandfather Popsicle
suffers a minor stroke resulting in some physical disability and depression, the
distance between father and son becomes even greater. Cessie's parents tempo-
rarily put her grandfather in a nursing home called Shangri-La, forcing Cessie to
make secret plans with Popsicle for a midnight voyage across the English Channel
to Dunkirk, where Popsicle hopes to find a long-lost love. Cessie's voice is beau-
tifully realized, as Morpurgo captures the intensity of a sensitive young adolescent's
thirst for fairness and combines it with the stirrings of a slightly wry sense of hu-
mor. The swift pace moves smoothly from incident to incident, and the character-
izations of even minor figures are complex enough to add depth and resonance.
The conclusion is not altogether happy-Popsicle's lost love is lost for good-but
the reunions of Popsicle and his son and of Cessie with her parents are satisfying
without being sentimental: "And there on the deck of the LucieAlice they hugged
each other for all the world to see; judging from the applause, all the world seemed
to be enjoying it hugely." Your readers will, too. JMD
140 
* THE BULLETIN
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
Sirena. Scholastic, 1998 
[2 2 4 p]
ISBN 0-689-81800-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
In this unusual approach to classical mythology, mermaid Sirena will not become
immortal unless she is loved by a human man, yet she cannot bring herself to lure
possible lovers to their almost-certain deaths with her irresistible song. She flees to
the island of Lemnos, where she discovers a sailor abandoned by his crew.
Philoctetes, cursed by Hera, has been bitten by a serpent; Sirena nurses him, loves
him, and is loved in return, only to be left, immortal and bereft, when Odysseus
rescues Philoctetes, who has been foretold as the hero who will win the Trojan
War for the Greeks. Sirena tells her own story, from the horror of witnessing her
first shipwreck, to her beautifully evoked experiences with the denizens of the sea,
to her farewell to her human lover. Nobly embracing her destined suffering of
love's loss through eternity, she releases Philoctetes from love's bonds for his own
sake, recognizing that the gods have no power over true love. Such a sacrificial
climax deserves more than the tired language used in the conclusion: "The gods
cannot break us apart-the gods cannot manipulate us-for nothing can affect a
bond of true love... it is within my power to release him from the duties of love.
I choose the latter-not for vengeance or any mistaken sense of honor-but for
the good of the man I love." Napoli has a firm grasp of things mythic and magical,
however, and her ability to fuse active fantasy with emotional reality results in a
well-realized world inhabited by emotionally true characters, fishtails or not. Readers
with a yen for an original take on tragic love may embrace this seaworthy expedi-
tion. JMD
NELSON, THERESA 
The Empress ofElsewhere. Jackson/DK Ink, 1998 
[278p]
ISBN 0-7894-2498-3 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
It starts when Jimmy and his little sister Mary Alice encounter a capuchin monkey,
which turns out to belong to rich and reclusive Mrs. Monroe across the street. The
return of the monkey leads to a job, ostensibly taking care of the monkey but
actually befriending Mrs. Monroe's troubled and troublesome granddaughter. J.D.
gradually grows on the siblings, and when she decides to kidnap the monkey and
return home to her mother, they figure the best way to keep her out of trouble is to
accompany her. Readers will especially enjoy the monkey, dubbed the Empress by
J.D., and the group's hideaway treehouse on the Monroe estate, the Elsewhere
that becomes their own special kingdom and a place of healing and continuity for
J.D. Jimmy's first-person narration is authentically colloquial in its individual
voice with a Texas overlay, and Nelson makes Mary Al's character quirky and
necessary rather than just a sidekick. Unwilling friendship as an impetus for mov-
ing on isn't a new theme, but Nelson gives it a characterful and.understanding
treatment. DS
NORMANDIN, CHRISTINE, ed. 
Spirit of the Cedar People: More Stories and Paint-
ings of ChiefLelooska; written and illus. by Chief Lelooska. 
Callaway/DK Ink,
1998 
38p
ISBN 0-7894-2571-8 
$24.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Like Echoes of the Elders (BCCB 12/97), also edited by Normandin, this is an
oversize and lavishly designed book of five Kwakiutl stories from the American
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
141
northwest coast. All are creation myths orpourquoi tales, explaining how daylight
and dark were divided, whence came the loon that calls out to guide fishermen
home safely from the sea, how halibut evolved from a monster fish, where puffins
came from, and how Young Raven released the sun, moon, stars, and living crea-
tures from Old Raven's cave. Although the stories are engaging, the style is stiffer
here than in the previous book ("So you are right again, you smooth-tongued
adversary"), and some of the artistic images introduce a toylike quality into other-
wise monolithic paintings. Still, it's an imposing volume with narrative and graphic
patterns that make it worthy of a place on the shelf beside its predecessor. A CD of
Chief Lelooska telling the stories is included. BH
PARTRIDGE, ELIZABETH 
Restless Spirit: The Life and Works of Dorothea
Lange. Viking, 1998 
122p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-670-87888-X 
$19.99 
R Gr. 6-10
The name Dorothea Lange brings to mind the stunning archetypal image of the
1930s migration from the Dust Bowl to California, the black-and-white photo-
graph of a pensive mother staring into the distance, her three children huddled
around her, their heads wearily resting on her thin shoulders. This biography of
Lange gives insight into the life of the woman who captured that image. The
author, the daughter of Lange's first assistant, Ron Partridge, was a part of Lange's
extended social group. Her position as an inside observer of Lange's life gives her
writing intimacy, and her inclusion of quotes from interviews with Lange's family
and friends, as well as from oral histories of Lange and her associates, adds an
immediacy that brings Lange to vibrant life. More than a chronology of Lange's
life, this is a chronology of Lange's art. Partridge places Lange, whom she obvi-
ously admires as both woman and artist, squarely in her time, connecting Lange's
photographs to the social upheaval going on around her. Generously placed
throughout this accessibly written biography are the photographic images that
make Lange a pre-eminent artist of the century. The book is elegantly designed
and the photographic reproductions are excellent; each chapter opens with a quote
from Lange describing some image or instance in her life, and all the photographs
are captioned. Although Partridge does not specifically state the source of each
individual quote, she does include an index and an extensive bibliographic note.
Partridge captures the struggles of Lange, a woman sometimes torn between her
family and her art, her politics and her art, her gender and her art, always coming
back to the importance of Lange's art to Lange, and, ultimately, to us. JMD
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
Homesteading: Settling America's Heartland; illus.
with photographs by William Mufioz. 
Walker, 1998 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8639-1 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8638-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
This photoessay offers a bare bones introduction to life on prairie claims from the
inception of the 1862 Homestead Act. Patent discusses claim filing and "proving
up," soddy construction, farming, natural disasters, home life, schooling, and rec-
reation in the most general terms, peripatetically interspersing her text with refer-
ences to contemporary families who attempt to live a similarly austere lifestyle.
Mufioz supplies vivid color photos of the Great Plains terrain and surviving (or
possibly reconstructed) pioneer homesteads. Although the pictures are captioned
142 
* 
THE BULLETIN
for content, few specify the exact site photographed; the apparently spacious, white-
washed interiors with their wooden floors and tidy quilts of obviously modern
vintage offer viewers a sanitized, living museum perspective on soddy life, un-
doubtedly far removed from the leaky, critter-infested real thing. Consider this
simplified overview an entree to a more complete and personal account of home-
steading, such as Warren's Pioneer Girl, reviewed below. EB
PECK, ROBERT NEWTON 
Nine Man Tree. 
Random, 1998 
170p
ISBN 0-679-89257-5 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
The Florida Everglades of 1931 is a dangerous, isolated place. Eleven-year-old
Yoolee Tharp lives in a rundown shack on the edge of the swamp with his eight-
year-old sister, Havilah, his mother, and his abusive, drunken father, Velmer. Velmer
has been promised $100 from some city slickers to help them track a 500-pound
wild boar that has killed several Everglade dwellers; Yoolee's Uncle Bib arrives and
stays to protect the family in Velmer's unregretted absence. A mysterious elderly
Colusa Indian named Henry Old Panther is tracking the boar too, in order to
protect the two towheaded children he calls "Hair that Sings" (Yoolee) and "Little
Singing Hair" (Havilah). The novel's external focus is the hunt for the boar; its
internal focus is Yoolee and what he thinks of the boar hunt and the boar hunters.
The dialogue of the main characters has a sort of Biblical rhythm and vocabulary,
but it is inconsistent and self-conscious; the Colusa Indian character thinks and
speaks in abbreviated English. The action is uneven, and the denouement, in
which Velmer is killed by the boar and the family is happily united under the arm
of the deputy sheriff sweet on the children's now-widowed mother, strains cred-
ibility. There is little context to inform the action, especially regarding the Colusa
Indians and their place in the Everglades. Henry Old Panther is more a plot device
than a fully realized character, here to provide a prologue and epilogue with ge-
neric mythic overtones. The pace is fast enough, and the adventuresome aspects
may hold readers, but some may find a giant man-eating pig more funny than
frightening. JMD
PIERCE, TAMORA 
Circle ofMagic: Daja's Book. 
Scholastic, 1998 
[240p]
ISBN 0-590-55358-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Daja is one of four young adult mages being fostered by Winding Circle, a sort of
wizard university. Her element is fire, her craft is that of smith, and her medium
is metal. Orphaned after the death of her trader parents, she was the only survivor
of their sunken trading vessel, and she has been declared trangshi, outcast, and
banished from her people, the Tsaw'ha, lest she bring them bad luck. While on a
trip with her fellow fosterlings and mentors to Gold Castle, a realm plagued by
drought and fire, she confronts her present and her past and discovers that magic,
like fire, both creates and consumes. In a flaming climax the young mage-smith
saves both a Tsaw'ha caravan and herself, and her status as trangshi is altered for-
ever. Pierce's fantasy world is remarkably rich, the elements of magical arts, sys-
tems of government, and complex cultural groups clearly defined. But it is not
just the physical realities that make this fantasy world as solid as New Jersey-it is
the emotional realities of her characters. Daja's isolation is the isolation of any
adolescent seeking his or her own road and a place where they belong, and her
fierce attachment to both her disapproving people and her loving and loyal friends
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
143
is bound to resonate with young-adult readers. This is the third title in Pierce's
Circle of Magic Quartet (see Circle of Magic: Sandry's Book, BCCB 12/97, and
Tris's Book, 4/98), and it is a strong reason for fans and new readers to look forward
to the fourth. JMD
PULLMAN, PHILIP 
Clockwork; illus. by Leonid Gore. 
Levine/Scholastic,
1998 [128p]
ISBN 0-590-12999-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
One snowy night in the public room of the White Horse Tavern, Fritz, the story-
teller, finds Karl, the clockmaker's apprentice, in a state of suicidal depression.
Karl is supposed to unveil his masterpiece, a figure for the great clock of the town
of Glockenheim, in the morning, but after wasting his time and energy for months,
he has nothing to unveil. Fritz begins to tell a tale without an ending (trusting in
providence and luck to supply one) about Dr. Kalmenius, a mad, soul-stealing,
sorcerer cum clockmaker, only to have Kalmenius himself suddenly fling open the
tavern door. Terrified, all flee but Karl, who accepts a murderous clockwork knight
from the demonic Kalmenius in order to hide his own failure. Fritz's disturbing
story is thus taken over by the characters he himself brings into being, with justice
meted out with little mercy, and love ultimately triumphing over artifice. Pullman's
deft evocation of atmosphere stands him in good stead here, keeping suspension of
disbelief alive as he tells the story within the story and brings his characters round
the full, magical circle of his plot. More an elaborate literary folktale than a novel,
this offers coolly intriguing concepts rather than the wildly adventurous elements
of Pullman's lengthier works. The same strong moral core is evident here, how-
ever: his characters are undone by their own weaknesses or saved by their altruism.
The premise of life as a story set in motion by a great clockmaker is not a new one,
but Pullman's presentation is still creepy and alluring. Gore's smoky black-and-
white visions add a softer but still mystical edge to the story. DS
RATHMANN, 
PEGGY 
10 Minutes till Bedtime; written and illus. by Peggy
Rathmann. 
Putnam, 1998 
[48p]
ISBN 0-399-23103-X 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
A boy headed bedwards is the focus of a tour run by an enterprising hamster in this
variant on more tranquil bedtime books. As the protagonist readies for bed, Dad
calls out the countdown in minutes; unbeknownst to the waiting father, however,
a tour of ten hamsters is eagerly following his offspring through his bedtime ritual,
taking snapshots, horsing around, and interacting with the exhibit--er, child.
Halfway through, when the sleepyhead and the ten touring hamsters are working
their way through a bedtime story, a second and multitudinous load of inquisitive
rodents turns up, requiring major accommodation and resulting in major disorder
before a peaceful tuck-in is finally obtained. The first batch of hamsters, all care-
fully individuated and numbered on their striped jerseys, are pert-near irresistible
as they follow along on the nighty-night tour (1 is always kicking spheres around,
we only ever see 8's rear, 10 offers a word of commentary on each spread, and 2
always does just what his child hero does); Rathmann's recurring theme of enter-
taining action going on unbeknownst to somebody else works well with the repeti-
tion and the countdown format. It's not entirely clear why, apart from the fact
144 
* 
THE BULLETIN
that they're really endearing, the first ten hamsters get to stay when the second
batch gets sent on its way at the close of the tour (and some kids may fear, when
they first see 8 sprawled under the wheels of the tour bus, that the tour started with
a tragedy). There's too much entertainment value here for those cavils to detract,
however, and the glorious jumble of the hamsters taking over our young
protagonist's room is one that many lapsitting viewers will yearn for even as their
own eyes close. DS
ROCKLIN, JOANNE 
Jake and the Copycats; illus. by Janet Pedersen. 
Delacorte,
1998 
48p 
(First Choice Chapter Books)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32530-4 
$13.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-440-41408-3 
$4.50 
R Gr. 1-3
Jake's little brother Pete is less than a year younger, but to Jake he's a baby and a
copycat. In the first chapter, Pete follows Jake outside and they end up in fairly
amicable sibling play ("They had a somersault race. They chased each other with
the garden hose"); in the second, Jake's super-fruit-punch stand is soon in cut-
throat competition with Pete's super-fruit-punch stand; in the third, Jake hangs
around Pete's birthday party; and in the fourth, Pete gets a kitten just like Jake's.
This is slightly reminiscent, in good ways, of Betsy Byars' My Brother, Ant (BCCB
2/96), not only in its depiction of a brotherly relationship but also in its pithy and
accessible wit, a balm to the beginning reader (while reading treasure-hunt clues
for an annoying little cousin, "Jake wanted to say, 'Walk ten paces to the closet.
Stay there, Boo-Boo'"). Pedersen's scrawny-legged freckle-faced sibs have a goofily
exaggerated authenticity that makes them friendly heroes indeed. It's hard not to
like a book that uses an escalating "You stink" contest to reinforce reading vocabu-
lary-so why fight it? DS
ROOT, PHYLLIS 
Aunt Nancy and Cousin Lazybones; illus. by David
Parkins. 
Candlewick, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56402-425-3 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Aunt Nancy has some pretty funny visitors, and Cousin Lazybones, "her fourth
cousin three times removed on her great-aunt Hattie's sister's side," seems some-
how related to her last guest in Aunt Nancy and Old Man Trouble (BCCB 3/96).
When Cousin Lazybones flops his fat self in her rocking chair, eating seventeen
helpings of lunch and twenty-two helpings of supper and figuring out endless ways
of helping out in no way at all, Aunt Nancy's always polite ("Family was family, so
what could she do?"), but eventually she's had enough. She "tidies up so good
even a cockroach would starve to death" and then takes to her bed with "a bone in
my leg ... a chest full of breath and such a terrible mess of brains in my head I
can't hardly think." Then she presents Lazybones with the possibility of doing her
spring cleaning, whereupon he suddenly remembers that Uncle Wilbur is expect-
ing him sooner rather than later. Root is a master of storytelling structure and
tone, and these original trickster tales do justice to folkloric tradition. Parkins'
black and white silhouettes on every page of text reflect the archetypal nature of
characters who are enlarged in realistic detail in facing, full-page, deep-hued oil
paintings that cleverly exaggerate the loutish postures of Lazybones and the dubi-
ous expressions of his long-suffering hostess. These graphic images project the
rhythmic action and humorous contrasts of Root's story, which will leave young
listeners eager to find out who knocks next on Aunt Nancy's door. BH
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
145
RUPP, REBECCA 
The Dragon ofLonely Island. Candlewick, 1998 
[128p]
ISBN 0-7636-0408-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
When the three Davis children-Hannah, Zachary, and Sarah Emily-arrive on
the family island to spend the summer at Great-Aunt Mehitabel's vacated house,
they fear the months will be long and dull. A jolly housekeeper who happens to be
a great cook, exploration of the huge old house, and the discovery of a three-
headed dragon named Fafnyr Dragonwings soon puts those fears to rest. The
children visit the dragon three times, and each time a different head is awake and
in a storytelling mood; each story is drawn from the dragon's long memory, and
each story fits a particular problem or difficulty of a particular child. If this sounds
a bit didactic in intent that's because it is, but Rupp has a knack for limning the
personality of a 20,000 year-old, three-headed dragon, and his curmudgeonly hu-
mor helps move the plot along. The adults-housekeeper, housekeeper's hus-
band, Mom and Dad-are pretty much benign but absent. Aunt Mehitabel is the
most clearly drawn grownup, and she is only present in her letters to the children
(and in the final dragon story). While the structure of the novel is obviously
programmatic, Rupp's knack for a good adventure yarn is clear from the dragon's
stories, and the dynamics among the three siblings are realistic and familiar. Those
readers who found comfort in the cozy style of Jane Langton's Diamond in the
Window or Swing in the Summerhouse will be comfortable here, too. JMD
SABUDA, ROBERT, illus. 
ABCDisney. 
Disney, 1998 
14p
ISBN 0-7868-3132-4 
$21.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Creator of well-known pop-ups A Christmas Alphabet and The Twelve Days of
Christmas, Sabuda now turns to a new subject. Each spread has four doors in eye-
catching colors and varied textures; each opens to reveal Sabuda's interpretation of
a Disney cartoon character in full three-dimensional glory, from Ariel to Zazu.
The success of Sabuda's other paper-engineered works depends largely on the sculp-
tural effect of their simple lines and form's transcendence over color; that isn't, to
put it mildly, what's going on here. Even the multihued doors on white space get
rather loud, and the colors and lines within each opening are often busier and less
subtle than the cartoons themselves, though Sabuda's textures do add some depth
to the images. Many of the creations are nonetheless quite ingenious-Mulan's
horse leaps right out at the viewer, the White Rabbit's legs pump as he dashes, and
the young Arthur performs a slick Excalibur-ectomy on the stone-though their
survival under use seems questionable despite solid workmanship (a gallivanting
Ariel frays early, for instance). While the same could be said of most Disney tie-
ins, the appeal of this to kids is undeniable, and this is at least more interesting
than most of its ilk. DS
SIMMS, LAURA 
Rotten Teeth; illus. by David Catrow. 
Houghton, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-395-82850-3 
$15.00 
R 5-8 yrs
In marked contrast to the stateliness of Bone Man (BCCB 12/97), Simms' per-
sonal story about how first grade Show and Tell turned her into a storyteller with
bite has an escalating sense of the ridiculous. Melissa is the smallest kid in her
class, and she doesn't want to get up in front of her classmates and talk. She
especially doesn't want to do Show and Tell, because nothing from her house
seems special enough. She asks her brother Norman what she should take, and he
146 * THE BULLETIN
advises that she take the big glass bottle of rotten teeth "all gray and green, with
long ugly dangling roots twisted together" from their dentist father's office. She
does, and when it's her turn for Show and Tell, she pulls out the bottle and an-
nounces, "ROTTEN TEETH! FROM REAL MOUTHS!" The students are
thrilled, but their teacher is not, and Melissa's moment of glory is curtailed. On
the playground, however, the students crowd around her wanting to know all the
gory details of how the teeth got pulled, "the moans, the blood on the towels, the
size of the needles, and the sound of the drills," and a storyteller is born. Catrow's
watercolors are a suitably twisted complement to Simms' somewhat warped sense
of humor (actually, it's perfect for this audience). His depiction of Melissa's archi-
tecturally eccentric house, Melissa herself with her big round spectacles and mass
of curly hair, and oh, that jar full of rotten teeth are simply priceless. The chang-
ing perspectives and unusual compositions are eminently eyecatching, and Catrow's
characters, cartoonily caricatured, have oodles of personality and expression. On a
scale of one to ten, the grossout level here is in the double digits, high enough to
make this a readaloud favorite. JMD
Sfs, PETER 
Tibet: Through the Red Box; written and illus. by Peter Sfs. 
Foster/
Farrar, 1998 
57p
ISBN 0-374-37552-6 
$25.00 
SpR Gr. 6-9
Sis tells, in what is apparently a factual narrative, of his father's filmmaking trip to
Tibet when Sis was just a child. The Soviet government technically sent Sis' father
on a two-month army tour in China, but in reality he was up in the Himalayas
filming the military construction of the highway into Tibet; further adventures
included getting lost, getting found, and entering the forbidden city of Lhasa for
an audience with the Dalai Lama. Sis' responses to and commentary on his father's
diary of the experience are interspersed with sections of what seems to be the diary
itself. The square, oversized pages are filled with delicate writing and with Sis'
even more delicate, intricately stylized illustrations of his father's fantastical adven-
tures; images range from stunning landscapes to dreamlike mixtures of vision and
reality to mandala-modeled, maze-dominated designs. The book looks at folklore
and history with the same eyes, which will frustrate some readers, who will want to
know what here really happened, and enchant others, who will feel that the com-
pelling and magical story is all the reality they need. The visuals and unusual story
work together to create a Tibet more evocative than most documentary treatments,
one that will entice readers with a taste for the esoteric. DS
STEIG, WILLIAM 
Pete's a Pizza; written and illus. by William Steig. 
di Capua/
HarperCollins, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205158-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205157-1 
$13.95 
R* 
2-5 yrs
Pete is very unhappy: "Just when he's supposed to play ball with the guys, it
decides to rain." The morose Pete stares out a window at the downpour, and
refuses to be comforted. "Pete's father can't help noticing how miserable his son
is. He thinks it might cheer Pete up to be made into a pizza." So the imaginative
Dad picks up his delighted son, places him on the kitchen table, and turns him
into a laughing, giggling pizza, complete with talcum-powder cheese and checkers
for pepperoni ("Pizzas are not supposed to laugh!" says Dad; "Pizza makers are not
supposed to tickle their pizzas!" replies Pizza Pete). By the time this hilarious
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
147
exercise in creative dramatics is over, the sun is out, and "the pizza decides to go
look for his friends." Steig proves he can be as witty for younger audiences as for
older with this impressively simple text that never strays from the playful premise.
The watercolor illustrations are executed in a clean palette with precise lines in
tightly controlled compositions, the semi-formality of which only add to the hilar-
ity. Pete, in his red-and-white striped shirt, reclines stiffly on the kitchen table
while his bespectacled, balding Dad makes pizza magic under the skeptical, some-
what worried eye of Pete's bejeweled mother. This is a jolly, affectionate story that
is going to make young listeners guffaw, while their readers-aloud reconsider how
they're going to handle the next case of rainy-day blues. JMD
STEVEN, KENNETH 
The Bearer ofGifts; illus. by Lily Moon. 
Dial, 1998 
[26p]
ISBN 0-8037-2374-1 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
A Lapp woodcarver is fascinated by a bright star "inviting him to follow it and find
something strange and wonderful," so he and his reindeer make their way to a land
where "the air was warm and people spoke languages he didn't understand." There
the carver finds a stable and the newborn baby, his clothes miraculously change
from blue to red, and he offers the baby a whittled wooden star; transformed by
the encounter, he brings presents to children each year in "memory of the day he
had met the child who would save the world." You can guess the rest: "We call
him Santa Claus." It's a challenge to keep track of the various legends and stories
ransacked to produce this holiday fantasy (several are mentioned in opening notes),
and the convoluted trip to Bethlehem might not be worth the reindeer feed were it
not for Moon's delicate, fanciful paintings. A bell-shaped Laplander with a teeny
oval head traverses a stylized landscape of crisp snow, cool sapphire hills, and spicy
crimson villages to reach the baby bathed in a radiant yolk of light. Shallow per-
spectives, dominant geometric shapes, decorative borders, and some judiciously
mottled texturing create a folkloric flavor with an updated zip. While listeners are
unlikely to buy Steven's spin on Santa's genesis, this could still be a mood-setting
entry in the countdown to Christmas. EB
STURGES, PHILEMON 
Bridges Are to Cross; illus. by Giles Laroche. 
Putnam,
1998 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 0-399-23174-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
"Some bridges carry speeding trains across wide fjords" (Firth of Forth Bridge in
Edinburgh); "Some carry llamas loaded with firewood across deep canyons"
(Apurimac River Bridge in the Andes). Brief statements of the purpose, name,
date, and structural type of fifteen bridges around the world make up the spare but
sufficient text accompanying Laroche's double spreads of intricately cut paper.
The soaring arches of Spain's Segovia Aqueduct dramatically frame the miniature
city at its feet; the sleek Salginatobel Bridge sweeps boldly across a deep Swiss
gorge thick with snowy pines and dotted with minuscule chalets. The paper archi-
tecture evinces a three-dimensionality, with obvious shadows and layering, that
gives the constructions a satisfying solidity as well as craft-tempting intricacy. Some
entries will be familiar-the Brooklyn Bridge and the Golden Gate Bridge-but
fortresses, aqueducts, footbridges, and canal boat bridges may be eye-openers for
viewers who narrowly regard bridges as mammoth metal spans conveying automo-
148 
* THE BULLETIN
tive traffic across water. This will certainly appeal to children who find their bliss
in the 600s shelves, and happily the reader will find plenty of visual treats and
information tidbits to sustain adult interest as well. EB
SUMMERS, SUSAN, ad. 
The Fourth Wise Man; ad. from a story by Henry Van
Dyke, illus. by Jackie Morris. 
Dial, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2312-1 
$16.99 
R* 6yrsup
See this month's Big Picture, p. 123, for review.
THOMAS, JANE RESH 
Behind the Mask: The Life of Queen Elizabeth I. 
Clarion,
1998 
196p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-69120-6 
$19.00 
R 
Gr. 7-12
The woman who gave her name to an age, Queen Elizabeth I lived and shepherded
England through one of the most significant periods in its history. The book
sensibly begins with Elizabeth's father, King Henry VIII, and the marital troubles
that made succession and religion dangerous issues in his children's reigns as well
as his own. Thomas then covers the Tudor queen's life from her negotiation of
pre-accession pitfalls to the major aspects of her tenure, both political and per-
sonal. The author makes little effort to avoid a modern bias and demonstrates a
particular fondness for rumor and anecdote, which she generally identifies as such,
but which makes her practice of including only a source list for each chapter rather
than specific notes problematic, as it's difficult to tell why she pooh-poohs some
rumors and supports the likelihood of others. The result is an entertainingly gos-
sipy and dramatic (if not scrupulously supported) picture, however, and one that
also manages to explore issues of the queen's role and iconography and some of the
important political and religious conflicts of the time. The book makes particu-
larly deft use of historical art and engravings, both in color and black-and-white,
which helps put faces to what can be a very large contingent of names. A precis of
the main figures begins the book; a timeline, sources list, and index are included.
DS
VAIL, RACHEL 
The Friendship Ring: Not That I Care. 
Scholastic, 1998 
216p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-590-03476-6 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-37453-2 
$4.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Those who were privy to the inner thoughts of Friendship Ring friends Zoe and
CJ (If You Only Knew and Please, Please, Please, BCCB 10/98) will have been
wondering what's going on behind Morgan's dark bangs, and now they can find
out. It's the big Bring Yourself in a Bag day in class, when students must collect
objects that represent themselves, and Morgan is filled with horror when she real-
izes (duh!) that she actually has to explain the items in her bag. The contents all
reveal Morgan's investment in things she's lost, like her charming father who left
the family for a girlfriend and forlorn hopes of a late-in-life acting career, and
things she's afraid she's losing, like CJ's friendship, and she reflects on her past as
she frantically tries to come up with other items or interpretations to present to the
class. Morgan was a spiky and interesting figure in the first two books, scowling
around on the edge of Zoe and CJ's budding friendship; she's actually rather less
intriguing when the whys behind her behavior are made clear, and the bag-con-
tents framework, with its teacher-approval finale, is somewhat contrived. Vail still
gets inside a junior-high character's head like nobody else, and the events them-
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
149
selves are realistic and memorable (one of the best is Morgan's remembered pri-
mary-school showdown with her brother, where he suffered a spatula-inflicted
wound in return for stealing her first baby tooth). Readers already addicted to the
saga of shifting allegiances will gobble up Morgan's account and wait impatiently
for the next, where it looks like Olivia, the classmate who's getting yanked into the
foursome largely to fill it out, is going to get a chance to tell her story too. DS
VAN NUTT, JULIA 
A Cobtown Christmas: From the Diaries ofLucky Hart; illus. by
Robert Van Nutt. 
Doubleday, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-385-32556-8 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 3-5
In a fictional diary written in 1845, Lucky Hart tells of the events surrounding the
holiday, including the discovery of a stray dog, the rescue of lost Swiss blind man,
the breakdown of the church organ, and the happy conclusion to all three. Lucky
describes in great detail how the paths of dog, man, and Cobtown cross one snowy
December. This title is going to make those grownups who enjoyfaux history very
happy: the pages of the journal are aged brown at the edges, and there are ticket
stubs and cunning little drawings tucked on the bottoms of the pages, along with
recipes for snow cream and directions on how to make apple pomanders. The
endpapers are the yellowed pages of the Cobtown Observer, the articles of which
reiterate Lucky's tale (and which are cut out and scattered through the text as
well). The full-page paintings show kewpie-doll-faced characters, with the occasional
jutting nose and chin, floodlit by unknown light sources. Lucky's story is text-
intensive and blandly ahistorical, and the layout is cluttered and crowded, with the
added disadvantage of a difficult-to-read, spidery font. This is an overproduced,
yearningly nostalgic package that, despite its glossy sheen, will have minimal appeal
for children. JMD
VOAKE, CHARLOTTE 
Here Comes the Train; written and illus. by Charlotte
Voake. 
Candlewick, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-0438-0 
$15.99 
R* 
2-5 yrs
The opening of Voake's tribute to trainspotting is an obvious invitation to come
along as William, Chloe, and their dad ride bicycles to the footbridge where "the
bridge is very high and narrow, with railings to keep people from falling over the
edge. And far below are the railroad tracks." The three stand and "look, and listen
for the trains." The suspense grows, the signal lights change from red to green,
and "suddenly there it is, a tiny speck in the distance! William shouts, 'Here it
comes ... HERE COMES THE TRAIN!' Louder and louder, nearer and nearer,
it comes! . .. All the children wave like crazy.... The children hold their breath
and... WHOOSH under the bridge it goes!" From the rhythmic chug-chug of
her language to her watercolor depiction of the bridge above the train tracks, with
its crowd of train-and-noise-and-excitement lovers, Voake thrillingly captures the
wild delight in watching the trains go by. In a clever use of perspective and com-
position, double-page spreads show the bridge stretched from left to right, dead
center; the audience's point of view is from above the bridge, so that we see what
the trainspotters see and then some. The large, clear type and watercolor and ink
figures are set against the clean white background in uncrowded, involving presen-
tations that positively roar through the pages until the very final moments: "At
night, when William goes to bed, if he's very quiet, he can still hear the trains in
the distance. And he whispers to himself, 'Here comes the train! Here comes the
150 
* THE BULLETIN
train! Here comes the train!' before he falls fast asleep." This is a winning readaloud
ride for any age. JMD
WARREN, ANDREA 
Pioneer Girl: Growing Up on the Prairie. Morrow,
1998 
[96p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-688-15438-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Warren culls the memoirs of homesteader Grace McCance Snyder to explore what
it was like to come of age in a Nebraska soddy. Following Poppie out to his claim
in the 1880s, Grace and her sisters adapted to the cramped quarters and rough
work, while Mama tried to preserve Eastern standards of household management
and propriety without benefit of close neighbors, schools, or even a well on their
property. Chronological episodes from Grace's life form the structure of the nar-
rative, supplemented by Warren's (undocumented) comparisons with the experi-
ences of other settlers. Although Warren goes out on a limb in accepting Grace's
earliest memories (from age three) at face value, those recollections illuminate as-
pects of prairie life often neglected in other accounts-a daughter's participation
in heavy field work, the potent morale boost from a windmill-driven well, children's
nalvet6 regarding the facts of life. The McCances' good fortune both at farming
and in general health and well-being may have been atypical of the homesteading
experience, in which childhood deaths and crop failure so often played important
supporting roles, but this account of their success demonstrates for young readers
why the West retained for decades such a powerful allure. Period photos and lists
for further reading are included. EB
WELLER, FRANCES WARD 
The Angel of Mill Street; illus. by Robert J.
Blake. 
Philomel, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-23133-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
It's Christmas Eve, and little Frances Murphy is waiting for her Uncle Ambrose
"with his fiddle and sweet, soaring voice" to get home for supper. It is snowing
and cold, and Uncle Ambrose is hampered by a bad leg, crippled when he was a
boy in Ireland. Frances watches from the window, fretting about her favorite
uncle's safety. While Frances frets, the illustrations reflect what is happening to
Uncle Ambrose as he struggles his way through the icy wind and snow with his
cane and his fiddle. As Uncle Ambrose crosses an old stone bridge, he slips and
falls. A big black dog nudges him to his feet and half-drags him through the snow
to the Murphy house, where Uncle Ambrose is greeted with joy and relief. The
dog disappears, Ambrose firmly believing the animal was his guardian angel that
saved him from freezing to death. An author's note states that this is based on a
family story, and that's not hard to believe, as it has the ring of an oft-told family
favorite. While the story leans heavily toward melodrama, Weller's narrative has a
smooth flow that encourages reading aloud, and her depiction of the family's worry
over a favorite uncle is genuine and realistic. Blake's watercolors lend themselves
to group viewing, the scenes of warmly lit interiors contrasting with the dark out-
doors and its blinding wind and snow to poignantly communicate Uncle Ambrose's
plight. JMD
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
151
WILBUR, RICHARD 
The Disappearing Alphabet; illus. by David Diaz. 
Harcourt,
1998 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201470-5 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-6
"If the alphabet began to disappear," Wilbur informs his readers, "some words
would soon look raggedy and queer." He goes on to enumerate, letter by letter,
the tragedies that would ensue as a result of this vaporization ("No N? In such a
state of things,/ Birds would have WIGS instead of WINGS"), with each page offering
a concise verse in pentameter or tetrameter couplets. The best entries are those
that make the most of the wordplay in the letters left behind, such as the hiss-free
nakes and erpents bereft of s; 
less successful are those that abandon the words and
opt for more free-form conceptual inquiry. Diaz' computer-created art has an air-
brushed and contrasty vigor intriguingly reminiscent of old block prints and sten-
cils; his incorporation of the relevant letter in some of the illustrations is often
clever, providing kids with something to hunt for. This would be a piquant addi-
tion to a language-arts discussion; it would also pair well with other linguistically
playful poetry such as Jane Yolen's Animal Fare (BCCB 7/94). DS
WYETH, 
SHARON 
DENNIS 
Something Beautiful; illus. by Chris K.
Soentpiet. 
Doubleday, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-385-32239-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
A young African-American girl leaves her littered yard and graffitied front door
and walks through her run-down urban neighborhood seeking "something beauti-
ful." She questions her neighbors, friends, and relatives and finds a cornucopia of
small beauties, from the taste of a sandwich to a smooth stone to the laugh of a
baby cousin, as individuals share their "something beautiful" with her. When she
asks her mother, "Do you have something beautiful?" she gets a predictable, but
nonetheless effective, response: "'Of course,' she says. 'I have you.'" This first-
person narration of one little girl's search for beauty is structured for maximum
emotional impact. The opening written and visual images, from the homeless
woman sleeping under a cardboard box to the dark alley where the little girl "must
never stop," indicate an environment fraught with violence and despair. The
movement from these desperate images to images of hope-the classroom hung
with bright examples of children's art, the crowded, busy diner, the children double-
dutching on the sidewalk, the fruit stand with its shiny apples-is a journey of
renewal for both the narrator and the reader. Soentpiet's paintings use light and
shadow to make the images reach out from each double-page spread, and the faces
of individual characters have an emotional articulation that will draw in readers
and viewers. Wyeth includes a note indicating that this story is based on a real-life
incident with her own mother. JMD
YOLEN, JANE 
Raising Yoder's Barn; illus. by Bernie Fuchs. 
Little, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-316-96887-0 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
When the Yoder family barn burns to the ground, eight-year-old Matthew Yoder
tells the story of how the neighbors in their close-knit Amish community come
together to build a new one. Yolen is at her best here with a solid story told in
simple, poetically descriptive language ("My brothers and I worked hard all sum-
152 
* 
THE BULLETIN
mer in a field with furrows as straight as a good man's life") with a strong sense of
time and place. Fuchs' light-suffused oil paintings suit the old-fashioned feel of
story. The palette is earthy greens and rusts, from the opening glow of the fire to
the closing glow of the final sunset; the unusual, slightly off-kilter perspectives (an
off-center front view shows the top of the burning barn, an underneath view shows
the skeleton of the new barn as the men hammer on the roof) give the paintings an
energy and immediacy unusual in this type of illustration. Yolen and Fuchs have
captured a specific incident in a culture often seen as quaint and cute and made it
vigorous, realistic, and not cute at all. JMD
YOUNG, ROBERT 
Game Day: Behind the Scenes at a Ballpark; illus. with photo-
graphs by Jerry Wachter. 
Carolrhoda, 1998 
48p
ISBN 1-57505-084-6 
$22.60 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
A few hours of excitement on the diamond requires nearly round-the-clock prepa-
ration by teams of baseball industry workers, from the concession provisioners
who arrive with deliveries at the crack of dawn, to the "blowers" and "pickers" of
the clean-up crew who labor into the night, readying the stands for the next ri-
valry. Young pokes around in all the tantalizing niches of Orioles' Camden Yards-
the mascot's office, where the costumed bird hacks away at his computer; the
umpire room, where the attendant prepares the balls with secret mud dredged
from the Delaware River; the control room, where "computer operators choose
what fans see on the scoreboard and the television screen during the day." Al-
though coverage is satisfyingly broad, the text occasionally introduces an intrigu-
ing aspect of the stadium for which no photo is provided, such as the first aid
station or the nursery for the players' children. Photos are plentiful and crisply
reproduced but often small, shadowy, or fussily composed, and the layouts are
textbookish and uninspiring. Still, readers ready to step up from Cooper's Ballpark
(BCCB 3/98) or craving more detail than Anderson's Batboy (BCCB 3/96) can
savor this entry through the long months until opening day. EB
How'D THAT HAPPEN DEPARTMENT:
In the November issue of the Bulletin, the publisher's name was accidentally omit-
ted from the review of Anne Isaacs' Cat Up a Tree. The title is published by
Dutton Children's Books. The Bulletin regrets the error.
DECEMBER 1998 
* 153
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Greeson, Janet. Name That Book! Questions andAnswers on Outstanding Children's
Books. Scarecrow, 1998. 2nd ed. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8108-31511. $32.50. 225p.
Chock-full of game questions, this title, considerably updated from its 1986 edi-
tion, provides professionals interested in putting on a Battle of the Books with
everything they need but the kids themselves. Questions are divided into age-
group sections, with two different levels of ability per age group and three possible
questions per book. Instructions for the BotB cover the situation fairly effectively,
mentioning staff needs, publicity suggestions, standards for judgment calls, etc. as
issues to consider. In addition, there are nearly a hundred pages geared to other
activities, especially Newbery Author Bingo and Author Crosswords (instructions
for ordering software that creates these are included), plus another dozen and a
half possibilities. While the occasional glitch might result in some ruffled feathers
during the game (authors aren't always given exactly as they are on the book, and
at least one title is incorrect) and during the reading of the book (the opening
suggestions point readers to the preface to learn about a Name That Book disk,
but the preface fails to mention it; media specialists might be taken aback to dis-
cover that the sample form assumes they're all Ms.), this is a go-forth-and-play-
with-books kit that users will find immensely helpful in embarking on big-game
territory. A multitude of appendices include author's birthdates and birthplaces,
author, title, and subject indices (including a listing by protagonists' first names)
of books mentioned, a sample championship game script and letter to parents. DS
154 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Grant; Johnson
African Americans-fiction:
Johnson; McKissack
African Americans-poetry:
Clinton
African Americans-stories: Wyeth
ALPHABET BOOKS: Wilbur
American Indians-fiction:
Bruchac; Cornelissen; Peck
Amish-stories: Yolen
Angels-stories: Weller
ANIMAL STORIES: Gershator
Architecture: Sturges
Arctic-fiction: Heinz
Astronauts: Brown
Baseball: Young
BEDTIME STORIES: Boynton;
Rathmann
Bible: McKissack
BIOGRAPHIES: Brown; Lewis;
Martin; Partridge; Thomas;
Warren
Books and reading-stories: Ernst
Bridges: Sturges
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Peck;
Rupp
Brothers-fiction: Rocklin
Cats-stories: Fleming
Christmas-fiction: Van Nutt
Christmas-stories: Steven;
Summers; Weller
CONCEPT BOOKS: Wilbur
Cowboys-stories: McAllister
Crime and criminals: Kraft
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Ferris
Dinosaurs-stories: Boynton
Dogs-stories: Meddaugh; Weller
Dragons-fiction: Rupp
Ethics and values: Bruchac; Jaffe
Families-fiction: Johnson;
Morpurgo
FANTASY: Napoli; Pierce;
Pullman; Rupp
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Ferris; Hesse; Hossack; Johnson
Fathers and sons: Sis
Fathers and sons-fiction: Bruchac
Fathers and sons-stories: Steig
Feral children-fiction: Gerstein
Victor; Gerstein Wild
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY
TALES: Hodges; Jaffe;
Normandin; Root
Food and eating-stories:
McAllister
Friendship-fiction: Anderson;
Hossack; Nelson; Pierce; Vail
FUNNY STORIES: Marx; Simms
Grandfathers-fiction: Bruchac;
Morpurgo
Grandmothers-fiction: Nelson
Hamsters-stories: Rathmann
Hawaii-fiction: Hossack
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Cornelissen; Gerstein Victor;
Gerstein Wild; Hunter; LaFaye;
Peck; Van Nutt; Hunter
History, U.S.: Cornelissen; Kraft;
McKissack; Patent; Warren
History, world: Thomas
Holidays: Steven; Summers
Hunting-fiction: Heinz
Language arts: Agee; Wilbur
Libraries-stories: Ernst
DECEMBER 1998 
* 
155
Literature, children's: Emberley;
Lewis
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Pierce
Mermaids-fiction: Napoli
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Gilbert; Grant
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Wyeth
Music and musicians-fiction:
Gilbert
Mythology, classical: Napoli
Photography: Martin; Partridge
POETRY: Clinton; Levy; Lewis
POP-UPS: Sabuda
Pregnancy-fiction: Grant; Roberts
Reading aloud: Brown; Heinz;
Levy; Lewis; Martin;
Normandin
Reading, beginning: Rocklin
Reading-fiction: Hesse
Religious education: Allan; Summers
Rural life-stories: Yolen
School-fiction: Vail
Science: Martin
Slavery-fiction: McKissack
Social studies: Sturges
SPORTS: Young
Storytelling: Hodges; Jaffe; Normandin;
Root
Storytime: Cuyler; Ernst; Fleming;
Gershator; Simms; Steig; Voake
Teeth-stories: Simms
Tibet: Sis
Trains-stories: Voake
Uncles-fiction: Anderson
Uncles-stories: Weller
Urban life-stories: Wyeth
Voyages and travel: Brown; Sfs
War-fiction: Hunter
Winter-stories: Cuyler; Gershator
Women's studies: Partridge; Thomas
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION OF THE
BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS (ISSN 0008-9036), as
required by 39 U.S. Code 3685.
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS is published eleven
times a year (monthly except August); annual subscription price is $40.00 (institutional,
domestic), $47.00 (institutional, foreign), $35.00 (individual, domestic), $42.00 (individual,
foreign).
The owner and publisher is the University of Illinois Press acting for the Graduate School
of Library and Information Science at the University of Illinois, a nonprofit organization.
Office of publication is located at 1325 South Oak St., Champaign, IL 61820-6975. The
managing editor is Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51
E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820. There are no stockholders, bondholders, mort-
gages, or other security holders.
The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status
for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Average number of copies printed per issue (net press run) during the preceding twelve
months: 5043; number for single issue nearest filing date: 5191. Average number of copies
of each issue distributed by mail to paid subscribers during preceding twelve months: 3903;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 4213. Average number of copies distributed
for free per issue during preceding 12 months: 82; number for single issue nearest to filing
date: 75. Average number of total copies distributed during preceding 12 months: 3985;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 4288. Average number of copies of each issue
not distributed (office use, unaccounted, spoiled after printing) during preceding 12 months:
1058; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 903.
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.
Nancy K. Barrett
Assistant Business Manager, University of Illinois Press
October 11, 1998
Teaching - 8
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
Every issue of Teaching K-8
provides informative articles on
T, c' inOK8 
the cutting edge of education.
i na 
RMY
'oull also tind insigntful
:olumns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
cAille
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
I___' __ 
.
__. 
-- .. 
-
Don i miss out on mis valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
Teaching• 8
x 54808, Boulder, CO 80322-4808
3-8793 * www.TeachingK-8.com
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
I f 
I
v
being a gloomy event, however, Raschka treats her demise
matter-of-factly as just another step toward Arlene's ultimate
goal.... An uplifting message that death is a regenerative part
of the life cycle." 
-Publishers Weekly*, starred review
All ages $15.95 TR 0-531-30111-7 $16.99 RLB 0-531-33111-3
-J
"TALL is terrific ...
It's energized
and it's gutsy."
-Jonathan Kozol
O 
y clearly
defining
academic expecta-
tions and setting
specific professional
standards TALL is
leading the way in
the teaching and 
/
the learning of
children's and young
adult literature.
"TALL is the Rolls Royce of the field."
- Joan E Smutny
National-Louis University
Uniquely organized, each issue brings you 16 inspiring,
practical, jargon-free articles guaranteed to enrich and
expand your professional practice.
For more information and a catalog
call 1-800-337-6525 or write to:
Essmont Publishing, P.O. Box 186, Brandon, Vermont 05733
by ELISHA COOPER
"The attractive line-and-watercolor illustrations capture the
action and reactions that children can observe at any
ballpark' --ALA Booklist
"Cooper manages to convey character and emotion gesturally
and with remarkable economy...Each reading will reveal
previously overlooked details:' -The Horn Book
"An elegant visual presentation that celebrates the on-field
artistry of the boys of summeiK"
--The Bulletin of the Center for Children 's Books
Ages 5 up. 40 pp. RTE $15.00/0-688-1 5755-6
I~98 Greenwilow 
Books * A division of William Morrow & co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.williammorrow.com
UkalS~a~Fst~~
?1HE 
LloN
AND THE 
UNICORN
A Critical ourmnal of Chldare's 
Liteature~
EDITORS:
Louisa Smith, Mankato State University
Jack Zipes, University of Minnesota
T he Lion and the Unicorn is a theme-
and genre- centered journal of
international scope committed to a serio
ongoing discussion of literature for chilc
The journal now appears three times a y
instead of two (in January, April, and
q. tember) 
;inc-_ren 
it 
U -4
p 
glltlsul/o 
rlev eaolxtl 
u 
w stou 
u».Vlv 
oV 1
and adding a general issue to each volume. The general issue presents
essays on "forgotten authors" and develops review essays on important
publications and scholarship dealing with children's culture.
THE GREAT COLLECTORS
SEPTEMBER 1998
(Volume 21, Number 3)
m A.S. W. Rosenbach, Dealer and Collector
(George R. Bodmer) Z Caught Up in the
Whirlwind: Ruth Baldwin (Rita J. Smith) N A
"Dukedom Large Enough": The de Grummond
Collection (Anne Lundin) 
Interview with
Tessa Chester (Curator of the Renier Collection)
(Louisa Smith) * The Kerlan Collection
(Karen Nelson Hoyle) M Lois Lenski's
Collection of Early Children's Books (Emilie
Mills) * (Re)Constructing Australian
Childhood: The Pound Collection at the State
Library of Victoria, Australia (Clare Bradford)
0 Some Manuscripts oflsaac Bashevis Singer
(Alida Allison) * and more ...
Shttp://www.press.jhu.edu/|
Prepayment is required.
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTIONs:
$26.00, individuals;
$58.00, institutions.
FOREIGN POSTAGE:
$5.60, Canada & Mexico;
$5.85, outside North America.
SINGLE-ISSUE PRICE:
$9.00, individuals;
$20.00, institutions.
Payment must be drawn on a U.S. bank in U.S.
dollars or made by international money order.
MD residents add 5% sales tax. For orders
shipped to Canada add
7% GST (#124004946RT).
SEND ORDERS TO:
The Johns Hopkins University Press,
P.O. Box 19966, Baltimore, MD
21211-0966, USA
To place an order using Visa
or MasterCard, call toll-free
1-800-548-1784, FAX us at
(410) 516-6968, or send Visa/MasterCard
orders to this Email address:
jlorder@jhupress.jhu.edu
press/journals/
S HEYiKriESEAR 
E
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(199812)52:4*;1 -C
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1997
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more... updated monthly!
II HII1111
t'I~4
 :-.-- ~1~. : 
--~;~~ -
lit~·a·*i~ 
~ds~~
·4:a'~Ji~ib~Yr
L-i 
.ii~·I ·'
.·
i
1. 
;
-x;··.--
";x-r 
;;1i:,
