ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
/e"
tiŽ
i
~~-i·
;k'
Secrets from
the Dollhouse
by Ann Turner
Full-color Dictures by Raul Colon
a uuiluouseC wouiu 
MiaL is iuiiy ica1LZceu .
. .
1.i11 a
lovely mix of evocative words and appealing art.
This one's for all doll lovers." -
Starred review / Booklist
Ages 5-8. $15.95TR (0-06-024564-6) * $15.89LB (0-06-024567-0)
Recent HarperCollins books by Ann Turner
DRUMMER BOY 
MISSISSIPPI MUD
Marching to the Civil War 
Three Prairie Journals
Full-color pictures by Mark Hess 
Full-color pictures by Robert J. Blake
Ages 4-8. $15.95TR (0-06-027696-7) 
Ages 7-10. $15.95TR (0-06-024432-1)
$15.89LB (0-06-027697-5) 
$15.89LB (0-06-024433-X)
www.harperchildrens.com
f HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks 1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, N.Y. 10019
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
April 2000
Vol. 53 No. 8
A LOOK INSIDE
267 THE BIG PICTURE
America's Champion Swimmer: Gertrude Ederle by David A. Adler;
illus. by Terry Widener
268 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
275 * The Wanderer by Sharon Creech; illus. by David Diaz
286 * Everything I Know about Pirates: A Collection ofMade-up Facts, Educated
Guesses, and Silly Pictures about Bad Guys of the High Seas written and
illus. by Tom Lichtenheld
288 * Malcolm X: A Fire Burning Brightly by Walter Dean Myers; illus. by
Leonard Jenkins
291 * Ring! Yo? written and illus. by Chris Raschka
297 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
298 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center fr Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Janice N. Harrington, Reviewer (JNH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Jeannette Hulick
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2000 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Terry Widener from America's Champion Swimmer: Gertrude Ederle ©2000.
Used by permission of Gulliver/Harcourt, Inc.
APRIL 2000 
* 267
THE BIG PICTURE
America's Champion Swimmer: Gertrude Ederle
by David A. Adler; illus. by Terry Widener
Picture-book biographies for younger readers are problematic. Theoretically, the
format precludes depth and scope and limits such a book's possibilities, since thirty-
two pages will only hold so much information; there's also the difficulty of writing
for the young reading audience instead of down to them. Nevertheless, the de-
mand for such biographies is great, and, thankfully, authors, illustrators, and pub-
lishers have risen to the occasion. Diane Stanley, Don Brown, and Jeanette Winter
have all produced respected picture-book biographies that embrace brevity's limits
and take full advantage of format. As a team, Adler (himself an author of many
such titles) and Widener made their debut in this genre with the excellent Lou
Gehrig: The Luckiest Man (BCCB 4/97). Their latest offering is further proof that
they have a marked talent for this invaluable genre.
Champion swimmer Gertrude "Trudy" Ederle was seven years old when
she learned to swim and twenty years old when she swam the English Channel.
She was the first woman to complete the channel swim and she broke the all-time
record for swimmers up to that date. In a few choice opening words, Adler makes
certain the reader gets a sense of the position of women in Ederle's day: "In 1906
women were kept out of many clubs and restaurants. In most states they were not
allowed to vote. Many people felt a woman's place was in the home. But Gertrude
Ederle's place was in the water."
The writing style is colloquial without being condescending, and the text
has the flavor of an oft-told family story streamlined to highlight the most exciting
points. The biographer wisely sticks to his subject's relevant formative experi-
ences: Ederle's increasing swimming prowess; her big swim (seventeen miles) from
lower Manhattan to Sandy Hook, New Jersey; her setting of twenty-nine U.S. and
world records; and her three Olympic gold medals. After carefully placing the
champion swimmer in the context of her home, family, and society, Adler then
settles in for a calm look at her two attempts to swim the channel. Given Ederle's
day and age, her decision to attempt to swim the English Channel was almost as
important as her actual success. She was front-page news: "Many people were
sure Trudy couldn't do it. A newspaper editorial declared that Trudy wouldn't
make it and that women must admit 'they would remain forever the weaker sex.'
It didn't matter to Trudy what people said or wrote. She was going to swim the
channel."
The illustrations that accompany the succinct but informative text are
equally effective. Widener's monumental figures and 'scapes have humor as well
as scope, and the thick opacity of the paints gives a concreteness to the composi-
tions that is reinforced by the sturdy lines and soft yet sculptural shapes. It's cear
from words and pictures that Ederle came from a close family: her father was a
staunch supporter who taught her how to swim; her sister Margaret was her assis-
268 
* THE BULLETIN
tant (and cheerleader) through both channel attempts. (Widener's acrylics show
the closeness between the sisters in scenes depicting Margaret coating Trudy with
lanolin and heavy grease to protect her from the icy water and cheering her on in
various swims.) Contrasting values provide opportunities for dramatic emphasis,
such as the white of a lifeboat against the blue of the sea, or the small swimmer and
her tracking boat against the hugeness of the rough water. Unusual perspectives
enhance the eye-catching compositions, encouraging the viewer to take a closer
look at the determined swimmer's adventures at sea.
The author's admiration for Ederle's athletic and other accomplishments
is obvious from the tone of his text. He evokes a sense of his subject's time and,
without belaboring the point, indicates that Ederle's success came as much from
indifference to the dictates of an unencouraging society as it did from her determi-
nation to complete her task. Adler makes sure that readers understand the magni-
tude of Ederle's achievement, both in the body of the text and in the final note,
which discusses the hazards of swimming the channel and Ederle's later accom-
plishments. Bemoaning the fact that Women's History Month has already passed?
Do a hero display and put Ms. Ederle front and center. (Imprint information
appears on p. 269.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AASENG, 
NATHAN 
Construction: 
Building the Impossible. 
Oliver,
2000 
[144p] 
illus. with photographs 
(Innovators)
ISBN 1-881508-59-5 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-10
RICHIE, 
JASON 
Weapons: 
Designing the Tools of War. 
Oliver,
2000 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs 
(Innovators)
ISBN 1-881508-60-9 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-10
The latest entries in the Innovators series (see Mulcahy's Medical Technology, BCCB
7/97) continue to examine those great leaps of inventiveness and tiny tweaks of
technology that prove pivotal within a given field of endeavor. Aaseng covers
seven massive projects of architecture and civil engineering-Imhotep's step pyra-
mid, the Thames Tunnel, the Brooklyn Bridge, the Eiffel Tower, the Panama
Canal, the Hoover Dam, and the Empire State Building. Richie's military innova-
tions include the submarine, revolver, battleship, torpedo, automatic machine gun,
tank, and ballistic missile. Each volume is organized into structured chapters sepa-
rated into sections on background, "The Breakthrough," and "The Result," but
each author employs a distinctive voice and approach. Richie's subject lends itself
to a more continuous treatment, with each escalation of offensive and defensive
armament contributing to an ongoing dialectic of death. Aaseng, on the other
hand, demonstrates how modern grand-scale engineering projects seem to rely less
on astonishing invention than on brilliant feats of organization of manpower and
APRIL 2000 
* 
269
material. Each can provide a chapter's worth of information (plus glossary, index,
and extensive bibliography) for researchers on a specific quest or a full afternoon's
reading for kids who camp out in the 600s. EB
ADLER, DAVID A. 
America's Champion Swimmer: Gertrude Ederle; illus. by Terry
Widener. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-201969-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
See this month's Big Picture, p. 267, for review.
ARNOLD, CAROLINE 
Easter Island: Giant Stone Statues Tell of a Rich and Tragic
Past; written and illus. with photographs by Caroline Arnold. 
Clarion,
2000 
[48p]
ISBN 0-395-87609-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Although the purpose of the moai that seem to stand sentinel around the famous
island is obviously the intriguing mystery here, Arnold sets the stone figures into
cultural perspective, examining what archaeologists, anthropologists, missionaries,
explorers, and descendants of island settlers have discovered concerning the
Polynesians who carved them. In a dozen succinct chapters she surveys the land
and its original topography, discusses legends about the earliest settlers, recon-
structs how the moai were carved, moved, and placed, and speculates on how
deforestation, overfarming, overhunting, clan warfare, and European-borne dis-
ease contributed to the decline of the island civilization. Plenty of crisply repro-
duced color photographs will draw in the browsers, while a comprehensive index
and concise chapter titles will help report writers navigate through the material
with ease. EB
BATTLE-LAVERT, GWENDOLYN 
The Shaking Bag; illus. by Aminah Brenda Lynn
Robinson. 
Whitman, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-7328-0 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Battle-Lavert fashions an original tale based on traditional motifs in descriptive,
effective language: "One cold, blustery evening, five ravens landed on her clothes-
line. They were black as night. Like trapeze artists, they swayed back and forth on
the line." Miss Annie Mae is a poor but generous woman who, despite her pov-
erty, makes sure all those birds around her place get fed. One night a traveling
man named Raven Reed knocks on Miss Annie's door, looking for food and a
place to sleep. Miss Annie has little to share but offers it nonetheless, only to see
Raven pull all they need from her empty seed bag with the magic words "Shake it
up! Shake it up! All around!" That Raven is an emissary from the birds may be
obvious, but the clarity of this tale, with its simple and obvious moral, is part of its
translucent charm. Robinson's illustrative style has a William Johnson-like flow
to the drafting of figures and a Goya-like verve to the vertical lines that energize
the compositions. The paper itself is a pale goldenrod that adds emphasis to the
palette, which consists mostly of intense shades of red, blue, and green. Several of
the compositions are crowded and difficult to see; still, the paintings have a vigor
that suits Battle-Lavert's storytelling voice. Any adult wanting to tell a lively, in-
structive tale should look in this direction. JMD
270 
* THE BULLETIN
BELL, HILARI 
Songs ofPower. Hyperion, 2000 
[224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2487-5 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0561-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-10
Imina, the protagonist of this action-packed futuristic novel, is one of a small group
of children living with their scientist parents in an underwater habitat that serves as
a base for researchers looking in the ocean for a solution to a world food crisis.
Imina, however, is not a scientist but a teenaged shaman-in-training, whose studies
with her Inuit grandmother were interrupted by the latter's death. She resents the
technology-saturated atmosphere in which she lives, and she is in return called a
"savage" by one peer and suspected by most adults of being mentally ill because of
her belief in magic. Magic soon becomes dangerously real, however, when the
habitat is threatened by a force emanating from the whales that make up the "council
of Makers," whose deliberations the reader has been privy to since page one. As a
magic-maker herself, Imina is the only one capable of reaching the whales, who
believe that the above-grounders have betrayed their trust; she's therefore the habitat's
only hope of survival. The cliche of the science/magic division is given no new life
here, and the cultural practices of the sketchily developed characters are a new age
hodgepodge of belief systems forced into thematic reconciliation within the novel.
The novel's message is further complicated by a pattern of allusions to Hamlet and
other classics of English literature. Still, whales and magic are popular elements
and the themes here are appealing; readers who want to escape to a place where
there is more in heaven and earth-and the ocean-than we have hitherto dreamed
will enjoy this ecological fantasy. FK
BOWDISH, LYNEA 
Brooklyn, Bugsy, and Me; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. 
Farrar,
2000 
[9 6p]
ISBN 0-374-30993-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Sam is nine when he and his widowed mother move from rural West Virginia to
Brooklyn to live with his grandfather. Sam has a hard time adjusting to city life,
and his difficulty is compounded by the fact that he feels his grandfather doesn't
want him there. Longing for the familiar and realizing he isn't going to get it
occupy a lot of Sam's time, but he slowly begins to learn his way around. More
importantly, he comes to the realization that his grandfather (the Bugsy of the
tite), a listener, not a talker, loves him and understands more than he lets on. In
less capable hands this title would be indistinguishable from any number of "ad-
justment to change" books. Bowdish, however, has a slightly warped sense of
humor (Sam's mom keeps Sam's dad's cremated remains in an urn that she talks to
daily) and a knack for fully dimensional characterization that keeps the proceed-
ings lively. Sam's voice suits his age, and his gradual unfolding to the pleasures of
1950s city life (stickball, stoop ball, Coney Island, egg creams) is unforced and
reassuring. Final illustrations not seen. JMD
BROOKE, PEGGY Jake's Orphan. Kroupa/DK Ink, 2000 
[272p]
ISBN 0-7894-2628-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
For orphan-a-philes who have sniffled with happiness through Goodnight, Mr. Tom
and Anne of Green Gables, Brooke offers a richly satisfying tale of Tree, a twelve-
APRIL 2000 
* 271
year-old whose dream of a home finally seems to be coming true. There's a price,
though. He has had to leave his younger brother, Acorn, behind at the orphanage,
since Delton Gunderson and his wife have no need for a second farm hand on
their North Dakota spread. The dour, nigh-unpleasable Gunderson puts Tree
through his paces, working him hard and long, but Tree flourishes at farm labor
and hopes to be adopted at the end of his trial year. Acorn, as angry, impetuous,
and conniving as Tree is steady, shows up at the farm and imperils everything Tree
has worked for; the elder brother must decide whether fraternal ties are stronger
than his dreams of a home. Then Delton Gunderson's bachelor brother, Jake, a
man who knows a thing or two about being a younger sibling, shows the boys a
way through their dilemma. Brooke brings Gunderson's 1926 farm vividly to
life-unforgiving rounds of dairy chores, horrifying brushfires, neighborly coop-
eration, a dinner table groaning with daily feasts. Tree and Acorn are achingly
believable in both their vulnerability and their inner strength, and readers will
cheer as they take up permanent residence with the man determined to be their
father. EB
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH 
Sacajawea. Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2000 
[240p]
ISBN 0-15-202234-1 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
In a dense narrative told in alternate chapters by Sacajawea and by William Clark,
Bruchac recounts the bulk of the Lewis and Clark expedition, detailing the history
of political and social relations between the explorers and the diverse American
Indian groups they encounter. Sacajawea proves to be a leader in these contexts,
endearing herself to the men of the expedition as a resourceful and resilient woman.
While the character of Sacajawea emerges as an engaging and thoughtful heroine,
the depiction of William Clark's character is eschewed in favor of long recountings
of details of the voyage, which may cause less dedicated readers to lose enthusiasm.
Also problematic are brief stories that appear at the opening of each chapter, which,
in tandem with alternating narrative voices, may disorient and deter some readers.
Once past these obstacles, however, this is an involving tale of struggle and sur-
vival. Bruchac emphasizes Sacajawea's grave difficulty in guiding this group of
men into a land where they didn't know the languages or understand the peoples.
A historical note at the end gives some examples of how closely Bruchac followed
the journals of Lewis and Clark in retelling the story of this voyage, and a detailed
map is included. The recently issued U.S. dollar coin featuring Sacajawea will
likely ignite renewed interest in the adventures of this brave and unusual woman
and her role in this complex tale of survival, history, and politics. KM
CALVERT, PATRICIA 
Michael, Waitfor Me. 
Atheneum, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-82102-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Sarah's put out (literally-she's forced to relocate into another bedroom) when
her older sister brings her fiance home for the summer. Soon, though, Sarah joins
the rest of the family in being smitten with Michael ("Michael was better than
brave. He could joust and use a word like ergo too"), and she is intrigued by the
revelation about his tragic past (he accidentally shot and killed his older brother).
As Sarah's family grows fonder of Michael, however, Sarah's sister grows away
from him, finding his dependence and sadness too difficult; her decision to dis-
solve the engagement leads to tragic consequences. Unfortunately, the story never
272 
* THE BULLETIN
succeeds in provoking genuine emotion. Michael is too wistfully perfect to find
any destiny but doom, and the other characters equally lack dimensionality, oper-
ating instead as functionaries to bring the drama to its inevitable end. Calvert has
a nice line in portentous foreshadowing, however ("What I never guessed was how
the whole family would be changed by the time September came"), and she also
offers some astute implicit commentary on both the allure and the labor of being
responsible for the happiness of another person. This might serve as a provocative
counterbalance to dramas of emotional rescue such as Randle's The Only Alien on
the Planet (BCCB 3/95). DS
CAREY, JANET 
Molly's Fire. Atheneum, 2000 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-82612-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
When Molly Fowler's father joins the Army Air Corps in World War II, he leaves
his gold watch chain in her keeping as a promise that he will return. The dreaded
telegram arrives informing the Fowlers that the lieutenant is missing in action and
presumed dead, and in the months that follow the family struggles to come to
terms with their loss-all except Molly, who remains stubbornly in denial. Her
hope kindles when she sees a pocket watch identical to her father's in the posses-
sion of a German POW in a labor camp in her Maine town, and she sets forth on
a mission to retrieve the watch and forestall her mother's romance with an ex-beau
until her father returns from overseas. Carey delivers Molly's hoped-for happy
ending, patterning her tale on accounts of pilots who "were fortunate enough to
go into hiding and eventually escape with the help of the underground." It is not
the improbability of the lieutenant's return, therefore, but the melodramatic en-
tanglements of secondary characters that impair the novel's credibility-saintly
friend Jane, who stoically bears insults concerning her illegitimacy and her Japa-
nese-American parentage; Jane's melancholy grandmother, who has never accepted
her own husband's death; Mrs. Fowler's love interest, Glen, the town bigot, whose
wife left him because he couldn't forget his old flame; Glen's son, Sam, whose
broken home has turned him into the town bully. Still, these soap-opera details
wield undeniable appeal for many readers, who will welcome the climactic father-
daughter reunion ("Her father's arms encircled her and held her tight. 'Daddy,'
she cried into the buttonhole by her cheek") and happily reach for the tissues. EB
CARLE, ERIC 
Does a Kangaroo Have a Mother, Too?; written and illus. by Eric
Carle. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
[26p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028767-5 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028768-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
Carle's newest picture book, sporting his hallmark collages composed of varied
color and patterns, takes a look at motherhood. The text hits the ground running,
asking on the title page, "Does a kangaroo have a mother, too?" Carle answers the
question on his opening page ("YES!/ A KANGAROO has a mother./ Just like me
and you"), only to test again: "Does a lion have a mother, too?" Though pre-
schoolers will enjoy the predictability of the call-and-response format and the gentle
reassurance of the last page ("YES! YES! Of course they do./ Animal mothers love
their babies, just as yours loves you"), Carle's lengthy repetitive text lacks the en-
ergy associated with other similarly formatted books such as Williams' I Went
APRIL 2000 
* 273
Walking (BCCB 12/90) or even Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What Do You See? Ter-
minology for each species' babies, parents, and groups is appended. EAB
CARMI, DANIELLA 
Samir and Yonatan; tr. by Yael Lotan. 
Levine/Scholastic,
2000 
[192p]
ISBN 0-439-13504-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
A bicycle accident lands Palestinian Samir in a "Jew hospital" awaiting surgery for
a shattered kneecap. Intimidated by the four Jewish children on his ward and
somewhat hampered by his limited grasp of Hebrew, Samir nonetheless begins to
make some tenuous connections with his hospital mates whose problems, he dis-
covers, are at least as grievous as his own. The manic Tzahi, who jumps on beds
and raucously rules the room in disregard of regulations, reluctantly admits he
needs a catheter; subdued Razia is recovering from a head injury from her drunken
father; withdrawn Ludmilla refuses to eat. It is studious Yonatan, however, with
his hand in a "device" and his head in the stars, who finally makes an overture to
Samir and promises him that, after surgery, he will take him on a trip to Mars.
The tedium and loneliness of Samir's hospital stay is convincingly portrayed; with
time hanging heavy in his hands he dwells on his hunger, fear of the Israelis around
him, and memories of his dead brother and his brokenhearted family, working
himself into a fever that only delays his surgery further. All this is in service of
Carmi's message of international brotherhood that, when it arrives, is forced and
heavy-handed. Samir and Yonatan bond over a virtual trip to Mars on a hospital
computer, Samir and Tzahi bond by urinating into a potted plant together, and
the future has a rosy glow: "Yonatan and me, my friend from the Jewish hospital.
We're improving a new world, free from troubles. Nothing looks impossible to
us, now that we're together." Although political strides have been made in the six
years between this novel's original publication and its English-language release,
reconciliation unfortunately hasn't proven to be this easy. EB
CASELEY, JUDITH 
Praying to A.L. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
[192p]
ISBN 0-688-15934-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
When her father dies after years of struggle against heart disease, Sierra is inconsol-
able not just at the loss but at the shutdown of her family. She's particularly
devastated by the disengagement of her best friend, Eli, who found in Sierra's
father a stability that his own father couldn't provide. The grief-stricken girl finds
comfort in the figure of Abraham Lincoln, to whom she was introduced by her
father and to whom she prays. Lincoln inspires Sierra to new courage in school,
where she coaxes her class into a play about the president's life and tragic death,
which brings her to accept her own recent tragedy. Caseley writes about the long-
ing and ravages of grief with perceptive understanding ("She pressed her face deeper
into the folds of his pillow, willing the cadence and pitch of his voice to come back
from the dead, searching in vain for his ghost. 'Haunt me, Papa,' Sierra whis-
pered. 'Please come back and haunt me'"). Her observations of the flailing family
are telling, particularly in contrast to Sierra's memories of happy days in the lively
household headed by her Jewish father and Cuban mother. The subplots detract
from the main focus, however, and the Lincoln obsession (though somewhat bet-
ter integrated than in Catherine Lewis' similarly themed Postcards to FatherAbraham,
274 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BCCB 2/00) never has the impact of Sierra's immediate drama. Still, the rawness
of grief is memorably limned here, and Sierra's-and her family's-gradual recov-
ery will give readers hope and reassurance. DS
CLARK, MARGARET 
Care Factor Zero. Avon Tempest, 2000 
[192p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-380-81390-4 
$6.99
Reviewed from galleys 
NR 
Gr. 9-12
Fifteen-year-old Larceny Leyton's led a hard life, moving from foster home to
foster home after her father's abandonment and her mother's suicide, but she might
have gotten into more than even she can handle after she believes she's killed the
fence to whom she sells her shoplifted goods. On the run, she encounters other
down-and-out teens, a few people who try to help her, and a man whose offer of
assistance is really his prelude to finding a use for her in his pornography and
prostitution businesses; her biggest obstacle, however, is the uncontrollable rage
that makes her lash out in violence. There's a slick simplification in this Australian
import that may be appealing in its similarity to some comic-book narratives, but
there are comics that deal better with the street-kid subject. The portrayal of
Larceny is oddly romanticized and she's described in cliches (she's "very beautiful
in a wild, untamed sort of way" with "her hips swinging suggestively in her tight
50 Is"), and the rest of the writing is similarly corny ("But though she ran and ran
till her lungs felt as if they would burst, she couldn't run away from the one thing
that terrified her the most: herself"). The plotting is random, Larceny's sudden
bonding with a new-agey social worker who spouts John Bradshaw is unlikely, and
the ending that leaves her in the clutches of the porn merchant but hopeful about
escape is both logically and dramatically unsatisfying. Even readers who can't get
enough of Shelley Stoehr's melodramas of slumming are going to wonder what to
make of this. DS
CONLY, JANE LESLIE 
What Happened on Planet Kid. Holt, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8050-6065-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Dawn's mother needs time to recuperate from surgery, so twelve-year-old Dawn is
spending the summer of 1958 with her mother's beloved uncle and aunt on their
rural Virginia farm. Though she misses her family, Dawn loves the farm and the
companionship of the neighboring Williams clan, especially her age-mate Char-
lotte and Charlotte's crush-worthy older brother Rufus; also in the pack of sum-
mer friends is Delbert, "kin to Auntie Merle, at the colored camp." The summer
escapades take on a darker tone as Dawn gradually realizes the violence Mr. Will-
iams inflicts on his family, violence that drives one son from home and may yet kill
Rufus. Conly brings deftly depicted and apparently random elements together,
creating a vivid mosaic of a summer experience. Details range from Dawn's pitch-
ing gift to Delbert's insistence on being called a different name every few days to
the establishment of Planet Kid, a secret hideout in a field of jimsonweed, and
Dawn's present-tense narration has a believable naivet6 as well as an effective sweep.
Elements of the period subtly inform the narrative, especially in attitudes towards
race (even Dawn's kindly Aunt Van serves "the colored boys lemonade from a
separate dipper") and family business ("If he's a little tough on them," says Van of
Mr. Williams, "I can see why"). While the conclusion's more open-ended than
readers seeking a happy ending might wish, straightforward triumph would be
APRIL 2000 
* 275
neither realistic nor typical of Conly's work, and the possibility of resolution is
enough to satisfy. DS
Cox, JUDY 
Weird Stories from the Lonesome Cafe; illus. by Diane
Kidd. 
Browndeer/Harcourt, 2000 
72p
ISBN 0-15-202134-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Narrator Sam is living with Uncle Clem while his parents are away on business.
Bound and determined to write a novel, Uncle Clem moves them both out to an
isolated cafe in the middle of Nevada, but the cafe is surprisingly busy and Uncle
Clem still can't find the time he needs to write. A "Help Wanted" sign on the
door produces a number of strangers fleeing the attentions of a Channel 54 News
team: Bigfoot (who becomes "Harry" the cook); Elvis (who becomes "El" and
delivers bread in his pink Cadillac); Dorothy (from Oz, who becomes the cafe
waitress); Santa Claus (who signs on as temporary handyman); and a little green
alien (who washes dishes). Each tabloid personality arrives with Channel 54 hot
on his or her trail, only to be rescued by the quick-thinking Sam, who finds jobs
for all the newsworthy notables. This premise is mildly amusing the first time, but
it runs out of gas fast, and Cox does little to refuel it. Kidd's black-and-white ink
drawings have an insouciant cartoony charm in their clean lines and jolly interpre-
tations of the exaggerated situations, and they help to make the incidents appear
funnier than they are written. This is just barely enough to make a light reading
snack for reluctant readers and youngsters who actually know who Elvis is and can
appreciate the humor attached to the sightings of various celebrities. JMD
CREECH, SHARON 
The Wanderer; illus. by David Diaz. 
Cotler/HarperCollins,
2000 
[320p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027731-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027730-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Sophie is thrilled with her summer adventure, sailing across the
Atlantic on the Wanderer, "a forty-five-foot sailboat with a motley crew: three
uncles and two cousins." Relations among Sophie's "boat family" are sometimes
prickly, with Uncle Stew and his son Brian officiously worrying, Uncle Mo join-
ing them to denigrate his lazy but charming son Cody, and everyone feeling a little
awkward about Sophie. It's understandable that her position in the group is com-
plicated, since her history is as well: the family to which she's so fiercely loyal
became hers through adoption three years ago, and she shies away from discussion
of her previous life. Her shipmates aren't sure of what to make of her multitude of
stories about Bompie, the grandfather they're sailing to see and whom Sophie has
never met-Sophie insists the stories are true, told to her by Bompie, but is this
just part of her retroactively imagined family life, and if so, what will happen when
she finally comes face to face with the old man? Interspersing Sophie's narration
with excerpts from Cody's log, Creech concocts an effective atmosphere filled with
promise and possibility, yet tinged with shadows of past grief. She doesn't overdo
the sea-changes, but it's clear that everyone, not just Sophie, is grappling with the
implications of their past and wondering about their futures. Sophie's past watery
tragedy is rather romantic, but in general the author employs these classic motifs
well; Sophie's physical and emotional passages are depicted with tenderness and
strength (her meeting with Bompie is unforcedly and superbly touching). Diaz'
276 
* THE BULLETIN
woodcuts are just right for adding both geography (maps of various parts of the
voyage are helpful) and decoration, with headpieces opening each brief chapter.
Sophie is a quietly luminous heroine, and readers will rejoice in her voyage. DS
CROWE, CAROLE 
Waiting for Dolphins. Boyds Mills, 2000 
139p
ISBN 1-56397-847-4 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 6-9
Molly's father died in a sailing accident, and in a fury of grief Molly shuts out her
mother, who is determined to sell the family sailboat, Emerald Eyes. Blinded by
her rage to dangerous realities, Molly resolves to be true to her father's memory by
stealing the sailboat and sailing to Tahiti. The arrival of drug smugglers, old fam-
ily friends, and a world-class hurricane complicate an already risky enterprise and
give Crowe a chance to end her story with a bang. Unfortunately, most of the
action in this book happens in the final pages; the majority of the novel consists of
Molly plotting to steal the boat and antagonizing her long-suffering mother. The
language is cliche-ridden and sentimental, and Molly is, despite her emotional
confusion and sense of loss, an unsympathetic and whiny character, acting much
younger than the fifteen-going-on-sixteen she is supposed to be. The salt sea and
sailing ships retain their magic, however, and undemanding adventure lovers may
set anchor here. JMD
DANZIGER, PAULA 
Snail Mail No More; by Paula Danziger and Ann M.
Martin. 
Scholastic, 2000 
[33 6 p]
ISBN 0-439-06335-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
This sequel starts up where the previous book left off, with the promise of a face-
to-face visit for former classmates/present penpals Tara*Starr and Elizabeth (writ-
ten respectively byAnn Martin and Paula Danziger) after the remarkably tumultuous
seventh-grade year chronicled in P.S. Longer Letter Later. Readers who missed the
first book get lots of catch-up explanations about the girls' domestic and romantic
situations in the lengthy, detailed emails that Eliz812 & TSTARR exchange dur-
ing and after that visit. Fans anxious for resolutions to conflicts and problems
introduced in the last book get them with a vengeance: most dramatically,
Elizabeth's downsized father-the one who deserted the family in the last book-
dies in a one-car drunk driving accident and Tara's mother gives birth. There's
also some kissing and drinking, but nothing parents or kids will find too edgy
(after Tara's first drinks, she takes the pledge). In fact, the book sounds like it was
proofread by OSHA: no opportunity is missed for imparting solid information
(about Alateen, skin cancer, cat safety), for recommending literary classics (from
Frog and Toad to Langston Hughes' poetry), and for raising social awareness (the
insufficiency of government funding for daycare is a recurring theme). Pre-YA
readers looking for a soap opera with a safety net will find this a satisfying answer
to the question of what happened next to this pair of attractive opposites. FK
ELGAR, SUSAN 
The Brothers Gruesome; illus. by Drahos Zak. 
Lorraine/Hough-
ton, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-618-00515-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
The three Brothers Gruesome are disgusting ogres who've eaten everything they
could get their hands on, including their own mother, since the day they were
born. Their eating continues as the landscape around them grows more barren,
APRIL 2000 
* 277
until they are chomped by a monster bigger than they are. The plot is slight, but
the illustrations are elegantly grotesque, featuring the three slovenly and wart-ridden
brothers and their rapidly munching mouths. Framed in delicate rectangles of
black, Zak's pen-and-ink illustrations depict finely textured figures and landscapes
in a muted palate of browns and grays, looking stark and desolate against crisp
white backgrounds. Spot art picks up vile details from the larger illustrations, such
as a dead bug with legs in the air or the carefully arranged bones of a recent meal.
Unfortunately, the rhyming couplets that constitute the text are rhythmically
inconsistent, and the story begins slowly before arriving at the eating action that
will engage children. Nevertheless, kids who are yearning for a beginning scary
book with a good dose of gross may be drawn in by the Brothers Gruesome and
their gratifyingly loathsome eating habits. KM
ERNST, LISA CAMPBELL 
Bear's Day; written and illus. by Lisa Campbell
Ernst. 
Viking, 2000 
12p
ISBN 0-670-89115-0 
$5.99 
Ad 
1-3 yrs
Cat's Play; written and illus. by Lisa Campbell Ernst. 
Viking, 2000 
12p
ISBN 0-670-89116-9 
$5.99 
R 
1-3 yrs
Ernst's new board books display her familiar gentle pastel watercolors with rounded
shapes, combining them with compact rhyming couplets for some cozy beginning
book experience. Cat's Play, in which a baby interacts with a favorite pet, is the
more successful, because the rhymes are more exact ("Hello, cat / Gentle pat...
Peek-a-boos/ Silly shoes") and the spreads less randomly connected. The rhyme in
Bear's Day, in which a child plays with a toy bear, is not as polished and the progress
is slightly more arbitrary. Either volume would be suitable for tiny hands (and
teeth), however, while the joyful play and child-centered illustrations are reminis-
cent of board books by Helen Oxenbury and Shirley Hughes. EAB
FLEISCHMAN, PAUL 
Big Talk: Poems for Four Voices; illus. by Beppe
Giacobbe. 
Candlewick, 2000 
[45p]
ISBN 0-7636-0636-7 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Fleischman is the king of choral poetry for young people, and here he takes a bold
new approach, orchestrating three fairly substantial poems for a quartet of readers
(though suggestions are included for workability with fewer or more as well). The
layout bears a resemblance to musical staves, with each voice being assigned a color
that backgrounds the text that reader speaks; once readers get the hang of moving
down to the next staff rather than turning the page at the end of the line, execution
will be a breeze. The first two poems ("The Quiet Evenings Here" and "Seventh-
Grade Soap Opera") aren't particularly noteworthy in their own right, dragging
things out a bit and relying on the arrangement rather than original language to
bring interest to the words. "Ghosts' Grace," however, is evocative and memo-
rable, playing with sounds and alliteration ("To bite into summer itself, sweet as
sugar") as it gives voice to ghosts who watch in envy as the living engage in the
pleasurable ritual of a meal. Throughout, the use of the vocal parts is clever and
effective, and the poems will make their own rhythms as parts shift from solo to
group, unison to near-fugue effects (there's a particularly nice touch in "Seventh-
Grade Soap Opera" when the full chorus chimes in on the names of the gossipees).
The visuals are unfortunately uneven, adding some loud complexity to the already
278 
* THE BULLETIN
dense pages (the opening spreads are particularly overbusy) and running to some
screechy and dissonant hues, especially in the strips of images that underscore the
texts. Still, the sheer pleasure of using this in class is undeniable, and once kids
have mastered this they might get a kick out of orchestrating their own favorite
poems. DS
FOGELIN, ADRIAN 
Crossing Jordan. Peachtree, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 1-56145-215-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
When the house next door is sold to an African-American family, Cass's father
immediately puts up a tall fence between the two yards. Cass makes friends with
neighbor Jemmie despite the fence; both girls are avid runners, and they meet at
the school track every morning to run. Their secret friendship is exposed when
Cass's father comes home from work unexpectedly, and he forbids Cass to see any
more ofJemmie or her family. Fogelin does an effective job of portraying anger on
both sides of the fence, with Jemmie's mother forbidding Jemmie from associating
with bigots just as fervently as Cass's father forbids Cass from associating with
black people. Although there is eventual reconciliation between the two families,
Cass's father does not entirely renounce his former bigotry; instead, he struggles
with his reservations about their friendship. Fogelin creates Cass and Jemmie as
complex characters with the same differences of approach and personality that
mark the interactions of other best friends, whatever their skin color. Cass' straight-
forward voice never falters, even when she questions her father's beliefs and her
own decisions. Readers will appreciate the honesty of Fogelin's approach and ap-
plaud the two girls in their fast friendship. KM
FRADIN, DENNIS BRINDELL 
Ida B. Wells: Mother of the Civil Rights Movement;
written by Dennis Brindell Fradin and Judith Bloom Fradin. 
Clarion,
2000 
[178p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-89898-6 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 5-12
Celebrated as the "Queen of the Black Race" and "The Princess of the Press," Ida
B. Wells is best known for her turn-of-the-century anti-lynching crusade. Her
biting editorials and inspired speeches against vigilantism inflamed Southern read-
ers, brought public attention to a "crime against humanity," and rallied support-
ers. Ahead of her time in her aggressively nonconciliatory approach, she was also
spurned by less militant African-American leaders of her day and avoided as a
troublemaker. The Fradins recount Wells' fight for racial equality, her encounters
with the day's personalities (Frederick Douglass confessed that "while he disap-
proved of lynching ... he had assumed that the victims were guilty and weren't
worth the time and effort of saving") and her extraordinary accomplishments: civil
rights activist, journalist, editor, founding member of the NAACP, suffragist, po-
litical candidate, Chicago's first female probations officer, and still more. Quotes
from contemporaries, excerpts from letters, grim photographs of lynchings, and
Wells' own words take readers beyond simple biography and set Wells squarely in
her time. The portrait is well rounded, showing that the fearless and uncompro-
mising activist was also an overbearing mother and a blunt and undiplomatic indi-
vidual ("I cannot or do not make friends . . . My temper has always been my
besetting sin"). Clearly captioned black and white illustrations, historical docu-
APRIL 2000 
* 
279
ments, and facsimiles are generously interspersed, and students will welcome the
insightful author's note, useful bibliography, and extensive index. JNH
FREEMAN, MARTHA 
The Trouble with Cats; illus. by Cat Bowman Smith. 
Holiday
House, 2000 
[80p]
ISBN 0-8234-1479-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Third-grader Holly is trying to adjust to her mother's remarriage, a new stepfa-
ther, his tiny apartment, his four cats ("William has four cats. And every one of
them is trouble"), and a new school. She perseveres and, eventually, proves victo-
rious over the small yet daunting obstacles to primary-grade happiness. It's clear
that Holly's troubles are more a question of perspective than tragedy (her first-
person narrative is cheerily pessimistic), and her slight emotional twitching to find
a comfortable fit in this new situation will elicit more rueful grins than belly laughs.
Bowman contributes pen-and-ink drawings with lines that quiver with energy,
and the spot art of the grinning cat that opens each chapter perks up the proceed-
ings. Freeman has a knack for wholesome, undemanding fiction (The Year My
Parents RuinedMy Life, BCCB 2/98) with enough action and humor to carry the
plot. Brief chapters and a chatty, casual writing style makes this title a good choice
for pleasure-or-practice reading for emerging bibliophiles. JMD
GARDELLA, TRICIA 
Blackberry Booties; illus. by Glo Coalson. 
Orchard,
2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33184-9 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30184-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In this old-fashioned and idyllic country story, a girl named Mikki Jo is searching
for a gift for her new baby cousin, Samuel. While delivering some fresh picked
blackberries, she hears the buzzing of sheep shears, and she's inspired to exchange
a bucket of blackberries for several handfuls of wool. Mikki Jo overhears other
neighbors who are carding wool, spinning thread, and knitting, and she exchanges
a bucket of blackberries for their help at each step in the making of the baby's
present, a pair of baby booties. Loose watercolors convey the motion of Mikki Jo's
restlessness en route to the completion of Samuel's gift, and Coalson uses a soft
palette of blackberry-stain purples and countryside greens and browns to depict
the bucolic environs. Unfortunately, human faces and hands are awkwardly drafted,
facial expressions are generically cheery, and the cumulative series of coincidences
that solves Mikki Jo's problems robs the story of tension. While young readers
may overlook these shortcomings in favor of the berry picking refrain of "one, two,
three in the bucket, one in the mouth," libraries may want to consider purchasing
another copy of Blueberriesfor Sal instead. KM
GEORGE, JEAN CRAIGHEAD 
How to Talk to Your Cat; illus. by Paul Meisel and
with photographs. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027969-9 
$9.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027968-0 
$9.95 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Obviously a felinophile, George clearly enjoys this disquisition on cat communi-
cation, which touches on history and behavior as well as vocalization. She exam-
ines cat greetings ("Among cats, 'Hello' is rubbing heads") and the various flavors
280 
* THE BULLETIN
of "Meow" (in a double-spread glossary), the purr and the positions of whiskers
and tails, the pretend mouse and the paper-bag cave, with attention to concrete
detail that will have youngsters poring over the book with one eye on their own
kitties. While George streamlines things a bit (it's never mentioned, for instance,
that pleasure is not the only motivation for a purr) and inclines towards a roman-
ticism that doesn't always go with her behavioral assessments, the book is effective
at nudging readers from their anthropocentric worldviews to a cat's-eye approach
to life (the notion of the cat's map of the house and neighborhood is particularly
piquant). Meisel's illustrations are a light-handed line-and-watercolor, with tail-
twitching cats pared down but expressive. In an intriguing move, the book pairs
the watercolor cats with a photographed human (George herself, to be exact) for
diagrams of human-cat interaction; the result is surprisingly successful, offering
along with its visual pleasures the implication of two different ways of seeing as
well as two different ways of being seen. With its mixture of animal behavior and
cuddliness, this will set young cat lovers purring. DS
GEORGE, JEAN CRAIGHEAD 
How to Talk to Your Dog; illus. by Sue Truesdell and
with photographs. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027093-4 
$9.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027092-6 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-5
In this companion volume to the above title, George turns her lens on the canine
world. Those familiar with the animal-behavior aspect of George's Julie of the
Wolves won't be surprised to see her detailed examination as the author explains
vocalizations, tail positions, scent and sniffing, facial expressions, and various other
aspects of doggy socializing. In this book too, some of the statements are a bit
misleading (not all dogs strive for dominance, for instance), but the author is clear
about the hierarchical nature of dogs and the impact of human leadership ("Tell-
ing your dog he is good is his reward for living"). The mixed photography (of
George, representing the humans) and illustration (an endearingly scruffy yellow
mutt is the main canine representative) is again effective. Truesdell's got a gift for
casually cockeyed canines: there's a Feifferesque touch to her scrawled lines, and
her panoply of pooches are expressive in the extreme with their motion lines and
flying ears (the collection on the endpapers will send dogophiles into sighs of yearn-
ing). As with George's cat volume, this will be an accessible and perhaps para-
digm-shifting introduction for young readers. DS
GIBBONS, 
GAIL 
My Baseball Book; written 
and illus. 
by Gail
Gibbons. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
[24 p]
ISBN 0-688-17137-0 
$5.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
My Soccer Book; written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. 
HarperCollins,
2000 
[2 4p]
ISBN 0-688-17138-9 
$5.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
This pair of inviting tites, trim sized for small hands to thumb or to tuck into a
backpack for reference at a game, offer an overview of fundamental rules and basic
plays. Clean diagrams of playing fields and positions set the scene, while a uni-
formed (no sandlot games, these), multicultural kid cast exudes joyful intensity as
APRIL 2000 
* 281
they zoom across the field and dart around bases, visually demonstrating the plays.
Gibbons takes a cookie-cutter approach to her texts, though, squeezing unequal
amounts of information between her identical openings (each sport "is fun, whether
you are playing yourself or rooting for your favorite team") and closings ("Every-
one cheers. It's been such a good game"). The format works well for the more
straightforward soccer rules; players even get a break at halftime. The greater
complexity of baseball rules, however, tugs at the seams of this constrained format,
and Gibbons simply cannot cover the contingencies young spectators are likely to
see on the field at a typical game. Some effort is made to clarify terms in the
appended glossary, but even such basics as "strike zone" and "grand slam" are
mentioned or demonstrated in text and action but left undefined. Still, adult
readers will probably be more than willing to fill in the blanks, and listeners will
appreciate an author who takes their interest in the game seriously. EB
GIBLIN, JAMES CROSS, ed. 
The Century That Was: Reflections on the Last One
Hundred Years. 
Atheneum, 2000 
[17 6p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-82281-2 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Although students are regularly expected to write essays, remarkably few essays are
written for children to read; in this anthology, eleven distinguished children's and
young adult authors embark on, if not uncharted, certainly unfrequented waters,
and their voyage through the century is far from smooth. Many entries are in-
tended to instruct, and of these Albert Marrin's finely crafted exploration of the
legacies of World War I is by far the strongest. Penny Colman, Walter Dean
Myers, and Laurence Pringle offer cursory overviews of the century's events in
their specialties-women's rights, civil rights, and conservation movements. Russell
Freedman and Jim Murphy respectively expound on the futurism of Jules Verne
and H. G. Wells (heavy on Verne, light on Wells) and the development of the
automobile and commercial airline industries; Milton Meltzer offers disjointed
observations on federal politics. Other essays take on a more personal tone: Bruce
Brooks' razor-sharp indictment of the "early breeding phenomenon" (raising small
children to be pros) in late twentieth-century sports is bound to raise howls of
protest or approbation among teen readers; Lois Lowry's intimate (and very funny)
reflections on the photographic images of six generations of women in her family
should send readers scurrying for their scrapbooks. Katherine Paterson contrib-
utes an earnest but rambling comparison of her views on Christian faith and ser-
vice with those of her minister father, and Eve Bunting tries unsuccessfully to
integrate her personal immigration experience with a whirlwind mini-history of
American immigration experience in toto. Although this composite volume is
maddeningly uneven, Marrin's, Brooks', and Lowry's entries suggest how power-
ful and entertaining essays for children can be; hopefully other efforts will follow.
EB
HARJO, JOY 
The Good Luck Cat; illus. by Paul Lee. 
Harcourt, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-232197-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
In poet Joy Harjo's first children's book, a young American Indian girl chronicles
the nine near-death experiences ("lives") of her good luck cat, Woogie, "a stripedy
cat with tickling whiskers and green electric eyes." Each well-paced double-page
282 
* THE BULLETIN
spread tells a distinct tale about the perils Woogie has survived: from the time she
was found by the narrator's mother "spinning and yowling in the dryer," to the
time the narrator herself hid Woogie in the trunk so she could come along to the
powwow-and then forgot about her-to the time her dad "watched Woogie's
seventh life fly by him as she ran after it," chased by the boys who had shot her in
the ear with a BB gun. The engaging illustrations play bold blocks of muted
acrylics against figures artfully framed in milky white, making the pictures easy to
share with a group. Woogie herself is clearly the central character, a "stripedy"
study in charcoal and shadowy taupes and tans seen through loving eyes, and an
equally clear picture of her extended human family emerges naturally from her
story. Like its subject, this book looks to have more than nine lives. FK
HEISEL, SHARON E. 
Precious Gold, Precious Jade. Holiday House, 2000 
[208p]
ISBN 0-8234-1432-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Although Chinese miners have resided in their own well-established corner of
Bounty for some time, fourteen-year-old Angelena Stuart has had little contact
with the "Celestials" until a Chinese widow enrolls her daughter An Li (dubbed
Leeana by the teacher) in the one-room schoolhouse, and Angelena is surprised to
discover just how much she likes the new girl. The Stuart family is soon at odds
with their neighbors for allowing Angelena to socialize with Leeana, and as the
town erupts into anti-Chinese violence, they are forced to define just how far
neighborliness should extend to people whose traditions are so foreign from their
own. Heisel presents a credible range of attitudes among the Bounty townsfolk:
Angelena's Uncle Jasper takes sadistic delight in taunting Chinese miners at their
claims with reckless gunshots and leads the gang that finally burns out the Chinese
village; brother Tom agrees with forced removal but will not turn his own hand to
violence. Even Angelena's parents, easily the most broad-minded and compas-
sionate of Bounty's citizens, draw the line at allowing Eastern notions of polythe-
ism to "corrupt" their children: "We build our lives on faith, family, and farm. ...
The townsfolk don't take kindly to your keeping company with a Celestial and we
have to pay some attention to that, too. Miners can move on, but farmers have to
live in a community." Angelena's voice, plainspoken and passionate, whips the
action along, and readers not quite ready to tackle Yep's Dragon's Gate (BCCB 12/
93) should find this a riveting introduction to a sad chapter in Oregon history.
EB
HERRERA, JUAN FELIPE 
The Upside Down Boy/El nifio de cabeza; illus. by Eliza-
beth G6mez. 
Children's Book Press, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-89239-162-6 
$15.95 
R 6-9 yrs
This exuberant bilingual picture book chronicles Juanito's experience of finding
his feet in a new place and his voice in a new language. In a brief introductory
note, Herrera (author of Calling the Doves, BCCB 12/95) explains that when he
was eight years old, his mother decided it was time for the family to give up their
nomadic life as campesinos (field workers) and settle down in the city so he could
go to school. Juanito's understandable anxieties at this move are poignant and
poetic; since he does not yet speak English, he especially worries about the lan-
guage gap and wonders, "Will my tongue turn into a rock?" The sometimes sur-
real acrylic illustrations successfully convey Juanito's nervous excitement as well as
APRIL 2000 
* 283
the disorientation he expresses when he later describes himself (after mistakenly
eating his lunch during recess time) as "the upside down boy." In time, however,
Juanito rights himself, thanks to his parents' appreciation of both their native Span-
ish and their acquired English and thanks to Juanito's young teacher, who praises
his first poem and his singing voice. A happy ending that reads the same in both
English and Spanish ("Uno . . . dos . . . and three!") allows readers and listeners
focusing on the language of either or both versions of the story to appreciate this
celebration of shared languages and individual voices. FK
HIYILMAZ, GAYE 
Smiling for Strangers. Farrar, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 0-374-37081-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
As Nina's grandfather lies mortally wounded, betrayed by a relative, he urges her
to escape from their war-torn Yugoslavian homeland and head toward the only
place that might secure her safety, England. Armed with little more than a letter
and a mysterious pair of aged airline tickets that once belonged to her mother,
Nina stows away in an aid convoy in hopes of finding Paul Fellows, the man who
wrote to her mother long ago and seemed to promise refuge. Her lies regarding
name and age (she adopts the identity of her deceased older cousin) mire her deeper
in trouble as an unbalanced aid worker from the convoy holds her temporarily in
a kind of eerie possessiveness, and a trip across England finally finds her hungry,
weary, and exhausted at Fellows' secluded home. There some longstanding family
mysteries are revealed, and Nina begins to hope for some stability in her life. The
political machinations behind the family drama are largely unclear, and even Nina's
perilous trek westward lacks the edge-of-the-seat immediacy of other refugee dra-
mas (e.g., Watkins' So Far From the Bamboo Grove, BCCB 6/86 or Temple's Grab
Hands and Run, 4/93). Still, this is a reasonably engrossing glimpse behind the
headlines of Balkan turmoil, and Nina's plight should keep the pages steadily turn-
ing. EB
HOOBLER, DOROTHY 
Vanity Rules: A History ofAmerican Fashion and Beauty; by
Dorothy and Thomas Hoobler. 
Twenty-First Century, 2000 
160p 
illus.with
photographs
ISBN 0-7613-1258-7 $25.90 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Primping and preening seems to have been a national pastime since the Pilgrims
first wiped their boots on Plymouth Rock; here the Hooblers venture well beyond
examination of modish apparel to discern Americans' pursuit of the so, so mal-
leable ideal of beauty. A dozen text-heavy but briskly readable chapters review the
history of American costume and also the vast array of related beauty industries
(hair dressing, body building, modeling, plastic surgery), inventions (standard cloth-
ing sizes, safety razors, Kotex, nylon stockings), and influences (movie stars, rock
stars, pinup girls, political correctness, and anything French) that Americans con-
sidered essential to lookin' good. Nor do the Hooblers consider this an exclusive
concern of upper-class white women; men's equally ego-driven trips to the hair
powderer, haberdasher, and gym are brought to glaring light, and minorities' quest
for loveliness is clearly shown to predate Madam C. J. Walker. Although readers
might pine for more illustrations, period photos and reproductions of engravings
and advertisements are well-selected; boxed inserts on fashion oddities ranging
from a cross-dressing colonial governor to the "King Tut" craze of the 1920s should
284 
* THE BULLETIN
prove effective hooks for luring browsers into the text. Source notes and an index
are included. EB
JONES, JENNIFER B. 
Dear Mrs. Ryan, You're Ruining My Life. 
Walker,
2000 
[13 2p]
ISBN 0-8027-8728-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 3-6
Harvey's mom, the eponymous Mrs. Ryan, writes books for kids his age, and every
year she comes to talk to his class about them. The problem is that through her
books and these class visits Harvey's mom ends up sharing his personal life with
"the whole world." It does seem that "somebody who knows how to make other
kids laugh should know what makes their own kid sad," as Harvey complains, but
since Mom doesn't seem to get it, he decides to try to distract her so she'll stop
writing about him. The plot he and his best friend Seal concoct (it's her idea
really) is to introduce Mrs. Ryan, a divorcee, to Mr. Fisher, the widowered princi-
pal. This plot-actually the whole book-hurtles towards a romantic conclusion
in spite of Harvey's second thoughts and halfhearted attempts to derail it. By the
end, however, he's reconciled to the new state of things, telling Seal, "I don't think
there's a whole lot we can do to change other people. All we can do is work on
ourselves. You know, make our own lives be the best they can be." This too-overt
message seems contradicted by Harvey's eventual success in getting his mother to
see why he resents being fictionalized for the amusement of his friends (which he
accomplishes by making her a character in his submission to a school writing con-
test for which she is a judge). In spite of shallow character development (Harvey
and his friend do little but play baseball and work on their stamp collections), this
is a fast-paced and accessible read for kids not quite ready for the sophistication of
Dear Mr. Henshaw. FK
KARR, KATHLEEN 
Skullduggery. 
Hyperion, 2000 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2439-5 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0506-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
At first it's hard to say whether signing on as phrenologist Asa B. Cornwall's assis-
tant is the best or worst thing that could happen to Matthew Morrissey. On the
up side, the orphan now has a warm shelter, adequate food, an amiable guardian,
and the opportunity to learn the science. On the down side, he is expected to rob
graves to procure specimens for Dr. Cornwall's research. Cornwall's genuine dedi-
cation to his vocation rubs off on Matthew, who soon demonstrates the business
acumen his employer lacks. As the skull-reading trade booms, Cornwall gathers
the funds to complete his magnum opus, which requires study of specific skulls of
the rich and famous. Cornwall and Matthew bag the likes of statesman-gone-
wrong Aaron Burr and financier Nicholas Mordecai, but before they can scoop up
Voltaire (the tomb's empty and they have to settle for second rate in Rousseau),
they find themselves pursued by a nefarious grave robber with decidedly lower
standards than their own scientific interests. Karr concocts some genuine chemis-
try between Matthew and Cornwall, and the goofier aspects of their whirlwind
phrenological spree are tempered with some thoughtful considerations of the eth-
ics of research on human remains. Conscience never gets in the way of the fun,
APRIL 2000 
* 
285
though, and readers digging for an adventure as droll as it is riveting will hit pay
dirt here. EB
KERR, M. E. 
What Became ofHer. HarperCollins, 2000 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028436-6 $15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028435-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Serenity is a small town that's seen events some residents might like to forget-but
other residents are determined they have to remember. E.C. comes face to face
with this dilemma when he becomes friends with Julie Slaymaster, niece of Rosalind
Slaymaster, powerful resident of the mansion on the hill. In her youth in Serenity
Rosalind was the despised and tormented outsider, and now she's causing resent-
ment by using her financial power to have a local park redeveloped and renamed
for her late father. E.C. and Julie are actually two parts of a trio completed by
daring and light-fingered Neal Kraft; Neal's uncle was Rosalind's chief tormentor,
and Neal's father, himself a recent suicide, the object of Rosalind's misplaced af-
fection. The looming trouble comes to a head when it's discovered that Neal has
pocketed some valuable items from Mrs. Slaymaster's estate and E.C., in an effort
to keep Mrs. Slaymaster from taking Julie and leaving town, kidnaps her beloved
talisman, Peale, a leather doll she treats as human. This is a complex multigenera-
tional plot, slowed down by the interpolation of Rosalind's diary and attenuated
further by some odd bits of framework that suggest E.C. is an author telling this
story retrospectively in an interview. While elements are compelling (particularly
Mrs. Slaymaster's obsession with the inanimate but magnetic Peale) and the char-
acter dynamics absorbing (there's a pleasure in fitting names from Rosalind's youth-
ful diary to contemporary adults), there are just too many threads here for a
satisfactory payoff. Kerr fans will still appreciate her deft portrayals of the intricate
small-town social structure and the what-might-have-been questions that drive us
all. DS
KIMMEL, ELIZABETH CODY 
Visiting Miss Caples. Dial, 2000 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-8037-2502-7 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Jenna and her best friend, Liv, are looking forward to eighth grade, when, accord-
ing to Liv, they can "take control," though as Jen notes "Liv had been in control all
our lives." 
As Liv tries to involve Jenna in her increasingly malicious schemes
(most of them aimed at tormenting an animal-rights activist classmate protesting
frog vivisection), Jenna is able to break away, thanks to Miss Caples, the senior
citizen she has been visiting as a human services class project ("fossil-sitting," in
Liv's words). Supposed to read to Miss Caples, Jenna instead begins using her as a
sounding board, telling her own story and eventually hearing Miss Caples' confes-
sion of the sins she herself committed in the service of friendship. Characters and
plots from the past and the present intersect against a background of contempo-
rary family problems (Liv's father declares bankruptcy and Jenna's dad leaves her
mother) that serve as catalysts for change and, for some characters, growth. Though
the plot flirts with melodrama and offers a full complement of coincidences, this
juxtaposition of old and new stories is central to a fuller exploration of the novel's
themes and may even lead readers to realize along with Jen that "life existed before
I came along." FK
286 
* THE BULLETIN
LICHTENHELD, TOM 
Everything I Know about Pirates: A Collection of Made-up
Facts, Educated Guesses, and Silly Pictures about Bad Guys of the High Seas; written
and illus. by Tom Lichtenheld. 
Simon, 2000 
34p
ISBN 0-689-82625-7 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-6
Not wanting to deceive his readers about his expertise, Lichtenheld comes clean in
his first sentence-"I don't know much about pirates, but I know enough to draw
some pictures. And I can make up enough to draw some more pictures"-thus
setting the stage for the comic commentary that follows. Lichtenheld has some-
thing to say about every aspect of a pirate's life: clothes ("The head pirate ... gets
to wear a really poofy white shirt with baggy sleeves that look cool during sword
fights"), personal hygiene ("Pirates are also careful to stay good and stinky. They
eat lots of garlic and never take baths"), and vernacular vocabulary ("Avast, ye
vermin!" and "Swab the deck yourself, Larry!"). Invaluable information on the
true history of the skull and crossbones (mistakenly believed to have been "discov-
ered by pirates on the inside of a desk in a seventh-grade classroom in DeKalb,
Illinois"), the importance of having "a decent, nasty pirate name" ("handy chart"
provided), and an Official Pirate Glossary contribute to the maritime mayhem.
Lichtenheld's humor goes beyond his text to take up residence in his mixed-media
cartoons ("ink, colored pencil, gouache, pastels, and ear wax"), where captions and
labeling act as punchlines for these sea-silly jokes, mad buccaneers, and piratical
accoutrements. JMD
LLOYD, DAVID 
Polly Molly Woof Woofl A Book About Being Happy; illus. by Char-
lotte Hard. 
Candlewick, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7636-0755-X 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Lloyd introduces this book as "as much a game as a story," and throughout the
story of Polly taking her dog Molly to the park, asides to listeners invite them to
join in the play by barking, sniffing, and scratching along. The text appears in
three different sizes: small font for the play-along instructions, medium font for
the story itself, and a variably sized gray font that transcribes onomatopoeic doggie
sounds. The story is slight: Polly and Molly meet dogs of various shapes and sizes
in the park, where they bark, sniff, and scratch together until everybody goes home
happy. Unfortunately, the instructional text slows the pace; just as the cumulative
dog barking is gaining momentum, the play-along instructions abandon the story
in favor of a daunting double-page spread of text, proffering commentary on the
happiness of barking. Hard illustrates a charming array of friendly canine visages
yelping amidst cheery yellow, orange, and turquoise backgrounds that welcome
readers to this walk in the park, although small boxed illustrations of dog faces
make the book less useful for large audiences than it might be. When used as a
group activity, this book will have puppy program participants pouncing, but when
read straight through, it's barking up the wrong tree. KM
LONDON, JONATHAN 
Snuggle Wuggle; illus. by Michael Rex. 
Silver Whistle/
Harcourt, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-202159-0 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
1-3 yrs
This friendly text asks how various mother animals hug their children and answers
with a rhyming response ("How does a bunny hug? Snuggle wuggle, snuggle
APRIL 2000 
* 287
wuggle./ How does a chick hug? Fluffy duffy, fluffy duffy"). The narrative then
slows to a double-page spread recapping all of the various methods of hugging,
concluding with a final question ("How do you hug?") and revealing that the
story's animals were the stuffed inhabitants of a child's bed. Overly formulaic, the
let's-everybody-hug sequence stops the narrative's flow, and readers-aloud will be
tempted to skip over this section to move hastily to the predictable ending. (Nor
is there any rhyme or reason for fawns to hug "lazy daisy" or for koalas to "cuddle
duddle," and the rhyme scheme breaks down in several places.) Young listeners
will nonetheless enjoy the language play; they'll also warm to the cheerful illustra-
tions featuring simple pictures of the various baby-mother pairings, in which shades
of brown predominate, occasionally accented by blue water or green leaves. Though
the content is thin, the book retains some sentimental appeal; it'll make good filler
for that upcoming animal storytime. JNH
McGILL, ALICE 
Miles'Song. Houghton, 2000 
[224p]
ISBN 0-395-97938-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Miles is an enslaved house servant on the South Carolina planta-
tion of Gency Tillery in 1851. His accidental glance at a book in the master's
study has led to his being sent to "the breakin' ground" so his spirit can be broken
and he can return to the plantation with the proper attitude. While at the break-
ers, Miles meets Elijah, an educated slave who teaches him how to read, dissemble,
and survive; Elijah promises to contact Miles when the time comes to escape to
freedom. Through Miles' eyes the reader sees the daily life of the enslaved, the
hardships and despair, the determination and resilience that made it possible for
individuals such as Miles to survive and escape. The loyalty and sense of commu-
nity among Miles and his fellow slaves permeates the action, and McGill stays with
the point of view of the young man who desires freedom above all else. The
occasional clumsy transition mars the flow of the text, but strong characterizations
and a driving sense of action carry the plot; dialect, when used, is easily under-
stood. The novel reads like a suspense thriller, with spies, counterspies, disguises,
and trickery used as weapons on both sides as Miles battles the belief that it is his
destiny to be a slave. JMD
MCGRORY, ANIK 
Mouton's Impossible Dream; written and illus. by Anik
McGrory. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-202195-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Mouton is a sheep with a yen to fly-an accomplishment which her barnyard
friends Canard the duck and Cocorico the rooster warn her is quite beyond her
reach. By studying the diagrams in the workshop of "the Brothers," though, she
hopes to learn the secret. Although autonomous flight will ever elude her, Mou-
ton and her friends unexpectedly find themselves airborne in a basket beneath a
hot air balloon-the first living creatures to make such a flight. McGrory's closing
note assures the listeners, "This story is not far from the truth." Indeed, the
Montgolfier brothers (coyly but pointlessly left unnamed throughout the text) did
send a sheep, duck, and cockerel into the blue on an early trial run. Unfortu-
nately, McGrory saves most of this fascinating truth for the note and fills her tale
with the anthropomorphized antics of Mouton and company, implying that the
288 
* 
THE BULLETIN
animals' ascent was a hasty diversion by the Montgolfiers, who were embarrassed
to find their livestock had followed them to Versailles. Watercolor scenes of skep-
tical Parisians and the portly Mouton's dreams of free floating in the ether do,
however, have their charms, and this may whet audience interest to take a peek at
Alexandra Wallner's The FirstAir Voyage in the United States (BCCB 5/96). EB
MCKINLEY, ROBIN 
Spindle's End. Putnam, 2000 
[4 32p]
ISBN 0-399-23466-7 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7 up
Almost-fairy Katriona is chosen to represent her village at the christening of the
long-awaited heir to the throne, the Princess Casta Albinia Allegra Dove Minerva
Fidelia Aletta Blythe Domina Delicia Aurelia Grace Isabel Griselda Gwyneth Pearl
Ruby Coral Lily Iris Briar-Rose. The appearance of evil fairy Pernicia is right on
schedule, but just as her curse falls, Katriona rushes forward and deflects it, unin-
tentionally resulting in the princess' secretly being put into her care. Rosie (the
princess) grows and thrives, develops a knack for communicating with animals,
and remains ignorant of her royal birth and of Pernicia's curse. When her true
circumstances are revealed, Rosie rises to the challenge of a final confrontation
with the wicked fairy, remembering grimly that "magic can't do everything."
McKinley's take on "Sleeping Beauty" is put forth in words dense with sensual
detail. The author sets her simple but elegant plot right along the boundary line
between fairy tale and fantasy; she stays close to the traditional tale but decorates it
so ornately it is just barely recognizable. A believable, fully imagined fantasy world
is patiently constructed, and the acceptance and integration of magic into the daily
lives of the non-magical is logically achieved. While the success of the heroine is
never in doubt, the fun lies in following McKinley's meandering garden path all
the way till the end. Major characters are complex and motivated; even support-
ing players are given a character-defining action or turn of phrase that makes them
notable. McKinley has a lighter touch here than in Rose Daughter (BCCB 10/98)
or even Beauty (12/78), and, while this retelling is undeniably wordy, a more re-
laxed style and a steady but promising pace make it a rich and rewarding read.
JMD
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Malcolm X: A Fire Burning Brightly; illus. by Leonard
Jenkins. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027708-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027707-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Myers combines quotes from interviews and speeches with a journalistic presenta-
tion and evocative, photo-based mixed-media images in this succinct but effective
biography of civil rights activist Malcolm X. Myers concentrates on the journey of
Malcolm X's life, describing the arc of incidents that influenced his politics: his
career as a street hustler, his incarceration in prison, his conversion to Islam, his
rise to power under Elijah Muhammad, leader of the Black Muslims, his philoso-
phy altering trip to Mecca, and his assassination in New York City. Myers' take
on the slain leader is admiring but not adulatory; he clearly and concisely follows
the development of Malcolm's radical politics and the incidents that shaped and
altered his path. A timeline documents important dates in the subject's life and
includes quotes from speeches and interviews, which give some small inkling of
the power of Malcolm X's rhetoric. Factual glitches (Myers states Malcolm X had
APRIL 2000 
* 289
four daughters, when he actually had six) and a lack of clear source notes (it's not
always evident who is being quoted, let alone from where) are a problem. Despite
these flaws, this is an accessible, balanced beginning biography on a controversial
and influential African-American leader. JMD
PEARSON, MARY E. 
Davidv. God. Harcourt, 2000 
[144p]
ISBN 0-15-202058-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-9
David is on a high-school field trip when the teacher-driven van he and several
classmates are traveling in goes off the road, resulting in their deaths. Although
their companions adjust to heaven with alacrity, David and classmate Marie do
not; David fusses and fumes and finally challenges God to a debate. Most of the
novel concentrates on David and Marie's eventual rapport with each another, and
on David's changing point of view regarding what is important in life. Pearson
wisely avoids too many heavenly details, concentrating on the developing relation-
ship between Marie and David (and David and God) instead. While the writing
tries too hard to be relevant (calling God "the bomb" already dates this title),
Pearson has a sense of humor that asserts itself throughout, leavening what could
have been a tedious diatribe. Theologically, the premise is unwieldy and doesn't
bear close scrutiny; the exposition is based more on convenience than logic, and
the ending is never really in doubt. Nonetheless, readers looking for something a
little out of the ordinary may be attracted to this unusual fantasy. JMD
PHILIP, NEIL, comp. 
It's a Woman's World: A Century of Women's Voices in
Poetry. 
Dutton, 2000 
[96p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-46328-3 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Philip, compiler of various useful anthologies (SingingAmerica, BCCB 7/95, etc.),
here turns his hand to female poets of the twentieth century. The emphasis is on
English and American poets, but the collection is wide ranging culturally (poets
from Japan, Romania, India, Russia, China, Kenya, and a multitude of other coun-
tries are included) as well as stylistically (there's Dorothy Parker and Anna
Akhmatova, Mari Evans and Edith Sodergran). Some of the poems will have a
terrific impact on young readers: Judith Wright's "Request to a Year" tells of her
great-great-grandmother's sketching of the distant drama that could have resulted
in her son's death; Linda Hogan's "The Truth Is" illuminates the tension between
her Chickasaw and white heritages. Others, however, demand more context or
sophistication than teens can generally bring to poetry, which makes much of the
anthology a rather daunting affair. Nor is there much help from the end matter,
which only provides a mention of national affiliation (with note of cultural
antecedence for American writers but not for those from other countries) within
the author index and no biographical information, notes, or dates for poems. The
intent may have been to leave the verse open for New Critical appreciation, but
the result is an odd homogenizing of female experience that restricts rather than
expands the world depicted. Still, the assortment is valuable, and browsers look-
ing to expand their poetic acquaintanceship will doubtless find some rewarding
offerings. Eloquent black and white photographs (of women though not necessar-
ily by them) open each section, offering vivid images of women from various points
on the globe and in the century. DS
290 
* THE BULLETIN
PLATT, RANDALL BETH 
The Likes ofMe. 
Delacorte, 2000 
244p
ISBN 0-385-32692-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Cordy's physical appearance is startling; she is the albino child of a Chinese mother
and a white father. Since her mother's tragic death, her emotionally distant father
has kept her cloistered in his house on the hill, which he occupies as boss of a
lumber mill in a remote Pacific Northwest lumber town. At fourteen, Cordy
resents her father's restrictions; inspired by a young lumberjack named Squirl, she
runs away to Seattle. There, thanks to her striking appearance and a little training
in tricks of the trade, she becomes a successful fortune teller; the spiritualism boom
is in full swing in the summer of 1918, and Cordy's services are sought after by
crowds of wealthy Seattle-ites. Her success is also noted by Dr. Ridenour, who
collects and markets human freaks in sideshows, and the adventure turns thriller,
with myriad twists that eventually involve everyone from unusual mystics to Cordy's
lumber town family. A mounting series of coincidences does not detract from the
suspense, which Platt keeps taut until the end. Opening lumber town scenes are
slow to unfold but rife with intriguing historical detail, and Cordy's adventures in
the underground world of profitable mysticism offer an unusual window into popu-
lar culture of the early 1900s. Once Cordy's travels begin, the plot roars along like
a log flume running down a mountain, and readers will be swept breathlessly along.
KM
PLUM-UCCI, CAROL 
The Body of Christopher Creed. Harcourt, 2000 
[25 6 p]
ISBN 0-15-202388-7 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Torey Adams, golden boy, harassed Christopher Creed as much as anyone else in
their high-school class; Creed, a social misfit and irritating to boot, seemed to
invite abuse. After sending a (possible) suicide email note to the high school prin-
cipal, Creed disappears; when he fails to reappear or be found, rumors of homicide
in the woods begin to fly. There is no body or indication of foul play, but that
doesn't stop Mrs. Creed-she is bound and determined someone will be punished
for what happened to her oldest son. Her malevolent eye falls on Bo Richardson,
an apparent hoodlum from the wrong side of the tracks, and for a time it looks as
if she's going to succeed in railroading him into jail. Torey and friend Ali (now
Bo's girlfriend) attempt to clear Bo, but their efforts do little more than add to the
appearance of guilt. Plum-Ucci limns the social hierarchy of a community resis-
tant to both change and truth, and her control is evident in the unsensational
handling of what could easily have degenerated into a lurid slice of small-town life.
Torey's discovery of a body in the woods is a devastating moment, but even more
devastating is his realization of some unpleasant realities about adults with feet of
clay. This is a complex, credible look at alienation, compassion, loyalty, and cru-
elty among young and other adults. JMD
PRESSLER, MIRJAM 
Anne Frank: A Hidden Life; tr. by Anthea Bell. 
Dutton,
2000 
[192p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-46330-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 10 up
Many aspects of Anne Frank's life apart from her diary have been illuminated in
other volumes (Anne Frank, Beyond the Diary: A Photographic Remembrance, BCCB
APRIL 2000 
* 
291
11/93), but Pressler offers an unusual presentation of the people in Anne Frank's
life. Beginning with Anne's father's return to their wartime hiding place, Pressler
provides historical context to invoke a sense of the personal devastation Otto Frank
might have felt when faced with the loss of his entire family and then, upon read-
ing Anne's diary, the loss of Anne's talent as well. While other chapters are less
intense, dealing with topics that range from historical events and their effects on
the annex occupants to intimate information about Anne's physical development,
Pressler presents the available facts to create an emotionally charged vision of hu-
man survival in pressing circumstances. Those circumstances, despite being nec-
essary to understanding interpersonal tensions in hiding, constitute a large amount
of complex information that may be daunting to many fans of Anne's more easily
readable diary. The book is neither browsable nor swift reading, and Pressler's
exegesis further burdens the narrative, as she inserts her own opinions between the
reader and Anne's experiences ("I cannot help wondering what it was like for [Anne]
later in Auschwitz, in Bergen Belsen. Could she retain her belief in God there? I
would very much like to think so"). Nonetheless, teachers will find excellent ex-
cerpts to read aloud in connection with curriculum, and readers eager for more
detailed information about Anne Frank will appreciate the windows Pressler opens
into the emotional lives of the annex dwellers. A chronology of Anne Frank's life,
notes, and a bibliography are included. KM
PRINGLE, LAURENCE 
Bats!: 
Strange and Wonderful; illus. by Meryl
Henderson. 
Boyds Mills, 2000 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-327-8 $15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Pringle lends his considerable talent for explaining science to young children to
the task of presenting bats, unsensationally and with enthusiasm. His lively ap-
proach is chatty and conversational without being condescending. Youngsters will
immediately be hooked by the opening text ("If you were a bat, you could stay up
all night. You could hang by your thumbs, or hang upside down by your toe-
nails") and a riveting illustration of a hanging bat, wings outspread, mouth open,
showing tiny teeth ("When a bat is afraid it opens its mouth wide and shows its
teeth"). The book then discusses different types of bats, the fact that they're mam-
mals (the only kind that fly), where they live, what they eat, and how they hunt. A
section "To Learn More about Bats" contains suggestions for additional reading
and the mailing address and URL for Bat Conservation International (which has
handy instructions for constructing bat houses, as well as links to other bat-sites).
The book design features framed full-page watercolor illustrations against back-
grounds of black, purple, and blue, along with views of bats in their natural envi-
ronments. JMD
RASCHKA, CHRIS 
Ring! Yo?; written and illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Jackson/DK
Ink, 2000 
40p
ISBN 0-7894-2614-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
One side of a telephone conversation is depicted in this follow-up to Raschka's Yo!
Yes? (BCCB 4/93), which featured the same duo of friends. In this title, the white
boy answers the phone, and the reader gets his side of the conversation as he talks
to the caller on the other end (revealed as the African-American boy at the conclu-
sion). The conversation is puzzling, but Raschka includes a final "key" to the
exchange at the end of the book that enlightens readers to one possible version of
292 
* THE BULLETIN
the scenario. The concluding question, "Or was it something else?," gives readers
carte blanche to imaginatively construct a conversation of their own. The mixed-
media illustrations (watercolor, pastels, and cut paper) evince Raschka's carefree
but expressive style. The boy is placed in the center of the composition, so his
reactions to the conversation are paramount. The simple text is set in large type
above his head, and emphasis is created by altering the size of the type and the
boy's body language. The appeal of this title lies in the humor and mini-suspense:
the comic responses of the character and his apparent dismay will attract readers
curious as to what the conversation is actually about. While as a stand-alone pic-
ture book there isn't much to this, it may well be useful in the classroom as a spur
to a creative writing project or dramatic play. JMD
RICHIE, JASON 
Weapons: Designing the Tools of War.
See under Aaseng, Nathan, p. 266, for review.
ROOp, PETER 
Good-bye for Today: The Diary ofa Young Girl at Sea; by Peter and
Connie Roop; illus. by Thomas B. Allen. 
Atheneum, 2000 
[48p]
ISBN 0-689-82222-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-5
Ordered by her mother to keep a journal, Laura records the events aboard her
father's whaling ship, the Monticello, in 1871. Laura has always regarded Hono-
lulu as home, but following this cruise she will return to her relatives in New
Bedford and enter school to become a "proper lady," a state of life for which the
nine-year-old frequently questions her aptitude. Until the fateful day arrives, she
soaks up all the maritime adventure she can, sailing with her father in the boats
and peering out of the crow's nest, coping with weevil-infested hardtack, weather-
ing a typhoon, and finally abandoning ship with family and crew when the Monticello
finds itself hopelessly ice-bound. Fictional Laura and her diary are based on the
lives and writing of two actual whalers' daughters; Laura's entries seldom vary in
tone, with her account of the raging typhoon only marginally more exciting than
her observations about fresh duck eggs. Descriptions of daily life do have a ring of
authenticity, though, and the brief entries should appeal to new chapter-book readers
making their maiden voyage into historical fiction. Sepia vignettes, several double
page watercolor spreads, a glossary (not as comprehensive as landlubbers might
wish), and a note on historical background are included. EB
Ross, ADRIENNE 
In the Quiet. Delacorte, 2000 
148p
ISBN 0-385-32678-5 
$14.95 
R* Gr. 5-8
Samantha, known as Sammy, has been missing a big piece of the world since the
tragic death of her mother; she and her father struggle on ("I look at him in the
dim kitchen light and realize he knows nothing about me. The thing I like most is
that he doesn't try to hide this"), but she's hopeful when her mother's sister comes
to stay that it'll be like having her mother back again. It's not: Constance is a
rover, a mysterious finder of missing objects, who loves her young niece but is
trying to find a vanished object of her sister's. With the aid of her friend Bones,
determined tomboy and digger par excellence, Sammy herself seeks the lost, search-
ing unconsciously for her mother's larger legacy while she combs the town for
concrete magic to make things right. Ross writes with a stealthy lyricism, Sammy's
APRIL 2000 
* 
293
plainspoken present-tense narration revelatory in its observations without being
forced into implausible poetry. Sammy's small-town world, especially the aban-
doned amusement park that, in its heyday, brought her parents together, is evoca-
tively realized, and Bones' determined insistence on local magic seems not entirely
unreasonable in light of that milieu and the powerful buried secrets the girls do
uncover. A strong yet tender portrait of adjustment to loss, this will resonate with
readers familiar with the longing for the buried past. DS
RUMFORD, JAMES 
Seeker of Knowledge: 
The Man Who Deciphered Egyptian
Hieroglyphs; written and illus. by James Rumford. 
Houghton, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-395-97934-X 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-5
This attractive picture-book biography traces the career of nineteenth-century
Egyptologist Jean-Francois Champollion from his childhood fascination with sto-
ries of Napoleon's Egyptian campaign to his race to crack the "code" of the Rosetta
Stone and his eventual breakthrough discovery that hieroglyphs can represent sounds
as well as words. Although Rumford's prose is occasionally a bit overblown
("'Thothmes!' Jean-Francois suddenly exclaimed, and the rushing sound of the
pharaoh's name, as if carried on wings across the centuries, filled the room"), it
ably conveys the passionate excitement with which Champollion pursued his life's
work ("'I have the key!' Then he collapsed. He had not eaten. He had not slept.
For five days, he lay near death"). Watercolor paintings dominated by rich, inky
blues visually underscore the drama, while hieroglyphs decoded in sidebars and
incorporated into the narrative cleverly convey the relationship between the styl-
ized image and the idea it represents. Historical notes, source notes, and a brief
glossary of hieroglyphs used within the text are appended. Expect this title to
perform double duty among Egypt buffs who read for pleasure and social studies
teachers on the prowl for fresh, classroom-friendly material on ancient civiliza-
tions. EB
SILVERSTEIN, ALVIN 
Pocket Pets; by Alvin Silverstein, Virginia Silverstein, and Laura
Silverstein Nunn. 
Twenty-First Century, 2000 
48p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-1370-2 $21.90 
Ad 
Gr. 3-7
Another in the Silversteins' series on pet possibilities (see A Pet or Not?, BCCB 9/
99), this one treats pets on the small side (though the title shouldn't be taken
literally for some of the larger entries unless one is prepared to do damage to ani-
mal and pocket). The ten pets here range from the familiar (the hamster) to the
unfamiliar (the degu), each receiving a picture and some "fast facts," plus two or
three pages of more in-depth information and further Internet resources. The
overviews contain useful information, and the book particularly emphasizes the
needs of various animals for companionship with their own kind and the different
relationships of the different species to their human caretakers ("Mice are not likely
to play with you the way rats will"). The collection seems a bit arbitrary (why
include the duprasi but not the sugar glider?); some of the text is blandly general
and some a little confusing (if the pets known as gerbils aren't true gerbils, what is
a true gerbil?); while some of the pictures are terrific, some are problematic-you
don't get much of a view of the degu, and the rat crawling through garbage doesn't
seem to be the domestic variety. Still, this is a useful showcase for little critters that
will appeal to the bigger critters that yearn for them. DS
294 
* THE BULLETIN
SIMMONS, JANE 
Daisy's Day Out; ISBN 0-316-79763-4; Daisy Says Coo!; ISBN
0-316-79764-2. 
Each book: written and illus. by Jane Simmons. 
Little,
2000 
8p 
$5.95 
Ad 
1-3 yrs
Using the same vividly colored palette familiar from her other Daisy books, Simmons
provides two new adventures for Daisy in board-book format. Daisy Says Coo!has
the young heroine cooing in response to all of the pond life ("'Zub, zub,' buzzes
the bee. 'Munch, munch,' chomps the caterpillar. And Daisy says, 'Coo!"'). Her
travels of course end with cozy reunion with Mama Duck. Daisy's Day Out fol-
lows Daisy and her mother as they traipse through the pond growth to see Granny
("We're off to see Granny./ Down and under Weepy Willow,/ trip, trip, trop!"),
ending each spread with a luscious three-word onomatopoeia. Though the over-
sized board books and effective art make Daisy right for sharing during babies'
lapsit or toddler programs, the unusually short length (even for board books) de-
tracts from the books' effectiveness. EAB
VINCENT, GABRIELLE 
A Day, a Dog; illus. by Gabrielle Vincent. 
Front Street,
2000 
64p
ISBN 1-886910-51-0 
$16.95 
R Gr. 2 up
This simple and simply told story, first published nearly twenty years ago in France,
relies solely on black-and-white sketches to convey its narrative. As the title sug-
gests, the protagonist is a dog; dumped from a car in the middle of nowhere, he's
abandoned and confused. He seeks his owner in passing vehicles, causing a grim
multi-car pileup in the process; he then finds his way to the seashore, then to a
town, and finally to a nearly empty road where he meets a kindred spirit in a
human traveler who welcomes him. The drawings employ energetic charcoal-
smudgy lines that stand out starkly on the elongated satiny white pages. The
sinewy curves of the dog are eloquent, expressing his despair, eagerness, hope, and
loneliness; the minimalist landscapes, particularly the shimmering beach and the
unfolding road, are impressively conveyed. The sad faces of the final meeting may
slightly puzzle young viewers, but it's clear enough that a partnership has been
formed. The effect of the textless story is similar to speechless film fables such as
The Red Balloon; kids accustomed to the panels of visual narrative in comics will
take easily to this form of storytelling and this satisfying not-so-shaggy dog story.
DS
WALSH, MELANIE 
Do Donkeys Dance?; written and illus. by Melanie
Walsh. 
Houghton, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-00330-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-5 yrs
Playing on the preschooler's delight in being right, Walsh's text asks a series of
nonsensical questions ("Do pigs buzz around flowers?"), followed by true answers
("No, bees buzz around flowers"). Large, bright creatures contrast with saturated
background colors that bleed to the edges, and a single background color unites
each double-page "wrong" spread with its "right" counterpart. The text is unusual
in that the subject of the question, not the verb, is altered in the answer (e.g., "Do
hippos hop?" is answered with "No, fleas do" rather than answered with what
hippos actually do), and preschool teachers will easily launch discussions about
APRIL 2000 
* 
295
action verbs from this engaging text. After each question is read, young listeners
will eagerly join with the reader on the "No" refrain, proud of their knowledge of
the way things are. Although the ending may jar young participants, when for the
first time the answer is "Yes" instead of "No," another reading will allow listeners
to learn all the right answers, and they'll clamor to hear it again. KM
WATSON, ESTHER PEARL, comp. 
The Pain Tree and Other Teenage Angst-Ridden
Poetry; comp. and illus. by Esther Pearl Watson and Mark Todd. 
Houghton,
2000 64p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-618-01558-2 
$16.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-618-04758-1 
$6.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
You'd be wrong to expect a lot ofyuks from a book clearly labeled "Teenage Angst-
Ridden Poetry," but the coyness of the title might also make a self-conscious teen
browsing the poetry shelf suspicious about how seriously the adults who collected
and illustrated these poems are taking them. Two introductory notes (from the
team that illustrated the boys' and the girls' poems respectively) do little to clarify
the book's purpose, but do explain the evolution of the project from a zine dedi-
cated to the poetry of then teens to a book containing more contemporary teen
voices, many of them discovered on the World Wide Web. These heartfelt poems
about love, in-groups and outsiders, and family life are uneven in quality, though
some, such as "Blush" (about a young girl's shock at hearing adult women "talk
about their sex/ like we're leaky faucets") and "Chalk" (in which love is compared
to a piece of chalk that starts out new and ends "a small, tiny piece/ That cannot be
held anymore"), are original or thoughtful. Others capture a youthful cynicism/
idealism that is complemented by the accessible symbolism and contemporary fash-
ions of the edgy poster-like illustrations and spot art created in response to each
poem. An appendix of brief zine-style bios of the teen (and former-teen) poets
offers insight into the attitudes of the writers and the occasions that called forth
the poems. Teen poets looking to check out the competition could start here. FK
YEP, LAURENCE 
The Magic Paintbrush; illus. by Suling Wang. 
HarperCollins,
2000 
[96p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028200-2 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028199-5 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
After a fire destroys his home and leaves his parents dead, young Steve must live
with his stoic grandfather and his grandfather's childhood friend Mr. Fong. Steve's
solace is painting, but he suffers an "F" on a school assignment when his too-worn
paintbrush leaves brush strokes in triplicate. Without resources to buy a new one,
Steve returns home only to discover with surprise that his (usually detached) grand-
father has a solution: a magic paintbrush that allows them to enter the objects they
paint on the walls. Yep weaves Chinese culture and folkloric motifs seamlessly
into the novel, but he depends on stock characters, predictable plot elements, and
convenient resolution to tell his story. Readers will still be drawn to the emotional
reconciliation between Steve and his grandfather, Steve's rise to the status of hero,
and the power of creating new worlds with the stroke of a brush. Full-page black-
and-white illustrations and decorative chapter headings provide a visual counter-
point to the text. EAB
296 
* THE BULLETIN
YOLEN, JANE, ad. 
Not One Damsel in Distress: World Folktales for Strong Girls;
illus. by Susan Guevara. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2000 
[128p]
ISBN 0-15-202047-0 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-7
Thirteen traditional tales from as many cultures feature heroes clever, honorable,
brave, and female. The stories of Atalanta the Huntress (Greek), Li Chi the ser-
pent slayer (Chinese), Brave Woman (White River Sioux), Molly Whuppie (En-
glish), and nine others are retold here from detailed sources (noted) with an eye
toward opening up "the back storeroom of folklore" wherein these stories have
always existed. Despite clueless and patronizing epigraphs ("A great medieval knight
in shining armor-and she's a woman!"), the individual stories are capably and
accessibly rendered, with intermittent flashes of the romantic and striking lan-
guage evident in Yolen's best work. The admirable heroes tend to blend into one
another, however, and their lack of differentiation contributes to an unfortunate
tonal sameness. The endings have a tendency to trail off into anticlimax, and the
uniform nobility of the heroes is never in doubt, which both flattens characteriza-
tions and effectively limits the suspense. Yolen's introduction ("An Open Letter
to My Daughter and Granddaughters") provides insight into her motives for com-
piling this collection and gives some background on historical women warriors
and leaders; extensive notes on the stories and a bibliography are included. Illus-
trations not seen. JMD
APRIL 2000 
* 297
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
RECENTLY RECEIVED:
Crowe, Chris. Presenting Mildred D. Taylor. Twayne, 1999. (Twayne's United
States Author Series/Young Adult Authors.) ISBN 0-8037-1687-4; $32.00. 162p.
illus. with photographs.
This eminently serviceable series turns to formative influence Mildred D. Taylor,
examining her life and literary contributions in a text accessible to young adult
readers as well as to adult professionals. Endnotes, a bibliography, and an index
enhance the volume's usefulness.
Elleman, Barbara. Tomie dePaola: His Art & Stories. Putnam, 1999. ISBN 0-
399-23129-3; $35.00. 208p. illus. with photographs. Reviewed from galleys.
This glossy, oversized volume, chock-full of reproductions of dePaola's art, offers
an extensive look into the life and work of this enduringly popular author/artist;
copious appendices and notes are included.
Chisholm, Anne. Rumer Godden: A Storyteller's Life. Greenwillow, 1999. ISBN
0-688-16944-9; $24.00. 333p. illus. with photographs.
Godden's life, with her long and eventful tenure in India and her struggle with the
demands of writing and family, has an epic sweep in its own right; Chisholm
examines Godden's work, both for children and adults, as well as the noted author's
life in this hefty but readable biography.
Marciano, John Bemelmans. Bemelmans: The Life & Art ofMadeline's Creator.
Viking, 1999. ISBN 0-670-88460-X; $35.00. 152p. illus. with photographs.
Bemelmans' grandson has pulled together an elegant compilation of art, notes,
interviews, and linking text in this lavish book that offers both visual pleasure and
intriguing insight into Bemelmans' career and creative labors; notes, a chronology,
bibliographies, and an index are included.
THE "WE THOUGHT YOU'D FIND THIS ODD BUT INTERESTING" DEPARTMENT:
"Harry Plodder and the Kidney Stone," Mad, March 2000, No. 391, 21-8.
The venerable yet sophomoric vehicle for satire offers an irreverent take on the
unstoppable phenomenon of Harry Potter.
298 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Brooke; Creech
ADVENTURE STORIES: Karr
African Americans: Fradin; Myers
African Americans-fiction: Fogelin
American Indians: Bruchac
American Indians-stories: Harjo
Animals-stories: Carle; Ernst;
London; McGrory; Walsh
Anthropology: Arnold
Art and artists-fiction: Yep
Asian Americans-fiction: Yep
Aunts-fiction: Ross
Aviation-stories: McGrory
Babies-stories: Gardella
Baseball: Gibbons Baseball
Bats: Pringle
BIOGRAPHIES: Adler; Bruchac;
Fradin; Myers; Pressler; Rumford
BOARD BOOKS: Ernst; Simmons
Brothers-fiction: Brooke; Calvert;
Elgar
Cats: George Cat
Cats-stories: Harjo
Child abuse-fiction: Conly
Chinese-Americans-fiction: Heisel
Civil rights: Fradin; Myers
Crime and criminals-fiction: Clark;
Crowe; Kerr; Plum-Ucci
Death and dying-fiction: Carey;
Caseley; Creech; Crowe;
Danziger; Plum-Ucci; Ross; Yep
Dogs: George Dog
Dogs-fiction: Vincent
Dogs-stories: Lloyd
Drama: Fleischman
Ducks-stories: Simmons
Egypt: Rumford
Email-fiction: Danziger
Engineering: Aaseng
EPISTOLARY FICTION:
Danziger
ESSAYS: Giblin
Ethics and values: Battle-Lavert;
Calvert; Carmi; Fogelin; Heisel;
Kimmel
Families-fiction: Creech
FANTASY: Bell; Cox; McKinley;
Yep
Farms-fiction: Brooke
Fashion: Hoobler
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Carey; Caseley; Crowe; Fogelin;
Platt; Ross
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Battle-Lavert; McKinley; Yolen
Food and eating-fiction: Cox; Elgar
Food and eating-stories: Gardella
Friendship-fiction: Conly;
Danziger; Fogelin; Freeman;
Kerr; Kimmel; Pearson; Plum-
Ucci; Raschka; Ross
FUNNY STORIES: Lichtenheld
God-fiction: Pearson
Grandfathers-fiction: Bowdish;
Creech; Yep
Heaven-fiction: Pearson
HISTORICAL FICTION: Brooke;
Carey; Conly; Heisel; Karr;
McGill; Platt; Roop
History, U.S.: Adler; Bruchac;
Fradin; Hoobler; Myers
History, world: Arnold; Giblin
APRIL 2000 
* 
299
Holocaust, the: Pressler
Homeless-fiction: Clark
Hugs-stories: London
Inventors and inventions: Aaseng
Journalism-fiction: Cox
Language arts: Fleischman; Giblin;
Herrera; Rumford; Walsh
Latinos-stories: Herrera
Magic-fiction: McKinley; Yep
Military history: Richie
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Crowe
Mothers and fathers-fiction: Carey
Mothers and sons-fiction: Jones
Mothers-stories: Carle; London
Moving-fiction: Bowdish; Freeman
MYSTERIES: Plum-Ucci
Nature study: Pringle
Oral interpretation: Fleischman
Orphans-fiction: Brooke
Pets: George Cat; George Dog;
Silverstein
Pirates: Lichtenheld
POETRY: Fleischman; Philip;
Watson
Racism-fiction: Carmi; Fogelin;
Heisel
Reading aloud: Philip
Reading, reluctant: Lichtenheld;
Watson
Refugees-fiction: Higyilmaz
Religion-fiction: Pearson
Religious education: Pearson
Restaurants-fiction: Cox
Runaways-fiction: Clark
Running-fiction: Fogelin
School-fiction: Freeman; Jones;
Plum-Ucci
School-stories: Herrera
Sisters-fiction: Calvert
Slavery-fiction: McGill
Soccer: Gibbons Soccer
Social studies: Giblin; Hoobler;
Rumford
South, the-fiction: Conly; McGill
Spiritualism-fiction: Platt
Sports: Gibbons
Stepfathers-fiction: Freeman
Storytelling: Battle-Lavert;
Storytime: Carle; Lloyd; London;
Simmons;
Suicide-fiction: Calvert
Telephones-fiction: Raschka
Uncles and aunts-fiction: Conly
Uncles-fiction: Cox;
Voyages and travel-fiction: Crowe;
Roop
War-fiction: Carmi; Higyilmaz
Weapons and warfare: Richie
Whales-fiction: Bell
Women's studies: Adler; Bruchac;
Fradin; Philip; Yolen
WORDLESS BOOKS: Vincent
World War II: Pressler
World War II-fiction: Carey
Yugoslavia-fiction: Hiqyilmaz
Keen un 
-ieachi-ue
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
L 
:. 
*..*
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
i`-·--··---~i~,------ 
~~._
Im 
,. 
~;~·-·~-··
BLACK
SAViON,
MY LiFE iN TAP
BY SAVION GLOVER AND BRUCE WEBER
FOREWORD BY GREGORY HINES
PHOTOGRAPHS
"Weber puts forth a trenchant and vivid history of tap dancing ...
Glover provides counterpoint, commenting on his influences
and how he came to dance. There are many photographs from
what is already a long career for the 25-year-old who starred in
The Tap Dance Kid, his own
Bring in 'da Noise, Bring in
'da Funk, as well as being a
regular on Sesame Street.
This book will delight and
instruct, with its hip-hop
rhythms and churning energy
-or, 
as he would say,
'diggitydiggitydiggitydiggity.'"'
-Pointer review /Kirkus Reviews
"The loose and limber
voice of dance wunderkind
Glover wafts through this
brief and inviting biography,
echoing the rhythms and
energy of his kinetic feet."
-Starred review / Publishers Weekly
Ages 10 up. $19.95TR
(0-688-15629-0)
© 1998 by Walter Chin
When Sophie Gets Angry--
Really, Really Angry...
B( 
MOLL'i 
BAWGO
Lee Posey's NIGHT RABBITS
1999 Parent's Choice Silver Honor Winner
and
Recipient of KIND Children's Book Award for 2000
(The Young Education division of The Humane Society)
NIGHT RABBITS
Written by Lee Posey
Illustrated by Michael
Montgomery
1-56145-164-9
Hardcover / Children's
Ages 4-8 / $15.95
Young Elizabeth treasures the
rabbits who dance on the lawn
in front of her family's summer
cabin. On hot, sleepless
nights, she goes out to the
hammock on the porch and
watches a magical nocturnal
scene: gentle rabbits frolicking
in the grass to a chorus of
night sounds. But the rabbits
are eating the grass that her
father has cared for all sum-
mer, and Elizabeth must come
up with a solution that both
protects the rabbits and helps
her father care for the lawn.
"Lee Posey...tells the tale with a hint of laid-back regionalism in her refresh-
ingly unhurried storytelling....Michael G. Montgomery's detailed dynamic
paintings nicely complement the text, and capture the sense of place so well
you could hear the crickets chirping yourself."-New York Times Book
Review
"Posey...displays a knack for description-rabbits are 'quick as moonbeams,'
morning is 'soft and gray, a picture waiting for the colors to be painted
in.'"-Publishers Weekly
"True to the child's point of view, the bond between father and daughter is
as tender as the nature story."-Booklist
PEACHTREE PUBLISHERS, LTD. 
494 Armour Circle, NE, Atlanta, GA 30324
ph: (800)241-0113 or (404)876-8761 /fx: (800)875-8909 or
(404)875-2578 www.peachtree-online.com
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
I II0008-9036
1 1111I
0008-9036(200004)53:8;1 -I
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
n
· ·-' 
~
g·:,~ 
)li
;.I··::i
·- ~·4
·~r~~i 
,·-·:II:-
