I LLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois Press
A#
"Cummings has another hit on her hands."
m 
---School Library Journal
b
i
_ ·
: 
:·i 
·::
; : ·- 
·
;, ·
I;
I
i"A baker's dozen of contemporary illustrators for children are
included in the handsomely produced sequel to Cummings's initial
volume of conversations with artists.... Fascinating and provoca-
tive studies ar included. 
."
-Starred, 
The Hor Book Magazine
"A special treat for budding artists and wonderful for teachers."
-Booklist
"Great inspiration for young artists, good for researching author
projects, or fun just to browse." 
-Kirkus 
Reviews
Ages 9 & up / 0-689-80310-9 / $19.95
SIMON & SCHUSTER BOOKS FOR YOUNG READIaRS i
I
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
1230 Avenue of the Americas * New York, NY 10020
7r 
I- 
1
Ir"
IIIII 
I 
ii
A
*
i
j
L
1
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
February 1996
Vol. 49 No. 6
A LOOK INSIDE
181 
THE BIG PICTURE
Wagons West! written and illustrated by Roy Gerrard
182 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
185 * My Brother, Ant written by Betsy Byars; illus. by Mark Simont
189 * Chuck and Danielle written by Peter Dickinson; illus. by Kees de Kiefte
198 * Newt written and illustrated by Matt Novak
199 
* Brian's Winter by Gary Paulsen
205 * The Toy Brother written and illustrated by William Steig
207 * Daring to be Abigail by Rachel Vail
212 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
213 SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Tara L. Rivera, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor Emeritus, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1996 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Roy Gerrard, from Wagons West ©1996 and used by permission of Farrar,
Straus and Giroux.
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 
181
THE BIG PICTURE
Wagons West!
written and illustrated by Roy Gerrard
Having logged a considerable number of literary miles on the pioneer trail west,
this traveler reports that it's a whole new trip with Gerrard as wagonmaster. Fa-
miliar scenery and familiar exploits are viewed here from the perspective of
Munchkin-sized settlers clipping along to a brisk, extended jingle, and traditional
textbook, novel, and memoir accounts of westward expansion can look a trifle pale
and poky in comparison. And although Gerrard breezes past the darker implica-
tions of the western migration, he playfully deadpans traditional images of East-
erners plodding their way to a Pacific Northwest promised land.
Buckskin Dan, seasoned guide and silver-tongued booster, convinces a
community of Eastern farmers struggling with their barren soil that fertile Oregon
country is the land of their dreams. Preparations and provisioning complete, they
set forth across the plains, taking on hostile elements and terrain, until "folks be-
gan to get downhearted and to wish they'd never started/ On this death-defying,
crazy wagon ride." But their greatest adventures begin when they temporarily
adopt Little Thunder, a lost Arapaho child who has "mislaid his tribe." Reuniting
the child with his grateful father, Mountain Snow, the pioneers make valuable
allies of their native friends, who rush to their aid when the wagon train is attacked
by dastardly cattle rustler Big Nose Percy and his band of varmints.
Narrated in flashback by a settled young matron recalling her childhood
adventure over her tea, it's a rousing story, zestily told, but adults who insist that
every trip should be educational will also approve of the wealth of historic detail
that suffuses text and illustrations. Consider the matter of diet: "We had only
slender means, so we stocked up high on beans/ And some other wholesome vittles
that were dried"; and later, "With our food stocks running low, Pa dispatched a
buffalo." River crossings, annoying at best and treacherous at worst, receive care-
ful narrative and visual attention: "When confronted by a river that made strong
men gasp and shiver,/ Dan soon showed us how to reach the other side." Just
above the falls, sturdy men haul the roped wagons, whose wheels have been re-
moved to aid flotation, while livestock, horses, and the family dog must swim to
shore. Indians and pioneers alike transact business at Fort Laramie, and if the
whimsical mix of lacy pantaloons and beaded buckskin hanging on the clothesline
is there for a laugh, the tolerant commingling of natives and whites suggested here
is (at least in these early days of westward movement) more accurate than matinee
images of prairie bloodshed.
Watercolor paintings, lush with detail, capture the changing landscape.
Dramatic play of shadow among the craggy mountains, carpets of delicately brushed
wildflowers, rivers serene and reflective or pocked with eddies, and cloud-swept
robin's-egg-blue skies rank among Gerrard's most skillful work. But of course it is
182 
* 
THE BULLETIN
his trademark race of diminutive folk that carry the day. The legion of expressive,
babyfat figures are extraordinarily individuated and fluently posed. Fisticuffs be-
tween the good guys and the bad guys gain heightened absurdity when played out
by roly-poly pugilists waist deep in black-eyed susans. Likewise, rivers seem deeper
and mountains passes seem steeper when confronted by these pint-sized pilgrims.
If the title for Most Cunning Rhymester hasn't yet been awarded out-
right to Sir William Gilbert, surely Gerrard is a serious contender. A mixed-meter
scheme with consistent internal rhymes provides some challenging fun for the
reader as well as giggles for the listener. Alerting their Indian friends to Big Nose
Percy's attack, the narrator relates, "My description took some time, for I did it all
in mime,/ But then Mountain Snow was quick to understand./ He grasped the
situation, expressed his indignation,/ And a daring rescue bid was quickly planned."
Even listeners who can't quite grasp the entire passage will understand that words
can be piled and arranged like building blocks, creating aural edifices that delight
as surely as they inform.
When our intrepid settlers finally arrive in "the fair Willamette" with
shirts unsoiled, hair unmussed, and equanimity only slightly ruffled, it is their
dignity rather than their stubbiness or glibness that leaves its impression. The
Oregon Trail was clearly no picnic, and listeners will readily concede that "tri-
umph must be earned,/ And that fortune often smiles on those who dare." (Im-
print information appears on p. 189.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
The Better Brown Stories; illus. by Fritz Wegner. 
Viking,
1996 
97p
ISBN 0-670-85894-3 
$12.99 
M 
Gr. 5-8
When the Browns realize that their lives are dull, they go to see if the Writer will
spice things up for the family: "'It's about this story we're in,' said Mrs
Brown. ... 'In a nutshell, y'see, the thing about this story is-it's boring."' So the
Writer makes things exciting for everyone including himself, as, among many other
happenings, some Mysterious Men steal the Writer's Mum, and the Brown chil-
dren (including Betsy, who demands to be two years older and renamed Nicola)
have to rescue her. The book is too clever by half: while its self-referentiality is
witty, its self-amusement is not, and because the story keeps reminding us of its
own arbitrariness, we don't give a fig for what happens next. Ahlberg has done
better by postmodernism with Ten in a Bed, The Jolly Postman, and Each Peach
Pear Plum; this book has ideas that are fun to play with but that cannot stretch to
fill the pages they consume. RS
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 
183
ALPHIN, ELAINE MARIE 
A Bear for Miguel; illus. by Joan Sandin. 
HarperCollins,
1996 
[6 4p] 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024522-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024521-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-3
In an unusually somber beginning-reader set in 1980s El Salvador, Maria goes
with her father to market to sell almost everything they own in order to get food.
Maria's father cannot get a job: "If I work at the government factory, the guerillas
will punish me. But if I work for people who help the guerillas, the government
will arrest me. So we must trade to get things from the market." They trade a
tablecloth for flour and sugar, a chair for beans and corn, and Papa's tools for two
chickens and a frying pan. When Papa goes away for awhile, Maria has her own
swap to negotiate: a young couple has milk, eggs, and butter they are willing to
trade for Maria's beloved stuffed bear, Paco, which they would like to give to their
little boy, "hurt by soldiers." It's hard but Maria does the right thing; while she
regrets the loss of her bear, she appreciates knowing that she's brought happiness
to another child as well as providing food for her family. Maria's resourcefulness
and courage are the focus of the story, so that it will stand on its own without
political/historical explanation; Alphin does provide a brief note as well as defini-
tions and pronunciations for the Spanish words used occasionally in the story.
Sturdy and rustic watercolors-including one picture of a group of armed gueril-
las-are effectively placed on the spacious page layout and provide the reader with
visual clues. RS
Avi 
Beyond the Western Sea, Book One: The Escape from Home. Jackson/Or-
chard, 1996 
[30 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08863-4 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09513-4 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
While you actually do have to turn the pages for yourself here, the task soon feels
like it's out of your hands as Avi's tense, twisting storytelling takes over. It is 1851,
and brother and sister Patrick and Maura are escaping poverty and the landlord's
destruction of their wretched Irish hovel; Laurence, son to an English lord, is run-
ning away from abuse and his own guilty conscience. All three young people
are-hope to be-on their way to America, with trouble and intrigue pursuing
them every step of the way. Although the book has the harum-scarum action of
melodrama, it never becomes pastiche; instead, Maura, Patrick, and Laurence seem
like real people in really dangerous straits as various villains, for various and con-
flicting reasons, try to keep them from boarding the Robert Peel, set to sail on
Friday, January 24. (The book essentially begins on the Monday of the same
week, so you can see that things move thick and fast.) The suspense and the
shifting among various points of view are expertly deployed but do become slightly
mechanical towards the last pages; you still won't be able to stop reading. More of
a problem is the cliff-hanging ending: the three kids are all on the boat but they're
still up to their necks in it, and you feel like you've only read half a book. Which
you have-and the next installment, LordKirkle's Money, won't be published until
the fall. Libraries may want to wait and purchase both volumes at once. RS
184 
* THE BULLETIN
BESSON, JEAN-LouIS 
October 45: Childhood Memories of the War; written and
illus. by Jean-Louis Besson; tr. by Carol Volk. 
Creative Editions/Harcourt,
1996 
96p
ISBN 0-15-200955-8 
$22.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
This is a child's-eye view of the occupation and war in northern France; seven-
year-old Jean tells of wartime life in Paris and in the village in Brittany to which his
family evacuates. Details, ranging from instances of French collaboration to popu-
lar songs to rationing, are vivid and specific, and the narrative is shaped not by
events but by time, indicated by page headings indicating the month and year.
The narrator's present-tense artlessness and passivity are authentically childish: he
remarks with equal enthusiasm upon the nifty uniforms of the Germans and the
clever ballpoint pens of the Americans. Unfortunately most American kids won't
be able to supply the external knowledge that gives the book its real impact; with-
out adult assistance or literary contrast the relative security of Jean's life and the
irony of some of his opinions and experiences (such as his complaints about the
uncomfortable train trip to Brittany) won't be evident to young readers, so they
may get an extremely misleading view of what constituted wartime hardship. The
book is, however, a readable account of a wartime viewpoint-that of people nei-
ther heroes nor victims-we don't often encounter, and kids not quite ready for
the grit of Westall's The Machine Gunners may find this an absorbing entree into a
different world. Delicate and surprisingly cheerful line-and-watercolor vignettes
and full-page illustrations keep the pages airy and the subject matter from becom-
ing as dark as, perhaps, it ought to be. DS
BIAL, RAYMOND 
With Needle and Thread: A Book About Quilts; written and illus.
with photographs by Raymond Bial. 
Houghton, 1996 
[48p]
ISBN 0-395-73568-8 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
A pervasive female art form that has recently attracted respectful attention from
cultural historians, quilt-making is a subject with inherent visual appeal for a
photodocumentary. Bial, who has focused on the domestic lifestyles of Shakers
(BCCB 3/94), frontier families (10/93), and Amish (5/93), here makes the logical
transition to a craft practiced by the women of all these groups. With illustrated
examples of traditional patchwork patterns such as Flower Garden, Nine Patch,
Ocean Wave, Log Cabin, Jacob's Ladder, and Wheel Spoke, Bial describes the
processes of marking, piecing, and quilting. An historical overview ranges from
the Colonial period to the famous AIDS Memorial Quilt. Highlighting the mul-
ticultural scope of this art form, Bial shows work by Amish, African-American, and
Hmong quilters. The narrative is accessibly simple, the photography is clear and
colorful, and a bibliography will guide researching students to other sources of
information. BH
BRENNER, BARBARA 
Chibi: A True Story from Japan; written by Barbara Brenner
and Julia Takaya; illus. by June Otani. 
Clarion, 1996 
6 4p
ISBN 0-395-69623-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8yrs
All Tokyo, it seems, makes way for ducklings in this true story about a duck who
built her nest in a busy office park and then decided to take her brood across eight
lanes of traffic to live in the moat of the Imperial Gardens. The ducks became an
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 
185
obsession of the Japanese in general and a photojournalist named Sato in particu-
lar, who made a media star out of the smallest and weakest duckling, Chibi, and
who led the search when Chibi was lost in a typhoon. Sunny, spacious paintings
(intentionally or not, some compositions reflect McCloskey's) ensure that young
audiences won't get too tense at this point in the action; they will, though, respond
to the suspense and be relieved at Chibi's reappearance. So will you-the simple,
friendly text builds up a great deal of empathy for the littlest duckling and for
Sato-san, her courtly protector. Although we aren't told when the events of the
book took place, a note states that Chibi and her siblings still return each year to
the moat, where the Emperor has built them a shelter. RS
BRIGGS, RAYMOND 
The Man; written and illus. by Raymond Briggs. 
Random
House, 1995 
64p
ISBN 0-679-87643-X 
$22.00 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
Briggs has dealt with surprising visitors before (The Snowman, BCCB 1/79, The
Bear 3/95), but here the visitor is a small one: a little man rudely awakens young
John by hurling cough drops at his head. The visitor, who looks to be slightly over
six inches in height, makes some immediate and peremptory demands: clothing
(he directs John in refashioning an old sock), food (he reviles the household's
high-fiber, low-fat tastes), washing and a haircut (with John as personal valet), and
a toilet ("I'm dying for a pee"). Disruptive, bossy, and enigmatic Man (as John
falls to calling him) stays for three days, during which time John runs hither and
yon trying to satisfy the visitor's needs without revealing his existence to his par-
ents, and during which time John is able to pry very little information from defen-
sive and proud Man about his small but burly kind. The format here ranges from
panel cartoons to sectioned pages to full-page art, with constant dialogue (John's
and Man's words are differentiated by typeface) occasionally enhanced by speech
balloons as well. The thorny relationship between the two has overtones of clash-
ing class standards, child-parent relations, and sibling rivalry, all touched with a
surrealism that makes the whole story satisfyingly mysterious as well as entertain-
ing. American kids may have to stretch a bit to follow some of the more British
references, but the thrill of the secret friend, the casually mundane depiction of the
wondrous, and the prickly camaraderie make this a rewarding adventure for reader
and protagonist alike. DS
BYARS, 
BETSY 
My Brother, Ant; illus. by Marc Simont. 
Viking,
1996 
[32p] 
(Easy-to-Read)
ISBN 0-670-86664-4 
$11.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 1-3
In a quartet of vibrant read-alone stories, preschooler Ant(hony) requires that
monsters be driven from under his bed, that stories be read to him right, that
letters be written to Santa in midsummer, and that artwork scribbled on his brother's
homework be fully appreciated. Each fresh challenge is met by his older (narrator)
brother with patience, sagacity, and/or fraternal affection, as the situation demands.
Rookie readers will empathize with the unnamed narrator, himself of an age at
which the trials of homework loom large, and they will probably recognize some of
Ant's antics from their own siblings, or even from their own not-too-distant pasts.
Within the constraints of controlled vocabulary, Byars constructs remarkably be-
lievable dialogue ("'Who is reading this-you or me?' I asked. 'You are,' Ant said,
186 
* 
THE BULLETIN
'but you have to say pigs"') that reads as well aloud as alone. Simont handily
captures both the domestic arena and the boys' imaginings in his witty watercolor
vignettes. EB
CLARK, CAA GILLOW 
Nellie Bishop. 
Boyds Mills, 1996 
12 8p
ISBN 1-56397-491-6 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 6-9
An avaricious mother and dissolute father, denizens of a Pennsylvania shanty town
in 1886, scheme to raise "a few coins" by selling off their comely but defiant daughter
Nellie to any canalman willing to pay. The fourteen-year-old heroine is rescued
from a fate worse than death by a mysterious stranger who wins her at the gam-
bling table, becomes protector and legal guardian of her beloved little brother, and
then virtuously offers her the choice to leave or to be wed. With its stock cast of
repellent parents ("This here's my girl, men.... Sweet, unspoilt heifer") and lech-
erous villains ("The woman said I could examine the goods"), this could be a
middle school step-up book to historical bodice-rippers ("Nellie mustered all her
strength and twisted away from him, ripping the cloth of her bodice as she turned").
Nellie's hero disappointingly exhibits more decency than passion and a couple of
slender subplots are left dangling, but the potboiler formula has its charms, and
Clark's skillful pacing and evocation of period and place may turn this yarn into a
guilty-pleasure read for the romance crowd. EB
CLEMENTS, ANDREW 
Temple Cat; illus. by Kate Kiesler. 
Clarion, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-69842-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Worshipped as a god in an ancient Egyptian temple, the titular feline longs for
freedom from his pampered existence. Slipping out of the temple "like a wisp of
smoke" in the night, the cat journeys for three days before reaching the seashore
where, looking "scrawny and a little wild," he is taken in by a fisherman's family.
"And then, before the cat even knew what his dearest wish was, it came true. He
played with the children, and they loved him." There's not much to be learned
here about why or how the Egyptians worshipped cats; the exotic locale simply
supplies a fresh twist to a whisker-thin animal adventure tale. Kiesler's hazy oil
paintings are stiffly executed, but the dominant shades of warm gold and wheat
underscore the loneliness of the soulful-eyed cat. EB
CULLINAN, BERNICE E., ed. Ajar of Tiny Stars: Poems by NCTEAward-Winning
Poets; illus. by Andi MacLeod and Marc Nadel. 
Wordsong/Boyds Mills,
1995 
94p
ISBN 1-56397-087-2 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Each poet who has won the NCTE Poetry Award-David McCord, Aileen Fisher,
Karla Kuskin, Myra Cohn Livingston, Eve Merriam, John Ciardi, Lilian Moore,
Arnold Adoff, Valerie Worth, and Barbara Esbensen-is pictured at the beginning
of a section that includes several representative poems and a significant quote. The
portraits are watercolor renditions from photographs, with cheerful pen-and-ink
sketches accompanying the verse; all are in black and white. A concluding section
gives further information about and remarks by the poets. The format is acces-
sible, and the selections themselves reflect popular appeal through a process in-
volving several thousand young readers ranking their top choices, which proved
once again "that children like poems they can understand: ones that make them
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 187
laugh and ones that tell a story." This neatly packaged anthology will make it easy
for teachers to incorporate poetry into a preset curriculum-and to defend the
time expended on literature-for-fun. BH
DASH, JOAN 
We Shall Not Be Moved: The Women's Factory Strike of 1909. Scho-
lastic, 1996 
[17 6p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-48409-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Dash offers here a zesty account and personal interpretation of the 1909 strike by
women who worked the bundle system manufacturing shirtwaists. With the shaky
support of their ill-funded, nascent union, the young women (many of whom
were only in their teens) formed tenuous alliances with women further up the
economic ladder-from sympathetic college girls, "high spirited, eager for a chal-
lenge," to society matrons with time on their hands and money to burn. It was
these alliances, Dash argues, that assured the significant, if limited, victories of the
strikers. Chronological coverage of the strike clips along with informal directness
and smooth narrative transitions. Sweeping observations, though they often beg
debate, are wittily packaged and likely to beguile readers unfamiliar with other
interpretations of the strike ("Those who had lived under Russian tyranny seemed
to have taken socialism in with their mother's milk"). A bibliography and index
are appended; black and white photographs will be included in the finished book.
EB
DAY, 
NANCY 
Sensational 
TV: 
Trash 
or Journalism? Enslow,
1996 
[116p] 
illus. with photographs 
(Issues in Focus)
ISBN 0-89490-733-6 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Sensationalism in the media is a hot issue these days, and this is a useful and well-
researched treatment of the subject. Day discusses topics such as the history of
tabloid journalism, trends in television news and newsmagazines, and the contro-
versies surrounding talk shows and reality-based television programs. She's not
quite as objective as she suggests the news should be (she tends to hold the tabloid
defenders to stricter standards than the tabloid accusers), but her engagement with
her subject keeps the book from being dispassionately bland, and her overall mes-
sage-viewers should think carefully about what they see rather than just accept-
ing it-is clearly and convincingly conveyed. Endnotes (referring to primary as
well as print sources) and an index are included. Reviewed from an unillustrated
galley. DS
DEGROAT, DIANE 
Roses Are Pink, Your Feet Really Stink; written and illus. by
Diane deGroat. 
Morrow, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13605-2 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13604-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Gilbert is writing out his Valentine's Day cards for his class, and he's going along
smoothly until he comes to Lewis and Margaret, of whom he's not so fond. For
them, he writes some rather uncomplimentary verses (Margaret's reads "Roses are
red, you wet your bed. I think that you have rocks in your head") and signs Lewis'
name to Margaret's and Margaret's to Lewis'. Lewis and Margaret catch on when
188 
* THE BULLETIN
they realize they have two cards from each other and none from Gilbert; after a day
of ostracism by the whole class, Gilbert comes to terms with Lewis and Margaret
in time for a happy Valentine's Day for all. The realism falters a bit come time for
the happy ending, but up till then the combination of primary-grades affections,
small-child insult, and scheming gone awry is absolutely accurate, and young lis-
teners will "Uh-oh" in sympathetic recognition the moment Gilbert gets caught in
his little plot. deGroat's multispecies animal cast are simply and sweetly depicted
without being bland: opossum Gilbert cowers behind his cards, with his short legs
dangling a foot from the floor, and there's a certain Lucy Van Pelt air to Margaret
that makes you think Gilbert wasn't entirely misled in his distaste. There's often a
little drizzle on much-anticipated holiday parades: this cozy and reassuring story
understands that but knows that holidays and friendships are still worth celebrat-
ing. DS
DEWEY, JENNIFER OWINGS 
Faces Only a Mother Could Love; written and illus. by
Jennifer Owings Dewey. 
Boyds Mills, 1996 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-046-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
This attractively designed volume features large colored-pencil drawings of animal
mothers and babies (many are exotic), accompanied by dollops of information
sized for preschoolers. The best entries discuss the relationship between parent
and offspring, leading listeners to consider differences among species. The baby
sloth, for instance, "licks its mother's mouth and chin . . . and tastes the leftover
bits of leaves its mother has chewed. In this way it learns which leaves are safe to
eat." However, text and illustrations are riddled with inconsistencies. AJackson's-
chameleon baby is pictured with its strikingly tri-horned mother, but mama is
never mentioned. Sphinx-moth camouflage is discussed, but neither mother nor
baby receives text space. All rhinos are drawn with horns, although the text speci-
fies that "the baby rhino does not have a horn." Some of the animals are rendered
out of scale, with owlets nearly the size of their mother and the minuscule tarsier
the size of a baby manatee. Finishing on a strong note, though, Dewey presents a
sensitive, unsentimentalized spread on humans: "It is through looking, touching,
and feeding that a mother comes to know her child and the child comes to trust his
mother." EB
DEXTER, CATHERINE 
A Is for Apple, W Is for Witch; illus. by Capucine
Mazille. 
Candlewick, 1996 
[160p]
ISBN 1-56402-541-1 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Apple's mother just looks like your basic suburban mom-she's actually a (good)
witch, potions, broomstick, and all, and she has promised Apple that she'll pass on
the family traditions when Apple turns sixteen. The problem is that Apple doesn't
want to wait six years, and when she accidently overhears one of her mother's
simpler spells, she gets herself into real trouble. The plot is formulaic and the
magic not very original ("Ribbetty, rabbitty, rug,/ Turn Barnaby into a slug") but
there's a big audience for this kind of lightly enchanted school-and-family story.
Dexter's writing, lively yet cozy, is better than her material, and some of the in-
triguing moments between Apple and her mother lead one to wonder what might
have happened if the book had taken itself a bit more seriously. RS
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 
189
DICKINSON, PETER 
Chuck and Danielle; illus. by Kees de Kiefte. 
Delacorte,
1996 
[96p]
ISBN 0-385-32188-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 4-6
Chuck belongs to Danielle; Chuck is a nervous whippet ("wimpet," Danielle's
friend's sister scornfully calls her) who's convinced that everything in the world is
coming to get her. Chuck's tendency to panic leads to some sticky situations, as
she bolts repeatedly between people's legs, but Danielle has bet her mother a Big
Mac that Chuck will save the universe someday. Seven chapters, each offering a
neat little Chuck story of its own, describe ways in which Chuck almost saves the
universe, until finally she does indeed get Danielle her Big Mac. En route, Dickinson
offers hilarious third-person (third-dog?) narration that attempts to unravel what
goes on in Chuck's little pea-brain ("He'd seen her! Her tail must be sticking out!
No, it couldn't be, because here it was right in under her belly, which is the proper
place when you're terrified. Ears right back, tail right under, tremble tremble
tremble-that's the drill"); beyond that, there's Danielle's life with her mother
(and a brief appearance by her long-gone father) and her friend Jenny, plus the
good fellowship of the people along the street who lend a hand to one another
when needed. An uncutesy and accessible dog story of originality, humor, and
charm, this'll make young caninophiles sit up and beg for more. Reviewed from
an unillustrated galley. DS
FEIFFER, JULES 
A Barrel of Laughs, A Vale of Tears; written and illus. by Jules
Feiffer. 
di Capua/HarperCollins, 1995 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205099-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205098-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-6
Roger, son of King Whatchamacallit, makes people feel good, and in this instance
that's not a very good thing. Everyone he meets bursts into unreasonable,
uncontainable merriment, and so the king's advisor, J. Wellington Wizard, packs
Roger off on a quest in the hope he'll return subdued. Unfortunately, as Roger
ambles, the narrative rambles, and some dozen chapters pass before Feiffer takes a
break from piling up comic literary devices and gives the prince some direction.
Characters who pop out of the storyline and pop back in at will and winking asides
from the author ("I came up with this title because it sounds like poetry, which is
good, and it isn't, which is better") garner some chuckles but are soon overplayed.
When Feiffer buckles down to storytelling business, though, the reader is finally
treated to some engaging episodes. Roger, transformed into an eagle, takes the
dour residents of the Valley of Vengeance aerial joyriding, reunites lovers parted
in a thirty-year game of hide-and-seek, and (back in his own hide) earns his own
happily-ever-after. Scratchy cartoon sketches scattered throughout the text pro-
vide plenty of visual breaks along the way. EB
GERRARD, ROY 
Wagons West!; written and illus. by Roy Gerrard. 
Farrar,
1996 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-374-38249-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 181, for review.
190 
* 
THE BULLETIN
HOLLYER, BELINDA 
Stories from the Classical Ballet; by Belinda Hollyer with an
introduction and performance notes by Irina Baronova; illus. by Sophy
Williams. 
Viking, 1995 
128p
ISBN 0-670-86605-9 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-8
The classic ballets have romantic stories, and this collection of eight of the most
famous gives them their lush due. Giselle, The Firebird, Swan Lake, and five other
terpsichorean tales unfold as the deep-hued art depicts scenes exotic, eerie, and
alluring within delicate pastel borders; each tale has a floral motif running through-
out as well. Balletomanes will especially appreciate the foreword and extensive
performance notes by ballerina Irina Baronova, who first appeared as the young
star of Balanchine's post-Diaghilev Ballet Russes; Mme. Baronova's exuberant and
chatty anecdotes of backstage life and performances great and small describe some
inspiring pas de deux, some entertaining faux pas, and one piquant glimpse of
skulduggery (when a rival cut through the straps of Baronova's costume, almost
causing her to be the first topless Firebird). The total effect is rich and insider-y,
and young dancers (and would-bes) will enjoy a trip through the glamorous side of
ballet before they hit the barres. DS
HOLTZMAN, CAREN 
A Quarter from the Tooth Fairy; illus. by Betsy
Day. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic, 1995 
40p 
(Hello Math Reader)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-26598-9 
$2.95
MACCARONE, GRACE 
Monster Math; illus. by Marge Hartelius. 
Cartwheel/Scho-
lastic, 1995 
32p 
(Hello Math Reader)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-22712-2 
$2.95
ROCKLIN, JOANNE 
How Much Is That Guinea Pig in the Window?; illus. by Meredith
Johnson. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic, 1995 
48p 
(Hello Math Reader)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-22716-5 
$3.50
SCHREIBER, ANNE 
Slower Than a Snail; illus. by Larry Daste. 
Cartwheel/Scho-
lastic, 1995 
32p 
(Hello Math Reader)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-26599-7 
$2.95 
M 
Gr. K-2
Appealingly packaged and appended with activities, these four math (arithmetic,
really) primers demonstrate various numeric skills through easy-reader texts. Monster
Math is the simplest in both concept and language ("Twelve little monsters/ wake
up at seven./ One jogs away. Now there are.. ."); Slower than a Snail, the concep-
tually weakest in the series, fuzzily defines comparatives ("I'm wider than a string
bean/ I'm narrower than a truck/ I'm lighter than a ton of bricks/ I'm heavier than
a duck"); A Quarter from the Tooth Fairy, in equally dispensable rhyme, explores
making change; a truly fatuous story, How Much Is That Guinea Pig in the Win-
dow, teaches children how to count to fifty. Although nothing is distinguished in
this series, everything adds up; still, you could create a more engaging arithmetic
lesson and save money simply by emptying your pockets onto a table. RS
HRU, DAKARI 
The Magic Moonberry Jump Ropes; illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Dial,
1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1755-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1754-7 
$14.99 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
April and Erica are jump-ropers extraordinaire, but they can't find that crucial
third person to jump Double-Dutch with: tying the ropes to the fence fails, and
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 
191
their youngest sister Carmen is just too little to do it right. When their Uncle
Zambezi turns up and gives them a set of rainbow-colored, wish-granting "magic
moonberry" jump ropes, the sisters wish for a jump-rope playmate and are thrilled
when Takara Brown, their age and also an aficionado of the sport, moves in next
door. The story here is pretty slight, and the brief tale of the magic moonberry
jump ropes seems calculated to bring in a discussion of Africa rather than to move
the plot along. This is one of the more evocative books, however, of summertime
hanging-out-in-the-neighborhood pleasures and free-time-has-lost-its-thrill blues,
and the casual interplay of the kids is recognizably authentic. The watercolor
illustrations also excel at depicting the everyday milieu, with hot sidewalks draped
in purple shadows contrasting with cool interiors of white walls and hardwood
floors; the neighborhood, with its gardening neighbors, leafy trees, and bouncy
jump-ropers is a pleasant place to browse through as well as to live (although one
wonders where people keep their cars). A note about rope and dye origins as well
as the sources of the jump-rope rhymes within is included. DS
HURD, THACHER 
Art Dog; written and illus. by Thacher Hurd. 
HarperCollins,
1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024425-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024424-0 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
He's a mild-mannered art-museum guard most days, but during a full moon Arthur
Dog becomes black-masked, beret-adorned Art Dog, who whips up murals on city
walls and disappears without leaving a trace. When the Mona Woofa is stolen
from the museum, the police mistakenly nab Art Dog, who paints his way out of
jail and into the rescue of the famed painting and the defeat of the art thieves. The
story has a camp, cartoonish Batman zaniness to it that kids will sink their canines
into; the illustrations, with their kennel of transformed famous paintings (the self-
portrait of Vincent Van Dog is eerily effective), Thurberesquely drawn cast, and
explosions of literally colorful action sequences will entertain artist and philistine
alike. DS
JACKSON, ISAAC 
Somebody's New Pajamas; illus. by David Soman. 
Dial,
1996 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1549-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1570-6 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Things go well on Jerome's first overnight at classmate Robert's upscale brown-
stone, until Jerome discovers to his chagrin that he is expected to wear pajamas,
and he doesn't own any. Jerome fast talks his way out of this social disgrace, but
finds no sympathy back home when he asks his father for a pair ("A pair of what?
Boy, you got to be crazy"). Eventually Jerome accepts that each "family has its
own way of doing things," but he is still overjoyed when he receives two pairs of
pajamas from his parents for his birthday. The angst expended on the pajama
crisis will puzzle many listeners, for whom new p.j.s would rank just above new
underwear on a birthday wish list. Soman's softly focused watercolors overlook
any social distinction between the boys, and Jerome's posturing-from cowed
pajamaless despair to pajama-clad elation-is often overdrawn. Still, it's a nice
portrait of two loving African-American families, and the message that it's the
warmth of the welcome that makes a child comfortable in a friend's home is a
reassuring and amiable one that comes through loud and clear. EB
192 
* THE BULLETIN
KARR, KATHLEEN 
Go West, Young Women!: 
The Petticoat Party, Book
1. HarperCollins, 1996 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027152-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027151-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The bumbling menfolk have all been killed or disabled by falling buffalo (yes,
falling buffalo), and now it's up to the sagacious womenfolk t'git this wagon train
to the Oregon Country. Twelve-year-old narrator Phoebe observes the trials of the
trail and the machinations of her peers and elders with wry detachment; her breezy
tone, together with plenty of bantering conversations, will appeal to readers who
favor sitcom over drama. Some anachronistic feminism occasionally creeps into
the characters' rhetoric ("Gunpowder is . . . the means of a final, total reliance
upon ourselves as a competent female society"), and an extensive subplot involving
the courtship of two flighty teens by lovestruck Pawnee braves is far-fetched, to say
the least. Still, readers who have had their fill of tales that regard the settlers with
awed reverence should find this romp a pleasant change of pace and be glad the
gals get only as far as Fort Laramie-there's definitely more to follow. EB
KHARMS, DANIIL 
First, Second; tr. from the Russian by Richard Pevear; illus. by
Marc Rosenthal. 
Farrar, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-374-32339-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
"First," says our protagonist, "I stepped out singing a song." Second, his friend
Pete comes along and joins him; third, they find the shortest man in the world
("no bigger than a jug") and they all three travel together, whistling songs; fourth,
they find a very long man ... You may think you get the idea, but soon the merry
troupe turns Aesopian as they figure out how to make use of a donkey they find
along the way, how they (now, including the donkey, five in number) can cross the
river in a tiny boat, then fit into a car, then retire to a hotel room, and then go on
their merry way in the morning. Kharms, an early twentieth-century absurdist, is
absurd indeed: the cumulation here is entertaining and also misleading, since part
of the point of the tale is that it's a shaggy-dog story, leading to nothing ("What
happened to us next is another story"). The contrast between the folkloric motifs
and the cheerful illogic reminiscent of dreams (it's pointed out that the appearance
of an elephant is impossible, but one turns up just in time to give the long man a
ride) makes the tale droll and near-parodic in a warmly dopey way. The line-and-
watercolor illustrations smack of early comic strips (there's a distinctly
Katzenjammerish air to the narrator, for instance), with movement and noise lines
adding emphasis, Kilroyesque figures poking their noses over walls and whatnot in
the background, and lots of zany supporting details (shadows going in all different
directions, hatted worms peering out of hollow trees at the action). Kids with a
budding taste for neo-cartoons such as The Simpsons will see just why this is silly,
and relish the vision. DS
KINDERSLEY, BARNABAS 
Children Just Like Me; by Barnabas and Anabel Kinders-
ley; illus. with photographs by Barnabas Kindersley and others. 
Dorling Kinder-
sley, 1995 
80p
ISBN 0-7894-0201-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Dorling Kindersley turns its clean if busy hand to an "It's a Small World" theme
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 
193
with this compilation of facts, photographs, and interviews with thirty-seven chil-
dren from thirty-two countries, including the U.S. Each child gets a full-page or
double spread built around a large color photograph of the child and, often, his or
her siblings; smaller photos show other family members, home and school, favor-
ite foods and toys, homework or schoolbooks, and file photos of famous sights.
Although the format is packed and visually treats its subjects more as design ele-
ments than people, the book focuses finely on just those things kids want to know
about other kids, and the quotes from interviews are fresh and ingenuous: speak-
ing of his future plans, eleven-year-old Yong-Koo of South Korea says, "I would
like to marry a polite and sincere woman. I'd also love to go to Australia to see
kangaroos and koalas." Nuclear families predominate, but nine-year-old Tadesee
lives in an orphanage in Addis Ababa, and twelve-year-old Suchart is a novice in a
Buddhist temple in Thailand. The book is arranged by continents, and each one
gets its own spread with a basic map and facts; an opportunity to join the "Chil-
dren Just Like Me Penpal Club" is offered at the back. An index of geographical
names is included. RS
KING-SMITH, DICK 
Sophie's Lucky; illus. by David Parkins. 
Candlewick,
1996 
[HlOp]
ISBN 1-56402-869-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Sophie, now eight, is as indomitably Sophie as ever in her quest for her farm; she's
therefore in heaven when her family decides to spend its summer on Sophie's
great-aunt's Scottish farm. Soon after their return, elderly Aunt Al (familiar to
readers from previous Sophie books, such as Sophie Is Seven, BCCB 5/95) dies,
leaving Sophie saddened at the loss of one of her dearest friends. The family,
however, is astounded to learn that Aunt Al has left them all a legacy that will
change their lives. In what is apparently to be her last outing, Sophie is still tough
and endearing, but the book's humor is more at her expense than previously (her
malapropisms in particular provide fodder). The Scottish trip doesn't come until
halfway through the book, and the small events beforehand aren't Sophie at her
pugnacious best and don't have the memorability of previous adventures. This is,
however, Sophie achieving her heart's desire, and readers who have grown attached
to our heroine won't want to miss it. Line drawings, heavy on hatch and cross-
hatch, give a pleasantly scratchy homeliness to the book. DS
KLAss, DAVID 
Danger Zone. 
Scholastic, 1996 
[240p]
ISBN 0-590-48590-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Jimmy Doyle is the star player on his small-town Minnesota high-school basket-
ball team, and he's good enough to go farther-which is just what he does when
an all-American Teen Dream Team is selected for international competition in
Italy. First at training in Los Angeles and then in Italy, Jimmy is plagued by
culture shock, self-doubt, and teammate troubles: the most gifted player on the
team, an African-American kid from South Central LA, resents Jimmy for taking
his best friend's spot. This is a fairly traditional sports story, and the team's char-
acters are stock as well (the clown, the angry prodigy, the easygoing kid); the addi-
tion of a Italian terrorist plot against the team makes the story more unlikelybut
not less predictable. There's plenty of exciting basketball action, though, as the
194 
* THE BULLETIN
team wends its way to the top, and the probing of issues of race relations and
national identity is thoughtful if not deep. Most of all, there's a likeable and
humble narrator whose talent takes him places he's never been before; hoop fans
will enjoy reading about his well-deserved triumphs. DS
KLEIN, ROBIN 
The Sky in Silver Lace. Viking, 1996 
178p
ISBN 0-670-86692-X 
$13.99 
Ad Gr. 5-9
The Mellings sisters, previously met in All in the Blue Unclouded Weather (BCCB
4/92) and Dresses of Red and Gold (5/93), have had to leave rural Wilgawa with
their mother, and it will be clear to readers if not to the girls themselves that their
parents' marriage is in some disarray. The fully realized setting of Wilgawa fo-
cused the previous collections of stories, but here, as the family moves three times
among the suburbs of an unnamed Australian city, readers will themselves feel like
the Mellings, always sorting out with no time to get settled. Those already ac-
quainted with the four sisters will enjoy seeing their lives and dreams progress (as
well as watching snotty cousin Isobel's comeuppance); those newly introduced
may have a hard time keeping the girls straight. Klein's penchant for neat endings
leads to some predictable stories, but one first-class entry shows Mother and oldest
sister Grace asking Aunt Elsie to take the family in: "'It's not called asking. It's
called ... begging,' Grace said in an odd voice, and Cathy saw with a shock that
her eyes were full of anguished tears." The book needs more such tough moments,
but it does offer a chance to visit a likeably obstreperous bunch. RS
KRAMER, STEPHEN 
Theodoric's Rainbow; illus. by Daniel Mark Duffy. 
Scientific
American/Freeman, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-7167-6603-5 
$17.95 
M 
Gr. 2-4
In this fanciful account, Kramer speculates on how the thirteenth-century Do-
minican monk Theodoric of Freiburg may have investigated the physics of rain-
bows. An adequate explanation of light refraction, awkwardly broken by some
fictional digression, will perhaps be less interesting to young readers than the su-
perstitions about rainbows expressed by Theodoric's fellow monks ("I heard of a
miller who pointed at a rainbow once. The next week, his finger fell off."). Glitzy
paintings are stiffly composed and rendered; the monks' eerily photorealistic heads
perch atop rigid, stylized bodies. No single spread simultaneously depicts the light
source, water-filled glass bubble, and object onto which the beams are projected,
making it difficult for young viewers to visualize the concept presented. An after-
word comments on the little that is known of Theodoric's life. EB
LITTLE, JEAN 
His Banner Over Me. 
Viking, 1995 
2 07p
ISBN 0-670-85664-9 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
After relating her own life in Little By Little (BCCB 7/88) and Stars Come Out
Within (12/91), Canadian writer Jean Little now turns to the story of her mother's
childhood and adolescence in Taiwan and Canada as the daughter of missionaries.
This book is less immediate than the others, not so much for its biographical
remove but because Little doesn't settle upon a particular point of view, preferring
that of her mother, Flora, but inconsistently wandering into the heads of the other
family members as well. (The fact that Flora is known to her siblings and friends
as "Gorrie" can also cause confusion.) Best are the early chapters, when Floral
Gorrie is still a little girl and undergoing the pain of leaving Taiwan and her father
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 
195
behind when her mother takes her and her sisters to Ontario to live with their
grandparents; dislocation comes again when Mother decides to rejoin her husband
and sends the girls to live with her sister. Later chapters, covering the death of
Gorrie's brother in the Great War and her entrance into medical school, are not
developed with as much patience--one chapter, for example, takes the girl from
eleven to sixteen. She remains, though, a tough yet bookish heroine; those who
came to admire Flora Gauld Little in Jean Little's previous memoirs will enjoy this
opportunity to know her better. RS
MACCARONE, GRACE 
Monster Math.
See Holtzman, p. 190, for review.
McKISSACK, PATRICIA 
Red-TailAngels: The Story ofthe TuskegeeAirmen of World
War II; by Patricia and Fredrick McKissack. 
Walker, 1996 
[13 6p] 
illus. with
photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8293-0 
$20.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8292-2 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
This actually starts with some fairly extensive history of African-American partici-
pation in the U.S. military and in aviation, explaining the background of prejudice
and exclusion behind the famous squadron's triumph. Detailed accounts of ad-
ministrative decisions, command assignments, and wartime experiences (includ-
ing capture by the Germans) follow; the breadth of the McKissacks' research, which
included interviews as well as secondary sources, is impressive and obvious. Some-
times, though, the very comprehensiveness results in detail at the expense of in-
volvement, as with the dizzying lists of names, dates, and combat units, and the
only European map is crowded and confusing. This is still a usefully thorough
account of black heroes engaged in courageous action, and kids who have had their
interest piqued by books such as Hart's Flying Free (BCCB 12/92) will appreciate
the in-depth investigation, while military aficionados will relish the meticulous-
ness of the chronicle. A panoply of historical photographs gives readers a look at
heroic faces both famous and little known; the squadron's war record and other
Air Force facts, along with a bibliography and an index, are appended. DS
MAESTRO, BETSY 
Coming to America: The Story oflmmigration; illus. by Susannah
Ryan. 
Scholastic, 1996 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-44151-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
As she did for the subject of money (BCCB 4/93) and the exploration of the
Americas (4/91), Maestro here provides a simple overview of American immigration,
scant on details, perhaps, but cohesive and easy-to-follow as a survey. The real
interest here is Ryan's watercolor illustrations; happier than Sendak's but more
intense than Diane Goode's, they share those artists' ebullience and attention to
expression and posture. Vignettes, full-page paintings and double-spreads are
theatrically alert to mood, shifting from a dramatic night view of the Aztec pyramids
to a Laura Ingalls Wilder pastorale of the westward movement to a snow-dappled
picture of Ellis Island's first arrival, fifteen-year-old Annie Moore from Ireland.
Darker moments, such as a child reaching out to a relative being sent back to the
196 
* 
THE BULLETIN
old country, are shown, but both text and pictures are essentially optimistic and
happy to be here. RS
MARKLE, SANDRA 
Pioneering Frozen Worlds. Atheneum, 1996 
[48p] 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31824-3 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
If anyone actually needed an excuse to repeatedly open and close the freezer door,
here it is. Markle's survey of science of and in the polar regions is regularly ex-
tended by suggested experiments that rarely require more than ice, water, and
plastic containers. They're simple but provocative and fun to do. The main text,
though, is sometimes awkwardly written and organized. The section asking "How
Is Technology Helping Scientists Explore?" is less than grammatically answered by
such subsections as "They're Breaking a Path through the Ice," "They're Diving
under the Arctic Ice," and "They're Dressing for the Cold." Too, the sections
seem arbitrary, so that a page on building shelter in Antarctica is followed by an-
other on polar-bear tracking in the Arctic. Although the book needs some maps
and some of the photographs need an indication of scale, the emphasis on scien-
tific inquiry makes the book a valuable complement to titles more focused upon
the regions' natural history or exploration. An index is appended. RS
MATTHEWS, MARY 
Magid Fasts for Ramadan; illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Clarion,
1996 
[48p]
ISBN 0-395-66589-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-4
With that pedantic title, this book seems at first like another one of those self-
consciously "multicultural" offerings that's really an encyclopedia article in dis-
guise, outlining the beliefs and customs of a people. But Matthews actually has
herself a story here: Magid, a contemporary Egyptian boy, does fast for Ramadan,
but he has to do it in secret because his parents think, at "almost eight"-years-old,
he's too young to endure the month-long, sunrise-to-sunset abstinence. Thus
Magid skips breakfast with the promise to eat lunch; thus he takes his lunch out-
side and secretly feeds it to the ducks. Thus, too, he gets caught by his older sister,
Aisha, who, none too pleased by her own first participation in the fast, tattles.
Matthews explains the significance of the holiday and the reasons for the fast in
natural conversation between Magid and his grandfather ("Fasting teaches us self-
control, and it reminds us that everyone is equal before Allah, because we all feel
hunger and need food"), but the story stays in front. Magid's spiritual fervor is
believably braided with his wish to be a grownup, and he is rewarded with a satis-
fying but realistic conclusion: admitting that an all-day fast is too hard for him,
Magid gets permission to not eat until lunchtime, and Aisha, still a bit too young
herself, will be allowed a snack after school. Lewis' watercolors are a little stiff but
matter-of-fact in their portrayal of a contemporary urban Egyptian family; a "Note
on Islam" and a glossary are appended. RS
MEDEARIS, ANGELA SHELF, ad. 
Treemonisha; from the opera by Scott Joplin; illus.
by Michael Bryant. 
Holt, 1995 
37p
ISBN 0-8050-1748-8 
$15.95 
R Gr.3-5
Michael Bryant's watercolors give a rich autumnal setting to Medearis' retelling of
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 197
Scott Joplin's 1915 opera about a young African-American woman of mysterious
origin who faces and defeats the evil forces bent on destroying her community.
Carny man Zodzetrick has the folks of Liberty in thrall to the empty promises of
his "magic" bags of luck, and when Treemonisha threatens to put a crimp in his
business ("I'm going to tell everyone I know that there's no such thing as buying
luck") he kidnaps her to his lair deep in the piney woods. But, just in time to
rescue the lady from being pushed into a wasps' nest, along comes a hero-
Treemonisha's handsome suitor Remus-and the rascals are run out of town. While
long for a picture book, the adaptation, incorporating pieces ofJoplin's libretto, is
smooth and lively, and its three-act structure gives natural stopping places for reading
aloud. Bryant takes the action away from the footlights and into the woods, with
vignettes, full-page paintings, and three climactic double spreads that capture both
characters and atmosphere with theatrical flair. RS
MERBREIER, W. CARTER 
Television: What's Behind What You See; written by W.
Carter Merbreier with Linda Capus Riley; illus. by Michael Chesworth. 
Farrar,
1996 
4 0p
ISBN 0-374-37388-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Merbreier is the host of a long-running Philadelphia-area children's show, and he
brings his expertise to bear here. Spreads carrying a multitude of thumbnail sketches,
diagrams, multi-character scenes, and television studios explain aspects of televi-
sion ranging from technical information about signal transmission to the various
jobs in a newsroom to predictions for the future capabilities of television. The
spreads are amusing (with visual and verbal jokes permeating each scene) and in-
formative but also often confusing both visually and conceptually. It's hard to
know where to look first on each page, so information is often disordered, and
explanations aren't always clear (and a few needed ones, such as the difference
between film and video, aren't included); the unwary may also mistake some of
the jokes (such as the cans of "canned laughter" and "wide pans") for literal depic-
tions. It's still an enticing and lively introduction to a world that most kids (and
adults) know very little about, and it's filled with televisual tidbits that young
readers will enjoy using to edify the less-knowledgeable. DS
MINAHAN, JOHN A. 
Abigail's Drum; illus. by Robert Quackenbush. 
Pippin,
1995 
6 4 p
ISBN 0-945912-25-0 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Apart from chores, there isn't much for eleven-year-old Rebecca and younger sis-
ter Abigail to do at the Scituate, Massachusetts lighthouse where their father tends
the lamp. They amuse themselves with mediocre fife and drum playing, attempt-
ing to emulate the stirring music they've heard from the Home Guard corps. Now
in September 1812, with the guard away patrolling the far side of the harbor, the
British have landed on a supply raid and taken the girls' father captive. Rebecca
devises a spontaneous plan to strike up their music in the echoing lighthouse,
frightening the British into a hasty retreat. The cluttered illustrations lack focus
and occasionally detract from the text, but the brief chapters and teasing cliff-
hangers make this fictionalized account of a true event appealing to readers who
are just moving into historical adventure novels. Minahan's version of the story is
slightly more difficult than Janet Greeson's An American Army of Two (BCCB 12/
92), but, oddly, he makes the sisters nearly ten years younger than they seem actu-
198 
* THE BULLETIN
ally to have been. An afterword comments on the genesis of the tale and the
history of the Scituate lighthouse. EB
MYERS, EDWARD 
Hostage. Hyperion, 1996 
[192p]
ISBN 0-7868-0115-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
A wicked fossil thief and a series of narrative contrivances take teenagers Alyssa and
Rob on a forced march through the desert of Dinosaur National Monument and,
eventually, into the rapids of Green River. Told, alternatively, from Alyssa's and
Rob's points of view, the story is thoroughly predictable, from the first glimpse of
the villain ("The man's hair caught Alyssa's attention at once: pure black except
for a white streak running from his brow to halfway across his head. He looked
like a skunk!") to the final battle ("Rolling, heaving, twisting, plunging, the raft
was helpless in the river's grip"). This isn't as focused as the author's previous
adventure story, Climb or Die (BCCB 12/94), but it does have lots of action and a
pair of resourceful young heroes. RS
NEWCOME, ZITA 
Toddlerobics; written and illus. by Zita Newcome. 
Candlewick,
1996 
[2 6p]
ISBN 1-56402-809-7 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-4 yrs
Newcome's sly and bouncy pictures of dancing toddlers will probably be lost on
the audience once it hears the equally bouncy rhyme: "Hats off, coats off, all rush
in-everybody ready for toddler gym!" Who could sit still? A miniature chorus
line of eight (pictured and named on the endpapers) demonstrates the moves sug-
gested here from stretches ("Stretch up high and touch the sky, bend down low
and touch your toes") to shimmies ("Make a circle, ring-around-the-rosy. Let's
bump bottoms, let's rub noses") to the touchdown ("Turning, twirling, like a
spinning top. Bump on your bottom when it's time to stop"). If you can settle
everyone down enough to look, the Oxenburyish pictures reveal lots of zest and
scraps of mischief; memorize the text for a big-bang story hour finale. RS
NOVAK, MATT 
Newt; written and illus. by Matt Novak. 
HarperCollins,
1996 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024502-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024501-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
Newt learns lessons in charity and unconditional love in this beginning reader,
but, ahem, this Newt is a newt. In the opening chapter Newt learns that a flower
he's taken looked a lot better where it was in the first place; in the second place, it
wasn't his to take. Next, Newt finds a bug/pet that can't do anything his friends'
bugs do, such as fly or make music or give rides: "Newt hitched the bug to a
wagon of rocks. 'Pull!' Newt shouted. The bug only looked at him with its twenty
sad eyes." But Newt learns that his bug is pettably soft and makes a nice buzzing
sound, and that that is enough. In the last chapter, Newt teaches the moon not to
be afraid of the dark and comforts himself in the process. Illustrated with Novak's
zappily amiable cartoons, these episodes wear their lessons lightly and give new
readers a hero who deserves at least another book of his own. RS
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 
199
ORGEL, DORIS 
The Princess and the God. Jackson/Orchard, 1996 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08866-9 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09516-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
As she did in Ariadne, Awake (BCCB 6/94), Orgel here elaborates a romantic
Greek myth into a novella that will have appeal for teenage reluctant readers (who
may be drawn in by the sexy cover) as well as for junior high students who have
outgrown-but still secretly enjoy-fairy tales. Told primarily by Psyche, the
story occasionally lapses into an omniscient voice (italicized) describing behind-
the-scenes action by Cupid/Amor, his mother Venus, and various other gods whose
behavior is all too human. Unlike many revisionist retellings of folklore, this pre-
sents no twist on the traditional point of view, but simply personalizes the story.
Psyche's youthful beauty arouses the jealousy of Venus, who commands Cupid to
shoot her with an arrow that will make her fall in love with a fool. Instead, he falls
in love with her himself, abducts her from a mountaintop to a magic palace, and
comes to her by night until she tries, at her sisters' urging, to look at him by the
light of a lamp. The lamp oil burns him, he flies away, and Psyche must undergo
trials before she recovers her love and becomes immortal herself. This is a complex
tale, and readers might benefit from hearing an unembroidered version of the
myth before reading Orgel's on their own, but the style is plain and the emotional
situation of intense interest to girls in the throes of first love. BH
PANDELL, KAREN 
Learning from the Dalai Lama: Secrets of the Wheel of Time;
written by Karen Pandell with Barry Bryant; illus. with photographs by John B.
Taylor. 
Dutton, 1995 
40p
ISBN 0-525-45063-7 $16.99 
M 
Gr. 4-6
A bit of Buddhist history, a dash of Dalai Lama biography, and a set of instruc-
tions for a do-it-yourself sand mandala enclose this brief account of the Kalachakra
Initiation held in Madison Square Garden in 1991. The complex Kalachakra
teachings and rituals which lie at the heart of this work are ill-served by a thready
text which, despite its good intentions, poses more questions than it answers. Pandell
indicates that only initiates who pledge "never to reveal the secrets of the mandala"
may view the sand wheel. Why, then, is her readership treated to color photos,
complete with interpretation of the wheel's symbols? Reasons for the Dalai Lama's
appeal in America and the hoopla that accompanied his visit are never discussed.
Several photos are equally problematic or underexplained: why does a little boy
hold a "China Out Of Tibet" sign; why is a "colorful mix" of Kalachakra sand
white; what does actor Richard Gere (who wrote the introduction and appears in
a couple of the pictures) have to do with all this? Adults may know, but the
intended audience will remain unenlightened. EB
PAULSEN, GARY 
Brian's Winter. Delacorte, 1996 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-32198-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
In his epilogue to Hatchet, Paulsen wrote that "had Brian not been rescued when
he was, had he been forced to go into hard fall, perhaps winter, it would have been
very rough on him." That's the tack in this what-if sequel, where Brian does
manage to retrieve the survival pack from the downed plane but does not find the
emergency transmitter, and so must endure the north-woods winter with little
200 
* THE BULLETIN
more than his newly acquired survival skills and, of course, his hatchet. Unlike
Hatchet, where Brian's concern over his parents' divorce pervaded the story, the
conflict here is entirely physical, boy against the elements: "The problem-well,
he thought smiling, one of about a thousand problems-was that he didn't hon-
estly know how cold it would get or how much snow there would be or what he
could do to live." That he does survive until rescue is an expectation of the genre;
that he manages credibly is a tribute to Paulsen's outdoor savvy and focused writ-
ing. While hardened and sharpened by his previous months in the wilderness,
Brian is still an ordinary kid, and his accomplishments (making a bow and arrows,
clothing, shelter, snowshoes) are admirable precisely because we know how diffi-
cult they are to do, composed as they are of equal shares of ingenuity, hard work,
and trial-and-error. Brian is a popular hero because he makes kids think that they
could do it, too, and Paulsen provides enough step-by-step instruction so that,
maybe, they could. (And for readers who can't get enough, don't forget Paulsen's
previous sequel to Hatchet, The River, reviewed in the 6/91 issue.) RS
PELLOWSKI, MICHAEL MORGAN 
TheArt ofMaking Comic Books; illus. by Howard
Bender and with photographs. 
Lerner, 1995 
80p 
(Media Workshop)
ISBN 0-8225-2304-3 
$14.96 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Pellowski, a longterm laborer in the comic-book world, here shares tips of the
trade with young readers. After a brief overview of comic-book history, the text
describes the making of a comic book, explaining the various jobs people hold and
the various stages books must go through. The writing is choppy and not always
successful at recreating the comic joie de vivre it occasionally imitates, but it's got
a nice confiding tone that aspiring comic-book artists will appreciate. The book
shifts around between several different sample comic-book ideas, which causes it
to lose a certain amount of cohesion, and the photographs, as opposed to the
comic-book reproductions, are indifferent and rarely elucidatory. Serious comic
fans will relish Pellowski's detail-oriented and knowledgeable pragmatism, how-
ever, and may find that this emboldens them to set pen to paper for homegrown
Marvels of their own. A glossary, list of further reading, and an index are included.
DS
QUATTLEBAUM, MARY Jazz, Pizzazz, and the Silver Threads; illus. by Robin
Oz. 
Delacorte, 1996 
[112p]
ISBN 0-385-32183-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Calvin is nine, and he wants a pet, something that "would be busy with him" after
school while his little brother reads, his friend Jenny practices magic, and Ms. Eva,
who watches them all, plans for her dance class. Unfairly enough, Calvin's parents
deem him too irresponsible for a pet and it's Jenny who gets Pizzazz, the hamster.
A jealous Calvin can't stay away from Pizzazz, and he tries to undermine Jenny's
confidence in Pizzazz's suitability for her magic act in the hopes that she'll pass the
pet over to Calvin. This is solid if not sparkling middle-grades fare: the pet di-
lemma, including Pizzazz' escape and illness (and Calvin's eventual possession of
the hamster) is predictable and the climactic show, where Miss Eva's dancers, the
Silver Threads, perform and Jenny does her magic act, is somewhat contrived.
Quattlebaum, author of Jackson Jones and the Puddle of Thorns (BCCB 3/95), has
a fresh and easy voice, however, and the interpersonal relationships, especially
Calvin's guilty sabotaging of Jenny's confidence, are convincing and believable.
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 
201
Donna Jo Napoli's The Bravest Thing (BCCB 10/95) is a better pet book, but this
is a light-hearted and entertaining rodential read. Reviewed from an unillustrated
galley. DS
ROCKLIN, JOANNE 
How Much Is That Guinea Pig in the Window?
See Holtzman, p. 190, for review.
RODOWSKY, COLBY 
RememberingMog. Farrar, 1996 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-374-34663-1 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Annie is getting ready for her high-school graduation, but she finds it brings more
pain than pleasure: her older sister, Mog, was murdered two years ago just as she
was preparing to graduate. Annie and her family, especially her mother, who
simply refuses to talk about Mog's death or her life, have adjusted poorly to the
loss, and now that Annie faces reaching an age and a milestone that her sister never
will, she finally seeks counseling to help her come to terms with her grief. Rodowsky
touchingly depicts the barrenness, anger, and yearning that are part of bereave-
ment; the authentic twist of Annie's guilt and confusion at growing beyond her
older sister (as well as the book's leaving around of some realistic loose ends) sets
this title apart from many on the subject. The visits to the therapist and their fairly
speedy efficacy are a bit predictable, but the reader's investment in Annie is strong
enough that the relief in the resolution dominates; we can't help but wish Annie
well as she embarks on the life after high school that Mog will never have. DS
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Gooseberry Park; illus. by Arthur Howard. 
Harcourt,
1995 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-15-232242-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
In this animal fantasy, the denizens of Gooseberry Park-Stumpy the squirrel,
Kona the dog, and Murray the bat resemble stuffed toys come to cartooned life
more than they do recognizable inhabitants of the animal kingdom. The crisis is
this: Stumpy has just given birth to three darling babies when an ice storm comes
and knocks the nest from the tree, parting Stumpy from the young ones. Her
friends Kona and Murray (and Gwendolyn the hermit crab) rescue and feed the
babies ("'Ouch!' Murray yelled. 'Ouch! Doesn't Stumpy ever feed these kids?'")
until they are reunited with their mother. Despite some jokes aimed over the
heads of a child audience, Rylant is a good, clean writer, and she manages to gather
some dramatic impact for the hackneyed plot and some sympathy for the cliched
characters; still, those children old enough to read the book on their own might be
embarrassed by the cutesiness, so you might want to save this for a readaloud for
younger and less sophisticated audiences. RS
SAN SoucI, ROBERT D., ad. 
The House in the Sky: A Bahamian Folktale; illus. by
Wil Clay. 
Dial, 1996 
[32 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1285-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1284-7 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
San Souci borrows from several Bahamian sources (credited in an author's note)
for this energetic tale of a younger brother's greed and an older brother's cunning.
202 
* THE BULLETIN
Boukee is willing to share with younger sibling Rabby the secret of how he pro-
vides so well for his family-he has been purloining food from a monster's magical
house. When Rabby accompanies him on a raid, he lingers too long gobbling
goodies on the spot, falls asleep in a monster's bed, and finally escapes, in a painful
fashion, with the aid of the monster's daughter. The text is a read-aloud delight,
with its magical chant, wordplay, and comic conversations. Clay's luridly hued
acrylic paintings, however, are crowded and frenetic; the relative sizes of the giant
monsters and humans vary erratically from spread to spread. Nevertheless, listen-
ers will be well satisfied with the broad humor and approve of the resolution: "I
been thinking it one bad idea to go thiefing other folks' food." "Bro', this the first
thinking I ever hear from you." EB
SCHREIBER, ANNE 
Slower Than a Snail.
See Holtzman, p. 190, for review.
SCHUR, MAXINE ROSE 
When I Left My Village; illus. by Brian Pinkney. 
Dial,
1996 
6 4p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1562-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1561-7 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
In this sequel to the picture book Day ofDelight (BCCB 11/94), Menelik and his
family are leaving Ethiopia because of the famine that is starving the entire nation,
and also because of the increased persecution of Menelik's people, the Beta Israel
the Ethiopian Jews. Where the first book was basically a cultural description, this
one does have a plot, as the family secretly and perilously makes its way to Sudan
and then to Israel; still, the characters seem to function more as markers for a
documentary account than as beings in their own right. Menelik makes an im-
probably poetic narrator ("a great gale blew across the black desert like wind from
some infernal bellows"), and the book's tone is too noble and high-minded, and,
as a result, too distant. Although Schur is not always clear about the factual back-
ground behind her story (she has the Ethiopian government helping the Jews on
one page and persecuting them on the next) it is one most children won't know,
and the picture of exile and relief is powerful. Pinkney's scratchboard, here in
monochrome, heightens the drama with glints of white gleaming against the darker
backgrounds. RS
Scorr, ANN HERBERT 
Brave as a Mountain Lion; illus. by Glo Coalson. 
Clarion,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-66760-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Spider, who lives on a Shoshone Indian reservation, is proud of his no-mistakes
spelling paper. He is less happy-petrified, in fact-about his subsequent partici-
pation in an upcoming spelling bee to be held in the big gymnasium at his school,
with parents and family invited. But taking some advice from his father, grand-
mother, and brother, Spider decides to be "brave as a mountain lion, clever as a
coyote, silent as a spider," and manages to get himself up onto the stage, where to
his relief and his family's pride, he takes second place. It's good to have a reserva-
tion-set story that is contemporary and not unduly heavy; as she demonstrated as
far back as Sam (BCCB 2/68), Scott knows how to take a universal childhood
anxiety and particularize it to the needs of a story. Glo Coalson (who also illus-
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 
203
trated Scott's On Mother's Lap, BCCB 12/72) here contributes warm and com-
fortable watercolors of family life as well as of the scary stage. RS
SEIBERT, PATRICIA 
Toad Overload: A True Tale ofNature Knocked OffBalance in
Australia; illus. by Jan Davey Ellis. 
Millbrook, 1996 
32p
ISBN 1-56294-613-7 $15.90 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Unlike Jeannie Baker's The Story ofRosy Dock (BCCB 3/95), which was beautiful
but vague in its explanation of the problems of introduced species, this picture
book is straightforward, even blunt, about what happened when cane toads were
imported into Australia to control crop-consuming beetles and grubs: "The toads
were much happier in town, where it was easy to find a satisfying meal." Not only
did the toads prefer pet food to beetles, they reproduced at an alarming rate, caus-
ing the original introduced population of 101 to grow into the millions, extending
their range to the entire northeast coast of the continent. Listeners will enjoy the
details (the toads are as big as dinner plates, they squirt poison, some children dress
them up like dolls) but the science should be more specific. Surely Seibert could
be more precise than stating that there are "millions and millions of toads"; the
ecological impact is left at "scientists are trying to find out"; and the book limply
and puzzlingly concludes with "Once these big toads came, they conquered!
Well ... almost." Colored pencil illustrations are somewhat grainy but large enough
for a science story hour; an appendix includes some q-and-a's about the toads and
a map showing their range. RS
SHECTER, BEN 
Great-Uncle Alfred Forgets; written and illus. by Ben
Shecter. 
HarperCollins, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026219-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026218-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Great-Uncle Alfred and little niece Emily trim his Christmas tree-but it's mid-
summer, not December, and Emily is patiently humoring her elderly relative, who
apparently suffers from Alzheimer's disease. Although Great-Uncle forgets Emily's
name, his shoes, even the seasons, Emily realizes that if she guides him out into the
sunshine and onto the subject of his childhood, his mind clears. Limning Alfred's
condition with neither humor nor pity, Shecter challenges his audience to accept
the man's frailties with the same sagacity and selflessness Emily offers. However,
children who have experienced the frustration of loving an older relative who is
tenacious of the past but forgetful of the present will recognize this as an idealized
portrayal, and the somewhat melancholy, somber-hued oil paintings reflect the
situation more accurately than does the text. If the story is unconvincing and the
last line, "Then we still have some time," abstruse, Shecter still provides an alterna-
tive to more clinical what's-wrong-with-grandpa tales. EB
SHREVE, SUSAN 
Zoe and Columbo; illus. by Gregg Thorkelson. 
Tambourine,
1995 
71p
ISBN 0-688-13552-8 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-4
The family dynamics change when Zoe and Columbo's family moves from their
old town, where the sibs were inseparable companions and Columbo was the star
of the neighborhood, to Providence, where Zoe starts finding her own friends and
identity and Columbo is afraid that his being adopted sets him apart from his
classmates and his sister. Columbo's uncertainty has actually led him to tell the
204 
* THE BULLETIN
kids in his new fourth grade that he and Zoe are twins (their birthdays are only,
after all, four months apart), and as his ostensible and Zoe's actual birthday ap-
proaches, his fear of being found out and being excluded increases. Characteriza-
tion here is particularly strong, with the deep bond between the near-twins
touchingly portrayed. As ever, Shreve investigates middle-grades angst subtly and
respectfully, and Columbo's bewilderment and uncertainty will strike a chord with
young readers, all of whom will recognize the problems of newness. Awkward
pencil drawings, unfortunately dorky, appear occasionally. DS
SIERRA, JUDY, comp. and ad. 
Nursery Tales Around the World; illus. by Stefano
Vitale. 
Clarion, 1996 
[11 4p]
ISBN 0-395-67894-3 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
3-7 yrs
This richly illustrated compendium of folktales does double duty as a nursery story
book for lap-sharing and as a sourcebook for parents and professionals. Each of six
themed sections, ranging from Runaway Cookies to Fooling the Big Bad Wolf,
contains three tales, carefully balancing familiar standards with lesser-known sto-
ries. "This Is the House That Jack Built" teams with the Italian "The Rooster and
the Mouse" chain tale; "The Hare and the Tortoise" speedster fable shares the bill
with the Chinese "The Fox and the Crab." Most entries feature strong rhythms
and repetition that invite audience participation and develop memory, and intro-
ductory hints to the novice reader/teller suggest how these devices maximize the
stories' impact and appeal. Meticulous source notes include tale-type and motif
index references for readers interested in expanding their repertoire. Top this
engaging text with Vitale's lavish oil-on-wood ethnic borders, motif vignettes, and
full-page illustrations, and you have a handsome work to be valued by readers and
treasured by listeners. EB
SMALLS, IRENE 
Ebony Sea; illus. by Jon Onye Lockard. 
Longmeadow Press,
1995 
[4 4p]
ISBN 0-681-00679-X 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
"And the waves kept rolling, to and fro, to and fro. Swoosh, swash, swish, swoosh,
swash, swish, splish, splash, splish-splash, splatter." This onomatopoeic chorus
projects an oddly lighthearted tone for a story of mass suicide, when an entire
shipment of Ebo people who have survived the Middle Passage walk silently into
the Wateree River rather than submit to the horrors of slavery. The witness is a
boy named Benriver who, "because he was part spirit could not go into the
water .. with them." This explanation may raise more questions than it answers
in a picture book that tries to condense a complex historically grounded legend.
Since the facts are not cited in an informational source note, listeners have no way
of distinguishing fact from fiction here-whether, for instance, the "African queen"
who leads the group ("In her Ebo beliefs an African who dies goes back home to
Africa") comes from history or imagination. Other problems arise from the text
itself: how did Benriver, newly arrived, understand an old slave's comforting words
spoken in English? Why did the slave masters stand back and watch while their
investment sank in irons? The art serves to further the mythical aspects of the
story more than underscore its historical basis. Melodramatic colors characterize
the compositions, and larger-than-life figures represent the heroic Africans, while
the whites are cartooned with comedic proportions that break the tragic tone of
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 205
the text. On one page, Benriver appears to be a boy in Auntie Louisa's arms; in the
next picture, with no passage of time indicated, he seems to be a young man. Parts
of the narrative are lyrical enough to move listeners and the art shows potential
illustrative power in some of the portraits, but the overall effect-despite a roman-
ticized vagueness of factual detail-is more polemic than poetic. BH
SMITH, ROLAND 
Journey of the Red Wolf written and illus. with photographs by
Roland Smith. 
Cobblehill, 1996 
60p
ISBN 0-525-65162-4 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Smith, a biologist and member of the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Services' Red Wolf
Recovery Team, explains the near extinction of the red wolf, which formerly roamed
the southeastern U.S., and the recent effort to save the species through capture,
breeding, and reintroduction into a wild refuge. Because the author has chosen to
fictionalize some of his material ("I tried to see both through the eyes of the red
wolf and through the eyes of the people who met the wolf on its journey"), it is not
always clear what really happened: while reports from the wolfs point of view
thoroughly resist anthropomorphism, the accounts of human actions and conver-
sations are unreferenced, leading us to wonder what was made up and what was
not. Explanations are not always clear (children will wonder why the biologists
wanted to kill coyotes so that the red wolves would not breed with them) and are
marked by a peculiar use of quotation marks ("Wild pups stay with their parents
for a longer period, forming what is commonly known as a 'wolf pack'"). Smith is
much better when he outlines the reintroduction program itself, which led to the
successful adaptation of the red wolf into a refuge in North Carolina. Color pho-
tos show the procedures of trapping, feeding and radio-collaring; along with an
index, there is a directory of zoos that have breeding programs for the wolves. RS
SPIRES, ELIZABETH 
With One White Wing: Puzzles in Poems and Pictures; illus. by
Erik Blegvad. 
McElderry, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-689-50622-8 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Riddles, of the old-fashioned "what am I" variety, have a certain perennial fascina-
tion, and here's a tidy and inventive collection of them. Not only do Spires' free-
verse poems offer punny and explanatory hints (the arrow slyly confesses, "Out of
many,/ I was chosen./ I quiver/ at the honor"), Blegvad's detailed watercolor vi-
gnettes always contain the answer without necessarily making it obvious. Some of
Spires' phrases misstep (it's surely rather misleading to call a mosquito a "kami-
kaze"), but most are neatly clever and some are inspired ("When you leave I get
bored," says the mirror, "and pretend I'm a room"). The poems are deft enough to
be interesting even to youngsters who can guess most of the answers without diffi-
culty, and the visual/verbal clues are enough to nudge wordaphobes to enjoyable
success. DS
STEIG, WILLIAM 
The Toy Brother; written and illus. by William Steig. 
di Capua/
HarperCollins, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205079-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205078-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-7 yrs
A story is all in the point of view, and this is Tom Thumb from the sibling's
perspective. It's set in the Middle Ages but narrated with sly modern digs and
206 
* THE BULLETIN
illustrated with Steig's signature wit. The story has lots of familiar ingredients, but
they're mixed well. Yorick, who considers younger brother Charles "a first-rate
pain in the pants," is apprenticed to his father, the famous alchemist Magnus Bede.
With their parents away, Yorick messes around in his father's laboratory and drinks
a shrinking potion that he can't reverse, even with Charlie's help. Charlie, mean-
while, is rather enjoying the situation ("Okay, peanut, take it easy") until he real-
izes the danger (Yorick "could be seriously injured by a fieldmouse who was feeling
his onions"). When Mr. Bede finally comes home and finds the antidote, the
whole Bede family go "altogether out of their medieval minds" with joy and live
happily ever after, Yorick still dreaming of turning donkey droppings into gold
and Charles developing a passion for making toy dolls that resemble Yorick. Framed
in purple borders, the watercolor cartoons feature plain compositions with homely
characters. Steig's strength has always been a good story with funny pictures, and
this book has enough child appeal to transmogrify any storyhour audience. BH
STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS 
The Bottle Imp; illus. by Jacqueline Mair. 
Clarion,
1996 
[6 0p]
ISBN 0-395-72101-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
A blend of folklore, morality tale, and absorbing fiction, Stevenson's story tells of
a man, Keawe, who buys an imp in a bottle. This bottle will grant him all he
requires, but he must sell it before he dies or else be damned for eternity, he must
sell it for less than he paid, and the payment must be in coin. Well and good:
Keawe uses the imp to give himself a beautiful and happy house and to win himself
a lovely woman, Kokua, and then sells the bottle-unfortunately he then discovers
he is suffering from leprosy, so buys the bottle back to cure himself and stay with
his beloved Kokua. Now, however, the bottle must be sold for less than one cent,
and who would buy it even if that were possible? The story is both moving and
slyly clever, but it is long and leisurely paced. The oversized format makes the
volume resemble a picture book, but the design makes the text dauntingly dense
on the glossy pages. Thickly brushed watercolors in intense and vivid island hues
appear periodically; they are decorative but don't enhance the story much. DS
SZABLYA, HELEN M. 
The Fall of the Red Star; by Helen M. Szablya and Peggy
King Anderson. 
Boyds Mills, 1996 
16 6p
ISBN 1-56397-419-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Szablya and Anderson's fictionalized account of the inspiring yet doomed Hun-
garian revolution of 1956 shows many parallels with more recent events. The
book views the revolution through the eyes of a fourteen-year-old student, Stephen,
who, along with many other young people, became a "freedom fighter" when the
Soviet Union tried to squash popular Hungarian resistance against its occupation
and control. There are street battles, secret plots, guerilla attacks, and even an
emergency childbirth scene, but the drama of the action is compromised by un-
likely dialogue ("Maria, empty the rest of the tomato sauce into that big pan. We
will need more bottles for the Molotov cocktails," says Stephen's grandmother)
and formulaic writing ("His grandmother. She was always happiest cooking-her
way of showing love"). Less introspective than most recent war fiction, but less
exciting than war adventure stories such as Serailler's The Silver Sword, this could
still find an audience stirred by youthful heroism. RS
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 
207
TURNBULL, ANN 
Room for a Stranger. Candlewick, 1996 
[112p]
ISBN 1-56402-868-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
The Dyer family of northern England, chronicled in Speedwell(BCCB 11/92) and
No Friend ofMine (11/95), is back; now it's wartime, Dad's been dead for a year,
the older girls are gone, Lennie's working down in the mine, and twelve-year-old
Doreen is the protagonist. She's not thrilled about the idea of putting up an
evacuee, and when Rhoda comes Doreen's peeved to discover that the new girl
apparently outshines Doreen in every way: getting along with adults, preparing
for a fund-raising concert, dressmaking, and, most of all, glamour. Doreen's jeal-
ousy leads to a blow-up between the two girls, which results in Rhoda's running
away to the old mine works and getting injured in a cave-in; in the aftermath it
becomes clear that Rhoda's glamorous life isn't quite what she's made it out to be.
The dynamics here are fairly predictable, with Rhoda rich in experience but poor
in love, the neglected child of the single stage mother, but this is still a lively and
involving account of non-sibling rivalry and wartime peer-group society ("Being
bereaved gave Barbara status. Doreen hoped that having an evacuee might help
her catch up"). Kids who prefer their wartime adventures on the lighter side and
readers who followed the saga of the Dyer family in the first two books will enjoy
following the struggles of the sisters-of-circumstance. DS
VAIL, RACHEL 
Daring to be Abigail. Jackson/Orchard, 1996 
[14 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08867-7 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09517-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Abigail tells her frightened little brother that "camp is for learning to be brave,"
and she's determined to be a different, braver person there. No longer timid Abby
but bold Abigail, she will dive off the high-dive, fit in wherever she goes, and be
the kind of daughter that her father, now dead for two years, had really wanted.
Fitting in, however, often means excluding and tormenting one camper, Dana, to
enhance solidarity with the other girls ("Abigail knew that being mean was what
Tracy liked best about her, too. Maybe the girls at home would notice her if she
acted nastier"), and Abigail eventually pulls a prank of serious and unforgivable
nastiness on Dana (whom she actually rather likes). Although the point of view is
occasionally muddlingly inconsistent, Vail is, as ever, unerring without ever over-
simplifying in her depiction of shifting middle-grades alliances, and Abigail's anx-
ious ambivalence is both realistic and immediately understandable. The book has
the courage to allow sympathetic Abigail to do really rotten things (and get nailed
with the proper repercussions on a personal as well as an administrative level), but
her vulnerability and her poignantly, desperately upbeat letters home will engen-
der reader sympathy and understanding. DS
VAN LEEUWEN, JEAN 
Blue Sky, Butterfly. 
Dial, 1996 
[128p]
ISBN 0-8037-1972-8 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Twig is devastated by her parents' separation and by the ensuing deterioration of
her life. She won't talk to her father when he calls from his new apartment, and
she can't talk to her mother, who, sunk into a depression, can't even manage the
cooking and the laundry, let alone deal with her children's emotional needs. Fi-
208 
* THE BULLETIN
nally she calls her grandmother, who helps Twig, her brother Nathan, and their
mother not only by visiting, but also by sending encouragement and material for
the starting of a garden, whose required hard work helps heal the family and whose
gradual blossoming parallels their recovery. Van Leeuwen's depiction of the shock
and sadness even an amicable divorce can wreak on a family is telling and authen-
tic; it's clear that the absence of any bad guys here (despite Twig's initial blaming
of her father) doesn't make the situation any happier. The garden motif isn't
overplayed but instead provides a cheerful and accessible symbol whose details
blend in with the other small individualities of the family drama. DS
WADDELL, MARTIN 
The Kidnapping ofSuzie Q. Candlewick, 1996 
[17 6p]
ISBN 1-56402-530-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
It's an ordinary day in the life of fifteen-year-old Suzie Quinn, who's dropping by
the market with her mother in preparation for her older sister's return home from
university when a robbery of the store goes wrong and the robbers kidnap Suzie
instead. The kidnappers are panicky and not very bright local youths-a nine-
teen-year-old, a seventeen-year-old, and his pregnant sixteen-year-old girlfriend-
who are convinced that Suzie has recognized them and that they need to find some
way out of this predicament. Suzie's narration tells of her captivity and her efforts
to escape it, alternating with descriptions of the furor on the home front as the
police hunt for the kidnapped girl and the family struggles to cope. Waddell has
written an absorbing thriller with a plucky yet believable heroine, and he's incor-
porated some complexities of attitude-the kidnappers really are pathetic and piti-
able, although undeniably dangerous-that freshen the story without making it
too difficult. It's also interesting to see a suspenseful story set in Northern Ireland
that deals with troubles other than the Troubles; it's clear that limited employ-
ment and educational possibilities have taken their toll on the kidnappers more
than political disputes have. This is classic kidnap fiction in the tradition of Lois
Duncan's Ransom and Robert Cormier's After the First Death. DS
WELLS, ROSEMARY, ad. 
Lassie Come-Home; illus. by Susan Jeffers. 
Holt,
1995 
48p
ISBN 0-8050-3794-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
Despite its surtitle of "Eric Knight's original 1938 classic," this is actually a sub-
stantially shorter picture-book version of the story about the collie who finds her
way back across 1000 miles from the house of the rich duke to the cottage of the
poor miner's boy she loves. While the plot retains much of its essential pathos, the
cliches of characterization become painfully evident in this adaptation, and we
don't get enough sense of Joe and Lassie's initial attachment to justify real invest-
ment in the drama. The figure drawing is inclined to be stiff and literal, but the
watercolor landscapes have an appealing sweep and imagination. It's a pretty and
effectively sentimental story that will, despite its flaws, reliably tug on youthful
heartstrings. DS
WESTALL, ROBERT 
Gulf Scholastic, 1996 
[96p]
ISBN 0-590-22218-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Tom has always been close to his sensitive little brother Andy,
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 
209
but he has also always worried about Andy's eerie, clairvoyant empathy that some-
times permits him to focus on nothing but the plight of someone or something
injured or in danger. When Andy's twelve, Saddam Hussein invades Kuwait, and
Andy somehow forms a link with a boy Iraqi soldier, shouting Arabic in his sleep
and going through the motions of a soldier on the march and, eventually, a soldier
under attack. Andy eventually becomes more Latif than Andy; his parents see it as
mental illness and hospitalize him, but Tom and a wise psychiatrist who believes
the truth see through Andy/Latif the struggle of the besieged Iraqi troops in the
last days of the Gulf War, as Latifs unit loses soldier after soldier to American
bombs. The late author shows his usual evocative way with atmosphere, and this
is an unusual treatment of a military conflict that passed largely unnoticed in
children's literature. Unfortunately the premise seems contrived, and the moral
questioning about warfare is obtrusive rather than arising naturally from the story
as it did in Westall's classic The Machine Gunners. This is still a good book for kids
interested in a creepy, ethically questioning story or simply a different look at war.
DS
WILSON, JACQUELINE 
Elsa, Star ofthe Shelter!; illus. by Nick Sharratt. 
Whitman,
1996 
208p
ISBN 0-8075-1981-2 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Novels about homelessness are often solemn or sentimental; here's one from En-
gland that's funny and brave. After her stepfather Mack loses yet another job, Elsa
and her family have to move into a bed-and-breakfast hotel: "But I'm not on
vacation. This is a shelter hotel. We live here because we haven't got anywhere
else to go." In her determined, breathless narration-regularly punctuated with
selections from her repertoire of truly terrible jokes-Elsa gives the rundown on
the shelter, their tiny room, her school and condescending teacher, and her abuse
at the hands of Mack: "Mack the Smack. That's not a joke. He really does smack.
Especially me." Elsa is matter-of-fact about Mack's punishments, and the author
is daring in the way she encourages our sympathy for the man, who's clearly been
pummeled along with the rest of the residents of the "oyal H t 
1" ("We saw the big
gilt lettering was all wobbly and some of it was missing"). There's a bit of a fairytale
ending in which Elsa loudly alerts the hotel to a fire, and the family gets to move to
a much nicer place. We do know that this is only temporary, and there's no telling
when Mack's temper will flare again. Plentiful and funny ink drawings that give
Elsa's view on things tell their share of the story, and fresh footnotes in Elsa's voice
define British terms: "knickers This is getting personal! Knickers means under-
wear. I say underwear, you say underpants." RS
WOLKSTEIN, DIANE 
Esther's Story; illus. by Juan Wijngaard. 
Morrow,
1996 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12128-4 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12127-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
The story of the Jewish girl chosen by King Ahasuerus to replace his deposed
queen Vashti and destined to save her people from massacre is recounted from
Esther's own point of view. All the key players and events from the Biblical ac-
count are here, but are presented to focus on Esther's vulnerability even as the
queen of Persia, ever at the mercy of her husband's benevolent whim ("I do not
think I shall ever forget my fear during those three days ... [n]or shall I forget the
210 
* 
THE BULLETIN
sound of the shofar or walking through the seven gates, one by one"). Although
the voice and perspective are clearly fictionalized, Wolkstein clings closely to a
Scriptural outline, with the notable exception of Esther's bold flirtation with the
king upon their first meeting. Although the opulent, jeweled, and gilded gouache
paintings, reminiscent of Marilee Heyer's lush fantasies, will attract a younger au-
dience, the political machinations and court cabals which give rise to Esther's act
of heroism are accessible only to a more attentive readership. Wolkstein notes that
she has drawn from the Book of Esther, oral legends, and her own musings, but no
source notes demarcate their boundaries. EB
YEP, LAWRENCE 
Ribbons. Putnam, 1996 
[19 2p]
ISBN 0-399-22906-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Robin lives for ballet, adoring her stern teacher, Madame Oblamov, and anticipat-
ing a glorious career. She's therefore devastated when her parents call a halt to her
ballet on financial grounds: they're devoting every penny they've got to bringing
her mother's mother over from Hong Kong and getting her settled-in Robin's
old room, while Robin shares with her little brother, Ian. The unfairness of Robin's
predicament is accentuated by her grandmother's obvious preference for Ian and
her parents' reluctance to intercede when the old lady's favoritism makes Robin's
life difficult. The Little Princess aspect of the story, with poor put-upon Robin
beset at every turn, isn't especially believable but will be very gratifying to readers,
particularly when they realize, along with Robin's parents, that Robin's year of
deprivation has led to permanent physical consequences (Robin's constant home
practicing of ballet in ill-fitting shoes has led to deformation of her feet) and that
her parents are wracked with guilt. The rapprochement between Robin and her
grandmother is a bit sudden but is warm and engaging, and the family dynamics
here are soapishly absorbing. Most memorable is Robin's cranky but strong-minded
grandmother whose granddaughter definitely takes after her; kids who appreciate
a story about fighting for one's dreams will enjoy Robin's saga. DS
ZINDEL, PAUL 
The Doom Stone. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
173p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024727-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024726-6 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 6-9
There are, alas, no crop circles in this book, but it includes just about all the other
supernatural motifs: cattle mutilations, Stonehenge, telepathy, phases of the moon,
and an ancient species whose survival depends on remaining hidden from human-
kind. Fifteen-year-old Jackson Cawley encounters all these when he visits his an-
thropologist aunt in England and discovers that a vicious missing-link-type hominid
has been killing and eating people. After the creature bites Aunt Sarah, thereby
causing her to begin changing into such a creature herself, Jackson hunts through
the countryside and history to find a way to destroy the evil menace without de-
stroying himself in the process. This has the same brisk pacing and old-fashioned,
satisfyingly kid-driven adventure as Loch (BCCB 11/94). Zindel's excesses here,
however, are often more histrionic than dramatic, which makes the book seem
self-parodic at times (as when the transforming Aunt Sarah begins to howl "BEEF!
GIVE ME BEEF!"). There are also several questionable plot points: it's not clear
how Jackson knows that the den of hominids he and his friend Alma stumble into
are, unlike the man-eater, friendly; the creature's telepathic capabilities aren't well-
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 211
explained; and Jackson's repeated and successful use of pig Latin as a secret code
isn't particularly believable. Still, the creature is scary enough and the action lively
enough that horror fans (who will appreciate the snarling skeletal face on the cover)
probably won't mind. DS
ZOEHFELD, KATHLEEN WEIDNER 
What's Alive?; illus. by Nadine Bernard
Westcott. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p 
(Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023443 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023443-1 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-445132-1 
$4.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Using familiar examples of a tree, a bird, and a cat, the author guides a young
audience toward a scientifically feasible definition of life. In a straightforward
discussion, she demonstrates that living organisms share a common need for food,
air, and water, and that they are capable of growth and some form of movement.
Dead creatures are carefully and sensitively distinguished from non-living things:
"A stone, or other non-living thing, can never eat or grow.... A non-living thing
can never die, because it has never been alive." Those with more sophisticated
understanding of the complexities of defining life will not fault Zoehfeld for ig-
noring anomalies such as anaerobes, viruses, etc.; her failure to factor reproduction
into the definition, however, is decidedly problematic (and the last line-"You
will always be able to tell what's alive, and what's not"-is an optimistic oversim-
plification). An adult who is prepared to broaden Zoehfeld's discussion will find
this title, with its cheery watercolor pictures and well-crafted extension activity in
classification, to be useful for introducing biology basics. EB
212 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Kohl, Herbert. Should We Burn Babar?: Essays on Children's Literature and the
Power ofStories. New Press, 1995. ISBN 1-56584-258-8. 178p. $18.95.
A man who puts guns, Barbies, and Babar in the same sentence is a man on a
mission. Should we burn Babar?-well, no, states Kohl, but we must ensure that
any sharing of it with children come accompanied by a critique of the story's
patriarchal and colonialist attitudes. Although there is something rather moving
about Kohl's earnest, unreconstructed old-leftism, his knowledge of children's books
seems rather thin, and he also seems unaware that much of his argument for a
"radical" children's literature has been made many times before. Accusations against
Babar, for example, aren't new (See Ariel Dorfman's The Empire's Old Clothes),
and Kohl rather overplays his hand by making much of the fact that de Brunhoff
named Babar's benefactor "The Rich Lady" when, of course, she is actually called
la Vieille Dame, the Old Lady. His essay on the mythologizing of Rosa Parks and
what he calls the "Rosa Was Tired" story, is more interesting, but his suggestions
for how children's books and textbooks shouldrelate the history of the Mongomery
bus boycott are paralyzingly dull. (Kohl's attempts at a few "stories" of his own in
this book don't do much more than demonstrate that his heart is in the right
place.) Among the few books that win Kohl's approbation are the novels of Geoffrey
Trease and Virginia Hamilton, the picture books of Vera Williams, and Pinocchio,
albeit with some caveats: "'Boys will be boys!' is a very dangerous attitude, one
that leaves the door open for the sanction of male violence." RS
Silvey, Anita, ed. Children's Books and Their Creators. Houghton, 1995. ISBN 0-
395-65380-0. 800p. illus. $40.00
Former Horn Book editor Silvey has here compiled an enjoyably browsable ency-
clopedia of children's literature with its focus and discussion weighted towards
books published and authors and illustrators prominent after World War II. En-
tries are of three kinds: biographical cum critical essays about authors and illustra-
tors; bibliographic essays on topics such as "Canadian Children's Literature in
French," "Easy Readers," and "Holocaust Literature for Children"; and "Voices of
the Creators," brief essays by authors and illustrators about how and why they do
what they do. All entries are signed or initialed and contributors are identified in
an appendix. While the point of view throughout is less analytical than apprecia-
tive, the coverage is broad and writing accessible. A comprehensive author, title,
and subject index as well as plenty of reproductions of children's books illustra-
tions (mostly in black-and-white, with an eight-page color insert) aid both enjoy-
ment and usefulness. RS
FEBRUARY 1996 
* 
213
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Shreve
ADVENTURE STORIES: Avi;
Paulsen
African Americans: McKissack
African Americans-fiction:
Medearis
African Americans-stories: Hru;
Jackson; Smalls
Alzheimer's disease-stories:
Shecter
American Indians-stories: Scott
Arithmetic: Holtzman
Art and artists-stories: Hurd
Art: Bial; Pellowski
Asian Americans-fiction: Yep
Aunts-fiction: Zindel
Australia: Seibert
Australia-fiction: Klein
Aviation: McKissack
Basketball-fiction: Klass
BIBLE STORIES: Wolkstein
Books and reading-fiction:
Ahlberg
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Avi;
Shreve
Brothers-fiction: Byars; Westall
Brothers-stories: San Souci; Steig
Buddhism: Pandell
Camp-fiction: Vail
Canada-fiction: Little
Cats-stories: Clements
Child abuse-fiction: Wilson
Comic books: Pellowski
CONCEPT BOOKS: Zoehfeld
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Klass; Myers; Waddell
Current events: Day
Dance: Hollyer
Dance-fiction: Yep
Death-fiction: King-Smith;
Rodowsky
Dinosaurs-poetry: Sierra
Divorce-fiction: Van Leeuwen
Dogs-fiction: Dickinson
Dogs-stories: Hurd; Wells
Ducks-stories: Brenner
Ecology. Seibert
Egypt-fiction: Matthews
Egypt-stories: Clements
El Salvador-fiction: Alphin
England-fiction: Avi; Turnbull;
Westall; Wilson
ESP-fiction: Westall
Ethics and values: Day; Westall
Ethiopia-fiction: Schur
FANTASY: Briggs; Dexter;
Feiffer; Rylant
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Alphin
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: San Souci;
Sierra
Food and eating-stories: San Souci
France: Besson
Friends-fiction: Levy;
Quattlebaum; Vail
Friends-stories: Jackson
FUNNY STORIES: Ahlberg;
Dickinson; Feiffer
Grandmothers-fiction: Van
Leeuwen; Yep
Gulf War-fiction: Westall
214 
* THE BULLETIN
HISTORICAL FICTION: Avi;
Clark; Karr; Little; Minahan;
Szablya; Turnbull
History, U.S.: Dash; Maestro;
Minahan
Homelessness-fiction: Wilson
Horses-fiction: King-Smith
Hungary-fiction: Szablya
Immigration: Maestro
Islam-fiction: Matthews
Japan-stories: Brenner
Jews-fiction: Schur; Wolkstein
Kidnapping-fiction: Myers;
Waddell
Labor movement: Dash
Literature, children's: Stevenson;
Wells
LOVE STORIES: Clark; Orgel
Missionaries-fiction: Little
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Dexter
Music: Medearis
MYTHOLOGY, CLASSICAL:
Orgel
Nature study: Dewey; Seibert;
Smith; Zoehfeld
Northern Ireland-fiction: Waddell
Pennsylvania-fiction: Clark
Pioneer life: Gerrard
POETRY: Cullinan; Gerrard;
Sierra; Spires
Polar regions: Markle
Princes-fiction: Feiffer
Quilts: Bial
Rainbows-fiction: Kramer
Ramadan-fiction: Matthews
Reading aloud: Avi; Cullinan;
Dickinson; King-Smith; Rylant;
Stevenson; Wells
Reading, beginning: Alphin; Byars;
Novak
Reading, easy: Dexter; Minahan;
Quattlebaum
Reading, family: Byars; Newcome;
Schreiber; Sierra
Reading, reluctant: Briggs; Karr;
Merbreier; Myers; Waddell; Zindel
Religious education: Matthews; Pandell;
Schur; Wolkstein
Riddles: Spires
SCARY STORIES: Stevenson; Zindel
School-stories: deGroat; Scott
Science experiments: Markle
Science: Kramer
Scotland-fiction: King-Smith
SHORT STORIES: Klein
Sisters-fiction: Klein; Rodowsky
Slavery-stories: Smalls
Social studies: Kindersley
SPORTS STORIES: Klass
Story hour: Brenner; Clements; deGroat;
Dewey; Gerrard; Hru; Hurd; Jackson;
Kharms; Newcome; San Souci; Scott;
Sierra; Steig
Summer-stories: Hru
Survival-fiction: Myers; Paulsen
Taiwan-fiction: Little
Television: Day; Merbreier
Toads: Seibert
Uncles-stories: Shecter
Valentine's Day: deGroat
War of 1812-fiction: Minahan
West, the: Gerrard; Karr
Witches-fiction: Dexter
Wolves: Smith
Women's studies: Dash
World War II: Besson; McKissack
World War II-fiction: Turnbull
o
"Tender is
the night."
-
Kirkus Reviews
~:~ELJE
b
-'- Starred by SLJ and Booklist
/
t.
THE BOY WHO LIVED
WITH THE BEARS
AND OTHER IROQUOIS
STORIES
Retold by JOSEPH BRUCHAC
Full-color pictures by MURV JACOB
"An appealing collection of six traditional Iroquois tales retold
in classic storytelling language... and presented as lessons the tribal
elders might pass on during winter story times. The reteller's introduction
is instructive and sets the mood for these humorous, moral-but never
didactic-tales. Each is carefully crafted with precise language
and striking images. Jacob's stunning, brilliantly colored paintings,
one for each selection, capture the moods clearly and gracefully.
A beautiful book that deserves a spot in every
folktale collection."-School Library Journal
All ages. $15.95TR (0-06-021287-X); $15.89LB (0-06-021288-8)
t HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 E. 53rd Street, New York 10022
>
r 
'_ 
- -
* 
I 
55
Schol 
Lirr 
Jounasar
1:*T 
IL 
DONKgel
*5 
* IC 
IVR 
F5501
By 
Magae 
Wise 
Brw
Fulcoo 
picure 
byAhe 
of
"hs 
tedr 
uiaoo 
aootcpehdrse
The sequel to his Child of the Owl
LAURENCE YEP'S
THIEF4 HEARTS
"Stacy has always felt
comfortable in her subu
middle school... [until
she finds herself caught
between the worlds of h
mixed Chinese and
American heritage. Set
thirty years after Child
of the Owl, which was
about her mother and
great-grandmother...
the three women go
back to San Francisco's
Chinatown, where
Stacy learns about their
immigrant past in all its
richness and struggle. A
kid caught between cult
will relate to Stacy's sea
for home." -ALA 
Boo
"[Yep's] warm depiction
of a mixed-race child in
changing world, combined with a page-turning mystery, should
guarantee a wide audience." -School Library Journal
Ages 10-14. $14.95TR (0-06-025341-X); $14.89LB (0-06-025342-8)
Among Laurence Yep's HarperCollins books
CHILD OF THE OWL
1977 Boston Globe-Horn Book Award for Fiction
Ages 10-14. $13.89LB (0-06-026743-7)
$3.95PB (0-06-440336-X)
DRAGONWINGS 
DRAGON'S GATE
A 1975 Newbery Honor Book 
A 1994 Newbery Honor Book
Ages 10-14. $14.89LB (0-06-026738-0) 
Ages 10-14. $15.00TR (0-06-022971-3)
$4.95PB (0-06-440085-9) 
$14.89LB (0-06-022972-1)
$3.95PB (0-06-440489-7)
9 HarperCollins Children'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
II
Only today's coolest picture-book duo could invent this hilarious
tale of a girl gripped by a Math Mania that totally totals her life.
It the besteller everybody% talki 
about
and every kidh wants to read!
*"A rollicking
tour de fere"
-The Horn Book
(Starred)
m'aea-ullMm
4'Zany.^non
stop fun"
-sLJ (Starred)
*'Seleszka
aud Smith are
at the top of
their clas."
-Booklist (Starred)
*"A triumph"
-Kirkus (Pointer)
A Book-efthe-
Month Club
main seleetion
Full color. Ages 7 up. 0-670-86194-4. $16.99
S Viking. Children's Favorites Since 1933
A Division of Penguin USA
Univerity of Ilinois Press
1325 South Oak Steet
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETuRN POSTAGE GUAANTEED
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
BCCB GOEs ONUNE
The University of Illinois Press has produced an online version of the Bulletin of
the Centerfr Chilren's Books for you to download and evaluate. This is an experi-
mental supplement to-not a replacement for-the print Bulletin, and it is avail-
able at the BuAin•W' new World Wide Web site. We expect to add other features
to this web site in the coming months; look for details on the home page and in
future issues of the print Bulletin.
The BCCB web site currently includes downloadable issues of Volume 48 (Sep-
tember 1994 through July/August 1995) of the Bulletin and is available without
charge.
You may download any or all of the online Bulletin issues from the following
World Wide Web site:
http:/edfu.lis.uiuc.edulcollections/bccb/BCCBhome.html
This web site contains the issues of the Bulletin in Adobe Acrobat (.pdf) format,
instructions for obtaining the Acrobat Reader software (available at no charge
online), and a set of evaluation questions, your answers to which will help us in
determining ways, means, and advantages of electronic access to BCCB.
iir 
; 
· il:tr
~· 
~ · · ~ 
·,i~i~~I 
:w~~"-"? ,~d
"~~-~i
~·
_~i 
ri
ma
L:
Y
17
x·j~
