I LLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois Press
Brand-new introductory level books
for earliest begEinning readers
BISCUIT
By Alyssa Satin Capucilli
Full-color pictures by Pat Schories
Biscuit is a lively puppy who has his own ideas
about bedtime routines in this "sweet entry
to reading." -Booklist. "[With itsl clear, large
pictulres... an appealing choice for just-beginning
readers." -School Library Journal
~Ages 3 5. $14.95TR (0-06-026197-8)
$1 4.89LB (0-06-026198-6)
New Edition
MINE'S THE BEST
By Crosby Bonsall
New full-color pictures by the author
Two boys argue over who has the
best beach balloon in this humorous
1973 favorite that "entices beginners
into reading."-The Horn Book
Ages 3-5. $14.95TR (0-06-027090-X)
$14.89LB (0-06 02709 1-8)
~. e%'
pI
SID AND SAM
By Nola Buck
Full color pictures by G. Brian Karas
"So long, Sid," says Sam as he stops their
singing match during her unending song.
With its phonetic friskiness and "illustrations
that convey the children's friendship.., this
book is perfect for neophyte readers."
- School Library Journal
Ages 3-5. $14.95TR (0-06-025371-1)
$1 4.89LB 
(0-06-025372-X)
*(t
I Can Read Books"
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
October 1996
Vol. 50 No. 2
A LOOK INSIDE
45 
THE BIG PICTURE
The Ghost ofNicholas Greebe by Tony Johnston; illustrated by S. D.
Schindler
46 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
49 
* Girl Goddess #9: Nine Stories by Francesca Lia Block
61 
* Following My Own Footsteps by Mary Downing Hahn
61 
* Lilly's Purple Plastic Purse written and illus. by Kevin Henkes
76 
* The Heart: Our Circulatory System by Seymour Simon
80 
Josefina written and illus. by Jeanette Winter
81 
* The Maestro by Tim Wynne-Jones
82 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
83 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
r
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
Susan S. Verner, Reviewer (SSV)
Amy E. Brandt, Graduate Research Assistant (AEB)
Lisa Mahoney, Graduate Research Assistant (LM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1996 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by S. D. Schindler, from The Ghost ofNicholas Greebe ©1996 and used by
permission of Dial Books for Young Readers.
OCTOBER 1996 
* 45
THE BIG PICTURE
The Ghost of Nicholas Greebe
by Tony Johnston; illustrated by S. D. Schindler
Pity poor old Nicholas Greebe: when he passes on, his troubles are just beginning.
The fierceness of the colonial Massachusetts winter means that he's not buried
quite deep enough: a little dog digs up his grave and takes one of his bones a-
wandering, leaving Nicholas' ghost to haunt his old farm till his bones are re-
united. His bone, however, has traveled farther than Nicholas ever did, and after
a century of bringing bad luck to ships and sailors, it finally returns to the Greebe
farm whereupon another dog, more obliging than the first, buries it in the appro-
priate spot.
Genuine ghost stories for this age level are rare. Older kids, who are
putatively too old for Halloween, get all manner of bloodcurdling literary excite-
ment sent their way all year 'round. True, we don't just want to hand the little
ones Christopher Pike, but picture books for the hardcore trick-or-treat crowd,
with their tendency to emphasize reassurance and entertainment, often paradoxi-
cally make the holiday less fun by insisting that fun is all it is. This picture book
lets in the dark, the cold, and the unknown but makes them do its bidding, keep-
ing everything masterfully under tonal control from start to finish.
Much of this comes from the book's delicate but distinct humor: the tale
itself, with its canine hijinks and string of hapless victims, is poised between darkly
sinister and darkly comedic, and there are quite a few linguistic turns that seem
straightforward but contain amusing wordplay ("The old man gave up the ghost.
That is to say, he died"). More often, however, the humor evinces itself in the
combination of deadpan text and slightly teasing illustrations: the portentousness
of "But that was not to be. For soon after, on a night ghostly with fog, the whaler
struck an iceberg and sank like a stone" is undercut by the image that shows a
complacent walrus eyeing a pool of Alka-Seltzer-esque fizz that marks the former
location of the doomed ship.
The book never overplays the joke and forgets its genre, however; it rev-
els in its classic trappings. The chilly winter moon, the flicker of candlelight, the
clatter of fleeing carriages, the creak of the old iron graveyard gate-they're all here
in the visuals, in the storytelling voice, and just in the atmosphere, even if they're
not explicitly mentioned. Greebe is a fairly sympathetic shade, more sinned against
than sinning, but he knows his ghostly business ("Sometimes something unseen
set hens fluttering upon their nests. Sometimes something caused the lids of the
kitchen stove to rise as if by levitation. Sometimes an unearthly wind whined in
the corn"). His eerie chant ("From this night forth/ I quest, I quest,/ till all my
bones/ together rest") and the occasional incantatory repetition of "The bone of
Nicholas Greebe" will also help make this a pleasingly sonorous readaloud.
46 * THE BULLETIN
The illustrations are a key component of this restrained spookiness.
Depending on extensive hatching and a multitude of precise lines on cool colors
for their effects, they keep both the humor and the darker elements disciplined.
Old man Greebe's ghost isn't overwhelmingly scary (and his skeleton seems quite
elated by the return of its femur), but the busy dogs and motley partygoers don't
chase all the chills away either. Shadows haunt the fields, and the cold steel-gray
hue of the sky, the sea, and the frosted hills is reason enough for shivers even
without a spectral presence. The landscape here is all early American, both in the
colonial scenes with bewigged gentlemen and ladies in caps and the lush Victoriana
of hurricane lamps and oriental rugs; Nathaniel Hawthorne and Washington Irv-
ing could be around any corner.
Endings are often a problem for ghost stories, since their usual goal is the
eradication of the most interesting character. Old Nick's tale has a properly cli-
mactic finish, with the exultant apparition displaying a verve one suspects he never
enjoyed in real life; it also has a nifty little fillip, both conceptually and artistically
decorative, in the form of Greebe's altered headstone that now displays a bone-
carrying dog in place of the angel it bore earlier. As well as being an ingenious
mechanism of closure, this is, of course, incontrovertible proof of the truth of the
tale, which makes it all the more delicious as well as all the more traditional. Read
by flashlight to a costume-clad (or pajama-clad) storytime audience, this will be a
hit with those youngsters with the nerve but not the stamina for Irving's headless
horseman. (Imprint information appears on p. 65.)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AASENG, 
NATHAN 
Genetics: Unlocking the Secrets of Life. 
Oliver,
1996 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs 
(Innovators)
ISBN 1-881508-27-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
This is not, as the title might suggest, an introduction to the principles of genetics
but rather a history of major genetic discoveries and the scientists who made them.
Starting with Charles Darwin and the theory of natural selection, proceeding
through Thomas Hunt Morgan and his discovery of the chromosome, and ending
with Har Gobind Khorana's creation of a synthetic gene, the book examines the
significant genetic ideas they and four others introduced to the world. Genetics
can be a fascinating field, and this clearly explains several key concepts as well as
demonstrating how much progress has been made in understanding this field in
such a short time; nor does Aaseng shy away from discussion of scientific politics
and prejudice. The biographical information, however, often slows the narrative
pace to a crawl, and strange extraneous tidbits appear in the marginal glosses (why
do we need to hear about the birth of Abraham Lincoln just because he shared a
OCTOBER 1996 
* 47
natal day with Charles Darwin?); occasionally those marginal explanations, which
also appear in the glossary, are misleadingly phrased. Readers who seek the excite-
ment of the chase should turn to Watson's classic The Double Helix, but this is a
useful overview of the subject. Black-and-white photographs, along with several
diagrams, appear throughout. DS
ARCHAMBAULT, JOHN 
Grandmother's Garden; illus. by Raul Col6n. 
Silver,
1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-382-39652-9 
$15.95
Trade ed. ISBN 0-382-39653-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
3-6 yrs
Using repetitive, rhyming text, Archambault creates a nostalgically idyllic garden
peopled by hand-holding children from many cultures ("We are one, we are one./
In grandmother's garden, we are one./ Turning 'round the sun,/ We are one").
This paean to multicultural friendship and understanding is simplistically senti-
mental at best ("Different colors, different faces, different names./ Underneath
our skin we are all the same") and is only partially redeemed by Col6n's scratch-
board and pastel illustrations. The children's faces are not particularly individual-
ized as they drift through a golden haze, and large blossoms overwhelm the
composition in several double-paged spreads. While smiling children engage in
horticultural activities ("It all starts from a tiny seed./ A little patch of earth is all
we need./ Fresh river water or falling rain,/ A little bit of sunshine and lots of love./
A little bit of sunshine and lots of love"), the idea of the world as a culturally
diverse garden is never fully developed. There is no tension or action in the text,
and the end result is a series of visual and written images that fall flat on their good
intentions. JMD
ARNOLD, CAROLINE 
Bat; illus. with photographs by Richard Hewett. 
Morrow,
1996 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13727-X 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13726-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Fox; illus. with photographs by Richard Hewett. 
Morrow, 1996 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13729-6 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13728-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
These two titles distill a lot of information into a compact size while leaving room
for forty photos apiece. Arnold forthrightly defends her predator subjects by ex-
plaining how they help control pests such as rodents and insects. The jam-packed
text offers intriguing information (rabid bats aren't violent, as "real vampire bats
rarely attack people"; foxes' oversize ears not only help listen for prey but cool
them off in hot climates) and anticipates kids' questions (yes, bats turn right side
up for peeing and pooping). The biggest question of all about bats, however, is left
unanswered (why their upside down lives); on the fox front, we are left wondering
why the author takes us on a sidetrip to visit coyotes and wolves. Hewett's realistic
photos make these references user-friendly for grade-schoolers. Both books would
be solid additions to a nature collection; each contains an index. SSV
48 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BALGASSI, HAEMI 
Peacebound Trains; illus. by Chris K. Soentpiet. 
Clarion,
1996 
[48p]
ISBN 0-395-72093-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Sumi sorely misses her widowed mother, who has recently joined the U.S. Army to
earn money for her education and for the family's financial security. As the young
girl sits on a hill overlooking the railroad, dreaming of the train that will bring her
mother home, Harmuny (grandmother) recounts for her the story of how she and
Harabujy (grandfather) abandoned their home during the North Korean invasion
of 1950. Harmuny, then a young wife, parted forever from Harabujy as a train
took her and her two children to safety in Pusan and her husband joined the South
Korean army. Although this seems a strange tale with which to comfort a child
who anxiously awaits her mother's return from military service, it does provide
exciting fare for readers who are not yet old enough for Watkins' moving So Far
from the Bamboo Grove (BCCB 6/86). The compelling core of the novel, however,
is sandwiched between chapters of narrative addenda in Sumi's distinctly un-child-
like voice ("I press Umma's doll over my heart and listen as the wind scatters the
last wistful echoes of the train whistle up to the twilight sky"). Soentpiet's portrai-
ture, which fills nearly every double spread, masterfully captures the young Korean
family in the best and worst of times, sharing a meal on the floor of their graciously
appointed home and trying to "memorize each other's eyes" at the train depot. A
concluding note provides brief information on the Korean invasion, and a glossary
of Korean terms is included. EB
BARROWS, ALLISON 
The Artist's Model; written and illus. by Allison
Barrows. 
Carolrhoda, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-87614-948-4 
$14.96 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
A young girl relates her experience as an artist's model. The artist is her father, and
she is to be the child princess on the illustrated cover of a fantasy novel. In com-
fortable language that communicates her excitement at the course of events, she
leads the reader from costuming to photography session, from the draft illustration
to the finished painting. Our narrator concludes, "When I grow up, I want to be
an artist just like my father. I think I'll start practicing now." The step-by-step
text is strongly supported by the step-by-step art, each half- and full-page picture
documenting the sequential process-bookmaking-of which this cover illustra-
tion is just one stage. The book unfortunately never addresses methodologies other
than the father's technique of working from photographs projected onto back-
grounds, and there's a glaring anachronism in an illustration that shows a worker
binding books by hand. Barrow's '50s-cartoon-style watercolors are still effective,
even with the narrator's ever-wide eyes, and the combination of actual black-and-
white photographs (contact sheets) with original art anchors the events in reality.
JMD
BERNHARD, EMERY 
Happy New Year; illus. by Durga Bernhard. 
Lodestar,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-525-67532-9 
$14.99 
Ad Gr. 2-4
This survey of New Year's celebrations around the world is replete with sound-
bites of information about parties past and present. Skipping from culture to
OCTOBER 1996 
* 49
culture, from time frame to time frame, Bernhard gives a paragraph at most on
celebrations and customs from various locales. From the ancient Romans to the
American West, from the Ibo to the Iroquois, the reader learns why noisemaking
is an element in Balinese New Year's celebrations, why Southeast Asians throw
bowls of water over statues of Buddha and each other, and why on Rosh Hashanah
Jewish families traditionally eat apples dipped in honey. Durga Bernhard's non-
descript watercolors are full of generically laughing celebrants in various celebra-
tory regalia. There is a short glossary, but no notes, sources or references are given.
JMD
BEST, CAR1 
Getting Used to Harry; illus. by Diane Palmisciano. 
Kroupa/Or-
chard, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08794-8 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09494-4 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Cynthia's mother, Inky, has just gotten married; there's "music and dancing and
kissing and hugging and laughing and crying," and as the happy groom, Harry,
observes, "Isn't love the berries!" The newlyweds return from their honeymoon all
ditzy and dewy-eyed, and now Cynthia finds that the old mother-daughter rou-
tines have been up-ended, Harry is perpetually underfoot, and it's hard to share
Inky's enthusiasm for this balding shoe-store owner with an abysmal fashion sense.
But when Harry takes Cynthia on a flashlight prowl through town in the dead of
night, pausing along the way to play a game of marbles and discuss some shoe-
store window-dressing, Cynthia realizes that life in her reconstructed household
might just be fun after all. Best spins her yarn a little longer than strictly necessary,
but Cynthia's narration is a nice combination of sulky and snappy, and Palmisciano's
oil-pastel caricatures poke some good-natured fun at a houseful of emotions run
rampant. While this is undeniably a thinly veiled reassurance to new stepkids, it's
delivered with a goofy sweetness that makes the lesson go down easy. EB
BLOCK, FRANCESCA LIA 
Girl Goddess #9: Nine Stories. 
HarperCollins,
1996 
[224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027212-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027211-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Poetic and sensual language distinguishes this collection of nine stories about pre-
and post-adolescent females and their coming to grips--or not-with the world:
La seeks acceptance by her peers and her father after the suicide of her thwarted
poet mother in "Blue"; Tuck Budd discovers the truth, or at least the facts, of her
two mothers' histories in "Dragons in Manhattan"; and in "Rave," the only story
with a male narrator, an unnamed teenage boy relates the short, sad life of a rock
groupie named Raven. Block's ripe imagery ("The wall was covered with passion-
flower vines-passionflowers like weird sea creatures that would close up around
your fingers if you touched them and bright-orange, bursting passionflower fruits")
carries the reader over any awkward construction or plot eccentricities. Reading
Block requires a certain suspension of disbelief as the world she writes about is
often a fantastical one, the settings surreal in their atmospherics, but her characters
fight against spiritual annihilation by groping toward creative expression with a
purity of purpose and inherent emotionality that is remarkably moving. JMD
50 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BRADFORD, KARLEEN 
There Will Be Wolves. 
Lodestar, 1996 
195p
ISBN 0-525-67539-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Ursula is unusual: her father, flying in the face of eleventh-century convention,
has taught her his apothecary's skill and trade, so that she too claims a role as a
healer. This eventually leads to a charge of witchcraft against her, and her only
way of escaping punishment is to travel from her German home to Constantinople
with the People's Crusade. Like her friend Bruno, Ursula has strong reservations
about the merits of such a venture; while those reservations are borne out, she also
finds treasure in places she didn't expect. First published in Canada in 1992, this
is an uneven blend of romantic contemporary sensibility and historical accuracy.
Ursula is a very modern heroine, whose actions (such as lecturing a woman into
taking her child and leaving her abusive boyfriend, and religiously taking baths)
and capabilities are often anachronistic, and the plot, including the love story be-
tween Ursula and Bruno, takes several exceedingly melodramatic turns. Bradford
is excellent, however, at evoking the grim realities of a pilgrimage and the prag-
matic obstacles such a project encounters, as well as the various currents of social
unrest. This is soapier and often less authentic than Frances Temple's The Ramsay
Scallop (BCCB 4/96), but it's still a dramatic picture of an engaging heroine in a
difficult time. DS
BRANDENBURG, JIM 
Scruff: A WolfFinds His Place in the Pack; edited by JoAnn
Bren Guernsey; written and illus. with photographs byJim Brandenburg. 
Walker,
1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8446-1 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8445-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 2-4
Adolescence is a trial regardless of species, as Brandenburg shows with his candid
shots of a wolf pack on Ellesmere Island in the Arctic Circle. There a yearling
wolf, dubbed Scruffy due to his appearance, struggles to find a role in the pack,
finally settling on nanny to a new litter of pups. Who'd've thunk it, given our
stereotype of wolves as big and bad, but there it is-Scruffy guarding the den,
walking the pups, playing tug-of-war, showing them how to attack and kill, teach-
ing them their own place in the lupine order. A return trip the following spring
reveals that Scruffy has again taken on the main caregiver role in the pack-not
the fast track to alpha status, to be sure, but valued nevertheless. Brandenburg's
photos are warm without being sentimental and the text direct and informative.
The narrative pulls the material together reasonably well, albeit in a rather anthro-
pomorphic "based-on-the-movie" fashion. This isn't quite up to Brandenburg's
usual standards, but it's useful as an involving read about arctic wolves. SSV
CALVERT, PATRICIA 
Glennis, Before and After. Atheneum, 1996 
[150p]
ISBN 0-689-80641-8 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Glennis is the middle child of five, taken for granted and taking
for granted her family's well-off lifestyle until her father goes to prison for bank
fraud. Now her mother is in a convalescent home with a nervous breakdown and
the kids have been scattered among the extended family, with Glennis choosing
eccentric Aunt Wanda in order to stay in visiting proximity to her father's prison.
She is shocked, however, when her father, whom she had believed innocent, con-
OCTOBER 1996 
* 
51
fesses his crime to her, and she struggles to understand this new life that is never
going to resemble her old one. Glennis' earnest narration is compelling and straight-
forward ("My father was a convict now. Which made me a convict's daughter")
but also believable in its ambivalence, anger, and shame. Characterization is qui-
etly strong throughout, with Glennis' weary father, her hardworking, loud-dress-
ing aunt, and her frail little cousin Skipper escaping the stereotypes into which
they might easily have fallen. Parental imprisonment has been treated in a few
other recent novels (Marcia Byalick's It's a Matter of Trust, BCCB 1/96, and Sally
Warner's Dog Years, 5/95), but this is the tenderest and least glossy portrayal of its
effects. DS
CARLSTROM, NANCY WHITE 
Let's Count It Out, Jesse Bear; illus. by Bruce
Degen. 
Simon, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80478-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
3-6 yrs
Jesse Bear (from What Will You Wear, Jesse Bear?, BCCB 5/86, etc.) is back and
this time he's very busy counting, rhyming, adding, and even spelling out num-
bers. Although cheerfully illustrated, this counting book, with its tedious rhymes
and cluttered layout, attempts to do too much so that by number four it isn't fun
anymore. The confusion begins with number one: "None and one more is 1.
One is fun!" What happened to zero? Problems continue to add up: in number
four, bumper cars "roar"; in number six, a shovel is a "stick for dumping"; in
number seven there are "stars in the tree." Even young listeners may argue that
bumper cars don't roar, a shovel is not really a stick, and stars are in the sky, not the
tree. Oh, and if you do get to number sixteen be sure to count both horns on the
bighorn sheep and the single horn on the rhinoceros, which float amid a sea of
musical instruments . .
you're counting horns, okay? Counting books need a
certain clear functionality in order to be useful; despite Degen's friendly water-
color illustrations showing Jesse Bear enjoying family and friends you will prob-
ably want to count this one out. PM
CLEMENTS, ANDREW 
Frindle; illus. by Brian Selznick. 
Simon, 1996 
[112p]
ISBN 0-689-80669-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Nick is bright and imaginative and occasionally trouble-making, and come fifth
grade he makes a particularly inventive kind of trouble. When his teacher, Miss
Granger, explains that popular usage determines a word's entry into the dictionary
(" We decide what goes in that book"), he mischievously takes her literally and
begins a covert campaign for a new word: frindle. "Frindle" is a synonym for
"pen," and the kids in Nick's class abet him by using the word at all their many
opportunities, until administrative displeasure escalates the matter into an all-out
linguistic war, the story of which is picked up by journalists across the country.
This is a refreshingly original plot whose combination of clandestine revolt and
language-arts lesson is surprisingly successful. The action is sometimes too adult-
driven, and the peripheral characters are easy to lose track of, but Clements keeps
the narrative kid-accessible and the tussle with authority gleeful despite its restraint.
It's all wildly unlikely, and this doesn't have the real faith in kids' troublemaking
power evinced by Cynthia Voigt's Bad Girls (BCCB 4/96), but it's a highly read-
able story of a kid's changing, if not the world, at least what we call a part of it.
52 
* THE BULLETIN
Occasional black-and-white illustrations and diagrams have a slight suggestion of
archness that lifts them above the mundane. DS
COLE, JOANNA 
The Magic School Bus Inside a Beehive; illus. by Bruce
Degen. 
Scholastic, 1996 
[48p]
ISBN 0-590-44684-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
The eighth in The Magic School Bus series (The Magic School Bus Inside a Hurri-
cane, BCCB 10/95, etc.) buzzes with activity. Cole's accessible language com-
bined with Degen's appealing cartoon illustrations cannot help but succeed. The
topic this time is honeybees: how they make honey, what it's like inside the hive,
the various roles assigned to the occupants of the bee community, and just a trace
of danger for the adventuring bee-sized students when a hungry bear comes look-
ing for something sweet to eat. For format's sake, the life cycle of the bees-
workers, drones, and queens-takes place in an afternoon, but the "afternotes"
explain that the time frame is longer in real life. Humorous dialogue balloons and
info-bytes supplement the more conventionally arranged text, along with excerpts
from students' science reports. Ms. Frizzle's costume in the final illustration shows
dogs, lambs, and pigs. Next stop: the farm? JMD
CONRAD, PAM 
Zoe Rising. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 1996 
131p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027218-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-02717-1 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
One wouldn't have thought that Stonewords (BCCB 5/90) needed to or even could
have a sequel, but here is one nonetheless. Zoe is now fourteen and enjoying a
summer away at camp with her best friend, Jedidiah, when she begins to slip through
time again. This time she goes back to her mother's childhood, seeing how the
happy, trusting child changed, as a result of one terrible incident, into the woman
whose instability makes her unable to commit to Zoe as a parent. Zoe determines
to alter the past and therefore the present, but finds that doing so endangers herself
as well. This story has neither the relentlessness nor the believability of its prede-
cessor; the mechanics of Zoe's travel are more labored, the dangers of the past
(Zoe's mother is abducted by a sinister neighbor) are melodramatic, and Zoe's
manipulation of the present via the past is implausibly depicted. Conrad is still a
smooth and poetic writer, however, and Zoe's troubles with the dichotomy of
then and now are vividly portrayed. DS
COTTRINGER, ANNE 
Ella and the Naughty Lion; illus. by Russell Ayto. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 1996 
[26p]
ISBN 0-395-79753-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
"The day Ella's mother came home with baby Jasper, a lion slipped in through the
door." This lion acts out all the mean, sibling-hating feelings of first-born Ella,
roaring, tearing up teddy bears, being really evil in the supermarket-until Ella
saves her baby brother from a bad fall and takes her rightful place as older sister
and heroic guardian. Cottringer's text has a great readaloud rhythm, and her accu-
rate expressions of Ella's obvious jealousy make this more than just "new baby"
bibliotherapy. Ayto's watercolors are buoyant and appealing, the combination of
vignettes, single, and double-paged spreads adding to the overall composition and
OCTOBER 1996 
* 
53
appeal; the style is heavily influenced by Maurice Sendak, right down to the sub-
dued yet effective palette. The ending-wherein Ella saves Jasper from a runaway
carriage-is reminiscent of McPhail's Pig Pig Grows Up, but Ella's story is none-
theless effective and satisfying. JMD
CREECH, SHARON 
Pleasing the Ghost. 
HarperCollins, 1996 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026986-3 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026985-5 $13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Dennis is nine, and he's unusually popular with ghosts: though other people seem
unable to see the spooks, they come to him at night on the wind. The most
significant ghostly visitor is Dennis' Uncle Arvie, who enlists Dennis in a scheme
to thwart Arvie's widow's incipient relationship with another man, but Dennis
keeps hoping that his own late father will ride the ghost wind one night and re-
turn. The relentless breeziness, Uncle Arvie's funny speech (he had a stroke several
years before he died, and even as a ghost is Mr. Malaprop), and the predictability
of Dennis' rapprochement with the bereaved bully who has also lost his dad unfor-
tunately prevent things from ever moving out of the shallows. Younger readers,
however, will appreciate the book's cheerful air and the entertaining but non-
spooky ghost plot with its emotional overtones. DS
CUMMINS, JULIE 
The Inside-Outside Book of Libraries; illus. by Roxie
Munro. 
Dutton, 1996 
48p
ISBN 0-525-45608-2 
$15.99 
R 5-9 yrs
Cummins takes her audience on a tour of several United States libraries that, to-
gether, demonstrate the breadth of library services available to patrons, even those
in remote places or with special needs. First stop is New York's Chatham Square
Library, which serves the populace of Chinatown with bilingual materials; next
comes Ocracoke Library, a weathered, one-room building on a North Carolina sea
island accessible only by ferry or plane. A private research library, a library aboard
a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier, a prison library, a library for the blind and physi-
cally handicapped, a tool-lending library, and a virtual library are featured along
the way, with final stops at the familiar (we hope) school library and home collec-
tion. A Braille passage securely attached to the page and translated in an insert is a
thoughtful added touch. Each site receives two double spreads and a description
of the collection specialty and the clientele it serves. Large, close-up paintings put
the viewer squarely into each scene for a look around, but crowded composition
and garish coloring create a claustrophobic rather than an inviting ambiance. Still,
this title reminds listeners that libraries, like the literature and information they
house, come in many packages. EB
CURLEE, LYNN 
Ships ofthe Air; written and illus. by Lynn Curlee. 
Houghton,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-69338-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
As interest in lighter-than-air travel revives with the proliferation of hot-air bal-
loon rallies and tours, children may be surprised to learn that these bulbous affairs
once served as scientific research vessels, World War I bombers, and airborne luxury
liners. Curlee relates the development of these craft from the eighteenth-century
54 
* THE BULLETIN
experiments of the Montgolfier brothers through the disasters among the 1930s
dirigibles, which put an end to their commercial use. Supporting science back-
ground is smoothly integrated within the historical narrative; the invention of
lighter engines, the substitution of hydrogen for hot air and helium for hydrogen,
and the introduction of aluminum frames are all presented as solutions to prob-
lems rather than mini-physics lessons. Curlee recognizes kids' fascination with
failures and includes a wealth of details such as French villagers who in 1766
"thought the balloon was a monster, and destroyed it with their pitchforks" and
the ice-laden Italia which crashed in the Arctic, spilling out most of its crew, only
to rise suddenly and leave them marooned. Single and double-spread paintings
use a streamlined realism to present the airships, eerie and majestic as they dwarf
the landscapes over which they hover. Although aerialist Jean-Pierre Blanchard
does not make an appearance here, older listeners who were intrigued by his ex-
ploits in Alexandra Wallner's The First Air Voyage in the United States (BCCB 5/
96) should find this title to be just the ticket for a longer flight. EB
DANZIGER, PAULA 
Amber Brown Wants Extra Credit; illus. by Tony
Ross. 
Putnam, 1996 
120p
ISBN 0-399-22900-0 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Amber (familiar from Amber Brown Goes Fourth, BCCB 11/95, etc.) is having a
rough time after her parents' divorce: her new teacher wants her homework and
she wants it on time, her father is in Paris with a new girlfriend and her child, and
her mother has a new boyfriend, "gorilla face" Max. Danziger's light touch keeps
it all in humorous perspective without condescending to new fifth-grader Amber,
who is having difficulty coping with the revelation that life is not fair. Character-
izations are concise and cogent, with caring parents and teachers engaging in be-
lievable dialogue with only somewhat precocious children. There's a lot of
how-I'm-feeling-about-all-this-stuff going on in place of a compelling plot, but
Danziger does a good job at making the old adjustment to the divorce story palat-
able. Ross' pen-and-ink drawings, scattered throughout the text, are cheerfully
emotive and lend a scampy tone to the story's characterizations. Amber is a lik-
able, credible character and series fans will be happy with her adjustment to real
life. JMD
DEFELICE, CYNTHIA 
TheApprenticeship ofLucas Whitaker. Farrar, 1996 
[16 0p]
ISBN 0-374-34669-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Unable to manage the family farm alone after his last remaining relative dies of
consumption, twelve-year-old Lucas finds work with a village doctor, Uriah Beecher.
Lucas ably assists with tooth pullings, barbering, and amputations, winning the
respect of both employer and patients. However, when consumption creeps among
the community and Doc Beecher is unwilling to offer a certain remedy, Lucas
defies the doctor and assists ailing neighbors with a grisly folk "cure" based on the
belief that persons who previously succumbed to the disease now prey, vampire-
like, on living relatives. Lucas defends his efforts to the doctor, convincingly com-
paring the cannibalistic aspects of the ritual with Beecher's own practice of
inoculation, but he soon learns why the doctor correctly doubts the long-term
efficacy of the gruesome "cure." Although the exhumation scenes are memorable
(and literally heart-wrenching), DeFelice treats the distraught families' desperate
actions with sympathy and respect. The state of mid-nineteenth-century medi-
OCTOBER 1996 
* 55
cine, in which the ministrations of trained practitioners were often as ineffective as
superstitious self-doctoring, is skillfully conveyed. A foreword and afterword dis-
cuss the "macabre 'cure' for consumption ... practiced in rural New England in
the nineteenth century" and reasons for the spread of tuberculosis. EB
DEMATONS, CHARLOTTE 
Looking For Cinderella; written and illus. by Charlotte
Dematons; tr. and ad. by Leigh Sauerwein. 
Front Street, 1996 
26p
ISBN 1-886910-13-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Off investigating a mysterious windmill, Hilda encounters characters from tradi-
tional Western European folk and fairy tales who consistently mistake her for Cin-
derella. Red Riding Hood brings her to the prince, a witch engages her to search
for her cat, Hansel and Gretel give her gingerbread baked by Snow White, she
races a giant with Tom Thumb-and she finally finds Cinderella scrubbing a re-
markably clean attic. This slight but appealing story is illustrated by restrained
watercolors that lend a certain realistic air to the proceedings. Double and single-
paged spreads combine with illustrative vignettes to visually carry the action from
one scene to the next. Dematons' watercolors work best when pastoral and pan-
oramic, and the extended horizons showing castles with banners flourishing in the
distance contribute to the fairy-tale atmosphere. The faces lack personality, and
the characters (except for Hilda and that hoodlum, Tom Thumb) are flatly two-
dimensional, momentarily out of sync with the stories they presumably re-enact
on some sort of fantasy continuum. The occasional inconsistency won't bother
anyone who's caught up in the idea of a gateway to world populated with favorite
fairy-tale folk, however, and children familiar with the old tales will enjoy finding
and seeking as Hilda wends her way home. JMD
DENENBERG, BARRY 
When Will This Cruel War Be Over?: The Civil War Diary of
Emma Simpson. 
Scholastic, 1996 
156p 
illus. with photographs 
(Dear
America)
ISBN 0-590-22862-5 
$9.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
GREGORY, KRISTIANA 
The Winter of Red Snow: The Revolutionary War Diary of
Abigail Jane Stewart. Scholastic, 1996 
173p 
illus. with photographs 
(Dear
America)
ISBN 0-590-22653-3 
$9.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
LASKY, KATHRYN 
A Journey to the New World: The Diary of Remember Patience
Whipple. 
Scholastic, 1996 
173p 
illus. with photographs 
(Dear America)
ISBN 0-590-50214-X 
$9.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Scholastic unveils a new series geared toward the same audience as Aladdin
Paperback's American Diaries (see review under Duey, BCCB 5/96), but here the
draw is fictionalized diaries of real young women who actually experienced major
events in America's past. Lasky's journal of Mayflower voyager Patience Whipple
is the strongest entry, possessing authenticity and immediacy; the young teen com-
ments in a wry voice about her neighbors ("Air Nose" Mary Chilton, who cheats
to be the first to set foot on the landing rock at Plimoth) and longs to confirm
rumors about the half-clothed natives ("Where exactly do they wear their feath-
ers?"). Abigail Stewart, Gregory's eleven-year-old diarist in The Winter of Red
Snow, speaks more as witness to than participant in events surrounding
Washington's encampment at Valley Forge. As Revolutionary bigwigs pass through
her neighborhood, Abigail offers a confused portrait of the General and his wife-
56 
* THE BULLETIN
pious and extraordinarily generous toward the locals and wounded soldiers, yet
evidently living high on the hog while the enlisted men starve. Denenberg's sub-
ject, fifteen-year-old Confederate Emma Simpson, evinces tantalizingly complex
views on slavery (she boasts of the loyalty of their well-treated slaves, yet admits
"We live with them but we know so little about them ... they are one way with us
and another with their own color"). However, her outlook tends toward the maudlin
and melodramatic, and her manner of expression is more forced ("How could I
know it would be the last Christmas we would all celebrate together? 1863 was the
most dismal year of my life"). All titles evidence the Procrustean strain of fitting
historical details, unremarkable to those who witnessed them, into a diary, as com-
plete letters are copied into a journal (Denenberg), recipes are jotted down for no
compelling reason (Gregory), and a child too sick to move nonetheless writes flow-
ingly in her journal (Lasky). Although all entries boast extensive and entertaining
background notes on the period examined, none gives the specific sources from
which facts on the girls' lives were culled. EB
DUQUENNOY, JACQUES 
The Ghosts' Trip to Loch Ness; written and illus. by Jacques
Duquennoy; tr. by Kathryn Nanovic. 
Harcourt, 1996 
49p
ISBN 0-15-201440-3 
$11.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The ghosts have dined (The Ghosts' Dinner, BCCB 12/94), and now it's time for
them to go on vacation-to where else but Loch Ness, in an attempt to see the
famous monster. They appreciate the company of the hospitable MacGhost, they
enjoy their fishing ("There's nothing wrong with a little fishing while you're wait-
ing for a monster to come along"), and they relish taking some vacation snapshots,
but they don't see Nessie. The reader will, however, since the cheerful green sea-
serpent pops up time after time just when the ghosts aren't looking, as the ghosts
realize when they get their photos developed. This isn't as cohesive as the previous
book, and it rambles on a bit, but the wide-eyed and innocent sweetness remains
and gives the book an endearing charm. The line-and-watercolor art is simple
without being cartoony, showing classic sheet-over-the-head ghosts whipping
through Scotland (filled with thistles and Scottish terriers) in their red Citroen,
peering through the gloom in search of the elusive monster, and contentedly hav-
ing a lochside snooze under the golden crescent moon. Gentle without being
prissy, this will appeal to kids who like a nice safe adventure. DS
DURRANT, LYNDA 
Echohawk. 
Clarion, 1996 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-74430-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-8
Jonathan is four years old in 1738 when the Mohicans raid his home, carrying him
off and killing his family. Eight years later, Jonathan is Echohawk, son ofGlickihigan
and older brother to Bamaineo. The twist in this coming of age novel is that the
adolescent coming of age is a white boy adopted into one Indian clan but not
accepted by others. Echohawk is aware that he is white, but he does not pursue his
origins with any particular intensity. In the end he "remembers" the death of his
family, forgives his Mohican father, and follows him into the wilderness in what
the reader knows is a hopeless effort to escape the encroaching white man. The
uncohesive plot acts primarily as a vehicle for cultural information, with the less-
than-three-dimensional characters embodying certain desirable, plot-enhancing traits
rather than standing on their own. As a result, there is little to involve the reader
emotionally. A list of sources, a glossary, and an afterword are included. JMD
OCTOBER 1996 
* 57
ERICSSON, JENNIFER A. 
The Most Beautiful Kid in the World; illus. by Susan
Meddaugh. 
Tambourine, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13942-6 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13941-8 
$16.00 
R 
4-8 yrs
Annie is dressed in her best clothes, courtesy of her mother. Her shoes pinch, her
tights droop, and the tag on the back of her dress itches, and "Grandma is coming
for dinner tonight. I want to be beautiful-the most beautiful kid in the world!"
Off she goes, donning flowered long underwear, a frothy tutu, her father's bed-
room slippers, and peanut-butter lipstick-resulting in a gaudy vision of loveliness
topped only by Grandma herself. Ericsson's text maintains a frenetic kid-like
momentum as Annie gleefully accessorizes, avoiding her mother's scrutiny at every
turn: "A squirt of perfume. Sparkling earrings. A long string of pearls. And
Daddy's favorite slippers. Yes!" Young children familiar with the desire to make
their own sartorial statement will delight in (and be inspired by) Annie's successful
subversion of her mother's more conservative fashion sense. Meddaugh's exuber-
ant cartoons show Annie in all her glory as she races around the house acquiring
each piece of her unique ensemble. Finally, "I grab the knob and fling the door
open. 'Happy Birthday, Grandma!'" And Grandma, in purple pants with black
paw prints, boots, and a fringed cowboy shirt "opens her arms wide. 'Why, you're
the most beautiful kid in the world!'" And she is, too. JMD
FAIN, MOIRA 
Snow Day; written and illus. by Moira Fain. 
Walker, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8410-0 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8409-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Maggie Murphy ("the most clever student in Sister Agatha Ann's class") runs afoul
of her instructress ("the toughest teacher in the whole school") when she gets caught
drawing pictures and marking up the desk instead of paying attention to her les-
son. Furthermore, she spends the evening in a pillow fight with her siblings rather
than writing her punishment, a poem to be delivered to the entire class. A winter
storm grants her a reprieve-the next day is a snow day, and Maggie goes sledding
with her brothers and sisters, only to find Sister Agatha Ann and the other teachers
waiting at the hill to climb aboard their students' sleds for a race. A discreet hint
from Sister shows Maggie how words can paint a picture as aptly as chalk and
crayons, and the errant student is ready with her poem for the class the next day.
Maggie never seems concerned enough about her predicament to bring a sense a
tension to the upbeat tale, and although snowy hills and storm-clouded skies show
to advantage in Fain's paintings, human figures are awkwardly rendered, with ex-
pressive faces on lumpy, ill-defined bodies. Adult veterans of '60s parochial edu-
cation will probably get the biggest kick from this; pity the child listeners who will
be in for tales of a time when kids were startled to discover that "Sister" knew how
to have fun, and when no real Agatha Ann would have tolerated her students'
poor posture or failed to catch them passing notes. EB
FRANKLIN, KRISTINE L. 
Nerd No More. 
Candlewick, 1996 
14 3p
ISBN 1-56402-674-4 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Wiggie was leading a normal sixth-grade life for awhile, but now his mother's the
star of an educational science program and new classmate Eddie, noting Wiggie's
scholarly capabilities, has loudly decided that Mrs. Science's son is a grade-A nerd
("It's not like I'm the only smart kid in the world, but the combination of being
58 
* 
THE BULLETIN
smart and having a TV scientist mom who talks about bowels had pushed me over
the edge"). Wiggie attempts to disprove this theorem by changing his image (a
dismal failure) and being one of the guys (which means he capitalizes on an unin-
tentional meanness to a friendly nerdy girl). A science field trip (with Wiggie's
mother, to boot) brings things to a head when a chain of foolishness, bravado, and
accident results in a broken arm, but also in Wiggie's intelligence and social status
coexisting peacefully. The plot of plummeting popularity and the be-yourself
message aren't new, but Franklin makes the story fresh with sharp writing, zesty
dialogue, and effective characterization. Classroom dynamics are a strong point
here: Eddie's obnoxiousness is genuinely funny as well as mean (his nickname for
Wiggie, picking up on one of his mother's televised phrases, is "Bowel Boy"), and
the drifting of Wiggie's former best friend in Eddie's direction is both credible and
understandable. Wiggie's travails are deftly portrayed and humorous; fans ofIlene
Cooper and Louis Sachar will appreciate them. DS
FRIEDEN, SARAJO 
The Care and Feeding of Fish; written and illus. by Sarajo
Frieden. 
Houghton, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-395-71251-3 
$15.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Lou Lou longs for adventure, and she gets her wish with the arrival of her seventh
birthday present from her world travelling Aunt Eclair. By following her aunt's
instructions, Lou Lou molds the large and unusual fish, eventually named Harold,
into a perfect companion: strolling in the park, dancing in ballet class, even shop-
ping for formal wear. But Harold, inspired to pursue his passion to be an opera
singer, grows away from Lou Lou. After a fond dockside farewell, Lou Lou returns
home to her new fish, a present from Harold. Frieden's text combines an outra-
geous premise with surreal illustrations, the end result being a happy combination
of animal fantasy and growing-pain pathos. Gouache illustrations, heavy on the
primary colors and reminiscent of Maira Kalman, are full of telling details, puns,
and humor, lending a jolly esprit de corps to the proceedings. Primary and middle
graders will appreciate the humor of the situation while recognizing that even
finny friends can't stay forever. JMD
GAFFNEY, TIMOTHY R. 
Grandpa Takes Me to the Moon; illus. by Barry
Root. Tambourine, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13938-8 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13937-X 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Gaffney's story, of a grandfather who walked on the moon and his grandson who
imagines returning there with him, begins at the beginning: "To get to the moon,
we go to Florida first. That's where the rocket is." The story is familiar to adults,
but kids raised in the space-shuttle era will be fascinated to learn about moon
landers, lunar rovers, and returning capsules parachuting into the ocean. In a
note, Gaffney reveals that his inspiration for the story came from the death of
James Irwin of Apollo 15 and the realization that the personal stories of these
astronauts are dying with them. Root's watercolor and gouache art conveys the
rich blackness of space and the harsh environment of the moon, effectively con-
trasting that with the lush tropical setting of Florida. Despite a somewhat jerky
ending (blasting off from the moon on one page and returning to earth on the
next), Gaffney delivers the right stuff. SSV
OCTOBER 1996 
* 
59
GAY, KATHLYN 
Saving the Environment: Debating the Costs. 
Watts, 1996 
12 8 p
ISBN 0-531-11263-2 
$22.00 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Gay takes a side in this debate early: "Earth is the home of many creatures, among
them humans, who are only a small part of the whole, and there is a need to
balance this fact with people's economic concerns." Well, who's to argue, really,
but it's difficult to claim an even-handed approach when many of the sources cited
are press releases from environmental organizations such as Greenpeace and the
National Resources Defense Council. There is a lot of useful information here:
we learn that other industrialized countries have environmental regulations three
or four times as stringent as the U.S.; many of the technologies used to clean things
up originally were developed in the U.S. but have found more receptive markets
abroad; the area in the American West overseen by the Bureau of Land Manage-
ment is as big as New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Michi-
gan, Wisconsin, and West Virginia combined. Few, however, will be the stalwart
souls persistent enough to mine such nuggets from the earnest prose. Included are
two appendices-"World Scientists' Warning to Humanity" and, oddly enough,
the complete text of the North American Free Trade Agreement-source notes,
suggestions for further reading, and an index. SSV
GIFF, PATRICIA REILLY 
Good Luck, Ronald Morgan!; illus. by Susanna
Natti. 
Viking, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-670-86303-3 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 1-3
A hot, sticky, best-friendless summer is not so easily overcome. But Ronald Mor-
gan is optimistic: he has his happy-go-lucky birthday pup (from Happy Birthday,
Ronald Morgan!), named Lucky, of course; a book on how to "Train Your Pet";
and potential friends, Kelly and her cat, Tiger, emerging from the moving van
next door. The animal pandemonium that thwarts his initial attempts to befriend
Kelly lulls just enough (over a picnic lunch of peanut butter) to declare a hasty
comradeship and return to the more immediate matter of pet training. Ronald
Morgan is his own straight man in this easy reader, with Natti's cartoon-but-not-
caricature illustrations providing the punch to many of his lines. Lucky's hole-
digging, book-chewing, cat-chasing antics provide comic counterpoint to the
training manual passages Ronald Morgan dutifully reads aloud ("Some dogs can
do tricks or swim.... Every animal is good at something, and that's the important
thing"). Earnest and bespectacled, Ronald Morgan is much less of a Charlie Brown
in this series installment. Young readers will think themselves lucky to find this
fortunately engaging sequel. Good luck, Ronald Morgan, indeed! AEB
GOLLUB, MATTHEW 
Uncle Snake; illus. by Leovigildo Martinez. 
Tambourine,
1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13945-0 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13944-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
"Long ago, before there was lightning," a fearless young boy enters a forbidden
cave and finds snakes with the heads of humans. He runs home, only to discover
that he has the head of a snake. His father takes him from curandero to curandero,
but no one can help. A nahual (shape-changing worker of magic) gives him a
mask to wear; after twenty years he takes off the mask, turns into a snake with a
human head, and leaps into the sky, becoming the first lightning. Black-and-
60 
* THE BULLETIN
white borders surround the moodily effective watercolors and are echoed by the
white text on a black background. Oversized figures are balanced by strong diago-
nals and by realistic elements juxtaposed against magical ones and seamlessly inte-
grated into the composition (i.e., the nahual floats in a tree as the snake-headed
boy and his father stand on bare, work-hardened feet in a suggested rather than
detailed landscape). This original tale is inspired by an ancient Oaxacan belief that
a snake in the sky (lightning) brings about heavy rains. Martinez' watercolors have
the same powerful impact as in his first collaboration with Gollub (Twenty-Five
Mixtec Cats), but Gollub's text here lacks the internal logic of that more tradition-
ally structured tale, the plethora of plot elements seemingly forced into a choppy
sequence of events. An author's explanatory note about Oaxacan culture is in-
cluded. JMD
GOODMAN, SUSAN E. 
The GreatAntlerAuction; illus. with photographs by Michael
J. Doolittle. 
Atheneum, 1996 
[40p]
ISBN 0-689-80131-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The Boy Scouts of Jackson, Wyoming, perform the usual good deeds one expects,
but with an original and distinctly local touch-they search the surrounding area
for elk antlers shed after the spring mating season. These treasures are then sold at
auction, with the proceeds helping feed the elk during the brutal Wyoming win-
ter. Goodman reports on the antler search (the Scouts check out the stream beds
and ditches) and its attendant hazards (they're wary of "bison crap"). Doolittle's
photographs have a summer-camp-bulletin-board quality to them which, when
coupled with a zestful spontaneity, seems entirely appropriate. As long as Goodman
sticks to the antler auction she has our attention, but she frequently elaborates on
related topics and the main story loses a bit of its oomph with each sidetrip. This
is reminiscent of McMillan's Nights ofthe Pufflings (BCCB 3/95); here, too, regu-
lar kids make their own unique contribution to conservation today, and their peers
will find the account both exotic and intriguing. There are both a glossary and
suggestions for further reading. SSV
GREGORY, KRISTIANA 
The Winter of Red Snow: The Revolutionary War Diary of
Abigail ane Stewart
See review under Denenberg, p. 13.
GRUNWALD, 
LISA 
Now Soon Later; illus. by Jane Johnson. 
Greenwillow,
1996 
[2 4p]
ISBN 0-688-13946-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Three-frame, three-sentence spreads trace the routine of a preschool girl whose
day is conceptually organized into blocks of present and future activities: "Now
it's time to take a nap"-she sulkily pulls up the covers; "SOON you'll be up again"-
she puts on her sandals; "LATER you'll go out and see your friends"-she and
Mommy visit neighbors. The unnamed narrator who addresses the little girl also,
by extension, addresses the listeners who empathize with her. And here lies the
problem-whether a child audience can vicariously plug into the girl's unrealisti-
cally idyllic family. Daddy goes off to work; Mommy does the housework, takes
her daughter to play in the park and with friends, works for awhile at her drafting
board, bakes cookies, and serves Perrier at dinner; Daddy does bath and bedtime
OCTOBER 1996 
* 61
tuck-in duty; and the little girl, daintily clad in a sundress, makes it though her day
without a smudge. This is '50s fare, self-consciously recast with a work-at-home
Mommy and an ethnically diverse neighborhood to play in the '90s. Still, the time
concept is clearly presented and the sharply outlined watercolors are attractively
uncluttered; even if the particulars don't always ring true, this title may offer some
reassuring answers for little ones with that insatiable need to know "What comes
next?" EB
HAHN, MARY DOWNING 
Following My Own Footsteps. 
Clarion, 1996 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-76477-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Gordy is relieved when his mother finally packs up the kids and takes off for her
mother's house, leaving his abusive father behind. It's a new life at his
grandmother's, and Gordy, who is used to being the tough local bully, has a hard
time finding a niche; to his surprise, he gradually becomes friends with William,
the overprotected boy next door whose polio has changed his life. Then Gordy's
images of soldierly bravery are shattered when his brother Donny comes home
bitter and disillusioned from World War II; Donny suggests that their brother
Stuart, whose desertion was chronicled in Hahn's Stepping on the Cracks (BCCB
12/91), and who is now in the mental ward of a VA hospital, had the right idea.
This is a telling and believable portrait of a boy on the cusp of major changes in his
life. Though things tie up with excessive speed and ease at the end, Hahn doesn't
gloss over the pain of some insoluble problems. Gordy's vacillation between his
similarity to his father and his desire to be different from him is strongly drawn, as
is the price he must pay for deciding to define manhood on his own terms. Read-
ers who enjoy historical fiction with contemporary immediacy, as well as fans of
the first book, will not be disappointed. DS
HALL, DONALD 
Old Home Day; illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. 
Browndeer/
Harcourt, 1996 
4 8p
ISBN 0-15-276896-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-8 yrs
As he did in Ox-CartMan (BCCB 2/80), Hall examines the agricultural cycle, this
time tracing the growth and demographic changes in Blackwater, a New Hamp-
shire farming community, from its settlement in 1799 through its bicentennial
celebration in 1999. The town booms in the heyday of the small farmer, v anes
when two wars and urbanization lure younger generations away, and is again poised
for revival, as the city-dwelling descendants of the town's founders look for their
family roots and greener pastures. There's really no plot here-a fact that would
be less a problem had the descriptive details of community development been
more compelling. Instead, Hall delivers lists of inhabitants and business owners,
folk moving in and folk moving out: "Tom Buzzell came up with his family from
Lowell, Massachusetts.... He stayed up half the night telling stories with Hamish
and Ruth Whittlesaw, who had taken the train all the way from North Carolina."
Following the evolution of names over two hundred years provides some interest,
as Boswells turn into Bussells and Buswalls, and Wittleseas become Whittlesaws,
but this slender diversion won't rivet listeners for long. McCully provides a lush,
nostalgically pastoral backdrop for Hall's litanies; an author's note rambles about
New Hampshire town development, but fails to state specifically whether Black-
water is a fictionalized locale. EB
62 
* THE BULLETIN
HENKES, KEVIN 
Lilly's Purple Plastic Purse; written and illus. by Kevin
Henkes. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12898-X 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12897-1 
$15.00 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Lilly, the older sister ofJulius, the Baby of the World (BCCB 11/90), is in love-
with school and, more importantly, with her teacher, Mr. Slinger. The hip Mr.
Slinger has charisma from his mustache to his Birkenstocks, and Lilly dreams of
being a teacher just like him. One day, however, Lilly's enthusiasm about her new
purple plastic purse ("that played a jaunty tune when it was opened") leads her to
become disruptive in class; when Mr. Slinger gently curbs her, Lilly's adoration
turns to bitterness. She soon regrets her anger, however, and with the help of her
family makes up with Mr. Slinger and all is amity again. The intensity of Lilly's
relationship with her teacher is absolutely authentic (and it may remind librarians
of Ramona's ups and downs with Miss Binney in Ramona the Pest), and Henkes
keeps the tone light and funny without patronizing any of the players. His mouse
characters are, as usual, wittily drawn and endearing, with small touches both hu-
morous (Mr. Slinger reads to the class from Stuart Little) and individualizing (Lilly's
father is casually clad in a peace-sign sweatshirt as he beams over his "no-frills
cheese balls"). His depiction of emotion is particularly deft, with sequential panels
showing Lily's progression from hurt to rage and, later, the literal interpretation of
her shrinking self-esteem when the guilt hits her. A stellar saga of love, passion,
and irresistible impulses in the kindergarten set, this will strike a purple plastic
chord with many young rodents-er, students. DS
HENRY, MARGUERITE 
Brown Sunshine of Sawdust Valley; illus. by Bonnie
Shields. 
Simon, 1996 
[96p]
ISBN 0-689-80364-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 3-6
Molly is thrilled that her tenth birthday will finally bring the realization of her
long-awaited dream: a horse of her own. She's disappointed when Lady Sue, the
mare her father buys, turns out to be more for him, but she's overjoyed when Lady
Sue surprises the family by giving birth to a baby mule. Molly names the baby
Brown Sunshine and spends three years gentling him and training him until fi-
nally he becomes a candidate for King Mule in the annual Columbia Mule Day
Celebration and parade. It's nice to see a story about one of the lesser-sung equines,
and it's also refreshing to see a different kind of event chronicled. This isn't, alas,
up to Henry's usual standard: the story moves quickly along the surface without
ever getting into the character of Molly or even of Brown Sunshine himself, so that
the description of events seems perfunctory; the narrative's inclusion of Molly's
diary entry is a rather awkward device, and the interpolation of mule facts through
Molly's school report is similarly cumbersome. Young horse fans don't have much
fodder these days, but the superficiality of this story may still leave them feeling
underfed. DS
HEO, YUMI, ad. 
The Green Frogs: A Korean Folktale; ad. and illus. by Yumi
Heo. 
Houghton, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-68378-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
"Long long ago, when tigers still smoked pipes, two green frogs lived with their
OCTOBER 1996 
* 
63
mother in a lotus pond. The green frogs loved their mother, but they never obeyed
her and always did the opposite of what she told them to do." This situation may
sound familiar to species other than green frogs. Children will enjoy the two
brothers' tracking their messy breakfast all over the floor, croaking backwards, or
engaging in a mighty mud fight. Adults will certainly empathize with mother
frog: "All she wanted to do was sit in the tall grass and read her book." Unfortu-
nately these particular youngsters never learn-until their mother grows old and
requests burial beside the stream (because she really hopes for a sunny spot on the
hill). But for once they obey her and, when a rainstorm threatens to wash her
grave away, they cry. They're still crying to this day, and Korean children who
don't listen to their mothers are still called green frogs. The first part of the story
is funny enough to make the second seem suddenly sad, but the brilliantly cohe-
sive illustrations ease the transition. Appropriate to a water-based story, Heo's art
takes on the appearance of amoeba soup, with bits of organic this and that floating
across subtly textured backgrounds while the bug-eyed, stick-limbed characters
cavort defiantly around their bespectacled mother. In one bedroom scene, a quilt
patterned with flies covers up all but the froggies' fingers and toes; minnows swim
on the wallpaper; and a rocking-turtle points toward a book titled F Is for Fly.
Viewers can enjoy these visual jokes while listening to a multicultural frog call
variant, not gribbet but GAE GUL! No specific references are given, but Heo notes
having heard the story as a child in Korea. BH
HEST, AMY 
Baby Duck and the Bad Eyeglasses; illus. by Jill Barton. 
Candlewick,
1996 
26p
ISBN 1-56402-680-9 
$16.99 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Baby Duck has new eyeglasses, and, upon close examination, decides she does not
like them a bit: "Poor, poor Baby, she looks ugly/ In her bad eyeglasses./ Every-
one can play but me,/ Poor, poor, poor, poor Baby." Her concerned parents'
soothing distractions are ineffectual, but Grampa has more luck, and after some
serious hugging and splashing around, Baby decides her new eyeglasses are an asset
after all. While Hest's conclusion is contrived and pat, this is an extremely simple
story with an extremely simple text that addresses a real issue for young children.
Barton's oversized pencil and watercolor illustrations lend a great deal of character
to Baby Duck and her relations, her lively expressions and actions drawing the
reader (and readee) into this predictable but useful tale. JMD
HINTZ, MARTIN 
Farewell, John Barleycorn: Prohibition in the United
States. 
Lerner, 1996 
88p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-1734-5 
$14.21 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
If the prevailing myth of Prohibition is composed primarily of zealots and crack-
pots, flappers and gangsters, Hintz goes some distance to dispel this simplistic
treatment. Billy Sunday, Carrie Nation, the Fitzgeralds, and Al Capone are all
included here, of course, but so is some serious mention of the booze-soaked state
of the early nation, the coalition between anti-immigration advocates and Drys,
and the alliance of women's suffrage and temperance issues. Missing, though, is
equal attention to the need for a sober workforce to staff increasingly industrial-
ized enterprises; although Ford's monetary contributions to the movement are
mentioned, the significance of industrialists' support is not. Except for a lively
discussion of the love-hate relationship between the public and the new brand of
mobsters, a textbook tone pervades the work; many of the sepia period photos are
64 
* 
THE BULLETIN
small and shadowy (but the book will soon fall open on its own to the gory St.
Valentine's Day Massacre shot). A bibliography and an index are appended. EB
HODGES, MARGARET 
Molly Limbo; illus. by Elizabeth Miles. 
Atheneum,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80581-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
With the opening line "There was once a miser named Mr. Means who bought a
haunted house," Hodges begins the spooky (but not scary) tale of ghostly Molly
Limbo, pirate's wife and housekeeper's friend. Molly haunts Mr. Means' house
and helps the housekeeper, Mrs. Handy, keep it neat as a pin. But when the
miserly miser decides he doesn't need to pay a live housekeeper when a supernatu-
ral, unpaid one will do, he soon learns the error of his ways: "He found rack and
ruin in every room of the house.... He ran downstairs where words on the floury
kitchen floor read NOT FAIR TO MRS. HANDY." Miles' watercolors contain a
great deal of involving sensory detail-tattered hangings on the walls, smoke from
the fire, steam from the kettle, cobwebs, piles of leather-bound books-and her
characters have personality and style, from Mr. Means' wild white hair and spec-
tacles to Mrs. Handy's bright red bun and flapping apron. A variety of perspec-
tives and unusual depth combine with a liveliness of line to make inanimate objects
appear inhabited and alive. This original story, based on elements of Scottish
folklore, has the ease of an oral tale and will be a popular readaloud and storytell-
ing choice. JMD
HOWARD, ELLEN 
The Log Cabin Quilt; illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Holiday House,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1247-4 
$15.95 
R 
6-8 yrs
Pap insisted that many cherished family belongings, particularly those that remind
him of his deceased wife, would not make the trip from Carolina to frontier Michi-
gan. Granny, though, was equally determined to bring along her huge sack of
quilting scraps, even if she had to perch on it through the entire journey. And it's
a good thing, too. Pap is off hunting when the first storm buffets their new cabin.
The family can only watch in alarm as the frozen mud falls out of their carefully
chinked walls, until young Elvirey gets the notion to stuff Granny's scraps into the
cracks. If warmth isn't reward enough, Pap returns and approves of the transfor-
mation with a "Your mam would be proud," an "Elvirey, you do beat all!" and a
long-absent smile. Elvirey's smooth, unsentimentalized narration is perfectly
matched by the sober browns of the full-page watercolors and facing vignettes.
Himler resists a flashy visual climax of gaudily striped walls, but rather allows the
faded scraps to blend into the wood and make the cabin "downright homey." Pair
this with Eve Bunting's Dandelions (BCCB 9/95) to compare the rigors of life on
different frontiers. EB
HUNTER, ANNE 
Possum's Harvest Moon; written and illus. by Anne
Hunter. 
Houghton, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-395-73575-0 
$14.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
When Possum sees "the biggest, brightest, yellowest" moon shining down one
autumn night, he decorates the grass with lanterns and berries and heads out to
invite the mice, the crickets, Raccoon, Rabbit, and other friends to his "Harvest
OCTOBER 1996 
* 65
Soiree." They are all too busy preparing for winter or recuperating from summer
to attend his party until, seeing the moon rise high in the sky, they "dream of
dancing, of eating and singing" and rush to Possum's party to celebrate. Earthy
greens, browns, and blues, textured with extensive crosshatching, provide an effec-
tive background against which the moon and fireflies gently glow. The perspec-
tive allows the reader to enter more completely into the story; in many illustrations,
the reader sees the world as if nestled down in the grass with the animals. Hunter
writes with careful simplicity, adding readaloud interest through alliteration ("Rac-
coon rousted his crony, Rabbit. The crickets invited their cousins the katydids"),
unobtrusive rhyme ("They hurried and scurried while the night was still young"),
and attention to detail ("They brought seeds and berries, fiddles and songs"). This
is a story suffused with both the excitement and the contentment awakened at the
sight of a full, luminous autumn moon. LM
JOHNSTON, TONY 
The Ghost ofNicholas Greebe; illus. by S. D. Schindler. 
Dial,
1996 
32 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1649-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1648-6 
$14.99 
R* 
6-9 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 45, for review.
JONES, DIANA WYNNE 
The Time of the Ghost. Greenwillow, 1996 
[25 6 p]
ISBN 0-688-14598-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-9
The "ghost" floats above people and places she vaguely recalls. She knows she is
one of four sisters-Sally, Cart, Fenella, or Imo-but has little notion of what has
brought her to her current confused, disembodied state. The sisters seek first to
exorcise then to help the spirit, realizing that her plight has something to do with
their play-worship of the goddess Monigan, created by Cart over a year ago. An
increasingly absorbing, if slow, opening jolts suddenly from past to present as the
reader-and Sally-realize that she is the "ghost"; she has been "floating" through
the past from her hospital bed in an effort to keep the very real Monigan, made
powerful by the girls' veneration, from claiming the life she was promised. Not
precisely time-travel and definitely not a ghost story, this is what happens when
some fanciful adolescents get together and, quite unintentionally, raise a primor-
dial, bloodthirsty goddess who exists in all times at the same time. Jones' strong
visual language and sharply delineated characterizations helps concretize the chain
of natural and supernatural events in spite of their unclear chronology. JMD
KARLIN, NURIT 
The Fat Cat Sat on the Mat; written and illus. by Nurit
Karlin. 
HarperCollins, 1996 
[32p] 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026674-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026673-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. K-2
The fat cat sat on the mat-the rat's mat, to be exact, and the rat doesn't like it.
The rat, a bat, and a hat all try to talk the cat out of sitting on the mat, but he's a
stubborn feline and won't budge, not even when tempted with a fish in a dish. In
his own sweet time, "he ate the fish, licked the dish, and went back to lie down in
the vat. 'Thank goodness!' said the mat." Okay, so "vat" is pushing the concept
for the sake of the rhyme scheme, and the talking hat (even with the propeller) is a
66 
* THE BULLETIN
little silly, but the kids won't mind. Karlin's watercolors have a James Marshall
feel and appeal to them that, along with the rhyming text, carries this slight tale
along pretty painlessly. Plot, decent rhythm, and a forward momentum aided by
energetic illustrations make this a better-than-average easy reader. JMD
KELLOGG, STEVEN, ad. 
I Was Born About 10,000 Years Ago: A Tall Tale; ad. and
illus. by Steven Kellogg. 
Morrow, 1996 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13412-2 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13411-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
This cheerfully anachronistic tale leapfrogs us through history's greatest hits as the
irresistible narrators brag that they were present to see everything from "Adam and
Eve driven from the door" to playing "hopscotch with some spacemen on the
moon." As Kellogg says in his author's note, telling tall tales means "elasticizing
the truth and peppering it with humor," and Kellogg's own additional stanzas are
in tune with the zany hyperbolic spirit of this nineteenth-century American folk
song. This is serious hilarity perfectly amplified by the uninhibited lunacy of the
narrators' myriad claims. The illustrations, in colored inks, watercolors, and acryl-
ics, have sly humor not-so-subtly hidden within (a sign on Columbus's ship: "This
voyage is made possible by our royal sponsors Ferd and Iz") and extravagantly
displayed without (a deliciously deranged General Hooker battling skeeters). This
should work as both a readaloud and a singalong-silliness and utter abandon
should be encouraged. Musical notation is included. SSV
KRISHNASWAMI, UMA, ad. 
The Broken Tusk: Stories of the Hindu God Ganesha;
illus. by Maniam Selven. 
Linnet, 1996 
[98p]
ISBN 0-208-02442-5 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Seventeen tales of Ganesha, elephant-headed Hindu god of new beginnings, son
of Parvati and Shiva, are accessibly retold and clearly grounded in their cultural
context. The preface discusses Krishnaswami's first exposure, as a child growing
up in India, to the oral tales about Ganesha, followed by an introduction to Ganesha
and Hindu mythology. Tales include the story of how Ganesha got his elephant's
head, why his chosen mount is a tiny mouse, and how he became known as the
master of the dance. Ganesha is a round-bellied, jolly sort of god, and his adven-
tures have a cheerful tone that is quite appealing though the stories are most effec-
tive when combined with Krishnaswami's notes on their religious significance.
This title would be very useful as part of an introduction to Hindu culture and
traditions. Source notes are included, as is a pronunciation guide, a list of charac-
ters, and a glossary. Color illustrations to come. JMD
LANSKY, BRUCE 
You're Invited to Bruce Lansky's Poetry Party!; illus. by Stephen
Carpenter. 
Meadowbrook/Simon, 1996 
84p
ISBN 0-671-5730-3-9 $12.00 
Ad 
Gr 3-6
A poetry party combines kids, snacks, and a book of surefire, hilarious poems;
Lansky's collection offers fairly edible poetic fare. The poems spring from situa-
tions important to elementary kids: school, obnoxious siblings, problem parents.
Although Lansky manages neither outrageous lunacy nor linguistic panache, he is
at his best with an occasional twist at the end of a poem ("I didn't do my reading./
I watched TV instead-" confesses one poem's narrator who turns out to be not a
OCTOBER 1996 
* 67
student but the teacher) and with the odd and surprising reversals of convention in
his nonsense poems ("My favorite food is spinach./ It makes my muscles small./
Each day I'm growing shorter-/ soon I'll be eight feet tall!"). Too many poems
are marred by droning singsong, spiritless rhyme and word choice, and uninven-
tive description: "My cat never comes when I call her./ She cannot remember her
name./ Her brain is the size of a thimble./ And that's why my cat is so lame." A
cartoonish black-and-white line drawing accompanies each poem. Kids may en-
joy this fast-food verse that feature teachers juggling meatballs or toes stuck fast in
noses-but if you want to host the poetry party of the year, be sure to stock up on
potato chips and Prelutsky, soda and Silverstein. LM
LASKY, KATHRYN 
A Journey to the New World: The Diary of Remember Patience
Whipple.
See review under Denenberg, p. 13.
LAUBER, PATRICIA 
Hurricanes: Earth's Mightiest Storms. 
Scholastic,
1996 
[6 4p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-47406-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
Lauber dives right into her subject in her usual businesslike style-in short order,
we are instructed on the whats, whys, wheres, and hows of the monster coastal
storms. A profile of a devastating 1938 hurricane in New England, which caught
the population unaware and unprepared, sets the stage for a review of modern
forecasting methods currently in use. Today's readers will be stunned at the rou-
tine damage of hurricanes past-the worst storm disaster in American history was
the Galveston hurricane of 1900 in which 6,000 people died. Some of the most
destructive storms of recent memory are mentioned (Andrew and Hugo) and Lauber
provides us with a rogues' gallery of infamous hurricanes, impressively illustrated
with archival photos. In fact, the visual aids themselves pack a wallop: maps,
diagrams, historical and space-age photos in a well-designed and attractive format.
There are helpful sidebars on weather instruments and the naming of storms. In
addition to its alluring depiction of stormy weather, the book closely examines the
effect human development has had on the fragile ecology of coastal areas and specu-
lates as to how such encroachment on nature may impede its natural rebirth after
a storm. This would fit neatly into a science unit for classrooms as well as standing
alone as a compelling read. An index and bibliography are included. SSV
LEVITIN, SONIA 
EvilEncounter. Simon, 1996 
24 9p
ISBN 0-689-80216-1 
$17.00 
M 
Gr. 6-9
As Michelle Morrow's junior year crumbles under the stresses of her parents' di-
vorce and her own constant bickering with her mother, Sandra, she agrees to give
group therapy a try. In no time at all, seductive group-leader Luke has Michelle,
along with the rest of her high-strung groupmates, hanging her emotional linen
out to air, and he has even pulled Sandra into some of the sessions. But a weekend
group outing goes deadly wrong: Michelle flees at night from Luke's insistent
offers of drugs and sex, only to discover the next morning that Luke has been
murdered and Sandra is the prime suspect. With an abrupt shift of gears, the story
now swings from psychodrama to whodunnit as Michelle and her ever-patient
almost-boyfriend Ray grab some books on criminology and show the local police
force how to get to the bottom of the mystery. Levitin fails to provide compelling
68 
* THE BULLETIN
reasons for intelligent, emotionally guarded Michelle's swift and total embrace of
the group's silly machinations ("Breakthrough. Then came the tears, the confes-
sions, the explanations, cries. Afterward Luke played the music celebration: 'Stay-
ing alive! Ah-ah-ah-ah, staying alive!"'). Michelle and Ray's subsequent foray into
detection, a la Nancy Drew and Ned Nickerson, is equally facile: "She turned and
grinned at Ray. 'Don't you love being a detective?' He clasped her hand. 'I love
being with you."' Revelations concerning Luke's deviousness and charlatanry come
as no shock to readers, who will be from the start more leery than Michelle is of
"doctor" Luke's disco therapy. EB
LEWIN, BETSY 
Chubbo's Pool; illus. by Betsy Lewin. 
Clarion, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-72807-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Let's face it. Chubbo is a pool hog. And there is little the zebras and warthogs,
baboons and elephants can do but leave, when this belligerent hippopotamus bel-
lows, "GET OUT OF MY POOL!" The hot sun soon dries up Chubbo's private
party, however, and he lumbers over to the next watering hole, only to find all the
animals peacefully sharing the water and himself an uninvited guest. While based
on the author's observation of a real hippo in the Okavango Delta in Botswana,
the story strays into Lion King Africa when the elephants, sensing Chubbo's self-
reproach and loneliness, thunder off to Chubbo's mud wallow with their trunks
full of water, and Chubbo's pool becomes the oasis of biodiversity it was meant to
be. Lewin's watercolors, sun-bleached yellows, browns, and greens, evoke the heat
and humidity of an African delta. However, the realistic wildlife illustrations (an
"Animal Glossary" appears on the last page, denoting both common and scientific
names of all the animals) camouflage what is a human, rather than hippo, story:
be nice and share with your friends. Despite the book's anthropomorphic angle
on the behavior of African fauna, the precision of Lewin's word choice ("The el-
ephants fled, ears out, tails up, and still thirsty") and the intensity of Chubbo's
refrain make this an exuberant readaloud for potential pool hogs everywhere. AEB
MACDONALD, AMY 
No More Nice!; illus. by Cat Bowman Smith. 
Kroupa/Or-
chard, 1996 
123p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08892-8 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09542-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Simon Maxwell, almost eleven, is sent to vacation with his Great Aunt Mattie and
his Great Uncle Philbert by default: his parents' unexpected business trips and
unwelcome houseguests leave nowhere else for him to go. Simon learns how to
spit flamboyantly from his uncle ("Now then, my boy, can you spit?" Simon
shook his head. "Well, I'll be pickled. I really will. You poor neglected child")
and to cuss colorfully from his aunt ("Mangy, mucculent misfits"). After two
weeks in this loving, freewheeling household Simon goes home, handily imple-
menting all that he's learned from Mattie and Philbert, resulting in detention, a
fight with a bully (he wins with spit and creative cuss words), and houseguests who
think he's remarkably rude. MacDonald has more than one opportunity to make
this book just too precious for words, but she never goes quite that far. Pen-and-
ink drawings throughout contribute to the old-fashioned, somewhat nostalgic tone
of the text, but Simon carries his story sturdily as he goes from well-behaved and
repressed to somewhat rambunctious and certainly more outspoken. Character-
OCTOBER 1996 
* 69
izations are amusing and concise, with secondary characters identifying themselves
as stuffy, self-absorbed, and uncreative by their own words and actions. A too-tidy
conclusion is still satisfying, because Simon is a good kid and you want him to be
happy. JMD
MCMILLAN, BRUCE 
Jelly Beans for Sale; written and illus. with photographs by
Bruce McMillan. 
Scholastic, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-590-86584-6 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 1-3
No fusty old lemonade stands for these young entrepreneurs-they're hawking
gourmet jelly beans, a penny apiece. A full-page photo of a penny, nickel, dime,
and quarter and their respective values kick off the sale, followed by facing spreads
which feature a close up of each transaction and another satisfied customer. The
point here, of course, is learning to count money; left-hand views show the buyer's
hand proffering a combination of coins, and the amount is expressed below in a
boxed equation (e.g., "lc + Ic + Ic + Ic + Ic + 5c = 10 jelly beans," for five pennies
and a nickel). The math is clearly and consistently presented, and several coin
combinations for various amounts are demonstrated. Photos of the money ex-
change, however, are deeply shadowed, and coins and jelly beans become increas-
ingly difficult to count as amounts increase. Likewise, jelly-bean borders and images
of the happy patrons are cast in more somber tones than one would expect for so
bright a subject. A color-flavor chart, jelly-bean trivia, and (for teachers who have
exhausted MedMMath?) information on how to obtain Jelly Belly classroom ma-
terials are included. EB
MCNIAL, TOM 
The Dog Who Lost His Bob; by Tom and Laura McNeal; illus. by
John Sandford. 
Whitman, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-1662-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Phil is a lost, dirty, blue-stained (yes, blue) dog. He runs away from his Sunday
morning bath and embarks on a journey that is filled with bow-wow woes and that
ends six months later, on another Sunday morning. Readers will be rooting for
Phil as he attempts to find Bob, his owner. All the doggone things that could
happen do: nasty kids, scavenging dogs, careening buses, and lousy weather. Text
and watercolor/pencil illustrations successfully collaborate to capture the excite-
ment and pathos of the gangly dog's plight. Particularly striking is the use of the
blue palette which serves to unify the exaggerated proportions and shifts of view-
point. The story's perceptive glimpses into how Phil "thinks" when he's lost will
be recognizable to humans who've been on the other side of that canine situation.
The sheer doggy joy when Phil hears Bob's voice on his rescuer's answering ma-
chine is palpable ("Phil wagged his nubby tail like anything and tried to smell his
Bob inside the machine"). This is a tale for anyone (and their dog) who's been
lost. PM
MICHELSON, RICHARD 
Animals That Ought to Be: Poems about Imaginary Pets;
illus. by Leonard Baskin. 
Simon, 1996 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-689-80635-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Hypothetical animals are always good poetic fodder, and here Michelson limns in
verse the merits of the Nightnoise Gladiator, the Talkback Bat, the Channel
70 
* THE BULLETIN
Changer, the Leftover Eater, and eight others. His creatures are inventive and
their characteristics sometimes amusingly fitting (The "I'm-All-Ears" "snacks on
whispers. I can't stop her./ She's part gossip, part eavesdropper"). Unfortunately,
the scansion is continually faulty, making reading frustrating; the poetic forms,
which employ either ballad meter or tetrameter couplets throughout, become re-
petitive; and some of the syntax is forced ("That's why I thank my lucky star/ that
animals are who they are"). Baskin's watercolor portraits of the poetic subjects
have a luminescent reality that makes them plausible as well as fantastic; their
emphasis on glowing eyes and gaping mouths gives them a slightly sinister reso-
nance. With its elegant, airy format and the poem and watercolor portraiture, the
book is visually reminiscent of Douglas Florian's On the Wing (BCCB 4/96) and
beast feast (8/94); the poetry here isn't up to that standard, but readers drawn by
the concept will enjoy a trip through this eccentric zoo. DS
MOTHER GOOSE 
Humpty Dumpty and Other Nursery Rhymes; ISBN 0-525-45675-
9; Jack and ill and Other Nursery Rhymes; ISBN 0-525-45676-7. Each book:
illus. by Lucy Cousins. 
Dutton, 1996 
14p 
$5.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
1-4 yrs
"Sing a song of sixpence" or sing any of the other verses offered in this series of
nursery rhyme board books. Cousins' simple, uncluttered forms and clear, con-
trasting colors, together with her use of small, repeated figures (such as all the
king's men and horses) reflect the lively, to-the-point nature of the verses in a way
that more typical sentimental pastel illustrations fail to do. She does provide a
touch of the old-fashioned in the long, unfrilled coats and dresses worn by some
figures and in her rendering of shoes, but the boldness of the illustrations gives
them a contemporary feel: yes, the king presented with a blackbird pie may wear
the traditional golden crown, but his toothy grin and triumphantly raised spoon
and the blackbirds rioting across the two-page spread are some distance from nos-
talgic illustration. The usual Mother Goose suspects-Old King Cole, the cow
that jumped over the moon-are here, but Cousins also includes a few lesser-
known verses like "Grandfa' Grig had a pig" and "Cobbler, cobbler, mend my
shoe." Careful: this Mother Goose is so energetic it just might shove its competi-
tors right off the nursery bookshelf. LM
NEENAN, COLIN 
Live a Little. Harcourt, 1996 
252p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-201242-7 
$12.00
Papered. ISBN 0-15-20124305 
$6.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Hale is beginning to realize just what kind of changes the end of senior year will
bring, but he's allowed no time for quiet reflection: his moony best friend, Sonny,
and his lab partner, Zoe, whom he secretly loves, take him on an emotional roller-
coaster ride. First, a mission to spy on Sonny's ex-girlfriend and her new boy-
friend nearly gets the three would-be agents killed; then Zoe's increasing
emotionality and changes in behavior lead Hale to think that she is suffering from
a terrible affliction. It's hard to gauge the tone here, since pranks and portentous-
ness get treated in the same way, and the characterizations are more gimmicky
than convincing, though the dramatis personae are often authentically irritating.
The energy is high throughout, however, the style easy and conversational, and the
intrusion of plausible real-life danger into the mundane high-school milieu is con-
vincingly handled (although most readers will figure out Zoe's problem chapters
OCTOBER 1996 
* 71
before Hale does). This glib but enjoyable saga will appeal to teens looking for
something lighter than Cormier or Crutcher. DS
O'CONNOR, BARBARA 
The Soldier's Voice: The Story ofErnie Pyle. 
Carolrhoda,
1996 
80p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-87614-942-5 
$16.13 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
In this brief biography O'Connor gives a focused picture of a unique man's life
and work. From Pyle's first "real" newspaper job in LaPorte, Indiana, to his final
job on a Pacific Island during World War II, O'Connor includes a sense of the
man as a three-dimensional personality, no mean feat given the brevity of the text
and the simplicity of her approach. She does not shirk the more sensational as-
pects of Pyle's life-excessive use of alcohol, his troubled marriage-but puts them
in perspective in relation to Pyle's career and world events. Most of the appeal
here is the inclusion of quotes from Pyle's personal letters and his newspaper col-
umns which lend an immediacy and personality to the otherwise bland text. An
easy if not outstanding design makes this an interesting, accessible work. The
quality of the black-and-white photos is uneven, but this is apparently a problem
with the originals, not a production flaw. Specific citations are not included, al-
though there is a statement that all quotes are from materials listed in the bibliog-
raphy; notes and an index are also appended. JMD
ORMEROD, JAN 
Ms. MacDonald Has a Class; written and illus. by Jan
Ormerod. 
Clarion, 1996 
[26 p]
ISBN 0-395-77611-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Inspired by their field trip to the farm, the ambitious Ms. MacDonald and her
preschool class prepare a play to be performed for their families. Their exuberant
activities-building scenery, painting masks and costumes, practicing animal sounds
and movements-are captured in vigorous watercolors that spread across clean
white space. Lines of music winding through the text, a familiar meter, and of
course the tip-off EIEIOs will have listeners aching to join in, except for the single
but significant obstacle-it's just too hard. The length and detail of the play
preparations are evidently too overwhelming for a single cumulative scheme; the
first half of the text features a cumulative pattern, while the second half abandons
the effort entirely. Moreover, Ormerod has transmuted the simple, singable rep-
etition of Old MacDonald's "oink oink here" into mouthfuls such as "With a
pigpen here and a hay bale there,/ Here a bucket, 'Where's your boots?' every-
where a chick chick," likely to stifle even the most resolute chorus. Preschoolers
should enjoy watching their fictional peers put on the show; just don't expect
much audience participation. EB
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
Children Save the Rain Forest; illus. with photo-
graphs by Dan L. Perlman. 
Cobblehill, 1996 
4 4 p
ISBN 0-525-65163-2 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 5-7
This is an elegantly concise explanation of what a tropical rain forest is and why it's
important. Using as her example the Bosque Eterno de Los Nifios (International
Children's Rain Forest) in Costa Rica, Patent engagingly describes the animals
and plants to be found there. She points out that many of today's medicines are
derived from plants found in rain forests, the birds we love to hear sing in our
72 
* THE BULLETIN
backyards often winter there, and destruction of rain forests leads to the overheat-
ing of the earth known as the "greenhouse effect." The book touches on the
intangible or spiritual effects, too ("Every loss of part of the natural world is a loss
to humanity as well"). The distinguishing mark of this title, however, is the em-
phasis given to the contributions of kids from around the world who are actually
helping to save this rain forest: "All it takes is a good idea and plenty of hard
work." Patent makes her points neatly albeit sometimes rather breathlessly; we
learn, for instance, that tiny Costa Rica (the size of Vermont plus New Hamp-
shire) has "more bird species than in all of North America north of Mexico." The
narrative is brisk, and most spreads are illustrated by crisp photographs. In addi-
tion to a couple of maps, there is a glossary and index. SSV
PETERS, JULIE ANNE 
How Do You Spell Geek? 
Little, 1996 
139p
ISBN 0-316-70266-8 
$12.95 
R Gr. 5-7
Ann and her best friend Kimberly both desperately want to make it to the Na-
tional Spelling Bee, but Kimberly's desire, fueled by her parents' pressure, borders
on obsession and begins to crowd out the rest of her life, including her friendship
with Ann. When Ann is assigned to help out a geeky new student, Lurlene, ten-
sions increase; when Ann begins genuinely to like Lurlene and also discovers that
she is a gifted enough speller to be competition, the rift between the friends seems
unbreachable. This follows some fairly traditional patterns of the middle-school
friendship story, but it's well-paced and energetic. The characters are nicely indi-
viduated, with Lurlene's cheerfulness and natural smarts quite plausible. The book
also takes a different (and probably more authentic) tack from many in allowing
the remaking of Lurlene's appearance to help her social status considerably; while
it's clear that judging people entirely on their outsides is a bad idea, there's also no
suggestion that the changing of that outside is a yielding of individuality ("You
degeeked me," says Lurlene happily). This is a satisfying entry on the perennially
popular topic of not-so-perennial popularity. DS
PFEFFER, 
WENDY 
Polar Bears. 
Silver, 
1996 
[32p] 
illus. 
with
photographs 
(Creatures in White)
Library ed. ISBN 0-382-39327-9 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-382-39326-0 
$5.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Lavishly illustrated with oversized photos, this book is a sunny tribute to the world's
largest land-dwelling carnivore-the polar bear. Solid bits of information ("By
midwinter the she-bear, that weighs about 700 pounds, gives birth to two cubs.
Each cub weighs about one pound-less than you weighed when you were born!")
ground this fictionalized account of a year in the life of a she-bear, a year in which
she gives birth and begins to teach her two offspring to fend for themselves. The
pictorial invitation to revel in the wildlife has its drawbacks: one particularly jar-
ring juxtaposition couples an adorable ringed seal staring full-faced at the camera
with copy on the following page stating that "the cubs get their first taste of seal."
Nor is there any comment on the encroachment of man into the bears' native
habitat. The book is ultimately not very deep, but it's got enough natural history
to keep it from being merely very pretty. The ending features a spread of "Bear
Facts" and a global map showing the native habitat of the species. SSV
OCTOBER 1996 
* 73
PHILIP, NEIL, ad. 
Odin's Family: Myths of the Vikings; illus. by Maryclare
Foa. 
Orchard, 1996 
[12 4p]
ISBN 0-531-09531-2 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Without oversimplifying, Philip tells the stories of the origin of the gods and frost
giants, how Odin got his wisdom, the death of Baldur, the coming of Ragnarok,
and eleven other Norse myths. What distinguishes Philip's anthology is its design:
large print, a generous amount of white space, and full-page color art make this an
eminently accessible, easily promoted collection. Foa's oil paintings (with a pre-
ponderance of red, gold and blue) have a primitive vigor that, while not necessarily
finished and fine, suits the nature of these somewhat ruthlessly unforgiving myths.
Philip includes a who's who (with pronunciation guide), an afterword that dis-
cusses the origin and history of Viking myth and legend, suggested readings for
children and adults, and a brief list of sources. JMD
PINKWATER, DANIEL 
Wallpaper from Space; illus. by Jill Pinkwater. 
Atheneum,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80764-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Steve is glum about his mother's proposed redecorations, especially when it seems
unlikely that he'll get the wallpaper of his choice ("Steve, they just don't make
wallpaper with people getting eaten. It isn't a popular choice"). He's won over by
wallpaper with glow-in-the-dark spaceships, which that night pulls him into its
drama: mouse spacemen whipping through black holes, singing heroic songs (mostly
about Steve), and searching for gumballs. None of this makes a hole--er, whole
lot of sense even in the book, and the old dream ending is well-segued but disap-
pointing after the inventive adventure. This has an accurate boyishness, however,
with its loopy space-themed happenings, that young readers will appreciate. Jill
Pinkwater's art has a marker-in-fist hardiness with its primary-color palette and
simple lines, while droll, thematically appropriate decorations surround the page
numbers. This will make an enjoyable fast read or perhaps even an offbeat bed-
time serial; it'll certainly up the demand for astronautical wallpaper. DS
POYDAR, NANCY 
Cool Ali; written and illus. by Nancy Poydar. 
McElderry,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80755-4 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
What's a big-city kid who loves to draw supposed to do on a smotheringly hot day?
Ali takes her chalks outside and draws flowers, beach umbrellas, and snowflakes on
the sidewalk and the front of the apartment building. Faster than you can say, "It's
not the heat, it's the humidity," neighbor Mrs. Frye is splashing her feet in a blue
chalk puddle and Mr. Boyle's teeth are chattering at the force of Ali's North Wind.
Do Ali's drawings actually cool down the scene or does she just have imaginative
neighbors? Poydar's refusal to answer this question gives the book a certain whimsy,
as does her depiction of Ali's drawings which are rough-textured, like chalk on
concrete, and convincingly childlike. Despite proper accoutrements (sunhats, san-
dals, newspaper fans) and colors (yellows and tans predominate), the soft, smeary
watercolors convey more a sense of gentle warmth than of stifling heat. When a
74 
* THE BULLETIN
cool rain washes away her pictures (and undermines the story's conceit by bringing
in weather unrelated to Ali's drawings), her neighbors cheer her with a hoisting
onto their shoulders and a Rocky-esque chant of "Ali! Ali!" Though the language
occasionally veers too close to slickness ("But the crowd noticed Ali, whose draw-
ing beat the heat") and the ending is somewhat anti-climactic, playful puns (Ira
Baker, Mr. Boyle), rhymes ("My, my, sighed Mrs. Frye"), and alliteration ("[rain]
pinged on the porches . . . and hissed off the hot sidewalk") help keep the story
light. This may inspire young chalkmeisters to decorate the neighborhood in their
own attempt to meddle with the seasons. LM
SAINT JAMES, SYNTHIA 
Sunday; written and illus. by Synthia Saint
James. 
Whitman, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-7658-1 
$15.95 
M 
3-6 yrs
In stilted, awkward language, Saint James walks the reader through the chronol-
ogy of events of an African-American family's Sunday ("Sunday morning, sleeping
late; pancakes piled high. Reading the paper, dressing in our Sunday best, walking
together to church"). After church where "we listen to our preacher's sermon.
Joyful voices sing!" there is a subway ride to Grandma's for supper, as "Sunday is
for family!" Saint James' bold geometrics and vivid colors aren't enough to create
interest in what is essentially a list of activities with no connecting narrative. Her
faceless figures, which worked so well in the monumental myth figures of Tukama
Tootles the Flute (BCCB 4/95), work against the individualization of her charac-
ters. While the colorful graphics and strong compositions reflect capable drafting
skills, the lack of narrative momentum is definitely problematic. JMD
SAN SoucI, ROBERT D. 
The RedHeels; illus. by Gary Kelley. 
Dial, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1134-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1133-6 
$15.99 
Ad Gr. 6-10
Lost in the woods, colonial cobbler Jonathan Dowse stumbles on a cottage inhab-
ited by the mysterious and lovely Rebecca Wyse. He offers to mend her shoes in
exchange for food and shelter. She gives him a pair of shoes with red heels-the
sign of a witch-and the smitten but frightened Jonathan repairs them. Later, the
spying Jonathan finds Rebecca dancing in the red-heeled shoes upon the surface of
a silver pond and joins her, dancing through the sky "and across the roofs of farm-
houses and townhouses, where goodmen and goodwives slept snug in their beds."
Returning to his calling and his craft, he regretfully leaves her. All ends happily,
however, when he makes himself a pair of dancing shoes, marries Rebecca, and
spends life happily cobbling, raising children, and dancing in the moonlit sky. San
Souci imposes the structure of traditional legend onto this original story, but be-
trays the integrity of the form with a tacked-on "happily ever after" conclusion.
Kelley's pastels capture the smoky, spooky feeling of a New England witch tale,
the red heels glowing in the subdued, autumnal palette, but the effective visual
elements make the disparate story elements even more jarring in comparison. Given
the setting and time period, the plot simply does not ring true: a woman whose
"witchcraft" apparently consists only of the ability to dance through the night sky
is willing to give up her powers for love, but does not have to do so because the
colonial New Englander enamored of her embraces her "magic" and joins in the
dance. This is witchcraft tamed, without consequence or sacrifice, and the result is
an anti-climactic conclusion that is ultimately unsatisfying. JMD
OCTOBER 1996 
* 75
SATEREN, 
SHELLEY SWANSON 
The Humane Societies: A Voice for the
Animals. 
Dillon, 1996 
[80p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-87518-622-X 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-382-39309-0 
$7.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-9
The United States has several thousand animal shelters that handle millions of
animals a year; this book explains how these shelters came to be, what their phi-
losophies are, and what they do. Sateren first describes the difference between
animal-rights organizations, such as People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals,
and animal-welfare organizations such as animal shelters, then explains that there
are national organizations and independent local shelters, which usually have no
connection with each other. She examines both traditional shelter tasks (animal
control, rehoming, and euthanasia) and outreach duties (abuse and neglect inves-
tigation, humane education, pet therapy, etc.). The book addresses the issue of
euthanasia squarely and discusses factors (such as the failure to spay or neuter
animals, the impulsive acquisition of a pet, and pet-store puppy mills) contribut-
ing to the overpopulation problem that makes the killing of unwanted animals
necessary. There are unfortunately no notes, and Sateren's contentions are some-
times broad or vague; nor does she acknowledge the controversy surrounding some
aspects of her subject, especially the work of the Humane Society of the United
States. It's still a useful and intelligent examination of a topic dear to many young
readers' hearts (although a note explaining how they can become involved would
have been welcome), and the color photographs are well chosen and placed to keep
the topic concrete. A list of addresses, a glossary, and an index are included. DS
SERFOZO, MARY 
What's What?: 
A Guessing Game; illus. by Keiko
Narahashi. 
McElderry, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80653-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
A plain white page with a small watercolor detail poses the bold typed question,
"What's hard?" The answer's on the verso: "A sidewalk is hard/ as a rock or a
wall./ So look out where you fall!" and we learn that the detail is, in fact, a piece of
a rocky wall near the pavement on which a young rollerblader has taken a spill
under the concerned eye of his little sister. "What's long?" Could be a rope, but
the verso discloses the children's toy train on its long track. Hard and soft, wet and
dry, cold and warm, long and short, dark and light are illuminated with gentle,
hazy watercolor scenes of two African-American siblings at play and at rest, and
three-line verses that are at once concise and elegant. For the big finish Serfozo
challenges listeners to consider what can possess all of these contradictory qualities
at once and makes a convincing case for the children's frisky puppy. By offering
more than one possible answer to her riddles, Serfozo encourages readers and lis-
teners alike to posit their own solutions. EB
SIMON, 
SEYMOUR 
The Heart: 
Our Circulatory System. 
Morrow,
1996 
[3 2p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11408-3 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11407-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
The hard-working engine of the circulatory system-the heart-gets no relief. It
76 * THE BULLETIN
pumps the blood through sixty thousand miles of blood vessels in each and every
human. Simon walks us through the circulatory blueprint in his usual informative
and accessible style, but it is the startling photographs which command attention.
Seen through a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and colored by computer,
many of the images are magnified millions of times over-what looks like a shower
of molten meteorites, for instance, is actually red blood cells hurtling at the viewer.
In addition to the photos, there are cross-section diagrams of the heart, veins, and
arteries (kids may find confusing the medical convention of showing the right side
of something-atrium, ventricle-on the left side of the page). Especially useful
in this day of frequent cardiac treatments is a brief explanation of what can go
wrong with a heart and what can be done to fix it. Flap copy indicates that this
initiates a series Simon will do on the human body; this first one has heart. SSV
SIROF, HARRIET 
Bring Back Yesterday. 
Atheneum, 1996 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-689-80638-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
When a plane crash takes the lives of her mother and father, Lisa is devastated.
Now living with her strongminded and offbeat Aunt Alice, she finds herself slip-
ping back in time to Elizabethan England. There she teams up with Rowena,
whose determination to act leads her to disguise herself and Lisa as boys and get
them jobs in the theater, and who, as Rooji, had been Lisa's beloved imaginary
playmate in early childhood. There's a lot going on here, what with Lisa's time
travel, her present tragedy, her growing friendship with a boy her age who lost his
brother in the same plane crash, and her aunt's growing activism for air safety that
leads to her trial for civil disobedience; unfortunately it doesn't knit together very
well. Lisa's trips to-imaginings ofP-the past are often more involved than inter-
esting, and they detract from the drama of her present anguish rather than inform-
ing it. At the heart, however, there is a telling picture of a girl struggling to face
unbearable loss, and that's the story young readers will appreciate. DS
SMALL, DAVID 
Fenwick's Suit; written and illus. by David Small. 
Farrar,
1996 
34p
ISBN 0-374-32298-8 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
What can you do about a yellow and red plaid three-piece suit that takes over your
life? In this slapstick comedy the clothes don't make the man, the clothes nearly
do the man in. Fenwick, the local office nerd, is dissatisfied ("I don't have any
friends. Maybe it's the way I'm dressed"). Thus Small takes us on an improbable,
hilarious escapade with Fenwick and his garish new ensemble. Sharp, exaggerated
angles, a few bony felines, and the suit's sophisticated strut through bustling
cityscapes capture the flamboyant spirit of the story, while mottled tones provide
appropriate background for the garment, itself swathed in a pristine white aura.
The cartoonish art agreeably matches the fast-paced text, which leads readers into
a fantastic adventure when Fenwick's threads become combative, inflate like a
hot-air balloon, and tuck Fenwick in their pocket ("'How humiliating! My clothes
are wearing me!' he exclaimed"). The caper literally unravels, concluding Fenwick's
humorous exploits--or perhaps not concluding them ("Maybe it's the way I wear
my hair, he told himself"). This is a story which could engender some lively dis-
cussions on what does make a man (or woman), and it's tailor-made for laughs.
PM
OCTOBER 1996 
* 77
SOTO, GARY 
OffandRunning; illus. by Eric Velasquez. 
Delacorte, 1996 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-385-32181-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
For those bored with the usual election-year shenanigans, here's an alternative:
Miata Ramirez (Soto's The Skirt, BCCB 10/92 ) and Rudy Herrera (The Pool
Party) square off in their own contest-for school president. Fifth-grader Miata
decides to "do something big"; her platform promises a school beautification project,
computers, and class trips, but Rudy tempts the fickle electorate with promises of
longer recesses and ice cream every day. Worried that her politics of substance will
be crushed by Rudy's pork, Miata goes right to the top, writing to the real presi-
dent for political advice ("Could you tell us something about winning? We need
help"). Spunky Miata could help even the White House-we never doubt that
she'll triumph. When she does, however, the victory rings hollow; Rudy and his
running mate give the deciding votes to the girls so they, the boys, can play on the
school soccer team. What's the unintentional message here-that the girls can
win only when the boys throw the election? Soft pencil drawings by Velasquez are
stiffly posed but show an appealing group of Latino kids. SSV
STAPLES, SUZANNE FISHER 
Dangerous Skies. 
Farrar, 1996 
232p
ISBN 0-374-31694-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Buck and Tunes are both twelve, and they've been best friends for years; it remains
to be seen, in this little corner of the Chesapeake Bay, how long that can last when
he's white and male and she's black and female. When Buck finds the body of
Jorge Rodrigues, who managed the teams of local laborers, he and Tunes suspect
fair-seeming but foul-tempered Jumbo Rawlin from the start; Jumbo, however,
tells a smooth story that makes Tunes the prime suspect in Jorge's murder. As
Buck tries to exonerate his friend, he runs up against the deep unstated prejudice
that makes a white man's word worth more than a black girl's, and he begins to
understand the reality of his world. While there are some compelling undercur-
rents here, the book's pacing is slow and uneven, and the children's accurate knowl-
edge of the murderer's (rather predictable) identity adds emotional momentum at
the expense of credibility. Staples depicts the sea and salt-soaked world of the bay
vividly, however, and the bitterness of Buck's growing awareness and the far-from-
triumphant ending gives the book a tang of truth. DS
STEVENSON, 
JAMES 
The Oldest Elf written and illus. by James
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13756-3 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13755-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
It's just before Christmas at the North Pole and Santa's elves are turning out today's
favorite toys-video games, helicopters, fire engines, racing cars, dolls-all equipped
to make loud beeps, whines, screeches, and wails. Fresh batteries are the coin of
the realm, with Santa himself passing them out. But in the quiet cellar below,
where the calendar is stuck at 1984, the forgotten yet faithful Elwyn makes the
same toys he's made forever-wooden boats, cars, planes, blocks, puppets, rocking
horses-without a battery or flashing light among them. To be sure, the plot's
predictable and the tone sentimental, but that doesn't stanch the flood of satisfac-
tion we feel when Elwyn and Blitzen (who's been retired in favor of a young thing,
78 * THE BULLETIN
Josephine) take off on their own to deliver the old-fashioned presents. Stevenson's
trademark pen-and-watercolor artwork washes over the bewildered expressions of
Elwyn and the determined look of Blitzen, lending both characters a cheerful home-
liness. This will make a merry addition to any holiday collection. SSV
TAFURI, NANCY 
The Brass Ring; written and illus. by Nancy Tafuri. 
Greenwillow,
1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14169-2 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14168-4 
$16.00 
M 
3-6 yrs
The "when I was little, now I am big" concept is a sure bet for the preschool crowd
and this is another attempt to illuminate that childhood rite of passage. The young
girl of the story takes a beachfront vacation and revels in her bigness. Both big
readers and little listeners, however, will be wondering where the brass ring of the
title is. Not until the story is nearly over do we find out the significance of the
brass ring of the Flying Horse Carousel in Watch Hill, R.I. (according to CIP
notes), when it makes a brief two-page appearance giving our heroine her reward
("YES! I've won another ride!"). Those unfamiliar with the idea of grabbing a
brass ring on a carousel to win a free ride may still be confused since she isn't
holding the ring in the last double-page spread. The art captures the glad adven-
tures of the child in a stylized way: watercolor and colored-pencil figures finely
lined in black ink often appear awkwardly drafted, and the fairground colors are
disappointingly muted. There are two stories here-"once I was little, now I'm
big" and "the brass ring on the carousel"-and only one book. PM
TOMEY, INGRID 
The Queen ofDreamland. Atheneum, 1996 
[18 4p]
ISBN 0-689-80458-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Julie is surprised, on her fourteenth birthday, to get a mysterious note inviting her
to Dreamland to have her palm read; when she succumbs to curiosity and follows
up on the note, she finds that its writer is the woman who gave Julie up for adop-
tion at birth. Julie, frustrated with her parents' uptight and stodgy home, enjoys
Loretta's careless warmth and energetic approach to life, she revels in her relation-
ship with Loretta's fragile son Bagley, and she's determined to unravel some of the
secrets that have plagued her childhood. The writing here is smooth and lively and
the book deals honestly with some adoption issues: Julie is authentically angry
about how much of her past has been hidden from her and how rosily the scenario
of her surrender has been painted, and her ambivalence is credible. The character-
ization is a bit stock, however, and the realistic plot jars uneasily with some more
soap-opera-ish elements: Bagley, paralyzed in early childhood, needs money for
an operation that will allow him to walk again; Loretta was paid off by Julie's
parents to stay out of Julie's life. This is a flawed but entertaining fantasy of a
hidden life that should appeal to many young readers who fear-or hope for-
such secrets of their own. DS
TRUMBLE, KELLY 
Cat Mummies; illus. by Laszlo Kubinyi. 
Clarion, 1996 
[56p]
ISBN 0-395-68707-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Cat mummies . . . thousands and thousands of them . . . what kid could resist?
Opening with the discovery in 1888 of thousands of cat mummies buried in the
OCTOBER 1996 
* 
79
Egyptian desert, Trumble proceeds to give a lively explanation of Egyptian reli-
gion, reincarnation, mummification processes, and the rise and fall of the Egyp-
tian Empire, relating complex ideas in a cogent text. Chapters describing cat
worship, the rise of the city of Bubastis, and Egypt's conquest by Persia are fol-
lowed by an appendix that includes information on human mummification, a list
of animals and the gods they symbolized, a timeline of Egyptian history, a list of
museums that have animal mummies "in stock," brief chapter notes, and a glos-
sary of names and terms. Kubinyi's watercolors (single and half-page illustrations,
with a sprinkling of double-page spreads) add to an already intriguing text, his
clear, unmuddy palette effectively reflecting the clarity of desert light. Design and
layout are attractively handled with large-point text and generous white borders.
Although the text is occasionally sweeping ("All along the Nile people revered cats,
ibises, hawks, beetles and other animals"), it provides a window into the day-to-
day activities of an ancient culture in such a way as to interest readers in additional
reading and research. There is an index and a bibliography. JMD
VIESTI, JOE 
Celebrate! In South Asia; written by Joe Viesti and Diane Hall; illus.
with photographs by Joe Viesti. 
Lothrop, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13775-X 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13774-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Celebrate! In Southeast Asia; written by Joe Viesti and Diane Hall; illus. with pho-
tographs by Joe Viesti. 
Lothrop, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13489-0 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13488-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
In these photoessays on holidays and celebrations in Asia, Viesti's color photo-
graphs are brilliant and involving, featuring all kinds of ceremonial dress, pomp,
and circumstance, from gaily draped elephants to henna-tattooed women to color-
fully costumed revelers engaged in (for the most part) unexplained ritual activities.
While the holidays and celebrations presented are unusual (not many children's
books have information on the Surin Elephant Round-Up or the Esala Perahera, a
Sri Lankan celebration in honor of one of Buddha's teeth), the limited text and
lack of tables of contents and indices make the facts frustratingly difficult to access
and utilize. The introductory paragraph to each title is the same except for the
substitution of South Asia for Southeast Asia in the text, and this apparently easy
culture-swap is indicative of these titles' somewhat generic approach to their topic.
JMD
WAITE, MICHAEL P. Jojofu; illus. by Yoriko Ito. 
Lothrop, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13661-3 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13660-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Jojofu, meaning "heroine," is a white dog owned by a young hunter named Takumi.
When Takumi sets out for the mountains with ten of his strongest dogs, it is
Jojofu who saves him from an avalanche by leading him away from the hillside,
Jojofu who saves him from plummeting over a cliff in the impenetrable fog. There-
fore, when an enraged Jojofu appears ready to attack her master, Takumi trusts to
her judgment and is vindicated when his beloved friend pounces on a huge snake
80 
* 
THE BULLETIN
lurking just behind him. It's a satisfying story of canine heroism (although one
feels a bit sorry for the lesser dogs lost to the avalanche and over the cliff); a source
note describes the tale's origin as the Ima Mukashi scrolls, but there's no informa-
tion about the translation or any intermediate versions. The illustrations play on
the scroll idea, unrolling the story at the beginning and rolling it back up at the
end. The draftsmanship, with its simplicity and tendency towards stiffness, is
often reminiscent of scrollwork, but in other spreads Ito's exploration of dark and
light shadings gives the scenes appropriate drama; Jojofu herself is an engaging
prick-eared presence, whose shining white coat distinguishes her visually from the
rest of the pack. We've had a fair amount of cat stories from across the globe;
here's a noble-dog saga that gives the worthy canine equal time. DS
WINTER, JEANETTE 
Josefina; written and illus. by Jeanette Winter. 
Harcourt,
1996 
36p
ISBN 0-15-201091-2 
$15.00 
R* 
4-8 yrs
Josefina (a character based loosely on Mexican folk artist Josefina Aguilar) creates
her family and her world in tandem, one from flesh-and-blood, the other from
reddish-brown clay. Her hands have molded clay figures since she was a child, and
she continues to work as her family expands to include nine children, who then
help her paint the fired clay: cool turquoises, deep violets, slate blues, warm pinks.
For Josefina, art is not something separate from life: she rises before dawn to
sculpt the sun ("un sol'), flowers bloom in the sunshine and she creates "four women
to sell the blossoms" ("cuatro vendedoras deflores"), and she feeds her child while
making "six babies for six mamas to hold" ("seis madres y seis bebes'). The use of
folk-art perspective further emphasizes the synchronicity of creator and creation; a
tiny Josefina dances in a clay landscape as effortlessly as her plump creations mingle
among her children. While technically this can be seen as a semi-bilingual count-
ing book, it is the story that demands attention. Numbers and Spanish phrases
serve only as unobtrusive headings for framed illustrations, while the text empha-
sizes Josefina's actions, emotions, and the passing of time. With Josefina, Winter
has sculpted a joyful portrait of a Mexican woman and folk artist's life. iViva arte!
AEB
WOLF, JAKE 
Daddy, Could I Have an Elephant?; illus. by Marylin
Hafner. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13295-2 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13294-4 
$15.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
Daddy hasn't even rolled out of bed in the morning, and already Tony has launched
his crusade: "Daddy, I need a pet." As his father attempts to get the day under
control, Tony first proposes an elephant; Daddy's Socratic questioning leads Tony
to recognize the impossibility of his suggestion and to counter with a pony, a
python, a flock of sheep, etc. By the time Tony lands on the idea of a puppy,
Daddy is sufficiently softened up to agree ... or just maybe Daddy knew what he
was doing all along. Tony's loony pet fantasies come to life in Hafner's meticu-
lously detailed line-and-watercolor pictures, in which the wildlife make themselves
comfy in the apartment-a sheep greets bleary-eyed Daddy with a tray of break-
fast and a cheery "Rise and Shine!" and a pelican lolls in bed with a boombox, a
can of sardines, and a volume entitled Poisson Complet. Solid as the pet story may
be, it's just as much fun to watch (put that gender indignation on hold) the Big
Guy and the Little Guy doing their guy things. EB
OCTOBER 1996 
* 81
WORMSER, RICHARD 
American Childhoods: Three Centuries of Youth at
Risk. 
Walker, 1996 
135p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8427-5 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8426-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Disputing the myth of "the good old days," Wormser examines the historical
hardships of childhood, focusing on topics such as Crime and Punishment, Dying
Young, Warrior Children, Sex and Romance, and Working Days. Drawing on
personal accounts and specific incidents, he pays particularly close attention to
those groups that fared least well-immigrants, minorities, and the poor-and
finishes each chapter with an extensive discussion of the contemporary situation.
The emphasis on the anecdotes makes the understanding more immediate but the
conclusions questionable, particularly as there is no supporting information for
sweeping statements such as "It is no wonder that many children died from the
cures rather than the diseases" (is it really clear what the children died of?) or "The
gangs were as violent as any of those roaming city streets today" (how do the
numbers stack up?). When statistics are provided they're often not the ones we're
interested in: it's less relevant what percentage of mill-workers were children than
what percentage of children were mill-workers, and it's similarly difficult to dis-
cern the typicality of many other problems the book addresses. It's still a useful
antidote to sunny histories and historical fictions, as well as to yearning for mytho-
logical easy times. A chapter-by-chapter bibliography is appended, but source
notes for quotes and assertions are not provided; black-and-white photographs
appear throughout. DS
WYNNE-JONES, TIM 
The Maestro. Kroupa/Orchard, 1996 
231p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08894-4 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09544-4 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Burl Crow is fourteen, and he's had a lifetime of abuse from his brutal father and
indifference from his tranquilized and passive mother. He finally flees his father's
rage and seeks shelter, after a night of cold and hunger, at a cabin on the distant
edge of a lake. The cabin is inhabited by Nathaniel Gow, a Glenn Gould-esque
pianist, composer, and eccentric genius, who is conflicted between his need for
solitude and his wish to help Burl, and who finally returns to Toronto leaving Burl
amply supplied in the cabin. When Burl receives the news that Gow has died, he
is desperate to make a safe place for himself. This leads him to attempt to claim
himself as Gow's illegitimate son and the heir to the cabin, then to a mission to
save Gow's last brilliant work-in-progress from oblivion, and finally to a show-
down with his bitter father. Wynne-Jones blends his plot elements seamlessly,
keeping the tone low-key and descriptive and never slackening his steady pace
(though the ending ties things up a bit too neatly). Burl's mixture of bewilder-
ment and determination is believable, and the details of rural Ontario life, where
everyone's familiar with marauding bears and depends on the doughty little local
train, enrich the book and enhance the drama. Wynne-Jones has displayed a knack
for the unusual made credible in his short-story collections (Some of the Kinder
Planets, BCCB 5/95, The Book of Changes, 10/95); it's nice to see that skill ex-
panded into a well-crafted and accessible novel. DS
'4
82 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Carle, Eric. The Art ofEric Carle; illustrated by Eric Carle and with photographs.
Philomel, 1996. [125p] ISBN 0-399-22937. $35.00. Reviewed from galleys.
This is really both a textual and visual anthology: in addition to Carle's autobio-
graphical chapter and the text of his 1990 speech at the Library of Congress, chap-
ters include accolades from Ann Beneduce (Carle's U.S. editor) and from Dr. Viktor
Christen (Carle's German editor). A photoessay on the artist's collage technique
rubs shoulders with a forty-page gallery of his illustrations over the last quarter of
a century, which precedes a look at some of his quick sketches and an illustrated
bibliography of his oeuvre. The book's inviting layout may appeal to artistic young-
sters as well as grown Carle fans, and the information about his working process,
particularly the technical details, is absorbing. The organization seems a little
random (though they're interesting, it's not clear why Carle's 1977 zoo sketches
are even in the work) and results in some redundancy (we hear a few anecdotes
several times over). Still, it's an open and inviting account of one of children's
literature's most popular artists. An index of persons and titles mentioned is in-
cluded. DS
Cohen, Morton N. Lewis Carroll: A Biography. Knopf, 1995. ISBN 0-679-
42298-6. $35.00. 577p.
Old-fashioned without being stodgy, this is a comprehensive account of the life, or
perhaps one should say the lives, of Lewis Carroll and Charles Lutwidge Dodgson.
Cohen shifts between the chronological and the thematic approaches, pausing in
Dodgson's middle years, for instance, to devote chapters to his character, his faith,
and other matters; the effect is pleasantly meandering, as the book places the thor-
ough examination of myriad facets of Dodgson's life above the progress of time.
The result is a particularly strong evocation of both the Oxford milieu and the
layers of connections between Dodgson and the great, the soon-to-be-great, and
the parents of the great. Quotes from and inclusion of original material, such as
Dodgson's diaries and his letters, give an intimacy to the biography and help ex-
pand the analysis of Dodgson's relationship with his child-friends. The style, es-
pecially in the areas of conjecture about events and character, occasionally leans
toward the fulsome, and some of the sweeping statements are eminently challenge-
able ("The Alice books affect all children of all places at all times in a similar way").
Overall, however, the extensive research, the atmosphere, and the detail (we learn
not only about Dodgson's later years, but about Alice's) will engage fans of Carroll
as well as those with a taste for literary history. DS
OCTOBER 1996 
* 83
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Tomey
Africa-stories: Lewin
African Americans-fiction: Staples
African Americans-stories: Saint
James; Serfozo
American Indians-fiction:
Durrant
Animal welfare: Sateren
Arctic: Pfeffer
Art and artists-stories: Barrows;
Poydar; Winter
Asian Americans-fiction: Balgassi
Astronauts-stories: Gaffney
Babies-stories: Cottringer
Bats: Arnold
Bees: Cole
BIOGRAPHIES: Aaseng;
O'Connor
Biology: Simon
Carousels-stories: Tafuri
Cats: Trumble
Cats-stories: Karlin
Child abuse-fiction: Hahn;
Staples; Wynne-Jones
Christmas-stories: Stevenson
Civil War-fiction: Denenberg
Clothes-stories: Ericsson; Small
Colonial life-fiction: Gregory;
Lasky; San Souci
Community history-stories: Hall
CONCEPT BOOKS: Carlstrom;
Grunwald; McMillan; Serfozo;
Winter
Costa Rica: Patent
COUNTING BOOKS:
Carlstrom; McMillan; Winter
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Calvert
Crusades-fiction: Bradford
Death-fiction: Sirof; Wynne-Jones
Divorce-fiction: Danziger
Doctors-fiction: DeFelice
Dogs-stories: McNeal; Waite
Ducks-stories: Hest
Ecology: Gay; Goodman; Patent
Egypt: Trumble
Ethics and values: Staples
FANTASY: Conrad; Creech;
Jones; Pinkwater; Sirof
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Calvert
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Barrows
Fathers and sons-fiction: Hahn;
Wynne-Jones
Fathers and sons-stories: Wolf
Fish-stories: Frieden
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Dematons; Heo
Foxes: Arnold
Friends-fiction: Giff; Neenan;
Peters; Staples
Frogs-stories: Heo
FUNNY STORIES: Clements;
Franklin; MacDonald
Genetics: Aaseng
Ghosts-fiction: Creech
84 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Ghosts-stories: Duquennoy;
Hodges; Johnston
Grandfathers-stories: Gaffney;
Hest
Grandmothers-stories: Ericsson
Growing up-fiction: Staples
Growing up-stories: Tafuri
Hippopotamuses-stories: Lewin
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Bradford; DeFelice; Denenberg;
Gregory; Hahn; Lasky
History, medieval: Bradford
History, U.S.: Hintz; Wormser
Holidays: Bernhard; Viesti
Horses-fiction: Henry
Hurricanes: Lauber
India-folklore: Krishnaswami
Japan-stories: Waite
Korea-fiction: Balgassi
Latinos-fiction: Soto
Libraries: Cummins
Lions-stories: Cottringer
Mexico-stories: Gollub; Winter
Money: McMillan
Moon-stories: Gaffney; Hunter
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Conrad; Danziger; Levitin;
Tomey
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Best; Ericsson
Mothers and sons-fiction:
Franklin; Hahn; Pinkwater
Mules-fiction: Henry
Mummies: Trumble
Music and musicians-fiction:
Wynne-Jones
MYSTERIES: Levitin
MYTHS AND LEGENDS:
Krishnaswami; Philip
Nature study: Arnold;
Brandenburg; Cole; Goodman;
Pfeffer
Neighbors-stories: Poydar
NURSERY RHYMES: Cousins
Opossums-stories: Hunter
Pioneer life-stories: Howard
Plays-stories: Ormerod
POETRY: Archambault; Lansky;
Michelson
Polar bears: Pfeffer
Prohibition: Hintz
Racism-fiction: Staples
Rainforests: Patent
Rats-stories: Karlin
Reading aloud: Karlin; Krishnaswami;
Lansky; Philip; San Souci; Small;
Winter
Reading, beginning: Karlin
Reading, easy: Giff; MacDonald
School-fiction: Clements; Danziger;
Franklin; Neenan; Peters; Soto
School-stories: Fain; Henkes; Ormerod
Scotland-stories: Duquennoy
Short stories: Block
Sisters-fiction: Jones
Snakes-stories: Gollub
Sociology: Wormser
Stepfamilies-stories: Best
Storytelling: Heo; Hodges; Johnston;
Krishnaswami; Philip; San Souci
Storytime: Archambault; Cottringer;
Ericsson; Gaffney; Hest; Hunter;
Ormerod; Poydar; Small; Tafuri;
Winter; Wolf
TALL TALES: Kellogg
Teachers-stories: Henkes
Teenage pregnancy-fiction: Neenan
Trains-fiction: Balgassi
Transportation: Curlee
Vacations-stories: Tafuri
Weather-stories: Poydar
Weather: Lauber
Weddings-stories: Best
Witches-stories: San Souci
Wolves: Brandenburg
World War II: O'Connor
World War II-fiction: Hahn
mom
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
announces our new
GUIDE BOOK TO GIFT BOOKS
An Annotated List of Books for Youth
Holidays, birthdays, and other special occasions call for the giving of the perfect
gift, a book, but it can be daunting to choose in a bookstore wilderness full of
shiny new titles for children. The Guide Book to Gift Books points you to land-
marks in the terrain.
Offering brief annotations for over one hundred of the most satisfying books to
give (and to receive), GB2 is a compact, convenient, and lightweight pocket guide.
Listed books have all been recommended in full Bulletin reviews from the last four
years and are verified as currently in print; entries are divided into age groups and
include author, title, publisher, and current list price.
Advance price of $2.00 until November 1, 1996, $2.50 thereafter; a discount is
available for orders of 25 or more; shipping is additional.
To reserve your copies, contact the Publications Office, Graduate School of Li-
brary and Information Science, 501 E. Daniel, Champaign, IL 61820. You may
also order by phone at 217-333-1359 or via e-mail at puboff@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
izufaw ft~asuao
David F. Birchmnan* illustrated by Daniel San Sauci
"A romp if thur. uvur was ann.... J. Jupiter Jackson is
convinced by a smooth-talking puzzle peddler to parlay his
lightning-quick jigsaw-solving skill into fame and fortune....
A rattling fine yarnY'-Publishers Weekly
"On. fun rida...Dirchman is a supur sturyi.Iiur, and this tall
tale is packed with hilarious scenarios that will have children
enthralled and adults chuckling. San Souci's watercolor
illustrations are no less amusing' -Schiool Library Journal
Ages 4 up. 32 pp Th $ 16.00/0-688-11632-9
LE $15.93/0-688-11633-7
lathrep, lu. &( Shepard
A division of William Morrow &r Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10018
-1
die anc
School
Perfect for Both School and Public Libraries
-Lists and annotates more than
4,200 titles essential to book
collections for adolescents
-Four annual supplements list more
than 600 new titles each
-Covers classic and contemporary
literature, plus books for the
professional librarian
-Arranged by Abridged Dewey
Decimal Classification, with author,
title, subject and analytical indexes
-Includes significant works on
such current issues as violence,
alcohol and drug abuse,
homelessness, and AIDS
queries
than 4,200 
* Helps with
:« 
sas»develop 
o
Junior High School 1
Seventh Edition
.6 
3/4 x 10 1995 - ISSBNr -8
iolume plus four annual paperboi
iyment optioi t. S"S 7/Canac
ion: (available U.S. only):$100 fir
Information, or To Place
o 1-800-37-770 or Fax
50 University Avenue *
"Serce Keeps
is coverng IyaI, 1y, 119
/f
Tk
*NIAK. .O 
E
I 
I 
r- 
) S * 
* 
S 
S 
* 
S
S 
S*i
*I 
LICI 
* 
S 
e::.1I
"A 
moving and potent 
U
story of self-discovery."ll~`lll
EXPANDING TO THREE ISSUES A YEAR!
THE LION
AND THE UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children's Literat
EDITORS:
Louisa Smith, Mankato State Ui
Jack Zipes, University ofMinnesc
he Lion and the Unicorn is
a theme- and genre-
centered journal of
international scope committed t<
• 
• 
1" 
• 
/
serious, ongoing discussion ot
literature for children. Beginning in January 1997, the journal will appear
three times a year instead of two (in January, April, and September),
increasing its book review section and adding a general issue to each
volume. The general issues will present essays on "forgotten authors" and
develop review essays on important publications and scholarship dealing
with children's culture.
YIU~~~~~U~UU 
I~~~----------
---- 
--------
11_
STRUWWELPETER AND CLASSICAL 
Prepaym
CHILDREN'S LITERATURE 
ANW2AL
$22.00, ij
(Volume 20, Number 2) 
$44.00, i
Featuring Heinrich Hoffman's cover illustration from 
FOREIGN
the 568th edition of Der Strrwwelpeter printed in 
$5.45, C;
$6.30, ot
Germany toward the end of the nineteenth century. 
,NGLE-.
SINGLE-l
* STRUWWELPETER, or Happy Tales and Funny Pictures 
$12.00, i
$23.00, i
(Mark Twain) m Mark Twain's "Slovenly Peter" in the 
$230
Payment
Context of Twain and German Culture (J.D. Stahl) N 
dollars or
STRUW'ELPETER at One Hundred and Fifty: Norms, 
MD reside
shipped to
Control, and Discipline in the Civilizing Process (Joachim J. 
7% GST
Savelsberg) 8 Civilizing Manners and Mocking Morality: 
SEND ORI
Dr Heinrich Hoffman's STRUWWELPETER (Eva-Marie 
The John
Box 1996
Metcalf) a "Tricky Dick": STRUWVWELPETER in American
To place
Politics (Gerhard Weiss) * Portrait of the Female Artist As 
or Maste
a Young Robin: Maria Edgewortb's Telltale Tailpiece (Mitzi 
1-800-541
Myers) 
and more... 
(410) 516
orders to
this E-ma
* 
jlorderj]
Visit our WEB site at:
S httpd/www.press.jhu.edu/oumrals/lionand_the_unicorn
ent is required.
SUBSCRIPTIONS:
ndividuals;
nstitutions.
POSTAGE:
anada & Mexico;
itside North America.
ISSUE PRICE:
ndividuals;
nstitutions.
nust be drawn on a U.S. bank in U.S.
made by international money order.
ents add 5% sales tax. For orders
i Canada add
(#124004946RT).
DERS TO:
s Hopkins University Press, P.O.
6, Baltimore, MD 21211-0966
an order using Visa
rCard, call toll-free
8-1784, FAX us at
-6968, or send Visa/MasterCard
il address:
hunix.hcf.jhu.edu
EA6
----------- 
----------------- 
-- 
--
A fascinating look
at the childhood of an
American legend
MINTY
A Story of Young
Harriet Tubman
By Alan Schroeder
S Pictures by
Jerry Pinkney
*"This 
fictionalized account
of Tubman's childhood provides
a cruel snapshot of life as a slave
and the circumstances that fueled
the future Underground Railroad
leader's passion and determin-
ation'--Publishers Weekly (Starred)
*"An exquisitely crafted book...
rich with melodrama, suspense,
pathos, and a powerful
vision of freedom.'
-Kirkus Reviews (Pointer)
"This beautifully illustrated
story can be used to intro-
duce the injustice of slavery
to young audiences'"-School
Library Journal
Full color. Ages 5-9.
Tr. 0-8037-1888-8. $16.99
Lib. 0-8037-1889-6. $16.89
SDial Books
for Young Readers
A Division of Penguin USA
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
-
U
0008-9036(199610)50:2*; 1 -S
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
NEW by the author/illustrator of
The Gifts of Kwanzaa
"The design is the thing in this
celebration of the activities of an
African-American family.., older
children will find the bold use of
color and shapes appealing."
Kirkus Reviews
Sunday
By Synthia Saint James
No day is like Sunday! There's sleeping late and a delicious breakfast and time for
everyone to look over the fat newspaper. Then, dressed in their Sunday best, the family
sets out for church. With relatives and friends, they rejoice in beautiful music and the
preacher's inspiring words. Afterwards. It's a subway trip to Grandma and Grandpa's
and an afternoon just to be together. Most of all. Sunday is for family!
Ages 5-8 * ISBN 0-8075-7658-1 * $15.95
S 
Albert Whitman & Company * 6340 Oakton Street * Morton Grove. Illinois 60053-2723 
r
·
I· 
-- U
I
61 
i9"~
LIIII~
~ ~4R-^. I 111111
