ILLINOI
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
S
S
I'
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
*'
'IfA.^
4t 
V
.0; 
-e
S"In his introduction, Marcus refers to Nordstrom (1910-88)
as 'children's literature's Maxwell Perkins,' a pithy summation
of a passionate personality and a brilliant career. The vibrant
letters collected here preserve Nordstrom's wry wit and unfailing
integrity and her deep affection for writers and illustrators."
-- (starred) ALA Booklist
S"Beguiling... .We can now eavesdrop on history-in-the-making
through Nordstrom's correspondence with such luminaries as
Margaret Wise Brown, Meindert deong, Garth Williams, Louise
Fitzhugh, Ruth Krauss, Mary Rodgers, Russell Hoban, Maurice
Sendak, and E.B. White." -(starred) The Ho Book
' "This extraordinary volume speaks to anyone who loves words,
books, or children." -(starred) 
Publishers Weekly
$22.95TR (0-06-023625-6) 
S HarperCollsChildren's 
Books
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
http//www.harperchildrens.com
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
May 1998
Vol.51 No. 9
I
A LOOK INSIDE
309 THE BIG PICTURE
God's Story ad. by Jan Mark; illustrated by David Parkins
Be Not Far from Me: The Oldest Love Story ad. by Eric Kimmel; illustrated
by David Diaz
Clouds ofGlory: Legends and Stories about Bible Times ad. by Miriam Chaikin;
illustrated by David Frampton
311 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
315 * The Secret Life ofAmanda K Woods by Ann Cameron
317 * The Un-Wedding written and illus. by Babette Cole
327 * Black Cowboy, Wild Horses: A True Story by Julius Lester; illus. by
Jerry Pinkney
336 * Simple Gifts ad. and illus. by Chris Raschka
346 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
347 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
CENTER STAFF
Shirley Chan
Linda Fenster
Kate McDowell
Jordan Martin
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1998 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by David Parkins from God's Story ©1998. Used by permission of Candlewick
Press.
MAY 1998 
* 309
THE BIG PICTURE
God's Story
ad. by Jan Mark; illustrated by David Parkins
Be Not Far from Me: The Oldest Love Story
ad. by Eric Kimmel; illustrated by David Diaz
Clouds of Glory: Legends and Stories about
Bible Times
ad. by Miriam Chaikin; illustrated by David Frampton
Bible stories are not unusual fare for children's books, and devotional literature for
youth has long been a staple in library collections. This spring, however, there
appears to be an unusual number of Bible-based titles, and not just the usual pic-
ture-book retellings or Biblical compendiums. This publishing season we have
three books based on the Old Testament and the Midrash, the explanation and
commentary of Jewish rabbis and scholars.
Our cover of David and his sheep is from Jan Mark's God's Story. Mark
follows her Bible-based picture book The Tale of Tobias (BCCB 12/96) with the
more ambitious undertaking of distilling the story of God's creation of mankind
and the evolution of Judaism into twelve eminently readable chapters. From the
first seven days of creation to Solomon and the promise of the Messiah, Mark
retells the stories of the people of Israel with wit, humor, and compassion. Her
text is poetic and spare, as is the overall design of the book. Mark's is an accessible
God, frequently addressed by His creations ("Moses said, 'Lord, when the people
do right, they are your people, and when they do wrong, they are my people. Right
or wrong, Lord, they are yours'") and sometimes learning as much from them as
they learn from him, as when God speaks to Samuel about choosing a new king
from among the sons ofJesse: "'They are allfine young men, but wait until I tell you
who to choose.' For God now knew, and Samuel knew, that looks are not every-
thing." David Parkins' ink and gouache illustrations (some were left black and
white, and others were digitally colored in an understated palette) have the same
elegant restraint of the text. Graceful curves and thick lines add substantially to
the visual drama in compositions depicting Abraham about to sacrifice young Isaac,
the angry faces of the builders of the Tower of Babel, and the inky cloud that
dooms Sodom and Gomorrah to destruction. The controlled use of white space,
the discreet and effective use of color, and the tall trim size enhance the memo-
rable, inviting text.
310 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Eric Kimmel tells tales of many heroes from many cultures, culling his
subjects' stories from fragments of traditional lore and variants of cultural legend.
In Be Not Far from Me, he retells the stories of Biblical heroes and heroines in
formal but accessible prose. In five sections (Abraham and His Children, Out of
Egypt, Judges and Kings, Prophets, Exile and Redemption), he presents not only
the stories of individuals but the story of the Jewish people, a faith, and a covenant.
Kimmel's retelling features an Old Testament God of terrible might and majesty,
a righteous God who is swift to anger and demanding of the faithful. David Diaz
eschews his usual busy collage backgrounds for semi-silhouettes of Old Testament
personages set against a rainbow of hues in full-page compositions notable for
their controlled authority. The cut-paper portraits have solid black edges offset by
the integration of translucent colors that give them a stained glass effect. From the
use of color in headings and chapter banners to the small thumbnail inserts that
open and close each story, this is a carefully designed volume, its oversized trim
adding a hefty physical weight to what is, despite its boldly eye-catching packag-
ing, a very traditional interpretation.
Miriam Chaikin's Clouds ofGlory, on the other hand, is less conceptually
traditional than either of the previous titles. Rather than concentrating on retell-
ing the plots of familiar Bible stories, Chaikin spends more time on the Holy One,
on the personality and motivations of God Himself. It is an intriguing approach.
Her God speaks through the angels that achieve ultimate bliss from their nearness
to the presence of glory. Chaikin's angels are both female and male, and one even
addresses an apparently long-standing gender issue: "Noticing that the Record
Keepers listed the names of the boys, but not of the girls, Raziel told the Holy One
of it. And she pointed out to him the likely reason. 'The Record Keepers are all
males,' she said." The angels have a pivotal role in Chaikin's retold and original
Midrashim, as do theological questions of the existence of good and evil, the role
of Satan, the ideas that God created out of love and that to be in the presence of
glory, the presence of God, is to experience eternal bliss. Trails of circular stars
bursting with rays dance through chapter headings and closings. Framed, full-
page colored woodcuts, with wide-eyed angels and other faithful smiling from
David Frampton's gold-toned, naively drafted illustrations, suit the rather fanciful
nature of Chaikin's text.
Underlying the obvious purpose of these titles-the retelling, adapta-
tion, and creation of Midrashim-is another less apparent but still unifying theme.
All three books present an image of God, and all three can be viewed as a subtle
discussion on the nature of God and creation as well as on humanity's place in the
universe. Although organized religion and youthful faith are addressed in fiction
titles such as Ruby's Miriam's Well (BCCB 5/93) and Rylant's A Fine White Dust
(9/86), and Bible stories are retold in apparently infinite numbers of Noah's Arks
and Nativities, theological questions related to the inherent nature of Divinity are
less plentiful. Three books for youth that deal with the same topic may appear to
demand the selection of a single volume only; a commitment to the inclusion of
multiple voices, however, makes purchase of all three of these titles a worthy alter-
native. Sources are carefully noted for each title, and each reteller introduces his or
her work with explanatory text. (Imprint information appears on p. 316, 326,
and 330.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
·03
MAY 1998 
* 311
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALCOCK, VIVIEN 
Stranger at the Window. 
Farrar, 1998 
[208p]
ISBN 0-395-81661-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Lesley, who is recuperating from hepatitis at Aunt Amy's London home while
Mom is in Cairo, is convinced she's seen a wild, dark-haired child staring out the
attic window of the Harwood house next door. When she confronts the neighbor
children with her observations, they not only deny them but suggest she is still
hallucinating from her fever. Soon, however, incontrovertible proof in the form of
a terrified little refugee boy of unknown foreign origin ends up in Aunt Amy's
yard, and the prickly, contentious Harwood children are forced to enlist Lesley's
help to protect Erri from the authorities, who, they are certain, will return him to
his own country and place him in mortal danger. Alcock adroitly juggles elements
of the classic gothic potboiler with the contemporary issue of refugee asylum, and
she tosses in some sly jabs at chronic do-gooders who blithely run charity opera-
tions but balk at actual human distress. The energetic group dynamics among the
children and the sharp, realistic dialogue keep the pace lively. Readers will greet
the bittersweet conclusion, which finds Erri adapting all too well away from his
protectors in a loving foster home, with a good, satisfied sigh. EB
ARMSTRONG, CAROLE 
Women of the Bible: With Paintings from the Great Art
Museums ofthe World. Simon, 1998 
[45p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-81728-2 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Twenty-one Biblical heroines are depicted in paintings from the fifteenth through
nineteenth centuries in this stately compendium. From Eve to Bathsheba, from
Judith to Naomi, in paintings by Piero Della Francesca, Dante Gabriel Rossetti,
and Caravaggio, the subjects glow from these glossy pages. Each full-page paint-
ing is preceded by a scriptural quotation and a page-long introduction to the woman,
her story, and the painting that depicts her. Armstrong's straightforward summa-
ries of the Bible stories are of necessity brief given the format, but stylistic and
conceptual glitches sometimes mar the compressed accounts. Still, this title offers
a window to both Bible stories and paintings that may well serve a religion or art
teacher seeking an unusual angle of approach to their curriculum. An index of
artists and paintings gives the birth and death years of the painters and the mu-
seum locations of each painting. JMD
BEARD, DARLEEN BAILEY 
The Flimflam Man; illus. by Eileen Christelow. 
Farrar,
1998 
[96p]
ISBN 0-374-32346-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
It all starts in Wetumka, Oklahoma in July 1950 outside the Wide-A-Wake Cafe.
Clara Jean, looking every inch the neglected child that she is, teases narrator Bobbie
Jo about her stuttering problem: "Wh-whatcha' g-got in th-the b-box, B-Bobbie
Jo?" To keep Clara Jean from snatching the giveaway puppy from the box, Bobbie
312 
* THE BULLETIN
hastily offers the hound to "a fabulous fat man with a checkered vest, a gold pocket
watch and black-rimmed glasses, getting out of a turquoise Chevy. . .. 'Allow me
to introduce myself,' he said, holding out his hand. 'My name is F. Bam Morrison,
advance man for Bohn's United Circus shows."' Quicker than that puppy can
become a circus dog, F. Bam Morrison is working his game ("A crying shame.
Some of you may not get to see Bohn's United Circus Shows") and Bobbie and
Clara Jean declare a truce and become his assistants. Tickets go fast for a circus no
one will see, and when Morrison skips town, the girls chase him down for a plucky
confrontation. Although the characterizations aren't deep, Bobbie Jo's voice, as
she struggles with her stuttering on a reel-to-reel tape machine (something Morrison
recommended), misses her deceased father, and manages her edgy relationship with
Clara Jean, sounds just right most of the time. Christelow's black-and-white draw-
ings extend this small town and its visiting huckster with an affectionate touch.
The affable flimflam man's hasty retreat leaves Bobbie with some philosophical
musings ("I-I got this funny feeling he was really sorry. True-blue sorry") and
eventually results in an annual event appropriately called The Sucker Day Festival.
Kids will enjoy this easy chapter book (based on a true incident) because it's just a
plain good yarn, and afterwards it may engender some discussion about faith and
gullibility. PM
BLAKE, QUENTIN 
Mrs. Armitage and the Big Wave; written and illus. by Quentin
Blake. 
Harcourt, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201642-2 
$15.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
Mrs. Armitage, a spindly, bespectacled, gray-headed woman, is strangely incon-
gruous in the role of surfer gal. Nevertheless, she and her dog, Breakspear, "swim
out to sea and wait for the Big Wave" in this cumulative comedy illustrated in
Blake's scribbly cartoon style, where watercolors splash bright hues in between
scratchy black details. Little by little, Mrs. Armitage goes back for things she has
forgotten. Her repeated refrain of "what we need here" is followed by an accumu-
lation of stuff: an inflatable desert island to keep her dog afloat, visor and umbrella
for protection from the sun's rays, "a selection of light snacks," a boat hook to ward
off shark attacks, and so on, until eventually her surfboard becomes something of
an afterthought. Just as the Big Wave arrives, they notice "a little girl named
Miranda who had swum out too far and was in trouble." With "a California
slither, a Bali swerve, a Waikiki flip," our surfer gal becomes a heroine, returning
the endangered child to her parents (who seem strangely calm) and then it's back
to what she came for... a triumphant ride on the Big Wave. Young listeners will
appreciate the eccentric heroine and her high-spirited antics, and, as always, Blake's
loopy illustrations make a closer look irresistible. PM
BOLDEN, TONYA 
And Not Afraid to Dare: The Stories of Ten African American
Women. 
Scholastic, 1998 
2 1 6p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-48080-4 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 5-9
From Ellen Craft, the slave who escaped across the Mason-Dixon line to freedom,
to Jackie Joyner-Kersee, who raced across the finish line for Olympic gold, ten
African-American women are showcased in these chronologically arranged short
biographical portraits. Representing a diversity of experience are well-known indi-
viduals such as Mary McLeod Bethune, Leontyne Price, Toni Morrison, and Mae
C. Jemison, as well as lesser-known figures such as Charlotte Grimke and Mary
MAY 1998 
* 
313
Fields. Bolden is at her best when she sticks to relating the inherently interesting
accomplishments of her subjects. She hinders her own efforts when her under-
standably impassioned prose slips into the dogmatic or melodramatic, which un-
dercuts the innate drama of the lives themselves. In addition, the text is sometimes
carelessly and ungrammatically constructed, as when it states that one of Ida B.
Wells' articles "informs the reader that of the thousands of African-Americans
lynched since the end of the Civil War, 'only three white men have been tried,
convicted, and executed."' A portrait or photograph of each woman is included as
is a set of twenty-one mini-bios ("And Some Others Who Dared"), a selected
bibliography, and an index, providing plenty of launchpads for further study of
brave African-American women. PM
BORDEN, LOUISE 
Good-bye, Charles Lindbergh: Based on a True Story; illus. by
Thomas B. Allen. 
McElderry, 1998 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-689-81536-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
As Gil scans the overcast skies above his father's cotton farm in spring of 1929, he
spies a biplane making its descent; after two futile attempts at landing, the plane
veers off to a nearby empty field, and Gil races over on horseback to join an excited
group of curious neighbors. Although they've never seen a plane up close, all have
been infected by barnstormers and newspaper stories with an avid enthusiasm for
flying machines, and they immediately recognize the shy, taciturn pilot as famed
aviator Charles Lindbergh. Refusing offers of hospitality, Lindbergh camps out
near his Curtiss Falcon for the night; come morning, Gil and the locals are back,
and after their brief brush with the great man himself, they clutch the orange
wings of the plane until Lindbergh signals them to release it for take-off. The
children fairly burst with pride-"He waved back just before he tipped his wings!"-
but the seasoned farmers put the episode rapidly into perspective:
"Maybe . .. Maybe not." Borden judiciously confines background on Lindbergh's
transatlantic flight (and the veracity of this event) to an introductory note and
focuses instead on aviation mania and accompanying celebrity worship that gripped
the country. Allen's colored-pencil drawings are reminiscent of pastels in their
grainy texture, and, if somewhat stiffly rendered, they have a dusty, bygone feel
appropriate to the retrospective story. Although many teachers will want to incor-
porate this title into history units, the substantial typeface, brief but fluid sen-
tences, and airy artwork should prove equally enticing to independent readers. EB
BRADLEY, KIMBERLY BRUBAKER 
Ruthies Gift; illus. by David Kramer. 
Delacorte,
1998 
150p
ISBN 0-385-32525-8 
$14.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Set against the backdrop of America's imminent involvement in World War I,
Brubaker's first novel loosely chronicles some of her grandmother's experiences
growing up in rural Indiana. Eight-year-old Ruthie Hawk is the only third grader
in her school ("It happened again. I'm the entire third grade") and is anxious to
behave like a lady despite living with six brothers ("How could she even hope to be
a lady when she was surrounded by so many boys?"). The short chapters will fly by
for young readers as Ruthie challenges her fourth-grade nemesis, Maude ("She's a
very hittable, very hateable person"), witnesses tragedy (her brother Paul loses part
of his finger in a graveyard accident), schemes to buy a Sears Roebuck doll ("If I
314 
* THE BULLETIN
had a doll like this, I could be a lady"), and survives a life-threatening bout with
pneumonia. The tale of Ruthie's gradual maturity into young womanhood, laced
with gentle humor, unfolds in small acts of courage and sacrifice that, fortunately,
are never allowed to make her into a goody-two-shoes. Tiny incidents of faith,
conflict, failure, and love ultimately combine to give readers a strong, absorbing
family story with particular appeal to girls, who may or may not understand all the
fuss about being a lady. In fact, when Ruthie calls at the post office for a package
(the gift of the title), she knows (and so do readers) that she doesn't need the doll
she receives to make her a lady. She already is one. PM
BRANDFORD, HENRIETTA 
Fire, Bed, &Bone. 
Candlewick, 1998 
122p
ISBN 0-7636-0338-4 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-9
A nameless old hunting dog tells the story of her master's family and her own in
late fourteenth-century England. When Rufus and his wife, Comfort, are jailed
for their presumed part in the Peasants' Rebellion, the miller's son attempts to take
possession of our dog narrator much as he seized Rufus' house, but the dog escapes
to follow her master and, after Rufus's execution, attends his wife and growing
children. The combination of dog story and rarely addressed political history is
quite effective: the doggy plot has inherent appeal, and the implicit parallels between
the life of the powerless humans and the life of the animals, both subject to arbitrary
rule and both dependent on hard labor in a difficult world, are subtly made.
Brandford keeps her anthropomorphism restrained but makes good use of it,
allowing it to simplify the view of the human situation as well as employing it to
keep a reassuring distance away from the tragedy. Reminiscent in concept of
Lawson's classic Ben and Me but with a sharper edge, this will draw kids with an
interest in the world of The Midwife's Apprentice (BCCB 5/95). DS
BRISSON, PAT 
The Summer My Father Was Ten; illus. by Andrea Shine. 
Boyds
Mills, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-435-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-lOyrs
A young girl tells about the tradition of planting a garden with her father every
year, and how "every spring my father tells me about Mr. Bellavista and the sum-
mer my father was ten." Mr. Bellavista was an old man who would clear away the
junk from a vacant lot next to his house and plant a garden full of tomatoes,
onions, and peppers: "He didn't talk much to other people who lived in the
building, and when he did talk, his accent made his words sound strange. My
father and his friends made fun of him sometimes and called him Old Spaghetti
Man." One summer the boys did more than make fun of Mr. Bellavista-retriev-
ing an errant baseball, they ruined his garden. The following spring, one repen-
tant boy (the narrator's father) and Mr. Bellavista plant a new garden, "and when
the tomatoes were red and ripe (and a little bigger than baseballs) . .. my father
helped Mr. Bellavista make spaghetti sauce. Then they all ate dinner together in
Mr. Bellavista's apartment and listened to opera on the radio." Brisson has a firm
grip on the sentimental elements of her story, and her framing device-the daugh-
ter telling her father's story-adds both distance and emphasis. A masterful han-
dling of white space adds to the airy lightness of Shine's watercolors, and while the
human figures are sometimes awkwardly posed and drafted, the gardens, houses,
and other exterior settings are deftly executed with rich details that evoke a strong
sense of place. JMD
MAY 1998 
* 315
BURKS, BRAN 
Walks Alone. 
Harcourt, 1998 
115p
ISBN 0-15-20162-0 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
In 1879, Walks Alone, a fifteen-year-old girl of the Warm Springs Apaches (New
Mexico), is wounded as she escapes a brutal attack on her tribe by the White Eyes
(U.S. Army). The assault leaves her mother dead and the fate of her grandmother
and Little Hawk, a young warrior whom she loves, uncertain. She and her younger
brother, One Who Is Quiet, encounter another survivor, Gray in Hair, who sub-
sequently gives birth to her first child, and together they work at survival. Not for
the fainthearted reader, this realistically grueling account follows Walks Alone
through a sequence of harrowing, nail-biting experiences. She is captured by the
army; she escapes, ends up hiding in a tree (naked, with dogs hot on her trail), and
is recaptured and beaten. Her brother dies, she has a narrow escape from two
Mexican scalpers, and she is finally reunited with her people (her grandmother
and Little Hawk). This happy moment provides only a brief respite for readers
before the last chapter delivers the final tragedy ("Walks Alone's hands were tied
behind her back, the leather thong cutting deep into her wrists.... She lifted her
chin. She was an Apache. Her captors would not see her cry"). Grim realities in
this historical fiction offering will provide plenty of food for thought as young
readers contemplate the plight ofAmerican Indians, personalized here in the life of
one who displays an enduring sense of survival and indomitable courage. A brief
epilogue and bibliography are appended. PM
BYARS, BETSY Disappearing Acts: A Herculeah Jones Mystery. 
Viking,
1998 
[128p]
ISBN 0-670-87735-2 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Herculeah takes a backseat to her best friend, Meat, in this fifth entry in the popu-
lar series. Meat is participating in his first stand-up comedy workshop at the new
comedy club Funny Bonz when he finds a dead body in the men's room. The
workshop leader goes to check the bathroom and is gone a suspiciously long time;
when he returns, he reports that there is no body and it must have been an April
Fool's Day joke. Meat doesn't believe it-after all, he has the body's wallet in his
back pocket-and he and Herculeah start investigating. Herculeah, however, is
sidetracked by the photos she develops from a used camera she bought off the
dollar table at the local discount store, photos that could provide clues to the where-
abouts of Meat's long-lost father. An unbelievable combination of luck and plot
coincidences reveals the murderer to Meat, and, in an oddly touching if somewhat
absurd climax, he finds himself comforting the weeping, unintentional murderess
at the scene of the original crime. While this novel takes a detour around the
labors-of-Hercules theme, and it doesn't have quite the wit or pace of the previous
series titles, it does have a satisfying reunion between Meat and his father and a
strong indication of a future Herculeah-n encounter with a lion-a Nemean lion,
that is. JMD
CAMERON, ANN 
The Secret Life of Amanda K. Woods. 
Foster/Farrar,
1998 
[208p]
ISBN 0-374-36702-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 4-7
Amanda's year of change begins with the departure of her next-door neighbor and
best friend, Lyle, which leaves her friendless in her small Wisconsin town. With
316 
* 
THE BULLETIN
the aid of advice from Margaret, her beautiful, successful, and socially calculating
older sister, Amanda actually succeeds in seeing her classmates less defensively and
even acquiring a new friend, Pam, whose affectionate family and self-disciplined
study habits provide Amanda with new perspective on family relationships and
new standards of achievement. Amanda begins to realize, as Margaret stretches
her wings in preparation for departure for college, that her judgmental mother's
preplanned roles for her daughters ("She's average, but she's very sweet," says her
mother in summation when she doesn't realize Amanda's listening) don't have to
define their lives after all, and that she does have the power to change her life. The
events aren't the point of this book as much as the maturation that happens as a
result of them; as with Cameron's Huey and Julian books, the benefit lies in seeing
how these circumstances reveal and shape the protagonist. Also as in those books,
Cameron displays a virtuoso gift for precision, telling observations, and creative
but unforced imagery-her deceptively simple yet excellent writing doesn't waste
time with self-advertisement but merely serves good reading (for instance, Amanda's
mother's adding machine "seems to be calculating the exact sum of Amanda").
The novel's 1950s time period makes Amanda's physical isolation more effective
but doesn't distance the concerns from contemporary kids; her negotiation of the
delicate nuances of the myriad relationships between people will open the eyes of
many readers attempting to do the same. DS
CARLSON, LORI MARIE, comp. 
Sol a Sol; tr. by Lori Marie Carlson and Lyda
Aponte de Zacklin; illus. by Emily Lisker. 
Holt, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-4373-X 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Fifteen poems in English and Spanish lead readers from sol a sol, sunup to sun-
down, in this affectionate paean to hearth and home. Each poem presents an
aspect of a child's day, from her mother making tortillas with a rolling pin that
sings "I love you, I love you," to her grandmother, "a honey-colored woman/
warm as the sand/ on her tropical island," to a setting sun "red like manzanas...
like an overripe mango or peach/ waiting to be eaten." The images are sensual and
solid, the language flowing beautifully in both English and Spanish. Lisker's acrylic
paintings reflect the vibrant intensity of the poems, the palette of deep reds, yel-
lows, and purples warming the double-page spreads. The compositions are gener-
ous and uncrowded, and the various active figures (dancing, bicycle riding, even
peeling potatoes) curve gracefully amongst the words. This is a deceptively simple
collection that has a wide range of appeal and curricular applicability. JMD
CHAIKIN, MIRIAM, ad. 
Clouds of Glory: Legends and Stories about Bible Times;
illus. by David Frampton. 
Clarion, 1998 
118p
ISBN 0-395-74654-X 
$19.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
See this month's Big Picture, p. 309, for review.
CHAMBERS, VERONICA 
Amistad Rising: A Story of Freedom; illus. by Paul
Lee. 
Harcourt, 1998 
40p
ISBN 0-15-201803-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
This handsome volume, replete with Lee's rugged, earthy portraiture and sweep-
ing seascapes, attempts to bring the complexities of the 1839 Amistad slave mu-
tiny within the grasp of a picture-book audience. Chambers appeals directly to
youngsters' imaginations in a breathy, emotional opening: "Stand with me on the
MAY 1998 
* 317
shores of New London, Connecticut. ... .Ask 
the ocean about the legend of
Joseph Cinqud, and this is what you might hear." After this catchy beginning,
Chambers launches into a simplified outline of events, told partly in an unneces-
sarily confusing flashback. Although she briefly mentions that the rebels commu-
nicated with their American listeners through an interpreter, Cinqud is inadvertently
presented as a skilled English orator ("The indisputable international law is that
the stealing of slaves from Africa is now illegal," the text has him saying; "By the
strength of our spirit and with the assistance of our ancestors, we are not slaves
today"). Listeners savvy enough to recognize elements of fictionalization and to
follow the courtroom portion of this account will probably be better served by
Jurmain's and Myers' lucid and readable histories, both reviewed below. EB
COLBERT, JAN, ed. 
Dear Dr. King: Letters from Today's Children to Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr.; edited by Jan Colbert and Ann McMillan Harms; illus. with
photographs by Ernest C. Withers and Roy Cajero. 
Hyperion, 1998 
64p
ISBN 0-7868-0417-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-7
Contemporary Memphis schoolchildren, ages seven to thirteen, wrote these letters
to offer their thoughts and questions to Dr. King. The format is often cramped
instead of visually exciting, but it does take an active role: light blue, white, black,
and gray backgrounds, sprinkled with photographs (presumably of the kids them-
selves as well as important moments in the Civil Rights movement), showcase the
letters, some lying resolutely on the page, others tumbling, swirling, and sprawling
across double-page spreads. The correspondence itself provides an array of emo-
tion and feeling ranging from the insightful ("I thought your speech would do it,
but it didn't, but you tried. Love, Maggie, Age 7") to the kid-practical ("Did you
have verbs when you were in school?"). The preponderance of letters (and their
tendency towards earnest well-meaning rather than originality) probably guaran-
tees that this book won't get a cover-to-cover reading, but the engaging missives,
resounding with themes of hope, despair, idealism, and realism, would enhance
your next MLK celebration and provide readers with a springboard for their own
messages to King. PM
COLE, BABETTE 
The Un-Wedding; written and illus. by Babette Cole. 
Knopf,
1998 
33p
ISBN 0-679-88898-5 
$17.00 
R 6-10 yrs
All is not well on the Ogglebutt estate. When parental disagreements over petty
matters erupt into open hostilities ("she put fireworks in his sausages and mashed
potatoes" and "he boiled her underwear until it shrank"), the "perfectly beautiful
children" consult the minister and arrange an un-wedding for their miserable par-
ents. Black-clad guests attend the rites; a smoke-gray cake, with a miniature un-
bride and un-groom plummeting from the top tier, is served; the newly un-weds
take off on separate honeymoons; the siblings bulldoze the mansion and oversee
the construction of new domiciles (better suited to each parent's taste and lifestyle),
connected by a tunnel for the children's exclusive use. Fractious pencil lines,
weighted down or diffused (whichever is appropriate to the situation) with water-
color, put the action into each exaggerated spread, lending a campy exuberance to
the proceedings. There's bound to be some outrage concerning the levity of this
take on divorce, but Cole delivers an indisputable and much-needed message--it's
not the kids' fault-with a broad nod to the dark humor of a grimly serious situa-
tion which many adults would prefer to ignore, but which similarly embroiled
318 
* THE BULLETIN
child listeners will probably recognize. There are no gentle adult assurances of "It
will be all right, dear" in either the text or the rollicking watercolor spreads; in-
deed, the Ogglebutt kids refuse to ride the storm of their parents' breakup with
patience and meekness. They're powerful, they take control, and, safely distanced
within their comical fairy-tale environs, they nudge their young comrades along
the path to some psychic relief. EB
CROWE, CAROLE 
Sharp Horns on the Moon. 
Boyds Mills, 1998 
112p
ISBN 1-56397-671-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Ivy Marie is isolated on an island, homeschooled by her aunt, and lovingly ignored
by her father, so meeting a ghost-girl her own age named Eleanor who wants to be
her friend is naturally perceived as a boon instead of a curse. Eleanor and Ivy are,
at first, inseparable, Ivy only beginning to question Eleanor's motives and behav-
ior when she realizes that Eleanor may be responsible for Ivy's mother's untimely
death. The ghostly manifestation set up so promisingly at the beginning of Crowe's
novel begins to unravel as Crowe blithely bypasses some basic tenets of ghost and
time-travel fantasy. Ivy does what her mother could not-she goes back in time to
save Eleanor and her family from drowning when their ship is led astray by
shipwreckers' lights-eliminating the ghostly Eleanor and replacing her with a
line of (live) descendants, the youngest of which becomes Ivy's new friend in the
present. The logic of the plotline gives way to contrivance as the climax approaches,
and the conclusion is so fraught with coincidence that even a willing suspension of
disbelief is not enough to make it resonate satisfactorily. Ivy is a likeable protago-
nist, however, and the quirkiness of secondary players like her aunt and father
makes them memorable. The island setting is poetically realized, with the sea an
ever-present force and influence, and the combination of a haunted island, a time-
traveling rescue, and a happy ending will probably be enough to keep undemand-
ing ghost fans involved in even this unlikely turn of events. JMD
DONOVAN, MARY LEE, ad. 
Won't You Come and Play with Me?; illus. by Cynthia
Jabar. 
Houghton, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-395-84630-7 
$16.00 
R 3-5 yrs
Children's epic distractibility generates some modest verses here, originating in
street rhymes of early twentieth-century Chicago, which the author extends in
keeping with their oral form. The text begins with a graphic-Nathan's list of
things to do, including haircut, bread, bananas, strawberries, and fish. Naturally,
all of these are accomplished by or subsumed in playing: "Down through the
village green I go-/ a shortcut through the flowers;/ for if I poke, my mother will
say/ I romped with the dogs for hours./ E-I-O for Flossie,/ E-I-O for Flossie;/
won't you come, won't you come,/ won't you come and run with me?" And
needless to say, the food on the list takes priority over the haircut. Summing up
the day is a final verse inviting Mama to sit with the boy at supper and share a story
afterwards. Jabar's illustrations are as simply composed and cheerfully toned as
the text. Large-scale figures, heavily outlined in black against clear bright hues,
seem caught in a constant motion reflecting the thrust of the rhymes themselves.
For young viewers, there's little detail to clutter the scenes, but plenty of action to
hold their attention. There's also a comforting, organic roundness to most of the
shapes, with Mama's curving over her child in a pose reminiscent of Keats' Snowy
Day and the whole panoply suggestive of Lois Lenski enlarged with living color.
BH
MAY 1998 
* 319
DUFFEY, BETSY 
Cody's Secret Admirer; illus. by Ellen Thompson. 
Viking,
1998 [77p]
ISBN 0-670-87400-0 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Cody (from Virtual Cody, BCCB 6/97, etc.) is shocked to receive a big, soppy, and
anonymous Valentine in the mail ("I'm not ready for a secret admirer," he pro-
tests, "I'm only nine"). Egged on by his friend Chip, he embarks on a mission to
ascertain which of his classmates is responsible. The pace is brisk, Cody's rueful
reflections are primary-school witty, and his interjected Top Ten lists ("Top Ten
Best Surprises I've Never Gotten"; "Top Ten Lists of Things a Teacher Would
Never Understand") give a rhythmic conclusion to every chapter. The subplot,
wherein Cody thinks his parents have arranged a marriage for him, stretches be-
yond the effective realism of the rest of the book, but Cody's reactions to impend-
ing marriage are comically consonant with the theme. For Valentine's Day or
whenever early love is in the air, this will satisfy kids hoping they can hang out in
the library until it all blows over. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. DS
DURRANT, LYNDA 
Beaded Moccasins: The Story of Mary Campbell. Clarion,
1998 
192p
ISBN 0-395-85398-2 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-8
"The air is soft, my dress is new, my chemise is from Paris, my lips still taste of
cinnamon. This is my day." That's a promising start, but Mary Campbell's twelfth
birthday takes a downward turn when an argument with her mother sends her
wandering off their farm in the Susquehanna Valley frontier, and then plummets
into tragedy when she and a neighbor woman and her son are kidnapped by Unami
Delaware. Mary has been taken as a replacement for the sachem's deceased grand-
daughter, and Mrs. Stewart is intended to be wife to a member of the tribe; the
fretful Stewart toddler impedes their arduous trek westward and is promptly scalped.
Despite the initial horror of the abduction, Mary eventually adjusts to life among
her new family-grudgingly at first, and then with some spirit, as she realizes that
she is temperamentally better suited to tending corn outdoors than carding wool
indoors, and that her new mother and sibling shower her with more affection than
her overworked mother and spoiled brother ever did. Durrant's exceptionally
graceful prose and nonjudgmental description of the cultural chasm between the
colonists' and Delawares' worlds set this novel apart from titles such as
Panagopoulous' Little Ship Under Full Sail (BCCB 3/98). Although a concluding
note states that the real Mary did in time return to white society, the fictionaliza-
tion ends with her triumphant naming day ceremony among the Unami; most
readers will be content to remember her there. An afterword gives some back-
ground about Mary Campbell and other historical characters; a glossary and list of
sources is also appended. EB
FIGLEY, MARTY RHODES 
Noah's Wife; illus. by Anita Riggio. 
Eerdmans,
1998 
32p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8028-5107-X 
$15.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8028-5133-9 
$7.50 
M 
4-7 yrs
Ever wondered what Noah's wife thought about that big boat in her backyard? In
this slight offering Noah's wife puts up with lots of animals ("She fed them, petted
them, sang to them, and put them to bed each night"), "piles of gopher wood
320 
* THE BULLETIN
everywhere," and the derision of the locals ("She's married to that crazy man who's
building a boat that's too big to fish in"). Her faith in her husband's message from
God keeps her going until the rainbow appears ("A new world of hope and love
was beginning"). Children familiar with Noah's situation may appreciate his wife's
perspective, but this overly sweet story combines cloying language with candy-
colored, unsubtle coloring-book images that will have little appeal for young view-
ers. Pass up this well-intentioned but saccharine confection for something more
palatable, like Sasso's Prayerfor the Earth: The Story ofNaamah, Noah's Wife (BCCB
7/97). PM
FLEMING, CANDACE 
The Hatmaker's Sign: A Story by Benjamin Franklin; illus. by
Robert Andrew Parker. 
Orchard, 1998 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33075-3 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30075-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Any student who has been awarded a "C-" by a (obviously obtuse) teacher for a
(indisputably magnificent) literary assignment will find him- or herself here in the
company of greatness. Thomas Jefferson, "flushed red with anger and embarrass-
ment," watches as the Continental Congress picks his Declaration of Indepen-
dence to shreds and is consoled, or at least calmed, by a story from elder statesman
Benjamin Franklin. Once a colonial hatmaker drafted a succinctly worded sign for
his business, but on his way to the signmaker all manner of well-meaning neigh-
bors deleted what they regarded as redundancies, leaving the hatmaker with a blank
page to present to the puzzled painter. The signpainter suggested the original
wording, and the hatmaker happily exclaimed, "How clever of you to think of it.
That is exactly right! Indeed, it's perfect!" Parker's spidery, scrawling black lines
lend shape to his boldly applied watercolors, which bleed into the shadowing and
shading of a perturbed and somewhat arrogant-looking Jefferson and his wise and
cunning mentor, Franklin. This parable will find itself equally at home in Lan-
guage Arts and American History classes and would make an encouraging gift for
any aspiring young writer. EB
FOGGO, CHERYL 
One Thing That's True. Kids Can, 1998 
128p
ISBN 1-55074-411-9 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Roxanne's getting ready for the school year to end and her great
summer to start, but events rear their ugly head: first she's groped by the class
troublemaker, which results in a fight; then her parents are struggling to deal with
the waywardness of Roxanne's beloved older brother, Joel, and they're making the
situation worse rather than better. Finally Roxanne's parents reveal that Joel is
adopted, the son of a cousin, and his birth father is now seeking to establish con-
tact with him; the revelation leads Joel to run away and Roxanne to struggle to find
her place and maintain her divided loyalties in the face of family upheaval. Foggo's
understated yet imaginative prose gives Roxanne's narration a rare authenticity,
which energizes the story and keeps the drama ofJoel's origins and departure from
tipping into the bathetic. The book also effectively weaves in other strands, such as
Roxanne's mother's concerns about their profile as a black family in a mostly white
Canadian community, Roxanne's crush on a nice friend ofher brother's, and her
falling out and eventual rapprochement with her dear friend Laura. The writing is
deft but unintimidating ("It had become my stock answer for everything, 'so what,'
a very good pair of words that conveys the truth of life"), and under it all is a story
MAY 1998 
* 321
of unusual positiveness, where good friends and loving family can hurt one an-
other but also sustain and bring joy. DS
GALLOWAY, PRISCILLA 
Snake Dreamer. Delacorte, 1998 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-32264-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Dusa is haunted by terrible nightmares about snakes, nightmares that contort her
body and sometimes make her violent. Hope appears in the form of the Doctors
Gordon, a pair of sisters who specialize in treating snake dreamers on their Greek
island clinic, where Dusa flies to be a research subject. Treatment at first seems
helpful, but Dusa is increasingly convinced that all is not well and that she is there
not to be cured but to serve the mysterious and perhaps malign designs of the
Gordons. Galloway's overwriting sometimes chokes the story's flow, but the sinu-
ous details of the Greek Gorgon myth realized and surviving into the present are
alluring and ominous indeed. The book makes its clues obvious enough for non-
classicists to get the drift (and it might inspire them to do a bit of research), and it
employs both classical motifs (someone does, very creepily, get turned to stone)
and reinterpretations (the Gorgon Medusa, reassembled with Dusa's unwitting
help, isn't such a bad sort) to great atmospheric advantage. Readers drawn to the
snaky revisionings of Banks' Melusine (BCCB 9/89) or Alcock's related classical
reinterpretation Singer to the Sea God (BCCB 2/93) will want to slither on in. DS
GREENBERG, JAN 
Chuck Close: Up Close; by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jordan.
DK Ink, 1998 
48p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7894-2486-X 
$19.95 
R Gr. 4-9
Greenberg and Jordan have been capable advocates of general art appreciation
(The Painter's Eye, BCCB 12/91, etc.), and here they turn their attention to a
specific artist. The book chronicles Close's youth and the development of his art
(oversized portraiture), including both technical and conceptual details ("He said
he'd never considered the fact that his nostrils were shaped like lima beans, but in
the four months it took him to paint the picture he had plenty of time to think
about it") that both enliven and inform. The fact that Close's art and life are facets
of each other is clear, and his consequent involvement of his friends in his paint-
ings will make him particularly intriguing to young readers (as will his return to
painting after a spinal injury bereft him of much independent movement). The
book is richly illustrated with Close's portraiture, and intelligent use of close-up
details helps convey the intricate labors of a Close portrait sometimes overlooked
in a larger view. The perceptual gamesmanship of Close's images (some of his art
may even suggest the three-dimensional Magic Eye visions) gives his work an al-
luring playfulness that many kids will respond to. A useful glossary, afterword on
"What Is a Portrait?", bibliography, and short list of museums displaying Close's
work are appended. DS
GREENE, STEPHANIE 
Owen Foote, Soccer Star; illus. by Martha Weston. 
Clarion,
1998 
[88p]
ISBN 0-395-86143-8 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
In this sequel to Owen Foote, Second Grade Strongman (BCCB 3/96), eight-year-
old Owen is so excited about joining the town soccer league that he talks his best
322 
* THE BULLETIN
friend, Joseph (who doesn't even like soccer), into joining with him. But life in
the big leagues isn't all it's cracked up to be: Owen's coach seems more concerned
about winning than coaching, his teammate Walter is a bully, and Joseph just
can't cut the mustard. How Owen manages to finally stand up for himself, his
team, and his best friend is the crux of this simple but effective novel. Greene has
a good handle on second-grade dialogue as well as on Owen's internal mono-
logues; the plot trajectory is steady if predictable, and an undistracting minor sub-
plot involving Owen's mother's quest to bake the perfect loaf of bread adds context
and humor. Weston's full-page and vignette illustrations have a comfortable feel
to them with their cozily expressive, cartoony characters. If you've got beginning
readers looking for books about sports and sportsmanship, this is a winning goal.
JMD
HARDMAN, RIC LYNDEN 
Sunshine Rider: The First Vegetarian Western; illus. by
Beth Krommes. 
Delacorte, 1998 
343p
ISBN 0-385-32543-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Wylie Jackson is thrilled when his aunt gets him a place on the Circle Six cattle
drive from Texas to Kansas. His style is cramped, however, by Roselle the cattalo
(buffalo/cattle cross); Roselle is the pet of Wylie's friend Alice Beck, who entrusts
Wylie with the task of making sure Roselle goes not to slaughter but to a friend's
home. And things get worse from there. Wylie flees the drive (in fear that the men
will discover he's carrying Alice Beck's drawers, which he needs to keep Roselle
following him), steals a horse, recasts himself as a doctor, falls in with a genuine
Indian healer, robs him blind, falls in with a medicine-show fraud, gets hanged
(albeit unsuccessfully and in error), falls in with a real doctor, and eventually gets a
showdown, a revelation about his origins, and a medical career. There's a tall-
taling Twainesque ramble to the book, and the sprawling plot (appropriate to a
wandering Western life in 1881) is compensated for by the wryly quizzical tone.
Characters lean to caricature rather than depth, which undercuts the more serious
aspects of the tale, but the generous eccentricities make the enterprise into a suc-
cessful pageant of colorful episodes. The recipes at the beginning of each chapter
(less likely to be vegetarian than to inspire vegetarianism) add flavor to this enter-
taining and more than slightly skewed saga. DS
HATHORN, LIBBY 
Sky Sash So Blue; illus. by Benny Andrews. 
Simon,
1998 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-689-81090-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In a picture book sophisticated in both art and text, this poem tells-with no note
on time or place-the story of a black slave's wedding dress. Narrative clues in-
clude references to "the Big House"; the demanding arrogance of "the Missus"
("Slaves don't need a preacher!"); the sad necessity to tear up a wedding dress made
from rags because "Missus was askin'/ 'Bout her duster put by/ From that burnt-
up sheet"; and the groom's buying the bride's freedom while mother and sister
remain behind, treasuring the hope represented by the bride's freeborn baby and
the blue sash that symbolically binds them all together. The lack of context, ironic
tone, and bitter implications make this a candidate for discussion with consider-
able adult input, while highly textured and heavily stylized collage paintings mark
it as part of the graphic trend toward picture books for older readers. The poetry
MAY 1998 
* 323
itself, which tends toward a love of breathless exclamation, features irregular end
rhymes and varied metrical patterns with unexpected rhythmic switches. Pair this
with picture books such as Patricia McKissack's Christmas in the Big House, Christ-
mas in the Quarters (BCCB 10/94) or selections from Gary Paulsen's Nightjohn
(BCCB 2/93) for context and balance. BH
HEAP, SUE 
Cowboy Baby; written and illus. by Sue Heap. 
Candlewick,
1998 [26p]
ISBN 0-7636-0437-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
When Sheriff Pa breaks the news to Cowboy Baby that it's time for bed, Cowboy
Baby refuses to go without his trusty sidekicks Texas Ted, Denver Dog, and Hank
the Horse. Cowboy Baby hauls on his boots and sets out to round them up one by
one, but he then discovers that none of them really wants to go home and hides
from Sheriff Pa; canny old Sheriff Pa lures them in with the promise of a surprise,
which turns out to be a lassoed star that makes Cowboy Baby Sheriff Pa's official
deputy, and the whole posse hits the sack. Heap balances the tone sagely between
the western and the domestic, and her text's spirited playfulness, in its repeated
"Howdy"s as Cowboy Baby tracks down his wayward companions and the pure
oral delight of saying "Cowboy Baby" (see if your listeners can say it ten times
fast), will hook listeners and entertain jaded readers-aloud. The illustrations, over-
sized acrylic and watercolor in pifiata colors, have a calm bedtime-worthy cheer in
their concrete detail and in Cowboy Baby's round cartoon features; playing up the
mundane side of the story, they make it clear that our cowpoke's sidekicks are toys
left lying about, but the sweeping plain and the star-roping give it a mythic air that
transcends the more familiar toy-littered bedroom. This'll help you round up
those wayward dogies come bedtime. DS
HEWETT, LOIm 
Lives of Our Own. 
Dutton, 1998 
214p
ISBN 0-525-45959-6 
$15.99 
R* Gr. 7-12
Shawna just moved to her father's small Georgia hometown from a ritzy Colorado
suburb. Her money and class are above town norms, especially for an African
American, and she's just gained notoriety for writing an editorial in the school
paper against the Confederate-glorifying Old South Ball. She really likes her child-
hood friend Marlon (whom she knows from summers spent in town with her
grandmother), and she's devastated to discover he's already involved; when Marlon
and his white girlfriend ask her to slip their piece about coming to the Old South
Ball together into the newspaper, she's in a further turmoil. Shawna's classmate
Kari is a longtime town resident whose resentment of Shawna's editorial leads her
to throw a rock through the window of Shawna's house; the aftermath reveals
some mysterious shared history between Shawna's father and Kari's mother, and
Kari and Shawna form an alliance in search of the buried truth. Hewett smoothly
combines the story strands into an exploration of present possibilities, legacies of
the past, and individual integrity. The characterization has depth and originality,
so that the human dynamics, not abstract messages, propel the story: unsure Kari,
sharper-edged Shawna, and even minor characters such as kind Marion and Kari's
laconic but independent friend M.C. are believably drawn. The book is honest
about ugliness of all kinds, racial and otherwise, but it's ultimately pregnant with
the possibility for individual change, individual choice, and a hopeful future. DS
324 
* THE BULLETIN
HOBERMAN, MARY ANN, ad. 
Miss Mary Mack: A Hand-Clapping Rhyme; illus. by
Nadine Bernard Westcott. 
Little, 1998 
28p
ISBN 0-316-93118-7 
$14.95 
R 
4-8yrs
The hand-clappin', thigh-slappin' classic takes on some new verses in this fresh
and wildly extended adaptation. Cartoon children on the opening endpapers dem-
onstrate the hand moves and set forth the tune. (Don't get bent out of shape,
adults, if the moves aren't exactly the ones you did; they work just fine.) Then it's
on with the show, as the famed fence-jumping elephant lands with "a bumpy
thud, thud, thud" and gets full "of muck and mud, mud, mud." In the ensuing
stanzas, Miss Mack cleans him up and convinces (well, bribes) him to be her pet,
even sacrificing her silver buttons, which end up adorning his trunk. Westcott's
line-and-watercolor pictures add lots of zip as the endearingly dopey elephant wipes
out a family picnic, and the neighborhood dogs chase away the zookeeper who
arrives to reclaim his errant charge. Get the kids patting their paws to this infec-
tious number, and they'll be chanting it in their sleep, sleep, sleep. EB
HOLDEN, ROBERT, ad. 
The PiedPiper ofHamelin; illus. by Drahos Zak. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-89918-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
The infamous town that refused the piper a fair day's wages for his fair day's work
is revisited by Czech illustrator Zak, who creates a somber and fantastical cityscape
worthy of the mean-spiritedness and avarice of its inhabitants. Grinning vermin
vie with bloated, ferret-featured citizens for their pied-a-terre beneath the looming
medieval houses and within the vaulted halls of Hamelin. Dominant mud-browns
and umbers fix the mood, while space is opened and brightened with areas of
untinted line drawing and capricious patches of color. Unfortunately, while Zak's
illustrations soar, Holden's verses can't reach the bar set by Robert Browning's
poetic retelling. Scansion is clumsy ("Instead in the square/ stood a figure of won-
der/ Who without any pause, without any blunder,/ Proceeded to round up the
rats!") and rhymes are strained ("The crowd had seen magic, yet after they cheered,/
Their own rat-like nature was shown in their greed"). Readers introducing the
story to fresh listeners can give this text a miss, but devotees of the tale will surely
want to pass around the pictures. EB
HORVATH, BETTY 
Sir Galahad, Mr. Longfellow, and Me. 
Karl/Atheneum,
1998 
137p
ISBN 0-689-81470-4 
$15.00 
R Gr. 4-7
"Of course, it was too bad Miss Tarbot died, but sixth grade with Mr. Van was
beginning to look like a whole new kind of world. A definitely improved world."
Narrator Emily Campbell is pretty well swept away by this "Sir Galahad ... in a
brown wool suit," and when he polls his new students for their interests and hob-
bies, she rashly blurts out that she writes poetry. During the course of the school
year, Mr. Van holds her to her claim, insisting that she produce regular entries for
his perusal. From her first romantic stabs at "gypsy" poems, she gradually hones
her skills and finds that she is writing as much to satisfy herself as to please and
impress her teacher. With a fresh, pert voice and a breezy sense of humor, Emily
revels in the homey details of her Depression-era school year, from the "law of
dibs" (whereby she claims the old barn as her personal writing studio), to the
MAY 1998 
* 325
humiliation of having Dad show up in the classroom with her galoshes, to her own
theological misgivings ("How come God spoke to Moses out of a burning bush-
and hasn't been heard from lately?"). Readers who have already made friends with
fictional budding writers such as Anne Shirley will be delighted to add Emily
Campbell to their circle of acquaintances. EB
JERAM, ANITA 
Birthday Happy, Contrary Mary; written and illus. by Anita
Jeram. 
Candlewick, 1998 
[18p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7636-0448-8 
$9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7636-0456-9 
$3.29
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Youthful fans of the "opposite day" concept will appreciate Contrary Mary's ap-
proach: "Much you very thank!" she says for her birthday presents, and then
makes inside-out sandwiches and frosts all the cupcakes upside down. Her birth-
day party continues in a similar vein ("Contrary Mary ate her Jell-O with a knife
and fork, and everyone copied her"), but the straightforward singing of "Happy
Birthday" makes her, logically enough, unhappy; fortunately, Dad's brilliant idea
of an inverted serenade ("You to birthday happy.. .") saves the day. The line-and-
watercolor drawings depict Mary and Co. as affectionately humanized rats, with
twitching whiskers, sturdy primary-color playclothes, and opposable thumbs.
Despite their charm, the compositions sometimes aren't very well focused, so that
the contrary action blends into the background (and it's not clear what's contrary
about Mary's hide-and-seek participation, which simply looks as if she's not very
good at it), thereby undermining the jokes; the inconsistency of Mary's contrari-
ness (sometimes she's backwards, sometimes she's opposite) is authentic but may
raise objections from young logicians. The inversions and the parental indulgence
towards same, however, will tickle perverse young rodents, and the backwards
birthday song will make for a rousing singalong finale that will doubtless inspire a
few backwards birthdays in real life. DS
JURMAIN, 
SUZANNE 
Freedom's Sons: 
The True Story of the Amistad
Mutiny. 
Lothrop, 1998 
128p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-688-11072-X 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-8
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Amistad: A Long Road to Freedom Dutton,
1998 
99p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-45970-7 
$16.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Middle-graders whose interest in the 1839 Mende revolt aboard the Amistad
slaveship has been piqued by Steven Spielberg's film (or even by the advertising
hype) have two fine resources to consult for information. Appended bibliogra-
phies suggest the authors have recreated events from differing sources and perspec-
tives, but both construct equally cogent, readable offerings. Myers uses the African
names of the mutineers-notably Sengbe, who is more often referred to as Cinqu6,
as in Jurmain's study. Amistaddelves into the emotional responses of the litigants;
Freedom's Sons is a bit more smoothly organized. Myers presents a slightly more
nuanced explanation of courtroom maneuvering, including material about mari-
time law missing from Jurmain's work; Jurmain includes richer background on
rebel leader Cinque's capture in Africa. As most of the drama of the Amistad affair
is played out in courtrooms by American lawyers and jurists, the onus is on the
authors to bring legal arcana into focus for young readers; each admirably rises to
326 
* THE BULLETIN
the challenge. Indeed, the only area of actual discrepancy between the two works
is closing speculation about Sengbe/Cinque's remaining life in Africa and death at
the Sierra Leone mission. Readers who choose either title will have a clear picture
of the rebels' ordeal and legal triumph; readers who compare the two will under-
stand some of the historiographic concerns as well. EB
KARR, KATHLEEN 
The Great Turkey Walk. 
Farrar, 1998 
[208p]
ISBN 0-374-32773-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Newly graduated from third grade (on his fourth attempt), fifteen-year-old Simon
Green solicits a modest investment from his beloved schoolmarm and embarks on
the precarious but potentially lucrative enterprise of herding turkeys from Mis-
souri to the 1860 boom town of Denver, where fresh meat is reported to be at a
premium. Along the way he befriends a father-figure mule driver and a runaway
slave, locks horns with his con-artist Pa who once abandoned him, and finds ro-
mance with near-crazed Elizabeth, an "older woman" of sixteen. Given the con-
siderable comic possibilities of a thousand turkeys on an overland trail, Karr's
plotting fails to scale the heights of avian hilarity. The lion's share of humor is
found in Simon's deadpan observations and exaggerated hayseed vernacular, par-
ticularly as contrasted with the equally exaggerated formality of the Pottawattomie
Indians he encounters ("As the official peacekeepers for our territory, we feel it
incumbent upon ourselves to see that nothing unorthodox occurs on our lands").
Mile for mile, there's more chat than action along this trek, but historical fiction
fans may still find some chuckles in this lighthearted yarn, loosely based on actual
incidents of turkey droving. EB
KATZ, SUSAN 
Snowdrops for Cousin Ruth. Simon, 1998 
183p
ISBN 0-689-81391-0 $16.00 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Johanna's younger brother, Johnny, was tragically killed by a car eight months ago
as he and his twin sister, Susie, built a snowman in their front yard. Besides the
obvious grief experienced by Momma and Poppa, the trauma has resulted in visits
to a psychiatrist for Susie, who refuses to talk. Johanna's narration relates how the
family inches back from unbearable sadness with the help of her mother's cousin
Ruth, who has moved next door. Besides the fact that Johanna "hears" Johnny
talking to her, this period of bereavement is further complicated by a bossy teacher
and two stereotypically mean classmates, Teresa and Bonnie Lou. Though the
school segments may propel readers through an otherwise maudlin plot, Cousin
Ruth's well-intentioned efforts to help the family, especially Susie, are only occa-
sionally compelling. Katz' style is pretty but too often becomes frilly and senti-
mental, and the book's stately pace is similarly old-fashioned and unengaging.
The book's promise of hope may be therapeutic to a reader suffering such loss, but
ifyou're looking for a better-crafted treatment of sibling death, choose VanOosting's
The Last Payback (BCCB 6/97). PM
KIMMEL, ERIC, ad. 
Be Not Far from Me: The Oldest Love Story; illus. by David
Diaz. 
Simon, 1998 
256p
ISBN 0-689-81088-1 
$25.00 
R* 
Gr. 6-9
See this month's Big Picture, p. 309, for review.
MAY 1998 
* 
327
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Alice Rose r Sam. 
Hyperion, 1998 
[2 0 8 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2277-5 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0336-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
It's the 1860s, and Virginia City, Nevada "is no place for a child," says twelve-
year-old narrator Alice Rose Tucker. She hates the place down to its very dirt,
even though veins of silver run through the earth and may make her father rich
someday. The novel opens with the burial of Alice Rose's recently passed away
mother and baby sister, but this sad beginning is quickly forgotten in Alice's sub-
sequent attempt to make their graves coyote-proof by piling stones on top of them
in the middle of the night. The plot picks up speed exponentially thereafter: Alice
Rose earns money by sewing fancy dresses for the hurdy-gurdy girls who work in
the local saloons, her father's newspaper gets a new reporter who is none other
than the young Samuel Clemens, and she becomes a spy for the forces of good
against the evil Confederate vigilantes, "The Society of Seven." The characteriza-
tion is slight and the history is hazy, but the language is accessible, the mud and
squalor of the mining town is palpable, and Alice Rose's somewhat jaundiced world
view is comically exasperated. Lasky throws in so many elements that it's easy to
stay interested, if only to see what sort of plot convolutions she uses to get to the
end. This may appeal to readers needing some (not too) historical fiction. JMD
LESTER, HELEN 
Tacky in Trouble; illus. by Lynn Munsinger. 
Lorraine/Hough-
ton, 1998. 
32p
ISBN 0-395-86113-6 
$15.00 
R 
4-6 yrs
Tacky, clad in a yellow-flowered shirt, is a penguin with a penchant for being odd,
while his companions Goodly, Lovely, Angel, Neatly, and Perfect are very En-
glish-butler penguin-proper. When Tacky's surfing expedition unexpectedly lands
him on an elephant's back far away from home, Rocky (the elephant) mistakes
him for a bunch of flowers (it's the shirt). In fact, Rocky won't give the shirt back
until Tacky proves that he is a penguin ("Tacky knew he was in trouble now. His
shirt was his sail. And without his shirt, how would he get home?"). So across
Rocky's tablecloth, Tacky does "penguinish" things like marching (through the
catsup bowl), belly-sliding (across the lemon pie), diving (into a pitcher of grape
punch), and hopping (in the gravy, mustard, etc.), with unexpected results: "'My
tablecloth!' hooted Rocky. 'I love it, I simply love it! Look at those colors! They're
brilliant!'" Tacky fans will enjoy his latest escapade, with its lively layers of visual
and textual silliness. What kid won't revel in the tablecloth fiasco where Munsinger's
splashy watercolors do full justice to the dripping, globby mess, which, by the way,
ends up in a gilt frame on Rocky's wall? Tacky is one nonconformist everyone will
want to be like. PM
LESTER, JULIUS 
Black Cowboy, Wild Horses: A True Story; illus. by Jerry
Pinkney. 
Dial, 1998 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1788-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1787-3 
$16.99 
R 
6-9 yrs
Former slave now Texas cowboy Bob Lemmons sets out on his black horse War-
rior in pursuit of a band of mustangs. Patient tracking reveals the herd and patient
persistence allows Bob on Warrior to infiltrate it; at a vulnerable moment, Bob
rides Warrior to challenge the herd stallion's leadership and wins, then taking
"his" herd back to the ranch for capture. This is an intriguing and specific look at
328 
* THE BULLETIN
an aspect of the old West; Lester's emphasis on poetic and sensate description
("For Bob there was only the bulging of the horses' dark eyes, the quivering of
their flesh, the rippling of muscles and bending of bone in their bodies") will
gratify kids who want to know what it felt like but often have to make do with
mere facts about what happened. Pinkney's equine draughtsmanship is some-
times clunky, but his horses pulse with life and action, the grass-green and earthtoned
palette suffuses the countryside with a golden glow, and there's even an antelope
playing (though the skies are cloudy, occasionally with galloping sky horses). The
wide open spaces, the history, the horses, and the hero's quiet craft will make
listeners long to be home on the range. Pair it with the younger Pinkneys' Bill
Pickett (BCCB 11/96) or, for a contemporary look at mustangs, George Ancona's
Man and Mustang (BCCB 4/92). An author's note (describing sources for the
fact-based story, which Lester has dramatically enhanced) and an illustrator's note
are included. DS
LE•TIN, SONIA 
Boom Town; illus. by Cat Bowman Smith. 
Orchard, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33043-5 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30043-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
This tale of a gold-mining boom starts with a textual bust, as pigtailed narrator
Amanda claims, "It took us twenty-one days on the stagecoach to get to Califor-
nia," while the endpaper map implies that they were never anywhere else, tracing
"Amanda's Route from Folsom to Boom Town, California." But Amanda's real
mission is to explain the connection between pie and prosperity, and she recounts
how wildcatters, lured by her tantalizing fruit pies, were convinced to forget the
gold fields and emulate her entrepreneurship. Soon merchants and cobblers and
blacksmiths and bankers and coach drivers were mining the pockets of their fellow
citizens, the West was tamed, and Amanda could go to school and leave her Pa to
run the pie business. Levitin strikes an uneasy balance between tall tale and fron-
tier history; although the rough outline for town development may be credible,
the details of perky little Amanda's influence are downright silly. Smith raises an
appealing watercolor clapboard town out of the yellow dust and populates it with
a cast of new neighbors who exude energy and good will. All that hearty friendli-
ness is probably enough to make Boom Town worth a brief visit. EB
LINDSAY, JANICE 
The Milly Stories: Corpses, Carnations, the Weirdness Index, and,
ofcourse, Aunt Gloria. Kroupa/DK Ink, 1998 
131p
ISBN 0-7894-2491-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Now that her critical aunt has died, it's just Milly and her kindly uncle living in
the funeral parlor. Aunt Gloria continues to nag Milly from her casket and grave,
however, her voice wandering in and out through the series of twelve chapters-
cum-stories narrated by Milly herself. In them, she tells of her cousin's eccentric
career as ice-cream merchant and homework helper, her making of a new friend in
an offbeat creative writing class, her serendipitous encountering of an old friend of
her late mother's, the landmark Halloween party in the funeral parlor, and other
adventures including the granting of Aunt Gloria's desired re-viewing to get the
funeral finally done right. Lindsay's writing is smooth and personable, and many
of her plot turns are innovative and funny. Some of the eccentricity is labored,
however, and the stories don't pack much individual punch yet are too separate to
contribute chapter-fashion to the overall momentum of the book. The combina-
tion of oddity and domesticity may nonetheless appeal to young readers looking
MAY 1998 
* 329
for something more offbeat than Sharon Creech or a gentle counterpart to Daniel
Pinkwater. DS
McKISSACK, FREDRICK L. 
Young, Black, and Determined: A Biography ofLorraine
Hansberry; by Fredrick L. McKissack and Patricia C. McKissack. 
Holiday House,
1998 
152p 
illus. with photographs.
ISBN 0-8234-1300-4 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
The photograph of Lorraine Hansberry on the cover of this handsomely designed
volume depicts a young woman with a determined expression and an intense gaze,
and it is that intensity that the McKissacks capture in this involving biography.
Hansberry's story begins even before her birth, for the McKissacks trace her family
tree from slavery to the Great Depression, with emphasis on the family's "long
history and tradition of hard work and literacy." In addition to the chronology of
events that made up Lorraine Hansberry's life-family, schooling, her move to
New York City-this biography includes a great deal of social history, placing her
firmly within the context of her time. Using excerpts from letters, diaries, and
interviews, Hansberry's biographers give readers insight into her manner of think-
ing, into her passions, and into her political activism. Scenes from her plays are
given brief but insightful commentary, black-and-white photographs of influen-
tial African Americans in both politics and the arts enliven an already involving
text, and candid family photos provide an unusual view of a public figure's private
life. This is a solid biography that fills a critical need for high-quality material
about women, African Americans, and artists. A timeline, extensive bibliography,
and an index are included. JMD
MCMILLAN, 
BRUCE 
Salmon Summer; written and illus. by Bruce
McMillan. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-395-84544-0 
$16.00 
R Gr. 2-5
McMillan applies his considerable expertise as photographer and essayist to this
glossy photoessay about nine-year-old Alex, a Native Aleut, as he fishes for sum-
mer salmon with his father in the streams of Kodiak Island. Alex helps set the gill
net (an almost invisible net that's left in the water overnight), cleans the variety of
salmon they have caught, preps the salmon for smoking and drying, traps Dunge-
ness and Alaskan king crabs, and, finally, gets to fish for fun. He even catches a
halibut that is "almost as big as Alex, and it's not even a big one." The photo-
graphs are balanced and sharp, with remarkable depth of field, capturing the star-
tlingly blue Alaskan sky and water in images that make them characters all by
themselves. The lively text is straightforwardly but affectionately descriptive, and,
combined with the photographs, provides a window into what is for most readers
an uncommon way of life. An author's note about Alex's cultural heritage, a glos-
sary, and an index are included. JMD
MAESTRO, BETSY 
The NewAmericans: Colonial Times, 1620-1689; illus. by Giulio
Maestro. 
Lothrop, 1998 
[4 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13449-1 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13448-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In this ambitious introduction to the early colonists and the American Indians
among whom they settled, Pilgrims and Puritans, Dutch traders and French Jesu-
330 
* THE BULLETIN
its, Algonquin and Iroquois sweep past readers on a march toward the political
configurations that would eventually spawn a war for independence. There's a lot
crammed into a small space here, and this is standard textbook fare, right down to
the monotone voice: "The Beaver Wars interrupted exploration and slowed the
fur trade. Coureurs de bois filled in for the embattled Huron to keep the flow of
furs moving east. The French began to look farther west for new links to the fur
supply." The tight focus and helpful graphics, however, offer a more clear and in-
depth look at the early days of colonization than most textbooks. Plentiful line
and watercolor illustrations of houses, forts, and settlements supply a social history
counterpoint to the impersonal litany of political and economic maneuverings
with which Maestro is largely concerned. An index and two pages of colonial
miscellanea are appended. EB
MAMA, RAOUF, tr. and ad. 
Why Goats Smell Bad and Other Stories from Benin;
illus. by Imna Arroyo. 
Linnet, 1998 
138p
ISBN 0-208-02469-7 
$19.50 
R Gr. 4-6
Mama's words take "flight over countries and kingdoms of long ago and alight" on
these twenty traditional tales from the Fon culture. Accessibly retold by Benin
native Mama, the stories in this well-organized and often humorous compilation
divide into four sections: Orphans, Twins and Other Children, Cautionary Tales
and Spirit Stories, Pourquoi Tales and Animal Wisdom, and Trickster Tales fea-
turing Yogbo the Glutton. Mama's vigorous retellings have style and verve, and
they lend themselves easily to reading or telling aloud. Readers may recognize
familiar variants-Cinderella in "The Prince and the Orphan," Demeter and
Persephone in "The Girl Who Brought the Rainy Season and the Dry Season"-
and a comparison of similarities and differences from culture to culture would
enliven any group discussion. Robust full-page black-and-white woodcuts open
each section. Mama's acknowledgments, introduction, and closing notes for each
tale explain his sources and research methods, give background on the Fon culture,
and specifically note if, why, and how he altered each tale. JMD
MARK, JAN, ad. 
God's Story; illus. by David Parkins. 
Candlewick, 1998 
178p
ISBN 0-7636-0376-7 
$17.99 
R* Gr. 6-9
See this month's Big Picture, p. 309, for review.
MARSH, T. J. 
Way Out in the Desert; by T. J. Marsh and Jennifer Ward; illus. by
Kenneth J. Spengler. 
Rising Moon, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-87358-687-5 
$15.95 
Ad 4-8 yrs
With two retellings (see Rogers, reviewed below) of the storytime staple "Over in
Meadow," it seems to be the month for takeoffs on that old favorite. Marsh and
Ward eschew said meadow for the Sonoran desert of the American Southwest,
leading readers on a rhyming tour of desert flora and fauna: "Way out in the
desert having fun in the sun/ lived a mother horned toad and little toady ONE./
"Scurry!" said the mother. "I scurry!" said the one,/ so they scurried all morning
having fun in the sun." Marsh and Ward do a good job keeping the rhythm and
rhyme scheme together, and while the reference to the "ocotillo door" may be a
little obscure, a glossary of plants and animals with simple definitions proves help-
ful. Spengler's double-page gouache illustrations are garishly colored and the ani-
mals have exaggeratedly animatronic facial expressions, but kids will probably enjoy
MAY 1998 
* 
331
searching for the hidden numerals in each busy spread. Up close, the composi-
tions are crowded, but try them out in a group setting and they'll probably work
just fine. Musical notation is included. JMD
MARTIN, DAVID 
Five Little Piggies; illus. by Susan Meddaugh. 
Candlewick,
1998 [32p]
ISBN 1-56402-918-2 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-2
The five little piggies of the title are the five little piggies of toe-counting fame, and
each small chapter in this cheery picture book is named after one of them: the
piggy that went to market, the piggy that stayed home, etc. Itty-bitty piggy prob-
lems take the stage as one little piggy forgets what she's supposed to buy for Momma
Piggy at the store, one little piggy turns into a picky eater, one little piggy just
makes it to the bathroom on time (crying "wee wee wee all the way home"), and so
on. Martin's text is not always as buoyantly silly as his premise would imply, but
dialogue balloons and Meddaugh's illustrations go a long way toward achieving a
certain lightness of being. Girl piggies in pastel flowered dresses, boy piggies in
striped shirts, and summer markets, apple orchards, and other outdoor scenes draw
in the viewer with sunny aplomb. Full-page compositions framed like cartoons,
half-page vignettes, and a visual motif of polka dots (from Momma's dresses to the
borders on the title page of each chapter) enliven the watercolor and ink illustra-
tions. The layout and design lends itself to group viewing, so if your beginning
readers will let you, you can read this to their younger fellows, who just may get a
kick out of the extended piggy conceit. JMD
MEEUWISSEN, TONY 
Remarkable Animals: 1, 000 Amazing Amalgamations; writ-
ten and illus. by Tony Meeuwissen. 
Orchard, 1998 
21p
ISBN 0-531-30066-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-5
Like Kees Moerbeek's New at the Zoo (BCCB 1/89), this is a split-page menagerie
of real animals whose three parts can be rearranged to form the fanciful. Take the
beginning of an opossum, the middle of a rhinoceros, and the end of an alligator,
for instance, and you have the Opinocetor, which hangs by its tail, stands seven
feet tall when threatened, and is made into expensive suitcases, handbags, shoes,
and watch straps. Meeuwissen understands that the more specific the descriptions
the funnier the conglomerations, and his ten animals (which do multiply to pro-
duce the 1,000 promised combinations) intriguingly vary into crustaceans and
insects and not just the more traditional mammalian sources. His art has a poker-
faced literalness to it, which with its near-garish colors and carefully rendered,
glossy details gives the book the air of an updated high-minded bestiary. Though
the thousand combinations will be explored quicker than you may have thought
(and the spiral binding may result in some premature extinction), this is an obvi-
ous inspiration for a language arts game of"Nowyou do some." DS
MIKLOWITZ, GLORIA 
Camouflage. Harcourt, 1998 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-15-201467-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M Gr. 5-8
Kyle Klinger boards a plane in California, figuring that a few weeks in Michigan
with his estranged father has got to be better than summer vacation filled with
summer school and Mom's policeman boyfriend, Brian. It quickly becomes clear,
332 
* THE BULLETIN
though, that Ed Klinger and his farm neighbors are involved in something danger-
ous and probably illegal. In his initial elation over renewing bonds with his father,
Kyle first ignores the warning signs-widespread interest in assault weaponry, per-
vasive rancor against the government, talk of white supremacy. When a local
farmer faces foreclosure and eviction for nonpayment of taxes, Ed and his "militia"
stage an abortive attack on the IRS agents and, subsequently, drag Kyle into a plot
to bomb the federal building in Lansing. Although Miklowitz delivers a climactic
wallop (Kyle manages to call in a warning of the bomb, but many lives are lost
nonetheless), she never explores the militia's grievances or Constitutional argu-
ments in any depth; Klinger and his cronies are simply stereotypical right-wing
bad guys. In a truly absurd denouement, Ed Klinger-who has just killed or
injured nearly two hundred people and has been turned in to the authorities by his
own son-simply slaps Kyle "hard across the face." Readers may be lured by the
timely theme of homegrown terrorism, but they will come away scarcely more
enlightened as to the political and economic tensions that breed it. EB
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Amistad: 
A Long Road to Freedom Dutton,
1998 
99p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-45970-7 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 5-8
See review under Jurmain, p. 324.
NEWTH, METTE 
The Dark Light; tr. by Faith Ingwersen. 
Farrar, 1998 
[256p]
ISBN 0-374-31701-1 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Thirteen-year-old Tora becomes dead to all the living when she's diagnosed with
leprosy, untreatable in early nineteenth-century Norway, and she's consigned to a
leper hospital in Bergen essentially to join her kind in rotting to death out of sight
of the healthy. The hospital, however, proves to be its own little world, where
Tora finds a loving mother figure (Tora's mother had committed suicide when she
saw her own leprosy advancing) in the caretaker Martha, people to help in the
form of those more crippled by the disease, and a challenge and eventually a be-
loved and generous friend in the form ofSunniva, a bitter young woman won over
by Tora's desire to learn to read. Newth has brilliantly realized a world unthink-
able to most of her readers, where savage physical decay is a daily reality, death is a
constant consideration and merciful release, and the pure heroism of those who
care for the diseased shines true and strong. Tora's growth and maturation offer
serious discussion fodder for the question of the meaning of an individual life-
and, in light of the novel's ending, which suggests that Tora's return home will
enable her, as she wishes, to follow her mother in taking her own life-the mean-
ing of and right to death. DS
NYE, NAOMI SHIHAB, comp. 
The Space Between Our Footsteps: Poems and Paint-
ings from the Middle East. Simon, 1998 
14 4p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-81233-7 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 6-12
Poet and anthologist Nye (This Same Sky, BCCB 12/92, I Feel a Little Jumpy
around You, BCCB 3/96, etc.) here uses the contemporary Middle East as her
poetic archives. Broken down into four sections ("A Gathering of Seeds," "The
World Is a Glass You Drink From," "Pick a Sky and Name It," "There Was In
Our House a River"), the collection counterpoints contemporary poems from all
MAY 1998 
* 333
across the region, geographically and culturally, with similarly representative art-
work. Though U.S. readers may be familiar with some of these names, such as the
Nobel Prize-winning Naguib Mahfouz from Egypt, Palestinian spokeswoman
Hanan Ashrawi, and Israeli children's author Nava Semel, most will be new ac-
quaintances; voices here range from lyrical to prosaic, telling of love and of trag-
edy, of food, of family, and of country. While not all of the poems (some in
translation, some written in English) will appeal to all readers, it's a sufficiently
substantive anthology that there will be plenty of effective poetic encounters for
most. The elegant format presents the poems pristinely on glossy pages, delicate
tracery decorating the headers and footers; the reproduced art, which is unfortu-
nately sometimes lost in the gutter, adds some usefully concrete visual emphasis
with its fondness for strong line and saturated color and provokes thought about
the juxtapositions with the poetry. Unobtrusive notes on sticky words are occa-
sionally included along with the poems; a map of the Middle East, detailed con-
tributors' notes, indices of authors/artists and poem titles, and a list of the
illustrations are included. DS
OLSON, GRETCHEN 
Joyride. Boyds Mills, 1998 
200p
ISBN 1-56397-687-0 
$14.95 
R Gr. 7-12
The title sounds like this might be a preachy cautionary tale on how not to drive,
but it actually refers to an incident that takes place before the book even begins.
JeffMcKenzie took a joyride with a friend through a local farmer's field, and now
he has to spend the better part of the summer at Hampton's berry farm working
off the damage. The back-breaking labor of the farm is an eye-opener to the
sheltered Jeff, who has never experienced anything like it in a life where his most
difficult activity is training for the country-club tennis tournament. He gets a
close-up look at what it means to be at the mercy of the weather, at the migrant
farm workers he and his privileged pals view with disdain, and at the family whose
property he unthinkingly damaged. Author Olson is a berry farmer, and her first-
hand experience with the workings of farm life inform and add depth to this first
novel. The settings are rich in sensory detail, and her characters, whether dressed
in tennis whites or jeans and rubber boots, fit comfortably into their environment.
The majority of Olson's characterizations are sharply delineated: Jeffs transfor-
mation is gently credible; Mercurio, the migrant worker who mentors a surprised
Jeff, has an unseen life that lends him unusual dignity; and Alex, the farmer's
daughter with a fierce devotion to her chosen vocation, is both likable and admi-
rable. Lively dialogue, a touch of suspense, and a satisfying but not mushy ro-
mance make this a promising debut. JMD
ORAM, HIAwYN 
Badger's Bad Mood; illus. by Susan Varley. 
Levine/Scholastic,
1998 
[2 6p]
ISBN 0-590-18920-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Badger, who is "never" in a bad mood, is in one now ("I'm just no good, you
know. No good for anything"). Mole, Squirrel, and Rabbit pay him a visit but
only Mole hangs around to offer any solace to the disconsolate creature. Other
attempts by Badger's friends to "snap him out of it" and "make him see reason" are
in vain, but when Mole plans an Awards Ceremony and cajoles Badger into at-
tending by a gentle hint ("You'll have to come, of course. A little bird tells me you
may be getting something"), we know everything is going to be all right. After the
334 
* THE BULLETIN
other awards are presented ("Miss Snail did win for Slow Dancing"), Badger is
presented with five awards of his own, beginning with "the award for Always Know-
ing The Best Way Through the Woods" and ending with "the award for Most
Loved Whatever His Mood." Although we find out (on the last page) that the
reason for Badger's malaise had something to do with not feeling appreciated, the
resolution that so easily cures Badger is on the facile side. Whimsical watercolors
and delicate pen render this woodland circle of friends in a warm, idyllic atmo-
sphere full of benign details. This has the feel of The Wind in the Willows without
its breezy energy, so whether listeners relate to Badger or not, it may be time to
rediscover the flamboyantly moody master of Toad Hall. PM
PATERSON, JOHN 
Images ofGod; by John Paterson and Katherine Paterson; illus.
by Alexander Koshkin. 
Clarion, 1998 
[112p]
ISBN 0-395-70734-X 
$20.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
This unusual title discusses the Biblical images used to explain the ways in which
God manifests Himself to humans. The book is divided into three sections, each
with an explanatory subtitle: All Nature Sings: Images from the Created World,
To Earth Come Down: Images from Ordinary Life, and With a Mighty Hand:
Images of Watchfulness and Creation. Within each section and within the con-
text of stories from the Christian Bible, the Patersons give examples of how the
presence of God was and is seen in the physical world by believers: God as light,
water and wind; mother, father and housewife; shepherd, king and architect, to
name just a few. While the exploration of the metaphors and similes used to
explain, represent, or define God's presence is an interesting journey, the necessity
for simplification in order to make this idea accessible for younger readers does
leave something to be desired. The bits and pieces of story, scripture, and parables
are utilitarian at best, and while there is obviously an attempt to be as concrete as
possible the purpose of this theological exercise remains somewhat abstract.
Koshkin's dense watercolors have an old-fashioned feel to them, with clumsily
drafted images of golden shields, screaming eagles, and characters in robes and
sandals proliferating throughout. A glossary of scriptural references and an index
is included. JMD
PATERSON, KATHERINE, ad. 
Parzival: The Quest of the Grail Knight. Lodestar,
1998 
127p
ISBN 0-525-67579-5 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Paterson has adapted Wolfram von Eschenbach's thirteenth-century epic poem
about the innocent-turned-knight Parzival, whose destiny as the Grail Knight was
to relieve the Angler King (often known as the Fisher King) of his interminable
suffering. Paterson has put the story into prose and eliminated some of its aspects,
but she has resisted the temptation to modernize the epic into a contemporary
novelization with psychological exploration and awareness of the story's place in
the enduring Arthur myth. This decision means her retelling isn't for all Arthur
buffs: this Parzival retains the original's emphasis on schema and symbolism rather
than character, and Paterson's appropriately restrained prose won't help readers
out when it comes to telling which bits are funny and which aren't. The book's
streamlining and helpful introductory cast notes will assist readers with the legend's
intricacy (though it does make the proceedings a bit catalog-ish). Young readers
game for adapting to medieval notions of narrative and drawn by the book's petite
MAY 1998 
* 335
trim size and delicate cover art may find exploration of Parzival's strange world
rewarding. A note on the legend is included. DS
PFEFFER, SUSAN BETH 
Devil's Den. Walker, 1998 
[128p]
ISBN 0-8027-8650-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Joey's excited by his family's participation in a Civil War project wherein they
"adopt" a particular soldier, but it gets him to thinking about his own family
connections. His wondering about his departed (in the literal, not in the funereal
sense) father intensifies when his stepfather announces his plan to adopt Joey, and
Joey is torn between the father he's always imagined and the stepfather he loves.
Pfeffer employs effective restraint here, generally eschewing dramatics in favor of
authenticity but seasoning more serious matters with occasional touches of hu-
mor. She also wisely avoids the too-neat wrapup (rather than Joey's becoming
reconciled to adoption, the family decides to shelve the prospect for awhile), fo-
cusing instead on Joey's adjustment to some difficult truths and his ultimate real-
ization that his family has worked out for the best. The added plot strand of the
Civil War soldier (including a Gettysburg tour) will intrigue some readers; the
book should also appeal to fans of C. S. Adler's stories of self-defined families. DS
PINKNEY, ANDREA DAVIS 
Raven in a Dove House. 
Gulliver/Harcourt,
1998 
[2 2 4p]
ISBN 0-15-201461-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Slade, best friend of Nell Grady's cousin Foley, can charm blushes and giggles out
of such a sensible woman as Great Aunt Ursa, so it's no wonder he can sweettalk
twelve-year-old Nell into a particular favor-hiding a Raven .25 handgun in her
long-abandoned dollhouse. He assures her that he and cousin Foley mean no
harm with it; it's simply their "ticket out" of the dead-end town of Modine and
into the brighter prospects of New York City. What Nell eventually discovers is
that this Raven is only Slade's on credit, and it isn't long before his teenage gun
dealer, under pressure to collect for a gun cartel, kills Slade (in what is probably an
accident). Foley runs away with the gun, leaving Nell to disclose the guilty secret
of one boy's death and another's disappearance. Readers who focus primarily on
the edgy dangers of a "gun" story are likely to interpret Slade's death as the story's
climax and, therefore, regard subsequent events (the town's grief and Foley's re-
turn) as anticlimactic. However, those who appreciated the moral dilemma of
Myers' Scorpions (BCCB 7/88) will gravitate to this title as well, and the gently
unfolding story of Nell's maturation and the dynamics of her circle of loving rela-
tives may attract some female readers wary of "guy" books. EB
PORTE, BARBARA ANN 
Hearsay: Strange Tales from the Middle Kingdom; illus. by
Rosemary Feit Covey. 
Greenwillow, 1998 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-688-15381-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Porte offers fifteen tales of varying length and complexity, both folklore retellings
and original tales loosely based on Chinese legends. "Cricket Musicians and Fight-
ers" includes some extensive and fascinating information on the history of cricket
collecting and fighting-more intriguing, in fact, than the brief tale it introduces.
336 
* 
THE BULLETIN
A rambling and ultimately silly story about female bandits contrasts sharply with a
philosophical anecdote from Lao Tzu. An intimate, gossipy tone pervades nearly
all the entries, and although it makes the foreign setting comfortable and acces-
sible, it treats such disparate tales as the tense "The Rescue of the Concubine" and
the humorous "Famous Painting" with the same bland chattiness. Source notes
are appended for each story, several of which contain odd tidbits at least as en-
grossing as the stories themselves. For a fresher spin on Chinese lore, refer readers
to Paul Yee's Tales from Gold Mountain (BCCB 3/90). Reviewed from an
unillustrated galley. EB
RANKIN, JOAN 
WOW! It's Great Being a Duck; written and illus. by Joan
Rankin. 
McElderry, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81756-8 
$16.00 
R 4-7yrs
Duckling Lillee refuses to learn to swim ("I told you I'd DROWN!") and instead
practices walking ("plomp, plomp!"). 
Her mother warns her that "Furry-legs,
Long-tail, Sharp-snout, Pink-tongue Fox will gobble you up," but Lillie will not
be moved-that is, until she encounters the wily fox and must call on her ducky
instincts to save her feathers. Rankin's text is wonderfully paced for reading aloud,
the repetition and phrasing lending itself to memorable recitation. The text itself
is deliberately laid out on the pages to curve around, over, and through the pic-
tures, the typefaces changing from lower case to upper case, bold and italics, to add
emphasis and give cues for expressive reading. The illustrations are an eye-pleasing
combination of full-page, half-page, and vignettes, flowing gracefully from one
scene to the next and effectively telling the story even without the text. Rankin's
watercolors are jaunty and smart, the humor extended through the visual ungain-
liness of the participants, from the eggshell-hatted white duckling with the over-
sized orange bill to the chops-licking wicked fox with his oversized ears and bushy
tail. Use this one in a story program and watch all the participants have a ducky
time. JMD
RASCHKA, CHRIS, ad. 
Simple Gifts: A Shaker Hymn; ad. and illus. by Chris
Raschka. 
Holt, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-5143-0 
$15.95 
R 3-8 yrs
This luscious visual presentation of the famous Shaker hymn (lyrics and notation
included) is cast in a highly stylized and idealized peaceable kingdom. As Raschka
indicates in a concluding note, the song originally accompanied a lively circle dance;
here a cat, squirrel, turtle, bluebird, and rabbit join the flowers in a riot of sinuous
motion, until in the final spread they "come 'round right," gazing from the page in
contentment. Though occasionally the near-abstractness of the artistic style and
the sometimes tenuous connection between illustrative and textual concepts may
bemuse young viewers, the interpretation is usually literal enough for youngsters
to follow (the squirrel "comes down" where he ought to be by descending a tree;
flowers "bow and bend" in unison), yet suggestive of a more transcendent spirit
that creates a "valley of love and delight." Thick, dark chocolate brown outlines
function rather like the leading in Tiffany glass, supplying definition and cohesion
to the jewel-toned golds, blues, greens, and corals of the dancing figures. The
terpsichorean motif is repeated in the rolling cursive lyrics that band the double
spreads. These bold, intricate compositions are best viewed from a distance; clear
the floor for viewers to join in the twirling and whirling. EB
MAY 1998 
* 337
REINHARD, JOHAN 
Discovering the Inca Ice Maiden: My Adventures on Ampato;
written and illus. with photographs by Johan Reinhard. 
National Geographic,
1998 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-7922-7142-4 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Mountaineer and anthropologist Johan Reinhard's 1995 ascent of Peru's Mount
Ampato garnered him more than the opportunity to observe an active volcano; he
and assistant Miguel Zarate discovered a frozen mummy bundle which proved to
be the remarkably intact remains of an Inca sacrificial victim. Synthesizing much
of the material included in his previous articles for National Geographic, Reinhard
recounts the discovery and subsequent expeditions with the enticing elan of an
adventurer: "While we walked, small rock slides went crashing past us. Any one
of them could have started an avalanche, which might have swept us down to our
deaths." Sharp color photographs capture the rugged austerity of the Andean
slopes and the eerie dignity of the mummy herself. Although Reinhard speculates
on the nature of the sacrifice and the probable disposition of the corpse, the real
focus here is on the discovery, transport, preservation, and scientific examination
of the "ice maiden" in an exciting team effort that tapped the talents of explorers,
historians, forensic anthropologists, and even refrigeration specialists. A timeline
juxtaposes Inca events with familiar milestones in world history; a glossary and
index are also included. EB
ROGERS, SALLY, ad. 
Earthsong: Based on the Popular Song "Over in the Endan-
gered Meadow"- illus. by Melissa Bay Mathis. 
Dutton, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-525-45873-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
In this "Over in the Meadow" redux, Rogers populates the familiar poem/song
with endangered species from around the world, including whales, pandas, tigers,
and leatherbacked turtles. The opening and closing stanzas place the song in the
context of a family tradition sung with grandparents who urge their grandchildren
(and readers) to "share Mother Earth as she spins through space." While the hu-
man characters in the opening and closing illustrations are stiffly drawn with wooden
expressions, the animals that inhabit the remaining double-paged spreads are bright-
eyed and friendly. The framed compositions are balanced and uncrowded, and,
while the palette gets disconcertingly dark in places, it is leavened by bold touches
of yellow, white, and orange. The patchwork-quilt motif of the endpapers rein-
forces the implied interconnectedness among the species depicted. The text car-
ries a worthwhile message that may be just too much for the simple structure of the
traditional lyric, but this will still get heavy use in ecology curriculum units or
theme-based story programs. A glossary gives a paragraph of information on each
featured animal; musical notation appears on the back cover. JMD
RYAN, PAM MuRoz 
Riding Freedom; illus. by Brian Selznick. 
Scholastic,
1998 
138p
ISBN 0-590-95766-X 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Charlotte is a horse-loving tomboy, and there's not a lot of tolerance for that in an
orphanage in the mid-nineteenth century. After her only friend there gets adopted
out, Charlotte takes off, disguises herself as a boy, and gets a job as a stablehand;
the stable owner eventually teaches her to drive a stagecoach, and Charlotte-now
338 
* THE BULLETIN
Charley-makes a career as a stage driver and heads out west to California, settling
on a farm and becoming the first woman in the U.S. to vote in a presidential
election (she voted as Charley before her sex was known or enfranchised). Some of
the characters here are on the well-worn side of familiar (the nasty orphanage over-
seer, the kindly black stablemaster) and the writing's simplicity sometimes be-
comes merely flat, but there's a real likeability to Charley and her story. Ryan
changes a few historical details (an extensive note describes the life of the real
Charley) but lets the genuine biography shape her plot, tying up the book with
Charley's voting and retiring to run a ranch rather than artificially splicing a ro-
mance in for her. Selznick's soft charcoal portraiture has a depth and solidity
unusual in novel illustrations; their homely Garth Williams flavor adds gentle at-
mosphere to Charley's adventure. Youngsters who liked Caddie Woodlawn better
unreformed and who appreciate an atmospheric blend of grit, horses, and history
will want to take a ride with Charley. DS
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
The Islander. Jackson/DK Ink, 1998 
96p
ISBN 0-7894-2490-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Ten-year-old Daniel has lived on a remote island with his grandfather ever since
his parents died in a plane crash. He is a quiet, solitary child, and his life with his
grandfather does little to mitigate his loneliness. Wandering by the sea, Daniel
finds a mermaid's comb, and, when the mermaid comes to fetch it, has his first
encounter with mystery. He communicates with the mermaid through notes in a
bottle, and her responses-a magical key that helps him locate injured creatures,
and a puppy-are the only things that ameliorate his solitude. Intensely emo-
tional events are depicted in this brief novel, from the initial encounter with the
mermaid to the destruction of a fierce hurricane to the grief Daniel experiences
after the death of his grandfather, but the subtle language used to describe them
makes the scenes more dreamlike than dramatic. The writing style is understated,
and Daniel's narration does a lot more telling than showing. Daniel's discovery
that the mermaid is really his grandfather's sister who drowned at seventeen trying
to save her dog and the end that leaves the twenty-year-old Daniel biding his time
to court a fifteen-year-old girl whose life he saved (the implication is that he will
marry her) are a bit convenient. Still, this poetic combination of magic and coin-
cidence is appealing, and young adults seeking a tender tale may appreciate this
one. JMD
SCHRIER, JEFFREY 
On the Wings ofEagles: An Ethiopian Child's Story; written and
illus. by Jeffrey Schrier. 
Millbrook, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-7613-0004-X 
$20.90 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
An ambitious picture book portrays the origin story of the Ethiopian Jews, their
difficult lives as "Falashas"-permanent strangers in their homeland-and the
persecution and drought that finally drove them onto secret Israeli rescue airlifts.
All of this, inspired by a New York Times account translated from Hebrew, is
projected through the playing of a boy, Isaiah, on his traditional flute, the washent,
around a campfire encircled by children. The story within a story within a story
finds structural reflection in the illustrations, which combine burnt-sienna line
drawings with paint and photo-collage against a background of fabric from a
handwoven robe called a Shamma. The result is sometimes extremely effective,
especially in understated scenes such as Isaiah "playing" his people's hope upon
their arrival in a land of freedom or again playing a vision of their search for safety
MAY 1998 
* 
339
in the last scene. Other scenes, such as a river crossing the desert between the
faithful and unfaithful, seem jarred by colors run amok or fragmented composi-
tion. Nor, unfortunately, do the difficulty and prejudice these black Jews have
faced in their adjustment to the promised land obtain a place in this mythically
scaled account. The complexity of both the narrative and design causes this title to
stagger under its own weight, making this a picture book for older readers, espe-
cially those exploring their ethnic roots and family heritage. BH
SHAHAN, SHERRY 
Frozen Stiff 
Delacorte, 1998 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-385-32303-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Cody and her cousin Derek sneak off for a kayaking and camping trip in Alaska's
Yakutat Bay, and what starts as a lark begins to look like a tragedy: the teens have
left big gaps in their preparations, Derek destroyed the note Cody left telling her
mother where they were going, and a glacial surge means that what was initially
safe camping ground is now flooding rapidly and has already taken Cody's sup-
plies. The situation gets worse when Cody realizes that there's been a strange man
lurking around their survival camp and then discovers that Derek has disappeared.
Survival stories have a perennial fascination, and the unusual location, complete
with glaciers, enhances the story here. Shahan piles too much on, however, with
pitfall after pitfall and then the threat-and eventually the help-of the mysteri-
ous stranger, whose presence and character (his threatening mask merely protects
an ice-scarred face) strain credibility. Readers who can't get enough of watery
adventures such as Will Hobbs' Downriver and River Thunder (BCCB 3/91 and
7/97) may nevertheless want to paddle along. DS
SLEPIAN, JAN 
Emily Justin Time; illus. by Glo Coalson. 
Philomel, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-23043-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Young Emily has conquered many childhood obstacles: going down the twisty
slide, pouring milk on her cereal, doing a cartwheel, but she still can't bring herself
to "stay the whole night through at her grandma's house." A match of fluid,
simple watercolors and a tenderly related if message-driven story makes this an
affectionate tribute to the small steps of growing up. The art is saved from
sweetsiness by authenticity and specificity, as in the kitchen scene where the wall
displays the clock at 10 P.M. as we peer down at a morose Emily and a grandma
who, as she throws her coat over her nightgown, optimistically reassures her: "It's
all right, my honey.... It just takes time. Someday you'll stay the night and think
nothing of it." In this tiny bibliotherapeutic volume, there are two heroines: Emily,
who after many attempts "has reached the someday when she can stay the night"
and Grandma, who has the wisdom and the patience to wait. Kids who aren't
there just yet will appreciate them both. PM
SMITH, MAGGIE 
This Is Your Garden; written and illus. by Maggie
Smith. 
Crown, 1998 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-70993-7 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-70999-2 
$14.00 
M 
5-7 yrs
With crispy, clean white backgrounds and perky line and watercolor illustrations
featuring a jeans-clad young girl laboring in her garden, this is a cheerful little
340 
* THE BULLETIN
tribute to gardening. Unfortunately, the book's preference for prettiness and whim-
sicality over realism makes it misleading and quite probably frustrating, and any-
one who gardens will have quarrels with the ambiguities and misinformation. For
example, the text says, "Some seeds you may get from your friends and family.
Some you will find in the backyard. Others you will find inside your own pocket."
If gardeners want flowers to grow, they typically do not "find" seeds in their back-
yard, nor do they just happen to have some in their pockets. The impression on
another spread that as you sit and sing "a song of encouragement" the seedlings
will obediently pop up through the soil may be cute but it is sure to result in
disappointment. And fluffiness goes too far when readers are told that the garden
will "be happy to see you when you return." The last double-page spread shows
the young gardener romping amid myriad gorgeous flowers, which are visually
appealing but unbelievably optimistic (particularly in light of the difficulty in grow-
ing some of the pictured flowers from seeds). If your desire is to fill a child's heart
with the wonders of gardening, use Stewart's The Gardener (BCCB 10/97) or for
the young green thumber try Ehlert's Planting a Rainbow. PM
SMITH, SHERWOOD 
Court Duel: Book IIofthe Crown and CourtDuet. Harcourt,
1998 
24 5p
ISBN 0-15-201609-0 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Crown Duel (BCCB 7/97) introduced readers to the teenaged Countess Meliara
and her homeland, Remalna. The action of this sequel moves away from civil war
skirmishes and harrowing escapes to the more finely tuned intricacies of a royal
court fraught with sophisticated and deadly intrigues. Meliara is happily restoring
her family estate with no thought of participating in the political melodrama until
her brother decides to marry and Meliara's presence at court is unavoidable. Once
there, she manages to maneuver amongst the hidden agendas of courtiers and fine
ladies by keeping a firm grip on her common sense and being careful from whom
she takes advice. Narrator Meliara writes her own history with bemused hind-
sight, and her point of view has matured from that of the rather harum-scarum
heroine of Crown Duel. Smith's prose is smoother in this sequel, characterization
is more satisfying, and the pace is more controlled and less pell-mell than in the
first book. Lest action fans despair, be assured this is not all mannered conversa-
tion: a secret admirer, an attempt to seize the crown, a few horse races, and a
rousing finish will keep readers happily engrossed. JMD
STOEHR, SHELLEY 
Tomorrow Wendy: A Love Story. 
Delacorte, 1998 
16 6p
ISBN 0-385-32339-5 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 9-12
Cary, a high school senior, is terminally confused-she is having sex with her
boyfriend, Danny, but she really wants to have sex with his sister, Wendy. In the
opening chapters, Cary keeps insisting she isn't gay, but it is so clear that she is
gay, or at least inclined to explore that element of her sexuality, that this presum-
ably meant-to-be-pivotal plot point has no impact. Cary manages to avoid con-
fronting the issue of her own sexuality by smoking a lot of dope and taking hits of
Ecstasy-which might possibly explain the existence of her imaginary friend, Rad,
who speaks only in song lyrics. Enter Raven, a new girl from down South, who is
apparently a lesbian belle. She loves Cary and is willing to wait for her to make up
her mind a) about her sexual orientation and b) about getting over Wendy. The
plot is a string of soap-opera cliches gender-bent and rehashed, and the character-
MAY 1998 
* 341
ization is shallow, consisting primarily of descriptions of clothing and hairstyles.
The "Lesbian Collective," as the group of homosexual high-school girls who all
hang around together are called by their peers, offer a modicum of probably unin-
tentional humor, but the remainder of the book is in deadly dull earnest with a
confused message about sexuality. Profanity takes the place of meaningful dia-
logue, and boringly endless rounds of pot smoking and meaningless sex are substi-
tuted for plot and pacing. If you are looking for a novel that effectively explores
the struggle for sexual identity or the dangerous attraction of recreational drugs,
try Kerr's Deliver Us from Evie (BCCB 12/94) or Burgess's Smack (BCCB 4/98).
JMD
SWEENEY, JOYCE 
The Spirit Window. 
Delacorte, 1998 
[24 4 p]
ISBN 0-385-32510-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Miranda's summer gets complicated when she, her father, Richard, and her new
stepmother, Ariel, go to visit her father's estranged mother, Lila. Grandma Lila
lives on a Florida island, and her property encompasses a wetland marsh she is
fiercely devoted to preserving. Her partner in preservation is eighteen-year-old
Adam (part Cherokee and all hunk) with the mysterious past. Grandma Lila and
Richard fell out when Richard agreed to sell the land he will inherit from Lila to a
developer after her death. When Lila dies, her videotaped will leaves generous cash
settlements to fifteen-year-old Miranda and her father, but the property and bulk
of the money goes to the nature-loving Adam, resulting in drunken rows, a marital
separation, and Adam's being unjustly arrested. Miranda and her father have a
heart to heart talk, psychic wounds are healed, and all look forward to a rosy fu-
ture. The plot does leave a few stones unturned (several plot stepping stones disap-
pear altogether), but Sweeney has a strong sense of place that contributes to an
overall setting of mood that is very effective. Minor characters-father Richard,
stepmother Ariel, Skip the land developer-are shallowly drawn, but Miranda,
Lila, and Adam have more depth and the relationships among the three of them
ring true. Sweeney doesn't overplay Adam's search for his Cherokee origins, nor
does she make too much of Miranda's dearth of memories of her deceased mother,
and there is a sense of romantic drama to both climax and conclusion that roman-
tic young adults may well find satisfactory. JMD
SYKES, SHELLEY 
For Mike. 
Delacorte, 1998 
197p
ISBN 0-385-32337-9 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 7-10
In the fall of their senior year, Jeff's friend Mike disappears, and Jeff begins to have
dreams wherein Mike attempts to explain his disappearance. Jeff thinks that the
dreams mean that Mike's dead and that their mutual friend Jerry Kirby is involved
somehow; the eventual discovery of Mike's body proves the dreams' insight on the
first part, and Jeff is determined to investigate the truth of the second. There are a
lot of elements in this book-Mike's disappearance, the discovery of his death, the
supernatural aspect of the dream visitations, Jeffs growing attraction to a girl who
has been a platonic friend, and the revelation of the circumstances surrounding
Mike's death-and they're too tonally contradictory to coalesce into a coherent
story. The writing, which is on the ungainly side, never gives Jeff or anyone else a
character deep enough to be involving, but the pace is too slow to be effective as
escapist suspense or crime drama or to overcome the predictable plot elements.
342 
* THE BULLETIN
The book does offer some interesting looks at the changes in Mike's family after
his loss and the role of the spiritual in his and his friends' life, but that's not enough
to overcome the wooden and labored feel. DS
WALTER, VIRGINIA 
Making Up Megaboy; illus. by Katrina Roeckelein. 
Jackson/
DK Ink, 1998 
64p
ISBN 0-7894-2488-6 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 4-9
Thirteen-year-old Robbie Lewis has just shot and killed a storekeeper, and various
voices-the television news, the storekeeper's wife, Robbie's parents, his friends
and acquaintances, his lawyer, and so on-respond to the event and its aftermath
in this collagic narrative. Computer-enhanced photographs and drawings and
constantly changing typeface give the story a graphic emphasis, which is appropri-
ate to the story of a boy whose real passion was the drawing of his comic-strip
creation, Megaboy. The overriding question seems to be "Why did he do it?", but
readers will search in vain for the answer; while Walter litters the cast with bad
guys of various stripes (Robbie's father is a macho racist, the principal eager to
disavow responsibility, his mother simplistic), nobody's badness seems to be par-
ticularly causal here or likely to result in the response it did. Though the variety-
of-voices approach is appealing, the voices themselves are often contrived, messagy,
and poorly differentiated, and the book seems more interested in suggesting the
failings of others than in generating sympathy for its protagonist. There are some
effective images in the art, but the format gets visually jumbled; that drawback and
the two-color spreads (black is highlighted with lime, peach, or sky blue) convey a
certain stodginess rather than visual excitation (the black-and-white spreads are
more focused and effective). Ultimately this bears a strong resemblance to Mel
Glenn's similarly multivocal and pointed works (The Taking ofRoom 114, BCCB
3/97). Readers may find the openendedness here less satisfying, but the book
could serve as a discussion-starter or inspirer of similar projects. DS
WARNER, SALLY 
Sort ofForever. Knopf, 1998 
[14 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98648-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88648-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-olds Cady and Nana have been best friends for what seems like for-
ever, but now that Nana is sick, their relationship is put under pressure. Cady
visits Nana in the hospital and out, daily or as close to it as her parents will allow,
watching as her bold and lively friend grows weaker and more detached from the
world beyond her doors. This is a younger fatal-illness drama than children's
literature generally sees, and Warner takes a different approach, starting in the
middle of Nana's illness (it's never stated what, except for some form of cancer,
she's actually dying of) rather than with the more traditional before-diagnosis be-
ginning. Though sometimes talky and awkward, the book is particularly good at
demonstrating the effect Nana's illness has on all around her, not just on Cady but
on Cady's parents (who worry about their daughter's overinvolvement and the
possibility of early death that Nana reminds them of) and on Cady's little brother
(who resents his sister's distraction and their parents' concern). There's also a
straightforward but sensitive acknowledgment of Cady's anger and conflicting
desires, since she desperately wants to keep Nana alive but also needs to plan for a
life after Nana's death. This is an endlessly fascinating topic, and youngsters not
MAY 1998 
* 343
ready for Love Story or even Hurwin's A Time for Dancing (BCCB 10/95) will
appreciate this early tearjerker. DS
WEAVER, WILL HardBall: A Billy Baggs Novel. 
HarperCollins, 1998 
230p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027122-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027121-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 8-10
Fifteen-year-old Billy is a farm boy with an incredible pitching arm, and it just
may be enough to get him a college scholarship. A scholarship, however, is close to
the last thing on Billy's mind-the first thing is "a tall girl with a silvery ponytail.
Her name was Suzy Langen, and Billy was in love." There wouldn't be much of a
story without conflict, and Weaver sets Billy in the midst of some time-honored
doozies: a love triangle with Billy, Suzy, and the well-heeled King Kenwood; Billy's
resentful attempts to please a demanding and undemonstrative father; and a class
struggle between the farmers and the townies, personified by the antagonism be-
tween Billy's father and the father of King Kenwood. Walker has a strong grip on
most of these set-ups throughout the novel, moving his characters through their
paces with a sure if occasionally grim hand. There is a remarkable solidity to
Walker's prose, and the group dynamics on the school bus, the play-by-plays of
baseball games, the barely suppressed sexual attraction between Billy and Suzy,
and the physical rivalry between King and Billy are deftly, almost relentlessly de-
picted. Unfortunately the writing surrenders its authority with a feel-good con-
clusion. The two boys, with the help of their coach, hand a contract with their
(essentially) emotional demands to their up-to-this-point unbending, obsessive
fathers, who, contrary to everything that has come before, concede sheepishly in a
finale that negates the strength of what has come before. Fans of the previous Billy
books (Striking Out, BCCB 9/95, and Farm Team, BCCB 2/94) may not mind
the last inning end-tying because up until the final scene strike out, Weaver will
have readers in the palm of his glove. JMD
WEEKS, SARAH 
Mrs. McNosh Hangs Up Her Wash; illus. by Nadine Bernard
Westcott. 
Geringer/HarperFestival, 1998 
20p
ISBN 0-694-01076-6 
$9.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
Nelly McNosh is a washerwoman of note, handwashing her laundry out of doors
in a big barrel. "It takes her all morning,/ and when the sun's high,/ she hangs
what she's washed/ on the clothesline to dry" and in this rhyming picture book,
she hangs up quite a bit. Segueing from the usual things like undies and nighties,
"she hangs up the stockings./ She hangs up the shoes./ She wrings out the paper/
and hangs up the news." Storytime attendees are going to giggle as the list of Mrs.
McNosh's laundry gets more and more outrageous, finally ending when "she takes
off her apron/ and lets down her hair,/ then hangs herself up ... / in a comfortable
chair." Westcott's line and watercolor cartoons show the red-haired protagonist in
a bright pink housedress with a rain barrel full of dark blue water, a green wash-
board, and a long clothesline full of unusual washables against a pale blue sky.
This sudsy bit of nonsense has a strong rhyme and a catchy rhythm and, aug-
mented by the bubbly (and easy to see) illustrations, it will make a humorous
storytime addition even while it introduces the idea that washing machines (and
dryers) are recent inventions. JMD
344 
* THE BULLETIN
WEIGELT, UDO 
The Strongest Mouse in the World; tr. by J. Alison James; illus. by
Nicolas d'Aujourd'hui. 
North-South, 1998 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-896-5 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-895-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Wait a minute! Stories where the mouse challenges the bear to a test of strength
are supposed to end with a trick that allows the little guy to beat the big guy
through powers of wit. This tale starts out with Lizzie the mouse dreaming of her
superlative strength, boasting of her prowess to various animals, and then defeat-
ing the bear only because it turns out to be her birthday and he lets her win as the
kickoff to a surprise party. Well, if the bear can let her win, the bear can also
overwhelm her, so the little guy here is ultimately not in control of things, which
robs vulnerable young listeners of folklore's traditional reassurance to the clever
and/or lucky undersized hero. Kids will probably enjoy the story anyway, espe-
cially because ofd'Aujourd'hui's spacious, oversize watercolor-and-crayon illustra-
tions that are similar to Bill Peet's action-packed bravado in tone and technique.
If the events are contrived, the art is spontaneous, and maybe nowadays the world
wishes, after all, to revolve around community goodwill rather than individual
cunning. BH
WILLARD, NANCY 
The Tortilla Cat; illus. by Jeanette Winter. 
Harcourt,
1998 
4 8p
ISBN 0-15-289587-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-10 yrs
They say that Dr. Romero can cure anything, but none of his medicines work
against the strange fever that fills his waiting room and takes the life of his wife.
One night Anna, the eldest of his five children, is awakened by the sound of cry-
ing, and, opening the front door, she finds a gray cat that she brings in from the
cold. In the morning it is gone, and Anna thinks she dreamed it. When Anna
comes down with the fever, her father despairs, but that night "out of the light and
into the room stepped the little gray cat. She was walking on her hind legs and
carrying a red tray in which rested a single tortilla." Anna eats the tortilla and gets
well, and as each child falls ill, the cat again arrives with a healing tortilla. Winter's
acrylics, brilliantly colored with deep purples, blues, and greens, suit this dreamy
tale, each illustration framed like a window into the Romero family's daily life and
feline miracle. Dark-haired, dark-eyed children comfort one another as lines of
stars dance in and out of the pages along with the green-eyed Tortilla Cat. This
brief fantasy seems to be reaching for a level of magical realism it never quite
achieves. Disparate elements-folkloric structure and motifs, Dr. Romero's schol-
arly paper on "The Tortilla Cat Delusion," the repeating nonsense rhyme used to
name a litter of kittens-are tonally inconsistent and fail to meld into a cohesive
whole. Though it falls a bit short of its reach, this little novella is quirkily appeal-
ing, and readers with a taste for the eccentric may still take it to heart. JMD
YEP, LAURENCE 
The Cook's Family. Putnam, 1998 
[192p]
ISBN 0-399-22907-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
In this sequel to Ribbons (BCCB 2/96), Robin Lee accompanies her Chinese grand-
mother to Chinatown where they are pressed into pretending to be the long-lost
family of Wolf, a despondent cook at The Celestial Forest restaurant. This one-
MAY 1998 
* 345
time visit turns into a weekly event as Wolf and grandmother form a semi-roman-
tic friendship, with Robin along as a kind ofjunior chaperone. Meanwhile Robin's
family life is evaporating with her parents' constant bickering, especially about her
mother's involvement in the family's electronics store. Robin and Grandmother
make a formidable team against the backdrop of splintering family relationships
and the fragile family fantasy they've created with the lonely Wolf. The appear-
ance of Wolfs real daughter dissolves the illusion, however, and when Grand-
mother intervenes to have Mom "fired" from her job at the store, peace is restored
on the homefront in record time. The parental arguments seem banal rather than
terrifying, although Robin's attempt to protect her younger brother, Ian, is quite
affecting. Readers who enjoyed Robin's struggle as an aspiring ballerina may be
disappointed to see ballet take a backseat, but they will appreciate the dynamics of
Robin and Grandmother's deepening relationship. It is Robin who takes a backseat
to her Hong-Kong-born Grandmother, whose multidimensional personality is the
most engaging in the whole novel. PM
ZIEFERT, HARRIET M. 
Pushkin Meets the Bundle; illus. by Donald Saaf. Schwartz/
Atheneum, 1998 
[34p]
ISBN 0-689-81413-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Pushkin lives happily with two people, Kate and Michael. What this canine child-
substitute (how many dogs can bat a ball or ride a tricycle?) in the red jacket soon
realizes is that Kate and Michael's newly arrived bundle has successfully pushed
him out of the spotlight ("Kate stays home. She pats the baby, but she doesn't pat
me"). The baby with "the big, BIG cry" forces the jealousy issue for Pushkin, and
"Just when I'm about to cry, I get a good idea." Performing his best tricks for the
baby, Pushkin causes the newborn intruder to stop crying and smile at his "sib-
ling"; on the final page we see the newborn baby riding Pushkin, who remarks, "I
might just get to like this baby after all." Accompanying the engagingly simple
text are richly tinted gouache renderings contrasted against crisp white backgrounds
in which simple shapes with deliberately skewed proportions offer a soberly fantas-
tical interpretation of the drama. The solution is rather convenient and the end
somewhat abrupt, but kids familiar with losing the family throne to a younger
sibling will probably welcome a canine in the role, whatever his pedigree. PM
ci
346 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Tomlinson, Carl, ed. Children's Books from Other Countries. Scarecrow, 1998.
304p. illus. with photographs. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8108-3447-2. $24.50
Produced under the auspices of the United States Board on Books for Young People,
this is a concise and convenient introduction to non-U.S. literature available in
this country. Tomlinson begins with a fact-packed overview of some history, rel-
evant publishing information, possible curricular uses, and sources for further in-
formation. The book then offers an annotated bibliography, divided by genre
(though some of the genre assignments seem notably arbitrary), of approximately
seven hundred books from countries ranging from Canada to China, Australia to
Ethiopia. Annotations include information about original publication (country of
origin is bold-faced) as well as American edition and note any awards received as
well as providing summaries of quite serviceable length. A boon for anyone with a
functional interest in this very current topic, this title packs a lot of useful but
previously un-centralized information about both individual books and larger con-
texts into a compact space. (It's also a sobering reminder of just how few imported
books, especially from non-Anglophone countries, have turned up here.) An ap-
pendix lists the winners of the Hans Christian Andersen and Batchelder awards;
an author/title index lists books by page and ID number; subject and country of
origin indices list entries by ID number only. DS
More Teachers' Favorite Books for Kids: Teachers' Choices 1994-1996. Interna-
tional Reading Association, 1997. 84p. illus. with photographs. Paper ed. ISBN
0-87207-179-0. $10.95.
Originally appearing in The Reading Teacher, the Teachers' Choices offer annota-
tions of selected titles, including bibliographic info, summaries, suggestions for
curricular use and applications (and occasionally direct quotes from those who
have used a book). Divided into three sections by age level, the entries are usefully
specific and may help educators looking for new ideas and librarians attempting to
assist with curricula. A twenty-page supplement offers four brief essays on aspects
of using trade books curricularly; author and title indices for the Teachers' Choices
are included. DS
MAY 1998 
* 347
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Foggo
African Americans: Bolden; Lester,
J.; McKissack
African Americans-fiction:
Hewett; Pinkney
Alaska-fiction: Shahan
Alaska: McMillan
American Indians-fiction: Burks;
Durrant; Sweeney
American Indians: McMillan
Animals-fiction: Hardman
Animals: Meeuwissen
Anthropology: Reinhard
Archaeology: Reinhard
Art and artists: Greenberg
Aunts-fiction: Katz
Aviation-stories: Borden
Babies-stories: Ziefert
Baseball-fiction: Weaver
BEDTIME STORIES: Heap
Benin-Ofolklore: Mama
BIBLE STORIES: Armstrong;
Chaikin; Figley; Kimmel; Mark;
Paterson, J.
BIOGRAPHIES: Bolden;
Greenberg; Lester, J.;
McKissack
Birthdays-stories: Jeram; Weigelt
Blacks-fiction: Foggo
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Bradley
California-stories: Levitin
Cats-fiction: Willard
China-folklore: Porte
Chinese Americans-fiction: Yep
Civil rights movement: Colbert
Colonial life: Maestro
Commerce-fiction: Levitin
Cousins-fiction: Shahan
Cowboys: Lester, J.
Cowboys-stories: Heap
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Beard; Byars; Miklowitz;
Pinkney; Sykes; Walter;
Death and dying-fiction: Katz;
Lindsay; Newth; Sykes; Warner
Deserts-stories: Marsh
Divorce-stories: Cole
Dogs-fiction: Brandford
Dogs-stories: Ziefert
Dreams-fiction: Galloway; Sykes
Drugs-fiction: Stoehr
Ducks-stories: Rankin
Ecology: Rogers
Ecology-fiction: Sweeney
Emotions-stories: Oram; Slepian
Ethics and values: Hewett;
Miklowitz; Newth
FANTASY: Galloway; Rylant;
Smith, S.; Willard
Farms-fiction: Olson
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Cameron; Crowe; Sweeney
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Brisson
Fathers and sons-fiction: Byars;
Miklowitz; Pfeffer; Weaver
Fishing: McMillan
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Holden; Mama;
Porte
Food and eating-fiction:
Hardman; Karr; Levitin;
Willard
348 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Friendship-fiction: Byars;
Cameron; Duffey; Greene;
Hewett; Warner
Friendship-stories: Oram
FUNNY STORIES: Lester, H.
Gardening: Smith, M.
Gardens-stories: Brisson
Ghosts-fiction: Crowe; Lindsay
Grandfathers-fiction: Rylant
Grandmothers-fiction: Yep
Grandmothers-stories: Slepian
Guns-fiction: Pinkney; Walter
HISTORICAL FICTION: Beard;
Borden; Bradley; Brandford;
Burks; Cameron; Durrant;
Fleming; Hardman; Horvath;
Karr; Lasky; Newth; Ryan;
Schrier
History, U.S.: Chambers;
Fleming; Hathorn; Jurmain;
Lester, J.; Maestro; Myers
Homosexuality-fiction: Stoehr
Horses: Lester, J.
Judaica: Chaikin; Kimmel; Mark
Kidnapping-fiction: Durrant
Knights-fiction: Paterson, K.
Language arts: Meeuwissen
Latinos-poetry: Carlson
Laundry-stories: Weeks
Letters and letter writing: Colbert
Literature, American: McKissack
Mermaids-fiction: Rylant
Middle ages-fiction: Brandford
Middle East-poetry: Nye
Migrant workers-fiction: Olson
Militias-fiction: Miklowitz
Mining-fiction: Lasky
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Cameron
Mothers and sons-stories:
Donovan
Music and musicians-stories:
Holden
MYSTERIES: Byars
MYTHS AND LEGENDS:
Paterson, K.
Neighbors-fiction: Alcock
Ocean-stories: Blake
Penguins-stories: Lester, H.
Peru: Reinhard
Pigs-fiction: Martin
POETRY: Carlson; Holden; Nye
Prehistory: Reinhard
Racism-fiction: Hewett
Rats-stories: Holden; Jeram
Reading aloud: Carlson; Duffey; Porte
Reading, beginning: Martin
Reading, easy: Greene
Reading, reluctant: Greenberg; Lester, J.
Refugees-fiction: Alcock; Schrier
Religious education: Chaikin; Kimmel;
Mark; Paterson, J.; Raschka
RHYMING STORIES: Donovan;
Hathorn; Hoberman; Holden; Marsh;
Raschka; Rogers; Weeks
School-fiction: Duffey
SHORT STORIES: Lindsay
Siblings-fiction: Foggo
Siblings-stories: Cole; Ziefert
Sisters-fiction: Cameron
Slavery-poetry: Hathorn
Slavery: Chambers; Jurmain; Myers
SPORTS STORIES: Greene
Stepfathers-fiction: Pfeffer
Storytelling: Mama; Porte
Storytime: Donovan; Hoberman; Marsh;
Rankin; Raschka; Rogers; Weeks
Surfing-stories: Blake
SURVIVAL STORIES: Shahan
Turkeys-fiction: Karr
West, the: Lester, J.; Ryan
Women's studies: Armstrong; Bolden;
Figley; McKissack; Ryan
World cultures: Nye; Schrier
Writers and writing-fiction: Fleming;
Horvath
"An original
anr fact
paced fantasy."
"Marvelously colorful
characterization combines
with a dangling-by-a-
fraying rope plot to
create humor, tension, and
interest:'
-School Library Journal
"Readers who only know
Kennedy by his inventive
verse will be delighted to
find this novel:' *
-Kirkus Reviews
The Eagle as Wide as the World
X. J. Kennedy * Ages 8-12 * 0-689-81157-8 - $16.00
Margaret K. McElderry Books
Simon & Schuster Childrenrs
Publishing Division
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
where imaginations meet 
y 
W N
www.SimonSaysKids.com
The Lemon Jelly Cake
Madeline Babcock Smith
Introduction by Dan Guillory
A surefire guarantee for the headaches and
stomach upsets of the late twentieth century,
The Lemon Jelly Cake carries readers back
to kinder, gentler times in a small town at
the turn of the century. Evoking a forgotten
America of lush lawns, bountiful summer
picnics, and shady front porches, the tale is
set when the day's toughest decision might
have been what to serve for dinner or which""
suit or dress to wear.
In this new Prairie State Books edition, an introduction by longtime
Millikin University faculty member and Findlay resident Dan Guillory
situates the book and its charming tale firmly in the Central Illinois
of 1900.
"A sophisticated, even urbane novel . . . The only real complaint
to be lodged against [the author] is that she is sixty-five and this is
her first novel. Why has she been holding out on us so long?"
-
Jane Cobb, New York Times Book Review
"Pure corn, but the most delightful corn we've come across in a
long time." -
Chicago Tribune
"A book that melts in the mouth." -
Lisle Bell, New York Herald
Tribune Book Review
"[An] affectionate, entertaining, and thoroughly endearing novel
of small-town life in a pre-Freudian era." -
Pamela Taylor,
The Saturday Review
A Prairie State Book
Paper, ISBN 0-252-06163-2. $14.95
Supported by Nettie Lou Samuels 
(800) 545-4703
www.press.uillinois.edu/s98/smith.html
J
I
)1 
IZI 
I'1 iý)Lt 
,1,ýlct-Ch 
np ig ,I 
6 S2
1.. Newbery Medal
SCHOLASTIC CONGRATULATES KAREN HESSE
Out of the Dust by Karen Hesse * 0-590-36080-9 * Ages 11 and up * $15.95
Winner of the 1998 Scott O'Dell Award
ALA Notable Children's Book * ALA Best Book for Young Adults
School Library Journal Best Book of the Year * Booklist Editors' Choice
Book Links "Lasting Connection" * Publishers Weekly Best Book of the Year
New York Public Library Children's Book of the Year - 100 Titles for Reading and Sharing
..................... 
.SCHOLASTIC 
PRESS
SCHOLASTIC PRESS
I
[_ýs 
C HO I.-AST I C I
TeacI 
I
Teach"ing
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
Te-cht--K8
Every issue of Teaching K-8
provides informative articles on
the cutting edge of education.
You'll also find insightful
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
Don't miss out on this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
TeachingK-8
-- --
i- -------------- 
-
One year
(8 issues)
$19-7li
x 54808, Boulder, CO 803224808
-8793
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
I 
I
skll
v
"TALL is terrific...
It's energized
and it's gutsy."
-Jonathan Kozol
O 
y clearly
defining
academic expecta-
tions and setting
specific professional
standards TALL is
leading the way in
the teaching and 
L
the learning of
children's and young
adult literature.
"TALL is the Rolls Royce of the field."
- Joan E Smutny
National-Louis University
Uniquely organized, each issue brings you 16 inspiring,
practical, jargon-free articles guaranteed to enrich and
expand your professional practice.
For more information and a catalog
call 1-800-337-6525 or write to:
Essmont Publishing, P.O. Box 186, Brandon, Vermont 05733
Other titles available from August House LittleFolk:
THE GIRL WHO WORE TOO MUCH
A Folktale from Thailand
Retold by Margaret Read MacDonald
with Thai text by Supaporn Vathanaprida
Illustrated by Yvonne Lebrun Davis
Hardback $15.95/ISBN 0-87483-503-8
THE DANCING TURTLE
A Folktale from Brazil
Retold by Pleasant DeSpain
Illustrated by David Boston
Hardback S15.95/ISBN 0-87483-502-X
I SCREAM, YOU SCREAM
A Feast of Food Rhymes
Selected as one of the New York
Public Library's 100 Best Children's Books 
,.
for reading and sharing
Lillian Morrison
Illustrated by Nancy Dunaway
Hardback $12.95/ISBN 0-87483-495-3
L
5(
Hardback $15.95
ISBN 0-87483-498-8
IUGUST HOUSE
Littl epk
P.O. Box 3223
ittle Rock, Arkansas 72203-3223
01-372-5450 * FAX 501-372-5579
order@augusthouse.com
1-800-284-8784
DK Publishing, Inc.
Spring 1998 
'
March
My Litt ABC
Board Book
LC: 97-36186
ISBN: 0-7894-2781-8
$6.95
LC: 97-32131
ISBN: 0-7894-2783-4
$6.95
Monster Machines
LC: 97-39624
ISBN: 0-7894-2796-6
$14.95 * Grades K-2
Playtime Rhyms
compiled by Shn
McKelar
illutird 
tby Prscilla
Lamonr
LC: 97-36187
ISBN: 0-7894-2861-X
$12.95 * Grades K-2
LOOK CLOSER
$4.95 each. Paperback
Grades 2-4
Desert IWE
LC: 91-58195
ISBN: 0-7894-2969-1
Poed Lif
LC: 91-58196
ISBN: 0-7894-2970-5
Rain Forest
LC: 91-58197
ISBN: 0-7894-2971-3
Tide Pool
LC: 92-52823
ISBN: 0-7894-2972-1
You CAN DsAW
$4.95 each, Paperback
Grades 2-5
Fabulou Cartoons
ISBN: 0-7894-2822-9
Sharks, Whales and
Other Sea Creatures
ISBN: 0-7894-2888
The Illustrated
Book of Fairy Tales
reald by Na/Phi",
illrsrd by Niideh Miry
LC: 97-34707
ISBN: 0-7894-2794-X
$19.95 * Grades 2-5
aff
EyEWrITNESS 
EXPLORERs
$5.95 each, Paperback
Grades 2-5
Human Body
LC: 93-31076
ISBN: 0-7894-2982-9
Mammals
LC: 92-54312
ISBN: 0-7894-2983-7
Shells
LC: 92-54311
ISBN: 0-7894-2984-5
Weather
LC: 91-58210
ISBN: 0-7894-2985-3
Soccer
by Ivor Baddid
LC: 97-36602
ISBN: 0-7894-2795-8
$16.95, Hardcover
ISBN:0-7894-3071-1
$12.95, Paperback
Grades 3 and up
The Young Astronomer
by Har, Fonrd
LC: 97-39623
ISBN: 0-7894-2061-9
$15.95 Grades 3 and up
The Young Baseball
LC: 9741728
ISBN: 0-7894-2825-3
$15.95 
Grade 3 and up
April
EYEWITNESS 
READERS
$3.95 each, Paperback
A Day at Greenil Farm
LC: 97-31285
ISBN: 0-7894-2957-8
Grades K-1
Dinoaur Dinner
LC: 97-36750
ISBN: 0-7894-2959-4
Grades 1-3
Spacbusters
LC: 97-31274
ISBN: 0-7894-2961-6
Grades 2-3
Days of the Knights
LC: 97-29396
ISBN: 0-7894-2963-2
Grades 2-4
THE UNEXPAINEDw
by Colin Wilon
$12.95 each 
Grades 3-6
Ghosts
LC Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2819-9
Pychc Powers
LC: 97-44359
ISBN: 0-7894-28
May
The Shoe Book
ISBN: 0-7894-29
$7.95 * Grades PI
The Beat Hide &
Seek Ad. Ever
by Tim Huchinso
ISBN: 0784-28
$14.95 
Grades
SEE & EXPLOR
$7.95 each, Paper
Grades 3-5
The Body and
How It Works
LC: 91-58203
ISBN: 0-7894-29
Sp 
Sua, Plar
and Spacecraft
LC: 91-60144
ISBN: 0-7894-29
Sharks and Othi
Creiaaus of the
LC: 91-72484
ISBN: 0-7894-29
Whales, Dolpin
LC: 92-T624
ISBN: 0-7894-29
Art Attack!
by Neil Buhamsa
LC: 97-35376
ISBN: 0-7894-29
$9.95, Paperbck
Grades 3-6
My Pony Book
by Lcuri 
Nni*Sam
LC: 97-34425
ISBN: 0-7894-28
$15.95 
Grades
Specialects
byiJake Hamuiln
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-28
$17.95 
Grades 4
June
EYEWrNEss READ
$3.95 each, Paper
Truck Trouble
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-29
Grades K-1
Fure Fishe
LC 97-36342
ISBN: 0-7894-29
Grades 1-3
Beastly Tal
LC: 97-38622
20-2 
ISBN: 0-7894-29624
Grades 2-3
Volcanoes & Other
Disaters
LC: Pending
0- 
SBN: 0-784-2964-0
reK-K 
Grades 2-4
EEWTNESS CLASSI
S 
rewMby A 
s rrlind
~
K
$14.95 each Grades 3-6
11-3 
Alddin and Other Tales
K-2 
fmm the Arabian Nights
illutmiud by Nilah Mistry
LC: 97-32300
back 
ISBN: 0-7894-3073-8
King Arthur
illmrttadby Tudor
Humphri
LC: 97-32301
65-9 
ISBN: 0-7894-2887-3
ets 
DKPOCKTr
Grades 4 and up
66-7
p7 
hp•Ack
?r,_ 
LC: 97-80368
Dp 
ISBN: 0-7894-2871-7
67-5 
$14.95
Student Thesauu
LC: 97-80388
ISBN: 0-7894-2809-1
68-3 
6.95
Record Breakers
LOC: 
97-80391
ISBN: 0-7894-2834-2
$6.95
Skeletons
06-3 
LC: 97-32187
ISBN: 0-7894-2833-4
$6.95
Spelling Dictionary
£ 
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-3073-8
10-5 
6.95
3-6 
I Anybody Out There
by Heatdiir CQ*er
Niprl Hmte
LC: 97-35398
ISBN: 0-7894-2798-2
13-X 
$14.95
and up 
Grade 5 and up
EAS
back
DK Publishing, Inc.
95 Madison Avenue
58-6 
New York, NY 10016
Available from your regular
supplint, 
o call I-888-DAL-
DKP (42-5357).
60-8
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETURN PosrAGE GuARANTEED
0008-9036(199805)51:9*;1-0
p,~
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
SBulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of tides
* Quote of the Month
SBulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1997
Sthe Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more ... updated monthly!
-a
C1
rr"
r~ ~"
~ 
~
i·I 
--
I"
~·"· ~
