T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
October 2015
Vol. 69   No. 2
Disseminate. Innovate. Collaborate.
A global community of authors, readers, and 
publishing partners align to discover and share 
new knowledge.
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
October 2015
Vol. 69 No. 2
73  the BIg PICture
 
  Baba Yaga’s Assistant  written by Marika McCoola and illus. by Emily Car-
roll
74  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
75 •  Symphony for the City of the Dead: Dmitri Shostakovich and the Siege of Len-
ingrad  by M. T. Anderson
77 •  Drowned City: Hurricane Katrina & New Orleans  written and illus. by 
Don Brown
109 •  Wait  written and illus. by Antoinette Portis
110 • Where’s Walrus? And Penguin? written and illus. by Stephen Savage
117 •  Funny Bones: Posada and His Day of the Dead Calaveras written and illus. 
by Duncan Tonatiuh and with photographs
122  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
123  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $108.00 or electronic $120.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2015 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Baba Yaga’s Assistant by Emily Carroll, copyright ©2015 and used by permission 
of Candlewick Press.
OctOber 2015 • 73
the BIg PICture
Baba Yaga’s Assistant
written by Marika McCoola; illustrated by Emily Carroll
In this lush and otherworldly graphic novel, a folktale brushes up against modern 
life, and a teen decides to choose magic over realism. After her mother died, Masha 
was raised by her grandmother, who kept her entertained by telling her stories of 
Baba Yaga and hinting at personal knowledge of the famous witch. Masha is distant 
from her father, and when her grandmother dies, she’s horrified to discover he’s 
been building a life with a woman and her dreadful child (there’s got to be an evil 
step-something, after all), a life that she is expected to share. Masha decides that 
she’ll walk away from her contemporary existence and respond to Baba Yaga’s ad for 
an assistant, assuming that a chicken-legged hut and a fearsome witch must surely 
be better than a brat and a bafflingly aloof dad. Clever and quick-witted, Masha 
draws on her memory of the folktales and the way characters have defeated Baba 
Yaga to try to meet the challenges—but is that the only thing she wants?
As a storyteller, McCoola is as shrewd as Masha and nearly as shrewd as 
Baba Yaga. Masha of course doesn’t just get to leave her real-life problems behind, 
and her obnoxious little stepsister Dani turns up as part of the test, allowing Masha 
to surprise herself by forging a caretaking relationship with her and influencing her 
behavior. Astute readers will also catch the fact that Baba is not, perhaps, averse to 
Masha actually succeeding, and that she is playing a role with gusto in real life as 
much as within the tales about her. 
The splendid digital illustrations hint at the story’s folk origins while also 
presenting Masha as a modern teen. Creative use of color suggests European folktale 
illustrations and sometimes evokes the darkness that rests at the edge of Masha’s 
thoughts, while always adding richness and depth, particularly in the larger pan-
els. There are three primary styles of illustration to indicate three different contexts: 
Masha’s memories, which are fuzzier, with dark colors on the borders that focus 
the eye and suggest the dual sharpness and haziness of memories; the folk stories 
from which Masha gathers information, which have clearly been told to her so 
many times that they stand out as vividly illustrated tales for her; and the current 
world where she is trying to accomplish her three tests. Readers won’t likely need 
these visual cues indicating the leaps between focal points, but it’s a nice touch. 
Carroll also uses shading and orientation to affect pacing and tone, as remembered 
melancholy scenes represent a stark departure from the usual lush coloration, and 
composition either speeds or slows the reader’s eye. 
There are all sorts of curricular possibilities here: exploration of folktale 
retellings, discussion about modernization, and even analysis of the use of the 
wordless panels and how art moves the story forward, but mostly this graphic 
74 • the bulletin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
novel deserves to just be savored as an old story yanked into modernity and told 
with aplomb. Baba Yaga is seamlessly included in the lives and stories of real people 
right from the start, as Masha walks through a crowd of people on the street who 
are swapping Baba Yaga stories. This intertwining is bookended pleasingly on the 
last page (back where we began), as her father regretfully lets her go and the witch 
appears, in her mortar with pestle, right in the neighborhood to swoop up her new 
assistant. As a result, the book places the audience firmly in a reading world where 
they don’t really have to worry about plausibility—they can just be swept into a 
tale. (See p. 101 for publication information.)
April Spisak, Reviewer
AdriAn, Emily Like It Never Happened. Dial, 2015 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42823-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Sophomore Rebecca Rivers loves being part of “The Essential Five”—the elites of 
her high school’s theater world. The group has sworn off intra-dating, but when 
arrogant, charming Charlie makes a move, she can’t resist, even if she notices that 
his chameleon-like personality changes as it serves him. Their clandestine relation-
ship hits the rocks shortly before the opening of the fall play and Rebecca defends 
their director against Charlie’s criticisms, inadvertently revealing her teacher crush. 
When someone falsely reports an inappropriate relationship between Rebecca 
and Mr. McFadden, her slut reputation from junior high returns (all because she 
wore thong underwear that a friend insisted she buy), and everyone, including her 
closest friends, turns on her. Adding to the tumult is the return of Rebecca’s older 
sister, Mary, whose relationship with their parents deteriorated when she began a 
romantic relationship with another woman, but Mary’s lessons from the school of 
hard knocks help bolster Rebecca through the anger and agony of suspicion and 
betrayal. Though burdened by Rebecca’s caricature-like mother, this novel makes an 
interesting study in rumors and reputation, as well as an ultimately positive portrayal 
of a conflicted but resilient and independent teen. It’ll be a lively read for theater 
folks, sure, but an even better one for those worried about their reputations.  AA 
OctOber 2015 • 75
AndErson, m. T. Symphony for the City of the Dead: Dmitri Shostakovich and the 
Siege of Leningrad. Candlewick, 2015 [464p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-7636-6818-1 $24.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
Consider a Venn diagram of twentieth-century history. What stories might lie 
within the set where music, war, and state-sponsored terror intersect? Surely this 
one, in which an upcoming composer, imbued with youthful enthusiasm for the 
promise of a revolution’s progressive new order, is body slammed with the reality 
of Stalinism, and his every word and every note are scrutinized for nonconformity. 
This was the plight of Dmitri Shostakovich; the praise and censure heaped upon 
his works through and beyond World War II chart the deadly vagaries of life under 
Mother Russia’s unhinged dictator. The climactic focus is Shostakovich’s Seventh 
Symphony, the “Leningrad”; this piece was composed while the city, left defense-
less due to the decimation of the Red Army by Stalin, starved under siege. The 
symphony is clearly a work of incredible courage, and there is still hot debate over 
its possible covert meaning or message, the possible damage done to its composer 
via its positive reception in the West, and its influential role in rallying the citizens 
of the beleaguered city itself. Anderson brings his narrative A-game to this dense 
work of nonfiction, blending the complex strands of the story into a satisfying 
whole. Embellished with scores of photographs and peppered with the author’s 
own commentary on the symphony, the text and supporting materials supply 
historical background for music enthusiasts and musical interpretation for history 
buffs. Source notes, index, and bibliography will aid report writers, but the most 
appreciative audience is likely to be engaged readers who settle into the tragic yet 
uplifting story of a suffering nation and its musical documentarian.  EB
BAdgEr, HilAry State of Grace. Switch, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-63079-015-8 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Wren lives in a perfect world: a garden setting full of teenagers who believe they are 
newly created and whose only job is to pick one bag of perfect newfruit each day 
as an offering to Dot, their god. Aside from a couple of prohibitions, they are free 
to enjoy themselves according to the Books of Dot, which teach them that their 
world is the only one, that all of Dot’s creations are good, and that she loves them 
unconditionally because they, too, are dotly. The problem, though, is that Wren is 
starting to have dreams of other places and people that leave her feeling unsettled 
(“precalm,” in the lingo of their world). When Blaze, a boy experiencing similar 
dreams, confronts her, she denies everything, but when a young boy stumbles 
into their garden and tells them of a gate and an outside world, Wren is forced to 
confront her growing uncertainty about the teachings of Dot. Wren’s firm belief 
that she is being tested by Dot wears a bit thin in its repetition, but her insistence 
aids the book’s broad criticisms of religious belief whether dangerous fanaticism or 
more tempered comfort. Echoes of many familiar narratives surface throughout this 
dystopian tale as the setting begins to look less like Eden and more like a similarly 
designed but more benevolent Hunger Games arena or Maze Runner Glade before 
taking on shades of Lord of the Flies violence and Feed’s capitalist corruption. Wren 
has clearly suffered a trauma, and the reveal of who and what is behind Dot offers 
her an ethical dilemma: learn to live with her guilt and pain, or take the escape of 
76 • the bulletin
oblivion and the new cosmology offered by DOT, Delusion Onset Therapy. While 
the plot itself is simplistic and the characters more sketched than nuanced, the issues 
the book raises offer opportunities for multilayered discussion.  KC 
BAndy, micHAEl s. Granddaddy’s Turn: A Journey to the Ballot Box; by Michael 
S. Bandy and Eric Stein; illus. by James E. Ransome. Candlewick, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6593-7 $16.99  
Ad 5-8 yrs
WinTEr, JonAH Lillian’s Right to Vote: A Celebration of the Voting Rights Act of 
1965; illus. by Shane W. Evans. Schwartz & Wade, 2015 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39029-3 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39028-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39030-9 $10.99  
R 6-9 yrs
Marking the fiftieth anniversary of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, this pair of 
picture books helps young listeners understand the troubled transition between 
African-American citizens’ legal right to vote under the Fifteenth Amendment 
and their actual ability to vote, guaranteed and enforced nearly a century later. In 
Granddaddy’s Turn, the narrator recalls the time he accompanied his grandfather—
dressed in his suit and entrusted by his wife with a camera to mark the event—to 
the polling place. There Granddaddy was stopped by the poll worker and given a 
text to read; failing the “test,” Granddaddy watched his ballot ripped and tossed 
on the floor. He left quietly but tearfully with his uncomprehending grandson, 
who years later would cast his own vote with his grandfather’s picture in his hand. 
Although the story is straightforward and Ransome’s paintings offer literal support 
for the text, listeners may have difficulty finding visual clues to determine the time 
frames under consideration. More successful is Lillian’s Right to Vote, inspired by 
centenarian Lillian Allen, who stumped through her hilly neighborhood to encour-
age neighbors to vote in the 2008 election. Allen’s fierce determination is powerfully 
relayed both in text and art: “It’s Voting Day, she’s an American, and by God, she 
is going to vote.” Ghostly line drawings of her ancestors and relatives who were 
denied their personal freedom and voting rights meaningfully accompany her as 
she makes her way up the hill. Although the endnote remarks that she cast her vote 
for Barack Obama, the body of the work wisely has a nonpartisan focus on the act 
of voting itself, emphasizing it as a privilege and a responsibility. Appended author 
notes provide historical context for both titles, and Winter comments as well on 
the 2013 Supreme Court decision “eliminating federal oversight of states’ election 
processes” and jeopardizing the effectiveness of the 1965 law.  EB
BArTon, BETHAny I’m Trying to Love Spiders; written and illus. by Bethany Bar-
ton. Viking, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-670-01693-8 $16.99  
R 5-7 yrs
For every kid who loves bugs, there’s another who shudders at the creepy-crawly; 
it’s at that second group that this title is aimed, as Barton entertainingly presents 
arachnid facts while recognizing (and indulging) the primal desire to squash the 
eight-legged critters. The text is informally informative, as the unseen narrator at-
tempts to get over her fears (“Fatal spider bites are so rare, you have a better chance 
of getting struck by lightning”) and convince herself that “spiders are cool” (“Next 
OctOber 2015 • 77
time I’ll focus on all the cool superpowers spiders have. Like 8 eyes”). Many of her 
attempts to appreciate arachnids go awry, though, as viewers are encouraged to 
repeatedly smash a large taupe spider (“AHHHH! It’s moving!! Squish it!! Squish 
it!! Squish it!!”). Only after the spider dispatches numerous other bugs does the nar-
rator see it in a new light and finally refrain from killing it—unlike the cockroach 
that escapes the spider’s web. The brisk, breathless tone and the concisely presented 
information will keep kids’ attention, and the interactive opportunities to smack 
the illustrated spiders extends a humorous (and entertainingly gross) invitation to 
even the most arachnophobic readers. Illustrations, rendered in inks, paper, com-
puters, and “concentrated awesome,” utilize plenty of white space and a splotchy, 
watercolor-like application of airy, cheerful colors to engaging effect. The cartoonish 
spiders (the poor guys who keep getting smooshed are endearingly goggle-eyed) are 
more amusing than truly creepy, keeping the overall feeling lighthearted. Adults 
wanting to jolt some new life into spider-themed units or storytimes will want to 
get their hands on this book.  JH
BrAy, liBBA Lair of Dreams. Little, 2015 [624p] (Diviners)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-12604-5 $19.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-36488-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
Catching the notorious Pentacle Killer in 1926 New York (in The Diviners, BCCB 
10/12) gave seventeen-year-old Evie O’Neill a chance at fame and fortune and 
she’s taken it, telling the world that her psychic abilities helped find the murderer. 
Unfortunately, her turn as “America’s Sweetheart Seer” also reveals that there are 
other Diviners with special talents, some of whom are none too happy about being 
outed. Meanwhile, a mysterious sleeping sickness is sweeping across the city, leaving 
its victims in a coma-like state until they pass away. Evie’s friend Henry DuBois, a 
Diviner with the ability to dreamwalk, meets Ling Chan, a fellow dreamwalker and 
a resident of Chinatown, which has been the hardest hit by the sickness. These are 
just two of the many plot threads here, the others including an interracial romance, 
shadowy men in dark suits seeking out Diviners, and continuous references to a 
man in a stovepipe hat and a coming darkness. While Bray deftly held the story-
lines together in the first installment, this outing proves to be more fractured, with 
glaring disconnects among events and an unwieldy amount of action that occurs 
in fits and starts. Still, the dialogue remains crackling and witty, and Bray is at her 
best when she pulls away from the various plot threads and offers readers a larger 
look at 1920s America, a nation scarred by war but poised for progress—progress 
that is mostly being built on the backs of immigrants. The mystery of the man in 
the stovepipe hat will likely have readers intrigued enough to continue following 
the series, and a rather startling occurrence at the end of this novel hints at which 
Diviner will be focused on next.  KQG
BroWn, don Drowned City: Hurricane Katrina & New Orleans; written and illus. 
by Don Brown. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 96p
ISBN 978-0-544-15777-4 $18.99  
R* Gr. 5-9
Brown (The Great American Dust Bowl, BCCB 10/13) stands once again at the 
intersection of Natural Disaster and Human Misstep, chronicling the drama of 
Hurricane Katrina and its aftermath in riveting graphic-novel format. The opening 
78 • the bulletin
scene features a mother and son tickled by a calligraphic flourish of wind: “Early 
August 2005. A swirl of wind leaves Africa and breezes toward the Americas. It 
draws energy from warm Atlantic waters and grows in size.” Brown follows its path 
over several pages and arrives at a double-page spread of a roiling storm closing in 
on the Gulf Coast, with an inset of a FEMA worker prophetically quoted, “When 
I have a nightmare, it’s a hurricane in New Orleans.” What follows, of course, is 
the tragedy of errors involving broken communications, poverty, and abject stub-
bornness that impeded evacuation efforts and led to the deaths of more than 1400 
persons. Although ink and watercolor artwork somewhat softens the horror, Brown 
doesn’t flinch away from depicting the victims’ suffering nor does he excuse govern-
ment officials (both local and federal) for their catastrophic unpreparedness that 
augmented death and displacement counts. Direct quotations that fill the speech 
bubbles—“We are out here like pure animals”; “Brownie, you’re doing a heck of a 
job”—underscore the extent of the debacle. Source notes and an extensive bibli-
ography will direct readers to further information about the disaster, but even the 
most casual of browsers will come away with insight into the historic devastation 
of a city that is still in recovery.  EB
BroWn, JEnnifEr How Lunchbox Jones Saved Me From Robots, Traitors, and Missy 
the Cruel. Bloomsbury, 2015 232p
ISBN 978-1-61963-454-1 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Joining the robotics team at his middle school is of absolutely no interest to Luke 
Abbott, who’d much rather spend his afternoons taking down virtual aliens in his 
favorite video game. When a teacher basically forces him onto the team, he finds 
himself in the Life Skills classroom, surrounded by a group of misfits that includes 
Lunchbox Jones, a mostly silent but nonetheless terrifying hulk of a kid, and Missy 
Farnham, a loud girl who has bullied Luke for years. The team’s chances at defeat-
ing their school’s rival in an upcoming match are pretty slim, considering that 
Luke’s computer skills are, despite his teacher’s assumptions, limited to shooting 
bad guys and trash-talking through his headset and that none of the others can do 
much more. Meanwhile, Luke is having problems at home as well, specifically in 
dealing with his older brother’s decision to join the Marines. An underdog team, 
misunderstood bullies, family drama—all the elements of an afterschool special 
are there, and indeed parts of this novel are similarly formulaic and sentimental; 
the parallel between Luke’s situation with his brother and the reason for Lunch-
box’s silence seems particularly forced. Still, Brown wisely restrains from offering 
a too-tidy ending and instead conveys the message that sometimes you play with 
the team you’ve got, not the one you want—and when that team inevitably loses, 
there are always more aliens that need to be destroyed.  KQG
BroWn, nAncy mAriE The Saga of Gudrid the Far-Traveler. Namelos, 
2015 204p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-189-2 $19.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-190-8 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-191-5 $8.95  
R Gr. 9-12
An author’s note describes the mix of legends and true stories that Brown used to 
write her fictional account of Gudrid, a Viking woman who sought a world beyond 
the gendered expectations for women 1,000 years ago. Ignoring the fact that she 
OctOber 2015 • 79
is promised to one man, Gudrid chooses her own mate, travels as she wishes, and 
is generally a fearless woman in a place and time where most women lived a life of 
drudgery and acquiescence. Gudrid is instantly a compelling character, and Brown’s 
elegant, lyrical writing reflects the historical context of this novel, firmly embed-
ding Gudrid into a time when even mildly independent thoughts were considered 
scandalous for a girl, let alone brazen intelligence and daring. It’s an immersive 
novel, and readers will leave with a clear understanding of not only big, historical 
moments but also the details of everyday life and chores. While a further reading 
list would have been welcome, the author does offer alternative spellings and a few 
specific details that might lead readers to more information on Gudrid and the 
context in which she managed to flourish, despite all odds.  AS
BuTTErWorTH, cHris Where Did My Clothes Come From?; illus. by Lucia Gag-
giotti. Candlewick, 2015 26p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7750-3 $12.99  
R 5-8 yrs
This funky overview of the origin of various textiles opens with the simple acknowl-
edgement that there are all different kinds of clothes for all different occasions, 
then poses the titular question of origin. What follows are step-by-step illustrated 
summaries of the processes behind creating six different types of garments: cotton 
jeans, wool sweaters, silk party dresses, synthetic soccer uniforms, plastic-based 
fleece jackets, and rubber boots. Each two-to-four page section follows the process 
from raw material (be it natural or fabricated) to finished product, and the steps are 
enumerated from start to finish. The retro-styled mixed-media illustrations offer 
tons of visual cues to pair with concepts, making this a treasure trove of informa-
tion for curious browsers. Most spreads are full of visual information without being 
chaotic, and listeners will likely enjoy the opportunity to pore over the pictures after 
hearing the story read aloud. Global and multicultural details make this a great 
offering for a study on world cultures as well as an obvious readaloud introduction 
on the science of everyday things. Burgeoning fashionistas and young scientists 
alike will find plenty of fun facts in this clever compendium. A bibliography and 
index are included.  HM
cAlmEnson, sTEpHAniE Ollie’s Class Trip: A Yes-and-No Book; illus. by Abby 
Carter. Holiday House, 2015 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8234-3432-9 $15.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-8234-3493-0 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
Identical in style to Ollie’s School Day (BCCB 10/12), this useful picture book ex-
plores the details of Ollie’s class field trip to the aquarium through a highly interactive 
yes/no format. The tightly patterned narrative asks a series of informative questions 
(“How will the class get to the aquarium?”) and provides three silly responses (“Will 
they go in a submarine? No! Will they fly there like kites? No! Will they roll to the 
aquarium like bowling balls? No!”) before finally offering an actual answer (“Will 
Ollie’s class ride the school bus? Yes!”). A splash of drama is thrown in when Ollie 
can’t find his buddy, but because he quickly tells the teacher, the crisis is averted. 
Calmenson’s muted watercolors are often humorous, particularly in the creative 
interpretations of the silly questions, and the large pages make this a great choice 
for classroom carpet sharing. There’s also plenty of field-trip etiquette rolled into 
80 • the bulletin
the simple story, from the importance of sticking with your assigned buddy to the 
expectations to “have fun looking, listening, and learning,” making this a requisite 
choice for prepping early elementary classrooms for the first fall field trip.  HM
cHApmAn, JArEd Steve, Raised by Wolves; written and illus. by Jared Chap-
man. Little, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-316-25390-1 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
It’s not just a figure of speech: Steve, a human child, was raised by actual wolves. In 
preparation for his first day at school, his lupine mother tells an anxious Steve to 
just be himself. Unfortunately, her advice results in excessive howling, destruction 
of school property, eating a dead bird for lunch, and ultimately bringing home a 
note from the teacher: “Steve had a hard time staying out of trouble today.” It’s 
not until Day Three that Steve finds a chance to shine: when the class hamster goes 
missing, Steve uses his wolfish instincts to track the tracks the hamster to the school 
cafeteria and saves the day. Chapman’s clever tale works well on several levels; the 
story of a wolf boy attending school is hilarious in and of itself, but it also offers 
implied hope to kids trying to figure out how to make their unique tendencies 
work within the parameters of the classroom. Steve’s mother is a remarkable voice 
of reason, never asking Steve to be something he isn’t but encouraging him to fit 
in with the societal expectations of the school while staying true to himself, and 
her advocacy sees him through. The hand-inked and digitally colored illustrations, 
which switch easily between full-bleed spreads and comic-panel sequences, provide 
plenty of humorous fodder; splashy turquoise, magenta, and kelly green predominate 
in the zingily cartoonish scenes. This is a terrific tale for framing a discussion about 
classroom expectations, but it will function just as well as a silly family readaloud 
with the wolf cubs at home.  HM
cHilds, TErA lynn Powerless; by Tera Lynn Childs and Tracy Deebs. Source-
books Fire, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-4926-1657-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Kenna is quite content working with her mother at a superhero lab and getting her 
weekly injection to ensure superpowers don’t affect her (a protective creation her 
mother made when Kenna turned out to have no powers of her own). When the 
bad guys literally appear in front of her, she’s pretty thrown but not for the reasons 
she expected: these villains are handsome guys, and and they’re seeking a loved 
one whom the heroes are apparently torturing. In addition, Kenna’s lifelong best 
friend has been secretly dating one of them. Kenna’s life is uprooted in an instant 
as all of her beliefs about good vs. evil are challenged, and she also learns she may 
have superpowers after all. She has little time to process these notions, though, 
because she’s busy trying to save her recently captured mom while also thinking 
about the sexy lips of one of her new (villainous) pals. Let’s make this clear right 
now: the world-building is convenient more than well considered, but that’s so 
not the point. Romance buffs who like star-crossed lovers will find more than one 
satisfying pairing to swoon over amidst the good guy/bad guy entanglements, and 
they’ll happily return to see what Kenna does next, both with her hottie and with 
her newly developing superpowers.  AS
OctOber 2015 • 81
cHoldEnko, gEnnifEr Chasing Secrets. Lamb/Random House, 2015 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99063-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74253-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97577-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
It’s San Francisco at the dawn of the twentieth century, but this time the plot centers 
not around fire but plague. Thirteen-year-old Lizzie Kennedy is encouraged by her 
physician father to follow her dream to become a doctor, and he gives Lizzie run of 
his library and takes her with him on his rounds. Therefore, when rumors of plague 
begins to circulate and Jing, the family cook, goes missing, Lizzie is drawn to the 
double mystery of the disease itself and the fate of the family’s Chinese servant. It’s 
not easy for an adolescent girl to wrangle information from tight-lipped, disap-
proving adults, but with the help of a schoolmate, a quietly smitten admirer, and 
even her recalcitrant older brother, she manages to locate Jing and unearth some 
very ugly truths about the white San Francisco community: many residents have 
conflated their fear of disease with their hatred of Chinese immigrants, and they 
are using the plague as an excuse to burn down Chinatown. Choldenko is a fine 
storyteller, and this should prove to be a historical fiction crowd-pleaser on several 
levels—the ever-popular theme of infectious disease, the intrigue of forbidden 
friendship, some hijinks at a cotillion (replete with details of ballgowns), and even 
a touch of tragedy. Endnotes (with their own source citations), and a timeline of 
events supply historical context.  EB 
cHrisTopHEr, nEil, ad. The Dreaded Ogress of the Tundra; illus. by Larry Mac-
Dougall. Inhabit, 2015 54p
ISBN 978-1-927095-79-9 $16.95  
R* Gr. 2-4
If you run into an Amautalik, or Arctic ogress, it’s unlikely you’ll live to tell the 
tale, so you might as well learn all you can in advance. Here’s your chance: this 
gorgeously illustrated pair of stories offers distinct regional interpretations of tales of 
these fearsome beasts. The Inuit tales feature plenty of cultural, social, and practical 
details about life in the Arctic so that readers from other cultures will leave a bit 
better informed as well. Mostly, though, these are stories meant for telling, with 
built-in pauses for dramatic effect and creepy, memorable details that will linger 
well after the book is closed or the tale is told. The lush, finely detailed oil paint-
ings that partner the stories are vibrant accompaniments (especially the random 
giant bugs), but the real stars are the intricate pencil sketches on the endpapers 
and in the introduction. The extras are just as magnificent, with an engrossing 
introduction explaining what an ogress of the Arctic might wear, eat, use as tools, 
and hunt, and a postscript inviting readers to linger over short descriptions and 
brilliant illustrations of other ogresses one might encounter while wandering the 
Arctic. There are no source notes or bibliography, but Christopher has experience 
that suggests considerable knowledge of the culture, and one hopes that in future 
volumes he’ll include more supporting information for his excellent storytelling. 
Offer this not just to folklore buffs but also to budding horror fans as a thoughtful, 
unusual alternative to the usual fare.  AS
82 • the bulletin
cHrisTopHEr, nEil, ad. On the Shoulder of a Giant; illus. by Jim Nelson. In-
habit, 2015 38p
ISBN 978-1-77227-002-0 $16.95 
 R 5-8 yrs
Inukpak is unbelievably enormous, catching whales and calling them fish and 
covering massive stretches of land in single steps, but he is missing something. 
When he finds a hunter (ordinary-sized but tiny compared to Inukpak) on the 
tundra, Inukpak believes him to be a lost child and decides to scoop him up and 
take him along for a walk. The unnamed hunter quickly realizes he is so far from 
his original land after only a short time with the giant that he might as well accept 
his new “parent,” and the two embark on a lifetime of adventure (though only one 
humorous day is covered in this story). There is such cleverness to the prose that 
an oral telling would be effective, but much would be lost without Nelson’s lush, 
finely detailed illustrations and their emphasis and exaggeration of the text. Al-
though the text stands alone, curious readers will be rewarded with a lively foreword 
explaining how Christopher became drawn to giant stories in general, and with a 
lengthy, fascinating afterword that gives broader details about other giants from 
Inuit storytelling. A pronunciation key (at the bottom of the page) the first time 
any tricky new word is mentioned smoothes any small concerns about accessibility 
and readaloud potential.  AS
coopEr, E. E. Vanished. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229390-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229389-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
High school junior Kalah doesn’t know why Beth and Britney, “It” girls of the senior 
class, picked her to be their friend. She’s honored to make their duo a trio, though, 
and sees their drama as only sisterly, despite her past experiences with frenemies 
that escalated her OCD to such a place she had to transfer schools. She refuses to 
take sides in their constant bickering, even if her heart is with Beth—in a rather 
non-sisterly way. In addition to her sporadic passionate kisses, Beth’s enigmatic 
nature keeps Kalah intrigued; she’s the opposite of Zach, Kalah’s dependable, 
loving boyfriend. When Beth takes off, saying goodbye only to Brit, Kalah is dev-
astated; only after Brit commits suicide does Beth finally return Kalah’s texts. But 
something isn’t quite right, and Kalah finds herself obsessively playing a game of 
wits and manipulation to figure out what really happened to her friends. Cooper 
does a nice job pacing this mystery, meting out revelations about the captivating, 
if superficial, characters, and building the suspense successfully. However, the story 
stumbles sometimes over unexplained details (why did Brit and Beth befriend 
Kalah?), and Kalah herself is bland and uninteresting. Still, it’s a swift ride of sex, 
jealousy, and betrayal that observes and utilizes contemporary technology to good 
effect, and Kalah’s sexual confusion rings true. An enjoyable if not wholly satisfying 
jaunt, this page-turner leaves the door open for a sequel. In the meantime, it may 
just convince teen readers to keep their passwords to themselves.  AA
OctOber 2015 • 83
coylE, kATiE Vivian Apple Needs a Miracle. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-544-39042-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12 
When readers last saw Vivian (of Vivian Apple at the End of the World, BCCB 4/15), 
she and her friend Harp had driven across the country to discover the truth behind 
the cult of Frick that led to the purported Rapturing of multitudes of people and 
the desperate devotion of millions more. Now Vivian and Harp feature on Frick’s 
Church of America broadcasts as dangerous enemies, and they have been sheltered 
by Winnie, Vivian’s older half-sister, and her anti-Frick militia. Those at the top 
of the Church are defending against Vivian and Harp’s anti-Frick message with a 
potent weapon: Peter, the son of Frick’s right-hand man, whom Vivian took for an 
ally—and fell for. This sequel definitely requires recent knowledge, since the huge 
cast is a challenge to keep track of; additionally, Vivian is less interesting here, as 
she’s considered a tough chick right from the start, yet her actions are sometimes 
more juvenile than in the previous title. However, there’s plenty of pulse-pounding 
action as the militia engages in armed conflict with Believers, Vivian and Harp slip 
in and out of the Los Angeles hotel that’s become the Church’s headquarters, and 
Vivian stealthily reconnects with her beloved Peter, who is merely pretending to 
go along with the Church. Relationships—Vivian’s relationship with her mother 
and Harp as well as with Peter—also shift and develop in intriguing ways. Mostly, 
though this is about seeing the venal Church of America get their comeuppance 
and Vivian back in Peter’s arms, and that will be enough to satisfy many fans of 
the first title.  DS
dAyWAlT, drEW The Day the Crayons Came Home; illus. by Oliver Jef-
fers. Philomel, 2015 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17275-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-9 yrs
This follow-up to The Day the Crayons Quit (BCCB 10/13) traces the whereabouts 
of an assortment of crayons young Duncan has lost over the years through a series 
of their postcards. Poor Maroon Crayon is broken and lodged in a couch cushion, 
Turquoise Crayon ended up in the dryer and has bonded to a sock, Orange and 
Yellow Crayons (the only characters to return from the previous volume) are melted 
together in the backyard, and Gold Crayon has his head stuck in a crayon sharpener 
after a lengthy assignment coloring a haul of pirate booty left him pointless. While 
the concept is not quite as fresh the second time around, the letters themselves 
remain clever, and young listeners will delight in the creative speculations on what 
happens to lost crayons. Each spread pairs handwritten text on a vintage postcard 
with an accompanying illustration; some show the crayons in their current state, 
others show the front of the postcard, while others depict various (crayoned) art 
projects from days past. Humor abounds, as does potential for discussion on point 
of view and epistolary writing, and the clever conclusion offers the perfect response 
to the problem of refugee art supplies.  HM
84 • the bulletin
dEsTEfAno, lAurEn The Curious Tale of the In-Between. Bloomsbury, 
2015 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-600-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-601-9 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Eleven years ago, Pram died inside her mother after the pregnant woman hanged 
herself, but doctors managed to get Pram breathing again and saved her life. Her 
two very practical aunts took her in and told her only that her mother died in 
childbirth and her father simply left. Pram still feels that she is “alive and dead 
at the same time,” a condition that is probably what allows her to see and speak 
with ghosts, one of whom, Felix, has become her best friend. Now, however, Pram 
finds a more corporal friend in Clarence, and the two set out to find Pram’s father 
and also the spirit of Clarence’s mother, who died in a car accident. They find 
assistance from Lady Savant, a powerful spiritualist, but it soon becomes clear 
that she has ulterior motives and that Pram, Clarence, and Felix are in serious 
danger. The arresting opening scene, in which Pram’s mother’s body is found, sets 
a macabre tone, but Pram’s practicality and genuine sense of curiosity warms some 
of the chill, and her thoughtful reflections on loss and grief add more poignancy 
than morbid drama. DeStefano’s vivid prose is both evocative and immersive, the 
subtly ambiguous period of the setting is effective, and Pram’s ventures into the 
spirit world are particularly memorable. Lady Savant may be cruel, but readers will 
likely find her sympathetic after Pram discovers the vicious things that were done 
to the spiritualist in the name of medicine (ironic, given that medicine is what 
saved Pram). Thematically haunting and skillfully executed, this blend of ghost 
story, family drama, and mystery will leave readers pondering the space between 
the living and the spirit world for some time.  KQG
dinnison, kris You and Me and Him. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2015 275p
ISBN 978-0-544-30112-2 $17.99  
R Gr. 8-12
Being ridiculed by her peers and criticized by her mother for her weight has left 
Maggie defensive. The only person she truly lets in is Nash, whose gayness and 
dysfunctional mother have placed him with Maggie in the outsider category in 
their small Washington town. When new kid Tom seems interested in Maggie, she 
can’t help but feel attracted but also guilty—Nash called dibs on Tom, and even 
though Tom is straight, true friends don’t mess with that sort of contract. When 
Tom kisses Maggie and Maggie makes the mistake of confiding in an indiscreet 
former friend, everything gets blown out of proportion, putting a gulf between her 
and Nash and showing the true colors beneath Tom’s charming veneer. The char-
acters here are effectively nuanced, flawed but forgivable as they muddle through 
teenage conundrums of loyalty and love. Maggie in particular feels very real in 
her use of humor for deflection, her disbelief in Tom’s interest, and her upset over 
“betraying” Nash—her intense distress over their fight rings true. Dinnison makes 
Maggie something of an unreliable narrator, who claims she doesn’t overindulge 
(and who, for the most part, truly doesn’t) but who then binge eats when her world 
turns upside down. Readers will recognize and appreciate how what we say about 
ourselves, our relationships, and our values doesn’t always hold up under pressure, 
OctOber 2015 • 85
and how acknowledging that inconsistency can allow us, like Maggie, to make the 
most of second chances.  AA 
duBuc, mAriAnnE Mr. Postmouse’s Rounds; written and illus. by Marianne Dubuc; 
tr. from the French by Yvette Ghione. Kids Can, 2015 26p
ISBN 978-1-77138-572-5 $17.95  
R 4-6 yrs
Mr. Postmouse makes many deliveries: a sugar cube for the Ants; a couple of pairs 
of roller skates for Mrs. Turtle; and a slightly unsettling package (a fox’s legs, snout, 
and tail sprout from the parcel) for a coop full of chickens. His route takes him 
through a variety of environments, including snowy and watery ones, and brings 
him into contact with a few classic folktale characters, such as Mr. Bear (seen enjoy-
ing some porridge with a golden-haired girl in his cottage) and Mr. Wolf (who is 
being robbed of his stash of sheep by three robber pigs). Dubuc is proving herself 
to be a master at creating quietly inviting animal-populated worlds, and this title 
is no exception. While the text is mainly a catalogue of the places and animals 
that Mr. Postmouse visits, it’s engagingly and elegantly presented. The careful 
details of the house interiors (shown in cutaway views) are reminiscent of Richard 
Scarry’s Busytown books, although with a more visually streamlined, less cluttered 
approach. Viewers will get a chuckle out of the Rabbit family’s burrow, from the 
stacked-to-the-ceiling bunk beds to the bunny toilet that leads to a lower hole full 
of little black bunny poops, and they’ll giggle at the car-shaped bulge punctuat-
ing the sinuous form of Mr. Snake, in his quonset hut–like abode that extends 
across multiple pages. Dubuc’s palette of soft colors (featuring plenty of outdoorsy 
greens, blues, and browns) and the clean, tidily outlined figures harmonize with 
the narrative’s calm, contemplative tone. Although this title invites close viewing 
to fully appreciate the details, it could still be a pleasant addition to a mail- or 
house-themed story session.  JH
EllioTT, kATE Court of Fives. Little, 2015 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-36419-5 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-36424-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Jes and her family find their lives upended when the aristocrat under whom they 
served dies, leaving behind debts that must be paid. Despite being a girl in a world 
that prizes boys, Jes is allowed to live because she is talented at the Fives, a complex 
athletic competition held dear by both Commoners and Patrons. Her sisters and 
her pregnant mother don’t fare as well, and Jes must get them out of the tomb in 
which they’ve been sealed before they die. She’s got some help, especially from her 
hunky new dalliance who turns out to be quite the important political figure, but 
it’s still a long shot whether all will survive the harrowing rescue. Along the way, 
Jes learns that there may be much more to the Fives than she first imagined, and 
if she can unlock the competition’s long-forgotten magical mysteries, it may serve 
her well. The world-building is effective, as the details of this hierarchical society 
emerge as much from the actions of the characters as they do from exposition. 
Unfortunately, the rescue, while obviously important, is fraught with so many 
starts and stops, pitfalls, and twists that it becomes tiring rather than thrilling. In 
addition, nothing quite feels original in this gendered, classist society, including the 
frowned-upon romance between Jes and her more powerful man. Even so, there is 
86 • the bulletin
plenty here to grab readers, and they’ll likely want to see how Jes fares in her quest 
for revenge, love, and glory.  AS
Emond, sTEpHEn Bright Lights, Dark Nights; written and illus. by Stephen 
Emond. Roaring Brook, 2015 [384p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-206-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-12
It’s senior year, and Walter Wilcox is sticking to his usual goals: blend in, fly under 
the radar, avoid confrontation. He’s managed to do so before, even last year when 
he and his cop father moved from a middle-class “burb” to a working-class “urb” 
after Walter’s parents’ nasty divorce. Walter’s wallflower ways, however, are tested 
when he meets Naomi, a witty, smart, charming black girl, and the two embark on 
a romance that becomes a scandal in the community after Walter’s dad is accused 
of racial profiling and assaulting a black teenager. Suddenly, Walter and Naomi’s 
relationship is being debated all over the internet, they’re getting threats, and friends 
and family are turning their backs on them. Simmering racial tension ignited by 
a police encounter is a timely topic, and Emond pays heed to the factors of race, 
wealth, and politics that play into the community’s implosion while still keeping 
the focus squarely on Walter and Naomi’s relationship, which must overcome 
hurdles of its own. Walter may be working class but he’s still white, and, as Naomi 
reminds him, the color of his skin affords him privileges that Naomi simply does 
not have. Both have to come to terms with the racist ideas that were once merely 
implied by loved ones but have now been laid bare; Walter especially struggles 
with this as it becomes clear that his father may not be totally innocent. Black and 
white illustrations pepper the book, often focusing on the buildings and streets of 
the city and lending grit to the story’s sense of place. Certainly rife with topics for 
discussion, this could easily be paired with Magoon’s How It Went Down (BCCB 
11/14) for a fictional exploration of an all too real event.  KQG 
foWlEy-doylE, moïrA The Accident Season. Dawson/Penguin, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42948-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
October is a strange and often disastrous time for Cara’s family: every year, the 
autumn month brings with it inexplicable accidents and leaves in its wake bruises, 
scars, and sometimes death, as in the case of Cara’s father and uncle. This year 
seems particularly ominous: a girl named Elsie from Cara’s school has gone missing; 
Cara’s sister Alice, who insists the accident season is merely a series of coincidences, 
is behaving erratically; and visions of four changeling children and a menacing 
metallic monster leave Cara unnerved and disoriented. It all comes to a head at the 
Halloween party Cara and her friends throw at a haunted mansion, where family 
secrets are laid bare and Cara’s version of reality is essentially destroyed. This is a 
lyrical and sometimes chilling exploration of the ways in which we manipulate 
memories to fall in line with our present narrative—the lies we tell ourselves to keep 
our brains safe and happy. Cara’s narration brilliantly, sometimes brutally conveys 
the unraveling of both Cara and her family (“Our pain . . . opens us out and drops 
pebbles of truth inside us and then sews us back together again”). Readers who 
initially find Cara to be trustworthy will begin to notice the gaps in her story and 
understand the far more tragic tale behind it. Irish author Fowley-Doyle is careful, 
OctOber 2015 • 87
however, to leave some mysteries unresolved, and the bittersweet ending will haunt 
readers as much it does Cara.  KQG 
fulk, dAvid Raising Rufus. Delacorte, 2015 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99178-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74464-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39072-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
When sixth-grader Martin Tinker wanders into a quarry near his home in Menomi-
nee Falls, Wisconsin, he finds a smooth, oval-shaped, speckled stone that turns out 
to be a dinosaur egg, and soon he is the secret guardian of a baby Tyrannosaurus rex 
that he names Rufus. When a new girl, Audrey, comes to town, he shares the news 
with her, and the two spend their summer caring for Rufus, who lives covertly in 
the barn cellar. By summer’s end, Rufus measures more than twelve feet long and 
it becomes obvious that he can be secret no more. A series of madcap events fol-
low, involving a disclosure, an escape, a capture, a sale, a rescue, and, eventually, a 
settlement that works for everyone, including Rufus. Fulk impressively develops the 
fantasy concept into a believable and enjoyable storyline. There a lot of appeal in 
the “what if?” line of thinking that will attract young readers, and the adventurous 
and slightly dangerous elements that run concurrent to the friendship tale make 
this a surefire hit on multiple levels. Though secondary characters are somewhat 
stock, Martin himself evolves over the course of the novel, especially in his new 
role as friend; since characterization ensures that readers will be invested in Martin, 
they’ll support his desperate harebrained scheming as he tries to figure out what 
to do with Rufus. This entertaining page-turner is a whole lot of fun, and it’s to 
inspire lots of conversations among young readers.  HM
gAnTos, JAck The Trouble in Me. Farrar, 2015 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-374-37995-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Hole in My Life (BCCB 5/02) described the author’s misguided youth and subse-
quent stint in federal prison; here Gantos revisits his early teen years to examine 
the origins of his darker side. Fourteen-year-old Jack adores his mother yet fears 
the softness he gets from her, and he’s desperately trying to impress his stern ex-
Navy dad, the Commodore. When Jack meets his new neighbor, Gary Pagoda, he’s 
immediately in the older boy’s thrall: Gary is a swaggering, girl-alluring, trouble-
making juvenile delinquent, and Jack “was consumed with me becoming him.” 
Their interlude together is marked by repeated conflagrations, explosions, and 
dissembling encounters with Gary’s probation officer, but ultimately Jack proves 
himself to be, thank heavens, not quite up to Gary’s standard of psychopathy. You 
could call this a prequel to Hole in My Life, but it’s also a bridge between Gantos’ 
official autobiography and his impulsive and trouble-ridden fictional protagonists 
Joey Pigza (Joey Pigza Swallowed the Key, BCCB 11/98) and Jack (Heads or Tails, 
BCCB 7/94, etc.). Gantos’ literary skills allow young Jack to articulate his dilem-
mas, especially his urgent need for approval, without making him preternaturally 
insightful. The author’s deadpan, wry style adds a poignant bit of self-knowledge 
(“That’s called thinking,” Jack says brightly when he makes a modification that al-
lows him to obliterate a family plan more dramatically), and indeed there’s a touch 
88 • the bulletin
of facepalm humor throughout, as the events become ever more jawdroppingly 
self-destructive. His exploits are also creative and a wee bit enviable, in the Jackass 
vein (if he’d grown up in the YouTube era he’d have been dead before adulthood), 
but readers will grasp that Jack’s not so much having fun as cartwheeling through 
desperation.  DS
gEorgE, JEssicA dAy Silver in the Blood. Bloomsbury, 2015 356p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-431-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-432-9 $12.99  
R Gr. 7-10
It’s 1897, and New York debutantes and cousins Dacia and Louisa are hoping that 
their European tour and visit with the Florescu family, their Romanian relatives, 
will be filled with gorgeous dresses, beautiful sights, and handsome men. The trip 
does indeed include all those things, but any giddiness the girls feel is soon eclipsed 
by their family’s revelation that Dacia and Lou descend from a long line of shape-
shifters who have used their powers to secure the safety of the Dracula bloodline. 
The girls are now expected to use their newly manifested powers to overthrow the 
current Romanian king, put Prince Mihai Dracula on the throne, and support his 
subsequent taking of all of Europe. The Florescus’ service to the Draculas is just one 
of the family’s many dirty secrets, and generations of dysfunction and misdeeds all 
come to head when the cousins defy the family, deciding murder and treason are 
simply not their style. Diary entries and letters give the girls distinct voices, even 
as events shift their dynamics (the normally bold Dacia is shocked into depression 
upon learning she can shift into a wolf, while timid Lou revels in her newfound 
power). The Romanian setting, with its opulent estates amid the Carpathian wilder-
ness, offers a perfect backdrop to this clash between high society’s customs, family 
loyalty, and supernatural powers.  KQG 
gino, AlEx George. Scholastic, 2015 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-81254-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-81258-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5 
Fourth-grader George has a problem: everybody considers her a boy, but she knows 
she’s really a girl, although she hasn’t yet told anyone this realization. When her 
class plans to put on a theatrical version of Charlotte’s Web, she gets an idea: if she 
rejects the boy’s roles and instead plays the girl’s role of Charlotte, then it will be 
apparent to all—classmates, her teacher, her mother—that she’s a girl. When her 
teacher sternly forbids George’s consideration for a girl’s part, George and her friend 
Kelly concoct a scheme to get George onstage as Charlotte nonetheless. George’s 
plight is keenly conveyed, and Gino sets it out in terms easily understandable to 
contemporary elementary-schoolers; crass but affectionate older brother Scott is a 
solid anti-authoritarian authority who capably demonstrates low-key acceptance 
while providing some voice for those surprised by George’s secret. However, the 
writing is sometimes awkward and the book treats the Charlotte plan with perplexing 
seriousness, given its obvious flaws (surely Charlotte’s most salient characteristic is 
her species, not her gender; wouldn’t Fern be a more effective role?); most charac-
ters are generally flat and directive, shifting instantly from opposition to support 
to maximize the book’s climax. Despite the book’s flaws, this is one of the more 
approachable books about transgender kids and one of the few aimed at younger 
OctOber 2015 • 89
readers, and its emotional depiction of George’s quandary will likely elicit reader 
sympathy.  DS
glAss, AndrEW Flying Cars: The True Story. Clarion, 2015 [128p] illus. 
with photographs
ISBN 978-0-618-98482-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-8
Boats float, planes fly, and cars roll along the ground. Everybody knows that. But 
then there are planes that take off and land on water, and amphibious boats that pull 
up onto dry land. So what about cars that take to the air? As Glass demonstrates here, 
it’s not an outlandish idea at all—just a somewhat arcane one whose brief period of 
promise flourished and then pretty much faded by the mid twentieth century. Short 
chapters in chronological order feature the many notable attempts at inventing a 
vehicle that is flight- and road-worthy, that can convert quickly from one mode 
to the other, that offers the comfort and operational ease of an automobile, and 
that is sufficiently stable in flight to be safe for the most amateur of pilots. Perhaps 
most surprising to readers will be the degree of success enjoyed by the inventors; 
many flying cars have been demonstrated as safe and efficient, only to suffer some 
one-off accident that, however minor, put the public off its appetite for a winged 
vehicle of their own. The text focuses on innovation at each new level, and if the 
writing style is somewhat dry, the photographs more than compensate. With at-
tention to engineering, design, and consumer demand, this is a topic well suited to 
STEAM curricula that should be welcomed by science teachers, young inventors, 
and anyone who browses the amazing pictures and wonders, “Why not?” Source 
notes, bibliography, index, and a list of websites for archival video are included.  EB
grAHAm, BoB How the Sun Got to Coco’s House; written and illus. by Bob Gra-
ham. Candlewick, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-8109-8 $17.99  
R 3-6 yrs
This playful story describes the journey of the sun as it moves along the earth and 
touches its light on spaces grand and small along the way (“It crossed a city, took 
a shortcut down an alley, and waited patiently outside an old lady’s window to be 
let in”). After traversing great distances, it finally arrives on the street of Coco, a 
little girl, and “barged straight through Coco’s window!” Having gotten her out of 
bed, the winter sun then shines on Coco’s outdoor romp in the snow, and “they 
spent the whole day together.” Graham returns to his recent theme of the local as 
a part of the global here, while still retaining his usual merry touch: the textually 
personified sun is a genuine playmate, dancing on an airplane wing to entertain a 
young boy and, “bold as you like,” turning off streetlights. Graham’s softly homey 
line and watercolor illustrations don’t overstress the concept, keeping the sun and 
sunlight firmly astronomical rather than human, but the clever noting of its slanting 
rays and many reflections is conceptually as well as literally illuminating. The final 
birds’-eye spread (with birds flying by to bring home the point) takes a slightly less 
realistic view of the sun in order to pick Coco’s house out amid the landscape, but 
it’s a detailed urbanscape worth poring over. This would partner wonderfully with 
Gerstein’s The Night World (BCCB 9/15), and its viewpoint fits naturally with kids’ 
tendency to put themselves at the center of the universe.  DS
90 • the bulletin
grAnT, JAcoB Little Bird’s Bad Word; written and illus. by Jacob Grant. Feiwel, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-250-05149-3 $16.99  
R 4-7 yrs
When Papa Bird drops a wriggly worm from his claws, Little Bird hears him utter 
a word he hasn’t heard before: “BLARK!” Immediately enchanted by the sound 
of it, Little Bird tries it out, only to be told “That’s not a word for little birds.” 
Even more delighted by the notion of a grownup word, he sets out to impress his 
friends with it. The thing is, his friends—a frog, a moose, a fish, a ladybug, and 
a turtle—are not impressed but pretty uncomfortable with the word (especially 
Turtle, who withdraws into his shell). Realizing that the word may in fact be “a 
BAD WORD,” Little Bird offers a sincere “sorry” to each friend, and they like that 
word much better. Grant uses the clever hook of inappropriate language to offer 
up the lesson that friends don’t like it when you make bad choices, successfully 
delivering the lesson as playful rather than pedantic. The artwork, charcoal lines 
with digital coloring, incorporates a warm, arboreal palette of forest green, deep red, 
and rich brown; the full-bleed spreads are particularly striking. While the ending, 
which shows a captured worm uttering the prohibited word, is a bit confusing in 
its message (is it okay for worms to say “blark”?), listeners will likely appreciate the 
final dose of humor. Kids who felt frustrated upon never learning the forbidden 
word in Tobin’s The Very Inappropriate Word (BCCB 10/13) will be delighted to 
have a new avian cuss word to add to their vocabulary.  HM
griffin, pAul Adrift. Scholastic, 2015 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-70939-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-70941-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Narrator Matt and his best friend John go way back, and as they plan for college 
and trade school, respectively, they make money over the summer selling refresh-
ments along the Montauk beaches. One life-altering afternoon the working-class 
guys hawk sodas to a privileged trio, and one of the flirty girls, Driana, invites them 
to a house party. There, Dri’s cousin Stef takes off for midnight windsurfing in the 
waves; Stef’s boyfriend JoJo and Dri go after Stef, and Matt and John suddenly 
find themselves helping the group “borrow” a boat from a neighbor to retrieve 
Stef. They’re able to haul Stef into the boat fairly easily, injured but stable. The 
ocean, however, isn’t about to let them go, and for the next fifteen days they drift 
under a punishing sun and suffer gale-driven waves; Stef dies, unmedicated JoJo 
becomes unhinged, John gets creepily focused on survival, and Matt and Dri fall 
in love. Griffin makes a strong attempt to distinguish his sea story from others of 
its ilk, supplying a backstory involving the death of John’s father, embellishing the 
rich-kid trio with some Brazilian panache, and attaching a bittersweet but realistic 
ending to Matt’s story beyond his rescue. Ultimately, though, the waves, sun, sharks, 
dehydration, and madness elements that call to survival-story fans are exactly what 
they expect—and for those readers, that will undoubtedly be enough.  EB
grovE, s. E. The Golden Specific. Viking, 2015 [528p] (Mapmakers)
ISBN 978-0-670-78503-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R* Gr. 5-8
Sophia returns in this second installment of the Mapmakers trilogy (following 
OctOber 2015 • 91
The Glass Sentence, BCCB 9/14), still hoping to find her parents and still seeking 
knowledge about this wonky, rearranged, mysterious new world that exists since the 
Great Disruption of 1799. It’s been a year since the last adventure, and her uncle is 
now too involved in politics to keep teaching her cartography or help her find more 
clues about where her parents went; Sophia’s not one for waiting, though, and she 
takes matters into her own hands when she thinks she has a lead. Of course, Sophia 
meets allies along the way, adding fresh characters into the familiar mix from the 
first volume, and Grove also carefully develops events in the Boston that Sophia 
leaves behind, setting up multiple open-ended plot threads for the final outing. 
There isn’t much point in trying to read this as a stand-alone novel, as the first book 
sets up much of the richness, complexity, and integral elements. However, return 
readers will find a wealth to explore, as the author manages to create memorable 
characters, an endlessly intriguing world that, even with the provided maps and 
her uncle’s careful explanations, still remains an almost complete mystery, and a 
plot that merits every single page of this lengthy volume.  AS
HAlE, BrucE Ends of the Earth; illus. by Brandon Dorman. Disney Hyperion, 
2015 287p (School for S. P. I. E. S.)
ISBN 978-1-4231-6852-2 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Max Segredo, the not-quite orphan from the Merry Sunshine Orphanage/School 
for S.P.I.E.S. (from Playing with Fire, BCCB 7/13 and Thicker Than Water, BCCB 
9/14), has reached a turning point in his brief espionage career. Charged by his 
spy-master headmistress Hantai Annie to infiltrate the evil LOTUS organization, 
he suspects he’s not quite competent to be a double agent, especially when he’s 
distracted by worry over the fates of his scattered classmates and the loyalties of his 
father, himself a spy with slippery affiliations. With the help of computer geek class-
mate Wyatt, who comes into his own in this title, and ever-faithful and resourceful 
Cinnabar, they finally confront the nefarious forces that are after a mind control 
machine (handy, of course, for world domination), and Max wards off a cleverly 
concocted evil plot to wipe out—via tiger attack—Britain’s legislature. Billed on 
the jacket blurb as the “climactic series finale,” this third book in the School for 
S.P.I.E.S. series nonetheless leaves the door slightly ajar for further adventures in a 
possible spinoff, with Max now firmly teamed up with his father and Hantai An-
nie’s identity still ambiguous. Keeping that hope alive will make the satisfying end 
to this series more palatable for fans who hate to let go, particularly those who are 
not quite ready to take the next literary step up to Alex Rider and similar young 
adult spy works.  EB
HAnlon, ABBy Dory and the Real True Friend; written and illus. by Abby Han-
lon. Dial, 2015 152p
ISBN 978-0-525-42866-4 $14.99  
R Gr. 2-3
Wildly imaginative Dory, from Dory Fantasmagory (BCCB 2/15), is back with 
a new adventure, as she prepares to start another year of school and attempts to 
make her first flesh-and-blood best friend, somewhat to the dismay of Mary, her 
imaginary monster pal. Fascinating new classmate Rosabelle is equally adept at 
pretend play, although the specifics of her imagined world—princesses, knights, 
and dragons—differ somewhat from Dory’s. Dory and Rosabelle combine their 
visions, though, and find common ground with Dory’s made-up nemesis, Mrs. 
92 • the bulletin
Gobble Gracker, who is soon starring as the villain in the pair’s imaginary play, 
to the delight of both girls. The mind-bendingly wacky dialogue that goes on in 
Dory’s class (“Can we pretend that all the kids are baby hamsters and you are trying 
to catch us and put us in a suitcase?” Dory asks her teacher at circle time) is pitch 
perfect both in its representation of and its appeal to young readers. Hanlon excels 
at affectionately capturing that fertile space between a primary-grader’s reality and 
his/her imagination, and even older kids may chuckle while shaking their heads at 
Dory’s antics. Youngsters who aren’t ready for Hilary McKay’s works will find the 
same sort of character-driven humor here at a primary level, and adults looking for 
a funny readaloud selection will want to share Dory with the kids in their lives.  JH
HArrison, HAnnAH E. Bernice Gets Carried Away; written and illus. by Hannah 
E. Harrison. Dial, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3916-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Young tabby cat Bernice may be at a festive party but she’s certainly not feeling 
the fun: she’s served a plain piece of cake (everyone else gets a frosting rose), she 
doesn’t get a turn at the piñata, and when someone finally breaks it open, she only 
gets “one lousy gumdrop . . . that someone had stepped on.” A bunch of balloons 
is brought out and put-upon Bernice grabs them all for herself—and floats away, 
passing a grouchy squirrel and a lonely bird, until she gets stuck in a grumpy storm 
cloud. Being quite literally above it all gives Bernice a new perspective, and she 
offers balloons to the cloud, the bird, and squirrel, causing them to cheer up and 
her to gently descend to her party pals’ level again, where she shares the remaining 
balloons with her friends. Bernice’s problems will garner her sympathy among the 
early childhood crowd; her realization that her issues are comparatively small and 
her eventual problem-solving provide useful messages while offering a satisfying 
conclusion. Harrison is skilled at punctuating her pithy text with an acrylic paint-
ing featuring Bernice in just the right pose; for example, “Yes. Bernice was in a bad 
mood” is partnered with a picture of a grumpy-faced, flat-eared Bernice standing 
with arms akimbo in her rose dress while a discarded party hat lies at her feet. The 
murky palette of the forest background lightens and brightens once Bernice has 
cheered up the storm cloud, and the changing colors also effectively echo Bernice’s 
dynamic state of mind. There are lots of classroom discussion possibilities with this 
one, or use it in a party- or sharing-themed storytime.  JH
Holm, JEnnifEr l. Sunny Side Up; by Jennifer L. Holm and Matthew Holm; 
illus. by Matthew Holm. Graphix/Scholastic, 2015 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-74165-1 $23.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-74166-8 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-74167-5 $12.99  
R Gr. 3-5
It’s the summer of 1976, and ten-year-old Sunny is visiting her grandfather at his 
retirement community in Florida. Flashbacks in this graphic novel reveal that this 
isn’t what Sunny had in mind: she was supposed to be going away with her fam-
ily and her best friend, but something happened to change those plans. She does 
manage to start having a good time when she bonds with Buzz, the groundskeeper’s 
son, and the two kids develop some local income streams (finding lost cats and 
retrieving missing golf balls) to purchase more of the comics they love. Timelines 
OctOber 2015 • 93
are made clear by dates that introduce each flashback, which together reveal the 
descent of her beloved older brother into antisocial and substance-abusing behavior. 
The past scenes also contribute to the mounting unease that lurks behind Sunny’s 
people-pleasing façade as she deals with the discomforts of life with her grandfather. 
Her friendship with Buzz is a low-key delight, and their shared joy in superheroes 
has contemporary relevance as well as thematic significance. The art is unfussy and 
summer-casual, warmly supporting the dialogue-ballooned text and smoothly slip-
ping in to take over the storytelling at times. Comic-book fans like Sunny as well 
as readers of family dramas will find welcome here.  DS 
Hopkinson, dEBorAH Courage & Defiance: Stories of Spies, Saboteurs, and Survivors 
in World War II Denmark. Scholastic, 2015 [352p] illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-59220-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-59222-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
Tween and teen readers who thrilled to the wartime drama of Hoose’s excellent The 
Boys Who Challenged Hitler (BCCB 7/15) can expand their knowledge of Danish 
Resistance activity in Hopkinson’s latest title. Following the exploits of three young 
men who believed their leaders capitulated too easily to Nazi occupation, Hopkinson 
observes the various paths of each that led to resistance work, and the network of 
committed collaborators and everyday citizens who supported their efforts. Niels 
Skov was a saboteur, launching small-scale attacks on Nazi materiel with the aid 
of a close friend; Skov was the sort of rogue troublemaker that worried Britain’s 
Special Operations Executive (SOE) as it attempted to coordinate resistance activ-
ity across occupied Europe. Tommy Sneum, an ex-military pilot who happened 
upon a German early warning system that sighted RAF fliers, was willing to work 
with the British government but was caught up in inter-agency communications 
problems that put him in peril from the Allies themselves. Jørgen Kieler started 
resistance work in the relative obscurity of an underground press but later stepped 
up his game to sabotage, ending up in prison with Skov and barely surviving 
internment in a concentration camp. Hopkinson draws much of her source mate-
rial from first-person accounts, many of which carry the polished tone of formal 
interviews conducted shortly after the war. There is no real question, though, of 
the daring and bravery of the featured surviving heroes and their colleagues as they 
embraced, with varying degrees of enthusiasm and reluctance, to carry out personal 
acts of war of which they could hardly believe themselves capable. Black and white 
photographs are included, as well as source notes, bibliography, timeline, list of 
persons highlighted in the text, notes on Danish language, a map (unfortunately 
buried within the back matter), and an index.  EB
HunT, lEo 13 Days of Midnight. Candlewick, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7865-4 $13.00
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Luke didn’t know his dad well, and he tried to avoid the paranormal reality show 
his father hosted. Now his dad is dead, and while Luke is happy to have the man’s 
cash, he learns that there was much more to his father than he knew when ghosts 
begin to appear around him, and the only clues seem to be locked in a green book 
he can’t open. No problem, he’ll just set the ghosts free, except Luke realizes that 
94 • the bulletin
he is stuck with them either until he learns how to release them in a way that they 
won’t destroy the world—or until they kill him. The ghosts are mostly a malevolent 
bunch, prone to scare tactics and genuine violence, but a few provide assistance 
to Luke, who also gets help from Elza, a local goth girl with second sight.. Luke’s 
difficult relationship with his dad only gets worse as he is forced to deal with his 
father’s dead spirit as well; this family complexity is a gripping point of authenticity 
in what is otherwise a solidly supernatural thriller. Hunt balances the macabre with 
dark humor, and Luke’s wry narration suggests that no matter how many times 
he screws up, he’ll likely pull through. Offer this to ghost fans who don’t mind 
some serious creepiness and a sturdy amount of gore mixed in with their spectral 
hauntings.  AS
JEnkins, sTEvE How to Swallow a Pig; by Steve Jenkins and Robin Page; illus. by 
Steve Jenkins. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-544-31365-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 3-6
“So, you want to learn how to swallow a pig,” say estimable natural science 
chroniclers Jenkins and Page. “You’ve come to the right place.” And not just for 
learning how to swallow a pig—concise step-by-step illustrated instructions with 
direct-address text first guide readers through a dozen other important animal skills 
such as “How to Repel Insects like a Capuchin” (step three is “Pop the millipede 
in your mouth”) and “How to Crack a Nut Like a Crow” (“It’s probably best not 
to try this technique until you learn how to fly”). While steps could occasionally 
be clearer, this is an immediately engaging approach that lets the team’s sly humor 
bubble up in straight out comedy as well as illustrative detail. Layout is inviting 
for even reluctant readers, with each task broken down into four to eight clearly 
headed steps and taking up only a page or two. Jenkins’ famous cut-paper collage 
illustrations are smaller, but the sequences of each critter enacting the instructional 
steps provides a broader look at the way the bird, bug, monkey, etc. moves and 
holds itself. Aside from the obvious science and literature-related uses for this, 
don’t overlook performance possibilities: kids who can follow the instructions to 
“Dance Like a Grebe” will bring the house down. End matter includes the usual 
quick thumbnail sketches and a brief bibliography.  DS
JoHn, Jory I Will Chomp You!; illus. by Bob Shea. Random House, 2015 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38987-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38986-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38989-1 $10.99  
R 4-6 yrs
Readers who dare to open this book are met by a bossy dinosaur-ish monster who 
warns them (and a bunny, frog, and bird), in no uncertain terms, not to proceed 
further: “If you turn any more pages . . . I will chomp you, buster!” These warnings 
are punctuated with full-page attempted “chomps,” but to no avail. Eventually, the 
monster reveals his motivation: “It’s because I have all of my cakes back here, at the 
end of the book.” A page turn reveals the confections in all their candy-colored glory, 
and after a few last-ditch attempts to chomp the viewer, the monster capitulates—
but first chomps up all the cakes himself. While similarly interactive texts have trod 
some of this ground before, the concept and its execution are hugely entertaining, 
and both readers-aloud and audiences will relish the theatrical possibilities of the 
OctOber 2015 • 95
chomp attacks. Shea’s zippy, vividly hued artwork is as amusing as usual; the tiny-
bodied teal monster is all oval head, bulging eyes, and a jagged mouth that looks 
like it was cut with pinking shears, while the poor little goggle-eyed bunny and 
bird and dot-eyed frog constantly and comically flee in terror from the chomping 
frenzy. Pair this with the classic There Is a Monster at the End of This Book for a duo 
of monster monologues with unexpected endings, or simply enjoy the performance 
element, possibly followed by cake.  JH
JoHnson, sTEpHEn T. Alphabet School; written and illus. by Stephen T. John-
son. Wiseman/Simon, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-2521-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
It’s been twenty years since Johnson’s Alphabet City (BCCB 11/95), and now he’s 
returned with a new illustrative take on serendipitous alphabetical appearances, 
this time looking at places audiences might find A through Z in their own schools. 
Rather than the photorealistic art of the previous volume, this time the illustra-
tions are grainy monoprints with some digital enhancement; the letters still require 
some discernment to find and isolate (L is the handle of a wall-mounted pencil 
sharpener, for instance), so the vignettes remain authentic in requiring tenacity and 
imagination while staying true to likely school surroundings. The varying levels 
of difficulty enhance the audience breadth; the conceptual pullback necessary to 
find F in a pair of fluttering flags on a pole, for instance, is a step that could lead to 
discussions of both art and science. While the visuals are intriguing, the real value 
here lies in encouragement to look closely and in new ways at a setting familiar 
to the point of invisibility; make sure you leave plenty of time for a letter-hunt 
around your own building.  DS
king, A. s. I Crawl Through It. Little, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-33409-9 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-33407-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
King has flirted with the extranormal in several of her books, and here she goes 
full-on surreal in the tale of Stanzi (not her real name), who’s waiting for her friend 
Gustav to finish building his invisible helicopter so that they can fly away together. 
Stanzi is also friends with schoolmates China, who ate herself (and appears as 
various elements of the digestive tract) after a traumatic event last year and writes 
sharp, vulnerable, and often pain-racked poetry; and Lansdale, who lies as easily 
as breathing and who watches as her father goes through a series of younger wives. 
When Gustav’s helicopter successfully takes flight, he brings along Stanzi (much 
to her delight) on a trip that demonstrates the limitations of utopia, reunites a pair 
of lovers, and allows Stanzi to reveal her own past grief. Andrew Smith has carved 
out a home for the surreal in YA literature, but where his strangeness is fierce and 
predatory, King’s magical realism is desperate yet hopeful. The book offers a keenly 
ironic balance between the teens’ overlooked traumas and the school’s single-point 
hypervigilance about in-school violence, and bomb threats of mysterious origin 
serve as a message of suffering in the only language the school would seem to speak. 
There are no neat allegories here, so contemplating possible meanings is part of 
the reward of the reading experience; so, however, is just going along for the ride, 
96 • the bulletin
appreciating the opportunity for creative takes on reality for readers beyond the 
picture-book stage, and feeling the authenticity of the teens’ emotional journey.  DS
konigsBErg, Bill The Porcupine of Truth. Levine/Scholastic, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-64893-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-64894-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 7-10
Carson hasn’t seen his father since he was a toddler, but now, the summer before 
senior year, his mother has hauled him out to Montana in order to care for the 
man, who is dying of cirrhosis. Carson’s dad had his own fatherly loss decades ago, 
when Carson’s grandfather took off; seeking to find more about his father, Carson 
begins to realize there is more to his grandfather’s story than his father knows. With 
his new friend Aisha (kicked out of her house for being a lesbian), Carson makes a 
cross-country road trip in search of his grandfather and in hopes of engineering the 
reunion his dad craves. There are multiple thematic threads in this book, but the 
two strongest ones are Carson’s familial legacy (if he’s a comedian like his dad and 
grandfather, does that mean he’s going to be an alcoholic and abandoner like them 
too?) and his reluctant exploration of spirituality. There’s both unexpectedness and 
poignancy in the reveal about Carson’s grandfather, who left his wife for a man (a 
fact kept deeply secret in his small religious town), and who died of AIDS shortly 
thereafter. Aisha’s difficulty with being an outsider (not only a lesbian, but black 
in a lily-white part of the country) provides a contemporary contact point for the 
struggle of somebody who doesn’t fit in, and her character offers an opportunity for 
some symbolic closing of the circle that makes for a happy, if over-rosy, ending. It’s 
a very different book than the author’s Openly Straight (BCCB 7/13), but readers 
who appreciated that title’s humor and wisdom about human dynamics will want 
to follow Carson and Aisha.  DS
krosoczkA, JArrETT J. It’s Tough to Lose Your Balloon; written and illus. by Jarrett 
J. Krosoczka. Knopf, 2015 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75480-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75479-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
The tight patterning in this gem of a picture book pairs a situation in which a 
young child would easily get frustrated (“It’s never fun when you break a toy . . . ”)  
with a more positive reinterpretation of the problem (“ . . . but you’ll have fun fix-
ing it with Grandpa”). While the simple text and message make this ideally suited 
for the preschool set, there is also plenty of potential for writing projects or social 
and emotional learning lessons in the early elementary grades. The layout gives a 
spread each to the problem and the solution, with the first spread featuring only 
the child in color, set against a coloring book–like black and white background 
that emphasizes the sense of isolation a kid can feel when they are frustrated; the 
presentation of the creative solution is then revealed in full buoyant color. Remi-
niscent of the feel of Henkes’ A Good Day (BCCB 5/07), the book offers a simple 
message: bad things can become good things if you change the way you look at 
them, and the opportunities for integrating this volume into classroom or family 
discussions are abundant.  HM
OctOber 2015 • 97
kudlinski, kATHlEEn v. Boy, Were We Wrong about the Weather!; illus. by Sebastià 
Serra. Dial, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3793-8 $16.99  
R 6-10 yrs
Kudlinski returns with another round of science mythbusting (Boy, Were We Wrong 
about Dinosaurs, BCCB 1/06; Boy, Were We Wrong about the Solar System; BCCB 
11/08). Although meteorologists are still risibly unreliable about the weather, 
Kudlinski demonstrates here that our knowledge of what drives weather has indeed 
come a long way from the Hittite rain dances to appease the god Enlil and the 
ancient Chinese interpretation of the flight path of the dragonfly to predict rain. 
This title charts a chronological course through scientific blunders, presenting first 
the entertaining misconception and then following it with current thinking. Some 
things that were once inconceivable, such as evidence for warm weather in polar 
regions and cold weather under current deserts, have now come indisputably to 
light. In other cases, though, the ancients weren’t all that far off: Europeans scoffed 
at the idea of hurricanes, which the Taino knew intimately, and seafarers’ “Red 
skies at night” jingle has a basis in reality. As to contemporary misapprehensions, 
Kudlinski pulls no punches: “Some people still think global warming is a myth. 
Boy, are they wrong!” (Science teachers, however, will want to address the unex-
plained shift from weather to climate.) Serra’s computer and pencil artwork has a 
retro cartoon vibe, and kids will enjoy watching the TV weatherman promising 
sunshine in his studio while pedestrians take cover under umbrellas at street level. 
The takeaway message of our continuing expansion of scientific understanding will 
land solidly. A timeline and NASA and NOAA website URLs are included.  EB
lAWson, JEssicA Nooks & Crannies; illus. by Natalie Andrewson. Simon, 
2015 316p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1921-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1923-9 $10.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Take one lonely, neglected eleven-year-old aspiring detective named Tabitha (and her 
trusty pet mouse). Add a mysterious summons of seemingly random guests to the 
remote, allegedly haunted estate of a reclusive countess. Throw in a big reveal (all 
of the children in attendance are adopted, and one of them is the dowager’s heir), 
a murder during a brief blackout, and successively disappearing guests. Sprinkle 
with secret passageways, portraits with eyes that seem to move, and a dour butler, 
then set it all against a dark and stormy Edwardian night (well, weekend) and you 
have this winning mystery novel that introduces readers to classic mystery tropes 
through the eyes of the smart, sympathetic Tabitha. Lawson skillfully builds the 
familiar plot, setting, and character elements into a well-paced head-scratcher, 
providing enough hints for readers to guess along with Tabitha but holding back 
enough for a surprising climax and a satisfying denouement. For an especially nice 
touch, the book begins each chapter with a quote from Tabitha’s favorite fictional 
detective, a Holmes-esque character whose absurd statements will elicit giggles 
from adults as well as from the intended audience. A gratifying delight as a stand-
alone read, this novel also will please fans of Frazier’s The Midnight Tunnel (BCCB 
3/11) and make a wonderful introduction to the classic cozies for all your future 
Miss or Mr. Marples.  AA 
98 • the bulletin
lEE, mAckEnzi This Monstrous Thing. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2015 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238277-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238279-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
This steampunk take on Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein, set in an alternative history, 
has Frankenstein’s creature reanimated with gears and clockwork. In this Europe, 
medical mechanics called Shadow Boys have developed techniques for fusing flesh 
to metal, repairing damaged limbs with clockwork imitations. A doctor named 
Geisler is attempting to devise a way to reanimate corpses using clockwork, but his 
experiments all fail until Alasdair (known as Ally) Finch, a brilliant young Shadow 
Boy, spots the flaw in Geisler’s research and secretly brings his brother, Oliver, back 
from the dead after accidentally killing him. The brothers’ close friend, known to 
them as Mary Godwin, assists Ally in the grisly work, but Oliver reawakens angry, 
violent, and without his memories. For two years, Ally keeps Oliver a secret, but 
then a book called Frankenstein, about a successful resurrection using clockwork, is 
anonymously published, putting Geisler on the trail of Ally and providing a rallying 
point for people with mechanical parts, who have suffered abuse and discrimina-
tion, to rebel. Richly imagined and ingeniously plotted, this version incorporates 
quotations from Shelley’s text while updating the perennial questions of the original 
regarding how far is too far when it comes to meddling in the affairs of life and 
death. Ally’s crush on Mary, his love commingled with jealousy and fear of Oliver, 
and his tender attachment to Clémence, a feisty girl who’s indentured to Geisler, 
make him appealingly vulnerable as he seeks to sort out what he can do from what 
he should do as he refuses to walk away from what he’s wrought.  KC
liss, dAvid Randoms. Simon, 2015 [496p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1779-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1781-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-8
Twelve-year-old Zeke changes from bullied Earth geek to . . . bullied space geek 
in an instant, but dude, at least he’s in space! The sci-fi and fantasy references start 
early on and never stop as inveterate fan Zeke calls on every space plot point he 
can remember to make sense of the fact that he has suddenly become one of four 
Earth ambassadors who will determine whether the planet makes it into a massive 
alien alliance. Zeke’s more of a rebel than even he knew, drawing from his own 
isolation and plenty of outsider sci-fi characters as he reacts to an inordinate number 
of emergencies. While his intentions are unfailingly good, he’s not so great with 
thinking things through, which leads to a lot of messes that must get cleaned up 
by adult alien allies. For readers who get giddy about mentions of obscure episodes 
of Star Trek or complex descriptions of nanites that allow humans to build up 
their natural abilities as they gain skill points (complete with a flowchart), this is 
a comradely treat. While things don’t end well for everyone, it is clear that Zeke 
never really thought it could, and readers will appreciate his development of new 
levels of maturity, gratitude for what remains, and empathy.  AS
OctOber 2015 • 99
lygA, BArry After the Red Rain; by Barry Lyga with Peter Facinelli and Robert 
DeFranco. Little, 2015 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-40603-1 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-40604-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
In this movie-ready novel (logical given the collaboration of Lyga with actor Faci-
nelli and film producer DeFranco), the world as we know it long gone, and what 
remains is grim. There are awful secrets about how fifty billion people died and 
what happened to the Earth afterwards, but Deedra doesn’t, initially, know any-
thing about that; she just knows if she doesn’t work and scavenge, she won’t eat or 
survive. After she meets Rose, a mysterious and gorgeous guy unlike anyone she’s 
ever known, things begin to fall apart in her previously predictable, if awful, world. 
Rose is perhaps the most intriguing element about this messy novel, as his origins, 
while absurdly out of the range of any realistic science, are creatively described 
and slowly revealed in tantalizing layers. Unfortunately, the villains are profoundly 
unsubtle, and issues of moral complexity are as flat as their characterization. In 
addition, while it is perhaps realistic that Deedra, an orphan in a world that has 
taught her almost nothing, would be rather slow to sort out the truth behind the 
lies, it’s tiring that she circles back multiple times to what she used to believe, even 
in the face of obvious hints that she is oh, so wrong. Even so, readers who appreci-
ate an apocalypse that truly feels like one, with massive numbers of dead, complete 
upheavals, and inevitable dystopian restructuring, may well find this compelling 
enough to keep an eye out for the likely sequel.  AS
mAnn, JEnnifEr k. I Will Never Get a Star on Mrs. Benson’s Blackboard; written 
and illus. by Jennifer K. Mann. Candlewick, 2015 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6514-2 $16.99  
R* 5-8 yrs
Rose’s teacher, Mrs. Benson, gives stars for neatness and spelling, but Rose is a 
daydreamer and a doodler, so she’s certain that she will never get a star on the 
blackboard. It’s not for lack of trying, but when she raises her hand to participate 
she loses track of the question, and when she offers to pass out the snack she ends 
up tripping and dumping it on the teacher. When it’s time for students to make 
thank-you notes for a visitor, Rose dives headfirst into the task with her usual chaos, 
only to find herself facing a neatness check. Much to Rose’s surprise, however, when 
Mrs. Benson spots Rose’s magnificent painting amidst the paints, pencils, and spills, 
she not only doesn’t get angry but notes that Rose is a “true artist,” gives her time 
later in the day to clean up, and awards her a star. This charming story is both 
affirmative and celebratory of the different skill sets children possess; Rose may 
not fit into the typical star-on-the-blackboard mold, but she is fortunate to have a 
teacher who appreciates her passion and artistry. Rose’s narration is authentic, equal 
parts longing and fatalistic as she tries to fit in. Her chaotic tendencies are on fine 
show in the ink, gouache, and digital collage illustrations, which slightly resemble 
Lauren Child’s in their childlike linework and streamlined visuals. Rose herself is a 
bit haphazard, with red braids flying and shoes untied; hard at work on her paint-
ing during desk check time, she’s particularly hilarious, a smudge-faced, big-eyed 
dreamer looking up petrified from a chaotic scene of spilled paint and crumpled 
paper. There’s considerable potential for classroom conversations here, particularly 
100 • the bulletin
as students gather to talk about different strengths, and Rose’s story will resonate 
with many an earnest artist trying to find his or her way onto the board.  HM
mAson, conrAd The Watchmen of Port Fayt. Fickling/Scholastic, 2015 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-83308-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-85941-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Port Fayt was founded years ago by Thalin the Navigator as a place where all crea-
tures—humans, elves, trolls, goblins, fairies—could live in peace together. Grubb, 
a half-goblin, half-human boy who suffers daily insults of “mongrel” knows that 
the island isn’t the idyll that Thalin envisioned, but it’s still better than the Old 
World, where the League of Light is butchering nonhuman “demonspawn” en 
masse. Tabitha’s human parents were murdered by a League agent for their nonhu-
man sympathies when she was a baby, and she was taken in by Captain Newton, 
leader of the Demon’s Watch, Port Fayt’s unofficial defenders against the League. 
When Grubb stumbles across a powerful magical item, a series of hazardous 
events (including an encounter with a shark and another with a talking cat) brings 
him to the Demon’s Watch, and Newton and Tabitha realize they are up against 
a dangerous and magical opponent who seeks to destroy all of Port Fayt with a 
powerful sea monster. This is simply good old-fashioned swashbuckling fun, with 
tricorn hats, one-eyed and one-armed pirates, terrifying underwater creatures, and 
descriptions of seafaring that will have readers feeling the ocean’s salty spray. The 
third-person narration shifts focus between Grubb and Tabitha, giving a more 
complete view of the island and all its various species (ogres, dwarves, imps, etc.) 
along with some of its history. Although the Demon’s Watch triumphs in this series’ 
opener, the closing scene, in which Port Fayt is nearly surrounded by the League’s 
armada, indicates that Newton and his crew will have plenty to contend with in 
the upcoming books.  KQG 
mATHiEu, JEnnifEr Devoted. Roaring Brook, 2015 328p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-911-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-912-2 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
At seventeen, Rachel is nearly marrying age in her strictly conservative faith, but 
she’s increasingly finding the church’s restrictions difficult to bear. When her father 
makes her destroy her beloved copy of A Wrinkle in Time as ungodly, she begins 
secretly to email Lauren, who left the church and her family when she was shunned 
for indiscretions; when Rachel’s emailing is discovered, her family plans to send her 
to faith camp to rededicate herself, but instead Rachel leaves and moves in with 
Lauren. She’s awkward but eager about her new life, doing paid work, consider-
ing attending high school for the very first time, and even making a guy friend, 
but she’s sad about the family she fears she’s left behind and she’s questioning the 
implications for her faith. Rachel’s quiverful faith doesn’t get off easy here, but 
compared to other escape-from-the-cult books this title refreshingly focuses more 
on her emotions and her negotiation of the transition than on the alienness of her 
church’s ways, and it’s clear life outside of her family is no bed of roses either. Her 
relationships make her more sympathetic: she’s deeply grieved about leaving behind 
her beloved younger sister, and her friendship with Mark, her boss’s goofy yet kind 
son, thankfully doesn’t undercut its whole point by turning her first relationship 
OctOber 2015 • 101
with an unrelated male into a romance. The sheltered group member breaking free 
is a perennially fascinating topic, and this is a more realistic treatment than many; 
readers whose interest in the topic has been piqued by The Unbreakable Kimmy 
Schmidt will want to pick this up.  DS
mccoolA, mArikA Baba Yaga’s Assistant; illus. by Emily Carroll. Candlewick, 
2015 132p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6961-4 $16.99  
R* Gr. 5-8
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 73, for review.
mccullougH, kElly School for Sidekicks. Feiwel, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-250-03926-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Evan has always wished he could be a superhero—he even hits the floor with his 
face every morning after rolling out of bed and hoping he can suddenly fly. After 
he unexpectedly becomes part of a battle between ultimate hero (or at least, as far 
as anybody knows) Captain Commanding and his nemesis, Spartanicus, Evan is 
shocked to not only find himself alive but also enrolled in a hero school. In fact, 
Evan now has powers of his own, and with the help of cool classes, a drunk and 
belligerent but also gifted superhero mentor, and a new moniker, Meerkat, he feels 
he can finally become all he was ever meant to be. It hurts him that his parents 
aren’t on board, and he’s a bit too young and idealistic to handle some disturbing 
secrets about the school (and the whole history of superheroes/villains and how 
they came about), but Evan’s a survivor, and he has some good new friends to 
help him handle the hard parts. The immediate sense of home that Evan feels at 
the boarding school is palpable—readers will likely be as relieved as he is that he 
finally found a place where he truly seems to belong. The book’s use of humor is 
enjoyable, and it’s also a good deflector for some pretty unsavory details about the 
governmental construction of good vs. evil and manipulation of superpowers. Pair 
this with Ferraiolo’s equally funny and irreverent Sidekicks (BCCB 4/11) for two 
looks at the uncelebrated, unappreciated sidekicks who do much of the work but 
get almost none of the glory.  AS
mcgHEE, Alison Firefly Hollow; illus. by Christopher Denise. Atheneum, 
2015 291p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2336-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9812-9 $10.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Firefly longs to fly to the moon, Cricket dreams of catching like Yogi Berra; both 
live in Firefly Hollow, along with a family of human Giants. Cricket’s and Firefly’s 
desires meet disapproval from their respective communities, and after an amiable 
encounter with the human child Peter, the pair decide to make a new life as Peter’s 
friends. The two comfort Peter, who is mourning the death of his best friend and 
refuses to go to school; when Firefly rashly attempts a moon flight but doesn’t 
fully anticipate the difficulty, her friends must work together to save her. This is 
a solid, tenderly told animal fantasy in the vein of E. B. White and Dick King-
Smith, and the spare but descriptive language effectively evokes both wonder and 
sorrow; the moment when Firefly is (wrongly) believed to be dead is particularly 
102 • the bulletin
moving. Gutsy little Firefly and persistent, baseball-obsessed Cricket are unique 
and endearing heroes, and McGhee does a credible job of describing the world 
through their miniature viewpoint. Fans of the aforementioned authors will find 
similar satisfaction here, and the title would make a cozy readaloud selection as 
well. Denise’s characteristically cozy illustrations, here done in black and white, 
effectively complement the story’s warm, gentle tone.  JH
mclEmorE, AnnA-mAriE The Weight of Feathers. Dunne/St. Martin’s Griffin, 
2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-05865-2 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-7323-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 8-12
Iridescent scales mark the back of sixteen-year-old Lace’s body, as they mark all 
female members of the Palomas, a family of traveling performers that earn their 
living by pretending to be mermaids for paying tourists. Black feathers fall from 
the hair of the Corbeaus, including eighteen-year-old Cluck, who constructs the 
feathered wings that make the spectacle of his family’s acrobatic dances in the trees 
seem even more magical. The two families have a decades-old rivalry, one so strong 
that it moves Lace’s abuela to kick Lace out of the family after she is rescued by 
Cluck during a chemical plant explosion. Believing that Cluck has cursed her, Lace 
seeks him out to lift the scourge but instead finds herself falling in love with him, 
and together they uncover the cause for their families’ deep-seated hatred. Lush, 
elegant language, peppered with Spanish and French phrases, lends this romance 
an ethereal feel well suited to the book’s magical elements. Behind the fantastical 
details is a realistic backdrop that reveals the decidedly non-magical secrets behind 
the families’ shows and the human error that causes the plant explosion. The con-
trast reflects Lace and Cluck’s relationship; alone, their passion transcends their 
families’ history, but the interference of the real world leaves their affair broken and 
unmoored. Romance fans will know, however, that true love overcomes any obstacle, 
and they’ll be enchanted by Lace and Cluck’s journey towards each other.  KQG
mETcAlf, pAulA A Guide to Sisters; illus. by Suzanne Barton. Random House, 
2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-553-49899-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
This matter-of-fact yet humorously tongue-in-cheek guide to sisterhood provides 
a fairly accurate snapshot of the big sister/little sister relationship, mostly from 
the perspective of the older sis. The guide begins by outlining the usual means of 
obtaining a little sister—“Most of the time, you get a new sister from the hospital. 
They are warm and squishy, like a freshly baked loaf of bread . . . but you should 
NOT put butter on them”—and continues to describe the various ways in which 
little sisters make themselves either endearing or bothersome. Topics covered include 
“Cuteness,” “Sharing,” “Cleaning Up,” and “Bedtime,” when “it’s time to put aside 
all the day’s fighting and be kind to each other.” Preschoolers newly promoted 
to big sister status won’t fully grasp the humor and occasional mild sarcasm, but 
primary-graders with little sisters will probably both chuckle and heave heavy sighs 
of recognition at the amusing and apt observations. Barton’s illustrations are neat 
and trim, with the figures of the older and younger sister simply drawn with black 
OctOber 2015 • 103
lines against the clean white backgrounds (with colored accents on their clothing) 
and the candy-hued objects that make up the scenery (a slide, a pile of presents, 
an armchair) tidily arranged against the white space as well. This would make an 
interesting counterpoint to Viorst’s oldie-but-goodie I’ll Fix Anthony or a lively 
addition to a sibling-themed storytime or a unit on families.  JH
mills, clAudiA The Trouble with Ants; illus. by Katie Kath. 
Knopf, 
2015 [176p] (The Nora Notebooks)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39162-7 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39161-0 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39164-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-4
Nora Alpers is a friend and classmate of Mason Dixon (from Mason Dixon: Pet 
Disasters, BCCB 10/11), and at ten she already knows she wants to be a scientist. 
Right now, her passion is ants, and she’s endlessly fascinated with studying their 
behavior in her ant farm; when she discovers that the youngest person ever to get 
an article published in a scientific journal was eleven, she’s determined to find a 
research project on her ants that will allow her to publish an article and beat that 
record. Mills as usual manages to deftly shine a light on one kid and a particular 
interest while keeping normal life going around her; Nora’s also negotiating friend-
ships with unscientific and even ant-hating classmates, for instance, including a girl 
besotted with the cuteness of her cat. However, the book avoids the stereotype of 
the science nerd who’s not good with people—Nora is actually very astute about 
human dynamics—while giving full respect to her laser-like focus (her notebook 
observations on ants, which often contain comparisons with humans, are inter-
spersed throughout). Mills fans will happily embrace this new entry in her oeuvre, 
and science-loving kids looking for themselves in literature will be pleased to meet 
Nora. Kath’s monochromatic line and watercolor illustrations have an appealing 
combination of domesticity and energy.  DS 
molk, lAurEl Eeny, Meeny, Miney, Mo and Flo!; written and illus. by Laurel 
Molk. Viking, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01538-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Four mice—Eeny, Meeny, Miney, and Mo—are going about their business of catch-
ing a tiger by the toe, when smaller mouse, Flo, tries to join in. The bigger mice 
tell her she’s too little, but Flo persists, albeit on the sidelines of the action, which 
is just as well, as the tiger’s roar blows her bigger buddies backwards. When the 
group catches a hippo, Flo is prepared for the resulting sneeze with a red umbrella. 
She also manages to musically charm the (toe-less) boa the bigger mice attempt 
to apprehend, studies the turtle that they tether, and searches for the elusive (uh, 
extinct) dodo they want to capture, before she finally heads away, trailing popcorn 
in her wake. There’s a moment of ominous uncertainty when the rodent foursome 
find Flo’s scarf on top of an alligator, but never fear—Flo just dropped it on her way 
past as she leads (and feeds) the crew of critters with her popcorn trail. Two narra-
tives unfold across the pages, one in a larger font across the top, an ever-changing 
iteration of the familiar chant that exchanges hippo for snake, etc.; meanwhile, the 
mice converse in balloonless in-art dialogue. In addition to the book’s readaloud 
104 • the bulletin
utility, the short sentences and simple vocabulary make it accessible to young readers, 
especially given the repetition of key phrases, and there’s plenty of humor to be had 
in the mice’s dialogue and in the clever details of the illustrations (Flo carries a sign 
reading “Lost Dodo. Last seen Mauritius 1662”). The nimble artwork, rendered in 
watercolor and pen and ink and combined digitally, has a genial playfulness and 
the bold colors and big double-page spreads make this an easy storytime pick.  JH
monningEr, JosEpH Whippoorwill. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-544-53123-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-12
“Whippoorwills” are what the local New Hampshire-ites call people like the Stew-
arts, classless people who have trash piled in their yard. Sixteen-year-old Clair is 
warily matter-of-fact about living next to the Stewarts, but when they acquire a 
big dog, who’s tied in the front yard and neglected, she can’t help but intervene. 
Clair’s interest in poor Wally draws the attention of teenaged Danny Stewart, who 
has seemed indifferent and therefore surprises Clair by being interested in help-
ing Wally. As the two train and socialize the dog, Clair begins to reconsider her 
opinion of Danny, and the two embark on a friendship and possibly a romance. 
When something goes terribly wrong at the Stewarts’, Clair seeks to save Danny and 
Wally from the effects of tragedy. Monninger remains the supreme YA chronicler 
of the human-animal dynamic, and Wally is both a good-hearted goofy dog who’s 
had a bad time and also a catalyst and emblem for Clair and Danny’s relationship. 
Narrator Clair is absolutely believable as the girl who’s stable yet also negotiating 
her own loss; she’s interested in Danny but wary of his obvious need, while at the 
same time trying to improve Wally’s lot. The Danny/Wally parallels are subtly drawn 
but accessible to young adult readers, with the portraits of both heartbreakingly 
sympathetic without being sentimental or emotional at Clair’s expense. Ultimately 
this is a book about grace—who gets it, how they get it, and what they have to do 
to deserve it.  DS
myErs, WAlTEr dEAn Juba! Amistad/HarperCollins, 2015 [208p] illus. 
with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211271-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211274-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 6-9
William Henry Lane, a seventeen-year-old free black in 1842 New York’s Five Points 
neighborhood, is eking out a marginal existence helping a white man, Jack Bishop, 
smoke seafood for resale to well-to-do New Yorkers. But just making ends meet 
won’t ever be enough for William, who has got music in his feet; he’s determined to 
make a career as a dancer. The minstrel show circuit, which expects him to “coon 
it up,” seems to be his only outlet, until a local club owner expands business with 
a newsworthy stage show and Juba (William’s chosen stage name) is commissioned 
to produce it. Juba calls in talent and favors, and the one-nighter is good enough 
to catch the attention of Charles Dickens, who writes about the entertainment in 
his American Notes. Fame is years in arriving, though, and Juba gets a few glorious 
months in the spotlight on a London tour with Gilbert Pell’s Serenaders in 1848, 
only to fade away with the waning minstrel show fashion and die in a workhouse 
in 1854. This fictional reconstruction of the life of the dancer presents Myers with 
OctOber 2015 • 105
the same challenges as the life of Sarah Bonetta in At Her Majesty’s Request (BCCB 
2/99), in which documented evidence of a celebrity’s life does not stretch to cover 
significant gaps. Rather than present Juba’s life a biography with acknowledged holes, 
Myers fills the chinks with an invented cast and a credible, if fancied, backstory. 
Juba’s trajectory as a performer offers a powerful examination of the obstacles a 
free black man in antebellum American would have faced in claiming a dignified 
career: “My dancing didn’t mean a thing. The only thing they see in a black man is 
a clown or a slave.” An author’s note, timeline, and period images are included.  EB
nApoli, donnA Jo Dark Shimmer. Lamb/Random House, 2015 [368p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90892-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74655-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98917-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
Ostracized on an island of dwarves because of her comparatively enormous height, 
fifteen-year-old Dolce finds comfort in mirror making, a trade that gives her value. 
When her beloved mother dies, the bereft girl flees her home and eventually makes 
her way to Venice, where she finds a world she never imagined, a world of people 
her size. She marries a wealthy noble and happily becomes a stepmother to young 
Bianca, but all the while Dolce continues her mirror making, crafting beautiful 
pocket mirrors to sell to other nobles, discreetly buying the freedom of the dwarves 
who work for them. The quicksilver she uses to make the mirrors, however, takes 
its toll on Dolce over the years, destroying her body and driving her to madness; 
eventually she attempts to kill her own stepdaughter, who escapes to another island 
of dwarves and thus brings the story full circle. Napoli offers up a sumptuously 
dark retelling of “Snow White,” bringing humanity to the wicked stepmother while 
still holding her accountable for her crimes. Readers will find sympathy for Dolce 
in her narration, as she moves from an outcast teen to hopeful wife and mother to 
a woman struggling for her sanity. A shift to third person, focalized through vari-
ous characters including Bianca and several of the dwarves, shows the full effect of 
Dolce’s misdeeds; her final encounter with her husband is absolutely wrenching 
in its depiction of a family broken by what were originally good intentions. The 
Venetian setting offers an elegant but dangerous backdrop, illuminating the various 
maladies and ambiguous morals that threaded through the wealthy. Readers who 
were intrigued by Cokal’s Kingdom of Little Wounds (BCCB 1/14) will find this 
disturbing fairy tale just as provocative.  KQG
nEss, pATrick The Rest of Us Just Live Here. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-240316-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-240318-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
Mikey and his friends are ordinary kids living in one of those towns that is occa-
sionally visited by supernatural evil. Not their problem, though, because everyone 
knows that the Chosen Ones are the others, the indie kids; they’re the ones who 
are drawn through mysterious portals, battle unseen forces, die mysterious deaths, 
and too often burn down the high school at graduation. Mikey and his sister Mel, 
on the other hand, along with their friends Henna and Jared, are busy figuring 
106 • the bulletin
out normal stuff—dysfunctional families, Mel’s anorexia, Mikey’s OCD, Henna’s 
parents’ missionary zeal, and Jared’s closeted sexuality. Each chapter begins with a 
brief summary of what’s going on with the latest battle begin fought by the indie 
kids and then focuses on the real action of the everyday, with the two stories ulti-
mately interweaving in both action and theme. The result is a cleverly metafictive, 
occasionally humorous, occasionally poignant love letter to the kids most likely to 
get sorted into Hufflepuff or who might occasionally date one of the Scooby gang, 
but whose real heroism lies in living their daily lives bravely and compassionately. 
Mikey’s real test comes when Jared turns out to be not so ordinary after all, and 
his answer adds another layer to the message that moving beyond expectations fed 
by teen fantasy fiction has a magic all its own.  KC 
norriss, AndrEW Friends for Life. Fickling/Scholastic, 2015 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-85186-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-86029-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
School often isn’t kind to kids who differ from the average, a fact that Francis, Andi, 
and Roland know well. Francis is a quiet, sensitive boy with an eye for fashion and 
aspirations to be a designer; tomboy Andi has a tendency toward solving problems 
with her fists; Roland’s obsession with gaming and his mother’s obsession with 
cooking for him have left him severely overweight. They’re all bullied and they’re 
all loners until they’re brought together by Jessica, the ghost of a girl whom only 
they can see. At first the friends are just glad to bask in one another’s company, 
but soon their curiosity about Jessica’s death (which Jessica does not remember) 
leads them to discover that she killed herself. While Francis, Andi, and Roland are 
shocked, they’re also sympathetic—they were all considering suicide right before 
meeting Jessica. This British import starts with a familiar premise, a group of misfits 
finding friendship, but provides nuance and depth to each character so that when 
the revelation of their suicidal thoughts comes, readers may be surprised but they’ll 
also be deeply invested. The group’s subsequent discussion about their feelings 
is searingly honest but without melodrama; Jessica’s description of “the Pit,” the 
quiet desperation that drove her to her death, is particularly heartbreaking, and it 
also serves as a reminder that depression does not require a recognizable catalyzing 
event nor does it always manifest overtly. This is a creative approach to a serious 
subject; Norriss provides a touching, accessible, and ultimately hopeful portrayal 
of depression that will feel ringingly true to young readers who have spent time in 
their own “Pit.”  KQG
osToW, micol Louise Trapeze Is Totally 100% Fearless; illus. by Brigette Bar-
rager. Random House, 2015 106p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49740-3 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49739-7 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49741-0 $9.99  
R Gr. 2-3
As she approaches her seventh birthday, Louise Trapeze (part of the Sweet Potato 
Traveling Circus Troupe) looks forward to finally being allowed to do some per-
forming on the high trapeze with her parents. When the opportunity is offered, 
however, she realizes that she’s actually (one of her favorite words) afraid of heights, 
a discovery she tries to hide from everyone in the circus. Reasoning that if she can’t 
OctOber 2015 • 107
find her fancy new costume she won’t be able to perform, she hides the outfit in a 
props trailer; the snake tamer’s cobra finds it, though, and somehow manages to 
carry it up to a treetop, necessitating the rescue of both the snake and the costume. 
With the help of Clementine, the circus elephant, Louise retrieves the reptile and 
the clothes and finally comes clean about her fears. The breezy, humorous narra-
tive paints a surprisingly sympathetic and credible picture of the way a fear can 
get a grip on a kid, and while the solution to Louise’s anxiety ends up being a tad 
contrived, her mom’s comforting response is not. Louise’s slightly sassy voice is 
reminiscent of Junie B. Jones or an older Lola from Child’s Charlie and Lola series, 
and her frequent interchanges about vocabulary and love for sparkles and ruffles 
will appeal to the Fancy Nancy crowd as well. While the length and complexity 
of the text makes it more suitable for older primary-graders as a read-alone title, 
younger students would likely enjoy it as a readaloud as well. Two-color illustra-
tions (black with pink accents) add to the fun, and Louise’s tangled mess of hair 
suits her frenetic energy.  JH
pAincHAud, micHEllE Pretending to Be Erica. Viking, 2015 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01497-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Thirteen years ago, four-year-old Erica Silverman went missing and was never seen 
again. And now she’s back—or at least she seems to be back, but really she’s a teen-
aged con artist named Violet, who’s going to get close to the Silverman family in 
order to steal their monumentally valuable Watteau painting. Negotiating her dual 
identities is tricky, especially as Violet gets close to Mrs. Silverman (Mr. Silverman 
has been institutionalized), to her classmates, and to James, a talented musician; her 
loyalties past and present all converge—and clash—on her prom night. This is a 
capable entry in the “is she real?” category of found missing children stories, such as 
Valentine’s Double (BCCB 3/12) or McMann’s Dead to You (BCCB 3/12). Violet’s 
romance with James is fairly routine and in general relationships aren’t deep here, 
but the realistic side isn’t really the point; the pleasure lies in Violet’s daring tightrope 
walk of identity, her grifter skills, and her gritty backstory (flashbacks reveal how 
her con man adopted father raised her with this task in mind and taught her all he 
knows, and the book slips between polite and arrestingly salty language). Readers 
will relish watching it all play out in this caper where the con grows a heart.  DS
pAniTcH, AmAndA Damage Done. Random House, 2015 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50751-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50749-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50750-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
The Vann family became social pariahs on the day Ryan Vann shot staff and class-
mates to death in the school band room. It’s not as if the family hadn’t seen warning 
signs; Ryan had been in counseling for years with Dr. Atlas Spence, a psychologist 
who hoped his intervention with the violent and apparently amoral child would 
boost his career. Now the family has been transplanted to a new state, and Ryan’s 
twin sister, Julia, is living under the name Lucy Black and taking tentative steps 
toward making a couple of friends—Alane, who drives her to school, and Michael, 
108 • the bulletin
who would like to be more than just a friend. However, Julia’s troubles run much 
deeper than keeping family shame locked in the closet. Readers discern through 
her increasingly disordered narration and through peeks into Dr. Spence’s private 
clinical notes that Ryan may not be the only psychopath here, and that the twins’ 
incestuous relationship is just one of Julia’s many secrets. Chills are too methodically 
orchestrated to allow the audience to fully immerse in the creepiness, and the open 
ending, which aims to extend the possibility of stalking beyond the novel’s end, is 
more contrived than intriguing. Nonetheless, fans who like their crime dramas a 
little on the freaky side might find this a diverting if predictable late-night read.  EB
pATrick, dEnisE lEWis Finding Someplace. Holt, 2015 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-4716-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Theresa “Reesie” Boone has big plans for her thirteenth birthday: she’ll get her hair 
done, enjoy neighbor Miss Martine’s famous coconut cake, and debut the skirt she 
has made especially for the occasion. Then Hurricane Katrina hits. Separated from 
her policeman father and nurse mother, Reesie takes shelter with Miss Martine, 
where they weather the storm by cooking up meat pies and swapping stories. Then 
the levee breaks. The floodwaters rise higher and higher, forcing them onto the 
roof, into a boat, and eventually to the Superdome; readers will feel Reesie’s fear 
and agitation as she encounters some of the best and worst in other people, all 
while navigating the crisis without the help of her parents. Patrick’s sensitive, ef-
fective portrayal of Reesie’s inner life and growth will evoke sympathy and respect, 
particularly as she moves beyond the immediate crisis and into the aftermath, where 
her move to New Jersey with her mother mirrors the long-term displacement of 
people and separation of families resulting from this poorly handled disaster. The 
depiction of the vibrant life and community of the largely African-American Ninth 
Ward pre-Katrina makes Reesie’s eventual return, and what she does—or rather, 
doesn’t—find there, particularly powerful, and the author’s note is a restrained but 
heartbreaking call for social justice. Patrick takes what might be for some audiences 
merely a headline or note from history and makes it immediate; pair with Brown’s 
Drowned City: Hurricane Katrina & New Orleans (reviewed above) to take kids 
further into this important event and its ongoing effects.  AA
pAulson, ElizABETH Dead upon a Time. Scholastic, 2015 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-64046-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-64047-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Kate Hood and her grandmother have always been considered outcasts in Shep-
herd’s Grove. When Nan goes missing from her cottage, Kate, who survives as a 
live-in servant, knows that any help she will get will have to be from the village’s 
other pariah, Jack the giant killer (who unfortunately slew the giant only after the 
beast left a trail of destruction). The only clues to Nan’s disappearance are several 
tapestries left in her house that depict grotesque scenes of torture: in one, a terri-
fied girl kneels in a cell covered in needles; another shows two small children being 
baked alive. When the king’s daughter goes missing as well, Kate and Jack acquire 
some royal assistance with their search; the evil behind the kidnappings, however, 
is a powerful force, and Kate’s budding magical abilities may be the only way to 
OctOber 2015 • 109
save the prisoners and the kingdom. A blend of fairy tale and crime procedural, the 
story is light on the world-building but skilled in pacing, leading readers from one 
clue to the next as the mystery intensifies. With a narration that somewhat belies 
her outward bravado, Kate is an appealing blend of vulnerability and moxie; her 
amiable, clever banter with Jack adds levity to their often dangerous predicaments. 
The ultimate villain, however, is not all that intimidating and immediately deflates 
the book’s tension, while the abrupt conclusion offers too many tidy solutions. 
Still, the accessible language and compelling plot might make this a quick pick for 
fairy-tale fans.  KQG
porTis, AnToinETTE Wait; written and illus. by Antoinette Portis. Porter/Roar-
ing Brook, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-921-4 $16.99  
R* 3-6 yrs
This picture book employing only three words follows a young boy and his mother 
on a walk through a city. Mother pulls the boy along, looking at her watch and 
urging “Hurry!”; the boy is distracted by the many fascinating things along the 
way (a dachshund, a cement truck, an aquarium, etc.) and keeps calling “Wait.” 
When it starts to rain, the two head for the train platform; just as they are about 
to board, the pulls his harried mother back to see a double rainbow spread across 
the urban skyline (“Yes. Wait,” the mother finally agrees). The dichotomy between 
kid purpose and adult purpose will be a familiar one to adult readers aloud, and the 
message comes sweetly and subtly through the little boy, who is more present in 
the moment than his hurried parent. The art, pencil, charcoal, and ink illustrations 
touched with digital color, incorporates chunky outlines set against white, and on 
many of the spreads the focus shifts from a wide-angle view of a bustling city street 
to a tightly focused depiction of the singular object that caught the boy’s eye. Both 
innovative and joyful, this clever new offering from Portis will charm children and 
grownups alike with its simple but effective reminder to slow down.  HM
ruBin, susAn goldmAn Hot Pink: The Life & Fashions of Elsa Schiaparel-
li. Abrams, 2015 56p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-4197-1642-3 $21.95 
 R Gr. 4-8
This appealing biography of the Italian designer, rival to Coco Chanel, is tailor-
made for aspiring fashionistas who want—indeed, need—to bone up on the big 
names in haute couture. Throughout her decades-long career, which spanned the 
Roaring Twenties, the Depression, and the second World War, Schiaparelli imbued 
her designs with a quirky playfulness and edgy artistry (often owing to her friend-
ships with Cubist and Dada painters) that set her apart from other contemporary 
couturiers. Through text and splendidly reproduced pictures of Schiaparelli’s cloth-
ing, readers will be surprised by just how many innovations are attributed to her, 
from the trompe l’oeil knitting technique of her groundbreaking bowknot sweater, 
to the Mae West–inspired curvature of her Shocking perfume bottle; from zippers 
that played decorative as well as functional roles, to a lobster-themed formal gown 
in tribute to Salvador Dalí. Although Rubin attends to “Schiap’s” privileged child-
hood, failed marriage, and close relationship with her daughter, the focus is largely 
on her career and the social context in which her designs found and, eventually, lost, 
favor. End matter comprises the expected index, bibliography, and source notes but 
also includes such thoughtful bonuses as a list of museums and collections where 
110 • the bulletin
Schiaparelli’s creations can be found, a list of her “Fashion Firsts,” and lists of artists 
and selected artworks that inspired her designs.  EB
sAvAgE, sTEpHEn Where’s Walrus? And Penguin?; written and illus. by Stephen 
Savage. Scholastic, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-40295-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
At the end of Where’s Walrus? (BCCB 2/11), Walrus had returned to the zoo and 
new performance opportunities there. Now he’s off again, darting out of the zoo 
gates when a sudden shower sends zoogoers home, and he brings his buddy, Pen-
guin. The wordless scenarios of mid-city camouflage are twice as funny as Walrus 
coordinates with Penguin, often capitalizing on Penguin’s natural formality. Walrus 
is a headscarfed mother holding a swaddled Penguin; Walrus is a top-hatted pas-
senger in a limo, driven by Penguin in a chauffeur’s cap; Walrus takes a bow as a 
Wagnerian soprano while Penguin conducts musicians in the pit. Hunting for the 
smaller Penguin ups the game quotient as well, and the concluding development (an 
injured Walrus falls for a walrus nurse, resulting in a happy zoo wedding) is both an 
amusing twist and a fine occasion for pageantry. Savage returns to fine form in the 
art, with graphically arresting spreads that have a retro feel in the slightly shaded 
digital tones, the details of the setting, and the rhythmically patterned city views. 
The keeper, who resembles a Fisher-Price dogcatcher with his simplicity of form 
and cartoonishly reductive net, is worth following in his own right. Walrus fans 
will cheer at his return, and their expectations will be raised further for whatever 
comes next.  DS
scHliTz, lAurA Amy The Hired Girl. Candlewick, 2015 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7818-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
At fourteen, Joan Skraggs realizes that all she has to look forward to in 1911 
America is the life of a spinster, doing house and farm work for no pay or thanks 
for her widowed father and any unmarried brothers who happen to live at home. 
Drawing on a modest nest egg left to her in secret by her dying mother, Joan takes 
off for the big city of Baltimore and, lying about her age, finds employment with 
the Rosenbachs. The family is grateful to have found a reliable Shabbos goy who can 
cook and do emergency household management during the Sabbath, and who gets 
along (mostly) with Malka, the housekeeper/cook who has been with the family 
for decades. Joan, passing as eighteen-year-old Janet, is happy to be comparatively 
well paid and nominally appreciated; sometimes, however, she forgets her place as 
a servant and oversteps into the private lives of the Rosenbachs, causing trouble 
in the short term but resolving tricky dilemmas in the long run. The somewhat 
predictable domestic perplexities might have amounted to little more than a light-
hearted romp were it not for Schlitz’s careful delineation of even minor characters. 
Subtext examines the cultural negotiations between the Reform Jewish Rosenbachs; 
the beloved but exasperatingly Orthodox Malka; Joan, who is determined to take 
this opportunity to embrace her mother’s Catholic faith; and her religious mentor, 
Father Horst, whose eyes are opened through Joan to the goodness of his Jewish 
neighbors. Anne Shirley might recognize in Joan/Janet a kindred spirit—prone to 
OctOber 2015 • 111
scrapes, quick to make peace, and eager to expand her horizons. Anne’s fans, who 
appreciate historical fiction as intelligent as it is entertaining, will be well pleased.  EB
scHrEiBEr, JoE Con Academy. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-544-32020-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Billy Humbert, passing as Will Shea, plans on a brief sojourn at Connaughton Acad-
emy—just long enough to con his way into the good graces and rich bank account 
of some fellow student, who will set him on the path to a life of wealth and privilege 
among the elite. That’s not how it works out, though. Andrea Dufresne, an able 
hoaxster herself, sees right through his lame scholarship son-of-dead-missionaries 
front. There’s only room for one con artist at Connaughton, so they agree to a race: 
first one to score $50,000 from vile classmate Brandt Rush, heir to his billionaire 
daddy’s business, gets to stay, and the loser must slink away. While Will busily 
plans an online poker scam (a cannily updated version of The Sting), Andrea turns 
the tables on him, tripping him up with his own bogus identity. Complications 
involving a love interest for Will, the appearance of his dissolute father, and the 
shady past of the school’s headmaster keep the outcome of the wager in constant 
doubt, and the climactic scene, rife with bloodshed and twists, is fully satisfying. 
This is an ideal teen quick pick—short and clever, with just a tinge of bitterness in 
Will’s voice to sell his character—and pure catnip for caper fans.  EB
sElTzEr, Eric The Long Dog; written and illus. by Eric Seltzer. Scholastic, 
2015 [32p] (Level 1 Readers)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-74632-8 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. K-1
 “Calling all dogs!” says this beginning reader/concept book, heralding a rhym-
ing series of contrasting pups: “This is a hot dog. This is a cold dog./ This is a 
young dog. This is an old dog.” Changing up the rhythm is the incremental reveal 
of a “long dog,” whose progress across the page is returned to after each stanza, 
and which sets up the playful close of “So long, dogs!” There’s some gender (and 
other) essentialism involved for the sake of contrast, but the tight structure, comic 
vignettes, and touch of wordplay lift this well above the usual beginning reader in 
its cleverness; the book also keeps its readership in mind with its careful patterning 
and helpful illustrative decoding hints. The art is simple but zesty: bumpy ink lines 
provide exaggerated, cartoonish draftsmanship, while planes of color and touches 
of pattern come from sweet watercolor tones, sometimes with a graininess that 
suggests colored pencil. The casual roundness and deep silliness to the pooches 
occasionally recalls James Marshall, and the climactic spread, which collects all the 
pups and features a multitude of different phrases for “goodbye” in speech balloons, 
provides an enjoyable callback and a bit of hunt-and-ID fun. Even non-dog fans 
will appreciate the exuberant contrasts, the jocular illustrations, and the chance to 
say a bunch of cheesy goodbyes.  DS 
112 • the bulletin
sHEinmEl, courTnEy Edgewater. Amulet, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-1641-6 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Seventeen-year-old Lorrie Hollander has been hiding from things from her rich 
friends: Edgewater, her family’s glorious estate, is now a dilapidated mess; her aunt 
Gigi, also her guardian, has pretty much gone off the deep end; and the only way 
Lorrie is able to stay at her elite boarding school is through a trust fund set up by 
her AWOL mother. Now the tuition check hasn’t come through and Lorrie must 
return home to Edgewater, where she finds that her sister Susannah has become 
almost as eccentric as their aunt. More concerning (at least to Lorrie) is the fact 
that the money has somehow gone missing, and her search for it points directly 
toward a wealthy local senator—who also happens to be the father of Charlie, the 
boy with whom she has sparked up a summer romance. The homage to Grey Gar-
dens is apparent, and Sheinmel manages to evoke both the titillating eccentricity 
of the Beales as well as their underlying sadness in Gigi and Susannah. Lorrie, on 
the other hand, is all edges and practicality, but her profound need to fit in, even 
at the expense of those she loves, and her arrogant sense of entitlement make her 
seem even more detached from reality than her sister and aunt and ultimately render 
her unlikable. The romance between Lorrie and Charlie develops at an unbeliev-
able pace, even for YA novels, and their families’ connection is painfully obvious 
from the get-go. Still, Lorrie’s grief upon discovering the truth behind her mother’s 
leaving and her aunt’s episodes is heartbreakingly authentic, and her shock at her 
own vulnerability softens some of her earlier prickliness. Despite the flaws, this is 
still an interesting exploration of the ways in which dysfunctional people figure 
out how to function.  KQG
sHEldon, dyAn The Truth about My Success. Candlewick, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7272-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Paloma Rose is no angel; she just plays one on television. Off set, the spoiled sixteen-
year-old star has been running with the wrong crowd, not to mention throwing 
tantrums that have alienated her her coworkers and escalated the tension between 
her and her mother/manager, Leone. Oona, on the other hand, works as a waitress, 
acts as a handyman for her rundown apartment complex when her depressed father 
can’t leave the couch, and earns the respect of her boss and neighbors for her kind-
ness and hard work. When Leone and Jack, Paloma’s slick agent, meet at Oona’s 
café, Jack notices the physical similarities between the two girls; after Paloma gets 
arrested and only brat camp can help, Jack recruits the reluctant but impoverished 
Oona to fill Paloma’s acting shoes while Paloma is secretly rehabilitated, ensuring 
that Paloma’s show—Jack and Leone’s meal ticket—will continue. With acerbic wit 
and dry observations, Sheldon creates protagonists whose personalities and internal 
journeys feel as realistic as possible given the enjoyably farfetched premise. These 
well-drawn characters and variation on the ol’ switcheroo plotline emerge in crisp, 
salty prose that engages readers from the outset but provides enough insight and 
character development to elicit sympathy amidst the stings. The author’s pull-no-
punches portrayal of Hollywood is evocative and intriguing, as is the camp for 
OctOber 2015 • 113
troubled teens where Paloma unwittingly finds herself and where readers begin to 
see her humanity. Readers will appreciate the lack of condescension, both in tone 
and outcome, where even Paloma and Oona’s joining forces against the conniv-
ing adults feels neither saccharine nor gratuitously vindictive. Send this one with 
beach-bound teens for added SoCal feeling—they’ll appreciate it.  AA
sHElTon, dAvE Thirteen Chairs. Fickling/Scholastic, 2015 [256p] illus.
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-81665-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82311-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
This clever assembly of thirteen short scary stories effectively employs distinctive 
storytelling voices for each of the tales to make this a standout collection. There 
is an efficient narrative arc that ties it all together: a kid named Jack stumbles into 
a mysterious gathering of twelve individuals. As the stories emerge, Jack realizes 
that he is expected to be part of the event, and he ends with a narrative of his own, 
“The House Where Ghosts Meet,” that wraps up the collection and hints at what 
he has learned about these individuals throughout his night. The symbolic gesture 
of each teller’s blowing out one of the few lit candles (thus making the room darker 
and darker) plus the uncertainty of who the heck these folks are add creepiness to 
the already spooky stories that reflect the ages, time periods, ethnicities, languages, 
and cultures of the diverse storytellers. Atmospheric black and white illustrations 
introduce each telling, and with a story like “Razor,” told by a sharp, serious 
woman who recounts the tale of a man investigating a house in which a murder 
has taken place, the illustration of single drops of blood leading to a gory razor 
are as memorably haunting as the words. This is quintessential flashlight reading, 
though readers may wind up turning on a reassuring light halfway through.  AS
simukkA, sAllA As Black as Ebony; tr. from the Finnish by Owen F. Wites-
man. Skyscape, 2015 [154p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-2995-0 $10.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-7995-5 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
In this closing title of Simukka’s Snow White trilogy, heroine Lumikki finally 
unravels the secret her parents have kept hidden (and her own subconscious has 
kept deeply buried) since her childhood. Meanwhile, as the truth bubbles ever 
closer to the surface, Lumikki contends with her divided affections: undiminished 
passion for Blaze, now back in her life after transitioning from female to male, 
and newfound peace and genuine contentment with her lover, Sampsa. This third 
volume focuses mainly on Lumikki’s interior struggle with romance and memory, 
and the external menace involving a stalker who knows too much about her past 
feels like a de rigueur peril to maintain the tone of the series and keep the danger 
rolling. Those who expected a fresh twist on an old fairy tale may find Lumikki’s 
second encasement in a coffin decidedly overplayed, but readers who relish the 
edgy darkness of the series will likely not mind, and teens who favor a steel-spined 
protagonist will admire Lumikki’s solution to her troubled love life.  EB
114 • the bulletin
siroWy, AlExAndrA The Creeping. Simon, 2015 [448p]
ISBN 978-1-4814-1886-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Seventeen-year-old Stella remembers nothing from the afternoon eleven years ago 
when she and her friend Jeanie entered the local woods and only Stella returned. 
Stella has tried her best to move past the tragedy of Jeanie’s disappearance, becoming 
one of the popular girls, remaining coolly aloof whenever the incident is brought 
up, and generally holding people at an arm’s length. Now, however, a new body has 
shown up—a redheaded little girl, just like Jeanie was—and Stella believes there 
may be more deaths if she can’t regain her memory. Old Mrs. Griever insists that 
Jeanie was taken by the Creeping, a malevolent supernatural force in the forest 
that has been preying on little girls for centuries, while the town detective, Shane, 
believes that a human monster is responsible. The book clunkily bounces between 
the two theories, so the terror of each is muted by the possibility of the other. Stella’s 
character arc, however, is more deftly developed, as the armor she has built up over 
the years is chipped away and she is left to confront both her grief and guilt over 
Jeanie’s disappearance. Ultimately, though, the book is simply overstuffed, trying 
to mete out messages about everything from high school dynamics to the human 
capacity for evil to the power of memory. Wasserman’s The Waking Dark (BCCB 
10/13) is more effective in its blend of supernatural and ordinary evil, but this may 
still please horror fans looking for a creepy thrill.  KQG
smiTH, ronAld l. Hoodoo. Clarion, 2015 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-544-44525-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Despite his name, twelve-year-old Hoodoo has never been able to conjure like the 
rest of his family members, who, by the 1930s, have been practicing folk magic 
for decades. Nonetheless, Hoodoo is content with his life in small-town Alabama, 
living with his strict but loving grandmother, Mama Frances, and hanging around 
with his friend Bunny. When a stranger comes to town, however, bizarre things 
begin to happen—corpses are dug up from their graves, mysterious screams echo 
throughout the night, and Hoodoo begins to have terrifying dreams of a red-eyed 
demon demanding his left hand. An encounter with the Stranger in the swamp 
leaves Hoodoo shaken; when Hoodoo finally reports all this to Mama Frances, she 
reveals that Hoodoo may have to pay for the misdeeds of his father, a powerful mojo 
man who “came to a bad end.” Hoodoo’s narration is quick and engaging, filled 
with colloquialisms and direct addresses to the reader that echo oral storytelling. 
Smith is careful to include details of the Jim Crow South (Hoodoo and Bunny 
attend the Colored Folks’ Day at the county fair, and Mama Frances works tire-
lessly for wealthy white families) while depicting the richness of Hoodoo’s close 
knit African-American community and the beauty (and danger) of the Alabama 
setting. The horror element is just as vividly drawn, with the terrifying Stranger 
rivaling Barraclough’s Long Lankin (Long Lankin, BCCB 9/12) in his creepiness. 
The straightforward plot makes this accessible to younger readers, and the atmo-
spheric setting will certainly leave them with a chill.  KQG 
OctOber 2015 • 115
soo, kEAn March Grand Prix: The Fast and the Furriest; written and illus. by 
Kean Soo. Stone Arch/Capstone, 2015 [144p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-62370-171-0 $14.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62370-532-9 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-5
In this buoyant and zippy graphic novel, March is a bunny on a mission to race 
cars, even in situations where a more moderate speed might be called for. He’s 
got an understanding family, a loyal and mechanically gifted best friend, and an 
unflinchingly good heart, and these all serve him well when he is bested multiple 
times by a fox who truly will stop at nothing to win. Three standalone stories 
feature overlapping characters but separate plots that each resolve fully. The first is 
a straightforward racetrack story; the uproarious second, “Baker’s Run,” features 
March and his pal Hammond (possible Top Gear hat-tip?) as the worst delivery 
assistants ever when April, March’s sister, opens a new bakery. The final entry is 
a warm tale where March genuinely grasps the lesson that being a good friend is 
better than beating a cheater. Each story offers a slightly different color palette, 
but butter-yellow March and his baby-pink pal match all of them as they bounce 
around in their bright panels. Soo ditches the panel format on occasion, allow-
ing for immersive car diagrams or full-page illustrations that slow the reader long 
enough to let a key moment sink in. Sure, there are some morals snuck in here, 
but mostly these are giddy, energetic comics that readers will devour in a gulp and 
leave wishing there had been more laps.  AS
sTrATTon, AllAn The Dogs. Sourcebooks Fire, 2015 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-4926-0938-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Cameron Weaver’s mother insists she and Cameron keep their bags packed in case 
her abusive ex-husband tracks them down yet again. Up until now, Cameron has 
been compliant, sharing his mother’s angst, but his weariness with moving and his 
frustration with being denied a full account of his father’s misdeeds has shifted his 
frame of mind. This most recent move to a ramshackle house hundreds of miles 
from their relatives is the worst by far. The landlord, Mr. Sinclair, is creepy, the 
kids at his high school ignore or bully Cameron, and rumors of deaths by murder 
and dog attack attach to the property. Cameron’s conversations with a ghost child 
who promises to keep him safe also has Cameron wondering about his own sanity. 
Drawn into trouble with classmates and isolated from his trusted grandparents and 
old friends, Cameron phones his father—whom he has, of course, been forbidden 
to contact—and Cameron’s fragile mental state is now the least of his problems. 
Thematically similar to Daniel Kraus’s Scowler (BCCB 4/13), this novel derives 
its horror from Hitchcockian suspense rather than torture and bloodshed, with 
the steady revelations of the old house’s gruesome mysteries paralleling Cameron’s 
increasing endangerment. This will be an easy sell to teens on the prowl for a 
done-in-a-night thriller.  EB
116 • the bulletin
surovEc, yAsminE My Pet Human; written and illus. by Yasmine Surovec. Roar-
ing Brook, 2015 [112p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-073-2 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
The hero of this amusing early chapter book is a freewheeling tuxedo cat unwilling 
to give up his life as an independent stray to go live with some human. After all, 
he knows all the best places to eat (the dumpster behind the Chinese restaurant 
has some yummy leftovers, and he can snag a few meatballs from the cooks at the 
Twirling Fork), he’s got a comfy hideout near an abandoned house, and he has 
plenty of other animal friends for company. When a little girl and her mother 
move into his neighborhood, though, he’s intrigued—particularly by the smell of 
macaroni and cheese and tuna wafting from their house. A few treats, a lot of back 
scratches, and some cozy cardboard boxes later, and the little kitty decides having 
a human as a pet isn’t such a bad idea after all. This is an easy and obvious sell to 
fans of felines, and the cat’s narration is particularly entertaining, especially when 
he tries to win over the little girl’s mother by bringing her a dead snake as a gift 
or swishing his tail against her face as a wakeup call. Simple, direct sentences and 
plentiful dialogue (in speech balloons) make this accessible, while the occasional 
challenging word will stretch readers’ skills. There’s a graphic simplicity to the 
black and white illustrations, and the rounded, wide-eyed figure of the starring 
kitty is meme-ready in its cuteness. Prepare parents for the possibility of a trip to 
the animal shelter after handing out this one.  KQG
TEAguE, mArk, ad. The Sky Is Falling!; ad. and illus. by Mark Teague. Scho-
lastic, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-63217-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-5 yrs
When cunning Fox’s slingshot downs an acorn onto Chicken Little’s head, she 
shrieks the requisite “The sky is falling!” Although Squirrel, Rabbit, and Cat 
point out the holes in this theory, her hysteria spreads to her hen housemates, and 
soon all the barnyard is engaged in reactive chanting and dancing (“The chickens 
break-danced. They did the pogo and the splits”) with the frenzy of a revival. Even 
Fox, initially bemused by a conga line of animals, gets in on the act, showing off 
until he collapses—at which point, young audiences can debate whether Chicken 
Little’s obstinate insistence and the resulting mayhem were good fortune or good 
thinking. Big, bold full-bleed illustrations featuring overinflated barnyard animals 
capture the frenetic energy and surreal twists to the story while providing both 
obvious and subtle jokes that will certainly contribute to young audiences’ hilarity. 
This will be an ideal readaloud for those squirrely audiences who want to conga 
as they listen.  AA
TEckEnTrup, BriTTA Get Out of My Bath!; written and illus. by Britta Tecken-
trup. Nosy Crow/Candlewick, 2015 24p
ISBN 978-0-7636-8006-0 $15.99  
R 2-4 yrs
This interactive picture book features an elephant named Ellie who is taking a 
bath. Things get a little crowded, however, when she is joined in the bathtub by a 
crocodile, a flamingo, a tiger, and a mouse. Eager to get her space back, Ellie sucks 
OctOber 2015 • 117
up all the bath water, leaving the others cold, shivery, and anxious to leave; when 
she is certain they are gone, she refills the tub and continues her solo romp in the 
water. Throughout the narrative, listeners are called upon to actively participate 
in Ellie’s bath (“Can you help her make some waves? Gently shake the book from 
side to side, then turn the page to see what happens”), making this an excellent 
storytime offering. Teckentrup’s digitally created illustrations have an Eric Carle-
like flavor; the textured fields of color and sharp cutout-style edges set against stark 
white recall his collaged paper, and the use of gleaming sweeps of lamination for 
the tilting bathwater is ingenious. The art makes excellent use of contrast, with the 
coral flamingo and mustardy tiger standing out against the blue-gray elephant in the 
blue-gray bathwater, and the large-scale illustrations will carry well in a group setting. 
This playful new offering for the preschool set offers plenty of splashy fun.  HM 
THomAs, lEAH Because You’ll Never Meet Me. Bloomsbury, 2015 344p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-590-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-591-3 $13.99  
R* Gr. 8-10
Ollie and Moritz are teenage pen pals who believe they will never get to meet in 
person. Oliver’s stuck out in the woods with his loving mother because he is “al-
lergic” to electricity. Moritz is across the world in Germany, remarkably adaptive 
and independent in spite of having been born without eyes and with a wonky heart. 
The two communicate via old-fashioned snail mail, and their letters constitute 
this stunning genre-crossing novel. The pacing is impeccable, as letters move from 
sunniness (Oliver) and bemused distance (Moritz) to both writers exploring their 
darkest fears, experiences, and worries for their futures. Readers must, like the boys, 
read between the lines to guess how the correspondents are truly doing, especially 
when Moritz disappears and only Ollie’s letters carry the narrative. There is also 
a decided science-fiction bent (a mysterious, ominous genetics lab pops up in the 
story) in addition to the realistic emotional exploration of two isolated teens who 
are finally finding their own voices. Even the open-ended conclusion is satisfying, 
as it hints at better things to come while leaving Ollie and Moritz the agency to 
get there in their own time and via their own wandering paths.  AS
TonATiuH, duncAn Funny Bones: Posada and His Day of the Dead Calaveras; writ-
ten and illus. by Duncan Tonatiuh and with photographs. Abrams, 2015 40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1647-8 $18.95  
R Gr. 2-5
Most kids are familiar with the playful skeletons associated with the Mexican Day 
of the Dead, but they’re a lot less likely to know about that tradition’s history. 
Tonatiuh redresses that with this history of José Guadalupe Posada, the nineteenth-
century artist who took the holiday tradition of skulls and light verse and developed 
a comic cast of skeletons whose fame has eclipsed their creator. The chronicle 
is wide-ranging despite its compactness, touching on Mexican history (Posada 
created political cartoons about the Mexican Revolution) and artistic technique 
(impressively clear step-by-step diagrams explain the processes of lithography, 
engraving, and relief etching). Direct questions posed to the audience (“Was Don 
Lupe saying that sometimes calaveras are not a laughing matter?”) add curricular 
opportunities. The book includes a multitude of Posada’s own work (and that of a 
few contemporaries), letting readers immerse themselves in the milieu of grinning 
and well-dressed skeletons. Tonatiuh’s art has its own stylized flair that complements 
118 • the bulletin
Posada’s; his familiar flat perspectives and digital collage are accented by elements of 
pattern (bone and pen borders decorate many pages) and geometric rhythm, and 
the style makes the combination of past and present into a cohesive whole. Stellar 
end matter includes a detailed author’s note, an informative glossary, a thorough 
bibliography in English and Spanish, a list of U.S. locations for viewing Posada’s 
art, and an index.  DS
ToWEll, kATy Charlie and the Grandmothers. Knopf, 2015 [240p] illus.
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96859-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86860-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89932-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Since his father’s death six years ago, Charlie has developed into an “exceptionally 
nervous” twelve-year-old, so it’s no surprise that neither his harried mother nor 
his brash sister, Georgie, pay him any heed when he fears that children are going 
missing from their small town. The accepted story is that the children have all gone 
off to see their respective grandmothers, but nobody seems worried that none of 
the kids have come back. Charlie is therefore horrified when his mother informs 
him and Georgie that they too will be off to visit their Grandmother Pearl—an 
odd arrangement considering neither of Charlie’s grandmothers were named Pearl 
and that they are both most certainly dead. Mom’s insistent, though, and Georgie 
is enthusiastic, so off they go. Grandmother Pearl is a severe, strange woman, and 
her shadowy, looming house isn’t much more welcoming. After theorizing that 
she is perhaps a vampire or maybe a witch, Charlie uncovers a far more terrify-
ing truth, one that will test his mettle and force him to confront his many, many 
fears. Towell (author of Skary Children and the Carousel of Sorrow, BCCB 7/11) 
constructs a Gaiman-esque world of horrors, filled with creatures that feed off of 
fear, insects that obliterate memories, and a queen who will use the nightmares 
of children to bring eternal darkness to their world. After the elaborate setup, 
readers may be grateful for the straightforwardness of the conclusion, and they’ll 
certainly cheer when Charlie does indeed overcome his fears. Reviewed from an 
unillustrated galley.  KQG
Tromly, sTEpHAniE Trouble Is a Friend of Mine. Dawson/Penguin, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42840-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-12
Zoe doesn’t know what she’s in for when trouble—masquerading as a sixteen-year-
old boy named Digby wearing an oversized black suit and scribbling in a notepad—
comes knocking at her door. She’s sure she doesn’t want any part of his amateur 
detective work and the hijinks that come with it—or at least that’s what she says. 
Whether it’s because she’s acting out against her divorced parents or just feeling 
sorry for Digby, who won’t rest until he finds the man who abducted his sister nine 
years prior, Zoe soon finds herself nabbing a pornographer, stealing electronic files, 
and going to the school dance with a thirteen-year-old boy wearing a cape. With 
snappy prose and wry humor alongside the gritty crime, this nod to noir moves as 
fast as Digby talks. Abundant action is tempered by sufficient introspection, making 
OctOber 2015 • 119
for an engrossing and satisfying read whose clever exposition style (author Tromly 
has television writing chops, and it shows) encourages readers to dig between the 
lines and see truths that even Zoe and Digby, in all their sardonic observations, 
can’t quite spell out. Hand this one out along with a Chandler or Hammett classic 
and the first season of Veronica Mars.  AA
TucHolkE, April gEnEviEvE, ed. Slasher Girls & Monster Boys. Dial, 
2015 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4173-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
In this loosely themed collection of fourteen horror stories, authors were tasked 
with selecting a pop culture reference (songs, stories, films, etc.) and writing a con-
temporary story that reflects their choice. The results are generally compelling, with 
the usual variability in quality but a high number of worthwhile entries. Dramatic 
standouts include Carrie Ryan’s terrifying “In the Forest Dark and Deep,” which 
makes the Mad Hatter the stuff of blood-soaked nightmares, and A. G. Howard’s 
gloriously horrifying “Stitches,” which adapts elements from Frankenstein into a 
story about a deeply flawed man who allows his children to cut away his sinning 
parts in an effort at redemption. The inspiration is listed at the end of each tale, so 
interested readers can go hunting, but most will likely be content to just read the 
stories as independent items with plenty of horror, dark humor, and cleverness.  AS
vErAno, m. Diary of a Haunting. Simon, 2015 [320p] illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 978-1-4814-3069-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Paige and her brother are trying hard to adjust to life in Idaho after their parents’ 
divorce, but it’s rough, especially when the creepy old mansion her mother bought 
is infested with spiders, flies, and malevolent spirits. Paige’s mother thinks they 
should just let any ghosts be, but Paige is fairly certain that direct action is needed 
to save the family from falling prey to whatever awfulness the house seems to be 
brewing. Armed with her diary, a friend, and access to old records, she endeavors 
to uncover whatever evil history might have created these hauntings. The premise 
here is that Paige’s personal diary, interspersed here with dramatic photographs, 
was found and edited by Verano, a professor and supernatural expert, and Paige’s 
narrative voice is sharp and gripping; it is impossible to not feel sympathy and 
concern as her frustration evolves into suspicion and finally abject terror as the story 
progresses. Her character suffers from convenient malleability, however, when her 
firm declarations are almost always forgotten or proven wrong by the next entry, 
and readers must scrap assumptions and start anew. In addition, the shock end-
ing is disappointingly abrupt, given the investment developed in key characters. 
Nevertheless, there is undeniable spookiness at hand here, and Blair Witch fans in 
particular may appreciate the “as it happens” immediacy of the format.  AS
120 • the bulletin
voigT, cynTHiA Mister Max: The Book of Kings; illus. by Iacopo Bruno. Knopf, 
2015 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97125-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97687-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97689-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Readers arrive at the grand finale to “solutioneer” Max Starling’s quest (chronicled 
in The Book of Lost Things, BCCB 10/13, and The Book of Secrets, BCCB 11/14) 
to locate and rescue his actor parents, who have been spirited off to Andesia, the 
fictional South American kingdom where they are being held (i.e., imprisoned) as 
its king and queen. Max enlists the aid of his own ruler, King Teodor, who reveals 
a longstanding connection to Max’s parents and gladly authorizes a quasi-official 
delegation to Andesia, comprising Max and many of the major characters readers 
have met through his previous adventures. When they arrive in Andesia, they’re 
held under de facto house arrest, allowed brief supervised visits with the “king,” and 
mired up to their necks in a power play between a general and local mine owners. As 
might be expected, the Starlings and their supporters will have to act their way out 
of their predicament, but their adversaries are also masters of deceit; the climactic 
drama is a cleverly plotted production of improvisation, missed cues, and changing 
playwrights. Bruno’s illustrations continue to delight with their blend of humor 
and menace, and the inclusion of an amended South American map encourages 
readers to immerse themselves in Voigt’s fictional world. This is a strong ending 
to an involving series, and readers who have eagerly awaited the final title will not 
be disappointed.  EB
WArd, kAiTlin Bleeding Earth. Egmont, 2015 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-644-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-645-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
When the Earth starts seeping blood (and later hair and bones), there’s really not 
much that can be done except be grossed out and hope it stops. Scientists are utterly 
baffled, the water supply is becoming contaminated, and no one, from religious 
fanatics to global leaders, quite knows what to say or how to behave. Lea’s distracted 
from the end of the world by her hot girlfriend, and it isn’t until she stops being 
able to make out with Arcely on the regular that she sees this crisis for what it is. 
Lea’s narration is effective in creating mystery as readers find out fairly early on that 
side effects of a psychological disorder caused by exposure to the blood include hal-
lucinations, disordered thought, and paranoia; Lea’s proclamations and assurances 
that she isn’t sick instantly become compellingly suspect. Unfortunately, Lea’s so 
prone to making horrible choices that she becomes an exasperating, unsympathetic 
character long before she figures out how urgent this all is. In addition, the dramatic 
climax is frustratingly unclear rather than scintillatingly mysterious. Nevertheless, 
those who loved the poignant, water-caused apocalypse in Bergin’s H20 (BCCB 
12/14) may appreciate this more gruesome but similarly themed look at the end 
of the world via one of the most unexpected (and, in this case, repulsive) means 
imaginable.  AS
OctOber 2015 • 121
WHiTE, JEn Survival Strategies of the Almost Brave. Farrar, 2015 311p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-374-30084-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-374-30085-2 $9.99  
R Gr. 4-7
This debut novel opens at an isolated desert gas station where twelve-year-old Lib-
erty and her eight-year-old sister Billie have been abandoned by their father, who 
is their only living parent. Liberty, who would do anything to protect her sister, 
kicks into survival mode; the narrative is framed by a series of survival strategies 
that see them through what quickly becomes a succession of episodes on the road. 
The two girls encounter a motley cast of characters, both friend and foe, along the 
way, and while the story is at times far-fetched, the element of mystery (particu-
larly surrounding the events that occurred just before the girls’ abandonment) and 
thoughtfully drawn protagonist will keep readers turning pages at a steady clip. 
The story bounces seamlessly back and forth from the present storyline to slowly 
and carefully revealed details from the past, often introduced through pages of the 
notebook that Liberty is constantly writing in to help her think things through, 
which also includes lists of survival tips. The outstanding message here is one of 
trust; Liberty is so determined to need no one that she often fails to do what is best 
for the two sisters, and her slow realization of this truth is poignantly drawn. This 
will have strong appeal to those who love a good relationship drama, especially 
one set on the road.  HM 
WinTEr, JonAH Lillian’s Right to Vote: A Celebration of the Voting Rights Act of 
1965; illus. by Shane W. Evans. Schwartz & Wade, 2015 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39029-3 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39028-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39030-9 $10.99 
 R 6-9 yrs
See Bandy, Michael, p. 76, for review.
122 • the bulletin
scHAckEr, JEnnifEr, ed. Feather, Paws, Fins, and Claws: Fairy-Tale Beasts; ed. 
by Jennifer Schacker and Christine A. Jones; illus. by Lina Kusaite. Wayne State 
University Press, 2015 [126p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-814340-69-1 $24.99 
E-book ed. 978-0-814340-70-7 $24.99
Reviewed from galleys
Schacker and Jones, scholars of folklore, argue in their introduction to this ten-entry 
collection that fairy tales are “open to endless interpretation” and that it’s not just 
the postmodern versions that interrogate social norms and power dynamic. Animals 
often play a key role in the creative readings of fairy tales, and Schacker and Jones 
offer up as an example a close analysis of Perrault’s “Le Petit Chaperon Rouge” that 
supposes that the wolf is far more than the wicked predator; it is rather a complex 
blend of human and animalistic behaviors and desires, “muddying the distinction 
and opposition of humans and animals.” They then invite readers to explore and 
consider possible interpretations of the ten tales—one verse, the rest prose, included 
in the collection. All but one of the entries are Victorian writing, either original 
literary fairy tales or period translations/adaptations; inspirations and sources include 
Italian, Punjabi, Portuguese, Norwegian, and Inuit. A brief introduction and source 
note accompanies each tale, which range from the familiar “The Story of Three 
Bears” and “East o’ the Sun and West o’ the Moon,” to the lesser known “Babiole,” 
a story about a princess transformed into a monkey, and “Nanina’s Sheep,” about 
a shepherd who loses her sheep to a musician but finds assistance from an old tree. 
The tales themselves do not seem as subversive as the editors argue, but the arrest-
ing illustrations that accompany the stories point toward thematic elements that 
lay below the surface. Kusaite’s art, intricate blends of textures and patterns along 
with tightly controlled, elegant linework, lend splendor and weight to each tale; 
red silhouettes of birds set against a wispy two toned illustration of a feathered 
woman echo the melancholy bitterness found in the “Ballad of the Bird-Bride”; the 
sharp angles of claws and teeth along with the soft roundness of human hands on 
a horned beast elaborate on the protagonist’s potential for violence and kindness. 
This is a collection that offers readers, scholars, and storytellers an opportunity to 
investigate the many layers and thematic depths of fairy tales.  KQG 
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
OctOber 2015 • 123
Abandonment–fiction: White
Abuse–fiction: Schmidt; Stratton 
Actors and acting–fiction: Sheldon
Addiction–fiction: Holm
ADVENTURE: Grove; Hale; Liss; 
Mason; Voigt
African Americans–fiction: Emond; 
Konigsberg; Myers; Patrick; 
Smith, R.
African Americans–stories: Bandy; 
Winter
Aliens–fiction: Liss
ALPHABET BOOKS: Johnson
Animals: Jenkins
Animals–fiction: McGhee
Animals–stories: Dubuc
ANTHOLOGiES: Tucholke
Art: Tonatiuh
Art and artists: Tonatiuh
Art and artists–stories: Mann
Babies–fiction: Oppel
Baths–stories: Teckentrup
Behavior–stories: Chapman; Grant
BiOGRAPHiES: Anderson; Gantos; 
Rubin; Tonatiuh
Biology: Barton; Jenkins
Birds–fiction: Coverly
Birds–stories: Grant
Birthdays–fiction: Ostow
Birthdays–stories: Harrison
Boarding schools–fiction: Mc-
Cullough
Boats–fiction: Griffin
Brothers–fiction: Brown, J.; Coverly; 
Lee; Oppel
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Liggett
Bullying–fiction: Brown, J.; Norriss
Cars–fiction: Soo
Cars: Glass
Cats–fiction: Surovec
Cats–stories: Harrison
Circuses–fiction: Ostow
Civil rights–stories: Bandy; Winter
Class–fiction: Monninger
Climate: Kudlinski
Clothing: Butterworth; Rubin
CONCEPT BOOKS: Graham; 
Johnson; Seltzer
Crime and criminals–fiction: Bray; 
Panitch; Painchaud; Schreiber; 
Simukka; Tromly
Cults–fiction: Coyle; Liggett; Ma-
thieu
Current events: Emond
Dance and dancing–fiction: Myers
Dance and dancing–stories: Teague
Depression–fiction: Norriss
DETECTiVE STORiES: Lawson; 
Tromly
Dinosaurs–fiction: Fulk
Disabilities–fiction: Thomas
Disasters–fiction: Patrick
Dogs–fiction: Monninger; Seltzer
Dystopias–fiction: Badger; Coyle; 
Lyga; Ward
Engineering: Glass
EPiSTOLARy FiCTiON: Daywalt; 
Thomas
Ethics and values: Badger; Dinni-
son; Griffin; Lee; Lyga; Mathieu; 
Schmidt
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
124 • the bulletin
Faith–fiction: Badger; Coyle; Mathieu
Families–fiction: Fowley-Doyle; 
Holm; Konigsberg; Mathieu; Mc-
Coola; Ness; Sheinmel
Fans–fiction: Liss
FANTASy: Childs; Elliott; Fulk; 
George; Grove; Mason; McCoola; 
McCullough; McLemore; Ness; 
Oppel; Paulson; Towell
Fashion: Rubin
Fathers–fiction: Hale; Hunt; Smith; 
White
Feuds–fiction: McLemore
FOLKTALES AND FAiRy TALES: 
Christopher Dreaded; Christopher 
Shoulder; Teague
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: Mc-
Coola; Napoli; Paulson; Simukka
Foster families–fiction: Schmidt
Friends–fiction: Cooper; Dinnison; 
Fulk; Hanlon; McGhee; Mills; 
Norriss; Soo; Thomas
Friends–stories: Grant
Gender–fiction: Gino
Ghosts–fiction: DeStefano; Hunt; 
Norriss; Shelton; Stratton; Verano
Giants–fiction: Christopher Shoulder
GLBTQ people–fiction: Cooper; Din-
nison; Gino; Konigsberg; Ward
Goblins–fiction: Mason
Gossip–fiction: Adrian
Grandparents–fiction: Holm; Konigs-
berg; Towell
GRAPHiC NOVELS: Brown, D.; 
Holm; McCoola; Soo
Grief–fiction: McGhee
HiSTORiCAL FiCTiON: Brown, 
N.; Choldenko; Myers; Schlitz
History, U.S.: Bandy; Winter
History, world: Hopkinson; Tonatiuh
Holidays: Tonatiuh
HORROR: Christopher Dreaded; 
Oppel; Shelton; Sirowy; Towell; 
Tucholke; Ward
HUMOR: Calmenson; Chapman; 
Coverly; Daywalt; Gantos; Grant; 
John; Mann; Metcalf; Molk; Sav-
age; Seltzer; Surovec; Teague
Hurricanes: Brown, D.
Hurricanes–fiction: Patrick
identity: Gantos
identity–fiction: Gino
illness–fiction: Choldenko; Konigs-
berg
imagination–fiction: Hanlon
immigrants–fiction: Choldenko
inventions: Glass
Journals–fiction: Verano
Language arts: Johnson
Letter carriers–stories: Dubuc
Literature, English: Lee
Magic–fiction: Elliott; Paulson
MAGiCAL REALiSM: King
Maps–fiction: Grove
Memory–fiction: Fowley-Doyle
Mental illness–fiction: Panitch; Shein-
mel; Ward
Mice–stories: Molk
Mindfulness–stories: Portis
Missing persons–fiction: Painchaud; 
Voigt
Monsters–stories: John
Mothers–fiction: Liggett
Mothers–stories: Portis
Music and musicians: Anderson
MySTERiES: Cooper; DeStefano; 
Lawson; Liggett; Sirowy; Tromly
Natural disasters: Brown, D.
Nature study: Barton; Jenkins
New Orleans: Brown, D.
New Orleans–fiction: Patrick
New york–fiction: Bray
Penguins–stories: Savage
Pets–fiction: Surovec
Pirates–fiction: Mason
Prejudice–fiction: Elliott
Problem-solving–fiction: Voigt
Problem-solving–stories: Harrison; 
Krosoczka
Rabbits–fiction: Soo
Racing–fiction: Soo
Racism–fiction: Choldenko; Emond
Readers theater: Jenkins; John 
Reading aloud: Christopher Dreaded; 
Christopher Shoulder; McGhee; 
Ostow
Reading, beginning: Molk; Seltzer
Reading, easy: Coverly; Hanlon; 
Mills; Ostow; Surovec
Reading, reluctant: Jenkins; Schreiber
OctOber 2015 • 125
Relationships–fiction: Coyle; Emond; 
Griffin; King; Monninger; Simukka
Religion–fiction: Mathieu; Schlitz
Reputations–fiction: Adrian
RHyMiNG STORiES: Seltzer
Romance–fiction: Bray; Childs; Lyga; 
McLemore; Painchaud
Romania–fiction: George
Russia: Anderson
SCARy STORiES: Shelton
School–fiction: Adrian; Brown, J.; 
Fulk; Mills; Ness; Schreiber
School–stories: Calmenson; Chap-
man; Mann
Science: Kudlinski
Science and scientists–fiction: Mills
SCiENCE FiCTiON: Lee; Liss; 
Thomas; Ward
Secrets–fiction: Fowley-Doyle; Fulk; 
Konigsberg; Sheinmel
Servants–fiction: Schlitz 
Sharing–stories: Harrison
Ships and sailing–fiction: Mason
SHORT STORiES: Shelton; Tuchol-
ke
Sisters–fiction: Coyle; White
Sisters–stories: Metcalf
Social and emotional learning: Har-
rison; Krosoczka
Society–fiction: George
Spiders: Barton
Spies and espionage: Hopkinson
Spies and espionage–fiction: Hale
Spiritualists–fiction: DeStefano
STEAMPUNK: Lee
Stepfamilies–fiction: Napoli
Storytelling: Christopher Dreaded; 
Christopher Shoulder
Storytime: Calmenson; Dubuc; Met-
calf; Molk; Teckentrup
Suicide–fiction: Norriss
Sun–stories: Graham
Superheroes–fiction: Childs; Mc-
Cullough
SUPERNATURAL STORiES: Bray; 
Christopher Dreaded; Hunt; 
Sirowy; Smith; Verano
SURViVAL STORiES: Griffin
SUSPENSE: Panitch; Stratton
THRiLLERS: Hunt
Time–stories: Graham
Twins–fiction: Liggett; Panitch
Venice–fiction: Napoli
Vikings–fiction: Brown, N.
Violence–fiction: King
Voyages and travel–fiction: Grove; 
Konigsberg; White
Voyages and travel–stories: Daywalt
Weather: Kudlinski
Werewolves–fiction: George
Wolves–stories: Chapman
Women’s studies: Brown, N.; Rubin
World cultures: Butterworth; Tona-
tiuh
World War ii: Hopkinson
Zoos–stories: Savage
 
To order
Call 630.571.4520; fax 708.876.5598; e-mail info@childlitassn.
org; visit us online at www.childlitassn.org; or write ChLA at 
1301 W. 22nd St., Suite 202, Oak Brook, IL 60523.
Not  
child’s play.
R. H. W. Dillard, Editor-in-Chief 
Amanda Cockrell, Editor 
Hollins University
Encouraging serious scholarship and research, 
Children’s Literature publishes theoretically-based 
articles that address key issues in the field. Each 
volume includes articles, essays, and abstracts 
of dissertations of note. Children’s Literature is 
the annual publication of the Modern Language 
Association Division on Children’s Literature and the 
Children’s Literature Association (ChLA). 
Published annually in May for the Modern Language Association 
Division on Children’s Literature, the Children’s Literature 
Association, and Hollins University. Volume 44 (2016).  
ISSN 0092-8208; E-ISSN 1543-3374.
childreN’s literature
Individual and institutional 
subscription is one of many benefits of 
membership to the ChLA.
