H
ILL I N 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
4 
*r 
4
"An unusually engaging animal adventure."
-Kirkus Reviews
vy rnyms xieynoias Niaylor
Newbery Medal-winning author of Shiloh
Illustrated by Alan Daniel
*A"The droll escapades of two cat brothers who leave the safe and cozy confines
of their home in search of adventure will readily enchant ailurophiles - and per-
haps even convert aficionados of things canine....Sunny and boisterous...an
uncomplicated romp starring two captivating kitties. As a lagniappe, reliable
nuggets of pet lore are scattered throughout....Daniel's true-to-type illustrations
are an added delight." -Starred, Publishers Weekly
"While Naylor's feline explorers are amusing and lovable, their behavior is always
catlike, and their interpretation of human foibles is often hilarious....Readers will
thoroughly enjoy Marco and Polo's grand escape and hope for more adventures."
-Booklist
$13.95 SBE/0-689-31722-0/Ages 8-12
SBE indicates a renored hardcov 
edition.
AATHENEUM
An imprint of the Macmillan Children's Book Group
866 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
September 1993
Vol. 47 No. 1
A LOOK INSIDE
3 
THE BIG PICTURE
The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig written by Eugene Trivizas;
illustrated by Helen Oxenbury
4 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
5 
* Bloomers!written by Rhoda Blumberg; illus. by Mary Morgan
9 
* Western Wind by Paula Fox
12 
* Gideon and the Mummy Professor by Kathleen Karr
14 
* Linger by M. E. Kerr
16 
* Baby by Patricia MacLachlan
23 
* Grandfather's Journey written and illus. by Allen Say
27 
REVIEW POLICY
29 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
31 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $3.00. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois, and additional mailing offices
© 1993 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Helen Oxenbury, from The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig ©1993 by
Helen Oxenbury and used by permission of Margaret K. McElderry Books.
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 3
THE BIG PICTURE
The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig
written by Eugene Trivizas; illustrated by Helen Oxenbury
It's the first day of a school for a class of scared and tentative kindergartners. Just
read them the title of this book, The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig, and
they'll feel smarter already. "That's not how it goes!" they'll say, at once comforted
by their knowledge of a story they've heard before, and made confident by going
the new book at hand one better.
"That's not how it goes" has always been the driving impulse behind
parody and satire. Whether it's Swift suggesting that the eating of babies could
solve the Irish problem, or Jon Scieszka and Lane Smith telling us in The Stinky
Cheese Man that the Ugly Duckling grew up to be just a really ugly duck, satirists
turn our sacred cows, pigs, and ducks upside-down and inside-out, exposing their
foibles and our expectations for the follies each can be.
This is true even for the gentlest satire, as The Three Little Wolves is, and
appropriately so for an audience not yet ready for the edgy humor of The Stinky
Cheese Man, or, for that matter, the same team's The True Story of the Three Little
Pigs by A. Wolf. In that book, the hard-biting Wolf tells his side of the story from
inside Pig Penitentiary, where he's doing time for all those lovely pork chops.
Here, the Three Little Wolves are "cuddly little wolves with soft fur and fluffy
tails," who, warned by their mother about the big bad pig, sensibly build their first
home away from home with bricks, which stand against the pig's huffing and
puffing with no problem at all. "But the pig wasn't called big and bad for noth-
ing," and he knocks the house down with a sledgehammer, with the three little
wolves just managing to escape through a window. Similarly, the pig, whom
Oxenbury pictures as a wonderfully robust macho strutter, destroys the next house
(concrete) with a pneumatic drill, and the third (a self-imposed prison the wolves
have made of steel, iron and Plexiglas) with dynamite: "the house blew up."
Some adults might object to the pig's violent-and noisy-inventive-
ness, but don't forget the traditional alternative for the little victims: being eaten.
The destruction has a Saturday morning cartoon humor, made all the funnier here
by Oxenbury's tender way with a pencil and the gentle washes of her watercolor.
Nobody has a wittier, more humanizing, as it were, take on animals (see also her
pictures for Martin Waddell's Farmer Duck, reviewed in the 6/92 issue), and there's
also Oxenbury's considerable ability to draw with ease and grace, remaining el-
egant in the picture of the big and bad pig determinedly putting his pneumatic
drill to the concrete, or leaning on the buzzer of the bunker, or blithely dancing in
his final epiphany, occasioned when the wolves build their last house of flowers
and the pig takes a deep breath in preparation for his respiratory assault: "It was
4 
* THE BULLETIN
fantastic. And because the scent was so lovely, the pig took another breath and
then another. Instead of huffing and puffing, he began to sniff."
Stops and smells the flowers, the pig does, and in an upbeat reversal of
the usual fortunes, he befriends and moves in with the wolves, a conclusion that is
cozy but always shadowed by the way we know it really goes. This isn't a revision-
ist folk tale sweetened in the interests of allaying nighttime fears. Instead, the
ending works because of its ironic light on the regular Joseph Jacobs variant: the
fact that the pig becomes a friend makes us all the more aware that the wolf of the
traditional story remains an enemy. (This is to cast aspersions upon neither pigs
nor wolves.) Most satire picks on things we like, turning swans into ugly ducks, or
gold into common straw, but this story is trickier, turning hero into villain and
into hero again. Irony entails a restoration of the proper order of things, and this
book has a double transformation that will reassure young audiences at the same
time it tells them a new truth about old tales: every pig has his day.
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
APPELBAUM, DIANA 
Giants in the Land; illus. by Michael McCurdy. 
Houghton,
1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-64720-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 6-9 yrs
Sometimes the best history is a small slice, and here the small slice is a big tree,
used in a way that tells worlds of the early American colonies: "A British warship
required a mast that was forty inches high at the base, one hundred and twenty feet
tall, and absolutely straight." The only trees in the British domain suitable for
such work grew in New England, and Appelbaum and McCurdy's book describes
how these trees were harvested. To start with, an absolutely straight road had to be
built between tree stand and river road, then came the chopping, then came the
incredible feat of twenty pairs of oxen pulling the tree down the road and being
lifted into the air as the timber see-sawed up and down the hills. McCurdy's
dramatic scratchboard drawings are especially impressive here, showing the terri-
fied beasts dangling beneath the looming log as it ponderously approaches the
river. And there's more than just drama: McCurdy's drawings show exactly how
the process worked, the lines of every chain-link and axle distinct. The book takes
a political turn in the end, when American patriots in 1775 withheld the logs from
the waiting mast ships, which had to return home cargoless and make do with the
weaker masts available from European trees. The big pine trees are now gone-
harvesting did not stop with the British-but the author holds out hope: "Step
into the woods on ground made soft by a blanket of pine needles and sniff the air
tangy with the scent of pine. Giants are growing." Placing readers between centu-
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 
5
ries past and centuries future, the book offers a unique perspective on American
history, showing the forest through the trees. RS
ATKIN, S. BETH 
Voices from the Fields: Children of Migrant Farmworkers Tell
Their Stories; written and illus. with photographs by S. Beth Atkin. 
Joy Street,
1993 
96p
ISBN 0-316-05633-2 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
In a revealing photodocumentary, ten Hispanic young people from nine to eigh-
teen years old speak eloquently of their lives as part of migrant families working
the California fields. They variously emphasize the labor itself, the living condi-
tions, the conflicts of moving, the loneliness of family separation, the threat of
danger from gangs, discrimination, and the struggle to better their situations through
education and parental encouragement. The black-and-white photographs are
honest and arresting, with the children's emotional vulnerability speaking as clearly
in portraits as in words. Editorial comment is limited to an italic paragraph or two
introducing each narrator; even more telling is the poem, in Spanish and English,
preceding each chapter: writes Silvino Murillo, "I say good-bye now/ because I'm
not a strawberry worker./ My back won't get twisted/ because I'm a good writer."
Although the subjects' voices are varied, they share common experiences and socio-
cultural legacies that give the book a powerful overall impact. BH
BLUMBERG, RHODA 
Bloomers!; illus. by Mary Morgan. 
Bradbury, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-02-711684-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
This appealing and unintimidating picture-book history tells of some women's
emancipation from "a tight corset that pinched the waistline and squeezed the
chest" and "at least four layers of petticoats-including one made with scratchy
horsehair-to puff out the skirt." Seneca Falls in 1851 was enlivened by the ap-
pearance of a young woman in billowing pants, which costume spread to suffrag-
ists Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Amelia Bloomer, the latter popularizing it (and
unintentionally investing it with her name) through her magazine. Blumberg links
the popularity of bloomers to the women's rights movement both by describing
the pants' success with famous suffragists (including Susan B. Anthony) and by
mentioning how much easier they made daily life for their wearers. Her writing is,
as usual, crisp and clear, although the ending is a bit anti-climactic and there are,
surprisingly, no notes. The line-and-watercolor illustrations have a slightly
cartoonish cast that keeps them lively, but their depiction of period details (a gro-
cer sawing an iceblock) and everyday trials (obstreperous children running amuck
and yanking on Mama) makes them both pointed and historically evocative. This
is a pleasingly accessible demonstration of how historical small stuff is not so small,
and it's one that kids are likely to take to, giggling all the while. DS
BOOTH, DAVID 
Doctor Knickerbocker and Other Rhymes; illus. by Maryann
Kovalski. 
Ticknor, 1993 
72p
ISBN 0-395-67168-X 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
With its swinging, contemporary slant ("Jingle bells, Batman smells...") this is an
apt companion to Schwartz's And the Green Grass Grew AllAround and Opie's I
Saw Esau, two other compilations of playground rhymes reviewed in the 5/92
issue. What's especially fresh here are Kovalski's extroverted pen sketches, ac-
6 
* THE BULLETIN
cented with clip-art from nineteenth-century engravings, which dance around the
pages while the rhymes whirl in concert, bubble out of cartoon balloons, or soberly
sit on the bottom of the page: "Ladies and gentlemen, take my advice, pull down
your pants and slide on the ice." While there's plenty happening on each double
spread, the design is controlled through lots of white space and a willingness to let
the pictures wander off the edges of the page. The rhymes are divided into three
sections (Out Loud, Right Now; Mama Said It and I Say It Too; and Echoes from
Long Ago) that roughly indicate the age of the rhymes, but they all share a lively
patter and judicious sprinkling of mildly naughty bits that will make today's kids
feel at home. Unfortunately, there are no notes, but a reading list and indexes of
rhyme-types and first lines are useful. RS
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH, ad. 
The First Strawberries: A Cherokee Story; illus. by Anna
Vojtech. 
Dial, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1332-0 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1331-2 
$13.99 
R 
4-7 yrs.
In a folktale especially well chosen for its accessibility to younger listeners, the first
man and woman ("made at the same time so that neither would be lonesome") live
happily until their first quarrel. He is angry to find her picking flowers instead of
preparing food; she walks away from his hurtful words. In response to the man's
vain attempts to overtake her, the sun intervenes with four creations to slow her
down-raspberries, blueberries, blackberries, and strawberries-the last, success-
ful. "'Forgive me for my hard words,' he said to her. And she answered him by
sharing the sweetness of the strawberries." The moral here is so delectable ("to
remember that friendship and respect are as sweet as the taste of ripe, red berries")
and so richly couched in simple story terms that those first learning to resolve their
differences will glean as much from it as their elders who have, theoretically, learned
the lesson. Equally palatable are Vojtech's paintings, also kept simple in scale,
composition, and coloration so that listeners in a group can see and absorb the
idyllic mountain landscapes emphasized as context for the story. It's too bad Bruchac
doesn't name the elderly Cherokee friend whom he mentions as having passed the
story to him many years ago, but his own telling is skillfully rendered. BH
CHANDRA, 
DEBORAH 
Rich Lizard and Other Poems; illus. by Leslie
Bowman. 
Farrar, 1993 
35p
ISBN 0-374-32447-6 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 5-7
The author of a previous collection, Balloons, offers twenty-four more poems that
have, overall, a silky tone in image and verbal play: "Spring/ took the/ icy/ hands
of Winter/ in her own,/ and stuck them/ in green gloves." From quick-sketch
personification to page-long lyrical narrations ("Fox," "Outside Overnight," etc.),
Chandra assembles poetic subjects primarily from nature. A few of these sound
notes of adult experience ("The Argument," for instance) or childhood nostalgia
("Moon Baby," "My Tooth"), but on the whole both the metered and free verse
have a naive appeal with flashes of tonal surprise (a spider's "bedding, soft,/ Be-
comes a sticky/ Tablecloth") and, sometimes, of music ("The River Speaks").
Bowman's scratchboard drawings are well composed; if they're occasionally on the
heavy side of dark, that serves to anchor the occasional transparency of Chandra's
verse. BH
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 7
CREW, GARY 
Strange Objects. Simon, 1993 
216p
ISBN 0-671-79759-X 
$14.00 
M 
Gr. 7-10
While on a school camping trip on the western Australian coast, sixteen-year-old,
portentously named Steven Messenger finds a mummified hand wearing a ring
that casts him into an eerie confluence of past and present, seeking the fate of the
young girl who wore the ring centuries ago. The story is told through a portfolio
of journal entries and newspaper clippings that Steven, who has disappeared with
the ring, sent to a sympathetic archaeologist working on the mystery of the re-
mains. There are a number of intriguing elements, including the true-life seven-
teenth-century shipwreck of the Batavia, aboriginal secrets, and the mystical powers
of the ring, that provide the book with an alluring potency, but there's too much
that's just plain confusing and too many questions that go unanswered. While
readers do find out the identity of the original ring-wearer, for example, we don't
know why her hand was amputated or who did it. Steven has a ghostly doppelg'inger
he sees when he wears the ring, and while we seem meant to understand that this
is Steven's idealized self, it seems an unnecessarily confusing motif, as is the closing
revelation that the father whom Steven periodically mentions is in fact specula-
tion. The pervasive ambiguities of story and theme fail in the end to justify their
own mysteries. RS
DECLEMENTS, BARTHE 
The Pickle Song. Viking, 1993 
[160p]
ISBN 0-670-85101-9 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Paula is curious about the new girl, Sukey, in her sixth grade class, but Sukey
initially rebuffs her attempts at friendship-embarrassed, Paula thinks, because
Sukey and her mother live in a car. Meanwhile, Paula has problems of her own:
her (loving) father is behind on his child support payments, and her nagging (though
surprisingly resourceful) grandmother has moved in, so Paula has to share a room
with her mother. Paula and Sukey scratch through their problems in a gradual,
realistic way, and while there's a satisfying pair of happy endings, these reflect
small gains rather than impossible hopes. DeClements' writing is smoother than
usual here, and she maintains her direct empathy for middle-graders' concerns.
Paula's redecoration of the basement for her own bedroom adds a light touch, and
there's a good balance of problem-solving, with both kids and adults doing their
shares. RS
DEUKER, CARL 
Heart ofa Champion. Joy Street, 1993 
199p
ISBN 0-316-18166-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Seventeen-year-old Seth Barham's father has been dead for ten years, and this is
Seth's story about a friendship that, during junior high and high school, shaped his
life in lieu of a father's influence. He meets Jimmy Winter during a game of
baseball and becomes just as passionate, though never as gifted, a player. The plot
parallels Jimmy's experience, dominated by an overbearing, alcoholic, unreliable
father, with Seth's, as the latter makes choices to either follow or pull away from
Jimmy in matters of sports, drinking, and-an ultimately tragic combination for
Jimmy--driving. This is a slower book than Deuker's stunning first novel, On the
Devil's Court(BCCB 12/88), but baseball is a slower game than basketball, and the
extensively detailed game play will strike a familiar rhythm for fans. The relation-
ship between the two boys is richly developed, rendering almost unnecessary the
8 
* 
THE BULLETIN
more predictable and even didactic action of Jimmy's following his father's self-
destructive pattern, which is forecast fairly early by several scenes. What's unex-
pected and most realistic about the novel is its exploration of the balance between
talent and discipline, the conflict of working within limitations, and the competi-
tive ambition that drives kids to train so hard in the sports they love. BH
DHONDY, FARRUKH 
Black Swan. Houghton, 1993 
[208p]
ISBN 0-395-66076-9
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Rose is a London teenager of mixed race who fills in at work for her hospitalized
mother. Her mother's employer, old Mr. Bernier, is of mysterious, possibly West
Indian origin; he seizes on intelligent young Rose as an assistant in his big project,
which involves copying the manuscript of an Elizabethan journal. The manu-
script, the journal of one Simon Forman, becomes a book within a book. It tells of
Forman's involvement with political intrigue and acquaintanceship with Christo-
pher Marlowe and Marlowe's lover, the black ex-slave Lazarus. According to
Forman, who made a speciality of staging deaths, both Marlowe and Lazarus (the
latter created by Dhondy and cast as the dark lover of the sonnets) wrote the plays
performed under the name of the useless actor William Shakespeare after their
own supposed deaths. The intrigue transpiring in the journal begins to parallel
that in Rose's life when Mr. B's enemies (he was a political leader on his native
Caribbean island, whose regime wants him for their own purposes) start hunting
down the old man and the girl, who eventually begins to doubt the truth of many
of his claims. The parallels are interestingly worked out and the fictional journal
of Forman has brilliance in conception and execution, but the layering becomes
very confusing, as does Mr. B's story. It's still a highly original, if difficult, story
that kids with historical tastes may enjoy. DS
DupRit, RICK, ad. 
Agassu: Legend of the Leopard King; ad. and illus. by Rick
Duprd. 
Carolrhoda, 1993 
4 0p
ISBN 0-87614-764-3 
$14.21 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
An introduction identifies this East African folktale as a hwenoho, a story based on
real events. It has all the earmarks of an epic, with the hero Agassu starting life as
a slave boy who is forced to dive underwater to clear the fishing nets and who is
later chained to the rowers' bench. But the sea whispers the secret of his noble
parentage and frees him with a windstorm to return triumphantly as king of his
village. It's hard to evaluate the adaptation, since no sources are cited, but Dupr6's
art shows clearly didactic intentions, as nine African-American leaders are worked
into the background of the idealized paintings. Unfortunately, their faces (espe-
cially Ida B. Wells') are so darkly camouflaged as to be almost indiscernible, even
in the appended identifying closeups. The figure drawing is awkward, too, though
the textures and color work give the illustrations strength. Both the setting and
the story are unusual enough to justify inclusion in a unit on African history or
African-American antecedents. BH
ENGEL, DIANA 
Fishing; written and illus. by Diana Engel. 
Macmillan,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-02-733463-5 
$14.95 
R 
4 -7 yrs
In a feat of understated simplicity, Engel manages to catch several fish with one
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 9
cast in this story about a grandfather-child relationship, a move that means major
readjustment for an African-American single-parent/single-child family, and a new
friendship that grows from old ties. Loretta can hardly bear to leave Grandpa
behind when her mother finds "a new job, a good one ... 
far away, up north."
The first few days of school confirm her fears, as classmates talk and laugh to-
gether, leaving her to walk home every day by herself. But Loretta has learned a
few things from her hours of fishing with Grandpa; when she ties an old piece of
string onto a paperclip hook, throws it over the hedge, and sits quietly waiting, she
gets a tug on the line ("'What are you doin'?' asked the girl. 'Can I do it with
you?"). In the words of Grandpa, "You caught a beaut!... A real beaut!" Like the
text, the pictures keep to clear images, earthtone colors, and compositions that dip
into the imagination as gently as a boat rocks on quiet water-at night Loretta's
dream turns her bed into a boat, and during the day her fantasy transforms a bench
into the same humble wooden craft. The whole sequence of past times dissolving
into present without disappearing will lead listeners to a genuinely hopeful conclu-
sion resolving the conflict inherent in separations and new starts. BH
FISHER, LEONARD EVERETT 
Gutenberg; written and illus. by Leonard Everett
Fisher. 
Macmillan, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-02-735238-2 
$14.95 
Ad Gr. 3-6
Fisher's brooding black-and-white acrylic paintings are well suited to the mysteri-
ous Gutenberg, whose date of birth is uncertain and whose portrait was never
made in his lifetime. What we do know is his persistence in experimenting with
metal typecasting and printing presses, and it's a shame that there's no specific
explanation here, with some rudimentary diagram, of the process he perfected.
Fisher does describe the vicissitudes of Gutenberg's career, which involved finan-
cial losses, antagonistic partnerships, and extended law suits, as well as acknowl-
edged success in producing Ars Grammatica, the Mazarin Bible, and the Catholicon.
Abbreviating the subject's complexities occasionally makes for a cryptic text (given
Gutenberg's secretive exclusion of his associates, for instance, there seem to be
sinister overtones to the fact that "Riffe and Heilmann disappeared soon after-
ward"). However, the drama of Gutenberg's achievement and Fisher's depiction
of it make an impressive picture book for independent readers. BH
Fox, PAULA 
Western Wind. Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08652-6 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06802-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 5-7
Eleven-year-old Elizabeth Benedict believes the reason she's being sent to spend
August with her grandmother in a primitive Maine island cottage is the newly
born brother on whom her parents lavish attention. Paula Fox uses an isolated
situation, as she has done before, to delve into a child's deepening awareness-
here, of her grandmother's value as a person, a painter, and an elder facing death
with dignity. Through interactions stripped bare by a simplified life devoid of
electronic distractions or electric conveniences, the two characters replace their
formal connection with an affectionate respect that contrasts ironically with the
one other family on the island, who comprise an odd mix of overprotection and
underestimation of each other. Elizabeth, her grandmother, and the vulnerable
young island boy whom Elizabeth rescues in more ways than one, are fine portray-
10 
* THE BULLETIN
als of individualistic independence at different stages of a life spectrum. Always
spare, Fox's style especially suits this taut narrative, into which she slips similes
that are frequent but consciously plain to suit the setting: a bay is "like a tray
holding bits of land on its metal-blue surface"; "the family is really like a small
country"; "birds swooped and rose like torn strips of paper"; Elizabeth sees "a
yellow bar of sunshine like the light at the bottom of a closed door" or stifles "a
laugh that was rising in her throat like a bubble in a bottle" or watches interest
fading from someone's face "like light dimming in a room." These are primarily
visual images-almost cubist like some of Gran's paintings-but they become less
decorative than inherent to plot and pace, as when Elizabeth realizes that the cot-
tage room seems "beautiful, almost like a person she had begun to love" or when
the supporting posts in the same room, which "had suggested trees or columns to
Elizabeth, now looked like the stout wooden bars of a cage" around the island
family fearful of having lost their little boy. It's seductive to start quoting a good
writer, but perhaps Fox summarizes her own book best: "Make it up," orders the
boy in soliciting Elizabeth to play his imaginative game. "You just need a little bit
of a thing to start a story. Pretty soon, there's everything!" BH
GIBBONS, GAIL 
Pirates; written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. 
Little, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-30975-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Pirates are a tempting lure for beginning yet reluctant readers, and Gibbons pro-
vides many juicy details about shipboard battles, buried treasure, and plank-walk-
ing. Although Gibbons begins the book with a present-tense definition-"Pirates
are robbers of the high seas"-her discussion ends with the eighteenth century,
with no mention of contemporary piracy. The historical outline is easy to read
and follow, and while the ink-and-watercolor illustrations are a little too cheerfully
cartooned for the drama, they have a dioramic plainness that accords well with the
simple text. Some points are confusing: a picture of a minimally featured treasure
map with a big red block labelled "treasure here" is captioned "Some maps were
very elaborate. The pirates wanted their treasure well hidden!" and to say that "not
all pirates were bad. Some were hired by kings and queens of great countries to rob
the ships of their enemies" certainly begs the meaning of the word bad. Still, there
are too few books for the beginning reader that tackle such rough-and-ready top-
ics, and the book will have appeal for those bored with more sedate offerings. RS
GOROG, JUDITH 
Please Do Not Touch. 
Scholastic, 1993 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-590-46682-8 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Judith Gorog offers a new collection of a dozen of her characteristically creepy
tales, with the linking idea of a futuristic museum where touching the exhibits
sends you into the worlds of the stories. Those worlds include a good old haunted
house ("The House on the Hill"), a shape-shifting, presumably Native American,
brother-in-law ("My Elder Sister") and a young DJ whose popularity stems from
his unique stream-of-consciousness style ("Radio Bimbos"). The author incorpo-
rates bits of old tales ("Henry and Vilma," in fact, is a popular joke turned story) in
a way that gives these pieces a haunting familiarity, and she wisely downplays
gimmickry in favor of tellability. The framing device is a little contrived, but the
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 
11
writing is lively and spooky enough to pleasingly alarm younger aficionados of
eerie stories. DS
HANDLER, ANDREW 
Young People Speak: Surviving the Holocaust in Hungary;
comp. and ed. by Andrew Handler and Susan V. Meschel. 
Watts,
1993 
16 0p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-531-11044-3 
$13.40 
R 
Gr. 6-9
An anthology of brief memoirs from eleven Jews who survived, as children, the
Nazi occupation of Hungary, this provides valuable primary source material even
though the accounts themselves are unevenly written. The best are shaped like
short stories-Andrd Stein's concluding narrative about his grandmother's steal-
ing his birthday candy and allowing the blame to fall on a servant, who subse-
quently turns them over to the police, reads like a stunningly ironic piece of fiction.
Others are more meandering, though all contain specific details of recollection
that render the situations immediate and poignantly childlike. Peter 0. Milch
remembers an SS guard stationed with a machine gun outside the house that he
and his family had previously occupied: "If he shoots me, my mother will kill me,
I thought." One of the editors, Susan V. Meschel, describes a game the children
play: "What are you going to do with Hitler when the war is over? . . . My
prizewinning suggestion was that we should inject spinach under Hitler's skin."
Although bombs are raining down around them, her main concern is that she
won't be able to collect her award, a lick of jam. "It still did not occur to me that
we could possibly die." Luck and nerve seem to be the ingredients most consistent
in these children's survival. Though none went to concentration camps, all lost
family, friends, and homes. While this has a dull format and is more specialized
than titles such as David Adler's We Remember the Holocaust (BCCB 1/90), it will
add to any study of anti-Semitism or World War II. BH
HARRISON, TED 
0 Canada; written and illus. by Ted Harrison. 
Ticknor,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-395-66075-0 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
This picture-book (previously published in Canada) describes, page by page and
province by province, that northern country. Each province or territory gets an
oversized page of text paired with a single tableau representing it. The spread on
New Brunswick, for instance, mentions its settlement, large forest, thoroughbred
horses, and the Bay of Fundy, which is "so long and narrow that the force of the
ocean creates tides fifty-two feet high, or as tall as a five-story building, that rush in
as fast as a person could walk"; the illustration shows a stylized thunderstorm over
the bay as two horses and a lighthouse look on. Harrison has a knack for incorpo-
rating interesting detail into the simple text, and he makes a point of including the
big and more homogeneous cities as well as the regionally diverse countryside.
The paintings, acrylic on canvas, aren't up to the task of depicting the essence of
an entire province, but they're eerily appealing with their muted non-naturalistic
colors (the horses in the New Brunswick illustration are lavender and pink) and
avoidance of black, in the thick borders, in favor of sea- and sky-blue; the total
effect is both restrained and vivid, suggesting the aurora borealis throughout. An
evocative and effective flying visit, the book also offers an easy-viewing map of the
country and the words and music for "O Canada." DS
12 
* 
THE BULLETIN
HODGES, MARGARET, ad. 
OfSwords and Sorcerers: The Adventures ofKingArthur
and His Knights; ad. by Margaret Hodges and Margery Evernden; illus. by David
Frampton. 
Scribner's, 1993 
96 p
ISBN 0-684-19437-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
8-11 yrs
This slim collection of King Arthur tales has been adapted by storytellers whose
narrative style reflects their experience. Each chapter begins with its own descrip-
tive introduction: "The month of May came, the loveliest month in the year. ...
And Queen Guinevere rode with ten knights and ten ladies to gather May flowers
in the fields and woods." Each chapter is also one entire story that could either
stand alone or serve as an episode within a storytelling series. Unfortunately, in an
effort to clean up the Arthur legend for a young audience, the adaptors have in-
fringed on the integrity of the tales. In this version, Arthur is not conceived out of
wedlock, he does not have sex with his half-sister, he does not father an illegitimate
son, and Lancelot doesn't even sleep with Guinevere. As a result of these omis-
sions, much of the characters' motivation is gone. For example Arthur throws his
beloved Lancelot out of Camelot because "Sir Gawain was sorely grieved by the
deaths of his brothers, and told the king that Lancelot was a traitor, so that Arthur
banished Lancelot from the court." Not likely. On the other hand, the book
flows from one tale to another with a smoothness not usually found in the Arthur
stories. The occasional black-and-white illustrations are done in the style of medi-
eval woodcuts. For a more passionate version, see Perham's collection, reviewed
below. KJ
JAMES, J. ALISON 
Runa. Atheneum, 1993 
138p
ISBN 0-689-31708-5 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Visiting her Danish grandfather on the verge of her thirteenth birthday, Runa
soon discovers that she is the latest link in a chain of sacrifices that goes back to the
death of Baldur. Centuries ago, an ancestress of Runa's had disrupted a Midsum-
mer sacrifice to the Norse god when she refused to allow the priests to immolate
her beloved horse and offered them her thirteen-year-old daughter instead. Since
then, any girl in the family born on Midsummer Day dies when her thirteenth
birthday comes, a fate Runa is understandably reluctant to share. With echoes of
The Owl Service (not to mention Gdtterdimmerung), the mythic core of the novel
is fierce and dark, but the writing, while smooth, doesn't match the material. Runa,
her grandfather, and her friends treat Runa's impending death as an interesting
puzzle to be solved, making their plans for the Midsummer celebration all the
while. After stacking the wood for the bonfire, discussing the sticky fact that "a
sacrifice does not work unless it is willing," and decorating the midsummer pole,
everybody troops inside for some coffee: "When we were all settled in the living
room, Rhianon took a sip and said 'I've been thinking about Runa's problem.'"
The lightweight, though suspenseful, treatment of Runa's "problem" undermines
the power of the myth, and the solution, where Runa is saved but a beautiful horse
is burned to death, is too strong for the prose. Many fantasy novels could use some
apt pruning, but this one is weakened instead by too little development. RS
KARR, KATHLEEN 
Gideon and the Mummy Professor. Farrar, 1993 
137p
ISBN 0-374-32563-4 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-8
This is one of those great reads that combines picaresque adventure, humorous
incident, quirky characters, eerie elements, and a style in charge of it all. Karr has
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 
13
managed to re-create a mid-nineteenth-century southern journey among con art-
ists possessed of an Egyptian mummy whose wrappings periodically shed invalu-
able jewels. Twelve-year-old Gideon and his father have come to the end of their
resources when George (the mummy) provides them with an emerald scarab that
promises to take care of their future-in a rather too terminal sense, it turns out.
Gideon, raised in Egypt when his father was in the diplomatic service, eventually
makes peace with George and breaks with his father, but meanwhile there's a rival
pursuing them to make a grab for the jewels, a voodoo queen interceding, and a
top-flight New Orleans villain who tries to take everything and loses to the alliga-
tors. It's all exaggerated spoof, but the credibility is considerably boosted by the
author's flair for dialogue and well-turned dramatic scenes; she never tells where
she can show. Kathleen Karr is to the Mississippi what Leon Garfield is to Lon-
don. Kids who liked Richard Peck's The Ghost Belonged To Me (BCCB 7/75) will
wait with bated breath to see how Gideon survives and thrives. BH
KELso, RICHARD 
Walking for Freedom: The Montgomery Bus Boycott; illus. by
Michael Newton. 
Raintree/Steck-Vaughn, 1993 
52p 
(Stories of America)
ISBN 0-8114-72818-3 
$13.98 
R Gr. 2-5
There have been any number of juvenile biographies extolling the roles of Rosa
Parks and Martin Luther King in the Montgomery bus boycott of 1956, but this
historical overview for young readers is distinguished by its emphasis on the com-
munity action that carried the movement toward a confrontation and its resolu-
tion. Beginning with Jo Ann Robinson's 1949-50 action through the Women's
Political Council to organize others in response to unfair treatment on city buses,
the easy-to-read account shows how other leaders such as railroad porter E. D.
Nixon put themselves on the line, along with thousands of ordinary citizens in
danger of losing their jobs and even possibly their lives, to honor the boycott. The
style is factual and involving, highlighting the inherent drama of the situation
without exaggerating it. Notes elaborate on a number of points of information,
and painstaking pencil drawings highlight ten of the scenes in this strong title for
U.S. history students who read well at a younger age or reluctantly at an older age.
BH
KEHOE, MICHAEL 
A Book Takes Root: The Making ofa Picture Book; written and
illus. with photographs by Michael Kehoe. 
Carolrhoda, 1993 
4 8p
ISBN 0-87614-756-2 
$16.13 
R* Gr. 3-6
Starting with an author's development of an idea into a story-Elizabeth Thomas'
Green Beans (reviewed in BCCB 2/93)-Kehoe documents the publication of a
picture book through various stages of manuscript editing, illustration and design,
typesetting and keylining, printing, and binding. Well-reproduced color photo-
graphs on every page are especially helpful in clarifying technical processes, which,
as they're depicted here, feature importantly in making this the most up-to-date
coverage of bookmaking available to children. (Aliki's How a Book Is Made, BCCB
11/86, for younger children is lots of fun but not as consistently explained;
Greenfeld's Books: From Writer to Reader, 4/77, for older readers is more intricate
and less fully illustrated.) Kehoe's straightforward approach will contribute solidly
to preparation for an author or illustrator's visit, for a field trip to a printing press,
or for a language arts unit in which students make their own books. And of course
his photodocumentary makes a great companion to Green Beans itself, a first col-
14 
* THE BULLETIN
laboration by an author/artist team deserving the boost to more classroom or fam-
ily read-aloud sessions. Teachers of children's literature will appreciate A Book
Takes Rootdually as a description of the publishing process and an example of first-
class juvenile nonfiction. BH
KERR, M. E. 
Linger. HarperCollins, 1993 
214 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022882-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022879-2 
$15.00 
R Gr. 7-12
Linger is more than a restaurant, it's a benevolent fiefdom run by the Dunlinger
family, which holds the small town of Berryville, particularly Gary's family, en-
thralled: "Dad thought the Boss hung the moon, and Mom talked about the
Dunlingers the way the English rave about The Royal Family." Gary's older brother
Bobby had a mysterious falling-out with Dunlinger, but now Bobby's fighting in
the Gulf, and Linger, awash with flags and yellow ribbons, has his photo on promi-
nent display, with big plans for a celebration when Bobby comes marching home.
As ever, Kerr has a sharp eye on the banalities that disguise hypocrisy and corrup-
tion, if not evil, as when Dunlinger admonishes his staff never to make an ethnic
joke and then covertly shuts down a competing Mexican restaurant with a cat-
cooking rumor: "Mafiana Meow." Or was it Bobby who started the story, and
why did he suddenly sign up for the Army? While there's plenty of Desert Storm
debate reported here (with caustic glances at the sloganeering of both sides), the
story is grounded in Gary's gofering work at Linger and his crush on the boss'
daughter Lynn, herself the recipient of hopefully amorous letters from Bobby.
The worlds of home and war are joined when Bobby comes back to a hero's wel-
come that is soon worn out. We've seen these characters before in Kerr's work, but
they're looking at something new, and Dunlinger makes a bluff, extroverted, in-
triguing companion to the more coolly sinister Gentlehands. RS
KETTEMAN, HELEN 
The Year of No More Corn; illus. by Robert Andrew
Parker. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08550-3 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05950-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 4-8 yrs
Parker has aptly chosen to tone Ketteman's sunny tall tale with sprightly yellows
from the very first page, where a young boy turns to his grandfather for comfort
and gets a story. It's the year 1928, says Old Grandpa: rain follows the corn
planting so hard that half the people in Indiana float on over to Ohio; the high
winds following the next planting blow a good many other people to Illinois and
take the kernels right out to sea to feed the fish; a heat wave pops the third corn
planting till the fields look covered with snow; the crows eat the fourth till they're
too fat to fly. With the seed all gone, Grandpa whittles an ear of corn (and here
Parker's bright yellow turns wood-tan) that tastes so good he plants it and gets
corn trees with bushels hanging from every branch. Ketteman has a good ear for
the echoes of oral phrase. The storytelling is as smooth and straightfacedly funny
as the pen-and-wash art, which cleverly depicts chickens "swimming just to keep
from being baked alive" by a yolk-shaped sun that's strategically place behind the
words too hot ("their eggs came out hardboiled"). Parker's loose drawing has al-
ways lent itself to rustic scenes, where his lines look like dark straw artistically
strewn to create figures on a landscape. It's a natural collaboration that kids will
take to like crows to corn kernels. BH
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 
15
KLAUSE, ANNETTE CURTIS 
Alien Secrets. 
Delacorte, 1993 
[2 4 0p]
ISBN 0-385-30928-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
It's Murder on the Orient Express, space style, as rebellious young Puck, expelled
from boarding school, is hyperspacing from Earth to distant Shoon to join her
scientist parents. With a host of strange and suspicious types on the ship, it soon
becomes apparent that the gentle Hushwa 'shoonyashanyaha, the only alien aboard,
is the center of plots and counterplots to relieve him of a precious relic of his
people, only recently freed from bondage to the evil, not-quite-vanquished, Grakks.
There's lots of action, with cliff-hanging chapter-endings ("'Oh, no!' he gasped."),
but the characterization is stock and superficial, as is the reliance on a jumble of
devices that might be fun for neophyte fans but that will seem too familiar to
seasoned SF readers. Still, Puck is a plucky heroine (and other prominent female
characters, both good and evil, give the book a feminist slant), and her friendship
with the alien gives some heart to the space opera. RS
KLINE, SUZY 
Song Lee in Room 2B; illus. by Frank Remkiewicz. 
Viking,
1993 
[6 4 p]
ISBN 0-670-84772-0 
$10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
Harry (see Horrible Harry and the Green Slime, BCCB 5/89) and Doug's class-
mate Song Lee is friendly and fun, but awfully shy: "Whenever the class had a
play, Song Lee had a silent part like a dead fish or Little Miss Muffet." She gets
over it in a particularly imaginative way and has a few other mild adventures,
either as protagonist or eager looker-on, before Kline's easy chapter book is over.
The author has her second-grade weltschmerz down pat; like others in the series,
this would make a good readaloud/alone followup to Miriam Cohen's First Grade
books. Song Lee's ethnicity is casually relevant, except in her less-than-casual yel-
low-approaching-jaundice color on the cover and a forced metaphor on the last
page: "Song Lee's smile was as big as Texas. Or should I say, Korea?" RS
LANDAU, ELAINE 
Sexual Harassment. Walker, 1993 
[108p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8266-3 
$13.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8265-6 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
In this compact and readable treatment of the issue, Landau uses anecdotes and
legal definitions to describe the problem, addresses the debate surrounding the
Clarence Thomas hearings (she apparently supports Anita Hill), and discusses sexual
harassment that might occur at schools-in other words, to the young reader-
and its effects. The book bobbles occasionally-Landau seems to find character
witnesses proof for Anita Hill and not Clarence Thomas, she relies overmuch on
the tabloid adjective "unsavory" in what is otherwise a politically and socially solid
treatment, and her advice sometimes seems confusing (the chapter describing what
you can do to avoid sexual harassment follows a section entitled "Become One of
the Boys" with one called "Avoid Being Inappropriately Friendly"). Overall, how-
ever, the book is sufficiently filled with fact and personal narrative to make it a
convincing work on the subject. Several appendices (on sexual harassment legisla-
tion, EEOC offices, and other organizations concerned with sexual harassment),
further sources (both print and video), endnotes, and an index will be included.
DS
16 
* THE BULLETIN
MACBRIDE, ROGER LEA 
Little House on Rocky Ridge; illus. by David
Gilleece. 
HarperCollins, 1993 
353p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020843-0 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020842-2 
$14.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-440478-1 
$3.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
MacBride carries on the tradition of the Little House books in this first of three
projected books about Laura and Almanzo Wilder's daughter, Rose. The author
used his and others' memories of "Gramma" Rose, her papers, and other historical
sources to research the book. He imitates Wilder's famous writing style faithfully,
and the result is a story that fits successfully into the "Laura" series. The book
covers the period when grown-up Laura and Almanzo decide to leave drought-
stricken Dakota for the promise of a better life in Missouri (The Land of the Big
Red Apple). Seven-year-old Rose is thrilled to travel by covered wagon with the
Cooley family and her two good friends, Paul and George. Each chapter's event is
interesting, whether it is dramatic (crossing the Missouri River, driving through
Topeka, losing a $100 bill) or mild (singing and telling stories in the wagon, spend-
ing Sunday in camp, Paul's refusal to forgive Rose after she gets him in trouble
with his father). When the Wilder family reaches Missouri, finds and settles into
their new farm, and meets their neighbors, the reader is happily reminded of the
original Little House series. KJ
McKINLEY, ROBIN 
Deerskin Ace, 1993 
309p
ISBN 0-441-14226-5 
$17.95 
SpR Gr. 10up
The author of Beauty (BCCB 12/78) has turned to the darker side of fairy tales
here with an adult fantasy based on Perrault's "Donkeyskin," which, like many
Cinderella variants, has a father lusting for his own daughter when his wife the
queen dies after making him promise to marry no one more beautiful than she.
Whereas a fairy godmother figure traditionally intervenes to direct the princess'
escape, however, McKinley's novel portrays the king brutally raping his daughter
and leaving her beaten nearly to death. It is her fleethound that awakens her and
urges her into the night of a long journey toward healing, though the magic
Moonwoman does intervene when she nearly dies again in miscarrying her father's
child. Outside of several violent scenes, the smoothly rhythmic narrative is vintage
McKinley, with a superhumanly resourceful heroine and an adventure that is grip-
ping despite a foregone conclusion that seems all the more suspenseful because the
reader knows it long before the main character does but must wait to find out
when she's going to find out. Innocently enough, this is also a dog story, for the
princess Lissar's canine companion Ash, along with the puppies that Princess Lissar
(in disguise) raises for a neighboring prince, lead to her emotional as well as physi-
cal salvation. In fact, without the relatively brief first and last sections, the book
would fall solidly into the realm of children's fiction, but its incest theme develops
in realistic detail; since McKinley is a Newbery Award winner and fantasy a cross-
over genre with a broad age range of fans, librarians should be aware that Deerskin
is for older rather than younger readers. BH
MACIACHLAN, PATRICIA 
Baby. 
Delacorte, 1993 
[112p]
ISBN 0-385-31133-8 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
A poignant tale of doubles, this first-person narrative reveals twelve-year-old Larkin's
grief over the recent death of her newborn brother and her ambivalence toward
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 17
Sophie, a toddler abandoned on their Northeast coast island doorstep. Larkin's
parents, too hurt to name or discuss their loss with Larkin, open their hearts to
Sophie, even while knowing that Sophie's mother will return to claim her as soon
as possible. Larkin's consolation has been her grandmother, Byrd, and her friend,
Lalo, and the novel comprises a dance of healing in fragmentary scenes involving
one or several of these six characters. MacLachlan's careful forecasting and stylistic
control, reminiscent of nuances in Sarah Plain and Tall (BCCB 5/85), serve to
smooth these scenes together, including Sophie's occasional memory flashbacks
from ten years after the action, when Larkin brings her back to the island for
Byrd's funeral. Occasionally the lyrical writing strains for effect, as when Lalo says
something clever beyond his years, or word repetition emphasizes a development
already rendered fictionally obvious-the one-word sentence "Love," for instance,
concluding Larkin's emotional embrace with her father. Part of the plot, however,
is a search for words, so the philosophizing, especially on the part of a poetic school
librarian, underscores the story more than it interrupts it. What moves a reader
beyond the level of MacLachlan's more generalized messages are the sharp, persis-
tent details of daily living at which she excels; Papa's playing Rock-Paper-Scissors
with Sophie long before she can understand the game makes an unforgettable
motif. The dynamics of family are closely observed, and the situation itself is
sensitively imagined and imaginatively rendered. BH
MCMILLAN, BRUCE 
Penguins at Home: Gentoos ofAntarctica; written and illus.
with photographs by Bruce McMillan. 
Houghton, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-66560-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Last seen wandering about the school with a class' pet mouse (Mouse Views, BCCB
4/93), McMillan now goes down under, way down, to the shores of Antarctica
where he observes the breeding and feeding behavior of the Gentoo penguin. At
two and one-half feet tall, the Gentoos are the largest of the three brush-tail pen-
guin species that inhabit the Antarctic peninsula (the largest penguin species, the
Emperor, lives in more remote areas of the continent) and McMillan's photo-essay
follows them from their summer (November) breeding season through egg incu-
bation and chick-feeding to their annual molt and return to the sea for the winter.
The color photos are clear and close-up, sharply observant of behaviors such as
nest-building with rocks and the grooming that keeps feathers waterproof. Each
page contains a photo and one paragraph about a particular characteristic of anatomy
or behavior, and while the book is somewhat statically designed, it's easy to follow.
Appended material includes a map, a bibliography (with only one children's book),
and an index. RS
MARRIN, ALBERT 
Cowboys, Indians, and Gunfighters: The Story of the Cattle
Kingdom. Atheneum, 1993 
196 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31774-3 
$22.95 
R* 
Gr. 6-12
Picking his way carefully through legends and skeletons, Marrin creates a detailed
and vivid picture of the U.S.'s conversion of the Plains from grassy buffalo habitat
to cattle-feeding, money-making (and money-losing) property. He succeeds par-
ticularly well in linking famous episodes in history to a broader view of the time so
that the reader learns about barbed wire as well as Bat Masterson. Television and
movie fictions are differentiated from fact, but the facts of hardship, violence, and
18 
* THE BULLETIN
adventure are certainly dramatic enough to make compelling reading in their own
right. Chapters focus on subjects such as the introduction of the horse to America,
the longhorn cow, and life in the frontier towns. Colorful and comprehensive,
this has both appeal and worth for browsers (who will become readers) as well as
report-writers. Period photographs and art, including several color inserts, appear
on almost every attractively formatted page; an annotated bibliography, endnotes,
and an index are included. DS
MARSHALL, JAMES 
Rats on the Range and Other Stories. 
Dial, 1993 
80p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1385-1 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1384-3 
$12.99 
R Gr. 2-4
Eight short-short stories comprise a sequel to Marshall's Rats on the Roof(BCCB 6/
91) and offer a range of humor from satire to slapstick. Young readers will espe-
cially enjoy the story where Pig courts Miss Lola with dinner at a gourmet restau-
rant, only to find her enthusiasm outstripping his newfound manners: "Later
Miss Lola ordered three desserts and devoured them in no time flat. She had gobs
of whipped cream all over her snout and some in her ears." A few of the stories
trail off at the end, but the sly style ("There was no arguing with a six-foot rat")
keeps a reader moving from one to the next. The last selection is especially poi-
gnant in light of Jim Marshall's recent death: "Buzzard Watkins lived another
fifteen years. And he did not leave his money to the Society for Stray Cats after all.
He spent it all on himself. And what a fine time he had too." Kids will certainly
relate to that, and we certainly hope Jim had a fine time, too. BH
MAYHEW, JAMES 
Dare You!; written and illus. by James Mayhew. 
Clarion,
1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-65013-5 
$13.95 
R 4-7 yrs
In this gently adventurous picture book, first published in England, brother and
sister Harry and Susie go a-rovin' by the light of the moon. They can't sleep, so
they "play ghosts," and Harry dares Susie down the stairs and into the backyard,
where the sibs, thrilled and alarmed by the strange nighttime world, play hide and
seek until their worried parents fetch them back. This text is full of child-rhythms
with repetitions of "dare you" and internal rhyme that combine with brief evoca-
tions of moonlit wonder to make an appealing readaloud. The line and watercolor
illustrations show cozily shaped kids gliding through a world overlaid with purple
shadow and earthtoned hatching lit up occasionally (if not helpfully-check out
the scary shadow of the cat) by the yellow flashlight beam slicing through the
night. Mayhew deftly captures the alienness of familiar surroundings in the night,
while making it so alluring that young listeners will immediately plan their own
evening exodus. DS
MILs, LAUREN, ad. 
Tatterhood and the Hobgoblins: A Norwegian Folktale; ad.
and illus. by Lauren Mills. 
Little, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-316-57406-6 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
This Scandinavian cousin of "Kate Crackernuts" is adapted from Asbjornsen and
Moe's nineteenth-century collection and illustrated with delicate, full-page water-
color paintings in a style of a slightly later vintage-some pictures seem consciously
reflective of Arthur Rackham's work in the early twentieth century. It's a satisfy-
ingly feminist tale (Ethel Johnston Phelps' 1978 Feminist Press collection bore the
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 
19
same title), with the heroine willful from birth, wild in her dress and actions, brave
in venturing to restore her beloved twin sister's beauty (Isabella's head is trans-
formed into that of a calf), and determined to marry a prince who respects her
powers of choice. A lovely precursor to Marianna Mayer's Noble-Hearted Kate
(BCCB 3/91), this is a long story but one with romantic appeal for young inde-
pendent readers as well as for preschool/primary-grade listeners experienced in the
twists and turns of fairytale journeys. BH
MITCHELL, MARGAREE KING 
Uncle Jed's Barbershop; illus. by James
Ransome. 
Simon, 1993 
34 p
ISBN 0-671-67969-3 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Sarah Jean's great-uncle Jed is an itinerant barber, "the only black barber in the
county," and has big dreams of one day opening his own shop. He saves his
money, but then Sarah Jean gets sick, and the white doctors won't operate until
they receive three hundred dollars. Later, when Uncle Jed manages to save three
thousand dollars in the bank, the Depression hits and his money is gone once
again: "Talk about some hard times." Many current historical picture books,
both about African-Americans and whites, bathe in a nostalgia that subverts their
history, but this book is honest about how difficult life was for black sharecroppers
and their families in the segregated South, witness Sarah Jean's long wait in the
"colored" waiting room at the hospital, where the doctors saw all the white pa-
tients first. At the same time, the story isn't grim. What matters here is the
affection between Uncle Jed and the grand-niece with whom he shared his dream
deferred and finally won: Uncle Jed gets his own shop at the age of seventy-nine,
and Sarah Jean, now grown, is there for the celebration. Ransome's large-scale oil
paintings in warm colors with lots of cozy details, team with the plainspeaking
prose to create an enveloping family story. RS
MOODIE, FIONA, ad. 
The Boy and the Giants; ad. and illus. by Fiona
Moodie. 
Farrar, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-374-30927-2 
$15.00 
R 
4 -7 yrs.
In a "little-known folktale from the Scottish Hebrides" not otherwise identified, a
boy named Thomas shows his kindness to several creatures, each of whom repays
him when he quests for pearls to pay a ransom for his true love, Kate, kidnapped to
a giant's castle. The eagle flies him to a window ledge to find Kate, the otter carries
him underwater to the sea kingdom for pearls, and the salmon brings him a nettle
to break the spell of the monsters who have bewitched him there. It's an adven-
turesome story with suspense from beginning to end, and Moodie's deep-hued,
subtly patterned paintings show fidelity to that action, including a glint of sinister
surrealism in the scenes of the sea princess and her kin. When Disney's variations
on "The Little Mermaid" have finally run their course (or before that, if you're
lucky) with the kids in your library or classroom, you can recommend this for
greater depth. BH
ONYEFULU, IFEOMA 
A Is for Africa; written and illus. with photographs by Ifeoma
Onyefulu. 
Cobblehill, 1993 
[26 p]
ISBN 0-525-65147-0 
$14.99 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Like so many recent abecedaria, this one is less concerned with teaching little ones
their letters than its is with using the alphabet as a frame for another concept
20 
* THE BULLETIN
entirely; in this case, one designed to give readers a glimpse of daily life in Africa.
Like so many recent books about Africa, this one strays in treating the continent as
a single country and culture (although a preface states that all the pictures were
taken in Nigeria, the photographer's home country) without acknowledging the
differences among people and groups. Hmay be for mud Houses, for example, but
do all Africans live in mud houses? Still, the color photographs are sharp and well-
lit, and while the objects and concepts presented favor the traditional (Drums,
Feathers, Ornaments) over the modern, they are simply explained and provide
good material for a lapsitting visit. RS
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
Prairie Dogs; illus. with photographs by William
Mufioz. 
Clarion, 1993 
[6 4 p]
ISBN 0-395-56572-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Like all the best animal-study books, this concise summary takes an ecological
approach to its subject, explaining not only prairie dog biology and behavior, but
also how the animal is an integral part of the short- and mixed-grass prairie ecosys-
tems. Patent explains that far from competing with cattle for grass (a belief that
has been used to justify prairie dog extermination), for example, prairie dogs keep
grasses short, and short grasses are more nutritious for cattle than grass that has
grown longer. Children might see the following interdependence as less benign:
prairie dogs are the almost exclusive diet of the endangered black-footed ferret.
Although the explanation of mating patterns is a little confusing, what kids will
find most interesting here is the discussion of the prairie dog's elaborate social and
architectural system of towns, wards and coteries, as well as their "barking" behav-
ior to warn of predators (and in another example of interdependence, Patent sug-
gests that antelope may frequent prairie dog towns to take advantage of the early
warning system themselves). Patent and Mufioz achieve their own symbiosis of
words and color photos that show the frisky subjects as well as their predators and
partners; some beautiful shots of the prairie itself justify Patent's gentle reminder
that it's not just the fancy mountains and big-treed forests that need protection. A
bibliography of adult sources and an index are included. RS
PERHAM, MOLLY, ad. 
King Arthur and the Legends of Camelot; illus. by Julek
Heller. 
Viking, 1993 
176 p
ISBN 0-670-84990-1 
$22.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In this oversized, amply illustrated collection, Perham does a decent job of pre-
senting the unwieldy Arthurian legends within less than 200 pages, but on occa-
sion the complexity of the tales make for convoluted reading. In the chapter entitled
"The Grail Quest," for example, the story jumps awkwardly from Sir Galahad's
adventures in his enchanted ship to the other knights' quests and back to Sir Galahad
again. The illustrations alternate between handsome black-and-white pencil draw-
ings and full-page paintings. One striking picture is of baby Mordred, held up in
his witch-mother's arms as she dedicates him to the "Old Powers." This books'
size and design are reminiscent of Lister's The LegendofKingArthur (BCCB 9/90),
but neither the illustrations nor the text are as distinctive as those in the Lister
version. However, for collections of Arthurian folklore, Perham's generic adapta-
tion will serve as a supplement. No sources are listed. KJ
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 
21
PERKINS, MITALI 
The Sunita Experiment. Joy Street, 1993 
179p
ISBN 0-316-69943-8 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
For a change from the somewhat labored and reverential novels about ethnic pride
and assimilation we've been seeing, here's a perky, upbeat story about an eighth-
grade girl who feels her whole life is ruined when her grandparents come for a year-
long visit from India. Sunita's mother tells her she can't have her boyfriend Michael
over to visit, the sitar records make the house "sound like a mecca for aging hip-
pies," and Didu (Grandmother) always seems to bring up Sunita's wonderful cousins
in Calcutta and finds Sunita wanting in comparison. Worst of all, her parents
appear to have bought into the whole thing, with her mother taking a year's leave
from her teaching position at the local college and trading in her jeans for a saree.
Sunita's exasperation is real but funny, as she melodramatically imagines a future
without her beloved Michael: " There she was! Her flowing white habit could not
conceal her beauty." Serious moments add texture, as when LeAnn, a beautiful
rival for Michael's affection, makes fun of Sunita's grandfather's wearing his tradi-
tional dhoti: "Isn't he a bit too old for diapers?" The storytelling is sometimes
frenetic, but it has a breathless, impatient quality that suits the bubbling conflicts
and happy resolution. RS
PETERSEN, P. J. 
I WantAnswers anda Parachute; illus. by Anna DiVito. 
Simon,
1993 
104p
ISBN 0-671-86577-3 
$13.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Matt and his little brother Jason are flying to San Francisco to visit their father and
his new wife and stepdaughter for the first time. Matt narrates the story and tries
to keep Jason, first-grader and worrier supreme, calm and parent-pleasing, fearing
that Dad's remarriage means he's lost to his sons forever ("It was funny to think
Dad had a new family. That made Jason and me the old family. That sounded
bad. Like old shoes or an old car. Something you didn't need anymore"). Of
course, all knock themselves out trying to please each other, which leads to awk-
wardness, tension, and brief crisis when Jason, panicked at the thought of a whale-
watching cruise his father has lovingly prepared, temporarily disappears. Matt's
narration is lively and funny, with his quieter anxieties overshadowed by Jason's
fears in a way that will allow young readers to acknowledge the stress and worry of
the situation while still feeling mature compared to Jason. Seasoned with cheerful,
irreverently scrawled line drawings, this is snappy easy reading on an issue touch-
ing many young lives. DS
PFOUTZ, SALLY 
Missing Person. Viking, 1993 
177p
ISBN 0-670-84663-5 
$14.99 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Carrie's mother Martha left a note saying that she was going to the movies and
then disappeared. Well, there's your booktalk, but unfortunately the story falls
short of its sensational premise and arresting cover art. Did Martha run away?
Was she kidnapped, maybe by her troubled student Christopher, or by her creepy
jogging partner Evan? We're not giving away any secrets that the author doesn't
give away herself in telling you that Martha was kidnapped by Evan, something
Carrie should have figured out long before she does (when she sees Evan buying
sanitary napkins at the store, for instance, and only wonders when he got a girl-
friend). The characters' obtuseness in face of so much evidence rapidly becomes
22 
* THE BULLETIN
unbelievable, as in a scene where Carrie comes home to find a shirt covered with
bloody handprints on her bed and the police dismiss it as a prank. It's also unclear
what the timespan of the book is, so that the repeated efforts by Carrie's boyfriend
and father to get her to stop worrying about her mother and start enjoying senior
year seem callous at best and unconvincing at worst. There's some perceptive
characterization demonstrated in Carrie's next-door neighbor and her young son,
and conversations are often sharply tuned, but the storytelling is clumsy, a fatal
flaw in a genre that demands neatness. RS
RAPPAPORT, 
DOREEN 
Tinker vs. 
Des Moines: 
Student Rights on
Trial. HarperCollins, 1993 
154 p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025118-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025117-4 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-9
When twelve Des Moines, Iowa, teenagers wear black armbands to school as a sign
of mourning for the dead on both sides of the Vietnam conflict in December,
1965, several are suspended and sue the school officials on the grounds that their
First Amendment right to free speech has been violated. Their case attracts na-
tional attention and travels all the way to the Supreme Court, which supports their
position. In the same series format as The Lizzie Borden Trial (BCCB 1/93),
Rappaport unfolds the events with an amalgam of background description, feature
reportage, primary source quotation, ex post facto interviews, and questions to the
reader to stimulate thought and provoke discussion. This format occasionally
seems gimmicky, but the overall impact is one of involving readers in a you-are-
there approach that will help them apply the situation to their own lives. Rappaport
has bent over backward to represent all sides fairly, and in doing so has reduced an
enormous amount of information to an objective selection. Due process takes on
new meaning here as readers follow each step of briefs and oral arguments. The
section on the Supreme Court does not make it entirely clear that the photograph
of the justices is dated and that the political climate changes with each new court
configuration, a point particularly important to this trial. But that's more a quibble
than a criticism of a book that will have ongoing relevance as high school students
continue to be suspended for expressing defiant opinions in their school newspa-
pers and personal appearance. BH
REEDER, CAROLYN 
Moonshiner's Son. 
Macmillan, 1993 
208p
ISBN 0-02-775805-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The time is Prohibition, the place is Virginia's Blue Ridge Mountains, and the
person is twelve-year-old Tom Higgins, who's apprenticed, by hill-country tradi-
tion, to learn from his father the craft of making corn liquor and fruit brandy. The
complications are a new preacher and his family, dedicated to working against the
evils of alcohol; renewed law enforcement against moonshine; and a criminal ele-
ment introduced by the conflict between new laws and old ways. This is a tall
order for a brief work of historical fiction, and Reeder, who won the O'Dell Award
for Shades of Gray (BCCB 1/90) seems oft-tempted to introduce information via
conversation, as in Tom's description of erecting a brush tabernacle ("You put up
a wood frame an' cover the top an' sides with branches an' vines to keep off the
sun, an' you roll logs underneath it for folks to sit on"), or straight-out exposition
("How he hated the 1919 law that sent even more law officers into the hills to look
for stills to destroy and moonshiners to arrest"), or downright explanation of the
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 23
obvious ("It was a raid!"). The real heart of the novel is Tom's loss of his mother,
who has long since run away with his two younger sisters, and conflict with his
father, which comes to a head in an authentic scene of parental violence. This is
too suddenly and predictably followed, however, by a happy ending that under-
scores the purposive aspects of the fiction: "Since I ain't gonna be makin' the best
whiskey in these hills, I guess I'll just have to make the best chairs." Reeder often
seems to be following an outline here. When she lets down her guard-with a
memorable description of the mountains fading in twilight, for instance-the book
comes alive, and we feel the atmosphere that a folklorist character so busily ob-
serves throughout the book. BH
Ross, RAMON ROYAL 
Harper & Moon. Karl/Atheneum, 1993 
18 1 p
ISBN 0-689-31803-0 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Ross shows himself a master of style, pace, and point of view in his second novel,
which walks a fine line between a mystery and realistic story about the relationship
between an abused child and a younger boy from a loving family. The story opens
with the last time Harper sees Moon's itinerant parents-Harper is eight and Moon,
around thirteen, has just been viciously beaten by his alcoholic mother-and ex-
tends through both boys' friendship with an old mountaineer, Olinger, whom
Harper eventually finds dead in the snow near his cabin. Moon, after rescuing
Harper from the snowstorm, is accused of murder, and Harper must puzzle out
what has happened to, and between, his two friends. The close-up scenes of Harper's
search for the missing Olinger and, later, for the missing Moon (he's attempted
suicide), have sinister aspects that are carefully controlled to reveal the scariest part
of growing up: confronting the unknown. The only weak scenes involve a near-
caricature of two animal-tormenting villains and a sheriff who starts out too mean
and ends up too suddenly reformed. The World War II, Washington state setting
is subtly rendered via battle-front radio broadcasts that invade the natural beauty
of Harper's farm and nearby wilderness area and that trigger Harper's escalating
concern for Moon, who enlists in the army after Olinger's death. Themes emerge
naturally here. Throughout, Ross' focus is on deepening the characters, but be-
cause the action never lags, readers can relate to the story on many levels, from
eerie adventure to unforgettable portraiture. BH
SAY, ALLEN 
Grandfather's Journey; written and illus. by Allen Say. 
Houghton,
1993 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 0-395-57035-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
In this companion to Tree of Cranes (BCCB 9/91), Say evokes the bittersweet
dilemma of the immigrant who, happy in his new country, still longs to return to
the old-and once returned, wants once again to travel. The narrator's grandfa-
ther leaves Japan for America as a young man, and marvels at the magnificent
fields and cities and landscapes. He returns home to marry his sweetheart, brings
her to settle in California, and later, in middle-age, makes a last journey back with
his wife and teenaged daughter. War puts to an end his dream to see America one
last time, but many years later, the narrator himself moves to California and has a
daughter of his own. Both the joy in new vistas and the ache of remembrance are
captured in Say's large watercolor paintings, fresh perspectives on purple moun-
tains' majesty and amber waves of grain. (Japan looks pretty good, too.) As in
24 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Tree of Cranes, which is about the narrator's California-born mother, the paintings
are precise, cool portraits and views that fix recollections into images, and the book
as a whole is an album where both a picture of a family standing amidst war's
devastation and a romantic pastorale of courting lovers find their place in memory.
RS
Sfs, PETER 
A Small Tall Tale from the Far Far North; written and illus. by Peter
Sis. 
Knopf, 1993 
[3 2 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-94345-5 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-84345-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
A Czech legend named Jan Welzl, possibly a real person, possibly not, possibly a
liar, possibly not, reportedly left Central Europe at the end of the nineteenth cen-
tury and became a denizen of the far north (Alaska, Siberia, northern Canada). Sis
depicts Welzl's cross-continental journey to the Bering Sea, his near-disastrous
encounter with a strange magnetic mountain, and his rescue by friendly Eskimos,
with whom Welzl forms a bond. The art here is mystical and haunting, with Sis'
usual densely-layered stipple and line work illuminated by blinding, bestial snow
in the tundra or dim firelight in the Eskimo's whale-shaped, folktale-bounded
home. The story echoes the art's dreaminess with its gentle pace and wry humor
(in the final resolution, Welzl decides he will lead intruders to their doom on the
magnetic mountain so as to prevent them interfering with his beloved Eskimos).
A few of the spreads are a bit confusing (should one read right to left or up and
down in the cave-building sequence?), but the language of the text remains simple
while the pictures stretch the perceptual skills of young readers. It's an evocative
picture of northern adventure for youngsters with a taste for gentler tall tales. DS
SLEPIAN, JAN 
Back to Before. 
Philomel, 1993 
170p
ISBN 0-399-22011-9 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-7
"Lionel Erda, almost twelve and slightly crazy (as he would be the first to say)" is
also more than slightly angry; his ailing mother died right after they had a fight
and he stormed out of the house. Lionel's cousin Hilary is also angry; her alco-
holic father left the family, and Hilary can't find anyone to blame it on except her
mother, whose relationship with someone new infuriates Hilary. Then the two
cousins find a ring that time-travels them back a year, giving Lionel a chance to
relive the last three days before his mother's death and Hilary a chance to see her
father for the unreliable person he is (readers will realize this long before Hilary
does). While it's not a new premise, and the divorced-father syndrome seems
overdrawn, Slepian animates her characters with a natural immediacy and lets us
see inside them without getting too didactically therapeutic. There's also an air of
suspense here as the children try to figure out what has happened (they slipped
through time during a bicycle crash in a violent storm), whether they will simply
repeat events or alter them, and how they can get back to their old lives. The ring
device is better incorporated into the action (Hilary loses it and searches frantically
to find it) than into the fantasy (if the ring triggers their time travel, how can they
return after Lionel leaves it with his mother?), but there's a clever twist at the end,
which is left ambiguous when Hilary wakes up from a concussion and doesn't
remember any of the events Lionel does. Readers can decide for themselves what
really happened, but they will see, either way, that both characters have been freed
from the past by a new understanding of it. BH
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 
25
TEASDALE, SARA 
Christmas Carol; illus. by Dale Gottlieb. 
Holt, 1993 
26 p
ISBN 0-8050-2695-9 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
The text here is Sara Teasdale's rhythmic ballad-meter poem of the Nativity, wherein
everybody comes to serenade the baby but "little Jesus fell asleep/ Before the song
was done." Gottlieb's strong figures, thick black lines, and bright saturated colors
fill the pages, creating a cheerful celebration with a host of multicultural angels
whose goofy hair and simple features make them as child-appealing as the old
Peanuts gang. The words have that mixture of simplicity and mysteriousness (kids-
and maybe you-won't know what "chrysoprase" is, but how many of them have
a reference for frankincense and myrrh?) that makes for good Christmas caroling
whether to music or art, and the smooth scansion propels the story right along.
This is a respectful yet vigorously joyful Christmas book that would make a nice
companion to a more traditional version of the Nativity. DS
TRUVIZAS, EUGENE 
The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig; illus. by Helen
Oxenbury. 
McElderry, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-689-50569-8 
$15.95 
R* 4-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 3
UCHIDA, YOSHIKO 
The Bracelet; illus. by Joanna Yardley. 
Philomel, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22503-X 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"It was crazy, Emi thought. They loved America, but America didn't love them
back." When Emi and her family are taken away during World War II to a Japa-
nese-American internment camp, she brings a precious remembrance, a gold chain
bracelet from Laurie, Emi's best friend in the second grade. While settling in to
their barely converted horse stall at the Tanforan Racetracks, Emi loses the brace-
let but is assured by her mother that Laurie, like Emi's father who has been previ-
ously taken away, like all the possessions they left behind, will be carried in their
hearts to "take with us no matter where we are sent." While somewhat fragmen-
tary in its structure and conclusion, the book (previously published as a short story)
is a gentle, honest introduction to the treatment of the Japanese-Americans during
the war, and Yardley's delicate pencil-and-watercolor paintings are cleanly drawn
and richly colored, with scant pencil lines softly framing the sad scenes. A brief
afterword gives a context for the story, allowing parents or librarians to give his-
torical weight to a feeling all kids can share, the pain of missing a friend. RS
VOIGT, CYNTHIA 
The Wings ofa Falcon. Scholastic, 1993 
[480p]
ISBN 0-590-46712-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 9-12
Third and last in Voigt's Jackaroo series of medieval adventures (Jackaroo, BCCB
9/85; On Fortune's Wheel, BCCB 7/90), this lengthy entry takes Oriel and his
ever-loyal friend Griff from childhood enslavement on an island of lost boys run
by a sadistic master, to, eventually, a contest for the hand of the lady Merlis and
the lands of her father, the King of the Kingdom. While some of the individual
scenes here, such as the cruel life on the island and a later journey when the boys
are captives of the ferocious Wolfers, have drama, most of the book is static, pre-
ferring belabored conversation to action, and the style is unremittingly verbose.
"'I say no more,' the Innkeeper said. He said no more." 
(He's also no he, a
complication that doesn't do anything for the novel as a whole.) Because Voigt
26 
* 
THE BULLETIN
gives each scene and occurrence the same degree of overattention, the book be-
comes monotonous, and it's difficult to pick out the significant events from the
background. It's too bad, because Voigt casts a cool eye on some of the cliches of
fantasy heroics. Oriel, for example, is often as insufferable a hero as his namesake
in On Fortune's Wheel. But the book is far too long and nigh impossible to follow.
RS
WESTRAY, KATHLEEN 
A Color Sampler; written and illus. by Kathleen
Westray. 
Ticknor, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-65940-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 2-4
A fresh approach to presenting colors and their myriad combinations also plays
with shapes, as each page of information is dedicated to a traditional quilt pattern
stylized into precise designs. Westray first names the three primary colors and
three secondary colors made from combining them (all in shapes of a Hexagonal
Star pattern), the six intermediate colors made from combining primary and sec-
ondary colors (Star of the East pattern), and the twelve colors of the color wheel
(Dresden Plate pattern). She goes on to show how other colors-including black
and gray-can be made, how to lighten and darken colors, how to play them off
each other by juxtaposing light and dark, and how to create illusions of distance
and size with color. The simple clarity of the text and illustrations is lent flair by
the inventive format, which could have been rendered even more useful by nam-
ing the quilt patterns on the page where they appeared; you have to go back and
match them up with the list at the end of the book, but there's a puzzle quality to
that exercise which kids may enjoy and which forces you to think about the imagi-
native aspects of quilt designs. Overall, this is the best practical introduction to
color for elementary grade readers, and it will plug into a wide range of art and
science projects. BH
WEXLER, JEROME 
Jack-in-the-Pulpit; written and illus. with photographs by Jerome
Wexler. 
Dutton, 1993 
40p
ISBN 0-525-45073-4 
$14.99 
R Gr. 2-5
As he has done for other flora (including Wonderful Pussy Willows, BCCB 4/92),
Wexler offers a photo-description of a Jack-in-the-Pulpit's structure, development
from seed to mature four-year-old plant, and reseeding. With its fantastical flower,
intricate pollination, and brilliant red berries, this is an alluring plant to depict,
but Wexler gives fair warning about its similarity to poison ivy's compound leaf,
and about picking wild flowers as a general environmental rule-his plants were
grown in pots. The botanical terms and processes are clearly explained, the full-
color photographs dramatic and lavishly reproduced. The beauty of the book
itself will generate excitement for classroom or nature projects involving this plant
or others with a similar reproduction cycle. BH
WILLIAMS, MICHAEL 
Into the Valley. 
Philomel, 1993 
194 p
ISBN 0-399-22516-1 
$14.95 
Ad Gr. 8-12
Provoked by his older brother's senseless accidental death while serving in the
South African army, Walter, sixteen, is looking for a hero. Reading in the paper of
the exploits of a charismatic teenage black leader in the African National Congress,
Walter travels to the troubled Shongweni Valley in search of him. The villagers
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 27
there are trapped between warring youth factions of the ANC and the Inkatha
Party, a feud fed by the financial interests of a local plantation; the South African
Army is an ambiguous though generally benevolent omnipresence. Walter's at-
tempts to meet "General Biko" are always frustrated by Biko's gang of supporters,
a fierce group of boys who hide in a mountain cave, protecting their mystery as
much as their ammunition. The author gives a splendid sense of the confusion
that surrounds what many Americans see as a dichotomous problem, but by no
means is this a simplistic tale of "black on black" violence. The story confusingly,
and unnecessarily, shuttles between Walter's first- and an omniscient third-person
narration, but while his monologues sometimes seem overburdened by preachiness,
the picture of life in the valley is clear and true. RS
WRIGHT, BETTY REN 
The Ghosts of Mercy Manor. Scholastic, 1993 
[160p]
ISBN 0-590-43601-5 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Gwen is unhappy about her placement with a foster family after
the death of her aunt. She wants to live with her grown brother and his wife,
especially after the Mercys' house proves to contain the ghost of a young girl who
leaves paper roses for Gwen and beckons for her to follow. Gwen's refusal to deny
seeing the ghost leads to trouble with her foster family; Mrs. Mercy, who lived in
the house as a child, is oddly anguished at the idea of the ghost, but Gwen's foster
brother Jason teams up with her to solve the mystery of the young girl's murder
years ago, which Mrs. Mercy had long suspected. The author sticks with the tried
and true here, as the unhappy girl ghost finds sympathy in Gwen the unhappy
outsider. The book is a little shallow and the wrap-up too fast (we never do find
out what's written in the letter hastily thrust in Gwen's pocket or see official cor-
roboration of Gwen and Jason's story). It's still got enough classic chills, however,
to keep young would-be ghostbusters involved. DS
REVIEW POLICY
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children 's Books receives virtually all new trade books
published for children and young adults each year (5000+ titles). The editors first
weed out those materials (reprints, textbooks, vanity press books, kits, most paper-
back series, etc.) that we consider out of scope. Then, weekly, we examine each of
the remaining books as to whether or not school and public librarians would be
interested in purchasing it. At this point, for example, a lot of elaborate picture
books designed for the coffee table market are rejected. Some of our priorities for
review selection include innovative illustration, first novels, new trends, contro-
versial titles, small-press publications, non-fiction topics of popular or curricular
interest, and books receiving critical attention with which we do not agree. In
regard to the ever-proliferating non-fiction series, we look for those titles that stand
out from their series format, and are of value to both school and public libraries.
Each of the editors has particular areas of interest, and their reviewing in
these concentrations allows them to compare titles and develop an in-depth sense
of particular genres and subjects. This is not a hard and fast division of labor, and
28 
* 
THE BULLETIN
in fact all books which are proposed for stars or NRs (the two poles of the Bulletin's
evaluative code), or about which there is a difference of opinion, get second and
third readings among the staff. We also occasionally assign books to our contribut-
ing reviewers, primarily members of the Center for Children's Books advisory board,
who have their own areas of expertise.
The editors and reviewers meet regularly to discuss books and reviews.
Here is our opportunity to check facts, get a second reading, and gather comments
to help us refine and clarify our reviews. Our policy regarding controversial books
or political aspects of literature is to reflect as broad a social and aesthetic awareness
as possible in reviewing for a national audience. We look for ethnic and cultural
diversity, artistic strength and integrity, and depth and nuance of craft, as well as
curricular value and/or popular appeal. In assigning stars, grade levels and recom-
mendation codes (R, Ad, M, etc.) we combine critical analysis and practical expe-
rience with young people. Recognizing that each reviewer interprets standard
evaluative criteria differently-and that each book generates its own criteria-we
articulate as clearly as possible our individual assessments and the reasons and evi-
dence for them. Each reviewer must decide if a book has kept its own promises.
Criteria for books discussed in the Big Picture, listed in the annual Bulle-
tin Blue Ribbons selection, and reviewed in the Professional Connections column
hold to the same standards outlined above. The Big Picture is a place for address-
ing issues and trends as well as for analyzing books that warrant extended atten-
tion. The Blue Ribbons selection includes a particular year's books that impress us
with their ingenious crafting, emotional impact, and strength of imagination. Books
reviewed in the Professional Connection Column include selected titles about
children's literature and the use of that literature in various professional settings.
While selection is always a subjective process, The Bulletin attempts a
balanced assortment of publishers, genres, subjects, and age levels (from birth
through high school), dependent on variations and cycles in publishing. We would
like to review more beginning-to-read books, for example, but few are currently
available. No library can or should depend upon one journal for book selection,
but we feel that The Bulletin offers a lively, critical consistency that makes it both
useful and enriching.
Betsy Hearne and Roger Sutton
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 29
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: A BRITISH LINK
In the Cotswold town of Stroud, formerly a center of the textile trade, live two
latter-day tailors of Gloucester who embroider mightily on the fabric of children's
literature. Nancy and Aidan Chambers of the Thimble Press have published works
of merit on many aspects of books for children. Their fine journal and more than
a dozen attractive paperbacks about poetry, picture books, reading, and the best of
books, deserve wider distribution on this side of the Atlantic.
SIGNAL. About a half-dozen articles by knowledgeable and respected
writers appear in each issue of the thrice-yearly journal, Signal: Approaches to
Children's Books, edited by Nancy Chambers and published since 1970. The "ap-
proaches" of the subtitle serve to represent the varied interests in children's books.
Finding acceptance in Signalpages are thoughtful and highly readable articles about
writing and illustrating; publishing, including editing and bookmaking; criticism;
literary history; the international scene; bibliography and biography; and intro-
ducing children to literature.
To grasp the diversity of topics in Signal consider five of the articles
published in 1992. Sheila Ray, who continues her long and distinguished career
by currently editing The School Librarian, provides succinct and pertinent com-
mentary on 75 assorted sources about children's books published in the United
Kingdom in 1991. Riita Kuivasmaiki, Director of the Finnish Institute for Children's
Literature, reports on a study of Finnish children's books of the last half of the
nineteenth century. Margery Fisher, indefatigable in her lifetime, based her in-
sightful exploration of "Stories from a Victorian Nursery" on four boxes of books
she inherited from her mother-in-law, a child of the 1880s. "Drawing Winners" is
a discussion by Jane Doonan of two titles on the short list for the Kate Greenaway
Medal. Peggy Heeks, of Loughborough University and advocate for youth ser-
vices, remarks on status and issues in her "Librarians for Children Today" and lists
her predictions for the future.
Signal is published in January, May, and September. An annual sub-
scription costs $27 (US) and $48 by airmail. Some back issues are available. Nancy
Chambers edited The Signal Approach to Children's Books (Kestrel Books, 1980), a
compilation of selected articles from the first decade, along with three essays writ-
ten especially for the book.
POETRY. In the May issue of Signaljudges offer reasons for their choice
of the winning title for The Signal Poetry Award, given annually since 1979. Be-
yond illumining the winner and some of the contenders, the selectors make men-
tion of many criteria that describe excellence in poetry for children.
A 1992 entry in the Signal Bookguide series is Poetry Books for Children
by Brian Morse, a poet himself. The compiler recommends a rich mixture of
anthologies and single-poet collections, stretching from acclaimed poets to play-
ground rhymes. Morse aptly encapsulates 200 titles in his annotations. His intro-
ductory paragraphs stress the importance of adults reading poetry to children so
that they might hear how poems sound as well as learn how to read them skillfully
by the example set.
Two earlier titles in the Bookguide series are Margery Fisher's Classics for
Children &d Young People (1986) and Mary Steele's Traditional Tales (1989). Both
titles are remarkable for their authoritative selections and commentaries and the
30 
* THE BULLETIN
guidance offered in using books with children. All of the Bookguides list many
titles available in the United States, some first published here. The guides cost $10
or less.
PICTURE BOOKS. Recent Bookguides about picture books explore
two different perspectives. Jill Bennett in Learning to Read with Picture Books (4th
ed.) urges teachers to use noteworthy picture books in teaching children to read.
Besides learning to decode, children just might develop a love for reading and even
become avid readers because the books are so engaging. Elaine Moss, critic and
reviewer, in Picture Books 9 to 13 (3rd ed.) argues convincingly about the value of
picture books of high quality and challenging content in stimulating older chil-
dren to examine their personal concerns and to consider global problems. The
annotations deliver to the adult many questions and dilemmas to trigger thought-
ful discussions. Among the social-political issues, ecological concerns are well rep-
resented. The 105-item list includes nine titles by Anthony Browne and a half
dozen each by Briggs and Burningham.
A very welcome work is Jane Doonan's Looking at Pictures in Picture
Books (1992). Doonan's astute and perceptive articles about illustration appear
frequently in Signa4 she deftly shares her sensitivity to visual elements and detail.
In this new book she addresses the aesthetic experience of considering picture books
as art objects. After explaining her "close looking," Doonan explicates two titles,
When Sheep Cannot Sleep and Cloudy, both available in the U.S. Suggestions for
classroom applications are followed by a useful glossary.
READING. Of particular significance to teachers and librarians inter-
ested in a literature-based approach to teaching reading are two titles by expert Liz
Waterland. In Read with Me (1988) she outlines ways of using fine children's
books to develop skills in, as well as love of, reading. Teachers report their success-
ful ventures in the compilation, Apprenticeship in Action (1989).
Margaret Meek, University of London and one of the editors of The Cool
Web (Atheneum, 1978), in How Texts Teach What Readers Learn (1988) inspires
adults to give some thought to the many ways children can and do derive pleasure
and meaning from the best of children's books when offered to them. She views
literature as an important vehicle in developing reading abilities. Meek enlarges
upon the act of reading and points out some of the faults of certain methods.
Aidan Chambers' underlying theme in The Reading Environment (1991)
is adults' instrumental role in helping children enjoy books. Practical suggestions
abound for encouraging reading in the school, library, and home. Two other
worthy, provocative, and sensible books by Chambers about children and litera-
ture are Introducing Books to Children (Horn Book, 2d ed., 1983) and Booktalk
(Harper, 1986).
Aidan and Nancy Chambers are individuals who are making a difference
in the world of children's literature. They received the prestigious Eleanor Farjeon
Award in 1982 for distinguished service to children's books. Aidan, who writes
plays and young adult novels and finds time for teaching and lecturing, gave the
May Hill Arbuthnot Lecture in 1986. Their contributions continue unabated.
Send for a leaflet describing the publications of the Thimble Press:
Lockwood, Station Road; Woodchester, Stroud, Glos.; GL5 5EQ United King-
dom.
Selma Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
SEPTEMBER 1993 
* 
31
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this new index, which
will appear in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this rather
idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books that could fill
a particular gap in a collection, to help teachers and librarians find books that
might be useful in various school or recreational settings, and to help in those
requests for a "love story" or a "scary story." In the case of subject headings, the
subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those
books intended for independent reading.
African Americans-history: Dupre;
Kelso
African Americans-stories: Engel;
Mitchell
ADVENTURE STORIES: Klause;
Voigt
Africa, East-folklore: Duprd
Africa: Onyefulu
Alcoholism-fiction: Deuker
ALPHABET BOOKS: Onefulu
Antarctica: McMillan
Arctic regions-stories: Sifs
Art: Westray
Asian Americans-stories: Say;
Uchida
Asian-Americans-fiction: Kline;
Perkins
Australia-fiction: Crew
Baseball-fiction: Deuker
BEDTIME STORIES: Mayhew
BIOGRAPHIES: Fisher
Books and reading: Fisher; Kehoe
Brothers-fiction: Petersen
Canada: Harrison
Christmas-poetry: Teasdale
Civil rights: Kelso; Rappaport
Clothing and dress: Blumberg
Cowboys: Marrin
Death-fiction: Fox; Slepian
Denmark-fiction: James
Divorce-fiction: Slepian
Dogs-fiction: McKinley
Ecology: Appelbaum; McMillan;
Patent
England-fiction: Dhondy
England-folklore: Hodges; Perham
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Bruchac; Mills; Moodie
Family life-fiction: Fox; MacLachlan
FANTASY: Crew; James; McKinley
Farm life: Atkin
Farm life-fiction: MacBride
Farm life-stories: Ketteman
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
McKinley
Fathers and sons-fiction: Petersen
Fishing-stories: Engel
Food and eating-stories: Bruchac
Foster children-fiction: MacLachlan;
Wright
Friends-fiction: 
DeClements;
Deuker; Kline
Friends-stories: Engel; Uchida
FUNNY BOOKS: Booth; Marshall
Geography: Harrison; McMillan;
Onefulu
Government: Rappaport
Grandfathers-stories: Engel
Grandmothers-fiction: Fox
Grandparents-fiction: Perkins
Gulf War-fiction: Kerr
HISTORICAL FICTION: Karr;
MacBride; Reeder; Ross
History, European: Handler
32 
* 
THE BULLETIN
History, 
U.S.: 
Appelbaum;
Blumberg; Marrin; Uchida
History: Fisher; Gibbons
Holocaust, The: Handler
Homelessness-fiction: DeClements
Horses-fiction: James
Immigrants-stories: Say
Intellectual freedom: Rappaport
Islands-fiction: Fox
Japan-stories: Say
Kidnapping-fiction: Pfoutz
Knights and chivalry: Hodges;
Perham
Latinos: Atkin
Literature, children's: Kehoe;
MacBride
Literature, English-fiction: Dhondy
Migrant workers: Atkin
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Pfoutz
MYSTERY STORIES: Pfoutz; Ross
Nature study: McMillan; Patent;
Wexler
Native Americans-stories: Bruchac
Night-stories: Mayhew
Norway-folklore: Mills
Penguins: McMillan
Pirates: Gibbons
POETRY: 
Booth; 
Chandra;
Teasdale
Prairie dogs: Patent
Prejudice-fiction: Kerr; Perkins
Prejudice-stories: Mitchell; Uchida
Prohibition-fiction: Reeder
Reading aloud: Booth; Hodges;
Kline; Marshall
Reading, beginning: Gibbons
Reading, easy: Booth; Kline;
Petersen
Reading, family: Booth; Mayhew;
Mitchell; Say; Trivizas
Reading, reluctant: DeClements;
Karr; Perkins; Wright
SCARY STORIES: Gorog; Wright
Science fair: Westray
SCIENCE FICTION: Klause
Scotland-folklore: Moodie
Shipwrecks-fiction: Crew
SHORT 
STORIES: 
Gorog;
Marshall
Sisters-stories: Mills
Slavery-stories: Dupre
Social issues: Atkin; Kerr; Landau;
Williams
South Africa-fiction: Williams
Story hour: Bruchac; Dupre; Engel;
Mayhew; Mills; Moodie; Say;
Teasdale; Trivizas
TALL TALES: Ketteman; Sis
Time travel-fiction: Slepian
Trees: Appelbaum
Uncles-stories: Mitchell
Vacations-fiction: Fox
Virginia-fiction: Reeder
West, The: Marrin
Women's rights: Blumberg
Women's studies: Landau
World War II: Handler
'IIll
'$1 i ~ iii Mliii Ill
I'i1IiII1H
Prelutsky, the best-selling
Something Big Has Been Here
~nd The New Kid on the Block,
has written a collection
witty and wonderful verse
about children's favorite
i$aary creatures: Dragons!
dazzling pictures are by
'I 
>r ~k IiIn~tr~itnr of
11111
ii II'HH~IHIIr~I
111111k
I1i1iiI1lI
11~111111~
1A fine introduction to Korean culture"
-The Horn Book
Sir Whong
and the Golden Pig
Adapted by Oki S. Han &
Stephanie Haboush Plunkett
Pictures by Oki S. Han
I
"Folktale collections won't want to be without this
Korean folktale of a trickster out-tricked... .Han's
watercolors contain many loving details of
~~skillandhumor....Socialstudiesclasseswill~
traditional Korean country life.. .and convey the
two main characters' personalities with great
mine Sir Whonq for its authenticity, and
individual readers will treasure it."-SLJ
"Suitable for reading aloud as well as
for storytelling. ..a solid addition
to comparative folktale
$13.89
~IBooks~
for Yofn~ Readers
A Division of Penguin USA
*"This picture book promises to jazz up any
story time and to give individual children a
measure of control over at least one mon-
ster....A hands-on approach to dealing with
nighttime fears." 
*Bookl ist
*'iRtonderf ul...innovative...A joy to read aloud,
the simple story entertains even as it helps its
audience master common fears. Emberley's
striking approach should win him new fans
aplenty." 
-Publishers WeeKly
*"Like a do-it-yourself Wild Things, with Kids
getting to perform Max's taming trick."
-The Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books
Ages 3-8. (12.45) $12.95 0-316-23653-5
GO AWAY
BIG GREEN MONSTER!
by Ed Emberley
LITTLE, BROWN AND COMPANY
EVE 
B
NTING
"Henry Coffin, the 12-year-old son of
a private investigator, helps a high
school 'gorgeous babe' find her
kidnapped mother. Complete with
dark basements, stolen art objects,
and threatening kidnappers, the
mystery unfolds skillfully and
swiftly, aided by a breezy, humorous
style. Will hold the interest of even
S 
the most reluctant readers."
S1, 
-School Library Journal
Among Eve Bunting's HarperCollins Novels
IS ANYBODY THERE? 
OUR SIXTH-GRADE SUGAR BABIES
Finalist, 1989 Edgar Award 
Best Books of 1990 (SLJ)
Ages 9-13. $13.00* (0-397-32302-6) 
Ages 9-11. $13.00" (0-397-32451-0)
$12.89t (0-397-32303-4) 
$12.891 (0-397-32452-9)
Harper Trophy paper ed. $3.95* (440347-5) 
Harper Trophy paper ed. $3.95* (440390-4)
SHARING SUSAN
Ages 9-12. $14.00* (021693-X)
$13.89t (021694-8)
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06. Trade ed. tUbraiy 
H 
earperCollinsChildren'sBooks
ed. Publisher's price only and in no way reflects the
price at which available from any other source. 
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
i
k.
IIU
*"Written with Aliki's usual good humor and aplomb,
the text considers not only the telling and listening
aspects of person-to-person exchange, but also the
importance of responding."
-ALA Booklist (starred review)
"Parents and teachers will find this a treasure for
sharing with children, and the empathy, humor,
and insight proffer very satisfying reading."
*T~ Horn Book
Ages 5 up. 32 pp. TR $I4.OOIO-688-1O529-7~ LE $13.93/O-688-11248-X
"In 1963, 250,000 people marched from the Washington
Monument to the Lincoln Memorial, in support of racial equality
and job opportunity. This book tells the story of all that went
into organizing that incredible gathering, from its first [proposal
to] the wonder of the day itself with its 'I have a dream' speech.
[With profiles] of Whitney Young, Bayard Rustin, Martin Luther
King, Jr., and Roy Wilkins [and with] plentiful photographs... an
eminently readable story of what may be regarded as one of the
great days in American history."-Booklist
Ages 10 up. $15.00* (0-06-021289-6); $14.89t (0-06-021290-X)
Other James Haskins HarperCollins books
BLACK DANCE IN AMERICA 
BLACK MUSIC IN AMERICA
A History Through Its People 
A History Through Its People
Ages 12 up. $15.00* (0-690-04657-X) 
Ages 12 up. $16.00* (0-690-04460-7)
$14.89t (0-690-04659-6) 
$15.89t (0-690-04462-3)
Trophy paper ed. $6.95' (0-06-446121-1) 
Trophy paper ed. $6.95" (0-06-446136-X)
1991 Best Books forYoung Adults (ALA) 
1987 Best Book for Young Adults (ALA)
1991 Coretta Scott King Honor Book 
1988 Carter G. Woodson Award (NCSS)
BLACK THEATER IN AMERICA
A History Through Its People
Ages 12 up. $14.89t (0-690-04129-2)
± HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks ",a^ d 
wpi e. 
ebh 
u 
s
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022pces 
onwhich 
avad in no way reflect the prices at
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022 
which available from any other source.
I\\ ///
impo
'-
L
"Not to be missed."*
*"A 
collection that belongs in every school library."
-School Library Journal
S'As extraordinary for its variety as for its richness."
- *Kirkus Reviews
cenent
-Publishers Weekly
12 up. (15.45) $15.95 0-316-75355-6
Nho
oYou
hink
of-the-Month Club Alternate Selection * A History Book Club
Featured Selection
October * 416 pages * $29.95 * 0-590-42868-3 * All Ages!
SCHOLASTIC 
[ 
HARDC OVER
Make Literature and Folklore
Come to Life with, 
ri
JL L W "- 
Thirty Plays from Around the World
Adapted from the poetry, folk songs, fables, folktales, and
myths of many cultures, the thirty puppet plays in Fantastic Theater
are chosen for their captivating plots and memorable characters.
" ins reaaabte well-aesignea volume on puppet theater ojers ajuat range
of ideas for those interested in this popular art form." -BOOKUST
Hands-on Guide to Shadow
and Rod Puppetry
Fantastic Theater offers plays de-
signed for two styles of puppetry--
shadow and flat rod-and includes
information on
* Puppet Rods
* Puppets with Moving Parts
* Designing Your Own Puppets
" Props and Scenery
* Puppet Manipulations
" Special Effects
follow-up activities are included
Fantastic Theater includes a useful
appendix that lists plays by size of
performing group. and by the geo-
graphical and cultural areas that
they represent
once again puts her special blend of talent and professional knowledge to use
in a brand-new storytelling resource. Look Back and See is a collection of twenty
gentle tales-stories with a mild, nonviolent tone-from around the world.
"For both new and experienced storytellers, MacDonald's latest collection
offers a rich variety of peaceful stories to use with all ages." -NJEA REvisw
A Unique Ethnopoetic Style
Each line of text is arranged to facil-
itate natural phrasing, and simple
cues are provided to indicate appro-
priate rhythm and emphasis Look
Back and See includes
* Singing Tales * Teaching Tales
* Tales for Quiet Moments * Tales
with Improvisational Plots
Encourages Audience
Involvement
The highly spirited tales in Look
Back and See offer numerous op-
portunities for audience participa-
tion MacDonald uses such tech-
niques as repetition and counting
drawing the listeners into the stories
t TIW HW~C WII'SON 
CO(-MPANY 
.~nir~nnddni 
c 
1Rn'R
To Order Call Toll-Free
800-367-6770
OutsicU f the U.S. ad
Canada. call 718-586-8400.
Fax 718.590-1617.
9 
UhL 
.. n.. 
Bin.Ii 
,'1..M 
S -.. 
670 j
I THIR 14- W W1 1-l Y `--V---- 
-90N -
COMPAY shai-i- Kx ,,, 
--
, S x-e i
"This fascinating
piece of Americana
belongs in all library
collections." -
David
Rouse, ALA Booklist
Illus. Cl: $29.95
Order toll free 800/545-4703
University of Illinois Press
54 East Gregory Drive * Champaign, IL 61820
mtm*mmmmtmtmmxsa 
EDB 
CTY 61620
S23 21
CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
CHILOREN'S RESEARCH CENTER 119
51 GERTY ST
CHAMPAIGN IL 61820-7498
